THE CHRISTIAN KNIGHT Compiled, BY SIR WILLIAM WISE MAN Knight, FOR THE
PVBLIKE WEAL AND Happiness of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

EPHESIANS. 6. Induite vos armaturam Dei.

Printed at London by John Legatt. 1619.

Good Reader,
I Have heard of a discourse the other year, between two Frenchmen, the one a
Soldier, the other a Ciuilian, against the vices of their times, and country.
The Soldier was the Duke de Mercury, a right noble, and valerous Captain,
late Lieftenant general to the Emperor, against the Turk in Hungary, and yet
a great enemy to Duells. The Ciuilian was a Companion of his, and undertook
against coveting, as it appears by the Preamble following. And I am sorry we
have no more of theirs, but the Preamble; since the times, and vices be as well
ours as theirs. What the rest of their method was, J have not seen, but by the
quality of their persons, and by their learning we may imagine. The argument
could not be but profitable, and J set down, what I think probable to come
nearest their meaning, and the good of our nation; and I speak English to
English. For here is first set up the mark, or white, which we must all
shoot at, and is done in two Orations Paranaeticall to heauen-ward, The one
showing us our way thither, The other our happiness, when we come there. Here
are secondly discovered two potent impediments in our way, that hinder our
sight, and level: and these are our Irascible, and Concupiscible parts. The
abuse whereof is touched in two Charges; the one showing the injustice of
Duel: the other our common injustice in buying, and selling, and neglect of
common good. And lastly, here be two Homages, or thanks-giuings to God. The one
of a Soul truly converted, the other of one proceeding in his grace, with
signs of both. There be many things here delightful to be thought of, nothing
hard to be done, and we shall blame our selves most desperately, if we have
not done. Read therefore I beseech thee, and make use of It; which if thou do,
thou will find much comfort; and if all do, they will make as flourishing a
commonwealth as ever was. There will scarce be any poor in it, or any
unquietness. Kings will glory in their Subjects, and Subjects in their
Sovereign, and all in each other, as it is in Heaven.

Farewell.
THE DVKE.
AFter the ceasing of our Turkish wars and twenty years peace concluded with
Acmath king of Turkey 1608. our faces were all turned homeward, and my
voluntaries not a few were impatient of idleness, seeking to be dismissed for
some other employment. They had followed me indeed many hundred miles out of
France; for which I was not only willing to listen to them, but also ready to
gratify them in some sort, with a final testimony of my love upon our
parting. I sent therefore for my Chaplain to come to me Mounsieur John Faber
Licenciat in Divinity, to be advised by him: who as he was a man both learned,
and discreet; so could he best satisfy me in any thing I should desire. And
when he was come, none being with me then, but Mr. Doctor Petroneus my
assistant, a Ciuilian of great understanding, and Lancelot Mott my Comptroller,
second of my Council; Sir said I to my Chaplain, we have a resolution to
discharge our companies, and to license our voluntaries, which you know are
many in this town of Vienna: for we loose but time in these parts, our business
being now at an end. We came not hither to chase the Stagge or wild Boar, and
nothing else you see is here to be done. A great many of them came freely to
us, and I would send them away with honor: howbeit, while I bethink me of
our departure hence, and of our long separation that will be, having been
heretofore so long accustomed together; I remember the saying of Christ, and I
am touched with some part of his compassion, saying, misereor super turbam, and
so say I in my affection toward them, Mark. 8.
that I have pity over my company: and as Christhereupon did feed their bodies
miraculously; so these that have no corporal need, I would they were
spiritually fed before their going; that above all things in these dangerous
times they may not faint in their way to heaven, and may be profitable in their
countries where they are to go. They are to me as children, and I know we shall
not part asunder, without tears on both sides. I would have them to do well,
and some instructions I wish they had with them, such as your self thinks
best. Both is your authority among them such as they will easily believe you;
and your learning and Method such, as they will delight to hear you, and
bear it in mind. I have been often bold with you, as my inward friend, yet
never so bold as to give you your text. Neither will, only thus much, I would
entreat you against the feast following, which is now at hand, that ye will be
ready to say somewhat against the enormities of our country by anger, and
auatice. The one proper to men of war, the other to men of peace: yet both to
much used by both, and have made our Country ill spoken of, and disioyned many
families with civil dissension. I am well advised what I speak. There be in
this city diverse that may do much in their country by their good example,
and I doubt not will come to such preferment there, as may amend many matters
that are much amiss. Our single challenge and combats there, are grown so
common, and upon so slight occasions, five thousand have been slain upon it in
France alone within these twenty years, and so many pardons of record to be
seen for it at this day: and again, our grating is so extreme upon the
poorer sort, that I know not what will come of it in the end, but the ruin of
us all. The commons will be glad of the least quarrel against the rich, and
daily factions between families will lay us open to any potent enemy to do us
wrong. But what should I speak thus to you, who know it as well as I. There
be those that come to see us every day, right worthy persons, and great
friends; but when they come home, they will be enemies I fear me; if they
have not some warning, and be not stored with the greater grace. Of the two
vices I speak of, I know not which is the cause of most injustice: well I am
assured, none does justice in the heat of anger, or coveting, more angry
sometimes for a small matter then a great; will kill a man for speaking of a
word amiss, and will spare a man that pickes his purse; will not spend three
pence upon a poor body, and will have hundreds instore to circumuent a poor
gentleman. All the world is misled with these two vices, and were it not for
these two, there would need no Officers in a kingdom. I know no sin almost,
but one of these is, I will not say the causer, but the very inforcer of it.
Give them I pray some effectual warning of these, that their corporal fight
may so match with their spiritual, as they may not perish for want of
instruction. Whereunto my Chaplain: Sir said he, your excellency has
propounded very well, and your zeal no doubt proceeds from heavenly grace. I
shall not be wanting on my part to do God and you service, and the fruits of
your desire shall be the performance of my uttermost. But by your graces
favor, since it has pleased you to participate thus much of your mind unto
me, which belongs specially to my charge to be answerable unto, yea forwarder
to accomplish so pious a request, then you to propose: you have given me
bouldnes in this, to impart unto you also my opinion, what I think best, and
will be most fruitful, if it shall please you to conceive so. I will prepare
my self (God willing) against your day, though it cost me two days in respect
of my weakness; not having yet recovered perfectly the blow of a Halbard, that
beat my Target to my head, and one of my sides to the ground, which so impaired
my strength, that I cannot speak much at a time. By Gods grace I shall set
them in a ready way to heaven: but form to discourse of Duellum; where
occasion will be to speak of honor, and arms, it little belongs to my
profession, but more a great deal to men of honor, and approved valor, such
as you are. For although where men make conscience of any thing, and resort to
me in private for my opinion, I shall be furnished I hope to resolve them: yet
will it be little esteemed from one of our sort, to speak all that such
discourse will require. They that contemn Christ in such a business, will
sooner contemn his servants. We that be Clergy men are accounted cowards,
and dastards, as I heard a knight say once of a Bishop who had been his Lord,
and Master: he commended him for his virtues, and wisdom; save only that he
was a Coward, for putting up so easily a box on the ear from a Duke, and
following his masters steps the Savior of the world. Truth is truth out of
any man's mouth, and yet more aptly delivered by one, then by another. When we
persuade in such a matter, they tell us we be Priests, and speak like our
selves, and are very simply conceited of us whatsoever we say; yea when they be
driven to say with us, they think against us, and do what they list, Maius
peccatum habent. I speak not this to fly the burden of telling truth,
whether it edify or not: at their peril be it, if they receive not the seed
that is sown in their hearts. But Sir, it would best become your self such a
burden as this, who are both a Soldier and a Scholar: we were both brought
up at a time, and students in the Sorbone. The eyes of all men were upon you
even then, to see honor and learning so unmatchable in your person; a perfect
understander of that you heard and read, and a perfect deliverer of that you
understood. You were but young, when you had passed your courses of
Philosophy, and morality: and when your ripenes was ready for the harvest,
our commonwealth, had the reaping of your best fruits in the greatest
employments both at home, and abroad. Think it not much to hear a little of
your praise. I have done before I have begun. I have heard you speak very well
at your board of many points concerning this controversy. I know none can
speak better then your self of it, if it would please you to appoint a time,
and to bestow an hour or two that way: with this, my Comptroler applauded it
exceedingly, and though your Chaplin, said he, might do it very well, and can
do much in that company to persuade, yet none more fit then your self, a
Christian Soldier amongst Christian Soldiers and much more piercing it would
be in their hearts, to hear so noble a sword-man to speak against the sword,
or Mars himself to speak against combat, whose honor is in fight: well said
I, ye will persuade me anon to preach too: I will be advised. But what say you
to the other matter, which was Avarice: that, I hope you will speak of. No
truly Sir said my Chaplain, if it please Mr. Assistant to undergo that
charge: who is both learned in our laws, and of great estate himself, and and
every way fittest, except his trouble. Not I Sir (truly said he.) I thought as
much, this is not the first time you have glanced at me: they be matters of
conscience, and consequence, that must be handled therein; and are fittest for
your charge. I pray do you your duty as my Lord has moved, and let me hear
no more of this: I am no Preacher. Ye shall both command me, (said my
Chaplain) and I will not fail of my duty, if ye will have it so: I do but
propound what I know, and am well assured would be best. The sin of Avarice
ye speak of, is crept so far into the Clergy, that our hearers bid us
amend our selves first, before we preach amendment to others; and they give us
a very deaf ear, whatsoever we tell them upon this Theme. To be a Preacher
belongs not to your vocation: Romans 1.
yet every one ought to be a Preacher if God Almighty bid speak: yea to
shun this charge when it may do good, is to blush at the Gospel. And who can
speak more freely of this then you, who are furnished with all that nature and
art can afford? who of your sort better seen in Scripture or history then
you? who better acquainted with the Common Law, or Civil then you, having
always professed the one of them to your great commendation? who more nobly
descended for a gentleman, better stated for land and offices, or that has a
more worthy offspring to provide for then you? and if it were lawful in any to
be covetous, it were truly lawful in you; that have so great a charge to care
for, and feed so many mouths: pretense of need, or fear of need, makes
many covetous, and there is a kind of need that attends the greatest. And
therefore for a man of your quality not to be covetous, who has no end of
expenses; or to speak against covetousness, which is want to maintain
greatness; would be as rare to hear, as imitable for example. The world wants
many such as you, that can as well speak as do. And although these Robes and
Velvet gown will not become a Pulpit, yet fit enough if it please my Lord for
a great chamber. There be many that give the charge at a Sessions, not better
furnished then you for the peoples edifying: and it is no more but a charge
that is required of you, although it be in matters of much greater importance,
and that touch more nearly the inward reformation: neither speak I this to
ease me of a burden (as I said before) who am born for burdens: Psalm. 65.
for as David says, God has laid his people upon our necks; and yet if such
a one as you can do more with a word, then we with ten, (pardon me Sir I
beseech you) I know not how you will be excused. But I say no more, your will
shall be done. Well Sir said my Assistant, since you be in good earnest, you
shall not take offense at me: but what if I deceive your expectation, and shall
not perform so well, as the matter imports. Surely Sir, said my Comptroler,
that was not wont to be your fault; and for my own part, I must say what I
think: I had rather hear but half from my Lord and you, concerning these
matters, then the whole matter from another: for both in the one case, my Lord
being a man of Sword and honor, it is not like but he will respect what he
may the honor of gentlemen upon falling out: so on the other side, your self
being also noble, and of great expense, who must have much coming in to bear
your charge; there is none will fear, or doubt partiality in you, to speak
against coveting or keeping, more then you must needs: but rather will extend
your self as far as you may, and your learning will give leave. Spiritual
men speak learnedly of their matters, and whatsoever ye bring us, I suppose
ye fetch it from their grounds: but if the temporal also, and men of action
concur with the same, as I know not well yet whether they do or no; and I
would gladly learn: surely this will make a double bar against all
impugners, that the evil disposed will not have a word to say, we have a
guess sufficient what our Prelates will say. But since the motion has been
made, and to my seeming very fitly: I should be a petitioner to you both, and
many more ye shall have if need be, that it may be so. We are true
Jsraelites, Exodus 20.19
that had rather hear Moses speak then God almighty: whereat, when we had
laughed a little while; It is not unusual with me said I, to speak to my
fellows and followers; and yet it is more then I dare promise you, neither
will, unless my Assistant do as much: I will take a pawsing time, and if I
can think of any thing worth your hearing, you shall know: and my Assistant
undertook in like manner. And so being ready to depart, I told them that for
teaching I would not intermeddle, but leave them wholly to their Pastors; whom
I would exhort what I could, to believe and follow in all such matters as I
should give them in charge; and but a charge I would make of it. No more shall
I (said my Assistant.) And my charge my Lord (said my Comptroler) shall be to
put your Excellency to charge for the time, and to bid them all welcome with
the best cheer we can make them. This was the end of our Parlance, and when
the times came, we performed accordingly: whereof I have here set down the
dead letters; but whosoever had heard my Chaplain, would have loved the world
the worse as long as they lived. My Assistant likewise delivered it with much
grace, and gravity: and my self did my good will. My Chaplain began as
follows.

THE CHAPLAIN upon Panis Viatorum. THE FIRST ORATION.
RIght honorable, worshipful, and well beloved, ye are come hither (I
perceive) to hear somewhat for your edification: but I fear me, you shall
find a soldier of me, rather then a divine: for so my many years employment
in the camp has made me; being a place of all others unfit for study, and a
mortal enemy to Muses. My scarres ye see make mention of some wounds, and my
blood has testified my love to you, that have seldom failed to bear you
company in your thickest perils, with target in one hand, and my book in the
other. I have assisted many a gasping spirit in their agony to heauen-ward;
where I doubt not now, but they see, and sit with God for ever and ever: and
you, whom his heavenly providence has reserved from slaughter, he has
preserved (ye must think) for his further service: if your sword rust, yet
your action may not, which must evermore be doing, and working of your weal:
ye have peace now, and ye have put up your weapons; what then? peace gives rest
to temporal, and not to spiritual fight, we may never stand still in our way
to heaven: and thither I was wished to exhort you to day by one, whose
authority I may in no wise decline. I will do my best (God willing) to set you
in your way; and in your way I will leave you: it will be no new matter I shall
tell you, but what ye have every day cause to think of, and are able to teach
others. Your years and days have been long time near death, as near as
Canon shot; and daily death before your eyes has been enough to mortify
you, and hasten you to another world. I shall not therefore be over tedious to
you, that are so well prepared already: neither will I dazell your
understanding with dark matters, nor weary your wits with points of
learning; but only admonish you, what encounters ye are like to have, and what
glory will attend you, if ye be conquerours. This will be the last time we
shall all meet thus; and if I shall any thing say worth your hearing, I beseeh
you also let it be worth your following.

Quare appenditis argentum non in panibus, et laborem vestrum non insaturitate.
Esaias 55. Intending therefore to exhort you, or rather to hasten you in your way
to heaven: I thought it fit to lay before you the saying of Esaias the Prophet.
Why spend ye silver (says he) and not in breads? your labor and not in
saturity? A short speech, but full of mystery: why spend ye silver and not in
bread, your labor and not in saturity or fullness? we will speak first of the
first part, and afterward of the second: and as touching the first part, it is
well enough known there is nothing more needful for the sustentatio^ of man,
the^ bread. It is that we pray for in our Pater noster, as the needfullest
food, and most universal that is: kings themselves cannot be without it; and
the poorest have it, though they have nothing else: every body loves it; no
one dish, that every body loves; yet every one loves bread. And besides the
love we all have to it, God has given it this prerogative, that, as it is most
necessary, so is it best cheap, and easiest to come by. And therefore most
justly the Prophet cries out, saying; why spend ye silver and not in bread? as
who should say; why spend ye money upon trifles, your patrimony upon pastimes,
and all the means you have upon merriments, and are content to sit a hungered
for them?

But what I pray you is this silver, that men spend in this idle sort? all that
a man has or can possess in this world, may be drawn to two heads: the one
is time, which how precious it is I need not tell, but if it were ten times
more, it were all too little to spend in our way to heaven. The other is our
goods (that is to say) all we have; whether they be of mind, as reason, wit,
will, memory, learning, and such like; or of body, health, strength, actiuity,
prowess, eloquence, or of outward fortunes, as riches, honor, pleasures, and
the like; all which is here called Silver, Apoc. 21.
as in heaven all is gold. And this is the silver the holy Prophet speaks of,
when he asks us this question after a manner of increpation, or in chiding
sort, saying: why spend ye all these things and not in bread?

But holy Prophet of God, shall I ask thee a question? did thou ever know
any that spent much, and cared not how much, and that much of it was not in
bread? could he live without eating? did he not feast and make merry? and
could this be done without bread? which if thou can not deny; why do thou
say they spend, and not in bread? I acknowledge thee Gods Prophet, and upon
this infallible word by thee delivered I must build to day: thy thought must
be my theme, thy spirit my text as near as I can. Bread was therefore here
but an allegory, or figurative speech, and by it is meant the bread of life, or
bread of the soul; as appears by that which follows tending all to the
soul, and not to the body, where he says soon after, Hearing, hear me, and
eat that is good, and yoursoule, he says, not your body shall be delighted
with fatness. And again; give ear, and come to me, hear me, and your soul
(he says not your body) shall live, and I will make an everlasting league with
you. The bread of the soul therefore is the bread he speaks of, and this
only bread is intended here; the bread that nourishes us, the bread that
strengthens us; is not to sin, and perdition, but to heaven and happiness.
This is the bread I say the prophet speaks of, and no man cares for; lets it
lie moulding by him, and buyeth it not; is daily offered him, and he daily
refuses it; yea scorns the offerer or bringer of it for the most part.

But let us enter a little further into the matter I beseech you, to find what
this bread is, that we may buy thereof, since it seems so necessary. Truly
it is not hard to find, if we would but contemplate our need: if our bodies
were hungry, we should know how to seek, and where to buy: we forget not our
dinner or supper, though stomach we have none; the time of the day will
remember us of it: and shall not our vprising then, and down lying put us in
mind of our souls food for our spiritual good, and life everlasting? Let us
stir up our zeal a little, and mark what this bread is, and what the worth
of it. Open your hands and unfold your arms; that ye may be ready to catch
it, and hold it when you have it.

This breads right worthy, is in two kinds answerable to our estates or lives
in this world, and the world to come. And therefore he calls it breads, not
bread: the one sort of bread for distinctions sake, I call the bread of
travelers, Panem viatorum: Psalm. 77.
the other Panem angelorum, the bread of Angels: which latter name, although it
be applied sometimes in the first sense, yet in this place for my better
methood, and your better remembrance, I will distinguish from the other; and
confine it only to our estate in heaven, and to our food there. The first
bread is that our souls do feed on, while it is in Via in the way to heaven.
And therefore I call it Panem viatorum; as Saint Chrysostom calls our life
here Figuram viatorum: Hom. 60. in Math. Psalm. 101.24.
The other is that it feeds on in the end of the way, when it comes to heaven,
and must live for ever. Of this last I shall speak last in time convenient; of
the first I shall speak first, and shall resemble it to the Show bread, 1.
Reg. 21.
or bread of Proposition, that was given to David to eat of, when he had been
weary and hungry, and was pursued by his enemies: and it was such as he might
not eat, but with cleanness of body, as the Scripture declares.

For the better understanding whereof, and true applying it to our selves, we
must know also that three special things are comprehended in this bread of
travelers: the one is the word of God. The second all manner of virtues, and
good habits in our souls. The third is Sacraments; all which may rightly be
called bread, and so sometimes are in holy Scripture. The word of God is called
by Christ, Mat. 15.16.
Panis filiorum the bread of children. And the woman of Canaan calls it the
crummes that fell from the masters table. Virtues be also called bread:
sorrows and tears for sin is a great virtue. And holy David calls it
bread: my tears have been bread to me day and night; and in an other place,
thou shall feed us with bread of tears. Psalm. 41. Psalm. 79.
An other virtue like to this is true mortification or penance, which is
signified in Scripture by this word Ashes. Psalm. 101.
As king David uses it saying, that he eat ashes for his bread; as who should
say, that ashes were bread to him: All which things and whatsoever else that
comforts our soul, he may seem to call by the name of bread, when he imputes
his dryness of spirit to nothing else, but to the neglect of it, saying, I was
withered like hay, and my heart was dried up, Quia oblitus sum comedere panem
meum, Psalm. 101.
Because I forgot to eat my bread.

Lastly For Sacraments, Omnia Sacramenta (says S. Austine) All Sacraments that
are done in us by the ministry of Gods servants, are meat to our belly. And
Christ calls his supper by the name of Bread: saying, John 6.
He that eats this bread shall live for ever, and prefers it before Moses
his bread, saying, that Moses gave not bread from heaven, but my Father (says
he) gives you true bread from heaven. Note this word true bread: as who should
say this were not true bread which we eat with our meat; but rather a
figurative bread, feeding only the flesh: and the Sacrament the true bread
that feeds and sustaineth the soul, or principal part of man. And these
three breads may well be meant by those three loaves in the Gospel, Luke 11.
which one came to borrow of his friend at midnight, and was importunate for.
Whereupon Saint Ambrose asks this question, lib. 7. in Luc.
and makes answer, Qui sunt isti tres panes (says he) nisi coelestis misterij
alimentum, What be these three loaves, but the food of heavenly mysteries.
Hom. 26. in Ioh.
Saint Augustine also calls these heavenly things bread, and tells us the
sweetness of it, such as is able to entice and force a man's heart to the love
of it, how little soever the world does esteem it. But to our purpose.

All these three may be rightly called the bread of Proposition, as I said;
being shown and propounded for all to buy of, and feed on, that be yet as
Travelers before they come to their iournies end. The word of God feeds us
with instruction: Virtues feed us with imitation: Sacraments feed us with
grace and consolation. The word of God gives life, and motion to our souls:
Virtues digestion: and Sacraments augmentation. The word of God with what
reverence it must be handled: Virtues with what resolution they must be
embraced: a Sacrament with what purity it must be received. I undertake not
now to teach: ye know or may know by your learned Prelates, to whom I remit
you: only of virtues I say thus much to you, because they are more within the
compass of your understanding, and ye have daily use of them; that as they be
many and very nourishing to your souls; so are they like flowers in your
garden, oil in your lamps, and corn to your Mill. A Mill will be fired, and
the stones fret out one another without corn in it: even so do our passions,
they chafe us and fret us to nothing, if Virtues come not between. The flowers
of virtue refresh and comfort the soul, and make it admirably sweet. The oil
of virtue makes the soul so bright and smoothe, that God may see his own face
in it, and acknowledge us thereby to be his true Image.

In particular have we taken away ones good name, or any thing else that is
his? Let us make a virtue of it by submission, and restitution. Are we angry at
a disgrace done us? Let us not be hasty of revenge; but let us be glad if we
can, of such a trial sent us. Temperance of body, and chastity of mind, are
great virtues and indeere us to God. I may not omit humility and mildness,
gentleness and affability, Mat. 18.
that makes us the very child that God took up in his arms, and showed him
for a pattern for all the world to behold. Fortitude or valor is likewise a
singular virtue, without which almost there can be no virtue; not humility
nor obedience can want it, not the least passion vanquished without it: my
purpose is not to reckon up all virtues, but only to give instance of a few.
In one word, ye know all of ye when ye do ill; shun it and amend it: ye
know what is virtue also, and when ye do well, embrace it and feed on it, it
is your souls bread; and to feed on it hard, makes a fat soul.

These be the bread you should buy, these the things you should spend your
silver on; make a household book and keep account with your selves of your
laying out, and expenses every day; which if they be not in a good conscience
of some of these virtues, or be in a bad conscience of the contrary; ye will
grow behind hand quickly, and your souls will be so poor, that ye will rid no
way in your poast to Heauen-ward. I have read of a noble Roman called Sextius,
who never missed night, Senec. lib. 3 de ira.
but would call to mind what he had done amiss that day, and if any day were
that he amended nothing in, he accounted it utterly lost: he learnt it I think
of some servant of God, and so may you look on your compting book every
night, and see what Items ye have there, what chaste thoughts, and how the
contraries resisted; what patience, and how anger was resisted; how just your
bargains and contracts? how ye pray and have God in your mind first and
last? how pitiful to the poor, how heedy for swearing, how for cursing, how
for overmuch eating and drinking, idle talk, and ribaldry, Phil. 4.
all which ye may do in him that comforts you, (as S. Paul says) if you put
your good wills to it. The horse that carries you, must be your good will: if
your will be ardent and zealous, he never tyers: if it be cold, he holds
not out a day. The wind that launcheth you through the Ocean, must be your
good will; the wind will be always as great as your will, and your will
should be ever as great as your hunger. Oh that we might feel our souls
hunger as sensibly as our bodies hunger; we should then buy this heavenly
bread much faster, and plye our souls oftener with these heavenly provisions
then we do. Behold the worth of this bread our holy Prophet offers us to buy.

But it may be, ye would gladly know why the Prophet calls these things
bread, and not by some other name as well, that may be as signifying for his
purpose as this word Bread: Surely we shall find in Scriptures if we mark
it, that what we eat to sustain our bodies with, is called sometimes by the
name of Bread, as if there were nothing else before us to eat but Bread, Exodus
3.2. Kings cap. 9. and other like places; where to dine or suppe is called to
eat Bread, and yet had they other things to eat besides bread. As we see
where Abraham entreated his three guests to come in and eat bread with him,
Genesis 18.
and yet there was not only bread, but honey, milk, and veale. And in the
first of Kings where Saul accursed them that should eat bread that day; cap.
14.
we read what punishment came upon them for Ionathans sake, for tasting only
of a hony-combe in his way, and touched no Bread. Lo here, where honey also is
understood by Bread, as every thing else may be which we eat, both for the
generality, and likewise for the necessity of the food of bread; since every
one must have it, and nothing can be eaten without it.

All things therefore we see that are food, is called Antonomastice by the
name of Bread, as by the worthiest name: and so of our spiritual food, if a
man should ask why our Prophet calls it bread, and not by some other name,
as why does he not call it Clothing, since we cannot come there without a
wedding garment: Mat. 22.
why does he not call it armor or weapons arma nostra spiritualia: 2. Cor. 10.
we come not to heaven without fight, neither fight we without weapons? why
does he not call it wings, Psalm. 54.7.
since we cannot fly without wings? why does he not call it a ladder as it is
called in Genesis, cap. 28.12
to clime to heaven by? why does he not call it Almes-deedes a thing so much
commended in Scriptures? why calls he it not I say by none of these, since all
these be so necessary for us? truly the reason is plain if we mark it.

All these things that I have reckoned, be they never so fit for us, yet are
they all without us. Clothing is for the outside, weapons, wings, ladder,
alms, or whatsoever else, are all on the outside of us, and come not so near
our life, as bread does: all other things do no good without, unless we have
bread within. Those things indeed do furnish us, but bread does nourish us;
and therefore though other things be necessary, yet bread is most necessary or
necessary of necessaries; and the word is used by the Prophet in a supereminent
signification; as a man would say, this is lock and key, this is all in all,
this the sinews, this the marrow of all our good: and therefore all that
intrinsically serves to our everlasting weal, be aptly called by this word,
even this supereminent word Bread. And as all our outward operations, and
actions are nothing without bread, and inward sustentation of man; whereby he
has strength, and comfort in his doing, and can do nothing without it: So if
we should devise one word to call all things by, that we need, either in
respect of the greatness of our need, or the multiplicity of them; we can
find no one word or name so fit, or so significant as this word Bread: and
for such is used, and made choice of in our Pater noster by God himself: where
whatsoever we need or pray for almost, we are bidden to ask it by the name
of Bread, give us this day our daily bread: that is to say, as holy fathers
expound it, give us whatsoever will nourish us, either body, or soul.

Are we to pray for patience? we ask it here by the name of Bread. Ask we
sorrow for sin? here it is called bread. Ask we feruor and devotion? God
understands us by the name of Bread. Ask we chastity and mortification? he
gives it us here by the word bread. Ask we comfort, ask we charity, ask we
grace, constancy, or perseverance to the end? all is included in this word
Bread. All is bread, all is food of soul, all makes it fat, rich, fair,
comely and beautiful, worthy of salvation, worthy of heaven, worthy of God.
And therefore no marvel if the Prophet call these things Bread, since God so
understands them in our daily form of prayer, which he gave us from his
blessed mouth: give us this day our daily bread.

Now let no man ask me, how is patience bread? how are devotion, charity, or
any other virtue bread? this reason shall serve for all reasons, that Christ in
effect has called them so. Let us go buy and bestow our money freely on it.
Let us be profuse, and prodigal upon it: the more we spend this way, the more
we have; the more we wast, the greater our store; the more we wrestle, and
exercise, the less weary; the faster we run, the more in breath, as all they
that prove shall assuredly find. And yet, if we shall seek a reason also
why; these things, or how, or in what sense they are called bread; we shall not
go far for a reason to satisfy them that be curious: and it will not be
unfruitful to us neither, when we understand it. We will go no further I say
for a reason, then to the very nature of bread, and the properties thereof, as
I will declare now unto ye.

We touched in the beginning some properties of bread, and some others there
are besides, which are also found in this heavenly bread: yea and much more in
this, then in that. First bread feeds us and keeps us from perishing: so does
our heavenly bread feed us and preserve us from perishing eternally. I need not
prove it to you, it is well enough known; for as bread has many alterations,
before it come to make flesh; even so it is with our ghostly bread. The first
alteration of bread is in the mouth, by eating and chewing, the mouth of the
soul is hearing, and reading. The second alteration is in the stomach, where
the meat is turned into a white substance called Chylus; the stomach of the
soul is deep consideration, all pale, and astonished to think of the
horrible danger it was in a little before. The third alteration is in the
liver, where our food turns to blood, and looks read; the liver of the
soul is shame, and confusion, blushing red as fire, for that we have done
wickedly. The last alteration is into flesh, and the flesh of our soul, is our
good estate to Godward; which hearing and reading consulted upon,
consideration resolved upon, shame kindled, and sends the blood of grace from
part to part to consolidate. Grace clarifies our reason, gives life to our
will, blows courage into our heart, which is the seat of virtues.

The second quality of bread is to make purest blood. Other meats have more
mixture in them of choler, or melancholy that the blood is the worse for it,
other studies, sciences, and high questions of learning though they feed the
soul also; yet are they mixed lightly with elation, or emulation, as it is
written, Scientia inflat; 1. Cor. 8,
and therefore go not so clearly to the good of our soul, as our ghostly
food does. This bread our Prophet speaks of here, has no such mixture in it:
the word of God is wholly void of it, like a crystal fountain of a most
fluent stream. Virtue were not virtue, if it endeavored not the same: and the
sacraments are the purest pipes from the side of our Savior, and cannot make
other then purest nourishment. Will ye know what blood these make? behold Gods
Saints from Enoch to the Apostles, and so downward: we may know their food by
their complexions that were so white and read in Gods sight according to his
own heart; the very pictures of virtue and grace: look upon the blood of
Martyrs, how precious it is in the sight of God, from Abel hitherto, and all
over the world. The seed of man is made of the purest blood said Pythagoras,
and God made choice of that blood, to sow the field his Church withal in due
season.

The 3. property of bread is to be loved of al: every one loves not every meat,
yet few or none loves not bread: and so it is with our spiritual bread; every
body loves it, the very wicked loves it in a sort, though they seek it not:
witness themselves, if we ask the^. But there are 2. sorts of love, the one
fruitful, which sinners have not, but may have; the other unfruitful, which
sinners have, and will do them no good: imperfect love it is I grant, yet love
it is; and so much our Savior may seem to imply, when he said love God withal
thy heart: Mat, 22.37.
as who should say it is love, and they may love God, though they love him not
withal their whole heart: Premium virtutis honor, it is virtues due to be
loved, and honored, though it be not always embraced. Our love to virtue is
commonly as childrens love to bread, or I would it were but so in some; better
to be but one step up then none at all. Children will call and cry for bread,
but if any thing else comes, they hide it, or cast it away. But what do I
speak of children, and those that be sick, or make strange of good life?
they that be whole and sound, or have not lost all feeling, must love the
means of their health, and will not refuse it altogether; or if they do, I
hold their estate to be damnable.

There is yet a fourth quality or property of bread; which is easiness to come
by: and this accords also with our spiritual bread. It is easy to be had
both in respect of the means which every one may have that will, as also in
respect of it self, that is every where to be sold: our means is our money,
and our money (as I said before) is our will, and thirsty desire after it: God
asks no other price of us. Let no man complain that he has not where
withal; our good God has provided enough for the poorest that is, to buy a
kingdom; though not enough always to buy a cow. If the business were a money
matter, the poor could not be virtuous, nor have share in our heavenly food.
The Gospel tells us that where our treasure is, Mat. 6.
there is our heart: but I think it is true both ways; where our mind and
love is, there is our money: our love is the best treasure, and we may furnish
our selves richly with it (if we list) out of our own Treasury: Have we no
money? let us coin it out of our own hearts, and we shall find plenty. He
that has least, has a self to give; and he that has most, can give no
more: and if we would know who sells it us, it is God that sells, S. Aug.
and God is every where to take our price; he is at every occasion, and at
every need of ours, to take our moeny. Come occasion of sickness, or
mischance to us, he is at hand to sell us patience. Come occasion of misery,
or want in our poor neighbor, he is ready to sell us the Bread of pity.
Come occasion of quarrel or falling out, he proffers us charity, so we draw
our purse wide enough. Be we fallen into temptation? he tenders us strength
enough to overcome it. Are we in sin? he meets us presently with remorse,
if we give him but reason for it. These and a great deal more are the holy
Bread he gives us at all needs, and all assayes, and he meets us mercifully
at our own door with all; we need not send so far for it, as to the next
market town: and thus much for the fourth property.

Now to these I could add a fifth; and that is such a one, as a man would
think were ill, yet is not ill, but only with evil using it. There is no
surfeit so hurtful to our body, as that of Bread, Omnis Saturatio mala, panis
autem pessima. If the stomach be charged with any thing else but bread, it
will recoyle and put it up. Bread not so, but lies clumping together like lead,
neither digesting it self, nor suffering other thing to digest. And this is
also manifest in our Bread of life; where pride or weariness bears down our
heart, and plunges it in time into the pit of Apostasy. Begins with zeal, and
ends with coldenesse: begins with too much, and ends with too little: begins
hotly, and has not grace to hold out. Was incrassatus, and dilectus, Deuteronomy. 32.
and at length recalcitrauit, presumes in own strength, and turns up the
heel against God, and all goodness. Physicians say the finer the bread is,
the more dangerous is the surfeit. And even so it is with heavenly food, by our
own perverseness. And therefore this made Angels Devils when they fell once,
this lost Saul a kingdom, ouerthrewe Solomon, and a multitude since to our
very days, without all remedy and cure. How many do we know in the world,
that knew Gods will, and were in good practice of it, yet now are given over
and left to themselves. They left off first one good exercise, then another;
and by little and little all, or very near all: time and temptation brought
them to it, and weariness of well doing. And this exceeds all other kind of
sin, that happily may find remedy when the passion is once over. This
passion is never over, lies heavy on the stomach like dough: will neither
void upward at the mouth, since they cannot forget what they have heard and
read; nor concoct in the liver, since shame is gone that should give it color
and entertainment. Set all the Aqua-vitae before them that is in the Gospel;
they took a surfeit of it once, and now will do them no good. Set Rosa-solis
before them, or waters of hottest spirit, all is in vain: these were so lately
their common drink, that now at a need, it will not warm their heart. They
are grown to very insensibility by their own pertinacity, and if God touch
them not extraordinarily, they are past all recovery.

But by all these properties of bread, ye see now by reason, as before by
authority, how fitly our heavenly food is here called Bread by our holy
Prophet. And our speech has not bin only of words and terms, but also of
effects, and substance, and true worth of it indeed. For first it nourishes
our soul as Bread does our body. Secondly, it makes the purest blood, even the
blood of Martyrs and Saints. Thirdly, how it is loved of all that love
themselves as they should do, and gives honor to the possessours of it.
Fourthly, Esaias 55.
how good cheap we come to it, venite, emite absque argento says our Prophet
in the same place: come and buy without money all ye that will buy; and almost
every occasion (we meet withal) sels it us. Lastly, we see how dangerous it
is, and how ill favored we look in Gods sight, if we leave this diet, and
content our selves with worse. We grew fat and fed daintily at his table,
and if a fat man fall, he has much ado to rise again. By all which we
may see as in a glass, what manner of thing this heavenly food is we fly
from daily, and list not buy. Food I say in a word, food in worth; a worth
not to be valued by the worthiest things in the world; not by diamonds, nor
yet by a diadem, and a whole diadem were well given for it, if it could not be
had without. All the world is so base and vile to it, that all together will
not buy the least piece of true virtue.

And therefore amongst other our spiritual breads aforesaid, that nourish,
feed, and beautify our soul: I may not omit to commend unto you here most
especially and particularly our Sacramental bread, Ioh. 6.
the body and blood of Christ, which he gave and spilt on the cross for the
life of the world; and which it may be was principally intended by our holy
Prophet in this place. And I do not commend it to you now for the praise of
it, but for the the use of it; the one being beyond my power to perform
worthily; the other being in your power to practice proffitably: ye have price
enough in your purses, as I told you, and I would wish you to buy of it often.
Let not once a year content you, which the Church does bind ye to once a
month in act, and every day in desire, is little enough for those, that know
the sweet of it. Little enough I say if we have a lively faith, and have
tasted how good it is.

But woe be to us. We apprehend it not, and therefore we buy it no faster.
We feel not the operation of it, and therefore we neglect it. It is to be
lamented with many tears, how careless we be and almost insensible in this
point, as will soon be seen by us, if we take not heed betimes. We are
like to a sea wall, that must be always repayring; which if we be not by
this holy Sacrament, we shall go every day decaying further from heaven; every
gust of wind, and sea will make a breach upon us, and every little temptation
will surround us. It is Gods work to repair us, and not man's. And if we will
be virtuous by our selves, or honest of our selves, and think a Sacrament but
an idle ceremony; the next news will be of us, that we have neither virtue at
all in us, nor scarce common honesty. All that be faithful know what they
receive, but all take not delight in it, because they know not the benefit of
it: yea more then this, let us call and cry to them never so loud, that they
will taste often of it, and try the good of it, as they will do by some thing
which is hard, or harsh enough to them at the first, but with use made
pleasing: yet in this heavenly Bread they will not do it, nor force themselves
a whit to love it, because it pleases not sense.

This noble Sacrament has many good things in it, and the Ancients have never
done praising it, and extolling it, even out of their own feeling. I have read
much, but I read no Doctor like the Doctor of Doctors, Christ himself, who
best could tell what good we receive by it. He has told us in two words as
much as shall be needful at this time, Ioh. 6.
in me manet, and ego in eo, He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
shall dwell in me, and I in him. To dwell in him (says Saint Augustine) is to
be a piece, Tract. 27. in Ioh.
or member of him. To be in him, is to be one body with him. And as Saint
Chrysostom says, Hom. 60.
non fide tantum, sed ipsa re nos suum corpus efficit, He does incorporate us
unto him, not only by faith, but in very deed, as much to say; we do not
only think it, and believe it; but our very soul does also feel it, and
find it to be so, and glories in it, for that we are made all one with so
great a Majesty.

Truly, there is no two can be one, so, as we with God, by this heavenly
Bread received: not the nearest friends that are, not the greatest lovers in
the world, not Angels, and Seraphins; yet we are one with God, by receiving of
God. What should we fear? whom should we dread on earth? Romans 8.
The blessed Apostle says, If God be for us, who can be against us: how much
more may we say it, if God be not only for us, but in us: for so he says.

Et ego in eo, and I in him; which words Saint Augustine expounds also very
well in the same place, how God is in us. He told us before, how we dwell in
him: now he tells us, how he dwells in us. He dwells in us, says he, as in his
temple, or place dedicated to his service: not content with stately temples and
goodly buildings made with hand, walled with stone, 3. King. 7.
covered with lead on the outside, with gold, and all that is precious on the
inside; large, fair, and wide, to receive a multitude. Not thus content I say,
but makes his chapel of ease in our hearts, his tabernacle in our breasts,
his privy chamber, or closset in our bosoms, to sit with us, to confer with
us, and as it were to solace with us in private: Et ego in eo. How is this I in
him? not in a general sort as God is every where; but in particular, as he
was in Salomons temple, when his Arc of Testimony was brought in. 3. King. 8.
Impleuerat domum domini gloria domini, there we read a Cloud entered, and
filled the house with glory. Here, not a Cloud, or shaddowe this ego in eo,
but the Sun it self comes in, and filles us indeed with glory.

These be great matters I speak of, and we may not slip them out, nor let
them slip from us lightly. To be all one with God, not with earthly kings; to
be united with God, not with Angels, or Archangels; to be the temple of God,
not a palace for a Prince; to be a resting place for Jesus, not a couch of
gold for Ashuerus. Who can tell what glory this is to us, what a privilege,
what an advancement in the sight of the whole heavenly warfare? even greater
then any Prince in the world can ever bestow on us, though it were to set us in
a throane by him.

Et ego in eo, and I in him, says God himself. Who can hear these words
drowsily, as though they were but words, and belonged not unto us? many a horse
knows when his master is on his back, and will show it by his carriage: are
not we better then horses? who can hear these quickening words, and starts not
out of a dead sleep? who hears ego in eo, and aspires not to have that ego in
him often, with often receiving? and when he has received, who can sin
wilfully that day, or soon after? 3. Reg. 19.8
Elias walked forty days in the strength of one loaf; how much more may we
hold out in the strength of this heavenly morsel, until the next time we
come to receive it? who cannot forget and forgive, that carries the Lord of
mercy in his bosom? who can wrong his neighbor in word or deed, and carries
the rightful judge in his own body? who can harbor an evil thought in his
soul, that has made his soul the altar of God? who can delight in unclean
talk, that has made his mouth an entrance into this temple? who can think of
nothing but buying and selling in this temple, that is the temple himself of
him that made it?

Et ego in eo. How is God in us? is it as a commer, and goer, and as a
passenger only? No: but as a dweller or inhabiter; for so the word manet
signifies. As one in a manner that left heaven, to dwell in the world; has
left the world to dwell in us. A noble possession keeper, a noble protector of
all we have, if we can hold him. By this being of God in us, we shall not
look to prophecy, or do miracles, or great wonders in the world, which are
more for others good, then our own. But all that is sure to better our souls,
we shall be sure to have. God will never see us want happiness. We are
possessed of God with receiving of God, and we are often possessed with receiving
him often. And if it be miserable to be possessed of evil and wicked spirits;
how happy is it then to be possessed of God, who brings all good things with him.
And lastly, if this temple of his, this body of ours do chance to perish, or
be wronged, or ruined for his greater glory and our trial in tribus diebus
Suscitabit illud, Ioh. 2.
he will build it again quickly much fairer then it was. There be of you here,
that have tasted the good of this bread of Travelers, and often receiving it;
it has made you hardy, and resolute in your business; and to such as have
dyed in the field, it has been their Viaticum, as the fathers call it, to
bring them to God. Such viaticum or voyage provision God send us near our
death, if we dye on a sudden.

Ye have hitherto heard what necessity there is of this heavenly bread, and
some part of the benefit of it, and what cause our Prophet had to cry out upon
us as he does, for misbestowing what we have, so vily, and not upon these
breads, for heaping unworthy things in this world, and neglecting the
worthiest, that will stick by us for ever. If the Prophet were now living, and
saw our grossness in this behalf, he would thunder more plainly against
us, then he does. Behold he is yet living in his writings and spirit. Let not
the letter lie dead in the book: take it and beat it in a mortar: Bruise it
well, and powne it into spice, that the fragrancy of it may fill every corner
of your house: make a sheafe of wheat of it, and thrash it out for a grist to
serve at your board, and feed your soul.

It follows in the same place; your labors, and not in Saturitie, Esaias 55.
or fullness. Now, since we have done with the bread of travelers; we ought of
right to speak next of the bread of Angels, (which was the other part of my
deuisio^) before we leave bread, and go to anew matter. Howbeit because we have
reserved this of Angels to be spoken of last; we will break order a little,
and go forward first with our Prophets own words as they lie; and the other
bread we shall find opportunity for (God willing) at an other time.

Why spend ye your silver (says he) and not in bread; your labor, and not
in saturity? He said before, your Silver, now your labor. He said before, and
not in bread; now and not in Saturity. Before he found fault with misspending
our goods; now, for wasting our bodies, for so is to be understood this word
labor, which is as much to say, as toil of body and mind. Gods curse it was
upon Adam, that the earth and creatures should rebel against him; and nothing
he should have without labor, and toil; Genesis 3.
in labor comedes; If thou will eat, thou must labor for it: and in the
sweat of thy brow shall be thy food. He has shown before, how prodigally
we spend our substance upon every thing, but that we should. Our will upon
selfe-liking; our wit upon fancies; our understanding upon things fading, and
transitory; our learning (if we have any) upon sensuality; our style or tongue
in setting forth a lie, as soon as a true tale; our health in pastime and
play, and all that we have in idle vanities for the most part, with little
respect of God, or of his holy service, for which only we were created;
insinuating unto us, that if it were not in bread, or in order to God, it must
needs be in one of these. Now comes he to our bodies also, and the actions
thereof; how we bestow our strength, how our labor; how our hands and feet,
how our senses: and finding them all no better bestowed then the other were;
that is (to say) in hope of ease, and yet no true ease; in hope of pleasure,
and yet no true pleasure; in hope of filling, and yet empty; in hope of
Saturity, and yet no true Saturity; he asks this question as before of our
money, and other outward things, so now of our labors, and cares of life,
saying: why bestow ye all these things as ye do, and not in Saturity?

Saturity ye must think is as much to say, as fullness of contentment: It is
as much to say, as I have enough Lord, Satis est, I ask no more in this life.
It is written of holy Ephraim and others, Luke 22. Plat. lib. 3.
that were much addicted to prayer and meditation; that they found such
extraordinary comfort therein sometimes; that they brake forth into these
words, saying; Satis domine, enough Lord; as much to say, as hold thy hand
Lord, I have enough. Let me not have heaven before I come there, I have
enough. And this is not only their contentment, that are perfect; but it is
every good bodies, that loves virtue, and delights in prayer, and although he
have not extraordinary comforts, nor can expect those rare illuminations which
some have had: yet if he use but an ordinary devotion in his ordinary course
of prayers, and resign himself wholly to God; he shall find (no doubt) so
much quickening hope, that he shall rise from his knees very contentedly with
Satis domine, and such complete satisfaction, as in his humility, and
acknowledgement of his unworthiness, he would think is much more, then he
could expect.

I confess, and let this be our ground, that there is no absolute content in
this life, all our content, even a Saints content upon earth; is but in
enigmate, or like the sun in a cloud upon a gloomy day: and therefore holy
David says, Satiabor cum apparuerit gloria tua he says not Satior in the
present, Psalm. 16.
but Satiabor in the future tense: Signifying hereby; that there is no saciety
in this life, no perfect filling, or saturity here; it must be in heaven, not
here; it is in vision of God, not in fruition of creatures; we are here but in
expectation, there in possession; here in hope, and promise, there in deed and
performance; here in fight, there in victory; here like hunters, and soldiers,
there we divide the spoils. The soldier in his fore-age is glad of any thing
he can get, and says Satis. The faulconer likewise, or hunter, is well pleased
for the time at a poor man's house, and says Satis for it, as if he were at
home in richer fare. And this is the best of our cases here. We are all
soldiers in this magno campo, Iudi. 1.
or great battle of the world. We are hunts-men in this wild forest, or
chase of beasts, and savages, our own appetites, and inordinate desires; which
sometimes we kill, and sometimes they escape our hands. But in the time of
this our hunting, we are glad many times to meet with a fountain in stead of
a tavern to cool our thirst; a little hope I say, in stead of a possession, a
fervent thought now and then instead of a present embrace: and this is Satis,
and sweet to us, until we come home at night, that is (to say) in the end of
our life, to our heavenly dwelling; where we shall have indeed, not only our
true Satis, but Satis superque, and shall have no end of enough.

I must confess I say that the life of the virtuous in this world is in hunger
and thirst, and in a longing after heaven: yea all their life is in defection,
and fainting; for so says David, concupiscit, and deficit anima mea in atria
domini, Psalm. 83.
my soul does lust, and faint withal, until it enter the house of God. Yet
what of this? is there therefore no contentment in it? See I pray what he
says in the very same place, ibid.
and verse? My heart and flesh (says he) have leapt for joy, that I shall
come to my loving God. Lo here how he answers the matter himself; he
faints, and yet he exulteth: he was ready to dye, and yet he leapeth for
joy. And so in another place, Mine eyes begin to fail me, Psalm. 68.
while I hope in my God. See here a notable Sympathy in an Antithesis, a
concord as it were in a holy discord, a fainting and leaping both at one time,
a defection and exultation both at a breath, a swounding and reviving all in a
verse, all at an instant. So as, let our discomfort be never so great, being
for God, and in a longing after him: such discomfort can be no true discomfort,
that is so full of comfort; no true dullness or heaviness, that is so quick
with child of so great hopes, or of so hopeful an inheritance.

It far exceedes the comfort of Jacob, who thought it little to serve seven
years for fair Rachel, being sure to have her in the end. Our enjoying also
lies in our wills: We are as sure of it as we are sure of our wills; fire
and water cannot part us, if we love and like. Romans 8.
What is there in the world should beat us from this hope? can tribulation?
can poverty, or any thing else? Yea, do not crosses increase our comforts, as
water increases fire? Prou. 15.
These be the comforts that Solomon calls Judge conuiuium, or all day feasting.
2. Pet. 1.
How can we be sorrowful in a feast full of harmony? To this content or
saciety, does Saint Peter invite you, saying Sat agite, that is (to say) Satis
agite. Do as much as lies in you for your contentment, which ye may gather by
him, can no where else be had, but in a moral certainety of your vocation,
and election, and your true concurring therewithal. This the comfort of
comforts, and well head of true content, or highest top of our Satis in this
life. What life can be in sorrow, that is endowed with this? and they that
have this, whatsoever they be, or have been, may joy and exult at all times.
Let miseries come like hayle upon us, yet can we not be unhappy, as long as
we have this. Let our estate for life be what it will be, so we be sure of
our inheritance: our perpetual hope of this, and our will still concurring
with our hope, is it that nourishes so, as, we can ask no more in this life,
wheresoever we become; in pain or pleasure, among friends or enemies, in
sleep or awake, in travel or at rest, in plenty or penury, peace or war, in
business or at quiet; still our Satis attends us, and we carry content where
we go, in triumph about us.

And these comforts if we will embrace them as we be offered them, are the
earnest pennies that tie us to God, and him to us, unless we go from it first
our selves. These our claim to a future inheritance, or a possession keeping
against the devil and his angels for the places they had, and lost in heaven,
and we must have after them. This the Satis domine that holy David felt in his
soul and spirit, saying, Psalm. 76.
Renuit consolari anima mea, memor fui dei, and delectatus sum. So delighted
he to think of his part he had in God, that he found himself unable to
hold the comfort of it. Now what comfort is there abroad in the world, that
they will say to God Satis domine with the Saints aforesaid; or Renuit
consolari anima mea with David? is there any will say, Lord thou give me to
much? Forbear. Will they not say rather give me more Lord, I have not enough?
I have no contentment yet for want of more? This is therefore that hearts ease,
this is the contentment and saciety our Prophet speaks of here, and finds
fault that we labor and toil as we do, and not in this Saturity.

My good friends, I have told you in brief, what Saturitie it is, that he
means, and is truly in Gods servants, and no where else to be found. Will
any man contend with me, and say it is in the world; it is where riches are,
it is where pleasures are, it is with kings and mighty folk? I cannot deny,
but such persons have contentment. They do what they will, and their pleasures
are provided for them without their trouble. They are tied to no rule, tied to
no law, keep no hours, day nor night. If they be sick, the Physician is at
their elbowe. What should I speak of riches? they may wallowe in gold, if they
will. What of fair houses and dainty gardens well set, and planted with
plumbes, and fruits of the best. None to contradict them in their desires, none
to cross them in any sort. I speak not of inferior persons, whose content
(it may be) is not, nor can be so absolute as these. And yet as great content
they may seem to have in their less, and meaner estate, as the other in their
grand superfluities: yet few of them can say Satis, or think they have enough,
as devout people can: but seek for more, labor for more, are unquiet for more
the most of them, as if they had nothing: yea I have known some confess, that
for wanting a little of their wills or wishes, it has troubled them more,
then if they had nothing. And of this there can be no other true reason, but
that they be no true contentments, but false and deceitful, as I could easily
prove, if my purpose were to insist on it.

This alone may suffice for this point, that the heathen Philosopher, who
reached no higher then morality, saw as much as I tell you, and found no true
contentment but in Philosophy, and wisdom, and in virtuous contemplation. In
respect whereof, he contemned all basser matters; pleasures they held both
counterfeit and foul. And if any man think them truly delightful, eth. 10.
dial. de rep.
the fault is in his corrupted mind (says Aristotle) that looks no higher.
And Plato likewise will have no true content in riches or pleasures, and they
that fight and scratch for them, as they do (says he) are like beasts that
feed downward and creep on their bellies, and never look up as men should,
toward their true contentment. Thus says he; and he makes no reckoning of
riches; and the greatest pleasures he holds but shadows of pleasures,
Stesichorus
as a very ancient Poet was wont to say, whom he there avouches for this
purpose thus.

For Hellen fair, as Trojans thought,
But not true Hellen, Trojans fought.
And to this effect they all agree most constantly, not swaruing a jot one from
an other, and by no other light, then by natural reason; that there is no true
Satis in any of all these; and therefore no marvel if it cannot be found
among them that be sensual, and more then purblinde of Soul, as most people
are.

And yet to come nearer our prophets meaning in this place, and to make a full
benefit of it for our greater good; let us search a little further, since we
have said what Saturity it is he speaks of here, who and what they be also
that labor thus (as he says) without it, and who they be I say that take so
much pains, and have not their fill.

We know a great many in the world, that as they have not their fill greatly;
so take they but little pains or labor for it. And therefore surely our
Prophet means not any of these, because they be not of those that labor.
They live by other bodies labors, and do nothing themselves. They are idle
and lazy, and will be troubled with nothing, but look that every thing
should be put into their mouths: whether our Prophet means these or no, I
must give them a touch by the way, because they swarm so in our country. Oh
how far do we degenerate from our Ancestors. Our nobility and gentry for
the most part are corrupted with idleness. Be it spoken without offense.
Unless they be Magistrates, officers, or housekeepers, students, soldiers
employed, merchants, tradesmen, or husbandmen; I dare boldly say it, for the
most part of them, they have so little care of bestowing their time well, that
they were better hold the plough then be so nobly idle as they be. They
cannot tell at night, what good they have done that day, as every labourer can.
But where idle company leads them, there they go, there they play, there they
wrangle or make merry, loose their time, loose their money and means, and make
themselves business to shift for more. Most of our young folk make fools of
themselves, that are otherwise well enough endued.

Is it not a shame to see how intemperate they be of their diet, how inconstant
in their hours, how unstable in their actions, how wavering in their gate, how
new fangled in their apparel, how fond and wild in their conversation, how
affectat in their words, how heathen-like every way, and ignorant in all
Christian duties? one takes it of another like a disease; every vpstart or
country ladde will be as proud, and idle as the best, if he come in place,
and can hold up his nose aloft, carry a fescue in his mouth, and answer not a
word to any man without three or four askings. Their exercise is to sleep
long, and to meditate on their mistress till almost dinner time. Then to
Tobacco, then to dinner somewhere, then to a play, or a Tobacco-house, or else
in pilgrimage from one idle body to another. He spends his time rarely, if he
take a vial in hand and sing to it; then to supper, then to gaming or Tobacco
again till midnight, or other like daliance until they be weary.

His books be Amades, or Ariosto, or an Arcadia, or if these be to high for
him, a play book or some such fancy as the world is full of, to while himself
withal, for want of company. Much like my ladies dog, that does nothing but
eat, drink, and sleep, or lie in a lap. Sometimes he barks, then to his
cushion again, then up into the bed, then down again to the fire, then
whines to the lap again: so fares it with our idle folks, void of learning,
void of resolution, void of grace, or very little stored with it. Holding it
most ridiculous to speak of Christ, or holy things, unless it be to swear by
them: seldom praying but for a fashion, imitating Angels in nothing but in
celerity, who shall say fastest: begin perhaps with domine ne in furore and
within two or three snappes after, are at valde velociter. Quickly in bed,
long in rising, pruning, and making ready, given to no good exercise, but ease
and fatness until they be gray and ready for a grave.

Besides this, every one has his humor, and is led by the nose with it like
a bear; gives way to all passions, and that is valiant with him. I have seen
some Neroes and Vitellij amongst them for spending, and ingurgitating. I think
they would spend seven millions (if they had it) in few months space, Suet.
as the one of these did; or a thousand sorts of fish at a meal, and as many
of foul as the other did, or be always inuenting new pleasures, as both did,
if it were not for very shame. For I make no scruple to judge the worst of them
by the abundance of the heart, that breaks out at their tongues ends, and at
their deboysht fashions unrecoverable. But these be the worthiest, they may
seem to follow, and none else. They will seem to be brave minded, and yet
will follow the basest.

They might learn if they pleased of that noble Roman Sertorius, Plut.
to hate their own vile conditions, and live more like men. He was fellow
with Princes, though in banished estate. And he was sought unto by kings. It
will disparage no man to follow him. Metellus refused single combat with him,
and Pompey twice driven out of the field: yet was he humble to all, dear to
his followers, pitiful to his enemies, chaste of body, sober of carriage, and
might not abide a dissolute body, that were always talking of women, and
wantonness. Another like to him was Agesilaus a grecian Prince, who although
he were amorous, yet modest in word, and action; content with any mirth but
impudicities; and if the contrary had been offered, he gave it a proud
repulse, or a deaf ear. How many examples be there of such in our books, and
how many noble christians both dead, and alive, very imitable in this kind.
But ours had rather follow Hanniball; Just.
and so let them; for there was not a more worthy for all qualities belonging
to a gentleman, nor any more sober or continent then he, or that took more
pains, or that less loved idleness then he. Our country men, many of them are
great readers, and small followers. They scorn to be ignorant of any thing,
yet make no use of it, but lip wit. I had rather see a still practiser,
then a loud speaker, that is ready to take the tale out of a man's mouth,
whatsoever he speaks of. He that reads much outwardly, and reformes little
inwardly, is like one that delights in a pleasant wood, and yet does nothing
when he is there, but make rods for himself.

Fie upon idleness, the mother of sin, and effeminatenesse both in high and
low.

Queritur Aegistus quare sitfactus adulter? Ovid.

In promptu causa est: desidiosus erat.
The question was asked: why loved Aegistus luxury?
Answer was made, Because he lived idly.
And therefore they that have any goodness, will hate to live idly. They
shall have time enough to be idle in their graves; but while we be living let
us always be doing. When Eumenes was so straightly besieged by Antigonus, Plut.
that his people had no room to do any thing, they were affraide of nothing
more then of idleness; their enemy troubled them not so much without the
walls, as idleness within. But their worthy captain provided for them very
well, devised new exercises of strength, and motion, such as their little room
would allow of, either in his hall, or in some other corners. And some he made
overseers of the rest. The very horses they would not let be idle, but kept
them in breath, with hanging them in such sort, that they could scarce touch
ground with their forefeete, and then belabored them so with stick, and
voice; that they sweat, and groand again. Others walked them, till they were
cool. Others ground barley for them. There was not a gentleman that refused to
do any thing to keep him from idleness.

Idleness is the corrupter of all good manners, Plut. in mor.
no virtue has possession (says one Philosoper) where a man is not in some
good action. Idleness has been equally punished heretofore with murder or
theft. Others made it but banishment; others made it fineable. Atheus persicus
made them worse then horse rubbers, in Licurgo. Strobeus ser. 42.
that were idle. Lycurgus provided so, that none could be idle; all persons had
enough to do in their place. Amongst the Lucanes in Italy, a man lost his
money by the laws, that he had lent to an idle, or a voluptuous body. Plin.
lib. 6.
Amasis likewise a most wise king who reigned four and forty years over the
Egyptians, made a law upon pain of death, Plut. in Sympo.
that every man should once a year give an account of his life, and actions,
and how he maintained himself: and he appointed Pretours of purpose to take
this account. Sueto.
This law did Augustus like so well of, that he made the like in Rome. And
Solon long before him brought the same to Athens, to root out of the city
unprofitable weeds, that suck out the juice and foyson of the earth, and
bring nothing again; take the fruit of it, and give no fruit again. The ox
feeds by us, and gives us his flesh to eat; the cow feeds, and gives sweet
milk for it; the sheep feeds, and gives us clothing to our backs; and our
horse carries us for his meat. Only our idle bodies take all they can, give
nothing again; and since they will not be their own law, it is great pity,
that the law of Amasis is not amongst them.

If I should tell you more stories in this kind; happly I should please you,
more then my self. It is not the Roman nor the Grecian, or Spartan that I
seek for: but the true Christian. Mat. 11.
Woe be to thee Corozain, as our Savior says: so woe be to thee so idle a
Christian whatsoever. For if Christ had walked the Egyptian streets, if Christ
had been preached out of the Roman pulpits, if Pagans had had such a mark to
shoot at, as we in the eyes of our faith have; had it been said to them,
Mat. 20.
why stand ye here idly, and have a world of your own to think of in
heaven, which will not be had with out thinking, and laboring? they would not
have needed such laws as I speak of, nor would have stood gaping so idly
about them, as we do, and care not which end goes forward.

And therefore o ye flower of our nation that are here together, the hope of
your friends, and not the meanest portion of your countries expectation. Whose
ancestors were not idle when then they carried the lillies far and near,
and extended your borders so wide, and large; nor idle when they defended your
frontiers, built your cities, towers, towns, castles, and Churches without
number; not idle in so many foundations, and noble monuments, which they have
left behind them to the glory of God, and honor of our nation; not idle when
they bred you, and brought you up to that you now be. And your selves also not
idle hitherto, either in your times of march, or days of truce. Nay, I know
not whether any in the world were in better business then you; not scorning
the meanest offices in the field, or camp; or about your own persons, when
ye had others to do it for you. Yet somewhat ye would be doing always with
your own horse, or armor, or drying your own powder, or accommodating your
pike, or picking and pruning your petronell, observing ever so willingly your
leaders voice; and serving God continually in word, and thought. Let not this
idle canker (I say) come near your doors hereafter, or set any footing where
you have to do. Fly it, shun it, avoid it, as you would a house that has
the plague in it.

Take heed I beseech you of this unprofitable idleness, that will be ready
to assault you when you come home. And beware no less of idle hangers on. I am
very unprofitable my self; but rather then I would be as some are, I wish my
self a stone, or a piece of wood, that somewhat might be made of me. There
is not a stick of wood, but will make somewhat. Either a bow, or a
bedde-staffe, or a top, or a tyle-pinne. But our idle bodies serve for
nothing. They are neither good for God, nor the commonwealth, nor themselves.
Not for God, but to practice his judgments upon. Not for the commonwealth,
but to eat up their provision before it be spoiled, and to drink up their
pots by yards, or dozens if that be good. Neither are they for themselves;
that put not out their wit, nor that they have to the most, no, not to any
advantage for their eternal good. Knowing well enough that they may not live
here always. One day the doleful bell must ring out for them, their
eye-liddes closed up, their face cast over with a cloth, their body laid out
upon cold boardes, the soul wandering the whilst in a very strange country,
dark and dismal, not a man or angel to speak for it, nor any to bid
welcome, but a sort of misshapen and angry monsters.

Idleness will be pitifully paid for at that day, and so I so I leave them.
If they have nothing else to do, let them be humble, and learn their
Catechism by heart again; or go to some heavenly broker, as they went in the
gospel to Saint John Baptist; or as they in the Acts, that came to the
Apostles, to know what they should do, or how they might put out with safety
any hability they had. Yea the Scripture there says more. Acts 2.
That they were compuncti cord, their hearts (as it were) bled within them,
when they heard of their duties. Oh that your hearts would bleed likewise,
though I be but a worm that speak to you at this time, for lack of a
better. Yet I do wish that this duty of yours were as deeply conceived by
you, as it deeply concerns you; to the end that ye ask always as they did,
quid faciemus, what shall we do? or what amends shall we make for time past?
how shall we bestow our selves hereafter? how shall we spend our idle
hours? how the forenoone, how the afternoon, that no more time may be lost?
Truly it will not hurt a man to ask; neither will it be troublesome to any
friend that loves you, to resolve you. But yet if my counsel be not pleasing
to some, I would wish them yet, to do as the great Turk does, (I would it
were the worst he did) to profess some mechanical art, to keep him from
idleness. This man makes rings for bowe-men, his father made arrows well.
And if a gentleman can paint or limme, or imborder for his exercise, or have
skill of gardening, and planting either fruit or fuel, or make, or mend any
thing that belongs to himself, or his horse, it will not disparage him.

And this I speak the rather before you that be Soldiers, because your course
of life I see is very active, or very idle. Your skill for the most part goes
no further then Mars. Ye have learnt nothing else here; and if Mars have no
employment for you at home, ye will fall to worse courses; which I would be
loath to hear of any of you, and yet idleness will dispose you to it, whether
ye will or no. Gray hairs will grow upon you quickly, and ye shall not know
for what. Bethink your selves suddenly what course ye will take, to pass
your time profitably, and to prevent the extreme evils that idleness brings.
The Philosopher says, there is no vacuum in rerum natura, from the top of
heaven, Arist. phi.
to the center, there is nothing void of some substance. And as the law of
nature admits no emptiness, so let your manly nature allow of no idleness, but
fill it up with good thoughts at the least, to keep out this idle vacuum.

I have stood somewhat long upon your idle folks, and upon idleness, because
it is the bane of commonweals, and ruin of most houses. And I would have
both public, and private to take notice of their daily danger, which is sooner
felt then avoided. Yet these be not they our Prophet speaks of, as I said
before: for these be but idle, and take no pains; In labor hominum non sunt,
Psalm. 72.
they be no painetakers, but ease-takers. And he speaks of those here, that
labor and are always toyling about somewhat; and whom it seems he takes
pity of, in that they travel, and sweat about such things, as give no true
contentment, or security at all to their souls. There be two sorts of these,
that take pains, and care in the world without this Saturity. The first is of
them that labor, and yet eat not at all, for all their labor. They feed not
of our Bread aforesaid, and therefore no marvel if they be not filled. The
more one labors, the further off from filling, if he feed not. The other is
of them that labor and feed, and yet they thrive not greatly, nor are filled.
They tafte and feed (I say) of the Breads I spoke of in my first part; but
they feed more sparingly then they need, having such plenty before them. And
these be those our Prophet speaks of properly; that take pains about many
things, when one thing only is necessary; labor so much for Transitories,
Luke 10.
that they are the weaker for it to things eternal.

The first sort surely comes not within his meaning in this place, being
notorious sinners, and such as labor for wicked ends. Of whom it may be said
iam iudicati sunt, they have Judgment of hell upon them already. And who be
these but extortioners, and wringers, that care not how they get, so they get.
Who else? but the proud, contentious, and malicious persons, men and women.
Who else? the backbiter, tale-carrier, and makebate. Who else? drunkards and
swearers, that do nothing but fret, and chafe, and make a noise; quarrellers
also, and lascivious persons, and perpetual gamesters. None of these be saved
almost without a miracle. For they will not so much as taste of any thing that
should do them good. If they would but taste, happily they might have their fill
at one time, or other. But they will none of it, and so I leave them also. It is
neither these our Prophet speaks of, being in no way at all, no, not in the
first step to Saturity: neither is it of idle bodies as I said before, because
they labor not at all. It is the other sort only (as I take it) that is here
intended, and meant; whose endeavors are for the most part to honestends, and
their business commonly not unlawful.

Such I say as have a desire to be saved and use means for it, but very
coldely many times, and very confusedly. Coldly, because it is with fervor too
little. Confusedly, because it is mixed, and interlaced, and ouerborne as it
were with worldly contentments. Ye know, if dross and filth get into our
veins, the blood will soon be tainted with it, and cannot give that
nourishment it should; but turns to bad humors, and bring us to that plight,
that although we feed with the best, yet we thrive not with the best. We look
like men that should be hardy and strong, but we prove like women in the
green sickness. We look pale and lean on it in Gods sight, and not worth the
ground we tread on. When we pray and our mind is fraught with other things;
when we come to the sacrament, and put not away all rancor; what is this, but
to sop our bread in the channel, or our meat in the dust of an old post, or
to eat raw flesh, or to pour in water into our Aqua-vitae. I will not say
but here is labor, and care, and means also used for the good of the Soul.
But it can never be fat thus, nor have Saturity. It will live, though it be
wan and pale; it will breath, though it be sallowe and green; it will go
forward though faintly; it will thrive a little, but not much. Sophocles.


Labor labori laborem imponit, as they say. One labor begets another in this
world, one labor must follow, and perfect other, or else all is imperfect.
There is labor in tilling, labor in sowing, labor in weeding, labor in
reaping, inning, and thrashing it out; after this, it must be ground, and set
on our board. If any of these labors be missing, there comes no fullness, or
saturity of it. It will be labor without saturity. What security have husband
men to mow their grass, and never make it; to reap their wheat, and to
leave it in the field to weather, and birds? What security find merchants in
loading, fraighting, launching, and putting into haven, if they leave all on
ship board when they have done, for every body to steal, and bring them not
into their warehouse? And this is that our Prophet speaks of here, our labor
must be contimando: he inueighes not here against notorious sinners, or damned
crewes; Such as the world is full of, and the Scriptures are full against them
in other places. But the Prophecies here against them, that are in their way to
heaven, and make no more haste in it; will be put by with every toy; go
forward one day, backward another; do well one day, ill another; amend one
day, fall to it again an other; have good meat before them, and eat no
better of it: eat well perhaps, but heed not what they swallow with it.

They forbear sin what they can, but watch not their bad inclinations; are
good to the poor, but reuengefull to their enemy, are given to fasting, and
prayer, yet are wayward and testy to their lives end. Others be mild, but
negligent withal; stout but stiff withal, wise but opinatiue, forward but
inflexible, obedient but against their wills; praise worthy but glorying in it.
It will prove inutilis labor. I fear me in the end. And their work may turn
to froth for all their labor in a great many; or else so full of trash, as the
blood of Christ can do no more then wash it away. There can be no virtue or
goodness in us without labor, no patience or perseverance without labor, no
withstanding temptations, or prayer fruitful without labor; and if we labor in
none of these, it is asigne that we hauenone of these.

Now what should I speak of zeal and fervor of devotion, which ought to be
our wings to heauen-ward? whether be these fled? What wicked fiend, or
accursed fortune of ours has blown them away? What coast, or foreign
country has ravished them from us; that we may go seek them, and fetch
them home again, and make much of them, when we have them? and will this be
done without labor also? I would to God we saw, what is yet to be seen, and
daily comes to our ears by merchants, and travelers of the furthest parts of
the earth? What love and zeal those Paynims bear both young and old of both
sexes to their gods, that are no gods. It would make us ashamed of our extreme
coldness, and indeuotion to our true God; if we saw it. Yea what will they be,
and how zealous, when they come to be converted (as it may be) since they are
now so devout to Idols or Pago-des as they call them, the handy works of men?
There were to be seen in the old testament, Psalm. 105.
that offered their children to sacrifice in their blind zeal. There be now
in the Jndies that sacrifice themselves daily to please their god, and they
think it no labor because we speak of labor, nor stick at any pains that
can be, in their wicked service. Happily ye will not believe what I shall tell
you, but there be thousands living to testify it: neither do I speak it, as
fit for us to follow, yet not unfit to make use of; that we may learn to
labor the good we may, by them that labor in evil which they may not.

Of certain they are there so full of devotion, and the people of all sorts are
so obsequious to their Pago-des; Hist. Alex.
that the king of Cochine not long since holden for a prudent prince, and a man
of notable government, left his government wholly, and in habit of a poor man,
went a five years pilgrimage, to visit all the pago-des of India al alone
unknown; where he endured much misery and sorrow before his return, and yet
such comfort he took in it belike, that he began such another voyage
afterward, but died in it.

His successor likewise that followed him, took after him unfortunately. For
being but of weak constitution, yet using great austerity to himself many
hours in a day in his closet alone, with superstitious meditations, which were
most hurtful to his health, he died within the year. Yet see his fervor.
Upon a day the governor of Cochine advised him, and besought him, to have more
care of his health, alleging the Physicians opinions, that the long
ceremonies, and much solitariness, which he used for prayer, would quickly
hazard him, or cost him his life. Howbeit the king set light by any thing he
could say; and told him further, that he made more reckoning of the least of
his devotions to the Pago-des, then of an hundred thousand lives; all which if
he had them, he would spend in their service. There be some kings and great
Lords in the country, that for the reverence they bear to their Pago-des,
they have little ones of gold hanging at their forehead, and do their
devotions to them at their times, with great humiliation. And to the end they
may not forget it, they have their pages of purpose, that have nothing else to
do, but to put them in mind of their hours, and to name but the name of the
pago-des, whereat the King will bow himself with great reverence. In the
night time also, these pages awake their masters for the same cause.

But that which exceeds all admiration is a terrible feast, which they hold
at Garcopa a little from Onor, on a certain day. And this is such a dreadful
thing, that Christians are forbidden to go thither upon pain of
excommunication. On this festival day, there is an infinite concourse of
people to attend it. The Pago-de with certain of the Brachmans comes forth in
a chariot very richly set out, the wheels whereof are tired with Iron, as
piercing and sharp as a razor. And as the chariot marches, there comes a
number to offer their lives to the Pago-de, and cast themselves on their knees
in the lowliest manner they can, until by little and little they lie flat on
the earth, just where the wheel must come over them, and cuttes them all to
pieces; and these be holden for Saints, as our Martyrs are with us.

In the other parts of India about the borders of Choromandell, of Saint
Thomas, and in other places likewise, the Pago-de is carried upon men's
shoulders; where the Brachmans that carry it make as though the god will go no
further, and they not able to carry it further. And it may be that the Devil
does press them so hard, that they cannot stir indeed. Then come there many
(that are never wanting at such a time) who stabbe themselves to death and
there fall down before it. And yet the Pago-de will not stir, until the
number be full, as the devil or Brachmans would have it. And then they go
forward to the temple again, well laden with the spoil of those damned
creatures both body and soul. Yet this they do, and think they do their god
service in it. And shall arise no doubt in judgment against us. Who know the
true God, and yet are so spiritlesse, and dull in his true service, as we be.

There is no need of sliceing, and wounding our selves as they do; yet it
will not hurt us to leap out of a warm bed sometimes for a Pater noster
while, either to encounter an ill thought assayling us, or to pray for them
that have no where to lie, or for them that be in danger that night by sea, or
land, or if we chance to hear a passing bell. God forbid we should kill or
misdiet our selves with over much care; and yet to pinch our selves a little
for the poor, or for abating our flesh that it rebel not, are testimonies to
our conscience that we fear, and love God. We will not leave our needful
business at randon; and yet we will take our times to talk with God in
secret, or at public prayer and think long to be at it. If we have a
charge, we may not neglect it; yet well may we think, that any act of
devotion is more noble in it self, then the mannaging of a kingdom. We will
not lie groueling a whole Sabbath till sun set, Psalm. 6. Psalm. 118.
as many Jews do; yet let us not think much to labor in our prayer with
groaning as king David did. And if we cannot do it seven times a day as he
did, yet once a day or a week it were noble, and would profit us much to pray
so, as if we should then dye.

It may be, ye think I impose too much upon ye now, when I thrust these
things into matter of salvation. But mistake me not I beseech you. I know ye
be stout men and valiant, and ye stand upon your gentry, but if ye be not
good men also (as I think ye are) all your stoutnesse is nothing. He is a
stout man, that is a good man, and I show you but some tokens how to know when
ye are as you should be. It is true. Christ is our salvation and redemption.
But how? Fac hoc and viues; Luke 10.
somewhat there is must be done on our part. And it will not be done without
Labor. We must decline from evil, and do good, and both these will cost
labor. And if ye think these little things, that I have spoken of; ye must
remember with all, what the Holy Ghost does teach us: Qui spernit modica,
paulatim decidet, Eccl. 9.19.
they that set light by little things, by little shall decay. Neither are they so
little, as they can be done without labor. If we repent us of our sins; is
this all? Saint Ambrose tells us, that he knew many repenters, but few that
did the works that belongs to it. If we fast, is this enough? our Prophet tells
us in another place, that our wills are found in our fastings. We labor not
to weed out our own wills, Esaias 58. 1. Cor. 5. 1. Reg. 16.
nor to sever our sour leaven from that which is pure. God looks not on the
stoutnesse of our person, or highness of our work, but on our lowliness and
meekenes withal: and loves us more for one act of Mortification, then if we
gained him thousands; yea although it were the whole kingdom of Turkey. One
temptation well encountered, or passion overcome, is more glorious in his sight,
then all the conquests of Julius Caesar, or the triumph of Aemilius. And this
is the labor God requires of us, and I exhort ye to. This the labor our
Prophet speaks of, and has Saturity. And the want of this Labor brings that
heavy sentence upon us, which few do mark, or take note of. I beseech you
mark what our Savior says to this purpose. Luke 13.24
Multi querunt intrare (says he) and non poterunt, Many shall seek to enter
heaven and cannot. What a saying is this, that many shall seek to enter and
cannot enter? whom will not such a sentence terrify, or not make him, or
compel him to stir about this business, although he were half dead? but
what is the reason of this sentence? No other but this. They seek and sit
still. They go forward, but mend no pace; the bridegroom is come, and gone
the whilst. They cannot abide to sweat at it, or take pains. They cry
Domine, Domine, and will not put out their hand. The Labor is not hard, yea
the burden light, and yet they will not lie under it. It is little more pains
then to see a play: and yet they will not do the one, when they do the other
daily. The Playhouse door is low, and narrow, and yet they stick not to
stoop, and rend their clothes with crowding. It is beset with bills and
halberds, and they may have a knock, and yet they fear nothing. They may
loose their purses or somewhat else, and yet they will adventure. It will cost
them money when they enter, and a great many sit uneasy for their money, or in
danger of infection, and yet they weigh it not. Who labors for heaven thus?
who seeks heaven so laboriously, fears no difficulty, scorns no disgrace,
sets light by loss, or a blow, biddes for the best place, and will have no
nay until they be in it? They that seek heaven thus, shall be sure to
enter. And they that seek it not thus; the sentence is ginen non poterunt,
they do but go by, and look at the place; but they cannot go in, as our
Savior says. And this may suffice for the second point, which was Labor and
Saturity, whereby to stir you, and hasten you, in your way to heaven. There
be two things belong to haste. The one is to know the readiest way: the next to
loose no time in our speed, if the matter be of importance. There is nothing
imports us more, then our heavenly inheritance. And I have shown the next way
thither out of the Prophet Esaias by holy virtuous life, hearing, reading, and
often receiving, which I proved to be understood by this word Bread, in
respect of all the properties of Bread that are found therein. The worth of
which bread has been declared unto ye, as also what Saturity and true
contentment is; and who they be that labor, and come short of it. I have not
been troublesome some to you, to inueigh against vanities, or love of the
world. Ye have store of books concerning that matter. I have not declaimed of
worldly contentments, how far they be from true contentments; yea rather
thorns, Mat. 13. Eccl. 1.
as our Savior calls them; or affliction of spirit as Solomon terms them.
Every sermon ye hear is full of this Argument, whereunto I refer you. And
therefore if ye should like to love them, or set your heart on them, being so
base as they be; in vain ye hasten forward, that go so clean backward. In
vain ye fly upward with so heavy a clogge at your heel; and in vain do I
persuade you to make haste, that will not do a way first, what will hinder you
of your journey? Have ye riches? love the^ loosely, and part with them
willingly, if need be. Have ye pleasures? use them moderately in godly
fear. Have ye honor, and pre-eminence? keep watch with your selves over
pride, and disdain; and let all that know you, make account of you, that ye
be as humble, as honorable. And so, if ye can carry your contentments in
this sort, as God be the practical ground, in whom alone is our true Satis,
or contentment; then are ye undoubtedly in your true, and perfect way to
heaven, and nothing remains now, but that ye make haste, and take comfort in
it. Howbeit for that in our best actions, and endeauours, that we have in our
way to God; our spirits be often times dull, and have need of quickening:
Sap. 9.
for as it is written, our body corruptible weighs down our soul, and
hinders haste exceedingly. It shall be our next and last point, that I will
entreat of; to say somewhat of the joys in heaven; that may waken us when we
slumber, remember us when we forget; and spur us forward to amend our pace,
when we begin to stand still. But this I will reserve until our next meeting.
I will trouble you no further now.

FINIS.
THE SECOND Oration. upon Panis Angelorum.
I Began the other day with Bread, and now I will end with Bread. I began with
Bread of Travelers. I will end with Bread of Angels. The best dish, I have
reserved for last; the bread the Angels feed on for ever. The other bread
which we have spoken of, was a preparatiue for this bread, and this thereward
of that: to set at board with angels, to eat angels meat. Psalm. 77.
Not the meat that was brought the Israelites by the ministry of angels, and
perished; but that which angels themselves do feed on, in sight of their
maker. And how far better is this, then to sit with Princes, or to be
fellows with Potentates? This is it must be the reward of our Labors, this
the Saturity, which nothing can be added unto. The very reward, that holy Moses
looked after, and now has to his fill. As it is written, Moses beheld his
reward. Heb. 11.
His eye was still upon this reward, and so overcame with ease the hardness he
sustained upon mountains, and rocks, for forty years together; and what he
endured in all his timethere, the tongue of man cannot express.

He was one that walked perfectly in the ways of God always, and therefore
was wortthy to talk with God face to face. Mitissimus super terram: not a
milder, or an humbler that ever lived upon earth. And yet the better to hold
out through all afflictions to the end, aspiciebat remunerationem, he was glad
to look at his reward; and to remember often, what he should have for his
pains in the end. S. Paul likewise had his eye that way, Romans 8.
that he said, that all we can suffer in this world, cannot deserve the glory,
that attends us in the world to come. But how did Saint Paul; or how did Moses
know this? were they ever to see it? certain it is, they had some
illustrations more then other? because their love of God was greater, and their
pains in Gods service much more then others. 2. Cor. 12. Exodus 33.
The one was ravished into the third heavens; the other saw the back-parts of
God, as the Scriptures make mention. By which I infer, if such noble sparks
as these had need of these comforts, and to reflect sometimes upon their
reward: How much more we, that are of the latter brood, borne as it were in
the wayne of the world, and coming short a great deal of their spirit and
fervor; had we need I say, to think one it often, and to bear continually
the joys of heaven in our mind; yea, to keep (if it might be) a true picture
of them always before our eyes, for fear of forgetting. For thus it is with
us. If we forget them, we are like to hazard them, if we remember them, they
are like to be our own.

There be four last things, that we are taught to bear in mind, Deuteronomy. 32.
and we shall never sin; whereof heaven is the principal. Death, judgment
and hell are very needful also to be thought of, because it is good for us to
fear, as well as love. These indeed do fill us with fear and terror; but
heaven filles us with love and ardent desire. Hell drives to God; heaven draws
to God. Hell whips us with horror; heaven hales us with beauty. Love and fear
are both of them profitable I say, but loueis more acceptable to God, because
it is his own prime, and original quality, who dreadeth nothing, and all
things dread him.

It seems (my dear lovers and friends) ye look that I should somewhat say
of the joys of heanen, what they be, and so it were fit, if I were able to
perform it. But me think when I enter into so great a matter, I am stricken
on a sudden with barrenness, and know not how to express my self, or where
to begin. For I must speak of that, which I do but wincke at a far off,
neither can I well tell, what credit I shall have with you, to philosophate
unto you of most excellent colors, which I never saw but darkeling. For if S.
Paul could not tell us that little which he saw, nor yet Moses; nor, if any
other Saint have been there, and come again to life, as S. Gregory writes of
one Felix: in Dial.
much less shall I be able, that never came near that place, to delineate
unto ye any thing with my rude pensill, 2. Cor. 12.
that shall be worth your expectation. Saint Paul calls them Arcana, hidden
mysteries, that are kept under seal from us, and such as we may not aspire to
know, until we come there; and much less to tell, no not with the tongue of
an angel. The best that I can bring you, will be but a reflection of a
reflection, or a piece of the Suns glory by night in the body of the Moon.
And yet since ye are come to hear, and I have undertaken to say somewhat, I
will be bold to say what I know, and no more; I leave greater mysteries to
them, that are better learned.

Our reward in heaven (sure) is admirably great: but what it is, or in what
fashion, that we may say it is thus and thus, no man can deliver. Two things I
know, and am assured of touching heaven, and heavenly joys; that is to say,
the greatness of them when we come there, and the neerenesse of them while we
be here: which may be also no small comfort unto us; and of these two I will
speak a little, after my wonted breuity, leaving the rest to your good
thoughts when I have done. If your faith were like to his, that said iustus ex
fide viuit; Abac. 2. Romans 2.
we should feel this greatness we speak of before we come at it; our very
soul would rejoice, and triumph in it, before it could express why. If our
faith I say were so lively, and springing as it might be, our tongues would not
list to speak, but our very deeds, actions, and behauiours, would show heaven
in our faces. Our very countenance would bewray heaven in us. There is nothing
would disturb us, no anger disquiet us, no passion distemper us, no ill
fortune bear us down; but as we shall be when we come there, so shall we
begin to be, while we be here, constant, stout, resolute in all good purposes
like Elias or Elizeus, or Saint John Baptist, and a multitude of others after
the new testament. But I shall speak more of this anon. Our faith and spirit
is not of that viuacity, that theirs was of; nor have we apprehensions of
heavens delights, but by such similies, and resemblances, as we can make by
visible things; by which we have a guess, or estimate at the greatness we
speak of, and yet come short of it by infinite degrees.

I cannot tell how to express this greatness better then by one word; a long
word full of matter, and makes up a verse alone. Incomprehensibility the sum
of our felicity. For we must know for a certainety, that the greatness of our
reward, that is to say, of heaven, is incomprehensible of any mortal
understanding. But why so? do we not read of some that have seen heaven, or
paradise in a trance, or ecstasy, and coming to themselves again, have told
what they saw there? delicate green meddowes with silver streams and golden
sands in the bottom running through the midst of them; the banks beset with
violets, and primroses, that never partch with heat, nor perish with treading
on; the weather temperate, always April with them.

Cool without cold, day without night,
Sun full of shade, shade full of light.
Is not this comprehensible? gardens full of all sweeteflowers, daintily dressed
without man's labor, the rose without thorns never fading, pinckes and lillies
of all fresh colors never decaying, spring and harvest coming always
together, blooming and bearing all at a time; nothing there but wish, and have
it, from the chirping bird of rarest feature, to the loud organ, or music of
the best harmony; these and such like have been revealed to some good folk.
Are not these also comprehensible? and yet we said, that heaven is
incomprehensible.

We shall there behold the humanity of Christ and his blessed mother the
glorious Virgin, whom to see in flesh, we could travel the world round, if
they were living; such comfort we should find of it. For, if that notable
Lawmakers of Megapolis thought long to dye, Circidas.
and took pleasure to think, he should then see Pythagoras, Euclid, and other
famous men deceased: how much more pleasure will it be to us, to see Jesus,
whom we all serve and honor: whose name alone makes hearts to leap, and
devils to tremble, in power so triumphant, so sweet andamiable in aspect, and
so alluring to all beholders, that we shall not off on him, after we come once
to see him. And is not this comprehensible?

This heaven we speak of was revealed to S. Apoc. 21.
John in form of a city, twelve thousand furlongs in length, as many in
breadth, and as many in height, all the twelve gates of it, were entire pearl,
the streets paued with gold, and the walls of the same pure gold, and smoothe
like crystal: on the bottom whereof, grew all kind of precious stones,
whereof twelve are named. It had no temple; for the temple was God himself.
He saw a River also of living water, clear as crystal, springing out of
the seat of God, and the lamb. This, and a great deal more he saw in
spirit; and is not all this comprehensible?

I gave you the other day five properties of bread. Wherein I told you nothing
above your reach, but ye might plainly understand them to be in our bread of
Travelers. And I can make it as plain to you, how they be also as evident,
and far more certain in our bread of Angels. The substance of our traveling
bread was the grace of God in word, and works: The substance of our Angelical
bread is his grace also, not in faith, but in fruit; not in works, but in
reward. His grace is with us here but in hope, there, in certain knowledge;
here in trembling, there in true possessing. Here we may fall again, there,
never. This grace of God in heaven, shall be his eye of glory upon us always.
The masters eye makes a fat beast, and the eye of God upon us incessantly,
makes fair creatures, and not inferior to Angels. And this was the first
property to feed us, and nourish us, Quipascit inter lillia, He shall feed
us amongst Lillies and Angels.

The second property was to make purest blood in us. We shall not look like
our earthly complexions. No gross humors or dross shall approach us. How pure
shall we be? As pure as Angels. Our bodies like glass transparent, Sine
macula aut ruga, All manner of spots will be taken out of us, and every
wrinckle made plain. A third quality of bread was to be loved of all. And who
shall behold that sparkling eye of God, and shall not be enamoured with it?
Vulnerasti cor meum in vno oculorum tuorum, Cant. 4.
Our hearts will be wounded with that alluring eye. It shall not be like our
loves here, which are more in clayming, then in obtaining, and after a while
we care not for them. Believe me: not so in heaven. And all this is
comprehensible.

Now what should I speak how common this bread is in heaven, which was the
fourth property? This bread of Seraphins, o how easily it is gotten, and
without asking? Common I say, for every one shall have enough. Neither shall
the commonnesse, or having without asking make the reward more vile. For every
one shall rejoice that another has the same, or more then he. The forefinger
is graced with that the little finger wears.

I keep still within compass of your capacity. And to omit the fifth property,
which is not in heaven, where none can ever be at loss, or fall from good
estate: I pass to a sixth property, which is in our Angels bread, and was not
in the other. There is no doubt, but we shall have our taste in heaven, as
other our senses, but in greater use and perfection. And if we could make a
piece of bread to taste in our mouth of what we list, like a pear, or
pearmaine, a cherry, a plumbe, or a piece of marmalet, we would think it an
excellent thing. Behold, our Angels bread tastes of God; and in God is every
good taste. No amber or ciuet so sweet as he, no conserve so preservative, no
codinik so delectable. Is not all this also comprehensible? How is it then that
we say, heaven is incomprehensible?

And yet we must make our saying good, that it is indeed incomprehensible. All
our amplifying is nothing absque eo, Cant. 4.
quod intrinsecus latet, All is nothing to that which is hidden, as the lover
said of his love in the Canticles. It is hidden from us most, that shall
delight us most. Few of all these are there, that I have spoken of. Buildings,
and walls of gold, no such thing there; no green meddowes, or silver
streams; no music, or melody, such as ever we heard, or knew. All these be
base, to that we shall find there. And yet our senses here attaining no
higher matter of pleasure: these things are said to be there, that we most
desire, and have greatest luster here. And which if we find not there, in
these kinds, yet are we not deceived; because we shall find them there in
another kind we know not of, five hundred times better, and without all
comparison greater.

And this do they that be learned call Theologiam negatiuam. Grana. de Symb.
Because all that we can say here of heaven and heavenly things in the
affirmative, we may boldly deny and say, there is no such thing there. For our
bodies it is clear, we shall be bright, quick, nimble, subtle, full of
noble perfections, such as we can ask no more. But for things without us, how
we shall find them, no man can justly say. No such light as we apprehend, no
such mirth or feasting, no pearl or precious gemes there; no palace of
pleasure with Bricks or pauements of gold; no such odours for the smell, or
dainty notes to our ear; or gustfull things to our pallat, as we have them
here. But on the contrary; if we say what is not there, that is evil and
troublesome here: all that we may boldly say to be literally true. No
affliction there, no fear of any thing, no sorrow or lamentation, no weeping
or wayling, nor any thing that can grieve. This flesh of ours shall not be
heavy, lumpish, or drowsy, mortal, passible, corruptible, or subject to
torment, not so much as to a finger-ake. All this we are sure shall not be,
and we shall not have; but what else we shall find there, or what heaven is
in the affirmative, it is wholly concealed from us, until we come there. And
therefore, as to our present knowledge, and to our now capacity; if we should
take upon us to define, or describe heaven what it is, I know not how to do it
then to say thus: Heaven is that which it is not; and it is not that, which it
is.

And with this agrees a saying of Saint Paul. For whatsoever we say or
affirm of heaven out of the Scriptures, fathers, revelations, or visions that
good people have had, and I should stand to recite here till night: yet
notwithstanding he tells us absolutely, In cor hominis non ascendit, It never
came up into our heart, and much less into our tongue, to think or say, what
it is. And to say the truth, it were a great imperfection in heavens
perfection, that it should be like any thing here, or we in our mortality
capeable of any thing there: more then this in general, that it is a vision of
God, and that we shall be so delighted with this heavenly, and blisfull gaze
when we come there, that when we have beheld him incessantly as many thousand
years, as there be minutes of hours in a thousand years; he will still be
as new to us, as if we had never seen him before; and we still more thirsty
after his divine contemplation, then ever we were of drink after a hot days
journey. Howbeit to say now what this felicity is, or rather in what sort we
shall apprehend God, or in what part, or power of us this feeling pleasure
shall consist, when we come to see Christ, and glorified friends, we neither
know, nor can know here.

No doubt, the apprehension we shall have of him, shall be in our
understanding soul. But whether in such sort, as it is in other knowledges, or
whether the difference will be Specificall or no, I know not. We hear of many
delicate fruits in strange countries, apples, pears, or plumbes, of most
excellent taste, and verdure. The outsides are described to us, both for
color, shape, and bigness. But none can tell us the sweetness, or
delightful relish of them within, until we taste. Only this we know, that
our sense can judge of them when we have them; and we shall need no new
addition to our senses perfection to taste them. But when we come to so
infinite an object as God is; shall we not need a new understanding think
ye? 2. Pet. 3. Apoc. 21.
Nouos coelos, nouam terram, and ecce nouafacio omnia. God will make all things
new. And shall not we have a new intellect also, to understand so new, so
rare, and so unspeakable a mystery? but I leave it. It is not for nothing,
that he says, in cor hominis non ascendit. It never came into man's heart what
God has prepared there, for those that love him, as they should do here.

And it is not only the vision of God, which the Apostle speaks of here; but
also of the particular joys, and accidental glories, ensigns, and laurels,
that Saints shall have given them there, after as their fight, and combat was
here. To Martyrs such a one, to confessors such a one, to virgins, and other,
such as it pleases him. Doctors, and Preachers, that labor to gain souls,
shall have their peculiar cognizance of glory. And so shall Kings, Princes, and
Magistrates that govern well, and labor the public good with their eye
always to Godward. And all you that be military, ye shall not want yours
also, that fear no blows, but are ready to execute for the good of your
country. All which particular glories, what they shall be, and of what fashion
our liueries, or new kind of vesture; or of what color our ensigns, and
laurels in our hands, and a thousand things besides; and how inestimably
delightful they will be to us, and graceful in the sight of others; neither
eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor has it ascended into the heart of man quae
preparauit says he. He says not quod preparauit. For God has prepared many
things for us, according to our many vocations and diverse employments we
received of his goodness in this his Millitant Church.

And here I shall desire you instantly to note well the words of this blessed
Apostle, when he says thus: in cor hominis non ascendit, it ascended not into
man's heart, or came not so high as man's heart. Why did he not say it came not
down, or descended not into man's heart, but ascended not into man's heart? Are
heavenly things below us, that he should say, they ascended not into our
hearts? Christ ascended into heaven. Heaven is above us. Psalm. 122.
Ad te domine leuaui oculos. When we pray for any thing, we look upward, and
ask it from above. And when it comes to us; it descends, and comes down to
us, not ascends to us; and yet the Apostle says, it has not ascended. The
greek word is (...). ascendit. How can they ascend or come up to us, that are
so far above us? this word me thinks has a mystery in it, and very fit
for our purpose, to show the greatness we speak of.

There is no contentment in this world, but if it come to affect us, and to
possess our heart, it ascends to our heart, and comes from below our heart;
it comes from under us, and for the most part, from under our very feet. We
tread on them, and they are all under us. Great lands and possessions, fair
houses, parkes, and palaces; they come all from under us, and were earth, and
clay first, before they came to this magnificence. Their furniture of silk
arrasse, and beds of gold; all that we carry on our backs, or deck our
heads, or necks withal when we be at the richest with stone, and pearl, and
coffers full of treasure, that are made so much of; whence comes all this, but
out of barren earth, or the bottom of the sea, sought for, and tumbled out by
the toil of man from the bowels of the earth, that are so far beneath us.
Again, if our contentment be in belly cheer, all comes likewise from the
lowest elements. Nothing lower then the earth, and water, which they feed on,
before they come to feed us. And therefore if they come so near our heart, as
to be loved by us; we love that which is lower, and baser then our selves, and
they must ascend a great height unto us, to be as high as our hearts.

Yea let us go to higher elements and so upward to the top of primum mobile;
let them be never so high above yet are they under us by Gods ordination, who
made them, to serve us. And if we delight in them, and in the study of them as
to contemplate their motions, and iufluences, and all their varieties, that are
most pleasant to think on, and have holden Philosophers all their lives time:
all these may be said, and are in the number of those that ascend to us; our
heart, and best part being Lord of them, and they our subjects, and inferiors.
The consideration of stars, and planets, with their brightness, and beauty,
pure substance, and greatness, and the orbs they are carried in, the swiftnes
of their motion without noise, their change without disorder, their various
aspects without confusion; all these and a great deal more come under the
heart of man; and though they appear much higher then we, that go low by
the ground underneath them; yet may they truly be said to ascend to us: yea
all that God made in his six days work, be they never so rich, or excellent,
never so high in their situation, yet are they beneath the soul, or thought of
man, and are homagers to this little world of our understanding; and they
cannot be so great, but our thought is greater, they cannot be so high, or
tall, but our understanding will compass them, and is higher and taller then
they. Only the joys of heaven are higher then our apprehension; and therefore
Saint Paul says, they ascend not into our thought, or heart, as all things
else do, because we are made to ascend to them, and until then, we are not
capeable of them, no not of the least of them.

Behold here the greatness of heavenly rewards, our heart, and mind, our
soul, and understanding, that is capeable of all things, that are in the
world; and all things ascend to it, as to their commander; yet knows it not
the least thing in heaven, as it is indeed. The wit of man does pierce the
most hidden and abstruse things that are in nature; and yet cannot fasten upon
the least, and lowest things above nature. It is a wonderful thing, that there
is almost nothing, that escapes our knowledge, but is laid open by us, and we
can teach it them, that know it not. Who was there ever that went down to the
center of the earth to take measure of it; and yet we can prove by just
demonstration, how many mile it is thither, and how many about the whole earth,
and never stir foot? Who was ever carried so high as the Moon? who has
walked among the planets and firmament, to know their motions and distances one
from another, the bigness of the Sun and Moon; and their heights from the
earth? yet all this is known, and the professors of that science are so well
acquainted with the laws, and rules of that Celestial commonwealth, as if
they bad been borne and bredde there. Their yearly Ephimerides do show the
certainety of their knowledge pointing us to the very degree, and minute, where
to find a star, or what time of day, or night an Ecclips will be, and how
many points it will be darkened an hundred years hence.

It is not unknown to any, what a multitude of hidden matters are revealed,
and lie open to the Philosopher, and what an Anatomy he has made of nature,
and natural things. And not so contented, has transcended nature, with his
metaphisicall knowledge, and lets not God himself lie wholly hidden, but
brings him out into light. Who taught Aristotle and Plato that God was
eternal, infinite of greatness, infinite in power, the first moouer, one, and
no more but one? But it is not my purpose to speak of all sciences that have
been labored, and perfected, by man, every one of them so full of mystery,
variety, and delight, as nothing more. Which although it greatly commend Gods
goodness and bounty toward us, in that he has made out of dust, and ashes a
creature so capeable, and piercing by his own permission even into his own
substance and nature: yet so has he limited this knowledge of ours, that we
are not able to imagine what he is indeed Sicuti est, nor how great the
meanest thing that belongs to us, and shall be ours in the world to come, if
God makes us worthy. We have not only not seen or heard, but neither can we
guess in thought, in cor hominis non ascendit, what it is.

If the least thing then in heaven be so great, what is all heaven? what is
God, who is the sum and substance of all reward, and felicity? We that be
Christians, have much more knowledge then heathens had. Our light of reason is
doubled with our light of faith annexed thereunto; by which we both see more
then we see with our eye; and what we believe, we believe more, then had we
seen with eye. What seek we more? We believe that heaven is truly great, and
our reward unspeakably great. What seek we further into the secrets of God,
to know how? Let us not be curious in matters not belonging to us yet. Let us
not destroy faith with too much curiosity? If God would condescend to give us
a sight of heaven, and of our glory there, we should rather refuse it with
humility, then expect it with importunity. We should rather say to him,
Satis domine; thy promise is as much to me Lord, as if I were there to see it.
It is enough to me, that I know it is so. O let me not see, until it please
thee to call. This should be our speech to God; and much heed we ought to
take, that we diminish not his faith with least doubt of his promise, or desire
to have it proved by sense. Sense knowledge, derogats from faith knowledge. If
we see it once, it is faith no more. And we may offend in it ere we be
aware. For he that searches into Majesty, shall be overcome of glory. Prou.
25.
As much to say, as he that will enter into Gods counsel before he be called;
shall be punished as Phaeton was; his own pride will overthrow him. This
alone may suffice for the greatness of our reward; ye apprehend it with
faith, and that is enough, yea a great deal more, then any eloquence in the
world can paint unto you.

I omit therefore to speak of many things besides that would express this
greatness. As also of the many names, whereby it is called in holy writ, and
ancient fathers: which would greatly testify the greatness of it. As where it
is called Mons pacis, the Mountain of peace, where no disquiet or brabble can
reach at us; and that which Princes have much ado to perform with all their
power and policy, is there done with ease. No war or dissentation can
approach this hill, where hearts and minds are all one; one will in all, and
there is not found a second. It is called Domus dei, Eccl. 4.17. Psalm. 22.
The house of God: Or if ye will, Gods court, and we his courtiers, or
servants in ordinary: or if ye will, Gods hospital, and we his old
soldiers, when age has weakened us, infirmity disabled us, and death put
down the bar, that we may fight no more. O happy they that can get a place
there: where al sit rent free; shall haueoile for their wounds, ease for cumber,
pleasure for their pain, and all things provided for their hand, and can never
say, this they want, or this they would have more. Apoc. 3.
Heaven is called also new Jerusalem; and well may it be so called. For old
Jerusalem is in the enemies hands, while all good people groan, and will
never linne grieuing (I fear) till God shall make them free of the new.

It is many times called regnum coelorum, Mat. 5. Mat. 19. Luke 7.
the kingdom of heaven, Let us consider of this world a little. A king and a
kingdom are relatiues. And he that has a kingdom must needs be a king.
What is a kingdom worth if a man should buy it? or who has price enough to
buy a kingdom with? It is a rare fortune to rise of nothing to be kings, and
yet such fortune some have had. Saul, David, Jeroboam, Iehu, Darius, and diverse
Emperors; and it is not every ones fortune: yet may it be every ones fortune
to have a far greater in heaven; and it lies in his own will. He may have
his crown there, his robes and purple there, and those more glorious there
then we can imagine here. Iac. 3.
And in this sense S. James does call us heirs of the kingdom that God did
promise, Romans 8.
and S. Paul does likewise call us heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ;
and more then this, he says, we shall reign together with him. Homer illiad.
For kigns are not there, as they be here; where one crown royal none can
have but one. Non bona res multi domini rex vnicus esto, Two kings in a
kingdom will never stand long. In heaven quite contrary. It is no disgrace to
a king to have many fellows. Yea Angels themselves rejoice exceedingly, and
Christ our Lord disdaineth not to set us by him, 2 Timothy 2.
and to communicate his crown with us. Saint Paul's word is conregnabimus, We
shall be fellow kings with him; this were treason here.

But we must know, that by this word king are understood two great titles.
The one of necessity; the other of honor: the one a title of pain, and
charge, begotten of common good, for preserving of peace, and justice among
men; the other a title of honor, and greatness, deserved by themselves, or
their ancestors, or both. In the right of the one, 2 Pet. 2. Apoc. 20.19.
ibid. 44.
he carries a sword ad vindictam; in right of the other, he wears a Crown
on his head as a conqueror. The one needless in heaven, where all be good;
the other needful in heaven to despite the devil, and them that be bad. And
this kingly honor, no king has more on earth, then souls have in heaven; 1.
Pet. 5.
who acknowledge no superior there but God, as kings do here. Only, their
crowns differ, the one is of gold, the other is of glory; they differ also not
a little in there estates, the one is for life, the other for ever.

And therefore in our creed it is called by another name, Vita aeterna, or
life everlasting. Our estate in our kingdom there, is for life, but we shall
live for ever. How far better this then your fee simple here, which ye say,
ye have for ever, yet cannot have longer then for life, nor so long neither
many times. And if they that follow you waste it, where is your fee simple. It
may rightly be called fee simple, a simple for ever. But ours not so; it will
be for ever; which no violence can wrest from us, no rust or moth wear away,
no time nor oldenesse wrinkle or disfigure, no sickness consume, no wrong
hazard, or misinformation call in question. Our estate there pure, perfect,
and indefeazable, tied to no condition, charged with no encumbrance, or fear
of forfeiture. Subject to no law like a king; no man's vassal, and doing no
man's will, but our own, and ours none of our own, but Gods.

What an inexplicable greatness is this? and yet I cannot leave it so: the
more I have said, the more me think I have to say. But I will bound my self
to one or two considerations more, and so end for this point. I may not forget
to tell you the price of heaven, and scarcity of buyers, that will give any
thing near the worth of it. Both which but briefly considered will not a
little advance the greatness we have in hand. By the price, that is given for
a commodity, we may guess at the worth of it. If a thousand pound be given
for a purchase, we esteem it at fifty a year. If a millio^ be given we
esteem it at fifty thousand a year. The price of heaven is set down by a
cunning survey or of those matters, Saint Augustine, Tantum valet, quantum es
says he. It is as much worth, as thy self: that is to say, all that thou
have, and art. And so is it prized by the Son of God; Mat. 13.
who likened heaven to a precious pearl, which a certain Ieweller finding,
Vendidit omnia sua, and comparauit eam, he sold all that he had to buy it.
Because it was worth all he had, he sold all, and bought it. Of all jewels
there is none more excellent then an orient pearl. Lib. 9. cap. 35.
It is culmen omnium presiotiorum (says Pliny) nothing more precious then it.
Both is it hardest to counterfeit; and there is nothing dearer, or higher
prized then it. The Queen of Spain had one given her at Florence was valued
by good Lapidaries at thirty thousand pounds sterling. Ferdinand Cortes that
conquered Mexico, had one at his ear valued at all the king of Spaines
treasure, that had ever come from the Jndies to that time. Which exceeded far
the price of any Diamond that ever I heard of.

Now if I should say, that this were the price of heaven; I should come short
of it by far. For the price of the poorest life is more then this. Cuncta
quae habet homo, dabit pro anima sua, Job. 2.
A man will give all he has for his life. Yet how many lives have bin given,
or joyfully lost for this heavenly pearl by holy Martyrs? Is not this an
admirable greatness, that should be worth a man's life, even a kings life and all
his kingdom, if he be a king? For by this text, a life comprehends all. Yet
all this is little to that. I can say no more. What if I can prove it to be
worth the life of God himself? yea, what should I need to prove so manifest
a truth, which all we that be Christians are bound to believe? I would we
could as sensibly feel it, as we truly conceit it. The life of God himself
was given for it. Adam once had morgaged it, and made a forfeit of it, and our
heavenly father sent down a price for it, his only Son to redeem it. Ye
are redeemed (says Saint Peter) not with corruptible gold, 1. Pet. 3.
or corruptible silver, but with the precious blood of the imaculate lamb. And
this is praetium magnum (says S. Paul). And well might he call it a great
price; 1. Cor. 6.
for it is an infinite price: whereupon I infer thus. To recover our lost
inheritance cost an infinite price; but an infinite price must be for an
infinite greatness, therefore our inheritance must be of infinite greatness;
then which, what is or can be greater.

And if this be not enough to stir your affections toward it, or to possess
you thoroughly of this greatness by the greatness of the price, that has
been given for it: Raise your imagination a little, and think with your
selves; that ye see God in flesh. Think that his noble presence were in the
midst of you. Behold his person, behold his face, and ye shall see the
greatness of heaven in it. In a little round glass, ye may see the firmament
above ye; and in the compass of his face ye may see whole heaven. That
ouerioyed face, with seeing heavens beauty; that ever sorrowed face, that his
flesh might not come there yet. Luc 12.
I am grieved says he, till it come to pass. That auerted face from all
worldly contentment; that scornful face to all earthly promotion, which he
neither had time to think on, nor yet thought worth his care, in respect of
that greatness, that was always glittering in his eye.

Gold to him showed no brighter then Counters, he would not touch it. Plenty
with him no greater then the poor man's box; more then that, was distasteful.
Pleasures to him no sweeter then blows; nothing could draw his eye from the
Radient splendour above him. Prou. 8.
All his riches was in that sacred eye of his. No pleasure here below but
among the poorer sort, to sit and converse with them. Deliciae meae cum Filjis
hominum, His delight was among the sons of men, to show them this greatness,
and to hold up his finger to them. And like as he was, so were his Apostles,
Psalm 44.
so his disciples, so his disciples disciples, and all their descendents in
spirit, to this very day. Pro patribus tuis nati sunt tibi Filij, As the
parents look, so look their children. We see Christ in them, and heaven in
Christ. Carnal children are like their parents for a descent or two, but
spiritual children for ever. They never loose the countenance of their
Protoplast, or the first shape, or favor of their founder. Psalm. 10.
As Christ looked so look ours, As Christ conuerst so converse ours. Nolite
tangere Christos meos. We may be bold to call them another Christ, to see
heaven in their faces, if our eye be not very naught.

But now I fear me I must change my song to speak of the last point; which is
the fewness of Buyers. I began with a Comedy and must end with a Tragedy. But
I will be the shorter. Yet somewhat I must say: and although it seem contrary
to somewhat I said before; yet has it an argument in it, of the greatness we
speak of. I told you even now, Mat. 25.
that it is called your kingdom, paratum vobis regnum, A kingdom provided for
you, from before the beginning of the world. I told you it was every bodies
fortune that list, to be a king in heaven; yet here I say it is almost no man's
fortune, the number of them is so passing small, that shall come there. Hardly
one of the twenty or rather of forty thousand that shall be saved throughout
the world. I think before Christ came, scarce one of a Million. The fault is
their own I grant, that they be not kings; but the fault is so universal,
that few can avoid it.

For the truth whereof, consider with me a little, what multitudes have been
in the world since the first age, and what multitudes have died, and bin slain
in a day, or near together, 4. Reg. 9.
and none saved. We read of Senacharibs army one hundred fourscore and
fifteen thousand slain in a night, Rex.
all heathens. Cyrus and two hundred thousand of his slain in one battle,
besides his enemy Scythia^s near as many more, Plut. vit. Nauel.
all heathen on both sides. Of Persians two hundred thousand slain at one time
by Melciades the Athenian Duke, besides his own, all heathen on both sides. Of
Armenians and others, three hundred thousand foot, and horse were slain
almost together by Lucullus, besides his own side, which was bloody enough,
all heathen on both sides.

Caesar in person was at the killing of one thousand thousand, one hundred
foure-score and ten thousand, besides a multitude of his own, and besides
them that were slain in the civil wars, which he as ashamed to reckon, all
heathens and Idolaters. Rex.
Alexander in three battles against Darius only, slew fifteen hundred
thousand, besides what else were slain of his own side, all heathen people on
both sides. Iosep. de Bell. Iud. Baroni.
The story of the Jews overthrow at Jerusalem is well enough known; where
were slain of them and Proselites together (besides forty thousand that went
out before to fly Gods wrath) eleven hundred thousand persons and above,
whereof it was thought few or none were saved, but died obdurate. Latter
histories relate unto us infinite battles of all heathens, and some of heathen,
and Christians together. Charles Martell slew three hundred threescore and
fifteen thousand Sarazens in a short space; and Rhodericus as many, and more.
To say nothing of the terrible slaughters in our days, between Turks,
Moors, Persians, Muscouites, Tartarians and Ethiopians, and such like, all
heathens without number, fighting one against another, none of them better then
other, all striving who should send down most to their great Master, whom they
served. And they that escaped the sword, were never the nearer. They went the
same way in the end, and drank of the same cup. To say nothing also of them,
that dye of the Murreine, plague or famine every year; Leo. Afer.
ten thousand carried out of Cayro in a day of the plague, and many other
like accidents that we hear not of.

God died for all: but none have the benefit of it, but his little brood of the
elect: and these were Jsraelites, and Jews before the incarnation, and
Christians since the incarnation. But what? were all the Iewessaued? are all
Christians partakers of this reward? though God co^fined himself most what to
the Jewish nation in those days, and now to Christians; yet very few there
be either of them, or us (in respect of them that miscarry) that shall be
partakers of this so rare, so noble, and so royal a reward. Heaven is not for
Gods enemies, or cold friends. The Jews were always so cold of devotion, so
prone to sin, so grumbling against God, and superiors, that he swear in his
anger, they should never see his rest. Psalm. 94.
Holy David complained in his time how abominable they became in their
iniquities, there was none that did good, no not one, Psalm. 13.
in comparison of those that were otherwise. And yet had they then a noble king
over them, and worthy Priests to govern them, and guide them. Saint John
Baptist also in his time couldscarce afford them a fair word, but called them
Vipersbroode. Mat. 3.12.


Now to speak of Christians, that came after; although the primitive sort of
us were more hot, Mat 20.
and zealous; yet Christ foretold us for our better warning, that many of us
should be called, Luke 13.23.
and few chosen. And in an other place being asked, Si pauci saluantur,
whether but few should be saved; he seemed to affirm it saying. Strive ye to
enter the straight gate. And even so has it proved in all ages. They that
were good, were always few. In all the old world, 1 Pet. 3.
eight persous only were saved, the rest were drowned. What numbers have there
been of heretics, and yet are, that have no part in the kingdom of heaven?
and of those that believe well, how many be there that live well? who delights
in Gods service, or holds himself to hours, and orderly life? who is there
almost, that has not one fault, to bring him to hell; and yet will not leave
it, until it leave him? how many more be there that have many faults, give way
to them all, swallow all, till all too late they repent them. The broad way
they be in, they like well to go forward in, love ease, love security, never
seek more, and so dodge on till they die, and dye as they lived.

Very few there be indeed, and too too few that be chosen. Many run in the
furlong (says Saint Paul) yet but one gets the prize. 1. Cor. 9.
And why but one amongst many? he insinuates a reason a little after, that no
man may-despaire notwithstanding, to get the gole if he will. His reason is for
that scarce one amongst many prepares for the race, as he should. They be
commonly so sloathfull, and drowsy, that they diet not themselves, they deny
not their belly all excess, inure not their souls to daily practice, and
exercise in that heaueuly race; so as they run, but uncertainly, and as it
were beating the air. All follow vanities, the proiects of their own hearts,
and no man ponders, or considers deeply the greatness of this heavenly gole
he runs for, and therefore loses it.

Alas we cannot get trifles in the world without care. Yea all the care we can,
we bestow upon them commonly. But no man bestows on heaven the least care,
come of it, what will. It is an ill dog they say, that is not worth
whistling. The most make worse then a dog of heavenly felicity. They hardly
bestow a sigh on it from their heart in a long time. But it is not my purpose
to show reasons why it is so, that so few be saved. It is enough that we have
proved it to be so, even amongst the professors of Christianity. O greatness
of heavenly reward. Who shall attain thy holy hill? Who shall be admitted to
sit with Angels? Omne paerclarum rarum, Every thing that is excellent in this
world, is also rare. If kings were common, and great persons every where, who
could see their greatness? Even so it is of good folk, who are as admirable
as rare, whatsoever men think of them. O happy lot, o excellent reward. Thy
excellency is seen by thy rareness, and hard to come by. O worthy of
worthies, that the world sets so little by, and is not worthy of. How great art
thou in thy height? How great in breadth, and largeness? Thou art big in
place, spacious in thy rooms, large in thy beautiful territories. The earth
is little to thee. Hell is nothing to thee. Behold here an admirable work of
God.

Heaven is above, near God. Hell below near the Center, as is thought where
most be, the place is narrowest to receive them: where fewest Souls be,
there is room to spare. The number of damned souls is without number beyond
those in Heaven; and yet their place is infinitely less then it in heaven. The
way to hell is broad and wide, but narrow and pinching when one comes there,
especially when they come to their bodies again. Most woeful it is to think
on, how they will lie thronging and crowding together for want of room, like
bricks, or tyles in a burning kill, not able or not allowed to stir hand or
foot, if they would never so feign, men and women, fat and lean, little and
great, hudling one upon another confusedly, without respect of age or sex, or
any bodies rank or place, which they had in this world: with Heaven all
contrary. The way thither narrow, and straight, and hard to pass it; but when
one is there, and has crowded through the little wicket; he finds a large
field, and goes freely where he will, without end or weariness.

The nature of contraries is in contrary qualities; hell is little in ease,
because, there is no ease; little in pleasure, because it is all in
displeasure; little in room, because it has no room for any repose. Heaven
therefore must needs be great, fair, goodly, bright, beautiful, full of ease,
full of repose, every body would have; few will take pains for; and therefore
thousands to one, shall not have it, as I said before. I doubt not but all men
believe as much as I; or any man can say of this Angelical subject. And I
doubt as little, but they think it well worthy of their study and care, and
of their pains and cost, if cost be needful for the obtaining of it. But
what is the pains that belongs to it, that men, and women so shrink at, and
pull in their necks? Is it loss of life, or limme? Not so, but in case of
Martyrdom. Is it to give all to the poor? Mat. 19.
Not so; though Christ advise it one, that sought to be perfect. Is it to
suffer burning, or pains of hell for it before we come there? Not so, and yet
Saint Augustine wishes it with all his heart, Medit.
that he might feelehell torments a good while together, to be sure to come
thither; and so does venerable Bede. See what apprehension these had of Heavens
greatness.

What is then the let that stoppes them? What the pain that terrifies? Prou.
26.
What Lion in the way, that puttes men out of the way? What spirit or hobgoblin
skares them so, that they run quite contrary, and scarce look back again?
Surely, nothing else in the world, but a loathing, or weariness of well doing.
They think the pain nothing, if it were short, but to persevere long in good
courses they hold it a cruel thing. They say in their hearts, they could
endure much for a day, or an hour, so Heaven would come presently, without
tarrying too long for it. But to live a long life, and all the while in
Battle, all the while in withstanding temptations, and allurements, and
denying their own wills; all the while expecting reward, and none coming; it
is more then flesh and blood can bear, and they will not endure it. But how
Dastardly a thought is this? How erroneous, and wide from the matter? That
which they think so hard, is with practice easy. And that which they think
is far off, is rather near, as I shall prove unto you now. I have spoken
hitherto of Reward, how great it will be when we shall have it. Now hearken I
beseech you for the Neerenesse also a word or two, according to my promise, and
then I shall conclude.

Our Savior well foresaw this weakness of ours, how weary we would be of
well doing, if he were not at hand to us with Reward, he knew our pronenesse
to evil, and how soon we were like to distaste, and forgo this Bread of
Travelers, if we should stay too long for our Bread of Angels. And therefore,
before he manifested himself to the world, he sent us word by his
forerunner, and the first words his Baptist spoke next to Penetentiam agite,
were these: Mat. 3.
appropinquauit enim regnum caelorum, The kingdom of Heaven is at hand. A
noble comfort, if we have faith to believe. Abac. 2.
Veniens veniet and non tardabit says another Prophet, Coming he will come,
and make no delay. And in another place, Ecce venio cito, and merces mea mecum
est, Behold I come quickly, and my reward in my hand. He does as mothers do
by their children, promise them to come quickly, that they may not think long;
so here, venio cito: Apoc. 3. ibid. 22.
mothers speak it sometimes in policy, but God says it truly (as we shall
find it) venio cito, I come presently. Non tardat Deus promissionem suam says
Saint Peter, 2. Pet. 3.
God is not slow in rewarding us; how can we say then that he tarrieth long,
he is far off from us, and scarcely thinks on us?

It is a sin against the Holy Ghost, not to believe the Holy Ghost. And if
we will believe nothing but reason, very sense and reason will tell us as
much. For it cannot be very far off, that, we fear rather is too near. Who
is there, that thinks not or fears not, that death is too near? for so said
the Epicure: Cras moriemur, Esaias. 22.
We shall dye to morrow. And thus say they that would live still, and take
their pleasure, they are always physicking, and guarding themselves against
death, which they fear still is too near. If death then be near, how is it
that Heaven is not near, which we cannot have, until we dye? Why complain
we; that Heaven is far off, when the door of Heaven is too near? Some
answer again, that death is too near indeed, but it is always in respect of
our unreadiness to dye only. Well then, death and Heaven are near. But it is
we that are far off. Why say we then that Heaven is far off, when it is
our selves are far off with our unreadiness, not Heaven far off with our
happiness? Indeed it is true, if Heaven be near, and we run from it, we
shall never come at it: and then no fault in Heavens neerenesse; but in our
farrenesse. Where otherwise if death be near, Heaven must needs be near to
them that shall have it. Me thinks, this reason should convince them. For if
death be near in our fear, why should it not be as near in our hope? We
confess the one; therefore we must confess the other.

And yet I cannot deny but the Saints also in some sense do think it far
off, and show some tokens of weariness. But this is doubtless out of a true
longing after heaven, not out of a fear, that they shall stay too long for
it; out of weariness they have of the world, not out of weariness of waiting
and attending Gods pleasure; out of their humility, and unworthiness to come
thither yet; not out of floath or presumption that it is time enough yet: out
of a thirst they have after God, whose face the Angels feed on; not out of
temptation, and weakness as we do, who, if our sense be not pleased, we
bid the spirit adeiw. In the one sense Saint Paul said, Romans 7. Psalm. 41.
Who shalldeliuer me from this body of death; and holy David, When shall I come
and appear before the face of my God? And in another place, Woe is me that my
habitation is prolonged, Psalm. 119.
thinking every minute an hour, and every day a year, until they were
dissolved, Phil. 1. Psalm. 13.
and were with Christ: in the other sense, Dixit insipiens in cord suo, The
fool said in his heart, there is no God. Or if he said it not, yet his
actions say that, when he believes not Gods promises, but makes him a
politician, to tell us he is at hand, when we have twenty, thirty, or forty
years yet to live, as many have. No, no, he deals not politikely, but
faithfully with us; and if we see not his words to be true in this, we are
blind, and see nothing. Psalm. 89.


Holy David says the days of man are threescore and ten years, these seem
great to children; but to our first fathers in the old testament this was no
age. And if we should now live ordinarily so long, we might happily have some
excuse for our weariness. But alas, what are these threescore and ten
years? They are nothing to speak of, and so run out. They that have them
think them quickly gone. We hear old folks confess it, and why should
we not believe them, when they say as they find? we believe the Sentinel,
what he sees from a high tower, because he is higher then we; and we believe
the seaman what he discouers from above the toppe-saile, seeing farther then
we. So ought we believe our elders, and ancients, when they speak what they
have proved, and we shall say the same, when we come to the same years. And
they say no more, but what our Patriarch Jacob said: the days of my pilgrimage
(said he) are an hundred and thirty; Genesis 47.
little and evil. Holy Job, said breues dies hominis sunt, our days are but
short. And he asks a question thus: Job 14.
nunquid non paucitas dierum meorum finietur breui, Will not the fewness of my
days be soon ended? Mark these words fewness; and soon ended; and yet he
had an hundred and forty years to live after; and when he spoke it, he was
in extreme pain, when every hour might seem a day to him.

These men I hope will be believed what they say. Compare now the Prophet
David's sayings to these: both speaking from one spirit of truth. Holy Jacob,
and Job say, the days of man are short. Holy David says our years are
threescore and ten; therefore (I say) the time of threescore and ten are
short, and quickly gone, and consequently our reward at hand. How will this
argument be answered? one telsvs, that all the earth as big as it is, and
full of great kingdoms is no bigger then a pinnes head in comparison to the
vast and huge firmament; and we easily believe it, when the learned tell us it,
though our sense does not reach it. And yet how little, or nothing, our
pilgrimage is here, even his that lives longest; a matter of so common
experience, and which our own infirmities, and daily indispositions mind us
of; we persuade our selves notwithstanding that it is a long time, and neither
will authority, reason, or warning by others, once move us, or beat us from
this moth-eaten hold we have of long life forsooth, and time enough yet. Three
or fourscore years are a long time with us in Gods service; though short
enough in our desires.

But let them be as long as men will have them. Suppose threescore and ten be
great, and grievous to hold out to the end withal in virtuous life. See
whether God in this also, have not done very much for us, that we may have no
cause to allege against him, if we will make benefit of it. How many be there
I pray, that live to threescore and ten. Does every man live, till he be old?
I will saymore. Does every one live to half those years? I will be bold to
say; and I think I can prove it, that half thove that are borne into the
world, do never come to five and thirty; yea more then this; hardly two parts
of three, come to see five and thirty. And this I prove two ways. First by
the many multitudes of them that dye between the cradle, and five and thirty.
As appears by sextons and Churchclarkes, whom I have heard affirm, that they
bury two of the younger half which are under five and thirty, for one of the
elder half, from thirty five to seventy. Secondly and principally, by a survey
of households, families, and towneshippes throughout the land, be it in city,
town, or country, and that in this manner. Divide any of these into three; and
scarce the third part is five and thirty. My self have noted that two parts of
three, are always under five and thirty. Unless it be in princes houses, and
hospitals. If the family be nine persons, six of them be under; if fifteen,
ten of them be under; If there be thirty in a house, twenty at the least are
under; and so forward in proportion. Ye will say this may be true; not because
they be dead, that should make up the number even; but because they marry
away, or provide themselves otherwise, ere they come to that age. Well then.
Follow them where they go, and where they settle, they must be some where.
Still ye shall find all one, and the same proportion wheresoever they become.
But to leave these, and come to those, that are entered the latter half of
thirty five, and upward; there, the odds is much greater; an hundred to one,
Titleman says a thousand to one, that they never shall see Seauentye.

Now what is become of all those, that were once five and thirty with him? are
they not all dead? but half a dozen, or not so many in a parish before they
come to seauenty, or any thing near it? yet thus it is in all places, and
countries. There is a multitude of the younger sort all of an age; but of old
folks but a few, and almost none in comparison. And therefore it is, I think
that holy David said, dies amorum nostrorum ni ipsis, etc. Psalm. 89.
The days of our years (in themselves) are threscore and ten; In themselves
they are so many: but in us not so many, or in very few of us. It is a time
limited to us, to which most few do ever attain. As if a man should say, it
is ten mile to such a town to go the next way over rocks, and places
impassable; but the common way is twenty. In it self that is ten, but to us
it is twenty. Even so it is with man's age. There be that live to those great
years, but so few, that a man needs not fear it, if he would not live long;
and it were folly to hope it, if long life be that he would have. But my
purpose is not to dwell upon these points, which although they be true; yet I
leave them rather to your scanning at more leisure upon these grounds I have
given you; then to seem ouercurious in a matter so serious, as now I have in
hand.

And yet I hope, this is not without fruit which I speak of; For so much as
even in this the providence of God is seen over us, and his tender love to us.
His providence first, in foreseeing our danger by living long. How many be
there in the world, that we have known virtuous in their youth, and vicious
in their age; in their childhood towardly, in their middle age of good
example; in their elder years declining, and at last unrecoverable. Which
David fearing in one place, Psalm. 70.
prays to God, saying: O forsake me not Lord, when I come to be old. And of
this we have diverse examples in Scriptures, Saul, Solomon, Ioas and others;
who of Gods especial servants, declined in the end to be Idolaters; Mat. 24.
or as ill. Gods love also is here to beseene toward his elect; for whose
sake as he will shorten, and abreuiate the whole world, Sap. 4 11.
and will hasten the end of it; so does he in particular for many of his
servants, abridge much part of their time, that otherwise they might have lived.

And albeit that many live longer for their amendment or increase of grace,
which is also his goodness, Patientiam habet nolensaliquos perire, 2. Pet. 3.
says S. Peter, he draws out the time with many, that they may have time to
repent them: yet so it is, that God will have us see, and know, and take notice
of it; what odds there is against us, that we shall not live long. Many
signs in our body, that our time will be here but short. Many spectacles
before our eyes, and warnings on every side by others harms, or untimely
deaths. New diseases every year, that will not let the bell stand; and
sometimes horrible plagues, and pestilent agues, that seldom touch old
folks, but pull down the lustiest. What should I speak of consumptions,
squinances, cough of the lungs; ptisickes, dropsies, pleurisies, collicke and
stone, lethargies, appoplexies, and sometimes the sweating sickness, that
plays sweepe-stake amongst us, when it comes, and these come commonly of
misdiet, or infection.

Besides this, the number is without number, that dye of age before they be
half old: of age I say, because it is old age with some under forty, with
some under thirty, with some under twenty, or under ten, if God will have
them live no longer; who has appointed every one their bounds, which they may
not pass: Posuisti terminos, qui praeteriri non poterunt. Job. 14.
He calls it terminos, not one bound for every man; but how many men, so many
limits and bounds, Heb. 9.
no certainty of it but one, which is (once) as Saint Paul says, but not when.
And of this there be natural reasons also, besides Gods ordinance, which are
the several indispositions of men's bodies, as we learn by Aristotle, Galen,
and Hipocrates; the poorness of moisture radical in infinite persons, and
the over abundance of it, in others, which natural heat is not able to
master. The faults also in our first conception, and generation (which no man
knows of but God) make an end of us quickly, when younger years promise longer
life. To say nothing of the Maleuolous influence of sundry stars the Lords of
our nativity; or of them, that keep no mean in their youth, and kill
themselves with misrule. Plures occidit gula, quam gladius, says one.

Lastly, the manifold names our life is called by, in Scriptures, and fathers,
do show the brittlnesse and uncertainty of it; as when it is called a bubble,
that is come, and gone in the twinkling of an eye. It is called hay, green
yesterday, and this day withered away. Sicut foenum dies eius, Psalm. 102.
and tanquam flos agrisic efflorebit. Compared here to a flower in the field,
this day fresh, and challenging the Sun for beauty, and fairness; to morrow
holding down the proud neck, and no body looks at it. It is called a smoke,
Iac. 4.
a vapor, our face in a glass, soon seen, and soon forgotten, a cherry
fair, a shadow, and as Saint Augustine calls it, Medit.
a shadow by Moone-light, so much to say as a shadow of a shadow. What
flowers of youth have we known in our time; the hopes of their fathers house,
and greatness, now blasted; and long since buried under the shadow of death;
and will be quite out of mind. What beautiful Matrons have we seen in our
days, that possessed men's hearts with their virtues, and sparkling eyes? They
arose like a morning star to show themselves in our Horizon, went down
again in their prime, and rise no more. To say nothing of our Europe worthies,
whom our eyes have seen to fall in our last wars like stars in the
firmament. De orat.
But o fallacem hominum spem fragilemque fortunam, says Tully; speaking of our
unstable life, how greatly we build upon it, and yet in medio curriculo (as
he calls it) we are taken, and intercepted by death, when we least think
it, in the midst of our course.

But thus we see in few words, how near our reward is; even as near as
death. And if authority of Scripture will not serve, here be also reasons for
it, and more might be added, if need were. Qui non credit peribit, And he
that believes not this verity which he sees testified with his own eyes, how
can he be thankful, as he should, for so great a benefit. Let life be
short or long with us, it is allotted for our good, and the way to make use of
it, is to thank God, that it is no longer. If a man make reckoning of the best
things here, and would live still, to enjoy them still; let him know he must
forgo them in the end, he knows not how soon. His delights must go one
way, and he another. Let him make much of life; for when life is gone, his joy
is gone. But if a man have a true feeling, and knowledge of himself, and of
his life; and of the frailties of it, how full of sin, and pronenesse to
sin, how full of inticements and evil prouocations, and dullness to any
goodness; what storms, and afflictions to beat us from God; what danger in
prosperity to neglect God; what multiplicity of business to forget God, or to
make us love him less; he will think it a blessing of God, not to live long,
Phil. 1.
and will say with Saint Paul, Mihi mori lucrum, My death my gain, and will
joy much in this possibility he has; this great possibility I say, to be one
of this number, that shall live but a little while.

Heathens themselves, that had no light but natural; yet saw they how good it
was, to dye betimes. For when the good old woman Argia was in haste to go to
the sacrifice as Tully tells in his Tusculan questions, and her Coach-horses
were out of the way; what did her two Sons Cleobis and Biton, but went in
presently to strip and anoint themselves, and drew her thither in stead of
horses, in very good time. For which their act, she besought God to bless them
with the greatest reward that could be given to men. And so he did. For the
next morning, after she had feasted them over night, and sent them well to
bed; she found them both stone dead. Their guerdon of their Piety was
shortness of life, as the greatest good thing, that could betide them. And
this no doubt does many a good mother amongst us obtain for her child, when
she prays for him, and thinks not that God will quit her so, though God does
know it to be best so. Yea good king David had not his prayers, 2. Reg. 12.
when he prayed so earnestly for his childs life. God saw it best to take him
away. And how much happier had it been for Absolon also, to have dyed in his
cradle, then live to be a Rebel. And to this purpose I have heard a saying of
Frederick the third, that worthy Emperor, and it was much noted. That being
asked once, what was the best thing God could bestow on us in the world, to be
taken well out of the world said he: and yet he tasted three and fifty years
what it was to be an Emperor, and to abound in peace, and in all good things.

O what a benefit is this of God? What thanks do we owe him for it? If a man
have a long way home in a hard winter time, and when he comes to his Inn at
night all moyled, and weather-beaten, (and must have many such days, before
he get home) shall find himself on a sudden in the midst of his own
yard; his wife and family with lights at the door to entertain him, a good
fire within to warm him, and change to shift him, will he not stand amazed,
and fall on his knees with wonder, that his journey proves so short? yet this
can no man expect, nor can it be done without miracle. A Merchant likewise,
that sets out from the Indies with goods of great price: the journey long and
tedious, and no less perilous. If he pass through safe, he is made for ever;
if he miscarrie, he, and his are undone; and every day breeds new fears.
Howbeit in putting in at some Cape three thousand miles hence, if he should
find himself at that instant just before Calis or Dover; could any tongue
express his joy? Yet this must be also by miracle. And these good happes be
never heard of, though in our case it be ordinary, and daily done without
miracle. So bountiful is Gods goodness toward us, that traffic here for
Heaven.

Our selves be this Merchant, or Traveler, that would so feign be at home.
We trade here for good habits, and the grace of God, more worth a great
deal, then gold of Ophir, or Heuilah. Our care is here but for safe arrival
through a maine of miseries, and contradictions in our way. It is common with
God, to harbor us at half way. The better half (as I said) are not gone
half way, but they are at their long home first: or if not, yet is it all one
to a man, if he be of resolution. Despare, and faint he will not, but hold
it out to the end. We may not stick in a slough still, without stirring a
foot, because we have a great way home. We may not cast our goods over board,
because we know not when we shall make use of them. We shall serve God still,
fear him still, love him still, and attend his good pleasure still, in little
and great, in wealth and poverty, in fair weather and in foul. We shall not
value inward riches, at less then outward; Heaven at less then the world; nor
take more care for clods, then for glory.

If we look but for an Executor-ship, or to be some rich man's heir, we are
willing to observe him with all respect we can; no duty, or service omitted if
he be our better; no kind of kindness vnshewne, if he be our equal; and
this not for a month, or a year, but many years. And if it be so, that we
think it long, yet wax we not weary straight, or cease to be respectfull, as
long as we have hope. And if it were so, that a man should be weary in such a
case, or should neglect the inheritance that is so long in coming, and should
go join with an enemy, or loose his possibility for a horse, or a hawke in
hand; should we not hold him unwise? Yet thus it is with most of us in
matters of Eternity. Heaven we would have, but we will not tarry for it. We
hold it tedious to be so long Virtuous, and in the mean time, we give heed
to our passions, and our humors bear all the sway with us. On the one side of
us love of Carnality, love of soft and sweet, love of money and momentaries;
on the other side choler, pride, envy, rancor, and revenge, and what not
besides, that the Devil will suggest. I speak of many things, but one of
these is enough to damn us, and to turn Gods face from us for ever; and all
for lack, of but a short whiles perseverance. And this may suffice for the
neerenesse of reward. I proved it before to be great, and now to be near,
what can we ask more.

The Conclusion.
I have been much longer, and I fear me more troublesome to you, then I
intended. But the matter we handle, is of greatest moment, and is the only
thing we must rely upon, and stick to for ever. All other matters are humane,
and temporary, this everlasting, and Angelical. This is the last dish we must
feed on, served into our table with a cover, that we may not see it, nor taste
it, until the cover of our flesh be taken away. What it is, I cannot describe
to you, in other sort then I have done. Well I know, it is the same, that
Angels feed on. The self same, that Cherubins and Seraphins delight in. For as
the damned have the same food, and fire in hell, as our Savior tells us,
that was prepared for the devil and his Angels; Mat. 25.
so have the Saved also the same fare, and are fed with the same food, that
was ordained for Gods Angels, and the Celestial hierarchy. And although we
know not yet how, or in what sort, or kind, this feeding, nourishing, or
exceeding pleasure, shall affect us; for as Leo says, nisi fides credat, sermo
non explicat, it is better believed, then expressed; yet have I opened unto you
after my poor manner, and given you a scantling of it, how great it is, both
by the visible things in the world (that are all nothing to it,) and also by
the greatness of man's understanding; which is able to conceive all things in
the world, but not the least things in heaven. What is not in heaven I have
also shown you. Nothing there to offend, or that can offend, a privileged
place from all arest of trouble, or of least molestation, as by the several
names it is called by, and the price that has been given for it, and by the
fewness of Buyers, it may appear, and I have there alleged. And in this
abundance of complete happiness, yea have heard also, what estate we shall
have, not for a year, or years, life, or lives, or to us, and our heirs: but
to us and our selves for ever. And least happily we should make void our faith
in any sort with overmuch curiosity, faith being no faith, if we believe not
without eye knowledge: I have importuned you, not to be too busy in matters
above your reach; as to know how, what, or when, and how long first. Which I
have lastly proved unto you, not to be long, at the longest, and is most
commonly as near us as we can wish. Tract. 110. in Ioh.
Hoc modicum longum videtur, dum hic agitur, says Saint Augustine, This little
seems long to us here, Sed cum finitum fuerit, sentiemus, quam modicum
fuerit; but when it is ended, says he, we shall see how little it was. And so
no doubt we shall find when we come once to that heavenly Sanctuary; that city
of refuge; that haven of all our hopes; where a hundred years shall seem as
nothing, if we lived here so long in fear of God, and virtuous life. Verily
we shall wonder at our selves then, that we could think the time here long;
believing heaven as we did, to be so long in lasting, and so never toward
ending. What Is a stones cast of foul way, to a world of fair way? Is it to be
stuck at. What Is a spoonefull of gaul, to a sea of Rose water? Is it to reckon
of? For shame of our selves let us think no time lost, or long in Gods
service. For if we do, must we not look to be punished for it? and that by so
much the more, by how much the more merciful he is unto us, in tempering as
he does our length of days with so many delights, and pleasing business in
the world; while either we recreate our selves moderately, sleep and rest our
selves temperately, converse with others familiarly, bestirre our selves in our
vocation commendably, see the fruits of our labor not without comfort. We are
not always at our devotions, not always praying, reading, and mortifying our
selves. Yea, the year it self which is the measure of our age, is also
distinguished for us into several seasons. Winter comes but once a year. Then
comes the spring bedeckt with violets below, and blossoms over head. Then the
summer full of daylight and ripening sun. Then harvest with all enticing
fruits to fill our mouths, and hands full all the year long, till new come
in; and every season has his lawful pleasures. Which if we abused hitherto,
or have spent our time unprofitably, or have lived badly; so merciful is God,
that he will not exact of us, to begin all our time anew, as tradsemen do by
their apprentises; but will take the rest for good payment, that we have to
live, though it be but a year, so we pray hard, and will yet resolve to amend.
Happily he will content himself with two hours in a day, or with less, so it
be with fervor. And this is not the tenth part of our life, nor eight hours
of the day, as king Alfred used, notwithstanding his wars, and commonwealth
affairs. What cause have we now to complain? If we be weary of kneeling, we
may stand or sit, Genesis 24.
if weary of sitting we may walk. Isaac went into the fields to meditate.
Again when God sends crosses, he interlaces them with promises, our
unhappiness he delays with comforts, our mischances with assurance of his
presence, and assistance, if we forsake him not: In Mat. 8. Psalm. 91.
Rebus mestis iucunda permiscuit says Saint Chrysostom: And holy David: What
measure we have in sorrows, the like measure we have in comforts. All these
helps he allows us against weariness, all these favors against
tediousness of life. In hell they would be glad of the least of them. Yet
thus God does by us, as it were stealing away time from us, that we may not
feel it, or think it long. Let no man say therefore hereafter, it will be
long first. I will think of these matters ten or twenty years hence. No,
let them not say I will begin to morrow; yea why not even now?

Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum. Says an old Poet, Think every day
to be thy last.
Take hold of time, ere time be past.


Let us learn of an heathen, what danger is in protracting and dallying with
God: If we have been slack, and mistrustfull of Gods promises hitherto, even
now let us begin, and turn over the leaf. I have spoken many words to day;
if any of them be to the purpose; I beseech you let it not fall, or come again
empty. Let us make our confession with holy David, Psalm. 54.
and say with him; ecce elongani fugiens, Not heaven far off, but we far
off with flying it, and making our selves strange to it, with our guilty
consciences. Yea, although in respect of our sins we may cry with him
otherwhiles, saying: Ne reuoces me in dimidio dierum meorum, Psalm. 101.
Cut us not off in the midst of our days, before we amend; and in zeal of
Gods service, Non moriar sed viuam, Psalm. 117.
et narrabo opera domini, I will live still, and will not die, but will tell
the works of God; yet in via virtutis, as there he says, in the way of
virtue, patience, and penitence in this life, it is profitable for us to think
of our short life, and to make that our daily prayer and comfort, saying,
Paucitatem dierum meorum nuncia mihi; Let me always have these tidings in my
ear, that my days be short, and soon at an end. And let us not only say it,
but also think it, and hope it to be very true. Oh that we might amend
hereafter, and spur the faster, that we may one day all of us meet, and
never depart again. If any difficulty be in it, it is all in the beginning.
All our pains will be at the first. A little use will make it easy, and the
hardest that is will break no bones. It will break a sleep indeed, to pray
as we should pray, and to force our wills at the first, to the rule of reason.
Make have I beseech you, for I have shown you the way. Let no impediment
stop you, no time or temptation weary you in so important a business. Waken
your souls, that reason sleep not. Diet your bodies, that it rebel not. Rom
1. Abac. 2.
I said before, the just man lives by faith. So do you. Stir up your faith,
that it lie not idle in you without fruit. Let us live by faith, as lovers live
by love. Their love is life to their thoughts, and fire to their affections.
They will do nothing against laws of love; they ply her with all the service,
and good offices they can; the ground of their hopes is but a word, or a good
look, or half a promise from her. Can we not do thus to God? It is but
changing the subject, and it is done. Keep your love still, be enamored still.
That which was to a creature, Let now be to the creator, and then ye are
right; hold your selves there, so it be to God. If nothing can please you but
riches, and splendor, make use of your faith; and ye shall have all
contentment in him, that ye can desire. If beauty delight you, reflect upon
your faith, and ye will never seek other, then what ye find in him. Your
hope shall not be so weak, as lovers hopes, upon a word, or half promise.
Every leaf in the Bible is fraught with promises. She is your own, what seek
you more, and if ye have faith she bringes all that is good with her. Do as
lovers do. Serve God and observe him, whatsoever ye have in hand. Let your
love be the one end of your thought. Mark what God loves in you, and do it;
note what he hates in you, and avoid it. Let him be always master of your
heart, to govern it; mistress of your love, to command it, a most bountiful
rewarder, ye shall find him, and a most beautiful mistress, yet none so
mean in the world, but may have her; none so great in the world, but may go
without her. How can a man be idle, and have so sweet a mistress to serve?
night, and day, he cannot sin, in thinking on her. But I leave all to your
good practice, ye have heard (worthy friends) all that one body can say in so
short a time, in words so few and in a business, so above all measure
necessary, and I may not spoil with tediousness, a matter so repleate with
all pleasantness. Shall I ask you a question, to make an end withal; ye
shall not need answer me in words, but in thoughts. Is there any unbeliever in
this place? Can any man persuade himself he shall live long, or that heaven
will be had without much care? or that worldly cares do not hinder it, and
hazard it exceedingly? Do they think they have no such inheritance in heaven
as I speak off, Locum nominatum dabit eis pater meus, My father will give them
a place by name: or think they that the least flower in heaven is not much
more worth, then the fairest bower on earth? that one glimps at Gods
brightness (if we might see it) would not dim and damn the worlds greatest
happiness? that one peep into heaven would not make our gold show like lead,
fair fields like a desert, the bright sun like a sparkle, beauty like the
white skull of adead body? if any such be here asbeleeue nothing but what they
see, delight in nothing, but what the basest, dullest, and most vulgar delight
in; I shall most humbly entreat them for the passion of Christ, and for the
true love they owe themselves, to inform themselves better, by them that be
better learned. Let them not be sick so dangerously and seek after no remedy.
But if it be so, as I have no doubt but ye all believe me, then tell me I
pray; whether ye need a spur thither, that have so fair a bait of it;
whether ye need a whippe, that have so fair allurements to it; whether ye
need inuiting to your own house, any bidding to your own banquet, any
enforcing to your own possession or proper inheritance: which if ye need, I
do not marvel much in this great opposition of flesh, and blood, which keeps
you from seeing your inward mark; and which until yeesee more perfectly,
mind more readily, and aim at more fervently, as you do at outward things;
sure, it is not with you, as it should be, and your present remedy is, to make
a pattern of outward things, whereby to guide you to the inward. Who stumbles
at money-bagge, and needs be bidden take it up? who has a a good legacy given
him, and needs persuading to go fetch it? who is a hungered, and needs
enforcing to fill his belly, having good meat before him. Sense furthers him
in all this. And shall our faith be weaker then sense, to further us to the
contrary? Sense tells us money is better then Gods mercy; itching pleasure
better then Paradise; present momentaries better then future euerlastingnesse.
And shall our faith lie dead the whilst. Take courage in God, and let not
sense so prevail against it; Let not idleness drown it; passion overthrow
it; and filthy custom cut the throat of it. Let faith rather go before, and
other things come after. When we follow one by night, our eye is never off him,
for fear we miss our way; even so let us look to our faith-ward always,
that our sense seduce us not in the dark of our understanding. If at any time
ye be feasting, or sporting, turn your eye now and then inward, and remember
the grand-feast preparing for ye above. Are ye in sorrow, or heaviness;
stir up your faith a little, remember heaven, and sorrow will vanish like a
bubble. Are ye at a royal mask, or other great entertainment? Think it all
nothing to that is ready for ye in heaven, against ye come there. Have ye lost
a friend or dear companion? Take the glass of faith in your hand, and ye find
an hundred for one more dear to you, then any can be upon earth. Have ye
sweetes at your nose, or dainties in your taste? Dwell not on them too long,
but reflect them higher. Are ye tempted with disloyalty, or other
disobedience? Raise an heavenly thought, and it will vntempt you. Are ye in
delight of harmony, the Waits perhaps at your window, to give you the time of
the day? Let this make work for your faith, and quicken it, and make it eager
after her heavenly harmony. Are ye melancholy at misfortune, discontent with
distress, dazeled with gloomy weather, afflicted with reproach or obliquie?
Repair to your lively faith; and it will banish all discomfort. Your field
music, and trumpets, that make you couch your lances, and your horses stamp
under you, let these be your alarums against your triple enemy, that baricado
the way between you and heaven. Let your inward trumpet sound with your
outward, to spend your spirits, and animate your souls, against any proffer to
beat you from heaven. Do ye know what heaven is? that noble heaven; that
golden heaven; that glorious and delightful heaven; that everlasting heaven;
where Angels becken you, and look every day for you, and will ye be beaten
from it? Do ye know your right to it, the Ancientie of your title, and the
price was given for it; and will ye be beaten from it with any fire, or
sword, or happily with a lewd look of an intemperate eye? Oh far be these from
your Christian manhood; far be it from your own self love; far be it from
your baptism, and grace of God in you. But me thinks I see heroical signs
in you: your faith leapes in your faces, your heart is in flames, and your
spirit replenished with resolution, which gives great hope that the gates of
hell will never prevail against against you, nor stop you of your way, your
way to heauenward I say, which I have painted and pointed you unto. Haste ye
thither, and run a pace, put wings to your wills, and out-strippe all
impediments: I conclude with Saint Paul. Sic currite vt comprehendatis, 1. Cor.
9.
So run, as ye may catch. So run, as ye may obtain what ye run for. Let
no man say he is fat, Esa. 35.
and pursie, and grown past running: For God has promised him the feet of a
Stagge, if he do but his good will. Abac 3.
Let no man say he is old, feeble and weak; and cannot break ill custom, for
he must know, that Virtus in infirmitate perficitur, 2. Cor. 12. Luc. 15.
The weaker a man is, the greater is Gods glory in the combat. Christ will
take ye up upon his shoulders, and run away with you, if you will but take
the pains to get up. Sic currite, so run says he. Almost all the world
runs backward, and yet they run. But this is not Sic currite. Run ye
forward I beseech you. There be some also that run about, Psalm. 11.
yet run, In circuitu impij ambulant, The wicked walk in a circuit: will ye
know what this is? They that walk the way of ambition and emulation, They
that walk the way of pleasure and delight, They that walk the way of riches,
and ease, it is a great adventure, they will never arrive at the happiness we
speak of, not that rich folk cannot come to heaven; but they that seek
riches, and lay to heap riches. Not, that men cannot win heaven that have
pleasure; but they that seek pleasure, and pour themselves out upon it. Not,
that kings, and princes, and honorable persons, Bishops, Archbishops, and such
like have no part in our heavenly kingdom; but they that aspire after
greatness, aspire after kingdoms, and labor after Prelacye, and Sublimitie
in the world: all these I say run round in a circle, and wax giddie withal.
They are drowned in their own desires, and cannot breath for it. They are
borne so down with their burden on their backs, that it is impossible to make
way. The word is (ambulant) they do but walk, not run; and to run thus,
is not Sic currite. Run ye the next way be sure, and loose no ground. Some
again there be, that run with the Hare as they say, and hold with the
hound. They fly vice, and yet incline to vice, fly one temptation and
entertain another; fly the act, and delight in thought. Oh this is not Sic
currite. Long shall they so run, and never catch. We are bidden so run, as
we may obtain. This word [runne] excludes all daliance, and delay. We must
not stand at a stay, nor look behind us. This word [obtaine] includes
perseverance, to hold it out to the end. To run therefore without
weariness, to go forward still without repentance; this is indeed Sic
currite: this is to run so as the Apostle will have us. The only enemy to
perseverance, is idle, uncertain, and unsettled life. Make your selves
business always, that may be good: and then let no alteration of time, or
place hinder you; no hard fortune disarme you; no fawning of any friends
vnstrengthen you. Let your word be Semper idem. He that knows ye now, and
sees you not again of twenty years together; let him find you the same, or
better. Let all your neighbors report of your sweetness, all your
acquaintance take example by you of much goodness, and fetch fire at your
fervor.

FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HIS VERY GOOD LORD, EDWARD EARL OF Worcester.
SIR, the place you have for honor and arms, with my bounden duty together,
have moved me to dedicate to your Honor, this part of my labors: wherein I
bring you not a grape of mine own planting, or a Pome-deroy, or a Muskmillion;
but a posie of mine own picking out of other men's gardens. My hope is, you
will not look into the meandness of my performance, but the merit of the
subject: wherein your self have also labored right nobly, and much more
profitably would, if gentlemen as they be true gentlemen, would become your
true followers. To them I speak in this little treatise, and not to you, but
learn of you. And so with all humility wishing you health and longer years, I
take my leave of your Lordship.

All your good Lordships to command W. Wiseman.

THE FIRST CHARGE BY THE DVKE against Duellum.
RIght noble audience, and fellows at arms. I have invited you hither to day
for your good company, which I can never be weary of: and partly also out of
the abundance of my heart, to impart unto you somewhat, that may stead you
hereafter, wheresoever ye become. Ye have been pleased ere now, to hear
your Generals voice half an hour together. And it has been I think for
your good. My words concluded then with commanding, but now with entreating,
and mutual embracing. Men of peace may be to seek in time of wars. So you,
that come newly from the wars, may be to seek of your carriage in time of
peace. Ye were men of sort, and noble, the most of ye, before ye came
hither. And ye have lost no reputation by your coming, but shall return into
your countries (I doubt not) with much increase of honor. Honor in regard of
your own approved valor. Honor in respect of the cause, and quarrel ye
have spent your time in, and much of your blood. For what more Honorable, then
to fight against the great deuourer of Christianity, the vpbraider of Jsraell,
and blasphemer of the Son of God, Christ Jesus? Yea, how much more honorable
this, then to waste our Jrascible part upon one another at home? Not only to
fight and kill, if we can; but when we have done our worst, to bear malice,
and deadly feud still, and sometimes, as long as we live. A very bad use in our
country. Even family against family, and man against man, without all
moderation. Those whom God gave his life for, we will take life from. Those
whom he suffered pain for, we would put to pain if we could, or to shame if
we cannot. Those who by generation, or regeneration, should be our brothers,
and all one with us, all selected children of one God, and parteners of one
blessing; we seek to dishonor by word, or deed, upon every light occasion.
We that should bear one another burden, and do as we would be done to, we
do the contrary, heap coals one upon another, deem the worst of every body,
as we list, never reflect upon Gods Law, or man's Law, but how to wreake our
anger, and make our humors therein both Judge, and hangman.

Thanks be to God, our hand has not bin hitherto in our neighbors blood. We
have spent our anger, and fury, where it can never be ill, or better bestowed,
upon the grand-enemies of God, our new Philistims. Whom to strike is duty, to
kill is Honor, and to be killed of them a sacrifice. There to fight, we are
sure is Gods battle; there to be valiant, is true valor; there, fear we no
injustice in the worst we can; nor need to be over scrupulous to thrust our
swords in up to the hilts. There to turn our backs is cowardice; there to
be afraid, is to be white liuered; there, to show pity, were impiety; and
they that should be fainting, or faulty therein, might be truly charged with
dishonor. The cause just, and honorable; the quarrel Gods, not ours;
commanded by lawful authority, not by humane leuity. The honor ours, if we
win; no dishonor, if we loose, so we do our endeavor.

There be men, too few for ought I see, to be employed in that honorable
service. And yet we fight, and wrangle, and kill up one another at home, and
rob the Christian commonweal of their interest in us, without mercy, pity,
or true manhood indeed, as I shall prove unto you. If our idle spirits at
home did but see, what we have seen, the inundation of hell hounds, that have
come down upon us by hundreds of thousands at once, their noise of armor,
horses, and howling; their pride, and fury against us, the air filled with
trumpet, fife, and drum, as if it were doomes day; our voice crying out the
whilst to God, and Christians, to come help us: men would not be so idle and
home-bredde, as they be (for want of an enemy to poke and push at one another
as they do; but would covet to fight where men fight, and dye where men dye,
and shall have glory, and renown for it.

When ye come in your country again, ye shall find those, even such as ye
left behind you, when you came hither; that never saw army in their life, and
yet will give laws of chiualry; know not how to trayle a pyke like a soldier,
and yet will brave a soldier to his face; were never officers in the field,
and yet if they have been at the University a while, and have read a little of
Liuie, or Plutarks lives; and then come new to court, or Innes of court: they
think themselves straight to be Scipioes, or Hannibals, and fall to
practicing; and do as they see others do; learn to give the lie bravely, or
to use the fist, or poynard at the entering. It is the fault of youth, and of
the times; and there be too many of them at this day, but I hope there will
be fewer. Years, time, and better knowledge of themselves, and of their own
worth, will bring them more discretion. Mean time, I would there were not so
many also of judgment sufficient, and of elder sort, that think it valiant to
be stirred quickly, a word, and a blow with them, or spit in his face, and in
the field next morning, to kill or to be killed. And this not only they do,
but think it lawful to do, and think it base, and cowardly not to do.

It is undoubted, that Honor is a great ornament to him that has it, and
every one seeks it in his degree, and rank. And our country is as fruitful
of Honorable, and well endued persons, as any nation in the world; and as
quickly it is seen by them, as soon almost, as they have cast off their long
coats. And as well furnished ye shall find them with matter fit to support
their honor, when they come to years; as either for manhood, valor,
strength, actiuity, or nobleness of mind. All which as they be virtues well
beseeming gentlemen, and men may do much to uphold them; so is it a most
unworthy thing, and worthiest of punishment, that they should receive blemish
by any wrong.

The most of you (as I said before) are men of sort, and as ye have all
deserved well, and none of you the contrary: so is it necessary ye should
maintain your Honor in places where ye come. But how? In Honorable sort,
without dishonor to God, or disgrace to your country, or Sovereign. And it
will be expected in these corrupted, and maleuolous times; yea God will ask it
at your hands, being men at arms, and never yet touched with the least
cowardice, no not when they have been five to one (I will not say ten to one)
that ye should show good example to your contrymen; and that your actions
should be their instructions, your good experience their better learning, and
your carriage their rule, that have not such cause to know what you know, or
not so well as you, in regard of the long time, and place, ye have served in,
where questions of Honor have daily risen, and were seldom suffered by
superiors to come to blood, if they had authority to restrain them.

The world is full of wrangles, and the good, and patient are abused, and
abased every where. Pride, and disdain have filled all things with debate. One
backbites, another is incensed; one does unkindly, another takes it ill; one
means well, the other mistaketh it; one gives a contumely, another deals a
blow; and in all these is wisdom required, to carry an even hand. And
because I would not wish you to take so much wrong; nor yet to right your
selves with any unrighteousness: I think it good to let you know, and it is
fit ye should always remember your duty to God, and the world, and to forget
your selves as little as ye can, in hot blood, or in cold. By hot blood I
mean all sudden things, before we can well deliberate. By cold I mean,
when the heat is gone, but desire of revenge remains. To the first belongs
iangling, brawling, blows, foul speeches, and multiplying. To the second
belong the dregs of the former, after they be parted. The first has
commonly present execution while the fire is yet hot. The second has time to
pause; and if he do amiss, the fault is the greater. The first can never be
without offense in the cause giver, whether it come of heat, mistaking, or
scorn. For how can ye miscall one, or give approbious words without sin;
neither is it without offense in the answerer, though not so great.

He is more then a man, or less then a man, that can put up a contumely on a
sudden. Cap. 7.8.
And therefore it is written in Ecclesiastes: Calumnia conturbat sapientem, A
disgrace, or contumely will trouble a wise man. S. Act. 23.
Paul himself might seem humanum pati, when he called him whited wall, that
made him be smitten. What marvel then, if Achilles smote Thirsites for his
foul mouth, though otherwise a man, that was not easily moved. The best men
will not soon give cause. But vir iracundus prouocat rixas, A hastle man,
Prou. 15.
or a chollericke sir will still be quarrelling, and provoking; ever urging,
ever misconstruing, never without a caprich, or two in store. An other man as
good as he, will never do it, but leave it to scouldes in allies, and
alehouses. He will always keep himself in compass of manhood as near as
he can, and never debase himself to such unworthy doings.

And there is a plain precept for it, Nolite prouocare, Ephesians. 6.
If I may not urge my child, or servants to anger, how much less my fellow,
or my better. The law gives favor to man slaughter, if he be provoked. But
there is not a greater infamy to a noble person, then to provoke or to be
accounted a quarreller. It is vnbecomming a woman, much more a man at arms.
Quippes, girdes, flauntes, tauntes; far be they from ye I beseech you. They
are but seeds of scoulding, the scumme of a woman's wit; though some women
delight in it, and think it worth printing every word they speak. Words
breed quarrels, and of quarrelling comes blood-shedde. An old Coronell of ours
rejoiced on his death bed; that having been in many broils in his life, and
many times provoked, he never gave cause of quarrel by word or deed, and yet
he would not turn his face from any man breathing.

To detract, or reveal a man's secret, if it be not against the state, or much
hurtful to his friend, is very unworthy a gentleman, and breeds much
quarrel. A man of sort would be loath to be thought a blabbe, or tell-tale. It
begins with idleness, and ends with damnation. Granado says there be
multitudes in hell for nothing else, but this. They say there would be no
thieves, if there were no receivers. And surely there would be no
picke-thankes, or slanderers, if there were no hearers to delight in them.
Possid.
S. Augustine had written about his dining board these verses: Quisquis amat
dictis absentum rodere vitam,
Hanc mensam vetitam nouerit esse sibi.
This table them forbidden is,
In English thus
That of the absent speak amiss.
Nemo sine crimine viuit, No man lives without a fault. But he that proclaims
it, is worse then he, Abhominatio hominum detractor, Prou. 24.
the backe-biter is holden abominable; and to be shunned as a venomous thing.
And for this cause only it has been allowed in Italy, that the wronged
should give the wronger a Cartella, to fight with him. How justly, I will not
now speak. Neither speak I of the sin to Godward; which I leave wholly to
preachers. I touch it only in point of dishonor, and as they be aspersions to
reputation; which both the wronger is bound to recompense, and the wronged may
justly require. I touch them as they be make-bates, and leave a stain behind
them in another coat, being slanderous, and scandalous to fame, and sooner
raised, then removed, if not repaired in time. Conturbat sapientem, It
troubles a right wise body, to have the lie, or a foul word given him, which
we use to our Page, or varlet. Conturbat sapientem, To have a frumpe, or a
scoff, or a bore in the nose; much more a stripe, or a trippe at his heels;
and no marvel if it cost blood, or sound blows, ere they part. These matters
are holden as small with us, as they be common. But the Romans held them very
shameful, and censors taxed the cause-giuer with ignominy, and shame, which
they used not to any man, but upon great cause, Plut. vit.
besides loss of his horse.

To you my dear country men, and friends (I must tell you) it is the
principal scope of my speech; that howsoever your sudden occasions of heat
may carry you at any time somewhat further then upon aduisement you would, to
break the peace or bond of charity with any; and for which I can give you no
other rule, then the measure of Gods grace in you: yet upon time of
deliberation, and space between; that is to say upon cold blood, which was the
other part I spoke of, I do wish much, and if I might I would command you, as
we do in the wars, that ye neither challenge your opposite into the field
upon any occasion; or if ye be challenged; that ye do not accept it. Being a
thing, both heinous in the sight of God to do, and no less then heresy to
think ye may do. This may be news to some of you. But not so new, as
true. Evil fashions drive old folks to School again. And the eldest of you
is not too old to learn, if any of ye be possessed with that pestiferous
opinion. That it is heinous, and sinful, it appears by this, for that it is
against the law of God, of nature, and nations. If against the law of God,
then heresy also to hold it lawful. This is in short, but I will make it
more plain to you, because it is a thing, ye must inform your selves in, and
it is gross to be ignorant of.

Single combat is honorable, if it be in just war, or commanded by the
Prince, or commonweal. As David did against Golias, for avoiding of
blood-shedde of many by the blood of one. Many in this kind we find in
histories, of one to one, or more to more, to weaken or discourage the
contrary; and we read them willingly in our books. And God has favored it
so, that it has saved the lives of many for the time. We have also an ancient
trial for title of land, or appeals of felony by single combat, where
matters be so obscure, or otherwise carried, that common law or justice can
hardly decide them. And the form is yet in use, but seldom suffered by
Magistrates to take effect, as sauouring more of heathenish times, when such
customs began, then of Christian lenity, which thanks be to God has almost
worn it away. This kind of combat also is needful sometimes, and men be
forced to it in defense of ones person, or purse, or honor, to avoid a
bastinado, or such like disgrace. But this must be as the learned say out of
Saint Augustine, in delicto flagrante, upon assault, Nauar.
or a wait; and cum moderamine in culpatae tutelae, Intending only their just
defense, and not otherwise. It must not be, if any means else be by flying
back, or stepping aside says the Law. But I hold it probable with others,
that if one assault me, let him stand to his peril; he forces me to fight; I
meet him not of purpose, nor upon challenge, which I may not do, nor any
authority upon earth can give leave to do, nor scarce conniue with, against
the law of God, thou shall not kill.

The learned hold, Exodus 20.
that by killing here, is understood murder. And this difference is between
killing, and murdering, as between an act done of authority, and of our own
head. Killing is lawful for Justice, and for example. Murder always
unlawful, and damnable. And not only the act of murder, but all that tends
to the act is hateful to God, and his Angels. Your challenging, or accepting,
your providing weapons, and preparing them, your going out of dooers, and
entering the field; the drawing of your sword, hitting, missing, wounding,
maiming, killing or not killing; every one of these is detestable, and
abominable; every step you set forward in this business, is a step to
hell, and irreuocable woe. And that this is true which I say, or shall say, I
could bring you excellent authorities out of divine writers, that handle these
matters in particular, and purposely; in their titles of Homicide, duellum, and
tempting of God.

But my purpose is not to read you a lecture, or to make you any long
discourse with vouching, or proouing. And if ye think me wrong, or that I
grate over hard upon any man's distemper, ask any that have learning, and cure
of your souls, and they will tell you as much, and will show it you out of
their books, if ye will believe them. And ye ought to believe them in their
own art, as ye will be believed in yours. You know best, how to use your
weapon; they know best when ye may draw it. And this was that Saint John
Baptist taught soldiers, and gave them directions in, both for justice, and
charity, when they came unto him, to know, what they should do. The Church
lives now by the same breath it did then, and the spirit of the Precursor
perished not with his person. His doctrine, and directions do still remain in
the breast of our pastors, with whom I have conferred ere now, and have read
somewhat my self; and what I find by some study, and conference, I willingly
impart unto you out of my love. Even that which has cost me many hours, and
days, I lay before you, as court keepers do, in an hours charge; both what
ye must know in this business, if ye be ignorant; and what ye must practice,
and are bound to forbear, when ye know it.

The law of God is directly, you may not kill. And Christ adds a curse to it,
Qui gladium acceperit, gladio peribit, He that shall take the sword in his
hand, shall perish by the sword. Virum sanguinum, and dolosum abhominabitur
dominus, God will detest him, and hold him abominable, Mat. 6. Psalm. 5.
that will steal the sword out of the magistrates hand: for what is this virum
sanguinum, and dolosum here, the man of blood, in guile; but he that steals
revenge, and rights himself so as public justice shall not know of it? Ye
see what the Psalm says of him. God will hold him abominable. And in
another place if I be not much deceived, we are forbidden directly to do it,
with a grievous curse annexed thereunto by the Holy Ghost it self, the words
be these: Cum audace non eas in desertum, Eccl. 8.19.
Go not out with an audacious body into the desert, (says he) Go not out
alone as Duellers do. For here be both parties touched very plainly as I
take it. First the cause giver by this word audacious, or foolehardy; so called
here, Quia quasi nihil est apud eum sanguis, Because bloodshed (says he) is
as nothing to him. Likewise, the wronged by this word [non eas] Go not thou,
or be thou not audacious as he is. Go not into the field with him. Vbi non
est adiutorium elidet te, God will give thee over for thy temerity, that he
shall kill thee, though thou be a better man then he. Thou have withdrawn thy
self from man, and God has withdrawn himself from thee. Non est adiutorium,
How can thou speed well, that have neither God, nor man on thy side? These
Scriptures and many more, being so evident against it; I doubt not to add,
and infer upon it, that it is not only sin to do, but also heresy to
hold. What is heresy, if this be not heresy? We need not a council to
make it heresy, when Scripture is contrary to it, as black is to white. It is
heresy to hold fornication lawful, swearing lawful, stealing lawful, and
so killing lawful. And he that sees not this to be sin, his opinion herein
may well be his punishment for his sin.

Happily they will distinguish and think it heresy with me for wilful murder,
but not for this. It is one thing to come behind a man, heresy in holding, or
scarce sin in doing. What shall a man dare me, and thou me to my face (say
they) and bid me meet him if I dare; and shall I not dare to meet him without
heresy, grace they say helps nature, not distroyeth it, and the nature of
man is gloriae appetens, desirous of honor, and differs from a beast in nothing
more, then in this. Take honor, and reputation from us, and take away our life.
They go forward also, and tell of many worthy persons, that have lost their
lives thus for their honor; and it were impiety to Judge them of heresy, my
sword; no more then plaintifes and defendants do in their suites of law. They
sue for their goods, and we for our honor. And then they fall to reckoning;

I will not speak of the dead, they be gone, and God forbid I should judge
them. Luke 23.
like Herod and Pilate made friends by killing of Christ. We are forbidden
expressly, not to kill at all. How can they think that they may kill, but it
must be heresy? God says they may not, they say they may. Their distinction
between wilful murder, and this, is somewhat, but not for this purpose.
heresy to hold so. They may prove as well fornication to be lawful, so they
mean to marry after; lawful to steal, so they mean to restore, when they
are able; lawful to swear idly all the oaths of God, so they do not
forswear; yet all this is sin to do, and heresy to hold; and such
distinctions will not save it either from Gods law, or from man's. And for
graces helping of nature; that is nothing to our matter. Grace helps nature in
good things, not in badde. And it is blasphemy to use the word grace in that
sort, as to animate us to sin, or to breaking of charity, or to get honor so
dishonourably.

They say they hate not their enemy. I answer, they shall not be judged by
their sayings, but by their doings. If they do the acts of hatred, their
sayings are but colors. Make the best of their case, that they go not to
fight, that they go not to kill, but to defend if need be, and to show
themselves only, that they dare meet their enemy in the field, and be as
good as their word. If he draw (say they) I will draw. If not, I have nothing
to say to him. I will never assault him. But this is too mathematical. How
many be there that go so into the field? and yet most of us know two noble
young gentlemen now dead; my Lord of Digion, and Count La-vall. This latter had
been somewhat wild, but much reclaimed of late. These two had been at high
words, and comparisons, and Digion challenged him, and they met next day
accordingly with either of them a Page. La-vall threw off his cloak, and his
rapier after it vndrawne; and told Digion he would not fight. Why come
thou hither then said he? because I promised thee said La-vall, and my word
slipped from me by chance. And yet I fear thee not (said he) but I will not
displease God, for a better man then thou. Thou have done me wrong, and I have
done thee some; and so he fell a dancing, with a turn and a half above the
ground. Digion was angry, and told him he would disgrace him, and make a boy
of him, if he would not fight. And therewithal came toward him with a light
thrust. La-vall put it by with his dagger, and followed it quickly with a
close. Digions foot slipped, and fell, and La-vall upon him, saying: now I could
send thee to the devil: but thou shall go to the Bishop first for absolution,
and so gave him a kiss on his cheek, and returned both friends, and did great
service here against the Turk after that; where they lost their lives with as
much honor as might be, as the world does know. But how many be there, that
go so scrupulously into the field as he did? And yet this going is sinful,
and vnexcuseable, and by God forbidden, though ye make the best of it ye can.

When God forbids murder, he forbids three things. The act, the intention, and
all manner of concurring. The act is damnable, the intention of killing is
damnable without act; and the least concurring that is, comes little short of
it. And there be nine manners of concurring, as may appear by an old
disticke. Iussio, consilium, consensus, palpo, recursus,
Participans, mutus, non obstans, non manifestans.
Here be nine words according to the several ways of concurring either to
murder, or any other notorious sin; as the learned do define. And it is
heresy to defend the least of them. Ye would think consensus, and palpo, were
but small matters; the one for consenting that a couple should fight, the other
for animating, and encouraging them to fight, by praising it, and soothing them
up. These be the least, and yet very grievous matters, and commonwealths, and
laws take hold of them in case of felony, or treason, and they are punished
little less then principalls. Even so in Gods court, the curious looking on,
or negligence in parting, is inuolued in the same sin, and censure. 1 Reg. 4.
Heli was pitifully punished for wincking at his sons abuses, and not
punishing them. Consentientes, et agentes pari pena plectentur, says the law.
And Saulus erat consentiens neci eius. Saul was as deep in the murder of
Saint Stephen for standing by, and keeping their clothes, as others that
stoned him. Act. 8.
This is the law of consenters, this the law for counselors, and abetters;
this for flatterers, and incouragers, how much more then for acters, and
deede-doers.

More then this I have known, where the party could never be proved to know
or consent to murder, and yet has justly suffered for it. As it happened
lately in Tholosa, where a great justice was done upon Madamoisella violenta, a
young woman of good breeding, beauty, and comeliness, if she had bin honest.
But she was kept by two, a merchant, and an Augustine friar. Who to color
their lewdness, put a husband to her. This husband deceived their expectation,
and sent her into the country twenty mile off, that he might have her alone to
himself. But this cost him his life. For he was murdered on an evening in the
backeside of the town as he was crossing the fields. The procurers, and one
or two more were executed for it, and the poor woman for company, that knew
nothing, as I said. (...) sed, for my reasons aforesaid. What should I speak
now of the commonest practice at this day? their bow bent, their stomach
pent, till they be at it. Their doings bewray their intentions. They say, and
swear sometimes, that they will kill, or be killed. They search one another to
the skin, that there be no let of speeding; run at tilt one at another, to
be sure to speed; two courses make an end of one, or both. And if one of them
chance to be scrupulous, how long will it last, if a wound begin to smart once,
or the blood to cover their eyes? how can these escape the vengeance of God,
that go to kill, or be killed, and glory in it, when they have done. He shall
be praised of men for it; shall be called stout, a man of his hands, a brave
man; and why? he has killed two or three. So profane we be grown; not
satisfied with doing ill, but we must glory in it. Diabolus est homicida, 1 Ioh.
The devil is a murderer, and we will be next cosins to him.

Can any thing be more against God, then this? Is it not strange in a
Christian, to think this honorable, or good, that dishonours God so much? Be
there any heretics in the world, if these be not heretics? Be they not justly
excommunicated by holy Church, justly forbidden burial in Church, or
Churchyard? and not only they; but their abetters, ayders, and incouragers,
and lookers on? so hateful is it in the sight of God, and the Church our
mother; and so dangerous to the souls of the poor Combatants, that are all
excommunicate in terrorem, even to the stander by. The party slain is
forbidden burial for two causes, unless he had time to repent him, and gave
good signs of it, and denied not his enemy forgiveness. The one is, because
he dies excommunicate: the other because he kills himself, and is in case of
felo de se, by reason aforesaid. Mark my words well I beseech you, and be
well advised on the matter; especially, if any of ye be of that opinion,
ouerswaied with the time. The more ye wade into the business, the truer you
shall find my words. Blind not your selves with ill custom. Let not the new
nesse of it, (if it be new) diminish the credit of it in your green conceits.
The law of God I am sure is not new, how new soever in our practice. What
should I say more to Christians?

Yet somewhat I should also say of the law of nature, or nations, which was
long before this. The law of nature was quicunque effuderit sanguinem humanum,
Genesis 9.6.
fundetur sanguis illius, His blood shall be spilt, that spills the blood of
another. This is the book of Genesis. And if a man will have a reason of it, a
reason is there given. Ad imaginem quippe Dei factus est homo, He that kills a
man, kills the image of God; Why should I spite him, or malice him? He is my
own Image, though never so hateful in my eye; why should I strike him, except
God bid strike, or the common weal? But note I beseech you the punishment
annexed to it. Blood will have blood. Fundetur sanguis illius, ibid. 18.
It shall cost him his life. And the Hebrew has per hominem. As he killed a
man, so a man shall kill him again. That is to say the magistrate, or
executioner, by lex talionis. And this has been the practice of all nations.
No hiding would serve their turn, but they were met withal at one time, or
other, as heathens themselves have noted, and have admired Gods providence in
it. And if some have escaped, yet this breaks no rule, but among Epicures; who
attribute all to fortune, while God (they think) is a sleep, or never minds
us.

Against whom I remember a grave saying of Isocrates in his Oration de pace;
wishing them if they be wise, not to hope of impunitie, because some are not
punished. For if there be some that escape (says he) yet the most do not. And
therefore it were wisdom to provide for that, which is most common, and
likely. And it is most fond (says he) when God is known to love Justice, to
think that he cares not for the just; or that the wronged shall have worse
fortune then the wronger. Thus he. And truly it is an old tradition of the
Jews, that Caine himself, before ever there were Magistrates, could not
escape this heavy judgment, to be killed by man, although he had a mark set
on him, that none should kill him. But such was Gods judgment, as he could not
avoid it. Blind Lamech slew him by mere chance. And this tradition is
affirmed in effect by scripture in Lamechs own words, saying: Occidi virum in
vulnus meum: septuplum vultio dabitur de Caine; J have killed a man to my own
wound, Genesis 4.
seauenfold revenge will be given to Caine.

Kings themselves, that are heads of magistrates, could not avoid this
animaduersion. 1 Reg. 22.
Saul for killing the foure-score Priests, lost his own life, and his sons
life, and a kingdom besides. David lost his child (when he had rather
perhaps have lost his life) for murdering Vrias. 2 Reg. 11.
Queen Iesabell, and Achab both slain, and seauentie of his sons for
killing Naboth. And although our Duellors fault were not so cowardly, or
tyrannical as these: yet our Ancestors have holden it a great unhappiness, to
kill one by chance, or with least fault; and that many disasters belong to it,
if they pray not the more earnestly all the days of their life. How much more
then, if the chance were by notable negligence, as fencing, wrestling, throwing
a stone at a dog, and hit a child, coyting over a house without warning to
passengers. Scholia Raym.
These, and such like, had a seauen-fold curse, as it was upon him, that killed
Caine, though it were by casualtie. And hereof I think it was, that seven
years penance was inflicted by the old Church for such acts. Where now it
is brought to one; besides imperial laws for the outward offense. How much
more yet, if the chance were of an unlawful act; but most of all, if of a
bloody, or of a reuengefull mind, as it is with Duellors. King David says;
Psalm. 54.
their days shall be cut into half. Viri sanguinum non dimidiabunt dies suos.

But to return to our matter; and to leave the Scriptures, and Church laws;
because they be not altogether our profession, and the word, and the sword
seem contraries, and they that be ill disposed have no skill of it: Mat.
For as St. Hillarie says: Sermo Dei carnalibus tenebrae sunt, and verbum Dei
infidelibus nox est, Scripture is dark to the carnal, and night to the
unbelieving: Let us stir up therefore the light of nature in us, and see what
nature tells us, and the practice of worthies, that is received, and commended
of all. Wereade of noble heathens, that killed themselves; But they are not
commended for it. Some others had other vices, and are condemned for it by good
writers. But what they have practiced, and are commended for by the best, is
likely to be good; and what they used not, neither is written of them that
ever they did, is likely to be naught, and unworthy the worthiest.

The trumpets of nature, and virtue, are Philosophers, Poets, and histories.
These acknowledge no such trial of manhood, when they discourse of fortitude,
and magnanimity, the two virtues, that gentlemen so much aim at. They talk of
honor, ignominy, contumely, and disgrace. They will not have a stout man put
up injuries basely. They touch many particular behauiours belonging to him. His
speech sober, without a word unbeseeming; his actions advised, Arist. eth.
without touch of temerity; his carriage grave, and staide, without leuity; in
righting himself, not over hasty; if angry, yet not forgetting himself. They
descend particularly, to tell how he must go, and with what composition of
body, on horseback, or on foot, in all things worthy of themselves, and not a
word of combat; unless it were for their country, or commonweal. Ye shall
not find such an instance in Plato, Plutarke, Seneca; not in Aristotle the
prince of Philosophers, Strabo.
and was himself a soldier also in the battle of Corronea. Not in all Homer,
who was (as a man would say) the light of nature speaking, and the setter out
of all heroical virtues, in the practice of great Princes. His work was
Alexanders looking glass, and was never out of his hand. Tully says, he that
can repulse an injury and will not, offends as much as if he forsook his
friends, and kinsfolk. But he talks of no repulsing by fight. He bids us
pugna pro patria, Fight for our country, but not for our private.

Many private grudges ye shall read of upon malice, and emulation amongst
them. But wisely carried, and never breaking out to this enormity we speak
of. Agamemnon wronged Achilles, to take his mistress from him, and some bitter
words past between, them for it; but neither blow, nor challenge. Many iarres
between Palamedes and Ulysses always, but no challenge. Some between Fabius
and Minutius, between Aristides and Themistocles, and between Cymon and
Pericles, Pompey and Lucullus, Craterus and Ephestion, Comines.
Castinus and Boniface, Bellisarius and Narses. And of later times, when the
Earl of St. Paul gave the lie to the Lord Himbercourt; and the Duke of Orleans
gave the like to the Prince of Orange, all brave men, and knights of the field,
and a multitude besides, which were tedious to recite; yet none came to
challenge; but either they thought it enough, to have given their opposite as
good as they brought, or have left revenge to God, or justice, or to mediation
of friends, as cause required, or have yielded to time, person, or place, for
their greater honor afterward; as Achilles and Metellus did; or tried their
valor against their common enemy, as Valerius and Cecinna did under the
Emperor Vitellius.

And yet upon accusation of treason in great persons, Suet.
where other proofs be not pregnant enough, as it was in Richard the seconds
time between Hereford, and Mowbrey. Dictis writes of Palamedes that he
challenged all his peers to fight with them one after another. But they would
not, being all fellows and colleagues with him. No more would Otho Duke of
Bauaria with his accuser Egino, though much urged thereunto by the Emperor
Henry the fourth; and yet the history calls this Duke Prudentia and rebus
bellicis admirabilem. Naucl.
But he chose rather to lose his Dukedom, and so did. And yet I must tell
you; as this Emperor was greatly blamed by his own mother, a most worthy
woman, and by all the Princes, except a few, who set him on to this injustice:
so can I not but marvel at two of our later Kings, the one of France, the
other of England; the one so prudent and pious, as he was, that he gave way so
easily, to a combat between two noble gentlemen Sir James Parker, and Hugh
Vaughan upon a far less quarrel then false accusation; wherein the knight
was run through the mouth at the second course by fault of his helmet, and his
tongue borne back to his neck, whereof he instantly died. The other of
France began his reign with blood; giving way to a combat between Jarnac and
Chastenroy, upon no great matter, but to grace his triumph with: where Jarnac
though newly recovered of an ague, defeated the other at length, and killed him
in the place. Neither of the kings much fortunate by it. The one was killed by
Mongomery in like triumph at tilting after a short reign: the other held not
his crown so void of fear, and jealousy, as other kings after him. And yet I
marvel much more at other Princes of our time, who in their triumphs and
iouiall feasts, allow of those dangerous and damnable sports of Jogo de toro,
and Jogo de Canna, which commonly cost killing, and cannot be avoided. It is
too like that Roman custom of fencers, and swordplayers, and those that knew
not God. Lib. 28.
Who set their lives and blood to sale as Liuie says, for pastime to their
Lords, or in honor of some feast, or generals fortune; where they spared not at
sharp, to kill one another, if they could. And so they continued many hundred
years; and was not quite abolished by Christian Emperors til the time of
Honorius, as Theod. writes. in Hono. Steph. in Aphida. Just.


Yet nothing more frequent in histories then single fight, as that of Patroclus
and Hector, Hector and Achilles, Xanthus and Melanthus for the kingdom of
Athens, Codoman and another for the kingdom of Armenia, the three curiates and
Horaces in Rome, Tullius and Metius, Florus.
Manlius and a french man, an other french man and Valerius, Alexander and
Porus, Ferracutus the Sarazen giant and Rolandus, and of later times between
Turks and us, where thanks be to God they went ever by the worst. But all
these were iure belli (as I said before) from contrary enemies. And of all the
combats that Marcus Seruilius fought for life, and death, which were three and
twenty, and he conqueror in all; Plut. in Emilius.
I read not of any to be with his compatriot, but all with public enemies in
lawful wars. And that was never upon their own heads neither, but with
consent of Generals, as we read in Liuie. Lib. 7.
Yea though a man be challenged by name from the other side, as Titus Manlius
was, and where it seemed reproachful to have refused it, yet it cost him his
life the accepting of it. I will tell you the history.

The law of arms is, that none should fight in the wars out of their rank,
but by direction of the commanders. Manlius the father was general against the
Latins at Capua. The son had charge of a troop of horsemen, and was sent to
discover the coasts of the enemy. Where coming within an arrow shot of the
corpse de-guard, which Geminius Metius a valiant knight had leading of, they
fell to some big, and daring words, and the Latin challenged the Roman to
break a staff with him. Young Manlius his blood was up at this, and thinking
it a shame to him to refuse him, he advanced himself to the business; they
ran their horses in full careere one against the other with spear in rest.
Manlius with lance aloft glided over, and rased the enemies head-peece. Metius
gave the other a light thrust upon his horse neck with point of spear. Then
turning their horses about, Manlius came first upon him with a second charge,
and so redoubled the push, that he pierced the others horse between the ears,
which put him to such pain, that he never left rearing, and capring with his
forefeete, and flinging down his head till he cast his rider. Who as he bare
his spear and shield, to raise himself from so grievous a fall, Manlius ran
him in at the throat and so through the ribs stuck him fast to the ground,
killed him, spoiled him, carried the spoil away to his own troop, and had
sentence of death on him presently for it, from his own father, in liew of
reward. The judgment I grant was severe. And the execution prosecuted with
much compassion, and tears. Yet none could say but it was just, and the
punishment answerable to his fault. And of great example it was, to reduce
broken discipline to the ancient rule, as it would among us now, if gentle
means would not serve. Some difference indeed there is in our cases. Theirs
was in time of wars, where challenges are lawful. Ours in time of peace,
where is no challenge lawful. Yet in this they agree. There, they might not
do it without leave of superiors; here much less; yet if they have leave, I
think it be less sinful.

And surely if we enter but into the causes of private combat; which are
commonly two; there is neither of both that will make the act justifiable. The
one is revenge, the other is reputation. And first for revenge; which is common
also to beasts and savages, and is more in savages then in men; and therefore
men must not do as they do; so revenge be, they care not how it be. Men I say
must look higher then so, and then they shall find this cause to be no cause,
unless they will stand in defiance with all civil government, and God
himself, who tells us plainly to the contrary, Mihi vindictam says he, et
ego retribuam. Rom 12.
He reserues revenge to himself, and to princes under him. And who is he,
dares say again, Non tibi domine, sed mihi, Revenge is mine, and none of
thine, I will right my self. And in another place it is said, Ne dixiris,
Prou. 20.21 Aug. in Steph.
vlciscar de inimicis meis, Do not so much as say I will be revenged of mine
enemies. And therefore, if we may not say it, much less may we do it. Read
all the civil laws that ever were, and see whether the sword were put into
the parties own hand. It is tolerated in Italy as I said before, as the stews
be, to avoid further mischief, and no otherwise. As God did likewise by the
Jews, that were a nation of all others most reuengefull; he gave some way to
their stiffenesse, that the next of kin to the party slain, Number. 35.19
might kill the killer when he could. But this was abolished by the coming of
Christ. Neither was it permitted him to kill, until the people had given
sentence; as it appears by the text. Verse. 24. Verse. 27.
Yea so far was the law from allowing otherwise this private revenge; and so
heavily taxed it all manner of manslaughter; that if it were but chance medly,
or in defense of ones self, a man was not freed from the rigor of it, if he
were found out of sanctuary. To say nothing now, what vicinity revenge has
with tyranny, and cruelty; which those are noted to have most, that are most
cowardly, as the most noble and learned king of England has written of late
most significantly for so few lines, where occasion was given his majesty, Upon
the Pater noster. page 80.
to touch thereat; and thereunto I refer you.

And as touching reputation, which was the other cause of combat, and is
proper only to man, and which he thinks is greatly hurt, if he be wronged
and challenge not, or if he be challenged and answer not, in both which
cases, if he be not answerable: he shall be deemed a coward. I little weigh
what they say, that are carried away with a vice regnant, Corrupt judgments
are no judges of honor. Holofernes his followers thought it a shame to let a
fair woman pass them untouched. Judith.
The virtuous thought not so. Yea: that alone is honor, which the worthiest
think to be honor, as I shall show anon. For this present I say no more but
this. He that has revenge in his power, has also judgment of honor; let the
vulgar say what they list. Psalm. 71.
We pray for kings and magistrates thus. Deus iudiciumregida, et iustitiam tuam
filio regis, For the king, that he may have judgment in choice of magistrates;
for the magistrate, that he may have will to do us right. Da iustitiam tuam
filio regis. Who is the kings son but the magistrate, begotten of his
greatness, and resembling him in power? We pray for him, yet we fly him when
we have done, and will be magistrates our selves. What, must we trouble Lawyers
or Lords (say they) for every blow or word of disgrace? it shall never be said
of me. This is it shall right me says he, and clappes his hand on his hilt.

But what reason have they to say it? if the matter be great, the magistrate
is ordained for it, to hear and determine. If it be small, why adventure they
their life for it, or seek another man's? They scorn to do as babes do, to
cry and complain; yet will be worse then babes, to wrong themselves more then
they be wronged. For if himself be killed, what extreme injustice has he
done himself for a trifle. If he kill, he must hide his head for it, his
friend may not receive him til he be acquitted of it someway. The great nesse
of his penalty shows the greatness of his crime. And we see not whom we
hurt, till we need him whom we hurt, which is our Soueraign. We wrong
sovereignty to right our selves, and yet we seek Sovereignty, to restore us
again.

I proved before, that it was not only a sin to do, but an heresy to
justify. Even so in this case between our Sovereign and us, it is not only
against nature to do these things, but also against loyalty, to think we
may do it. I said it was heresy in respect of religion. Now I say, it is hurt
to majesty in point of subjection. As king Alexander might seem to take it,
who was no mean Justizer in martial affairs. For coming just to a fray
between two of his favorites that were ready to be revenged one of another
with swords drawn: he was in great anger, and told them they should both
dye for it, or he that gave the cause, if they did it again. And this not for
killing, or drawing of blood, but only for the disloyalty, and contempt of
majesty, in the very attempt. And yet ye must understand me right. I do not
say it is treason. For it is not to the person of the Prince, or estate. They
intend nothing against Majesty, yet would mince his authority. They love the
state, but they would pull from prerogative. They allow them to be their
Judges, but not in all things; no, not in the greatest, that belongs to their
charge. What greater thing in the world then life, and honor? There be diverse
marks of Sovereignty, which none can have but Sovereigns. And it is a great
contempt in the Subject to usurp them. As power of peace and war, power of
making laws and abrogating laws, power to make money and alter money, power
to make noble and unnoble, and such like. But the greatest of all, is power of
life, and death over the subject. Yet this the subject will assume to himself
in part, and quarter prerogative with his Sovereign.

And is it marvel then if Henry the fourth of France have made it treason by
parliament, Edict. 160.
and have stopped his ears to all offenders in this nature? Or can we find
fault with the laws in England, that a Duellor killing, is equally punished
with a thief stealing? A thief commonly has not friends to speak for him. 1
Pet. 4.
But S. Peter puts them together; Nemo vestrum patiatur vt homicida, aut fur. A
thief steals for need, the other killes for honor. If a man be poor, yet
he must not steal; if a man be disgraced, yet he must not kill. If either
of both transgress, the law makes no difference between them. Their pain is
alike, therefore their fault alike.

Arguit esse reum lex capitalis eum.
Their fault cannot be small,
whose pain is capital.
No difference in punishment, therefore no difference in crime. No friend in
parliament, has moved for altering the Law, either for one, or other, though
the one be the case of many a good gentleman. Whereupon as to this point, we
may boldly affirm, that your Duel, as it is used, and is equally punished
with greatest faults, so is it in his own nature an evil thing, and tending
to the greatest evil. It is offensive to God, injurious to Sovereignty,
disgraceful to the commonweal, and that which remains further to be
proved, to themselves that be the doers most of all dishonorable.

It is no small charge, I lay upon Duellors; and it may be I bring a challenge
upon mine own head for calling it dishonorable. Yet since I have partly
proved it by the baseness of the punishment (unless it be so that they
hold themselves Martyrs) I hope they will pardon me, if I prove it further.
For I have not so many heads, as I would adventure in making this good.
Divines do prove it sinful, and I must prove it dishonorable. And this I
suppose were easily proved, if our greatest soldiers, that have been, had
written of this matter, that we might produce their authorities. But it shall
not need. Their practice is a better testimony then any books. And yet we
may gather out of Cornelius Tacitus, who was himself a noble soldier and
Historiographer; what he thought of this business, when he calls private
revenge a vice. For, giving a reason, why we are more reuengefull for a wrong,
then thankful for a benefit; he says it is, because revenge is a vice, and
vitium in questu est (says he) gratia oneri, Vice makes show of gain, though
a man have but his will of one; where thanks is a burden, because a man is
bound to it.

And so Polibius another soldier, and an honorable person, companion with
Scipio, in his second book is so far from our minds in this; that he
calls it nefas interficere ciuem, A horrible thing to kill our countreyman any
way. He commends single combat with a public enemy, in his sixth book, and
extols the Romans for undertaking such challenges, but not inter ciues. Paul.
Diac. lib. 14.
Yea the practice of Aetius was quite contrary to ours; who although he were
the greatest soldier in the west, and a terror unto Attila whom he drove out
of Jtaly with loss of all his men: yet he fled his private enemy, and emulator
at home, and thought it either iniust, or dishonorable; or both, to fight in
that sort. And what do we read of Fabius Maximus a great leader amongst the
Romans, when he was bitterly provoked by Minutius, and (as his friends
thought) very intollerably; his answer was as I have read, that he thought
them more cowards that were moved with floutes, Naucl.
and taunts, then they that fly their enemy. Lo here what our grand Master
says, that we ought not to be moved, and much less revenge our selves with
word or blow. Which when such an one as he has said, being no light headed
man, but deep of judgment, we must think his authority to be a reason
sufficient.

But the only man of Mars that has given his opinion freely though somewhat
sparingly in this business; is a very late writer, but one who for wit and
education could very well judge of honor. And yet he spares not to set down
for perpetual memory; that no man in honor ought accept a private challenge,
being a thing so opposite as it is, to Gods law, and man's. The law of man
(says he) has appointed the Hangman to second the conqueror; and the law of
God has appointed the devil to second the conquered so dying in malice.
Whereupon he concludes it to be both foolish, and base, to accept of such
challenge as is so basely accompanied. All which he has reasons for, if a man
will read him. And it is not without cause that he calls it base, and
Ruffin-like, since the nature of cowardice will approve the same.

For what is cowardice, but an act against reason; done for fear, in matter
of courage. As to run away at sight of drawn swords, whereof he had no
reason, but his womanish fear. First we have proved already single combat
to be an act against reason; and I will prove it again thus. It is an act
against the end of every commonweal, which is peace; and therefore
unreasonable. It is an act concurring with the inclination of beasts, if they
could speak, and therefore unreasonable. We see two dogs when they be
parted, they run out of company to fight alone. And Pliny writes of a
Lioness that roamed up and down the desert to encounter the Bear, that
killed her whelps. But ye will say, I may forbid you as well to eat and
drink, and defend your selves, because it is the inclination of beasts. Not
so, ye must make a difference between acts that be natural which must be,
and no law is against; and acts of passion, which reason is always against,
unless it be in beasts that have no reason. And therefore I prove it
thirdly to be an act of passion, ergo unreasonable. That fighting and
revenging be acts of passion, and stomach, is proved first a contrarijs. For
the concontrary acts of patience, and forbearance, are acts of reason, as I
will show anon by examples of the worthiest; ergo, revenge must needs be an
act of passion. I prove it again thus. Passion commands revenge; delights in
revenge, is eased with revenge, as the old Satyr says. Est vindicta bonum
vita iucundius ipsa.
It does us good revenged to be,
more then our life, or liberty.
How many have killed themselves out of this passion; and for want of revenge,
ergo an act of passion, and unreasonable. And to say no more it is proved
sufficiently by all their confessions that come to dye for it, or dye in their
beds, as my self am witness, although their stoutnesse until then, would not
suffer them to see it. But I must prove it it now to be an act of fear also,
which was the other part of my definition. And which although it seem hard to
prove, because there is no sign of fear that appears, yet if we find any
fear at all, it will suffice.

There is a fear, which is of death or maime. But this they have not, no more
then unreasonable creatures have, when they assault one another. There is also
an other fear which is a fear of shame, and disgrace with the vulgar; and
that is a base fear, but yet they have it. They fear not what the best
think, but only what the vulgar, and most think. And were it not for this
fear, happily they would not fight. Quid non ausus erit, populi vitare cachinnos?
What is it, they dare not do,
for vulgar fear, that longs thereto?
They fear more every idle breath of a man's mouth, then loss of their life.
They fear more what a shoppe-keeper says when they walk the streets by him,
then what a Fabius Maximus if he were living. And this is that cowardly fear
which God rebuked in Jonas, when he sent him to the Ninevites, to foretell
their subversion. But he would not go for fear of disgrace by it; regarding
more what the common sort thought of him, then what God, or the people of God.
Jonas was soon corrected for it; but people now a days will not see. They are
ashamed, not to be vulgar, Psalm. 135.
and fear where there is no fear, as David said, which is the bafest fear
that is.

This the dastardly fear that another Prophet exclaimes against, saying:
Nolite timere approbrium hominum. Esa. 51.
Fear not what the vulgar say, or think of you, that seldom think as they
should think. For so the word homines here signifies the common or vulgar sort
of men, be they Noble, Mar. 18.
or others. So Christ himself used it, Quem me dicunt esse homines? Whom do
men say that I am? and presently after but what think you, says he? as who
should say, you that are not of the vulgar, Cap. 21. Gal. 1.
what think you of me? So in Saint Luke, Eritis odio omnibus hominibus. So
Saint Paul. Si hominibus placerem Christi seruus non essem. If I should please
men, that is to say the common sort of men, I were not Christ's servant. Must no
man please God, but Saint Paul? none but Apostles and preachers? none fly the
vulgar leaven, but these? Did not Solomon so take it also, when he called the
vulgar fools, Stultorum infinitus est numerus? An other calls them inconditum
vulgus, the unseasoned or distempered vulgar. Others ignobile vulgus, the base
conceited vulgar, and insipiens vulgus, the doting vulgar, that judge not
rightly of honor, or any thing?

The last part of my definition was [in matter of courage] And matter of
courage is, where a man may, and is bound in honor, to use courage. If I see
my friend assaulted; here is matter of courage to defend him. If my master, or
servant be in danger, and I run away, here is want of courage. If I see a
gentlewoman abused, or disgraced in the street, and I can right her with my
sword, the defense is honorable; and a thousand things besides, wherein to be
fearful, or shrink away, is want of manhood, and courage, and the party to
be charged in point of honor. But to say that that is honor or cowardice
which the vulgar only think so, that, is (as our author says) both foolish
and base. And the king of France and Princes of the blood call it brutish
madness; and have adjudged it no true honor. For who made the vulgar judges of
honor, Edict. of 1609.
that gentlemen should stand so in fear of their censures. Indeed if they
were brought up as gentlemen be, or gentlemen brought up as they should be;
their judgment and opinion might justly be feared; and stout men would not
dare to do as they do, for fear of true shame. But the ground of honor is
horribly mistaken by us, which is not altogether in boldness, or hardiness,
but as it is employed in virtue, and true prowess.

Who is there in the world, can tell us what is honor, if he know not what is
virtue? Is it honorable to have ones will in every thing? Honorable to be on
fire quickly, or give a scoff readily, and to thrust into every fray? these
be graceful things with a great many. But let no man tell me of honor in
action, if it be not for some virtue, that makes the motion. I hold Hercules,
and Theseus honorable for strength of body, and durable nature, bestowed where
it should be. I hold those soldiers honorable in times past, that won the
crowns. Liui. 5.
One for entering first the enemies camp, called Corona Castrensis, another for
scaling a wall first, another for bording a ship first, Strabo.
and these were of gold; another of oak leaves called Ciuica, for rescuing a
citizen, as Socrates did by his fellow Xenophon; Liui. 7. Steph. text.
another of green grass, which was best of all, and was given to Publius
Decius, Fabius, and Petreius for some singular exploites, and raising of
sieges. All be honorable that do honorable things; discover treasons, save
blood from spilling, houses, and towns from burning with danger to
themselves. Honorable Scipio, Hanniball, Pompey, Caesar, Alexander; Honorable
all men at arms, Grave Senators, and counselors most honorable of all, next
unto Princes, that rule the world in their chair, and give to all men their
due. And these may be called heroical honors. But the bounds of honor go
further then this. There is honor due to all kind of Excellency. And in the
meaner sort it is called praise. Each profession has honor, or praise with
it, even to the meanest that is. And as every one excels in the same faculty,
so are they more noble, or more praise worthy then other.

Now, which of all these do our Duellors excel in, when they make challenge
or answer? which of these virtues do they show in it? what innocent defend
they by it? what good to the common? what duty to God, or man has drawn them
to it? Ye say honor is a virtue, and that ye fight for your honor. A fair
Lady is precious, and ye fight for her love. A satisfied mind is a good
thing, and ye fight for obtaining it. And if you get any of these thus, ye say
it is honorably gotten. Pardon me I beseech you, It is not honorably gotten.
It may be stoutly and hardily gotten, but not honorably. Ye abase honor,
when ye apply it thus. Friendship is not friendship, if it be to a
traitor. Duty to ones father is no duty, if it be to overthrow a city, or
commonweal withal. We may say, there is metal, and courage in a
villanousaction, and matter of honor in a rebel dishonourably bestowed, as it
was in Clodius, and Catelyn. Will ye wound your self to show a passion of
love? or strike him that is next you to satisfy your mind? be these good
means to get honor? and if it were good that we desired, were it honorably
gotten, to get it so giddily per fas et nefas? Say your meaning be good, yet
the means must be lawful, else the act is dishonorable. And that this means
is unlawful, I have proved already both by Gods law and man's law, and the
light of nature. Choose which ye will stand to, it goes against you. Wine is
pleasing, and profitable out of a cup, but good for nothing if you power it on
the ground. So courage is indifferent to good and evil; but never honorable
with dishonorable circumstances.

Think not so basely of your courage, as to spend it so vainly. Think not so
meanly of your manhood, as to trifle it away in boe-peepe, and least be-seene.
Either ye be bad Orators, that defend such doings no better, or else your
cause bad, that has no other ground for it but vulgar error; nor other
authority for it, but a tumultuous plebiscite (as it were) without a Senate.
The breeding of gentlemen is such (as I said) or ought to be such, as they
should never do amiss for want of knowledge. Howbeit because they be ignorant
in these matters, and do not as they should do, but measure honor by
hardiness only, and think they have found their helmet, when they find but
the feather, and seek no further: hence it is that the common sort do ill
also, when they (they see) do ill, that have better breeding, and give no
better example.

But I may not stand too long with ye upon a point, or exceed the bounds of a
charge, especially when other things are to be spoken of, that are very
considerable about this this subject. For besides the injustice, and dishonor
of it, which by your good favors, and patience I have proved, and will
appear more plainly hereafter, we will see next, what manner of trial it
is; to the end, that if it neither be just in it self, nor the trial
reasonable; we may wholly exclude it from the society of men. The trial many
times is such as a man would laugh at, if it were not so common, and many times
unhappy withal. Men be never soldiers until they fall out: and then every
country man is a caualeer. Young lawyers, and scholars be soldiers; the
seruing-man, tradesman, and artificer is turned soldier on a sudden. They
will be honorable in an instant, if they come to see fashions, and upon their
honors they will stand. The question between them is for honor, or honesty;
who belyed other, who wronged other, and was the honester man. And they must
try it by that, which they have no skill in for the most part. They fly to
another man's trade, and run away from their own. No other trial will serve
but at sharp. That which is peculiar to men at arms for God, and their
country; they practice forsooth of their own heads, and fall to thrashing
one another, chance it as it list. I hard a merry story once, but it was true;
and a good judgment upon the case, by a knot of good fellows, such as setued
the turn.

Being once at supper in my brothers house the Duke; news was brought us, of
a fray newly passed between two of the meaner sort. The one I knew, his name
was Pot, a big fat fellow. The other was an Ale-man, of stature small, but
nimble, and desperate. These two fell out in a tavern, and appointed meeting
next morning at four a clock, in a close at the towns end. The Ale-man had
pawned his dagger, and was driven to go out with his single rapier, that
stuck at his beds head, and came to the place appointed first. Anon after he
spied his fellow afar off come tumbling over a mudde wall, with a tree on his
neck to his thinking; but when he came near, he saw it was a long rail,
sharpened on the one side. But besides this, he had two weapons more under his
girdle. A long reaching rod, and a whip made of a bedstaffe. What (says the
Ale-man) do thou think me an ox, or a dog, or a breeching boy, that thou
come in this sort? and thou (says Pot) do thou think me a piece of
beef, that thou come with a butchers prick in thy hand? I will lay you
anon (syrra) over yonder block, and you shall feel me as long as these
last, and so lettes drive at him with his rail. Back goes the Ale-man, till
he could go no further; and then thought best to draw his enemy into the
midst of the field again, and to run round about him. Pot fearing he
would run him in behind, was driven to turn round with him, till he was
almost turne-sicke, and craved parley. But the Ale-man would none of that; but
spying his advantage to come within him, Pot struck at him with a mighty blow,
and brake his rapier all to pieces, and stuck his rail fast in the ground.
And while he was struggling to get it out; the Ale-man steps to him quickly,
and twitches his whip from him, and laid at his legs withal. The other
leaves his rail, and draws out his rod, lashes him on the face, and almost
cut off his nose. The Ale-man finding his buttons covered with blood, takes the
butte end of the whip, and the other the great end of the rod, and here began
a new battle; until Pot reaching at him to catch hold of him, the Ale-man by
chance, hit him right under the ear, and laid him asleep, and fled. Next
day in the afternoon, it was both their happes to meet at a blind alehouse
in an alley, and a new brabble toward, if company there had not stickled
between them. They fell to vnripping of old matters, and much ado there was
about wronging, and dishonouring. Till some of the standers by told them: ye
were both fools (masters) to deal with weapons ye had no skill in. And if
we had been of your council (said they) ye should have both of ye met
fasting in a morning, with a dozen of pots a piece, well filled, and have tried
it out who should stand longest. And with this, they called for half a dozen
fresh cannes, put both their honors in a pot, and made an end of the
quarrel. But to come to my purpose.

It is an old saying, quam quisque nouit artem, in hac se exerceat, Cicero.
Let no man go out of his element, or skill. Let merchants deal with
merchandise, and scholars with books: every man meddle with his own
profession. It suffices a man to be honest, though not honorable. What
should a shoemaker go try his honesty in the field with a hatter, that
challenges him; but rather challenge him again (as one did) to show him as
good a Hatte, as he can show a shoe. And this is manhood enough, if men be
not mad. What deformity were it in a gown'd man, or Alderman, or Justice of
peace, to become a cutter? Cedant arma togae. So far is it from cowardice to
refuse a challenge in that case. And what difference is there between these
and other gentlemen of quality? All are bound alike for the peace, though all
be not sworn to it, as Justices are. If any sort may do it; the kings men
may, and squires for the body, Pentioners, guard, and other near his person;
who ought to be men of likely valor, or trust, and to fear no man: and yet
we have proved, that they may not do it, when the precept is general that
none may do it. And Princes take it not well, when persons so near them be so
highly carried away, as to transgress so grossly. Princes themselves are
sacred, and hate blood, if it be not to save blood, hate effusion, if it be
not to spare effusion. And if they were Gods, to know men's thoughts; a bloody
mind should never approach our Sanctuary of peace, to stayne his house, and
bring a curse upon it, where a blessing is due.

Lastly, if any else be, that may break the peace, a soldier may, and men of
honor, whose special profession is to handle arms, and to stead their
country that way as occasion serves. And yet there is no warrant for them to
do it. And we read how Titus Quintius Crispinus a Roman, would not do it
of his own head, though never so much provoked, and challenged most
reprochfully by Badius from the contrary army, where it seemed most
disgraceful to refuse it. And although he undertook him afterward and ran
him into the shoulder above his shield at the first career, and unhorsed him,
and made him run away and leave horse, and shield behind him: yet this was
upon suite first, and with leave of his General. Which having, he could not
refuse combat without cowardice; but not having, to refuse was honorable. And
I tell it you for this. That if Crispinus could put up so many reproaches as
Liuie sets down for order, Lib. 25.
and duties sake in the wars; is it not much more to be done in peace? if
he regarded not his private honor for the public in wars; shall we
begin a civil war (for so is your Duel) and prefer our private before
the public in peace? if he for those due respects, would break no peace in
wars, shall we be so rude and vnrespectiue toward the public, as to
break peace in peace? Is not the like obligation of subjects to superiors in
peace, as it is in wars, or not rather so much greater as they have less
excuse for it, and more blame if it be broken?

But to forbear you a little, and to yield a little to ill custom, and bad
applied courage; because ye shall not challenge me, I will challenge you
first. Let any man afford me a sound reason, why single combat should be a
true trial of honor, or honesty; as to say which of them was in the wrong,
and which in the right; or which more honorable, or valiant then other; for
that is all the question between them; not who has more courage, but who has
more honor; not who more desperate, but who more wronged. That is it, they go
into the field for, to make their sayings good upon each others body. Will
conquest fall out always with him that has right? Do the valianter always
go away with the victory? If this were so, it were so newhat. But when it is
not so, they that think so, tempt God, and sin in presumption; which I shall
prove unto you thus.

As all our actions while we live are humane; so our trials upon difference
must be humano more. We must not look to hear God speak, but by deputies
and magistrates; we ought not expect miracles, nor be our own Judge. Else why
do we not fight for our lands and goods, as the law of Lombards was with
short staff and target. Why fight we not with our trespassour, but go to
law with him? Before there were Tribunals, I marvel not much. But since there
were laws, and lawmakers, and civil, and orderly government; our learned
hold it piaculum, a very tempting of God, to waiue public justice, and to be
our own tryers. If one call me villain, thief, traitor, bastard, or
perjured; he shall pay dear for it in body, or purse. If he slander me
otherwise of sin, or crime; I have remedy in court Christian. We shall not
need appeal to fire, water, or sword, as they did in old time, when other
justice could not be had. So Tutia fetched water in a sieue from Tyberis. And
some have floated above water, tied hand, and foot. The Empress to Henry the
second, walked fifteen paces on hot iron, as other have done before her. And
such an other like trial there was little more then a dozen years agone. in
the East Indies, in the kingdom of Malabar. Which because it is rare, and may
be suiting to my argument anon; let it not be troublesome to ye that I set it
down, as I find it written.

One Jacob, Alexis. hist.
and Achar his wife a fair conditioned couple of the town of Mangata after
some children had between them fell at a little variance upon suspicion he
had, that she was not altogether chaste. And this the good woman took so
exceeding ill, measuring the depth of the wrong, by the height of her
innocence; that she demanded justice of the heathen king, and would be tried
by fire. Forty days she took to prepare her self with prayer, and devotion.
When the day of trial was come, she also came. Thither came the king, and all
his nobility, besides a number of Heathens, Moors, Jews, and Christians not a
few. Before whom a harth of fire being made in the front of the Church; she
puts her self upon her knees before the king, and lifting up her eyes to
heaven, Lord Jesus Christ (said she) our true God, that made both heaven and
earth; thou know the truth of my innocence. Make known I beseech thee to
all this people here, that Christian wives if they follow thy commandments,
commit no adulteries, nor falsify their faithes, which they have given their
husbands. Show to all these, that we be not dishonest with any, or think of
any thing more, then to accomplish thy law, and to live chastely with our
husbands, in hope to have children, and to increase thy faithful. I adore thee
my only true God, and I keep thy commandments. Then turning her eyes to the
king; Sir said she, you that be our king; we are bound by the law of Christ,
to render you obeisance. And here I swear before you, and before all these, by
the law of Jesus Christ our Savior, whom I worship; that I have not only
not committed adultery, nor wronged my husband; but also have not any thing
thought against conjugal chastity which I owe him. And with this, she put
forth her hands to one that laid green leaves on them as their fashion is,
and another took a red hot Iron bar, and laid it on the thin leaves,
which she held fast, until it was turned black; and then they took it from
her. The king, and as many as would, drew near, to view her hands, which they
found untouched, and likewise the leaves vnscorcht. And the woman protested, she
never felt any heat at all, such as was likely to hurt.

This ye may think, made a great astonishment amongst infidels, and joy to
Christians, when it pleased God to concur with it as he did. Even so again
for trial by sword. We have one notable instance amongst others in the
Emperor Henry the thirds time; Naucl.
who took to wife a fair young Lady, the king of Englands daughter. She was
accused of incontinency by a servant near the Emperor, a man of monstrous
bigness and Giantly stature, As the German writer says. Naucl.
And there was no man durst undertake the virtuous Ladies part, so much as to
speak on her behalf; until in the end, she challenged the Giant to fight
with a boy of hers, which she carried out of England with her. The time, and
place was appointed. The only comfort the Giant had in his wounded conscience,
was the weakness of his enemy. His victory as he thought was assured. But he
was deceived. God was greater then he. For the boy adventured so boldly, and
with such a spirit toward him, not afraid of his big looks, and scorns,
and heavy blows, (which would bear down an ox) that after a few boutes, he
thrust him into the thigh, and wounded him so sore, that he could stand no
longer. The Emperor at this was much confounded; and would have had her
again. But he had more to do for her second good will, then ever he had for
her first.

These and such like reserved trials, we hear, and read of in case of
extraordinary need, and Gods particular favor. Which every one may not
presume upon as I said. And to expect it of God, is to tempt God; and so is
holden by the servants of God, that are of learning and experience; as by the
story I told you of the Indian woman, it may appear. For although she escaped
the fire marueilously; yet whether it was for her sake, or for conversion of
heathens upon that occasion, God only knows. And the Archbishop of Goa a
very learned man, being then in the same town by chance, about his
visitation, would not only not give countenance to such a trial with his own
presence at it, but rather misliked her that she would take no other
satisfaction when it was offered her; yea also when she came to him afterward,
he told her plainly in the hearing of many; that it was not for her merit
that God wrought this wonder; for we be all wretched and sinful creatures
said he, as long as we live in this mortality. But it was for poor infidels,
and heathens sake, that knew not the good of Christian marriage, nor how
pleasing it is to God to hold only to one (which was very grievous to them)
both in deed, and thought. By which words ye may see how little he accounted
of this trial; as of a trial; although he gave some way to it, because he
would not abreuiate the hand of God amongst those blind infidels in an act,
which otherwise he might think to be mere presumption, and tempting of God.

And this tempting of God is a greater sin then we are aware of, and is so
called, Guicciardin. Comines.
because we tempt him thereby to do a miracle or extraordinary favor upon us.
As a Iacobin Friar did a little before our age. Who standing in contention with
a certain Franciscan in Flarence, challenged him to walk with him through a
great fire prepared of purpose in the market place, with the Sacrament in his
hand. And this is called tentatio expressa, a gross tempting. And the
Magistrates punished him for such attempting. There is an other tempting also
which is called Tacita; when a man intends not actually to tempt God, yet what
he does, he has no reason for, but tempting of God, and mere presumption. As
one that is deadly sick, and will take nothing, ask him why? God will help
says he, when he sees good. A man may say to him again, do you look for a
miracle? and in this they offend God presumptuously in time of the plague; that
go so boldly to visit the sick, as if it were but an ague, and this for no
other cause, but to visit, or to show their boldness, and to boast of it
afterward that this they have done, and how little they fear death; or how
ready they be for God, more then others are. If they will needs tempt God,
let them do it where they hurt none but themselves; and they are ill advised
that animate them therein, without all manner of need. A Bishop likewise, or
other eminent persons offend herein, that are notably slaundered, and will not
stir in it, but leave it to God, having good justice, and means for it.

The like of all lazie-bodies, that will take no pains for their living,
saying God will provide for them. Do not all these tempt God? and say with him
in the Gospel, Lord, Mat. 7.
Lord; but will do nothing for themselves? And this Tacit or silent tempting
coming always of sloth, or pride, prouokes God much; being oftentimes joined
with repining, and banding at authority, as the Jews did against Moses, when
Moses answered them again, Quid iurgamini in me, Exodus 17.
et tentatis dominum? Why do ye wrangle with me, and tempt your Lord God? So
Judith to the priests in Bethulia, Cap. 8.
Qui estis vos, qui tentatis dominum? Who are you that tempt God, when she
saw them limite God to their laws, and subject him to their false fears, as
Duellors do? By which ye may see, it is no new sin I speak of. And wicked
Achaz was so well instructed, as he acknowledged it a sin, when God bad him
ask a miracle, and he should have it. But pretending holiness, he said no,
I will not ask. Esaias 7.
Non petam said he; non tentabo dominum, I will not sin in tempting thee;
being holden even then, a grievous sin, and we cannot plead ignorance of it
now.

But to come nearer our purpose; our Duellors sin this way in the grosser
manner. And I appeal to their own conscience, whether I say not true.
Briefly thus. They seldom regard the odds, or inequality that is between
them, no more then David did against Golias, or Alexander against Porus, who
was two cubits higher then he: and yet the lesser overcame the greater, when
it was an hundred to one against him in ordinary reason. David's victory
indeed, is attributed to Gods revealed assistance, which gave him boldness in
his business. But Alexanders only to his fortune, as I shall show you anon.
They care not (I say) for odds in their person, odds in skill, odds of
experience. His enemy happily has been in many frayes; or may be as strong as
Pompeys man was, who met with his challenger in the field without weapon, and
brought him away into the camp with a finger: yet all is one to him. What
argues this, but, (I will not say) a miracle, yet an admirable conquest? They
presume of setting fortune here against nature, chance against reason. I ask
whether this be not true? It may be, some are more wary or fearful. But
most commonly it is true. I ask them secondly what makes them so presume? They
cannot say their skill, if the other have more, not their strength if the other
be stronger, not their courage when the other may have as much. They cannot say
their right, for that is the question; neither can they say their fence for
their body, for they go not out like men, many of them; but more like savages
without defense. Their only fight at this day is with single short sword. The
knowledge whereof if it be right, has advantage of any other. For he has a
whole body to hurt, and but half a body to defend. But being so, that few
have true skill of it, it is both dangerous and speeding, and hardly tolerable
in a kingdom. I fear me, they will come shortly to the case of bodkins, or
the Dutchmans stabbe or cut, with either of them a whitle, all unbraced, and
untrust, as if they went to a bacside rather, then to a trial of life, and
death. How far is this from the ancient doctrine of manners, or manhood, now
corrupted wholly, by the vpstart humors of a number of desperates; who if it
were a fashion to ride out in the rain, and leave their cloakes behind them,
no doubt they would follow it.

Ye thought much even now, that I called it dishonorable to challenge, or
answer. But as they use it now; I may swear it is dishonorable. For it is
desperate, therefore dishonorable. What more desperate then to be careless
of ones life, when it is sought; or to hazard it for want of defense. They
cast us their gauntlet when they challenge, and leave it behind them when they
come to fight. Ye may learn of Thucidides (who was himself a soldier also)
that the right side of a man is to use his weapon with, Lib. 5.
the left to defend with. Ours go to it like half men. The great Monarch of
the Assyrians, having taken distaste against many of his Princes and Potentates,
sent them a challenge thus: That he would defend himself against them all;
Judith. 1.
showing by this, that the chief part of a soldier is defense. Ours challenge
also, but he that brings his mothers spindle with him, brings as much defense
as they. Ye have been in fencing schools, And the first thing ye learn is
your wards and locks. Ours bring nothing to ward withal. If ye have been
scholars, what learn ye there, but to defend, more then oppose? He is the
best scholar, that defends his conclusions best against all that come.

Take away defense therefore, and take away manhood. A man may refuse you with
honor, if ye bar defense. For the fight is not like a man, but like a beast
without defense. And yet verily it is a wonder, to hear our Duellists talk
among themselves. By God he killed him bravely say they; I say ruffinly,
without defense. He killed him manfully, I say casually without defense. He
killed him valiantly, I say fearfully without defense. All night-feares would
haunt my soul, if I should kill a man so. For though I had my self no more
defense then he; yet my sin would be the greater, the more way I gave chance,
to tyrannize without defense. Duel is sinful every way, but without defense,
it is a sin against nature. So far is it from honor, one naked man to
conquer another, without defense.

Archidamus the Lacedemonian Duke gave his men this rule; that when they went
to fight, Thucid. lib. 2.
they should prepare themselves as if they feared, and fight as men that dared,
and how is this preparing, but by defense? Iliad. 13.
Homer commends a sword-man, by his defense, not by his offense, Been loricati
Achiui, his bright armor, brigantine, or coat of plate. He commends a
fighting man thus, Galea galeae, clipeus clipeo, Helmet to helmet, or buckler
to buckler, not poynard to poynard, or wastcoate to wastcoate, as our carpet
knights do. The old Greeks gave them punishment that went into the field, not
without sword or lance, but without buckler or shield. Dionis. Hali. lib. 4.
The Romans likewise appointed every one after their quality, what to have for
their defense, howsoever their weapons were. The best and ablest had their
silver buckler, and head-peece of steel, their curat also, and steel boots.
The second had the same, all saving the curat; and instead of a buckler, they
had a shield. The third had like the second, but no boots. The fourth or
meanest that bare arms had their target, and might not go out without it.
They made reckoning of a man's life, and that a man was but a man; his skin is
not of a Lion, or of dagger proof. And so should every man think of himself.
And if he be a gentleman, his scutchion of arms that makes show of a shield,
does put him in mind how to go into the field; or at leastwise not like
slingers, and carters, that come behind the camp, and can reach to no higher
fence, then their fortunes. If our loss be no more then of a dog out of the
way, we may fight like dogs. But men, I would have to fight like men, and
they are bound by nature to it, as sure as they can for the part defensive,
howsoever they be for the offensive, as it is in the wars; and why not? Now
what is it then, that makes them so bold, and yet so naked? Surely it must
needs be this, that they presume to have God on their side, if it be any
thing; and so (to my former saying) they tempt God. Or if it be as they say,
their fortune they stand upon, they tempt their Lady fortune, which is very
deceitful. And they do not as we do in the wars. We will not hazard our
selves upon a notable disadvantage; and it is no dishonor to refuse battle in
that case, unless we cannot mend our selves, and be driven to it perforce.

Now lastly; supposing equality, and that there is no odds between them; but
that the one is as strong, valiant and able as the other; although the
injustice of the trial seem better cloaked, yet it is tempting of God
notwithstanding. For they cannot deny the sword to be one of the three trials
extraordinary. They may not use trial by fire, nor by water, therefore not by
sword without tempting of God. For though a man expect not a wonder in
conquering his enemy, as by fire, and water he does; yet tempts he God in
one of these two ways. One is in presuming of Gods favor in a wrong if he
have wronged his enemy. The other is in seeking Gods favor inordinately,
though he have right on his side. He will challenge God forsooth to right him
with an extraordinary trial, which I proved the sword to be, and spoils his
cause by it. For so it may be said of him.

Victrix causa deo placuit, sed victa Catoni.
Victory due to the cause, no victory, as it is handled.
As if a man should give me a Iuell, and I go pick his lock, or his pocket
for it. Would this be well taken? Have I not lost a friend by it? This kind of
presumption is toward God as ungodly, as the other to man most unmannerly. And
I shall wish you to take heed, and enquire of it further; for it will stand ye
much upon.

And yet to give you this also, and to free you from an audacious presumption;
which I can by no means do: yet I may not allow this trial to be a trial
indifferent, and reasonable, but false, uncertain, and deceiuable, as I prove
to ye thus. There is no man can make a trial certain, whose issue is chance.
But the issue of combat is chance, therefore the trial unreasonable. That the
issue is chance, it appears by the many casualties that combat is subject
unto, if his foot slip, or sword break, the sun, wind, or dust, in his
eyes, or if his breath fail him, he is gone. Neither is a man always in best
practice for his defense. King Porus looked aside a little, hearing his men in
tumult behind him, and Alexander took advantage of it, and overthrew him. And
to go no further then my former examples; Liuius ib. 7
Valerius took like advantage of a Raven that flittered in the french man's
face, and ouerthrewe him by it. And yet these vncertaineties our Duellours make
no reckoning of, weighing their honor in their humor, at no more in a manner
then a throweat cross and pile, or a cast at mum-chance.

The insufficiency of this trial is also seen, by the little esteem is made
of it by the whole body of justice. King, Council, Judges, Magistrates, and
all the grave heads that are in the world. All that ye have ye hold by their
wisdoms, and judgments, the cloak on your back, and your sword in your
hand. Yet they hold such conquests of yours as nothing. They will not condemn
the conquered for the worser man, or commend the conqueror for the better man,
or that he who has the day, has always right on his side, as commonly he
has in just wars, and so is noted by Pomponius Laetus. In compendio. lib.
28. Liuie. 7.
But in single fight it is often contrary. As we may see in Corbis, and Oswaes
case, two principal men of Spain while Scipio lay there; who would have
vmpered the matter between them for the principality of Ibes. But they were
both resolved; no trial but combat, either take all, or loose all. The
apparent right was in Oswa who stood upon his spirit, and flourishing youth.
The other was both older, and stronger, and stood upon his skill. Much
preparation was on both sides, and great concurse of people, and friends. But
the stronger obtained the victory, and the younger paid dear for his leuity.
Like case we find in king Henry the sixts time of England, how William Cartur
was traitorously appeached for a traitor by his own servant, and in combat
was slain by him in Smithfielde, the servant carrying away the victory, and
the Master the honesty, as it was deemed and pitied by all that knew him. And
it was not long, that the servant could escape the judgment of God for it,
being hanged soon after for another fault.

Neither will such conquests be so much as an evidence in any court of
audience. As for example, one calls me thief, or baseborne. I challenge him the
field, and am overcome, and he goes away with my sword. After this, I bring my
action of slander. He pleades conquest by battle, and shows my sword for a
testimony, with other witness besides. Yet all is nothing. I shall have
damages against him notwithstanding. But I leave these matters unto ye, to
be better considered of; as also the humors of men, from whence this uncivil
business proceeds. Green heads commonly without ripeness, courage without
knowledge, good metal ill applied, good signs till impolyed; and to put all
in a word, the greatest adventure that is, for so small a prize; as appears by
the fruits of it, which are two.

First a cruel repentance, if ever we come to repent us, but especially if
death followed. We must remember one day, or at sometime or other, when we
set alone, and think of things past, that he was our brother, whom we
maliced, or supplanted so. He was partaker of one Christendom with us; Like
flesh, one country, the same language with us. Perhaps he was our friend
and lover in his heart, howsoever he might be led by humane error, and
peradventure our kinse-man, or allie for any thing we know, or care for in our
passion. If ever we come to remember our selves, we shall rue it most
pitifully, and with the bowels of extremest compassion. Alas for pity,
that we cannot take warning one by another; yea that ever we should wear a
sword, and use it no better. How many be there that perish thus of cold iron
in this iron age? how wanton be they with their weapons, after they get a
little fence, and are not at quiet, till they have sheathed it in their
brothers bosom, or lie breathless, and speechless under the surgeons hands?
They pass a trial indeed; but whereof? Truly, in my opinion of the greatest
misery, and most comfortless desolation that may be. Victus perijt, luget
victor, As the old Oracle went, neither of them honorable by it, both of them
miserable, and who can tell which more? Whether he that is by this time God
knows where, or he that suruiues; and though he be in his right mind, yet
cannot make amends, or bemoane it sufficiently.

The second fruit if we may call it so, is an abominable blindness of heart,
which they be grown unto. Let us speak but of one or two of their laws,
that they live by, and dye by. Our young Solons, and Lycurgusses, what bring
they? Or from whence? Not from the Athenians, or Egyptians; not from the
Romans, or Lacedaemonians; and much less from good Christians. Their first law
is good, and is but for a show; to color the rest. And that is this, ye must
do wrong to no creature living. But they keep it ill. For if they carry a
spleen against one; they will give him a iustle, or a scorn, or somewhat else
that the other will not take, and raise a brawle presently. The second is if
ye happen to wrong one, or that the other take it for a wrong, it is base to
cry him mercy for it, or ye must do it coldely, or rather stand to it, and
justify it, and add wrong to wrong, and word upon word to the defiance. No
place left for courtesy, but a courteous scoff. A third is, if one throw duste
or salt in your face, or disgrace you in any sort: if ye be not a cow, ye are
bound to challenge him.

A fourth is, that if a man do not answer his challenge, the other may stabbe
him, or pistol him for it, wheresoever he meets him. Less then his life
cannot satisfy the disgrace. What a horrible law is this? How inhumane? And
yet there be other as ill as these; but they agree not all in a tale. I omit
to speak of their satisfactions; as what is due for the lie given, what for a
blow with a fist, what with a cudgel? The satisfaction must be greater then
the wrong always, else no satisfaction, or rather no satisfaction will serve,
unless the party think it so. And it comes to this in the end; that he must
be his own judge. For if he think it not satisfaction enough, all his friends
must not quiet him. These matters I shall desire you to examine with the law
of God, and with the professors of the same. And let no man make a puff at
it, if he be a man indeed, and not a very Canniball.

There is an eternal law, which to aim at, is all our duties, and to swerue
from is frailty; but to make laws against it is plain Apostacy, or as I
said before, mere blindness of heart. For what should I call it else, when
they forget God so much, forget nature, forget all ciuility and humanity? A
gentleman is so called of gentleness, and sweetness to all. The opposite of
rudenes, surlines morositie, and hard to please. And as they be toward man, so
are they to Godward; that is to say contemptuous and base. If the king
command a man that he fight not, or if a man be bound with his friend to the
good behavior, and be challenged; he will refuse for fear of forfeiture, or
offending man, and they hold it no cowardice. But when the king of kings
forbids, Heb. 1. Psalm. 90.11.
and his angels are our sureties, as it is written, God has given them charge
of us; we neither listen to God, nor Angel, but turn our backs to them most
rudely, and therefore they turn their backs to us, and we speed ill fauouredly
with it in the end.

Neither does it help the justice of our cause, to fly our country for
trial, as many do. Coelum, non mores mutat qui trans mare currit. It saues
them a penalty, but helps no fault, being both of one allegiance, which if
it were several, the sin were only to God. As it happened in the time of King
Edward the third, between a gentleman of Cyprus, and the bastard of France,
both hired soldiers to the king of Armenia. One of these had charged the other
for taking money of the turkish enemy. And being to try it by combat before
some competent Judge, that were indifferent to them both: They both agreed to
go over in to England, Edward 3.
and to be judged by the king there. They would not be their own judges as
our Duellors are; nor steal revenge as we do; nor wrong their Sovereigns, as
they had done, if they had been of one allegiance. But the matter being great
between them, they prepared themselves for all trials of chiualry, on
horseback, and on foot, and submitted themselves to the honorable censure of
the worthiest Prince in those days, who judged it for the Frenchman, after a
long combat.

Ye talk of daring, and what a trouble it is to a man of spirit, to be dared
to his face in any thing. And why should it trouble you, so he cannot out dare
you in true honor. Neither is he the best man that dares most; Fortis non
est qui nihil timet (says Aristotle) Most valor goes not by least fearing.
Yea a man must fear as well as dare, if he be a true soldier or professor of
arms. Vulneribus didicit miles habere metum. And yet is not this to be
rightly called fear in him, but a necessary care of himself, as far as may
stand with honor. The truth is, he is most valiant, that can, and will, and
will what ere he can, due circumstances considered. If your enemy will dare
you to the devil, must ye dare to go with him? And I have proved it to be
little better. If your enemy can clime a tree like a squirrell, or swim like
a dog, or have other actiuities, that you have not; as to ride a wild bull,
or cloze with a Bear, or be so desperate as to run upon his swords point,
or leap into a well; will ye answer his challenge in any of these for your
life, though he dare you, and dare you again? And yet I cannot deny it to be
a great deal of courage (if a man were not drunk) to dare so.

I knew two gentlemen fell out on an evening, and they must try it presently by
starre-light, with either of them a knife in their hand, and had almost killed
one another if they had not been found in the fact, and parted. Did any man
commend them for it, or not rather laugh at them? I heard of Sir John Wallop an
hardy knight of England, who when he was old, was challenged into the field
by his enemy. And it was no dishonor to refuse it, and our Duellors will not
deny it, but will blame the challenger rather. But the old knight did
challenge him again to be bound in a chair against him; as he should be
also, with a case of Pistols in their hands, and so to try it. But the other
refused (our Duellors will say) with honor enough. For, may not, and can not,
are both in a rank of things that are not to be done. Why should a man dare
then to do that he may not without defense, more then that he cannot without
knowledge, or ableness to perform.

It is pitiful, that men dare so, and have God against them. I know well, we
dare every day against God, when soever we sin wilfully. We presume upon
long life, and therefore we dare. But to dare him so near death, and in an
act, that tendes to death, I hold it most desperate, or like unto one, that
picked a pocket as he was going to the gallows. But whether goes he? he goes
where he may dye, though man good enough; and his other sinners may deserve it,
though this were none. What more? He goes where none that fears God will go
with him to give him countenance. No spiritual man will associate him, to give
comfort at his death, or dare bid him God speed in so speedy a way to hell.
He shall have many no doubt of his own spirit, that will accompany him, and
animate him in naughtiness; but no man of God to pray for him, or God to take
his prayer. Let his cause be what it will be, right, or wrong. If it be
right, he spoils it with ill handling; if it be wrong he sins doubly. It
is base to wrong any, but more base to stand in it.

Ye ask me then, what remedy for gentlemen to right themselves, if they be
wronged, or dishonored. I answer, my purpose is not to give remedy to
remediless humors, but to show unto ye, that what ye think is remedy, is
no remedy, and what ye think is honor, is no more but courage. For, ye must
distinguish of it thus. There is honor without courage, and that is
harmless; there is courage without justice, and that is honourlesse, or
honors ape; and there is honor and courage together; and that is true
valiantness, as I have said sufficiently before, and well becomes an
honorable person. They that have breeding, will choose the best of these I
doubt not. And as for righting; verily in the law of arms, and chiualry, we
acknowledge no such laws as your Duellors talk of, but only one, which is to
do no creature wrong. An other law we have like to this, never to be our own
Judge. For this we hold to be childish and base. Neither is it for a man's
honor, to be so ill neighboured, or ill friended, that he will not be
judged by any, but by himself. Let these two laws be well observed, and men
will quickly do right, or be righted. For it is not unmanly for a man to ask
pardon, where he has wronged, so it be not for fear; neither is it
honorable for a man on the other side, to ask unreasonable satisfaction, or
to ask satisfaction where there needs none; as if a blow were but proffered
only, and not given, as Astyochus did by Hermocrates.

What is fit satisfaction for the lie given, or what for other disgraces; what
is a just repulse of a wrong, and when the burden of honor is truly cast
upon the iniurer, your Marshals can tell best, who are best acquainted with
this new disease. New maladies have new medicines. If a man have the lie put
upon him, and he strike him for it, I think he should be satisfied. If he
take a blow, and give another, what would he have more? for this was Moses law
Leuit. 24.
Oculus pro oculo, dens pro dente, An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. And
must we have two for one? No we may not, for what says the law more? Qualem
inflixerit maculam, Verse. 20.
talem sustinere cogetur, What contumely he has given, the like he shall be
made to undergo. A disgrace for a disgrace, a blow for a blow, or an humble
submission for an unworthy aspersion. And yet with us, these be no
satisfactions. We will have more then the law, we will have his blood rather.
And where the law says cogetur; whereby the magistrate is appointed to right
us; we say no, we will right our selves. What a presumption is this, to teach
God almighty what is just? Again, there is much quarrelling about women. If
two fall out about a corruptible mistress, they must go fight for her love,
and know not why. Were it not much more honor, to do as Lester and Liques did
of late? The more they loved the self same mistress, the more they loved one
an other. Yea when Liques had obtained her, and married her one morning, and
was taken by Lester the same day in a skirmish near Saint Omers; and she sent
unto him to send him to her again out of hand; he obeyed her voice, as the
voice of his general, and sent him away the same night with honor. And why
should not all men do the like? but snarle at one another, like a couple of
mungrels, more for lust, then for love. In a word.

If ye will have of me any remedy, I must speak out of Gods law, or no law.
And then I say if one have done me a despite, that the law will not remedy; yet
by Gods law, I may not be his executioner. Neither need I salute him, or
speak to him, or move cap to him, until he have satisfied me. I may deny
him all points of friendship, though no point of charity. He has lost my good
opinion of him, which otherwise I owed him. He has lost my love, and good
will, and the love of all that love me. Is not this revenge enough think ye?
but ye will laugh at me now, all you that know not the worth of love, and
good will. I protest unto you, if I had wronged one in word or deed, it would
be to me the greatest pain that could be. For both must I make him amends, and
also I am bound to seek him, if I have any Christian blood in me. If thy
Brother have ought against thee, that is to say, be wronged or think him
wronged by thee; Mat. 5.
go thou and be reconciled to him. Lo here. I must go seek him where he
is. But I leave this to preachers, who tell us, and agree in this; that the
wrong doer is bound to seek the wronged for his love, and that with all the
good terms he possibly can. And we have many examples of Princes that have
done the like.

A Prince will not wilfully loose a subjects good will for a piece of his
kingdom. As we read of Alcibiades the Athenian Duke, who gave to Hypponicus a
Senator a blow on the ear, in public place. But being come to himself, he
grieved at it much, and went to seek him next day at his house, offered
himself to be whipped, beginning to strip; and so insinuated into his favor
again, with due satisfaction, that Hypponicus soon after made him his son
in law. King Agrippa likewise hearing of one that thought ill of him for
somewhat, was not quiet in mind, until he had spoken with him, and won him,
made him sit down by him, argued sweetly with him, reconciled himself to
him, and so sent him away. Who will hold these men for base, or not truly
honorable, and not true esteemers of love or good will? Only thus much I will
add. He that is so rude or unsociable, as to wrong one, and neither seeks
reconcilement, nor cares what any man thinks of him, like Mounsieur Orguiles,
whom we heard maintain, that he had rather have his neighbor to be his
enemy, then his friend; such as these (says Morus) have more need of pity
then revenge, they are half way poor souls in hell already.

Neither do I weigh the common objection, that our enemy will set light by us,
and double upon us injuries in these maleuolus times, if he fear no more but
loss of our love. Whereunto I answer, I will provide my self against wrong as
well as I can. And yet if he fears me not, it shall be to me no dishonor, or
harm; no more then if a Bear do not fear me, I will see to it, that he
shall not bite me. But must I challenge or answer the field to every one,
that baits me, or scorns me? So I might set up a bulring, and play the Bull
my self, when I have done. In a word, I dare approve no saving of honor by
fighting, nor any remedy that way. And as touching challenge, I can allow of
none at all; but to summon him to the court of honor (if they be gentlemen,
and bear arms) to answer it at their peril. And the sentence there may be as
great satisfaction to the wronged, and disgrace to the iniurer, as that of the
Censour of Rome was. Which Roman gentlemen stood in more awe of, then of fire
or sword. And this is all I can allow you, and no more. My reason is this. For
either the wrong is proved, or not. If proved, then no combat, as all agree,
because there is means for civil satisfaction. If not proved, as to say the
lie was given you, but you cannot prove it, conquest cannot prove it, except
it speak true always, which no man will say.

Howbeit for a perfect remedy, or preventing rather of the cause, I would wish
that we were so wise as to withstand beginnings, and to temper our heat, that
there might be no brawles at all. For it is a rule in arms, that he who
forbeares ill words, can never have the lie given him justly, nor the burden
put upon him to challenge. Detraction behind ones back, and contumely to ones
face, are principal bellows to these combustions. Or to speak more inwardly
to the business, I find most commonly men's thoughts in Duel before their bodies
are. Envy and pride in them fill their heads with comparisons. I as good as he,
I more wise or worthy, I more valiant or hardy, or of better desert then he.
And this is mental Duel which breaks out into act upon small occasion.

They say comparisons are odious, and yet they use them as though they were
gracious, and that is childish. For it began with childe-hood, and should
end at manhood. Quanto mayor es, tanto te geras submissius, the greater we be,
the more kind, and humble we ought to be. And we that be Christians have
great helps for it, over that heathens have. And yet have heathens also given
us excellent examples herein; and it is good for us to learn of them, if we
will not learn of Christ. We may learn of Fabius Maximus, as I said before,
not to regard what men say of us, so we deserve it not. We may learn of noble
Antigonus, who ouerhearing some of his followers, talking their pleasure of him
in the next room, came out suddenly upon them with a staff in his hand, and
badde them get them further out of his hearing, and then talk what they list.
Why took he not revenge? We may learn of Philip of Macedon, who contrariwise,
would not part with Nicanor, although he were told that he was ill tongued,
and spoke not well of him. "I must look to my self (said he) that I have no
fault, and he will have little to talk of. So said Tiberius before he fell
to tyranny. When complaint was made of certain libels cast out against him;
We must have patience (said he) tongues and thoughts are free; I will do
nothing hereafter, but what I can account for; and if they shall hate me
notwithstanding, I can but hate them again. And like to these was our Lewis
the twelfth, who was so quallified in this kind; that he renewed the old
custom in plays, and enterludes, to point at men's faults. with quippes, and
ieastes before their faces (which is death in Venice) and would not himself be
spared, no more then others.

And to this effect said Phocion that noble Duke of Athens that he had no
enemy; nor could hate any man. For if a man should wrong him undeservedly, he
was his own enemy, and not his: and if deservedly, it was a warning to him to
amend. I would to God we had the mind to learn of him; for he was full of
wisdom, and manly fortitude. He held it base to keep revenge in his breast
to any private person. In so much as going to dye, one asking him what he would
have to his son; "nothing (said he) but that he revenge not my death. And
of the same mind was Vespatian the Emperor, as great a soldier as he was,
he would take no revenge of private enmity. For being thrust out rudely
(before he was Emperor) out of Neroes presence by an usher of the chamber,
with these words; get you out, get you out with a vengeance, what do you
here: This usher coming afterward to him when he was Emperor, to crave
pardon of him to late; he gave him no more but his own words again, saying:
"get you out with a vengeance, what do you here. This is base to our young
masters now a days, that must bear no coals in no sort.

And what do we read of Lycurgus long before these? when Alcandar had
maliciously put out his eye with a cudgel; did he think of revenge? no
contrary; he took him into his service, and he became his louingest servant
that ever he had. A strange thing, that heathens should practice the Gospel
before they heard of the Gospel. Yea more strange, that God requires no more
of us, but what our light of nature shows us the way to. And most strange of
all, that we who know the Gospel, set so light by it, will not hear of
turning to 'ther cheek, or of rendering good for evil; Mat. 5.
neither do Ivrge them to it now; and yet these Pagans led them to it, by
their own practice, and example.

Was it want of courage think ye, that Caesar would put up a wrong in an
instant? As when he gave his voice for Memmius to be Consul, that called him
all to naught but a little before, was pleased with Catullus in an instant; and
badde him to supper, who had defamed him with libels? and who could take more
temperately those biting speeches of Cecinna then he? Where was courage? where
was revenge? Where letters of defiance? What revenge took our Constantine,
when one was brought before him, that had stabbed his picture on the face? This
was all he did. He called for a looking-glass, and finding there that his face
was never the worse for it, he let him go without punishment.

These virtues in those great Princes were admirable. And although I do not
commend them in all these things, in regard they were public persons, and
might lie open to contempt by it, if they should use it: yet are they of great
example to private persons, not to think so loftily of themselves as they do,
when such as these, and so far above them in honor and worth, could forget
their greatness, and policy, for love of these virtues, and in hatred of
revenge. It is commended in Cotys king of Thracia, that finding himself so
weak as he was in resisting anger, he shunned occasions of it, though it were
but to a servant. For which cause he brake once a number of costly
drinking-glasses, that were given him for a present, saying: he had rather be
without them all, then be angry with his man for breaking but of one. Yet much
more commendable it had been, if he had spared the glasses, and watched his
anger better: which we that be Christians may more easily do then he, by
help of grace, which he had not.

Gentlemen should bestow some time, their idle time I mean, upon morality and
laudable histories, that they may see and make choice of the worthiest actions,
and imitate Princes if they will. Princes I say, that were not greater (some of
them) in their outward conquest over others, then in their inward over
themselves. How much better should they employ there time thus, then upon love
books, and poems of idle subject, which have multiplied, and swarmed of late
toward the end of the world, to light a candle before the devil, and to
intoxicate men's heads with matter of impertinent fiction, and such as Duellors
are most beholding unto.

For to speak a word or two of the original of this vice before I leave it;
how it sprung, and grew to this greatness: I take it, it comes two manner of
ways. One, by some likeness it has to virtue; And Similitudo matter erroris
says Galen, All the world is deceived with Similies. Pride is like
magnanimity, and therefore men be proud; envy like justice, and therefore men
be spiteful; gluttony like natural appetite, and therefore men be ravenous;
letting of money like land letting, and therefore men be Usurers. So Duel
upon private quarrel, like combat upon our countries command, and therefore
they will fight, when their humors command. The other is a multitude of idle
books and ingenious devises as I said, but much naughtiness in them, to
invegle the mind of man, and wrie our understanding quite on t'oue side. Such
as Amades, and Ariosto, Valentine and Orson, and the knight of the Sun; that
are full of these challenges, and brauadoes, and such like unchristian stuff,
which some of the Authors have repented them of since, and so have professed at
their dying day. These and such like, men tear, and wear with continual
reading. Every one will have one of these, or a play book in his hand, and
what men delight in, they are made like unto.

An other way how Duel comes in, may be our badde inclinations always to make
good ill, and to corrupt any thing that is good. Religion slides easily into
superstition, devotion to scrupulosity, honor to insolency, civil manhood into
rank, and wild manhood; as herbs, apples, and flowers do, which for want
of culture, and kindly mould, degenerate in time to weeds, and wildings. The
true soil where manhood grows, is lawful hostility, or just defense; for
want of which, and through idleness together in peaceable countries, it grows
rank, and rammish, and works upon it self for lack of the true subject.
Like fire, that cares not what it burn so it burn somewhat; or like a
ston'd-horse, that for want of a Marrow falls a kicking, and leaping his
fellows, to vent his courage.

But to speak more historically; the very beginning of Duellum, and the laws
thereof came first out of the North if we believe Bodinus. In Meth.
The Scythians first, a strange people, and of large dominions, who lived all
upon sword, as old histories make mention, and do yet at this day. Iniurias
illatas rare iure, sed ferro vindicant, says Munster, They seldom right
themselves but by sword. And this was so agreeable with their horride nature;
that Anacharsis, their own country Philosopher, was killed by them for
attempting to alter it. After these, the old Germans, as Tacitus reports,
The magistrate (says he) determines nothing either in public, or private,
but by sword. And as this people not knowing God, or his laws, ouerranne the
South with many notable incursions; and has left a print of it yet in old
Imperial laws: so carried they their fashions with them, and infected all
countries with their inciuilities, which would never be quite abolished to
this very day. And this is such an injustice (says my author) as I know not a
greater; that a weak body cannot be righted of any wrong, but he must fight
for it, though it be with his far over match.

Italians and Spaniards, the one divided into Guelphes and Gibelines, the other
in Moors and Natifes, were also much to blame in this business. And from them
it came over the mountains to us, and we as forward therein as our masters.
All bordering countries likewise, that lived most upon sword, rapine, and
spoil, as professed outlawes, infected the inlandes in time with their
disorders, and outlawe sovereignty, as the nature of man is, prone to learn
that which is evil. But what is the end of it? See whether it were of God or
no. Those nations have almost left it now, and are fallen to worse, to privy
murders with long needels, and poisoning, where they bear grudge; and so
shall we also if we be let alone, and a man shall not know who hurt him. All
arts and sciences are come at this day to the top. Nothing almost can be
added. Even so it is with the malice of man, as by this very sin is easily
seen. One thing it is to sin of frailty as I said, or upon sudden
occasions, where man's reason has no time to discourse: but to say we do
well, and are bound to do it, where we do ill and will do it again, is to
forget God quite, and to resign our interest we have in our Christendom, or
shall have in his kingdom.

There be laws against this vice in some places. But what should there need
laws to men of honor and arms, who ought to be their own laws, and other
men's. Laws be needful to those of ruder fashion. But be not you like those
feeble women the Miletian virgins, Plut. apoph
who never left killing their own selves, until an act past against them to
be carried out naked when they were dead, for every man to look on. Ye have
but one life, and ye have it not for your selves alone, but for many: your
friends, and kinsfolk, and country have part in ye, says Cicero. Nay, what
says Saint Augustine? Quid tam non tuum, quam tu? What so little thy self as
thy self? As who should say, others have more in thee then thy self. How
unworthy is it then to adventure thy self so vngloriously? Your neighbors,
and contrymen have part in ye, why should ye rob them of ye? Your
kindred have interest in ye, why do ye deprive them? Your Sovereign may
need you, why deny you him his due, and hazard the best blood ye have in
obscurity? Will other men rise of your blood think ye, when ye are gone? how
basely do ye think of your selves in your highest conceits.

A man is borne for many, yet we will ieopard our selves to do good to no
body. One man may kill many in his countries defense; yet we will be lavish
of our life in hope to kill but one, and him as good a member (it may be) as
our self. And what do we in this, but work against our selves? If a man
possess any thing, there is none but will have as much as he can for it
before he depart with it. Only our life shall we set so little by, as to
adventure for little, or nothing? Do we not know the worth of our life, and
what a jewel it is? how never to be had again, when once gone? how soon
forgotten? how little care of us when we be dead, and put into a hole, to
revenge our quarrel? every one is not Patroclus, who had an Achilles to
revenge him. It has been comfort to many, that their death should cost many
deaths. Epaminondas died joyfully of his deadly wound, when he heard that he
had won the field. We neither winnne field, nor shield by it, but content
our selves with a little fearful honor, which is no honor. We little
remember, that our life is all our stock; and what merchant will adventure all
at once, to make but own of own. If I kill, I kill but one, if I be killed
also, I loose two. What is gotten by this? if a man had many lives, he might
hardly spend one idly. Having but one life then, and to spend it so
prodigally, I would think he had too much of one.

And I cannot but here (while I think of it) digress a little from the
matter, although not much. And great Princes I hope will not blame me, if I
remember them of an intolerable abuse of their Jrascible part, if they take not
heed. And their fault therein is the greater, and commoner, the more absolute
their authority is, where no man is to control them in the power that is given
them by Gods assignment. They are appointed by God, or rather put in trust to
be his vindices ad iram, Reuengers for God to execute his wrath upon those
that be evil, Romans 13.
and wrong doers, ijs qui mali sunt. I speak not of the power they have over
their subjects, which is meant directly in this place; but of that they have
over their equals in other countries, if they or theirs be wronged and may
right themselves by the sword if cause require. It is seldom seen, that right
is on both sides. And therefore how many battles we read of, or hear of, so
many wro^gs most commonly, yea so many massacres, or wilful murders on the one
side, which is horrible to think, that it should be amongst Christians.

Some go to it with as slender pretenses as may be. Some with justice enough,
but unjustly. Our Charles the eight will never be forgotten, who ran through
Italy like a fury for recovery of Scicilie and Naples; set towns and people on
fire where he came; robbed Churches and profained them, ravished women, and
cut their throats when they had done. In a town of Tuscane where they had
nothing to do, but to pass it through; yet spared they not man, or woman,
poor innocent people, till they had slain seven hundred of them. How far
was this from Charles the wise his grandfather, a most peaceable and powerful
Prince. Charles of Burgundy likewise had the name of a worthy Prince; yet not
to be excused for the malice he bare to them of Leodes, where he made his
soldiers carry firebrands in the one hand, and their swords in the other
throughout his army. He left not a stone of their walls one upon an other, to
wreake his will on them for a very small cause. And against the Switchers soon
after, what outrage committed he, where he hung five hundred captives at once
without all redemption, brake promise foulely with those of Granson, demanded
of his subjects a sixth of their goods, but they would not yield him a penny,
unless he would come home, and leave those idle, (they might have said)
pernicious wars. And to go no further then our next neighbors, what a
devilish fight was that between the Switchers, and some of the Cantons,
because they would not leave their league with Austria? They grew to that
rancour, and mortal feud, that when they had vanquished them in a sore battle,
they were not thus content, but made stools, and tabels of their dead bodies
to sit on, and feast upon. And that which is more, they opened their breasts,
and drunk their blood to one an other, and pulled out their hearts, to tear
them with their teeth. Would ye think this were in Christendom? I give but a
few examples in stead of many, and am ashamed to tell, what has happened nearer
our time.

The like not read of scare in all the Bible, that faithful were against
faithful. Yet with us daily, Christians against Christians, and suffer their
faith to sleep the whilst. There want not prelates, and clergymen, to
forward Princes in such business, and to sow pillowes to every bed. There
want not histories great plenty to extol their doings, Ezech. 19.
and magnify their names, for executing bravely upon their own tribe, Pom.
Let.
and alliance without all respect of nature, and pity. He that kills most is
extolled most, says one. A Christian is but a dog to him, if he be angry.
And if a Prince be of quiet disposition, and peaceable, and thinks he has
enough of his own to govern in peace, and fear of God, as Numa and Solomon
did; they count them scarce worth writing of, because there be no battles nor
conquests in his time. Where contrary, they should think him wise, for
sparing, and not spending so much treasure, and blood upon that which they
cannot keep no longer, then they be stronger, and have no more title to most
commonly, then is sealed with an edge on their next neighbors flesh. It is a
wonder to see, what pains and eloquence our writers bestow in this kind, to
set forth the glory they think, but indeed the sin and shame of their
countries, if it were not apparently just, and honorable, which they took in
hand.

We read in the book of Judges, how ten tribes fought against one, which was
Benjamin. The quarrel was just, the revenge approved of God, for a horrible
crime committed in Benjamin, and the whole tribe overthrown by them, except a
few. Yet when they had done their worst; doluerunt, they were pitifully
grieved at it, and penitentiam egerunt, Judge. 21.
their sorrow was expressed in deeds, and care to make them amends, as it
their appears. They vaunted not of their valor, nor made bragges of the blood
they spilt, but lamented with tears, and with wringing of hands for that was
past, and could not now be recalled. How many Princes have we known in
Christendom, that have shown much sorrow for twenty or forty thousand slain
on a day of the same tribe themselves were of, and bought with the same blood?
Yea, have they not made tryumphs and bonefires for it, when they came home, and
Te deum sung in Churches for them, when they had more need of a miserere?

There have been thrice five hundred years since the coming of Christ, and
the fourth is begun. In the first five hundredth began our greatest
Monarchies. In the second they grew Christian, and were of great example. In
the third they began to neglect religion, and to prefer their own ends,
pulling from each others greatness, and abiding no equals, which caused much
war. What will become of this fourth five hundredth, we know not yet. But if
the rest hold out like the first of it now last past, we must look for a
general revolt from God and all goodness, 2. These. 2.
our sins deserving it, and our contempt of his laws. I pray God my fear
prove greater then the events. I have read an old prophecy, that Europe shall
burn, and it has proved true in this last age. The rather through difference
of opinions, and those both great, and many in matter of Religion. By reason
whereof so many have been slain in a few days space, as would have driven
the Turk out of Hungary, Walachia, Transiluania, and out of all Germany home
to Constantinople; and in a few years so many of our Christian brethren have
been slain by our fire, and sword, as would have wholly uncrowned him, and
cast him out of all commerce with us, beyond the Caspian sea, from whence he
came.

Ispeake not of older times then this last hundredth, wherein it bad been better
(if it were Gods will) that Flanders and Netherland had been under water,
Milan swallowed of the earth, Naples flat with the ground; then so many lives
had been lost about them, and so many souls either damned, or endangered by
them: the turk looking on the while, and laughing at us; giving praise to his
Mahomet, and crying, blessed be our confusion. The day is now come I think,
which Christ foretold us, that malice shall abound, and charity wax cold. Mat.
24.
It could not else be, that we should be so ready to strike our brother or
neighbor as we do upon so slight occasions most commonly, or not so great as
Beniamins was, and dye unrepentant for it. It is no new saying; but begotten of
long observation in most countries, and ages, especially, in former times, and
for this only sin. Ad cereris generum sine caede, et sanguine pauci.
Descendunt Reges, aut sicca morte tyranni.
Few kings or tyrants dye fair death,
But some misfortune stops their breath.
I list not illustrate it with examples, what untimely deaths have followed
Princes for it. Or if not death, yet cruel rending of their kingdoms, or
translating them out of their line to some worthier then themselves, and
sometimes to their enemy. Psalm. 67.
Dissipa gentes quae bella volunt says king David, Let them be confounded that
seek wars. And the Emperor Martianus who had been a warrior all his
days; yet this was his saying: let no man have war, that may live in peace.
Pax vna triumphis innumeris potior, says an other.

And yet I would not have them loose what they be truly Lords of, nor put up
encroachments, and unworthy disgraces, for which they may honorably right
themselves, if some things concur. For first the cause must be just, and so
resolved by reverend men. Secondly (if long out of posession) that it cost not
more then it is worth. And thirdly, how like they be to hold it, when they
have gotten what they would. lib. 1. c. 16.
Our Phillip de Comines, who was in the bosoms of many great Princes adds
this also; that where there are many Princes of equal degree, and cannot
agree: if they will be sure to do well, they must always have some superior
amongst them, to advise them, and ouerrule them in matter of quarrel, and anger
between them. What a thing is it, that two Princes both of them wise, should
lead their armies into the field, Lib. 3. cap. 3
and invade one another so boldly, and bloodily as they did, and knew no cause
why, but the cunning of contriuers, and make-bates, as the same author
affirms of his own knowledge. Who shows also what deceits they have used,
and striuen who should deceive the other most in their accords, with more then
Punicke frauds, murders, and paricides, when they gave scope to their
humors, and would be ruled by none? The danger whereof is so great to them,
and to their posterity, cap. 28.
that he exhorts them in his first book more like a Divine, then a Statist;
to think of hell often, and of the torments there. I say no more; but humbly
wish them to read it, out of the book it self, and mark it well, as the
Emperor Charles the fifth I think did, for the book was never out of his
hands. And yet it is no more then Ecclesiasticus aduises them, Memento
nouissimorum, cap. 18.
and desine inimicari, Remember the last things, and thou will have no mind to
make war.

Lastly, touching this point of wars, if we believe Divines; a demand of
recompense must precede for saving of blood-shedde, before the enterprise be
undertaken. Against Turks and heathens, we need not be so scrupulous, so
touch be kept with them, and the law of arms. If a king go personally
against infidels, it is impious to trouble him at home, before he return;
though some have practiced it, and defeated good enterprises by it, to the
sorrow of Christendom, and the enemies great advantage. I cannot but wish, and
pray, that God would touch the hearts of Princes with zeal of propagating the
name of Christ; and if they love wars, to show their valerous minds where they
may show it, and not broyle in civil discord, and advance broken titles, and
vengeance at home, while the bounds of Christendom in Europe grow narrower,
and narrower. But what hope of making Christians, if they have no scruple of
killing Christians? I will return to my matter again. As Princes have care of
many lives, that they be not lost, or cast away: so ought Subjects not to be
prodigal (as I said) of their own life, or their neighbors, though never so
enemy to them.

God has made us little less then Angels, Psalm. 8.
as we read in the psalm, and the world has been in travel with us, five
or six thousand years, to bring us forth for Gods service, and our countries.
And what service have I done, to kill or hurt my brother, or but to adventure
my self for a shadow? What honor gotten by mayming him, or drawing blood of
him, which every beast can do better then I? Yea, what if he deserved ill of
me? What if he deserved death by wronging me, and that he fall into the
hands of justice for it? The sentence which grave Judges pronounce not without
heaviness, shall I go, and prevent with triumph? That which Gods people
behold not without tears, shall I execute with vaunting? and therefore as my
case is, the Psalm is changed in me; and I have made my self so far off
from Angelical, that I am little better then a devil, if I dye in that
estate. O how great we be in our own sights, and yet how pleased to adventure
our selves abiectly, and to deserve ignominiously in the last act we do?

This one life which God bestowed on us at length before the world were quite
ended; is it not a dreadful thing we should waste so idly, spend so
carelessly, and end so desperately? That which our worthy friends had care to
leave unspotted to us, untouched with infamy, unstained with wrong doing,
memorable some of them for their countries good, honorable for their deserts,
and dying in Gods favor; shall we alone be foolish, and unworthy, and as we
led our life unprofitably, so shall we leave it I know not how? that which
King, Council, and communalties have care of to preserve with peace, shall we
frustrate with a giddy fancy, and finish with a fatal blow? That which God and
nature have conspired to produce with consent of stars, firmament, and all
heavenly influences, shall we rashly bring to nothing with a bloody thrust?
That which our noble ancestors have helped to bring to light for their honor,
and to inrole in their descent, shall we vnrole with some base attainder, or
patch up with a purchased pardon, which none will think honorable, but our
selves?

What will the world, or they that know us, say of us? Surely no better then
thus; we have good riddance of him, or I would we had; he was but a
quarreller. What will Pagans say, if they can speak for laughing, to see us
quell one an other as we do? What will our Sovereign say? He would never
have been our friend, that was not his own, farewell be. What would his
ancestors call him, if they knew him, but an abortiue, unprofitable, Esaias.
14.19
one that came for naught, and is gone for naught? But above all we should
fear the judgments of God, what he will say of us. Sorrow, and unluckiness
go with him, Psalm. 13.
because he would not know the way of peace. Nay, what will himself say if he
dye out of Gods peace? Woe is me, woe is me, I sought honor, I find horror.
Tell me now I beseech you, what worth is your enemy of? how dangerous a
person? what monstrous Gorgon or infectious Dragon do ye make him, that ye
dare undergo all these censures for him, from God and his worthy creatures;
and having but one life, will boldly ieopard it in such a quarrel?

The Conclusion.
But I will make an end. I have laid before ye after my fashion, what my
self do know to be true, and many by corruption of times are ignorant of. I
say little of the hurt our country has by such enormities. The State will
look to that, and provide laws according. King Arthur forbad it his knights
particularly; Bocas. lib. 8.
and so did Alfonsus to his knights of the band, that they might not hurt, or
touch one another for any thing: which they would never have forbidden, if it
had been honorable. Whatsoever Laws be, it is the minds of men, that I
would have reformed in this matter of heat, that laws may be obeyed for
conscience, not for fear. To which purpose I have shown ye, how comely and
necessary it is for all sorts to carry passion even. How pleasing to God,
agreeable with nature, and grateful to all that are well minded. As also I
have illustrated with examples of some great persons, that have been bitten
behind their backs, or to their faces, and have not taken it for disgracious,
as we do. And in this point of hot blood, I have insisted the more, because
it is the ground. And if this be well tempered in the beginning, much evil is
knocked on the head by it, and we shall never go so far, as to be our own
reuengers, or to err upon cold blood, which yet was the principal subject of
my this days charge. I have told ye of the commonnesse of the fault, and how
sinful, and not only sinful, but heretical. Inquire of it. I have proved
to ye how opposite it is to the law of God, of nature, of nations, which S.
Paul calls also the justice, Romans 1.32.
or law of God; and how never practiced by the worthies of the world, scarce
read of in histories, not acknowledged by ancient Poets, or commended any where
by moral men, yea accounted plain cowardlines by Fabius Maximus, and much
less to be entertained and used by Christians: whom I have proved to be
little better then felo de se, if they dye in it, and are justly forbidden all
Christian burial; and the spectatours, and abetters, are subject to censure
for it. Inquire of these points further, if they be not so. I have told you my
opinion likewise touching honor, and praise of men, and wherein it consists
truly, and how not to be sought for out of the compass of a man's own
profession. Every man professes not arms, and as little wit is in accepting,
as manhood in tendering of such a challenge, unless they be swordmen. Which if
they be, yet to these also I deny the liberty of single combat upon private
quarrel; being neither honorable, what God forbids, nor loyal to Prince
or country, what man's law disauoweth, nor the trial indifferent, that stands
upon chance, without necessity force us. Besides that, I proved it to be a
tempting of God directly, which how great a sin it is, I have also said, and
I hope ye will not forget. Although for your better assurance, I would wish ye
to take your better information when ye may, of those that be learned in
divine laws, and humane. Who I suppose will avouch as much as I have said;
and will further bear me witness, that I tie not your honor to syllables, or
your haughty spirits to words of art; but have done what I can out of my my
love, to free ye from Satan's tyranny in this kind; against whom and his
works, and all his powerful deceites, I profess my self a perpetual enemy.
For I have lastly told ye what blindness of heart this sin has brought us
unto, and what badde laws come of it, such as it is a shame should come from
Christians. The original of it also, and the strength it is grown unto, has
been opened unto ye. And finally what a benefit it is of God, to give us a
lives time in the world, and all the means to conserve it in health, peace,
and good estate; and yet how unthankful we be in departing with it, or but
hazzarding it for a trifle. What God made not without great wisdom, and
counsel, we will unmake for a toy or a caprich of our own. We will go
steal a glory by our selves, and the first step we make, is into the
bottomless pit of hell. There is nothing remaining, but that ill custom
prevail not with you, which bears a mighty stroke in the actions of men.
Ill custom I say, that goes handsomely dect in flowers of honor, the more
likely to deceive; and makes such impression in men's minds, that it will not
away with beating. Their arguments are, I will not, I cannot, I will be hanged
first, the devil take me first both body and soul. For if they speak
soberly, they bring us nothing at all, that is greatly worth answering. 7. Mac.
Some will urge me with Eleazar in the Machabes, who lost his life to avoid
disgrace, or scandal to his name. I answer, it is one thing to suffer death by
Martyrdom, an other thing to be an actour in it, by fighting, which may not
be. For howsoever the disgrace be, it is either past, or to come. If past, it
is revenge to fight, and revenge is absolutely unlawful in a subject. If to
come, we fight for nothing. For that which is to come is not yet; unless it
were upon assault, as I said before. Secondly if they allege the book of
Kings, where Joab entertained the challenge of Abner, twelve to twelve, and
fought it out. I answer, they were of several allegiance, and in case of just
war. David had then no more but Judah under him; the rest followed Jsboseth
the son of Saul, whom Abner then served: and I often have told you the
difference between just war and private combat. And if ye think this a
distinction of my own, without warrant, because it is somewhat new to ye: 2.
Reg. 1.
read the third of Kings, where king David calls it the blood of war in
peace, to revenge your selves by sword; and gave judgment accordingly upon
Joab that he should dye for it. Thou shall not suffer him (says he to
Solomon) to dye in peace; because he has spilt the blood of war, or blood
(that may not be spilt but in war) in time of peace. And what is it the
Duellor spils, or would spill, but his fellows blood? When? in time of peace.
Some there be happily, that think it to be sin, to fight thus, because all
that be godly think it. Yet their error is, that they think it excusable.
And that out of Saint Paul's own words, 1. Cor. 10.
not understanding the scripture, where he says: Let no temptation take hold
of ye, but humane: that is to say, a man's temptation, a temptation belonging to
a man, and not to a beast; a temptation of dishonor, which beasts are not
capable of, and therefore may seem to be excepted or wincked at here by this
word humane. I answer, howsoever it may lessen the fault of the wronged, more
then of him that wrongeth for point of offense; yet nothing it makes for their
purpose. For I never heard that place understood of such gross and vulgar
temptations; but rather as Saint Augustine expounds it, of such as the godlier
sort commit by mental detracting, Esa. 14.
or suspicion sometimes without cause, and such like. Called humane, because it
is not diabolical, as Lucifers was of pride or malice; humane because it is not
of beasts (as ye say) from lust or from revenge; humane, because it touches at
humane infirmity, and puts us in mind that we are but men, Romans 6.
the best of us. Humanum dico propter infirmitatem, says Saint Paul in an
other place. I call it humane says he, because of our infirmity, by the which
the best that are, fall seven times a day, and cannot therefore be meant by
Duel, which commonly comes of pride, anger, Prou. 24.
or base vulgar fear; and is never severed from contempt of laws. And it is
ridiculous to say as some say, that if their manhood were known once in a
combat or two, they would do so no more. Like the woman, that tried her
chastity so long, till she wounded it. But where do they live (trow ye) that
think so? No man's house on fire near them, to show their courage in? No
occasions of manhood near hand in defense of some innocent that is in danger
of robbing or beating? Nothing near them to make their valor and spirit
known, but they must go into the field to make it less known of all true
esteemers? They vouch the authority of Francis the first, for satisfaction of
the lie given. But that makes nothing for private Duel; which both that Prince
was much against, and in his own case refused, if we believe Surius. Yea, none
more against it, then our Henry the fourth, a Magnanimous Prince, who now
lives. As by his rigorous edicts against this enormity which I touched before,
it may appear. What else our Duellors can say for themselves, I know not.
Marshall Biron was to be commended for his valor and fortune otherwise, but
not for his three to three combat with Mounsieur Cerancy, where his side slew
the other side, and was driven to live basely for it, till his father got his
pardon, but God never gave him a quiet mind after. He sought to witches and
sorcerers, and in the end aspiring to be Duke of Burgundy, a base Burgundian
strok of his head. Neither are the two combats of late between Don Philippin,
and Crequi in any sort to be followed. For although they were of contrary
allegiance, noble personages and stout warriors both of them; the one bastard
brother to the Duke of Sauoy, the other a Baron of France: yea though the Duke
himself out of passion enforced his brother to it the second time, where they
fought desperately in their shirts, and Philippin was run through and stuck
to the ground: yet the Duke perceived quickly that he had done amiss, and sent
after him with speed, to bring him back again, when it was too late. Neither
durst any man there bury him in Christian burial, as great a man as he was.
What further authority they can hammer out of diuilesh custom, is all they
have. Good customs are laudable; but Malus mos abolendus est. Custom may not
make sin lawful, or make it less, but rather greater says Ramundus. Less
seen I grant, and therefore more dangerous, as we see by many examples. How
comes any vice to reign as it does, and to dance unseen, but by daily ill
custom? Has not usury gotten up to such an height of ill custom, that many
cannot see the injustice of it; yea maintain it to be lawful? and that is
heresy. How common are dreadful oaths by ill custom; so as the swearer
never thinks of it, but rather swears that he swear not. So of drunkenness,
so of ribauldry and ribauld plays, where the people laugh not so fast, but the
devil out-laughs them. What should I speak of dicing, tabling, and carding at
this day in such excess, either for long sitting at it, or greatness of the
gain; night and day, nights and days spent in it, forgetting health, nature,
justice; loose their time, gain loss and ruin their estates. Why so? Want
they wit? Not, so. They do as others do. Gallants teach it them, and they
teach others. Custom makes it familiar, and all passes clear with us under
color of company keeping, and nothing else to do, and I do but as I will be
done to. And therefore you, that be soldiers, or men of spirit, no marvel, if
ye be deceived also in your kind. Every man is taken and tript in his own
humor. Ye know what belongs to fight, but not always when ye may do it,
and when not. Remember still the saying of the Athenians, Nullum inhonestum
vtile. Themistocles told Aristides a way how to conquer the Lacedaemonians, and
to be revenged on them. Aristides related it to the Senate out of the pulpit.
But because it was not honorable, they would none of it. So say I. Is there
sin in it? then not honorable. Is there no way to quit our selves, but to
strike God almighty? Remember in your assaults of anger, what Philip of Macedon
said to Demochares the Athenian Orator, when he told the king, it would
please the Athenians well if he would go hang himself. Seneca says, the
king was not moved with it, nor touched him for it, as he might; but willed
him go ask his masters that sent him, which was more honorable, to give
those words, or to take them? An answer most worthy the father of Alexander.
But let us end where we began. My dear lovers and friends, let us never be
so hot, as to forget to be Christians. And let us be also Christianlike. And
whatsoever fault we have, as who has not; yet let us hate no man, no, not our
enemy; but pity him, and inwardly love him for his love, and Pitties sake, who
gave his hearts blood for his mortal enemies. His love brought him from heaven
to earth; and your love must bring you from earth to heaven. Our learned say,
and I believe it well, There is no virtue such as this, to indeere us to God;
nor any thing the devil bestirs him more in, then to break in sunder the
linkes, that chain us together. Let us be wise in this, or in nothing. Say, we
be suddenly moved to break amity or peace: Yet let it not be much, or if
much; Ephesians. 4.
yet Sol non occidat super iracundiam vestram, Let not the sun go down in
your wrath. It will not ill become a red scarf, and a plume of feathers, to
hear the trumpet of God speak. Let not the sun go down in your anger says
Saint Paul. As who should say, when ye lie down, lay down. What must ye lay
down? Lay down your weapon, lay down all malice and hatred. More then that.
Lay down anger, and all thoughts of revenge. So far be it from ye, to
think of challenge, or answer in that kind. Vanquish your selves, overcome
your selves, show your selves Gods men, and conquer your selves. If ye were
hot in the day, be cool at night. If ye were hasty when time was, ye have
respite to think on it, double not your folly with a new days sin. The
sun is down, ye must think no more of it. Have ye vowed revenge? Have ye
ten times vowed it? The sun is down, ye are bound to break your vow.
Ask your learned, if it be not so? Every time you go to pray they will tell
you, ye must lay aside quarrels. Forget and forgive if ye will be heard of
God. Especially, at two times, and then it is sacrilege they say, or sin
against the holy Ghost, to keep a quarrel in your breast. The one is when ye
go to receive the Sacrament. The other in any likeli-hood of death; be it by
service, or sickness, as ye may learn also by the heathen aforesaid Phocion.
Let Duellors look to this at their peril, that go to dye, or may dye, and
carry so bloody a mind with them in stead of a winding sheet. Let us not be
harder hearted then Pagans in the new Orb, where the Lords, or Naires would
stab their servants daily upon their least miscarriage toward their Masters.
Mat 9.
They leave it now, rather then loose the Church-rites. Even so must we do by
rancour and revenge. We may not carry such baggage to Church with us. If ye
be wronged, I deny ye not to right your selves by law, or other means
lawful; and if laws relieve you not, I wish they might. But this I must tell
you. Ye may not look to have all that is wrong to be righted here in this
world, or not so suddenly as your heat, and hastiness many times expects. If
all things were right here, there were no matter of patience in this life. 2.
Cor. 6.
Saint Paul was content with good fame, and badde. The testimony of a good
conscience was to him sufficient. And ye are no better then Scipio, and
Coriolanus, that died in banishment by malice of their enemies. Some are kept
from lands, some from goods, or good name, and shall not be righted till
Doomse-day. And yet if a man have patience; the case is very rare, but he may
be righted here. But it may be ye are in haste, ye cannot stay the
Magistrates leisure, nor your friends. And what will ye do if ye be sore hurt?
must ye be whole in haste, or not at all? will ye give time to your Surgeon for
your curing, and none to the Magistrate for your satisfying? Be not to
earnest, and hot in your parley. Be not furious as some be, nor give evil
words. A lavish tongue was never graft on a noble heart. I have noted, that the
worthier the persons be, the sooner they be at one. And Caesar, when he
perceived his mortal enemy Caluus but a little inclining to peace, he
prevented him straight, and wrote unto him first. But I make an end. Set God
before ye I beseech ye. Let it not be nobis vtile, that is turpe deo. And ye
may know the foulness of your fault always by your unwillingness to be
advised in it by any reverend man. I have been long; but it may be for your
profit, if ye escape a scourge by me. Happily ye will one day say with King
David, Psalm. 34.
Congregata sunt super me flagella, et ignorabam. When ye shall see your fault,
and seek to amend it; God will draw the veil from before your eyes, and
show you the whippes, that were ready for ye, if ye had continued in this
error. But ye have time now to consider of it. Once again remember S. Paul,
Sol non occidat. Is the Sun down? Cry truce to anger, truce to revenge. Free
your souls from passion, and unquietness. True honor be your ground. Wear
no colors but of God, and your Prince, and rely upon them boldly. So shall
ye be as truly honorable, as ye be duly obsequious. Iacta super dominum
curam tuam, Cast your care upon God, and your country; Psalm. 54.
and they will protect your honor, and defend your fame, and will not suffer
ye to go to your graves with the least disgrace.

FINIS.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR FRANCIS BACON KNIGHT, BARON OF VERVLAM, LORD HIGH
Chancellor of England.
SIR, you are the highest Iusticer in this land, or next the highest. And
therefore this piece of my labor if it be worth so much, I think fit to
dedicate to your Honor. In this garden of English justice you are a principal
gardener, where every subject should be a weeder; to pull up that by the root,
which makes you endless work. This root of Avarice is not so great but the
compass of a heart contains it. The biggest man has no bigger plat to weed
in: and yet your Lordsh. finds to your pains, that it is not done, and
perhaps never less done. You can do no more but cut it down as it grows
hurtful: yet up it comes again like Hydraes heads. If I can weed it in my
self, which J cannot well say; and can show an other how, which J dare say:
let no man despise an admonishing brother, that speaks in Gods name, and his
countries, and under your Lordships correction. My project J doubt not will be
well pleasing, if it want not well handling. So, wishing you all the blessings
of the Patriarch Joseph, I humbly take leave of Your Lordship.

All your good Lordships to command W. Wisemart.

THE SECOND CHARGE BY THE CIVILLIAN AGAINST AVARICE.
THe noble Philosopher, and Statesman Plutarke has such a saying: De ira cohib.
that lust, self-love, and cupidity do provoke much anger in us, and breed in
our bosoms a neast of Bees. As much to say: they put sour in our sweet, gall
in our pleasure, a sting in our honey; and our best contentments worldly are
subject to a frette. And to prove his words true as touching lust; what gall
it is mixed withal, we need not seek so far as the destruction of Troy for
the rape of Helena, and the wars that were made for love of her. We have
examples enough at home, of those that have lost their lives, and limbs for
women. And for the other part which is Covetousness, or Cupidity; and what
matter it gives for anger, and unquietness; we may well perceive it, both by
courts of justice, that are full of quarrelling for thine, and mine; and also
by them that have more then they can spend; yet rest not so content, but still
will be adding more water to the sea.

Of anger or the part Irascible (right worthy friends, and gentlemen of great
hope) it pleased my good Lord to speak very nobly yesterday; and there is
nothing to be added, though all be too little that can be said, if the
concupiscible also be not well qualified, and made to know it self. Of this
therefore it comes to my course to speak to day, though very unable for it:
and where the last days charge was to quench the fire of anger with cool
water; now shall it be my endeavor to pull away wood from it also, and all
combustible matter if I can, that there may be nothing to kindle it.

And it will no doubt be worth my labor; since there is nothing hurts us more
then anger, nothing stirs up anger sooner, then evil guided Concupiscence,
whereof I shall now entreat. And yet of lust and luxury, which is the one half
of it, I will not speak, those being such known sins, and having so little
excuse for them, that their apparent deformity does show it self sufficiently,
without my labor, and your trouble at this time. And they that are entangled
with this vice, if they would refrain it as well, as they know it well to be
sin; they would not (sure) be far from the kingdom of heaven. My charge
shall be to you, the other part called Covetousness, a desire of other men's;
in latin alieni appetentia. And not of all that neither, as of usury, theft,
or unjust bargains, by cheuance, practice, cosmage, or deceit, such as laws
do punish and take note of. All these are likewise so manifest to a man's own
conscience, that he needs no other tutor, then himself to instruct him, nor
yet an heavier judge then himself, to condemn him.

My purpose only is to speak of one thing, and that is the desire we have of
too much, which is called superfluum; the vnstinted desire (I say) of more by
much, then is enough, or competent to our estate. And for this, as there is no
law against it, nor can well be, but ones own will; so the will is commonly in
infinitum, if there be means to feed it. It is true, there is no law against
this, and therefore we must be our own law; the evil of it being as dangerous
to our soul, as it is unmarked: and yet we run on with it as moules do under
the earth, until we be caught in a ginne, and lie sweating in our moulten
metal for it in hell, ere we be aware. God requires it therefore, that we
should be our own law, and that we be careful herein. The nature of common
good requires it. Charity, and brotherly love in that we be even Christian,
does also require it, and challenge it at our hands. For otherwise how come
public weals to allow of private possessions; how does God restrain his hand
from the common good, to the good of a few; if he put not a trust in those few,
as in his faithful stewards, to dispense his bounty, and divide it again
when they have it; and to dispose it to his fellows, as cause, or need
requires.

Gods is the earth, and the fullness thereof. Psalm. 23. Psalm. 113.
And when God made us, he gave it us to live of. Terram dedit filijs hominum.
He gave it not at the first to one, more then to another, but to the sons of
men indifferently. And as he gave them the earth, so he gave them the fullness
withal, that every one might have full enough, and no more. And the earth is a
large field, and was always able to feed them all that lived on it, and more.
And so commonweals began with equality, and equal distribution of outward
fortunes, and none to have more then other. Noe, Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, had all
between them, and their posterity after them. The Israelites had there
partage in the land of promise per funiculum distributionis, part and partlike,
as it is written in the Psalms. Psalm. 77.
And that which they had thus, the law was so careful to preserve equality,
that they could not morgage, or sell the same, but it must reuert again to
them in the year of Jubilee. Even so amongst gentiles a while. And when this
equality was broken, they labored still to restore it, and reduce it if it
might be, as by the practice of all estates throughout the world, and the
consent of lawmakers accordingly, it may appear. Such as Bocharis, Licurgus,
Draco, Solon, Romulus, all tending to this, to cut of superfluum in many, and
to help poverty in the most, who have bodies as well as the best, and must
have maintenance as well as the rich, and are the Mayor part of the
commonwealth, yea the principal strength of the same.

For the taking away of extorsion, oppression, and misery in the multitude, and
that all sorts might live in comfort, and their Common weal happy, and
prosperous; they labored in the beginning to bring it to equality, thinking
nothing so fit for their purpose, as that. And Licurgus herein went further
then the rest, or else had better fortune. For in what estate he left the
Lacedaemonians, in that they continued five hundred years after, no nation
stronger, or more invincible then they. But when gold and silver came in
again, which he had utterly banished; they lost both valor, and greatness
together (as is noted by good authors) and they were no better then other men.
When they fell to gathering, and heaping once, equality was gone, and the
strength of the Comminaltie was dissolved with anguish and care. For like as
the stream of a river goes quietly away without noise, and seeks the level
without murmr, if it have no shelues to trouble it underneath, nor
narrowness of the banks to stop the course of it: even so it is with the
stream of a commonwealth. The channel are the commons, or vulgar sort, who
are easily moved, and run not even toward their happiness, if the banks
on both sides, which are laws, and magistrates, stand not firm to them, and
have not care to keep them in their ancient bounds, with paring and sewing
them, as they ought, where golden sands lie clottering in heaps to gull them
up.

Equality I must say had been good amongst us, if it were possible to hold.
But it is indeed so like to heaven, that earth cannot hold it long. It has
such affinity with Angelical perfection, that it will not well relish with
humane corruption. And therefore in vain they sought to establish it in any
worldly Estate. Saint Austine began a course of equality or community with
some of his companions, before he was a perfect Christian; but it held not
long; his design was dissolved. Even so those Lawmakers, they began well, but
it would not continue. The sequel of subsequent ages tells us, that they
consumed themselves the most part of those great wise men, with unprofitable
labor. If minds be contrary, how can possessions be agreeable? If
affections be opposite, how can effects conspire in equal terms? And yet I
hold well with their ground, and most certain it is, equality there must be
one way or other, else no commonwealth can stand. And this equality I seek
for, which heathens could not, and we must find, that are Christians, or no
people in the world.

A thing which our great master of conscience Saint Paul exhorted, and directed
the Corinthians unto, 2. Cor. 8.
for disposing their abilities to them that were in need, vt sit equalitas,
that there may be equality says he; as upon occasion I shall tell you anon,
when I shall speak of Superfluum. For there is a rule of conscience, which
among the virtuous is instead of a law, and in liew of equality, and that is
this; to cut away Superfluum in all men. Keep your lands, keep your
possessions to ye, be they never so great, or more then others have; yet put
your Superfluum out of your hands, and others are even with ye, that have
less. Put not away what ye need, but what ye need not. Do but employ it
well what ye may not hold, and all will be well. This way and no other, will
soon make equality; even that which our Lawmakers have sought for, and could
not attain.

The Spartans would have all men bring in there money, Plut. in. Lycurgus.
and to divide it amongst many. But when rich men liked not that, they banished
money quite; gold and silver made no payment, but lumpes of iron in liew of
them, five pound of ours in their new coin, was a horse load. And as long as
this held, there was equality; but when silver came in again, equality went
out, and could tarry no longer. The Romans to avoid inequality, and
extraordinary greatness in some, over other some, which they saw was by
incroaching, and buying up all, that others would sell; Liuie lib. 6.
whereby some grew mighty, and the greater part in misery; they made this
law: that none should have more then five hundred acres at once. For so much
was thought enough for the best man in Rome to spend in his house by the year.
The law was good, but it held not. And Licinius Stolo, that made it, brake it,
lib. 7.
and was in praemunire for having a thousand. Their leges agrariae also were
without number, but their covetousness brake them. By Caesar's law a will was
not good, where nothing was given in common; but this being forced, and
inuoluntarie, it came to little purpose, and the Emperor Antoninus was driven
to abolish it, and left it altogether to men's good wills.

Other countries have other laws to fetch it away again, what others draw to
them, and hold so fast when they have. And those be, to rate men's possessions
for contribution to the poor, and other public charge, as they did also in
Rome. Yet this does but little good neither in most places. Rich men favor one
another, and conceal there estates; and so hardly comes any thing from them,
and with so evil a will, that it can have no blessing, and the poor
especially have little certainty of it, but choose rather to try their
fortunes abroad with begging, then like to attend an uncertain courtesy at
home. Many laws might be reckoned in this kind, but none like the law of
conscience, for true working, and benefit, both to ones self, and others; and
to conscience it must be left, when all is done. Which law, because it cannot
be done before it be known, and is most necessary to be always in use, and
fresh in your memory: I will open it briefly unto you, and exhort you to it
in the end; craving nothing of ye for it in liew of my pains, but your best
attention.

Divines whom we ought to follow in matter of conscience; Heb. 13.
ipsi enim peruigilant, these be they that watch for us, and have charge of our
souls, that we may do the best, or not the worst for want of instruction:
they tell us many things, that are good for us to know, if we desire to be
secure of our safety, and profitable to others. They tell us first, we must
love God above all things, and this not with love composed of words, but
inward, real, and effectual; breaking out per actum elicitum, as they call
it, as fire out of a flint, by express word, or thought, that may testify to
our selves, our inward feeling. Some such touch had the Heathen Philosopher,
Plato.
when he cried out in a sweet admiration, saying: O ens entium, miserere mei,
Have mercy upon me o thou maker of all things: as if he had seen what he in
in the Canticles saw, Cant 4.
when he said; All fair art thou my love, there is no spotte in thee. Or what
King David saw in Ionathas (which is by interpretation the gift of God) saying
he was to be loved more then the love of women. 2. Reg. 1. Psalm. 6.
Or when he said in the Psalms; How admirable is thy name over all the earth.
And in another place: 2. King. 1. Psalm. 6. Psalm. 83.
How enticing thy tabernacles o my Lord: my heart does leap to think on thee,
and my flesh exults after my living God. When shall J come and appear before
the face of my God: and such like. Some writers hold, that if a child do dye
after use of reason, and never raised to Godward any act of love, either
little, or much; he can hardly be saved. And their breeders are infinitely to
blame that put them not to it. For if nothing on our part do bring us to
heaven, but love; and this love be so cold in a capable creature, as neither
inward eye of faith can move him, nor howerly benfites can stir him to love
the bestower; how can such a spirit aspire, where God has to do?

They tell us next, we must love our selves next. And in our self, are two
things contained. Our soul, and our body. Our soul we must esteem above all
creatures, and we must not adventure the loss of it for ten thousand souls.
Our third love is to our neighbor, both body, and soul. His soul I must love
more then my life, and goods; especially if I be his pastor, and have charge
of him ex officio. His life also I may prefer before my own out of
friendship, if not out of charity. And so I may loose my life for him, or in
defense of the weak, or innocentbody; and this is a great virtue, but we are
not always bound to it. We are taught also, how to love our parents, wife,
children, and which more, if it come to be shown, as in case of necessity.
There is a love and care due to servants, that they want no necessaries; to
masters that we fail them not in our duty, or charge. They teach us to love
our benefactours, both bodily, and ghostly, and which more, if it may not be
done to both alike. There is a justice, and truth in all these. And it is not
idle to ask, and know our duty in all. And yet these latter may seem more
curious then necessary; but I come to greater matters, and more near to our
purpose.

They show us further our duty to the public, and where the common good is to
be preferred before private; and where it is in our wills to prefer it or
not. And first for life, or member, if twenty do assault me, I may kill them
all rather then be killed; so it be in my just defense, and not against lawful
authority. And yet if a man be so charitable, they do not deny, but he may
suffer himself to be killed, rather then kill. Whereof there have been noble
examples, though very few now adays. And therefore men are deceived when they
think they are bound to kill rather then be killed. It is not so. They may
kill, but they are not bound. Yea on the other side, if he that assaults me
unjustly be a public person, as the king, or any of his children, I am bound
to fly him, as David did Saul: but if he follow me so hard, that I must kill
or be killed, I am bound to loose my life, and it lies not in my choice. So of
a Bishop, or some other eminent person, whom the Commonwealth cannot spare; if
one boat will not hold both, I am bound to slip out, and leave my self to
God. Yea they say further, if my life be sought maliciously in France, and I
fly into England for succor, and there is like to be wars for me, or
breach of amity between Princes: although the State may not deliver me, for
that were tradere iustum sanguinem; Yet am I bound to render my self to my
enemies before public peace should be broken, or any league in hazard for
me. Such high regard must be had of public good, that a man's private is
almost nothing to it. And with this we see how the law of nature concurres.
Hesione was commended for it, and so was Curtius the Roman, for exposing
themselves as they did; the one to be devoured of a monster, the other to be
swallowed horse and man in a gashfull pit, to stop the plague, that was then
in their city.

They teach us also touching goods and possessions, or any worldly thing we
have, that tends to our being, or well being: they be all either necessary,
or superfluous. Necessaries a man must not be negligent to provide. And it is
lawful for us to love them so far forth, as we cannot be without them, no
more then without life. And these be in two sorts, as either necessaries of
life, meat, drink, warm clothes, which every one must have, the poorest
that is: or necessaries of estate that a man was borne to, or lives in. As if
he be a yeoman, thus; if a knight or gentleman, thus; if a nobleman, thus; and
the greater the persons are, the more things are necessary, which to the
inferior are excess. And all these may have a proportion in our loves. We
love a new hatte, or garment, a fair gown, or handsome cloak, or what else
is fitting for us to wear within our compass or degree. We love a good dish,
and competent fare, proportionable to our means. And every man knows what is
meetest for him, and best suting to his ability; even that the ciuilest sort of
his rank does use with decency, and without ostentation, or incroaching upon
the ranks above him, either man or woman.

A great many delight, yea too too many in excess, but such love is naught,
and vicious. The back and belly have made much work for Parliaments, and
Lawyers every where. It is an old fault, and the Lacedaemonians so prevailed
against it, both for diet and wearing, that the subject never exceeded. The
Romans likewise had many laws about expenses, called sumptuarie; as the
Aemilian, and Licinian laws, what they should spend ordinarily, and what upon
Calends, and festival days. By the laws fannia, and didia, principal men
were bound to spend but so much in meat, and no more, besides herbs, bread
and wine, and that must be of the same country, and no other. To say nothing of
the Anthian law, that was made to bar suppers, and other laws without
number, which their outrage of excess gave occasion of. There was also the law
Oppia for apparel, especially for women, that they might not exceed in their
settings out, nor be carried in litters. Yet Solon would not have them walk
the streets in solemnity out of coach; neither might they wear in their ear
above seauenty grains. Their excess ye must think was very strange, and
monstrous, that caused these laws; and there be many statutes in our days for
wearing, but no reformation. I know no good comes of them, save that they argue
us of our pride, and give us a learning what is fit for every one to wear.
Other fruit I see none of them, neither force I much.

I speak only of the law, that should be within us, the law of a good
conscience, which is, to know, and do, and to cut off excess in all. It
shows a weakness of mind, and poorness of soul, that powers it self out
so excessiuely upon outward vanities, and pride. For what is it else? they would
be great, and are not great, they would be Queens, and are not Queens, yet
leave no ornament for Queens, but their crown. I have heard of a lawyers wife
that came before Queen Elizabeth in a gown, and kyrtle of needle work, set
forth with strawberries, and pescods of silk, and silver. The Queen asked her
name; which when she had told her, the Queen laughed at her, and called her
Queen N. I cold give our women some good examples to imitate, which were
better then any laws, if they will. But as the cause of this excess is mere
pride, and want of wit, so the nature of it is, to be worse for counsel.
Themselves would be all others patterns, and will have no paragon. Yet men
should be wiser then they, though women's doteries do befoole them too much.
For what women delight in, they must wear, and draw women the rather to
vnderpeere them. But my purpose is not to amend all in others, that have faults
enough of my own to amend. Yet these things fall within compass of my charge;
and where they be, they must be amended betimes, or dearly paid for.

All other excesses, in hunting, hawking, feasting, and disportes, which have
little restraint by law, belong all to my argument; being as they are,
Cupidities inordinate, and undoing loves, if they draw us to much cost, and to
wast our estates. The estate of all men is much regarded and favored by
learned Juristes, and Casuistes, and therefore they hold two or three things
hereabouts, that would be noted. As first for alms, that although the precept
be general to all, for giving to the poor, and needy, that are near them:
Yet this is only understood, if a man have superfluum. It must be out of some
abundance, or overplus that a man has. He must not weaken his estate with
giving; which if he do, it is sin. For if Charity bids, yet justice
forbids, unless the need be extraordinary: for virtues are not contrary, but
complying with each other, if they be true virtues, and used with discretion.
My means is a thousand crowns a year, and I have wife, children and family
to maintain in frugall sort, not denying the reuersion of my table to the
poor. This is my daily charge, and of this I may not diminish to give larger
alms. And if I go further, it is indiscretion, and vicious. Excess in virtue
is a vice, how much more in evil things.

They hold further, if I be in debt, or decay by loss, or want of some
providence, which all have not alike: I am bound to pay Creditors as soon as I
can without notable impayring of my estate, and not before: and the Creditour
is bound to stay for it, if there be no fraud in me or intention to deceive,
nor need in the money lender; or if there be, yet they distinguish of need.
For there is grauis necessitas, and there is extrema. Extreme necessity is of
life; as if both of us want meat and clothing, and I owe him as much, as will
buy but one of us our dinner, so as one of us is like to starve; I am not bound
to pay it him. For the use of all things is common in extremities, and the law
of nature they say must be preferred before the law of nations, and property.
Yet this case is rare, but in a siege, or famine.

The case of great necessity (which is the other sort of need) has been
somewhat more common; as if creditour, and debtour be both in like danger of
arrest, the one if he be not paid his own, the other if he pay. Some say the
debtour must pay, some say he is not bound. I think he is bound if he borrow
it gratis, but this case also is not often, that both necessities alike should
meet so just. The common case is, that the debtour cannot pay suddenly, and
the creditour is able to stay for it. This is the case that troubles many, and
wrings the multitude, as we see by daily examples. All our learned hold, the
creditour must forbear, and have patience, patientiam habe, omnia reddam tibi,
Mat. 18.
as he in the Gospel said to one that he owed money unto, and because the
creditour would not forbear, he was delivered to the tormentours. The Savior
of the world might seem to call it a choking sin, Tenuit, and suffocauit
eum, he arrested his fellow, and choked him up in a Iayle, and yet as his case
was, he had some reason to do as he did, and to importune his own debtour for
his own, being himself in need, and in danger to his Lord for a great deal
more. But my purpose is not to prove my conclusions, which would ask much
time; but only to inform you of these verities; which your learned can
instruct you in, better then I, if you be as ready to follow them in all your
doubts, as they will be ready to guide you, and govern you.

Take heed I beseech you, and you cannot be too heedy of this kind of sin.
For though laws were made for the rich, and this was not always law, that all
extremity should be used but hanging, for recovery of debts; no cessio in
bonis will serve but a man's flesh, and not a groat sometimes left him to
relieve himself and a poor family with; which yet the law of nature and
nations provides for, that a man's person should not want out of his own
goods; and yet notwithstanding, I would not blame laws or policy for it, if
there were store of conscience in lenders, or if lenders would lend gratis, as
they have done: Yet remember still the old saying, that extreme right is
extreme wrong. Is there no mean amongst Christians? For want of a Tyrant to
reign over us, shall we tyrannize one over another, or have power in our hands
to do it, if we list? If our goods be in our hands, let us use them as we may;
if they be out of our hands, let us get them in as we need; but let it be done
with all Christian lenity; let no choking or throtling be heard of amongst us
which will hurt our poor brother, and do us no good.

The Lord I spoke of in the Gospel, Math. 18.
had to do with a debtour, that was able to pay, yet gave him day to make
money: we deal with many that be not able, and have nothing to help them with
but their labor and pains, and yet we cast them in prison, take all their
means from them, and allow them nothing to keep them. I said before, if there
fault were fraud, fraus nemini patrocinabitur: there is no reason to spare
them, that live by practice and cosening. And yet we are not so scrupulous
altogether, but that we may deceive our deceiuer. If one steal from me
privily, or deceive me subtly, or extort from me unjustly, I will steal,
and wring from him if I can, and do him no wrong in it. Fallere fallentem,
violat neque ius neque gentem. Provided always, this be done without
scandal, and that we have no other remedy at hand. But as the case of common
debtors is, that have no fraud at all in them, and grow behind hand not by
riot or vice, but for want of heed, or best advice; the difference is very
great. All that shoot come not near the mark. Some be fortunate, but more
are unfortunate. Some their good nature hurtes, some their negligence, some be
ruled where they should not, and false hopes deceive many, without either
malice, or evil mind; and may rightly say by their outward fortunes, as David
said by his inward, ad nibilum redactus sum, and nesciui, Psalm. 72.
I am wasted and consumed to nothing, and was not aware. Yet such as these we
punish here, as if they had cosened us; and if we durst be so bold, we
would not spare the greatness of any man.

We are at loss by such I grant, but why then did we trust? what hope of
gain drew us to it? or if not gain, yet all things we know are in
adventure; nothing certain in this world. We loose by sea, and say nothing;
we loose by land, and cannot help it; we loose by friends and kinsfolk many
times, and look for no amends; we are subject to loss daily, and more to
loss, then gain. And why have we not patience then with one that is poor,
and not so wise in the world, or not so thriuing as we? We are bound
sometimes to pardon when we can right our selves. Why forbear we not then,
when revenge will not right us? For what is it else but revenge in us when we
be so greedy? It is not seeking our own by it, which will hardly be had that
way, and therefore what can we make of such violent courses, but revenge? and
there we bid them lie till they rotte.

O let us not stand so high upon the ruffes of our fortunes, or coffers
thoroughly lined: let us not conteme our debtors, lest happily we contemn our
betters. God blesses not all alike to the world. Who can tell what will betide
the best of us in time to come, or any of ours? We are no better then one of
the sons of the Prophets in the fourth of Kings, who dyed in debt, cap. 4.
and his children seized, and like to be sold for it: and yet vir timens Deum,
He was a man that feared God. It is no sign of reprobation to owe money, but
not to pay when we have it. Mutuabitur peccator and non soluet, Psalm. 37.
The sinner indeed will borrow and not pay, and is worthily punished. But how
many do we know, and could name, that have been sunk ere now, and shrunk in
their fortunes; which yet with liberty have risen again to give contentment,
and could never have done it in prison?

If reverend antiquity had foreseen the hardness of hearts, and conscience that
now is; they would never have given way to such Laws as they did, that one
should tread another under foot as they do. The person of a man has bin much
more precious of old, then now it is, and still is in Spain, especially if he
be a gentleman. It was not subject to restraint for debt, no not for debt to
the king, but by later laws. And though Emperors also had like law for
recovering their debts with more speed; Baronius tom. 3.
yet Constantine took it away quite, so as none could have their persons
touched but for felony, or contempt of majesty, or magistrate. And thus it was
in the best commonwealths that ever were, the Egyptians, the Athenians,
Spartans, Romans, France, England, and others. And the noble king Seruius
Tullius, gave a reason of it, who set the old law on foot again, that
creditours should go no further then men's goods, and lands. For why should
they loose liberty (said he) who preserve the common liberty with their
liberty? And yet much ado there was about it after that, for the space of two
hundred years. Creditors as they prevailed in credit with great men (which
they did too much in our country, or in time of peace, when there was no need
of men) got laws against debtors, sometimes to imprison them, sometimes to
make them serve for their money. Liuie. 8.
Which held a great while, till that foul matter fell out between the usurer
Papyrius, and his poor bondsman young Publius, whom he had so torn with whips,
and rods for not yielding to his abominable voluptuousnes: that the matter
being known, there was present order taken by public decree, that none
should be in prison, or in bondage again to Creditours, for time to come.

I hear of some now adays, whom we have known of good merit in their time,
some of them walking the streets continually in danger of arrest, and some
that suffered long imprisonment, five, seven, ten, and some twenty years
for no greater fault then misspending themselves when they had it, and no man I
see takes compassion of them. Much better it were for them, to have all their
pains at once, and their Carcass divided amongst the Creditours, as of old it
was among the barbarous; then so to languish in inevitable misery, being
stripped out of all means. And what is this but revenge under color of justice.
They say nine hornets kill a horse, and two undo a man. That is to say the
ale-wife and a baylife; or if he be a gentleman, the usurer and a sergeant.
How much better is it in Scotland and Venice, Holland, Flanders, and many other
places, where men be set free at the years end, if they prove unable; and
the Creditour in some countries bears the charge of the Prisoner. Better in
Gran Cayre the head city of Afric, where the prison-keeper paies the debt,
Leo. Afer.
if he take in a prisoner that is not able. The root of all this is extreme
covetousness; which having lost the sword, would beat a man to death with the
scabberd. Justice has denied her the one, yet lets her tyrannize with the
other as heavily as she can. But I will proceed with our greater matters.

Two things more our pastors teach us as touching our estates; the one is of
our bettering it, the other is of our carriage in it toward the Common. In
both which there is a great deal of justice to be followed, and much injustice
is practiced, that lies unseen. And first for amending our means, they hold
it a thing to be good, and lawful, but that we are not bound to it. I hold it
a sure way to be always mending it a little, if we can, without abating our
outward Countenance, or necessary charge. If it so increase and in such wise,
as hospitality increase withal, it is commendable and virtuous; if otherwise,
it is naught. It is snudging and niggardly and unworthy a gentleman, or man of
sort. And to this end I approve their opinions, that spend but half in
housekeeping; that is to say, in meat, drink, and wages: and of the other
half, by that time we be competently clothed, and have paid our duties to the
King, Church, Poor, and other necessaries, to furnish and better our stock,
there will be but little left for much idle expense.

Neither am I forgetful of children or of bestowing them when they come to
age; which is also a necessary duty, and worth our care. Some exceed in it,
and some come short. To give great portions with one daughter, and little with
the rest, is not as it should be. Some there be that strain themselves over
far, to match them over high. I am no Solon. But out of the soueraignety that
a man has over his children, it were good he made two laws to himself, and
if they were binding, it were all the better. One is never to give above a
years revenue with any daughter; and this were enough to marry them honestly,
if not honorably. It is a sufficient proportion, if pride be not; but where
pride is, a great deal more is too little. I would not have them so strict as
Solon, Plut. vit.
or Lycurgus, who allow no portion at all for women, more then their clothes,
and some other necessaries. The other law should be for sons; never to pay
the sons debt, that were riotously spent, having means sufficient allowed
him, and such as he did accept. Or else the law of Claudius were good among
us, Tacit. li. 11 Suet.
and the like was made by Vespatian, to avoid all bonds, especially of
interest, which any should make, or enter into, who were at their fathers
finding or living in house with him. This would be a great preservation of
houses, and a stop to young men for running riot; nor would there be such
cheating upon them as there is upon presumption of payment. Good nature is
against this, as it may seem; but less good nature to ruinate ones house with
unlooked for leakage. Some prodigal child will be against me also. Luc. 15.
But we read not in Scripture that he spent any more but his own, his father
paid no debts for him.

Increase of our estate is many ways, and every way vicious, if we look not
into it narrowly, and be not somewhat furnished with good counsel, and
conscience. For avoiding of which danger, it is good for a man to inform
himself of truth, and justice in every business; and he that flatters
himself herein, thrusts a sword in himself, and sets on fire his own house,
though he live not to see it. They that grow rich on a sudden, shall want
blessing in the ending. Prou. 20.
And it is very suspicious that they come not rightly to it, unless it be by
merchandise, or offices. Land and money can seldom do it suddenly without
wrong, and injustice. It were wisdom never to purchase without store of
Superfluum. It were charity to lend first (if the man be poor) before we buy
his land of him. But we have no precept for any of these. A man is bound to
neither; and therefore I leave it. Yet charity and justice exact of us, that we
defraud no man of his full price in the purchase. He is driven to fell; and
when he has sold, he never comes to it again. God forbid we should beguile
him of aught, or make use of him so far, that instead of lending him, we
should work upon his need.

The learned make three prices of every thing, which they use to call summum
medium, and infimum. The highest lowest, and middle price; each price exceeding
other by one at the least for land: as if twenty be the most, eighteen the
least; the middle price must be nineteen years purchase. Here they tell us,
we are bound to give him eighteen for his land: and no less; and the other
may take twenty, and no more. I speak after the ordinary course of things. For
times and circumstances may be; upon occasion of wars, scarcity of money, or
fewness of buyers; and the contrary of these make it dear. Ordinarily, there
be two notable faults in buying and selling.

The one is in the buyer, the other is in the seller, and both proceed of
griping, and covetousness; and men must look to answer for it in an other
world, howsoever they do vaunt themselves of their fortune here. I speak of
no dark matters, but what every one may know, and shall have no excuse for,
when God shall one day charge the^ with blood-sucking one of another. We are
bidden to do what we will be done to, Mat. 7.
that is to say, we must not do, as we will not be done to. The law of
nature teaches us, how abject and base it is, and I may say vnchristian-like,
to lie upon advantage as we do one of another. Cap. 27.
There is a saying in Ecclesiasticus: Qui quaerit locupletari angustabitur
peccatis, He that strives to be rich, shall be pinched with sins. And he
compares the buyer, and seller, to a poast in a stone wall that cannot stir
for the stones that stick so close round about it: even so (says he) stands
Covetousness between buying, and selling, that can hardly stir any way for
sinning, and pinching our brother. I pray think of it seriously, it is no idle
thing I tell you of.

The fault of the buyer is, to give but the one half for it, or three parts of
four at the most. Here is a whole quarter purloyned from the owner. He
denies not the profit of it, he mislikes not the tenor, or assurance, or
honesty of the seller. But his reason is, I have bought for twelve, I never
gave more then fourteen. A bad reason; I have done naughtily, therefore I will
not amend. I have helped to undo some, therefore I will undo more. But if he
wished his son would sell so, he would not leave him a foot. An other reason.
He was as willing to take my money, as I to give it. True. And so it is with
him, that gives forty in the hundred. A third reason. Land may fall to a low
rate, but when? All the mines are discovered, and set on broach to the world;
people increasing, never more, and land they must have of them that have it. No
wars likely, peace round about us. And if they should sell again, what they
buy so good cheap; these would be no reasons. They will not sell for eighteen,
that they bought for thirteen. But the true reason is, the sweet they have by
unlawful gain. Ten in the hundred at the least, and most commonly interest,
upon in terest now grown so common, and tirannising almost every where without
control: that who is there almost that has money, and will buy land, where he
shall not see his money again, in eighteen, or twenty years as he must not,
if he do justly. Where contrary, the usurer dubbles his hundred in seven
years all save five pound, two shillings seven pence. And in twenty years,
he sees it five or six times double. His hundred is made six hundred,
fourteen shillings, eleauen pence. His thousand comes to six thousand, seven
hundred, twenty seven pound, nine shillings, eleven pence. And if it come in
half yearly, or quarterly, it is more. But this is his rate and rule, or no
bargain with him. He is not in need himself, and to'ther is, and must have
it at any rate, be it never so unconscionable. Banish therefore this monster,
or commonwealths worm, and twenty pound land will be worth twenty years
puchase I doubt not. Where vice reigns, virtue sits without doors; and land
bears no price, nor fishing to the sea shortly where usury domineers.

The sellers fault is to take double for it if he can; thinking every thing so
much worth as a man will give for it. Which is not so. The price of land is
certain within a little over, or under, as I said before, though it be not so
of stone and pearl. But the injustice of this is, when I make a man pay for
his commodity over and besides the highest price. It is worth but twenty at the
most, and I make him pay thirty, or five and twenty for it, because it lies
handsomely within him, or is so necessary for him, that he cannot be without
it: all that I take above the highest ordinary, they tell us is unjust, and
subject to restitution. For I make him pay twice for it. Once for the full
value, another for his commodity. As if I should make a sick body pay double
for a partridge; one for the value, another for the wholesomnesse of it. This
must needs be extorting, and vicious; proceeding always of couetice, or
malice, and yet is grown so common, that men will not hear the contrary. To
this may be added Monopolies, or ingrocing of needful commodities into one
or a few men's hands, to make them dearer. Likewise to buy or sell with simple
or unexperienced persons, who know not what they buy or sell, yet are no
fools. The rule is this. They may buy for the least of the three; and they may
sell again presently for the best of the three, and make gain of it, but more
then this will not be warranted with good conscience.

The fault of both buyer and seller is this, that they joy and glory in their
doings. It is their daily study, and they take a pride in it. And what do they
glory in? Even that which will work them a great deal of woe. Happy is that
man, that buys as he will sell, and sels as he will buy. This is the glory a
good body should take; and not in pinching and pulling from his brother. Psalm.
61.
Mendaces filij hominum in stateris, There is complaint made to God of us, what
ill measure we keep to our brother. King David calls us liars in our
weights. We buy with one weight, and sell with another. Is this meant by none
but bakers, and butterwiues think ye; and not much more by other matters,
that sink men's estates, and make them groan. Why should the poor be
defrauded a penny of the full worth, when if a rich man sell, he will have
more then he, by ten or twenty in the hundred.

Aristides, who for his singular justness was called the Just; defined justice
thus: not to desire any thing that was another man's. So far was he from
taking, or seeking; that he would not so much as covet another man's. And how
far are we from this, who are coveting still, even when we cannot have?
Biblius was so afraid of this coveting humor, that he would not stoop at a
purse, or any thing else he found, for fear of being tempted. In general it
is good in buying and selling, to keep even between the pious or least price,
and the rigorous or highest price, as your Aristides will advise you, if ye
will ask. I will not persuade you to do as Hermes Aegyptius did, a great wise
man, both learned and rich. Some think it was he that apologied for
Christians to the Emperor Adrian. It is written of him, that he would never
buy, but he would give too much rather; and would not sell, but he would take
somewhat under. The like we read of Quintus Mutius long before him, who
although he were heathen, yet in compassion of the sellers need, he gave
them more for their houses or lands which he bought, then they would ask.

If we that profess Christianity were all of his mind, we would busy our
heads no doubt, with better matters, and more worthy of our selves, then how to
make gain still by another harm; neither do I speak this to put scruples
in your heads, which I am far from, and I omit them of purpose. They be
matters of great moment which I mind you of, and as much as your souls are
worth; no less I say, then the breach of one whole commandment, the last of
the ten, Exodus 20.17
Thou shall not so much as covet thy neighbors goods, and this does bind us
as much as the other nine. Howbeit, we pass it over lightly, as if it were
nothing; being in very deed the sum and ground of all Justice between man
and man. In other precepts the act; here the desire only is forbidden, as
either to desire an other man's, who is not willing to depart with it, as Naboth
was not; 3 Reg. 21.
or to have it for less then it is worth, as the Common case is at this day.
And both these are directly against the Commandment, Thou shall not covet. And
therefore he that draws from his neighbor in this manner, sins doubly;
that is to say, in coveting, which is a sin alone by it self, and also in
acting, which is against the eighth Commandment.

It is also against the general precept of loving our neighbor as our self,
which every man is bound unto. For Qui non diligit manet in morte. It is
damnation I say, 1 Ioh. 3.
not to love our neighbor as our selves. And who is he that thinks he loves a
man, and does what he can to pull him on his knees? The learned tell us, there
be four degrees of love, which if we have not, or have none of them, it is a
sign that we have no love. The first they say is liquefaction, that is to
say, Aquinas. 1. 2 ae. q. 28.5.
a melting, or a relenting heart toward our brother. The second is a delight
we have to be where we love. The third is a heaviness to be from our love.
The fourth is fervor, or a burning love. And although it be not given to every
man to have these three last, which are delight, longing, and feruency: yet
none can love without the first, or least degree, which is a relenting, or
compassion over our brother, when we see him in distress, and sell for need.
Surely, if this be love, it is a congealed or frozen love, which is contrary
to melting love. It is a cold love, which is contrary to fervent love. Yea, it
is no love at all; or if it be, it is the devils love, who loves us to devour
us, and swallow us down his throat. What we give our brother too little, would
happily set him up again, and do our selves no hurt. And yet we love him so,
that we have no feeling in us of the least commiseration toward him.

Howbeit the corruption of the time so concealeth this injustice from us, and
has bredde such blindness in our hearts with continual coveting, that it is
now grown from a sin, to a very disease. I know ye scanne upon my words, and
I do not marvel. What? shall I not buy as good cheap (say you) and sell as
dear as I can? nothing freeer then gift; if a man will give me his land, I
will take it. But how many give their land, that sell for need? Ye may not
deceive your selves, nor be Judges in your own case. I exhort you to repair
to them that have skill. And this is the whole scope of my speech. Believe not
me, but believe them at your peril. We will not rob, nor steal, nor scarce
tell money on a Sunday; and so long we think all is well with us. But we
will seek a bargain to day, that shall gain us five hundred, or a thousand
to morrow; and this is just with us, because it is no usury. How far is this
from the nature of bargaining, to do as we do. The very word of bargaining
biddes us bar gain, and take but a penniworth for a penny. The Merchant
adventures dangerously for that he gets; but this man without adventure at
all, if he meet with an honest man, and his Lawyer be not asleep. Yet thus
much he gets, and will get as much more next day if he can, by one bodies
need, or other. O where be the bowels of charity, that we can sleep quietly
in our beds, Gal. 5.15.
and our poor brother undone by us? Saint Paul calls it eating one another. The
cry of it reaches up to heaven, yet will it not reach to our ears. Yea more
then this; men praise our fortune for it; and wish it were theirs: and I shall
not have such fortune says one; and I shall never have such luck says
another. A sweet piece of luck; when we cannot rise so fast, but a hundred of
others go down as fast. Have care of it I beseech you; I give it you in charge,
that ye may not be unfurnished at the counting day, nor others by your examples.

Now as concerning the things that are bought and sold; we must think the
principal thing that is to be had for money, is land. Nothing more worth a man's
money, or more truly valuable, or profitable, then good land. Store of land
makes great men. Greatness of lands makes kings great. Terra matter omnium, The
earth is mother, and matter of all things. Whence comes all our sustenance but
from crop, and vintage; whence our strength and complexion, but from
maid-sweete in green meddowes, and three leau'd grass? bags of money will
not bring forth a rose; nor heaps of gold make cherries. And where go we for
shade in a parching day, but to the green wood? where fetch we fire in cold
weather, but from the same? whether go we to see our hawke fly, or follow
our hounds, but to hill, and vale, and stubble field? galleries, and great
chambers will not serve our turn. Land fills markets with dainties and
necessaries. Land furnishes the sea with shipping to carry out, and bring in.
Fish is fat with that comes from land, and the the fowls of the air, with
all their variety, are homagers to land for all their feature, and food. If a
man have all the riches and Jewels in the world, what are they good for, but to
buy land withal? when we be dead, we shall need land, and nothing else but
land. Abraham was rich of gold, and silver; but gold, and silver would not have
buried him, if he had not bought land for it.

We read in Scripture when God would make his people blessed, he promised
them land; knowing nothing so great a blessing in this transitory world, as
land. Psalm. 9.
Pulchritudo agri mecum est says he, the beauty of the field is mine to
bestow. Land he promised them, and land he gave them, to every one some, as I
said before. What possession is there, that yields us thirty, sixty, yea an
huudred for one but land, by Christ's own words. And therefore I marvel not at
Naboth in the book of Kings, that he parted with life rather then his land,
though it were to pleasure a King.

And I speak not this, that men should love land too much, or desire more of
it then only competent. Neither is any thing so good; but we must loose for
God, or sell to pay true debts, that every body may have their own. But to set
land at naught, or to sell it with loss, and to spend it riotously when we
have done, in play or misrule, without order, or honesty, as many do now
adays; is there wit, or grace in it? Is gaudy apparel more worth thy money,
then land? Dice and cards if they were of gold, are they more precious in thy
eye then goodly lands? will thy mistress maintain thee when all is gone; or
is the soking usurer more worthy thy patrimony, then thy fathers child? No. As
nothing so worthy price, as land, so let nothing hold up the price like land,
if we will be good to our selves, or to the common, as may be easily
demonstrated. To be short, there will be alawies some that sell. And it is free
for all to buy that can; unless it be crowneland; Church-land, or the poores.
Thus much for the best possession, which is land.

Now for other things that are bought and sold; I must give you to understand,
that there is in this no small injustice and ignorance abroad in the world. The
ignorant make scruple where none is, for buying honors, and offices. And the
Covetous make a tush at Church-lawes, if they prove against sense and profit.
Symony they dare not avouch, but to buy and sell aduousons, and right of
Patronage, either appendant, or in gross, or to extort pensions or anuities
from incumbents, they think it no sin. There be also that will not buy a
benefice; but they will give well to another, that shall procure it them. To
take a gratuity it is lawful, so it be without pact; but to frown at the
gratuity, if it be not big enough, is no better then Simony. To give money
for a spiritual service, otherwise then by way of alms to the poor, as for
praying, preaching, christning, or such like, it is holden abominable; yet not
unlawful to give or take for ones pains, and travel in such business; or to
give yearly stipends for weekly or monthly duties. For though no spiritual
function be valuable with price; yet ones labor and tie to it is.

Moreover to with hold our tithe, as it is a sin well known, and to take
more then is due, is also very unjust; so do I hold it very unfortunate, and
ominous to our estates (if I may so say) to be niggardly in this duty, or to
give the worst we have. For God must needs be sparing to us, and pinching in
his blessings, if we be pinching to him, and think all too good, that goes
that way. And to speak my conscience, although in some sort against my self;
I know not how two things be warrantable about this business, and yet are very
common among us. The one is in paying Custom, or composition tithe, when tithe
in kind is worth twenty times more. For though tithe in kind were little more
worth when such custom began, and the people fewer to be taught; yet now,
the world being risen to a higher rate, more people to be instructed, ten, or
twenty for one; the clergy likewise increased, rents, and profits also aised,
and all commodities at the dearest; a poor pastor must have no more but a
noble or ten groats, as he had then, for that which is worth at this day a
great deal more. There is a maxim in law, that a custom to pay nothing is a
void custom; and what is it then to give little better then nothing; twelve
pence perhaps for an angel, unless our Clergy had the privilege to buy all
things for their money at old rates.

The other injustice is in paying nothing at all; and there be thousands that
do not. Men of trafique, art, and trade, rich, and thriuing, who have neither
corn, or cattle, nor five acres land to pay tithe for, if it be a house, it is
all. Abraham paid it Melchisedecke of all he had, even of that which fell unto
him by spoil of his enemies. Heb. 7. Lib. 20. Thucid. lib. 3. lib. 5. Genesis 28.
The like we read the Grecians did to their Painym gods, as Thucidides and
Iustine write of the Spartans, Crotoniates, and Locrines; and Liuie of Furius
Camillus, to Apollo Delphicus by the light of nature. Jacob vowed to God all
manner of tithing, not of this commodity, or that, but of all he possessed. Not
that a man should give of that which lies by him; but only of the increase,
which comes of money, or goods employed in any lawful negotiation. Hom. 43. in
Cor. Ser. 1. de domin. 12. 1. Cor. 3.
For so says Saint Chrysostom, who freeth not the very tradse-man, or
artificer, nor Saint Augustine the soldier or merchant from this bond of
Tithe, if he get any thing by it, though it be by nothing else, but by buying,
and selling. For it is God who gives the increase of both alike, and must
therefore have his part in both alike. The law cannot say what this man, or that
man gains, and therefore leaves it to men's consciences. And they are called
priuy-tithes, which many good men have used ere now, and I lay no bond upon
you; but wish you to inquire of them that be learned; that you may not be found
unthankful when ye shall be summoned before your grand benefactour.

Now for temporal offices, I am rather to note the vulgar ignorance, then
dissuade any thing. When we see great offices bought and sold, which we cannot
have our selves; we make a nodde at it commonly, and cry Omnia venalia, as if
they were Church offices. Indeed where Judges do sell Justice, and lie open to
bribes, there is Omnia venalia. And so if they deny Justice, or delay Justice
for money, or if they be partial, and accept of one person more then another,
we may justly say Omnia venalia. But there be two sorts of offices. The one of
judgment, the other of execution. This latter there is no question of, being
mere temporal, and of profit certain, and therefore valuable for money, as
house and land are. And such be all under officers of court, or of Justice,
especially if they be for life, or to ones heirs. And many of these kinds are
sought for, more for countenance and credit, then for fee, or profit. For as
Comines says, some have given so for them, Lib. 1.
that they have not seen their money again in fifteen years.

Offices of judgment also are in a sort valuable. For although the Emperor
Seuerus were very severe herein, and removed them from their places when he
came; yet it was rather for their dear buying of offices, which made them
subject to bribes, then otherwise. For when a favorite of his did think to
prevail so far with him as to keep his office still, telling him that it
cost him dear; ye therefore thou shall loose it said he. They that buy
dear, must sell dear. And he would allow him no more but one years profit,
and away. The learned say it is not only lawful for the commonwealth to take
money in such cases, but also necessary. Lawful because they take it not for
doing justice; but for the profits belonging to it, which is the commonwealths
to bestow, and which they may take to themselves, if they list. Necessary also
for increasing the common treasury, which ought not to be neglected, where
lawful means will afford it. Yet so notwithstanding, that care be had of a
worthy choice, and moderation be used, that they pay not too much for it; both
in regard of their years commonly, which will not let them hold it long; and
likewise of their charge, that they be not disabled by it, to give countenance
to their place, and to maintain hospitality. Happily, the sum of two years
profit will not hurt them; and after that rate took King Henry the seventh of
England, of the Lord Chief Justice in those days, which I hear was five
hundred marks.

Lastly for buying and selling honors, the question is not so much of the
injustice in bestowing, as folly in the seeking. And therefore I will give it
but a touch. Honor was ordained for a reward of merit; and merit is either of
act, or fortune. If it be of act; as for valor, or virtue; honor is due
without money by justice distributive. If merit of fortune, as favor, birth,
riches; it is no new thing to purchase honor or arms, as due to their
fortunes, by justice commutatiue. And this is called by Bartolus a civil
honor, being the Princes to bestow, where and when he will, and upon what
motive he will, and for money if he will, to enable him the better for those
that merit in act. Yet so notwithstanding, that the better the motive is, the
more honor to the receiver. The fault or folly is as I said, to seek it
without merit at all, or to wrong others that are better then themselves. The
old rule is always true, Malo esse quam haberi, and thus much for lesser
honors. Of greater honors I say nothing. For as men are more in view of the
Prince, whence honor comes; so better note is taken of their merit. And we
may not doubt but they are well deserved of a prudent Prince, wheresoever we
find them to be bestowed. But I leave this matter, and go forward with our
dregs of avarice, if any thing be to be said else.

No doubt there is more to be spoken of, then I mean to trouble you with.
Contracts for money, stock, or cattle, let out together, or apart, are
infinite. Wherein the learned discover to us much corruption, whether with
saving, or loosing the principal; whether with adventure, or without, in
nature of pawn, or morgage, or absolute, by direct bargain or condition, or
bills of exchange. In these and many other, are many shifts, and devises for
profit extraordinary, which pass for current daily, yet are unlawful, and
liable to restitution. Wherein I do not particularize, for holding you too
long. But we may know them partly, and shall have cause to doubt them, and to
inquire of them, by the greatness of the gain; and ignorance will not excuse
us, when it is gross. And two things make it gross. One is if it be like
sin, or extorsion for the excessive gain: as to get a commodity for five,
that is worth ten; why should not a man doubt, and ask in this case? The
other is when we have ready means to inform our selves by those that be
learned, and will not; but live close, and work by our selves. We ask our
selves whether we be able to deal with it or no; we ask Lawyers for our
title, and security. And where should we seek for the right, and justice of
it before God, but of Divines? whom God calls his Angel by the mouth of his
Prophet; Mal. 2. Ier. 18.
and says, we must ask his Law at their mouth; Et legem requirent ex ore
eius. And we should never adventure upon any thing that our Charity doubts of,
without their counsel. Who are as ready at hand for our spiritual good, as
others are for our temporal. Yet if it be so that doctors doubt of the case,
ye may practice whether ye will; though indeed the safest opinion be the best
for us.

If it please you to listen to them seriously, remembering always what snares
hang about you, as thick as ycesickles in the chill of your Charity: believe
me, ye will find much good of it. They will help you in the very game you
play at, that ye may not be undone by it. But they will not allow you to play
away above the twentieth part of your commings in by the year. More then this
they hold wastfull, or auaricious. Not that they know just when it begins to
be sin, but by some notable decay it makes in your estate; and therefore
will put a conscience in you to waste no more. If the twentieth part be spent,
there be but nineteen left. If another part, or the one half be spent, there
is but so much left, and so much weaker ye grow to do your selves good, or
any of yours; and ye must come to sell land for it, which they will by no
means allow. They hold it little less then damnable to play away such a
deal in a night, as many do; or to have other end of gaming, then for good
companies sake, or passing away the time. And if ye entice one to play that
has no skill, or win of a servant his masters goods, or of a wife her
husbands money, or of a child that which is his parents, without consent or
conniuence: all ye get thus, is none of yours, but must be restored.

They give us a caveat likewise against Alchumy, or chymike art, for the known
idleness of it, and the apparent hurt to men's estates, that have followed it,
and spent long time in it; whereof nothing has come but smoke, and expense,
and fruitless effects. It is a wonder to tell, what gold and silver it has
cost, to make gold and silver, and how many have bin consumed by it. Whether it
were the charge of workmanship, or cosening in undertakers, or Gods curse upon
the auaricious attempt, especially of late years, since common experience has
proved it idle, and the censure of Divines has declared it sinful: which
of all these is the true fault I know not. But if they be true professors of
it, they come to beggary in the end: which our provident pastors would not
that we should fall into. This art has been much used in the kingdom of
Fez; Leo. Afer.
where they were very skillful both in making the Elixer, and multiplying of
metal. But they turned in the end to coining, and lost both their hands for
it, by which mark they have been commonly known.

Two sayings more our learned have to Lawyers and Atturnies, and all their
appendants, under the degree of Judges. For of Judges and Clergy men I can say
little, or rather nothing. Psalm. 81.
They are Gods upon earth. The one may say Si mei non fuerint dominati, Psalm.
18. 1. Reg. 2.16
If I wink not too much at Ophni, and Phinees in my place; but have an eye to
their abuses, that daily press the poor subject, tunc immaculatus ero, 1 Cor.
13.5
Then shall I be unspotted. The other, if they seek not their own, but the
good of their flock, both spiritually and temporally; what can we ask more?
But of Counselors, and Advocates it is required; that first, and foremost they
take not excessive fees, nor fee at all, but what they do somewhat for. In a
late Parliament of France, they were limited what to take, and no more: which
thing so displeased them, that they gave over their practice three or four
hundred of them at once, and men could have no law for their money, until
they were brought back again with a device. Lib. 11.
It may seem by Tacitus that the Roman Lawyer took no fee, until he had
won the cause. Which made them I think more careful of their matters, and
better studied. For their Clyents cause was now become their own, and they
would follow it no doubt, though their Clyent were asleep. Neither durst they
very easily entertain a bad cause, for fear to have nothing for their pains.
Onley their fault was in taking excessiuely, hundreds of pounds for a see, and
sometimes thousands, until they were stinted by the Emperor Claudius, to take
but a hundred marks at the most, or thereabouts.

An unworthy thing it is that Lawyers should need Laws. 1 Timothy 5.
Dignus est operarius mercede sua. If they be learned, they deserve more, and
their desert must be answerable to their pains. I say no more but this. There
be many of known conscience, and grave, of whom I would wish the younger sort
to learn conscience, as well as Law. But the second fault is the greater in my
opinion, and that is their entertaining, and aduising of bad causes, or causes
of small moment. For bad causes, I have known some learned men that would give
no counsel with usurers, or bargains of unlawful gain. Likewise for slight
matters, and trifling quarrels, that stood more upon will, then reason; I have
known others, that would not be of counsel with such, nor take their money by
any means. But what the centumviral authority was in Augustus his time, to
visit courts of justice, and cull out all triuiall actions, and to force men to
an end whether they would or no; these have practiced before hand, that they
might never come so far, as to trouble a court. Mat. 5.
Blessed be the peacemakers. And this belongs principally to men of law. So
far be it from them to wait upon every man's passion for a little gain; and
to boulster up men's idle humors with calumnious bills, and answers, and
smothing of lies, more like to sophisters, then men of gravity; and all for
what will ye give me. He that aides the evil in their desires, is particeps
criminis. Be he counselor, or coursiter, Sheriff, or sheriffs men, who
execute for usurers, or quarrellous busybodies: Your Deuines will tell you,
(not I) that they sin as well as the parties, and are bound to restore.

The like may be said of executors to usurers, and to wrong doers. They be
subject to restitution as the testator was, if they exact, or execute in right
of his wrong. To you I may speak it; but to them, I do surdo canere. It is in
vain to tell them of it; the world is become incapable of this verity. And of
all the multitudes that offend herein, I can name but one that made conscience
of it. For when they die, they leave all to such as themselves, that will not
part with a groat, howsoever it were gotten. Yet one I knew, who was executor
to such a one, and refused to administer, but for me. For I asked him whether
he knew what he did, or no? Or whether he had not power in him now to right
many? Right said he? Who can tell when all will be righted whom he has
wronged. He is damned, if any be damned, and I will not meddle with ill gotten
goods. The more to blame you, (said I) you speak not according to knowledge.
How know you that he is damned, who dyed of so good a mind, as to make you
executor, that wants neither knowledge, nor will to make all even, that he
has done amiss. And therefore I told him, he ought, and must, and so he did,
and made such a restitution as has not been heard of in France.

I may not stand to vnrippe all things. Yet one thing more I may not omit.
The law of escheates is very beneficial in this kingdom, both to king, and
mean Lords, and requires in us much conscience to free us from injustice. Our
greediness after escheates is very sinful, especially upon matters of life,
and death. For in wishing the effect, which is felons goods, we wish the cause
also, which is felony, or treason. Our pastors tell us, it is not good for us
to take all we may by law. But as we be Lords, so much we be Chancellours,
and have our eye still at equity, and brotherly compassion. He that will take
all, is bound to keep wife, and children sometimes more then his own; or else
provide for them otherwise. For though their means be gone, yet they must be
fed. I speak not of open sins in this kind, as when a man shall pry into
othermens doings, even their own freeholders, and tennants, for love of that
they have, and not for justice. The rule of Saint Augustine is, that when we be
judges over our brethren, we must condole with them. Congemiscat says he, et
ad pariter conandum seinuitet, We ought to sigh together with them, and to
stir our selves to amendment, by that in them was amiss.

Much like to these are most informers, and promooters, who live upon
forfeitures, and spoil of others. I would have them know their sin, and save
their souls. I would have them beeseruants of justice, and not of cursed
lucre. Their wages is commonly a third part, but they make it more then the
whole many times. Worse then these are those who under color of nullum tempus
occurrit regi, Fall to searching records for old attainders, and sleeping
recognisances, to entitle the King, or themselves, and to trouble the subject,
so far forth; as he knows not whether he have any thing of his own, or
no. But see their conscience. For I speak only of the abuse. If it be so,
that they find for the subject, they say nothing. Luke 3.
The Scripture bids us disquiet no man, neminem concutieritis, Live not upon
thy brothers spoil. But what says he? I will not spare my father, if I can
get by it. Non eris criminator, nec susurro in populo, Leuit. 19.
Thou shall not raise a crime, or a whisper among the people. Let them look to
it and inquire whether this be not meant by them; Mar. 2. Luke 5.7.15 Cap. 2.
and whether these be not the Publicanes the Scripturespeaketh of, when it
joins the Publican always, and sinner together. A publican is called a
Publicando, that is to say of confiscating; as we read in Daniel, Domus
vestrae publicabuntur, Your houses shall be confiscate, and these be the
instruments of it. Many Princes, when they have come to their estates, have
laid their first animaduersion upon such as these, and have driven them out of
their Dominions with many stripes. Herodian. Suet in Tit. Domis
Titus moreover to the end there might be no use of them at all, made these
two laws. One was, because there were many laws for one thing, therefore if a
man had been sued upon any one of them, he should never be touched for the
rest. Another was, that if the ancestour were once dead, and a few years past,
the heir should never be charged with old matters.

I could enlarge my self much further upon this subject, if I would open the
injustice of every particular estate. But partly, they may all be reduced to
some of these I have spoken of; and partly are touched in the penal laws of
every country, which are given in charge at assizes, and sessions, for all men
to take notice of, that will live by a law. And therefore let this suffice to
make you see your danger, and the need ye have to advise with some body; and
often to ask about your private affairs, before your account grow too great,
and your clogge too heavy, in the sight of God. And how do ye know but these
may be the secret sins, which the Prophet teaches us to pray that we may be
cleansed of; Psalm. 50.
yet cleave so close to our love, and are so warranted by the practice of the
richer sort, that when we should look at our fault, we look quite over it,
and cannot find it of our selves? Ignorance is the mother of sin. If I have
brought you out of the one, ye may avoid the other with more ease. And thus
much in brief, for our private estates.

Now for our carriage toward the common, wherein a great part of our duty
consists, and is much-what forgotten, or neglected: I must have a word or
two. Where I cannot forget that noble saying of Leonidas King of Sparta; that
more we owe to our country, then to our own life. As he approved right well
by himself, and all his actions. I have told you, what your learned think
belongs to a good Christian: now hear what they say becomes good citizens,
or commonwealths men. That is to say such as are good to the common, love the
common, delight in common good, and prefer the same before their private, as
I will briefly show you. Ye have heard what they think of life; how little
it is to be regarded in respect of common welfare. Even so they tell us of
our goods, and estates, and give us one rule in stead of all; which I beseech
you to mark whether it be not of God, and most worthy our following. 2.2 ae,
q. 26.3.
Jn all worldly things (say they) which we are bound to wish to the common, and
to our selves, we are bound to prefer the common before our selves. They do
not say we may prefer; but we are bound, and sin if we do not.

Out of this rule comediuers noble conclusions, and fit for every man to
know. I will remember you of some few in stead of many. I may prefer my self
before the common to this house, or that manner, because I am not bound to wish
these things to the common. I may save my own horse from drowning before the
kings horse, if other danger ensue not, but loss of a horse. It is a common
case to defend our right against the King in lawful sort, and to hedge in our
grounds from the purlieus, if we have right so to do, though his game have
restraint by it. Otherwise, it is of his house, or palace where he dwells,
which I am bound to defend with loss of my own house in danger of fire. If my
storehouse adioyne to the public granary, I must save this before my own. My
single damage must not weigh with the public; I am bound to ruin mine own
house, to stop a fire from going further. All statutes and by-lawes made for
common good, we are bound to observe. And there is a curse due to wilful
breakers, as is to them that dig up dooles. Some think they satisfy with
paying the penalty. But laws were not made for the penalty, but for
conformity, that all may draw by a line. Laws intend not the punishment of a
few, but the good of all. And therefore all that be of one commonwealth, must
have one spirit, and the same the Lawmakers had. They ought not to set light
by laws, nor break them as they list, so they be not spyed. Yea more then
this, we should rather work our selves, and be still devising for common
good, and for them that come after, though we live not to see it.

But it is a wonder to see, how cross and contrary we be on this behalf. As
if laws belonged not to us, when they be made; or if we keep them, it is
more for fear, then love of the common. What a flourishing commonwealth
should we now have, if laws had been as duly observed, as gravely provided.
Or how would it yet flourish, if we would yet begin, and leave to be children
in this kind? Where one makes conscience to keep a good law, twenty break it;
and then as good no law. There is none will take benefit sooner then we, of a
high way mended, or a bridge new builded, or repaired. But when we come to
contribute, we draw back; or if they fetch gravel for it out of our
grounds, we resist, and swear, we will be even with them another time. How
far is this from common-wealths-men, or good men either? I will approve it,
he loves not God, that tenders not common good to his power. Aquinas. 1. 2 ae.
q. 92.1. ad 3.
Aquinas says, (and other Divines after him) Impossible est quod homo sit
bonus, nisi sit been proportionatus bono communi, He cannot be a good man,
that is not in good proportion to common good. That is to say, that rates not
himself, and ranks not himself for common good, in proportion to his means.
And our nation has been accounted most zealous in this kind, though few care
now, but for their own time. We may learn of Moors and African merchants
another while; Leo Afer.
who I hear are so forward for common good, that we scarce have the like of
them now adays amongst Christians. Yea who so opposite to God herein, as we
that be Christians?

Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 9.
Omnia omnibus factus sum, I am become all things to all men. What would he
have done if he had been rich? Col. 3.11. Ephesians. 1.
He that made himself common to all men's service, should not his purse have
been common also to the common good? Christ himself was omnia in omnibus. And
surely he that was so liberal of his blood, that all of us have part in it;
would he have been sparing of his goods toward us, if he had professed to
possess much? would he have preferred himself before the common, or taken
from commons as we do, without amends to the poor? We are made like to God
says Leo, Ser. 2.
that we may have in our selves a pattern how to imitate him; yet see how
different we be from God herein, who was all for every body, and we nothing
for any body, but our selves. The very Sun (I think) that shines to all, we
would ingrosse to our selves if we could, and make rent of it. How do we
imitate Christ in this? and yet we do in this, as we do in all. We make our
selves strangers to his Law in all things. We carry his imitation in our
hands to read of; but we have it not in our hearts to make use of. Verily, if
it were no more, but for imitating of God, and of Gods known servants; and
though ability were not great in us, yet our good will we should show in this
duty, and our inclining that way in what we can. The commonwealth should not
be so ready to ask of us, as we ready to give. Common-good not so ready to
require our service, as we ready to proffer, and perform, and glad that we
may stead it in any sort. And this has been the practice of our forefathers,
and ancestors, that have gone before us, as by the public works they have
left behind them, and our Chronicles are full of, and every towneship can give
testimony, it may appear.

And this if we cannot do after the best imitation; yet me think we should
do it for our honor, and reputation, Lib. 5. de ciu. cap. 15.
as Saint Augustine tells the Romans did. Priuatas res suas pro re communi, hoc
est pro repub. and pro eius aerario contemserunt, They despised their own for
the public good, and common treasury. And all their industry was, (if they
were good) vt aerarium esset opulentum, tenues res priuatae, That their
treasury might be rich, though their private were poor enough. And with this
agrees Salustius in catelinario, and Ammianus Marcellinus in his fourteenth
book.

And the contrary of this, was base, and odious in those days; especially in
great persons; who should be others examples, as that one instance may serve
instead of many. Where Valerius Ruffinus was put from the senate by the Censour
Fabritius, for buying eight score ounces of plate to his private use. And thus
it held (says Saint Augustine) until corruption came in, and brought in with
it the contrary, public egestatem, priuatim opulentiam, Aug. lib 5. de ciuit.
dei. cap. 12.
Weakness of common treasury, and greatness of private estates. Here began
forgetfulness of God, and of his blessed imitation; forgetfulness of honor,
and of all good order; which will not have the head to stand at courtesy of the
hand or foot; or the common to be at the mercy of the private, upon every
need or occasion: but rather the contrary, as they that will read, and mark,
shall see; that the richer the common was, the richer were ever the commons;
unless it were under Tyrants; and the richer that Princes were out of their
providence, without cause of exacting, the richer were the subjects, or at the
least, less wanting.

It is for every ones good that the common good thrive; and for this good, we
be all borne officers. No reasonable creature is exempted from this bond. His
sword in time of war, his purse, or other ability in time of peace. The
poorest can have no excuse, as far as in them does lie; much less they that
be of means. Who although they be not so wholly for the common, neither is it
required as the Romans were: yet most pitiful it is, if not sinful, how
hardly any thing comes from them, either for town charge at home, or for the
Church, or King. Touching all which as it were our part to be so forward of
our selves, as we should need no rating: so they that be learned hold, that
when it comes to rating, we may not hide our estates to lessen our charge, or
to lay the more upon others; which is a common sin amongst us. And when it
comes to paying, it is done so unwillingly, and vnreadily, as if they had
mighty wrong in it. I knew a merchant of late, whose ability was inferior to
none, his good will was less then most men's. I have heard officers complain
of him, how much they had to do, and how often they have attended him for a
mark charge, and could never get it of him, till they were ready to distraine
a fat ox for it, and then he turned to his man, and bid him pay the knaves.

It is a shame to tell what shifts we make to put of taxes, and subsidies when
they come, be they never so needful. Divines tell us two things about them.
One is on the subjects part, a readiness to perform. The other on the Taxers
part, that it be not out of covetousness, but of need. And if of need, yet
it must be regarded; that the burden light not upon the poorer sort, as the
tax of salt did, which Philip de Valoys imposed, making every man pay as much
as the rich. Or to lay tribute upon country necessaries, which we cannot be
without, or upon servants wages, or laborers earnings and such like. And if a
tax be doubtful, whether it be just or no, or not certain, we are bound to
pay it, and the public is to be preferred (some say) though other say no;
that melior est conditio possidentis, as it is in other cases of doubt,
between party and party. But my purpose is not to trouble you with doubts, and
questions. Lysten I beseech you to known truths, which learned men of the
best, do all agree upon, and will resolve you in.

And because we speak of public estates, and private; it is to be deduced
out of the grounds aforesaid, that both common and private, are to attend their
Sovereigns estate; being a thing the whole good of a kingdom depends on,
as much as may be. And therefore where they hold it dangerous to our souls,
to have much lying by us, as I will show you anon: Yet otherwise in kings, to
be rich and well stored with treasure, it is both honorable and necessary,
and they can hardly have too much. Nauar. Pom. Let
They must multa possidere, that must multa impendere, as one advised
Constantine. So manifold be the charges that press them daily, so infinite the
pipes, that suck still, and draw from their cesterne, to make it dry:
especially in this age, and these times, when all things are at the higest; and
the wisest that are, and that live most prouidently have somewhat to do to
keep out of debt. Kings much more in their Chaos of occasions, which the
subject never feels, nor thinks of, until the Sovereign be in debt, and
their aid be required for contribution.

It has been an old prayer amongst us; that we may live out of debt, and
deadly sin. But a vain prayer, if our selves put not to it our helping hand,
and the best endeavor we can. We are bound to pray it for our selves, we
are bound to pray it for the common. And particularly for the head of the
common. For soul business as I said before, we must prefer our selves
before all men. And therefore my rule was, in all temporal good, we must
prefer the common. Peace and prosperity which are temporal blessings, we
must wish to the common, before our selves. Poverty, and debt are temporal
evils in all; but in Princes most intolerable. And therefore a kings estate
herrein must be preferred before our own, whenever it happens. There, must
every man's hand, and heart work together; there must duty, and love contend
which shall out-strippe the other; there must we apply our wits, their our
abilities, even for Gods love, if we owed our Prince none. How much more if he
be mild, and clement, and one according to our hearts, good to all, hurtful to
none. And in so doing, we do good to ourselves; the King of heaven will
reward us, though kings of earth never hear of our names.

And I speak it the rather to inform your consciences against this eating
evil of the west. For it is hardly matched all over the world besides. That
which heathen princes compel, and command, we have much a do to be
entreated. That which out of Christian knowledge we are bound to offer, we
make dificultie to be drawn to. That which our tenants do for us most
readily, though it cost them their best cow in their yard, to uphold their
Landlord at a need; we think much to do to him, that is Landlord to us all.
We should teach heathens obedience, and they teach us. It is absurd to see how
we be haled to common good. We were yesterday rich, and made our brags. To day
when we come to be assest, we are poor, and make believe we have nothing, or
not a foot of freehold; as one of the richest subjects in our nation I heard
say once, when he was charged with a couple of lances.

O how sparing would such men be of their bodies and blood (says Boccace) if
their country should need it, Lib. 25.
that are so near themselves in their worldly pelf. They stretch themselves
far to bestow their daughters magnificently, rather then ciuilly, and to
furnish a bride chamber for a Prince, rather then for a private body. They
spare for no cost to set out themselves with sattens and silks, their wives
with bracelets, an borders of gold, and pearl. Their horse with trapping, and
furniture of the best. Their hawks, and hounds shall want no cost of keeping,
and manning, yet can they find nothing for the common. Fools, that we are,
what will become of us if the common weal be in shipwreck? What will great
kindred avail, if the commonwealth fail? How will peace be maintained,
wrongs righted, or private good secured? Who will there be to give us justice,
Quis dabit iura, si publicum cessabit subsidium; Take away common aid and
subsidy, and take away all owner-shippe from all men. Thus far he, and more
to like effect. It is absolutely against duty, and policy, to do as we do,
and God will plague us for both at once. That it is against duty, I have told
you already, and if ye will ask your learned, they will tell you much better,
1. Pet. 2.
regem honorificate. What honor is it we do him, or our selves, to deny him
public aid, or to shrink in our heads, or to make such beggarly suites as
we do, to be discharged?

It is also against policy; for we must allow them to be Kings, and full of
Prerogative. Both Gods law, and man's law gives it them. They are patriae
parents, and what the child is bound unto toward his parents, we are bound
as much to our Princes, and they say more. And therefore if we forget our
selves toward them, when occasions bring them behind hand, and they are loath
to urge our unwillingness: can we blame them, if they do what they can out of
their prerogative Royal, to help themselves? In places where Kings have no
lands, yet they live like Kings, by their prerogative: and if they have lands
also, yet they loose no prerogative though they use it not always, but at a
need. And moreover, if subjects be unkind, they spoil their Princes, and
will make them do many things, that they may, and would not; take all
forfeitures and escheates, close their hands to all pardons and immunities,
enclose forests, and chases, and all their wastes to themselves, give ear to
all informers, and promooters, that shall any way entitle them, and that which
is worst they will make them sell and alienate the revenues of the crown:
which is so unfitting a thing to a kings estate, that subjects ought to take
notice of it, and make means rather for his relief. Much less ought they to
rob kings, and pull from kings; especially if they be officers in any sort.
It is next to sacrilege, and robbing of Churches, to supplant a King. A kings
officer had need to be one of his joints, if it might be. For nothing so
consolidates the greatness of a king, as trusty, and true officers; and
nothing soooner sinks the same, then to bore holes in his ship. Remember I
forewarne you, if ye chance to bear office.

If a king be poor and unable, can the subject be secure? Is he not a prey to
his enemies, and we with him? Or do we not know by our selves, and our own
debts, how immense will his be quickly, if they be not quit betimes? He that
sees a king in debt, sees but half a king, to that he is, and would be if he
were free. His bounty is stop, his rewards stopped, and much grace stopped, that
would flow like baulme from him toward his subject; and many a good thing
unperformed by him, that would help and enrich many. If a king be in plenty,
all the care he has, is, that his subject may have also plenty. But if
otherwise, all his care will be for himself, and all the good a king can do
is hindered, or rather buried before it be hatched. I cannot speak too much of
the sores that do ensue the indebted estate of kings. Our flourishing France
had a costly trial of it once or twice in my memory, and was in great hazard
by it, if timely aid had not come. Her headache made her cry heartily, caput
meum doleo, 4. Reg. 4.
caput meum doleo; and if God had not helped her when time was, she could not
have been raised again without miracle.

Two great faults I note in the subject about this affair. One is an unworthy
tergiuersation, or backwardness in him toward the common good, with a base
conceit he has, that all is too much that goes that way, never reflecting upon
his duty to God, and his country, nor to the ease of those that be not so
well able as he. He will lay all upon his tenants if he can, and have all
his rents come in clear to him. And the richer they be, the further off most
of them, as may be seen by their carriage. The other fault is delay; where if
that were done at the first, which must be done at the last, when it is grown
double and trebble with lingering; it would have been much better; where now
it is scarcely seen. Interest increases, and new charges grow, before the
old be discharged; and by that time one subsidy be paid in, two more will
not suffice. Which punishes also the subject more, then had he drawn his
purse wide, and cleared all at the first. And therefore I commend them of
Vtica, when Julius Caesar came, and imposed a great matter upon them, to be
paid at six payments in three years; they made him answer out of their love,
or height of mind, that they would pay all down, and so they did the same
day. Naucl.
I think three hundred persons paid all.

Once well done, is twice done. But as matters be handled, ten times done is
scarce once done. Before the kingshould fell land, or diminish his estate; who
would not make the hundredth part of his means, and give it him down, rather
then make an every years charge of it, as we do, and the king not much the
better by it? And this would quit a million or two suddenly for once in a
kings life time, and do no man hurt. And how much better this, to give part
rather then all, or half, or a third part of ones Rents, as they did to
Ladislaus king of Boheme, and Hungary; and as in extremity we are bound, though
God defend it should be needed. But I have read of the like in other
countries; namely once in Rome, under the Consuls, Liuie. 26. Florus.
Leuinus and Marcellus, when there was not a man from the highest to the
lowest, who brought not into the treasury all his gold and silver he had; and
left themselves little else, but what they wore on therr belts and buckles, and
rings on their fingers. An other time, they of Marseiles did the like unasked,
Just. 43.
to aid the Romans at a need, and left not themselves a piece of gold,
either in public, or private.

Neither is it fit for us to judge the State at our pleasure, when matter of
burden is propounded, our Sovereign being wise, and bearing conscience
toward us. They sit near the Sun, and know what must be, better then
we. They are wise, and more experienced then we, and their part is in the
burden, as well as ours. It belongs to us to listen willingly, and perform
gladly. 2. Cor. 9.
Hilarem datorem diligit deus, God loves a cheerful giver, and blesses him no
doubt accordingly. And the reason why our ancestors thriued better then we,
and lived more plentifully, Saint Augustine imputes to this, Quia deo decimas,
Hom. 48. de Sanctis.
regi censum dabant, Because tithes they paid to God, and tribute to the king.
Others pay also at this day, but they do it not willingly, and God regards
more what the heart does, then what the hand does.

And therefore whosoever be Justices, or Assessours on the bench; our love and
conscience must be of the quorum. Let mutiny and turbulency find no place
with ingenuous spirits. Christ himvelfe made means to contribute to superiors
for our example, having himself neither lands, nor goods. And so would we, if
we had but love in us. A dead horse is no horse; no more is dead love any love.
And where should we show it more, then to our Prince, in whom all causes of
love concur together most commonly? Some wear their kings in their hat, some
in a jewel about their neck, and we set up his picture in our eye where we
eat, and drink; we praise him, and set out his virtues, and run out to see
him, and bid God save him, as if we had never seen him before. We pray for
him in private, and public; and he is all our glory till we come to part
with any thing; and then the king knows not me say they; I shall never have
thanks of him, I have children and charge, the king had more need give me.
Some say it, some think it, and we see not who looks on the whilst. Even he
that judges both subject, and Sovereign, and will not suffer his anointed
unrevenged of any indignity. But I will go forward.

I come now to your Superfluum I spoke of. A thing that is not ill in it self,
if men do not love it too much, and seek it not so eagerly as they do. I
will tell you in a word what your Pastors think of it, and then conclude. The
scripture bids you; Tobit 4.
If ye have much, give much. Abundanter tribue. If ye have little, give
little, but let it be volenter, willingly. Christ says, Mat. 25.
we shall be damned for not doing some things. Which all the fathers understand
to be the works of mercy, both spiritual, and temporal. The spiritual are
comprehended in these verses. Aduize, reprove, good comfort give,
Bear with him, pray for him, and forgive.
All which six, as well temporal persons, as spirituail, are bound to do;
especially the second, which is brotherly correction. No man may forbear to
admonish his neighbor of his offense, if ye be not more likely to do hurt
by it, or be likely enough to do him good, and no body else will.

Which rule alone I must tell you, when I well considered; it made me the
bolder to adventure on this days charge, though better becoming other manner
of persons then my self, if they were at hand. But being so that my hap
above others has been here to speak about such business; although I have
no cause to admonish, or touch in particular any one for the enormities
aforesaid; yet by the way of praemonition I give a brotherly warning to all,
(as by this rule I think my self bound) that they fall not into the same. For
according to this rule I find it written in another place, vnicuique mandauit
Deus de proximo suo, Eccl. 17.
every man has charge in charity over his neighbor. That is to say, either by
preventing evil before it come, as I do now; or by correcting evil if it be
past, which I have no cause in any of you. And this I hold to be the chief,
or only spiritual work, that all persons alike are bound unto. But as for
temporal works which was the other part of my division, we are bound to
more. And therefore for our better memory, they are put into verse thus. Feed,
visit sick, redeem out of thrall,
cloth, harbor harbourlesse, give burial.
All set down by our Savior himself, but the last, Mat. 25.
which is burial: and all these or most of them we must do upon pain of
hell fire. Ite in ignem eternum says he, Go ye into everlasting fire. For
ye visited me not, ye clothed me not, etc.

Of spiritual works more then I have said, I say nothing; they belong to
Divines and Preachers; who are the best instruments with learning, and spirit,
to manage our souls. Of corporal works also I have not much to say, more
then of the instrument and means for them, which is gold and silver; and which
we either have, or lay for more then they, and therefore are bound to do them
more then they. For there is not a corporal work except that of visiting, but
requires some charge, and outward ability. Every body cannot redeem
prisoners; yea who make prisoners but rich folk. An hundred dye in a year
sometimes out of one prison, as many ready to starve without shirt to their
back, or bread to eat. Many are ashamed to beg, or to complain and bring
in their winding sheet when they come in, unable to buy necessaries, and much
less to pay debts. But this is their manner of redeeming prisoners, to lay
them faster if they can, or to abridge them any comfort, that a prison may
afford. Let rich men and prison-keeprs take heed of this, if ever they look
to prosper with that they have. For if any should perish thus through their
wilfulness, it is murder before God; and if they want maintenance, they are
bound by this precept to maintain them. The rich men (I say) for deteining the
unable, if they think them so. Prison keepers for looking no better to their
hospitalls; for every Iaile is an hospital, as well as a prison. And if
begging will not serve, they must find them bread, and drink at least, or
give up their office.

God will charge us one day, that we did not some of these things, which we
were able to do, and had good means for. Vnicuique mandauit Deus, as I said
before. And [mandauit] implies a duty. It is not as we will, but we are bound
to it; as it appears by the penalty which is laid upon it. Else why should
we be damned for not doing, if we were not bound to perform? I would have you
to understand these matters rightly, being the maine point of my this days
charge, which I have, and am to deliver you. Ye have one notable error amongst
you, that if ye have hundreds, or thousands lying by you, you think all is
your own, that is left at the years end; and if the world do follow you a
little, ye think God loves you straight, and ye begin to follow it. Then
comes in hourding, and heaping, and loathnesse to depart with it. And this,
because it is not usury, or theeuery, and we come well by it; we think it all
our own, when it is not. Remember that saying. Qui festinat ditari, non erit
innocens, He that hasteneth to be rich, Prou. 28.
can hardly be innocent. For either he comes not well by it as he should, or
uses it not well when he has it, or thinks all to be his own, and
forgettes his Stewardship.

We think all to be our own I say, and so it is against all men but God, and
the poor. If the poor want, it is none of ours. Howbeit, such be the times,
and so far be we grown from the true conceit of this duty, that we commonly
make but a tush at it. They knew it better in the primitive Church, then now we
do; as appeared by the voluntary contributions, and often gatherings for the
afflicted, and them that wanted. They were called Collectae, and were paid most
readily without long asking. But afterward as devotion grew slack, Bishops
were driven to send out their warrants to compel them to charity. And in these
latter times, there be temporal laws to enforce us to so needful a work.
We are driven to pay by the acre, and yet it comes full hardly from us for
want of true knowledge of our bond on this behalf. Which necessary knowledge,
even so necessary as any can be, I would resuscitate as it were, and raise
again in our souls, and spirits, that we may not perish for want of this
love, and pious affection. Which God himself not counsels but commands,
not requires but exacteth, not advises but strictly charge us, that it do
not decay in us, but be always burning.

Saint John says there is no love in us, 1. Ioh. 3.
if we have the substance of the world, and will see our brother want. Behold
here a flat judgment against us, and yet we think our selves secure having
store by us, and will not part with it. We can help, and will not, we have
the substance of the world, and yet we will see him want. Ye have heard
already, that whatsoever our profession be, we must not be ashamed of the
Gospel; our Glory must be in Gods holy word. We are bidde^ to love one
another. Saint John the divine of divines says plainly, We love not, if we
have the substance, and power it not forth. And what follows then but loss of
our souls. It is not I that gives the censure, but the written word gives it,
and it will not be avoided. If we keep our substance to our souls, we love
not, 1. Ioh. 2.1.
if we love not we shall not live. And this S. John himself says, he writes
unto them, to the end they may not sin. What glory now in your superfluum?
what glory in your abundance? what glory in your substance, if it be provided
you to damn you?

Let us come now to our deuines, and best expositers. And see whether they will
help us? No. They sing all one song. The word of God is eternal, sooths no
man, is subject to no mutation. It was so in the beginning, and must be so to
the ending. They tell us first out of the prophecy of Scripture, Mat. 25.
that the poor we shall have always with us. And there be reasons for it,
besides authority. The first reason is natural. For the poor come nearest the
nature, and fashion of the first age, when all were in equality, all cladde
alike, all in like business of husbandry, and bodily labor, without
distinction of nobility and popularity, riches and poverty, as was most
congruent to the law of nature; and so have continued from age to age to this
very day, the truest pattern of our primitive estate, or golden world. And
therefore we may not contemn them, Thucid. 2.
or think their estate shameful. For it is no shame to be poor (said
Pericles) but to be idle, and do nothing whereby to live.

An other reason is the corrupt nature of man, who strives to draw all to him,
and would leave his fellows little, if he could. Like them that play at dice,
where one gettes all with his fortune or falsehood, and leaves the rest
pennilesse. A third reason is moral, or political. For the poor are
profitable, and were it not for them, we should do our work our selves. Also
many of these be weak, lame, blind, aged, or sickely, and cannot work. A
fourth reason is supernatural. For if there were no poor, there would not be
such matter of charity, or such store of it, as there is daily amongst us. And
charity is one of the Theological virtues commended to us often in Scriptures,
and without which we know not whether we love God or no. For it is a notable
sign that we love God, when we love the poor for God.

In which respect, not to deny the poor also their due commendation, and to
acknowledge the good we receive by their means; there needs no other
testimony of it, then the promised blessings belonging thereunto, out of holy
writ. Psalm. 40.
Beatus homo, Blessed is he, that looks upon the poor, and needy; God will
deliver him in the evil day. God will keep him from his enemies, and will
help him, at his hour of death. These be high benefits. And in another place,
Pro. 11.
Qui diuidunt propria ditiores fient. Lo here a temporal blessing also. They
that distribute of their own, shall be richer by it. And in another place; he
that gives to the poor, Prou. 28.
shall never want. Besides this, which is greatly for the glory of poverty,
Mat. 25.
God makes himself free of their company when he names himself among little
ones, saying; what ye have done to these little ones, ye have done to me. And
what ye have not done to these little ones (whom he called needy before) ye
have not done to me.

Verily, the poor in some sort may be compared to a Merchants ship, that is
kept most part under water. And the more ye put into it at your launching, the
more profit ye make at your landing. Psalm. 112.
They are like a fat soil about a city, called in the scripture, soil and
manure, the more silver ye sow in it, the thicker it comes up again. 2. Cor.
9. Esaias 48.
They that sow in blessings, shall reap in blessings. The Prophet Esaias
compares poverty to a furnace of fire, because it dryes up the marrow of a man
with care, and thought, and scorches the very intrailes of him with extremity
of want: this fire also, the more meat ye hang on, or lay down before it,
the better ye shall fare, when ye come to sit.

I say nothing here of the good of poor men's prayers, which God is inclined
to hear in all our business. Psalm. 21 and 101. Psalm. 10.
Non spreuit, neque despexit deprecationem pauperis, God despises not the poor
bodies prayer. Oculi eius in pauperem recipient, his eyes are fastened on the
poor. Yea as the poor do live by the rich, or should do; so the rich do
live by the poor, or may do; that is to say, by their good prayers. For the
rich give earthly food out of their abundance: and the poor give heavenly
food out of Gods ordinance; Luk 16.
who has made them our entertainers in his kingdom (as silly as they seem
here) to receive us, and welcome us to those heavenly tabernacles, when we
come there. Neither do I speak what we loose by them, if we neglect them.
Prou. 28.
For qui despicit deprecantem, sustinebit penuriam, He that despises him that
asks of him, what is his reward? he shall come to be poor himself, he, or
his in the end. Which I wish with all my heart that every good body would take
heed of, before they come to make proof of. The poor we shall always have
with us. And this is our first ground.

An other ground is, that this want of theirs must be supplied out of our
Superfluum. Luc. 11. Verse. 40. Luke 3. ibidem.
For it is written quod superest date, Give of that which remains to you over
and above your necessaries. So, qui duas habet tunicas det non habenti, If you
have two coats, give to him that has not. Et qui habet escas similiter, Do
the like by your meat, give of that you have to spare. And this is not a
counsel, but a precept, as may appear by S. John Baptist in the same place.
Where if we do not these things, he compares us to a tree, that bears no
fruit, and must therefore be cut down, and thrown into the fire. And which to
prevent, he that has two coats (says he) let him give one. And for this
cause Saint Augustine tells us plainly. in Psalm. 47.
Res alienae possidentur cum superflua retinentur, All that we have more then
enough, he says directly is none of ours. He charge us in a manner with
stealth, and theft, if we keep our overplus from the poor. So Saint
Chrysostom, and Saint Hierome interpret the words God, and Mammon. We may not
serve God and goods gathering (say they) more then we need. And pretense of
need will not serve. To the hourder also it was said, this night shall thy
soul be taken from thee, Luke 12. verse. 20.
quia sibi thesaurisauit non deo, because he heaped for himself, and not for
God; that is to say, not for the poor.

And yet in this, your pastors favor you in what they may; and do not tie
you to the supply of every need, that occurres. For they distinguish of time,
person, and place. In time of Scarcity, and dearth, more care is required, then
when there is more plenty. For person and place, our country man must be
preferred before a stranger, our kinseman before an other not of kin, our
own parish before an other parish, and this by law of neighborhood, and
vicinitie. And in all these, regard must be had of them that be of Gods
household, or household of faith, before them that be without, Gal. 6.
by Saint Paul's own rule. Lastly they distinguish of Superfluum, as they did
before of necessaries. For as there be necessaries of nature, for keeping one
alive only, with broken meat and patcht clothes; and necessaries of estate,
which are clothes, and dwelling convenient: so be there also superfluous of
nature, when a man has more then will suffice nature; and superfluous of
estate, and person, when he has more then he has present need of for his
estate, and person.

A poor man for example has meat, and torn clothes about him, but not to
keep him sweet, and wholesome; here is nature served, but no conueniency. An
other has convenient clothing and abode, but wantes work, or means to set
up trade; here is another necessity supplied, but not the third, for he must
not live idly. The first is most-what supplied at every man's door out of
their Superfluum of nature. And if they cannot supply it otherwise, they must
make Superfluum, and eat less, rather then a poor creature should starve at
his door. The second is a great necessity also, and must be supplied out of
some little Superfluum of our estate; and some have given their cloakes off
their backs at such a need, and have been greatly blessed for it. The third
which are ordinary necessities, they hold we are not bound to supply, unless
we have some store of Superfluum. So as if we have more then enough for our
selves, we are bound to supply those ordinary necessaries in them, whom we
see, or hear do need. Idcirco te voluit abundare Deus (says Leo) vt per te
alius non egeat.

This is the doctrine which your learned upon very good grounds do hold, and
teach. And when they speak thus of Superfluum or overplus, their meaning is of
that only which we possess over and above that which is needful to our most
decent estate we live in. All that, they say we cannot call ours, and it must
not be retained, but it must be employed in some good and pyous uses, or to
supply the ordinary wants of others. Neither does this bond of ours arise they
say, out of the necessity of the poor only, as in alms it does, where the
need is extreme; 2. 2 ae. q. 32. ad 5.
but out of the very nature of Superfluum, and Justice distributive; whereof By
this only title we become dispensers, because it is more then we need our
selves. And so much Saint Augustine insinuates unto us, Tract. 50. in Ioh.
both by the place aforesaid; and also in another place, saying: tibi
superflua, domino necessaria. As who should say because thou need them not
thy self, they are God almighties, who has infinite use of them in his
members. Many a younger brother borne to little or nothing, would be thy
champion, or beadsman, for a little of that which thou could spare. Many a
poor gentleman decayed by loss, or misfortune, would hold up his hands day
and night for thee. Some ruinated house might rise again by thee, and give
thee the style of her founder, and rayser. Much evil is in the world, and many
badde, courses attend good natures through only want; which a cast of thy
pitiful eye might easily help to thy eternal comfort. And if any of these
works be too great for us, he will not ask so much of us, but only in
proportion to our abundance; and by no other title, but of our abundance.

And it stands greatly with natural reason, if we mark it. For as the
waters of Nilus do ouerflowe, and divide themselves once or twice a year unto
all the valleys, and meddowes thereabouts, to make them fruitful out of their
abundance; even so it is where superfluum is, and where plenty ouerflowes the
banks of our own need, it is made for the leuelling, and making up of low
places; and poor men's wants either public or private, are but channels, and
trenches to direct it, and lead it where it should go. And no doubt, but if
God out of his Lordly power over us, should but use the ministry of an Angel
about this so needful a level; his justice would fetch it out again, as fast
as we hold it, that every man and woman might have enough, and yet the owner
never want it.

God did the like once, as we read in Exodus, and it had been our case right,
Exodus 16.18
if Manna there had been money, and and not meat. For he that gathered most
of that Manna, had use of no more, then he that gathered least; and he that
gathered least, had as much as he. Wherein God showed us then, in a figure,
what he would now have us to do with our money. He showed it us then indeed
by miracle. But this miracle in the old law, Saint Paul would have us supply by
conscience in the new law, to make this equality between rich, and poor, as I
touched in the beginning. The thing which he requires of us, is this, and no
more; voluntas prompta secundum id quod habet, 2. Cor. 8.14
A ready will (says he) according to that we have. This is the conscience he
requires of us, and commands. And as it was with them that gathered Manna, He
that had most, had not Superfluum, and he that had least; wanted not, Qui
multumhabuit non abundauit, and qui modicum, non minorauit this is Saint Paul's
own allusion: ibid.
even so it must be with us. Our will is the miracle must do it, to make a
level between the poor, and us. Our ready will is it that must divide it.
Our compassionate heart must be Gods Angel here, to distribute it, before it
come to rust.

For as Saint Basil and S. Ambrose say very well; Ser. ad diuites auaros. Ser.
81. Aquin. q. 66 art. 7.
If they that abound, were not bound, to bestow it again upon them that are
needy, and poor; God were unjust in his division of things amongst us, to
give some more then enough, and to some nothing, or less then enough, when all
had enough in the beginning, and none had more then other, but all was common.
And of this mind I verily think, there is not a covetous man in the world but
would be of, if he came to taste once what poverty is; whereupon the learned
argue thus: No man can say that God is unjust; therefore no man can say, that
this is his own, if it be more then enough. Not that any man can take it from
him perforce; for that were villainy, and theft; but that the owners are bound
to dispense it, or dispose it, where there is need.

Far be it from God to be unjust. For though he give too much one way, yet he
makes it even an other way; Like to a tender father, who leaves all he has to
the eldest, with charge notwithstanding, that he be a father to the rest, and
that his brothers, and sisters want not: who notwithstanding, if they chance to
want, and the eldest forget himself; yet the father did his part, and woe be
to the elder. Even thus it fares with every rich man. I see no difference. God
gives a purse in his hand, and a precept in his heart with it, I was naked, I
was hungry, I was harbourlesse, or friendlesse, and in a word, I was poor, and
comfortless, and ye looked not at me. These be his younger brothers, that must
not want by him. And therefore look what we swell by Gods gift, we come
down again by his law. How much the gift raises us, the law curbeth us. And
many a worthy body in the world, has been most glad to be rid of the one,
that he might be eased of the other. Like honest receivers, and collectours
for the king; who to quit themselves of care, and cumber, have been content to
loose their fees, and to resign to others. Now what could God do more for
this equality but make a law? what can Princes and policy do, but innact,
and command. And if men will not observe, whose fault is it? God gives not man's
Law, but conscience-Law, the greatest binder that is. And we read it every day
in our poor brothers and sisters forehead, that we may not forget it. And
therefore if we will not do it, at our peril be it.

True it is, this law has been better known to our consciences then now it
is, and ye should seldom have heard of coffers, and bags full, when one was
dead. And good people would have lamented, and wept over them that dyed so, as
we are wont to do over them, that kill themselves. Hence come so many vaes
from godly people against rich folk, and hourders, that scrape, and rend, and
are pitiless. Hence groans, and plaints of many a pious person for there
friends, and kinsfolk, that leave no better comfort behind them, then such a
damnable sign. And therefore Saint James gives us warning of it aforehand.
Agite nunc diuites plorate vlulantes; Now weep o ye rich folk, and howl in
your myseries, Iac. 5.
which ye cannot avoid. Ye heap anger against your selves in the latter day.
And he tells us the cause of this anger; which is keeping of Superfluum by us.
For thus he concludes his inuectiue. The ruste of your gold, Ibid. v. 3.
and silver shall be witness against you, says he. And how comes this rust,
but of long lying by us? Behold here an other Judgment against hourding. Ye
hard an other even now out of Saint John.

A third judgment may be deduced out of Saint Paul; where he calls it
Idolatry to be a hourder. His words are auarus, quod est idolorum seruitus.
Ephesians. 3.5.
And I call this word auarus in this place an hourder in english, because it is
meant by hourders, and Scripture has no proper word for hourding but auaritia.
Theft which is a kind of covetousness is called furtum. Usurers are properly
called Fenoratores; extortioners are here called Rapaces. Luc. 7. 1. Co. 5.11.
Every one of these has his proper name but hourding; which is here therefore
called by the general name auarus, for want of another word. And to this
interpretation S. Paul's comparison leads us very fitly, when he calls it
Idolatry. For an Idol is set up and stirs not, no more does their money. An
idol is commonly made of metal, so is there money of gold, and silver. The
keeping and holding of it is called here Idolatry in respect of the much
making of it, or hiding of it, as Rachel did, that none may come at it but
themselves. It is idolatry in regard of the honor done to it, which is due to
God. For though they know it is not God, nor dare adore it for God; yet they
love it altogether, as they should love God; that is to say, with all their
heart, with all their soul, and leave to God but a little.

It is called idolatry also in the other sense. 1. Reg. 5.
For when God comes in place, the idol Dagon falls to the ground. Even so when
grace comes, hourding breaks her neck. Then swelling bags begin to leake, and
massy heaps fall in pieces. The metal melts as the heart melts, till all be
divided into portions, and go where it should go. Some such examples there be
of true repe^ters, though very few; but many more might be, if men were not
made hard like metal, with looking at metal; as the Liuonians were turned to
wolves, with often gazing at wolves. S. Paul makes no better of these horders,
the^ excommunicate persons. 1. Cor. 5. h.
For he will not have us converse with the^, nor so much as eat in their
company. They be rightly called, auari quasi eris auidi, or money gripers; auari
quasi amari, for their bitterness toward the poor; auari quasi auersi, they
turn their backs to a body, that looks poor, and thin on it. And yet
because they wrong none in getting, they will not see their fault in keeping,
and are in danger therefore of damning.

Howbeit, Genesis 14.
there is none of these judgments, that ever touched holy Abraham, who was
dives auri, et argenti. For he kept a great house, and relieved many with it.
Three hundred and eighteen the Scripture speaks of, that were fighting men,
besides women, and children, all bredde and brought up says Josephus in his
own house. lib. 1. ca. 11 1. Par. 28.
These touched not David, who heaped such a mass of treasure for the house of
God, which his son was to build, and he might not. These hardly touch
Princes, or noble men of great expenses as I said before; nor Magistrates, or
Prelates, who have great riches, if they be good men withal, and as ready to
pour it out again, as fast as it came in, to the relief of many. Neither
touch they any other, be they never so rich of Gods blessings, so they be
humble withal, and thinking store to be a burden, will take advise, and be
governed, where they ought, and are directed.

If a man have a years revenue lying by him, the matter is not great, and it
may be fitting for him. But to have many years gatherings moulding by him, I
never yet heard or read of any good man, but one; and him it never did good
either dead, or alive. And that was Narses, General to Justinian for the west.
He is touched with no fault but hourding. For he was otherwise a man both
humble, and valiant, and no badde man to the poor. He left so much wealth in
a cesterne under ground, that it could not be carried out in many days after
it was found. But the Emperor made a good work of it; for he gave it almost
all away to the poor. And therefore I commend Belisarius much better, who was
the other General for the east at the same time, and saw the bestowing of his
hugeriches himself upon such as were of desert, and other pious uses, and
hospitals for the poor. Our nation and country also has been, and still is
as much beholding to such benefactours as any; and their names are memorable in
towns, and cities where they abide. But especially those I say, that do what
they will do in their life time, and not at their death only, when they can
hold it no longer themselves.

This argument (my good friends) may seem as to you, but vain, who I know are
little troubled with this kind of sin. And yet ye have good means when ye
come home to rise and raise good fortunes. But the due consideration of
tempting riches of the one side (which we must dearly answer for if we have
them) and of pinching poverty on the other side, which but few care to comfort,
or afford a good look on; does teach us to pray thus, Prou. 30.
and it ought to be al our prayer. Diuitias et mendicitatemne dederis mihi, sed
tantum victui meo tribue necessaria. As one should say, Lord let not me be
rich, nor clog me with Superfluum; neither let me be in beggars estate, nor
distract me with want, or misery, only give me necessaries, and I ask no
more. If riches come, I have but an office of charge by it, and more care I
must have to bestow them well, then happily they be worth. If I be poor, I
cannot pray quietly for thinking of my wants. Give me a mean therefore
between both (Lord) that I be not tempted to deny thee (as it is said) in the
same place, ne illicear ad negandum. ibid. verse. 9.
And it may be I shall deny thee with hourding, if I be rich; or with
stealing, if I be poor.

And thus when our Pastors teach us, we must not think they jest with us, but
show us the right way we must walk to dye securely. There calling is to know
what is good for us better then our selves, and what is right and equity in all
things. This law of conscience I say is it, that makes all even, which neither
Solon nor Lycurgus ever knew of, to imprint in men's minds. And which if they
had, or that the Spirit of God had come within the element of natural
understanding; Philosophers, and Orators would have urged us to this, as well
as they. And yet many of them have practiced the very same, in their course of
life, just as ours do teach us. They contemned riches, or poured them out when
they had them, content with enough and no more. Such as Crates, Anaxagoras,
Zeno, Philoxenus, and all the rest almost; not one of them rich, or that sought
after it. Demonax would take no care for meat or drink, but when he was hungry
he went in, where he saw the next door open, and took a pitta^ce. Your
excellent Poets, Homer, Ennius, Plautus, Martial, and others, who had wits to
command riches; yet were they poor men, content only with inward contentment,
let outward things go. And to come nearer our word, Empedocles thought nothing
more Honorable, then contempt of Superfluum. The same said Chilon one of the
seven wise. Possess no more then ye need said he.

And of this opinion might seem to be the greatest worthies, almost that ever
were, if they were not over ambitious. Such as Cimon of Athens, Phocion,
Aristides, Lamachus, Epaminondas, Fabritius, Menenius; who either refused
always what was given them, or divided their massy spoils amongst there
countrymen that wanted; and left not many of them so much as would bury them,
but were buried at the common charge. And among these, Epaminondas aforesaid, I
know not whether he were a greater Soldier, or Philosopher, but we find him a
great lover of poverty; one that would neither borrow of any, nor take of gift,
except it were for others need. He thought most basely of covetousness, or
hourding; and said so vile a thing as it, could never take such root in us,
but by ill education. He gives us also a medicine for it. The same (says he)
that is good against raging lust. Let us bar our selves sometimes of lawful
pleasure, and we shall avoid unlawful the better: even so said he of
Covetousness. We must forbear lawful gain sometimes if we will not be
tempted of that is unlawful. We must not be always listening after
bargains; which if we be, he held it impossible to be just, and virtuous. And
by this means he brought Pelopidas the Duke of Thebes, a marvelous rich man,
to be a great contemner of riches, and an imbracer of poverty. Whereby he
raised many worthy men, and relieved numbers that wanted, and made the common
to flourish out of his superfluum, although he had children of his own.

Such an other was Scipio the pattern of all military prudence, and honor;
who had the treasure of many nations to dispose of, yet left no more when he
dyed, then three and thirty pound weight of silver, and two of gold. Yea what
left Pericles behind him, more then what his father left him, notwistanding
his forty years greatness among the Athenians? What left Cato minor? what
Phocion, who might have been the richest in Athens, if he would have taken
what was offered him by Alexander, and others? But he would not, no not so
much as for his children, or family. And I have heard the like of an English
Chancellor, who out of all his offices, and superfluities that had passed his
hands, he made up his hundred mark a year (which his father left him) but an
hundred pound to leave to his heir. I say nothing of Plato, Plutarke, Seneca,
whose works are extant, and breath out nothing but contempt of that, which we
strive to rende so much one from another.

What should I speak of the Tuberones in Rome; all gentlemen of a noble house,
but decayed; yet lived most contentedly sixteen couple of them together, upon
one little farm, with much poverty and pains taking, and never sought for
more. No more did Marcus Regulus, or Quintus Cincinatus; the one content with
poor seven acres to keep his wife and children with; the other with four;
neither cared they for more; and this with good husbandry they thought
sufficient. To whom I could add a friend of mine at this day, a younger
brother of the best gentlemen in our country, but of small means. It would
do one good to see him undergo so merrily his great charge of wife and
children. He was driven to do all things almost himself. He was their Cater,
Nurse, Chamberlain, Schoolmaster, and whatsoever else was to be done, he
did it, either within doors, or without. His only study was, and a worthy
study, to play the good husband, and keep within compass. But I return to my
matter.

Against this doctrine, which Divines are so clear in, ye will object, that
there is no such bond as I speak of, for giving to the poor, because ye are
not bound to bestow those things on your selves; and therefore much less to
give to others. Ye grant it is good to give, but ye are not bound. I answer,
the consequence is false. For although I may be bold with my self, yet I may
not be bold with another. If one owe me money, I may refuse to take it,
though I need it. But if I owe to him, I am bound to pay. Also I may refuse to
eat if I will, but I may not deny my servant to eat. Again, if my self be
defamed, I need not always stir in it. But if I defame another, I must
right him. And therefore that argument holds not.

Ye object again, if that be true of Saint Austine, that we may not keep
Superfluum, then also we may not get it, nor receive it: but we may receive
it, therefore we may keep it. I answer. The case is like waifes, and strayes,
which belong to the Lord against all men, until the owner come to challenge
them; and then they be none of the Lords. Even so it is with Superfluum. It is
our own, and we may take it, keep it, and provide more until occasion do
come to employ it, and no longer. And yet it may be also, that we are not
bound to seek occasions, Genesis 18.
as Abraham did, who went abroad to meet strangers of purpose, and to bid
them come in to eat and drink with him. Or as they of Emaus did in the
Gospel, Luke 24.
who compelled the traveler to go in and eat with them. And yet God so
blessed them for it, that he made them worthy to talk with him face to face:
the one with the blessed trinity, as some expound that place; the other with
Christ glorified, as we read in Genesis, Genesis 18.13. Luke 24.
and in the Gospel of Saint Luke.

Lastly ye object, and ye will not be answered, but tell me I speak
against my self, and against nature. What (say you) are we not nearest our
selves? Have we not wife and children to provide for, which God has sent, and
we must keep, and leave behind us so provided for, as may be answerable to
our estate, and honor? Is it sin to gather and lay up for them, which will
not be without care; and care will not do it, if we be so charitable, as to
spend it as it comes in? Is it a sin to purchase, build, or amend our
estates? Indeed I must confess, I spoke even now of bettering our estates,
rather then abating; which cannot be well done, but out of Superfluum. For to
borrow much for it, will prove diminishing instead of amending, as my self
have tried to my cost ere now, when I was so wise as to leave my estate to
others wits, and fortunes, while my self had more mind to higher studies. But
to satisfy you further in this point, I should refer you over to your
learned masters, 1 Pet. 3.
who are parati ad satisfactionem omni petenti rationem. It belongs to us to
believe, and not to dispute. I am no Divine, but only an instructed Christian,
as you and all may be, that will ask, and learn.

Howbeit, if ye will take such satisfaction as is to me satisfaction; it may
please you to accept it, until a better come. There be many just occasions of
spending our Superfluum besides the poor. I will give instance only of a
house; which a man may want, and were no more then fitting for his estate, but
he has it not. They hold it a sin to weaken his means, and sell much land
for it, as it were to make a rich coat for one that lies a dying, or is sick
of a consumption. If his Superfluum will do it, he may do his mind in it.
Many poor shall have work, and relief by it, and if he keep a good house
after for the poor, and not a show of a house, for the world to gaze on, as
some have done; his conscience will be the better satisfied, and the world in
him, that God is not forgotten, but has his part in it.

There is no question made, but a man may purchase what he will out of
Superfluum, so the laws of love be kept to his neighbor, which I spoke of
before. He must not gripe him by no means, nor work upon his need, but give
him the full worth. A gentleman stands in more need sometimes then a poorer
man in show. And it may be a deed of charity to buy of him, if lending will
not serve. And we shall never be charged with it for hourding. But I must tell
you more what they hold, and it is a caveat to all purchasers. They must not
put themselves upon the taint so, as to shut up doors, or abate sail for it a
year or two after; but the more they purchase, the more they must spend,
either in their house, upon increase of an honest retinue, or upon the poor
elsewhere; five persons more for every hundred pound land purchased, were not
much. If Crassus had gotten it as well, as he spent it well what he got, he
had been a right good man. He kept a Legion some whiles together at his own
charge, besides other good works of his. How much more should Christians do
the like. They may purchase warily; but they must spend it liberally. They may
heap, but not hourd; like, but not love too much. And the greater means one
has, the more in store for them that want.

They be misers that purchase, and spend no more; lurchers to the common; they
abuse the law of Superfluum, and the blessings of God bestowed on them. Yet how
many be there of these that we could reckon; who live at the same rate now,
as they did many years since, when they could not spend the tenth nor twentieth
part. They keep never the more servants, set never the more on work, feed no
more mouths, give no more to the poor, or contribute to the common much more
then they did. And what a world should we have, if there were many rich, and
every rich man should do so. Either men must perish, or seek some where else
where to dwell. We may judge of a whole country by a little country town,
of forty, or fifty houses, with land to them all, and one man buys them out,
and dispeoples the village. What becomes of the poor the whilst, who lived
there wholly upon relief, happily ten, or a dozen? No doubt he is bound to
keep them, out of his increase. They must be part of his purchase, or
appurtenances; yet will not spend two pence the more for it, but posts them
over to the shire, if he can, to beg their bread. Would not many such towns
in a country consume a country? and is it not happy that provision was made
for it betimes in later Parliaments? Deuteronomy. 15.
Let there not be a beggar amongst you, says the Law of God. And there is a
blessing annexed to it from Gods own mouth. As who should say, Divide your
abundance among them, every one in his tribe, ward, or parish, that there may
be no beggar, or vagrant person among you. For without this division, there
will be store of them, and Statutes will not serve the turn.

I assessed therefore every hundred pound a years increase at keeping five
poor bodies, or setting them on work, besides his household. Whether I exceed
or come short in this reckoning, I must refer it to your judgments, and
experience. Our doctors intermeddle not so far, but leave it to men's
consciences, so they make a true conscience of it. But if ye think that I
grate too much upon you; Deuteronomy. 32.
Mementote dierum antiquorum, call to mind the ancient days, when there were
not such store of poor, as now therebe to bestow their superfluum on. But in
lieu thereof, what a number of Churches, and Chapels were then built, every
three miles walk does testify; besides Bishoprics, and houses of religion,
free-schooles, hospitals, bridges, almes-houses, and other works of charity
every where to be seen, with lands to most of them all. Which if it be well
pondered, and how largely they powered out their superfluum in those days; the
proportion I speak of, will not seem great to make up this equality. It is
hard to make a rule in this business, if conscience do it not. But very probable
it is, if a man spend half his revenue in hous-keeping, and among the poor,
and leave nothing of it at the years end, he will have little to answer for
in that; and the remainder will not be much. But not to spend half that way,
not a quarter, not a fifth, or a tenth part, as many do not; that they hold to
be execrable in the sight of God, and intolerable in a commonwealth.

Neither is their any sense or husbandry in it, to hord and lay up for
children, which made such a flourish in the contrary argument at the first.
There is no sense I say, for the portion will not grow bigger with locking up.
Not good husbandry, when Scripture it self advises us to put it out to
bankers or other lawful gain, and not to hide it or dig it into the ground;
Mat. 25.
Opportuit te committere pecuniam meam nummularijs. And so no doubt it would
be both surer to them that shall have it; and also more available to them,
then if it lay cankering all the while in a corner to look one.

But the thing I should have spoken of at the first, I may not omit to speak
of last. And that is, how to know Superfluum, and when we have it. For the true
deciding whereof, I think we shall need a judge. For if men be their own
judges, they think they have never enough, much less too much. Witness their
own complaints, if we talk with them seriously about this business, though
they be never so rich. And I think they say truly in respect of their want
of that they intend, and would compass; but falsely, in respect of our duty to
God, and bond to the poor. Covetousness is a most vile passion, and covetous
persons are never out of it. The angry body is not always angry. The spiteful
body not always envious. The vicious, and gluttonous bodies are not always
so. These have a time to see their faults, being as it were in a tertian, or
quartan, the other allows no intermission, but is in a cotidian till he dye.
And being always therefore in his passion, he cannot judge rightly of
himself. He knows not his own way, or work so well as an other, or as
himself either, if his fit would give leave. Which yet, because it will not,
he can hardly judge right, but partially without a good friend to help him.

And this is Plutarkes rule, not mine. That when we are doubtful, whether we
do well or ill, and whether we mend or impair, Deira cohib.
and we cannot go out of our selves as Paynters do from their work a while,
to judge the better of a fault when they come to it again: here (says he)
we had need convent our selves before some friends, or friend, and ask their
opinions what is amiss, and would be amended in us. A golden rule, and more
worthy a Christian, then a heathen. And if we follow it, we could never err.
Neither can any man want such a friend, if he be humble, or as curious for his
souls health, as he is for baser things. But what is he that knows not his
own store, and expenses; or how few there be, that fare the better by him? Let
him think with himself whether he would not spend less if he could with
honesty. Let him call to mind, how many men's lands, and inheritances he holds,
whereof every one fed many, and he feeds not one the more? Can he see
this, and know this, and think he has nor Superfluum?

Or if he never were purchaser; yet he cannot but know how much comes in to
him, more then he spendes, welfare all good tokens. His bags make mention, if
he have eyes to see them. He is well enough sighted, to judge of his
neighbors, what every one is worth. And can he not see himself much better?
He will say, such a one is but a poor man, or not the man he is taken for.
Such a one is well to live, and before hand. Such a one is a near man, and
has thousands, or a thousand to spare; and yet does not know, what himself
has to spare? His cost upon iron chests, and double doors, and locks most
curious; do not all these point him to his Superfluum? his fear of robbing,
his heart now and then misgiuing, or his mind still running on it, with a
perpetual audit in his brain; do not all these usher him daily to the mint
of his treasure; and can he not yet see, or think, that he has Superfluum?
There is none so blind, but may see it if he will, though many be so
selfe-louing, that they list not to heed it.

And of this, my coming is to heed you, and to advise you my dear lovers,
and friends, that when ye come to have more store of Gods blessings, ye may
make a blessing of it, and not abuse your selves, abuse God, abuse his holy
word, as all that be covetous do; who have nothing so frequent in their heart,
and soul, and it is all the Scripture they practice, Noli esse iustus multum,
Be not over just, and, Omnia traham ad me ipsum, I will draw all to my self,
Ecclesiastes 7.17. Ioh. 12.
and my fellows shall have none. As who should say all were borne beggars to
make him great; all men's fortunes ordained to raise his fortunes. And it is not
out of time, that I advise you thus. It may be no time fitter then even now,
that the world goes diminishing every day from God, and all goodness; and
stands a great deal more upon will and pride, then it has done eschewing
counsel. As every man thinks it aduantageable for him, so goes right and
wrong with him, and he will be his own judge. Time has been, that these
cloaked, and colored sins have not been so common, as now they are. Either
people have been more single-hearted, or easier to be instructed then they be
now; and had more care of the world to come, and how to get thither, then to
sit devising with themselves how to make themselves great here, and let
heavenly things come after at leisure. But let us leave the reason to God. Once
we find his word to be true, Diminutae sunt veritates a filijs hominum,
Truths are clipped and diminish't from the sons of men; Psalm. 11.
and the sons of God (if we be so) must restore them again. If we will ask,
we may find. And we have the same oracles we had, the same spirit to teach
us, and to set on foot again that primitive justice, if we will embrace it.

Covetousness is a most venomous thing, contagious, and vnneighbourly, fed
only with self-love, a most base and unworthy love, and I have given you
rules against it. Prodigality also, and Riot, are naught; and I have told you,
what a sin it is to waste ones estate wilfully, and how ye may avoid it with
frugality. Both sorts are very sinful. For the covetous body persuades
himself, that all the Superfluum he has, is no more but needful. The
prodigal makes no more of his needful, then if it were superfluum, and so
poures it out wastfully without wit. The sweet mean is between both, which
there is no difficulty to practice with the help of God, and your cheerful
endeavor.

To which end, I have told you many things which a covetous ear would be loath
to hear at the first, until he do deeply consider what will become of things
at last. And yet if I have any thing said, more then your learned will approve;
let it be as unsaid. I have laid before you but their conclusions; which if ye
shall doubt of, your pious scrupulositie for better resolution, knows whether
to repair. Out of my love I would have you justly informed, and as it were
catechized in matters of justice, as ye are wont to be in your points of faith.
For which cause, I have spent some time with you; but I desire no more credit,
then what your learned will affirm. I told you there must be equality
wheresoever there is good government; even between king and subject
respectively, and between rich and poor. Yea, there can be no stable
government, where this is not well looked into, as it has been in the
beginning of all commonwealths.

To some belongs more, to some less, every one must have necessaries to their
estat; which if they have not, they ought to be supplied. And the supply makes
as just an equality, as if al had alike. If one have money, and another have
wares, they are equal. If one be poor, and another supply, they are equal.
If one have substance, and another desire it not, they are equal: Epist. 120.
it is all one to have (says Seneca) and not to desire to have. For equality
consists not in having alike, but not wanting alike. If wants be supplied,
all is equal; if not supplied, there is a fault, that must be amended. Yea;
where known want is, and no supply; some man's pinching will smart for it in
the world to come; and none have cause to fear it so much, as they that have
Superfluum. No law to pull it from them, but the law of conscience as I said,
which to observe is to make all even; and not to observe, is to provoke Gods
displeasure, who is Lord of all; and no more is to be done in it, then
heathens can in the business.

And therefore I have gone with you by degrees, to rectify your consciences;
as how ye should love your self, and how your neighbor. Your soul first,
his next. Your own life first, his next; unless he be a public person, or
very necessary to the commonweal. Your goods, and fortunes likewise, how to
be used frugally, yet charitably, without hurting your selves, or your souls.
I might have said how bountiful also for gifts, and benefits to followers, and
favorites, according to their deserts, and your abilities; else it will soon
be sin, and sink men's estates with overmuch good nature, ere they be aware.
And this is more to be pitied, then any thing; besides the offense to
Godward. Likewise how ye may purchase, and what conditions for buying and
selling without wrong, or exaction. 1 These. 4.
Saint Paul's rule is the best; nequis supergrediatur, neque superueniat in
negotio fratrem, Let no man ouer-reach or circumuent his brother in any
business. Of your charity remember it. I might have said the like of lending;
which is as good a deed, and a man is as much bound to do, as to give, if it
be with assurance. Iucundus homo qui miseretur, and commodat. Holy David says
it made him merry to lend, Psalm. 111.
and yet he had no interest for it. I might have said somewhat also of
setting, and letting, where men be of opinion, that they may do what they
will. But they may not. You must not rack it to the most, and stand to no
hazard. It ought not to trouble a man, if his tennant have a penniworth for
his money, or for favor. The Lacedaemonians never raised Rents, yet lived most
happily. It is good for you to follow some worthy bodies, and to do as they
do, that are known to be of the best conscience.

I have not omitted to say somewhat of our duty to the common, and of the
greatness of this bond, and of the cheerfulness and alacrity we ought to
entertain it with, sorry that our hand is not in every public work, though
no body saw it, but only God. To the king especially; who as he is great by
law, so should he be greater in our love, and have part with us in all, but in
grudge and contradiction. So far be it from us to magnify him in words, and
minnifie him in works, as they do to Conquerers and Tyrants. And lastly I
come to your Superfluum, whereof I have shown you some deformities, and what a
monster it would prove in a commonwealth, if laws did not reprove it
somewhat, and conscience more. And yet I have been brief upon the point; the
matter requiring more persuasion, then instruction, more eloquence, then
arguments, and more grace in the hearer, then tongue in the teacher. For why?

Goods if they be good, they have wrong to be kept in. Omne bonum est sui
communicabile, The nature of good is to do good, and to impart it self to
others, if man do not hinder it. The sprouting springs are not content with
their own fullness, and to serve the neighborhood with pailes full and
tankardsfull, but send the rest immediately to poor Millars, and Fishermen,
and make rivers nauigable for the use of man. The liver not content to feed it
self with blood, packes away the overplus all the body over, even to fingers,
and toes, as far as it can go. Yea, gold and silver not satisfied with
their own riches, and brightness; nor precious gemmes with their luster, and
virtue, where they lie in sea coasts, or desert mountains; but offer
themselves to man's industry, whosoever will fetch them. Leo. Afer.
Gaoga and Tambuco furnish Afric with millions. Mexico and Peru replenish
Europe and Spain; and the East Indies relieve Asia with richest stone, and
metal. It is against nature to keep good things in. Yet we, by corrupt
usage smother up all in corners, that none may be better for them. If one may
do it, all may do it. And what if all should do the like? what if all were
hourders? should we not think them Caterpillars?

Say it were not money we hourded, but that we bought up all the beefes and
muttons in markets, all the corn, and grain that comes there; and all other
commodities that come in for man's provision: would not towns and countries cry
out on us? and is it not all one, to hourd up every man's provision, and to
hourd up that which men should buy it with? If all should hourd up corn as one
did, a countri-man of ours, who sold no corn but in dear years; should they
not be murderers to the multitude, and quellers to their ownesoules? The man
was rich, and had always three years corn in barnes, and stackes before
hand. His farm was his own, rich ground all of it. The fourth year, upon a
Whitsune-eue, he walked up a hill, and saw the country full of goodly corn,
and came home to the good woman his wife, and told her he was undone. Why so
said she. It is likely to be a plentiful year again said he. Marry thanks
be to God said she, many such years God send us. But he went into his
barn, and hung himself, and so had dyed if chance had not been. The hourder
does enough for his part, that no man should have either money, or wares.
Dionisius the Tyrant of Syracusa, taught a citizen how to employ his money
better then so. For hearing of much treasure he had hidden in the ground, he
sent unto him to bring it him; which he did. But he brought not out all. And
that which he left, he bestowed presently upon house and land in the
country. Which when the Tyrant also heard of, he sent for him, and gave him
his money again, saying to him: since thou know how to use money, take thy
money again, which is made to use, and not to lie by one; and so dismissed
him. Glad was he that he learnt so good cheap. But woe be to the country that
knows not how to use riches, until a Tyrant teach it them.

True riches is to have store of necessaries, wherewith to feed many, not
store of Superfluum, that no body may touch. Gold and silver will not feed as
they lie, nor costly furniture with gazing on. It will be long before any of
these will give us a breakfast, though never so goodly to behold. And therefore
it was thought but rude and childish in Telemachus: Odisses. 2. Plut. Mor.
who when he came unto Nestors house, and saw it stored with wine, meat,
provision, and entertainment for all comers, and how shold-stuffe in great
plenty; he never commended him for the store of all necessaries. But when he
came to Menelaus his house, where was plenty of superfluous things: the romes
bright with copper, gold, and alchumy; and pillars of great magnificence: he
was ready to adore, saying: Talem intus Jupiter (nisi fallor) olympius aulam
Possidet; attonitum sic me veneratio tentat.
Jove's Bower I think can show no more;
So am I tempted to adore.
As if pomp were more necessary then life; or Superfluity more commendable in
a few, then enough for all.

The Conclusion.
NOw let me not hold you over long. As I professed in the beginning, to say
nothing of open sins, but of these close, and cloaked sins, which are
sins notwithstanding, and full of injustice: so have I said no more then
nature teaches us, as well as law divine; what a monster Cupiditie is, and how
grossly it misleades us, and how contrary to it own self, more then other
Cupidities are. I began with Plutarke a heathen wise man, In his Moralls.
and I will end with him. He tells us plainly that no Cupidity so fights
with it self as this of riches does. All other desires, are more for using
then possessing. This contrary more for possessing, then using. We desire not
meat, to abstain from it, we desire not wine to forbear it, we desire not
warm clothes to lay them up: but when we have eaten we are satisfied, when
we have drunk we have enough, when our gown is on, it is cumber to put on
more; and if we have our pleasure at any time, we have done with it soon.
Only riches when we have them, our thirst is not alaide; we still desire
more. The more we have the more we covet, Semper auarus eget; new rents, and
new commings in assuage not our appetite while we live; but the medicine
increases the disease. To this we may add. What hinders us more in our
journey to heaven, then this untoward Cupidity? what stoppes us to do justly
with our neighbor, friend, or brother, but Cupidity? what makes us grate upon
him, and draw what we can from him, but this? what blindes us so that we see
not our debt to the poor, but this? for so the Scripture calls it debitum,
Eccl. 1.4.
a debt, Declina pauperi aurem tuam, et read debitum tuum, render thy debt to
the poor. Who can abide to hear this? ye will say they be lewd folk now a
days, and unthankful, and it is no charity to give them. How then? I talk
not of giving them, I speak of debt. It is our abundance as I said before, and
not their goodness, that makes it theirs. If they be badde, they must live to
amend, Mat. 5.
God sends rain upon the just, and unjust; and our debts we must pay both to
good, and badde; whereof this debt is one to the poor, howsoever cupidity
blindes us, and casts a veil over our eyes, that we cannot see it. Poets feign
Cupid blind: even so is Cupidity. It covers our understanding, turns
reason awry, it strengthens passion weakeneth judgment, rayseth pride puts
down pity, fireth envy cools charity, preaches parsimony hates
hospitality, is open handed to take close fisted to give, no, not to himself;
robbes the king of that is his, the subject of his, the common of theirs, nor
willingly gives any body their own. We may call it in a sort a sin against
nature, that bears such a sting against it self, and own honor. O think
not less of it because it is less seen. The more hidden a sin is, the more
dangerous. I have discovered unto you many a sinful practice to day, which
it may be ye have not heard of. Contemn them not I beseech you. For such as
these will damn a man, when evil custom biddes him be secure. 2. Reg. 24.
That sin of David in numbering of his men, how soon would he have seen it,
if the Prophet as it is thought had not told it him first? and yet this
ignorance escaped not punishme^nt, his kingdom was plagued for it; seventy
thousand lost their lives at a clappe. And how would Saul have acknowledged his
sin, 1. Reg. 15.
in saving the best things of Amaleck to serve God with as he thought, if
Samuel had not stepped in with due reprehension? and yet pretense of reason was
no bar to Gods judgment, that fell out heavy upon him. Long before that,
Gods servant Moses, Number. 20.
how had he known his offense of conniuence with the peoples contradiction,
if God had not admonisht him presently before it grew greater? Genesis 38.
Or the Patriarch Judas his injustice to Thamar, until she had shown him his
Ring, 3. Reg. 13.
and staff, and then he said, Iustior me est, The harlot was iuster then he.
Long after this, the man of God, who was sent to overthrow the altar of
Jeroboam, and foresaw the things that happened three hundred years after, yet
knew he not the thing that was present, which was his own sin of light
belief; until knowledge came to him accompanied with punishment, whereof a
Lion was both messenger, and executioner. It is no rare thing amongst sinners,
not to see their fault, until they be told of it. Saint Bernard complains of
himself, that he has set up a vice for a virtue sometimes. Now what think
ye I pray you of all these, and what of your selves? are ye stronger and
better sighted then they? might ye not be deceived all this while in your
courses, as well as they? and if we have a plague or plagues in our country,
may it not be for some of these hidden sins, though there were no other? And
may not the good be punished for the badde, as they were in Iosuaes days, for
the sin of only Achan? yea, Ios. 7. Amos 8.
may it not be for these enormities alone, that God does threaten to set the
earth in an vproare, and to make the dwellers thereof to wring their hands, for
using the poor so hardly, for buying them out with silver, and making use of
their need? How much better is it therefore for us to take warning by these,
and to furnish our selves in time with sufficient knowledge, especially where
ignorance will no way excuse. Omnis via virirecta sibi. The Spirit of God
foretells us as it now proves, that every one thinks he is in the right, when
he is not, nor is like to be, Prou. 21.
where he is his own judge, and partiality holds plea. I told you Plutarkes
rule; we must summon our selves before our friend, or friends in doubtful
business, and Scriptures accord with it. Vae soli, Woe be to one alone. Eccl.
siastes 4.
For if his wit and self conceit once give him a fall, who can raise him
again? We live in miserable blindness here in the world. For while we be in
sin, Prou. 21.4.
we have no other light but sin. Lucerna impiorum peccatum, We have no other
torch-light to go before us, but ill custom; a dark dazeling light, and
therefore have need of one to lead us by the hand. Coecus amor, our love
blindes us. Coeca libido, Sap. 4.
our daily likings, and holding affections blind us. Concupiscentia
transuertit sensum sine malitia, says Sapiens, We are so used to our
appetites and iniustices, and make them so bold and wanton with us every day,
that we sin, and think not of it. And therefore woe be to a man alone
without a guide, or admonisher. It is not good for a man to be alone says God
himself. Faciamus ei adiutorium, Genesis 2. Ier. 10.
Let us make him a help. For, Viri non est vt dirigat gressus suos, says holy
Jeremy, It belongs not to a man to govern himself. And therefore let us
make him a help. And what help? Not an angel, not a God to converse with
him; but simile sibi, Such an other as himself; a sinner like himself, a
frail man like himself, a man. It is for our humility, that God will have man
to comfort man, none but man to counsel man, and will not have us look for
illustrations from heaven in every doubt, as they did in old time, when all
was darkness, and very few to govern us. God shines upon diverse diversely.
And his grace has put more wisdom and grace into one, then into another, to
furnish them that lack. The Scripture calls them, Sensatos. Cum videris
sensatum, euigila ad eum, When ye shall shall find an understanding man,
Eccl. 6.
or a learned man, give ear to him. Wear down his thresholds with often
coming, and listen to him, as it is written in the same place, Gradus ostiorum
eius exterat pes tuus, ibid.
says he. And King David tells us in another place, where he speaks to God,
saying: Psalm. 98.
Tu parasti directiones; That God provided directions for every one that will
ask. Yea more then this, if we ask not, it is a sign (I think) that God is
angry with us. For so he speaks of a sinner, that Secundum multitudinem irae
suae non quaeret, It is according to the greatness of Gods anger, Psalm. 9.25.
that a sinner will not seek, or ask. And therefore why do men ask no oftener
then they do, or follow them no better? or why do they not wear down their
thresholds with coming, and going, as they are bidden? And I speak not this
to hourders only, but to young men, and spenders also; who daily undo
themselves for want of directions. I never knew any man waste himself, that
was ruled by such. And of all the unthrifts that ever I heard of, I never knew
any, that was ruled by such. They will be ruled by cheaters, and those that
prey upon them, but not by such. They will listen to them that humor them, but
not to them that pity them, and wish them all true wealth. Both sorts need
counsel, I know not which more. Whether he that will waste all with over
lashing; or he that ruins many with ouer-keeping. You stand yet indifferent
between both. But which way soever you incline; be never your own judges,
but listen. Be fearful always to endammage any man, and at such times
especially I wish you to be advised most, when ye have most advantage, or are
likely to gain most. There be that persuade you to contempt of the world; I
entreat you only that it contemn not you, when it has tumbled you into the
lake. To them it belongs, to show you the fickleness, and deceit of it; I do
but wish you to imprint it in your mind. Your preachers tell you, how and
what ye must hourd; Mat. 6.
thesaurizate vobis thesauros in coelis, Heap treasure in heaven; I do but
admonish you of your sin against nature, and the abuse of your good means,
which God has lent you. They tell you how hardly things are gotten, how soon
lost, and how little they deserve of us, for all our much making, and will not
so much as accompany us to our grave: I say no more then what Leonidas told
you, when Xerxes wrote unto him to come on his side, and he would make him
much greater then ever he was. But he wrote unto him again. If thou knewst o
Xerxes what the goods of this life are, and how little to be esteemed, thou
would not seek as thou do for others men's. This ye will think was well
said of a king, a soldier, a heathen. We should know better then he, what
these things are. What be they better the best of them, then a penny in a
paile of water, seem great, and are not; fire in ones bosom, burn more then
warm; a wagge, or wanton much cockered and loved, and loves not again? when
we dye, they are as readily another man's as ours, who took all the care to
get them together. Let us learn of a heathen for very shame, if not for
charity, nor love of Christ, to esteem as little of these outward things, as
they do of us. That is to say, to make use of them, and no more; or at the
least, not to prize them so, as to lie cankering by us long. If ye like to go
light, and free from burden, heap not burden upon burden; which if ye do,
ye will hardly keep even, but one sin or other will overtake you, and give
you a fall. Qui pauca requirunt, non multis exidunt, says our Philosopher,
They that seek little, offend little; therefore they that seek much, offend
much; and what they get ill, will prove ill, do what they can. What will it
avail a man to circumuent his poor brother, and to get by him (as they say)
by right or wrong? I have told you, it is wrong, if he get it so; and it must
be repaired ere ye dye. If learned men be learned, and have not bestowed all
their time in vain; if God have promised them his spirit to direct you; if
they be not very ciphers, and dumb shows only; Ephesians. 4.
and furthermore, if God has given them our souls in charge, for their
knowledge and grace; and we as much bound to hear them, as the Jews were to
hear theirs in the old law; Ose 4. Ier. 17.
who held it the greatest sin that was, to disobey them in any thing: and
lastly, if we be not very Atheists, and enemies to all religion; they be the
men we ought to believe in the cases aforesaid, where wrong, or injustice may
in any sort be doubted. The very attempt and throught of wrong, is wrongful,
much more the accomplishing. And believe me they will none of them prove as
they promise, but deceive us most pitifully in the end. I have known and seen
it in many. If God love them, he will never let them thrive with it long; but
either they shall loose it quite, that they get so, or shall have more
unquietness, and trouble with it, then it is worth. If God love us not; we
may thrive with it iollily for a time, and some of our posterity after us for
our greater plague. God gives the wicked also their desires, but it is in
anger, not in mercy says Saint Austine. And then, what are we better for
Sunshine, if he that made the Sun frown on us. We savor not now adays
of the ancient piety, and Christian feeling that has been. Men and women have
thought it burdensome to their consciences, to keep any thing wrongfully. It
lay heavily on their stomachs like raw flesh, when they had done amiss. And if
they were of any resolution to Godward, they would not touch, nor come near
that was none of their own. Whereof we have a noble example of Constantine,
who forbad the tribute of Curtizans to defile his coffers, as they were wont.
And our Christian Tiberius whom I named before, would none of Narses his massy
treasure. He knew not how it was got, that was so euilly kept. And the same
Prince before he came to be Emperor, being made Master of the Palace, and
declared successor to Justinius; whose wife Sophia that covetous Empress had
gotten together ilfauouredly great heaps of treasure: this worthy man when he
found it, he poured it all out, and sent it packing to the poor. Whereat when
the old Empress was angry, and asked him what he meant to be so lavish of
that she got together with such labor, and anxious care for her husband; o
said he, the Exchecker I hope shall never need such ill gotten goods. And his
words proved true. For there was never Prince so rich and fortunate in all
things, that ever I read of, as he was afterward for the time he reigned,
which was seven years. And who more unfortunate then Brennus the french Duke
after he had spoiled Temples, and robbed Churches of their treasure, saying;
the gods had need give us, and not we give them. And was there any in the
world, more unhappy then Caepio Seruilius, and his partners, after the spoil
of the Temple of Tholousa, where they had infinite treasure, enough to have
made them all for ever? but as Liuie notes, none of them all prospered, but
miserably dyed. Caepio himself, was overthrown by the Cimbrians, was turned
out of his Consulship, as never was any before him; his goods confiscate, was
tumbled headlong down the stairs, and dyed in yrons, having been happy
enough before, and triumphed over the Cilicians. But this is the judgment of
him that searches all things, and winkes at them still that do naughtily,
until he sees his time, to come upon them with vengeance. And what has a
man gotten when he has rent and scrap't together what he can? many a cappe
and knee it may be, for his fortune; for it was but his fortune. Many a secret
curse that he dies not yet; for they have no hope of him to do much good,
while he lives: many a nodde he gets besides at his manner of rising. For
such a one is undone by him says one, and yet he was no interest man. He has
much to answer for says another, and yet he never took forfeiture, or sold
to days. He has been hard to the common says one; yet he would hoyse up
his fellows says another. The king is the worse for such as he, says one;
but it is more then the king knows, says another. Thus they play upon the
poor penny-father. But he shall not want some also, that will praise him, and
commend him, to be a very kind man to his friend; so it cost him nothing,
says another. One commends him for a good Iusticer; he will not come in
danger of law, says another. I have seen him give well to the poor, says
one; so it be well seen, says another. He is very wise says one; to have
and hold, says another. He was continent of his body, says one; he saved
by that, says another. So every virtue of his has a sponge with it, and every
vice a pensill. Few think well of him heartily, no not they that feign would.
And when he comes to dye, what laughing tears follow, and blackes of joy, not
of mourning. And here begins his woeful pageant. If all his gold were in his
carcass, he would have as many hounds about him, as a dead horse, or as
there be tormenters about his beggarly soul. His conscience torments him, and
wounds him, that ever he was so carking for that he should never have with
him. His memory tortures him, to think of his cares, and what a slave he was
to them, and is not the better of a pin for them now, but the worse. His
fear affrights him, that they that have all, will be deceived with it, as he
was. He fears his wife will come to him shortly, or his child, or some body
else whom he loved; and this torments him extremely. The devils floute him
instead of comforting him; and those whom he wronged, have never done accusing
him to his thinking. His wits confound him, and rende his heart in pieces with
cruel distractions. His throat hoarse with crying, skrieking, and hellish
groans. He would feign get out by him that came in last, but impossible. All
his fellows so grifly and gashfull, that it is a hell alone to see them. If a
man were amongst Turks, or Cannibals, he might happily find some face of
gentler aspect, then other, to ease his heart, and make his moan unto; there
not so, all insociable villains. No friend, or old acquaintance there to
befriende him. No not brother, or sister, but to take him by the throat, and
spit fire in his face. It boots him not to lie still, he is so full of pain.
It helps him not to stir, for being made to lie still. No kind of hope has
access, but is barred, and double barred from him. It were some comfort unto
him, if he could not think at all. All thoughts are lashes to him with an iron
whippe. See how the poor wretch is changed. To think of gold, is to think
of a toad. To think of them that have it, and care little for him, it wrings
him to the guts. To remember the pleasures he had in walking over his
grounds, makes him as melancholy as a mad man. To think of heaven lost for a
trifle, so like an Ass as he was, he knawes his flesh from his bones. Alas,
how short I come of his dreadful estate with my slender imagination? But
surely when such a soul reflects upon such a misery, he frettes and grieves,
and wrings his hands so pittiously, that a heart of brass would melt to
behold it. But all in vain. He would feign imagine it a dream, but that is
idle. He wishes he were in some dungeon full of ordure, in a stinking prison
full of irons, in a shipwreck at sea, in the bottom of a deep well, or in an
oven full of flames; yet all this in vain. Wishes do no more but torment
more. He curses God to his face, he curses his parents, and progenitors; he
curses all flatterers, and them that soothed him up; he curses himself most
damnably, that had but one sin, or evil disposition to take heed of, and
set so light by it. He finds it now, that he saw and would not see, knew and
would not know, he might have asked, and would not stoop for it, because he
liked his own ways. Poor wretch, forlorn, miserable, and forsaken wretch.
If he were in life again, what would he do? he could tell how to use the
matter, better then he did. Which I pray God, we may learn to do by his
woeful example, if we saw him. It is not land, or money, or goodly things, or
fair glozes, that would damn him again, if he were alive again. He was not
so griping, as he would now be giving. He was not so upon advantage, as he
would now give advantage. He was not so ready to rend from a man the one half,
as now to render fourefold; not so sparing then toward common good, as now
more for the common, the^ for his private; not so proud then of his fortunes, as
now humble and affable; not so large then, as now scrupulous; not so auerted
then from the poor, as now compassionate and tender over the poor, and rather
delighting in them. This day let all men assure themselves, will one day come,
and will not be long, but they shall see how foolish they were for all their
seeming wit; how little for all their greatness; how poor, and ragged for all
their hourding, and scraping together; how full of lip-labor all their
prayers, and how course their conceits in heavenly affairs. More shall they
see under a silly winding sheet, then under a Cannopy of gold; more in the
dumpes of their everlasting melancholy, then here in the height of their
iolitie. But all to late after final impenitence. O that any tears of ours,
or sobs of endless lamentation might give them ease, but they will not. I
speak no more of them; my heart does bleed, that any of these woes should
fall upon any one. But it has been, and will be. Yet thanks be to God, and
truly let us rejoice, and clappe our hands, all we that are yet living, and
are not as yet in that doleful pit. There is no wrong but we may yet right.
And it may be, there is yet no wrong but we may prevent. Let us be wise
betimes, and learn by other men's harms. We especially that profess our
selves of Gods household; and let us accustom our selves to be scrupulous, and
to do nothing without counsel. It will trouble us much to restore again,
when we have wronged. We find by experience they will be damned first (as
wise as they are) before they will hear of it. To think all ours, that we
force from a body by law, or might, it is folly. To do otherwise then we will
be done to, is little honor, or honesty. To sooth our selves with ill
custom, where nothing warrants, but ill custom, is to cozen our selves, and
make sport for the devil. Now let us cast up our eyes to heaven, if we be not
cast-awaies, and desperate. Let not a little money damn us, or hope of gain
gainsay us, when we knock at heaven gate. Nay why should we hazard our
best part so, or put our heavenly portion in adventure for it. What reason have
we to loose a certenty there, for an uncertainty here? Why should we loose a
thousand poundessure our own, for an hundred halfpence not sure our own, or
how long we shall have it? away with it. Let it not taint our chests, and
canker our souls. Put it not together with that is well gotten. In stead of
giving, or lending where need is, let us not take another man's without need,
and which no need should compel us unto. He that has least, has enough of
that little to answer for, though he heap not on himself more, by wresting
from others. If ye will be patient, and mild, and void of all passion; if ye
will free your selves from envy, and anger, which I told you in the beginning
is so necessary for us; and lastly, if ye will go light to heaven when ye dye,
and will be always ready for it when God shall call; away with your clogge of
cupidity: let it approach your heart no more; but be indifferent to all things,
whether ye have them or no, and assure your selves ye shall gain in the end by
it. Magnus questus pietas, cum sufficientia, Better a little with content, 1.
Tim. 6.
then a great deal to trouble our brains withal at our last gasp: a little
with true honesty, then a great deal with profane cupidity. Will rich men and
ambitious bodies give credence to S. Paul, who tells them wherein true gain
consists, and how they shall get it? Religion, piety, and fear of God;
these make profit says he, and gain us great matters. Let these be the
plain song to all our descant, these the commanders of all our business. O
that we had the faith of Tobias. Tob. 4.
We lead says he a poor life. Yet what was his comfort? We shall have many
good things (said he) if we fear God. Where is our faith now, is it asseepe?
See how Saints agree. Magnus questus says one; Multa bona says an other. We
shall have many good things without hurting, or wronging any. O that we could
look out of Saint Paul's eye, when he called it, Magnus questus. What were the
riches he saw, when he said it? what purple robes? yea, they exceeded all
purple. What gold, and silver? no treasure comparable. What pearl or precious
thing? no pearl or jewel comes near it. What saw he then? what inamoured his
Eagles eye? what filled up his heart so, that he left no corner in it for
worlds glory, or mony-bagges? What content took Tobias, who had wife and
children to provide for, and many childrens children? yet none of these base
things could fasten on him. His Multa bona, were in heaven; not vnum bonum on
earth. His thoughts were high reachers, as lowely as he was: a little was
enough here. What a world-skorning word is that of Saint Paul, Cum
sufficientia? What he meant by it, he explaines himself in an other place;
Habentes alimenta, 1. Tim. 6.
and vnde tegamur, his contenti simus, If we have enough to feed us
competently, and to cover us conveniently to our estates we live in, (for so is
his meaning) what seek we more? why climb we higher? what necessity to make
our selves great? what need lace upon lace, silk upon silk, dishes after
dishes, and a thousand curiosities more then mere decency? Saint Paul loved it
not, nor would have us to love it. For he speaks not this to priests, and
religious only (says Saint Chrysostom) but in general to all that live in
the world. lib. 3. cont. Vitrup.
Now how will your Superfluum, and this sufficiency agree? how will those lime
twigges comply with your wings, when ye shall come to use them? But I will
conclude with a judgment, or a ruled case; ruled by God himself in Saint
Lukes Gospel. Luke 18.
Quam difficile qui pecunius habent in regnum dei intrabunt? How hardly shall
they enter the kingdom of God, that have store of money? for he says not
pecuniam, but pecunias; not money which we cannot be without, but monyes, or
store of money, which keeps us out. This is it, that makes it hard, or
impossible. It is our selves that make it hard. Heaven is hard enough of it
self to come by, yet we forsooth must make it harder. Our unfortunate
coveting has given us such a law, that it is almost impossible to come there.
Half our wits are employed in this world, to make all things else easy. Our
shoe must be easy for pinching us, our saddle easy, our horse easy, our
garment, our armor easy, that we may bestir us; our staire easy to get up.
Arts, and sciences also we make easy with compendiums, the study of the law
with abridgments. If we be to run, we throw off, we lay not on more. Only in
our way to heaven still, where we should go lightest of all, we clogge on most
of all, and for want of a Camels bunch on our back, we tie us on one, as like
it as we can, that we may pass through the streights with more difficulty.
Naked we were borne into the world, that we may run the lighter; yet we
heap impediments upon us, to make us heavier. Hearken you that be rich, and
delight so in gathering. Listen to your judgment. Quia dives erat, ibidem.
Because he had much, and store of Superfluum by him, and employed it not;
therefore it was impossible that he should be saved. Now who would hourd
after this? or who would not be afraid of it? This is the gnawing worm of
our souls, the bane of all good works; the damme of deadly omissions, the
very devil in a hutch. Is there any man here that would be rich with these
conditions? Let not the rich man tell us, that he is not rich. Let him tell
God so. Let him not tell me, that he keeps it for good purposes, this or
that, or what it will be. Let him tell God, and his friend so, and deceive not
himself. Evil keeping is almost as dangerous, as evil getting; and if ye
halte with God in your pretenses, look for no better then fire and brimstrone.
I speak my dear friends to them that be rich, and holding; and not to you,
but by the way of prevention; and to drive into your souls this holy fear
before hand, which I see but very few have. Show your grace and courage in
withstanding this evil. I love you all dearly, and I have done you the
uttermost of my love. My self ye see am decaying, and growing out of the
world. You have a long time to live yet, and to give good example. After a few
days happily, we shall never see one another more. Yet if we may meet in
Heaven, that only is my desire, and my heart is inflamed with it.

FINIS.
THE FIRST HOMAGE OF A SOVLE TRVELY CONVERTED, WITH SIGNS THEREOF.
LOrd it grieved thee (no doubt) to see our sinful estate; and not so much
our acts of sin, as our miserable corrupted will, from whence they came. This
drew thee from thy heavenly throane, to an earthly habitacle, not only to pay
our debts, but also for our example, and imitation of life. But woe be unto us;
we endeavor night and day to shame thee our loving master if we could, by
doing, and willing the clean contrary. By how much the more, I unworthy wretch
of all others am bound to thy greatness; for that yet at length, before all
hope be past with me, thou have given me in part to know my self. That is to
say, where I was, and whether thou have now led me, and out of what darkness.
I see it now, thy self mercifully showing it unto me. Heretofore I have not
seen; my own will blinding me. Blessed Lord, since my conversion unto the, I
know my fault, and see the cause of it. I have thought my self converted unto
thee, before I was indeed.

True conversion is to turn to thee, and from sin, and the same so to
detest, as to desire any thing to suffer, then to commit again. Secondly to
have a watchful eye over our temptations, and evil motions. Thirdly to call
to thee effectually for grace, and strength. And fourthly in that strength not
to doubt, but to resist them manfully as fast as they come. We practice
commonly the contrary, and give the bucklers to our enemies, as thinking our
selves too weak for so many assaults; and so we be without thee. But in thee
and in a perfect resolution to serve thee, and to renounce sin; my Lord I
find mine enemies every day weaker, and weaker, not in my own strength, but
thine in me.

I know thou can not abide a coward, or that casts difficulties in thy
service; but if our hearty endeauours be with thee, thou suppliest with
strength, and never suffer us to take the foil. Blessed Lord, thou have let
me see now, what hindered my sight before my conversion; even that which
blinds others, yea, multitudes, that are not yet converted unto thee. That is
to say, things seeming good and fair, that tended to perdition. And being no
more gracious then others, I have used my self-love to command, and self-will
to judge so long, that I could not take their masterie from them without much
rebellion; and have been therefore contented to think that good or ill, that
my humor said was good or ill. And this by ill custom has made a law in me so
far forth, that I have not only thought as they informed me, but also I have
verily believed whatsoever they suggested.

Which notwithstanding, it has pleased thy goodness, to show me their tyranny
very palpably. And that first in others, whom I have seen in wretched bondage
unto them, and to their own appetites. Not but that my self was in the like,
or greater; but because we spy a fault sooner in another, then in our selves,
and they were a glass to see my self in, how monstrously I have blinded that
light of reason ere now which thou have given me, and I had almost lost, and
became like a beast; until thy grace restored me, when it was a thousand to
one against me.

My reason instructs me, that no creature well ordered is governed by it
self. The soul much less, among so many hidden enemies; since in heaven
where is no enemy, no soul is guided by it self. My reason tells me, that
none is ouerthrown but by self-rule. And we confess it in reater crimes,
wilful murder, incests, robbery, and the like; because they be more notably
punished in sight. In less we cannot see it so well, because they are more
qualified and mingled by the devil, and il custom, that they may poison the
more cunningly.

My reason, and experience teach me, that the devil has nothing to work upon,
but our will, and is a most subtle perswader. And therefore if I have no more
will, or wit, but my own, it is impossible to stand against him. And very likely
it is I am not as I should be, when I do nothing all the day long, but my own
will, nor am angry or melancholy at any thing, but my own will crossed some way
or other; which perhaps was thy sending, and then I should be glad.

My reason instructed with reading, and hearing, has taught me, that I cannot
have heaven here, and in the world to come. And yet my shunning at griefs, and
crosses, and again my laboring, and laying for temporal emoluments, tell me
to my face, that I have sought nothing but my heaven here, howsoever I have
looked upward in my prayers toward thee for a fashion.

My reason, and grace, how little soever it be, dares not deny but thou art
truth. And thou have said, The way to heaven is narrow, and few do find it.
And yet my life and actions do make it seem broad. Mat. 7.14.
Rather I am to suspect that I am out of the way, by the broadnesse of it: and
am in my reason to doubt, and ask, that I may be set in my right way, and not
to rest until I be in it. And it is hard to find. First, because I never went
it. Secondly, because I use not to ask it. I ask not, because commonly I
think not of it, having found by the way goodly meddowes, and fine earthly
things, or at the least the desires of them; that have holden me distracted,
and busied one way or other, until I want day almost to go any further.

Moreover I cannot but listen, and believe them, that have trodden this path
before me. The practice and authority of thy known Saints, that (being
sometimes as I was when I doubted so little of my self, and as every one is at
this hour, that is not yet converted) confess how maliciously, they were over
borne by their own will, even to perdition; and yet saw it not, no more then I
did then; followed their own likings as I did then; thought they did enough as
I thought then, counted others over scrupulous as I did then, if they had much
care of their conscience; and all this thy Saints have found as soon as they
cast off the yoke of their own wills, and had given their names to thy holy
service.

From which time being afterward thy special servants, and I hearing, and
reading their true opinions, what they thought of themselves, when they were as
I was, and thought my self so sure: good God, what reason had I to think my
self safe, and not rather to ask the way of some skillful body, and forswear
this closeness to my self as long as I lived. Thy noble Doctor Saint
Augustine shows me, that when I thought or persuaded my self that I went
forward daily under the sails of my own will, I went just backward. For so
says this Doctor he did, and yet thought verily that he went forward.

I trusted (says he) sometimes in my own power, Mcd.
and when I meant so to run, where I thought I should stand most, even there
I fell most, and was cast behind hand, and not forward; and that which I
thought verily to catch, went further and further from me. But now I know thou
have illuminated me. Because what I thought I could most, that could I always
least of my self. I had a will, but I wanted ability; I had ability, but I
wanted will; because I trusted in my own strength. But now I confess unto
thee my Lord God, father of heaven and earth, that a man shall not grow strong
in his own strength; nor foolish presumption of any flesh vaunt it self
before thee. And in another place, he says: I thought I was somewhat, and I
was nothing; I said I would become wise, and I became a fool; I thought I was
wise, and I was deceived. Thus far and much more to that effect has this
Doctor.

How much more then may we say it, that live abroad, and have to do with the
world? where every thing distracteth us from thee, every toy dulleth us,
delights darken, cares oppress, and much business confoundes our understanding,
and disableth it wholly of it self, to judge what is best for us without a
Doctor.

And yet I cannot deny (my Lord) but true it is that shamefully and
blasphemously we bear our selves in hand that we are ruled by thee, when yet
we have nothing else in us but a bundle of concupiscences, and desires, that
tend not to thee, but daily pull from thee. As covetousness, and pride, unclean
life, and ribauldry, hatred, and emulation, brawling, swearing, drunkenness,
and epicurisme, and some worse then these; which the dooers of them do daily
father upon thy blessed will. Not by saying that those acts be thy will; but by
saying, or thinking they do thy will daily, when yet these bad fruits, and
none but these grow upon them more, and more, with little or no amending at
all. Whom when I see notwithstanding to be holden wise, yea in all ages some
such graced in the world for their natural gifts, and fortune, which thou have
bestowed upon them; what a mirror is this, that thou have given me to see my
self by, as I said in the beginning, and to fly selfe-gouerning as a mortal
enemy.

Lastly, from my cradle in a manner thou have taught me how corrupt our nature
is, how proane to evil, and apt to follow our selves, and our own ways. And
hereupon we wish when we be young, that we were grown to be men; hoping then,
that we shall rule our selves, and do what we list. And when we have our wish,
and the bridle in our own hands, what have we gotten? even that which in our
childhood, and weak judgment, and before we had fully the use of reason, we
desired, and thought a very good thing; even that our corrupt nature loves,
and imbraceth most, to rule our selves. Which my understanding then must needs
conclude. If so desired of children, of corrupt nature, of those that be most
weak, and imperfect; ergo childish; ergo an imperfect thing, and tending to
corruption of body in bodily things, and of soul in soul business. Again, if
so desired in childhood, and corrupt nature, ergo to be resisted and subdued in
man's estate, and reasonable nature, as well as other childrens toys, that we
blush to use when we be men.

Which when I have done the contrary; that is to say, maintained it and
nourish't it in me, by seeking, and plotting my desires, though not in childish
things, as children use to do, yet in other things answerable to my years,
and estate, and have shunned always to be ruled or hear counsel to the
contrary: I had just cause therefore in my light of reason, to misdeeme and
suspect my actions, both to be childish in the respect of the original of
them; and also wicked in respect of the discretion and other abilities, which
thou gave me to discern it withal.

But now my Lord God, and king of eternal Majesty, I know thou have
illuminated me (as thy servant Saint Augustine says) because I see, I can do
nothing of my self; which either I saw not before, or would not see. And
although no sinner can at all times perfectly assure himself of thy favor
whilst he lives: yet some comforts or tokens as it were earnest-pennies, it
pleases thee to bestow upon us, whereby with humility we may believe and be
persuaded that we be in thy favor, and assuredly hope, that we be converted
unto thee. And that by nothing more then by the alteration of our wills, and
desires, which we feel, and find by thy grace, over that we did before our
conversion. And he that has not this feeling, and has been a sinner, can
hardly think himself truly converted, no more then a sick body can recover,
but he must feel it, and can tell when he began to amend. And by this feeling
and alteration that I find in me, I hope I am converted unto thee, and have
joy, and comfort in it; not presuming in my own merit, but humbling my self
in thy greatness, that have made me partaker of so great a benefit.

And to thy only glory, and my poor comfort, I often call to mind how it is
with me now, and how heretofore when I was all alike without alteration, and
felt my self neither better nor worse at any time. And although self-love in
me has made me been careless, as yesterday, and the day before, so this day,
and the same this year, that I was the year before, and many years before
that, without finding any difference at all in me, but that if I were well
now, I was well then; if well then also now; and at this stay I kept many
years together at an even water, but indeed ebbing; and marked not that none
can stand at a stay in thy service, but qui non proficit, deficit; Leo.
and that shall every one feel in themselves, if they flatter not themselves.
All this while I say, I could not think my self truly converted unto thee;
because I could not remember, or make estimate, when I began to alter from my
wonted desires, or sinful estate.

I began not my conversion with hearing of sermons only, and little care to
follow them; or with reading good books, and liking or commending them only,
which was but for a fashion. I began not with outward receiving the Sacrament,
which we were wont to do at a certain age, and are worse and worse for it, if
we take not heed. I began not with inward security that all was well with me,
because I felt no resistance in me. For this was indeed no true security, but
a blindness, and punishment for sin, bredde by custom; like those that live
in an ill air, and care not to go out of it, because they are used to it.

All these were to me no arguments of my conversion. But contrariwise, that I
was all this while in the clouds, and darkness of self-conceit, and
selfe-liking. It was my very great fault, and I confess vnexcuseable; that
being so well endued by thee, as I was, and so quick of sight otherwise; I
would be so grossly misledde by my enemy where he listed; until it pleased
thee of thy infinite goodness to pull in my scattered thoughts, and made me
see his deceits that blinded me; gave me a heart to be pennitent and
sorrowful, grace to be thankful, care to be watchful, and courage to fear
no blows that I might receive from any adversity or prosperity in time to come.

Hoc signum posuisti in nubibus, Genesis 9.
This is the first sign or mark which thou did put in the clouds of my
soul. Ever since I have had a detestation of sin more or less, and a desire
to know my sin. Since that time also I have been afraid to trust my own
judgment again in matters of my soul. Me think I heard thee say to me:
Eccl. 32.
fili, sine consilio nihil facias; and, peccator homc vitabit correptionem, I
know right well that custom in sin makes us think we sin not, when we
sin. And therefore I have doubted my self, and asked such as have thy
spirit, and know more in these matters then my self.

After this it has pleased thee secondly to nourish my poor endeauours with
gladness, much like to them that are lightened of a heavy burden.

Thirdly, when of frailty I have fallen again at any time; thy mercy toward
me has not given me over, but has touched me inwardly with some heaviness,
and anger against my self, till by thy ordinary means I have been restored
again to good estate.

More then this, thou have given me a fourth token, which is to examine my
thoughts, words, and deeds many times in a we eke. Especially in those things
I use to offend in most; that by often contrition, and sorrow for them, I may
be the readier for thee, and not altogether unprovided if thou should call
me any time upon the sudden. For all which good signs, and loue-tokens of
thy thine, I humbly thank thee, and beseech thee to continue to my lives end.
Amen.

THE SECOND HOMAGE OF A SOVLE PROCEEDING IN GODS GRACE, with signs thereof.
O My Lord God, by thy gifts we are illuminated, and carried upward; by thy
light and leading we go higher and higher, and make ascents in our hearts, and
sing unto thee a canticle of degrees, or song of parts. Behold the degrees, or
steps thou have made in my soul. O that thou could behold them in me, as
thy gracious goodness has intended them to my undeserving self. Thou have
showed me much, and I have followed little. Thou have inspired often, and I
have embraced seldom. Thou have proffered great things, and I have not bin
answerable. Thou have often dropped on my marble heart, that it might be made
hollow and capeable of thy honey dew, at the least wise in some small measure,
and quantity.

Small, and very small it is indeed by my own fault, as thou do know, and my
self bewail; yet somewhat it is, whatsoever it is. In respect whereof I am to
rejoice in it, being thy gift, and therefore good, although in less measure
then thou have meant it me, yet more a great deal without comparison, then I
could ever deserve. I rejoice, and praise thee, because thou have done great
things upon me. All creatures praise thee in their creation, for which they be
Homagers to thee of duty, and Tributaries of endless thanks. Men much more,
and I above all, do praise thee, or ought to praise thee, and I much more then
numbers, do owe unto thee all that can be due by a subject to his Prince, by a
child to his parent, by a lost child, or castaway to a pitiful father, by a
captive, or gally-slaue to a merciful redeemer, by a ruefull and unhappy
firebrand of hell, to a most sweet, and bountiful Savior. Even whatsoever a
creature can possibly owe unto his Creator, all that I do owe unto thy Majesty.

If I should reckon the things that have made me indebted to thy greatness, it
would ask an infinite labor. For thy benefits have no end, nor am I able to
express the greatness of the least of them. Howbeit for so much as the
commemoration of benefits received, is both a thankfulness to a benefactour,
and a stirrer of duty, and devotion in the receiver; I cannot but often
remember to thy glory, and my poor comfort, how I have been lost, and how
thou have found me; being found, I was slack, and thou did put me forward;
using first my self-love to prick me inwardly with fear of eternal
damnation; and after a while using my fear to fly sin, and to seek thee; by
seeking thee to know thee, and by knowing thee to be acquainted with thee in
some sort; by acquaintance with thee to fall in love with thee; and with love
of thee to contemn all but thee; first a little, then more; even according to
my grace with thee, and my poor endeauours.

And these be the degrees, or stairs that a good will has made in my soul.
Fear first drove me till I came at love; and when love had the mastery, it
drove away fear. Fear frighted me for doing sin; thy love urged me to
loathing of sin. For who sees thee, and knows thee, that art truly
brightness, and detesteth not sin, that is true deformity, fowlenesse, and
dishonor? Happy the fear that fears to offend thee, but how much happier
the love that delights in pleasing thee? for both I humbly thank thee, and
for continuing in both, I thank thee more. Many have both for a time, and are
at loss again at an other time; rising and falling with the tide of their
passions, and faring like those that hazard all upon the uncertain dice, and
have money in their purses at one time, and none at an other.

With me likewise it has been so ere now. But now I hope in thy grace not
so. Yea, though my frailties, and many imperfections do daily humble me in my
own eyes; yet thy grace makes me bold to say, that thy fear, and love has
now gotten some strength, and taken root in me. The which thou have shown
unto me, as to other thy servants, by some signs, and tokens, that thou
give us, to encourage us the more in thy service. And these are daily
amendment, or care of amendment, and all those graces, and strength, that
follow thereof. Which are joy and quiet of mind in thy service; obeying thee
without repining, loss without grudging, having chaste thoughts without
corruption, patience without murmuring, humility without affecting, fear
without scruple or despair, truth without doubleness, and such like.

But in particular I have noted these things following, which I account not
only signs, but also exceeding great benefits of thine. And which it
behooves every soul that has them, as well to be mindful of, to be
thankful; as of his sins, to be penitent; and sorrowful for them.

The first and greatest is, a great good liking I have to be rather subject,
and under in a mean sort, if it pleased thee so, then to be over others in the
best sort that can be in the world. Knowing well my own exceeding weakness,
and insufficiency to govern others, that have spoiled my self well-neere
with governing but one: and also seeing that government has always
multiplicity of business, Eccli. 28.
and business cannot be without many neglige^ces, which (unless thy grace be
marvelous great) do turn thy face from us daily more and more, and put us
quite from our by as to heauen-ward.

An other benefit it has pleased thee to bestow on me, which is a desire,
and love I have to be always reading, or hearing talk of thee, either in
sermons, or otherwise, if my spare time and vocation do permit me; which if it
do not, it contents me yet to think of thee often. And this thy benefit has
in me also two more with it, which I should not miss for any thing.

The first is, that I regard not the style, or eloquence of one, or other, but
the sense, and spirit of the writer, or preacher; thinking it ever an argument
of great imperfection in me, to hear him for the style, or tongue, and to be
left to nouices rather, that know not yet what thy service means; or rather
to Jndians and Ethiopians that are drawn to know thee first with trifling
things, as rings, bells, and looking-glasses, that pleased them, and made them
first to love thy servants, and by little and little to listen to them, and
afterward to believe them, and to acknowledge thy truth. Neither do thy
servants, and preachers (though greatly, and diversely endued by thee with
nature, and art) use to affect eloquence in their preaching. Or if they do, it
is but toserue our vicious, and curious ears, that will not be drawn to thee
without many words, and devices, and much persuasion. All messengers are alike
to me, that come with tidings from thee: let them stut or speak plain, all is
one to me, so they tell me true. My love does easily supply all defects that
may be.

The second is, that when I hear a virtue commended, I think not straight,
that I come near the perfection of it. Or when I hear a vice, or notorious
sin inueighed against; thy mercy is such toward me, that I think not
straight of such, or such a one to be touched, but only my self, either in
act, or will, if thy grace had not let me; or else I am moved thereby to
compunction for my former life past, or for others in general, that are yet
entangled in the same sin.

It is also another great benefit of thine, that of thy goodness thou put me
often in mind of my own weakness for perseverance, or constancy in resisting
sin, or temptation, as of my self, but only by thee. And to that end I often
pray to thee still for more grace, and further supply of thy gentleness toward
me. And in receiving any grace of thee, I am always humbled by it in respect
of thy free bounty and liberality and my own unworthiness, that can no ways
deserve it.

O my Sauidur I cannot think of these thy benefits so great, without blushing;
that ever thou should bestow them so freely upon so poor a worm of the
earth, and so ungrateful a creature, as I have been, and am. And yet not
here an end of thy benefits. Which the further I wade into, the further (me
think) I am from an end. Yet two or three more (with thy leave) I can not but
speak of, because they are comforts also, and tokens to me, that I am in thy
grace. Grant I beseech thee, that I may be thankful.

I have been soon angry ere now, and long in pleasing. And that either through
strength of my passion, and little heed how thou frownedst upon me all the
while; or else for that I thought it unworthy of a high mind to be soon pleased
with out much mediation first. And so (as the devil would have it) I have made
two or three sins of one. But now through thy grace most chiefly, and my
own endeavor, and watch (which is also thy grace) I have in a manner killed
the heart of this infirmity; and do prepare my self against it at the first
encounter, when occasion is. If I happen to be disgraced, disdained, or
flouted, none of these (I thank thee) disturb me within; or if they do, thy
grace is with me by and by, to amend my self by it in somewhat, or to pity
them that wrong me without cause, or think it sent me for my trial, or
mortification.

I find that the Philosophers had these virtues also; but I perceive it was for
pride much-what, and praise of men. And they thought it a high degree of
virtue, if they had done a fault to go into the market place, and publish it
there, and to lay themselves open to every man's reprehension. But this to do,
as it may be scandalous, so I see it not practiced by any of thy servants. And
yet if it be done, magistro, et fratri, (as S. Hierome says) I hold it not
good to conceal any thing either done, or intended. I seek not praise of men,
but simply to please thee. And I can take a reprehension in good part, though
told me in the worst manner.

The Philosophers have another opinion, that he that profits in virtue, shall
never dream they do ill, no more then a beast (they say) will go out of the
way he is used to, although he be turned loose, and the reins on his neck.
But this I know by thy grace is no certain sign. For the enemy when he cannot
fasten on us waking, will delude us sleeping, yea and make us believe we sinned
when we did not, if we gave no provocation to it waking, which we must labor
to avoid.

In all my contracts, bargains, and promises, I am very scrupulous of my
words, that they prove true. And I use to ask much counsel, if there be any
likelihood of injustice. I thank thy goodness for it; I have as much care of
this, as I have of the title I deal withal; especially toward my inferiors.

One common infirmity I am careful to prevent. And that is ingratitude, a
churlish and unmannerly sin; that reigns both in court and country. I had
rather lie fast for debt, then be ingrate. It is worth a man's study to satisfy
where one is beholding; and rather to my inferiors, and equals, then to my
betters, though necessary to both.

One miserable gulf I have escaped by thy grace, which I beseech thee of thy
goodness to continue to my lives end. And that is aptness to take scandal.
He is half way in hell, that will be soon scandalized. All the world is full
of scandals. It is called scandalum pusillorum, Scandal of the weak. If I see
a Saint do naught, yet by thy grace I will not do naught; but look to my self
the better for it. No abuse of religion shall weaken my faith. The thing abused
I like never the worse for the abuse, but the better. Being the devils doing,
to raise scandal on that which is good, to take that which is good away. If
Churchmen excommunicate for money, and absolve for money, and take more of a
rich man, then of a poor; is the Church of less authority for their abuse? I
cannot think with my self, what corruption can scandalize me. And this is thy
grace, with many others daily growing on me. And which thou know I speak not
to my praise, but to thine, that art the giver. Thou give both velle, and
perficere. I endeavor, though but weakly sometimes; perform it thou, for thy
mercies sake, and and make me still stronger and stronger. Amen.

FINIS.

