The Saints Legacies: OR, A COLLECTION of certain PROMISES out of the word of
God.

Collected for private use, but published for the comfort of Gods people: By
ANNE PHOENIX.

Believe the Promises: so shall you prosper.

By believing and applying the Promises, we come to participate of the divine
Nature. 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious
Promises, that by these we might be partakers of the divine Nature.

The third Edition, corrected and amended.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. Roystone in Ivy-Lane. 1633.

TO THE HAPPY SOCIETY of all true Believers.
Gracious Believers,
KNowing you to be the only heirs of those rich and precious promises, which
it has pleased our gracious Father freely to give unto his freely beloved
Children: I have presumed without your knowledge, to bequeath unto you a
fatherless child brought forth into the world with out the parents knowledge,
hoping you will not be unwilling to let it pass under your favorable
protection. For the subject matter of it, it is very beautiful, and of such
use, as no child of God can pass to Heaven without it, and in that regard, it
shall be no shame unto you whom the Lord has honored with the grace of
believing, to accept of this small treatise from one that desires your
prospering in your souls and bodies. There is no blemish in this that I
dedicate unto you, but such as came by the hands of the unskilful bringer
forth of it, which only minded their own good in it. And weighing daily the
beauty of it, and the sweet refreshing strength which flowed from it, for the
overcomming of those three deadly enemies, the Devil, Sin, and the World,
they desired that God would be pleased to move the minds of some of his most
skilful workmen, to put to their hands to frame a more perfect work upon so
perfect a subject, and to give a more comely form, to this so beautiful a
subject, and till then they intended to smother in their bosoms the beauty of
this, rather then to bring it forth with the blemishes of their unskilfulnesse.
But the good that may be gained by it being unutterable, I hope grace in the
hearts of Gods people will cause them, like the Be, suck out the sweet and
nourishing virtue of these fragrant flowers, that grow here and there in the
garden of Gods word, and not with discontent to cast away this pleasant posie,
gathered out of the celestial Eden of the sacred Scriptures, because an
unskilful hand, and indeed unworthie, has bound them up together, not so
orderly as might please the curious eye of man, no nor their own, neither was
it their aim so to do. If any gain any good by it, the gatherer of these
sweet flowers together, neither deserves nor desires thanks, for they intended
it to none but to themselves, and some private friends, whose importunity
wrung some copies from the^, and now without their consent have published it.
And now since it is published and cannot be stopped, the Lord cause it to work
in all his, according to that which he has given the promises for to work in
the hearts of his people, even to make them partakers of the divine nature. 2.
Pet. 1.4. and as a means to make the^ to take every day a little posie from
the rest, one of the promises gathered together, and apply it to thy self, see
how thou stand in need of it, and every word in it, and then apply it to thy
self by faith, and let it stir thee up to go to God in prayer for the
accomplishme^t of them unto thee, then wait in the diligent use of all means
for the gaining of them, and you shall find God not only making you heirs of
promises, but you shall be comfortable possessours of those many good things
which God has promised to believers. The more you meditate and the oftener you
pray upon them, the more good will you see in them, and find flow from them. I
say no more, but I doubt not, but your experiences of good by these promises
will be more then I can make known unto you I desire the God of mercies, our
loving father, in our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom all the promises are Yea and
Amen, to make you daily find experimentally, the truth of al his gracious
promises.

TO THE SAME Right Honorable and happy Society of all true Believers
militant in England: A Friend to you, and the Author, wishes fullness of
grace, peace, and heavenly comfort, certain assurance; sealed evidence, and
seasonable entrance into, and possession of the celestial, promised,
incorruptible, undefiled and never fading inheritance.
BEloved Believers, both you and I, are infinitely beholden to our everliving
Father, who has made his will and given all us his children great wealth, rich
portions, and large Legacies. Now, in present possession, Graces, and comforts,
in unshaken expectation and assured reversion, perfection and eternal glory.
We are greatly beholding to Iehova, for his will damnatorie, directorie,
hortatorie, correctorie, but most of all for his will consolatorie, in which,
he salves all our sores, physics all our sicknesses, medicines al our
maladies, Psalm. 103.4.
heales all our diseases, and crowns us with loving kindness and tender
mercies? And surely we are all of us much beholding to the holy Author of this
sweet (though little) book, who has so piously, painefully, and profitably
perused the holy will of our heavenly Father, and wisely sought and found out
and put into our hands, the spiritual portion, and soule-legacies, given and
bequeathed unto us by our best friend, many of which, most of us scarce knew
of, few sought and sued for them, and very few comfortably enjoyed and wisely
and diligently used, to the donours glory and their own good. Careless
children, come oftentimes to be beholding unto their more careful brethren and
thriving friends, who save all they have, sue for all that is promised, and
seek for all they hear of: so is it here, we careless, negligent, poor and
ill thriven Christians, must be beholding to this careful, diligent, rich and
wellthriven author, who obeyes Paul's counsel 1 Cor. 12 31.
1 Cor. 12 31. Couets earnestly the best gifts and will not suffer the heavenly
Father, to purse and keep a penny that is due, to withold grace or comfort
(which he has promised) in whole, or degree, but he shall hear of his
promise, and if he do not presently fulfill according to covenant, a petition
is spedily drawn, to be preferred in the court of heaven, and an advocate
prepared lesus Christ the righteous. 1 Ioh. 2.1
1 John. 2.1. Suite (by prayer) begun, and in an eager pursuit continued, till
the thing promised be performed.

This little book, and private practice of the author (who has sued for all
these Legacies, and in some good measure has attained the same, and thereby is
become spiritually rich) will sufficiently prove what I have spoken. We are
much beholden to this author, for letting us see our portion and legacies in
our fathers will and setting us a work both by pen and practice to sue for the
same.

The volume is little, but the virtue contained in the same is great. The book
is extraordinary, being altogether for application and practice. The scope and
drift of it is, to furnish believers with abundance of good; to free them from
all sins inward, outward, secret, and open; To fill them with all graces in
life, power, and exercise; To bring them comfort in, and seasonable deliverance
from, all their troubles; To draw down upon their souls and bodies abundance
of blessings of all sorts and natures: to give them full assurance of certain
and seasonable entrance into glory, and to give them fast hold of heaven.

There are many, I know, that will little regard it: the profane person will
not like it, for it is full of holiness: the carnal protestant will not
discern of it, nor relish it, for it is spiritual: the dissembling hypocrite
will not well approve of it, for it will rob him of his Rimmon slay his Mrs., his
Delilah, his Herodias, his daling sin, it will tell him, if he applies
promises, he must keep the conditions, obey praecept, and put every iniquity
though never so pleasurable or profitable far way from his Tabernacles. But the
honest hearted and sinceere believer will approve of it, prize it, use it, and
profit by it.

And not to overcommend my commodity, as one desirous to make it more vendible
and sailable (for neither I, nor its author (God is witness) aim at any such
thing, but at the spiritual good of their souls unto whom it shall come) this
little book, like a well filled little Apothecaries shop, contains within it
heavenly receipts of all sorts, wholesome physic of every kind for expelling
and curing all sorts of diseases and sicknesses incident to Saints, and for the
corroborating and strengthening of new nature, and for keeping the spiritual
man in good health, lusty and strong, able for Gods service, Phil. 2.12.
and for working out his own salvation with fear and trembling. What here I
speak unto one believer, I intend for all.

Has sin, that deadly poison infected thee? Lo here in this little book an
Antidote, a preservative which will extract and expel this poison. Has this
serpent so fiery stung thee? Numb. 21.8.
Lo here the Brazen Serpent upon the pole. Has it beggered and undone thee?
Ioh. 3.14, 15.
Behold a way in this book, how thou may become rich. Does it daily trouble
thee, will it needs tyranize and dominere over thee? This little book will
learn thee to depose this Tyrant, Romans 6.14.
and tell thee he shall not have dominion and Lordship over thee. Has it
stricken thee dead? Lo here means of reviving and inliving thee, to an happy
life of grace. Does it threaten thy ruin? Lo here physic for thy fears, 1
Cor. 15.35.
death has lost its sting, sin is destroyed, death shall fully and finally
free thee from it. Art thou hunted like a poor lamb by the hellish devouring
Lion, Satan, and chased before this infernal dog, like a silly Dear, in
temptations? Lo here a thicket, a shelter, a shepherd, under which thou may
repose and rest thy self in safety. Art thou overcome with his wily
stratagems? Lo here wisdom. Art thou beaten down with his power? Lo here
strength. Fear thou the fiery darts of this evil one? Lo here a little
housefull of targets, sheilds and buklers,( Ephesians. 6.16.
promises applied by faith) which will repel and quench them. Job. 6.4.
Do Gods terrors set themselves in array against thee? are Gods arrows in
thee? does his flaming wrath burn in thy bosom, and is likely to consume
thee? Lo streams of mercy and grace from a refreshing fountain, fluent in the
pipes of the promises; by thy hand of faith turn the cock, and the cool water
of Gods grace and mercy shall flow forth upon thy soul, and allay its burning
heat, and scorching inflammations. Does the wily world endeavor to entangle and
inveagle thee by its lures and snares? Lo here liberty, freedom better things
propounded, and promised, which believers do for the present in some measure
enjoy, and shall have a most certain and full possession of afterward.
Want thou Grace, comfort, deliverance, blessing, or any good thing? Behold
here thou may have them, to the great joy of theine heart, and content of
thy Spirit.

Set faith a work to draw out what thou want, and thou shall have it. Suck
these sweet and heavenly breasts of God by the mouth of thy faith; open these
pipes and veins of the promises, which run so full of mercy, grace, truth,
comfort, joy and peace, for every beelever, by faith; and thou shall be satiate
with every good thing.

Lest I should make too great a porch for this little house, and too great gates
for this little city, I will conclude, with an exhortation to all my beloved
brethren and sisters, which are believers, to perfect their faith by
application of the promises, both of these in this sweet little book, and of
all others, contained in the Old and New Testament.

Suffer not GODS promises (as I may so say) to milk themselves, do you draw
them, let not good rest with God, which you may have, by believing and begging,
to your great comfort and enriching, but take Gods commodities off his hand,
trade with that wealthy Merchant in the far Country, the Lord Jesus in
heaven, for his rich commodities of graces and comforts, and glorious hopes
until you be rich and wealthy, and for this purpose cause those two good
factours, Faith and Prayer, founded upon and quickened and confirmed by the
precious promises, always to trade for you in heaven, until you come thither
your selves. I would desire all believers to make this their pocket book that
it may solicit and woo them to prayer, make solid and firm their faith,
increase their graces, co^forts, and heavenly hopes, prepare them for enduring
the storms of trouble and tempests of temptations, and may encourage them in
holy weldoing and christian perseverance unto the end. Heh. 6.12
Now brethren; my hearts desire is, that ye be not slothful, but followers
of them, who through faith and patience inherit the promises.

That you may be inheritours of them, it shall be my daily prayer unto the Lord
my God, to bestow upon your hearts to use all good means, for the attaining
of the good, in these and other promises of God unto his people. That he would
teach and enable you to meditate upon them diligently day and night, to believe
the^ firmly, to apply the^ severally, particularly, personally, to sue for them
earnestly by prayer constant and fervent, to wait for their promised
accomplishment by patience, that so you may enjoy the good of them here and
hereafter, which God in mercy grant unto me, and also you. Amen.

To the Reader.
MAn which at the beginning was created happy, Genesis 1.26.
Ephesians. 2.12.
having now lost God and his image, Ephesians. 2.2.3.
is of all earthly creatures become most miserable, no less then a slave of
the Devil, a child of wrath, and an heir of eternal damnation. 2. Cor. 4.4
This is not the estate of a few only, but of all mankind out of Christ; for
we are all by nature under the curse. Gal. 3.10
The best, Ephesians. 2.3.
before their conversion, were by nature children of wrath, even as others: for
every woman's child did fall equally in Adam: Romans 5.12.
hence it comes to pass, that no man by nature is now in better esteem with
God then other. Cain and Abel as children of the first Adam only were equally
miserable; the like may be said of us all, Romans 3.9.
for both Jews and Gentiles are come under sin. And as the Psalmist says, Ps.
14.3.
We are all gone out of the way, we are altogether become filthy, there is
none righteous, no not one. Oh that men and women had their eyes enlightened,
and judgments convinced of that woeful plight in which naturally they are!
Oh! were their hearts thorrowly laden therewith, surely they would not long
content themselves therein. The truth is, 1 John. 5.19.
most in the world are spiritually blind, 1 Cor. 2.
and cannot discern their own misery; Ephesians. 2.1.^
and spiritually dead too, and cannot be affected with it: The Holy Ghost
says thus of them; Ephesians. 4.1 ^ 19.
They walk in the vanity of their mind, having their understanding darkened,
and are strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance which is in them,
because of the hardness of their hearts: who being past feeling have given
themselves unto wan tonnesse, to work all uncleanness with greediness. Such
as these, are so far from having any right to Gods promises, that for the
present they are under the curse, Deuteronomy. 27. ult. Deuteronomy. 28.^8.63.
and consequently in the dint of all the plagues and thretnings in Gods book.
Wherefore let not such as yet challenge any comfort from the Promises, but let
them rather labor to the uttermost of their power, in using all good means to
be made capable and sit subjects for mercy revealed in the Promises. Is it not
pity so many sweet promises of life should be made, and yet thou die and be
damned notwithstanding? Pray fervently to God that he would touch thy heart
with grief for all thy sins, Act. 2.37 Luke 15.1 2 Cor. 1.^ 20, 21.2^
and work in thee a clear apprehension of thine own unworthiness, and that
he would bestow faith on thee, that by it thou may be able to go wholly out
of thy self to God, through Jesus Christ for salvation.

We having departed from him who is the God of all grace and consolation, are
fallen into an estate of all baseness desolation, and misery; and cannot be
recovered again into the former estate of spiritual life and happiness,
unless we be brought again to him who is the foundation of life and
happiness, even the living God: and brought to him we can never be, but by
Faith, Heh. 11.6.
which is nothing else but the going out of the soul to god through Christ, to
fetch a new principal of spiritual life and grace, which once in Adam we
lost, and now need. Romans 10.8, 17.
The which work of faith is not wrought but by the promises; and being wrought
in our hearts gives us a most sure right and interest unto all the promises of
grace. Heh. 6.12.17.
Thus we through faith and patience are said to inherit the promises,
therefore we are called the heirs of the promise: the promises are as well
ours, who truly believe, as heaven it self is. Now by these heavenly
Promises, 2. Pct. 1.3.
God our Father has engaged himself as a debtour to us his poor children for
all things needful to life and godliness, until that blessed time comes when
we shall be put into full possession of all things which we have now only in
promise: at that time Faith shall end in fruition, and Promises in performance.
As the soul is the life of the body, and faith the life of the soul, so are
Gods promises the life of faith. For from whence has faith his efficacy, but
because it lays hold on the free promises? but from whence have the promises
their strength? 2, Cor. 1.20.
even from the constant nature of Jehovah, who always gives a being to his
word. Desire thou faith? then take notice of Gods promises: would thou
have thy faith like the light in the Lords Sanctuary never to go out? then
acquaint thy self with Gods Promises, know them well, meditate on them,
confer about them: let them be continually in thy mind, memory, heart and
tongue. Satan labors in nothing more then to keep us in unbeleefe,
especially of particular Promises, for he knows if we believe them, 1 John 5.
we shall in all things have the victory, Ephesians 2.
come before God with boldness, Romans 15. Heh. 11.
carry peace in our own bosoms to our graves, and do, and suffer any thing
for God. Oh the abundance of sweet cordial comfort which all humble believers
draw by faith out of every promise! Now beloved, Isay 66.11 12.
these precious Promises, (our breasts of consolation) whereupon our happiness
so much depends, lie hid in the holy scripture, as veins of gold in the earth.
Surely, those that search those mines to bring to light these treasures, are
worthy of great commendation. Wherefore I doubt not but the good pains of this
blessed and faithful servant of God will find good entertainment of all the
children of the promises, that hope to entertain them, who has with great
care and good evidence of sprituall understanding discovered and compiled the
variety and use of all the promises in matters temporal spiritual, and
eternal. So that here is a medicine for every disease, and a salve for every
sore. Read them carefully and ponder them seriously, and apply them faithfully.
And I beseech the good Lord, who is the author of them, that by his holy spirit
he would make them powerful, and effectual in us. 2 Timothy 2.7.
Consider what is said, and the Lord give us understanding in all things.

RVLES TO BE OBSERVED IN READING THE PROMISES.
WHatsoever Promise is made in general to all the faithful, every one must
particularly apply it to themselves; as Genesis 3.15. the Messtah is promised to
al, every one must apply him to themselves.

2 Whatsoever promise is made to any one of the faithful (if there be not
some particular reason which ties it to his person, as was to Abraham for a
son, and his seed to inherit the land of Canaan) every challd of God has right
to it: as you may see, Iosuah, 1.5. I will not fail thee nor forsake thee.
This every one may apply to themselves, as we know the Holy Ghost applies it,
Heb. 13.5. For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Which
teaches us to do the like in all the rest of the promises.

3. Under temporal promises to the Jews, are set forth the excellent promised
graces, which God will give to his people after the coming of Christ, Ezck.
34.25, 26, 27.

4. When we read the conditions of the promises, they are not like to the
duties of the Law, made to the perfect fulfillers of them; the promises are
Evangelicall made to those which endeavor to keep them, and the maine
conditions of the^ are faith.

5. In all the promises for increase of grace, or means of grace, or for any
carthly things, we must know we shall have them so far parformed to us, as
the Lord sees good for us.

6. In our weak endeavourings to keep the Promises, we must believe the
performance to us, in, by, and through Christ; In whom all the promises of God
are yea and Amen: that is, as I conceive, confirmed and made good to us in him,
2 Cor. 1.20, when we can see nothing in our selves why they should be
performed to us, even then we are to claim them for Christ's sake; if thou be
in Christ: for if thou be not in him, no promise belongs to thee: but that
threatenings and judgments are thy pertion, and nothing else can we claim as
our due. Sorrow weeping, and howling is that which God requires of us, and not
laying hand upon the comfortable promises, till we hunger after Christ: which
God grant we may do more and more, till we come to be satisfied with his
image in the life to come. Psalm. 17.15.

THE FIRST LEGACY.
These promises I have observed for spiritual things.
First about Sin.
WHen wefinde nothing in our selves, that might move the Lord to have mercy,
then apply these promises, Isai. 43.25. I, even I am he, that blotteth out thy
transgression for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. Isai.
44.22. I have blooted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud
thy sins: return unto me, for I have redeemed thee.

Ier. 31.34. I will forgive their iniquity, and remember their sin no more.

Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean
from all your filthiness.

Isai. 57.18. I have seen his ways, and will heal him, I will lead him also,
and restore comforts unto him, and to his mourners.

These promises are free, made by the Lord, not for any thing that is in man,
as you may see, in Isaiah 43. from the 22 verse, to the 25. for the Lord says,
They had not called upon him, but wearied the Lord, brought him no offering,
yea wearied him with their sins; and yet in the 25 verse he says, for his
own sake he would forgive their sins.

These promises we shall have always need of, as at our conversion, so
afterward many times we shall in our own feeling find nothing in our selves
to persuade us of the pardon of our sins, then we must fly to these free
promises. When thou see nothing in thy self why the Lord should pardon thy
sins, and therefore doubt'st of the pardon of them, apply, I am he that puts
away thy sins for mine own sake.

When thy sins rise up as a cloud, that thou can see nothing but them,
apply, I have put away the sins as a cloud.

When thou fear the multitude of thy sins, apply, You shall be clean
from all your sins.

The 2. Legacy.
When we fear, God will remember our fins before commitred, to punish us for
them, apply Ier. 31.34. I will remember his sin no more. Ezekiel. 18.22. His
transgressions which he has committed shall not be mentioned to him, but in
the righteousness which he has done, shall he live.

Ezekiel. 33.16. None of his sins that he has committed shall be mentioned to
him.

The 3. Promise.
WHen thine often sinning causes thee to fear that God will not pardon thee,
apply, Job. 33, 27.28.29. He look eth upon men, and if any say I have sinned,
and perverted that which was right, and it profits me not: he will deliver
his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light. Lo all
these things works God, oftentimes with man. Wherefore believe not Satan that
persuades the contrary, nor let thy corruptions make thee bold to presume of
pardon; for though God promise pardon, yet it is to the penitent, not to the
presumptuous, as verse 27.

The 4. Promise.
WHen thou art at the pits brinke of despair, and art dried up with sorrow,
then go to some faithful Preacher that is able to preach Christ unto thee, and
apply these promises: Job. 33, 24, 25, 26. Then he is gracious unto him, and
says, deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom. His
flesh shall be fresher then a childs, he shall return to the days of his
youth. He shall pray unto God, and he shall be favorable unto him, and he
shall see his face with joy for he will render unto man his righteousness.

Isai. 57.19. I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace, to him that is
far off, and to him that is near, says the Lord, and I will heal him.

When thou come to the uttermost extremity for sin, apply, I will have
mercy on him, and deliver him, that he go not down to the pit.

When thou fear that God or his Ministers will not speak peace unto thee,
apply, I have received a reconciliation. I create the fruit of the lips to be
peace, to them that are far off, and to them that are near.

When thy sorrows have withered thee up, apply, He shall return as in the
days of his youth, and his flesh shall be as the flesh of a child.

If in this estate thou fear, God will not hear prayers for thee, apply,
He shall pray to God, and he will be favorable to him.

When thou fear thou shall not be able to look upon the Lord with joy,
apply, He shall see his face with joy.

When thou see not any thing in thy self, that should cause thee not to
believe this, apply, He will render to man his righteousness; which is (I
think) Christ's righteousness, for whose sake he will do it.

The 5. Promise.
WHen thou feel sin an heavy burden, and Satan pursuing thee with many
fears, by reason of the same, fly to Christ, and apply, Matthew. 11.28, 29.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest. Matt. 1.21. He shall save his people from their sins.

Romans 16.20. And the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.

Isai. 32.2. And a man shall be as a hiding place from the wind, and a covert
frrom the tempest, as rivers of waters in a dry place, as the shadow of a
great rock in a weary land. Thus does Christ to the soul that flies to him.

If Satan pursue thee, apply, He is an hiding place.

If storms of temptations and afflictions do arise, apply, He is a refuge
against the tempest.

If thy soul be ready to faint through weakness, apply, He is a river of
water in a dry place, to revive thy spirits, and as the shadow of a great
rock, under which thou may safely repose thy self. When thou find thy
sins very heavy, apply, I will ease you.

When thou have no rest in thy soul because of sin, apply, You shall find
rest to our souls. He shall save his people from their sins, both from the
punishment and the power.

If thou fear length of time in temptations, apply, The God of peace shall
bruise Satan under your feet shortly.

The 6. Legacy.
WHen thou turnest from sin, and doubtest of the pardon of it, apply, Isai.
1.18. Though your sins be as skarlet, they shall be as white as snow;
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.

Isai. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy on him, and
to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

Micah 7.18.19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. He will turn again, he
will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will
cast all their sins into the depthes of the sea. Prove. 28.13. He that
confesses and forsakes his sins shall find mercy. 1 John 1.9. If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

When thou see thy soul of a sinful color, apply, Though they be red like
crimson, they shall be as white as wool.

If thou fear God will hardly be entreated, apply, He will have mercy, for
he is ready to forgive.

If we fear that our sins have taken such strong hold upon us, as we shall
never get from them, apply, He will cleanse us from all our unrighteousness.
See God promises to be the cleanser, fear not the hardness of the work.

The 7. Legacy.
WHen thou feel many rebellio^s in thine heart and life, and would have
them not only pardoned, but subdued, apply, Hos. 14.5. I will heal their
backsliding. Which promise (as I think) contains thus much, that God will
not only pardon, but heal us, and in stead of rebellious hearts and lives,
will give us obedient hearts and lives; for as healing follows the curing of
sickness: so obedience does the curing of rebellion. Micah 7.19. He will
subdue our iniquities.

When thou feel sin very strong, fly to this promise, and apply the
strength of him that promises, against the strength of sin: it is the Lord
that has promised to subdue it; what though Sin and Satan join their force
together, yet the Lord is stronger then all their force, we need not doubt.

The 8. Promise.
When thou feel thine heart hard, and full of corruption, apply, Ezekiel.
36.26. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give
you an heart of flesh.

Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of
thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul, that thou may live.

When thou feel thine heart worldly carnal, apply, I will circumcise thine
heart. A new heart will I give thee.

When nothing will break thine heart, apply the power of Jehovah, that has
promised to cure thee, in taking away thy stony heart.

The 9. Legacy.
WHen thou can not bridle nature, but it breaks forth into violent passions,
to contention, apply, Isai. 11.6. The Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb,
and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calfe and the young Lion,
and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them. Such shall be
the power of the Gospel, that those which are by nature like Wolves and
devouring beasts, shall dwell very peaceably: and if we find our nature such,
we must apply, the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb.

Micah 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities, and will cast all our sins into
the depth of the sea: that which is cast into the Sea, as it appears not in
sight, so we cannot get it again, though we would: so will God do by our
sins, cast them out of his sight, so as we shall not return to them any
more: press him with his promise, and you shall find more then you think.

The 10. Promise.
WHen thou feel thy self in bondage to some sin, apply, John 8.32. You
shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free.

Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you.

When thou feel thy bondage that thou can not do good, or keep thy self
from evil; apply, The truth shall make you free.

If thy sins often prevail against thee, apply, Sin shall not have dominion
over you.

Psalm. 130.8. He shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

The 11. Promise.
WHen thou feel some sin so strong in thee, that thou fear it will break
out to Gods dishonor, and the blemishing of Religion, apply, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23,
24. That your whole spirit, soul and body may be preserved blameless, unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he that calls you, who
also will do it. That God which has called thee, will keep thee blameless
unto the coming of Christ: therefore use the means, and rest upon the Lords
faithfulness, which never fails them which trust in him.

2 Thessalonians. 3.3. But the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you and keep you
from evil.

1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. By cleansing (as I
think) is meant, not only from the guilt of sin, but the power of it, that
the filthiness of it shall not appear in our lives and conversations. When
sin pursues thee hard to make thee fall, do thou pursue the Lord with
prayers, for performance of this promise, and doubt not of the issue.

Micah 7.19. He will subdue our iniquities. And to these add the prayer of
Christ, John 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world,
but that thou should keep them from the evil. Now what greater evil then
sin? therefore though thy prayers be but weak against it, yet he has
prayed that was always heard, therefore fight and be sure of victory.

The 12. Legacy.
WHen thou art stayed from sin by admonition, apply, Ezekiel. 3.21. If thou
warn the righteous man, that the righteous sin not, and he does not sin, he
shall surely live, because he is warned.

When any admonish thee, obey, and it shall be life to thy soul, therefore
receive the admonition, and apply, He shall live, because he is admonished.

The 13. Legacy.
IF thou fear, God will destroy thee for thy sins, apply, Ezekiel. 18.30.
Turn your selves from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your
ruin.

Mat. 1.21. He shall save his people from their sins.

When thou fear the greatness or multitude of thy sins will be thy
destruction, apply; Iniquity shall not be your ruin.

When thou see no means of safety, apply, He (that is, Christ) shall save
his people from their sins.

The 14. Legacy.
IF thou be tempted to uncleanness, apply, Prove. 2.16. He shall deliver thee
from the strange woman.

1 Thessalonians. 5.24. Thy body shall be kept blameless until the coming of Christ.

The 15. Legacy.
IF thou can not find out thy sin, for which God corrects thee, apply,
Job. 36.9. If they be tied with the cords of affliction, then will I show them
their work, and their sins.

A wise father will not correct his child, but he will show him wherefore,
how else should he amend his fault? much more will the Lord. But we enjoy not
many promises, because we sue not for them.

Thus far about Sin, the next promises are about Grace.

The 16. Legacy.
IN doubt of salvation, apply, God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life, Joh. 3.16.

John 5.24. He that hears my word, and be leeveth on him that sent me has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from
death unto life.

John 8.51. If any man keep my saying, he shall never see death.

John 11.25. He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.
And whosoever believes in me shall never see death.

If thou doubt that thou shall perish, and not be saved, apply, He that
believes in Christ, shall not perish, but shall have everlasting life, and
shall not come into condemnation. Labor to believe these Promises, and that is
all that is required of thee, for the obtaining of what is promised.

The 17. Legacy.
WHen thou find thine heart as a wilderness barren of good, apply, Esa.
35.1, 2. The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them: and
the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the Rose. It shall blossom
abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing.

This promise is made to the Church, and every member of it may apply it to
themselves: therefore when thou feel thine heart as a desert wilderness and
waste ground, void of good, full of briars and thorns of sin, then know,
thou shall not only bring forth sweet smelling graces, like roses, but also
all abundance of the^.

Pro. ^1.28. The righteous shall flourish as a branch.

Prove. 13 4 The soul of the diligent shall be made fat.

Hos. 14.5, 6. I will be as the dew to Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly, and
cast forth his roots like Lebanon. His branches shall spread, and his beauty be
as the Olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon.

When we want means to make us fruitful, apply, The Lord will be a dew to
Israel.

When we desire to flourish and grow up in grace, apply, He shall grow as the
Lilly, his branches shall spread.

If thou would shine forth in the beauty of holiness, apply, His beauty shall
be as the Olive Tree and as the Lilies, whose glory is greater then Salomons
in all his royalty.

If thou would have thy graces send sorth a sweet smell, apply, His smell
shall be as Lebanon.

If thou fear the continuance of this estate, apply, He shall fasten his
roots, as the trees of Lebanon.

It matters not how great our barrennes be, when God will be a dew to us: it
will quickly make us fruitful, we shall bring forth fruits glorious to the
sight, as the Lilly, and as the Olive tree, and the sent of our graces shall
be a sweet smelling savor, as the trees of Lebanon. Therefore though thou
feel thy heart yet barren, and thou have used means long, and yet art not
fruitful, still use the means, and believe, for therein did Abraham glorify
God that he believed above hope, that Sarah should have a son, whose womb
was barren, and by years past child bearing: so though thine heart remain
barren in thine own feeling, after long use of means, yet still follow seeing
in the means, and believe, for we have as sure promises, and as faithful a
performer, as Abraham had, Jesus Christ, yesterday, and to day, and the same
for ever.

John 7.38. He that be leeveth on me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
water of life.

The 18. Legacy.
When thou art troubled for want of holiness, apply, Exodus 19.6. You shall be
an holy nation.

Deuteronomy.28.9. And the Lord shall establish thee an holy people unto himself.

The Lord will make thee holy, therefore Sin, nor Satan, nor wicked men cannot
hinder thy holiness: for he that makes thee holy is stronger then all, and
does what he will.

1 Thessalonians. 5.23.24. The God of peace shall sanctify you throughout, in spirit,
soul, and body. Faithful is he which calls you, which will also do it.

The 19. Legacy.
WHen thou can not offer up any sacrifice to God of prayer or praise, or thy
self in sacrifice, apply, Exodus 19.6. Ye shall be unto me a kingdom of
priests. God promises that we shall be priests, that is, such as shall offer
up sacrifice unto him, for that was the priests office. Therefore when thou
find thy self unable to pray, or praise the Lord, or to offer up thy self
to God, soul and body, strive in faith grounded on the promises, that he
which commanded, has also promised to make us a-able to do it, for he has
said, We shall be Priests, Malac. 1.11. In every place incense shall be
offered to my name, and a pure offering; which is spoken of the believing
Gentiles, therefore thou being one of them, shall be able to offer up pure
offerings.

The 20. Legacy.
WHen thou feel littlegrace, knowledge, faith, love, repentance, all very
little, apply, Job. 8.7. Though thy beginning be small, yet thy latter end
shall greatly increase.

Matthew. 13.12. Whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have
abundance.

Therefore let not thy small beginnings discourage thee; but if thou can
prove thou have some grace, then join faith and diligence together, and they
will quickly make thee rich.

The 21. Promise.
WHen thou find al thy graces very weak, and no strength to perform any
spiritual duty, either prayer or fasting, or any other duty, then apply,
Psalm 29.11. The Lord will give strength unto his people. Isa. 40.29.31. He
gives power to the faint, and to them which have no might he increases
strength. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall
mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall
walk and not faint.

When thou feel thy self faint, stay thy self with this promise, He
gives strength to him that faints.

When thou feel no power, apply, to him that has no strength he increases
power. If thou have lost thy power, then stay thy self with this, they shall
renew their strength.

If thou art ready to give over through weariness, then gather strength from
this, They shall run and not be weary, and walk and not be faint.

And if thou find not these promises performed unto thee, either thou
endeavorest not to keep the conditions, or else thou art negligent in
searching out the promises, or cold in suing for them: the Lord will be sought
to for the performance.

Isai. 41.10. I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea
I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. Isa. 26.4. Trust
thou in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.

To know there is strength in the Lord is no comfort, unless we know it shall
be for us. Therefore since it is given for a comfort, it must include this
promise, Thus the Lords strength for evermore shall be employed for our good.
Therefore when we want for either soul or body, we must fix our confidence in
him, who will-not fail us, if we seek unto him.

The 22. Legacy.
WHen thou feel thine heart dried up for want of grace, that thou can not
send forth any water of grace in thy thoughts, words, and works, apply, Isai.
44.3. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry
ground.

Isai. 58.11. The Lord shall satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy
bones, and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of waters,
whose waters fail not.

Ier. 17.8. He shall be as a tree planted by the waters, that spreads out
her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat comes: but her leaf
shall be green, and shall not be careful in the year of drought, neither
shall cease from yielding fruit.

Jer. 31.12. Their soul shall be as a watered garden.

Jam. 4.6. God gives grace unto the humble.

Isa. 35.6, 7. In the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the
desert. And the parched ground shall become a poole, and the thirsty land
springs of waters. That is, the most barren heart shall abound with grace,
according to that promise John 7. Out of their bellies shall flow rivers of the
waters of Life.

Isa. 41.17.18.19. When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none,
and their tongues fail for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of
Israel will not forsake them: I will open rivers in high places; and fountains
in the midst of the valleys: I will make the wilderness a poole of water,
and the dry land springs of water. I will plant in the wilderness the Cedar,
the Shittah tree, and the Myrtle, and the Oil tree: I will set in the desert
the Fur tree, and the Pine, and the Box tree together. So now though thou
feel thy heart barren, know that God will be thy Gardener to thy barren
heart, to make pooles, and plant pleasant grapes of graces; therefore seeing
he takes upon himself the work, fear not the badnesse of the ground, for
he will make it good as a fruitful garden.

The 23. Legacy.
IF thou feel thou want the Spirit of God, apply, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put
my Spirit within you.

Luke 11.13. If ye then being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them
that ask him.

Joel 2.28.29. I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and
your daughters shall prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your
young men shall see visions. And also upon the servants, and upon the hand
maids in those days will I pour out my Spirit.

Joh. 6.14.16.17.18. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever: even the Spirit of truth, he
dwells in you, and shall be in you, I will not leave you comfortless, I will
come to you.

When thou can not pray thy self, stay thy self on these prayers that
Christ has prayed, to the Father to give the Spirit, and he was heard in all
he prayed for, therefore thou may claim it, though thy prayers be but
weak.

The 24. Legacy.
WHen thou look upon the great love of God unto thee, and can not find
thine heart enlarged in loving God again, apply this promise, Deuteronomy, 30.9. I
will circumcise thine heart, that thou may love the Lord thy God with all
thine heart, and with all thy soul.

The 25. Legacy.
When thou can not bring thine heart to delight in the Lord, apply, Isai.
41.16. Thou shall rejoice in the Lord, and glory in the holy One of Israel.

Psalm. 89.16. In thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy
righteousness shall they be exalted.

Job. 22.26. For then shall thou have thy delight in the Almighty.

Psalm. 33.21. For our heart shall rejoice in him: because we have trusted in
his holy name.

When thou see cause of rejoicing in the Lord, and yet can not move thine
affections, apply, They shall rejoice in him.

If through many troubles and temptations, thou find thy joys often
interrupted, apply, they shall rejoice continually in thy name.

The 26. Legacy.
WHen we seele not the fear of God in our hearts, apply, Jer. 32.40. I will
put my fear in their hearts.

If we would have a reverent fear of God, when we perform any holy duty, or
at other times, as thou feel thy need, so urge the Lord with this his
promise, for he delights to be sued to, upon his promise, by his servants,
Ezekiel. 36.37. I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do
it for them.

The 27 Legacy.
When thou can not bring thine heart to praise the Lord, apply, Isai. 43.21.
This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise.

Joel 2.26. Ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the name of
the Lord your God.

Psalm. 22.29. They shall praise the Lord that seek him.

When thou see what great things God has done for thee, and find not thy
self able to set forth his praise, apply, They shall set forth my praise.

When thou find thy ungrateful heart not affected with the mercies thou
enjoyest, so as they stir thee not up to praise the Lord, apply, He shall eat
and be satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord.

The 28. Legacy.
WHen thou see thy want of wisdom makes thee not walk like a Christian, so
unblameably as thou ought apply, Jam. 1.5. If any of you lack wisdom, let
him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally, and up braideth not, and it
shall be given him.

When thou find thou want wisdom to improve thine afflictions to the
best advantage, or for the ordering of thy actions, occasions and course of
life, to Gods glory and the good of others, and thy self, then fail not to
ask wisdom, and doubt not of the obtaining of it.

The 29. Legacy.
WHen thou can not understand the voice of God in his word, or works, not
knowing what to learn by them, apply, Isa. 35.5. The ears of the deaf shall
be unstopped. That is, those that were as deaf not understanding any thing,
shall be made to hear, that is, to understand.

John 10.16. Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold, them also I must
bring, and they shall hear my voice. Which is a promise to the Gentiles, that
they shall understand the voice of God.

The 30. Legacy.
IF thou can not see into the divine mysteries of the Gospel, apply, Isai.
35.5. The eyes of the blind shall be opened. Isai. 42.7. He shall open the
eyes of the blind. Luke 4.18. He has sent me to recover sight to the blind.

These places are what Christ will do to his people, therefore we need not
fear our disease, seeing Christ is our Physician. If every creature does that,
for which it was ordained, then he will surely do that which he was sent to
do of the Father, to give sight to the blind.

The 31. Legacy.
WHen thou see a good way, and have no power to walk in it, or art to
perform any duty, ordinary or extraordinary, and feel no strength to walk
in that way, apply, Ezekiel. 36.27. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause
you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

When thou look at the greatness of the duty which God commands, look also
at the largeness of his promises for the keeping of them, and then thou will
not be discouraged at it. What matters it what he commands, seeing we have his
promise?

If thou fear the strictness of thy ways that thou shall not be able to
walk in them, though thou step into them sometimes, strengthen thy faith in
this promise, I will give thee my Spirit to cause thee to walk in my ways.
Can sin or Satan then resist? Nay surely the Spirit is stronger, and greater
is he that is in us, then those that are against us. And when we see great
duties which God commands, and fear we shall want strength to do them,
apply, He has said, You shall keep my judgments, and do them.

Isai. 40.31. They shall run, and not be weary; they shall walk, and not
be faint. That is, Those which of themselves could not step one step, shall
be able to run swiftly in the ways of God.

The 32. Legacy.
WHen thou want memory to remember the word of God, apply, John 14.26. But
the Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name,
he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you,

The 33. Legacy
WHen thou see thine ignorance, and fear thou shall not be able to
glorify God as thou might, if thou had more knowledge, stir up thy
self to desire, and apply, Jer. 31.33.34. Thus says the Lord, I will put my
Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and they shall all
know me, says the Lord, from the greatest to the least. Hosea 2.20. Thou
shall know the Lord, Prove. 1.23. I will pour out my Spirit unto you, I will
make known my words unto you.

Psalm. 25.9.12.14. The meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will he
teach his way. What man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the
way that he shall choose. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him:
and he will show them his covenant.

Prove. 2.4.9.11.12.13. If thou seckest her as silver and searchest for her as
for treasures. Then shall thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and
equity, yea every good path. Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding
shall keope thee, to deliver thee from the way of the evil man, from the man
that speaks froward things: who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in
the ways of darkness. Isai. 11.9. The earth shall be full of the knowledge
of the Lord. Prove. 8.17. Those that seek me early, shall find me. Isai.
35.8. The fool shall not err. John. 7.17. if any man will do his will, he
shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my
self. Isai. 32.3, 4. The eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the
ears of them that hear shall harken. The heart also of the rash shall
understand knowledge.

When thou think of the great mystery of God manifest in the flesh, and of
one divine essence, and three Persons, and see thine own inability to
conceive of this great God, apply, They shall all know the Lord: The heart of
the fool shall understand.

When we fear God will not reveal his will to us; apply, I will pour out my
mind to you. He will teach the humble his ways. he will teach him the way he
shall choose.

If thou fear that though God reveal his will, yet thy ignorance is such,
as thou shall not be able to understand it, apply, I will cause you to
understand. Thou shall understand judgment, righteousness, equity, and every
good path.

If thou fear men will draw thee away to error, apply, Counsel shall
preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee and deliver thee from the
evil way, and from the man that speaks froward things, and from them that
leave the ways of righteousness, to walk in the ways of darkness. The
fools shall not err. He shall know the doctrine whether it be of God.

The 34. Legacy.
IF thou desire Grace, and thy desires are not satisfied, apply, psalm. 34.7.
Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of
thine heart.

Psalm. 145.19. He will fulfill the desires of them that fear him.

Psalm. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.

Matthew. 5, 6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness, for they shall be filled.

Prove. 10.24, The desire of the righteous shall be granted.

Do thou desire grace? fear thou God will not grant thy desires? apply,
He shall give thee thy hearts desire: He will fulfill thy desire.

Fear thou that if he give grace, it will be but a little? apply, Open thy
mouth wide, and I will fill it. Thou shall be filled.

Isai. 30.18. Blessed are all they which wait for him. He will certainly have
mercy upon thee at the voice of thy cry, when he hears he will answer.

When thou beginnest to faint with waiting, apply, He will certainly have
mercy upon thee.

The 35. Legacy.
When thou feel thine heart dead, that it will not stir to God or
goodness, apply, Ps. 22.26. Your heart shall live for ever.

Prove. 3.21.22. Keep sound wisdom and discretion, so shall they be life unto
thy soul.

Isai. 57.15. I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive
the heart of contrite ones.

Amos. 5.4. Seek the Lord and ye shall live.

When thou fear thou shall never overcome the deadness of thine heart,
apply, Your heart shall live. Seek the Lord, and ye shall live.

When thou have got some life, and fear the losing of it, apply, Your hearts
shall live for ever.

The 36. Legacy.
WHen thou fear thou shall fall away, and beginnest to decline, apply, 1.
Cor. 1.8. Christ shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be
blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord
always before me: because he is at my right hand I shall not be moved.
Psalm, 145.14. The Lord upholdeth all that fall: and raises up all those that
be bowed down. Psalm. 92.12.14. The righteous shall flourish like the
Palm Tree. He shall grow like a Cedar in Lebanon. They shall still bring forth
fruit in old age: they shall be fat and flourishing. Psalm. 1.3. And he shall be
like a tree: planted by the rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in
his season: his leaf also shall not wither, Psalm. 31.24. He shall stablish
thine heart. Job. 11.15.27. Thou shall be steadfast, thine age shall be
clearer then the noone day, thou shall shine forth, thou shall be as the
morning. Judge. 5.31. They that love the Lord shall be as the Sun, when it
goes forth in his might. Now we see that nothing can hinder the Sun in his
might, but it chaseth away the darkness and clouds before it, and cease not
till it has run his race: so shall the child of God, for the Lord has said
it; we need not doubt of it. If thou fear thine own weakness, and the
power of temptation, with the subtilty of Satan, apply, That God whose power
and wisdom over-reacheth all other, has said, He will confirm you to the
end. He shall stablish thine heart, thy leaf shall not fade. Art thou hard
pursued by sin and Satan, apply, that God whose power and wisdom
over-reacheth all, he has said, He will stablish thee. If thou be ready to
fall and faint, apply, The Lord upholdeth all them that fall, and lifts up
all them that are ready to fall: thou shall pot slide. It thou fear that
though thou be kept from sin, yet thy graces shall decay, apply, The righteous
shall flourish as a Palm Tree, and shall grow as a Cedar in Lebanon. They
shall bring forth fruit in their age, they shall be fat and flourishing: thou
shall bring forth fruit in season: thou shall be stable; thine age shall
appear more clear then noone day. Thou shall shine as the morning.

The 37. Legacy.
WHen we are fallen and sear the Lord will leave us so, then apply, Psalm.
55.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall
never suffer the righteous to be moved.

Psalm. 37.24.28. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for the
Lord upholdeth him with his hand. For the Lord loves judgment, and forsakes
not his Saints, they are preserved for ever.

Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart
from me. When thou art fallen, and fellest a great load of sin or misery
upon thee, and no power to unload thy self, thy graces so weak, that they will
not help thee, and therefore thou think thy state desperate, apply, Though
he fall, he shall not be cast off, for the Lord puts under his hand.
Therefore though sin and misery be never so heavy to press thee down, yet
that powerful hand of God, when thou art at the lowest, being under thee,
shall easily lift thee up, thou have his promise he will not suffer thee to
fall for ever.

The 38. Legacy.
When the Lord has for saken thee in thine own feeling, and thou searest he
will not return again, apply, Isai. 54, 7, 8, 9, 10. For a small moment have
I forsaken thee: but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I
had my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, says thee Lord thy Redeemer. For this is as the waters of Noah
unto me; for as I have sworn that the Waters of Noah shall no more go over
the earth: so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke
thee. For the mountains shall depart, and the hills shall be removed: but my
kindness shall not depart from thee; neither shall the covenant of my peace
be removed, says the Lord that has mercy on thee.

Genesis 17.7. I will establish my covenant betwixt thee and me, and everlasting
covenant to be a God unto thee.

Deuteronomy. 31.8. I will be with thee, I will not fail thee, neither forsake thee,
fear not, neither be dismayed.

1 King. 6.13. I will not for sake my people.

2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you while you be with him.

Job. 8.20. Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man.

Job. 36.5. Behold, God is mighty, and despises not any

Hosea 2.19.20. I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea I will betroth thee
unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in
mercies. I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness.

The 39. Legacy.
WHen thou feel thy vileness, and fear the Lord will loath thee for it,
apply, Levit. 26.11. My soul shall not abhor you.

Hosea 14.4. I will love them freely, for mine anger is turned away from them.

Deuteronomy. 7.13. I will love thee.

John 14.21.23. He that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will
love him, and will manifest my self to him, my Father will love him, and we
will come unto him, and make our abode with him.

Jer. 3.41. I will rejoice over them to do them good.

When thou see a multitude of sins, so that thou seem most loathsome,
apply, My soul shall not loath you.

When thou see nothing in thy self that should move him to love thee, but
all to the contrary, apply, I will love them freely.

If thou fear thy many sins will cause the Lord not to delight in thee,
apply, I will delight in thee.

If thou fear thy sin will cause the Lord to hide himself from thee, apply,
I will show mine own self unto him.

The 40. Legacy.
WHen thou feel thy spiritual poverty, apply, Math. 5.3. Blessed are the
poor in spirit; for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Isai. 66.2. To him will I look, says the Lord, that is poor and of a
contrite spirit, and trembles at my words.

When thou feel thy sins many, and thy graces very little, and therefore
fear that such a miserable creature as them art, shall not inherit heaven,
apply, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.

If thou fear the Lord will not look upon thee, apply To him will I look,
says the Lord, that is of a contrite spirit.

The 41. Legacy.
WHen thou art in a strait, and know not what to choose, either in some
truth, or in something that is to be done, that thou know not what to
choose, apply, Psalm, 25.22. Him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose,
verse 13. His soul shall dwell at ease.

Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

Prove. 16.3. Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be
established.

Isai. 30.21. And thine ear shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is
the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn
to the left.

Isai. 58.11. The Lord shall guide thee continually.

Isai. 61.8. I will direct their work in truth.

Jer. 31.9. I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters, in a straight
way wherein they shall not stumble.

When thou doubt'st of some truth, apply, He shall teach him the way that he
shall choose, his soul shall dwell at ease. Thine ears shall hear a voice
behind thee, saying, this is the way walk in it. I will direct thy way in
truth.

When thou art thinking what course to take, and fear thou shall not know
what the Lord would have thee to do, apply, Thy thoughts shall be directed, he
shall direct thy ways.

When thou fear thy weakness will at sometimes carry thee astray, apply,
The Lord will guide thee continually. The Lord will lead thee in a strait way,
that thou shall not stumble.

The 42. Legacy.
WHen thou fear that Satan by his power and subtlety will cause thee to
fall, and art troubled with his temptations, apply, Genesis 3.15. He shall bruise
his head. Therefore fear not, for Christ has overthrown all his power and
subtilty, that he cannot do us any harm. Psalm. 19.3.4. Surely he shall
deliver thee from the snare of the fowler. He shall cover thee with his
feathers: and under his wings shall thou trust: his truth shall thy shield and
buckler.

Romans 16.20. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.

Does Satan press thee with strong temptations, and fear thou his power,
apply, He shall bruise his head. He will cover thee under his wings, and thou
shall be safe under his feathers, his strength shall be thy buckler.

Fear thou his subtilty? apply, He shall deliver thee from thee snare of
the fowler, and bruise his head, wherein lies all his power and plots.

The 43. Legacy.
When thou can mot profit by the Word of God, or his works of mercy, or
afflictions, apply, Isai. 48.17. I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to
profit, which leads thee by the way that thou should go.

Mat. 21.41. The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a
Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.

This is a promise, that the Gentiles shall bring forth the fruits of the
Gospel, therefore every believing Gentile may apply it.

The 44. Legacy.
WHen thou find thy self not like the people of God, either in heart or
life, apply, Jer. 32.39. I will give them one heart, and one way.

When thou see thine heart not like the people of God, either in their
affection of God, or his people, or ordinances, or in their forrowing for
sin, apply, I will give them one heart.

When thou see thy life and conversation not so holy as the people of God,
apply, I will give them one way.

The 45. Legacy.
IF thou would have the blessing of the Lord to rest upon thee, apply,
Psalm 5.12. The Lord will bless the righteous.

Deuteronomy. 7.13. I will bless thee.

Psalm. 3.8. Thy blessing is upon thy people.

Psalm. 24.5. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness
from the God of his salvation.

Psalm. 115.12.13. The Lord will bless us, he will bless the house of Israel,
he will bless the house of Aaron. He will bless them that fear the Lord,
both small and great.

The 46. Legacy.
IF thou would be a blessing in thy place, apply, Genesis 12.2. I will bless
thee, and thou shall be a blessing.

Ezekiel. 34.26. I will make them about my hill a blessing.

The 47. Legacy.
When thou separatest thy self from the wicked in their corrupt worship and
manners, apply. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. I will dwell in them, and walk in them,
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people, Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord; and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will receive you; and will be a father unto you, and ye shall be
my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

Thus far of Grace; the next Promises are about the means of Grace, either
ordinary, or extraordinary.

The 48. Legacy.
IN every Ordinance thou may apply this promise, Isai. 12.3. With joy shall
you draw water out of the Wels of salvation. Now in that it is said, out of the
Wels of salvation, and not Well, I think we ought to apply it to every
ordinance of God, so as we are to use them with a comfortable persuasion, that
we shall receive abundance of grace from them. As the Lord promises we shall
draw waters from out of them, we shall not only use them but draw from them
with joy. Therefore when we pray, meditate, hear, confer, fast, in every
duty, apply this promise, and you shall find him faithful which promises.

The 49. Legacy.
WHen thou prayest apply these promises for the strengthening of thy faith, and
for thy hearing. Mat. 7.7. Ask, and it shall be given you, seek and you
shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you.

Matthew. 6.6. Pray to the Father which sees in secret, and thy Father which
sees in secret shall reward thee openly.

Mat. 21.22. And all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing ye
shall receive it.

John 14.13.14. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, I will do it.

John 16.24. Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy may be full.

John 15.7. Ask what you will, and it shall be done unto you.

Isai. 65.24. Before they call I will answer, and whiles they are yet
speaking, I will hear.

Job. 22.7. Thou shall make thy prayers unto him, and he shall hear thee, and
if thou seek him he will be found.

The 50. Legacy.
WHen thou meditatest, apply these promises, Prove. 14.22. Mercy and truth shall
be to them that devise good.

Psalm. 103.17.18. The loving kindness of the Lord endures for ever, to them
which think upon his commandments to do them.

Phil. 4.8, 9. Think on these things, which ye have both learned, and
received, and heard, and seen in me, and the God of peace shall be with you.

If thou desire mercy, or the truth of God to be for thy good, or the
loving kindness of the Lord to be for ever toward thee, and that God which
brings peace with him, to be with thee, then meditate on good things, and with
such a meditation, as may stir thee up to practice, and then all these
promises shall surely be performed to thee. And because meditation is an hard
duty, therefore encourage thy self to it by the benefit it brings, and it
being a way of God, he will give thee his Spirit to cause thee to walk in it.

The 51. Legacy.
IN meditating conferring, and reading of the word of God, apply, Joshua 1.8.
Let not this book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day
and night, that thou may observe to do according to all that is written
therein: for then thou shall make thy way prosperous, and then thou shall have
good success.

The 52. Legacy.
IN reading of the Word, if we understand not, apply these promises, Prove.
1.23. In will pour out my Spirit unto you. I will make known my words unto you.

Prove. 1.4. It gives subtilty to the simple: to the young men knowledge and
discretion.

Psalm. 19.8. The Commandment of the Lord is pure, inlightning the eyes.

The 53. Legacy.
When thou can not speak in conference to edification, but feel thine
heart shut up, then apply, Joh. 7.38. He that believes on me, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water.

Prove. 10.31. The mouth of the just brings forth wisdom.

Prove. 12.14. A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth.

Isai. 32.4. The tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.

Isai. 35.6. The dumb man's tongue shall sing.

When thou art with the people of God, that thou may receive good from them,
and do them good, apply, Prove. 13.20. He that walks with wise men shall be
wise. So apply, Prove. 12.14. John 7.38. Ezekiel. 47.12. His fruit shall be meat,
and his leaves medicine.

If thou find thy soul stand in need of wisdom, keep company with the
people of God which are the only wise people, and then thou have the only sure
promises of the Lord, thou shall be wise. If thou hungrest after good, resort
to the righteous, and thou shall be satisfied with good things. If thou feel
thy self dead, apply, out of him shall flow rivers of water of life, for thy
quickening. If thy soul be faint or sick, apply, his fruit shall be meat, and
his leaves medicine. Let all this good which is gotten by their fellowship,
cause thee to delight in them, and take heed of forsaking the fellowship of the
Saints.

When thou go into company, apply these promises to thy self, that thou
may be so to others, and hinder not thy self, by unbeleefe.

The 54. Legacy.
WHen thou art to go to the assemblies, to participate in the ordinances,
apply, In places where I record my name, I will come to thee and bless thee.
If thou want the Lord or his blessing, go to his house, and thou shall find
him. Psalm. 36.8, 9. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of
thine house, and thou shall make them drink of the river of they pleasures.
For with thee is the fountain of life, and in thy light shall we see light.
Psalm. 65.4. We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of
then holy Temple. Psalm. 83.11. The lord God is a Sun and shteld, the Lord
will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold, Psalm. 92.13,
14. Thouse that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the
courts of our God. They shall still bring forth fruit in their old age: they
shall be fat and stourishing. Psalm. 128.5. The Lord shall bless thee out of
Sion. Isai. 25.6, 7, 8. In this mountain shall the Lord of Hosts make unto
all people a feast of fat things, a feast of Wine on the lees, of fat things
full of marrow, of wines on the lees, well refined. Therefore when his
ordinances are corrupted with men's inventions, then thou may press him with
this promise, that he will give us wine fined and purified, even his purest
ordinances, and most comfortable to our hearts, as wine is. And when there is
little nourishment, because their gifts are weak, urge him with this, that he
has promised to make us a feast of fat things full of marrow; for I take this
promise to be meant of the Churches after Christ, verse. 7. And he will
destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and
the veil that is spread over all nations. Thy sins that are too strong for
thee, bring them to the Lord in his ordinances, and he will destroy them,
though thou seem to be covered with them, and they spread as a veil upon
thee, yet believe his promises, and all things shall be possible unto thee.
Isai. 56.7. I will make them joyful in mine house of prayer, their burnt
offering, and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar. God will
both give to them and accept from them their sacrifices, as pleasing to him. 2 Chronicles 20.20. Believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper.

Prove. 1.5 A wise man will hear, and will increase learning, and a man of
understanding shall attain unto wise counsels. Prove. 4.10.12. Hear and
receive my sayings, and the years of thy life shall be many, when thou go
thy steps shall not be strait, and when thou runnest thou shall not stumble.
Mark 4.24. Unto you that hear shall more be given. Isai. 55.3, 11, 12.
Incline your ears and come unto me, hear and your souls shall live; and I
will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. My
words shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto I sent it. Therefore ye shall go forth with joy, and be led forth
with peace; the mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into
singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their hands. verse. 13. in
stead of the throne shall come up the firre-tree, and in stead of the bryer
shall come up the myrtle tree; this force shall the word have in thine heart
for planting of Grace, and destroying of sin.

Hos. 14.7. They that dwell under his shadow shall return, they shall revive
as the corn, and grow as the vine, the scent thereof shall be as the vine in
Lebanon. If thou should return, apply this, he shall return. If thou
be decayed, apply this. They shall revive as the corn. If thou would
flourish in grace, apply, They shall flourish as the vine. If thou would be
a sweet smelling savor in all places, apply, The scent thereof shall be as
the vine of Lebanon. Seeing all these good things come from the powerful
ordinances of the Lord, let us give him no rest, till he bestow these
blessings upon us; when the Pastor of the people pronounces the blessing,
apply this promise, Numb. 6.27. I will bless thee.

The 55. Legacy.
Would thou enjoy the ordinances of God, and a blessing upon them, apply.
Jer. 31.14. I will satiate the souls of the Priests with fatness, and my
people shall be satisfied with goodness.

Jer. 3.15. I will give you pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed
you with knowledge and understanding.

Ezekiel. 34.26.27. And I will make them and the places round about my hill a
blessing, and I will cause the showers to come down in his season: there shall
be showers of blessing. And the tree of the field shall yield her increase, and
the earth shall yield her fruit.

These promises are both for Pastor and People, the Pastor shall be able to
teach with knowledge and understanding, his soul shall be replenished with
fatnes, his teaching shall be as seasonable showers of blessing, that shall
make the people fruitful. The people must apply these promises, first that God
would give them able Teachers, and that they may find their ministry blessed
unto them, according to these promises. That they may be fed with knowledge
and understanding, that they may be satisfied with goodness, and that their
teaching may be seasonable showers of blessing to make them fruitful, as it
is promised, that the trees shall yield their fruit. How much are Gods
ordinances to be desired, by which he does convay so many blessings unto his
people? Let us give him no rest, till he furnish Jerusalem with all her
ordinances and officers.

The 56. Legacy.
IF thou enjoyest glorious graces, or means of grace, and fear the losing
of them, apply, Isai. 4.5.6. Upon all the glory shall be a defense. And there
shall be a Tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a
place of refuge, and for a covert from storm, and from rain.

Isai. 27, 3. I the Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment: lest any
hurt it, I will keep it night and day.

Isai. 33.16 His place of defense shall be the munition of Rocks, bread shall
be given him, his waters shall be sure.

Have thou any glorious grace or means of grace? arm thy self with the power
of God in his promises, for the Devil will use all his forces and subtilty, to
deprive thee of them; have thou a glorious minister, and pure ordinance or
glorious graces begin to spring in thine heart, and see no means to defend
them, apply, Upon all thy glory he shall be a defense. His defense shall be a
munition of Rocks. See thou an heart of sin in thy self, or the rage of
the wicked, that causes thee to sear the loss of them? apply, There shall
be a covering for a shadow in the day for the heat. Does the devil raise up
storms? outwardly, persecutions? apply, The defense and covering shall be a
place of refuge, and cover for the storm, and for the rain. Fear thou the
subtilty of thine enemies, that unawares when thou think not on them, they
will surprise thee, and steal thy blessing from thee? apply, I the Lord do
keep it night and day. If thou fear God will not continue thus to thee,
apply, I will water it every moment; not one moment, but he will be adding and
nourishing: bread shall be given him, and his waters shall be sure.

The 57. Legacy.
WHen thou art banished from Gods ordinances, apply these promises for thy
return, Isai. 35.10. The ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Sion
with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Jer. 3.14. I will take you
two of a family, and one of a City, and will bring you to Sion. Deuteronomy. 30.4. If
any of thine be driven out unto the out most parts of heaven, from thence will
the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will he fetch thee. Ezekiel.
34.11.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Behold I, even I will both search my sheep, and
seek them out. As a shepherd seeks out his stock in the day that he is
among his sheep that are scattered: so will I seek out my sheep, and will
deliver them out of all places, where they have been scattered in the cloudy
and dark day. And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from
the countries, and will bring them to their own land, and feed them upon the
mountains of Israel, by the riviers, and in all the inhabited places of the
Country: I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains of
Israel shall their fold be: there shall they lie in a good fold, and in a fat
pasture shall they feed upon the mountains of Israel. I will feed my flock,
and I will cause them to lie down, says the Lord God. I will seek that which
was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that
which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick.

If thou now mournest for Gods ordinances, apply, Thou shall not only return
to Sion, but return with joy, and sorrow shall flee away. If thou be but
one amongst many which desire it, and fear thou shall be left among them,
apply, I will take you one of a city, and two of a Tribe: though thou be
but one of a City that returnest to the Lord, he will bring thee to Sion from
all the rest. If thou art far removed from all means, and that the Lord has
done it for thy sin, apply, Though thou were cast into the outmost part of
the Heaven, thence will the Lord gather thee, and from thence will he take
thee; he will deliver from all places where they have been scattered in the
cloudy and dark day, and will feed them in good pastures, and will bring them
to rest.

The 58. Legacy.
WHilst thou art banished from Gods house, apply, Ezekiel. 11.16 I will be unto
the^ as a little Sanctuary in the countries where they shall come. Isai. 40.11.
He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with
his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are
with young.

In thy banishment, at those hours when they soul was wont to be refreshed in
the Sanctuary of God on the Sabbath, and at other times, when thou find thy
self to stand in need either of defense, or nourishment, apply, I will be a
Sanctuary unto you. He shall feed his flock as a shepherd. If in this time
thou feel thy self very weak, apply, He shall gather his Lambs in his
arms, and carry them in his bosom, and guide them with young: they cannot
miscarie that are shut up in the bosom of God: nor fear who are guided by
him. Therefore though we be never so weak in our selves, yet here is our
comfort, we are safe in our God: O happy people, saved by the Lord.

The 59. Legacy.
WHen wicked sheepheards are over us, then apply, Ezekiel. 34.10. Thus says the
Lord God, Behold, I am against the sheepheards, and I will require my flock at
their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock, neither shall the
sheepheards feed themselves any more: for I will deliver my flock from their
mouth, that they may not be meat for them. verse. 21, 22. Because ye have
thrust with side, and with shoulder, and pusht all the diseased with your
horns, till ye have scattered them abroad: Therefore will I save my flock,
and they shall no more be a prey, and I will cause the wild beast to cease
out of the land.

When the sheepeards feed themselves, and are ready to devour us, apply, The
sheepheards shall not feed themselves any, more. I will deliver my sheep from
their mouther; they shall no more devour them.

When through their greatness and our weakness, they push us so with their
horns, that we are scattered, both shepherd from people, and one from
another, apply, I will help my sheep, and they shall no more be spoiled; I
will cause the wild beasts to cease out of the land.

The 60. Legacy.
WHen through evil shepherds we are come to great misery, apply, Ezekiel.
34.16. I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven
away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which
was sick. Isai. 30.20. Though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and
the water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner
any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers. When through evil sheepheards
thou art come to such an estate as thou feel thy self to have lost God and
goodness, and art driven away from all things that might help thee, apply, I
will seek that which was lost, I will bring again that which was driven away.
When thou art even broken with misery and grown very weak, apply, I will
bind up that which was broken, and strengthen that which was weak. When they
Teachers which should help thee in this estate, are forced to fly and hide
themselves for fear of wicked sheepheards, apply, Thy teachers shall not be
removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers.

Thus far of the ordinances of God, which are ordinary; Now for the duty of
Fasting, which is extraordinary.

The 61. Legacy.
WHen thou set thy self to fast, apply, Mat. 6.18. If thou fast in secret,
thy father which sees in secret will reward thee openly.

Jam. 4.8.10. Draw nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh unto you. Humble your
selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up.

Thus far of the means of Grace, the next promises are when we suffer
presecution for well-doing, for all that will live godly must suffer
persecution: therefore strengthen thy self with these promises.

The 62. Legacy.
IF thou be railed upon for well doing, apply, 1 Peter 4.14. If ye be
reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of God, and of
glory refleth upon you.

Matthew. 5.11.12. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you;
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and
be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they
the Prophets which were before you.

The 63. Legacy.
WHen they persecute thee any other ways even unto death, apply, Matthew. 10.
39. He that loses his life for my sake, shall find it. Matthew. 5.10. Blessed
are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. When we lose any earthly blessing for Gods cause, apply,
Mat. 19.24. Every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
father or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my names sake, shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.

This is the greatest (and yet lawful) usury of all others, to part with one
outward blessing, and to receive an hundredth for it, to lose a miserable life,
and to enjoy eternal life, to suffer a short time, and to have a great reward
in heaven, to be disgraced, and to have the Spirit of glory rest upon us
Therefore when thou art rayled upon, apply, Blessed am I, the Spirit of glory
rests upon me, therefore they cannot make me vile. Art thou any way
persecuted? apply, theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; great is your reward in
Heaven. Take they thy life? apply, He that loses his life for my sake shall
find it. Take they away any earthly blessing? thou shall receive an hundredth
fold at this present; therefore if Usurers gladly let out their money, that
hope to receive but eight in the hundredth, be ashamed of thy self, that thou
should not give one for an hundredth, when thou have the promise of him that
never failed to perfome.

The 64. Legacy.
IN partaking with Gods people in suffering, that thou may be partaker of
their comforts, apply, 2 Corinthians. 1.6. As you are partakers of the sufferings:
so shall ye be also of the consolation.

The 65. Legacy.
WHen thou art called forth to defend the truth, apply, Matthew. 10.19. When they
deliver you up, take no thought, how, or what ye shall speak, for it shall be
given you in that same hour what ye shall speak.

Luke 21.15. I will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your adversaries
shall not be able to gainesay nor resist. Matthew. 10.32. Whosoever confesses
me before men, him will I confess before my Father which is in heaven. When
thou fear thou shall not be able to speak in defense of the truth, apply,
It shall be given thee, though thou have it not before, in that hour, what
thou shall say. If thou fear the learning of thine adversaries, and thine
own simpleness, apply, I will give thee not only a mouth, but also wisdom,
where-against they shall not be able to speak. If thou want courage, embolden
thy self with this, Christ will confess thee before his father.

The 66. Legacy.
IF thou would bring forth seasonable fruit for every estate, and for every
duty, apply, Psalm. 1.3. Thou shall be as a tree which brings forth his fruit
in season. Ezekiel. 47.12. He shall bring forth fruit according to his months.
If thou art to speak or pray, or do any duty, that thou may do it
seasonably, and have fitting words and thoughts, apply, thou shall bring forth
fruit in season. So in every estate, prosperity or adversity, that thou may
bring forth the fruits of it, apply, They shall bring forth fruit in season,
according to their months.

Thus far about spiritual things. The next promises are about earthly
things: and because Children are the most excellent, therefore I will begin
with them.

The 67. Legacy.
IF thou have children, apply, Psalm. 112.2. His seed shall be mighty upon
earth: the generation of the just shall be blessed.

Deuteronomy. 7.13. He will bless the fruit of thy womb. Genesis 17.7. I will establish
my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their
generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed
after thee. Isai. 44.3, 4. I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my
blessing upon thine off spring: and they shall spring up as among the grass,
as willowes by the watercourse. If thou desire grace and Gods blessing for
thy children, apply, I will pour my Spirit and blessing upon thy seed. If thou
would have them grow up in it, apply, They shall grow as among the grass,
and as the willowes by the water courses. If thou would have them in the
covenant with thy self, thy God to be theirs, apply, I will make an
everlasting covenant with thee, to be God to thee, and to thy seed ofter thee.
Desire thou outward things for the^? apply, His seed shall be mighty upon
earth.

The 68. Legacy.
IF thou want children, apply, Deuteronomy 7.14. Thou shall be blessed above all
people, there shall neither be male nor female barren among you. Deuteronomy. 28.11.
The Lord shall make thee plentiful in the fruit of thy body Psalm. 128.3. Thy
wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house, thy children
like Olive plants, round about thy table. verse. 4.6. Lo thus shall the man be
blessed that fears the Lord. Thou shall see thy childrens children.

If thou have conceived, apply this promise for keeping of it, Exodus 23.26.
There shall none cast their young, nor be barren in thy land. This, and all
other promises of earthly things, are to be applied so far as is good for
us: we are not to doubt of them.

The 69. Legacy.
IF the Lord deny thee children, apply, Isai. 56.5. To them will I give in mine
house, and within my walls, a place and a name better then of Sons and of
Daughters, I will give them an everlasting name that shall not be cut off.

The 70. Legacy.
IF thou would have the comfortable and holy use of thine habitation, apply,
Job. 5.24, Thou shall know that thy Tabernacle shall be in peace, and thou shall
visit thine habitation, and not sin.

Psalm. 91.10. There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come
nigh thy dwelling. Prove. 14.11. The Takernacle of the upright shall flourish.
Prove. 12.7. The house of the righteous shall stand.

If thou would prosper in thine house, apply, Peace shall be in it. No
plague shall come near it. It shall flourish. If thou would have it
continne so; apply, It shall stand. That they may not be a snare to thee, but
thou may use thy blessing, and not sin, apply, Thou shall visit thy
habitation, and not sin.

The 71. Legacy.
IF thou would have thy coming in and going out blossed, apply, Deuteronomy. 28.6.
Blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed shall thou be when
thou go out. Psalm. 121.8. The Lord shall preserve thy goin, out, and thy
coming in; from this time forth, and even for evermore.

When thou go out, if thou would have the heavens and earth, and all
creatures blessed to thee, and be made able to make the spiritual use of
them, apply, Blessed shall thou be when thou go out, and when thou come
in. The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in. If thou would
have the continuance of it, apply, From this time forth for evermore.

The 72. Legacy.
WHen thou eatest or enjoyest any blessing, that it may satisfy thee, and thou
may have the sanctified use of it, apply, Joel 2.26. Ye shall eat in plenty
and be satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord your God.

That thy meat and outward blessings may give thee content, and satisfy thee,
apply, Thou shall eat and be satisfied.

That thou may have the sanctified use of it, apply, Thou shall praise the
Lord.

The 73. Legacy.
WHen thou take thy rest at night, apply, Prove. 3.24. When thou lie down
thou shall not be afraid: yea thou shall lie down, and thy sleep shall be
sweet.

Job. 11.19. Also thou shall lie down, and none shall make thee afraid.

If thou art troubled with fears of the night, apply, Thou shall not be
afraid.

When thou take thy rest, apply, None shall make thee afraid.

If thou art troubled with any thing that breaks thy rest, apply, Thy rest
shall be sweet.

The 74. Legacy.
WHen thou put thine hand to any work, that it may be blessed, apply,
Deuteronomy. 28.12. The Lord shall bless all the work of thine hand. Deuteronomy. 30.9. The
Lord thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of thine hand. The Lord
will not only bless some of thy works, but every one; therefore in every
work send up short prayers for the clayming of them, and so at our going out,
and coming in, or eating, or sleeping, renew these promises upon thy self, by
faith applying them, and by prayer suing for them.

The 75. Legacy.
IF thou would have thy outward blessings blessed of God, apply, Deuteronomy. 28.4,
5. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and
the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kind, and the flocks of thy
sheep. Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store. Deuteronomy. 7.13, 14 The Lord will
also bless the fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn, and
thy wine, and thine oil, the increase of thy Kine, and the flocks of thy
sheep. There shall be neither male or female barren a mong you, or among your
cattle. That thy goods and thine house may be blessed, apply, Blessed shall
be thy basket and thy store. If thou be in debt, apply, Deuteron. 28.12.
Thou shall lend unto many, and shall not borrow.

The 76. Legacy.
IF thou desire to enjoy the labors of thine hands, apply, Isai 65.21, 23,
23. They shall build houses and inhabit them, they shall plant vineyards and
eat the fruit of them. They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall
not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a tree are the days of my
people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the works of their hands. They shall
not labor in vain, nor bring forth for trouble. Ps. 128.2 Thou shall cate the
labor of thine hands.

The 77. Legacy.
WHen thou art diligent in thy calling, apply, Prove, 12.14.24. The recompense
of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him. The hand of the diligent shall
bear rule. When thou enjoyest that thou have labored for, apply, Psalm. 128.2.
thou shall cate the tabour of thine hands: happy shall thou be, andre shall
be well with thee.

The 78. Legacy.
WHen thou see the wicked to be carried with restless desires, hungring and
thirsting after those things which satisfy them not, and thou desire
content, apply, Isaiah 65 13, 14. Thus says the Lord, behold my servants shall
cate, but ye shall be hungry: behold my servants shall drink, but ye shall
be thirsty, behold my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed: Behold
my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart,
and shall howl for vexation of spirit.

The 79. Legacy.
IF thou fear thou shall lose by following the Lord, apply, Psalm. 37.9, 11,
18, 19, Those that wait upon the Lord shall inherit the earth, their
inheritance shall be for ever: they shall not be ashamed in the evil time.
They shall inherit the earth, and delight themselves in the abundance of peace.
Psalm. 112.3. Wealth and riches shall be in his huse. Job 22.23, 24. Thou shall
be built up, thou shall lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the
stones of the brooks. verse 25. Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defense, and
thou shall have plenty of silver.

Genesis 15.1. I am thy exceeding great reward, Fear thou the loss of thy
land, apply, Thou shall inherit the earth, their inheritance shall be for
ever. Thou shall possess the Earth. Do others trouble thee? apply, They shall
have their delight in the multitude of peace. Art thou poor or fear the
loss of thy goods? apply, Riches and taeasure shall be in his house. Art thou
oppressed by the wicked? apply, The Almighty shall be thy defense.

The 80. Legacy.
WHen thou have lost blessings by sin, apply these promises for their
recovery, Joel. 2.24, 25, 26. The floores shall be full of wheat, and the fats
shall overflow with wine and oil, and I will restore to you the years that
the Locust has eaten, the cankerworme, the caterpiller, and the palmerworme:
and ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the Lord. Deuteronomy. 20.5.
I will multiply you above your fathers.

The 81. Legacy.
IF thou fear the loss of thy good name, apply, Job, 5.21. Thou shall be
hid from the scourge of the tongue. Job. 11.15. Thou shall lift up thy face
without spot. Psalm. 37.6. He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light,
and thy judgment as the noone day. Prove. 10.7. The memory of the just is
blessed.

Fear thou the wicked will take away thy good name? apply, Thou shall be
hid from the scourge of the tongue. Cast they blots upon thee? apply, Thou
shall lift up thy face without spot. Seek they to darken the light of thy holy
life? apply, He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy
judgment as the noone day.

The 82. Legacy.
IF the World despise thee, comfort thy self with these promises, Ex. 19.5.
Ye shall be Gods peculiar treasure above all people. 1. Sam. 3.30. Those that
honor me will I honor, says the Lord. Psalm. 91.14. I will set him on high,
beause he hathy known my name. Psalm. 112.9. His horn shall be exalted with
honor. John 12.26. If any man serve me, him will my Father honor. Prove. 4.7,
8, 9. Get wisdom, exalt her, and she shall promote thee, She shall bring
thee to honor when thou do embrace her; She shall give to thine head an
ornament of grace, a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee.

When the world counts thee as the offscouring of the world, vile,
nought-worth: apply, Ye shall be Gods chief treasure above all people. Does
the world debase thee? apply. The Lord will exapt thee. The Father will honor
him.

The 83. Legacy.
WHen thou art in any want for soul, or body, apply, Psalm. 34.9.10. There is
no want to them that fear him. The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger,
but they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. Psalm. 84.11. No
good thing will he with hold from them that walk uprightly. Mat. 6.33. Seek
ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall
be added unto you. Art thou troubled with distracting cares for outward things?
apply, Seek the Kingdom of Heaven and his righteousness, and all other
things shall be cast upon you. Fear thou that thou shall be overpressed
with want? apply, Those that seek the Lord, shall want no good thing. No good
thing will he withhold from-them that walk uprightly.

The 84. Legacy.
IN liberal giving, apply these promises, Prove. 11.25. The liberal soul
shall be made fat, and he that watreth shall be watered also himself.

Prove. 19.17. He that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord: and that
which he has given will he pay him again.

Math. 6.4. Givein secret, and thy Father himself shall reward thee openly. 2.
Cor. 9.6.10.11. He which sows bountifully shall reap bountifully. He that
ministers seed to the sower, does minister bread for your food, and multiply
your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousness, being enriched
in every thing to all bountifulness.

Isai. 58.10.11. If thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the
afflicted foul: then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be
as the noone day. And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy
soul in drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered
garden, and like aspring of waters, whose waters fail not.

When thou give to the people of God, and entreatest them kindly, apply,
Matthew. 10.41, 42. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall
receive a Prophets rewards and he that receives a righteous man, in the name
of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. And whosocver shall
give to drirke unto one of these little ones a cup of cold water only in the
name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward.

The 85. Legacy.
IF sickness be amongst us, apply, Exodus 23.52. I will take sickness away
from the midst of thee.

Psalm. 41.3. The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; thou will make all his bed in his sickness.

Deuteronomy. 7.15. And the Lord will take away from thee all sickness, and will put
none of the evil diseases of Egypt upon thee.

If the plague be amongst us, apply, Psalm. 91.3.6, 7. Surely he shall deliver
thee from the noisome pestilence. Thou shall not be afraid of the pestilence
that walks in darkness, nor for the destruction that wastes at noon day. A
thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but it
shall not come nigh thee.

Art thou sick? apply, The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of sorrow:
thou will make all his bed in his sickness.

Art thou there where the sick are? apply, I will take away all sickness from
the midst of thee.

Fear thou the pestilence? apply, I will deliver thee frrom the noisome
pestilence.

The 86. Legacy.
IF thou fear death, apply, Isai. 57.2. He shall enter into peace, they shall
rest in their beds. None fears to go to bed, when they know they shall rest,
being weary. This resting is more sure and lasting for ever. Romans 8.11. He
that raised up Christ from the dead, shall quicken your mortal bodies.
Therefore we must not think of it, but as a better life given by the Spirit of
God.

The 87. Legacy.
IF thou fear untimely death, apply, Job. 5.26. thou shall come to thy grave
in a full age, like as a shocke of corn comes in, in his season. Exodus
23.26. The number of thy days will I fulfill. Psalm 91.16. With long life will
I satisfy him, and show him my salvation Psalm. 41.2. The Lord will preserve
him and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the earth.

Have thou many enemies, and fear the loss of thy Life by them? apply, the
number of thy days will I fulfill: the Lord will preserve him and keep him
alive, therefore man cannot shorten it one day.

Fear thou that thou shall either live too long, or die too soon? apply,
Thou shall go to thy grave in a full age, as a ricke of corn comes in due
season into the barn.

The 88. Legacy.
IF thou fear hurt by any of the creatures, apply, Genesis 9.2. The fear of
you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every
foul of the air, upon all that moves upon the earth, upon all the fishes of
the sea, into your hand are they delivered, Job. 5.23. Thou shall be in league
with the stones of the field: and the beast of the field shall be at peace with
thee.

The 89. Legacy.
WHen thine heart is troubled either for soul or body, apply, Phil. 4.7. The
peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts and
minder Psalm. 29 11, The Lord will bless his people with peace.

Is thine heart troubled with many temptations of Satan, or with fears of sin
and misery? apply, the peace of GOD shall preserve your hearts. Have thou many
troubles outwardly? ap. the Lord shall bless his people with peace.

The 90. Legacy.
IF thou would have thy purposes to prosper, apply, Job. 22.28. Thou shall
also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee: and the light shall
shine upon thy ways.

Psalm. 1.3. Whatsoever he does shall prosper. Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way unto
the Lord: trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass.

When thou often purposest to do good both for thy soul and body, and yet
find thy purposes broken, apply, Thou shall decree A thing, and the Lord
shall stablish it unto thee. He shall bring it to pass. When thou art in doing
of any thing, apply, Whatsoever he does shall prosper.

The 91. Legacy.
When thou art called to a great work, wherein thou shall have great
opposition, apply, Deuteronomy. 31.8. The Lord he it is that does go before thee, he
will be with thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: fear not,
neither be dismayed, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. The Lord will show himself strong in the
behalf of the^ whose heart is perfect to wards him: Psalm. 91.11, 12 13. He
shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: They
shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder: The young Lion and Dragon shall thou
tra^ple under feet.

It matters not what be the lets to oppose us, when the Lord goes before us, he
will easily beat them down: nor what strength resists such, as he has
promised to show his strength for: nor how many be our dangers, when his
Angels have charge over us to keep us. Therefore go on in the work, and fear
not the issue, being strengthened by the promises of him, that never fails his.

The 92. Legacy.
IN the time of danger, apply, 1 Samuel 2.9. The Lord will keep the feet of his
Saints. Pro. 1.33. Who so harkneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be
quiet from fear of evil. Job. 11.18, 19. Thou shall be secure, because there
is hope, yea thou shall dig about thee, and thou shall take thy rest in
safety, also thou shall lie down, and none shall make thee afraid. Psalm. 125
1, 2. They which trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Sion which cannot be
removed, but abides for ever. As the mountains are round about Jerusalem: so
the Lord is round about his people from henceforth, even for ever.

Psalm. 121.3, 4, 5. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: be that keeps
thee will not slumber. Behold he that keeps Israel will neither slumber nor
sleep. The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.
Seeing the Lord is our keeper, we need not fear the danger.

The 93. Legacy.
WHen thou art in great trouble, apply; Isai. 43.2. When thou passest through
the waters I will be with thee, and through the Rivers, they shall not over
flow thee: when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee. verse. 20. I will give waters in the
wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chose.
Psalm. 32.6, 7. Surely in the flood's of great waters, they shall not come nigh
unto him. Thou art my hiding place, thou shall preserve me from trouble; thou
shall compass me about with songs of deliverance.

When thou see thy self compassed with many troubles, and beginnest to
fear? apply, I will be with thee, they shall not over flow thee. In the fire
of affliction, thou shall not only not be burnt, but the flame shall not
kindle upon thee, the greatest troubles shall not do thee the least harm, for
God being with thee, will bring thee out, as he did Israel through the sea,
and the three children out of the fire, with not so much as the savor of fire
about them: so shall not so much as the savor of evil be upon his, but he
will compass them about with songs of deliverance.

The 94. Legacy.
When thou seem to be forgotten in affliction, apply, Psalm. 9.9.18. The
Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed: a refuge in times of trouble. For
the needy shall not always be forgotten: the expectation of the poor shall not
perish for ever.

Isa. 49.15. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will not I
forget thee Psalm. 103.9. He will not always chide: neither will he keep his
anger for ever. Lament. 3.31, 32. The Lord will not cast off for ever. But
though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion, according to the multitude
of his mercies.

The 95. Legacy.
WHen thou fear thou shall end thy days in misery, apply, Job. 36.11. They
shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures.

The 96. Legacy.
WHen thy sorrows grow great, apply Job. 11.16. That shall forget thy misery,
and remember it as waters that pass away. Job. 8.20, 21. Behold, God will not
cast away a perfect man, till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and thy lips
with rejoicing. Psa. 27.14. Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thy
heart, Psalm, 112.4. Unto the upright there arises light in the darkness.
Psalm. 126.5, 6. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. He that goes forth
and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubt less come again with
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.

Prove. 10.28. The hope of therighteous shall be gladness.

Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

John 16.22. Ye now have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your hearts
shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you.

Has sorrow taken deep root in thy soul, that thou fear thou shall never
find hearty joy? apply, He shall comfort thine heart. Is such a cross upon
thee, that thou fear thou shall never forget it? apply, thou shall forget
thy misery, as waters that pass away.

The 97. Legacy.
WHen thou art in such an estate, as thou know no way out of misery, either
for soul or body, or both, apply, Ier. 33.3. Call unto me, and I will answer
thee, and show thee great and mighty things which thou know not.

The 98. Legacy.
IF thou would have deliverance out of trouble, apply, Psalm. 149.4. He will
beautify the meek with salvation: or, He will make the meek glorious by
deliverance.

Ps. 34.17.19. The righteous cry, and the Lord hears: and delivers them
out of all their troubles. Many are the afflictions of the righteous: but the
Lord delivers him out of them al. Job. 5.17, 18, 19. Happy is the man whom
God corrects for he makes sore and binds up: he wounds, and his hands
make whole. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, in seven there shall no
evil touch thee. Ps. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble: I will
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.

When thou art in many troubles, and fear thou shall never get out of all,
apply, The Lord will deliver thee out of al. If the Lord has delivered thee
once or twice, and thou fear he will not continue so still, as often as thou
fallest into troubles ap. He shall deliver thee in six troubles, and the
seventh it shall not touch thee.

The 99. Legacy.
WHen thine enemies prevail, apply, Ps. 125.3. The rod of the wicked shall not
rest upon the lot of the righteous: lest the righteous put forth their hands
unto iniquity: Psalm. 18.3. I will call upon the Lord: so shall I be saved from
mine enemies, 1 Samuel 2.10. The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to
pieces: the eyes of the wicked shall fail, their refuge shall perish, their
hope shall be sorrow of mind. Job. 11 20. Deuteronomy. 28.7. The Lord shall cause
thine enemies that rise up against thee, to be smitten before thy face.

See thou many to rise up to trouble thee? apply, thine enemies that rise
against thee, shall fall before thy face. Hope they to prevail against thed?
apply, their hope shall be sorrow of mind: Have they great means to cause
them to prosper? apply, their refuge shall perish. Have they long oppressed
thee? apply, the rod of the wicked shall not always rest upon the lot of the
righteous. See thou no means to get from them? say with the Prophet David,
will call upon the Lord, so shall I be safe from mine enemies.

The 100. Legacy.
THat thou may be delivered, and thine enemies afflicted in thy stead,
apply, Deuteronomy. 30.7. The Lord thy God will put all these curses upon thine
enemies, and on them that hate thee, which persecute thee. Prove. 21.18. The
wicked shall be a ran some for the righteous, and the transgressour for the
upright.

The 101. Legacy.
IF thou would have thine enemies destroyed, apply, Job. 8.22. They that
hate thee shall be clothed with shame, and the dwelling place of the wicked
shall come to naught.

Isaiah 41.11.13.15. Behold, all they which were incensed against thee shall
be ashamed and confounded, they shall be as nothing, and they that strive with
thee shall perish: for I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto
thee, Fear not, I will help thee. Thou shall thresh the mountains and beat
them small, and shall make the hills as chafe, by which mountains and hills, is
meant the greatest enemies. 1. Sam. 2.30. They that despise me shall be
lightly esteemed. These promises are to be applied by us, as they are the
enemies of God and his Gospel, and ours for his sake.

The 102. Legacy.
IF the wicked plot against thee, apply, Psalm. 37.12. The wicked plot against
the just; their sword shall enter into their own heart, their bow shall be
broken. The Lord shall laugh at him. Isai. 54.15. The enemies shall surely
gather themselves together against thee, but not by me; whosoever shall gather
themselves together against thee shall fall.

The 103. Legacy.
IN the troubles of the Church, apply, Psalm 128.6. Thou shall see peace upon
Israel, Thou shall see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life. Jer.
31.12. Thou shall come and sing in the height of Sion: when thou have applied
the promises, and used all the means, and yet find not thy self filled
with God, as thou desire, then comfort thy self with this, Yet is little
while, and when thou awakest, thou shall be satisfied with his image. Psalm.
17.15.

The 104 Legacy.
BEcause the time draws near of the fall of Antichrist, we must stir up
our selves to hasten the Lord by earnest prayers, and for the strengthening of
our faith, apply these promises, Rev. 17.16. And the ten horned which thou
saw upon the Beast, thest shall hate the Whore, and shall make here desolate
and naked, and shall cate her flesh, and shall burn her with fire, Reu.
18.8.21. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death and mourning, and
famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God
who judges her. And a mighty Angel took up a great stone, like a great
Millstone, and cast it into the Sea saying, Thus with violence shall that great
City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all, Even so down
Lord Josus, and hallen this happy day.

The 105. Legacy.
SEEing the Lord has promised many glorious things to the Jews, with much
grace and pouce, both to the Jews so Gentiles at their conversion; when the
tonne tribes shall be reunited to the two, which never yet was, let us never
give him rest till he set up Jerusalem the praise of the world, and for the
strengthening of us in prayer, apply, these promises: Ezekiel. 37.21, 22. Thus
says the Lord God, Behold, I will take the children of Israel, from among the
heathen, whither they be gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring
them into their own land: and I will make them one nation, in the land upon
the mountains of Israel: and one King shall be King to them all, and they
shall be no more two Nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms
any more at all, Jer. 3.18. In those days the house of Judah shall walk with
the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the North
to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers: Isaiah
60.2, 3, 4, 5, 15, 16. The Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be
seen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall come to the light, and Kings to the
brightness of thy rising, thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters
shall be nursed at thy side, then thou shall see and flow together, and thine
heart shall fear and be enlarged, because the Sea shall be converted unto
thee: the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee. Whereas thou have been
forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee an
eternal excellency, a joy of many generations: Thou shall also suck the
milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the breast of Kings. Isaiah 62.2, 3, 49.
The Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all Kings thy glory, and thou
shall be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name, thou
shall also be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a roy all diadem
in the hand of thy God. Isaiah 61.4, 5, 6. They shall build the old wastes,
they shall raise up the former desolations, they shall repair the wast Cities
the desolations of many generations. And strangers shall stand and feed your
flocks, and the sons of the alien shall be your plow-men, and your
vinedressers, but ye shall be named the priests of the Lord: men shall call
you the mintsters of our God, ye shall cate the riches of the Gentiles, and in
their glory shall you boast your selves. Isaiah 49.22, 23. Thus says the Lord.
Behold, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the
people, and they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters shall
be carried upon their shoulders, and Kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and
their Queens thy nursing mothers, they shall bow down to thee with their face
toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet.

THese promises I have observed: many more there be of most excellent use, but
because they need opening for the understanding of them, I would not set them
down, lest through the shallowness of my understanding I should wrong the
precious promises: but I picked out the most plain, and those that I found of
continual use for Soul and Body, which I have found much good by, for the
promises are our Legacies bequeathed to us in the will of our Father, and we
are to claim them, as we stand in need of any of them: and surely that God
which would not have children wronged in that which is bequeathed to them in
the will of their fathers, much less will he withhold that which his Son has
bequeathed to us in his last will, which he sealed with his blood. Therefore let
us sue for them, for the says, he will be sought to, to perform them to us.
And when thou applyest any promise, seek unto the condition, and labor to
keep it, and doubt not of the performance of what is promised, for he is both
able and faithful that has promised.

FINIS.
A TABLE FOR THE right and ready finding out of any Promise in this Book, for
the comfortable supply of present necessity: the number shows the page,
where the Promise (we would have) is to be found.
RVles for reading the Promises. If we find nothing in our selves that may
move God. page 1. If we fear God will remember our sins, to punish them
page 5 If often suing cause thee doubt of pardon. page 6 If thou despair. page
7 If thou find sin an heavy burden, and Satan pursuing. page 10 If thou
turn from sin, and yet doubt of pardon. page 13 If thou would have thy
many felt rebellions subdued page 16 If thy heart be hard and full of
corruption. page 18 If unbridled nature break out into passion. page 20 If thou
be in bondage to some sin. page 22 If thou fear the breaking out of strong
sins. page 23 When thou art stayed from sin by admonition page 26 If thou
fear God will destroy thee for sin page 27 If thou be tempted to
uncleanness page 28 If thou caust not find out thy sin, for which God
corrects thee. page 29 If thou doubt of salvation. page 30 If thine heart be
as a wilderness, barren of good, page 31 If thou want holiness, page 37
When thou can not offer up any sacrifice page 38 When thou feel but little
grace page 40 When all thy graces are weak page 41 When thy heart is dry for
want of grace. page 41 If thou want the spirit page 45 If looking on Gods
love, thou can not love God again page 48 If thou can not bring thine
heart to delight in the Lord ibid. If thou seelest not Gods fear in thine
heart page 53 If thine heart will not praise the Lord page 54 If thou want
wisdom page 56 If thou can not understand Gods voice page 57 If thou can
not see into the mysteries of the Gospel page 58 If thou see a good way and
have no power to walk in it page 59 If thou want memory. page 62 When thou
see thine ignorance. page 68 If thou desire grace and art not satisfied
page 68 If thine heart be dead page 70 If thou fear falling away page 72 If
thou art fallen page 76 When the Lord has forsaken thee page 78 When thou
feel thy vileness. page 81 When thou feel thy spiritual poverty page 83
When thou art in a strait page 85 If thou fear Satan will cause thee to fall.
page 88 If thou can not profit by the word of God page 90 If thou find thy
self unlike Gods people page 91 If thou would have Gods blessing rest upon
thee page 92 If thou would be a blessing in thy place. page 94 If thou
separatest from the wicked in their corrupt worship. ib. A promise to be
applied in every ordinance page 96 When thou prayest page 97 When thou
meditatest. page 99 In meditating, conferring, reading Gods word page 101 In
reading of the word if thou understandest not page 102 If thou can not
confer page 103 When thou art to go to the assemblies, page 106 Would
thou enjoy the ordinances of God, and a blessing upon them page 114 If thou
enjoyest grace or means of grace page 117 When thou art banished from Gods
ordinances page 120 Whilst thou art banished from Gods house page 124 When
wicked shepherds are over us page 127 When through wicked shepherds thou art
come to great misery page 129 When thou set thy self to fast page 132 If
thou art railed upon for well doing page 133 If thou art persecuted page 134 In
partaking with Gods people in suffering page 137 When thou art called to defend
the truth ib. If thou would bring forth seasonable fruit for every estate
page 139 If thou have children page 141 If thou want children page 143 If
the Lord deny thee Children page 145 If thou would have a comfortable and
holy use of thy habitation. ibid. If thou would have thy going out, and
coming in blessed page 147 When thou eatest or enjoyest any blessing that it
may satisfy, and be sanctified page 148 When thou take thy rest at night
etc. page 150 When thou put thy hand to any work page 151 If thou would
have thine outward blessings blessed page 152 If thou desire to enjoy the
labors of thine hands page 154 If thou art diligent in thy calling page 155
When thou see wicked men follow unsatisfying things with restless desires,
and thou desire content. page 156 If thou fear thou shall lose by
following the Lord page 157 When thou have lost blessings by sin page 159 If
thou fear loss of thy good name page 160 If the world despise thee etc.
page 161 When thou art in want for soul or body page 163 In liberal giving.
page 165 If sickness be among us page 168 If thou fear death page 170 If
thou fear untimely death page 171

