Of the Church of England.
THe Kings supremacy over the Church Impugners of the Kings Supremacy
censured. The Church of England a true and Apostolical Impugners of the
public worship of God established Impugners of the Articles of Religion
established Impugners of the Rites and Ceremonies established Impugners of the
government of the Church of Impugners of the form of consecrating and
ordering Authors of Schism in the Church of England, Maintainers of
Schismatickes in the Church of Maintainers of Conuenticles, censured.
Maintainers of Constitutions made in Conuenticles, censured.
Of Divine Service and Administration of the Sacraments.
Students in alleges to receive the Communion Copes to be worn in Cathedral
Churches by those Surplisses and Hoods to be worn in Cathedral Notorious
offenders not to be admitted to the Schismatics not to be admitted to the
Communion. Strangers not to be admitted to the Communion. Fathers not to be
Godfathers in Baptism, nor The lawful use of the Cross in Baptism
Ministers their Ordination, Function, and Charge.
Four solemn times appointed for the making None to be made Deacon and
Minister, both in The Titles of such as are to be made Ministers. The quality
of such as are to be made Ministers. The Articles of Subscription. The form of
Subscription.
Ministers not allowed Preachers, may not expound. Strangers not admitted to
Preach without showing Strangers not admitted to preach in Cathedral The names
of strange Preachers to be noted in a No public opposition between
Preachers. The Licenses of Preachers refusing Conformity, The form of a
Prayer to be used by Preachers Preachers and Lecturers to read divine Service
The Sacraments not to be refused at the hands of Ministers reading Divine
Service, and Administering Ministers to Catechize every Sunday. Confirmation to
be performed once in three Ministers to prepare children for Confirmation.
Ministers not to marry any persons without Bannes or License.
Schoolemasters.
NOne to teach School without License. Curats desirous to Teach, to be
licenced before The duty of Schoolemasters.
Things appertaining to Churches.
THE great Bible and Book of Common A Font of stone for Baptism in every A
decent Communion Table in every Church. A Pulpit to be provided in every
Church. A Chest for Alms in every Church. Churches to be kept in sufficient
reparations. Churches to be suruayed, and the decays certified A Terrier of
Glebelands and other Possessions Churches not to be profaned.
Churchwardens, Questmen, and Sidemen.

Parish Clearks.

Ecclesiastical Courts belonging to the Archbishops Jurisdiction.
Bona notabilia liable to the Prerogative Court. be exhibited to the Judge.
Inhibitions not to be granted to factious Appellants, None to marry within
the degrees prohibited. None to marry under xxj years, without their By whom
Licenses to marry without Bannes Security to be taken at the granting of
such Licenses, Oaths to be taken for the Conditions. An exception for those
that are in Widowhood. No Sentence for Divorce to be given upon the No
Sentence for Divorce to be given but in open In all Sentences for Divorce, bond
to be taken for The penalty for Judges offending in the premises.
Ecclesiastical Courts belonging to Bishops and inferior Ordinaries, and the
proceedings in them.
NOtorious crimes and scandals to be certified Quorum nomina. Peculier and
inferior Courts to exhibit the original copies of Wills into the Bishops
Registry.
Judges of Ecclesiastical Courts.
THe Quality and oath of Judges. The Quality of Surrogats.
Proctors.
PRoctors not to retain Causes, without the Proctors not to retain Causes
without the counsel Proctors not to conclude in any Cause without Proctors
prohibited the oath In animam Domini Proctors not to be clamorous in Court.
Registers.
A Buses to be reformed in Registers. A certain rate of Fees due to all
Ecclesiastical A Table of the rates of Fees to be set up in Courts The whole
Fees for showing Letters of Orders and other Licenses, due but once in every
Bishops time.
Apparitors.
THE number of Apparitors restrained.
Authority of Synods.


JAMES by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
defender of the faith etc.
To all to whom these presents shall come, Greeting.
Whereas our Bishops, Deanes of our Cathedral Churches, Archdeacons, Chapters
and Colleges, and the other Clergy of every Diocese within the Province of
Canterbury, being summoned and called by virtue of our Writ directed to the
most reverend father in God JOHN late Archbishop of Canterbury, and bearing
date the 31. day of January in the first year of our Reign of England, France
and Ireland, and of Scotland the 37. to have appeared before him in our
Cathedral Church of Saint Paul in London the 20. day of March then next
ensuing, or elsewhere, as he should have thought it most convenient, to treat,
consent, and conclude upon certain difficult, and urgent affairs mentioned in
the said Writ, Did thereupon at the time appointed, and within the Cathedral
Church of Saint Paul aforesaid, assemble themselves and appear in Convocation
for that purpose, according to our said Writ before the Right reverend Father
in God Richard Bishop of London, duly (upon a second Writ of Ours dated the
9. day of March aforesaid) authorized, appointed and constituted, by reason of
the said Archbishop of Canterbury his death, President of the said
Convocation, to execute those things which by virtue of our first Writ did
appertain to him the said Archbishop to have executed if he had lived: We for
diverse urgent and weighty causes and considerations us thereunto especially
moving, of our especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, did by
virtue of our Prerogative royal and supreme Authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, give and grant by our several Letters Patents under our great
Seal of England, the one dated the 12. day of April last past, and the other
the 25. day of June then next following, full, free, and lawful liberty,
license, power, and Authority unto the said Bishop of London President of the
said Convocation, and to the other Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Chapters and
Colleges, and the rest of the Clergy before mentioned of the said Province,
That they from time to time during our first Parliament now prorogued, might
confer, treat, debate, consider, consult, and agree of, and upon such
Canons, Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions, as they should think necessary,
fit, and convenient for the honor and service of Almighty God, the good and
quiet of the Church, and the better government thereof to be from time to time
observed, performed, fulfilled and kept as well by the Archbishops of
Canterbury, the Bishops and their Successors, and the rest of the whole
Clergy of the said Province of Canterbury in their several Callings, Offices,
Functions, Ministeries, Degrees and administrations, as also by all and every
Deane of the Arches, and other Judge of the said Archbishops Courts, Gardians
of Spiritualties, Chancellors, Deanes and Chapters, Archdeacons, Commissaries,
Officials, Registers, and all and every other Ecclesiastical Officers, and
their inferior Ministers whatsoever of the same Province of Canterbury in
their and every of their distinct Courts, and in the order and manner of their
and every of their proceedings: and by all other persons mthin this Realm, as
far as lawfully being members of the Church, it may concern them, as in our
said Letters Patents amongst other clauses more at large does appear.
Forasmuch as the said Bishop of London, President of the said Convocation, and
others the said Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Chapters and Colleges, with the
rest of the Clergy having met together at the time and place before mentioned,
and then and there by virtue of our said authority granted unto them, treated
of, concluded, and agreed upon certain Canons, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions, to the end and purpose by Us limited and prescribed unto them,
and have thereupon offered and presented the same unto Us, most humbly desiring
Us to give our Royal assent unto their said Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and
Constitutions, according to the form of a certain Statute or Act of
Parliament made in that behalf in the xxv. year of the Reign of King Henry
the eight, and by our said Prerogative Royal, and supreme Authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, to ratify by our Letters Patents under our great Seal of
England, and to confirm the same: the title and tenor of them being word for
word as ensues:

Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical treated upon by the Bishop of London,
President of the Convocation for the Province of Canterbury, and the rest of
the Bishops and Clergy of the said Province: and agreed upon with the Kings
Majesty's license in their Synod begun at London An.Dom.1603.
And in the year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord James by the grace of
God, King of England, France, and Ireland the first, and of Scotland the 37.
Of the Church of England.
I. The Kings supremacy over the Church of England in causes Ecclesiastical,
to be maintained.
AS our duty to the Kings most Excellent Majesty requires, we first decree
and ordain, That the Archbishop of Canterbury (from time to time) all Bishops
of this province, all Deanes, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars, and all other
Ecclesiastical persons, shall faithfully keep and observe, and (as much as in
them lies) shall cause to be observed and kept of others, all and singular
Laws and statutes made for restoring to the Crown of this kingdom, the
ancient Jurisdiction over the state Ecclesiastical, and abolishing of all
foreign power-repugnant to the same. Furthermore, al Ecclesiastical persons
having cure of souls, and all other Preachers, and Readers of Divinity
lectures, shall to the uttermost of their wit, knowledge, and learning, purely
and sincerely (without any color or dissimulation) teach, manifest, open, and
declare four times every year (at the least) in their Sermons and other
Collations and lectures, That all usurped and foreign power, (forasmuch as the
same has no establishment nor ground by the law of God) is for most just
causes taken away and abolished: and that therefore no manner of obedience, or
subjection within his Majesty's Realms and Dominions, is due unto any such
foreign power: but that the Kings power within his Realms of England, Scotland
and Ireland, and all other his Dominions and Countries, is the highest power
under God, to whom all men, as well inhabitants, as borne within the same, do by
Gods Laws owe most loyalty and obedience, before and above all other Powers and
Potentates in earth.

II. Impugners of the Kings supremacy censured.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm that the Kings Majesty has not the same
authority in causes Ecclesiastical that the godly Kings had amongst the Jews,
and Christian Emperors in the Primitive Church, or impeach in any part his
Regal supremacy in the said causes restored to the Crown, and by the Laws
of this Realm therein established, let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and
not restored but only by the Archbishop after his repentance and public
reuocation of those his wicked errors.

III. The Church of England a true and Apostolical Church.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the Church of England by Law
established under the Kings Majesty, is not a true and an Apostolical Church,
teaching and maintaining the doctrine of the Apostles, let him be
excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored, but only by the Archbishop after
his repentance and public reuocation of this his wicked error.

IIII. Impugners of the public worship of God, established in the Church of
England censured.
Whosoever shall herafter affirm that the form of Gods worship in the Church
of England, established by Law and contained in the book of Common Prayer, and
administration of Sacraments, is a corrupt, superstitious, or unlawful worship
of God, or contains any thing in it that is repugnant to the Scriptures: let
him be excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored but by the Bishop of the
place, or Archbishop, after his repentance and public reuocation of such his
wicked errors.

V. Impugners of the Articles of Religion established in the Church of England
censured.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm that any of the nine and thirty Articles
agreed upon by the Archbishops, and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole
Clergy in the Convocation holden at LONDON, in the year of our Lord God, one
thousand five hundred sixty two, for the avoiding of diversities of opinions,
and for the establishing of consent touching true Religion, are in any part
superstitious or erroneous, or such as he may not with a good conscience
subscribe unto: let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored, but
only by the Archbishop, after his repentance and public reuocation of such
his wicked errors.

VI. Impugners of the Rites and Ceremonies established in the Church of England
censured.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church
of England by Law established, are wicked, Antichristian, or superstitious, or
such as being commanded by lawful authority, men who are zealously and godly
affected, may not with any good conscience approve them, use them, or as
occasion requires subscribe unto them: let him be excommunicated ipso facto,
and not restored, until he repent and publicly revoke such his wicked errors.

VII. Impugners of the government of the Church of England by Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. censured.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the government of the Church of
England, under his Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, and
the rest that bear office in the same, is Antichristian or repugnant to the
word of God: let him be excommunicated ipso facto, and so continue until he
repent and publicly revoke such his wicked errors.

VIII. Impugners of the form of consecrating and ordering Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. in the Church of England censured.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm or teach, that the form and manner of
making and consecrating Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, contains any thing in
it, that is repugnant to the word of God, or that they who are made Bishops,
Priests, or Deacons in that form are not lawfully made, nor ought to be
accounted either by themselves or by others, to be truly either Bishops,
Priests, or Deacons, until they have some other calling to those divine
Offices: let him be excommunicated ipso facto, not to be restored until he
repent and publicly revoke such his wicked errors.

IX. Authors of Schism in the Church of England censured.
Whosoever shall hereafter separate themselves from the Communion of Saints as
it is approved by the Apostles rules, in the Church of England, and combine
themselves together in a new brotherhood, accounting the Christians who are
conformable to the Doctrine, Government, Rites, and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, to be profane and unmeet for them to join with in Christian
profession: let them be excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored, but by
the Archbishop, after their repentance and public reuocation of such their
wicked errors.

X. Maintainers of Schismatickes in the Church of England censured.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That such Ministers as refuse to subscribe
to the form and manner of Gods worship in the Church of England prescribed in
the Communion Book, and their adherents, may truly take unto them the name of
another Church not established by Law, and dare presume to publish it, that
this their pretended Church has of long time groaned under the burden of
certain grieuances imposed upon it, and upon the members thereof before
mentioned by the Church of England, and the Orders and Constitutions therein by
Law established: Let them be excommunicated, and not restored until they
repent and publicly revoke such their wicked errors.

XI. Maintainers of Conuenticles censured.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm or maintain, That there are within this
Realm other meetings, assemblies or congregations of the Kings borne Subjects,
then such as by the laws of this land are held and allowed, which may rightly
challenge to themselves the name of true and lawful Churches: let him be
excommunicated and not restored but by the Archbishop, after his repentance and
public reuocation of such his wicked errors.

XII. Maintainers of Constitutions made in Conuenticles, censured.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm that it is lawful for any sort of Ministers
and Lay persons, or either of them to join together, and make Rules, Orders,
or Constitutions in causes Ecclesiastical without the Kings authority, and
shall submit themselves to be ruled and governed by them: let them be
excommunicated ipso facto, and not be restored until they repent, and
publicly revoke those their wicked and Anabaptisticall errors.

Of divine Service, and administration of the Sacraments.
XIII. Due celebration of Sundays and Holy days.
ALl manner of persons within the Church of England shall from henceforth
celebrate and keep the Lords day, commonly called Sunday, and other Holy days
according to Gods holy will and pleasure, and the Orders of the Church of
England prescribed in that behalf: that is, in hearing the word of God read
and taught, in private and public prayers: in acknowledging their offenses to
God, and amendment of the same, in reconciling themselves charitably to their
neighbors where displeasure has been, in oftentimes receiving the Communion
of the body and blood of Christ, in visiting of the poor and sick, using all
godly and sober conversation.

XIIII. The prescript form of Divine Service to be used on Sundays and Holy
days.
THe Common prayer shall be said or sung distinctly and reverently upon such
days as are appointed to be kept holy by the Book of Common prayer, and their
Eeues, and at convenient and usual times of those days, and in such place of
every Church as the Bishop of the Diocese, or Ecclesiastical Ordinary of the
place shall think meet for the largeness or straitness of the same, so as
the people may be most edified. All Ministers likewise shall observe the
Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies prescribed in the Book of Common prayer, as well
in reading the holy Scriptures and saying of prayers, as in administration of
the Sacraments, without either diminishing in regard of preaching, or in any
other respect, or adding any thing in the matter or form thereof.

XV. The Letanie to be read on Wednesdayes and Fridayes.
THe Letany shall be said or sung when, and as it is set down in the Book of
Common prayer, by the Parsons, Vicars, Ministers, or Curats in all Cathedral,
Collegiat, Parish Churches and Chapels, in some convenient place, according to
the discretion of the Bishop of the Diocese, or Ecclesiastical Ordinary of
the place. And that we may speak more particularly, upon Wednesdayes and
Fridayes weekly, though they be not Holy days, the Minister at the
accustomed hours of Service, shall resort to the Church and Chapel, and
warning being given to the people by tolling of a Bell, shall say the Letanie
prescribed in the Book of Common prayer: whereunto we wish every Householder
dwelling within half a mile of the Church, to come or send one at the least of
his Household fit to join with the Minister in prayers.

XVI. Colleges to use the prescript form of Divine Service.
IN the whole Divine Service, and Administration of the holy Communion, in all
Colleges and Halles in both Universities, the Order, Form, and Ceremonies
shall be duly observed as they are set down and prescribed in the book of
Common prayer, without any omission or alteration.

XVII. Students in Colleges to wear Surplisses, in time of Divine Service.
ALl Masters and Fellows of Colleges or Halles, and all the Scholars and
Students in either of the Universities, shall in their Churches and Chapels
upon all Sundays, Holy days, and their Eues, at the time of Divine Service
wear Surplisses, according to the order of the Church of England: and such as
are Graduats shall agreeably were with their Surplisses, such Hoods as do
severally appertain to their Degrees.

XVIII. A reverence and attention to be used within the Church in time of
Divine Service.
IN the time of Divine Service, and of every part thereof, all due reverence is
to be used: For it is according to the Apostles Rule: Let all things be done
decently, and according to Order. Answerable to which Decency and Order, We
judge these our directions following: No man shall cover his head in the Church
or Chapel in the time of Divine Service, except he have some infirmity. In
which case let him wear a Nightcap or Coife. All manner of persons then present
shall reverently kneel upon their knees when the General Confession, Letanie,
and other Prayers are read, and shall stand up at the saying of the Belief,
according to the Rules in that behalf prescribed in the Book of Common
Prayer. And likewise when in time of Divine Service the Lord JESUS shall be
mentioned, due and lowly reverence shall be done by all persons present as it
has been accustomed: testifying by these outward Ceremonies and gestures,
their inward humility, Christian resolution, and due acknowledgement that the
Lord Jesus Christ, the true and eternal Son of God, is the only Savior of
the world, in whom alone all the Mercies, Graces, and Promises of God to
mankind for this life and the life to come are fully and wholly comprised.
None, either man, woman, or child, of what calling soever, shall be otherwise
at such times busied in the Church, then in quiet attendance to hear, mark,
and understand that which is read, preached, or ministered; Saying in their due
places audibly with the Minister, the Confession, the Lords Prayer, and the
Creed, and making such other answers to the public Prayers as are appointed
in the Book of Common prayer: neither shall they disturb the Service or
Sermon by walking or Talking, or any other way, nor depart out of the Church
during the time of Service, and Sermon, without some urgent or reasonable cause.

XIX. Loyterers not to be suffered near the Church in time of Divine Service.
THe Churchwardens or Questmen, and their assistants, shall not suffer any idle
persons to abide either in the Churchyard or Church porch, during the time of
Divine Service or preaching: but shall cause them either to come in, or to
depart.

XX. Bread and Wine to be provided against every Communion.
THe Churchwardens of every Parish against the time of every Communion, shall at
the charge of the Parish, with the advice and direction of the Minister,
provide a sufficient quantity of fine white Bread, and of good and wholesome
Wine for the number of Communicants that shall from time to time receive there:
which Wine we require to be brought to the Communion Table in a clean and
sweet standing Pot, or Stoop of Pewter, if not of purer metal.

XXI. The Communion to be thrice a year received.
IN every Parish Church and Chapel where Sacraments are to be administered
within this Realm, the holy Communion shall be ministered by the Parson,
Vicar, or Minister, so often, and at such times as every Parishioner may
Communicate at the least thrice in the year (whereof the Feast of Easter to
be one) according as they are appointed by the book of Common Prayer.
Provided, that every Minister as often as he administreth the Communion, shall
first receive the Sacrament himself. Furthermore no Bread or Wine newly
brought shall be used: but first the words of Institution shall be rehearsed when
the said Bread and Wine be present upon the Communion Table. Likewise the
Minister shall deliver both the Bread and the Wine to every Communicant
severally.

XXII. Warning to be given beforehand for the Communion.
WHereas every Lay person is bound to receive the holy Communion thrice every
year, and many notwithstanding do not receive that Sacrament once in a year:
We do require every Minister to give warning to his Parishioners publicly in
the Church at Morning prayer the Sunday before every time of his administering
that holy Sacrament, for their better preparation of themselves: Which said
warning, We enjoin the said Parishioners to accept and obey under the penalty
and danger of the Law.

XXIII. Students in Colleges to receive the Communion four times a year.
IN all Colleges and Halles within both the Universities, the Masters and
Fellows, such especially as have any Pupils, shall be careful that all their
said Pupils, and the rest that remain amongst them be well brought up and
thoroughly instructed in points of Religion, and that they do diligently
frequent public Service and Sermons, and receive the holy Communion: which we
ordain to be administered in all such Colleges and Halles the first or second
Sunday of every Month, Requiring all the said Masters, Fellows, and
Scholars, and all the rest of the Students, Officers and all other the
servants there so to be ordered, that every one of them shall Communicate four
times in the year at the least, kneeling reverently and decently upon their
knees according to the order of the Communion Book prescribed in that behalf.

XXIIII. Copes to be worn in Cathedral Churches by those that administer the
Communion.
IN all Cathedral and Collegiat Churches, the holy Communion shall be
administered upon principal Feast-dayes, sometimes by the Bishop if he be
present, and sometimes by the Deane: and at some times by a Canon or
Prebendarie, the principal Minister using a decent Coape, and being assisted
with the Gospeller and Epistler agreeably according to the Aduertisements
published Anno 7. Elizabethae: the said Communion to be administered at such
times and with such limitation, as is specified in the Book of Common prayer.
Provided, that no such limitation by any construction shall be allowed of, but
that all Deanes, Wardens, Masters, or Heads of Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches, Prebendaries, Canons, Vicars, Petticannons, Singingmen, and all
others of the Foundation, shall receive the Communion four times yearly at
the least.

XXV. Surplisses and Hoods to be worn in Cathedral Churches when there is no
Communion.
IN the time of Divine Service and Prayers in all Cathedral and Collegiat
Churches, when there is no Communion, it shall be sufficient to wear
Surplisses: saving that all Deanes, Masters and Heads of Collegiat Churches,
Canons and Prebendaries being Graduats, shall daily at the times both of Prayer
and Preaching, wear with their Surplisses, such Hoods as are agreeable to
their degrees.

XXVI. Notorious offenders not to be admitted to the Communion.
NO Minister shall in any wise admit to the receiving of the holy Communion, any
of his Cure or Flock which be openly known to live in sin notorious
without repentance, Nor any who have maliciously and openly contended with
their neighbors, until they shall be reconciled: Nor any Churchwardens or
Sidemen, who having taken their oaths to present to their Ordinaries all such
public offenses as they are particularly charged to inquire of in their
several Parishes shall (notwithstanding their said oaths, and that their
faithful discharging of them, is the chief means whereby public sins and
offenses may be reformed and punished) wittingly and willingly, desperately and
irreligiously incur the horrible crime of Perjury, either in neglecting or
in refusing to present such of the said enormities and public offenses, as
they know themselves to be committed in their said Parishes, or are notoriously
offensive to the Congregation there: although they be urged by some of their
neighbors, or by their Minister, or by their Ordinary himself, to discharge
their consciences by presenting of them, and not to incur so desperately the
said horrible sin of Perjury.

XXVII. Schismatics not to be admitted to the Communion.
NO Minister when he celebrateth the Communion, shall wittingly administer the
same to any, but to such as kneel, under pain of suspension, nor under the
like pain to any that refuse to be present at public Prayers, according to
the Orders of the Church of England, nor to any that are common and notorious
deprauers of the Book of Common Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments,
and of the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies therein prescribed, or of any thing
that is contained in any of the Articles agreed upon in the Convocation 1562.
or of any thing contained in the Book of ordering Priests and Bishops, or to
any that have spoken against and depraved his Majesty's sovereign Authority
in causes Ecclesiastical: Except every such person shall first acknowledge to
the Minister before the Churchwardens, his repentance for the same, and promise
by word (if he cannot write) that he will do so no more: and except (if he
can write) he shall first do the same under his handwriting, to be delivered
to the Minister, and by him sent to the Bishop of the Diocese, or Ordinary of
the place. Provided that every Minister so repelling any (as is specified
either in this or in the next precedent Constitution) shall upon complaint, or
being required by the Ordinary, signify the cause thereof unto him, and
therein obey his Order and direction.

XXVIII. Strangers not to be admitted to the Communion.
THe Churchwardens or Questmen, and their Assistants, shall mark as well as the
Minister, whether all and every of the Parishioners, come so often every year
to the holy Communion as the Laws and our Constitutions do require: And
whether any Strangers come often and commonly from other Parishes to their
Church, and shall show their Minister of them, lest perhaps they be admitted to
the Lords Table amongst others: which they shall forbid, and remit such home to
their own parish Churches and Ministers, there to receive the Communion with
the rest of their own neighbors.

XXIX. Fathers not to be Godfathers in Baptism, nor children not Communicants.
NO Parent shall be urged to be present, nor be admitted to answer as
Godfather for his own child: nor any Godfather or Godmother shall be suffered to
make any other answer or speech, then by the Book of Common prayer is
prescribed in that behalf. Neither shall any person be admitted Godfather or
Godmother to any child at Christning or Confirmation, before the said person so
undertaking has received the holy Communion.

XXX. The lawful use of the Cross in Baptism explaned.
We are sorry that his Majesty's most princely care and pains taken in the
Conference at Hampton Court, amongst many other points, touching this one of
the Cross in Baptism, has taken no better effect with many, but that still
the use of it in Baptism is so greatly stuck at and impugned. For the further
declaration therefore of the true use of this Ceremony, and for the removing of
all such scruple as might any ways trouble the consciences of them who are
indeed rightly religious, following the royal steps of our most worthy King,
because he therein follows the rules of the Scriptures, and the practice of
the Primitive Church: we do commend to all the true members of the Church of
England these our directions and observations ensuing.

First, it is to be observed, that although the Jews and Ethnicks derided both
the Apostles, and the rest of the Christians for preaching and believing in him
who was crucified upon the Cross: yet all both Apostles and Christians were so
far from being discouraged from their profession by the ignominy of the
Cross, as they rather rejoiced and triumphed in it. Yea, the holy Ghost by the
mouths of the Apostles did honor the Name of the Cross (being hateful among
the Jews) so far, that under it, he comprehended not only Christ crucified,
but the force, effects, and merits of his Death and Passion, with all the
comforts, fruits, and promises which we receive or expect thereby.

Secondlly, the honor and dignity of the Name of the Cross, begat a reverend
estimation even in the Apostles times (for ought that is known to the
contrary) of the sign of the Cross: which the Christians shortly after used
in all their actions, thereby making an outward show and profession even to the
astonishment of the Jews, that they were not ashamed to acknowledge him for
their Lord and Savior, who died for them upon the Cross. And this sign they
did not only use themselves with a kind of glory, when they met with any
Jews, but signed therewith their children when they were Christened, to
dedicate them by that badge to his service, whose benefits bestowed upon them
in Baptism, the name of the Cross did represent. And this use of the sign of
the Cross in Baptism was held in the Primitive Church, as well by the Greeks
as the Latins, with one consent and great applause. At what time, if any had
opposed themselves against it, they would certainly have been censured as
enemies of the name of the Cross, and consequently of Christ's merits, the
sign whereof they could no better endure. This continual and general use of
the sign of the Cross, is evident by many testimonies of the ancient Fathers.

Thirdly, it must be confessed that in process of time, the sign of the
Cross was greatly abused in the Church of Rome, especially after that
corruption of Popery had once possessed it But the abuse of a thing does not
take away the lawful use of it. Nay, so far was it from the purpose of the
Church of England, to forsake and reject the Churches of Italy, France,
Spain, Germany, or any such like Churches in all things which they held and
practiced, that, as the Apology of the Church of England confesses, it does
with reverence retain those Ceremonies which do neither endammage the Church
of God, nor offend the minds of sober men: and only departed from them in
those particular points, wherein they were fallen both from themselves in their
ancient integrity, and from the Apostolical Churches which were their first
founders. In which respect, amongst some other very ancient Ceremonies, the
sign of the Cross in Baptism has been retained in this Church both by the
judgment and practice of those reverend Fathers and great Divines in the days
of King Edward the sixth, of whom some constantly suffered for the profession
of the truth: and others being exiled in the time of Queen Mary, did after
their return in the beginning of the Reign of our late dread Sovereign,
continually defend and use the same. This resolution and practice of our Church
has been allowed and approved by the censure upon the Communion Book in
King Edward the sixth his days, and by the harmony of confessions of latter
years: because in deed the use of this sign in Baptism was ever accompanied
here with such sufficient cautions and exceptions against all Popish
Superstition and error, as in the like cases are either fit or convenient.

First, the Church of England since the abolishing of Popery has ever held
and taught, and so does hold and teach still, that the sign of the Cross used
in Baptism, is no part of the substance of that Sacrament. For when the
Minister dipping the Infant in Water, or laying Water upon the face of it (as
the manner also is) has pronounced these words, I baptize thee in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, the Infant is fully and
perfectly baptized. So as the sign of the Cross being afterward used, does
neither add any thing to the virtue or perfection of Baptism, nor being
omitted does detract any thing from the effect and substance of it.

Secondly, it is apparent in the Communion Book, that the Infant baptized is
by virtue of Baptism, before it be signed with the sign of the Cross,
received into the Congregation of Christ's flock as a perfect member thereof,
and not by any power ascribed unto the sign of the Cross So that for the very
remembrance of the Cross, which is very precious to all them that rightly
believe in Jesus Christ, and in the other respects mentioned, the Church of
England has retained still the sign of it in Baptism: following therein the
Primitive and Apostolical Churches, and accounting it a lawful outward
Ceremony and honorable Badge, whereby the Infant is dedicated to the service
of him that died upon the Cross, as by the words used in the Book of Common
prayer it may appear.

Lastly, the use of the sign of the Cross in Baptism, being thus purged
from all Popish superstition and error, and reduced in the Church of England
to the primary Institution of it upon those true rules of Doctrine concerning
things indifferent, which are consonant to the word of God, and the judgments
of all the ancient Fathers: We hold it the part of every private man, both
Minister and other, reverently to retain the true use of it prescribed by
public Authority, considering that things of themselves indifferent, do in
some sort alter their natures, when they are either commanded or forbidden by a
lawful Magistrate: and may not be omitted at every man's pleasure contrary to
the Law, when they be commanded, nor used when they are prohibited.

Ministers their Ordination, function, and charge.
XXXI. Four solemn times appointed for the making of Ministers.
FOrasmuch as the ancient Fathers of the Church led by example of the Apostles,
appointed Prayers and Fasts to be used at the solemn ordering of Ministers,
and to that purpose allotted certain times, in which only sacred Orders might
be given or conferred: We following their holy and Religious example, do
constitute and decree, That no Deacons or Ministers be made and ordained, but
only upon the Sundays immediately following Ieiunia quatuor temporum, commonly
called Ember weeks, appointed in ancient time for Prayer and Fasting
(purposely for this cause at their first Institution) and so continued at this
day in the Church of England: and that this be done in the Cathedral or
Parish Church where the Bishop resideth, and in the time of divine Service, in
the presence not only of the Archdeacon, but of the Deane and two Prebendaries
at the least, or (if they shall happen by any lawful cause to be let or
hindered) in the presence of four other grave persons being masters of Arts at
the least, and allowed for public Preachers.

XXXII. None to be made Deacon and Minister, both in one day.
THe Office of a Deacon being a step or degree to the Ministry according to
the judgment of the ancient Fathers, and the practice of the Primitive Church:
We do ordain and appoint, that hereafter no Bishop shall make any person of
what qualities or gifts soever, a Deacon and a Minister, both together upon one
day: but that the order in that behalf prescribed in the Book of making and
consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons be strictly observed. Not that
always every Deacon should be kept from the Ministry for a whole year when
the Bishop shall find good cause to the contrary: but that there being now
four times appointed in every year for the ordination of Deacons and
Ministers, there may ever be some time of trial of their behavior in the
office of Deacon, before they be admitted to the Order of Priesthood.

XXXIII. The Titles of such as are to be made Ministers.
IT has been long since provided by many decrees of the ancient Fathers, that
none should be admitted either Deacon or Priest, who had not first some certain
place where he might use his Function. According to which examples we do
ordain, that henceforth no person shall be admitted into sacred Orders, except
he shall at that time exhibit to the Bishop of whom he desires Imposition
of hands, a presentation of himself to some Ecclesiastical preferment then
void in that Diocese: or shall bring to the said Bishop a true and undoubted
Certificate, that either he is provided of some Church within the said
Diocese, where he may attend the Cure of souls, or of some Ministers place
vacant, either in the Cathedral Church of that Diocese, or in some other
Collegiat Church therein also situate, where he may execute his Ministry: or
that he is a Fellow, or in right as a Fellow, or to be a Conduct or Chapleine
in some College in Cambridge or Oxford: or except he be a Master of Arts of
five years standing, that lives of his own charge in either of the
Universities: or except by the Bishop himself, that does ordain him Minister,
he be shortly after to be admitted either to some Benefice or Curateship then
void. And if any Bishop shall admit any person into the Ministry that has
none of these Titles as is aforesaid, then he shall keep and maintain him with
all things necessary, till he do prefer him to some Ecclesiastical living.
And if the said Bishop shall refuse so to do, he shall be suspended by the
Archbishop being assisted with another Bishop, from giving of Orders by the
space of a year.

XXXIIII. The quality of such as are to be made Ministers.
NO Bishop shall henceforth admit any person into sacred Orders which is not
of his own Diocese, except he be either of one of the Universities of this
Realm, or except he shall bring letters Dimissory (so termed) from the
Bishop of whose Diocese he is, and desiring to be a Deacon, is three and
twenty years old, and to be a Priest four and twenty years complete, and
has taken some degree of School in either of the said Universities, or at
the least, except he be able to yield an account of his Faith in Latin,
according to the Articles of Religion approved in the Synod of the Bishops
and Clergy of this Realm 1562, and to confirm the same by sufficient
testimonies out of the holy Scriptures; and except moreover, he shall then
exhibit letters Testimonial of his good life and conversation under the Seal
of some College in Cambridge or Oxford, where before he remained, or of three
or four grave Ministers, together with the subscription and testimony of
other credible persons, who have known his life and behavior by the space of
three years next before.

XXXV. The examination of such as are to be made Ministers.
THe Bishop before he admit any person to holy Orders, shall diligently
examine him in the presence of those Ministers that shall assist him at the
Imposition of hands. And if the said Bishop have any lawful impediment, he
shall cause the said Ministers carefully to examine every such person so to be
ordered. Provided that they who shall assist the Bishop in examining and laying
on of hands, shall be of his Cathedral Church if they may conveniently be
had, or other sufficient Preachers of the same Diocese, to the number of three
at the least. And if any bishop or Suffragan shall admit any to sacred Orders
who is not so qualified and examined, as before we have ordained: the
Archbishop of this province having notice thereof, and being assisted therein
by one Bishop, shall suspend the said Bishop or Suffragan so offending, from
making either Deacons or Priests for the space of two years.

XXXVI. Subscription required of such as are to be made Ministers.
NO person shall hereafter be received into the Ministry, nor either by
Institution or Collation admitted to any Ecclesiastical living, nor suffered to
Preach, to Catechize, or to be a Lecturer, or Reader of Divinity in either
University, or in any Cathedral or Collegiat Church, City or market Town,
parish Church, Chapel, or in any other place within this Realm, except he be
licensed either by the Archbishop, or by the Bishop of the Diocese, (where he
is to be placed) under their hands and seals, or by one of the two
Universities under their seal likewise: and except he shall first subscribe to
these three Articles following, in such manner and sort as we have here
appointed.

1 That the Kings Majesty under God, is the only supreme Governor of this
Realm, and of all other his Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal and that no
foreign Prince, person, prelate, State, or potentate, has or ought to have
any Jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or authority
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within his Majesty's said Realms, Dominions,
and Countries.

2 That the Book of Common prayer, and of ordering of Bishops, priests and
deacons, contains in it nothing contrary to the word of God, and that it may
lawfully so be used, and that he himself will use the form in the said Book
prescribed in public prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, and none
other.

3 That he allows the book of Articles of Religion agreed upon oy the
Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the
Convocation holden at London in the year of our Lord God, one thousand five
hundred sixty and two: and that he acknowledges all and every the Articles
therein contained being in number nine and thirty, besides the ratification, to
be agreeable to the word of God.

To these three Articles whosoever will subscribe, he shall for the avoiding of
all ambiguities subscribe in this order and form of words, setting down both
his christen and surname, viz. I N. N. do willingly and ex animo subscribe to
these three Articles above mentioned, and to all things that are contained in
them. And if any bishop shall ordain, admit, or license any as is aforesaid,
except he first have subscribed in manner and form as here we have appointed,
he shall be suspended from giving of Orders and Licenses to preach for the
space of twelve months. But if either of the Universities shall offend
therein, we leave them to the danger of the Law and his Majesty's censure.

XXXVII. Subscription before the Diocesan.
NOne licensed as is aforesaid, to Preach, Read, Lecture, or Catechize,
coming to reside in any Diocese, shall be permitted there to Preach, Read,
Lecture, Catechize, or Minister the Sacraments, or to execute any other
Ecclesiastical function (by what authority soever he be thereunto admitted)
unless he first consent and subscribe to the three Articles before mentioned,
in the presence of the Bishop of the Diocese wherein he is to preach, Read,
Lecture, Cathechize or administer the Sacraments as aforesaid.

XXXVIII. Reuolters after Subscription, censured.
IF any Minister after he has once subscribed to the said three Articles, shall
omit to use the form of Prayer, or any of the Orders or Ceremonies prescribed
in the Communion Book, let him be suspended: and if after a month he do not
reform and submit himself, let him be excommunicated: and then if he shall not
submit himself within the space of another month, let him be deposed from the
Ministry.

XXXIX. Cautions for Institution of Ministers into Benefices.
NO bishop shall institute any to a Benefice, who has been ordained by any
other Bishop, except he first show unto him his Letters of Orders, and bring
him a sufficient testimony of his former good life and behavior, if the Bishop
shall require it: and lastly shall appear upon due examination to be worthy of
his Ministry.

XL. An Oath against Symonie at institution into Benefices.
TO avoid the detestable sin of Symony, because buying and selling of
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Functions, Offices, Promotions, Dignities, and
Livings is execrable before God: therefore the Archbishop and all and every
Bishop or Bishops or any other person or persons, having authority to Admit,
Institute, Collate, Install, or to confirm the election of any Archbishop,
Bishop, or other person or persons to any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
function, Dignity, Promotion, Title, Office, Jurisdiction, Place, or Benefice
with Cure or without Cure, or to any Ecclesiastical living whatsoever, shall
before every such Admission, Institution, Collation, Installation or
Confirmation of Election, respectively minister to every person hereafter to be
admitted, Instituted, collated, Installed, or confirmed in or to any
Archbishopricke, Bishopric, or other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical function,
Dignity, Promotion, Title, office, Jurisdiction, Place, or Benefice with Cure
or without Cure, or in or to any Ecclesiastical living whatsoever, this Oath
in manner and form following, the same to be taken by every one whom it
concerns in his own person, and not by a Proctor: I N. N. do swear, That I
have made no Symoniacall payment, contract or promise, directly or indirectly,
by my self or by any other to my knowledge, or with my consent, to any person
or persons whatsoever, for or concerning the procuring and obtaining of this
Ecclesiastical Dignity, Place, Preferment, Office or Living, (respectively and
particularly naming the same whereunto he is to be Admitted, Instituted,
Collated, Installed, or Confirmed) nor will at any time hereafter perform or
satisfy any such kind of payment, contract or promise made by any other
without my knowledge or consent; So help me God through Jesus Christ.

XLI. Licenses for plurality of Benefices limited, and Residence enjoined.
NO License or dispensation for the keeping of more Benefices with Cure then
one, shall be granted to any, but such only as shall be thought very well worthy
for his learning, and very well able and sufficient to discharge his duty,
that is, who shall have taken the degree of a Master of Arts at the least in
one of the Universities of this Realm, and be a public and sufficient
Preacher licensed. Provided always that he be by a good and sufficient
caution bound to make his personal Residence in each his said Benefices for
some reasonable time in every year: and that the said Benefices be not more
then thirty miles distant sunder: and lastly, that he have under him in the
Benefice where he does not reside, a Preacher lawfully allowed, that is able
sufficiently to teach and instruct the people.

XLII. Residence of Deanes in their Churches.
EVery Deane, Master, or Warden, or chief Governor of any Cathedral or
Collegiate Church, shall be resident in his said Cathedral or Collegiate
Church fourscore and ten days Coniunctim or Diuisim in every year at the
least, and then shall continue there in preaching the word of God, and keeping
good hospitality, except he shall be otherwise let with weighty and urgent
causes to be approved by the Bishop of the Diocese, or in any other lawful
sort dispensed with. And when he is present, he, with the rest of the Canons or
Prebendaries resident, shall take special care, that the Statutes and laudable
Customs of their Church, (not being contrary to the word of God, or
Prerogative Royal) the Statutes of this Realm being in force concerning
Ecclesiastical Order, and all other Constitutions now set forth and confirmed
by his Majesty's Authority, and such as shall be lawfully enjoined by the
Bishop of the Diocese in his Visitation according to the Statutes and Customs
of the same Church, or the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, be diligently
observed, and that the Petty Canons, Vicars chorall, and other Ministers of
their Church be urged to the study of the holy Scriptures: and every one of
them to have the New Testament not only in English, but also in Latin.

XLIII. Deanes and Prebendaries to Preach during their Residence.
THe Deane, Master, Warden, or chief Governor, Prebendaries and Canons in
every Cathedral and Collegiat Church, shall not only preach there in their own
persons so often as they are bound by Law, Statute, Ordinance, or Custom; but
shall likewise Preach in other Churches of the same Diocese where they are
resident, and especially in those places whence they or their Church receive
any yearly Rents or profits. And in case they themselves be sick, or
lawfully absent, they shall substitute such licensed Preachers to supply their
turns, as by the Bishop of the Diocese shall be thought meet to Preach in
Cathedral Churches. And if any otherwise neglect to omit or supply his course,
as is aforesaid, the offender shall be punished by the Bishop, or by him or
them to whom the jurisdiction of that Church appertains, according to the
quality of the offense.

XLIIII. Prebendaries to be resident upon their Benefices.
NO Prebendaries nor Canons in Cathedral or Collegiate Churches, having one or
more Benefices with Cure, (and not being Residentaries in the same Cathedral
or Collegiat Churches) shall under color of the said Prebends, absent
themselves from their Benefices with Cure above the space of one month in the
year, unless it be for some urgent cause, and certain time to be allowed by
the Bishop of the Diocese. And such of the said Canons and Prebendaries as by
the Ordinances of the said Cathedral or Collegiat Churches do stand bound to
be resident in the same, shall so among themselves sort and proportion the
times of the year, concerning residence to be kept in the said Churches, as
that some of them always shall be personally resident there: and that all
those who be, or shall be Residentiaries in any Cathedral or Collegiat Church,
shall after the days of their Residencie appointed by their local Statutes or
Customs expired, presently repair to their Benefices, or some one of them, or
to some other Charge where the Law requires their presence, there to discharge
their duties according to the Laws in that case provided. And the Bishop of
the Diocese shall see the same to be duly performed and put in execution.

XLV. Beneficed Preachers being resident upon their livings to preach every
Sunday.
EVery Beneficed man allowed to be a preacher, and residing on his Benefice,
having no lawful impediment, shall in his own Cure, or in some other Church or
Chapel where he may conveniently near adjoining, (where no Preacher is)
preach one Sermon every Sunday of the year, wherein he shall soberly and
sincerely divide the word of truth to the glory of God, and to the best
edification of the people.

XLVI. Beneficed men not Preachers to procure monthly Sermons.
EVery beneficed man not allowed to be a Preacher, shall procure Sermons to be
preached in his Cure once in every month at the least, by Preachers lawfully
licenced, if his living in the judgment of the Ordinary, will be able to bear
it. And upon every Sunday when there shall not be a Sermon preached in his
Cure, he or his Curate shall read some one of the Homilies prescribed, or to
be prescribed by authority to the intents aforesaid.

XLVII. Absence of Beneficed men to be supplied by Curates that are allowed
Preachers.
EVery Beneficed man licensed by the Laws of this Realm, upon urgent
occasions of other service not to reside upon his Benefice, shall cause his
Cure to be supplied by a Curate that is a suffiicient and licensed Preacher, if
the worth of the Benefice will bear it. But whosoever has two Benefices, shall
maintain a Preacher licensed, in the Benefice where he does not reside,
except he preach himself at both of them usually.

XLVIII. None to be Curates but allowed by the Bishop.
NO Curat or Minister shall be permited to serve in any place, without
Examination and Admission of the Bishop of the Diocese or Ordinary of the
place having Episcopal Jurisdiction, in writing under his hand and seal,
having respect to the greatness of the Cure, and meetenesse of the party. And
the said Curates and Ministers if they remove from one Diocese to another,
shall not be by any means admitted to serve without testimony of the Bishop of
the Diocese, or Ordinary of the place as aforesaid, whence they came, in
writing, of their honesty, ability, and conformity to the Ecclesiastical
laws of the Church of England. Nor any shall serve more then one Church or
Chapel upon one day, except that Chapel be a member of the Parish Church, or
united thereunto: and unless the said Church or Chapel where such a
Minister shall serve in two places, be not able in the judgment of the Bishop
or Ordinary as aforesaid to maintain a Curate.

XLIX. Ministers not allowed Preachers, may not expound.
NO person whatsoever not examined and approved by the Bishop of the Diocese,
or not licensed as is aforesaid for a sufficient or convenient Preacher, shall
take upon him to expound in his own Cure or elsewhere, any Scripture or matter
of doctrine, but shall only study to read plainly and aptly (without glozing
or adding) the Homilies already set forth or hereafter to be published by
lawful Authority, for the confirmation of the true Faith, and for the good
instruction and edification of the people.

L. Strangers not admitted to Preach without showing their License.
NEither the Minister, Churchwardens, nor any other Officers of the Church,
shall suffer any man to preach within their Churches or Chapels, but such as
by showing their License to preach, shall appear unto them to be sufficiently
authorized thereunto, as is aforesaid.

LI. Strangers not admitted to Preach in Cathedral Churches without sufficient
authority.
THe Dea^, Presidents, and Residentiaries of any Cathedral or Collegiate
Church, shall suffer no stranger to preach unto the people in their Churches,
except they be allowed by the Archbishop of the Province, or by the Bishop of
the same Diocese, or by either of the Universities. And if any in his Sermon
shall publish any Doctrine, either strange or disagreeing from the word of God,
or from any of the Articles of Religion agreed upon in the Convocation house
Anno 1562. or from the book of Common prayers: the Deane or the Residents
shall by their Letters subscribed with some of their hands that heard him, so
soon as may be, give notice of the same to the Bishop of the Diocese, that he
may determine the matter, and take such order therein as he shall think
convenient.

LII. The names of strange Preachers to be noted in a Book.
THat the Bishop may understand (if occasion so require) what Sermons are made
in every Church of his Diocese, and who presume to preach without License: the
Churchwardens and Sidemen shall see that the names of al preachers which come
to their Church from any other place, be noted in a book, which they shall
have ready for that purpose: wherein every Preacher shall subscribe his name,
the day when he preached, and the name of the Bishop of whom he had License to
preach.

LIII. No public opposition between Preachers.
IF any Preacher shall in the Pulpit particularly, or namely of purpose,
impugn or confute any doctrine delivered by any other Preacher in the same
Church, or in any church near adjoining, before he has acquainted the Bishop
of the Diocese therewith, and received order from him what to do in that case,
because upon such public dissenting and contradicting, there may grow much
offense and disquietnesse unto the people: the Churchwardens or party grieved
shall forthwith signify the same to the said Bishop, and not suffer the said
Preacher any more to occupy that place which he has once abused, except he
faithfully promise to forbear all such matter of contention in the Church,
until the Bishop has taken further order therein: who shall with all
convenient speed so proceed therein, that public satisfaction may be made in
the Congregation where the offense was given. Provided, that if either of the
parties offending do appeal, he shall not be suffered to preach pendente
lite.

LIIII. The Licenses of Preachers refusing Conformity, to be void.
IF any man licenced heretofore to preach, by any Archbishop, Bishop, or by
either of the Universities, shall at any time from henceforth refuse to
conform himself to the Laws, Ordinances, and Rites Ecclesiastical
established in the Church of England, he shall be admonished by the Bishop of
the Diocese, or Ordinary of the place, to submit himself to the use and due
exercise of the same. And if after such admonition, he do not conform
himself within the space of one month, We determine and decree, That the
license of every such Preacher shall thereupon be utterly void and of none
effect.

LV. The form of a Prayer to be used by Preachers before their Sermons.
BEfore all Sermons, Lectures, and Homilies, the Preachers and Ministers shall
move the people to join with them in prayer in this form, or to this effect,
as briefly as conveniently they may. Ye shall pray for Christ's holy Catholic
Church, that is, for the whole Congregation of Christian people dispersed
throughout the whole world, and especially for the Churches of England,
Scotland, and Ireland. And herein I require you most especially to pray for the
Kings most excellent Majesty, our Sovereign Lord JAMES, King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defendour of the Faith, and Supreme Governor in
these his Realms, and all other his Dominions and Countries, over all persons,
in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal. Ye shall also pray for our
gracious Queen ANNE, the Noble Prince HENRY, and the rest of the King and
Queens Royal Issue. Ye shall also pray for the Ministers of Gods holy word
and Sacraments, as well Archbishops and Bishops, as other Pastors and Curates.
Ye shall also pray for the Kings most honorable Counsel, and for all the
Nobility and Magistrates of this Realm, that all and every of these in their
several Callings, may serve truly and painefully to the glory of God, and the
edifying and well governing of his people, remembering the account that they
must make. Also ye shall pray for the whole Commons of this Realm, that they
may live in true Faith and fear of God, in humble obedience to the King, and
brotherly charity one to another. Finally, let us praise God for all those
which are departed out of this life in the Faith of Christ, and pray unto God
that we may have grace to direct our lives after their good example: that this
life ended, we may be made partakers with them of the glorious Resurrection in
the life Everlasting, always concluding with the Lords prayer.

LVI. Preachers and Lecturers to read divine Service and administer the
Sacraments twice a year at the least.
EVery Minister being possessed of a Benefice that has Cure and Charge of
souls, although he chiefly attend to preaching, and has a Curate under him to
execute the other duties, which are to be performed for him in the Church, and
likewise every other stipendarie Preacher that reads any Lecture, or
Catechizeth, or Preaches in any Church or Chapel, shall twice at the least
every year read himself the divine Service, upon two several Sundays,
publicly and at the usual times, both in the Forenoone and Afternoon in the
Church which he so possesses, or where he Reads, Catechizeth, or Preaches
as is aforesaid, and shall likewise as often in every year administer the
Sacraments of Baptism (if there be any to be baptized) and of the Lords
Supper, in such manner and form, and with the observation of all such Rites and
Ceremonies as are prescribed by the book of Common prayer in that behalf:
which if he do not accordingly perform, then shall he that is possessed of a
Benefice (as before) be suspended: and he thatis but aReader, Preacher, or
Catechizer, be removed from his place by the Bishop of the Diocese, until he
or they shall submit themselves to perform all the said duties, in such matter
and ^ort as before is prescribed.

LVII. The Sacraments not to be refused at the hands of unpreaching Ministers.
WHereas diverse Persons seduced by false Teachers, do refuse to have their
children baptized by a Minister that is no Preacher, and to receive the holy
Communion at his hands in the same respect, as though the virtue of those
Sacraments did depend upon his ability to preach: Forasmuch as the doctrine
both of Baptism and of the Lords Supper is sufficiently set down in the book
of Common prayer to be used at the administration of the said Sacraments, as
nothing can be added unto it that is material and necessary: We do require and
charge every such person seduced as aforesaid, to reform that their
wilfulness, and to submit himself to the order of the Church in that behalf,
both the said Sacraments being equally effectual, whether they be ministered by
a Minister that is no Preacher, or by one that is a Preacher. And if any
hereafter shall offend herein, or leave their own Parish Churches in that
respect, and Communicate or caus^ their children to be Baptized in other
Parishes abroad, and will not be moved thereby to reform that their error
and unlawful course: let them be presented to the Ordinary of the place by
the Minister, Churchwardens, and Sidemen or Questmen of the Parishes where they
dwell, and there receive such punishment by Ecclesiastical censures, as such
obstinacy does worthily deserve: that is, Let them (persisting in their
wilfulness) be suspended, and then after a months further obstinacy,
Excommunicated. And likewise if any Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall after the
publishing hereof, either receive to the Communion any such persons which are
not of his own Church and Parish, or shall Baptize any of their children,
thereby strengthening them in their said errors, Let him be suspended, and
not released thereof, until he do faithfully promise that he will not
afterward offend therein.

LVIII. Ministers reading Divine Service, and Administering the Sacraments, to
wear Surplisses, and Graduats therewithal Hoods.
EVery Minister saying the public Prayers, or ministering the Sacraments or
other Rites of the Church, shall wear a decent and comely Surplisse with
sleeves, to be provided at the charge of the Parish. And if any question arise
touching the matter, decency, or comeliness thereof, the same shall be decided
by the discretion of the Ordinary. Furthermore such Ministers as are Graduats,
shall wear upon their Surplisses at such times, such Hoods as by the orders of
the Universities are agreeable to their degrees, which no Minister shall wear
(being no Graduat) under pain of suspension. Notwithstanding it shall be lawful
for such Ministers as are not Graduats, to wear upon their Surplisses in stead
of Hoods, some decent Tippet of black, so it be not silk.

LIX. Ministers to Catechize every Sunday.
EVery Parson, Vicar, or Curate, upon every Sunday and Holy day before Evening
prayer, shall for half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth and
ignorant persons of his Parish in the ten Commandments, the Articles of the
Belief, and in the Lords prayer: and shall diligently hear, instruct, and
teach them the Catechism set forth in the Book of Common prayer. And all
Fathers, Mothers, Masters, and Mistresses, shall cause their children,
servants, and apprentices, which have not learned the Catechism, to come to
the Church at the time appointed, obediently to hear, and to be ordered by
the Minister, until they have learned the same. And if any Minister neglect
his duty herein, let him be sharply reproved upon the first complaint, and
true notice thereof given to the Bishop or Ordinary of the place. If after
submitting himself, he shall wilfully offend therein again, let him be
suspended. If so the third time, there being little hope that he will be
therein reformed, then Excommunicated, and so remain until he will be
reformed. And likewise if any of the said Fathers, Mothers, Masters, or
Mistresses, Children, Servants, or Apprentices shall neglect their duties, as
the one sort in not causing them to come, and the other in refusing to learn
as aforesaid, Let them be suspended by their Ordinaries, (if they be not
children) and if they so persist by the space of a month, then let them be
Excommunicated.

LX. Confirmation to be performed once in three years.
FOrasmuch as it has been a solemn, ancient, and laudable Custom in the
Church of God, continued from the Apostles times, that all Bishops should lay
their hands upon children Baptized and instructed in the Catechism of
Christian Religion, praying over them, and blessing them, which we commonly
call Confirmation, and that this holy action has been accustomed in the
Church in former ages, to be performed in the Bishops Visitation every third
year: We will and appoint, that every Bishop, or his Suffragan in his
accustomed Visitation, do in his own person carefully observe the said
Custom. And if in that year by reason of some infirmity, he be not able
personally to Visit, then he shall not omit the execution of that duty of
Confirmation the next year after, as he may conveniently.

LXI. Ministers to prepare children for Confirmation.
EVery Minister that has Cure and charge of souls, for the better
accomplishing of the Orders prescribed in the Book of Common prayer concerning
Confirmation, shall take such especial care as that none may be presented to
the Bishop for him to lay his hands upon, but such as can render an account of
their Faith according to the Catechism in the said Book contained. And when
the Bishop shall assign any time for the performance of that part of his duty,
every such Minister shall use his best endeavor to prepare and make able, and
likewise to procure as many as he can to be then brought, and by the Bishop to
be confirmed.

LXII. Ministers not to marry any persons without Bannes or License.
NO Minister upon pain of suspension per triennium ipso facto, shall celebrate
Matrimony between any persons without a Faculty or License granted by some
of the persons in these our Constitutions expressed, except the Bannes of
Matrimony have been first published three several Sundaies or Holy days in
the time of divine Service in the Paris^ churches and Chapels where the said
parties dwell, according to the book of Common prayer. Neither shall any
Minister upon the like pain under any pretense whatsoever, join any persons
so licenced in Marriage at any unseasonable times, but only between the
hours of eight and twelve in the forenoone, nor in any private place, but
either in the said Churches or Chapels where one of them dwells, and
likewise in time of Divine Service: nor when Bannes are thrice asked (and no
License in that respect necessary) before the Parents or Governors of the
parties to be married, being under the age of twenty and one years, shall
either personally, or by sufficient testimony, signify to him their consents
given to the said Marriage.

LXIII. Ministers of exempt Churches not to Marry without Bannes or License.
EVery Minister who shall hereafter celebrate Marriage betwixt any persons
contrary to our said Constitutions, or any part of them, under color of any
peculiar Liberty or Privilege claimed to appertain to certain Churches and
Chapels, shall be suspended per triennium, by the Ordinary of the place where
the offense shall be committed. And if any such Minister shall afterward remove
from the place where he has committed that fault before he be suspended, as is
aforesaid, then shall the Bishop of the Diocese, or Ordinary of the place
where he remains, upon Certificat under the Hand and Seal of the other
Ordinary from whose Jurisdiction he removed, execute that censure upon him.

LXIIII. Ministers solemnly to bid Holy days.
EVery Parson, Vicar, or Curate shall in his several charge declare to the
people every Sunday at the time appointed in the Communion Book, whether there
be any Holy days or Fasting days the week following. And if any do
hereafter wittingly offend herein, and being once admonished thereof by his
Ordinary, shall again omit that duty: let him be censured according to Law,
until he submit himself to the due performance of it.

LXV. Ministers solemnly to denounce Recusants and Excommunicats.
ALl Ordinaries shall in their several Jurisdictions carefully see and give
order, that as well those who for obstinate refusing to frequent divine Service
established by public authority within this Realm of England, as those also
(especially of the better sort and condition) who for notorious contumacie or
other notable crimes stand lawfully excommunicate, (unless within three
months immediately after the said sentence of Excommunication pronounced
against them, they reform themselves, and obtain the benefit of Absolution)
be every six months ensuing, as well in the Parish Church, as in the
Cathedral Church of the Diocese in which they remain, by the Minister openly
in time of Divine Service upon some Sunday denounced and declared
Excommunicate, that others may be thereby both admonished to refrain their
company and society, and excited the rather to procure out a Writ De
excommunicate capiendo, thereby to bring and reduce them into due order and
obedience. Likewise the Register of every Ecclesiastical Court, shall yearly
between Michaelmas and Christmas, duly certify the Archbishop of the
Province of all and singular the premises aforesaid.

LXVI. Miuisters to confer with Recusants.
EVery Minister being a Preacher, and having any Popish Recusant or Recusants
in his Parish, and thought fit by the Bishop of the Diocese, shall labor
diligently wi^h them from time to time, thereby to recl^ime them from their
errors. And if he be (...) Preacher, or not such a Preacher, then he shall
procure, if he can possibly, some that are Preachers so qualified, to take
pains with them for that purpose. If he can procure none, then he shall
inform the Bishop of the Diocese thereof, who shall not only appoint some
neighbor Preacher or Preachers adjoining (...) labor upon them, but himself
also (...) important affairs will permit him) shall (...) is best endeavor by
instruction, persuasion, and all good means he can devise to reclaim both
them and all other within his Diocese so affected.

LXVII. Ministers to visit the sick.
WHen any person is dangerously sick in any Parish, the Minister or Curate
(having knowledge thereof) shall resort unto him or her (if the disease be not
known or probably suspected to be infectious) to instruct and comfort them in
their distress, according to the order of the Communion book, if he be no
Preacher: or if he be a Preacher, then as he shall think most needful and
convenient. And when any is passing out of this life, a Bell shall be tolled,
and the Minister shall not then slack to do his last duty. And after the
parties death (if it so fall out) there shall be rung no more but one short
peale, and one other before the burial, and one other after the burial.

LXVIII. Ministers not to refuse to christen or bury.
NO Minister shall refuse or delay t^ christen any child according to the form
of the book of Common prayer, that is brought to the Church to him upon
Sundays or Holidays to be christened, or to bury any corpse that is brought to
the Church or Churchyard (convenient warning being given him thereof before) in
such manner and form as is prescribed in the said book of Common prayer. And
if he shall refuse to christen the one, or bury the other, except the party
deceased were denounced excommunicated maiori excommunicatione, for some
grievous and notorious crime, (and no man able to testify of his repentance)
he shall be suspended by the Bishop of the Diocese from his Ministry by the
space of three months.

LXIX. Ministers not to defer Christening, if the child be in danger.
IF any Minister being duly without any manner of collusion, informed of the
weakness and danger of death of any Infant unbaptized in his Parish, and
thereupon desired to go or come to the place where the said Infant remains to
baptize the same, shall either wilfully refuse so to do, or of purpose, or of
gross negligence shall so defer the time, as when he might conveniently have
resorted to the place, and have baptized the said Infant, it dies through such
his default unbaptized: the said Minister shall be suspended for three months,
and before his restitution shall acknowledge his fault, and promise before his
Ordinary, that he will not wittingly incur the like again. Provided, that
where there is a Curate or a Substitute, this Constitution shall not extend to
the Parson or Vicar himself, but to the Curate or Substitute present.

LXX. Ministers to keep a Register of Christnings, Weddings, and Burials.
IN every Parish Church and Chapel within this Realm, shall be provided one
parchment Book at the charge of the Parish, wherein shall be written the day
and year of every Christning, Wedding, and Burial, which have been in that
Parish since the time that the Law was first made in that behalf, so far as
the ancient Books thereof can be procured, but especially since the beginning
of the Reign of the late Qneene. And for the safe keeping of the said book,
the Churchwardens at the charge of the Parish, shall provide one sure Coffer
with three locks and keys, whereof the one to remain with the Minister, and
the other two with the Churchwardens severally, so that neither the Minister
without the two Churchwardens, nor the Churchwardens without the Minister,
shall at any time take that Book out of the said Coffer. And henceforth upon
every Sabbath day, immediately after Morning or Evening prayer, the Minister and
Churchwardens shall take the said parchment Book out of the said Coffer, and
the Minister in the presence of the Churchwardens shall write and record in the
said Book, the names of all persons Christened, together with the names and
surnames of their Parents, and also the names of all persons Married and Buried
in that parish, in the week before, and the day and year of every such
Christning, Marriage, and Burial: And that done, they shall lay up that Book
in the Coffer as before: and the Minister and Churchwardens unto every page of
that Book, when it shall be filled with such inscriptions, shall subscribe
their names. And the Churchwardens shall once every year within one Month
after the five and twentieth day of March, transmit unto the Bishop of the
Diocese, or his Chancellor, a true Copy of the names of al persons Christened,
Married, or Buried in their Parish in the year before (ended the said five and
twentieth day of March) and the certain days and months in which every such
Christning, Marriage and Burial was had, to be subscribed with the hands of
the said Minister and Churchwardens, to the end the same may faithfully be
preserved in the Registrie of the said Bishop: which Certificat shall be received
without Fee. And if the Minister or Churchwardens shall be negligent in
performance of any thing herein contained, it shall be lawful for the Bishop
or his Chancellor to convent them, and proceed against every of them as
contemners of this our Constitution.

LXXI. Ministers not to Preach or administer the Communion in private houses.
NO Minister shall Preach or administer the holy Communion in any private
house, except it be in times of necessity, when any being either so impotent,
as he cannot go to the Church, or very dangerously sick, are desirous to be
partakers of that holy Sacrament, under pain of suspension for the first
offense, and Excommunication for the second. Provided that houses are here
reputed for Private houses, wherein are no Chapels dedicated and allowed by
the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm. And provided also under the pain
before expressed, that no Chapleins do Preach or administer the Communion in
any other places, but in the Chapels of the said houses, and that also they do
the same very seldom upon Sundays and holy days. So that both the Lords and
Masters of the said houses and their families shall at other times resort to
their own Parish Churches, and there receive the holy Communion at the least
once every year.

LXXII. Ministers not to appoint public or private Fasts, or Prophesies, or to
exorcize, but by authority.
NO Minister or Ministers shall without the License and direction of the Bishop
of the Diocese first obtained and had under his Hand and Seal, appoint or
keep any solemn Fasts, either publicly or in any private houses, other then
such as by Law are, or by public authority shall be appointed, nor shall be
wittingly present at any of them, under pain of Suspension for the first
fault, of Excommunication for the second, and of Deposition from the Ministry
for the third. Neither shall any Minister not licensed, as is aforesaid,
presume to appoint or hold any meetings for Sermons, commonly termed by some,
Prophesies or Exercises, in Market towns or other places, under the said
pains: Nor without such License to attempt upon any pretense whatsoever,
either of Possession or Qbsession, by fasting and prayer to cast out any devil
or devils, under pain of the imputation of Imposture, or Cosenage, and
Deposition from the Ministry.

LXXIII. Ministers not to hold private Conuenticles.
FOrasmuch as all Conuenticles and secret meetings of Priests and Ministers,
have been ever justly accounted very hurtful to the State of the Church
wherein they live: We do now ordain and constitute, That no Priests or
Ministers of the word of God, nor any other persons shall meet together in any
private house or elsewhere to consult upon any matter or course to be taken by
them, or upon their motion or direction by any other, which may any way tend to
the impeaching or deprauing of the doctrine of the Church of England, or of the
Book of Common prayer, or of any part of the government and Discipline now
established in the Church of England, under pain of Excommunication ipso facto.

LXXIIII. Decency in apparel enjoined to Ministers.
THe true, ancient and flourishing Churches of Christ being ever desirous that
their Prelacie and Clergy might be had as well in outward reverence, as
otherwise regarded for the worthiness of their Ministry, did think it fit by
a prescript form of decent and comely Apparel, to have them known to the
people, and thereby to receive the honor and estimation due to the special
Messengers and Ministers of Almighty God. We therefore following their grave
judgment, and the ancient Custom of the Church of England, and hoping that in
time new fanglenesse of Apparel in some factious persons will die of it self,
do constitute and appoint, That the Archbishop and Bishops, shall not intermit
to use the accustomed Apparel of their degrees. Likewise all Deanes, Masters of
Colleges, Archdeacons, and Prebendaries in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches,
(being Priests or Deacons) Doctors in Divinity, Law, and Physic, Bachelors
in Divinity, Masters of Arts, and Bachelors of Law having any Ecclesiastical
living, shall usually wear Gowns with standing collers, and sleeves straight
at the hands, or wide sleeves as is used in the Universities, with Hoods or
Tippets of Silk or Sarcenet, and square Caps. And that all other Ministers,
admitted or to be admitted into that Function, shall also usually wear the
like Apparel, as is aforesaid, except Tippets only. We do further in like
manner ordain, That all the said Ecclesiastical persons above mentioned, shall
usually wear in their iourneys Cloakes with sleeves, commonly called Priests
Cloaks without gards, welts, long Buttons, or cuts. And no Ecclesiastical
person shall wear any Coife, or wrought Nightcap, but only plain Nightcaps
of black silk, Satin, or Velvet. In all which particulars concerning the
Apparel here prescribed, our meaning is not to attribute any holiness or
special worthiness to the said garments, but for decency, gravity and
order, as is before specified. In private houses, and in their Studies, the
said persons Ecclesiastical may use any comely and Schollerlike Apparel.
Provided, that it be not cut or pinckt, and that in public they go not in
their Dublet and Hose, without Coats or Cassocks: and also that they wear not
any light colored Stockins. Likewise poor beneficed men and Curats (not being
able to provide themselves long Gowns) may go in short Gowns, of the fashion
aforesaid.

LXXV. Sober conversation required in Ministers.
NO Ecclesiastical persons shall at any time, other then for their honest
necessities, resort to any Tauernes or Alehouses, neither shall they board or
lodge in any such places. Furthermore, they shall not give themselves to any
base or servile labor, or to drinking or riot, spending their time idly by
day or by night, playing at Dice, Cards, or Tables, or any other unlawful
game: but at all times convenient, they shall hear or read somewhat of the
holy Scriptures, or shall occupy themselves with some other honest study or
exercise, always doing the things which shall appertain to honesty, and
endeavoring to profit the Church of God, having always in mind that they
ought to excel all others in purity of life, and should be examples to the
people to live well and Christianly under pain of Ecclesiastical censures to
be inflicted with severity, according to the qualities of their offenses.

LXXVI. Ministers at no time to forsake their Calling.
NO man being admitted a Deacon or Minister, shall from thenceforth voluntarily
relinquish the same, nor afterward use himself in the course of his life, as a
Lay man, upon pain of Excommunication. And the names of all such men so
forsaking there calling, the Churchwardens of the Parish where they dwell shall
present to the Bishop of the Diocese, or to the Ordinary of the place, having
Episcopal Jurisdiction.

Schoolemasters.
LXXVII. None to teach School without License.
NO man shall teach either in public School, or private house, but such as
shall be allowed by the Bishop of the Diocese, or Ordinary of the place
under his Hand and Seal, being found meet as well for his learning and
dexterity in teaching, as for sober and honest conversation, and also for
right understanding of Gods true Religion, and also except he shall first
subscribe to the first and third Articles before mentioned simply, and to the
two first clauses of the second Article.

LXXVIII. Curats desirous to teach, to be licenced before others.
IN what Parish Church or Chapel soever there is a Curate which is a Master
of Arts, or Bacheler of Arts, or is otherwise well able to teach youth, and
will willingly so do, for the better increase of his living, and trayning up
of children in Principles of true Religion: We will and ordain, That a License
to teach youth of the Parish where he serves, be granted to none by the
Ordinary of that place, but only to the said Curate. Provided always, That
this Constitution shall not extend to any Parish or Chapel in country
Towns, where there is a public School founded already: In which case we
think it not meet to allow any to teach Grammar, but only him that is
allowed for the said public School.

LXXIX. The duty of Schoolemasters.
ALl Schoolemasters shall teach in English or Latin, as the children are able
to bear, the larger or shorter Catechism heretofore by public authority set
forth. And as often as any Sermon shall be upon Holy and Festival days,
within the Parish where they teach, they shall bring their Scholars to the
Church where such Sermon shall be made, and there see them quietly and soberly
behave themselves, and shall examine them at times convenient after their
return, what they have borne away of such Sermons. Upon other days, and at
other times they shall train them up with such sentences of holy Scripture, as
shall be most expedient to induce them to all godliness: and they shall teach
the Grammar set forth by King HENRY the eight, and continued in the times of
King EDWARD the sixth, and Queen ELIZABETH of noble memory, and none other.
And if any Schoolmaster being licenced, and having subscribed, as aforesaid,
shall offend in any of the premises, or either speak, write, or teach against
any thing whereunto he has formerly subscribed, (if upon admonition by the
Ordinary he do not amend and reform himself) let him be suspended from
teaching School any longer.

Things appertaining to Churches.
LXXX. The great Bible and Book of Common prayer to be had in every Church.
THe Churchwardens or Questmen of every Church and Chapel shall at the
charge of the Parish provide the Book of Common prayer lately explaned in some
few points by his Majesty's authority according to the Laws and his Highness
prerogative in that behalf, and that with all convenient speed, but at the
furthest within two months after the publishing of these our Constitutions.
And if any Parishes be yet unfurnished of the Bible of the largest volume, or
of the Books of Homilies allowed by Authority: the said Churchwardens shall
within convenient time provide the same at the like charge of the Parish.

LXXXI. A Font of stone for Baptism in every Church.
ACcording to a former Constitution, too much neglected in many places, we
appoint, That there shall be a Font of stone in every Church and Chapel where
Baptism is to be ministered: the same to be set in the ancient usual places.
In which only Font the Minister shall baptize publicly.

LXXXII. A decent Communion Table in every Church.
WHereas we have no doubt but that in all Churches within the Realm of
England, convenient and decent Tables are provided, and placed for the
celebration of the holy Communion, we appoint that the same Tables shall from
time to time be kept and repaired in sufficient and seemly manner, and
covered in time of divine Service with a Carpet of Silk or other decent stuff
thought meet by the Ordinary of the place, if any question be made of it, and
with a fair Linen cloth at the time of the ministration as becomes that
Table, and so stand, saving when the said holy Communion is to be administered.
At which time the same shall be placed in so good sort within the Church or
Chancell, as thereby the Minister may be more conveniently heard of the
Communicants in his prayer and ministration, and the Communicants also more
conveniently and in more number may communicate with the said Minister: and
that the ten Commandments be set upon the East end of every Church and
Chapel where the people may best see and read the same, and other chosen
Sentences written upon the walls of the said Churches and Chapels in places
convenient: and likewise that a convenient seat be made for the Minister to
read Service in. All these to be done at the charge of the Parish.

LXXXIII. A pulpit to be provided in every Church.
THe Churchwardens or Questmen at the common charge of the Parishioners in
every Church, shall provide a comely and decent Pulpit to be set in a
convenient place within the same by the discretion of the Ordinary of the
place, if any question do arise, and to be there seemly kept for the
preaching of Gods word.

LXXXIIII. A Chest for Alms in every Church.
THe Churchwardens shall provide and have within three months after the
publishing of these constitutions, a strong Chest, with a hole in the upper
part thereof, to be provided at the charge of the Parish (if there be none such
already provided) having three keys. Of which one shall remain in the custody
of the Parson, Vicar, or Curat, and the other two in the custody of the
Churchwardens for the time being, which Chest they shall set and fasten in the
most convenient place, to the intent the Parishioners may put into it their
Alms for their poor neighbors. And the Parson, Vicar, or Curate shall
diligently from time to time, and especially when men make their Testaments,
call upon, exhort, and move their neighbors to confer, and give as they may
well spare to the said Chest, declaring unto them, that whereas heretofore they
have been diligent to bestow much substance, otherwise then God commanded,
upon superstitious uses: now they ought at this time to be much more ready to
help the poor and needy, knowing that to relieve the poor, is a sacrifice
which pleases God: and that also whatsoever is given for their comfort, is
given to Christ himself, and is so accepted of him, that he will mercifully
reward the same. The which Alms and devotion of the people, the Keepers of the
keys shall yearly, quarterly, or oftener (as need requires) take out of the
Chest, and distribute the same in the presence of most of the Parish, or six
of the chief of them, to be truly and faithfully delivered to their most
poor and needy neighbors.

LXXXV. Churches to be kept in sufficient reparations.
THe Churchwardens or questmen shall take care and provide that the Churches
be well and sufficiently repaired, and so from time to time kept and
maintained, that the Windows be well glazed, and that the Floores be kept
paued, plain, and even, and all things there in such an orderly and decent
sort, without dust, or any thing that may be either noisome, or unseemly, as
best becomes the house of God, and is prescribed in an Homily to that effect.
The like care they shall take, that the Churchyards be well and sufficiently
repaired, fenced, and maintained, with Walls, Railes, or Pales, as have been
in each place accustomed, at their charges unto whom by Law the same
appertains: but especially they shall see that in every meeting of the
Congregation, peace be well kept, and that all persons Excommunicated, and so
denounced, be kept out of the Church.

LXXXVI. Churches to be suruayed, and the decays certified to the high
Commissioners.
EVery Deane, Deane and Chapter, Archdeacon, and others which have authority
to hold Ecclesiastical Visitations by Composition, Law or Prescription, shall
suruay the Churches of his or their Jurisdiction, once in every three years in
his own person, or cause the same to be done, and shall from time to time
within the said three years, certify the high Commissioners for causes
Ecclesiastical, every year of such defects in any the said Churches, as he
or they do find to remain vnrepaired, and the names and surnames of the
parties faulty therein. Upon which Certificat we desire that the said high
Commissioners will Ex Officio mero send for such parties, and compel them to
obey the just and lawful Decrees of such Ecclesiastical Ordinaries, making
such Certificates.

LXXXVII. A Terrier of Glebelands, and other Possessions belonging to Churches.
WE ordain that the Archbishop and all Bishops within their several
Diocesses, shall procure (as much as in them lies) that a true note and
Terrier of all the Glebes, Lands, Meadows, Gardens, Orchards, Houses, Stocks,
Implements, Tenements, and portions of Tithes lying out of their Parishes which
belong to any Parsonage or Vicarage, or rural Prebend, be taken by the view
of honest men in every Parish, by the appointment of the Bishop, whereof the
Minister to be one, and be laid up in the Bishops Registrie, there to be for
a perpetual memory thereof.

LXXXVIII. Churches not to be profaned.
THe Churchwardens or Questmen and their Assistants shall suffer no Plays,
Feasts, Banquets, Suppers, Church-ales, Drinkings, temporal Courts or Leetes,
Lay-iuries, Musters, or any other profane usage to be kept in the Church,
Chapel, or Churchyard, neither the Bells to be rong superstitiously, upon
Holidays or Eues, abrogated by the Book of Common prayer, nor at any other
times without good cause to be allowed by the Minister of the place, and by
themselves.

Churchwardens or Questmen, and Sidemen or Assistants.
LXXXIX. The choice of Churchwardens and their account.
AL Churchwardens or Questmen in every Parish, shall be chosen by the joint
consent of the Minister and the Parishioners it it may be. But if they cannot
agree upon such a choice, then the Minister shall choose one, and the
Parishioners an other, and without such a joint or several choice, none shall
take upon them to be Churchwardens, neither shall they continue any longer then
one year in that Office, except perhaps they be chosen again in like manner.
And all Churchwardens at the end of their year, or within a month after at
the most, shall before the Minister and the Parishioners give up a just account
of such money as they have received, and also what particularly they have
bestowed in reparations, and otherwise for the use of the Church. And last of
all going out of their Office, they shall truly deliver up to the Parishioners
whatsoever money, or other things of right belonging to the Church or Parish,
which remains in their hands, that it may be delivered over by them to the
next Churchwardens by Bill Indented.

XC. The choice of Sidemen and their joint Office with Churchwardens.
THe Churchwardens or Questmen of every Parish, and two or three or more
discreet persons in every Parish to be chosen for Sidemen or Assistants, by
the Minister and Parishioners, if they can agree, (otherwise to be appointed
by the Ordinary of the Diocese) shall diligently see, that all the
Parishioners duly resort to their Church upon all Sundays and Holy days, and
there continue the whole time of divine Service: and none to walk or to stand
idle or talking in the Church, or in the Churchyard, or Church Porch during
that time. And all such as shall be found slack or negligent in resorting to
the Church, (having no great or urgent cause of absence) they shall earnestly
call upon them: and after due monition (if they amend not) they shall present
them to the Ordinary of the place. The choice of which persons, viz.
Churchwardens or Questmen, Sidemen or Assistants, shall be yearly made in
Easter week.

Parish Clearks.
XCI. Parish Clearks to be chosen by the Minister.
NO Parish Clearke upon any vacation shall be chosen within the City of London,
or elsewhere within the Province of Canterbury, but by the Parson or Vicar: or
where there is no Parson or Vicar, by the Minister of that place for the time
being: Which choice shall be signified by the said Minister, Vicar, or Parson,
to the Parishioners the next Sunday following in the time of Divine Service.
And the said Clearke shall be of twenty years of age at the least, and known to
the said Parson, Vicar or Minister to be of honest conversation, and
sufficient for his Reading, Writing, and also for his competent skill in Singing
(if it may be.) And the said Clearks so chosen, shall have and receive their
ancient Wages, without fraud or diminution, either at the hands of the
Churchwardens at such times as has been accustomed, or by their own
collection according to the most ancient custom of every Parish.

Ecclesiastical Courts belonging to the Archbishops Jurisdiction.
XCII. None to be Cited into diverse Courts for probate of the same Will.
FOrasmuch as many heretofore have been by Apparitors both of inferior Courts,
and of the Courts of the Archbishops Prerogatives much distracted, and diversely
called, and summoned for probate of Wills, or to take administrations of the
goods of persons dying intestate, and are thereby vexed and grieved with many
causeless and unnecessary troubles, molestations, and expenses: We constitute
and appoint, That all Chancellors, Commissaries or Officials, or any other
exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction whatsoever, shall at the first charge
with an oath all persons called, or voluntarily appearing before them for the
probate of any Will, or the Administration of any goods, whether they know, or
(moved by any special inducement) do firmly believe that the party deceased
(whose Testament or goods depend now in question) had at the time of his or her
death, any goods or good debts, in any other Diocese or Diocesses, or peculiar
Jurisdiction within that Province, then in that wherein the said party died,
amounting to the value of five pounds. And if the said person cited, or
voluntarily appearing before him, shall upon his oath affirm, That he
knows, or (as aforesaid) firmly believes, that the said party deceased had
goods or good debts in any other Diocese or Diocesses, or peculiar
Jurisdiction within the said Province, to the value aforesaid, and
particularly specify and declare the same: then shall he presently dismiss
him, not presuming to intermeddle with the probate of the said Will, or to
grant Administration of the goods of the party so dying Intestate: neither
shall he require or exact any other charges of the said parties more then such
only as are due for the Citation, and other Process had and used against the
said parties, upon their further contumacie: but shall openly and plainly
declare and profess, that the said cause belongs to the Prerogative of the
Archbishop of that Province, willing and admonishing the party to prove the
said Will, or require Administration of the said goods in the Court of the said
Prerogative, and to exhibit before him the said Judge the probate or
administration under the seal of the Prerogative within forty days next
following. And if any Chancellor, Commissary, Official, or other exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction whatsoever, or any their Register shall offend
herein, let him be ipso facto suspended from the execution of his Office, not
to be absolved or released until he have restored to the party all expenses by
him laid out contrary to the tenor of the premises: and every such probate of
any Testament or administration of goods so granted, shall be held void and
frustrate to all effects of the Law whatsoever.

Furthermore we charge and enjoin, that the Register of every inferior Judge
do without all difficulty or delay, certify and inform the Apparitor of the
Prerogative Court, repairing unto him once a month and no oftener, what
Executors or Administrators have been by his said Judge for the incompetencie
of his own Jurisdiction, dismissed to the said Prerogative Court within the
month next before, under pain of a months suspension from the exercise of
his Office for every default therein. Provided, that this Canon or any thing
therein contained, be not prejudicial to any composition between the
Archbishop and any Bishop or other Ordinary, nor to any inferior Judge that
shall grant any probate of Testament or administration of goods to any party
that shall voluntarily desire it, both out of the said inferior Court, and also
out of the Prerogative. Provided likewise, that if any man die In itinere, the
goods that he has about him at that present, shall not cause his Testament or
Administration to be liable unto the Prerogative Court.

XCIII. The Rate of Bona notabilia liable to the Prerogative Court.
FVrthermore we decree and ordain, that no Judge of the Archbishops
Prerogative shall henceforward Cite, or cause to be Cited Ex officio any person
whatsoever to any of the aforesaid intents, unless he have knowledge that the
party deceased was at the time of his death possessed of goods and chattels in
some other Diocese or Diocesses, or peculiar Jurisdiction within that Province
then in that wherein he died, amounting to the value of five pounds at the
least, decreeing and declaring, that who so has not goods in diverse Diocesses
to the said Sum or value, shall not be accounted to have bona notabilia.
Always provided, that this clause here, and in the former Constitution
mentioned, shall not prejudice those Diocesses where by composition or custom
bona notabilia are rated at a greater sum. And if any Judge of the
Prerogative Court, or any his Surrogate or his Register or Apparitor, shall
Cite or cause any person to be Cited into his Court contrary to the tenor of
the premises, he shall restore to the party so Cited all his costs and
charges, and the acts and proceedings in that behalf shall be held void and
frustrate. Which expenses if the said Judge or Register or Apparitor shall
refuse accordingly to pay, he shall be suspended from the exercise of his Office
until he yield to the performance thereof.

XCIIII. None to be Cited into the Arches or Audience but dwellers within the
Archbishops Diocese or Peculiars.
NO Deane of the Arches nor Official of the Archbishops Consistory, nor any
Judge of the Audience, shall henceforward in his own name or in the name of the
Archbishop either ex Officio or at the instance of any party, originally Cite,
Summon, or any way compel, or procure to be Cited, Summoned, or compelled, any
person which dwells not within the particular Diocese or Peculiar of the
said Archbishop, to appear before him or any of them for any cause or matter
whatsoever belonging to Ecclesiastical cognizance, without the License of the
Diocesan first had and obtained in that behalf, other then in such particular
cases only as are expressly excepted and reserved in and by a Statute Anno 23.
H. 8. cap. 9. And if any of the said Judges shall, offend herein, he shall for
every such offense be suspended from the exercise of his office for the space
of three whole months.

XCV. The restraint of double Quarrels.
ALbeit by former Constitutions of the Church of England, every Bishop has had
two months space to inquire and inform himself of the sufficiency, and
qualities of every Minister, after he has been presented unto him to be
instituted into any Benefice: yet for the avoiding of some inconveniences, we
do now abridge and reduce the said two months unto eight and twenty days
only. In respect of which abridgement, we do ordain and appoint, that no
double Quarrel shall hereafter be granted out of any of the Archbishops Courts
at the suite of any Minister whosoever, except he shall first take his
personal oath, that the said eight and twenty days at the least are expired,
after he first tendered his presentation to the Bishop, and that he refused to
grant him Institution thereupon: or shall enter bonds with sufficient sureties
to prove the same to be true, under pain of suspension of the Granter thereof
from the execution of his Office, for half a year toties quoties to be
denounced by the said Archbishop, and Nullitie of the double Quarrel
aforesaid, so unduly procured, to all intents and purposes whatsoever. Always
provided that within the said eight and twenty days, the Bishop shall not
institute any other to the prejudice of the said party before presented, sub
poena nullitatis.

XCVI. Inhibitions not to be granted without the subscription of an Advocate.
THat the Jurisdictions of Bishops may be preserved (as near as may be) entier
and free from prejudice, and that for the behoof of the Subjects of this land,
better prouison be made that henceforward they be not grieved with frivolous
and wrongful suits and molestations: It is ordained and provided that no
Inhibition shall be granted out of any Court, belonging to the Archbishop of
Canterbury at the instance of any party, unless it be subscribed by an
Advocate practicing in the said Court: which the said Advocate shall do freely,
not taking any Fee for the same, except the party prosecuting the suit, do
voluntarily bestow some gratuity upon him for his counsel and advice in the
said cause. The like course shall be used in granting forth any Inhibition at
the instance of any party by the Bishop or his Chancellor against the
Archdeacon, or any other person exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: and if
in the Court or Consistory of any Bishop there be no advocate at all, then
shall the subscription of a Proctor practicing in the same Court be held
sufficient.

XCVII. Inhibitions not to be granted until the Appeal be exhibited to the
Judge.
IT is further ordered and decreed, that henceforward no Inhibition be granted
by occasion of any interlocutory decree, or in any cause of correction
whatsoever, except under the form aforesaid: and moreover that before the
going out of any such Inhibition, the Appeal it self, or a copy thereof
(avouched by oath to be just and true) be exhibited to the Judge, or his
lawful Surrogate, whereby he may be fully informed, both of the quality of
the crime, and of the cause of the grieuance, before the granting forth of the
said inhibition. And every Appellant or his lawful Proctor shall before the
obteining of any such Inhibition, show and exhibit to the Judge or his
Surrogate in writing, a true copy of those Acts wherewith he complains
himself to be agrieued, and from which he appealeth, or shall take a corporal
oath that he has performed his diligence, and true endeavor for the obteining
of the same, and could not obtein it at the hands of the Register in the
Country, or his Deputy, tendering him his Fee. And if any Judge or Register
shall either procure or permit any Inhibition to be sealed, so as is said,
contrary to the form and limitation above specified, let him be suspended from
the execution of his office, for the space of three months: If any Proctor, or
other person whatsoever by his appointment, shall offend in any of the
premises, either by making or sending out any Inhibition, contrary to the
tenor of the said premises, let him be removed from the exercise of his
Office for the space of a whole year without hope of release or restoring.

XCVIII. Inhibitions not to be granted to factious Appellants, unless they
first subscribe.
FOrasmuch as they who break the Laws, cannot in reason claim any benefit
or protection by the same: We decree and appoint, that after any Judge
Ecclesiastical has proceeded Iudicially against obstinate and factious
persons, and contemners of Ceremonies, for not observing the Rites and Orders
of the Church of England, or for contempt of Public prayer, no Judge ad quem,
shall admit or allow any his or their Appeals, unless he having first seen
the original Appeal, the party appellant do first personally promise and
auow, that he will faithfully keep and observe all the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church of England, as also the prescript form of Common prayer: and do
likewise subscribe to the three Articles formerly by us specified and declared.

XCIX. None to marry within the degrees prohibited.
NO persons shall marry within the degrees prohibited by the Laws of God and
expressed in a Table set forth by authority in the year of our Lord God 1563.
and all marriages so made and contacted shall be adjudged incestuous and
unlawful, and consequently shall be dissolved as void from the beginning, and
the parties so married shall by course of Law be separated. And the aforesaid
Table shall be in every Church publicly set up and fixed at the charge of the
Parish.

C. None to marry under xxj. years, without their Parents consent.
NO children under the age of one and twenty years complete, shall contract
themselves, or marry without the consent of their Parents, or of their
Guardians and Governors, if their Parents be deceased.

CI. By whom Licenses to marry without Bannes shall be granted, and to what
sort of persons.
NO Faculty or License shall be henceforth granted for solemnization of
Matrimony betwixt any parties, without thrice open publication of the Bannes
according to the book of Common prayer, by any person exercising any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or claiming any Privileges in the right of their
Churches: but the same shall be granted only by such as have Episcopal
authority, or the Commissary for Faculties, Vicars general of the Archbishops
and Bishops sede plena, or sede vacant, the Guardian of the Spiritualties or
Ordinaries exercising of right Episcopal Jurisdiction in their several
Jurisdictions respectively, and unto such persons only as be of good state
and quality, and that upon good caution and security taken.

CII. Security to be taken at the granting of such Licenses, and under what
conditions.
THe security mentioned shall contain these conditions: First, that at the
time of the granting every such License, there is not any impediment of
precontract, consanguinitie, affinity, or other lawful cause to hinder the
said marriage. Secondly, that there is not any controversy or suit depending
in any Court before any Ecclesiastical Judge touching any contract or marriage
of either of the said parties with any other. Thirdly, that they have obtained
thereunto the express consent of their parents (if they be living) or
otherwise of their Guardians or Governors. Lastly, that they shall celebrate
the said Matrimony publicly in the Parish Church or Chapel where one of
them dwells, and in no other place, and that between the hours of eight and
twelve in the forenoone.

CIII. Oaths to be taken for the conditions.
FOr the avoiding of all fraud and collusion in the obtaining of such Licenses
and Dispensations: We further constitute and appoint, That before any License
for the Celebration of Matrimony, without publication of Bannes be had or
granted, it shall appear to the Judge by the oaths of two sufficient
witnesses, one of them to be known either to the Judge himself, or to some
other person of good reputation then present, and known likewise to the said
Judge, that the express consent of the Parents, or Parent if one be dead, or
Gardians, or Guardian of the parties is thereunto had and obtained. And
furthermore that one of the parties personally swear, that he believes there
is no let or impediment of precontract, kindred, or alliance, or of any other
lawful cause whatsoever, nor any suite commenced in any Ecclesiastical Court,
to bar or hinder the proceeding of the said Matrimony, according to the tenor
of the foresaid License.

CIIII. An exception of those that are in Widowhood.
IF both the parties which are to marry being in Widowhood, do seek a Faculty
for the forbearing of Bannes, then the clauses before mentioned, requiring the
Parents consents, may be omitted: but the Parishes where they dwell both shall
be expressed in the License, as also the Parish named where the Marriage shall
be celebrated. And if any Commissary for Faculties, Vicars general, or other
the said Ordinaries shall offend in the premises, or any part thereof, he shall
for every time so offending, be suspended from the execution of his Office for
the space of six months: and every such License or dispensation shall be held
void to al effects and purposes, as if there had never been any such granted:
and the parties marrying by virtue thereof, shall be subject to the
punishments which are appointed for Clandestine Marriages.

CV. No Sentence for Divorce to be given upon the sole confession of the
parties.
FOrasmuch as Matrimonial causes have been always reckoned and reputed
amongst the weightiest, and therefore require the greater caution when they
come to be handled and debated in Judgment, especially in causes wherein
Matrimony having been in the Church duly solemnized, is required upon any
suggestion or pretext whatsoever to be dissolved or annulled: We do
straightly charge and inioyne, that in all proceedings to Divorce and Nullities
of Matrimony, good circumspection and advice be used, and that the truth may
(as far as is possible) be sifted out by the deposition of witnesses, and
oth^^ lawful proofs and euictions, and that credit be not given to the sole
confession of the parties themselves, howsoever taken upon oath, either within
or without the Court.

CVI. No Sentence for Divorce to be given but in open Court.
NO Sentence shall be given either for separation a thoro and mensa, or for
annulling of pretended Matrimony, but in open Court, and in the seat of
Justice, and that with the knowledge and consent either of the Archbishop
within his Province, or of the Bishop within his Diocese, or of the Deane of
the Arches, the Judge of the Audience of Canterbury, or of the Vicars general,
or other principal Officials, or sede vacant, of the Guardians of the
Spiritualties, or other Ordinaries to whom of right it apperteineth, in their
several Jurisdictions and Courts, and concerning them only that are then
dwelling under their Jurisdictions.

CVII. In all Sentences for Divorce, bond to be taken for not marrying, during
each others life.
IN all Sentences pronounced only for Divorce and Separation, a thoro and
mensa, there shall be a caution and restraint inserted in the Act of the said
Sentence, That the parties so separated, shall live chastely and continently:
neither shall they, during each others life, contract Matrimony with any other
person. And for the better observing of this last clause, the said Sentence of
Divorce shall not be pronounced, until the party or parties requiring the
same, have given good and sufficient caution and security into the Court, that
they will not any way break or trangresse the said restraint or prohibition.

CVIII. The penalty for Judges offending in the premises.
ANd if any Judge giving Sentence of Divorce or Separation, shall not fully
keep and observe the premises, he shall be by the Archibishop of the
Province, or by the Bishop of the Diocese, suspended from the exercise of his
Office for the space of a whole year, and the Sentence of Separation so given
contrary to the form aforesaid, shall be held void to all intents and purposes
of the Law, as if it had not at all been given or pronounced.

Ecclesiastical Courts belonging to the Jurisdiction of Bishops and
Archdeacons, and the proceedings in them.
CIX. Notorious Crimes and Scandals to be certified into Ecclesiastical Courts
by presentment.
IF any offend their brethren, either by Adultery, whoredom, Incest, or
Drunkenness, or by Swearing, Ribaldrie, Usury, or any other uncleanness and
wickedness of life, the Churchwardens or Questmen and Sidemen in their next
Presentiments to their Ordinaries, shall faithfully present all and every of the
said offenders, to the intent that they and every of them may be punished by
the severity of the Laws, according to their deserts, and such notorious
offenders shall not be admitted to the holy Communion till they be reformed.

CX. Schismatics to be presented.
IF the Churchwardens or Questmen or Assistants, do or shall know any man
within their Parish or elsewhere, that is a hinderer of the word of God to be
read or sincerely Preached, or of the execution of these our Constitutions, or
a fautor of any usurped or foreign power by the Laws of this Realm justly
rejected and taken away, or a defender of Popish and erroneous doctrine: they
shall detect and present the same to the Bishop of the Diocese or Ordinary of
the place, to be censured and punished, according to such Ecclesiastical Laws
as are prescribed in that behalf.

CXI. Disturbers of divine Service to be presented.
IN all Visitations of Bishops and Archdeacons, the Churchwardens or Questmen
and Sidemen shall truly and personally present the names of all those, which
behave themselves rudely or disorderly in the Church, or which by untimely
ringing of Bells, by walking, talking, or other noise shall hinder the Minister
or Preacher.

CXII. Not Communicants at Easter to be presented.
THe Minister, Churchwardens, Questmen and Assistants of every Parish church
and Chapel, shall yearly within forty days after Easter exhibit to the
Bishop or his Chancellor, the names and surnames of all the Parishioners,
as well men as women, which being of the age of sixteen years, received not
the Communion at Easter before.

CXIII. Ministers may present.
BEcause it often comes to pass that the Churchwardens, Sidemen, Questmen,
and such other persons of the Laytie as are to take care for the suppressing of
sin and wickedness in their several Parishes, as much as in them lies, by
admonition, reprehension and denunciation to their Ordinaries, do forbear to
discharge their duties therein, either through fear of their Superiors, or
through negligence, more then were fit, the licentiousness of these times
considered: We ordain, That hereafter every Parson and Vicar, or in the
lawful absence of any Parson or Vicar, then their Curates and Substitutes may
join in every presentment with the said Churchwardens, Sidemen, and the rest
above mentioned at the times hereafter limited, if they the said Churchwardens
and the rest will present such enormities as are apparent in the Parish: or if
they will not, then every such Parson and Vicar, or in their absence as
aforesaid their Curates may themselves present to their Ordinaries at such
times, and when else they think it meet, all such crimes as they have in
charge, otherwise, as by them (being the persons that should have the chief
care for the suppressing of sin and impiety in their Parishes) shall be
thought to require due reformation. Provided always, that if any man confess
his secret and hidden sins to the Minister for the vnburthening of his
conscience, and to receive spiritual consolation and ease of mind from him, We
do not any way bind the said Minister by this our Constitution, but do
straightly charge and admonish him, that he do not at any time reveal and make
known to any person whatsoever, any crime or offense so committed to his trust
and secrecy (except they be such crimes as by the Laws of this Realm, his
own life may be called into question for concealing the same) under pain of
irregularitie.

CXIIII. Ministers shall present Recusants.
EVery Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall carefully inform themselves every year
hereafter, how many Popish Recusants, men, women and children above the age of
thirteen years, and how many being popishly given (who though they come to
the Church, yet do refuse to receive the Communion) are inhabitants, or make
their abode either as Soiourners or common Guests in any of their several
Parishes, and shall set down their true names in writing (if they can learn
them) or otherwise such names as for the time they carry, distinguishing the
absolute Recusants from half Recusants: and the same so far as they know or
believe so distinguished and set down under their hands, shall truly present
to their Ordinaries before the Feast of the Nativity next ensuing, under pain
of suspension to be inflicted upon them by their said Ordinaries, and so every
year hereafter upon the like pain, before the Feast of S. John Baptist. Also
we ordain, that all such Ordinaries, Chancellours, Commissaries, Archdeacons,
Officials, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers, to whom the said
presentiments shall be exhibited, shall likewise within one month after the
receipt of the same, under pain of suspension by the Bishop from the execution
of their Offices for the space of half a year (as often as they shall offend
therein) deliver them or cause to be delivered to the Bishop respectively: who
shall also exhibit them to the Archbishop within six weeks, and the
Archbishop to his Majesty within other six weeks after he has received the
said presentiments.

CXV. Ministers and Churchwardens not to be sued for Presenting.
WHereas for the reformation of criminous persons and disorders in every
Parish, the Churchwardens, Questmen, Sidemen, and such other Church Officers
are sworn, and the Minister charged to present as well the crimes and
disorders committed by the said criminous persons, as also the common fame
which is spread abroad of them, whereby they are often maligned and sometimes
troubled by the said Delinquents or their friends: We do admonish and exhort
all Judges both Ecclesiastical and Temporal, as they regard and reverence the
fearful judgment seat of the highest Judge, that they admit not in any of
their Courts, any complaint, plea, suit, or suits, against any such
Churchwarden, Questmen, Sidemen, or other Church officers for making any such
presentiments, nor against any Minister for any presentment that he shall make:
all the said presentiments tending to the restraint of shameless impiety, and
considering that the rules both of Charity and Government do presume that
they did nothing therein of malice, but for the discharge of their consciences.

CXVI. Churchwardens not bound to Present oftener then twice a year.
NO Churchwardens, Questmen, or Sidemen of any Parish, shall be enforced to
exhibit their presentiments to any having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction above
once in every year, where it has been no oftener used, nor above twice in any
Diocese whatsoever, except it be at the Bishops Visitation. For the which
presentiments of every Parish Church or Chapel, the Register of any Court
where they are to be exhibited, shall not receive in one year above four
pence, under pain for every offense therein, of suspension from the execution
of his Office for the space of a month toties quoties. Provided always that
as good occasion shall require, it shall be lawful for every Minister,
Churchwardens, and Sidemen, to present offenders as often as they shall think
meet. And likewise for any godly disposed person, or for any Ecclesiastical
Judge, upon knowledge or notice given unto him or them of any enormious crime
within his Jurisdiction, to move the Minister, Churchwardens, or Sidemen, as
they tender the glory of God and reformation of sin, to present the same, if
they shall find sufficient cause to induce them thereunto, that it may be in
due time punished and reformed. Provided that for these voluntary
presentiments, there be no Fee required or taken of them, under the pain
aforesaid.

CXVII. Churchwardens not to be troubled for not presenting oftener then twice a
year.
NO Churchwardens, Questmen, or Sidemen shall be called or cited, but only at
the said time or times before limited, to appear before any Ecclesiastical
Judge whosoever, for refusing at other times to present any faults committed in
their Parishes, and punishable by Ecclesiastical laws. Neither shall they nor
any of them after their presentiments exhibited at any of those times be any
further troubled for the same, except upon manif^st and evident proof it may
appear that they did then willingly and wittingly omit to present some such
public crime or crimes as they knew to be committed, or could not be ignorant
that there was then a public fame of them, or unless there be very just cause
to call them for the explanation of their former presentiments. In which case of
wilful omission, their Ordinaries shall proceed against them in such sort as
in causes of wilful perjury in a Court Ecclesiastical it is already by Law
provided.

CXVIII. The old Churchwardens to make their Presentiments before the new be
sworn.
THe office of al Churchwardens and Sidemen shall be reputed ever hereafter to
continue until the new Churchwardens that shall succeed them, be sworn, which
shall be the first week after Easter, or some week following, according to the
direction of the Ordinary. Which time so appointed, shall always be one of the
two times in every year, when the Minister and Churchwardens, and Sidemen of
every Parish shall exhibit to their several Ordinaries, the presentiments of
such enormities as have happened in their Parishes since their last
presentiments. And this duty they shall perform before the newly chosen
Churchwardens and Sidemen be sworn, and shall not be suffered to pass over
the said presentiments to those that are newly come into office, and are by
intendment ignorant of such crimes, under pain of those censures which are
appointed for the reformation of such dalliers and dispensers with their own
consciences and oaths.

CXIX. Convenient time to be assigned for framing Presentiments.
FOr the avoiding of such inconveniences as heretofore have happened by the
hasty making of Bills of Presentiments, upon the days of the Visitation and
Synods: it is ordered, That always hereafter every Chancellor, Archdeacon,
Commissary, and Official, and every other person having Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction at the ordinary time when the Churchwardens are sworn: and the
Archbishop and Bishops when he or they do summon their Visitation, shall
deliver, or cause to be delivered to the Churchwardens, Questmen, and Sidemen
of every Parish, or to some of them, such Books of Articles as they or any of
them shall require for the year following the said Churchwardens, Questmen,
and Sidemen to ground their Presentiments upon at such times as they are to
exhibit them. In which Book shall be contained the form of the oath which
must be taken immediately before every such Presentment: to the intent that
having before hand time sufficient, not only to peruse and consider what their
said oath shall be, but the Articles also whereupon they are to ground their
Presentiments, they may frame them at home both advisedly and truly to the
discharge of their own conscienences, after they are sworn, as becomes
honest and godly men.

CXX. None to be Cited into Ecclesiastical Courts by Process of Quorum
nomina.
NO Bishop, Chancellor, Archdeacon, Official or other Ecclesiastical Judge,
shall suffer any general Processes of Quorum nomina, to be sent out of his
Court: except the names of all such as thereby are to be cited, shall be first
expressly entered by the hand of the Register, or his Deputy, under the said
Processes, and the said Processes and names be first subscribed by the Judge,
or his Deputy, and his Seal thereto affixed.

CXXI. None to be Cited into several Courts for one crime.
IN places where the Bishop and Archdeacon, do by prescription or composition
visit at several times in one and the same year, least for one and the self
same fault any of his Majesty's Subjects should be challenged and molested in
diverse Ecclesiastical Courts We order and appoint, That every Archdeacon, or
his Official, within one month after the Visitation ended that year, and the
Presentiments received, shall certify under his Hand and Seal, to the Bishop
or his Chancellor, the names and Crimes of all such as are detected and
presented in his said Visitation, to the end the Chancellor shall thencefoorth
forbear to convent any person for any Crime or cause so detected or presented
to the Archdeacon. And the Chancellor within the like time after the Bishops
Visitation ended, and Presentiments received, shall under his Hand and Seal
signify to the Archdeacon or his Official, the names and Crimes of all such
persons which shall be detected or presented unto him in that Visitation, to
the same intent as is aforesaid. And if these Officers shall not certify each
other as is here prescribed, or after such certificate shall intermeddle with
the crimes or persons detected and presented in each others Visitation: then
every of them so offending shall be suspended from all exercise of his
Jurisdiction, by the Bishop of the Diocese, until he shall repay the costs
and expenses which the parties grieved have been at by that vexation.

CXXII. No sentence of deprivation or deposition to be pronounced against a
Minister, but by the Bishop.
WHen any Minister is complained of in any Ecclesiastical Court belonging to
any Bishop of this Province for any Crime, the Chancellor, Commissarie,
Official or any other having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to whom it shall
appertain, shall expedite the cause by Processes and other proceedings against
him: and upon contumacie for not appearing, shall first suspend him, and
afterward his contumacie continuing, Excommunicate him. But if he appear and
submit himself to the course of Law, then the matter being ready for Sentence,
and the merits of his offense exacting by Law, either deprivation from his
living, or deposition from the Ministry, no such sentence shall be pronounced
by any person whatsoever, but only by the Bishop, with the assistance of his
Chancellor, the Deane, (if they may conveniently be had) and some of the
Prebendaries, if the Court be kept near the Cathedral Church, or of the
Archdeacon if he may be had conveniently, and two other at the least grave
Ministers and Preachers to be called by the Bishop, when the Court is kept in
other places.

CXXIII. No Act to be sped but in open Court.
NO Chancellor, Commissary, Archdeacon, Official, or any other person using
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction whosoever, shall speed any judicial Act, either
of contentious or voluntary Jurisdiction, except he have the ordinary Register
of that Court, or his lawful Deputy: or if he or they will not, or cannot be
present, then such persons as by law are allowed in that behalf to write or
speed the same, under pain of suspension ipso facto.

CXXIIII. No Court to have more then one Seal.
NO Chancellor, Commissarie, Archdeacon, Official, or any other exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall without the Bishops consent have any mo
Seals then one for the Sealing of all matters incident to his Office. Which
Seal shall always be kept either by himself, or by his lawful Substitute
exercising Jurisdiction for him, and remaining within the Jurisdiction of the
said Judge, or in the City or principal Town of the County. This Seal
shall contain the title of that Jurisdiction which every of the said Judges or
their Deputies do execute.

CXXV. Convenient places to be chosen for the keeping of Courts.
ALl Chancellors, Commissaries, Archdeacons, Officials, and all other
exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall appoint such meet places for
the keeping of their Courts by the assignement or approbation of the Bishop of
the Diocese, as shall be convenient for entertainment of those that are to
make their appearance there, and most indifferent for their travel. And
likewise they shall keep and end their Courts in such convenient time, as
every man may return homewards in as due season as may be.

CXXVI. Peculiar and inferior Courts to exhibit the original copies of
Wills into the Bishops Registrie.
WHereas Deanes, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, Parsons, Vicars, and others
exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, claim liberty to prove the last
Wills and Testaments of persons deceased within their several Jurisdictions,
having no known nor certain Registers, nor public place to keep their
Records in, by reason whereof many Wills, Rights, and Legacies upon the death
or change of such persons and their private Notaries, miscarry and cannot be
found, to the great prejudice of his Majesty's Subjects: We therefore order and
inioyne, that all such Possessours and Exercisers of peculiar Jurisdiction,
shall once in every year exhibit into the public Registrie of the Bishop of
the Diocese, or of the Deane and Chapter under whose Jurisdiction the said
Peculiars are, every original Testament of every person in that time deceased
and by them proved in their several peculiar Jurisdictions, or a true Copy of
every such Testament examined, subscribed, and sealed by the peculiar Judge and
his Notarie. Otherwise if any of them fail so to do, the Bishop of the
Diocese or Deane and Chapter unto whom the said Jurisdictions do respectively
belong, shall suspend the said parties and every of them from the exercise of
all such peculiar Jurisdiction, until they have performed this our Constituion.

Judges Ecclesiastical and their Surrogates.
CXXVII. The quality and oath of Judges.
NO man shall hereafter be admitted a Chancellor, Commissary, or Official, to
exercise any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, except he be of the full age of
six and twenty years at the least, and one that is learned in the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Laws, and is at the least a Master of Arts, or Bachelor of
Law, and is reasonably well practiced in the course thereof, as likewise well
affected, and zealously bent to Religion, touching whose life and manners no
evil example is had, and except before he enter into or execute any such
Office, he shall take the oath of the Kings Supremacy in the presence of the
Bishop, or in the open Court, and shall subscribe to the Articles of Religion
agreed upon in the Convocation in the year one thousand five hundred sixty
and two, and shall also swear that he will to the uttermost of his
understanding, deal uprightly and justly in his Office, without respect or
favor of reward: the said oaths and subscription to be recorded by a Register
then present. And likewise all Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials, Registers,
and all other that do now possess or execute any places of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, or Service, shall before Christmas next in the presence of the
Archbishop or Bishop, or in open Court, under whom or where they exercise their
Offices, take the same oaths and subscribe as before is said: or upon refusal
so to do, shall be suspended from the execution of their Offices, until they
shall take the said oaths, and subscribe as aforesaid.

CXXVIII. The quality of Surrogats.
NO Chancellor, Commissary, Archdeacon, Official, or any other person using
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall at any time substitute in their absence any
to keep any Court for them, except he be either a grave Minister and a
Graduate, or a licensed public Preacher, and a Beneficed man near the place
where the Courts are kept, or a Bachelor of Law, or a Master of Arts at least,
who has some skill in the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law, and is a favorer of
true Religion, and a man of modest and honest conversation, under pain of
Suspension for every time that they offend therein from the execution of their
Offices for the space of three months Toties quoties. And he likewise that is
Deputed, being not qualified as is before expressed, and yet shall presume to
be a Substitute to any Judge, and shall keep any Court as is aforesaid, shall
undergo the same censure in manner and form as is before expressed.

Proctors.
CXXIX. Proctors not to retain Causes, without the lawful assignement of the
parties.
NOne shall Procure in any cause whatsoever, unless he be thereunto
constituted and appointed by the party himself, either before the Judge, and
by Act in Court, or unless in the beginning of the Suit, he be by a true and
sufficient Proxy thereunto warranted and enabled. We call that Proxy
sufficient, which is strengthened and confirmed by some authentical Seal, the
parties approbation, or at least his ratification therewithal concurring. All
which Proxies shall be forthwith by the said Proctors exhibited into the Court,
and be safely kept and preserved by the Register in the public Registrie of
the said Court. And if any Register or Proctor shall offend herein, he shall
be secluded from the exercise of his Office for the space of two months
without hope of release or restoring.

CXXX. Proctors not to retain Causes without the counsel of an Advocate.
FOr lessening and abridging the multitude of Suits and contentions, as also
for preventing the complaints of Suitors in Courts Ecclesiastical, who many
times are overthrown by the oversight and negligence, or by the ignorance and
insufficiency of Proctors, and likewise for the furtherance and increase of
learning, and the advancement of Civil and Canon Law, following the laudable
customs heretofore observed in the Courts pertaining to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, We will and ordain, that no Proctor exercising in any of them
shall intertaine any Cause whatsoever, and keep and retain the same for two
Court days, without the Counsel and advise of an Advocate, under pain of a
years suspension from his practice: neither shall the Judge have power to
release or mitigate the said penalty, without express Mandate and Authority
from the Archbishop aforesaid.

CXXXI. Proctors not to conclude in any Cause, without the knowledge of an
Advocate.
NO Judge in any of the said Courts of the Archbishop, shall admit any Libell,
or any other matter without the advice of an Advocate admitted to practice in
the same Court, or without his subscription: neither shall any Proctor conclude
any cause depending, without the knowledge of the Advocate retained and feed in
the cause: which if any Proctor shall do, or procure to be done, or shall by
any color whatsoever defraud the Advocate of his duty or Fee, or shall be
negligent in repairing to the Advocate, and requiring his advice what course is
to be taken in the cause, he shall be suspended from all practice for the space
of six months, without hope of being thereunto restored, before the said
term be fully complete.

CXXXII. Proctors prohibited the oath In animam Domini sui.
FOrasmuch as in the probate of Testaments and Suits for administration of the
goods of persons dying Intestate, the oath usually taken by Proctors of Courts
In animam constituentis, is found to be inconvenient: We do therefore decree
and ordain, That every Executor or Suitor for administration, shall personally
repair to the Judge in that behalf, or his Surrogate, and in his own person
(and not by Proctor) take the oath accustomed in these cases. But if by reason
of sickness or age, or any other just let or impediment, he be not able to
make his personal appearance before the Judge, it shall be lawful for the
Judge (there being faith first made by a credible person, of the truth of his
said hinderance or impediment) to grant a Commission to some grave
Ecclesiastical person abiding near the party aforesaid, whereby he shall
give power and authority to the said Ecclesiastical person in his stead, to
minister the accustomed oath above mentioned, to the Executor or Suitor for
such administration, requiring his said Substitute, that by a faithful and
trusty messenger he certify the said Judge truly and faithfully what he
has done therein. Lastly, we ordain and appoint, That no Judge or Register,
shall in any wise receive for the Writing, Drawing, or Sealing of any such
Commission, above the sum of six shillings and eight pence: whereof one
moitie to be for the Judge, and the other for the Register of the said Court.

CXXXIII. Proctors not to be clamorous in Court.
FOrasmuch as it is found by experience, that the loud and confused cries and
clamours of Proctors in the Courts of the Archbishop, are not only troublesome
and offensive to the Judges and Advocates, but also give occasion to the
standers by, of contempt and calumny toward the Court it self: that more
respect may be had to the dignity of the Judge, then heretofore, and that
causes may more easily and commodiously be handled and dispatched, We charge
and enjoin, That all Proctors in the said Courts do especially intend, that
the Acts be faithfully entered and set down by the Register, according to the
advice and direction of the Advocate, that the said Proctors refrain loud
speech, and brabling, and behave themselves quietly and modestly, and that when
either the Judges or Advocates, or any of them, shall happen to speak, they
presently be silent upon pain of silencing for two whole Terms then
immediately following every such offense of theirs. And if any of them shall the
second time offend herein, and after due monition shall not reform himself:
let him be for ever removed from his practice.

Registers.
CXXXIIII. Abuses to be reformed in Registers.
IF any Register, or his Deputy, or Substitute whatsoever, shall receive any
Certificate without the knowledge and consent of the Judge of the Court, or
willingly omit to cause any persons cited to appear upon any Court day to be
called, or unduly put off, and defer the Examination of witnesses to be
examined by a day set and assigned by the Judge, or do not obey and observe
the judicial and lawful monition of the said Judge, or omit to write, or
cause to be written such Citations and Decrees, as are to be put in execution
and set forth before the next Court day, or shall not cause all Testaments
exhibited into his Office to be Registered within a convenient time, or shall
set down or enact as decreed by the Judge any thing false, or conceited by
himself, and not so ordered or decreed by the Judge, or in the transmission of
Processes to the Judge Ad quem, shall add, or insert any falsehood or
untruth, or omit any thing therein, either by cunning, or by gross
negligence, or in causes of Instance, or promoted of Office, shall receive any
reward in favor of either party, or be of counsel directly or indirectly with
either of the parties in Suite, or in the execution of their Office, shall do
ought else maliciously, or fraudulently, whereby the said Ecclesiastical Judge
or his proceedings may be slandred or defamed: We will and ordain that the said
Register of his Deputy or Substitute, offending in all, or any of the
premises, shall by the Bishop of the Diocese be suspended from the exercise
of his Office, for the space of one, two or three months, or more, according
to the quality of his offense, and that the said Bishop shall assign some
other public Notarie to execute and discharge all things pertaining to his
Office, during the time of his said Suspension.

CXXXV. A certain rate of Fees due to all Ecclesiastical Officers.
NO Bishop, Suffragan, Chancellor, Commissarie, Archdeacon, Official, nor any
other exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction whatsoever, nor any Register of
any Ecclesiastical Courts, nor any Minister belonging to any of the said
Officers or Courts, shall hereafter for any cause incident to their several
Offices, take or receive any other or greater Fees, then such as were certified
to the most Reverend Father in God John late Archbishop of Canterbury, in the
year of our Lord God, one thousand five hundred ninety and seven, and were by
him ratified and approved, under pain that every such Judge, Officer, or
Minister offending herein shall be suspended from the exercise of their
several Offices, for the space of six months for every such offense. Always
provided that if any question shall arise concerning the certainty of the said
Fees or any of them: then those Fees shall be held for lawful, which the
Archbishop of Canterbury for the time being shall under his hand approve,
except the Statutes of this Realm before made, do in any particular case
express some other Fees to be due. Provided furthermore, that no Fee or money
shall be received either by the Archbishop or any Bishop, or Suffragan, either
directly or indirectly, for admitting of any into sacred Orders, nor that any
other person or persons under the said Archbishop, Bishop, or Suffragan, shall
for Parchment, Writing, Wax, Sealing, or any other respect thereunto
appertaining, take above ten shillings, under such pains as are already by Law
prescribed.

CXXXVI. A Table of the Rates of Fees to be set up in Courts and Registries.
WE do likewise constitute and appoint, that the Registers belonging to every
such Ecclesiastical Judge, shall place two Tables, containing the several
Rates, and Sums of all the said Fees: one in the usual place or Consistory
where the Court is kept, and the other in his Registrie, and both of them in
such sort, as every man whom it concerns may without difficulty come to the
view and perusal thereof, and take a Copy of them: the same Tables to be so
set up before the Feast of the Nativity next ensuing. And if any Register
shall fail to place the said Tables according to the tenor hereof, he shall be
suspended from the execution of his Office, until he cause the same to be
accordingly done: and the said Tables being once set up, if he shall at any
time remove or suffer the same to be removed, hidden, or any way hindered
from sight, contrary to the true meaning of this Constitution, he shall for
every such offense be suspended from the exercise of his Office for the space
of six months.

CXXXVII. The whole Fees for showing letters of Orders, and other Licenses due
but once in every Bishops time.
FOrasmuch as a chief and principal cause and use of Visitation is, that the
Bishop, Archdeacon, or other assigned to Visit, may get some good knowledge of
the State, Sufficiency, and Ability of the Clergy, and other persons whom
they are to Visit: We think it convenient that every Parson, Vicar, Curate,
Schoolmaster, or other person licenced whosoever, do at the Bishops first
Visitation, or at the next Visitation after his Admission, show and exhibit
unto him his Letters of Orders, Institution, and Induction, and all other his
Dispensations, Licenses, or Faculties whatsoever, to be by the said Bishop
either allowed or (if there be just cause) disallowed and rejected: and being
by him approved, to be as the Custom is, signed by the Register, and that the
whole Fees accustomed to be paid in the Visitations in respect of the
premises, be paid only once in the whole time of every Bishop, and
afterward, but half of the said accustomed Fees, in every other Visitation
during the said Bishops continuance.

Apparitors.
CXXXVIII. The number of Apparitors restrained.
FOrasmuch as we are desirous to redress such abuses and aggrieuances as are
said to grow by Sumners or Apparitors: We think it meet that the multitude
of Apparitors be (as much as is possible) abridged or restrained. Wherefore we
decree and ordain, that no Bishop or Archdeacon, or their Vicars or Officials,
or other inferior Ordinaries, shall depute or have more Apparitors to serve in
their Jurisdictions respectively, then either they or their predecessors were
accustomed to have thirty years before the publishing of these our present
Constitutions. All which Apparitors shall by themselves faithfully execute
their Offices, neither shall they by any color or pretense whatsoever cause or
suffer their Mandats to be executed by any Messengers or Substitutes, unless
it be upon some good cause to be first known and approved by the Ordinary of
the place. Moreover, they shall not take upon them the office of Promoters or
Informers for the Court, neither shall they exact more or greater Fees then are
in these our Constitutions formerly prescribed. And if either the number of the
Apparitors deputed shall exceed the foresaid limitation, or any of the said
Apparitors shall offend in any of the premises, the persons deputing them, if
they be Bishops, shall upon admonition of their superior discharge the persons
exceeding the number so limited: if inferior Ordinaries, they shall be
suspended from the execution of their Office until they have dismissed the
Apparitors by them so deputed, and the parties themselves so deputed shall for
ever be removed from the Office of Apparitors: and if being so removed, they
desist not from the exercise of their said Offices, let them be punished by
Ecclesiastical censures as persons contumacious. Provided, that if upon
experience the number of the said Apparitors be too great in any Diocese, in
the judgment of the Archbishop of Canterbury for the time being, they shall by
him be so abridged, as he shall think meet and convenient.

Authority of Synodes.
CXXXIX. A National Synod the Church representative.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the Sacred Synod of this Nation in
the Name of CHRIST, and by the Kings Authority assembled, is not the true
Church of ENGLAND by representation, let him be Excommunicated, and not
restored, until he repent and publicly revoke that his wicked error.

CXL. Synodes conclude as well the absent as the present.
Whosoever shall affirm, that no manner of person either of the Clergy or
Laity, not being themselves particularly assembled in the said sacred Synod,
are to be subject to the Decrees thereof in causes Ecclesiastical (made and
ratified by the Kings Majesty's supreme Authority) as not having given their
voices unto them: let him be Excommunicated, and not restored until he
repent and publicly revoke that his wicked error.

CXLI. Deprauers of the Synod, censured.
Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the sacred Synod assembled as
aforesaid, was a company of such persons as did conspire together against godly
and Religious professors of the Gospel: and that therefore both they and their
proceedings, in making of Canons and Constitutions in causes Ecclesiastical by
the Kings authority as aforesaid, ought to be despised and contemned, the same
being ratified, confirmed, and enjoined by the said Regal Power, Supremacy,
and Authority: let them be Excommunicated and not restored, until they repent
and publicly revoke that wicked error.

WE of our princely inclination, and Royal care for the maintenance of the
present Estate and Government of the Church of ENGLAND, by the Laws of this
our Realm now settled and established, having diligently, with great
contentment and comfort, read and considered of all these their said Canons,
Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions agreed upon, as is before expressed; and
finding the same such, as We are persuaded will be very profitable, not only
to our Clergy, but to the whole Church of this our kingdom, and to all the
true members of it, (if they be well observed) Have therefore for Us, our
Heirs, and lawful Successors, of our especial Grace, certain Knowledge,
and mere Motion given, and by these presents do give our Royal assent,
according to the form of the said Statute or Act of Parliament aforesaid, to
all and every of the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions, and to
all and every thing in them contained, as they are before written.

And furthermore, We do not only by our said Prerogative Royal, and supreme
Authority in causes Ecclesiastical, ratify, confirm, and establish by these
our Letters Patents, the said Canons, Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions,
and all and every thing in them contained, as is aforesaid: but do likewise
propound, publish, and straightly enjoin and command by our said Authority,
and by these our Letters Patents, the same to be diligently observed,
executed, and equally kept by all our loving Subjects of this our kingdom,
both within the Province of CANTERBVRIE and YORK, in all points wherein they
do or may concern every or any of them, according to this our will and
pleasure hereby signified and expressed: and (...) likewise for the better
observation of them, every Minister, by what name or title soever he be called,
shall in the Parish Church or Chapel where he has charge, read all the said
Canons, Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions once every year, upon some
Sundays or Holy days, in the afternoon before Divine Service, dividing the
same in such sort, as that the one half may be read one day, and the other
another day: the Book of the said Canons to be provided at the charge of the
Parish betwixt this and the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord God next ensuing:
Straightly charging and commanding all Archbishops, Bishops, and all other
that exercise any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction within this Realm, every man in
his place, to see, and procure (so much as in them lies) all and every of the
same Canons, Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions to be in all points duly
observed, not sparing to execute the ^ena(...) them severally mentioned, upon
(...) that shall wittingly or wilfully break, or neglect to observe the same,
as they tender the honor of God, the peace of the Church, the tranquillity of
the Kingdom, and their duties and service to Us their King and Sovereign.

In witness, etc.

Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty.

ANNO DOM. 1604.


