ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF IN THE ORDINARY VISITATION OF THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL
MASTER DOCTOR PEARSON, Archdeacon of Suffolk, Anno Domini 1637.

insignia with two snakes entwined around a scepter and two hands clasping F K

PAX OPVLENTIAM SAPIENTIA PACEM



LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kingston. 1627

The Tenor of the Oath of the Churchwardens and Sworne-men.
YOu shall swear, that after due consideration had of these articles given you
now in charge, that you will diligently enquire, and true presentment make of
all and every such Person of or within your Parish, which you shall know to
have committed any offense, or omitted any duty mentioned in the said Articles;
or which are publicly defamed or vehemently suspected of any such offense or
negligence. So help you God, by the Contents of the holy Gospel.

Answer distinctly and severally to every Article.
The Minister (be he Parson, Vicar, Lecturer, Preacher or Curate) may join
with the Sworne-men in their Presentiments, and he is to inform the Ordinary
under his hand, of such faults as the Sworne-men shall leave unpresented.

It is lawful for the Minister alone, or for the Sworn Officers, to present
as often as occasion requires: and it is meet that notorious offenses should
in due time be presented and punished.

ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF BY THE CHVRCHWARDENS AND QUESTMEN IN THE ordinary
Visitation of the right Worshipful M. ROBERT PEARSON, Doctor of Divinity, and
Archdeacon of Suffolk, or his Official. Anno Dom. 1637
Articles concerning the Church, the Ornaments thereof, and the Churches
Possessions.
Tit. 1.
FIrst, whether have you in your Church or Chapel, the whole Bible of the
largest Volume, and of the last Translation, the Book of Common Prayer lately
set forth by his Majesty's authority, the two Books of Homilies, and Bishop
Jewels Apology, all well and fairly bound: a Font of stone set up in the
antientusuall place, with a hole in the bottom of it to convey away the water:
a convenient and decent Communion Table, with a Carpet of silk, or some other
decent stuff continually laid upon the Table at time of Divine Service, and a
fair linen cloth, at the time of administering the holy Communion: and whether
is the same Table placed conveniently as it ought: and whether is it so used,
in, or out of the time of Divine Service or Sermon, as is not agreeable to the
holy use of it, as by sitting on it, or throwing hats thereon: or is it abused
by any other profane uses? Are the ten Commandments set up on the East end of
your parish Church, with other sentences of Scripture about them?

2, Item, whether have you in your Church or Chapel, a convenient feat for
your Minister to read Divine Service in, together with a comely pulpit, set up
in a convenient place, with a decent Cloth or Cushion for the same, a comely,
large and fair Surplesse, a fair Communion cup, a Flagon of Silver or pewter,
with all other things and ornaments fit and necessary for the celebration of
Divine Service, and administration of the sacraments? And whether have you a
Chest for alms, with the locks and keys, and another chest for keeping the
Books and ornaments of the Church, and the register Book, and have you a
Register Book in Parchment, for Christenings, Weddings, and Burials, and is
the same kept in all points according to the Canons; and have you a Table set
in your Church of the degrees wherein by Law men are prohibited to marry?

3. Item, whether is your Church or Chapel, with the Chancell thereof, and all
your Parsonage or Vicarage houses in good reparations, and are they employed to
godly and their right holy uses? if any of them be ruinated and wasted, in whom
is the default? Is your Church or Chapel, or Chancell decently and comely
kept, as well within as without; and are the seats well maintained, the
windows well glazed, the floor kept paved, plain and even, and all things in
decent sort, without dust, or any thing that is either noisome, or unseemly for
the house of God, as is prescribed in a Homily to that effect, and the 85.
Canon.

4. Item, whether be your Churchyard, well fenced and kept without abuse? If
not, whose default is it? Has any person incroched upon the ground of the
Churchyard: have any used a place consecrated to holy use profanely or
wickedly; have any quarrelled or stricken another in the Church, or
Churchyard: have any annoyed your Churchyard, or the fence thereof, by
putting in of cattle, by hanging of clothes, or by laying there any dust, dung
or other filthiness?

5. Item, what Legacies have bin given to the use and benefit of your Church,
how they have been bestowed, who received them, and detaineth them without due
employment? Does any detain or embezell any of the Church goods, or any other
gifts given to charitable uses?

6. Item, whether is there any erecting of pues, or minuating of seats in your
Church, by any private man of his own authority, and what seats have been so
built, and by whose procurement, and by what authority?

7. Item, whether has any popish Recusant, being lawfully excommunicated,
been interred or buried in the Church or Churchyard, before absolution of the
censure and excommunication? if yea, then by whom, and when?

Articles touching the Steeple.
Tit. 2.
FIrst have you a Steeple belonging unto your Church, and is it well covered
with lead, or some other good and sufficient tecture, and are the walls thereof
in sufficient reparations?

2. Item, how many Bells have you in your Steeple, and of what weight are they,
and are they all well hanged up in frames in the Steeple; have they good ropes
belonging to them, wherewith to ring them, and are they tuneable?

3. Item, are the frames and wheels of the said Bells sound and strong, and are
the planchers of your steeple good, and not broken, and are there a good pair
of stairs or good ladders, wherewith to go up readily into the said steeple?

4. Item, whether have any of your Bells within this twenty years, or more last
past, been alienated or sold? If yea, by whom, and to whom, and of what weight
were the said Bells, and of what value by common estimation?

5. Item, have your Bells or any of them been made less upon the last yoating
of them? If yea, by whose default, and what is become of the metal that was so
saved out of them?

Articles concerning Religion and Doctrine.
Tit. 3.
FIrst, whether there be any abiding in, or resorting to your parish, that
have, or do maintain or defend any heresies, errors, or false opinions,
contrary to the faith of Christ and the holy Scripture?

2. Item, whether does any in your parish being sixteen years of age and
upwards, or others lodging, or commonly resorting to any house in your parish,
absent themselves from the parish Church, Chapel, or Oratory upon Sundays
and Holy days, and other days appointed, at morning and Evening prayer? Or
what person does usually come late to Church, or depart from Church before
Divine Service and Sermon be ended? Or whether be there any that persuade
others to forbear and abstain coming to their parish Church to hear Divine
Service, and to receive the holy Communion, according to his Majesty's Law in
that behalf enacted?

3. Item, whether be there any in your parish, that has been or is vehemently
suspected to have been present at any unlawful assemblies, conventicles or
meetings under color or pretense of any exercise of Religion, or does any
affirm or maintain such meetings to be lawful?

4. Item, whether be there any within your parish, that deny or persuade any to
deny or impugn the Kings Majesty's authority and supremacy in causes
Ecclesiastical?

5. Item, whether be there any abiding or resorting to your parish, that be, or
are commonly reputed or taken to be ill affected in matters of Religion
professed in our Church, or taken to be Recusant papists, refusing to repair
to Church to hear Divine Service, and receive the holy Communion, and
disobedient to his Highness laws in that behalf established? present their
names, qualities and conditions. Does any papist keep a Schoolmasters in his
house which repaireth not to your parish Church as is required, what is his
name, and how long has he so taught there, or elsewhere?

6. Item, is there any in your parish, who in the manner of preaching has
taken upon him to repeat any Sermon in any private house, in any assembling or
meeting together of people?

Articles concerning public Prayer, and administration of the Sacraments.
Tit. 4.
FIrst, whether any of your parish has spoken or declared anything in
derogation or depraving of the form of Gods Worship in the Church of England,
and administration of the Sacraments, rites and ceremonies set forth and
prescribed in the Book of Common prayer, by the Kings Majesty authorized and
confirmed? Do any preach, speak or declare that it contains any thing which
is not agreeable to the holy Scriptures?

2. Item, whether has any in your parish caused, procured, or maintained any
Minister to say any common or public prayer, or to administer either of the
Sacraments, of Baptism and the Lords Supper, otherwise or in any other manner
and form than is mentioned in the said Book of Common prayer? or whether has
any interrupted, hindered, let, or disturbed the Minister to read divine
service, and administer the Sacraments, in such manner and form as is mentioned
in the said book, or interrupted him in his sermons?

3. Item, whether is the Sacrament of Baptism rightly and duly administered,
according to the prescript form expressed in the Book of Common Prayer, with
due observation of all rites and Ceremonies prescribed in the administration of
the same, without adding or altering any part or parcel of any prayers,
interrogatories, or not using the sign of the Cross in the administration of
the same?

4. Item, whether is the administration of the Sacrament of Baptism deferred
longer than the next Sunday or Holy Day immediately following the birth of the
child?

5. Item, whether is the Sacrament of Baptism refused to be administered to any
children borne in, or out of Wedlock, their birth being made known to the
Minister of the parish, and offered unto him to be baptized; or have any such
children dyed unbaptized?

6. Item, whether be the parents of any child to be baptized, admitted to be
Godfathers and Godmothers to the same?

7. Item, whether have there any children been baptized in private houses by any
Lay person, or Midwife, or popish Priest, or by any other Minister, without
urgent occasion, when the child was in danger of death?

8. Item, whether have the children which have been borne to any popish
Recusants, or begotten by them, been publicly baptized in your Parish
Church, by your Parson, Vicar or Curate, or by whom were they so baptized, or
where, to your knowledge?

9. Item, whether has the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper been duly and
reverently administered every month, or thrice every year at least; whereof
once at Easter, within your Parish Church to every Parishioner, being of the
age of 16 years, or upwards?

10. Item, whether is the said holy Sacrament delivered unto, or received by
any of the Communicants within your Parish, that unreverently sit or stand, and
do not devoutly and humbly kneel upon their knees at the time of the
administration of the same?

11. Item, whether have any excommunicate persons or Schismatickes, common and
notorious depravers of the Religion and government of this Realm, without
unfeigned sorrow shown for their impiety and wickedness, been admitted to
receive the holy Communion within your Parish? present their names.

12. Item, whether has any of your Parish been debarred from receiving the
said holy Communion without just cause, and without intimation first given to
the Ordinary, viz. the Bishop of the Diocese, Chancellor, or Commissary, and by
whose default?

13. Item, whether has any affirmed, that any of the 39. Articles agreed upon
by the Archbishop and Bishops in the year of our Lord God, 1562. for the
avoiding of diversities of opinions, are in any part superstitious or
erroneous, or such as he may not with a good conscience subscribe unto?

Articles concerning Ministers and Preachers.
Tit. ^
FIrst, whether does your Minister distinctly and reverently say Divine service
upon Sundaies and Holy Days, and other days appointed to be observed by the
Book of Common Prayers, at fit and usual hours of the day: and does your
Minister duly observe the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies prescribed in the Book
of Common Prayer, as well in reading all public Prayers and the Letany, as
also in administering of the Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimony, visitation
of the sick, burying the dead, churching of women, and all other like Rites and
Offices of the Church, in such manner and form, as in the said Book of Common
Prayer is enjoined, without any omission or addition of any thing.

2. Item, whether does your Minister always, viz. every Sunday and Holy Day,
both Morning and Evening reading Divine Service, and administering the
Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church, wear the Surplesse, according to
the Canons, and does he never omit the wearing thereof at the times aforesaid?
if at any time he have omitted, specify the times.

3. Item, whether does your Minister bid Holy Days, and fasting days, as is
appointed? Does he administer the holy communion every month, or thrice in the
year at least, whereof once at Easter, to every parishioner? does he receive
the same himself on every day that he does administer the same to others, and
does he use the words of institution, according to the Book of Common Prayer,
without alteration at every time that the Bread and Wine is renewed; does he
use and never omit the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, or does he ever baptize
in any basin or any other thing but the usual Font? If yea, then is the basin
set within the Font, and does he baptize out of the same basin standing in the
Font? Does he marry any couple without a ring; or in times prohibited, or
without the Banes three times published, without a special license from the
Archbishop, or the Bishop of the Diocese, or his Chancellor or Commissary,
first had and attained?

4. Item, whether does your Minister, being learned and sufficient, confer with
the popish Recusants of your parish (if any there be) and endeavor to reclaim
them from their errors, and present them being obstinat, for their recusancy.

5. Item, whether does your Minister in the Rogation week go the
perambulation of the circuit and bounds of your Parish, saying and using the
prayers and suffrages, and thanksgiving to God, appointed by law, according to
his duty? And did he give warning the Sunday before, when the Parishioners
should meet to go?

6. Item, has your Minister, or any other Preacher within your parish made any
Sermons in any private house, administered the Sacraments, or churched women in
any private houses, otherwise than by law is allowed?

7. Item, what Preachers and Curates do read prayers, or administer the
Sacraments within your parish, without lawful license from the Bishop of the
diocese, his chancellor or commissary? or does any Lay man (not having holy
Orders) presume to read public prayers in the Church?

8. Item, whether have you any Preacher or Lecturer in your parish? If yea,
whether does he twice at the least every year read himself Divine Service
both Morning and Evening two several Sundaies publicly in his Surplesse, and
also twice in every year administer both the Sacraments, with such rites and
ceremonies as are prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, according to the
46. Canon?

9. Item, whether is your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Preacher given to
drunkenness, or idleness of life, a hunter of Tavernes, Alehouses, or
suspected places, a Dicer, Carder, Tabler, Swearer, given to base and servile
labor, or otherwise gives any ill example of life?

10. Item, whether is the Parson, Vicar, Curate or Preacher of any other
Parish, known to be a frequenter of Tavernes, Innes, Alehouses which are
situated within your own, or any other Parish? Or is he publicly defamed of
such resorting and frequenting, as is aforesaid?

11. Item, whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate, upon every Sunday and
Holy day, before Evening Prayer half an hour or more, examine and instruct
the youth, and ignorant persons of his parish, in the Commandments, the
Articles of Belief, and in the Lords prayer? And does he usually upon the said
days diligently hear, instruct and teach them the Catechism, set forth in
the Book of Common prayer and none other?

12. Item, whether have your Preachers and Readers of Divinity Lectures
declared four times at the least every year in their Sermons or other
collations and Lectures, that all usurped and foreign power is, for most just
causes taken away and abolished, and that therefore no manner of obedience or
subjection within his Majesty's Realms, is due unto any foreign power?

13. Item, whether have your Ministers used continually before their Sermons
and Lectures, the form of prayer prescribed in the 55. Canon, especially in
praying for the Kings Majesty, and the Archbishops and Bishops, and in ending
with the Lords prayer?

14. Item, whether has your Minister, after that he had received any letters
of Excommunication, under the seal of an Ecclesiastical Judge, suffered the
party excommunicated to abide in the Church or Chancell, in the time of Divine
Service or Sermon?

15. Item, whether has your Minister in any of his sermons or Lectures
preached against any of the ceremonies commanded to be used by the Church of
England, or has so preached against ceremonies in general, that by common
acceptance at the least of the weaker, his words might be taken to tend to the
depraving of the ceremonies established by the Church of England?

16. Item, whether has any one in his Sermon or Lecture, declared, limited, or
bounded out, by way of positive Doctrine, the power, prerogative, authority,
and duties of Sovereign princes, or otherwise intermedled with matters of
State?

17. Item, whether has any Preacher in his Sermon used any undecent railing
speeches, or bitter invectives against the person of either Papist or Puritanes?

18. Item, whether has your Minister when a dead body is brought to be buried,
met the corpse at the Church door; and when the corpse was making ready to be
laid into the earth, Has he stood by the grave, or has he read the Prayers or
Psalms appointed to be read by the Book of Common prayer, standing or sitting
in his Deske?

19. Item, whether has your Minister churched any woman but when he himself
stood by the Communion Table, and she kneeled down by the said Table or near
unto it?

Articles concerning Matrimony.
Tit. 6.
FIrst, whether be there any in your Parish, that have married within the
degrees of Consanguinity or Affinity, by the Law of God forbidden, and what be
their names?

2. Item, whether have any within your Parish been married secretly in private
houses, or without their parents or governors consent signified, being under
the age of 21. years?

3. Item, whether do any married Couples live asunder unlawfully, and do not
cohabit together, as becomes Man and wife? And if yea, what be their names,
and in whom is the default?

4. Item, whether any persons (the banes not thrice published in the Church)
have been married without license, who were present at such Marriage, and what
Minister married them?

5. Item, what popish Recusants or their children have bin married within your
parish, in what sort was their matrimony solemnized, when and by whom

6. Item, whether have there been any persons married in your Church in the
times prohibited by the Laws, viz. from Advent Sunday, until eight days
after the Epiphany, from Septuagesima until eight days after Easter day, from
three days before the Ascension until Trinity Sunday, without a lawful
license or dispensation first obtained from the Bishop of the diocese, his
Chancellor or Commissary?

7. Item, whether has the Minister said all the Prayers and Psalms appointed
to be said by the Book of Common Prayer at the time of the solemnization of
Marriage, and has the Minister standing by the Lords Table (and the married
couple kneeling) before the same, said those prayers which follow next after
the Psalm, Deus miserere: and has he omitted any part of them? if yea, then
specify the parties between whom marriage was solemnized, and the time when
the minister did omit any part of his said duty therein.

Articles concerning the keeping of Christenings, Weddings, and Burials.
Tit, 7.
FIrst, is there in your parish Church or Chapel, a parchment Book, for the
Registring of Christenings, Weddings and Burials?

2. Item, has the said book been kept in your parish Church or Chapel in a
Coffer with three locks and keys, and has one of the said keys been kept
by the Minister, and the other two with the Churchwardens severally?

3. Item, has the Minister without the Churchwardens, or have the
Churchwardens without the Minister, at any time taken out the said Book out of
the said Coffer, or has the Minister kept the said Book in his private house?

4. Item, has your Minister, in the presence of the Churchwardens upon every
Sabbath day, immediately after Morning or Evening Prayer, written and recorded
in the said Book the names of all persons Christened, together with the names
and sirnames of their parents, and also the names of all persons married and
buried in that parish in the week before?

Articles concerning Schoolemasters.
Tit. 8.
FIrst, does any in your parish openly or privately take upon him to teach
school without license of the Ordinary, and is he conformable to the religion
now established? and does he bring his Scholars to the Church to hear Divine
Service and Sermons? and does he instruct his Scholars in the grounds of the
Religion now established in the Church of England, and is he careful and
diligent to benefit his Scholars in learning?

2. Item, does your Schoolmasters teach and instruct his youth in any
Catechism than is allowed by public Authority, and what Catechism it is
that he so teaches?

3. Item, does any keep School in the Chauncell or Church, by which means
that holy place, and the Communion Table are many ways profaned and the
windows broken?

Articles concerning the Parishioners?
Tit. 9.
FIrst, whether do any of your Parish or any other, that has resorted, or
does resort to your parish, profane the Sabbath day, or Holy Days, by
drinking and tippling in Iunes, or Alehouses, or by playing at unlawful games?

2. Item, is there any in your parish that do impugn or speak against the
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, or the lawful use of them, and
the government of this Church under his Majesty, by Archbishops, Bishops and
other Ecclesiastical Officers?

3. Item, who in your parish do come to the Sermon only, and not to divine
Service, and who do not reverently behave themselves during the time of Divine
Service, kneeling when the general confession of sins, the Letany, the ten
Commandments, and all prayers and Collects are read, and using all due and
lowly reverence when the blessed name of the Lord Jesus is mentioned in the
time of Divine Service, and standing up when the Articles of the belief and
the Gospel are read? And who do cover their heads in time of Divine service,
unless it be in case of necessity, in which case they may wear a night cap?
And who do give themselves to babbling, talking, or walking, and are not
attentive to hear the Word read and preached?

4. Item, is there any in your parish that refuse to have their children
baptized; or themselves to receive the Communion of your Minister, taking
exception against him, because he is no preacher? Or have any wives refused to
come to Church, to give thanks to God for their safe deliverance, in a decent
habit, with a rail, as has been anciently accustomed?

5. Item, have any of your parish spoken slanderous and reprochful words
against your Minister, to the scandal of his vocation, or against their
marriage or wives, or defaming him, touching any crime of Ecclesiastical
cognizance?

6. Item, whether do any in your parish exercise any trade or labor, buy, or
sell, or keep open their shops, or set out any wares to be sold upon Sundaies
and Holy Days, by themselves, their servants or apprentises, or have otherwise
profaned the Sunday, or Holy Days?

7. Item, is there any in your parish that be, or are commonly known, or
reputed to be blasphemers of Gods holy Name, or accustomed swearers, or to use
any ribaldry in their talk, or be drunkards, adulterers, fornicators,
incestuous persons? And have any been detected of any such notorious crimes and
offenses; and whether have they done penance for the same?

8. Item, is there any in your parish who is publicly defamed, or vehemently
suspected of getting his, or their wives with child before Marriage?

9. Item, whether have any persons dyed within your parish; whose Will and
Testament (if any were made) is not proved, or administration of their goods
taken, according to law; and whether is there any in your parish, who do
administer the goods of any person deceased, without lawful authority, and
before he or they have proved the Will and Testament of the party deceased, or
have obtained Commission from the Ordinary, viz. the Bishops Chancellor or
Commissary, to dispose the said moveable goods?

10. Item, what excommunicate persons be within your parish, and for what
causes are they excommunicate, to your knowledge? And whether do any such
excommunicate persons repair to your parish Church in time of Divine service
or sermon, not being absolved?

11. Item, if there be any persons excommunicate within your parish, which is
made notorious by denouncing them excommunicate in the face of the Church: who,
and what person and persons do keep or frequent their company, eat or drink,
or have any thing to do with any such excommunicate person? present their
names, for it is not lawful for them so to do, so long as they remain under
the sentence of excommunication.

12. Item, whether do all Fathers, Mothers, Masters and Mistresses, cause their
Children, Servants and Apprentises, both males and females, which have not
learned their Catechism to come to the Church upon Sundays and Holy Days,
before Evening Prayer, obediently to hear, and to be ordered by the Minister,
until they have learned the same?

13. Item, is there any House-holder within your parish, that does not duly go
in perambulation with the Minister, and the rest of the parishioners, the
circuit and bounds of your parish? What are the names of such as made, or
suffered default to be made therein?

14. Item, do the old Churchwardens, or any other persons, that were
Churchwardens, retain any goods belonging to the Church, and have not made
the just account of their receipts and expenses about the executing of their
office?

15. Item, what person or persons is, or are chosen Chuch-warden, or
Churchwardens of your parish for this year, 1637 and when were they so chosen,
and by whom?

16. Item, whether is there a Book in your Parish, wherein the name of every
strange Preacher that preaches in your parish, should subscribe his name, the
day when he preached, and the name of the Bishop of whom he had license to
preach? and whether has every Preacher that was a stranger, so subscribed
before he preached in your Church?

17. Item, whether does not every one dwelling within your Parish, observe all
those days for fasting days, which are appointed by a statute made in the
fifth and sixth year of Edw. 6. or shall eat flesh upon those days?

18. Item, whether you the Churchwardens and Assistants have according to the
28. Canon, marked whether all and every of your parishioners in your parish
come so often every year to the holy Communion, as the law and his Majesty's
Constitutions Ecclesiastical do require? And whether any stranger have come
often and commonly from other parishes to your church, and whether have you
showed your Minister of them, least they should be admitted there to the Lords
table? and whether such person or persons have been forbidden and remitted home
to his or their own parish church, there to receive the communion? or has he
or they notwithstanding received the same in your Church? Declare their names,
and who admitted them thereunto.

19. Item, whether do the people say audibly with the Minister the Confession,
the Lords Prayer, and the Creed, and make such other answers to the public
Prayers as are appointed in the Book of Common Prayers? or who fails therein?

20. Item, whether has any one in your Parish answered as Godfather for his
own child? Or has any been a Godfather or God-mother, before he or she have
received the holy Communion? Declare their names.

21. Item, whether there be any married women in your parish who after
Childe-birth have refused to come to the Church to give God thanks for their
safe deliverance, and to have the prayers publicly appointed on that behalf
by the Book of Common prayer, to be used?

22. Item, whether has any woman been churched sitting in her seat, and not
kneeling down in some covenient place nigh unto the place where the Communion
Table stands?

23. Item, How many have you in your parish that do practice as Physicians or
Chirurgians, and by what authority? specify their several names.

FINIS.

