A DECLARATION SET FORTH BY THE Protestants in France; showing the lamentable
distress and calamities that they of Bearn in France are fallen into, by
means of the oppression and wrong done unto them, in regard of their
profession of the reformed Religion.

With all the troubles which happened unto them since the beginning of the
Edicts sent out against them by the French King until this time.

Together with the rest of their proceedings, until this present month of
July. 1621.

Printed at Rochell 1621.

A Declaration, set forth by the Protestants in France.
TO have and endure calamities, and not to feel them, is a mortal infirmity,
seeing that feeling is an affection of Life. To feel adversities, and dare not
complain, is a cruel respect, and an enemy to nature, seeing that grief and
sorrow is eased by tears, and assuaged by complaints; we endure calamities at
this present, and yet have not hearts of Brass or Steel to feel our own
miseries, nor yet so soft nor faint, that we dare not complain: Seeing then
that all other remedies at this present are taken from us, let us fill our eyes
with tears, the Air with our sighs, and this Paper with the true recital of
the miseries that we endure; And so at the least we shall reap that
contentment to make our grief known to our brethren, and letting them
understand our troubles, we shall move them to compassion with us, it being a
just thing, that as we are united together by one selfsame Religion, and
hated for one cause, we should be touched with one selfsame and the like
feeling.

It is plain and manifest to all the Realm of France, that there was a
Sentence given, and Judgment sent forth upon the same, for the attachment of
the spiritual Land in the country of Bearn (so much spoken of) which Sentence
and Decree was given, without hearing or permitting those of the reformed
Churches of this Sovereignty, against all order of Justice, to be heard speak
in their onwe cause: And there are but few men, to whom it is not known, that
for the space of 51. years, our Ministers (the College and Garrison of
Nauerreux) had their maintenance and entertainment only, out of the same. No
man likewise is ignorant of the just Complaints that our Churches have made,
not only against that Decree and Edict made thereupon, but also against an
other Edict called the Supply; whereby we were sent out of the Country, to seek
that entertainment. All those that have understood our cause, may easilye judge
of the equity of our Complaints, seeing that the sovereign Court of Bearn, by
two Decrees made at the presentation of those Edicts (and of a Commission) had
declared, That there was no cause to justify the said Edicts, which oght to be
acknowledged for just, seeing that the general Assembly of the Churches of the
Religion in France, holden at Loudun with so great affection and zeal, craved
and pursued the reuocation of that Arrest and Edicts: The said complaints and
pursuits likewise were just, for that the King (by the advice of his Counsel)
granted the said Assembly seven months time, to begin, from the seventh of
April last, wherein the Churches of Bearn should be heard, and might make
their complaints and declarations unto his Majesty, touching the said Decree
and Edicts. And let us add hereunto, for the better Instruction and
satisfaction of those that know it not, That the general Deputies of the
reformed Churches in France, during that time, seeking and soliciting the said
reuocation, Answer was given them by the Kings Counsel, that they must stay
the coming of the Churches of Bearn, And his Majesty him self being at
Bourdeaux, wrote unto the Judges of the Parliament of Pau, that he did not
dislike, that the said Churches should have the advantage of the said months,
in their savor granted unto the said general Assembly, The Tenor of which
Letter follows in this Discourse: To distrust the Royal word of a King, no
man could do it without offending his Majesty: to conceive, that during the
time granted, his Majesty would command the verification of his Edicts, had
been a crime meriting great punishment; nevertheless, behold we beseech you,
what happened unto us during the said time.

The King having appeased the troubles that began to arise in the State of
France, resolved to divert his victorious Arms into Guyenne, and being at
Bourdeaux, nothing was spoken of in the Court but of Bearn: Bearn was the only
subject of the discourses, and the object of the animosity of those, that long
time had practiced and sought our ruin and overthrow. The Romish Prelates
kindled those coals, to cause a great fire to burst forth, using all the
means they could to inflame the Kings wrath against us, specially employing
those means that are most ordinary with them, that is, slanders and evil
words, describing us to be Rebels and I disobedient, publicly saying, that
all the Country was in Arms, and that we spoke not of the Kings sacred person,
but injuriously and with great despite. These impostures being continually
hanged at the ears of the Ministers of the State, more and more increasing the
hatred of the Religion, and the desire utterly to extirpe it. And knowing that
the execution of the Edict of seazing upon the Eccleasticall Lands, would be a
means to disgrace and dishonor the Churches of this Country, and to cast them
into a pittious and lamentable estate; and to the contrary raise the Romish
Church to a prodigious greatness, and the height of riches; did most
industriously employe all the artificial means and practices that they could
devise, to effect their designs, and thereby with them to make a hole in the
treasure of worldly dignities, and to play fast and loose with them that drew
no other breath then that of the earth. The Kings Counsel composde of
Cardinals, Bishops, and Jesuits, that were sure not to stop their ears
against their solicitations, but rather had an instrest in their demands,
persuaded the King that it was a means to diminish his authorities, and that
the cause was his and not the Bishops.

Upon the report that the King came into Guyenne the Parliament of Pau
appointed two Deputies to go to the King wheresouer he was, and to assure his
Majesty of their most humble and obedient service, which the said Deputies
with great diligence speedily performed, finding the King at Bourdeaux, where
nothing was said unto them, but only touching the veryfication of the Edict of
the sensure of the spiritual Laws, whereby the King had fully resolved to
content the Pope, and to further and advance the Romish Church. And to that end
his Majesty had already commanded Monsieur dela Force Governor and Lieutenant
General of these Countries, and Monsieur de Casaux chief President in the
said Parliament, to repair to him at Bourdeaux; who being come to the Court;
they kneeled down before the King, not only in their own names, but also in
all the names of those of the Country, to renew the assurances of their
subjection, obedience and most humble fidelity, who after audience had, he
commanded them to return to Bearn again, thererin to procure the execution of
his will and pleasure, and to cause the Edict for the seazing upon the
Ecclesiastical lands, made in favor of the Bishop of Rome, and that of the
supply made in favor of our Churches to be verified. After them, about the
beginning of October, he sent a second commission into Bearn by Mounsieur de la
Chesnay, to solicit the Judges, and to make them capable of the impressions,
which the King counsel intended to give them: he threatened them with the
coming of the King; assuring them, if they refuse the same, he had resolved to
turn his forces against them.

The Parliament knew not what to resolve: on the one side being abashed by his
menaces; and a fear to draw upon the Country a total and an inevitable ruin,
knowing that the wrath of a King is death: On the other side, considering the
Kings Edict, finding it to be contrary to so many other Edicts, Proclamations
and Declarations, made as well by his Majesty (now reigning) as by the Kings
his predecessors, contrary to the grant of the aforesaid terms of seven
months, made to our Churches, contrary to the peace and assurance of the
state, and which is worst of all: The ruin of the said Churches, as bereauing
them of the land that were allotted unto them for the maintenance of their
Ministers, and making them tributants to the Popes officers. What should they
do, should they break, and annihilate so many Edicts, to justify, and allow
one? Should they be constrained to disobay the King, to yield obedience unto
him? He that in all things ought to procure the good of the state and to be a
tutor to the people; shall he do a thing that is contrary to the good of the
state; and disturb the peoples peace? He that make profession of the true
religion, shall he be cause of the loss of his religion? He that was borne in
the Church, fed and nourished in her bosom, shall he be constrained (Oh hard
and heavy condition) for saving of his own body to pierce his mother the
Churches Breast?

At last, having long waighed this case in the balance of uncertainty, he
determined to use an indifferent course between two extreamities, and
thereupon ordained, seeing it had pleased his Majesty, by the intercession of
those of the assembly general holden in Loudum, to grant his subjects of
Bearn, making profession of the reformed religion the space of seven months,
to present their most humble supplications and declarations, seeing also that
not long before his Majesty had vouchsafed to write to the Parliament, that
his intent was that the Churches of Bearn should have the advantage of the said
time, which as the^ was not expired, he ordained (I say) that humble
suplicatio^ should be made unto the King to beseech him to hear and give
audience unto the said Churches within a month, whom he commanded by decree to
go thither, within the time that yet rested vnexpired, to prostrate themselves
at his feet, to present their humble supplications and requests unto his
Majesty, and in default thereof, the Parliament would bind it self, to
verify the Edict without moderation or reservation, according to his Majesty's
commandment. To bear this decree to the King, and to inform him of the
equity thereof; two Counselors of the said Court of Parliament were deputed.
But all they could do, they could not obtain the effect of this so just a
demand: And who would ever have thought that the King would have refused to
hear the most humble supplications of his faithful Subjects, desiting to
prostrate themselves at his feet in all humility, seeing also that he had so
solemnly promised by his answers given to the motions made by those of the
assembly at Loundun, Is not the King as able to will, as puissant to hold his
word and to accomplish his promises? Shall we complain, surely not of the
Kings bounty (so just and courteous a Prince) but of the malice of this world
and the evil dispositions of the spirits of the Court, dispitefull against us,
and resolute to seek our destruction.

The King having heard the Tenor of this Deeree, roughly sent the Deputies
away, and thereupon determined and fully resolved to go into Bearne:
whereupon, the Parliament being advertised of his design, to appease the Kings
wrath, and to divert the effect of his severe threatenings, determined to
verify his Edict, without moderation or restraint whatsoever: What should it
have done, should it have resisted a King that came with a wrathful spirit,
accompanied with a puisant and fearful Army, to abate, cast down and break
in pieces, all those that should resist and withstand? The Edict being
justified, the Kings Attorney general had charge to bear the verification of
the same to the King, as a testimony of our obedience and submission: who found
the King all ready on his journey to Bearn, and showing himself before him as
he was on the way, he presented the verificatio^ of the Edict unto him, which
was according to his pleasure: But he being resolutely determined to make the
Bernois feel the effect and rigor of his wrath, staide not therefore, but went
forward. Most puissant Prince, will not your grace be pleased, in some measure
to moderate your wrath? will you not at this present show your self as
gracious and gentle unto your Subjects, as you are terrible and redoubted of
your enemies? shall that Country that has had the glory to have borne,
nourished in her bosom, and finally given France that great Herculee, the
terror of the world: Henry the great your Father, sooner feel the arrows of
your indignation, then the effects of your favor and being presence?

The nearer that the King approached to Bearne, the Court of Parliament
attended and expected nothing but threatenings against this poor Country: it
was already ordained to the pillage, and those of the religion to the
slaughter, as an offering to be made to appease the Kings wrath. The
papisticall Edict of the Town of Morla'as (presented some dangerous accidents
against us) who to defend themselves from the cross, marked their houses with
a cross; It was against the Pastors particularly that their malice extended,
and specially against those, who being employed showed some rigor in
maintaining the Churches cause, all their names were known at the Court; they
were noted and marked by their faces: on all sides they were counseled to fly
into Rocks and holes in mountains and Caves. In the mean time the King
entered into the Country; accompanied with terror and fear. The Soldiers
took, pilled, ransacked, and hardly used their Hosts, with immeasurable
insolency, their hands were employed about nothing but extortion and violence:
Their mouths never opened, but to blaspheme and curse God, and to threaten
injurious bloody perseeutions, against those of the Religion; whom they called
rebels, traitors, bougers, old sorcerers, and an accursed race; speaking of
nothing but fire, gibbits, and gallows. They entered forcibly into the
Churches, and being therein, brake and cast down the Pulpits and seats. In
the mean time the Papists in the Country tryumphed and audaciously bragged,
whose laughters and insolent behauiours, were, as many arrows that pierced
into the hearts of those of the Religion, so much astonished for the present
evils, and the fear of future perils, that it seemed, that all things
conspired and contributed with envy to persuade them, that they had met with
another St. Bartholomewes.

The King coming to Pau, would accept of no triumph, nor joyful welcome or
receiving into the Town; he would show himself to be armed with wrath and
displeasure; and like a blazing Star, which fore-sheweth the death of some
great Prince, and the ruin of an Estate. Nevertheless the Consuls of the
Town went in their Liueries out into the suburbs to receive him; presenting
the keys of the Town, together with the testimony of the obedience and
fidelity of all the inhabitants unto his Majesty. The Judge and others of the
Court of Parliament, in scarlet robes, fell down at his feet to yield unto him
the assurance of subjection and fidelity: but the King looked on them with a
countenance full of indignation, and sent them away with this answer in few
words, which entering into their ears, pierced their hearts: Saying, (when you
serve me better, I will be a good Prince unto you) and in the mean time while
they kneeled at his feet, presenting their affections and lives in quality of
most humble, most faithful, and most obedient Subjects and servants, some
spoke aloude and says, that they were worthy to be hanged up, as traitors and
rebels.

The Church for her part, and the consergerie of Pau also did their duties, and
went to the King being in his chamber, where kneeling down before him, and
speaking by the mouth of Monsieur Pefarre one of their Ministers, they
presented unto his Majesty the fidelity of their hearts, consecrated to his
most humble service, as his most faithful servants and subjects, protesting,
that what slanders and calumniations soever were imposed upon us, by our evil
willers, our Religion commanded us, to serve, honor, obey and respect his
Majesty as our King; not only for fear, but specially for Conscience sake. The
King made him answer and said, Serve me well and I will love you. This
contentment was a comfort unto us, against all the calumniations, and insolent
speeches used against us, that it was reported unto us, that by the mouths of
the Cardinals and Bishops that then were present, and by the general consent
of all that heard us, being no small number: The Church received this
testimony, that our Minister had spoken worthily and most Christianlike.

While his Majesty stayad in Pau, who is able to rehearse all the excesses
committed against those of the Religion? If a Minister spoke, he was pointed at
with their singers; he was reviled, and laden with injuries: how many of them
received disgrace, were beaten, and hardly used openly in the streets, for
making open confession that they professed the reformed Religion; how many for
fear of blows, were constrained to make the sign of the cross? how many
upon the general day of Procession were forced with blows of staves, to
kneel down on the ground to adore the host, which with so great pomp was
carried under a Cannopy to blind the common peoples eyes? But what shall I say,
touching the prophanations committed in Paul's Church? The King contrary to that
which he had ordained by his answers, to the assemblies of the Bishops, gave
the Church of those of the Religion to the Papists, and caused Mass to be said
therein before he went from Pau: Those that first entered into it, polluted that
place by so many abominable blasphemies, that it is mauaile, that the earth
did not tremble, and the roof of the Church fell not down to destroy them. But
what other thing could they do, to witness, that from that place they
banished the purity of Gods service, and the invocation of his name, then by
casting forth such execrable blasphemies against the holy and venerable name of
God? being not content therewith, they went up into the Pulpit, and there sung
impudent and villainous songs, and after that filthily eased their bodies
therein, casting the Bible that they found in the Church four times on the
ground: and tare and pulled in pieces the table of Gods Commandments that hung
on the walls, to witness that they drove the truth of the word of God, and
the observations of his commandments out of the Church.

But this is not all; for I must tell you of a most abominable act which
deserves to be punished with a thousand Torments, and yet the Cardinals and
Bishops that heard thereof, laughed at it, and the discourse made thereof,
served in the Court for a matter of sport and pastime. One of those abominable
rascals, who in that matter handled the sacred Commandments of God, having
therein read, Hearken Israel, with horrible blasphemies cried out and said,
that Israel was some devil whom those Buggerers the Hagonites adored: and so
reiterating both that name and those blasphemous words, furiously fell upon the
table of those divine Commandments; and thereupon took occasion to tear them
in many pieces. What said thou blasphemous villain, That Israel is the name
of a Devil? Oh little flock (in the Scriptures called the Israel of God) is
it possible that thy enemies should give thee the name of Belial? Oh holy
Angel of God, have thou permitted that good Patriarch Jacob, to hate the name
of Satan, for the price and reward of his holy and constant wrestling, but
rather oh thou the most faithful watchman over Israel, that never sleep; be
thou iealious of the honor of thy name: thou have heard this blasphemous word,
and have seen this profane villain, and heard his execrable speeches, that
are made a jest and laughter to the world. Oh God of vengeance, suffer them not
long to go unpunished, least they should say, where is their God?

To report all the indignities done and offered to those of the Religion,
during the time of the Kings being in this Country, were a matter that
requires a long subject and great leisure; some other will shortly undertake
to declare them severally: it shall suffice for this present time to show, that
in the same time, they fully witnessed and make known what hatred against
Religion, and what choler against those that make profession thereof, they
have conceived; for their is no word that issues from their mouths, nor action
nor motion of their bodies, which tends not thereunto, so far, that
Monsieur de Paulo President of the Court of Parliament in Thoulouse; speaking
to the Earl de Chambrot, touching the strange alterations that had bin made in
Bearne, eapable, as he said, to trouble the peace and tranquillity of France,
and to reduce matters to extremities, he made answer with a loud voice
(whereby many men of good quallity heard him, saying) you deceive your self
Sir: The Hugonites have the quarterne ague; They have bin sick a great time,
you shall see other things within these few days, for the King is resolved to
take all their places from them, either by force or willingly: take, and boldly
take our Fortresses from us, pull down the walls of our Towns, beat down
our defenses, but yet you cannot bereave us of that heavenly retract, and most
impugnable fortress of the power of God, which appears and shows it self
in the conservation and defense of his Church.

All these, most insupportable things, have bin followed and had their course
with many prejudicial alterations as well in the Church, as in the common
Wealth: which might sufficiently exagerate the loss of the Ecclesiastical
possessions of the Churches lands, possessed and inioyed by them for the space
of 51. years. by good and available Titles, as Edicts, letters Patents, and
Decrees of Kings: and now what a pitiful thing it is, that two Bishops, that
live idly, in delights and pleasures of the world, should swallow up and
encroach upon all the possessions of the Church, and that our Ministers who
incessantly labor in the Ministry of the word of God, to teach the people to
fear God, and to obey the King, should be constrained, to seek for their
maintenance else where? what grief of heart is it, that those that never are in
rest, but when they labor and strive against us, should draw and receive a
recompense and reward from us? that they that make war against us, should be
paid by us? That wolves should cloth themselves with the wool, and nourish
their bodies with the milk of the flock? a pittious and lamentable condition;
we shall see two Bishops abounding in riches, elevated in Honors and
Dignities, and filled with delights, march in Royal manner; but what say I,
that we shall see them? yea, and that we shall be constrained to contribute
the Tenths of our revenues to entertain these flashes of lightning, and this
worldly pomp and magnificence? a hard servitude: we shall be compelled to give
our bracelets, our eare-rings, to be molten, to make an Image, and shall have
no means to contribute any thing toward the building, and preparing of the
Tabernacle: and to employ our goods, for on ornament and beautifying of
Babylon, while Jerusalem remains desolate, and her gates burnt down by fire:
can we endure to see Idolatry get the upper hand, and seize upon our Churches,
while for the pure service of God, and for the Preaching of his word, we have
no other couerture then the Skies, nor receptacle but the mountains? In our
Churches where long time, so many good and sacred Psalms have bin sung, we
shall hear a strange and barbarous sound, and a company of babbling Priests,
exclaim against us, and make our miseries the subject of their pleasures?

The state ought to serve for a support and protection of the Church, and those
that are advanced to be Officers in the State, ought to use their authority of
the conservation and maintenance thereof, our ill willers jealous of the peace
and quietness of the same, and impatient to see it flourish and prosper, know
that well, and therefore have effected so much, that the Offices and
authorities of those of the Religion are taken away from them, and given unto
Papists; to the end, that the Church holding no more by any branch, may by the
least shake be borne down to the ground. The government of Nauarreux, having
bin 51. years in the hands of Monsieur de Sales a Gentleman, on whom the eyes
of envy or hatted never so sharply piercing, could never note nor perceive the
least shadow what soever of infidelity toward his Prince, who perceiving
himself to be very old, and without Children, certain years past, obtained
the reuersion of his government for Monsieur de Laur his Cosen, who in all his
actions shows the footsteps and degrees of a rare and singular piety, and in
his body bears the marks of his courage, having (in the Kings presence at
the siege of Amiens) received a shot with a Musket in his right shoulder, which
has bereft him of the free use of his Arm.

Monsieur de Sales sent him to Bourdeaux, with Monsieur de la Force, to assure
his Majesty of the continuation of his sidelity, who being at the Court, he
found that the enemies of the Religion had dispersed some report abroad that
tended to the prejudice of the sincerity of his affections, which had pierced
even unto the cares, and almost into the thought of his Majesty, but coming
into the Kings presence, he dispersed those shadows, and made the King
plainly to see and perceive, that his actions were able to endure the trial:
Whereupon the King, shows him the honor to assure him, that he was persuaded
of his innocence, exhorting him, to persist in serving him faithfully, and
withal commanded him to assure Monsieur de Sales of his favor and good will.
The King approaching to the Frontiers of this Country; Monsieur de Laur
presented himself once again unto him, to reiterate the protestations of his
most humble and most faithful service; not only in his own, but also in the
name of Monsieur de Sales, most humbly beseeching his Majesty to bear with
his great age, that would not permit him to present his body laden with years
at his graces feet. The King receiving those words of obedience and fidelity
from Monsieur de Laur, commanded him to continue and go forward in employing
his time for the benefit of his service. Wherewith he returned well contented
in mind, but upon the report that was spread abroad, of the Kings intent to
see Nauarreuz, he went again to speak with him at Pau, where Monsieur de
Luines told him, and the King confirmed it with his own mouth, that he had no
other intent nor meaning but to see Nauarreuz, and that he should assure
Monsieur de Sales, that nothing should be altered nor changed in the state of
that place. Monsieur de Laur assuring himself upon that promise, which he
thought to be inviolable, contented himself, and sought to settle and assure
Monsieur de Sales mind and conceit to the contrary, being moved thereunto by
diverse aduices given him from all places, that his government would be taken
from him.

The King coming to Nauarreux, at his entry into the Town, Monsieur de Sales
presented the keys thereof, and speaking unto him, said: Sir, it is now above
fifty years that I have had the honor to be governor of this place; God has
given me the grace always to have kept it well, not only in the reign of the
King your Father deceased, but also in yours: and I am assured, that if in your
Court there be any of the King your Fathers old servants; they will witness
that his Majesty was well contented with my service, and assured himself of
my fidelity, I never had a better desire to serve, then I have at this present:
if your Majesty will accept thereof, as I most humbly beseech you, and in
sign of my obedience here are the keys of the Town, which I present unto
you. The King made him answer, that he always was assured, and still did
assure himself more and more of his good service, willing him to continue and
profit in serving him well, and he would be his good Master, and acknowledge
his service in time and place when occasion fell out, commanding him to give
the keys of the Town to Monsieur le Marquis de la Force Captain of his
guards, and so he did.

Those pleasing and agreeable words of the King rejoiced and comforted
Monsieur de Sales, and with the same he began to be somewhat comforted: but an
hour after the King entered into the Town, he sent him word, that he would
have no more of his service, and gave the government to Monsieur de Puyane a
Papist, and a Stranger, contrary to the laws of the Country, whereby Strangers
are excluded from those charges; presently thereupon all the inhabitants were
disarmed, all the Garrison was discharged, that is 120. Soldiers: Their
Lieutenant and Ensign beard, six Captains, the Commissary, the Controller,
the Keeper of the Munition: The Doctor and the Apothicarie all of the religion,
and four Companies of the Regiment of Picardie were brought in until Monsieur
de Ruyane had gathered his composed of 300. men, Strangers and Papists.

A most pitiful and lamentable desolation! how could they deal roughlier
with that venerable old Gentleman, who^ the most impudent calumniation durst
not accuse them after 50. years and upwards of his service, shamefully to
displace him of his government, and thereby laid his gray and weak age, with
so sensible an affliction: What pity is it, that he who all his life time had
lived in honor and authority, he that by the length and fidelity of his
services, persuaded himself that he had settled that charge in his own house,
now in his later days, should see him self laden with shame, and from so
eminent a place, reduced to a private state, while a stranger laid hold on his
spoils, and walked like a peacocke upon the rampers and walls of Nauarreux,
which his father and he at other times courageously defended, against the
invasion of strangers. It is certain that the hatred against religion is
excessive great, seeing that neither the long service, of that ancient Knight,
his fidelity without reproach; nor his tears could mollify the hearts of those
that had induced and incited the King, to such a severe resolution.

How hard and troublesome it was to Monsieur de Laur that had the reuersion of
that his Uncles government, was received therein, and had taken his oath
accordingly, that had served the King commanding with honor above 25. years
over a company of the regiment of Navarre, lamed in the Kings service, and one
that could not be accused of infidelity or disobedience, and for a recompense
of all his services to see himself in the face of all the Court put from his
charge, and made the subject and matter of the scoffings, works and jests of
our enemies. What griping grief must it needs be, unto a genenerous heart,
sencible of the force of honor: poor and desolate inhabitants of the town,
that are all of the religion, unless it be one Apostate? what comfort and
consolation can mitigate your grief in this feeling of so whot in affliction,
but with what words, and mourning weeds, can or may we set forth and show that
the deplorable state and miserable condition of six score Soldiers, most of
them inhabitants of the Town; having wives and children, and such as for the
most part succeeded their fathers, whose fidelity was manifest in the defense
of the Town assiged by the Kings enemies? What grief is it, at this day to
see them, (without any offense by them committed) dispossessed of their places,
and disarmed, and thereby with their wives and children, brought into shameful
poverty? What burning words might their hearts feel, on the one side, to see
strangers in their houses brag and brave it out in their arms, and on the
other to hear the sighs and continual complaints of their wives and
children, ready to famish? But by what counsel was it done, that our ill
willers seek (by making us lose this place) to give us so great a subject
complaint? have not we defended the same with the price of our blood, against
the audatious enterprise of the Papists, that had driven Queen Ioane out of
the Country, and by treason, rebellion, and reuolting, had gotten all the rest
of this state into their hands? Is it not we, who in recompense of our
fidelity, have possessed the same 60. years under the Kings service? These
Titles only were sufficient and authentic seeing they were grounded upon so
long a possession, signed and sealed with the fidelity and blood of our
fathers: and yet this is not all. By the Edict of Nantes it was agreed, that
all the places and Garrisons, which were in possession of those of the
Religion, and not in time to come to be taken from them, and at the same time
more were given them, which after that by many Edicts and Declarations, has
bin confirmed, after that our Churches by the Kings permission, were united
with those of France, as all the world knows; this grant made by the Edict
of Nantes in favor of the Churches of France, was enlarged in our savor by
the express Declaration made by his Majesty to the supplication presented by
the last general assembly held in Rochell; who then would be so obstinate to
doubt whether Nauarreux so long time holden by us, in the time of peace, and
many years before, should not still be kept by us? What manner of malice is
this? who would maintain and affirm that it could be taken away from us,
without overthrowing of so many Edicts, and declarations, which ought to be
firm and inviolable?

But now again see how far they proceed to the supreme degree of
stubbornness and malice, and yet after all that, the most bitterrest persons
must hold their tongues, and make no answer. The King and his Counsel,
knowing that out of the Ecclesiastical lands of the Churches or Ministers
College and Garrison of Nauarreux and other charges were maintained and
vpholden, ordained by his Decree, that another means should be assigned unto
us, for the supplying thereof, and namely for the entertainment of the Garrison
of Nauarreux, which afterward was more expressly declared in the Edict of
supply; verified in the Parliament of Pau. What more formal proceeding could
be desired then this Edict, which was made in our favor: then this Edict I
say, which was only a means for our assurance? his Majesty there assigned a
means for the Garrison of Nauarreux; was not that a witness confirmable to so
many other Edicts and declaritions, to show that this place ought not to be
taken away from us? Puissant King, is it possible that within 4. days after
the verification of this Edict, against so many other reasons, and so many
other Edicts, that ought to assure this place unto us: you would take it away
from us? Alas, we have said it, and are again constrained to reiterate the
same; pardon us noble Prince, it is not against your royal Majesty, that our
clamours and complaints are made, but against the rage and malice of our
enemies, which have done you that wrong, not to permit your promises to be
inviolable. Having taken Nauarreux from us, they began to turn the State
vpside down, and therein to make alterations prejudicial to the Religion:
Garrisons were put into all the Towns, to oppress the liberty of the
Country, besides the 4. Companies that are in Nauarreux, in Orthes they put 6.
Companies of the regiment of Picardie: in Sanueterre 4. Companies of the
regiment of Champaigne: as many in Oloron of the same regiment: and a company
of light Horsemen in Nay. Who can sufficiently declare the great excesses and
disorders which those people undertake in a Country, where they are as it were
animated by the hope of pillage? Who can without horror tell and speak of the
horrible blasphemies that they belch forth against God, and the jests and
scornful brauadoes which they vomit out of their mouths against those of the
Religion? what a servitude it is to live like slaves at home in our own
houses, and as strangers in the Town? to see our streets full of Corcelets,
Pikes and Muskatiers; our means, and our lives, in the power of the enemies of
our Religion; ready, if God did not restrain their impetuositie by his
providence: assail us, and to put their tyrannous intents in execution.

All the Country concerning Martial government is divided into 6. parts,
which are called Parsans: every Parsan always had a Captain that commanded
over the Soldiers under the Kings Lieutenant, most ancient Officers; and as it
were ordained at the first beginning of the State: all those 6. Captains were
of the Religion, but what fell out? Envy could not endure that, that remnant of
authority should continue in the hands of those of the religion; but rather to
weaken them all together, and only to let them go and escape away with their
lives, the said 6. Captains were discharged, without any crime or offense
imposed upon them, and in their places, there was a new Officer made in the
Country, that is, a Provost Marshall with certain Archers to attend him; and
that Office given to a Papist: What an alteration of affairs is this, To
suppress the ancient Officers, and to make new, only to advance the Papists,
and to raise them to a formal greatness, and to imbace those of the religion,
and reduce them to a pitiful and lamentable condition?

And further, Monsieur de Bernac the chief Baron of Bearn, (whose auncesters
have made themselves famous, in respect of their sincere affection, and loyalty
to the Kings service, and the conservation of the Countries liberty,) had a
grant in possession, from father to son of the chief Precedence in the
State: But envy could not endure that a most affectioned family to the
religion, should be in possession of that dignity, and therefore sought to
dispossess him thereof, to inuest the Bishops with the same; and the better to
bring their desiring to effect, a bruit was spread abroad in the Court, that it
was not good for Monsieur de Bernac to stay in Pau, and that if he presented
him self, he should serve for an offering to redeem and recompense the
disobedience of Bearn: advice was given him from all places, by men of greatest
quality in the Court, that he was appointed to be an example, and an abashment
to the rebels: he choosing rather to loose his estate, then his head in Court,
resolved to keep himself secretly in one of his houses, and in his absence,
the Bishops were instabled, without any contradiction, in the Precedence of the
States, and by that means, they had places in the Counsel or Parliament next
to the Presidents, and free voices therein to Judge of all affairs, specially
of those of the religion, although one of the Bishops had a Cousin that sat in
the same Parliament, and that by the law of the Country, the Uncle and the
Cousin cannot be Judges in one cause and company. But when there is any thing
to be done that may disadvantage those of the religion, there is no law which
they will not violate, nor custom which they care not to break.

But this is not all, Bearn is united unto France, and by this Union the whole
estare thereof is turned vpside downward: We have two kinds of laws, the one
is the law of the Soueueraigne, which may be altered, changed or disanulled as
occasions fall out: the other is the Laws of the Soueraignetie, whereby the
Prince is advanced to the Sovereign estate, and are as it were the Articles
and causes of the contract made between the Sovereign and the Country. Those
are inviolable, and cannot be changed, unless the state be changed, as being
the props whereupon it holy stays and depends. The principallest of those
laws being that which binds the Sovereign to maintain the state in the
Title of Soueraignetie, and to defend the same from allienaton, and
transportation else where. Now by incorporating Bearn with France, the Title of
Soueraignetie is taken from it, and carried else where, seeing that the King
endoweth the Crown of France therewith, and by consequent overthrows the
estate, by the which intrusion an infinite number of mischiefs are introduced.
By the same means Navarre is joined to Bearn, making the Chancerie of Navarre
and the Counsel of Pau one Parliament, by that conjunction to introduce a
great number of Papists into the body thereof, and so much the more to weaken
those of the religion, Monsieur de Lescun the Kings Councellor, would never
consent unto the verification of the Kings Edict touching the Spiritull
livings, but still in the Country, in the Court, and in the general assembly
did maintain Gods cause, and the Churches right with an invincible and
impenecable vigure and constancy, he was hated in the Court, and diligently
sought for, and being not found, he was summoned to appear within twice 24.
hours, and failing therein, he was prohibited from executing his charges Most
brave and generous wrastler, receive, I pray thee, this prohibition for an
honorable reputation, and a glorious mark of thy incomparable zeal for the
conservation of the Church, and in the mean time expect most green Garlands
of Laurel, and immortal Crown from him, whose cause thou have defended with
so great constancy.

And you poor and desolate Churches, which in times past were like to the land
of Goshen; only light, while all the Country about it was obscure and dark,
and which at this present perceive and behold darkness to get the vpperhand
and to prevail against you, to extinguish our light, you that have seen the
purity of Gods service planted and reestablished in enery place, and Idolatry
wholly banished out of the Country; and now behold it to be spread abroad in
all the quarters thereof, to ouerwhelme both the Towns and fields, and to
build her nest in your Churches, and already behold squadrons of worms and
grasshoppers rise out of the bottomless pit of hell, to gather your grapes and
mow your fields, in danger of prohibition not to enter into the house of God:
rejoice and comfort your selves, God at this time calls you to endure
persecutions, why are you abashed and astonished thereat? it is your condition,
it is the livery of your head and commander, whose head being Crowned with
Thorns, why should the Church dream of dignities, and earthly Crowns? you
see the world rise up against you: Why should you be dismayed? it is the
ordinary course thereof, it is the enemy of the truth of the Gospel, which is
not of this world but of heaven: an enemy of the Church, which has withdrawn
it self from the world, to be transported and planted in an other Territory
and place of abode: your places of defense are taken from you, and are not you
lodged in the closet of the Sovereign God, and under the shadow of the wings
of the most Mighty? and who can pull you out from thence? is that Fortress to
be batred? is it to be taken by men? The living destined and appointed for your
Ministers are taken from you. And he that in times past commanded the Crows
to be Puruoirs and victuallers for the Prophet Elias, he that commanded the
oil in the pitcher not to wast; and the oil in the glass not to decay or
wax naught, is not he at this day the same God? should his arm be shortened
that he cannot, or the bowels of his mercy shut up, that he will not, have a
care of his Church, and provide food for his Ministers? you have the honor to
suffer persecution for righteousness sake, although your enemies seek to
imblemish the same with the Title of rebellion and disobedience: but where do
the effects, much less the proofs of this rebellion appear? can they object,
that you did ever at any time conspire against the Kings sacred person, or
attempted any thing against his State? that the murderers of Kings,
(infernal furies of hell) were found or came out from you? that your Ministers
did ever go up into their pulpits, to proclaim war, to kindle a revolt, or
to sow sedition in your hearts? can you be reproched, that you are bound by
oath of fidelity and obedience to any other, but unto the King your Sovereign?
that you acknowledge any superior power in the world, that can put down or
transport his Crown to any other? have your Ministers books bin condemned to
be burnt, as free of falsehood, and detestable propositions, tending to the
subuertion of Sovereign powers, and the rising up of Subjects against their
Princes, as the books of those that defame and slander you by injuries, and
violently pursue you, have bin? then where is the rebellion and disobedience,
that is improprietated unto you? It is, (say they) because you did withstand
the verification of the Kings Edict, and thereupon they exclaim, and cry out,
saying, what audaciousnesse is this, what an attempt worthy of death is this?
What consolation and comfort have you, when you see and perceive that they can
not accuse you, but only by changing the names of things, and by calling that
rebellion, which is nothing but obedience.

The King having given the Ecclesiastical livings to the Bishops, you could
never obtain that favor to be heard by the Kings Counsel, it being instantly
sought for and desired; answer was made, that you should be fully heard before
the Judges, to whom the King would send his Edict or Commissions: You presented
your selves before those Judges, with respect and humility, you desired to be
maintained in your possession of 51. years, grounded upon Edicts, Decrees, and
letters Patents of the King your Sovereign. Is it called rebellion with honor to
solicit your cause to the Judges appointed by the King, and to whom he sent
you to be heard? rebellion to ask and demand the observation of the Kings
Edicts, and execution of his promises? What Title will they give to Rebellion
and disobedience, if respective and humble requests and solicitations are
qualified with the name of disobedience and rebellion? An ingenious age,
wherein the names of things are changed, thereby afterward to have the means
to change and pervert all things.

And you Brethren, that by one self same band of Faith, and Religion are
united, and strictly bound unto us: Behold in this sorrowful spectacle what
has bin done, and what more they will do unto you: Consider our calamities
therein, and seeing you are members of the same body, behold your own therein:
Make your selves sensible of our miseries, help us to find some remedies,
either by your most humble prayers unto God, that he will be pleased to appease
his just wrath and indignation inflamed against us, because of our sins, and
unthankfulness, or else by your supplications to our good King, to be admitted
and restored to our first estate, or by your good assistance against those,
that do nothing else but labor utterly to root out and destroy us, by these
chollerous alterations.

In the mean time, God grant that these strange alterations, be not the
causes of other as dangerous, and ominous alterations. God grant, that so
often, striking against the hardness of our patience, they do not make some
sparkles fly out, and that of those sparkles some great side should chance to
burst forth: But before all things, God grant that our good and debonarie
King may be lively touched with the pure zeal of his house, to the end that
thinking upon the greatness of the mischiefs, that he has bin counseled to
do unto us, he will show himself to be our restorer, and the nourisher of our
Churches: And for our parts, attending that time, and happy motion, of
changing, rechanging, and of turning all things vpside downward, we are fully
resolved never to change, our affections unto God, as Christians, nor to the
wills nor desires, not to honor the King as his faithful Subjects: But
rather as we pray unto God, to strengthen our patience, that it may not break
under the burden of so many calamities, that are procured unto us, so we
beseech him to prosper the King, and to give him long and many days, a
flourishing Empire, and faithful Subjects.

BY THE KING, Sovereign Lord of Bearn.
Loving friends and our trusty servants, we are certified that you have sent
unto us for your Deputies, Messieurs de Gillot, and de Lendresse to make your
duties known, and to certify us of your fidelities without any further charge
committed unto them, although Monsieur de Causaus chief President, gave you to
understand, that it was our pleasure that you should send some of your Deputies
to speak with us about our Edict touching the Spiritual revenues, to receive
our commandments, and to yield us an account of things past, grounding this
doubt upon this, that by the said Monsieur de Casaus letter it seemed that your
deputation was referred unto that with those of the religion. P. R. of our
Soueraignetie are to make. And although you have nothing at all to do with
them, and that it is free for them, to take that occasion, which the time that
we have granted yields unto them; and for that it tends to the good of our
affairs and service, the quietness of the Country, that our intents and
pleasure should forthwith be made known unto you: for these causes, we will,
and command you, that forthwith, and without any delay, you nominate and send
some of your company unto us, to receive those orders touching the Spiritual
livings, that we will give unto them, without depending upon the deputation of
the said Messieurs de Gillot and de Lendresse, your duties to observe our
Co^mandments bind you thereunto, fail not therein, for such is our pleasure.
Given in Bordeaux, the 21. of February. 1621.

Signed, LOVIS. And somewhat lower, DELOMENIS.
And below to our loving friends and faithful servants of our Counsel in the
Sovereign Courts of Bearn.

This letter being received by the Parliament of Pau: The Decree following,
word for word translated into French, was thereupon made.



THE Counsel Chambers assembled-together, having seen the requests of the
reformed Churches of this Country, and the Kings letter sent to the Counsel,
bearing date the 22. of November, last past; importing, that it is free for
those of the reformed religion to take advantage of the time, that was given
them, agreeing with that which before had bin granted to the assembly in
Loudun. It is decreed, That before all things his Majesty shall most humbly be
entreated, to give audience unto the most humble supplications and declarations
of the said Churches, willing the said Churches, to present themselves unto his
Majesty, before the said time be expired, which being expired, and for not
doing it, we will proceed to the registring and publishing of the Edict,
according to the contents of the Commission, bearing date the 10. of September
last. And to that end Messieurs du Four and de Marca are appointed Deputies
presently to go to Bourdeaux or any other place, where the King shall be.

Given in Pau, the last of January. 1621.

