A BOOK of certain Canons, concerning some part of the discipline of the
Church of England.

In the year of our Lord. 1571.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

3. Of Bishops. 6. Of Deanes of churches. 9. Of Archdeacones. 11. Of
Chauncelors. etc. 17. Of Churchwardens. 22. Of Preachers. 24. Of Residence. 25.
Of Pluralities. 25. Of Scholemasters. 27. Of Patrones. etc.
Of Bishops.
Here follows in this book some certain articles of the holy ministry, and
of the offices of the Church, fully agreed upon by Matthew Archbyshoppe of
Caunterburie, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, and all other Bishops
of the same Province, which were partly present in person, and partly
subscribed by the hands of their Proctors, in a Synod begone at London in
the Church of S. Paul, the third day of April. 1571.
ALl Bishops shall diligently teach the Gospel, not only in their
Cathedral Churches which they ^uerne, but also indifferently in all the
Churches of every of their Dioces, where they shall think it most needful.

(...) ^^pally they shall exhort their people (...) the reading and hearing of
the holy scriptures, and that they come together in times appointed, every man
to his own Church, and that they give ear diligently to the preachers of the
Gospel, and that both they do hear reverently the godly prayers, which shall
be spoken by the Minister, and also pray them selves with him, and that they be
partakers of the heavenly mysteries, as they be now godly ordained and lawfully
in our churches by the authority and commandment of the whole Realm.

Every Bishop before the first day of September next, shall call unto him the
public preachers, such as shall be in his own diocese, and shall require
again of them, their licenses of preaching, which they have signed with any
autenticall seal, which they shall retain with themselves, or else abolish.
After prudent choice made of them, he shall give readilye again new licenses
to them whom he shall find able to that great office, in respect of they
^^^res, doctrine, judgment, honesty of life* ^^^ie, and gravity: and yet so
that they (...)he to the articles of Christian religion, ^^^^ly approved in the
Synod, and that (...) ^ake promise willingly to maintain (...) that doctrine,
which is contained in the (...) most agreeable to the verity of Gods w^^^

The Bishop must very diligently (...) what manner of men he do admit into his
household: for it chances sometimes where this foresight is not used, that
wicked men, and enemies to the true religion, vicious men, and corrupt in all
their life, yea, and men void of grace, be admitted. Whereby the adversary
will soon take occasion to speak evil.

The Bishops servants shall so modestly and orderly apparel themselves, in
every part of their garments, that they do not offend their brethren whom Paul
calls of the household of faith.

The Bishop shall lay his hands on none henceforward, but such as have been
trained up in good letters, either in the university, or some other inferior
schole, or that does understand the Latin tongue competently, and has been
well exercised in the holy scriptures: nor yet on any, except he be of that
lawful age which is appointed by the statute and law: nor except his life and
honest behavior, be commended by the testimony of grave and godly men, and
such as are well known unto the bishop: nor on any that has been brought up
in husbandry, or some other base and handicraft labor: nor on any, but such
as have some title (as they call it) whereby he may live, if by Gods
sufferaunce, he become blind, or fall into grievous sickness of the body, or
into a continual and languishing disease: nor except he will exercise the holy
ministry within his own diocese: nor at any other time, but when it shall
chance, that some place of ministration is void in the same diocese. And he
shall admit no stranger, nor any that he knows not, either to the profits
of any benifice, or to ecclesiastical ministry, except he bring with him
that Bishops letters of commendations, which they call letters dimissories, out
of whose diocese he came.

The bishop shall not grant unto any man the next, or second, or third
aduouson (as they call it) of any prebend or benefice belonging unto him: for
those aduousons are far from good doings and christian charity: neither shall
he ratify and confirm the leases of any profits or revenues of any
parsonage, or ecclesiastical benefice, for term of many years, in any wise.

The Bishop shall suffer no man to be occupied in the ministration of the
Church, which calls himself by the idle name of a Reader, not having
received imposition of hands.

Every Archbishop and Bishop shall have in his house The holy Bible in the
largest volume, as it was lately printed at London, and also that full and
perfect history, which is entitled Monumentes of Martyrs, and other such like
books, fit for the setting forth of religion. These books must be placed
either in the hall, or in the great chamber, that they may serve to the use of
their servants, and of straingers.

Deanes of Cathedral Churches.
THe very same books, which we spoke of last, every Deane shall cause to be
bought, and to be bestowed in his Cathedral Church, in such convenient place,
that the vicares and peticanons, and other ministers of the Church, as also
strangers and forrieners may easily come unto them, and read thereon.

The Deane, and every chief Residentarie, whom they call the dignities of the
Church, shall buy the same books every one for his own family, and shall lay
them in some fit place, either in hall, or in the chamber.

The Deane and his prebendaries shall preach the word of God diligently, not
only in the cathedral Church where they live, but in other Churches also of
the same Dioces, and especially in the same places whence they receive yearly
revenues and profits. Which if they do not, they shall be punished according
to the discretion of the Bishop.

No Deane, nor Archdeacon, nor Residentarie, nor master, nor warden, nor head
of any college, or cathedral church, neither president nor rector, nor any of
that order, by what name soever they be called, shall hereafter wear the Graye
Amice, nor any other garment which has been defiled with ye like superstition.
But every one of them in their churches shall wear only that linen garment,
which is as yet retained by the Queens commandment, and also his Scholars
hoode, according to every man's calling, and degree in schole.

Every Deane shall be resident in his cathedral Church, four times a year at
the least. And shall continue there, by the space of a month every time (if he
may possibly) in preaching the word of God, and keeping good hospitality,
except he shall be otherwise let with weighty, and urgent causes. Which
causes he shall at every such time, declare unto his Ordinary. When he is come
to the Church, he together with his prebendaries resident, shall foresee that
the statutes of his church, if they be not contrary to the word of God (as
many are) and that the statutes of this realm whatsoever, concerning
ecclesiastical order, and all Injunctions, either set forth by the Queens
Majesty, or enjoined by the bishop in his visitation of the same Church, be
diligently observed. Moreover the Deane and Residentaries shall endeavor as
much as lies in the^, that the peticanons or vicares, and other ministers of
their Church, (lest they live idly and unprofitably in slouthfulnes, and give
themselves to unlawful gaming) be constrained to the study of the holy
Scriptures, and that every one of them have the new Testament, not only in
Latin, but also in English.

The Deanes and Residentaries shall see that there be no other form observed
in singing, or saying prayers, or in the administration of the Sacraments, but
only that which is set forth, and prescribed in the book of Common
Prayers: neither shall they suffer any stranger to preach unto the people,
except the Queens Majesty, or the Archbishop of the same Province, or the
Bishop of the same Dioces, have granted him license thereunto. And if such a
Preacher so allowed, either by the Queens Majesty, or by the Archbishop, or
Bishop, shall in his Sermon publish any doctrine either strange, wicked, or
disagreeable with the word of God: or with the Articles of our Religion,
agreed upon in the Convocation house (which no doubt are consonant to the
Scriptures,) or with the book of common Prayers: the Deane, or the Residentes,
shall as soon as may be, give notice of the same to the Bishop, by their
letters, subscribed also with some of their hands, which heard him preach:
that he may determine on the matter, as he shall see good.

Archedeacons.
EVery Archedeacon shall have in his house, both the other books, and namely
those which are entitled, Monumentes of Martyrs.

Every Archedeacon which has authority to visit, either by common law, or
by prescription, shall visit his territory once every year in his own
person: and he shall not substitute any to be his Official, but such a one as
has been brought up in the universities, and has studied the civil law, and
is of the full age of xxiiij. years, being able not only in learning, but
also in grauety, and modesty to discharge that office.

Archedeacons and their substitutes (whom they call Officialles) shall call the
clergy to account in their visitations, how much every one of them has
profited in the study of Scripture, and shall give unto so many of them, as
have not taken the degree of a master of Art upon them in the university,
some part of the new Testament to be learned without book, and at the next
Synod shall compel them to make repetition thereof: and they shall detecte
unto the Bishop, such as are either stubburne, or negligent herein.

When the visitation is finished, the Archedeacon shall signify unto the
Bishop, whom he has found in every Deanery, so furnished with learning and
judgment, that they may be thought worthy to enstruct the people in sermons,
and to rule and govern others. Of these the bishop may choose some, whom he
will have rural Deanes.

Archdeacons shall straightly and severely punish all offenders; and not wink
at their faults, or suffer any man to escape unpunished, who is known to have
offended.

Archedeacons shall have a special care, that the monumentes of their acts,
and doings be faithfully and safely preserved: and shall once every year
bring to their bishop, all the original copies of such testamentes, which
shall be proved before them the year before, that they may be preserved by the
Bishops Register. They shall write out the copies of the same Testamentes to
their own use, if they will.

Chauncellors, Commissaries. and their Officials.
EVery Chauncellor, Commissary and official, shall be learned in the
ecclesiastical and civil laws, and such one as is twenty and six years old,
and has taken some degree in the schools for learninges sake, and is
reasonably well practiced in course of law, touching whose life and manners, no
evil report be heard. Besides, every one of these either shall be in the
ministry, or if he be not, yet shall he be well affected, and zealously bent
toward religion, and such he shall openly and freely show himself, and before
he enter his office, he shall take an oath of the authority and supremacy of
the Prince, and also shall subscribe to the articles of religion allowed in the
convocation of Bishops.

None of these, neither Chauncellor, Commissary nor Official shall proceed in
examination of matters unto the sentence of excommunication, but only in
causes of instances. In matters of correction, they shall do all other things
which lawfully they may and are wont to be done.

But the sentence of excommunication they shall leave only to the Bishop,
which either he himself shall pronounce, or shall commit the pronouncing
thereof to some grave man, which is in the ministry. After that he has given
sentence, he shall also add, for a warning and terror to the people, a
certain order of words (...) upon in the convocation, and wheresoever the
Bishop shall command, shall declare his conscience to the people, what he
thinks of those articles, and the whole doctrine. And he being once admitted
into the holy ministry, shall from thencefoorth never depart from it, nor
shall use himself as a lay man, either in apparel, or in any part of his
life.

Every Parson, Vicar, or Curate shall yearly before twenty days after Easter,
exhibit to the Bishop, or to his Chau^cellor or Commissary, the names and
surnames of his parishoners, as well men, as women, (of those I say) which
being fourtene years of age, come not to the holy Communion (as by the
statutes and ecclesiastical laws of this Realm, they are bound) and such as
refuse to be examined by the minister of the church, in learning the
Catechism, and articles of christian religion, and what parents or masters
think scorn to send their children or servants to church, at the times
appointed, to hear and learn the same Catechism. They shall suffer none to
undertake for an Infant at Baptism, except he have received the Communion,
and have been partaker of the holy mysteries, and he shall admit none to the
partaking of the sacraments, which has not learned the Catechism, and
articles of the faith.

Every sunday and holiday, the parsons, vicars, and curates, shall come to the
church so timely and conveniently in due season, that the parishioners having
done their business, may come thither with their children and servants. And there
they shall reverently, (as it is fit) and godly say or sing the holy service,
so plainly, so manifestly, and distinctly, that the people may hear and
understand, what is said or song, and thereof receive comfort and commodity.
The like reverence and godlynes they shall observe in celebratyng the most holy
Sacraments, so that they turn not to superstition, or worshipping, or
Idolatry. But if that in time of the holy Communion there shall be no sermon,
they shall on the book in the pulpit read some one, or other of those
homelies, which we have to that end set forth before. In the mean time they
shall exhort the people, to come diligently to Church, that they attentively
hear that which is read and said, and that all the time thereof, they use
themselves reverently and modestly: and least the godly may be offended
thorough wantonness and lightness, void of religion, they shall take heed that
young men, especially contreymen, (whose nature is more prone to the contempt
of godliness, and to disorder) neither ryng belles, neither walk in the
churches, nor have idle talk together, nor by laughing, or noise, or dishonest
jesting, either let the minister, or offend the people.

They shall admonish the people to come oftener to ye holy Communion, and that
before, they prepare themselves with a perfect mind, as it is fit. And that all
may understand, what duty they owe to God: what duty to the Prince whom they
ought to love and reverence as the vicar of God: what they owe to the laws,
what to the magistrates, what to their brethren, what to the people of God:
they shall be ready in the church straight after noone, every sunday and
holyday, and there at the least, they shall read two hours, and teach the
catechism, and therein shall instruct all their flock, of what age or degree
soever, not only maidens and children, but also the elder, if need be. But
especially they shall warn young folks, not only men, but also women, that
it is provided by the laws, that none of them may either receive the holy
communion, or be married, or undertake for a child in Baptism, except before,
they have learned the principles of Christen religion, and can fitly and aptly
answer to all the parts of the Catechism.

But if the parsons, vicars, or curates, either can not preach, or have not
received license to preach of the Bishop, yet they shall teach children to
read, to write, and know their duty toward God, toward their parents, and also
others: and if they perceive any of them to be of that disposition, that by
teaching and instruction, they may attain to the knowledge of learning, they
shall counsel their parents, to set them to schole, that being endewed with
learning, they may one day become fit for the holy ministry of the mighty God:
but whom they perceive to be duller, and not disposed to learning, to see them
set to some other science, or to husbandry.

They shall also warn their parishioners, that for great and weighty causes
it was appointed in the co^uocation by the Reverend father in God, Matthew
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other bishops, that children mary not,
without consent of the parents, and that no young man has power in himself
to contract marriage, before he be xvj. years of age, and no maid before she
be xiiij. years old.

Churchewardens and and side men.
CHurchewardens according to the custom of every parish, shall be chosen by the
consent of their parishioners, and their minister: otherwise they shall not be
churchwardens: neither shall they continue any longer then one year in that
office, except perhaps they be chosen again. And all churchwardens once every
year shall give up just accounte of such money, as they have received: and also
particularly shall show, what cost they have bestowed in reparations, and for
the use of the Church. Last of all going out of their offices, they shall truly
deliver up to the parishioners, whatsoever money, or other ecclesiastical
things shall remain, and be in their hands, that it may be redeliuered by
them to the next churchwardens.

The Churchewardens shall see, that the churches be diligently and well
repaired, with lead, tyle, lyme, and glass, that neither the minister, nor the
people, either in the holy ministry and worshippyng of God, or in celebratyng
the heavenly mysteries, or in receiving and hearing the Communion, be troubled
with tempestuous weather. But especially they shall look unto, that in every
meting of the congregation peace be well kept: and in all visitations of
bishops and archdeacons, they shall truly and personally present, and name all
those, which rudely behave themselves in the church, or which by untimely
ringing of belles, by walkyng, by talking, or noise, shall let the minister or
preacher.

Churchwardens shall see, that the churches be kept clean and reverently, yt
they be not loathsome to any, either by dust, sand, or any filthynes. They
shall also see, that the holy Bibles be in every church in the largest volume
(if it may conveniently be) such as were lately imprinted at London: that the
book of common prayers, that the holy homelies, and the homelies which lately
were written against rebellion, be in every church. It is meet that these
books be whole and clean, not torn or foul in any wise, lest it breed
irksomnes or contempt amongst the people. They shall see, there be a fair
joined table, which may serve for the administration of the holy Communion, and
a clean clothe to cover it: a convenient pulpit, whence the heavenly doctrine
may be taught. Moreover they shall see, that all roodloftes, in which wooden
crosses stood, and all other relics of superstition be clean taken away,
that the walls of ye churches be new whited, and decked with chosen sentences
of the holy Scripture, that by the reading and warning thereof, the people may
be moved to godliness. Last of all they shall see, that in every church there be
a holy founte, not a basen, wherein Baptism may be ministered, and it be kept
comely and clean.

They shall also warn tauerners, alehousekepers and victualers, which sell meat
or drink, that they receive none into their tauern or alehouse, all ye time,
wherein either is preaching, or common service. If any do contrary, upon
contempt or stubbernes, they shall present both him, and them whom he
received, by name in the next visitation. If any offend their brethren, either
by manifest adultery, or whoredom, or incest, or drunkenness, or much swearing,
or baudry, or usury, or any other uncleanness and wickedness of life, let the
churchwardens warn them brotherly and freendly, to amend. Which except they
do, they shall by name show them to the parson, vicar, or curate, that they
may be warned more sharply and vehemently of them: and if they continue so
still, let them be driven from the holy Communion, till they be reformed: And
that all which live unchastly and loosely, be punished by the severity of the
laws, according to their deserts. The same Churchwardens shall present those
adulterers, whoremongers, incestuous, drunkardes, swearers, baudes, and usurers
in the Bishops, and Archdeacons visitations.

Churchwardens shall suffer no feasts, bankets, suppers, or common drinkings to
be kept, in the church, neither the belles to be rong superstitiously, either
in the feast of all souls, or ye day after all saints (which day not long
since was kept holy for the souls of the dead) neither at any time at all,
whereas the custom of ringing shall seem to incline to superstition. They
shall suffer ringing only at those times, which are appointed in the book of
aduertisementes, and to that only use, and after that only order.

It shall not be lawful to keep fayres, and common markets upon the sunday:
neither on that day to put to death, and openly punish offenders condemned by
the sentence of ye Judge.

They shall not suffer, that any of these light wanderers in markettes, and
pelting sellers, which carry about, and sell pinnes, points, and other small
trifles, whom they call pedlars, to set out their wares to sale, either in the
churchyeardes, or in the porches of churches, or any where else, on holidayes or
sondayes, whilst any part of the holy ministry is in doing, or any sermon is
preached, neither that beggars, or vagabondes, which have no certain dwelling,
abide either in the churchyearde, or in the church porch, all the time of
service, or preaching: but shall command them, either to come in, or to
depart.

They shall also search, and diligently enquire, if any of the parishioners
either come not at all to church, or come later or slower at ye times appointed
by the laws: and whom they shall find so to offend, they shall punish them,
according to the appointing of the law. They shall mark whether al and every
of the parishioners come so often every year to the holy communion, as the
laws and statutes do command: and whether any straingers from other parishes,
come more often and commonly to their church, and shall show their curate of
them, lest perhaps he admit them to the Lords table amongst others, but shall
send them rather to their own curates.

They shall receive no parson, nor vicar, to the ministry of their church, but
whom the Bishop shall allow by his institution, and by his mandate shall put
in possession of that church. They shall receive no curate, but him that by the
letters, and seal of the Bishop, is specially appointed for that church. But
if the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, behave himself otherwise in his ministry, or
that he read ill, darckly, and confusedly, or that he live more losely and
licentiously then is fit for a man of that calling, and thereby great offense
be taken: the churchwardens shall spedely present him to the Bishop, that by
and by he may be punished, and amendment of his fault may follow.

And that the Bishop may understand, what sermons are made in every church of
his dioces: the Churchwardens shall see, that the names of all preachers, which
come to them from any other place, be noted in a book, which they shall have
ready for that purpose, and that every preacher subscribe his name in that
book, and the name of the Bishop, of whom he had license to preach.

Last of all, the Churchwardens shall see, that all things be diligently
observed, which pertayne to their offices, and that are contained in the
Queens injunctions, and the book of aduertisementes, and that shall be set
forth by the Archbishop or Bishop in every their visitations, for the use of
the Churches. But if any do rail upon them, or go to law with them, for doing
their duty, and detecting of offenders, that also they shall present unto the
Bishop, that by his means and trauaill they may more easily be delivered from
that trouble.

Preachers.
NO man shall openly preach in his parish, but being licenced by ye Bishop,
neither hereafter shall be so bold, as preach out of his own cure and church,
except he have obtained license so to preach, either of the Queens Majesty,
over all her realm: either of the Archbishop, through his province: or of the
Bishop, in his dioces. And no license to preach, shall hereafter stand in
force, but that which has been obtained after the last day of April, which
was in the year, 1571. Preachers shall behave them selves modestly and soberly
in all their life.

But chiefly they shall take heed, that they teach nothing in their preaching,
which they would have the people religiously to observe, and believe, but that
which is agreeable to the doctrine of the old Testament, or the new, and that
which the catholic fathers, and ancient Bishops have gathered out of that
doctrine. And because those articles of Christian religion, agreed upon by the
Bishops, in the lawful, and godly convocation, and by the commandment, and
authority of our noble princess Elizabeth assembled and holden, undoubtedly
are gathered out of the holy books of the old, and new Testamente, and in
all points agree with the heavenly doctrine contained in them: because also
the book of common prayers, and the book of the consecration of Archbishops,
Bishops, Ministers and Deacons contain nothing repugnant to the same doctrine,
whosoever shall be sent to teach the people, shall not only in their
preaching, but also by subscription confirm the authority, and truth of those
articles. He that does otherwise, or troubles the people with contrary
doctrine shall be excommunicated.

In preaching they shall wear a very modest and grave garment, which may
becomme and set forth the minister of God, and such as is prescribed in the
book of aduertisementes. They shall require no money or reward for their
preaching, but shall be content with meat and drink, and plain provision,
and one nights lodging.

They shall teach no vain, and old wives opinions, no heresies, nor popish
errors, disagreeing from the doctrine and faith of Christ: neither any thing at
all, whereby the rude people may be stirred up to the desire of novelties, or
contention. But they shall always teach that, which may make for edifying, and
may unite the hearers in Christian peace and love.

Residences.
THe absence of the shepherd from the Lords flock, and that careless
negligence, which we do see in many, and forsakyng of the ministry, is a
thing in it self to be abhorred and odious to the people, and pernicious to
the Church of God. Therefore we exhort all pastors of Churches, in the Lord
Jesus, that forthwith they return every one to their parishes, and diligently
teach the Gospel, according to their living to keep house, to help the poor
by hospitality, and there to be resident every year no less then lx. days.

Plurality.
IT shall be lawful for no man, of what degree, or order so ever he be, to
have at one time, any more then two ecclesiastical benefices: neither shall it
be lawful for any man at all, to obtain two benifices, if they be distant more
then xxvj. miles.

Of Scholemasters.
IT shall not be lawful for any to teach the Latin tongue, or to instruct
children, neither openly in the schools, neither privately in any man's house,
but whom the Bishop of that dioces has allowed, and to whom he has given
license to teach under the seal of his office. And here we except (for honors
sake) the Lords of the Parliament: but the Bishop shall allow no
Scholemaister, nor account him worthy of yt office, but whom he shall find in
his judgment to be learned, and worthy of that place, and whom he shall see
commended by the testimony of godly men, touching his life and manners, and
especially his religion.

Scholemaisters shall teach no Grammar, but only that, which the Queens
Majesty has commanded to be read in all Schools, through the whole Realm,
neither any other Latin Catachisme, then that which was set forth, in the
year. 1570. The which also, that is translated into English, we will have
taught unto children that are ignorant of the Latin tongue.

All other books they shall teach, whereby the fulness and finenes of the
Latin and Greek tongue may be learned, and those especially, which profit to
the knowledge of Christ and godlynes. And once every year they shall signify
to the Bishop, what chosen scholars they have of all their number, which are of
that aptnes, and so forward in learning, that there may be good hope they will
become fit, either for the common wealth, or for the holy ministry. By this
hope the parents being allured, will more willingly keep them at schole.

But chiefly they shall so order and frame the tongues of children, that they
may pronounce openly, plainly, and distinctly. And as often as any sermon
shall be, they shall either send them, or bring them to church, that from their
childhode they may be brought up in godliness: and lest they should hear it
negligently: at their return to schole, they shall call and examine every one,
what they have learned out of that sermon: and that the minds of children, may
be the more styrred up to virtue and diligence: they shall rebuke the idle and
sluggish, and shall praise the attentive and diligent.

Patrones and Proprietaries.
THe Bishop shall earnestly and diligently exhort patrones of benefices, to
consider the necessities of the churches, and to have before their eyes the
last day, and judgment, and the tribunal seat of God. Therefore that they
prefer no man to any ecclesiastical living, but him which by doctrine,
judgment, godlynes, honesty, and innocence of life, is able to bear so
heavy a burden, yt they do nothing therein, but uprightly, incorruptly and
truly: and he shall profess that he will use all honest, and lawful means to
search out the truth. But if, either in the pre^e^tation, or else after he shall
perceive any corruption, or simony to be committed any way, either closely,
either directly, or indirectly, by him, or any other, either that money, or
moneyworth, or that any commodity, or any part of the profits should come
unto him: yt he then will publish and declare this wicked deed and simonie, not
only in the cathedral Church, but also else where, to his shame and perpetual
reproach, and also thrust out that minister, whom he so wickedly presented, not
only from the office of a Priest, which he unlawfully entered: but also from
all ministry, and out of the whole Dioces.

Humble petition must be made to the Queens majesty, that some way by her
leave and commandment may be found, that the (...) our bishop, by the name
and authority of the most mighty God, has excommunicated him from all
company of the church of God, and has cut him of as a dead member, from the
body of Christ: In this state, and in so great danger of his soul is he at
this time. S. Paul being taught by the inspiration of the holy ghost,
commands that we eschew the fellowship, and company of such men, least we be
partakers of the same wickedness. Yet, as christian charity warns us,
because he will not pray for himself, neither understands his danger, let us
all in his name pray unto God, that once he may acknowledge his miserye and
filthiness of life, and may repent, and turn unto God. For our God is
merciful, and can call them from death, that were fallen.


