A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross the thirty day of May. 1591. By M. George
Giffard, Preacher of the word of God at Maldon in Essex.

AT LONDON Printed by I. Windet for Tobie Cook, at the Tigers head in Paul's
Churchyard. 1591.

To the worshipful, Master William Rider, Alderman, and elect Sheriefe of
London.
SIr, this Sermon was preached at Paul's Cross the 30. of May last, at the
which there were some that gathered the same in writing so near as they could,
their coppies being conferred and laid together, were (nevertheless) found
very imperfect, so that the Preacher was requested to perfect the same so
near as his memory would suffer him, the which having done and the coppie
coming to my hands, J have by public authority printed it, I hope to the
good of many. And findinge my self greatly indebted to your worship and
yours for many courtesies, J was bold to present it unto you as a testimony of
my thankeful mind, hoping that you will accept the same in as good part as I
meant it. And so beseechinge God to bless your worship to the fulfillinge of
that hope which many conceive of you in time to come, I humblye take my leave
this 7. of August. 1591.

Your worships humbly affectionate to command. T. C.

Psalm. 133. Behold how good and how, etc.


THe holy Prophet, King David was the composer and writer of this Psalm, as
the Title thereof does expressly mention.

It is called a song of degrees, as there be 14. other besides this, here set
together of the same title, but in what sense: the learned interpreters are of
diverse judgments. I will follow that which is most probable by the holy
Scriptures. The word Magnaloth, which the Prophet here uses, does properly
signify steps or stairs, by which we assend into higher places. But by
Metaphor (as I take it to be here used) it signifies high estate, high degree,
excellency, or dignity. For proof hereof we read. 1. Chro. 17. verse. 17.
where David speaking unto God, says, thou have regarded me according to the
estate of a man of high degree, using the same word that is here. So then, if
we consider the phrase of the Hebrewe tongue, which to express the
superlatiue degree, uses the plural number, a song of degrees, that is, a
song of excellencies, or a song of dignities, is as much as to say, a most
excellent, or a most worthy song. The holy ghost in giving this title, does,
as it were, set a mark in the forehead of the Psalm, to give notice unto us,
that there is a treasure of most excellent doctrine, and most fit for our
instruction contained in it, yt we may with the greater diligence and attentio^
give ear unto it.

The Argument or the matter here handled, is all but one. For the holy ghost
with a very high and singular praise, through the whole Psalm does seth
forth and commend the unity and concord of brethren. The brethren (which he
speaks of and which are to keep this holy agreement) are all the faithful
children of the Church, fellow members of Christ's mystical body, and true
worshippers of God, among whom is the spiritual brother-hoode. The virtue it
self which is here commended, is that same which S. Paul does so earnestlye
exhort and persuade all Christian men unto, to keep the unity of the spirit,
in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. ver. 3. The Primitive Church is commended for
the practice thereof, in which we have a lively example set before us: for it
is written, that the multitude of them that believed were of one heart, and of
one soul, Act. 4. ver. 32. For as one body consisting of many members, has
but one heart and one soul, by which all the members are united, and love each
other, so the multitude were united in judgment and affection, as if there
were but one heart and one soul in them all.

The commendation and praise by which the holy ghost sets forth the
excellent worthiness of this virtue, is under two Epithites, which are these,
good and comely. For he says, behold how good and how comely a thing it
is, for brethren also to dwell in unity. These two Epithites he afterward
opens and amplifieth by two similitudes: the one is taken from the anointing
of Aaron with the precious ointment, to declare cheefelye the sweet and
pleasant comelines of this unity: the other is taken from the dew of Hermon,
which comes down upon the mountains of Sion, to express the fruit and good
that comes thereof. And finally he concludes from the highest cause, even
the Lord God, who has commanded the blessing of life eternal to be upon
this unity. This is breefelie the sum of the Psalm, or of this praise which
is given. Now come to to the exposition.

By the first word (behold) the Prophet does stir up the minds of the
Israelites, even of all the Tribes, to take view how blessed a thing unity and
concord is, even by their own experience which they had, partly by the
former times, and partly by the time then present. For in former days they
had felt with much sorrow, the great calamities, harms, and annoyaunces of
discord: and at this time now present when this Psalm was given, they saw the
blessings and benefits of unity and peace. For their former experience in the
days of King Saul, when he persecuted David which had done none evil, the
worship of God was neglected, good men were oppressed, evil men flourished,
with much grief of mind unto many, then was there discord, so far as men
durst speak. When Saul was taken away, and David was anointed King in
Hebron, Abner the son of Ner Captain of Saules army, took Ishbosheth
Saules son, and set him up for King, the discord then grew much greater,
for then one part of the Tribes claue unto David, the other unto the house of
Saul. They were indeed all the sons of Iaacob and professed the God of
Abraham, whom they should with one mouth have worshipped and glorified as S.
Paul says, Romans 15. ver. 6. but they were divided and rent a sunder, for there
was bloody war and long time continued among the Tribes: 2. Sa. 2. and. 3.
brethren with deadly hatred and enmity pursuing their brethren, seeking the
blood each of other. It could not be but that great calamities in this time
of discord did ouerspred the whole land: they might by experience then and did
behold how evil and how mischeeuous a thing it is, for brethren to be at
variance. The cutting down of so great an evil, and taking away all occasion
is a very great good. Therefore when Abner and Ishebosheth were slain, all
Israel came together and set up David. Then there grew a reconciliation of
Tribe unto Tribe, and they which were before rent a sunder, became again one
body, brethren embraced each other with love, the bitter hatred before among
them was cut down and extinguished. The worship of God was now set up, the
blessings of God were powered down from heaven upon them in great plentye, the
whole land did rejoice with joy and gladness: Therefore he wills them now to
behold how good and how comely a thing it is, for brethren to dwell also at
unity. Thus were they taught by their own experience on both sides: For they
had found the grievous annoyances of discord, and enmity on the one part, and
the benefit of peace on the other, and this is it he wills them to behold.
Behold how good and how comely a thing it is, which does cut down so great
evil, and behold how good and how comely a thing it is, which brings with
it such great blessings of God: thus much for the first word. Then to the
praise it self: the first Epithet is (how good) which contains the great
fruit that arises thereof, and is afterward set forth by the second
comparison, that is, of the the dew of Hermon: for that is a thing fruitful
and good. The other is (how comely) the word is Magnim, which signifies
beautiful, sweet, comely, or pleasant: as in Psalm. 16. Where he speaks of
the resurrection and exaltation of our savior Christ, saying. Thou will show
me the path of life, the fulness of joy is in thy presence, at thy right hand
comely pleasures for evermore. This comely pleasant sweetness of concord, is
resembled and shadowed forth by the former similitude, that is, of Aarons
anointing, for that was a very comely and a sweet thing, and had a mystical
signification. To understand the better what is here meant, first ye may read
of this precious ointment, both whereof the Lord commanded it should be made,
and how Aaron and his Sons should be anointed therewith unto the preests
office, in Exodus 30. Then further we are taught in the Scriptures, that Aaron
was a figure of Christ, and that this anointing of his with that precious sweet
ointment, did represent the spiritual and heavenly annoynting of Christ Jesus
with the holy Ghost, whose graces distill from him the head, upon every part
of his mystical body, which is the Church. Of him it is said, the spirit of
the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me, etc. Luke. 4. verse. 18.
Mark further then wherein the comparison holds. Thus powringe the precious
ointment upon Aarons head, running down upon his heard, and to the scirts of
his clothing, was pleasant to behold, and cast forth a sweet savor unto all
that stood round about. Also in that it discendeth upon his beard, and so
downward upon all parts even to the scirtes of his clothing, it resembles the
graces of the holy Ghost flowing down from the Lord Jesus Christ, upon all
the members of his body knit together in an holy unity. When it went down
from Aarons head upon his body united to the same, it discendeth even to the
lowest part of his garmente, because there is no rent nor separation. Even so
the Church united unto Christ, her head, and every member of the same united
unto the rest in an holy union, and making one body, the heavenly graces of
the holy Ghost, far sweeter then that precious ointment, flow from him upon
them, and all are partakers thereof, even the lowest and meanest member, even
to the scirtes. For where they are joined in this spiritual unity, look what
graces soever God from his Son Christ does power upon the highest members,
(that is upon Princes and Pastors) they distill also upon the other parts and
members, and so from each to other.

That which was separate from the head, from the body, and from the garments
of Aaron, received no drop of that precious ointment, which descended from
the head to a body united, and to all parts of the garments wrought
together. In like manner the graces of the holy Ghost discende from Christ the
head, upon nothing that is separate and divided and rent from him, but upon
all the members united in one body. We may then briefly set forth what
this similitude declares, in this wise. The sweet oyntmente is powered upon
the head of Aaron, it goes down upon his beard, then upon his shoulders and
all parts of his body even to the lowest border of his garments. Jesus
Christ the head of the Church is anointed with the holy Ghost, and from him
the sweet graces descend, and come upon all the body, and upon every member
of the body even to the meanest: this it is to be united to him, and to his
Church: this is a thing most sweet and most comfortable.

In the other similitude he resembles this unity unto the dew of Hermo^,
which comes down upon the Mountains of Sion: the waters which fall upon the
high mountain distill into the valleies, but into those valleies which are
joined thereunto at the foot thereof, and make them plentiously fruitful:
even so the heavenly spiritual dewes that come down from above upon the
Mountains, flow upon the valleys which are united thereunto, and there is
great fruit, and all good things springing from thence. Thus much we may
consider in these similitudes, which express how good and how comely a thing
it is for brethren also to dwell at unity.

Now all this is from the most high God, for he says (there) that is to say,
upon those which dwell together in this holy unity, the Lord has commanded
the blessinge, and life for evermore. It is Gods unchangeable decree that they
shall have the blessing, that is, the great great high blessing, even the
blessing of all blessings in everlasting continuance. This can never fail,
for God almighty is unchangeable, and what he has decreede and commanded,
shall stand for ever. This may persuade much to dwell in unity: for it is a
goodly matter to be under the blessing of almighty God: and there, that is,
upon the unity of brethren, he has commended his blessing, and no where else:
for this, there, is as much as to say, there only. Now we see the praise it
self of unity and concord here set forth, unto us it remains, that we
consider to what end and purpose the holy Ghost gives this great
commendation. This we all know, that when a thing is dispraised, it is to
bring us into a misliking and shunning of the same, as a thing either
unpleasant or hurtful. And contrariwise, praise, especially where it is given
by God, who knows the worthiness of every thing, is to draw our liking, and
to make us in love with that which is praised. This is then done hear, that we
may have our hearts inflamed, and that we may be in love with unity and
concord: and that we may studiously seek after it, and embrace it, as a
most precious jewel: and finallye by all means take heed, that we do not any
thing which may hinder and disturb the same. And doubtless if this can not
move us, and kindle an earnest love and zeal to be studious of Godly peace,
that it is so good, so sweet, and pleasant, and that Gods blessing is upon it
unto eternal life, how dull are we unto spiritual and heavenly things, or
what can move us? Shall we not care to have that cut down which brings
mischief and destruction, and to set up that which carries all blessedness with
it? Shall we neither care to avoid the curse of God, plagues and punishments
on the one side: nor yet covet to have his blessing, that it may move us the
rather, I will come now to the application of this Psalm to our estate.

We have (as ye all know) received great blessings from the Lord our God,
by the means of our gracious Queen. For by her happy reign, we have inioyed
long peace, even such as the like has not almost been seen or heard of in
this land. We have also great plenty of all things, our country over
flowinge with milk and honey: every man sitting under his Vine and under his
fig tree. And moreour the Lord has protected us by her Scepter and power,
from the invasion of foreign enemies, and from the wicked practices and
treasons of domestical adversaries, these are great benefits received. But the
greatest blessing of all is, that by her government, he has delivered us
from the bondage of Pharaoh, from the heavy yoke of Antichrist, out of
Idolatry and blindness, and has restored unto us his holy word, and his
true worship. Yet notwithstanding there has been among us, many years (as ye
all know) great discord and variaunce, and that not only against Papists and
other enemies of the holy religion, but even among brethren, which profess
the same holy doctrine and faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. An all this time we
have tasted the bitter fruits of enmity and discord, we have felt and
sustained the mischeefes, harms and damages that grow from it, so that we
have had experience with the Isralites in the worser part, and can say of our
own knowledge, behold how evil and how uncomely a thing it is for brethren
to be at variaunce. To make this more apparent, if I should stand to rippe up,
and to lay open all the euilles which have already come upon us by the
discord of brethren, it would be a long and a tedious labor. I will therefore
only note some of the chief and most general, that beholding as it were our
most grievous wounds, we may seek to have them salued and cured if it may
please God.

First therefore, I may note as a principal evil fruit of enmity, that it is
a joy, and on ancouragement unto the enemies of the Gospel, the Papists for to
see brethren set against brethren: for as it is in an army of men, if they be
at deadly variance among themselves, Captain against Captain, band against
band, pursuing each other: That the adverse part (against which they should
wholly together bend their forces) will say, we shall not need to do much, we
shall easily prevail, for they will pull down and destroy themselves with
their own hands, and hereof will much rejoice. So is it in Gods Church,
Christ's army, which is set upon by deadly enemies on every side, when there
is discord growing unto sharp enmity, and the leaders themselves bent one
part against an other, the wicked enemy does laugh, and receives boldness and
strength, for he says in his heart, this sharp contention among them, will
proceed in the end even unto blood, and to the desolation of both parts. O
how much ought we to be pricked and grieved at the rejoicing and boldning of
Gods enemies? And how doleful a calamity were this, if it should among
brethren come unto blood? We see that among the children of Israel, the
discord and enmity brake forth even unto blood, and so doubtless, except the
Lord in great mercy turn it away (such is the nature of contention when it
grows sharp) that the end among us also will be most grievous. This one evil
ought to move us to love and embrace the holy unity here commended in this
Psalm. I would the consideration of it might be deeply printed in our
minds. The wounding of the weak is an other great evil that arises from
discord: doubtless many are cast down, or turned out of the way, or at the least
much hindered hereby in our Church. Stumbling blocks being thus laid, before
the blind and lame. What pity this ought to move, and how much the sight of
it should vex and grieve us, the doctrine of our Savior Christ uttered by him
self and by his Apostles does every where show: threateninges also and woes
are pronounced against them, that shall cast down the weak: And shall not we
regard this thing at all: shall neither the compassion and love to our
brethren for whom Christ died, nor the threatninges and woes denounced take
any place? Thirdly, the discord of brethren, does bring both parts into
contempt and disgrace among many. And so by this means the ministers of the
Gospel, the messengers of Christ, which should be had in precious account and
estimation for their works sake, even as the vessels of Gold and silver in the
Lords temple, and as the Angels of the Lord of hosts) are baselie esteemed even
as if they were vessels of earth or wood. If this did reach only unto ye men
themselves or unto their disgrace, it were the less, and might with less
grief be borne: but the contempt and disgrace reach indeed eue^ to the
glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, because in the disgrace of the men, the power
of their ministrye is weakened. For where the teacher is evil thought of and
despised, the multitude does not regard his doctrine. This evil goes deep,
and if we consider well of it together with the former which I have mentioned,
ye shall see that upon our own experience we may say, indeed behold how
evil and how vncomlie a thing it is, for brethren to be at enmity and
discord. These evils do highly displease almighty God, and if they be
continued in without redress, who is able to show the punishments and
calamities which in time will ensue and come upon us in this Land? The
contempt of the Gospel, and growing into Atheism thereby, will draw down
infinite plagues and miseries. For the righteous God will not always suffer
such abuse unrevenged. Then seeing unity is so good, bringing so many
blessings, and discord so evil, drawing such an heap of mischeefes with it,
the one as a nourisher of true life, is to be sought for and maintained by all
Godly Christians, and the other is to be eschewed as a deadly pestilence: and
this is to be don of us speedely, because dissension is like the breaking out
of waters, the longer it continues, the wider is the breach made and so
becomes the more difficulte, to be recovered. This being confessed of all,
for there is no man I think that will deny, but that it is a most necessary
thing in Gods Church and among brethren, to eschew discord and to seek
unity: therefore let us in the next place consider and understand how it is to
be sought: for let let it be that we both agree, it is to be sought, and also
do seek for it, yet if we seek not the right way, we are never the better
for seeking. First then know this, that there are two sorts of unity and
agreement, the one is in God, being in ye truth, in the spirit, in true
holiness and sanctification. The other is in error and sin and not in the Lord.
Now indeed it is the holy unity in the Lord, which is praised in this Psalm,
and which we must seek after, upon which the blessing of God shall come. This
may ye see by that exhortation of S. Paul Ephesi. 4. When he says, studying
to keep the unity of the spirit in the band of peace, for he adds as the
reason, there is one body, and one spirit, as ye are called in one hope of your
calling: one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, etc. For
like as all the members of the natural body are coupled together by one soul
and make but one body: so by one spirit of the Lord, all the faithful are
united, and become all one mystical body of Jesus Christ: by one faith, and by
one baptism, they are all in one Lord, and in one God. The foundation of this
unity is in the truth, and by it men grow up together in God: and for this
cause it is said in the first verse of the Psalm, Brethren also to dwell in
unity: He says (also) because as there is a reconciliation wrought by Christ
between God and man, and so a man is come into unity with God, he must also
grow into unity with those which are together reconciled to ye Lord with him:
seek this unity, to be united with our brethren unto God, otherwise, all shall
be dissolved and scattered again in confusion. Touching that other concord
which is in error and wickedness, they which possess it who are of diverse
sorts do commend it, and much complain of the disturbaunce and breach
thereof. As first of all the Papists make a great exclamation against us which
profess the glorious Gospel, and have forsaken them: that like wicked
Scismatickes, we have disturbed and broken this holy unity, by rendinge our
selves from the true Church, and so from the faith, and from Christ's mystical
body: this is a grievous and a sore accusation, if their unity which they glory
of, were in the truth. But seeing it is most evident that they have forsaken
the truth of God, blaspheme and condemn it, and set up abominable errors and
cursed Idolatrye, all their agreementes, all their holy league (as they term
it) is no more but a most wicked and cursed conspiracy against God and his
people. What is their unity more then that which is described by the Prophet
David, Psalm. 2. Why do the Gentiles rage, and the people meditate that which
is vain? The Kings of the earth stand up, and the Princes take counsel
together against the Lord, and against his Christ? Here is a great unity, nay a
conspiracy of wicked traitors against Christ. This perplexity is fulfilled by
them: And we have the commandment of God by the voice of the Angel, Come out
from among them my people and separate your selves: so that all their cry is
nothing against us, we have not dissolved this blessed unity here commended,
but have forsaken their cursed conspiracy, which the nearer a man is joined
unto, the further of he is from God. Let no man therefore be troubled or
disquieted by their great words, but forsaking them, embrace the holy faith,
and be united thereby together with the Prophets and Apostles, and all holy
men, unto Jesus Christ.

Ye shall here many other sorts of men complain, that there is not
fellowship and unity kept with them. When indeed as they walk after their
wicked and unclean lusts in all abominable sins, as in contempt of Gods
word, in drunkenness, whoredom, pride, ambition, covetousness, usury,
extortion, bribery, oppression, envy and many such like. The holy ghost says
unto us, have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5. ver. 11. We can not join Christ and Belial, we
can not be united to ye Lord and have fellowship in wicked sins: If we say we
have fellowship with him (says S. John) and walkein darkness, we lie, etc.
1. John. ver. 6. Ephesians. 5.11. He that cries out for peace, and does walk in
ungodly ways, straying from the truth and from sanctification, whatsoever he
will seem to be, he is naught else but a disturber and breaker of all holy
unity. For who can take part with him in those things, but he shall separate
him self (as I have showed) from truth and Godliness, without which there can
be no blessed unity? S. Peter calls our Lord Jesus Christ a living stone,
unto whom all the faithful coming as living stones, are built up and become a
spiritual house. 1. Pet. 2. If stones be not squared and made smoothe to sit
and join together, how shall they grow into one buylding? If men be not
framed in faith and godliness, how shall they be united in the Lord? In deed
there be imperfections both in doctrine and manners, all the best hewn stones
have some ruggednes remaining, and men must bear one with an other in much:
for charity must cover the multitude of sins. 1. Pet. 4. while the Temple of
God is in the world, the stones are not perfectly set together, but the work is
still in hand, this temple is still in buylding, we must beware of the down
fall on that side also. Then seeing this blessed unity must be in God, in the
truth, in ye spirit, to be built up in Christ Jesus, in true sanctification
(for he that is in Christ is a new creature) and seeing all concord without
this foundation, shall fall down as a rotten building, let the holy book of
God be our ground, let it be brought forth to cut down all controversies, and
let men if they look for any part of the blessing here promised, yield all
honor and glory unto this sacred word. Yea let no man stand upon his own
honor or reputation: If he have maintained any thing awrie, but so soon as
ever he esspieth the truth in any matter, yield thereunto, let the truth of
God go before and lead us the way. For this is the only way to grow into
this holy unity. And let such as walk awrie, forsake their evil ways,
embrace the heavenly truth, and follow the rules thereof, if they will be
accounted studious of peace and concord. Joining thus unto the truth, both in
faith and godliness of life, we shall be joined together in the Lord, and it
shall be said, behold how good and how comely a thing it is, for brethren also
to dwell at unity. It shall be like that precious ointment upon the head of
Aaron, etc. The heavenly graces and gifts of the holy ghost, shall come down
upon us plenteously and flow unto every member: we shall bring forth fruit
unto God watered with heavenly dewes: we shall have that great and high
blessing of God almighty unto eternal life. Therefore if it be not too late,
that the sins of this land have provoked the Lord to displeasure, let all men
lift up their hearts and cry unto the Lord, that he will bestow this precious
jewel upon us, that we may be at unity (not in all manner of wicked vices, nor
in errors) but in the Lord. And now who shall seek this unity? who shall
study to advance it? This may be in question. I answer, even all states and
degrees of men, private persons, rulers and teachers, even all and every one
that will look for any part of Gods blessing must advance it: Every man I say
must look unto the heavenly truth of the holy religion, and embrace the same
with all love and hearty affection. Every man ought to be zealous in spirit of
the glory for Christ.

For if a man have not the zeal of religion, he cannot be a good man,
whether he be ruler or private man, though he seem to be never so peaceable,
but as ye Lord says to the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, Reu. 3. Because
thou art neither hot nor cold, I will spew thee out of my mouth: God does
reiecte all such dull and drowsy Atheistes, and irreligious persons, which are
so earthly minded, as that they regard not the heavenly graces which are
offered in the Gospel. Let all men therefore stir up their hearts to be
fervent in gods truth, and let not Godly zeal be quenched. The^ further (as I
have also showed before) we must join the practice of this holy word, as the
Apostle S. James wills, be doers of the word and not hearers only, deceiving
your selves. Ia. 2. ve. 19. for the great disturbance of peace and the grievous
breaches of unity, and all bitter dissentions do cheefely arise from hence,
that all sorts and degrees of men do not walk in the rules which God has
prescribed unto them in his word. We must therefore enter more particularly
into this matter, that we may see how each man is to further this blessed
unity. I begin with the private person, for whom there are rules prescribed
in Gods word for him to observe, if he will be a true member of the Church, and a
seeker and preserver of this unity, and so a partaker of Gods blessing unto
life everlasting. One rule is touching subjection and reverence unto rulers and
gouernous, both Civil and Ecclesiastical: for God has commanded to honor
and obey them. Submit your selves unto all manner ordinance of man, for the
Lords sake: whether it be unto the king, as unto the superior, or unto
governors, as unto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well. 1. Pet. 2. v. 13.14. Also of
this obedience and subjection for conscience sake, of this reverence and honor
to be rendered, S. Paul writes, Romans 13. ver. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7. Likewise obey
them that have the oversight of you and submit your selves, for they watch for
your souls as they that must give accountes, etc. Hebr. 13. ver. 17. The
neglect and breach of this rule, even the denying of obedience, reverence, and
honor unto the rulers, governors and teachers, disturbeth and overthrows
the unity which is here praised. If then a man will not make conscience to
perform this duty in obeying the holy doctrine of the lord, what is he other
the^ an enemy unto ye true concord, a dissoluer of unity and peace? But what if
rulers offend, Pastors and governors fail, and come short in some duties, and
thereby seem unworthy to be regarded? I say if they do, they shall answer
before God for it, but yet private men are not set at liberty, they are not
discharged from this obedience and rendering honor unto them: for it is unto
the authority, and unto Gods ordinance that they do it, and not in respect of
man. God has not prescribed the duties of men which are to be don unto others,
under this condition, if they perform all that which they ought to do on
their parts, or if they be such manner of men as they ought to be. But he has
prescribed every man's duty absolutely. If an other fail in his, he shall answer
(as I said) for it before God, thou have no warrant hereby to depart from the
rule which God has set unto thee. For thou art tied in conscience unto God to
obey his will, and not in regard of man, or of thine own benefit to do this or
that: for by yt doctrine of ye blessed Apostle, we see that christian subjects,
and faithful servants, are commanded even for conscience, to give honor unto
heathen Princes, and infidel Masters. Romans 13.1. Tim. 6.1. we must then from
this express word of God observe, that when governors do amiss, men have not
their tongues set at liberty to revile, and to reproach them, or to dishonor
them with evil speech: seeing it is also written, Thou shall not curse the
ruler of the people. Exodus 22. ver. 28. But contrariwise, prayers, and
supplications are to be made unto God, for rulers and teachers of the Lords
people. When they offend, it is with great hurt to the Church, and therefore
men are to lament and mourn for it, and not to make themselves merry with
iestes and reproaches. Let all evil speeches of disgrace then be turned into
prayers, and the laughter into tears, for this shall be more pleasing unto
God. Let no man bear him self in hand, yt he is not guilty of the breach of
holy concord, when he observes not the rules of this doctrine, of submission,
of reverence and honor to be given unto governors.

Another rule is given by the Apostle, in these words: That ye study to be
quiet, and to meddle with your own business, and to work with your own
hands, etc. These. 4.11. as God has distributed unto every man, and as the
Lord has called every one (says the Apostle) so let him walk, and so
ordain I in all churches. 1. Cor. 7. ver. 17. God has ordained the several
places and callings, he has given gifts of ability to men to perform the
things he requires in the same, he has also set the bounds and limits
within which every one is to keep himself, and to walk orderly, meddling
with that which appertains unto him. This is an holy thing and comely, a
preserver of unity: But it is much broken, and great evil ensues thereof: for
there be many private persons, which would seem very religious, and to seek
the holy unity above others, which leave the duties of their places and
callings, and busy themselves wholly with those matters which do not belong
unto them. For as if the matters of their trades and sciences were too base, or
as if the care of their family were a thing over vilde, they set these aside,
and neglect them: and take upon them greater and higher business. For
beholding any thing amiss in the Church, as if God had set them to be
overseers of the governors and teachers, contrary unto this rule of S. Paul,
they labor not with their hands, nor meddle quietly with their own
business, but they bend all the powers of their mind, to dispute and reason
about government, and the duties of governors and teachers, wandering about,
and seeking to persuade and draw others to their mind. They think thus to do
GOD high service: But who has given them power to dispense with this rule,
that ye study to be quiet, and to meddle with your own business, and to
labor with your hands? Has God called them and set them aworke about greater
things, and freed them from these? Is it not the ordinance and will of our
God, that men shall instruct and guide their families in his ways?

Is there not labor and pains and care to be taken, that the children and
servants may learn the holy doctrine and walk in it? But there are many which
deeply meddle in public matters, and if they have two or three children and
as many servants, they are left ignorant, no pains taken about them, they may
walk awry many ways, the care thereof is little. Also a man's own matters
which S. Paul wills to meddle with, are in providing earthly things,
necessary for his family: so that S. Paul says, if there be any that
provides not for his own, namely for them of his family, he denies the
faith, and is worse then an infidel. 1. Tim. 5.8. and so in other duties.
Shall we think the truth is obeyed, or that God is pleased by such ways?
when the rulers and guides of Gods people do amiss, a man is to sorrow at it,
he is to look to his way that he keep upright before God: but when in
reprehending that which others fault in, he neglectteth his own calling, how
shall he eschew this sentence, thou art therefore inexcusable (O man) whosoever
thou art that iudgest another, for in that thou iudgest another, thou
condemnest thy self. For thou do the same things that thou iudgest, Romans
2. ver. 1. Thou leauest undone thy duty in guiding that small charge
committed unto thee. And let us make the comparison, is he not more worthy
blame that finds fault with the greater, and does it not in the lesser, when
the greater is more difficult to be performed? It is harder to govern a whole
kingdom, a city, or a flock, then a little family, and more faults will
appear. How unreasonable a thing then is it that a man which guides not his
little family in any such order as God requires, should let go the sight of
his own defects, and wholly give him self in speech to deprave the public
guides. Lament and sorrow for evil, consent notthereunto in any wise, follow
the ways of the Lord, obey the rules of the word: and therefore let all men
regard this, and keep their place and standing which God has set them in,
and so walk as that they may answer before the high Judge, and give account
how they have discharged their duty.

To come now to the governors and guides of the Lords people: and first to
the pastors and shepeheards which have the power and authority
Ecclesiastical. These are principal, and above all other, and after a
special sort to procure, and to preserve this blessed unity, as the end for
which they are given of Christ, does show. He has (says S. Paul) given some
to be Apostles, and some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and teachers:
and then he shows to what end, saying, for the repairing of saints, for the
work of the ministry, and for the edification of ye body of Christ: till we
al meet together in the unity of faith, and that acknowledging of ye son of
God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the age of ye fulness of
Christ, etc. Ephesians. 4. ver. 11.12.13. This is their whole work and labor
appointed them, even to build up Christ's body, the Temple of God, by framing
and cupling together the living stones, unto that unity of brethren, which is
commended in this Psalm. Then let us see the rules prescribed in gods word,
which they must observe to perform this holy work, the elders (says S.
Peter) that are among you, I beseech, which am also an Elder and a witness of ye
sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed,
feed the flock of God which depends upon you, caring for it not by
constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: not as
though ye were Lords over Gods heritage, but that ye may be examples to the
flock. 1. Pet. 5. ver. 1.2.

First the sheep of Christ are to have food, their life depends thereupon. It
is required therefore in all shepeheards that will answer their calling before
God, to have the same affection in them which Christ had: who when he saw the
multitude he had compassion on them, because they were as sheep without a
shepeheard. Mat. 9. v. 36. pity and compassion upon the straying sheep must
move them to feed: yea love must constrain: For Christ says to Peter, Simon
Ioanna love thou me more the^ these? feed my sheep: love thou me? feed
my lambs: love thou me? feed my sheep: as if he should say, of al love do
this for me. Here I am to move those which be in authority in the Church, if
it may any way come to their ears, I do humbly beseech them for the Lord
Jesus Christ's sake, to have compassion upon the flock, that the sheep may
have their appointed food, even the bread of life plentifully broken unto them,
that they may be led into the green pastures, and unto the fountains and
streams of the living waters: cry also unto the Lord of the harvest, that he
will pour down his spirit upon them, that in compassion, there may be
laborers sent forth: And that such as have taken upon them the charge, and be
idle or absent, may be compelled to do their duty: that such as be not able
to feed, or that walk in a dissolute and wicked behavior in life and
conversation, may be removed: And that such as be both skillful to teach, and
of godly life may be set over them, to guide them both by doctrine and
ensample. If this be not performed, how is the true concord and unity sought?
If the people be not instructed and led in the way of godliness: how shall they
be framed and built together in one holy temple? If the Shepherd be ungodly
and give corrupt example: what peace, what unity, or what agreement can such as
will fear God, hold with him? And if there be a division between the sheep
and the Shepherd, where shall be the unity of brethren? It is out of all
controversy that the mean to work the Godly unity of brethren, is, that the
flock of Christ be fed and guided by skillful Godly men, which teach
doctrine, and give good ensample in life and conversation.

And now touching the care of the flock, not by constraint nor for gain, but
willingly and of a ready mind: not as Lords over Gods heritage, but as
ensamples to the flock. I do again instantly beseech the Pastors and
gouerners even for Christ's sake, to abound and to increase in all fatherly
love toward the Lords people, without which this care can not rightly be
performed. Follow herein the example of S. Paul, who setting forth his labor
and travail, not of ambition or desire of gain, nor with roughnes, but as he
says, we were gentle among you even as a Nurse cherishes her children. 1 Thessalonians. 2. ver. 7. where this fatherly love is broken of, there follows (to
the exceeding decay and desolation of the Church) that which the Lord
complained of by the Prophet Ezechiel against the Pastors of Israel. Woe be
unto the Shepheardes of Israel, yt feed them selves: should not the shepherds
feed the flocks? Ye eat the fat, and ye cloth ye with the wool: ye kill them
that are fed, but ye feed not the sheep: the weak have ye not strengthened:
the sick have ye not healed, neither have ye bound up the broken, nor brought
again that which was driven away: neither have ye sought that which was lost,
but with violence, and with cruelty have ye ruled them. Eze. 34. ver. 2.3.4.
This was the state of the flock then, and shall be even to the worlds end:
that among Christ's sheep as some be strong, so some be weak, some sick,
some going astraie. Yea such are the frailties of all the faithful, so many
are the errors and the sins which do break forth: but yet they are still
the sheep of Christ, the Israel of God, and the Shepheardes of Israel are to
look to them. Now I say, if there be not a fatherly love in the Shepherds to
cover the multitude of sins: If there be not a tender compassion, as in the
Nurse toward the little babe, in steed of care to heal the broken and sick,
and to supporte the weak, to bring into ye way that which strayeth, they shall
despise and loath them as not worthy to be regarded, yea they shall with
violence and rigor beat and bruise them, certain it is, that the greater the
frailties are, the greater care and compassion is to be showed. So that
violence and rigor are not fit to be in the Sheepheardes. For shall the nurse
throw the little infant against the stones, or push it forward when it can
hardly stand alone? Shall the Shepherd take his staff and strike the young
and tender Lambs? Or shall he beat and bruise the weak and feeble sheep?
What shall we say, are the sheep of Christ of less value? Many of them are
weak and feeble in knowledge, many of them are but as young babes, as touching
ye spiritual power of sanctification. A number of sins do break from them.
Many are wounded in conscience and troubled in spirit: here is place for the
love, the care, the compassion and labor of Sheepheards. O ye sheepheards of
Israel put on this love and compassion, loath not the sheep of Christ for
these frailties, rule them not with violence and cruelty: but feed and
support, and heal them with all meeknes and long suffering. Let no perverseness
or injuries of any of the sheep toward the sheepeheards, break of the
course of this love and care. For if they look unto this, how the sheep
despise them, how they walk stubbornely against them, they shall never be
able with patience and meekenes to go through with the work. If we think it an
unworthy thing, or such as does discharge the sheepeheard from his tender love
and care, or yt may warrant him to be rigorous, that many of the sheep do not
reverence him. Look upon Moses and Paul two great and notable servants of God,
two special sheepeheards of the Lords flock, who is worthy to be compared
with them? They have left an example to be followed. How great things did
Moses for the people? And yet how often did they murmur against him, and were
ready to stone him? How many were their rebellions and injuries don unto him?
And yet his love is not quenched, his care does not fail, but his prayer is
most earnest unto God to pardon them: He still esteems them (though not al)
as the Lords chosen people. What can they do more unto us, then go about to
stone us? Behold also the exceeding abundant love of Paul, who wished him
self accursed from Christ, yt his kinsemen the Jews which were obstinate
might be saved. How much greater was his love to the faithful of his kindred?
And yet could they, even the Church of Jerusalem scarce think any thing well of
him all ye time yt he lived, but thought hardly of him, though he did never so
much for them? This is gathered by yt which he writes, To. 15 where he first
shows that it had pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to give somewhat to
the poor Saints in Jerusalem, and that he went with this their beneuole^ce to
see it delivered: and then he entreated the^ to be very earnest in prayer to
God for him, yt he might be delivered from the disobedience of Judea, and that
his ministry toward Jerusalem might be accepted of ye saints. It is a
merueilous thing to consider, yt there being so great need in ye Church at
Jerusalem, and that money being so welcome to those which are in penury, and he
carrying so plentiful store, yet there needs earnest prayers that this his
service might be accepted. He had moved the Curches of ye Gentiles, (as
appears in his second Epistle to the Corinthians) to make this liberal
contribution. He wrought this matter, he goes up with it, so great was his
care. Yet when he shows all this love and diligence toward the^, how great
was their misliking of him, that he fears his ministry would not be
acceptable to them? The cause of the misliking, James does show unto him when
he was come up, Act. 21. ver. 21. Namely that it was reported he had taught ye
Jews among the Gentiles to depart from Moses, and not to circumcise their
children. We see he loves them dearly for all this, and calls them saints:
Notwithstanding their great frailty in this matter, and the hard opinion they
conceived and held of him, so great and so worthy a servant of the Lord Jesus
Christ. What a pattern of meekenes and fatherly love is here for all ye
shepheardes of the Lords flock to follow, among the poor feeble and wandering
sheep, which do not so reverence and regard them as they ought to do. The
sheepheardes as S. Peter requires, must be examples to the flocks, and
therefore of all other are to show meekenes, long suffering, and that love which
covers the multitude of sins: where the pastors abound in this fathely love,
and do not fall upon the frail sheep and tender lambs with rigor and
violence, the blessed unity of brethren here praised is cheefely furthered:
for ye building up of Christ's body in sanctification is greatly advanced, by
ye example of the pastors and teachers. The multitude are drawn thereby to
embrace and to follow the truth. I do therefore again humbly beseech all the
pastors and guides of ye Lords people, to consider of this holy rule and worthy
examples and to practice it, that ye people of the Lord may be brought into
true concord and brotherly amity. Then lastly, it appertains also unto rulers
in civil matters to maintain this unity according to the truth. They are to
minister justice and true judgment unto all, to punish the evil doers, and to
cherish and maintain yt good. Mercy and love is also necessarily required in
them, that they may deal even as fathers when they correct and chastise. If
this be not, there will great mischeefes ensue, even to the disturbance of all
godly peace and concord: for let a ruler, a judge, or a mighty man be void of
religion, and withal given to anger, dealing among the Lords weak and feeble
sheep, he will be ready to beat them down and to crushe them in pieces. The
frailties and sins are many that break forth even from some of Christ's
sheep and lambs (as we see, there be the weak, the sick, the bruised and
such as err) yt thing is odious in them, because they profess holiness, and
therefore cannot in them be borne: therefore lift up your hearts in earnest
prayer unto God, that he will power down the spirit of fatherly love and
mercy upon rulers and judges, that they may deal in the Lords flock, and
toward his poor weak sheep, with such regard as that they may answer
before Christ. Thus if we honor and embrace the truth, if we practice the
rules thereof, every one performing those duties which the Lord inioyneth, the
rulers and judges, pastors and gouerners in the Church, as also the private
persons, we shall grow into this holy unity which the holy Ghost here
praises, we shall receive all heavenly gifts and blessings, yea even that
great blessing of all blessings, the life for evermore. Grant this unto us O
Lord, for thy dear sons sake our redeemer and Savior: to whom with thee and
the holy ghost three persons, and one everlasting God, whom we worship, be all
honor, glory, dominion and power, for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

