C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENCE

flower surmounted by a crown thistle surmounted by a crown fleur-de-lys
surmounted by a crown harp surmounted by a crown
The Character of a True Subject, OR The Loyal Fidelity of the thrice
honorable Lord, the Lord Marquess Huntley, expressed in this his speech in
the time of his imprisonment, by the Covenanters of Scotland, Anno 1640.
Together with the fruitless hopes of rebellious insurrections, and wars
taken in hand, against God his Laws, and their Princes Prudent Government.
I Stand before you a prisoner, accused of Loyalty; For who can charge me of
any other crime? you seem to do me some great favor, when you leave it to my
free election, whether I will be so or not: is any so in love with fetters, but
that he would change them for freedom, (were the conditions equal)? true it
is, Liberty is offered: but like Merchants you value it at such a rate, that my
fidelity, honor, and all that is dear to a noble mind, must be the price to
purchase it. If I refuse what you propound, rack, torture, loss of goods,
lands, and perhaps life it self: (a hard choice) it is in my power to be a
free man: but how? if I will be a slave, enter into covenant, and take an oath
which in it self is plain perjury: as if treason were nothing, unless I
made it Sacramental. I have already given my Faith unto my Prince, upon whose
head this Crown is by law of Nature and Nations justly fallen. Shall I
falsify that Faith, and join my wicked hands with yours to put it off again?
(Heaven forbid): what but Religion, Liberty and Glorious Shows are pretended?
dare not all Rebels cloak their purposes with such goodly titles? They are
much deceived who think that religion, and rebellion can be companions; or
that God will favor their attempts, that strike at himself through the
princes sides. In that very word King, there is such a Deity enclosed, that who
wounds them, wounds the divine Nature. Why do you then so rashly draw the
sword under so holy a veil? was religion ever built on blood? did the
primitive Christians ever propagate the Gospel with other then their own
blood? which they at all times shed, not only to God; but to their own
princes although pagans, but never against them. As the Devil was the first
Rebel, so Judas was the only traitor among the Apostles: and shall we rank
our selves with those hated examples of disloyalty and treachery? But were
our case good, and we able to contend with the forces of England: when have we
fought with them, but we have been beaten? even then, when their dominions and
strength were less, by all that Ireland and Wales have added to their power:
and then, when they did labor, both with foreign, and their own civil
distractions, their title no better then the sword: yet we found it a hard
task to keep our Kings in their seats, whose royal offspring we do
endeavor to tumble out. We have no France to flee unto for succor, our
ancient league is worn out, theirs wholly Simented, by strong tie of marriage.
To depend upon any other foreign assistances, were to build Castles in the
air. And besides that, Traitors are distastefull to all Kings: our persons
cause, is not more odious then our religion. It is easy to begin, but let us
see what will be the event of such ill grounded war. I foressee with horror
the miseries that attend it: as firing of houses, wasting of goods, famine,
ruin of towns and cities, and the unjust liberty usurped, lost in an
instant and for ever; Wife, Children and Blood, man by nature holds most dear;
if we pity not our selves, yet let us not forget them we hold most dear:
Kings have strong hands to put a bit in the most stubborn; if you cannot
relish gentle subjection, how will you digest slavery? Put not back therefore
this blessed arm that stretches out to receive us; when all is wilderness,
we shall then beg what now we refuse.

For my part, I am in your powers, and know not how this free speech of a
prisoner will be taken. Howsoever you dispose of me, I will never distaine my
Ancestors, nor leave that foul title of Traitor, as an inheritance to my
posterity: you may when you please take my head from my shoulders; but not my
heart from my Sovereign.

London Printed by E. G. and are to be sold at the Horse-shooe in Smithfield,
1640.


