GOD SPEED THE PLOVGH.

Genes. 26.12. Serens Iitzchak in terra illa, adeptus est in eodem anno
centuplas mensuras.

LONDON Printed by John Harison, dwelling in Pater noster row, at the sign of
the Gray-hound, and are there to be sold. 1601.

GOD SPEED THE PLOVGH.
I Had preceded certain affirmed errors, that of late came to my hands, by a
private confutation of a general causlesse applause, had not the vain show of
maintaining the poor, been the noted color for their maintenance: I
therefore then spared my conceit thereof, till now provoked by this spirit that
I ever feared would give the first provocation. I tax him not, but wish that
his Books were not so universally branded, that so his affectation of odd
novelties, might be in part obscured.

It much contenteth me, that this novelty has his passage, though I endeavor
to show the vanity of it being thus far passed: my hopes are, that it will
set an edge to good Husbandry, which with us for many years has been
generally neglected.

The original of the Spade, I attribute to Caine Adams eldest Son, with
inference upon holy writ, and Josephus more particularly. Excellent spirits
succeeding him, labored after some easier and more profitable course, from
whom in course of time proceeded the Plough. The first inuentors whereof in
every several kingdom, being thought worthy to be deified, read Virgil
and Pliny for Ceres: Diodorus for Isis: and Dionisius the second, who is
reported first to have yoked Oxen to the Plough. But now the reuiuers of the
Spade, a thing in use only in the infancy of the world, must be glorified. If
our purpose be to reduce the old world, before by degrees things came to
perfection, then in my judgment it were best beginning at the wooden dagger.
But if we desire to know how of late it came in use, at home let us confer
with the Dutchmen about Sandwitch, and some Gardeners about London: if abroad,
travel Germany, where you shall find many presidents thereof; suruay the
Provinces, peruse the Eastern Countries, and they will manifest, that it has
been long in use. The truth is, these last two years have drawn it amongst
us into some more general use. For they being dry and extraordinary
temperate, the weeds increased not as in former years: the stalk was short,
the care not so long nor so heavy: it stood therefore in these years with
all advantage, and so profitable only in their like. In wet years it will
ledge, with all the disaduantages subsequent, and therefore unprofitable in
them. I might prophecy, that as the two precedent years revived it; so the
two succedent years will leave no memory of it: and yet this present year
promises good success to it, which justly might dis-harten my opposition to
this novelty, were not my ends in seeming to oppose, desires to perfect to the
general good.

The Plough, which now is generally in use, can compass with the aid of two
or one, as the Country requires, an Aere or two in a day. Threescore ordinary
Country laborers, can hardly dig an Acre at two Spades, whereof I have made
trial. If a Husbandman appoint thirty Acres for Wheat, which is no great
proportion, it will require threescore men to dig it, and twenty women or
children to set it. If one employ fourscore for seven weeks space, which will
be the least time, accompting change of weathers, what shall his neighbor
Farmors do? depend upon the favor of the laborers for having Corn or no
Corn? But if it be well considered, it will appear, that if a Parish have
three thousand Acres of arable, the laborers inhabitants cannot compass 100.
I dare affirm not fifty Acres: what then can be the profit to dig and set
some fifty Acres in a Parish? is it possible to equal the sowing of three
thousand, or three hundred Acres? If then it cannot be used with any general
good to the Commonwealth, it is not to be preferred before the Plough, nor to
be bruted as a matter of that consequent.

The ground must be dug at a Spade, a Spade and a half or two Spades. If
most profitable, then two Spades. If two Spades, then will the ground, being
made loose so deep as it can afford nutriment to the roots of the Wheat at
any time, yield at one time his full vigor, so as I cannot understand, but that
the second crop will be poor, and the third none at all. For soil to
supply, it cannot be but to small parcels, and that to no purpose, except
there be threescore load upon an Acre, and that well turned in with the old
earth. For a Spade and a half, which is the fittest depth, because Spades are
made to make it but one work, it admits small or no difference. For a spade
depth, I confidently set down a subsequent use of the Plough, of better profit
then that. When the second crop is taken after the Spade, at two, or one and a
half depth, it being double weeded every crop, so as neither grass grows
upon the supersicies, nor life remains within the earth, what then shall be
done with it? It will remain like a Gardiners ground, out of the which the
Gardener by often digging has taken the heart: which I desire to be examined of
them, to know what gifts they have, to extract the virtue out of the earth, and
after a third croppe of that ground, that at the first was covered with dung,
what profit they have left to the owner? On the contrary, the Plough affords
three crops, and then yields upon the rest some profit for Catle, and so
every year continues his labor and increase, whereas the other cannot to
any purpose yield above two crops in four years, except extraordinarily
helped. So it leaves the Commonwealth destitute of the continual profit. And it
is not the glut of plenty, but the ordinary increase that maintains the
Commonwealth.

In some grounds digging is of small or no use: as in stiff Clay a very
general earth: Light Sand: Grauelly grounds: or such grounds, as at half a
Spade depth affords a barren earth. The Clay will not be broken: if it could,
it would yield no such increase. The light Sand, will afford his full profit,
as well after the Plough, as any labor whatsoever. The stony ground will
require infinite labor, and yield no better profit. The ground that has a
barren earth at half a Spade, can only be used by the Plough. So these
containing the greatest quantities of our arable grounds in England, and these
not in that kind to be used with profit answerable to the charge: I affirm,
that the Plough is to be preferred.

The ground, wherein the Spade is employed, must be dug, set, weeded twice,
vpheld, being set divided in beds if so profitable, and it must be kept a
Month before Harvest. The charge of the digging of an Acre will amount to
three pound, more if it come to a general use: The setting, thirteen
shillings and four pence: The weeding twice, the first time, thirteen
shillings and four pence: The second, six shillings and eight pence. The
upholding it with rayles on the out sides, as good huswiues do their Onions,
or as Gardiners do their Pease, will be a charge in some Countries at the
least of one pound six shillings and eight pence the Acre. It must be kept a
Month, which for a youth at four shillings the week meat and drink,
comes to sixteen shillings, I say it must be kept, because no grounds are so
rich to afford it so plentifully as those that adioyne to dwelling housen, nor
none so convenient to be helped as them, then is it of necessity that the Birds
will lie upon it with great prejudice, therefore it must be kept. The total
charge, is at the least six pound thirteen shillings and four pence upon an
Acre, besides the rent of the grounds, Understanding this, I demand where the
Husbandmen be, that now living upon so excessive racked rents, can disbursse
the charge of many Acres. Besides, there is a necessity in this work, where
so many must be employed, of a Bailey of sufficiency, whose charge is to be
thought upon by the way.

The charge of the Spade you have heard, and every man knows the charge of
the Plough. For the inconveniences of the Spade, it is more subject to weeds.
For we see the richer the ground, the more weedie; and the more pliable and
gentle the mould is, the weeds more abound, as it is manifest in Gardens, so
as it cannot be otherwise, but that in a wet season the weeds will ouergrow
the Corn, and in many years not possible to be helped. For it being in ear,
the weeders will do more hurt then good: and it is the wet after it comes in
ear, that also causes the weed that choketh the Corn: this every
experienced man knows. Yet to those that have set and must weed, I persuade
the end of March, and the beginning of April for their first time, and at that
first time, I persuade the doing of it thoroughly. It is more subject to be
blasted and smutten, for that by the freeness of the ground, it will be sooner
in ear: yea, so soon as at the beginning of May it will show it self, being
then subject to the frosts and dewes of that season, the loss whereof witness
the Corn in the Marshes. By birds I know it will receive great prejudice,
which will be so sensible, as with the time, we will in our rich grounds by
our housen, return to sowing roots. As for the ledging, I cannot but profess
that only that will discourage all affecters of this nouoltie, for many
stalks will come out of one root, every stalk will be slender and long,
every ear will be heavier and longer then ordinary, or else, no
possibility of such increase as is talked for, and it must be exoeeding
rank. If a smaller stalk, longer, heavier ^^red, and thicker set then
ordinary, how is it possible to be vpheld? Experience will teach, that the
least wet in Summer, will cause a dislike of the Spade and reuocation of the
Plough, who comes not so soon into ear, who is stronger stalked, not so
long, heavy, nor so thick set. Also, I know the place within twentienliles of
London, where this last year for all the temper of it, that set Wheat, did
ledge and come to small or no profit. The Corn that is set, is more subject to
the mould, Mouse and worm: for the ground being lighter, they have the freer
passage in the earth, and it must maintain a Mould-catcher, if used in any
quantity. The difference in my understanding, between setting and sowing is:
That in sowing, the Birds will pick up some of the Corns at seed time, and
the grass will prejudice the Corn in coming up. The Birds (they say) takes
away much of the Corn sown, but none of that set; I admit that, but what part
of the Corn is it? is it any but the loose Corn? if sown timely in the
year, if late, I confess the Crows will scrape some small quantity out of
the ground: but if it be sown under Furrow; then is it every way as safe as
that which is set, and where it is not, the proportion of sowing is three
bushels upon an Acre in good ground, and for setting half a bushel or a
pecke, as some would have it. That being so, it cannot be but upon every
Acre, where three bushels are sown, that there will a bushel remain to come
to perfection, so as the Birds cannot be of that prejudice, as to make it seem
nothing in comparison of the Spade. But if sown before Michaelmas under
furrow, then is it as safe from Birds as that which is set. For the grass a
fallow kills it, and leaves it upon as good terms. Also, it may be raked off
at much less charge then buried by digging. I must confess, that there is a
great fault committed in England, for sparing a little charge in weeding;
especially in good grounds. Yet there are that take up the defense; that so
they want the after Pasture, the leaving of the Fogge on the ground there to
rot and be as new compost. Also, the grass after his season of cutting,
sends down into the earth again that nutriment which it received, which may
be observed in the omitting to cut Meadows in their due time. But these are
answered: for in being not weeded, if the year prove wet, the Corn is at
loss: if dry, the increase will be double, especially in rich grounds, as by
experience you shall find: use it, and persuade the use of it, how slender so
ever the crop seem to be, and of what nature so ever the ground be. I affirm
therefore, that an Acre of ground turned up before Christmas, so as it may lie
in a Winter fallow, then in May compost to the equal goodness of the ground,
set and Ploughed cross, and laid in a Summer fallow, after stirred, and then
Ploughed and sown under forrow three weeks before Michaelmas, will yield an
equal crop with the Spade, and exceed it, in that it will afford three crops
one after another, and the other but one to any purpose. I will not disgrace a
proof I mean to make trial of for Barley. And that is to give to a piece of
ground four earthes, every one deeper then other, having a Plough for the
purpose. After two of which, to break and level the ground with a great Ox
harrow, which I persuade to al good husbands for Summer grain. After the other
two, to rake away the grass that the light Harrow leaves till it be as level
as a Garden, and then set it, which being discreetly used, will not exceed
above ten shillings more charge upon an Acre, by the overplus of the grain
that is sown: and so I doubt not; but to have as great a quantity (always
provided, that I take care to weed it) as he that diggeth and sets it. I
conceit well, that when a piece of ground is clean out of heart by Ploughing,
and the earth under the Plough, co^rinueth as good as that above, that then
this houeltie be used as being there of best use. Yet a Plough may so be made
and handled, as it may go deeper by half a foot then ordinary, yea a foot,
proportioning the strength of the Teame and Plough together. I have persuaded
some very eager to set Wheat, that they should do it in the beginning of
March next if the ground be rich as it ought to be; thereby to prevent the
smut, the weed, the length of the straw, and so ledging and I hope of their
having a good increase: for the best crop that ever I saw, was a Summer crop of
wheat in a rich ground. Besides, I except not against beds of Corn vpheld by
those that love novelties, for I know that without some strengthening it will
ledge and come to nothing. And I advise all those that this year has been at
great charges in digging and setting, that in the latter end of March in a dry
time, they get wood, and either rail their grounds through at six foot
distaunce, as Onions are for seed, or set sticks clean thorough the ground
for the Corn to rest upon, as Pease have: Or else at every four foot in
breadth, set rows of sticks which will be sufficient. But all things
considered, I resolve that the old good Husbandry of the Plough is most
profitable for the fields, and the later Huswifrie of roots and necessary
provision for the house, most profitable for the Gardens.

It may be, that some will object that hitherto I have erred from the state of
the question, proving only the Plough of better use then the Spade, for the
general or particular good; whereas I ought to have proved also setting of
Corn to be inferior to sowing. For that it is setting, which is specially to
be regarded in this new art and not digging. I answer, that if digging were
not as the soul of this question, and setting but as the body, I would never
have set pen to paper. But in all reasonable understanding, it is the
loosning of the ground, whereby the earth may yield nutriment to the roots,
and the roots increase and take strength so easily in the earth that yields
so great increase. As for setting, it is nothing but form at such a distance,
and such a depth: The distance they say of four or five inches: the depth
three or four inches. The Gardener, a certain time after his Parpsnips and
Carrats are come up, if they appear to thick, takes out the smallest and
sets again: so may also the Corn be used, where it is too thick, by those
that have nothing to do. But if the thinness of the Corn cause the profit,
it may be sown as thin as set, only not so just at a distance, yet as
profitable. For the depth, I know no difference, between that and sowing under
furrow: it rests only in the distance. And that a Bushel orderly sown
under furrow upon an Acre that is dug, will yield as great profit as half a
bushel set, I challenge any man to the practice. Besides, I vouch him
authority for the increase of sowing, such as neither his reading nor practice
shall ever show me the like for setting. I have no Hebrew for the Text; but I
have all translations agreeing. Genes. 26.12. Isaacke sowed in Gerar of the
Philistines, and found in the same year an hundred fold. And till this place
be answered, I justify the true state of the question to be between digging
and Ploughing, concluding ever, that at much less charge to as great profit,
the Plough may be used by good husbands.

The affirmed errors.
That it will yield thirty, or twenty quarters upon an Acre.
I See no probability; for if true, it would far exceed any increase of any
root, or whatsoever sown or set by the Gardeners, and have yielded the profit
with a great deal less charge and trouble, but they have found the contrary.
Besides, an Acre timely sown after four earthes under furrow, in a very
fertile ground has not exceeded six quarters, though the stalk has been as
thick on the ground as any can be that is set, only presuppose the ear not
so long. But I cannot be persuaded, that the ear set will be twice as long,
as the ear sown: if it would, it cannot then exceed twelve quarters. But is
it not probable, that much of the Corn sown under furrow lies as deep, as
well rooted, the earth as loose, and comes up in as many sprouts, and so
becomes as many stalks and heads, as the other? It does certainly, and I
can show it by my own practice; and therefore pardon my belief. The only
difference is, that no pains nor care will be omitted for digging, setting,
soyling, weeding, and preserving a piece of ground adjoining to a dwelling
house, whereas the like cannot be of many Acres in the fields.

That Corn that is sown after or about Alhollowtide, cannot send forth so
many stalks by reason of the clods.
BY reason of the weather I confess in general, not in every particular. But
in comparing their worthes, let us sort them for times: for otherwise the
dispute is betwixt ill husbandry with the Plough in sowing, and good
husbandry with the Spade in setting. The later winter Corn is sown,
generally the worse it prospers, this every Husbandman knows. Yet I know
grounds in Barkshire and other places, that will prosper much better, being
sown in dirt after Alhollowtide then before. But that fallow grounds with
reasonable store of clods, should be prejudiced by the clods, I deny, for they
yield a double benefit to the Corn. They keep it warm, defending it from the
blastes and frostes of Winter: they break generally in the best season to
comfort it; which is toward the Spring, and so yield a new earth to the Corn.
But if the clods offend any man, I beseech him take me for his president. I
drew an Ox Harrow over my last Wheat fallow, before the last earth, and
thereby I brake the clods all to dust, but I repented me, and so may be do that
follows me.

Black and rich mould out of Vaults and Cellers, laid upon Gardens for want of
the Sun, will make them barren.
Do we not see and know that the Sun is prejudicial to the superficies of
the earth in extracting the virtue out of it; and therefore we lay not in the
heat of Summer our soil upon our grounds, least the radical moisture should
be extracted? Does not a new earth turned up, if of equal goodness with the
first crust, yield a better increase then the first? Why are grubbed grounds
better for Corn then other, where the Sun has not come for many years. Is
not the bottomes of dung heaps most profitable, because the Sun has
extracted the virtue from the upper parts? What benefit of the Sun has the
earth of pits, ditches and ponds, which lie covered with water? What has the
Marle and Chalk, dug out of deep pits to manure grounds, Cummultis alijs,
etc. This I had thought to have passed over as being impertinent to our
Species, but that it crosses a true received observation, very profitable in
my understanding. And that is, that there is no Manor in England, either
subsisting wholly of barren grounds, or in part: but has a Marle, as they
term it: that is a fat earth, as I term it. (Be it of what kind or color so
ever) Chalk or other stone, turfe, or such like, either to be burned or
unburned, that will help the grounds as much or rather more then dung, and
this to be dug out of his proper ground upon trial at a fadam, two, three,
or four. Also, there is much good to be done by observing the difference of
earthes, in making the earth of one field supply the defect of another, and so
interchangably they may be tempered to an excellent benefit.

If any except against my idle hours, and make opposition in general or
particular, I profess to press the arguments no further, as being no part of
my profession. But therein upon equal terms, I will not be wanting to
answer whilst I live.

FINIS.

