CERTAIN SERMONS, FIRST PREACHED, AND AFTER PUBLISHED at several times,

By M. THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor at Rotherhith.

AND NOW GATHERED together into one Volume: The several Texts and Titles
whereof are set down in the leaf following.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND and ANNE GRIFFIN. 1637.

TITLES AND TEXTS.
PART I.
David's Instructor.
PSALM. 34. verse. 11. Come, Children, hearken unto me, I will teach you the
fear of the Lord. Page 1
The Christian Man's Care.
MATTHEW. chap. 6. ver. 33. Seek first the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you. Page 27
The Spiritual Watch: or, Christ's general Watchword.
MARK. chap. 13. v. 37. What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch. Page 61
True Contentment, in the Gain of Godliness, with Its Self-sufficiencie.
1 TIMOTH. chap. 6. ver. 6. Godliness is great gain, with Self-sufficiencie.
Page 127
The Joy of the Just: with The Signs of such.
PSALM. 97. verse. 11. Light is sown for the righteous; and joy for the upright
in heart. Page 175
Jacobs Thankfulness to God, For Gods Goodness to Jacob.
GENES. chap. 32. v. 10. I am not worthy of all thy mercies, and all thy truth,
which thou have showed unto thy servant: for with my staff came I over this
Jordan; and now am I become two troops. Page 257
David's Remembrancer.
PSALM. 13. v. 1. How long, O Lord? will thou forget me for ever? how long will thou hide thy face away from me? Page 311
PART II.
Noaes Obedience; with, The Ground of it; or, His Faith, Fear and Care.
HEBR. chap. 11. verse. 7. By Faith, Noa being warned by God of things as yet
not seen, moved with Fear, prepared an Ark, for the saving of his household.
Page 1
Englands Delivery from the Spanish Invasion.
PSALM. 48. v. 7. As with an East wind thou breakest the ships of Tarsis; so
were they destroyed. 8. As we have heard, so have we seen, in the City of
the Lord, in the City of our God: God will establish it for ever. Selah. Page
29
A Spark toward the kindling of Sorrow for Sion.
AMOS chap. 6. v. 6. But they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.
Page 47
Gods Parley with Princes: with An Appeal from them to him.
PSALM. 82. v. 6. I have said, Ye are Gods, and Sons of the most high, all
of you. 7. But ye shall die like men, and fall as one of the Princes. 8.
Arise, O God; judge thou the earth: for thou inheritest all Nations. Page 71
A Marriage Prayer.
GENES. chap. 24. v. 12. And he said; O Lord God of my Master Abraham, I
beseech thee, send me good speed this day, and show kindness unto my Master
Abraham. 13. Behold, I stand here by the well of water; and the daughters of
the men of the City come out to draw water. 14. Now let it come to pass, that
the Damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may
drink, and she shall say, Drink you, and I will give thy Camels drink also;
let the same be she, that thou have appointed for thy servant Isaak: and
thereby shall I know, that thou show kindness to my Master. Page 119
A Good Wife, Gods Gift.
PROVE. chap. 19. v. 14. Houses and Riches are the Inheritance of the Fathers:
but a prudent Wife is of the Lord. Page 135
A Wife in Deed.
PROVE. chap. 18. v. 22. He that finds a Wife, finds Good; and obtains
Favor of God. Page 147
Marriage Duties.
COLOS. chap. 3. v. 18. Wives, submit your selves unto your Husbands, as it is
comely in the Lord. 19. Husbands, love your Wives, and be not bitter to them.
Page 185
Paul's Desire of Departure: and Deaths Advantage.
PHIL. c. 1. v. 23. Desiring to depart, and to be with Christ; which is by much
more the better. Page 217
The Benefit of a Good Name, and a Good end.
ECCLES. chap. 7. v. 1. A good Name is better than a good ointment; and the day
of Death than the day of ones Birth. Page 237
Abraham's Decease.
GENESIS c. 25. v. 8. And Abraham gave up the Ghost, and died, in a good old age,
an old man, and full of years; and he was gathered to his people. P. 263
Jeroboams Sons Decease.
1 KINGS chap. 14. v. 17. The Child died. Page 291
Christian Constancy crowned by Christ.
APOCAL. chap. 2. v. 10. Be thou faithful unto Death; and I will give thee a
Crown of Life. Page 317
(...) David's Instructor.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE VISITATION OF the Free-Schoole at Tunbridge in Kent
by the Wardens of the Worshipful Company of Skinners:

By THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND. 1637.

To the Right Worshipful and much Honored Sir Thomas Smith Knight, Governor
of the famous Company of Merchants trading to the EAST INDIES, etc. Long life
and health here, with eternal happiness elsewhere.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL;
BEing requested lately by my kind Friends, the Wardens of the Worshipful
Company of Skinners, to assist them in their Visitation of the free School at
Tunbridge, founded long since by that worthy Knight, of blessed memory, Sir
Andrew Judde, your Grandfather, and committed to the charge and oversight of
that well-deserving Society; I made choice of such a portion of Scripture there
to treat of, as seemed not altogether unfitting an occasion of that kind.
After the handling whereof, being then presently solicited by some, and since
further importuned by others, to make these my weak labors more public, as
not unlikely (so they deemed) to do some further good; I was at length drawn,
regarding more their opinion, than mine own conceit thereof, as well knowing
it to be but a tumultuary work, amids many distractions hastily peeced
together; and to give them satisfaction therein, that seemed so desirous of it;
to let it go abroad, and make trial what benefit either Teacher, or Scholar,
or other might make of it. This resolved on, I began to bethink my self,
observing the usual manner of the times, whom I should make choice of for the
patronizing of it. In all respects none seemed so fit as your self, whom I
have therefore made bold to address it unto. The School was first erected and
endowed by your Worships Ancestor. And you have worthily built upon his
foundation, and added liberally to his gift. So that through your munificence
it is very likely to flourish, and not to come behind some of those that be of
chief note. Your bounty herein, and in other works of the like nature, is the
rather to be regarded, for that you do not (as the manner is of the most,
unwilling to part with ought, till they must needs leave all;) defer wholly
your well-doing to your deaths-bed, or your dying day; but bend your self
thereunto, while you may yet surviving your own donation, your self see
things settled in a due course, and receive comfort by view of the fruit and
benefit that may thereby redound both to Church and Commonweal. And
certainly, to omit, that Beneficium nisi a volente non datur. Sen. de ben. l.
5. c. 19. Beneficium est quod qui^ dedit, cum posset and non dare. Ibid. l. 3.
c. 19.
the good that men do in their life time is a surer note of true bounty, than
that they do at their decease; as Legatur Ambr. exhort. ad poenit. and August.
homil. 41.
there is greater evidence of sincere repentance, in the abandoning of vice,
while men have liberty and ability to continue the practice of it, than in
leaving of sin then, when sin it self leaves them, and they can no longer
follow it: Howsoever the benefit to others may be equal in either, to the
Donor himself in the former is the comfort far greater. Good done at our end
is like a Lantern borne after us, that directs them that come after us, but
affords us little light; whereas the good done in our life time is like a
light borne before us, that both Beneficium dando accepit, qui digno dedit. P.
Syrus.
benefiteth them and us also alike, imparting light equally unto either. Yea,
of such beneficence I may well say more: it benefiteth the giver in diverse
respects much more than the taker; it is far greater pleasure to the bestower,
than it is to the receiver. Act. 20.35.
It is a more blessed thing, says our Savior, to give than to take. Yea
(...). Epicurus. (...). Plut. de philosopb. apud duces disser. Non honestius
tantum, sed and jucundius est beneficium dare quam accipere. etc. Itaque Sen.
de ben. l. 1. c. 1. Malim non recipere beneficia, quam non dare.
to give than to take, says the Heathen-man, it is the pleasanter of the
twain: to bestow a benefit upon another, than to receive a benefit from
another, it is more delightsome to any man of a free and ingenuous disposition.
So that, to pass by the religious consideration of the rich and royal reward
and recompense of well-doing from God and with God, which may be alike unto
either; the very light of Nature shows, that in true Beneficence there is
more pleasure and contentment, and consequently more comfort and benefit even
for the present, to the giver than to the taker: that which is a great part of
it, wanting unto those, that defer their well-doing, though they do never so
well then, till their decease. You, worthy Sir, do otherwise, and long may you
live so to do, to the increase of your joy and comfort here, and the
furtherance of your account and reckoning elsewhere. With which wish I seal
all up, that I be not over-tedious and troublesome to your Worship, amids your
other manifold more serious and weighty affairs; and requesting only your
favorable acceptance of this sorry trifle, rest,

Your Worships to be commanded in the Lord, THOMAS GATAKER.

DAVID'S Instructor.
PSALM. 34.11. Come, Children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of
the Lord.


ALL (...). 2. Tim. 3.16.
Scripture, says the Apostle, is divinely inspired, and is profitable to
instruct. And Prove. 30.5
Every word of God, says Agur, is pure: even Psalm. 12.6.
as pure as gold or silver that has past seven times through the fire in the
furnace.

But yet, as some gold and silver is finer than other; and some golden vessels
are more useful than others are: so between Scripture and Scripture (though
all pure, precious, and profitable) there is great difference: some is of
greater excellency, and of more ordinary use.

And Licet omnis Scriptura divina Dei gratiam spiret, praecip^e tamen dulcis
est Psalmorum liber. Ambr. praesat. in Psalm. (...). Basil. praesat. in Ps.
Psalmorum liber quaecunque utilia sunt ex omnibus continet. August.
no one Book of Scripture more excellent, or Psalmus omnibus and ubique prasto
est Lege Ambros. Aug Ruffin. and Euthym. praefat. in Psalm.
of more frequent use both in public and private than this of the Psalms;
wherein the holy men of God, as they Psalm. 42.4. and 102. tit. 1. Sam. 1.15.
power out their souls unto him, so they portrait and paint them out unto us.

Among the rest of the Psalms, some of them there are, about which the Holy
Ghosts pleasure was, that the Penmen thereof should take more pains than
usual, and more Art than ordinary should be showed, in the framing and
contriving of them: And where he uses more Art, we may well expect more
excellence; where they have taken most pains in teaching us, there should we
use most diligence in learning that, that is taught us.

Of this kind are the 25. the 37. the 119. and this 34. Psalm; Psalmi
Abcedarii. Aug. ad Psalm. 118. in fine.
composed according to the order of the Hebrew Alphabet, the verses of them
beginning, as in Acrostichall Poems, with the letters thereof in their vulgar
and usual order: partly Vt memoriae consuleret Muscul. in Psalm. 119.
to help memory; and partly, Vt quemadmodum parvulorum ingenia primis
literarum cleme^tis assuescunt usum dicendi assumere; ita nos etiam usum
vivendi discamus. Ambros. in Psalm. 118.
that even Children and learners, together with their first Elements of other
learning, might have an Alphabet of piety and godliness taught them.

This Psalm, one of those thus artificially framed, is a Psalm consisting
partly of Verse. 1.2.
Celebration, of praise and thanksgiving to God; and partly of Verse. 3, 5, 7,
8.
Exhortation and instruction to us.

The words propounded for the subject matter of my present discourse, are
parcel of the latter part. For in Verse. 9.10.
the verses next before-going, the Psalmist had incited men to the fear of
God: and in these words he undertaketh to teach them this Fear.

In the words there are these four parts: Invitatio, Compellatio, Exhortatio,
and Pollicitatio.

1. An Invitation; Come.

2. A Compellation; Children.

3. An Exhortation; Hearken to me.

4. A Pollicitation or a promise; and therein again these four particulars:

The Agent, the Act, the Object, the Subject.

1. The Agent; King David himself, the Penman of this Psalm; I.

2. The Act; teaching or instructing: I will teach.

3. The Object, or persons to be taught; Children; whom before he called upon;
You.

4. The Subject Matter of his teaching, that wherein he would instruct them;
the Fear of the Lord.

And of these parts and points in order, as briefly as conveniently I may.

prompta Invitatio, a free Invitation: affording us this Lesson, (to omit all
others) that

mementoes in the word of God: Eccles. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator: and, Deuteronomy. 9.7.
Remember, forget not: etc. so many Caveats; 1 Timothy 4.16.
Cave tibi; Take heed to thy self: and, Deuteronomy. 4.23.
Cavete vobis, Take ye heed to your selves, etc. so many Invitations; Esai.
2.3.
Come, let us go up to Gods house: and, Esai. 2.5.
Come, let us walk in the light of the Lord: and in this place, Come,
Children; hearken to me: etc.

All needful, and all little enough:

Job. 11.12.
Man by nature, says Zophar, is like a wild Asses Colt: as an Asses foale,
for rudeness; a wild Asses, for unrulinesse: untamed and untractable, Ier.
2.24.
as the wild Ass in the wilderness.

Prove. 15.24.
The way of the wise, says wise Solomon, is upward. We are bred in Hell: (
(...). Ephesians. 2.3.
by Nature vessels of wrath:) and we must climb up to Heaven: (...). Hesiod.
Et, Ardua virtutis via. Horat. carm. l. 3. ode 24. Sed and Ovid. de Pont. 3.
eleg. tendit in ardua virtus. Et Silius bell. Pun. l. 2. Ardua virtutem prosert
via. Et, celsum virtus petit ardua collem. Lege Senec. epist. 123.
a long way and a steep. We are Men's cum ad meliora enititur, quasi contra
ictum sluminis conatur, etc. Greg. Romans moral. l. 11. c. 28.
like those, that row against wind and tide; we strive against the stream
and current of corrupt nature, of evil custom; we struggle against the
strong counterblasts of bitter scoffs, and bad counsel. We have need
therefore of all kind of encouragement.

2 Thessalonians 3.13. Galat. 6.9.
And you, my brethren, says the Apostle, be not weary of well doing. We are
too prone, even the best of us, to wax weary on this way, to grow slack at this
work. It is true of us, that Alphius foenerator, cujus meminit Horat. epod. 2.
Alphius the Usurer sometime said of his Clients, Optima nomina non appellando
mala fieri, Alphius dixisse verissime fertur. Colum. de re rust. l. 1. c. 7.
Even good Debtors will grow slack Pay-masters, if they be let alone, if they
be not now and then called upon.

Hebr. 10.24.
Let us observe either other, says the Apostle, (...).
to whet on, or to egg on, to love and good works. So the Holy Ghost
describes the manner of Gods Saints, quickening, calling on, and encouraging
either other. Esai. 2.3.
And many people shall go, and say; Come, and let us go up to the Mountain
of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob: and he will teach us his ways,
and we will walk in his paths. And, Esai 2.5.
Come, O ye house of Jacob, and let us walk in the light of the Lord. And
again; Zech. 8.21.
The people of one City shall go to another, and say; Up, and let us pray
before the Lord, and seek the Lord of hosts: and I will go my self too.

Now this, as it is the duty of all, Application.
so more specially of those that converse familiarly together; most especially
of those that have care and charge of others, Ministers and Magistrates in
public, Parents, Schoolemasters, and Masters of Families in private, (...)
to whet up their inferiors, (it is the term that Deuteronomy. 6.7. Sic Prove. 27.17.
Moses uses, and the Apostle imitateth him in) to be often calling upon those
that be under their charge, and inciting of them to those things that be good
Remembering, that, as the Heathen man says that those that correct but instruct
not, are (...). Plu. praecept. polit.
like those that snuff the light often, but put no oil into the lamp; so those
that instruct but incite not, are like those that put in oil enough, yea
enough it may be to drown the light, (that which may often soon be done,) but
are not careful or mindful to raise and pull up the week, which unless it
be in due time still done, the light will of it self soon decay, and wax dim,
though there be no defect of liquor to feed it withal.

2 Pet. 1.12.
I will not be negligent, says Peter, to put you in mind of these things,
though you have knowledge, though you know the truth already, and be
established in it. Yea, Romans 15.14.15.
Though I be persuaded of you, says the Apostle Paul, that you are full of
goodness, and of all knowledge, and able to admonish one another: yet I am
bold by writing to put you in mind of these things. Yea, Philip. 3.1.
It is not tedious to me to go over the same things often with you; and it is
the safest course for you. So that Fortibus assuevit tubicen prodesse, suoque
Duxbene pugnantes incitatore viros. Ovid. de Pont. lib. 3. eleg. 1.
even those that are best grounded, that have abundance of sound knowledge,
that are full of grace and goodness, that are the greatest proficients, and
forwardest Scholars in Christ's School, yet may stand often in need of being whet
up, and put on: much more such as are but rude and raw, as are but novices and
dullards, as are scarce, it may be, yet of the first form in Christ's School.
Plantas tenellas frequentius adaquare proderit. Primas. in Philip. and Greg.
Romans moral. l. 27. c. 14.
Tender plants and new planted have need often to be watered; they are in danger
else to windle and wither away. And Gods grace and good things in us are like a
dull sea-coale fire, which if it be not now and then blown or Hinc (...)
monemur, 2. Tim. 1.6.
stirred up, though there be no want of Fuel, yet will of it self at length
dye and go out.

prompta Invitatio, so blanda Compellatio: as a free Invitation, so a sweet and
loving Compellation: Children.

The Name of Children is a most sweet Name, savouring strongly of Love; and
used therefore so often by Ioh. 13.23. and 21.7.
that Disciple of Love, and of Christ's love, in that Epistle of his that
breaths nothing but Love: 1. John 3.17. and 4.7.
Little Children, let us love one another, not in word and tongue, but in deed
and truth: and, 1. Ioh. 3.7.
Little Children, let no man deceive you: And, 1. Ioh. 5.21.
Little Children, keep your selves from Idols, etc. And it shows what loving
affection ought to be between Teacher and taught; even such as is between
natural Parents and Children. That which the Apostle Paul so often, and in so
lively manner expresses in himself, when he compares himself, sometime to a
Father; 1 Thessalonians. 2.11.
I exhorted you and besought you, as a Father his Children: sometime to a
Mother; Galat. 4.19.
My little Children, of whom I travail again till Christ be formed in you:
sometime to a Nurse; 1 Thessalonians. 2.7.
We were gentle among you, as a Nurse cherishes her Children.

And great reason is there that so it should be:

Exodus 20.12. Deuteronomy. 5.16.
God has given the name of Parents unto them: he has comprehended all
Superiors under that head.

And surely, if other masters have the name of Father given them: as 2. King.
5.13.
Naamans servants give it him: Schoolmasters much more. They are in some
kind, under God, (to use the Apostles term) Hebr. 12.9.
patres spirituum, the Fathers of men's Spirits. Our Parents are instruments
under God, for the producing of our Bodies the baser part: they are instruments
under him, for the framing and moulding of our minds and souls, the better and
more principal part of us.

Paul says of the Corinthians, that 1 Cor. 4.15.
he was their Father, because by his Ministry he had begotten them to God: so
such Schoolmasters as are careful and conscionable of their duty in that
kind, may well say of their Scholars that they are their children in Christ,
as the same Paul styles (...). 1 Timo. 1.2. 1 Tit. 1.4.
Timothy and Titus elsewhere; since that many (no doubt) of them receive the
first seeds and grains, and beginnings of faith and fear of God, and other
saving and sanctifying grace from them.



Princeps pius nunquam carebit liberis: Totius est regni pater. Princeps
abundat ergo foelicissimus Tot liberis, quot subditis. Th. Morus in epigram.
he has as many Sons as he has subjects, and is therefore as a kind and
loving Father to them: so should the Schoolmasters make account that he has
in some sort, (...). Homer. de Vlysse Odyss. (...). Xenophon Cyripaed. l. 8.
as many Children as Scholars that be under his charge; and therefore carry
himself toward them in kind and loving manner, even as if he were a natural
Father unto them.

Which kind and loving carriage, or Fatherly affection, yet is not so to be
interpreted, Caution.
as if it were utterly to exclude and cut off all just reproof and due
correction, when occasions shall require it. That was the fault of 1 Samuel 2.22.
Levis objurgatio non satisfecerat disciplina. Sulpit. hist. sacr. l. 1.
Eli, and 1 King. 1.6.
David too, though worthy men of God otherwise; and it proved 1 Samuel 4.18.
a breake-necke to the one, and 2 Samuel 15.12. 1 King. 1.5.
an heart-sore to the other. Prove. 29.15.
The rod and correction give instruction, says Solomon, but a child left to
himself is the confusion of her that bare him. And, Prove. 13.24.
He that spares the rod, hates his Son, but he that loves him, chastneth
him betimes. Mango blanditur, ut corrumpat; Pater minatur, ut corrigat. Aug. in
1. Joan. tract. 7.
The seducer speaks the child fair to mar him; the Father handles him
roughly to amend him: Pius est seriendo; crudelis esset parcend^. Idem de temp.
94.
He is kind in correcting him; he were cruel in sparing him. (...)
Aristotel. ethic. Nicom. b. 2.
Correction is a kind of cure. A fair hand, we say commonly, makes a foul
wound. Quid tam pium quam medicus ferens ferramentum? saevit in vulnus ut homo
sanetur: quia si vulnus palpetur, homo perditur. Aug. de verb. Dom. 15.
The Surgion searches the wound to the quick, that he may save the man's life:
for he should endanger the one, if he dealt but superficially with the other.
(...), ( 1 Cor. 15.55.) (...). Basil. in ascet. q. 4.
He is not cruel that diggeth and gasheth the flesh, to get out a sting, or a
splinter, that will not out otherwise: he is cruel rather, that (out of a
fond pitifulness) lets it alone: Nor he cruel, that gives correction,
when it is requisite and needful, but he rather that then with holds it.

Reproof therefore, yea correction too, may well stand with Love. Apoc. 3.19.
As many as I love, I rebuke, says our Savior. And, God, says Hebr. 12.6.
the Apostle after Prove. 3.12.
Solomon, whom he loves, he corrects; and he scourges every Son that
he receives. Molestus est and Medicus furenti phrenetico, and Pater
indisciplinato filio, illeligando, ille cadendo, sed ambo diligendo. Si autem
illos negligant, and perire permittant, ista potius mansuetudo falsa, crudelis
est. Aug. epist. 50.
The Physician is troublesome to the frantic Patient, and the Father to the
unruly Child; the one in binding him, the other in beating him: and yet both
do what they do out of Love.

Yea severitie and sharpness may in some cases well agree with it. Tit. 1.13.
Rebuke them (...), rigide. Beza in not.
sharply, says Paul to Titus of some, that they may be found sound in the
Faith. And, to use an Heathen man's comparison; (...), etc. Dion Chrysostom. orat
78.
A Surgion had he two persons to cut for the stone, the one his dear Friend,
the other a mere Stranger, would he be so foolish, think we, out of love
and favor to his friend, as to cut him with a blunter tool or razor than he
would cut the other with?

It is not meant therefore, when kind and loving carriage is required of
Instructers and Teachers, that they should not therefore either correct or
reprove: But that Sive taceas, dilectione taceas: sive clames, dilectione
clames: sive partas, dilectione parcas: sive corrigas, dilectione corrigas. Ad
disciplinam fiant omnia dictante charitate. Omnia de charitatis procedant
radice. Dilige, and quod vis fac. Aug. in 1. Joan. tract. 7.
whether they teach, or instruct, or reprove, or correct, they 1 Cor. 16.14
do, according to the Apostles rule, all in Love, and in loving manner: That
they strive in the first place -- Veluti pueris dant crustula blandi Doctores
elementa velint ut discere prima. Hor. sat. 1.
by all mild and gentle usage to win them, and by fair words and rewards to
entice and allure, as (...) Alliciet Deus Iapetum Genesis 9.27. Et Hosh. 2.14.
Alliciam eam, and loquar ad cor ejus.
God himself is wont to deal with us. And again, when they shall be
constrained to take rougher courses with them; yet that then also they Et
severitatem mansuetudo condiat, and mansuetudinem, ne dissoluta sit,
districtionis severitas accendat. Greg. Romans in Evang. hom 17. Ne aut
districtio sit rigida, aut pietas remissa. Idem de pastore part. 2. cap. 6.
Remissio non vitians, correptio non cruentans: and severitas etiam
temperamenti, quae non sit tetra, sed tetrica. Sidon. epist. 9. lib. 4. and
Radevic. de gest. Frid. l. 2. Quae sanguinem eff^ndat potius quam effundat.
Tertul. apolog.
temper severity with lenity, and allay the sharpnes of the one with some mild
dash of the other: (...). Galat. 6.1. tanquam membrum luxatum in locum
proprium, ad situm nativum reducite. Strigel. ad Gal.
Restore the offender, says the Apostle, with the spirit of lenity; as (...).
Paul. Aegin.
the Surgion sets and restores a limb dislocated to his proper place and
due site again, with as little pain, as needs must, to the party: Do as
(...). Dion Chrysostom. orat. 33. veluti pueris absinthia tetra medentes cum dare
conantur, prius oras pocula circum Contingunt dulci mellis flavoque liquore, Vt
puerorum aetas improvida ludificetur Labrorum tenus; interea perpotet amarum
Absintbi laticem, deceptaque non capiatur, Sed potius tali facto recereata
valescat. Lucret: de rer. not. l. 4.
those that give Children wormwood or aloes for the worms, they sweeten the
brims of the cup with honey, or mix it with wine or milk, or some other such
sweet thing to make them take it the more willingly, and give them a little
sugar after to sweeten their mouths with again: or as (...). Basil. and
Euthym. praefat. in Psalm. Sapientes medic^, siquando usus poposcerit, ut
austeriora medicamenta aegris offerant mortalibus: ne aeger utilitatem pra
austeritate refugiat, ora ac summitates poculi quo remedium porrigunt, melle
circumlinunt. Aug. ibid.
those that give bitter pills to queesie stomached patients, they wrap them up
in some conserve, or in the pap of an apple, that they may with as little
offense as may be take them in, and the better keep and retain them when they
be down: So order and temper their reproof and their correction, that it may
appear not to proceed from spleen, or grudge, or choler, or some other such
peevish and sinister humor; but that even by the very manner of it, and the
affection showed in it, it may be seen to issue from a loving mind, and to
aim at nothing but the well-doing of the party either corrected or reproved.

In a word, let Teachers and Instructers remember what the Heathen man truly
says, that Nullum est animal morosius homine, quodque art majore tractari
debeat. Sen. de clement. l. 1. c. 17.
there is no living creature more wayward naturally than Man, nor that need to
be managed with more discretion and skill.

1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13.
I beseech you, says the Apostle, that you would take notice of them, that
take pains with you, and that admonish you; and that you would have them in
singular love for their work sake.

The Heathen themselves could say, that Diis, Parentibus, and Praeceptoribus
nihil pro merito posse rependi.
to God, a man's Parents, and his Teachers, sufficient requital could never be
made. And no marvel. For if the Teachers do as they ought, and the Scholars
likewise make that use of them that they should, they may well say of them as
Paul does to Philemon, Philem. 19.
Etiam animam mihi debes, that they owe them their very souls; as having been
a means even Prove. 23.14. Iam. 5.20.
to save their souls. And how ought they to love them from the heart, whom
they owe their very souls unto?

Far be it from any here then, to be like those wicked wretches, whom the
Prophet inveigheth against, Amos 5.16.
that hate those that reprove them: to hate their Instructors, because they are
sometime also necessarily Reprovers or Correctors, to hate them for that, for
which they ought rather to love them. You must not, as Psalm. 32.9.
this our Psalmist speaks, be as Horse or Mule that are without
understanding. Horses and Mules can well endure and are wont Esai. 1.3.
to take notice of those that feed them, and stroke them, and make much of
them; but Iumenta eos calce morsuque appetunt, a quibus eorum curanda vulnera
contrectantur. Aug. epist. 10. and homil. 24.
they cannot endure those that come about them to drench them, or bleed them,
or to meddle with their sores, though they intend nothing therein but their
good: because they have sense, whereby they perceive some present good in the
one; but they have no reason to apprehend any future good in the other.
Creatures endued with reason, must be wiser than they: and love their Teacher,
as well reproving and correcting, when just occasion is, as speaking fair and
commending: as Medicum and urentem and secantem diligimus: quem and ad urendum
ac secandum conducimus Ambr. in Psalm.
men were wont to esteem themselves beholden to the Surgion, as well for
opening the ulcer, and letting out the corrupt matter, as for healing up the
wound again.

They must remember what the wise man says, that Prove. 12.1.
he that hates Instruction and Correction, and so he that hates his
Instructers and Correctors, is a Fool: yea, Prove. 15.10.
he that hates either, shall dye.

Seria exhortatio, a serious Exhortation: Wherein is expressed, the principal
duty of Children, Scholars and Learners, to hearken unto their Parents,
Instructers and Teachers. That for which Solomon so often calls upon those that
he deals with: Prove. 4.1.
Hear, O ye Children, the Instruction of a Father, and give ear to learn
understanding: and, Prove. 4.20.
My Son, hearken unto my words, and incline thine ears to my sayings. And,
Prove. 5.7.
Hear me now therefore, O Children, and hearken unto the words of my mouth,
etc.

And great reason they so should.

Prove. 13.1.
A wise Son, says Solomon, will hearken to his Fathers instruction. And,
Prove. 12.15.
He that hearkneth to good advice is wise. Prove. 3.7. and 26.12. Bis de sipit
qui sibi saepit.
No greater folly in young people, than to think themselves wise enough,
Confilii satis est in me mihi. Arachne apud Ovid. met. l. 6.
able enough to advise and to guide themselves well enough, and to stand in no
need of direction or advice. You know well what the famous sentence so often
cited says: (...). Hesiod. oper. l. 1. and Arist. ethic. l. 1. c. 4. Paucis
animus sui rector optimus. Moneri velle ac posse secundae virtus est. Senec. de
benefic. l. 5. c. 25.
He is the best man that can of himself discern, what is fit and meet to be
done. He is the next him, that can hearken to good advice given him by others:
But he that neither can see what is fit of himself, nor will follow the good
counsel that others shall give, such a one is as an unprofitable limb in the
body, (...). telluris inutile pondus. Homer. Iliad. (...). and Odyss. (...).
and a very burden to the earth that bears him. Children and young people,
since they cannot be in the first rank, (because (...). Sophocl -- seris venit
usus ab annis. Ovid. metam. l. 6. Quisquis senex ad sapientiam pervenit, annis
pervenit. Senec. epist. 68.
age brings experience, and skill requires years:) they must be content to
be in the second, lest they come within compass of the third.

Ezech. 3.7.
They will not hear thee, says God to the Prophet: for they will not hear
me. And surely (...). Philo de Decalog.
the fifth Commandment, (as Philo the Jew well observes, who therefore also
makes it a branch of the first Table, and so divides the Tables equally,
assigning five precepts to either:) it is a mixed Commandment, and differs
somewhat from the rest of those in the second Table; they consider Man as our
neighbor, in nature like us; this as Gods Deputy, standing in his stead, by
him set over us, and in his name, and by his authority, performing offices
about us. And therefore when such instruct and admonish, 2 Cor. 13.3.
God does it by them. Quicquid obedientiae exhibetur, ei exhibetur, qui dicit;
Qui vos audit, me audit. Bern. de grad. obed. Luke 10.19.
When we hearken to them, we hearken to him in them: when we refuse to regard
them, we contemn him in them. Neither can such contempt be cleared from some
taint of impiety.

Auris prima mortis janua, prima aperiatur saluti. Ber. alicubi.
Let the Ear, says Bernard, that was once opened to let in death and
destruction, by harkening to evil counsel, be now set wide open to let in
life and Salvation, by giving ear to good advice. Let your ears with Homer.
Odyss. (...). Sapiens eris, si clauseris aures, quibus ceram parum est obdere.
Firmiori spissamento opus est, quam usum in sociis Vlyxem ferunt. Sen. ep. 31.
Ulysses (to deal with you out of your own learning) be close shut against
the Sirens songs of such as shall Romans 16.18.
by fair words and smooth language, go about to seduce you, and to withdraw
you from that, wherein consists your special good; that shall seek to bring
you out of love with your Instructers, or with those courses that are by them
taken with you for your good. But let your ears be open, and your hearts
pliable to attend unto them, their instructions and admonitions, and Quia utile
est juventutiregi, impositi sunt illi quasi Magistratus domestici, sub quibus
contineretur. Sen. de ben. l. 3. c. 11.
yield your selves wholly unto them to be ruled, guided and directed by them.

There is a blessing of God promised on those that so do: Prove. 8.32.33.
a Blessing of wisdom, a Blessing of long Life. Prove. 15.31.
The ear, says Solomon, that hearkeneth to the instruction of life, shall
lodge among the wise. And, Ephesians. 6.2, 3.
It is the first Commandment, says the Apostle, in the Decalogue, that has a
special promise annexed to it; Exodus 20.12. Deuteronomy. 5.16. Matthew. 15.4. and 19.9.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother; (and Instructers, as we heard before, are as
Parents:) that it may go well with thee, and that thou may be (...).
long-lived.

As on the other side, there is a Curse of God denounced against those that do
otherwise, that Psalm. 58.4, 5.
stop their ears, like the deaf adder, against good admonition, and refuse to
hear the Charmers voice, charm he never so sweetly, to be ruled by their
Governors, deal they never so kindly and lovingly with them. Prove. 30 6.
The eye that scorneth the Father, or sets light by the Mothers admonition,
Effossos oculos voret at^o gutture corvus. Catull. in Comin.
let the ravens of the valley dig it out, and the young Eagles devour it. They
are cursed with a witness, whom the Holy Ghost thus curses, in such
emphaticall manner, in such exquisite terms, as may well make ones heart quake
to hear.

Yea, to do otherwise it is made a note of a reprobate and a castaway, of one
that God is fully determined everlastingly to damn and destroy; 2 Chronicles. 25.16.
I know, says the Prophet to Amaziah, that God is determined to destroy thee,
because thou do thus, and wilt not hearken to mine advice. And of Elies
Sons, says the Holy Ghost, 1 Samuel 2.25.
Notwithstanding they obeyed not the voice of their Father, because the Lord
was bent to slay them. We are wont to say of those that have Plague-spots, that
they have Gods tokens upon them, and such are seldom known to escape or
recover. Of such ungratious Children we may much better say, that they have
Gods tokens indeed on them; and such (observe it when you will) you shall
seldom see come to good.

benigna pollicitatio, a kind pollicitation or promise.

And in it consider we, according to our former Division;

the Agent, or person teaching, King David himself. As Eccles. 1.1, 12.
Solomon his Son, though a King, scorned not the title of a Preacher; so
David his Father, though a worthy Prince, thought no scorn to play the part of
a Schoolmaster, to be a Teacher of Children, even of pety Scholars, of little
ones.

Abraham, though a Genesis 23.6.
Prince of God, or Sic Montes Dei, i. ingentes. Psalm. 36.6. Et (...). Arat. in
diosem. (...). Theon. in schol.
a great Prince, yet was careful himself Genes. 18.19.
to teach his sons and his servants (God himself testifies it of him, and
commends it in him) to keep Gods commandments. David, though Psalm. 78.71.
the chief Governor of Gods people, and Psalm. 18.43.
the Head of many Heathen, yet inviteth Children here to come to him, and
promises himself to instruct them: as also elsewhere, Psalm. 32.9.
I will instruct and teach thee what way to take, I will guide thee with mine
eye. And Solomon, 1 King. 3.12. 2 Chronicles. 2.12.
the wisest mere man that was ever since Adam, thought it no disparagement
either to his place or his person Prove. 4.1, 2.
to give instructions and directions to the Children that God gave him. Yea, as
our Savior says, Matthew. 12.42.
Behold one greater than either Matthew. 22.43, 44.
David or Solomon. Our Savior himself, Matt. 19.13, 14, 15.
when Children were presented unto him, and his Disciples would have kept them
back from him, as supposing it too mean a business for him to be employed in,
was displeased with them for so doing, and called the Children unto him. And he
that was so forward to embrace them and bless them, was (no doubt of it) as
ready also to teach and instruct them, so often as opportunity was offered him.

Neither ought any to disdain or think meanly of this office. For

Solomon thinks no scorn to instruct his Son, Prove. 4.3, 4.
because his Father instructed him in like manner before.

Operum Fastigia spectantur, latent Fundamenta. Quintil. institut. praesat.
Plus habet operis quam ostentationis. Ibid. l. 1. c. 4.
It is the foundation, that lies lowest, under ground, out of sight, that
though it makes least show, yet Non sunt contemnenda quasi parva, sine quibus
magna constare non possunt. Hierom. ad Laetam. Ad nullius rei summam nisi
praecedentibus initiis pervenitur. Minora ista si negligantur, non erit
majoribus locus. Quintil. institut. praesat. Debise fundamentum fallit opus.
Wainstet. de Grammatica. Nec siquid discere satis non est, ideo necesse non
est. Quantil. instit. l. 1. c. 1.
bears up the whole building. As Kingdoms and States consist of Cities and
Towns, so these of private Families; the well-being whereof mainly depends
upon the careful education and training up of the youth in them.

a Priest or a Pedant? as in scorn they use to term them the one and the
other. And yet Levit. 10.3. Number. 16.9.
who come nearer to God than the Ministers of his word? Or who come nearer to
Ministers than Schoolmasters do? What is their School but a private Church?
if it be ordered as it ought. If 1 Cor. 16.19.
Christian Families be so, Christian Schools much more. Or what are they
themselves, (if they be at least that they should be) but private Catechists,
but private Preachers? But as he says, Scientia non habet inimicum nisi
ignorantem.
Skill has no foe of any, but such as are unskilful themselves: so none will
think basely of so worthy and honorable a Calling, but those that are
themselves either rude dolts or debauched rake-hels.

Eccles. 5.9. (...). Socrates. (...) Xenoph. oeconom.
Solomon says, that the Throne (or the Chair of Estate) is upheld by the
Plough: so we may truly say, that both Church and State are upheld by the
School. For let private Schools be neglected, whence shall the Universities
be supplied? whence shall the Ministry be provided? how shall they teach
others, that were themselves never taught? how shall the chief Offices be
furnished with men of ability either in Church or Commonweal? Both Religion
and Learning will soon dye and decay, if life be not kept and maintained in
the root.

Application.
And here can I not wholly pass by in silence, nor forbear to put you of this
place, in mind, of those two Honorable Knights, St Andrew Iudde.
the Grandfather, and St Thomas Smith.
the Grandchild, the one long since deceased, the other yet living; whom God
has made Instruments of a great blessing, in this kind, to this place. The
former of them first founded a free School among you, for the training up of
your youth in virtue, religion, and good learning, and left land and means to
maintain it, with stipends (such as were in those times ordinary) for
Schoolmasters and Ushier. The latter of them has added liberally to his Grand
Fathers gift, has increased the salaries of the Teachers, and beside sundry
yearly pensions to the poor both of this place, and of diverse others near
about you, to encourage Parents the rather to set their Children to learning,
and the Children to bend their minds and endeavors thereunto, has given a
Seventy pounds per annum.
large and liberal exhibition for the maintenance of seven Scholars in one of
the Universities, to be chosen successively each year from your School. The
Lord reward this his bounty and liberality abundantly into the bosom of Him
and His; give you grace to make a good use of it; and stir up many more whom he
has blessed with ability, to show their thankfulness in like manner to him
from whom they have it, by setting apart and consecrating some part of their
means, to the furtherance and advancement of religion and learning.

the Agent: the Act follows, and that is Teaching or Instruction: I will
teach.

Psalm. 32.9.
I will instruct thee, and teach thee, says our Psalmist elsewhere. And,
Prove. 4.3, 4.
When I was young and tender, my Father taught me, says Solomon. A work and
duty of great necessity.

instar tabulae abrasae, as a clean pair of tables, that have nothing at all
written in them. Nemo nascitur artifer. Non dat natura virtutem. Ars est bonum
fieri. Virtus non contingit animo nisi instituto and edocto, and ad summum
assidua exercitatione perducto. Ad hoc quidem, sed non cum hoc nascimur. Et in
optimis etiam, antequam erudiat, virtutis materia, non virtus est. Senec.
epist. 9.
There is no grace or goodness, learning or art naturally written in it:
howsoever some grounds there are, whereby these things may through industry and
Gods blessing be attained.

instar codicis depravati, as a book blurred and blotted, or depraved and
misprinted, that must have much rased and done out, ere it can be well
corrected, or that written into it, that it ought to have.

It is Vt ager quamvis fertilis sine cultura fructuosus esse non potest: sic
sine doctrina animus. Cic. Tusc. l. 2. Cultura animi philosophia est, quae
extrahit vitia radicitus; and praeparat animos ad satius accipiendos; eaque
mandat his and serit, quae adulia fructus uberrimos ferant. Ibid.
instar agri inculti, as an untilled ground, wherein Incultis urenda filix
innascitur agris. Hor. sat. 2. and injussa virescunt Gramina. Virg. Georg. l. 1.
weeds of all sorts come up of themselves naturally, but no good thing will
grow without mucking and manuring, without much travel and toil: it is a
mother (as (...). Terra sponte nascentium matter, consitorum est noverca. Aesop.
apud Planudem in vita ipsius.
he said of the Earth sometime) to the one, it is but a stepdame to the other.

(...). Pejus est comparari jumento, quam nasci jumentum. Chrysostom. homil. in
ascens. Domini.
It is worse, as that ancient Father well says, to be like unto a beast, than
to be a beast indeed. O learn, if you be wise, to know your own happiness
before many others, to acknowledge Gods goodness to you above many others, and
to show your selves thankful both to Him and to Those, that he uses as
Instruments to provide such things for you.



Otherwise, if they shall bear the name of Teachers, and not execute the
Office, they shall be but Idols; or, as the Prophet says, Zech. 11.17.
Idol-shepherds, so Idol-Teachers: like Idols, that have Psalm. 96.5.
the name, but Galat. 4.8.
not the nature of God; that have limbs and lineaments of a man, but no action
nor life; Psalm. 115.5, 6, 7.
that have mouths, but speak not; hands, but feel not; feet, but stir not,
etc.

If they take the wages, and do not the work, they shall be no better than
Thieves. As he said sometime in Socrates, that (...). Socrat. hist. Eccles.
lib. 4. cap. 23. Monachus nisi operatus fuerit, praedoni par censctur.
Cassiodor. hist. tripart. l. 8 c. 1.
the Monk that labored not with his hands for his living was a Thief: so the
Schoolmaster that labors not with his tongue in instructing his Scholars;
yea though he labor with his hands otherwise never so much, yet if he tend not
his School, and the instruction of those under his charge in it, he is as very
a Thief, as he that takes apurse by the highway side; he might as well pick
their Parents purses or pockets.

Yea, if he be wholly careless of the discharge of his duty herein, he is
little better than a Murderer; he becomes guilty of soule-murther: as
Bernard truly says of Parents negligent in the education of their Children,
that they are Peremptores potius quam parents. Bern. in Epist. 111.
rather Paricides, than Parents. For he is a murderer, not only that
knocks a man on the head, or cutteth his throat with a knife, or runs him
through with a Rapier; but he also that by detention or denial of due food
starveth him whom he stood bound to feed and releeve, and so suffers him to
perish through his default.

As therefore you are called Teachers, and are called to teach, so be you
careful to Nomen tuum attend. Esto quod diceris. Hieron. ad Paulin.
answer your Name, to be that, that you are termed. Apply your selves with all
alacrity, sedulitie and diligence, to this necessary, to this worthy work.
Neither let it discourage you, if you meet with some foolish and unthankful
persons or Parents, that shall either slenderly consider your travel, or con
you little thank for your labor. It is with you in this case, as with
Tailors, that make garments for Children: though the Children pay them not, yet
their Parents, they are sure, will. Do you your duty faithfully and
constantly; and as the Prophet said of himself, Esai. 49.5.
Your work shall be with God, and your wages with him: He will regard and
reward you, whether men do or no. For 1 Cor. 3.8.
Every man shall receive his wages from him according to his work.

Nor again let it dishearten you, if you meet with some untoward ones, whom
notwithstanding all your pains and toil you can do no good upon. Curam
exigeris, non curationem. Bern. de Consid. l. 4.
It is the care, not the cure of them, that is required of you. Do your best
endeavor, and Securus labor, quem nullus valet evacuare defectus. Ibid.
let the event be what it will, you shall have from God, whose work you do,
when you do conscionably what you do, (...), non (...). Secundum laborem, non
secundum proventum. Ber. ibid. 1 Cor. 3.8.
according to your pains, not according to the issue or event of it.

David undertaketh to teach? And so pass we on from the Act to the Object,
(the third particular in his promise;) the persons taught, You. They are the
Children, that before he called upon, and invited unto him.

Prove. 22.6.
Teach a Child, says Solomon. And, Prove. 4.3, 4.
When I was a Child, my Father taught me. And, 1 Ioh. 2.12, 14.
I write to you, Children; says the Apostle John, among others.

And that not without good cause. For,

Fingit equum docilem tenera cervice magister, Ire viam quam monstrat eques.
Horat. epist. 2. Vt corpora ad quosdam membrorum flexus formari nisi tenera non
possunt: sic animos quoque ad plaeraque duriores robur ipsum facit. Quintil.
inst. l. 1. c. 1. In cunctis fere rebus citius assuescit omne quod tenerum est.
Novellas adhuc and vix firmae radicis arbusculas, dum ad omnem ductum sequaces
sunt, in quamlibet partem flecti facile est: quae natura plaerumque curvata
cito ad arbitrium colentis corriguntur. Tenerae adhuc and primae aetatis
animalia sine labor domari solent; quantoque citius a vagandi liberate
dissueta sunt, tanto sacilius vel colla jugo, vel fraenis ora insuescunt.
Pelag. ad Demetr.
The foale is easier broken and brought to a pace, that is taken while it is
yet young, than that is let alone till it have more years. The plant is easily
bowed and bent any way, while it is but a twig, that will sooner break than
bend when it is grown a strong tree.

Alt^us praecepta descendunt, quae teneris imprimuntur aetatibus. Senec. ad
Helv. c. 16. Natura tenacissimi sumus eorum quae rudibus annis percipimus. Vt
sapor, quo nova imbuas, durat: nec lanarum colores, quibus simplex ille candor
mutatus est, elui possunt. Quintil. institut. l. 1. c. 1.
What we then learn, sticks best by us. Any vessel will retain long the
Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem Testa diu. Horat. epist. 2.
Difficulter eraditur, quod rudes animi perhiberunt. Lanarum conchylia quis in
pristinum candorem revocet? Recens iesta diu and saporem obtinet and odorem,
quo primum imbuta est. Hieron. ad Laet.
savor of that liquor, that it was seasoned first withal. And the cloth best
keeps its color, that was died in the wool, that it took in ere it came to
the wheel or the woofe. Prove. 12.6.
Teach a child, says Solomon, in the trade of his way; and he will not
depart from it when he is old.

(...). A^s longa, vita brevis. Hippocr. aphor. 1.
a long task, and a short time. Perge and propera, ne tibi accidat, ut senex
discas: imo ideo magis propera, quoniam id juvenis aggressus es, quod
perdiscere vix senex possis. Senec. epist. 77.
Though we set upon it while we are young, we can hardly attain to any
perfection in ought ere we be old: and therefore can never begin too soon,
nor soon enough neither.

Turpis and ridi ula res est elementarius senex. Ibid. 36. Quid turpius quam
senex vivere (discere) incipiens? Ibid. 13.
It is a shame for an old man to be then learning his first elements, that,
that every Child may and should know. Not that they should not then learn,
that have not before learned. (...). Socrat. apud Stob tom. 2. c. 29.
It is better to learn late than never. Stultum est nolle discere, quia diu
non didiceris. Sen. epist. 36.
It is a folly for a man to refuse to learn at all, because a long time he
has not learned. And if it be a shame for a man not to have learned till then;
it is much more a shame for him not to learn then neither. But Sed propera,
nec te venturas differ in horas: Qui non est hodie, eras minus aptus erit.
Ovid. remed. l. 1. Hoc est discendi tempus. non quod aliquod sit, quo non sit
discendam: sed quemadmodum omnibus annis studere honestum est, ita non omnibus
institui. Sen. ep. 36.
the longer we defer it, the more pain it will be to us, the more shame it
will be for us, not a shame, I say, so much that now we learn, as that before
we have not learned.

Omni mobili mobilius consistere non potest, sed molendini instar, impigre
volvitur, etc. Bern. m dit. cap. 9.
The mind of man or child is like a restless, Mill, that cannot stand still,
will never be without work. Nihil agendo male agere homines discunt. Catonis
oraculum, quo nihil verius. Colum. de re rustic. lib. 11. cap. 1.
By doing nothing, says the Heathen Man, men soon learn to do evil things.
And Incultis urenda si ix innascitur agris. Horat sat. 3.
evil weeds come up apace, and grow soon over-rank in us, if some diligent
husbandry be not constantly used with us.

-- Nunc adhibe puro Pectore verba, puer: nunc te melioribus offer. Horat.
epist. 2. Vtendum est aetate: cito pede praeterit aetas; Nec bona tam sequitur,
quam bona prima fuit. Ovid. art. l. 3. Vd^m ac molle lutum es, nunc, nunc
properandus and acri Fingendus sine fine rota. -- Pers. Sat. 3.
to apply themselves to their learning, while their senses are lively, their
wit quick, their memory fresh and strong; take that in now that may stick by
them hereafter; Inveni parandum, seni utendum est. Senec. epist. 36. Quaere
adolescens; utere fenex. Sense. lib. 1. contr. 7.
lay that up now that they have comfort of, and benefit by hereafter: Do as
wise travelers, that have a long days journey to make, that get them up
betimes, and take the day before them, and not (...). Hesiod. -- mora non t^ta
est. -- Ov d. art. l. 1. -- mora damnosa est. Idem met. l. 10. -- semper noc^it
differ. Idem remed. lib. 1. -- mora saepe malorum dat causas. Manil. astrom.
l. 6.
like foolish, improvident, and unadvised persons, that with frivolous delays
triflle out the time, and burn daylight. You know what is said commonly, that
Sed fugit interea, fugit irreparabile tempus. Virgil. Georg. lib. 3. -- breve
and irreparabile tempus Omnibus est vitae. Idem Aen. l. 10. Agit nos, agiturque
velox dies: inscii rapimur; nisi properamus, relinquimur. Et nos inter
praecipitia lenti sumus? Non dicuntur dies ire, sed fugere: quod currendi genus
concitatissimum est. Quid ergo cessamus nosipsos concitare, ut velocitatem
rapidissimae rei possimus aequare. quod fugit occupandum est. Sen. epist. 108.
Irrevocabilis est-praeterita aetas. Lucret. l. 1.-ut, Stygis irremeabilis unda.
Virg. Aen. 6. Quasi fluvio quodam decurrit genus humanum. Aug. de Trinit. lib
4. c. 16. Et hic ver um Heracliti illud, (...). Plato Cratylo. In idem flumen
bis no^ descendimus. Sen. epist. 58 -- assiduo labuntur tempora motu, Non secus
ac flumen, neque enim consistere flumen, Nec levis hora potest. sed ut unda
impellitur unda, Vrgeturque eadem veniens urgetque priorem: Tempora fic fugiunt
pariter, pariterque sequuntur, Et nova sunt semper. Ovid. met. l. 15. -- eunt
anni more fluentis aquae, Nec quae praeteriit cursu revocabitur unda: Nec quae
praeteriit hora redire potest. Idem art. l. 3.
Time and Tide tarieth for no man. Neither is it possible to recall any one day
or hour, when it is once over, nay nor the least minute or moment of our life,
when it is once past and gone. It will be too late for you to say hereafter, O
mihi praeteritos referat si Jupiter annos, etc. Virgil.
Oh were I as young again as once I was; or, Were I to begin again as
sometime I was, and had that time and those means that then I had, or might
have had, I would then do thus and thus. Prevent it now therefore, while you
may, by following good counsel, and taking your learning, that now seeks
you, and offreth it self unto you, Prove. 5.11, 12, 13.
lest you mourn hereafter in your latter days; when you have spent your time
and your strength in folly and vanity; and say, How have I hated instruction,
and in mine heart scorned correction; and have not obeyed the voice of them
that taught me, nor inclined mine ear unto them that instructed me: yea Job
20.11.
when your bones, it may be, as he speaks in Job, are so filled with the
sins of your youth, with the fruits of those loose courses that then you
took, that they leave you not, till they lie down with you in the dust.

Genesis 26 35. and 27.46.
such a corrosive and an heart-sore unto them, that they make them even weary
of their lives, and often bring their gray heads with excessive grief for them
to the grave.

Let them alone, say they, yet a while; they are but young yet: there will be
time enough to teach them, and to nurture them hereafter. Yea, but for the body
of thy Child, thou would be wiser and more wary. Were any limme misshapen,
or did any part grow awry, thou would be sure to take it betimes, while the
nerves are gentle and pliable, the flesh soft and waxie, and the bones tender,
and gristly, so as they may be easily wrought and molded any way. Be no less
wise then for the soul of thy Child. Thou can not begin too soon. Ad
nominem ante bona men's venit quam mala: omnes praeoccupati sumus. Virtutes
discere, est vitia dediscere. Sen. epist. 51. Ad virtutem contendimus inter
vitia districti. Ibid. 76.
Forestalled we are all of us; the Heathen themselves saw and said as much.
We bring vice into the world with us, that must be wrought out of us: and the
sooner we are dealt with, ere it take deeper root with us, or grow to stronger
head in us, the more easily it will be done.

What shall we say of those, that all their whole time train them up in
idleness, in nothing but vanity and naughtiness? That which proves after
the very bane and utter overthrow of them. For having been brought up to
nothing, and having no kind of employment to pass their time away with, they
light commonly into lewd company, whom they waste themselves and their means
with, and so come at length to confusion. What shall we say, I say, of such,
but what Bernard before said, that such are Peremptores potius quam parents.
Bern. epist. 111. Vtinam liberorum nostrorum mores non ipsi perderemus.
Insantiam statim deliciis solvimus. Mollis illa educatio, quam indulgentiam
vocamus, nervos omnes and mentis and corporis frangit. Quintil. instit. l. 1.
c. 2.
rather Paricides than Parents? And the blood of their Children shall be one
day required at their hands, which though they perish deservedly through their
own voluntary default, yet by their diligent endeavor and care might have
done much better.

But what is it that David would have these little ones to learn? the
Subject Matter of his teaching; the Fear of the Lord.

Genes. 18.19.
Abraham, says God of him, will teach his sons and his whole household, to
walk in Gods ways. Eccles. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator, to wit, to fear and serve him, says Solomon, in the
days of thy youth. And, Ephesians 6.4.
Ye Fathers, says the Apostle Paul, bring up your Children in instruction and
information of the LORD.

And great reason for Parents so to train them up, if they desire or regard
their good.

(...) Prove. 9.10. Virtutum omnium fundamentum pietas. Cic. pro Planc.
Timor Domini principium sapientiae: The Fear of God is the Beginning of
Wisdom; says Solomon. Yea, Timor Domini caput, or praecipuum sapientiae; The
Fear of God is the chief and principal point of Wisdom; says both Psalm.
111.10.
David, and the same Prove. 1.7.
Solomon. And Job long before either of them, (...) sicut Prove. 3.9. and 4.7.
(...) Job 28.28. Quod and idem fere Solomon Pro. 15.33.
Timor Domini est sapientia ipsa: The Fear of God is wisdom, even wisdom
it self. No true wisdom without it, no true wisdom but in it. To be taught
our Children therefore, if we would have them wise, if we would not have them
fools and idiots, as they must needs be without it.

Psalm. 112.1.
Blessed is the man that fears God: and, Psalm. 128.1.
Blessed is every one that fears the Lord; and, Prove. 28.14.
He is a blessed man that stands always in awe. For, 1 Timothy 4.8.
Godliness (that is, the Fear of God,) has the promises both of this life,
and of that that is to come. Of this life. For, Psalm. 34.9, 10.
There shall be no want to those that fear him: they shall lack nothing that
is good for them. And of the life to come too. For, Psalm. 103.17.
The loving kindness of the Lord is for ever and ever upon them that fear
him; and his Ita verto (...) prout usurpatur, Psalm. 112.3.9. and 2 Cor. 9.9, 10.
bounty or mercy upon their Childrens Children. And therefore no marvel if
Solomon, as in the Entrance into his Proverbs he makes the Fear of God, the
Beginning of all; so in the Conclusion and shutting up of his Ecclesiastes, he
makes the same Fear of God, the very Sum and the End of all. Eccles. 12.15.
Summa, or Finis rei. Will you hear (says he) what is the Sum, or the End
of all: Fear God, and keep his Commandments: For that is the whole duty of
man: and that is the only means to make man truly happy, the maine matter that
Solomon there intended to teach.

your labors and endeavors with them; even to teach them the fear of God. You
are not to think it enough, that you have taught them some trade, that you
have given them learning, (humane learning, I mean) that they may live by
another day; but you must withal, or else you come far short of that you
should do, teach them also to fear God, and so to serve him here, as they may
live with him eternally, when they go hence.

To which purpose it is well observed, that the promise of a blessing to be
continued to posterity, though made to the observance of all Gods precepts,
yet is Exodus 20.6. Deuteronomy. 5.10.
more specially annexed to the second Commandment in the Decalogue, which is
concerning the service and worship of God; God thereby intimating what Parents
and others should principally apply themselves to have planted in their
Families, if they would have Gods blessing entailed upon their issue. For as
for other things, even Heathen and Infidels, or mere Civil and natural men,
will be ordinarily teaching and instructing their Children, to forbear and
abhor lying, and stealing, and looseness of life, and surfeting, and
excess, and the like; because such things may make them unfit for common and
civil society, or may be a means to waste them, and that, that they shall
leave them. But God would have us (and those that be truly godly will regard
it) to go a step further, and to teach them a lesson beyond all this, not
civilitie alone, but true piety too; that we may be blessed in them, and they
inherit Gods blessing with us.

And surely what difference will there be between a Christian Parent and an
Heathen, a Christian Schoolmasters and a Pagan; if the Parent or
Schoolmasters teach his Children and Scholars, matter of civilitie or humane
learning alone? Do not Heathen even the same? As the Apostle speaks in
another case, 1 Timothy 5.8.
He that provideth not for his Family, is worse than an Infidel: So here,
that Parent that brings up his Child idly, is worse than many an Infidel:
he that traineth him up in some worldly trade only is no better than they. That
Schoolmasters that teaches them not at all that be committed unto him, is
worse than many an Infidel; he that gives them humane learning only, is
little better than they. That Parent or Teacher that does not teach them
Civilitie, comes far short of many Heathen ones; he that does teach Civilitie,
and not Piety withal, goes no further than they have gone.

Eccles. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator, says Solomon, in the days of thy youth. And, Psalm.
119.9.
Whereby shall a boy, or a Child, says David, make his path pure, but by
taking heed to it according to Gods word?

It is an idle conceit of many, that Religion and Godliness is not for
Children, that such things concern them not. There is no age freed from it.
And therefore John writes unto, and directs, what he writes, unto all, 1
Ioh. 2.12, 13, 14.
not to old men, and young men, strong grown men only, but to Children and
little ones also. And surely most equal it is, that as the Vt primitiae rerum,
ita primitiae dierum. Greg. in Evang.
first fruits of other things, so the first fruits of our years should go
also to God.

It is but a Devilish Proverb, A young Saint, and an old Devil. The Holy
Ghost by Solomon assures us the contrary: Prove. 22.6.
Teach a Child, says he, in the trade of his way, and he will not depart
from it, when he is old. It is true indeed, that those that have made most
show of piety, 2 Pet. 2.20. Matthew 11.45.
when they fall away again, prove usually most profane. But 1 Pet. 1.23. 1
Ioh. 3.9.
where it has once truly taken root in the heart, there it will continue
constantly even to all eternity, and never dye or decay again.

Let this therefore, good Children, Sapientiam non amittitur; in stultitiam non
revolvitur. Sen. epist. 76.
be your principal care and study: (For what shall it avail you to be
cunning in Tully, Virgil, Homer, and other profane Writers, if you be
unskilful in Gods book? to have learned Greek and Latin, if you learn not
withal Esai. 19.18.
the language of Canaan? to have your speech agreeable to the rules of Priscian
or Lilie, if your lives and courses be not consonant to the rules and laws of
Christianity? to have knowledge of the Creatures, when you are ignorant of the
Creator? to have learned that whereby you may live a while here, and neglect
that whereby you may live eternally hereafter?) Learn to fear God, to serve
God; and then God will bless you. For Psalm. 115.13.
He will bless those that fear him, be they great or small. Yea he will
take charge of you, and provide for you, if your Parents be taken from you.
Psalm. 27.10.
Though my Father and Mother, says David, should leave me, yet would God take
me up. Psalm. 68.5.
He will be a Father unto you: Psalm. 23.1.
he will see you shall not want. If your Parents have wrought the Fear of God
into you; Psalm. 37.25, 26.
they shall be sure to leave Gods blessing to you; they may boldly bequeath it
you; and you shall be sure to partake with them in it.

To end where we began; it is the commendation of Timothy, and of his Parents
withal, that 2 Timothy 3.15. (...).
he had known the holy Scriptures from a Child; and had been even 1 Timothy
4.6. (...).
nursed up in the words of faith and good doctrine; (...). Himer. Sophista in
Monod. Rufini.
sucking piety and godliness in, with his Mothers milk, and beginning to be
acquainted with it even at the breast. Let the like course be taken of, and
with others, and it will make them prove in time also like Timothy, 2 Timothy
3.15, 17.
wise to salvation, and enabled to every good work.

FINIS.
THE Christian Man's Care. A SERMON on MATTHEW. 6.33.

Together with A Short Catechism for the Simpler Sort.

By THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed for FVLK CLIFTON. 1637.

TO My very kind and Loving Uncles, Mr. NICHOLAS CRISPE And Mr. ELLIS CRISPE,
with Theirs.
BEloved in Christ Jesus; that which was preached sometime at the request of
the one of you, unto A meeting of the Worshipful Company of Skinners.
a solemn Assembly, whereof he then was Chief, is now further presented
jointly to you both, (and well to you both, by (...). Chrysostom. in Romans hom.
19. Fratres in seculo; fratres in Domino; quae posterior major est and melior
fraternitas: uti Author Ambr. nom. Sermon. 9. and 79. Aug. de verb. Apost. 25. and
Max. de diverse. 4.
a double bond, as well of Nature as Grace, Brethren) together with the rest of
yours, as all Branches of one Stock, through Gods gracious provision, neither
far severed in abode, and combined sweetly in the holy band of true Love. The
maine subject Matter of it is nothing in effect, but a Motive or incitement
unto that, which it stands us all upon, in the first place, and with our best
care and endeavor, as well to seek after, as to seek into: To seek into, that
we may know it, and learn it; to seek after, that we may be possessed and
seized of it. Since it is that alone wherein Psalm. 84.4, 5, 10, 11, 12. Matthew
5.3. Luke 14.15. and 22.29, 30. Act. 20.6. and. 22.7.
Man's Happiness wholly consists: and it is Aliud est divitias multas nosse,
and aliud possidere: nec notitia divitem facit, sed possessio, Bern. in Can. 23.
not the bare notice of it, but the owning and enjoying of it, that can make
men truly and eternally happy. That we may therefore know and understand what
it is, wherein it consists, and by what means it may be attained (and
Praeparatio enim rorum cognitio est, Bern. ibid.
till we be thus acquainted with it, we can never come to be possessed of it)
we must make diligent (...), Ioh. 5.39.
search and inquiry into Gods Word, for it is that alone that can 2 Timothy 3.16,
17. In iis quae aperte posita sunt in Scripturis, inveniuntur illa omnia, quae
continent sidem, moresque vivendi, Aug. Doctr. Christ. l. 2. c. 9.
fully and Ioh. 17.17. James 1.18. 2 Pet. 1.19. Ego solis Scripturatum libris
Canonicis didici hunc honorem timoremque defer, ut nullum eorum Autorem
scribendo aliquid errasse firmissime credam. Alios autem ita lego, ut
quantalibet sanctitate doctrinaque praepolleant, non ideo verumputem, quia ipsi
ita senserunt, sed quia mihi vel per illos autores Canonicos, vel probabili
ratione, quod a vero non abhorreat, persuadere potuerunt, Aug. epist. 19. and
apud Great. did. 9.
infallibly inform us of it: Other writings only so far forth as they are
drawn out of it, agree with it, and are grounded thereupon. This Word
therefore ought to be Psalm. 1.2. and 119.47, 48, 97.
the constant Matter of our daily Meditation; (as containing the fundamental
Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom here propounded; together with the
Conditions and Capitulations required on the part of all those that are to
partake in it, and the royal Privileges and Prerogatives annexed thereunto;)
if we desire or expect ever to have part and portion therein. But because
Arsnulla absque Magistro discitur, Hieron. ad rustic.
no Art is easily without a Teacher attained: and, in this more specially, all
1 Cor. 3.7. 1 Job. 2.20.27. Spiritus Sanctus necesse est operetur intrinsecus,
ut valeat medicina quae adhibetur extrinsecus, August. in 1 Joan. tr. 3.
Meliusque dicit and docet; qui intus habitat, quam qui foris clamat, Idem in
Joan. tr. 3. Nolite putare quen quam hominem quicquam discere ab homine. Sonus
verborum nostrorum aures percutit; Magister qui docet, intus est. Inanisque fit
strepitus sermonis nostri, nisi qui doceat, intus sit, Idem ubi sup. (...).
Plut. de Socr. dam.
outward teaching without the inward is uneffectuall: As Coloss. 3.16.
all holy helps are to be used, the 1 Thessalonians. 5.20.
public Ministry especially to be diligently frequented; ( (...).
the Church is Christi docentis Auditorium, Bern. in Cant. 23. 2 Cor. 13.3.
the place wherein he ordinarily teaches, who has Magister unus qui co^da
docet, scholam habet in te ^ris, cathedram in coelis, August. in 1. Joan. 3.
and de diverse 12. and 41. and de Sanct. 23.
his School on earth, though Esai. 66.1. Hebr. 12.25.
his Chair in Heaven:) so earnest prayer is to be used for a blessing from God
on all such our courses and endeavors either public or private, that he will
be pleased with his good Spirit to second and assist his own Ordinances, that
thereby Psalm. 119.18.
the eyes of our minds may be opened, and Ephesians. 1.18. Luke 24.45.
our understandings so illightned, that we may be able in some due measure to
see and discern this estate what it is, and to conceive and apprehend the
Mysteries appertaining unto it. Again, because it will little avail us to
know it, unless we have our share in it, to be well seen in the Statutes and
Ordinances of it, unless we have part in the Immunities and Royalties that
are therein to be enjoyed: (It is but a double misery for a man to know what is
to be had, if he have it not himself:) Our next endeavor therefore must be
(for the effecting whereof also Psalm. 86.11. and 119.33, 34, 35, 36. Ephesians.
3.14 -- 19.
the assistance of Gods Spirit is humbly and instantly to be craved) to have
that which we have learned, or do learn, out of Gods word, concerning this
Royal and blessed estate, to be effectually Iam. 1.21, 22. 1 Pet. 1.23.
wrought into us: (and indeed till it be so wrought into us, it is Ioh. 6.45.
Ephesians. 4, 20, 21, 22, 23. Vide not. Bez. ibid. 1 Ioh. 2.3, 4. and 4.7, 8.
never truly, soundly, or effectually learned of us:) That is, we must strive
and labor to have true faith, repentance, and other spiritual graces surely
James 2.21. Ephesians. 3.^^.
settled in our souls; whereby we may both have a right and title to this
Kingdom, and be in some good sort and measure also possessed and seized of it.
The rather since that Apoc. 20.6. Matthew. 19.2 John 3.3, 5.
after this life none shall partake in it, but those only that in some degree
or other were possessed of it, while they lived here. As it is with us
therefore in regard of worldly possessions: so should it be in regard of this
heavenly Inheritance. For worldly possessions, we will get, if we can, a
title to them; when we have it, we will be sure that our title be good, and
use all means to make it sure: and when we have so done, we are not yet then
at rest neither; we cannot be quiet, till we be seized and possessed of it,
yea till we be in an absolute, quiet, and peaceable possession, not of some
part of it, but of the whole. In like manner should it be with us for this
Hebr. 3.1. 1 Pet. 1.4.
heavenly Inheritance: we must first labor to get a (...), Ius, Bez. John
1.12.
right and title unto it: which by Ibidem.
faith must be procured: for it is that alone on our part, that by Romans 3.23,
24, 28. and 5.1, 2.
Justification and free Galat. 3.26.
Adoption gives us a title thereunto. In the next place we must endeavor to
get some 2 Pet. 1.10.
good assurance that this our title to it is good: that which must by the 2
Cor. 13.5.
trial of our faith be effected: For See the Signs of Sincerity on Psalm.
97.1^.
(to omit, that by seeming titles many often are deluded) though our title to it
be never so good, yet we may not be aware of it, and so miss may we of much
comfort, until we have taken some due trial of it. And lastly, we must
strive and contend to get our selves more and more possessed of it: which must
be done 2 Pet. 1.4. -- 8.
by the 2 Timothy 1.6.
exercise and Luke 17.5. 1 Thessalonians. 4.1, 10.
growth of our faith, and other the graces of God in us, and by 1 Thessalonians. 5.19,
20.
a constant usage of all good means whereby the same may be 2 Pet. 2.1, 2.
nourished, Ephesians. 3.16.
corroborated, and Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
increased. For Romans 6.6.14. Col. 3.5, 8, 9, 10.
the more spiritual grace spreads and grows powerful in us, the more
ground get we of our corrupt nature: And Romans 6.11, 12.
the more conquest we make of this our inward corruption, the further proceed
we in possession of this our Ephesians. 2.5, 6. Philip. 3.20.
heavenly Inheritance. Now because so long as we live here in Philip. 3.12.
an estate of Imperfection, (for Philip. 3.13. 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11.
no perfection is to be had, or to be hoped for of us while we are here) we
can never fully be acquainted with the Rules and Rights of this Kingdom, or
the parts and parcels of this Inheritance: For so long as 1 Cor. 13.9, 11.
we know these, as 1 Cor. 8.1, 2.
all other things, but in part, Maxima pars eorum quae scimus, est minima eorum
quae ignoramus. Aug.
we cannot but of some part of them remain ignorant still: Nor can we
attain to such a full and plenary assurance of our right to it, but that some
doubt and scruple about it will be sometime troubling us: For since that as our
other parts, so Matthew. 6.30. and 8.26. and 14.31. and 16.8. Luke 17.3, 4.
our faith also is imperfect; and our notice of it as weak ordinarily, as our
faith it self is; and that where faith is so imperfect, there must needs be
some Mark. 9.24. Idem simul, qui nondum perfect crediderat, and credebat, and
incredulus erat; Greg. in Ezech. 15.
infidelity more or less mixed with it; it can hardly be avoided but that some
Fides vera cum dubietatis aura, Idem Mor. l. 10. c. 8.
wavering should be: especially considering that we have to deal with a most
wily Adversary, that is wont often to be questioning of this our right and title,
and by many subtle quirkes, and fallacies, and colorable pretenses,
endeavoring to shake this our assurance: And much less can we attain to any
full and absolute, (while but Romans 8.23. and 7.25.
in part as yet we are sanctified, and but Romans 5.2. and 8.24.
in hope only glorified;) yea or quiet and peaceable possession of it; Romans
7.17, 20.
the enemy being and abiding yet within our gates, and Romans 7.23. Gal. 5.17.
daily working our disturbance: For this cause therefore, and in regard hereof,
is our Seeking of this Kingdom, not to be practiced for a spurt, or taken up
for some time, and then to be let fall and laid down again, as if no further
need were of it, but Psalm. 24.6. and 27.8. and 105.3, 4.
last it must, and continue Apoc. 2.10, 26.
so long as this life lasts. Still Prove. 2.3, 4. Rom 12.2.
searching we must be into it, that we may 2 Pet. 3.18.
grow better acquainted with it: and still Apoc. 3.2.
strengthening our assurance, that we may take Apoc. 3.10, 11, 12. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15.
faster hold of it: and still striving to Phil. 1.9, 10, 11. 2 Pet. 3.18.
grow in grace, that we may 2 Pet. 1.11.
get further possession of it: And a principal part must it be of our daily
Prayer, that Matthew. 6.10.
This Kingdom may come; that not only it may Luke 17.21. Vt in nos veniat,
Ambr. Dion. de Sacr. l. 5. c. 4. Et in nobis maneat, Tertul. ad Marc. l. 4.
come into us to take possession of us, but that Matthew. 25.34. Ne forte veniat,
and nobis non veniat. Multis enim non est obventurum, quod est tamen venturum,
Aug. hom. 42.
we may come at length also to a full fruition of it, 1 Pet. 1.9.
attaining to the Romans 8.22.
end of our faith, and hope, and sanctification, the eternal 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.
salvation of our souls and Romans 8.23, 24. Phil. 3 21.
bodies. This is the course that in this discourse you are encited unto; which
I doubt not but that you have also made both an happy entrance into, yea and
good progress in already: yet if any spur may be found therein, that may
help to prick you on (or any of you, or any other that have more need than
you) to a more eager (...), Phil. 3.13, 14.
pursuing, putting on, and pressing hard (with the Apostle) to the marke-ward,
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; or if any rub may
thereby be removed, that either has been, or hereafter may be cast into your
way, either by the World, or Ioh. 12.31. and 16.11.
the Prince of it, or any homebred confederate of his, whereby you might be
(as the people were by 2 Samuel 20.12.
Amasa's corpse) either stayed, or turned aside, or disheartened, or slacked in
this your religious course; a plentiful recompense I shall esteem it of my
pains therein taken, and I beseech God to that purpose to give his blessing
thereupon. I have unto the Sermon annexed a short Catecheticall Sum, which
may help, though not your selves, being now past such helps, yet your younger
ones, that are 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. Hebr. 5.12, 13.
not past the breast yet, (for which sort in mine own Family at first I
contrived it;) in the enquiry after, and discovery of the way to this Kingdom:
wherein from the grounds of sacred Scripture is briefly declared, how at first
we were Constituti.
possessed of it, how we came to be Destituti.
deprived of it, and by what means we may be Restitui.
restored again to it: As also it may help to fit and prepare them for the
participation of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Commending both to Gods
Blessing, and my self to your Prayers, I take leave, and rest

Yours in the Lord Jesus, THOMAS GATAKER.

THE CHRISTIAN MAN'S CARE.
MATTHEW. 6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you.


IT is the wonted manner of Physicians, Erumpens sanguis vena secta sistitur.
Fernel. method. med. l. 2. c. 6.
when blood issues out immoderatly one way, to open a vein elsewhere, and so
Dum revulsionis vi revocatur. Ibid.
by revulsion, as they term it, to stay it, by diverting the course and
current of it another way: Occasion.
The like course does our Savior Christ take in this place. For observing
Verse. 31, 32.
the minds and hearts, the thoughts and cares of most men, to be wholly
addicted unto, and carried after the things of this world, he endeavors in
this place to withdraw them therefrom, and so to cure them of this running
disease, by diverting and turning the tide and stream of them another way.
Drift.
And as the Apostle would have us turn all our worldly grief into 2 Cor. 7.10.
godly grief, into sorrow for our sins; and our Savior elsewhere, all our
worldly fear into godly fear, into Matthew. 10.28. Timorem timore pellit, ut
clavum clavo.
fear of offending and displeasing God Almighty; so here he wills us to
turn all our worldly care into godly care, our care for this life, Sum.
and the things of this life, into care for the things of another, of a better
life.

Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness.

Now because many Luc. 12.29.
doubts and distrustful thoughts might hereupon arise in weak or worldly men's
minds, how they should be provided for, and furnished with meat, drink, and
apparel, and other necessaries of this life; that they may beg or starve, if
they look not after the world: Our Savior for the further strengthening of
their faith herein, and better encouragement hereunto, assures them that upon
their due and diligent pursuit of the one, God himself will be mindful of
them, to supply them with the other; these things that they now thirst after,
and take so much thought for, shall upon their so doing, without their further
care be cast in upon them, and Non ait, (...), dabuntur; sed (...), addentur,
(...), velut additamentum: Metaphora ab eis qui poma, pyra, etc. emunt. Piscat.
(...). Chrysostom. in Matthew. 22. Non ait, dabuntur, sed, adjicientur. Aliud est
enim quod principaliter datur, aliud quod superadditur. Greg. Moral. l. 15. c.
20.
added as an overplus or an advantage thereunto.

And all these things shall be added unto you.

Division.
So that the words, you see, divide themselves into two General Parts;

Exhortation,

Motive to induce thereunto.

four Particulars;

Act, what we must do, Seek:

Object of this Act, what it is that we must seek, Gods Kingdom and his
righteousness:

Order and Manner, how and when these things must be sought, in the First place:

Benefit that thereby will accrue unto us, (...). Chry. in Mat. ho^. 22.
And all these things shall be added unto you.

To begin with the First, Seek.

Spiritual things must be sought.

Coloss. 3.1.
Seek the things that be above, says the Apostle Paul. And, Romans 2.7.
To Act.
says the same Apostle. And, Matthew. 13.45.
The Kingdom of Heaven is like says our Savior.

Sought thus they must be in two respects,

Ratione d^fficultatis.
In regard of the Difficulty,

And Ratione dignitatis.
in regard of the Dignity of them.

First in regard of the Difficulty of obtaining them: Prius est quarere quam
acquirere.
because Without

(...). Plato Cratyl. and Hyppia maj. and de repub. l. 4. Plut. de Paedag.
difficilia qua praeclara. Sine studio et ardore quodam mentis in vita nihil
quicquam fit egregium. Cic. de orat. lib. 1.
all things of worth and weight are ordinarily, and such also these are. They
are compared to a Kingdom both here, and often Matthew. 3.2. and 5.3. Iam. 2.5. 2.
Pet. 1.11. Apoc. 1.9.
elsewhere: And a Kingdom, we know, is not easily conquered: a Crown is not
ordinarily compassed with ease. It is not won commonly without battle; nor
bought but with blood. They are compared to Matthew. 13.44.
treasure, and matter of 1 Timothy 6.6.
gain. And worldly Wealth, we well know, (and the heavenly much more) will
not be gotten but with labor and travel.

(...). Aristot. Ethic. Nicom. l. 2. c. 3.
Arts and Sciences, (because Nemo nascitur artifex. Nemo nascitur sapiens. Sen.
de Ira, lib. 2. cap. 10.
no man is borne an Artist) must by study and industry be attained. And much
more then this Ars artium regimen animarum. Gerson. de Recid. pecc. Ars est
bonum fieri. Ad hoc, sed non cum hoc nascimur. Sen. epist. 9
Art of Arts; this Ars regnandi.
Art of reigning; this Ars been beateque vivendi. (...). Epict. Arian. l 3. c.
26. Ars vitae. cic. Tuscul. l. 2. Ars vitae recte agendae. Sen. epist. 94. Ars
benevivendi. Idem ep. 90. Virtus ars est been vivendi. Aug. de civit. l. 4. c.
21. Art of happiness. Rowse.
Art of living well and happily, yea of living everlastingly, Non dat natura
virtutem. Non contingit virtus animo nisi instituto and edocto, and ad summum
assidua exercitatione perducto. Sen. epist 9.
will not without much study and industry be learned: especially lighting
upon such blocks, as we all are naturally, being borne Job 11.12. Psalm. 73.22.
Prove. 30.2. Ier. 10.14.
stark idiots, and of our selves wholly 1 Cor. 2.14. (...).
incapable of ought in it.

3. Things must be sought, that are not every where to be had, as foreign
commodities that must be far fetched. But such is 2 Pet 3.13. Mat. 13.45.
(...). Macar. homil. 38. praeclara rara.
the Righteousness spoken of in this place. It is a simple that every soil
will not bear: a rare drugge that every country or climate will not afford
Eccles. 7.29.
It grew once in Paradise. But upon the fall of our first Parents, -- Terras
Astraea reliquit. Ovid Met. lib. 1. Neglecta terras fugit Astraea. Memor.
Octav. 2. 1. -- ad superos Astraea recessit. Iuven. sat. 6. Terra cessit,
incoelumque ^igravit. Lact. instit l 5. c. 5.
it left this world; and it is Job 28.13, 14.
not now to be found here on earth, in the land of the living. It must be
fetched again, as ( Hesiod. Oper. l. 1.
they say) fire was by Prometheus from heaven. Iam. 1.17.
Every good giving, and every perfect gift, says S. James, comes (...), i.
(...), ut Act. 14.17. vel (...), Mat. 21.25. i. a ^eo. Drus. in prove. and
quaest. l. 2. c. 61.
from above.

Luk 19.10.
he came to seek what was lost. And Luke 15.8, 9.
the Widow in the Parable, by seeking found her lost Dram eni^ valebat 7.
denarios cum dimidio. Breerwood de number. Iud. cap. 1.
testor. Such are these, we had them once, but we have now lost them. Our
first Parents were (...), i. in ostro nati: uti Claudian. nup. Honor. and Mar.
borne, as I may so say, with this Genes. 1.26, 27. Eccles. 7.29.
royal robe; they were created with this Psalm. 8.5.
imperial Crown. But the Devil stripped them of it; Porrexit pomum, and
surripuit Paradisum. Bernard. de Grad. humil. 4.
he cheated and coosened them of this Crown, as we use to do Children, with
Genesis 3.5, 6.
the Apple, or Ficum vult Moses Bar-Ceph. and Theod. in Genesis quaest. 28.
Malogranatum Machmed. in Alcoran. Malum Medicu^ alii, alii Perficum, quod Peche
Gall Aliipomum Paradisi, prout fructum quendam Syri indigitant. Sed and Malum
ex Hebraeis quidam ex Cant. 2.3. vide Perer ad Genes.
what ever fruit it were, that he tendered unto Eve. So they lost it: and their
posterity must recover it, ere they can enjoy it; they must win this Crown
again, before they may wear it.

difficulty, because otherwise they cannot be had.

Now they must again be sought in regard of the dignity of them. Which worth
and dignity of them appears in the next Point.

Use of this in a word.

First use hereof may be for Confutation, Confutation.
to control the vain conceits of those that think that these things will
come without seeking; Credunt dormientibus sibi haec confecturam Deum. Ter.
Adelph. 4. 5. Non curant quaerere, quae tamen desiderant invenire: cuoiunt
consequi, non and sequi. Bern. in Cant. 2.
that hope to have them though they never once look after them, or the means
whereby they may be attained; that make account that heaven and happiness will
drop into their mouths, if they do but gape when they lie a dying, and say,
Lord have mercy upon me, or, Lord help me to Heaven. It were to little
purpose for our Savior to incite us here to seek thus after them, if without
such seeking they might be had. No, Prove. 2.4. (...). Menan^,
If thou seek for it, says Solomon, as for silver, and search for it, as for
treasure, etc. And God, says our Savior, will have us Matthew. 7.7 (...).
Sopho^l. Plut de fortun.
ask that we may have, and seek that we may find, and knock that it may be
opened unto us. And as he adds there, that Matthew. 7.8. (...). Idem. Nil tam
d^fficile, quin quaerendo investigari posset. Ter. Heaut. 4. 2.
He that seeks finds: so Illud desperandum est, posse nobis casu bonum
tantum in fluere. Sen. epist. 50.
certain it is, that he that seeks not, is never like to find ought.

Use hereof may be for Conviction, Conviction.
to convince many Nemo in sapientiam incidit. Nulli sapere casu obligit. Sen.
epist. 76. Et cui credere contigit? Bern. de Consid. lib. 3.
not to have what they profess and pretend to have. For how many pretend title
to, and claim interest in this Kingdom, that never took pains or labor
about the compassing of it? How many profess themselves to be possessed of the
Righteousness here spoken of, that never traveled or labored in the
searching out of it, or in the seeking after it?

He would be deemed a most vain man, that would boast and bear men in hand
that Quomodo Caius Caesar Gallis Graecisque aliquot una condemnatis,
Gallograeciam se subegisse gloriabatur, cum pedem Italia non extulisset. Et
Oceanum ipsum devicisse, cum legionibus signo dato imperasset, ut conchas per
otium in litore legerent. Sueton. Caio. cap. 29. and 46. Et Domitianus qui
falsum a Germania triumphum egit, emptis per commercia, quorum habitus and
crines in captivorum speciem formarentur. Tacit. Agric. At si quis de
certaminibus gloriose peractis gloriaretur, qui nec oleum quidem quo ungi
solebant athletae, oculis unquam usurpasset, ut Theocrit. idyl. 4.
he had been at the East Indies, conquered a great part of the Country, and
brought away much treasure and rich commodities from thence, who yet had never
crossed the seas, or set foot once on ship-boord, or come near the sea side.
And no less vain are they, that would have men believe them, that they have
made conquest of the Spiritual Canaan, and possessed themselves of much of the
wealth and treasure of it; when as they never yet stirred once out of the
mystical Egypt, never so much as enquired the way to it, much less ever
traveled toward it. He would be deemed most ridiculous, that would profess
Ac sierud tum se quis jactaret, (...), qui nec A^sopum unquam d^dicisset: ut
Aristoph. avib.
to have rare skill in the Mathematickes, or some other abstruse Science, when
he had never spent day or hour in the study thereof. And no less ridiculous
are they that will seem to have gotten much skill in this spiritual Art
regnandi, sive imperandi, ut Live. hist. 22. vel art imperatoria, ut Cic. de
Orat. l. 1. (...). Greg. Naz Apolog.
King-craft, (if I may so term it) and yet never beat their heads, or busied
their brains about it; never studied Evangelium Regni. Matthew. 4.13. and 24.14.
the Gospel of this Kingdom, the only Book out of which it may be learned.
Yea in this regard is this Spiritual Treasure rather like learning than
wealth; in that Pecunia ven^et ultro, honor afferetur, gratia ac dignitas
fortasse ingerentur: virtus in te non incidet, ne levi quidem opera, aut parvo
labor cognoscitur. Sen. epist. 76.
worldly wealth and Honors may be had without labor or study by the donation
of others, or by succession and descent; this, Philosophia non est res
beneficiaria: non obvenit. Sen. epist. 90.
not so; each one must seek it for himself, and must seek and labor in it
himself, or else the seeking of others, and their endeavor for him, will stand
him in little stead.

It is a pithie speech, indeed, that Bernard has, and in his sense not
unsound. Speaking of those words of the Prophet, Lament. 3.25.
The Lord is good to him that trusts on him, and to the soul that seeks
him; Si tam bonus quaerenti, quid invenienti? (Quomodo idem in Cant. Si tam
bonus sequentibus, quid consequentibus?) Sed in hoc mirum est, quod nemo te
quarere valet nisi qui prius invenerit. Vis quaeri ut inveneriaris: vis
inveniri ut amplius quararis. Bern. de dilig. Deo, cap. 3.
If God be so good, says he, to him that seeks him, what will he be to him
when he finds him? But a strange matter it is; That no man can seek God
before he have found him; nor can a man linne seeking of him, when he has once
found him. God will be sought, that he may be found of us; and he will be
found, that he may further be sought of us. Men cannot seek him, says he,
until they have found him: and certain it is that they have not yet found
him, that never sought him, or that do not still constantly and Psalm. 105.4.
continually seek him.

Yet for the better explaining of Bernards meaning in the words before recited,
and the assoiling of some scruple that thence might arise, as also for the
reconciling of some Luke 11.10. and 13.24.
speeches of our Savior, that may seem the one to cross the other: we must
understand, that Esai. 65.1.
there is never any seeking on our part, before some proffer on Gods part: for
Potes quaeri and inveniri: praeven^ri non potes. Bern de dilig. Deo, c. 3. Ad
bonum assurgere perfect non possumus, nisi nos spiritus and praeveniendo
exo^tet, and subsequendo confortet. Greg. in Ezech. 10. Nolentem praevenitut
velit: volentem subsequitur, ne frustra velit. Aug. Enchir. cap 32.
man can by no means prevent Gods work. Now to pass by those Romans 1.20. and
2.15.
common lights and helps of nature by God generally afforded unto all, of
which the Apostle Paul to Act. 17.27.
the Athenians, and Act. 14.17.
the Lycaonians in the Acts; because 1 Cor. 1.21. and 2.7, 8, 9.
they never prove effectual in this kind to any purpose ordinarily in any:
and to confine our selves to those aids that he offers and affords usually
in his Church; which alone in ordinary course are effectual to this end: There
is as a twofold vocation; so a twofold disquisition: As Vocatio duplex;
externa, interna: sive generalis and specialis: vel communis and peculiaris:
Vide Aug. de Corrept. and Great. c. 7. Drus. Miscell. lib. 2. cap. 2. and Calv.
Institut. l. 3. c. 24.. 7.
a twofold vocation on Gods part: an external vocation, in the offer of the
means, which does not always take effect; of which our Savior, Matthew. 20.16.
and 22.14.
Many are called, but few chosen: and Quae and vocatio secundum propositum:
Romans 8.28. 2 Timothy 1.9.
an internal vocation, in the blessing accompanying those means, which cannot
be without effect; of which the Apostle, Romans 8.30.
Those that he calls, he justifies; and those that he justifies, he
glorifieth. So there is Disquisitio duplex.
a twofold disquisition or seeking on our part; an outward seeking (if I may so
term it) in the use of the means, the study of them, and pains taking about
them, which yet is not always effectual: For, Hosh. 5.6.
They shall go to seek the Lord with their sacrifices; but they shall not
find him, says the Prophet: And Luke 13.24.
Many shall seek to enter, but shall not be able, says our Savior. The other
inward, Ier. 29.13, 14.
when those means by the gracious assistance of Gods Spirit, have wrought
thoroughly upon the heart: of which the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.^.
Blessed are they, that seek him with their whole heart: and God by the
Prophet, Ier. 24.7. and 30.21. and 31.18, 19. 1 Ioh. 5.20.
They shall seek me, and find me, because they shall seek me with all
their heart. And this is that seeking that Bernard speaks of; which is ever
effectual; and of which our Savior therefore, Matthew. 7.7, 8. Luke 11.9, 10.
Whosoever seeks finds. For none so seek but such as by effectual
vocation are found of God before: none so seek, but such as by effectual
conversion (the inseparable effect and fruit of such vocation) have Ier. 24.7
and 31.18.
returned unto God, and so found him in part already. But as none are called
ordinarily in the latter sort, but those that are called first in the former:
so none seek ordinarily in this latter sort, but those that have diligently
Pro. 2.3, 4, 5. and 4.19.10, 20. and 8.33, 34 John 5.39. Luke 10.39, 34. Act.
8, 27.28. and 16.13, 14. and 17.11, 12.
sought first in the former: which seeking our Savior therefore inciteth
hereunto, and by which we may hope to attain to the latter, if we continue
constant therein, through Gods blessing thereupon. But without it there is no
hope ever to attain to it, or to find that, that in some sort may be John
7.34. Romans 9.31, 32.
sought and not found, but Psalm. 119.155.
cannot be found unless it be sought; and when it is once found, is so far
from causing men to give over their seeking, that it makes them, Sirac. 24.23,
24.
incited by that sweetness that they find in it in part found, Esai. 26.9.
Psalm. 119.10, 45.
seek more diligently now than ever before.

seeking then, these things are not to be expected. But are they worth the
seeking? may some man say. Propter saporis dulcedinem, qui gustatus magis
excitat appetitum, Bern. de Temp. Manducant and bibunt, quia inveniunt; and
quia esuriunt and sitiunt, adhuc quaerunt. Nam and inveniendus quaeritur, and
quaerendus indenitur, qui and quaeritur ut inveniatur dulcius, and invenitur,
ut quaeratur avidiut, Aug. de Trinit. l. 15. c. 2. Sic ergo queramus tanquam
inventuri, and sic inveniamus tanquam quaesituti: quia Sirac. 18.6. ibid. l. 9.
c. 1. Videantur and Ambros. epist. 11. Gregor. in Evang. hom. 36. Bern de
Dilig. Deo, c. 1. and epist. 2. and 341. and de Diverse. 38.
There are indeed some Nugae d^fficiles. Turpe est difficiles habere nugas: Et
stultus labor est ineptiarum, Martial l. 2. epist. 86. tristes ineptiae,
ca^^ans. imo ridiculae, Sen. epist. c 13. Sophismata, quae nec ignoranti
nocent, nec scientem juvant, Idem epist. 45.
toylsome toys, hard to come by, but of no use or worth when a man has them:
like an Olive, or a Date-stone, hard to crack the one, and to cleave the other,
but nothing or nothing worth ought, when it is cracked or cloven, within either:
And the very (...). Scopas Thessal. Plu. de Avarit.
wealth, yea and the Latrunculis Iudimus. In supervacuis subtil^tas teritur,
Sen. epist. 106.
learning too of many consists much in such.

(...).
hard and difficult, so they are singularly (...).
excellent. And therefore difficulty; so they may well be sought that they may
be had, in regard of the dignity, the worth, the excellency of them; yea in
regard of the use too, and the necessity of them.

a Crown, a Kingdom, the highest pitch of ambitious men's aims. (...),
Eteocles apud Euri^. Phoenis. apud Plut. de And. Poet. and sanit. tuend. Nam si
violandum est jus, regnandi gratia violandum est: aliis rebus pietatem colas,
Cic. Offic. lib. 3.
If for any thing a man should break his faith, it should says one. And the
Devil hoped, if by any means, by the proffer of Matthew. 4.8.
a Kingdom, to draw our Savior to his impious and devilish desires. If such
reckoning then be made of 1 Cor. 9.25.
a corruptible Crown, of Psalm. 68.33.
an earthly Kingdom, Dan. 5.21.
the Kingdom of men; that which when it has been long a getting, may be lost
and gone again the very next (...), Eurip. (...). Idem Hecub. Quicquid longa
series, multis laboribus, multa numinis indulgentia struxit, id unus dies
spargit and dissipat, Senec. epist. 91.
day, yea may be overturned in an (...), Demetrius Phalar. apud Plut. ad
Apollon. Longam moram dedit malia properantibus, qui diem dixit; hora
momentumque temporis evertendis imperiis suffecere, Sen. epist. 91. Simul parta
ac sperata decora unius horae fortuna evertere potest, ^iv. hist. l. 30.
Vincendo didici magna momento obrui, Sen. Troad. 2.2.
hour: what account should be made of an (...), 1 Cor. 9.25. (...), Iam. 1.12.
incorruptible Crown, of a Crown that cannot be lost, of an heavenly
Kingdom, the Kingdom of God; of (...), Heb. 12.28.
a Kingdom, says the Apostle, that cannot be shaken, of Psalm. 45.6.
a Throne that stands firm and immovable for ever?

Righteousness, Ephesians. 4.24.
a principal part of Gods Image, Genesis 1.27. (...), Greg. Naz. in Matthew. 19.
Haec antecedit animalia; Deos sequitur, Senec. epist. 76.
wherein Man at first was made: that whereby man excels the beasts; and that
makes him 1 John 3.7. 1 Pet. 1.15.16.
like God; yea without which man is not only no better, but far worse than a
beast; and whereby men do as far excel men, as men themselves do beasts.
For Ipsis bestiis bestialior est homo ratione vigens, and ratione non vivens,
Bernard. in Cantic. 35.
a man endued with reason, without this righteousness, that is, without
religion, is (not only as bad as, but) far worse than any beast. And Ratione
homines jumentis, religione homines hominibus antistant. Vltra homines
provebit^ probitas sola, infra hominem detrudit improbitas, Boet. Consol. lib.
4. Pros. 3.
Religion makes some men excel other some that want it, as much as reason
makes them excel brute beasts.

It was the saying of an Heathen Man, that Nihil est virtute formosius, nihil
pulchrius, nihil amabilius, Cicer. de Not. Deor. lib. 1. and 2. and de Amic.
Quae si oculis cerneretur, mirabiles sui amores excitaret, Idem Offic. lib. 1.
Omnes mortales in admirationem sui raperet. Senec. epist. 89. Nemo non amore
ejus arderet, si videre illam con^ngeret, ibid. 115.
Moral virtue was so beautiful, that if it could be seen with bodily eyes,
it would make men to be wondrously enamoured with it. And yet was that, says
Lactantius, but a bare Vmbra quaedam and imago justitiae, Lactant. Institut. l.
5. c. 17. and l. 6. c. 6. and Faber. in Romans cap. 2.
shadow of the Righteousness here spoken of. But Si rem ipsam praeclarissimam
omnium penitus videremus, quonam gaudio compleremur, quum tantopere ejus
adumbrata opinione laetemur? Cic. de Fin lib. 5.
if the shadow be so excellent, what is the substance? if the Picture be so
beautiful, what is the Person it self, which the Picture comes so far
short of? Tanti Vitrum, quanti margaritum. Tertul. ad Martyr. Tanti vitreum,
quanti verum margaritum? Hieron. ad Demetr. ad Salvin. and alibi.
If they made such account of their glassie bugle, says Jerome after
Tertullian, how ought this rich and precious Pearl of ours to be esteemed of?
This to that is as (...), Homer. Iliad. z. Vilius argentum est auro, virtutibus
aurum, Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 1.
Gold to Brass, says Bernard; and a little of Melius est pallens aurum quam
fulgens aurichalcum. Bernard. in Cantic. 61.
the palest and coursest Gold is far better than much of the finest and
brightest Brass.

But let us consider them a little severally.



A Kingdom propounded to all Christ's followers and favorites.

Seek Gods Kingdom, says our Savior.

1. What Kingdom this is; 2. Wherein it consists; 3. Why it is so termed.


Kingdom then here spoken of, is not so much the Kingdom of God over us, as
the Kingdom of God in us: not the Kingdom whereby Psalm. 103.19. Luke 19.27.
he reigns over us; (and yet it is no small privilege and preeminence to be
subject and Psalm. 18 and 36. Title. (...), Man. Palaeol. praecept. 7. Romans 1.1.
Phil. 1.1. Merito Paulus hoc titulo gloriatur, 2 Cor. 11.22. O praeclarum
ministerium, quo non principatu gloriosius? Bern. de Consid. l. 2.
servant to so puissant a Sovereign; if they were counted 1 King. 10.8.
happy that were in Salomons service, then are they much more Psalm. 84.4, 13.
blessed that dwell in Gods house and court, that have dependence upon him:)
but the Kingdom whereby he reigns in us, and wherein we reign with him:
Luke 12.32.
It is your Fathers will, says our Savior, to give you a Kingdom. And, Apoc.
1.6. and 20.6.
He has made us Kings and Priests, and we shall reign with him Apoc. 22.5.
for ever. And, Apoc. 3.21.
To him that overcommeth I will give to sit on my Throne, as I overcame, and
sit on my Fathers Throne.

Kingdom there are two degrees.

Regnum gratiae.
a Kingdom of Grace; wherein Romans 5.21.
we reign here in grace by Christ, whereby we have power here;

Humilis res est stultitia, abjecta, sordida, servilis, multis affectibus and
saevissimis subjecta. Hos tam graves Dominos, interdum alternis imperantes,
interdum pariter, dimittit a te sapientia, quae sola libertas est, Sen. ep. 37.
Quem vicerim quaeris? non Persas, non extrema Medorum, etc. sed avaritlam, sed
ambitionem, sed metum mortis, qui victores gentium vicit, Idem epist. 72. Nulla
major est victoria, quam vitia domuisse. Innumerabiles sunt qui urbes, qui
populos habuere in potestate; paucissimi, quise. Quaest. Not. l. 3.
our natural corruptions, 2 Pet. 2.12. Jude 16. Non eunt, sed feruntur, Sen.
ep. 23. Turpe est autem non ire, sed ferri, Idem ep. 37.
wherewith worldly men are led captive, enslaved and enthralled, and which Romans
6.17. 1 Cor. 12.2. Tit. 3.3.
before our conversion bare sway, and ruled in and over us also. Sibi imperare
maximum est imperium, Sen. ep. 113. Si vis tibi omnia subjicere, te
subjicerationi. Multos reges, si ratio te rexerit, Idem ep. 37.
It is a point of the highest command, says the Heathen man, for a man to have
command of himself. Regem non fa iunt opes, Non vestis Tyriae color, Non
frontis nota regiae, Non auro nitidae trabes. Rex est, qui posuit metus, Et
dirimala pectoris: Qui tuto positus loco, Infra se videt omnia. Rex est qui
metuit; rex est qui cupit nihil. Sen. Thyest. 2.2. Latius regnes avidum domando
Spiritum, quam si Lybiam remotis Gadibus jungas, and uterque Poenus Serviat
uni, Horat. Carm. 2.2. Rectius enim is appellabitur Rex quam Tarquinius, qui
nec se nec suos regere potuit. Cic. de Finib. l. 3. -- tum omnia jura tenebis,
Cum poteris Rex esse tui, Claud. de 4. Coss. Hon.
He is a King that dreads naught; he is a King that covets and desires
nothing. And, Immane regnum est posse sine regno pati. Senec. Thyest. 3.1.
It is a wondrous great Kingdom for a man to be able to contemn a Crown, to
set light by a Kingdom, as Hebr. 11.24, 25, 26.
Moses did, that preferred afflictions with Gods people before it: to tread,
not the Earth only, but the very Apoc. 12.1.
Moon too, and all sublunarie things, as Philip. 3.8.
dross and Trash under his feet.

persecutions, the sword, famine, and nakedness; Romans 8.35, 36, 37.
In all these things, says he, (...), Sicut Sophocl. Elect. (...).
we are more than Conquerors, (What is that? even Triumphers.) through him
that has loved us. For, 2 Cor. 2.14.
God makes us always to (...), i. (...), Theophyl. triumphat, i. triumphare
facit, Primas.
triumph through Christ. Crux Christo currus fuit triumphalis. Thom. Cartw.
Harmon. Evan. in Luc. 13.32. and Joan. 12 32. Sic and col. 2.15. (...), Ignat.
ep. 5. Cum ultima host morte praeliatus, per trophaeum crucis triumphavit,
Tertull. ad. Marc. l. 4.
The very Cross of Christ, says one, was Christ's Charet of Triumph. And the
very same is the Cross even to this day to all Christians; it is their Charet,
their Chair of estate. (...), Ignat. ep. 4. Duris ut ilex tonsa bipennibus,
Per damna, per caedes, ab ipso Sumit opes animu^que ferro. Non hydra secto
corpore firmior vinci dolentem crevit in Herculem. Merses profundo: pulchrior
evenit. Luctere: magna proruet integrum Cum laud victorem, Horat. Carm. 44.
He is a valiant Champion indeed, says Ignatius, who though he be beaten, and
receive many blows, yet will not give over till he have vanquished his
adversary. Apoc. 12.11.
They overcame him, says the Holy Ghost, Apoc. 13.7.
that warred upon them, and overcame them, by the blood of the Lamb, and by
the word of the Testimony, and by not thinking much to lay down their lives
unto death; by setting light (as Act. 20.24.
the Apostle of himself) by their lives. The Spirit of God may seem to
contradict himself when he says in the one place, Apoc. 13.7.
He made war upon the Saints and overcame them; and in the other again, Apoc.
12.11.
They conquered and overcame him. But the one is spoken (...).
according to humane conceit, the other (...).
according to the truth of the thing. And certain it is, that as Gods Tunc
enim non ex malo uno, sed ex omnibus simul and semel liberantur, Aug. in Psalm.
34.17, 19. Ita liberantur, ut liberari amplius opus non habeant, Bern. in
Psalm. 91.15, 16.
Children are never better delivered out of their troubles, than when they
seem not to be delivered at all, when they are delivered out of them by death:
So (...), Oecum. in 2 Cor. 2. (...), Chrysostom. in Romans hom. 15.
they never more prevail against, and triumph over their adversaries, than
when those their adversaries outwardly seem most to prevail against, and to
triumph over them.

Psalm. 45.13.
Majesty is most inward, and 1 John 3.2.
the world cannot so well see it: there is secondly therefore Regnum gloriae.
a Kingdom of Glory, whereby those that Romans 5.21.
reign now in Grace by Christ, shall one day Romans 5.17.
reign in Glory with Christ. For, Coloss. 3.3, 4.
our life is now hidden with Christ in God; says the Apostle: But when Christ,
who is our Life shall appear, then shall we also appear in glory with him.
And, 1 John 3.2.
We shall at his appearing become like unto him, because we shall see him as
he is. As Ephesians. 2.6.
We are now glorified in him, so 2 Thessalonians. 1.10.
he shall then be glorified in us; what time we shall hear from him that
blessed and joyful sound, Matthew. 25.34.
Come and receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world.

Kingdom is called the Kingdom of God;

Matthew. 20.23.
he has prepared it;

Luke 12.32.
he conferreth and bestows it;

Apoc. 4.10.
of and under him we hold it;

Apoc. 20.6.
with him we reign in it; for from him we receive it, and together with him
we reign in it.

a Crown and a Kingdom then, and such a Crown and a Kingdom, that our
Savior here makes offer of?

Reprehension.
as Number. 11.5, 6.
the Israelites preferred the In cepe and allium impensa 1600. talenta in
pyramidum una extruenda, refert Herodot. l. 2.
Leekes and Onions of Egypt, before Psalm. 78.25.
the bread of Angels, John 6.31.
the food that came down from heaven; so prefer paltry Peables before these
precious Matthew. 7.6. and 13 45.
Pearls; (...) Habac. 2 6
thick-clay, as the Prophet speaks, before this Apoc. 3.18.
pure Gold; the worlds counterfeit coin, before this Luke 16.11.
true treasure; the base and slavish service of sin and Satan, before the
Crown and the Kingdom that our Savior here makes offer of: that choose
rather, with Genesis 49.14, 15.
Issakar, (dull asses indeed) to couch themselves quietly between two packs,
and bow their shoulders down to bear any such (even unsufferable and
unsupportable) burdens as (...); Chrysostom. in Matthew. 38.1. Legatur Pers. Sat.
5. and ad eundem Epictetum ex Arian. d^ssert. l. 3. c. 26. apud Casaub. qui eos
multa facere contendunt qui cupiditatibus suis serviunt, quae si servus domini
jussu faceret, de dura servitute sua multum quiritaret.
the World is wont to impose on those that are slaves and drudges to it; than
to rouse up their spirits, that lie grovelling on the ground, seek to shake off
the yoke, and free themselves from this thraldom, and strive to get command
of him, that now keeps them as captives: that Malunt servire Diabolo, quam
regnare cum Christo: Cui servire regnare est, Bern. de Temp. 110. and de bon.
deser.
are content to serve the Devil rather, and their, nay his, brutish lusts, (
(...), Clem. Strom. l. 2. Nulla voluntaria turpior est servitus, Sen. epist. 47.
the baddest and basest service that can be,) than to reign with Christ, or to
serve him in a free and honorable service, whose Romans 6.21. Fallitur egregio
quisquis sub principe credit Servitium: nusquam libertas gratior extat,
Claudian. de Stilic. Philosophiae servias oportet, ut tibi contingat vera
libertas. Qui se illi subjecit and tradidit, statim circumagitur. Hoc enim
ipsum Philosophiae servire, libertas est, Senec. epist. 8.
service is true freedom, and (...), Gregor. Nazianzen. de Pace 2.
to serve him is to reign with him, who makes all his servants Captains,
Commanders and Verius quam Assure, Esai 10.8.
Kings.

Conviction.
not to be Christians indeed and truth, though they bear the name and title of
such. For Christianity is a Kingdom. It not freeth men only from the
thraldom of Sin and Satan; ( John 8.31, 32, 36. Arbitrium voluntatis tunc
est vere liberum, cum vitiis peccatisque non servit, Augustine. de Civitat. lib.
14. cap. 11. Sapientia sola libertas est: Senec. epist. 37. (...). Nisi sapiens
nemo liber: Zeno apud Laert. Cic. Parad. 5. Non natura servum facit, sed
insipientia: nec manumissto liberum, sed disciplina, Ambros. epist. 7. Solus
sapiens liber est, Ibidem.
they are free indeed that Christ makes free;) but it makes them Kings also
to rule and sway over such as Ephesians 2.2.3.
before they were enthralled and enslaved unto. Whereas many millions of those
that profess themselves to be Christians, remain still Satan's vassals, Alius
libidini servit, alius avaritiae, alius ambitioni, omnes timori. D^bo
consularem aniculae servientem: dabo ancillulae divitem, Sen. epist. 47. Si
metuis, si parva cupis, si duceris ira, Servitii patiere j^gum; tolerabis
iniquas Interius leges, Claud. 4. Coss. Hom. Liber est qui servitutem effugit
sui, haec est assidua servitus, and ineluctab^lis, and per diem ac noctem
aequaliter premens, sine intervallo, sine comm^atu. Sibi servire gravissima
servitus est, Sen. Not. q. l. 3. Extrema est servitus, cum animae vitiis
deditae, rationis propriae possessione ceciderint, Boet. Cons.
slaves some to their filthy lusts, some to their muck and their money, some to
their pride and ambition, some to their furious affection, some to one
corruption, and some to another. Yea as one says of Rome when she was in her
Pride, that Victrix gentium, captiva vitiorum. Aug. de Civ l. 15 c. 4.
she conquered other Countries abroad, but was vanquished with her own Vices
at home: and another of the Persian Kings, that (...). Plut. ad prefect.
indoct. 1 Esd. 4.26, 29, 30, 31. Emunt sibi dominas, Ambr. epist. 7. captivarum
suarum captivi. Ibid.
they commanded the whole World, but their Wives or Concubines commanded them.
And Cato of the Romans; (...), Cato Censor. Plut. Apophth.
All men, says he, but we, rule their wives; We rule all men; and our wives
rule us. And the Orator of Verres, that Jurae omnia Populi Romani nutu atque
arbitrio Chelidonis meritriculae gubernari, Cic. Verrin. 5.
he governed the Province, and a base strumpet him. And Themistocles of
himself, and the Athenians, That (...), Plut. in Apophth.
the Athenians ruled all Greece, he the Athenians, his Mother him, and his
Son his Mother: So many in this kind, they are 2 Pet. 2.19.
Masters of others, and yet servants themselves; command some, but are again
commanded by others; Bonus etiamsi serviat, liber est: Malus, etiamsi regnet,
servus est: nec unius hominis, sed quod gravius est, tot dominorum, quot
vitiorum, Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 4. c. 3. Est sapienti and servire libertas:
Stulto and imperare servitus est: Et quod pejus est, cum paucioribus praesit,
pluribus dominis and gravioribus servit. Servit enim propriis passionibus,
servit cupiditatibus suis, quarum dominatum nec nocte potest fugere nec die,
Ambr. ep. 7. Vidit eos qui judiciorum Dominos se dici volebant, harum
cupiditatum esse servos. Cic. Verr. 3. Quos vides sedere celso Solii culmine
Reges, etc. Detrahat siquis superbis Vana tegmina cultus, Iam videbit intus
arctas Dominos far catenas, Multos far tyrannos, Boet. Consol. l. 4. metr.
2. Refraenet prius libidines, spernat voluptates, iracundiam teneat, coerceat
avaritiam, caeteras animi labes repellat. Tum incipiat aliis imperare, cum ipse
improbissimis Dominis dedecori ac turpitudini, parere desterit. Dum his quidem
obediet, non modo Rex, sed liber habendus omnino non erit. Cic. Parad. 5. Vide
and Horat. Ser. l 2. Sat. 7.
have as many Lords as lusts, that bear rule and sway in them; For 2 Pet. 2.19.
by whom a man is overcome, his bondslave he is, says S. Peter: And, Romans 6.16.
His servant he is, whom he yields obedience unto; says S. Paul: And, John
8.34. (...), Diogen. Laert. l. 6. Melior est autem ejus status qui famulatur
homini, quam qui suae servit cupiditati, Aug. in Prosper. Sent. 164.
who so commits sin, is the servant of sin, says our Savior. As long
therefore as Iam. 4.1. -- intus and in jecore agro, Nascuntur domini, Pers.
Sat. 5. Intra se dominos habet: intrae se servitium patitur intolerabile, Ambr.
ep. 7. Levius autem est malum captivum esse corpore quam animo, Salvian. de
Provid. l. 6.
thou have a Master, yea many Masters, within thee, thou art a slave to thy
corruptions, Iam. 1.14. (...), Plat. leg. l. 1. (...), Antonin. vit. sua, l. 7.
(...), Ibid. 12. (...), Ibid. l. 10. and Chrysostom. to. 8. Ser. 13. (...). Tu
mihi qui imperitas, aliis servis miser, atque Duceris ut nervis alienis mobile
lignum, Horat. ser. l. 2. 7.
they rule and sway thee as they list, they wind and turn thee which way they
will, like an artificial motion that goes with a screw, and stirs as that
writhes it; so long as thou reignest not over them, but they reign in and over
thee, and thou art ruled and swayed by them, so long thou art no Christian,
whatsoever thou may be counted or called; For, Christianity is a Kingdom;
and 1 Cor. 7.22.
every Christian is not a Freeman only, but in this kind even Apoc. 1.6. and
5.10.
a King too.

Christians called to a Crown, to a Kingdom? Admonition.
Then let them learn hence how charily and warily it behooves Christian men to
walk of all others.

Soli latere si licet, Regi licet. Sen. de Clem. l. 1 c. 8. Nam lux altissima
fati Oecultum nihil esse sinit, Claud. de 4. Conss. Hon.
The Sun may go unseene as soon as Kings may. Qui inexcelso aetatem agunt,
eorum facta cuncti mortales novere, Sal ust. ad Caesar.
They are in the eye of the world, and Omnium in ista conversi sunt oculi, Sen.
ubi sup.
all men's eyes are on them. And, Matthew. 5.14.
You are the light of the World, says our Savior, not to us Ministers alone,
but to all Christians in general: Ye are as Idem.
a City seated on an hill, that cannot be hid.

In maxima fortuna minima licentia, Salust. in Catil. Magna servitus fortuna
magna, Sen. ad Polyb. c. 26. Minimum debet libere, cui nimium licet, Sen.
Troad. Quanto plus liceat, tam libeat minus, Auson. 7. Sap.
greatest states afford least liberty. Liberiora omnia sunt his quorum
affectus tegi possunt, Sen. ad Polyb. cap. 25. Multa tibi non licent quae
humillimis and in angulo jacentibus licent, Ibid. c. 26. Cui omnia licent,
propter hoc ipsum multa non licent, Ibid. Quam multa tibi non licent, quae
nobis tuo beneficio licent? Serve. ad Neron de Clem. l. 1. cap. 8.
Many things may well beseem mean men, that will in no wise become great
ones. It stood not with Themistocles his state to stoop down to take up of
the spoils, that the enemy had thrown from them in flight; but, (...), Plut.
Themist. Servo quo melior, quo liberior sit avarus, in trivio fixum cum se
demittit ob assem, Non video. Hor. ep. 16. l. 1. Hinc and Pers. Sat. 5. Inque
luto fixum possis transcendere nummum.
Take up of them, if thou will, says he to one of his followers; thou may
well enough; for thou art not Themistocles; thou art not as I am: And many
things may well beseem a worldly man, as Mat. 6.32.
to be greedy of the world, and to Phil. 3.19.20.
mind earthly things, which will in no wise become a Christian.

(...), Dion. Chry. orat. 1.
the greater and higher the person is that offends, the more Indignitate
peccans peccat amplius, Justin. in Authent. and Hilar. Pp. ap^d Great. c. 25. q.
1. c. 4. Majore Regum scelera taxantur modo, Sen. Herc. fur.
heinous and Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se crimen habet, quanto
major qui peccat habetur, Iuvenal. Sat. 8.
conspicuous is his offense. (...), Greg. Naz. in Matthew. 19. In vest labes
candida est insignior, Iuel. Apolog. Eccl. Ang.
Any spot is soon spied upon white apparel; and the least stain does evil
upon a royal roabe. A small defect in a Christian is more, than a greater
matter in a mere Worldling. And Ideo deteriores sumus, quia meliores esse
debemus, Salvian. de Provid. l. 4.
therefore are such worse, says Salvian, though they be no worse, than others,
because they ought to be better.

a Kingdom, that we are here invited unto? This may serve to incite us, if
there be any mettle in us, Exhortation.
to the diligent and industrious seeking after it. Perpessi sunt exercitus
inopiam rerum omniu^, vixerunt herbarum radicibus, and dictu foedis tulerunt
famem. Haec omnia passi sunt pro regno (quo magis mireris) alieno, Sen. epist.
17 Ah miseru quid si peteretur crimine tanto Limes uterque poli? pugna est de
paupere regno. Stat. Theb. l. 1.
Who would not put hard for it, to win a Crown, to gain a Kingdom? Here is
fit matter for our ambitious thoughts and desires to be working upon with
warrant. For, as Augustine observes, that there is a kind of lawful and
religious Qui vetat te esse foeneratorem, idem jussit te esse foeneratorem, et
dicitur tibi, Foenerare, Aug. in Psalm. 36.
Usury, that the Word of God allows; Prove. 17.19.
He that shows mercy to the poor, lends on Usury to the Lord, and it
shall with large interest be repayed him. And there is a kind of spiritual
(...).
Covetousness, that the Spirit of God approves of; when men are Very boni
aviditas luta est, Sen. ep. 23.
greedy of Grace, they can never have enough of it; Matthew. 5.6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness. So there is a
kind of holy (...). Romans 15.20. 2 Cor. 5.9. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
Ambition, that our Savior Christ not allows only, but enciteth also, and
exhorts us hereunto. (...). 1 Cor. 12.31.
Affect, says the Apostle, the best, the chiefest things. And, Let even a
Kingdom at least, a Crown, and no less, says our Savior, be your aim. It
is enough for earthly Princes, their followers and favorites, if they can
attain to some Titles of inferior Honor, to be Dukes and Marquesses, or the
like. But if they begin once, Legatur Dio Cass hist. lib. 57.
with Seianus, to have an eye or aim at a Crown, Nulla fides regni sociis,
omnisque potestas, Impatiens consortis erit, Lucan. lib. 1.
that will in no wise be endured in them. But it is not some Vsque ad regni
dimidium. Ester. 7.2. Mark 6.23.
inferior Honor, some petie place in a kingdom, but the Crown and Kingdom
it self, that our Savior Christ here would have us shoot at, and seek after.
And who would not seek after a kingdom, if he had any hope to attain it? We
see upon what uncertain hopes ambitious persons in such cases lay Imperia
pretio quolibet constant been, Polynices apud Sen. Theb. 4.
all at the stake, and hazard loss, not of living only, but of life. And
certainly our Savior would never encite us to seek after it, if (...).
it were not to be had. Yea he gives us assurance, that if we seek
seriously, and so as we should, we shall find it. For Luke 11.10. Solus Deus
nunquam frustra queritur, etiam quum non invenitur, Bern. de Consid. l. 1.
Every one, says he, that so seeks, finds: he is as sure to find, as if
he had found already. 2 Timothy 1.17.
One siphorus sought me diligently, says the Apostle, and he found me: And
so, Prove. 8.17.
I love them that love me, says the Wisdom of God that Apoc. 19.11.
has the disposing of this Crown, Apoc. 2.26. and 3.21.
of this Kingdom, and all those that seek me early, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
shall be sure to find me. The Kingdoms of this World, as the Aurum
quaesiturus es, and forte non inventurus: quisquis me quaerit, cum illo sum.
August in 1 John 10.
Wealth of this World, may be sought, and not found; this Kingdom we shall
not miss of, if we seek it as we should. Amaturus es honorem, and fortasse
non perventurus. Quis me amavit, and non ad me pervinit? Ibidem.
He that sincerely desires it, has in part attained it already.

a Crown, a Kingdom? may some say. Imperare omnes volunt; parere nemo. (...),
Greg. Naz. Apol.
What man is there that will none of it? What need any man be incited or
exhorted to accept of it? Quis non perpetuo vivere velit? Salvian. ad Eccles.
Cath. l. 1. Nemo est qui beatus esse nolit. Aug. de lib. Arb. l. 1. c. 14.
Vitam beatam omnem hominem modis omnibus velle quis dubitat? Idem Epist. 121.
Who would not have heaven and happiness? Who would not reign in heaven
eternally with God and Christ? Unless it be some wretched and accursed
Atheists, that think there is no such thing to be had.

Subjection.
Yea but there is somewhat more than so in it. Matthew. 19.28.
We must begin to reign here, if we mean to reign there. We must partake
with Christ here in the Romans 8.23.
first fruits of Grace, if we desire hereafter to partake with him in John
1.14.16.
fullness of Glory.

There is no access to this Kingdom, but by Righteousness only.

Seek Gods Kingdom and his Righteousness, says our Savior Christ here.
And, Romans 5.21.
That Grace may reign through Righteousness, says the Apostle elsewhere.

Righteousness, three Questions would be discussed;

1. What is meant by Righteousness here;

2. Why it is called the Righteousness of God;

3 Why no part in this Kingdom can be had without it.

Righteousness; and every true Christian (it is the constant Doctrine of all
our Divines; and Legantur quae Mortonus noster adducit ex scriptoribus
Pontificiis, Apolog. Cath. par. 1. l. 1. c. 24.
our Adversaries wittingly wrong us, when they charge us with the contrary)
has his peculiar share in either. There is Iustitia imputata, Romans 4.6.
a Righteousness imputed, and there is Iustitia impertita, Ephesians. 5.9.
a Righteousness imparted; the one Ierem. 23.6. and 33.16. Romans 10.4. 2 Cor.
5.21.
inherent in Christ, and imputed to us; the other 1 Cor. 1.30. Ephesians. 4.24.
imparted by Christ, and In nobis, non ex nobis, Aug. ep. 143.
inherent in us. For that Esai. 61.1.
spiritual Oil that was powered upon Christ our Head, and wherewith Psalm
45.7.
God anointed him above all his fellows, when John 3.34.
the Spirit was given him beyond measure, like Psalm 133.2.
the Ointment that was powered upon Aarons head, is shed forth and diffused in
some measure, more or less, unto every living member of his mystical Body.
John 1.16.
Of his fullness have we received all, even grace for grace. 1 Cor. 6.11.
The former is the Righteousness of Justification; the latter is the
Righteousness of Sanctification.



Sermon: as where it is said; Matthew. 5.6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness: And, Matthew. 5.10.
Blessed are they that suffer for righteousness sake: And, Matthew. 5.20.
Unless your Righteousness go beyond the Righteousness of the Scribes and
the Pharisees, etc. Which very passage these words seem to have reference unto.

Righteousness that does properly, peculiarly, and immediately make us actually
Kings, and puts us in the actual 2 Pet. 1.4. Men's regnum bona possidet,
Sen. Thy. 2.2. Qui recte faciet, non qui dominatur, erit Rex, Auson. Monosyll.
possession of this Kingdom: the former meriteth it, this enters us into it:
the former purchases it for us; this prepares and fitteth us for it. Romans
4.5, 6, 7, 8.
Our justification acquiteth us of the guilt of sin: Romans 8 1, 2.
Our sanctification freeth us from the power of sin, Romans 6.8, 17, 14.
enabling us to quell it, to subdue it, to prevail against it, that ruled,
conquered, and kept us under before: and so causes us Apoc. 20.6.
to reign here as spiritual Kings over it: yea Ezekiel. 36.25. Ephesians. 5.26.
it cleanses us also of the soil and filth of sin, and so by eating our
corruption out of us by degrees, it prepares and fitteth us for that Kingdom
to come, 1 Cor. 15.50.
which flesh and blood cannot enter, nor corruption inherit. But whether of the
two be here meant, is not greatly material; since that 1 Cor. 6.11. and 1.50.
Romans 8.29, 30.
they never are severed the one from the other: And where the one therefore is
expressed, there the other ever is implied.

Now this Righteousness is here called the Righteousness of God;

Generally, Luke 18.9.
that counterfeit Righteousness that the Scribes and Pharisees so much bragged
of, and gloried so much in; and which our Savior had discovered, taxed, and
rejected before Chap. 5.20.
in this Sermon.

More particularly, in diverse respects:

1. Because it is given of God. For, (...). Nullum bonum, quod non a summo
bono, Aug. de diverse. 3.
All good is of God. And (...), Pindar. Olymp. 9. Nemo absque numine aut est,
aut fuit bonus. Bonus vir sine Deo non est, Sen. ep. 41. Nullu sine Deo meant
bona est, Idem ep. 73.
No John 3.27.
No man can have ought, says S. John the Baptist, unless it be given him from
above. And, James 1.17. (...). Marc. de Leg. Spir. p. 40.
Every good gift, says S. James, is from above, and comes down from the
Father of lights. As Matthew. 19.17.
none is originally and essentially good but God: so no man is in any kind or
degree good without God. Nemo bonus, qui non ex malo bonus, Aug. in Prosper.
Sent. 155.
There is no man good, says Augustine, but that of bad, is by God made good.
And, Qui neminem bonum invenit, neminem salvat, nisi quem praevenit, Bern. de
Great. and lib. Arb.
He, says Bernard, that Psalm. 14.2, 3.
finds no man good, saves none but such as by preventing grace he makes
good.

approved of by God: which that other of theirs is not. It is said of Zachary
and Elizabeth, that they were Luke 1.6.
just in Gods sight. Whereupon says Ambrose, Multi hominibus justi videntur,
pauci Deo. Aliter enim hominibus and aliter Deo. Hominibus sec. externam
speciem and faciem: Deo sec. internam veritatem and virtutem, Ambr. in Luc.
It is one thing to be just in man's sight, and another thing to be just in Gods
sight: An outward show and semblance, is enough for the one: but inward power
and truth is required unto the other. And Luke 16.15. Matthew. 23.27, 28.
that that makes a glorious show in the eyes of man, is most abominable many
times in the sight of God; Aurum hominibus, lutum Deo. Gregor. Mor. l. 34. cap.
13.
Gold in man's eyes, dirt in Gods sight; says Gregory.

conformable to the Law of God; It makes us 1 John 3.4, 6, 9, 10, 24. and 5.2,
3. Romans 7.25.
conformable to it in part here for the present, and it will make us Ephesians.
5.27.
fully and perfectly conformable to it hereafter. Whereas that other of theirs
does nothing less. Tota vita infidelium peccatum est. Et nihil est bonum
absque summo bono, August. in Sent. Prosper. 85.
The whole Life of such, says Augustine, is nothing but sin: and their best
actions, no better than Splendida peccata: Et vitia potius quam virtutes, Idem
de Civit. lib. 19. c. 25. Sine Christo siquidem omnis virtus in vitio est,
Hier. in Gal 3. Incassumque quis laborat in acquisitione virtutum, si aliunde
eas sperat, quam a Domino virtutum, Bern. in Cant. 22. Omne etenim probitatis
opus, nisi semine verae Exoritur fidei, peccatum est, inque reatum Vertitur:
and sterilis cumulat sibi gloria poenam, Prosper. de ingrat.
glittering corruptions.

rewarded of God. The Crown expected is called 2 Timothy 4.8.
the Crown of Righteousness. And, Romans 2.7.
To those, says the Apostle, that by well-doing, and continuance therein,
seek glory, and honor, and immortality, will God give eternal life in that
day. And, Matthew. 6.6.
Thy Father, says our Savior, that sees thee in secret, will reward thee
openly. Yea there is Matthew. 25.34.35, 40. Luke 14.9.
no action so mean or slight proceeding from this, even to Matthew. 10.42. Mark
9.41.
the gift of a Cup of cold water, that shall pass unregarded, or unrewarded
with God. Whereas that other Righteousness of theirs has no reward promised
it. Matthew. 6.2.
Verily I say unto you, says our Savior, not barely, (...).
they have, but they (...). Quod Theophylactus observavit.
have all, their reward: they have Matthew. 23.5, 6, 7.
all they desire, and all they deserve, and all that ever they are like to
have: they may make their (...). Quo modo Paulus Phil. 4.18. (...). De quo
argutius paulo Dunaeus noster ad Chrysostomum Savilianum.
acquittance, for such kind and manner of discharge does our Savior there
allude unto.

But why may a man without this Righteousness have no part in Kingdom?



These among many others:

Commander in this Kingdom, is Hebr. 7.2. (...) (ex Hebr. (...) Genesis 14.18.)
(...). Frustra ergo est author Etymologici, qui (...), inquit, (...). Imo (...)
ad quod Salem alludit, est (...), uti and Apostolus, ibidem, Etymologico
ducente alucinatus est and Meurs. animadv. Miscell. lib. 1. cap. 11.
a King of Righteousness. The Scepter of this Kingdom is Psalm. 45.6.
a Rod of Righteousness. The Throne of this Kingdom is Psalm. 9.5. and 97.2.
a Seat of Righteousness: And the Kingdom it self is Romans 14.17.
a Kingdom of Righteousness: And, 1 Cor. 6.8.
No unrighteous therefore can inherit this Kingdom; that has nothing at all
but Righteous in it. Esai. 60.21.
The people of it, says the Prophet, are all Righteous.

Romans 5.17. Apoc. 20.6.
none but those that have part here in the Kingdom of Grace, may hereafter
partake in the Kingdom of Glory. But by Righteousness we become members of
the Kingdom of Grace. Romans 5.21.
That Grace, says the Apostle, may reign through Righteousness. None but
such therefore have any part in the one; none but such shall ever have share in
the other.

Righteousness is the Royal Roabe. Psalm. 132.9.
Let thy Priests, says the Psalmist, (and the same Persons here are both 1
Pet. 2.9. Apoc. 1.6. and 5.10. and 20.6.
Kings and Priests) be clothed with Righteousness. And, Isai. 62.10.
He has clad me with the Robe of Righteousness. And, Apoc. 19.8.
To the Bride it was given to be arrayed in fine Silk: and (...).
the fine Silk is the Righteousness of the Saints. As no man then might come
into the Wedding-house Matt. 22.11, 12.
without the Wedding Garment; so may no man enter into this Kingdom without
this Royal Robe. Hebr. 12.14.
Without Holiness, says the Apostle, shall no man ever see God. And Psalm.
132.9, 16.
those alone that are clothed with Righteousness here, shall be clothed
everlastingly with Salvation hereafter.

Apoc. 21.27.
No unclean thing can come within the walls and compass of this Kingdom:
nay, Esai. 35.8.
no unclean person can set foot into the Way that leads to it. But this
Righteousness, and this alone is that, that can truly and thoroughly cleanse,
purge, and purify us, and that not Psalm. 24.3, 4. 1 Timothy 2.8.
our hands only, but our Matthew. 5.8. Act. 15.9.
hearts too; as well the Romans 7.22. 2 Cor. 4.16.
inward man, as the outward; as well 2 Cor. 7.1. Ephesians. 4.23.
the Spirit as the Flesh. Whereas that other Righteousness Mat. 23.25. Luke
11.39
cleanses the outside only, but leaves the inside as foul still as ever it
was. And therefore no marvel if our Savior tell us, That Matthew. 6.20.
unless our Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and the
Pharisees, we shall never get into the Kingdom of God.

Kingdom?

Are we ambitious of a Crown? and that such a Crown, Information.
as is not Inest imperio cura maxima maximo, Salust. ad Caes. Seleucus Rex
dicere solebat, si multo scirent, quantum fit negotii tantummodo tot epistolas
scribere ac legere, nec humi projectum diadema tolerent. Alphonsus Arag. Rex, A
sinorum conditionem esse potiorem quam regum: si quidem illis dum pascuntur
dominos parcere, regibus neminem. Rex alius accepto in manus diademate, O
Pannum, inquit, nobilem magis quam felicem! quem siquis penitus cognoscat, quam
multis periculis, sollicitudinibus ac miseriis sit refertus, ne humi quidem
jacentem tollere dignetur, Erasm. in Apophth. l. 6. and 8. Legantur Dio
Chrysostom. de Rege Persarum, Orat. 4. Sen. Thyest. 3. 1, 3 and Oedipod. 1. 1.
and Agamem. l. 2. Et Petrarch. Dialog. 79. and 96. Site itaque locasta in
Theb. 4. Ne metu^; poenas and quidem solvet graves: Regnabit; haec est poena.
--
environed with pricking Cares, as if it were (...), Mark 15.17. De quo
Meditationem Serenissimi Iacobi Regis nostri consulas fis.
a Crown of thorns or thistles, but such a one as may cure and rid our heads
of all carking care? as hereafter we shall see. Learn we here the way to it.
The Way to this Crown, to this Kingdom, is by Righteousness. Seek ye,
says our Savior, the Righteousness of God; and that will bring you to the
Kingdom of God. For, Romans 14.17.
The Kingdom of God is Righteousness. This Kingdom of God is not like the
Kingdoms of this World: that are Scelere parta; scelere retenta: De quibus
Sen. Theb. 4. -- regna cum scelere omnibus sunt exiliis graviora. --
gotten often by wicked courses, and kept by the like: wherein Aude aliquid
brevibus Gyaris and carcere dignum, Si vis esse aliquid. -- Iuvenal. Sat. 1.
men rise by unrighteousness, and wherein not 2 Pet. 3.13.
Righteousness, but -- exeat ausa Qui volet esse pius -- Virtus and summa
potestas Non coeunt. -- Lucan. bell. Phars. l. 8. -- jura, pudorque, Et conjugii
sacrata fides Fugiunt aulas. Fraus sublimi regnat in aula, Sen. agam. 1.2. --
sanctitas, pietas, fides, Privata bona sunt, Sen. Thy. 1.2. Vt nemo doceat
fraudis and scelerum vias, Regnum docebit. -- Ibid. 2.1. -- quid jam non
regibus ausum? Aut quod jam regni restat scelus? Silius bell. Pun. l. 16.
unrighteousness often reigns. There is no way to rise in this Kingdom, there
is no way to attain to this Kingdom, but by Righteousness. Prove. 21.21.
He that follows Righteousness and mercy, shall find Righteousness, and
Life, and glory; says Solomon. For it is the Just, says the Psalmist, that
Psalm. 11.5, 7.
God loves and regards, that Psalm. 5.12.
he regards and protecteth, that Psalm. 17.15.
shall behold his face, that shall Psalm. 140.13.
dwell ever in his house; and that Matthew. 13.43.
shall shine as the Sun, says our Savior, in the Kingdom of God their
Father Dan. 12.3.
for ever and ever.

Eviction.
though a Crown, a Kingdom, an incorruptible Crown, an everlasting Kingdom
be propounded to this Righteousness, and annexed unto it, yet will rather
lose this Crown, rather leave and forgo this Kingdom, than condescend to
accept of it upon such a condition; At Paris ut vivat regnet que beatus, Cogi
posse negat, Horat. epist. 2.
will not be constrained to live happily, and to reign everlastingly, unless
he may do so upon some other terms; will choose rather not to reign, than to
be righteous. If this Crown indeed might be compassed by fraud and deceit, or
by oppression and extortion; not a few would be sure to have a share in it,
that are now never like to have any interest therein. Or if it might be held
with loosnesse and lewdness of life, we should not need much Rhetoric to
persuade many to accept of it. It is (...), Plut. ad prefect. indoct. Peccandi
libidine potentiae suae magnitudinem metiuntur, Vell hist. l. 2. Idque esse
regni maximum pignus putant, Si quicquid aliis non licet, solis licet, Sen.
Agam. 2. 2. Impune quidlibet facere, id esse Regem esse, Salust. Iug. Hoc
principatus praemium putant, Tacit hist. 1.
one maine end, for which many men desire authoritity and greatness, that they
may thereby gain liberty to live and do as they list; Sceptrorum vis tota
perit, si pendere justa Incipit. -- Lucan. l. 8. Vbicunque tantum honesta
dominanti licent, Precario regnatur. -- Atreus, Sen. Thyest. 1.2.
and without which they esteem power and authority naught worth. When Matthew.
3.1, 2.
John the Baptist preached the Gospel of this Kingdom, Mark 6.20.
Herod would willingly have had it, if he might have held his Herodias, his
Harlot with it. When Matthew. 4.23. Mark 1.14.
our Savior Christ published it, Ioh. 12.42, 43, and 3.1
the Pharisees would feign have had it, if with their Matthew. 23.6, 7. John 5.44.
pride, Luke 16.14.
covetousness, and Luke 12.1.
hypocrisy, it might have been had and held; or if such Matthew. 5.20. Luke
18.9.
a specious show of Righteousness would have served the turn for it, as they
dazzled the eyes of the simpler sort with. But when this Matthew. 5.20. and 7.13.
Righteousness of God, this strictness of life, comes to be propounded
together with it, and to be exacted of all those that will have any share in
it; now Mark 6.17, 18.
Herod flies off, and will none of it, Luke 7.30.
the Pharisees keep aloof off, and reject it; and every natural man's
perverse heart thinks it held at too high a rate, Mica 6.6, 7.8.
if without change of his corrupt course of life it cannot be compassed.

Exclusion.
yea and persuade themselves, that they have a good share in it. They have no
share in the former, because they have no part in the latter: They have no part
in the Kingdom propounded by Christ, because no part in the Righteousness
annexed unto it; because they remain still as they were naturally, 1 Cor.
15.32, 33, 34. 2 Cor. 12.21. Tit. 1.10, 12, 15, 16.
unrenewed, unsanctified, unholy, unrighteous, wholly impure and profane both
in heart and in life; or if they have some show of holiness, it is 2 Timothy 3.2,
3, 4, 5.
in outward semblance only, there is no inward substance or power of it. Such
they are; and Psalm. 58.3, 4, 5, and 36.1, 2, 3. Ier. 9.2, 3, 5, 6.
other they refuse to be. They like well of this Kingdom; but they cannot away
with the Righteousness: Number. 23.10.
They are desirous to reign; but unwilling to be righteous. Impius and foelix
sic simul esse cupit, Vt nolit pius esse, velit tamen esse beatus. De Macrino
nescio quis apud Iul. Capitolin.
Happy they would be; but holy they will not be. And yet they hope, they say,
to do as well as the best. A thing that Quod natura negat, nec ratio patitur,
Ibid.
neither Religion, nor natural Reason admits. For God has lincked these
two together with an indissoluble bond, Apoc. 20.6. (...). Bonus beatus omnis,
et malus miser, Socrat. Plato. Gregor. and Cic. Tusc l. 5.
Happiness and Holiness, Reigning and Righteousness; the one as the Crown,
the other as the Robe, which cannot be had or worn therefore the one without
the other. And Matthew. 19.6.
what God has conjoined, man, do he what he can, shall never be able to
dis-joyne, and to sever. Whosoever refuses Romans 8.12.13. Gal. 6 7, 8, 9.
Vivite itaque been, ne moriamini male, August. de verb. Dom. 24. Id age ut
bonam vitam habeas, and quacunque occasion a vita exieris, ad requiem, ad
beatitudinem aeternam exibis: merces enim vitae bonae, aeterna est. Idem
discipl. Christ. c. 2.
to live as a Saint with Christ here on earth, shall never reign as a Saint
with him hereafter in heaven.

(...), Plut. de profect. Itae, (...), Epicur. Stob. cap. 16. Quod body non
est, cras erit: sic vita truditur, Petron. Satyr. Cras hoc fiet, idem cras
fiet. Quid? quasi magnum Nempe diem donas. Sed cum lux altera venit: Iam cras
hesternum consumpsimus: ecce aliud cras Egerit hos annos, and semper paulum
erit ultra, Pers. Sat. 5. Itaque pulchre Chrysostom. ad Pop. Ant. 19. (...).
we be not so for the present, yet intend we, and purpose one day to be such;
we hope to be so ere we die, when we lie a dying at least. As there is no
wretched miser almost, no miserable worldling, no griping cormorant, no filthy
leacher, no debauched hell-hound, unless he be Ierem. 2.25.
desperately bent to destroy his soul, and be wholly given up unto Romans 1.28.
a reprobate sense, and to Ephesians. 4.19.
a senseless estate, but will say, that he means yet one day to do
otherwise; Ier. 8.5, 6.
he goes far, they say, that never turns; and he hops he shall have
time enough so to do ere he die. But they must follow the world, or their
own lusts first a while, and then they will take time at last to look after
these things.

Subjection.
thereby to cheat men of their souls, our Savior here admonishes us to seek
Gods Kingdom and his Righteousness, not in the last, Order.
but Sive aliquid habes; o jam philosophare. Sive nihil, hoc prius quaere qua^
quidqua^, Sen. ep. 17.
in the first place.

Spiritual things as they must be sought, so they must be sought in the first
place:

(...), Nigrinus apud Lucianum.
They must be sought instantly, without longer delay; Ab hoc incipiendum est.
Nihil prius quam hoc parandum est. Quid tu differs and post caetera paras? Sen.
epist. 17.
they first, Prove. 4.5, 7.
before and above all other things. Seek ye first Gods Kingdom, and his
Righteousness, says our Savior. And, Prove. 8.17.
He that seeks me early, says Gods Wisdom by Solomon, shall find me.

And great reason there is, why it should so be.

Merito poscit studia majora pars melior, Eucher. ad Valor. Prior pars potior.
Vt quae utilitate prior est, non sit consideratione posterior, Ibidem.
The better part justly claims the principal care, and to be provided for in
the first place. Other things concern our bodies; these our soul and its
welfare. And as our Savior says, Matthew. 6.25. Luke 12.23.
The body is better than raiment: so (...), Plut. cont. Epic. (...), Idem de
Tranq. (...), Aristot. Polit l. 7. c. 1. Nostri melior pars animus est, Sen.
quaest. Not. (...). Greg. Naz. ad Cledon. 1. (...), Idem de Nupt. (...), Post
Euripid. Idem in Iul. 1. (...), Idem Apolog.
the Soul is better than the body. Besides that, The Soul may do well
without the Body; but the Body cannot do well without the Soul. Our (...),
Chrysostom. tom. 8. ser. 17. Prima animi bona, Iuven. Sat. 8.
first and principal care therefore should be for our soul, and those things
that concern it; and for these therefore in the first place, because they
principally concern it.

Aeterna momentaeneis praeserenda sunt.
Things eternal should be preferred before things temporal. 2 Cor. 4.18.
While we look, says the Apostle, not on the things that are seen, but on
the things that are not seen. For the things that are seen, are temporal;
but the things that are not seen, are eternal. And, John 6.27.
Labor, says our Savior, not for the meat that perishes, but for (...),
Plut.
the meat that endures unto life eternal. But (...), Euripid. Mortalium
mortalis est faelicitas. Mortale est omne mortalium bonum. Metrodorus de his
loquitur bonis ad quae concurritur, Sen. Epist. 98.
all other things are temporal and transitory; Certum est sen piternumque
virtus bonum. Hoc unum contingit immortale mortalibus, Sen. Epist. 98.
these only that our Savior enciteth hereunto, are eternal. And what
comparison then between the one and the other?

Supervacua necessariis postponenda sunt, Sen. epist. 49. and 109.
Things necessary ought to be preferred to the first place. But these are the
only necessary things. Vnicum necessarium, Luke 10.42.
There is but one thing necessary; says our Savior to Martha. Which Psalm.
27.4. (...), Chrysostom. tom. 8. Sers. 17.
one thing therefore only David desired; and Paul made his Phil. 3.12.13.
maine aim, counting all but as dross and trash unto it: to wit, this
Kingdom, and the Righteousness of it. The old Proverb here holds, Aut
Caesar, aut nullus, (...), Gregor. Naz. in Pentecost. Omnis homo aut est cum
Christo regnaturus, aut cum diabolo cruciandus, Aug. de Temp. 85.
Either a King, or a Caitiffe. The greatest King in the world, if he miss of
this Kingdom, is as miserable a wretch as may be.

Indignu^ est dare Deo, quod dedignatur homo, Hier. in Malac. 1. Great. Decret.
Did. 49. c. 3.
It is a most unworthy thing to deal so with God, as no man would endure to be
dealt with. We will serve God, forsooth: but when? when we are now good for
naught. When we have served our selves of the world, and satisfied our own
lusts, are glutted with the one, and have surfetted of the other, and are unfit
and unable any longer to follow either; -- Postquam lapidosa ^cheragra Fregerit
articulos, veteris ramalia fagi, Pers. Sat. 5. Cum omnibus membris extorti and
fracti, ne in lectulo quidem queant nisi ab aliis moveri; uti de Domitio Tullo,
Plin. epist. 18. lib. 8.
when we are scarce able to turn our withered bodies, and wearied bones in
our bed, then will we offer and tender our service to God. Malac. 1.8. Non
pudet te reliquias vitae tibi reservare, and id solum tempus bonae menti
destinare, quod in nullam rem conferri possit? Sen. de brev. vit. cap. 4.
Offer it to thy Prince, says the Prophet; and see if he will accept of it.
Yea make proffer of thy self then, say I, to any mean man. And it is an
unworthy usage of God, for a man to offer that unto God, that any man would
think scorn of.

Non omnis aetas ad perdiscendum sat est. Plaut. Truc. 1. 1. Nullum non tam
magnis rebus tempus angustum est, Sen. q. Not. l. 3. Non cum vacaveris,
philosophandum est: Omnia alia negligenda, ut huic assideamus, cui nullum
tempus satis magnum est, etiamsi a pueritia usque ad longissimos humani aevi
terminos vita protenditur, Idem ep. 72.
All man's life is little enough, were it never so long, as for the learning, so
for the attaining of these things. And (...); Epicur. Stob. c. 16. Nihil in
diem, nihil in horam permittitur, Sen. ad Marc. cap 10. Nihil ne in totum
quidem diem certum est, Idem ad Polyb. c. 29.
we have no surety of any time, no not of an hour. Psalm. 31.15.
My times, says David, are in thine hands. Our times are in Gods hands, who
Qui promisit poenitenti veniam, non promisit poenitendi horam. Qui poenitenti
misericordiam promisit, peccanti crastinum non promisit, Aug. de verb. Dom. 59.
and homil. 11. and 13. and in Sent. Prosp. 72.
as he has promised pardon, says Augustine, upon our repentance, so he has
not promised us, so much as an hour for repentance. And when Apoc. 2.21, 22.
he has given men space, but they have no grace to turn, it is a just thing
with him Apoc. 10.6, 7.
to deny them futher time for turning. Maximum been vivendi impedimentum est
expectatio, quae pendet ex crastino. Perdis hodiernum; quod in manu alterius
positum est disponis; quod in tua dimittis, Sen. de brevit. vit. cap. 9.
It is a fond thing therefore to let go and lose the time that we have, in
hope of, and building upon that that we may never have; to let that go that
is in our own hand, relying upon that that is in another hand.

Durus valde, imo potius, quod molestius est, valde mollis capitur,
consuetudine mala and diutina fractus, qui vitiis simul and emarcuit, and
induruit, Sen. ep. 112.
The longer we defer it, the more unfit shall we find our selves for it. Qui
non est hodie cras minus aptus erit, Ovid. remed. l. 1.
He that is not fit for it to day, will be more unfit for it to morrow.
Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati, Bern. de Cons. cap. 4.
Continuance in sinning hardens in sin, and breeds a brawninesse in the
Soul: while Nature, and Custom, (...), Arist. Eth. Mag. l. 2. c. 6.
Consuetudo altera natura, Cic. Fin. l. 5. Bern. de Diverse. 14.
a second Nature, concurring together, Ier. 13.23. Natura and consuetudo
robustissimam faciunt and invictissimam cupiditatem, Aug. ad Simpl. l. 1 q. 1.
Ex voluntate perversa facta est libido; and dum servitur libidini facta est
consuetudo: and dum consuetudini non resistitur, facta est necessitas. Idem
Conf. l. 8. c. 5. Inveterata in nobis malorum omnium labe, aliter jam non vitio
si esse non possumus, nisi ut omnino non simus, Salv. de Prove. l. 6. Longo quod
usu in pejus usque induruit, multo facilius fregeris quam flexeris, Buch. Bapt.
produce an irrecoverablenesse in evil.

Righteousness should be sought in the first place, because (...), Arist.
Eth. Nicom lib. 5 cap. 1. and Mag. lib. 1. cap. 34. et Eudem. lib. 4. cap. 1.
(...), Plato de Rep. lib. 4. Iustitia instar sanitatis est, sine qua nihil
quicquam juvat. Sine justitia nihil valet, Cic. Offic. lib. 2. nihil potest
esse laudabile, Ibid. lib. 1. Domina siquidem est omnium et regina virtutum,
Ibid. lib. 3.
Nothing whatsoever, though never so good, either is good, or can do good
without it. Yea the better and the more excellent any thing is, the worse it
is, if it be not joined with it.

What is better than government? the very Sine imperio nec domus ulla, nec
civitas, nec gens, nec hominum universum genus stare, nec rerum natura omnis,
nec ipse mundus potest, Cic. de leg. lib. 3. Istud est vinculum, per quod
Respub. cohaeret: ille spiritus vitalis, quem tot millia trahunt: nihil ipsa
perse futura nisi onus and prada, si men's illa imperii subtrabatur, Senec. de
Clem. l. 1. c. 4.
Life of a State. Yet if the Scepter be not swaied aright; if it rule not
according to justice and right; Regiment without righteousness degenerateth,
and turns into Tyranny; it is but Iudex injustus latro cum privilegio est.
Sicut medicus imperitus, homicida. Colum. lib. 1. Iudex locusta civitatis est
malus, Scalig. Ate.
Robbery with authority. For the maine Fruendae justitiae causa reges
constituti sunt, Cic. Offic lib. 2. Iudex iniquus and latrone pejor est.
end of government is for the execution and enjoyment of justice: and without
it therefore government is no better than plain (...), Plut. ad prefect
indoct. Remota justitia quid sunt Regna nisi magna latro^ima, Aug. de Civit. l.
4. cap. 4.
robbery; yea it is in some respect ^nj^sta regna justa latrocinia sunt.
worse than it.

What is (...), Euripid
better than Law? the (...), Arist. Rhet. l. 1 c. 3. Praesunt enim
Magistratibus leges, ut populo Magistratus, Cic. de Leg. l. 3. (...). Demosth.
apud Stob.
life of Government. But Leges iniquae nec leges dicendae sunt, Aug. de Civit.
l. 19. c. 21.
unjust Laws are not worthy the Name of Laws. Esai. 10.1.
Woe to those, says the Prophet, that make unjust Laws. Woe to those that
make them; yea and woe to those also for whom they are made. For Legibus
fundata civitas, legibus evertitur, Plin. Paneg.
they are but a means to undo those, for whose good they are pretended.

(...), Gregor. Naz. in Iul. 1. (...): Idem ad Cledon, 2. Pax optima rerum Quas
homini novisse datum. Pax una triumphis Innumeris potior. -- Silius bell. Pun.
lib. 2.
What is better than Peace, Unity, Agreement, and Concord? Iudicia, legesque
esse non possunt pace sublata, Cic. Phil. 8.
Without which those former also are of no use, of no force. The very (...),
Greg. Nazian. de Pace 3. Dulce nomen est pacis: res verd ipsa tum jucunda, tum
salutaris, Cic. Philip. 2. and 13.
Name of Peace is sweet; but the thing it self much sweeter. Behold, says the
Psalmist, (...), Greg. Naz. de Eutax.
how goodly and how pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity! Psalm. 133.2.
It is for the pleasantness of it, like the precious Levit. 8.12.
Ointment that was powered upon Aarons Head, that wet his Beard, and ran down
to the very skirts of his Garments. It is Pax serenitas mentis, tranquillitas
animi, simplicitas cordis, vinculum amoris, consortium charitatis. Haec est
quae simultates tollit, bella compescit, iras comprimit, diseordes sedat,
inimicos concordat, cunctis est placita, Aug. de verb. Dom. 57.
delightful not to those themselves alone, that are at unity among
themselves, but it sends forth a pleasing savor to their neighbors round
about them: as on the other side, contentious persons are not troublesome to
either other only, but to all that dwell near unto them. Quod in cantu
harmonia, in civitate concordia, arctissimum atque optimum incolumitatis
vinculum, Cic. de Repub. l. 2. Aug. de Civit. lib. 2. cap. 21.
Concord in societies, is as Harmony in consorts, which being duly observed,
makes the Music delightful; being not observed, by jarring makes all harsh
and untunable, as well to the hearers, as to the singers themselves. Again,
for the profitablenesse and behovefulnesse of it, Psalm. 133.3.
It is like the dew of Hermon, and that that comes down upon the Hill of
Sion. It is as a sweet Proverb. 19.12.
dew, that makes all things grow and thrive; as the contrary spoileth and
lays all things waste, like the Hag. 1.9.
blast of some malignant aspect. Concordia res parvae crescunt: discordia
maximae dilabuntur. Micypsa apud Sal. Iugur. (...), Eccles. 4.12. Gregor Naz.
ad Egypt. adven.
Concord and agreement adds strength even to mean things; discord and
disagreement brings the strongest to wrack. And no marvel: For Nihil beatum
non favente numine. (...), Aeschyl. Theb
without the Blessing of God what can prosper; yea or subsist? But Psalm. 133 3
There, says the Psalmist, has God promised his Blessing, (to wit, Verse. 1.
where Brethren agree together in one) and life for evermore. But Mat. 18.19,
20. Romans 16.20.
the God of Peace will give Pacis Deus nisi pacem colentibus benedictionem non
dabit, Cyprian. Quid simultates amas, quod autoripacis placere non potest? Non
potest concordiam habere cum Christo, qui discors esse voluerit cum Christiano,
August. de verb. Dom. 57.
no blessing there, where Peace and Unity is not. So that there is nothing
more delightful, more behovefull than Peace. In regard whereof, it is that the
Apostle Paul so often, and so instantly enciteth unto it. Ephesians. 4.1. -- 6.
I therefore Paul, the Lords Prisoner, beseech you, that you would walk worthy
of the Calling whereunto you are called; with all humbleness of mind, and
meekness, with long suffering, supporting one another through Love;
Endeavoring to retain the unity of the Spirit in the Col. 3.14.
bond of Peace. There is Romans 12.5. 1 Cor. 12.12, 27.
one Body, and 1 Cor. 12.13.
one Spirit, one Psalm. 133.1.
Faith, one Hope, one Baptism, 1 Cor. 8.6.
one Lord, one God and Father of all, above all, through all, and in you all.
And again, to pass by many other passages; Philip. 2.1, 2.
If therefore there be any consolation, if any comfort of Love, if any
communion of Spirit, if any bowels and compassions; Fulfill ye my joy, that
ye be Act. 4.32. Romans 15.5, 6. 1 Cor. 1.10. Phil. 3.16. and 4.2. (...),
Aristot. Laert. (...), locus in Catonem min. ipsiusque hospitem, Plut. (...),
Gregor. Naz. in Basil.
like minded, like affected, of one accord, and of one judgment. And so Phil.
23, 4.
proceeds he to dehort them from self-will, self-love, selfe-respect, and
self-conceit, the very bane and pests of agreement and concord. (...),
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. hom. 19. Hanc ergo qui accepit teneat; qui perdidit,
repetat; qui amisit, exquirat; Aug. de verb. Dom. 57.
This therefore should you strive and labor by all means to maintain among
your selves, being (as Genesis 13.8.
Abraham told Lot) brethren; and being Coloss. 3.15.
called and joined together (as the Apostle speaks) into one Body. But
(...), Greg. Naz. de Pace 1. (...), Chrysostom. in Joan. hom. 57.
withal, you must have a care that this your Peace be the Peace of God, that
it be in God, and for God; that the maine aim of your agreement be the
advancement of Gods Kingdom, and the maintenance of Right. For (...), Greg.
Naz. ibidem.
if Peace be not joined with Piety, better no Peace than such Peace; Sine
justitia pax nulla est, Cic. de Repub. l. 2. Aug. de Civit. l. 2. c. 21.
if agreement be not joined with justice and equity, better no agreement at
all than such. As it is Conciliabulum. sive Conventiculum, non Concilium.
no Council, but a Conventicle, wherein Truth is not aimed at: so it is (...),
Act. 23.13. (...), Chrysostom. in Matt. hom. 35.
no Society, but a Conspiracy, wherein right is not regarded. When men are,
as Simeon and Levi, Fratres in malo, Genesis 49.5. Pax mala est inter malos, ut
quibus est una malitia, and unus ad malefaciendum consensus, Author oper.
imperfect. in Matthew. hom. 26.
Brethren in evil; when they combine themselves together to injure and wrong
others; (...), Chrysostom. in Mat. 35. Pax cum bello sub Sylla de crudelitate
certavit and vicit. Aug. de Civit. l. 3. c. 28.
such agreement and concord is worse than any discord or disagreement
whatsoever. And Vt pernitiosum est, si unitas desit bonis: ita perniciosius
est, si non desit malis. Eripiuntur enim justa, dum dividuntur injusti. At vero
contra bonos vehementer praevalent, quando in malo se concorditer tenent, Greg.
Mor. l. 34. c. 3. Qui iniquos paci sociat, iniquitati vires administrat: quia
bonos deterius deprimunt, cum unanimiter persequuntur, Idem Pastor. part. 3. c.
1.. 24.
the more strongly men in such case are united together, the worse they are,
the more evil they may do; yea the worse it is for themselves too. For the
more they are united and conjoined either with other, the more are they
dis-united and dis-joyned from God.

But to leave this Digression, though not altogether impertinent, which I was
that morning admonished, that somewhat of this Argument was of course by the
Doner^ desire required and expected.
the present Occasion in part required of me; and to return to the maine
Point that we are principally to pursue.

Gods Kingdom and his Righteousness first to be sought, because

The seeking thereof will be the most Compendious Course for the compassing of
our own Desires.

Gods Kingdom? Moratur meres familiarus. Sic illa^ disponere volo, ut
sufficere mihi hoc agenti possit, ne aut paupertas mihi oneri sit, aut ego
alicui. Quantumsat est, non dum habeo. Si ad illam summam pervenero, tunc me
totum philosophiae dab^, Sen. epist. 17.
Forsooth, Benefit.
because they must build their houses, they must feather their nests first:
they must get something that may be a stay to them hereafter, that they may be
able to defend the world withal. To remove therefore this rub, and to rid
and ease men of this care, our Savior here tells them, that Quid in longum
ipse te differs? expectabis ne foenoris quastum, aut ex merce compendium, aut
tabulas beati senis, cum fieri possis statim dives? Repraesentat opes
sapientia: quas cuicunque supervacuas fecit, dedit ibidem.
upon the due seeking of Gods Kingdom and his Righteousness, or the
Righteousness thereof, (for Eodem quod sensum attinet, redeunt; etiam si ad
Deum, non ad Regnum referri Syntaxis Grammatica postulat. Atque hoc est quod
Calvinus in hunc locum voluit. Quem inique igitur Maldonatus taxat tanquam
Gracaru^ literaru^ imperitum.
all comes to one effect) all these things that men so much desire and look
after, and take so much thought and care for, shall be by God himself
provided for them, supplied unto them, and cast in thereupon as an advantage
thereunto.

So that

Virtus omnia in se haebet: Omnia adsunt bona, Que^ penes est Virtus, Plaut.
Amph. 2. 5. Est tanti laborare, omnia bona semel occupaturo, Senec, epist. 76.
This one thing will bring all with it, it will help us to all things, that
Psalm. 37.3, 4.
Trust in the Lord, says the Psalmist, and do good, and thou shall assuredly
be fed. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he will give thee thine own hearts
desire. Psalm. 84.11.
He will be Deus Sol et Scutum, dabit gratia^ and gloria^.
thy Sun and thy Shield; he will give thee grace and glory: and he will deny
thee no good thing, so long as thou leadest a godly life. As 1 King. 3.9. --
13. 2 Chronicles. 1.11, 12.
when Solomon asked Wisdom, it pleased God so well, that he gave him Wealth
and Honor together with it: so upon the seeking hereof, we shall not only
find it, but we shall have all other good things cast in upon us together
with it.

Nor indeed can it be otherwise.

1 Cor. 3.22, 23.
All things, says the Apostle, whether present, or future, this world or the
next, all things, I say, are yours; and you Christ's; and Christ Gods. As Hebr.
1.2.
Christ, so all Christians are Gal. 3.26. Romans 8.17
in Christ Apoc. 21.7.
Heirs of all things. And for Audacter Deum roges, nihil illum de alieno
rogaturus, Sen. epist. 10.
God therefore to deny them ought, were to deny them of their own.

John 1.12. Gal. 3.26. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.
Gods Children in Christ; and John 14.13. and 16.23.

1 John 5.14, 15.


may have for the asking what they will at Gods hands. For, Matthew. 7.11.
If you that are evil, says our Savior, use to give good things to your
Children; how much more will your heavenly Father give you good things, if you
ask him? Psalm. 147.9. Matthew. 6.26. (...); etc. Epictet. Arian. Dissert. l. 3.
c. 26.
He feeds the fowls of the air, and the beasts of the field: and he that
is careful to provide for his hounds and his hawks, will he suffer his
Children to beg and starve, that must one day be his heirs?

a Grown, a Kingdom for them. Luke 12.32.
Fear not, little flock, says our Savior, it is your Fathers will to bestow
a Kingdom upon you. And, Qui dabit regnum, no^ dabit viaticum? Aug. de verb.
Dom. (...), Chrysostom. in Matt. 22.
Will he deny them a Crum, that will give them a Crown? Will he deny them a
bit of bread, or a cup of drink, ( 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12.
all the wealth in the world is no more with him; he can as easily give the
one as the other) that purposes one day to make them Kings?

his own, his only Son on them. John 3.16.
He so loved them, that he gave his only begotten Son for them. And, Romans
8.32. (...), Chrysostom. in Romans hom. 15.
He that spared not his own Son, but gave him up to death for them, how can
he but give them all things together with him? Qui misil unigenitum, immisit
spiritum, promisit vultum, quid tandem tibi negaturus est? Bern. de Temp. nihil
ei negaturus creditur, quem ad esum vituli hortatur, Hieron. de Fill. Prodig.
He that 1 Ioh. 4.9, 10.
sent his Son to die for them, has Galat. 4.6.
put his Spirit in them, and has Matthew. 5.8.
promised them the fruition of his blessed presence for ever; how can he
refuse to provide for them, and confer upon them whatsoever good thing they
shall stand in need of, while they live here?

first and most, and what they should last and least care for. Admonition.
Optimum est curam principalem animae impendere. Eucher. ad Valor. Vt primas
apud nos curas, quae prima habentur, obtineant: summasque sibi solicitudinis
parts, quae summa est, salus vendicet. Omnia vincat eo studio, quo praecedit
omnia, Ibidem.
Their first and principal care should be for the principal things, that is,
for spiritual things, for Gods Kingdom and his Righteousness, for
sanctificat ^n and true holiness. Quis extruendi, nisi cum fundamenta jeceris,
locus est? Superaedificare caeteras utilitates destinanti salus fundamentum
est. Caeterum quomodo quispiam sequentia addat, si nec prima possederit? Idem
ibid.
These are the things that most nearly concern them, and without which they
can have no benefit of ought else. And these are the things that God would have
them most to look after: As for other things, when we have so done, he would
have us leave the care of them wholly to him. Psalm. 55.22.
Roll thy burden upon the Lord, says the Psalmist, and he will maintain
thee. 1 Pet. 4.4.
Cast all your care upon him, says S. Peter; for he takes care for you. And,
Philip. 4.6.
Take you no thought for ought, says S. Paul: but let all your wants be made
known unto God by prayer. He Matthew. 6.32.
knows what is fit for you, and he will supply you. What a deal of
trouble, and distraction might we free our selves of? How great quietness and
sweet tranquillity of mind might we procure to our selves, if we could do
thus?

Reprehension.


spiritual things, and leave the care of temporal things wholly to him.
Whereas most men take a clean contrary course. (...), Chrysostom. in Matthew. 22.
All the care they take is for temporal things, and as for spiritual things,
they say, they will leave all to Gods mercy: They will take to themselves Gods
part, and they will leave God their part. What he would do himself, they
will do; and what he would have them do, that they put off and refer
wholly to him. Temporal things they will be sure to look for, they will not
trust God with them: But for spiritual things if they will not be found
without seeking, for their parts they are never like to be sought after.

Spiritual things God would have to be esteemed as the (...).
principal, and to be set in the first place; and temporal things to be
reckoned of as (...), Chrysostom. in hunc locum.
secondary matters, as things accessorie unto them. Whereas worldly men
generally take a direct contrary course. They (...), Lucian. Terpsion.
set the cart, as we say, before the horse. They Si caro famula, anima domina,
non oportet posteriore loco nos dominam ponere, ac famulam iniquo jure
praeferre, Eucher. ad Valor.
make Sara tend on Hagar; the Mistress wait on the handmaid. (...), Agatho
apud Clem. Strom. l. 5. Velut apud Athen. Dipnosoph. lib. 5. (...), Sic enim
utrobique interstinguendum, ne suus sententiae lepidissimae lepos intereat.
Vise Hadr. Iunium in Adag. Cent. 3. Adag. 79.
They make the principal the accessorie, and the accessorie the principal.
Take most pains in that, that God would have them to take least in; and take
least pains in that, that God would have them to take most in. First Gods
Kingdom and his Righteousness, says Christ, and then Riches or those other
things, Verse. 32.
meat, drink, and apparel. But O cives, cives, quaerenda pecunia primum est.
Virtus post nu^mos. -- Horat. ep. 1.
first Riches, says the World, moneys and means of maintenance, (for Lucri
bonus est odor ex re Qualibet. -- Vnde habeas quaerit nemo; sed oportet habere,
Iuven. Sat. 14. -- facias rem, Si possis, recte: si non, quocunque modo rem,
Horat. ep. 1.
these must be had howsoever) and Ita est; cum omnia habueris, tunc and
sapientia^ habere voles. Hoc erit ultimum vitae instrumentum, and, ut ita
dicam, additamentum, Sen. epist. 17.
then Religion and Righteousness may a little, time enough, be looked after,
when we are once furnished of the former.

Yea Gods Children themselves are oft-times too much faulty in this kind: Too
slack and careless in seeking after the best things; and more careful than
they should be, for the things of this life. Not so diligent in attending as
they should be, with Mary, that Vnicum necessarium Luke 10.42.
one thing, that is only necessary, and without which no worldly thing can
ought avail them; and on the other side, with Martha, Solliciti de multis,
Luke 10.41.
troubled about many things, and those many times such as they might very well
be without, much perplexed and distracted with care and thought about
provisions for the body, for the back and the belly, for meat, drink and
apparel; (that which our Savior here Matthew. 6.25, 28, 31. Luke 12.22, 29.
had reproved in his followers before) as if either they wanted Matthew. 6.26.
a Father to provide for them, or Matthew. 6.32. Luke 12.30.
their Father were ignorant of their wants. Perkins alicubi.
If we see a young man grow worldly, full of care and thought for the world,
we are ready to say, Sure his Father is deceased, and his Friends gone; he
has lost those that should look after him; he has no body left to take
care for him but himself; else (...). Aristot. Rhetor. l. 2. c. 12.
he would never sure be so worldly, so full of care as he is. But our heavenly
Father is not dead: (he 1 Timothy 6.17. Apoc. 15.7.
lives for ever to do for us:) nor does or can Esaias 49.15.
his care die for them, whom he has once vouchsafed to undertake the care of.
And it is a great wrong therefore, that Christian men offer to this their
careful and provident Father, when they are so full of care themselves.

But does no care at all then become Christians? may some man say. Care utterly
condemned? Should Christian men be like those of Judge. 18.27.
Laish, a sort of careless people, to live looking after nothing, but Qui
finxit alas papilioni, is curabit omnia. Luxuriosorum diverbium. Scalig. de
Subtle.
put off all to Gods providence, and so let things go at six and sevens, as we
say?

Not so neither. We must wisely distinguish here; whirle-pit of
distrustfulnesse on the one hand, nor wrecke our selves against the rock of
retchlesnesse on the other. There is a twofold care, yea or carfulness, if
you will: there is Solicitudo diligentiae, (...).
a carfulness of diligence; and there is Solicitudo diffide^tiae, (...).
a carfulness of diffidence: the one is approved and commended; the other is
disallowed and condemned: we are Prove. 27.23. and 22 29. Phil. 4.8, 9. 1 Timothy
5.4, 8.
enjoined the one; we are Philip. 4.6. 1 Timothy 6.8, 17.
inhibited the other; nor does the one necessarily follow the other, or the
expulsion of the one exclude also the other. Conceive it by a plain and
familiar instance. A Father places his Son in a Farm, furnishes him with a
stock, bids him play the good husband; and further assures him, to put him
out of all fear, that, if things fall out otherwise than well, so that it be
not by his own wilful neglect or default, he will supply him and set him up
again. The Son in such case, though he may well be the less distrustful,
yet ought not to be the less diligent, for this his Fathers kind offer, and
the assurance given him of such supplies. Nor ought Christian men therefore to
be the less careful of Prove. 6.6, 7, 8. and 12.11. and 28.19.
walking diligently and industriously in those places and callings whereunto
God has assigned them, or in following the affairs and doing the duties that
do thereunto appertain. (They 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, 11.
walk inordinately, says the Apostle, that 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
follow not their own work, and as well 2 Thessalonians 3.10.
earne, if they be able, a^ 2 Thessalonians. 3.12.
eat their own bread;) because God has graciously promised, and undertaken to
provide for them. (...), Phil 3.16.
Walk they must each one carefully 1 Cor. 7.20, 24.
within the compass of his calling, and expect Deuteronomy. 28.8. Psalm. 128.1, 2.
Gods blessing upon their labors and endeavors. But for the issue and event of
them, they must not be troubled and distracted about it; but Psalm. 37.5. 2 Samuel 10.12.
leave that all to God, Hebr. 13.5, 6.
assuring themselves that he will not see them to want, howsoever things fall
out, but will furnish them ever with what is fit.

Gods Kingdom, Prevention.
because they fear that they shall want necessaries, if they shall so do.
For, to omit that true Fides famem non formidat, Hieron. ad Heliodor.
Faith, as Jerome speaks, fears not Famine: and again, that he is
unworthie this Crown, this Kingdom, that prefers worldly trash before it,
or Matthew. 13.44, 45, 46. Luke 14.26, 33.
that is not content Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.
willingly, yea and Hebr. 10.34.
gladly, Omnia relinquas, ut hoc habeas, Sen. ep. 76.
to forgo the one, for the attaining and compassing of the other: Such fear
is wholly superfluous; it is a groundless fear: Since that God the Father by
Jesus Christ his Son and 2 Cor. 1.20.
his Surety, has here given thee assurance, that so long as thou seek it as
thou ought, At necessaria deerunt. De esse non poterunt, Sen. ep. 17.
thou shall never want ought; all other things shall be from God himself
supplied to thee with it. And Psalm. 34.10.
the Lions themselves therefore, says the Psalmist, (and the Lion is the Prove.
30.30.31. Rex ferarum, Isid. Orig. l. 10. c. 2.
King of beasts,) shall hunger and starve: those that are likeliest to be fed:
But those that seek the Lord shall want nothing that is good. He Psalm.
78.24. Pluviam escatilem, Tertul. de Patient.
will rain bread from heaven, and Psalm. 78.20. and 114.8. Petram aquatilem,
Ibid.
set the flint stone abroach, and turn Psalm. 107.35. 2 King. 3.17. Esai.
43.19, 20.
the dry and waste wilderness into rivers of water, before his shall pine and
perish.

Encouragement.
us to seek, as the more carefully, so the more cheerfully after these
things, considering that so gracious a promise is annexed thereunto: Psalm.
34.9.
Fear, that is, Sicut, 1 King. 17.32, 33. and alibi.
serve the Lord diligently, ye his Saints, says the Psalmist: for there shall
nothing be wanting to them that fear him. Parare unde vivam volo. Simul and
parare disce -- Sen. epist. 17. i. vis parare? Parandi rationem disce, Lips.
Would thou then be cared for? Would thou be provided for? Would thou
need to take no more thought or care for ought? Get thee into Christ's Court;
get thee a place in Gods Kingdom. Men think they shall be well, they shall be
safe, they shall be made for ever, when they have got some place, so it be at
least some gainful one, about the King, or belonging to the Court: such an
office could they compass, they should never need more to fear want, or to
take further care for the world. Yet we know and see that such places often bring
Desere palatia: nam Curia curis, imo crucibus and mortibus Semper est obnoxia,
Petr. Bles. ep. 57. -- dum excelsus steti, nunquam pavere destiti. -- Sen.
Thyest. 3. 1.
a world of cares with them, and Paucos beavit aula, plures perdidit: Sed hos
quoque ipsos, quos beavit, perdidit.
are a means often to bring men to want. But he that has a share in this
Kingdom of God, shall never indeed need to take further care for ought, shall
never need indeed to fear any defect. Ierem. 17.7, 8.
Blessed is the man, says the Prophet, that depends upon God: for he shall
be as a Tree planted by the water side, that spreads her root along the
river, and does not feel when the scorching heat comes, but continues ever
green, and takes no thought for the year of drought, nor at any time cease
to have fruit on her. Forbear not therefore the following hereof for fear of
want; but follow these things rather if thou would not fear want.

In like manner for your Children, would you have them so provided for, that
you should not need to take any further care for them in that kind?
Distrustful care, I mean still, and of uncertain event; for otherwise 2.
Cor. 12.12.
Parents ought to be careful to provide for their children; and 1 Timothy 5.8.
he is worse, I say not, than an Infidel, but Nahum. 2.13. Thren. 4.3. Ipsae
ferae saevissima s^^tus suos fovent, en^tri^at: ^ilvi p^llas circumvol^^^s
rapinis prospici^^, Aug. de Civit. l. 19. c. 12.
than a brute beast, that does otherwise. But would you so do for them, that
they may be sure not to want? which otherwise, Eccles. 4.14. Ample and regiae
op^s, ubi ad malum dominum pervene^^^^, (...) ^ssi^gntur, S^ (...) s^^ (...)
^^oef^^^ ^rat. (...) Ovid. Trist. 3.7.
though you leave them never so much, they may do. Do the like for them, that
you are exhorted here to do for your selves. A poor man when he has gotten
his child once into the Hospital, how glad is he? he thinks he need take
no more care for him, whether he live or die, whether he leave him ought or
no; (and yet he will do his best to get some what to leave him;) he knows
there he shall not want. But get yo^^ Children, say I, not into Christ's
Hospital, but into Gods Kingdom (...) Grace, and they shall then be sure
indeed never to want, you shall need to take no further thought for them. Let
this be thy first care, and thy principal care, as for thy self, so for them,
not how to make them rich, but Genes. 18.19. Deuteronomy. 6.6. 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
how to make them religious, how to work the sincere Prove. 24.21. Ephesians 6.4.
f^a^e of God, and 1 Timothy 4.6. 2 Timothy 1.5. and 3.15.
faith of Christ into them. This when thou have once effected, thou need not
be troubled to think what will become of them, if thou be taken away from
them; or what thou shall be able, when thou die, to do for them: thou shall
leave them Gods blessing, if thou have nothing else to leave them; (where
Religion and Righteousness runs on in a race, there Psalm. 115.13.14.
Gods blessing is also hereditarie with it:) and if thou leave them that,
though thou leave them naught else, they shall be sure to do well, they shall
never want ought. For, Psalm. 37.18, 19.
The Lord knows the days of the upright, or the righteous; says David: and
their inheritance shall abide for ever. They shall not be confounded in the
evil time: and in the days of famine they shall have their fill. And he
confirms it further by his own experience, both concerning them and their
issue. Psalm. 37.25, 26.
I have been young, and am now old; yet (...), Clem. Alex. Paedag. lib. 3.
cap. 7.
never, either in my younger or elder times, have I seen any righteous man
forsaken, or his seed driven to beg their bread. But though he be merciful
and ready to lend, (a means many times to lessen and impair men's estates) yet
his seed after him inheriteth the blessing.

Yea but we see even Hebr. 11.37.
godly men many times in want, may some say.

I answer in a word. Psalm. 37.10 and 64.11
They never want what is good, what is necessary, Solution.
what is Sicut contra de malis Chrysippus apud Plut. de commun. not. (...). Ait
sapientem nulla re indigere, and tamen multis illirebus opus esse: contra
stulto nulla re opus est; nulla enim rescit uti, sed omnibus eget. Egere enim
necessitatis est. Nihil autem sapienti necesse est quod no^ habet. Sen ep. 9.
needful and behoovefull for them to have. And whatsoever is not good and fit
for them, it is (...), Diogen. Laert. l. 6.
better for them to be without it, than with it; to want, than to have it. Do
we not see, I say not, the Sons of Kings, but even Kings and Princes themselves
often by the Physicians direction (...), Dion. Chrysostom. Orat. 14.
imprisoned in their own Palaces, confined to, and cowpt up in their chambers,
restrained of their wonted full and delicate fare, and held to hard meat, as
we say, tied to a strict and spare diet; yea and glad too to observe it,
because (...), ib.
it would otherwise be worse with them? No marvel then if the godly sometime
in like manner, though Kings and 2 Cor. 6.10.
Lords of all things, are for their spiritual health and further good,
restrained of some things that are not so fit for them at the present. Such
want is no want, when a man rather Aliud enim non habere, aliud carere, Cic.
Tuscul. l. 1.
is without, than wants that, which to be without then is for his good.

Conclusion.
To end where we began; let us by any means take heed lest our immoderate care
for the things of this life, expel and justle out our care for things
belonging to a better life: Congruum non est in honor solicitudinis nostra
praestantioribus pe^ora subjicere, Eucher. ad Valor.
Let that rather yield to this, and Philip. 4.4.
this then will discharge us of that: let our maine and principal care be for
Gods Kingdom and his Righteousness, and for other things we may then boldly
1 Pet. 5.7.
cast our care upon God, who will be sure thereupon Psalm. 23.1. Luke 22.35.
sufficiently, yea 2 Cor. 9.8. (...), etc. Chrysostom. in hunc locum.
abundantly to furnish us with whatsoever Matthew. 6.32.
he shall see to be needful and fit for us.

FINIS.
A Short Catechism for the Simpler Sort.
1 Q Who made the whole World, and Man at the first?

A. Genes. 1.1.27.
God, Eccles. 12.1. Romans 11.36. Apoc. 4.11.
the Creator of all things.

2 Q. What is God?

A. An Psalm. 90.2. and 102.27
eternal, and Apoc. 1.8. Psalm. 115.3. and 135.6.
almighty John 4.24.
Spirit, most 1 Timothy 1.17. Jude 23.
wise, most Esai. 6.3. Apoc. 4.8. 1 Samuel 2.2.
holy, most Psalm. 92.15. and 145.17.
just, and most Psalm. 102.8. -- 19. and 145.8.
merciful.

3 Q. How many Gods are there?

A. There is but Esai. 44.6.8. 1 Cor. 8.5, 6.
one God.

4 Q. How many Persons are there in that one Deity?

A. There are 1 John 5.7.
three Persons, Matthew. 18.19. 2 Cor. 13.13.
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

5 Q. Is each of these Persons God?

A. Yea: John 17.3. Ephesians. 1.3, 4.
the Father is God, John 1.1. Hebr. 1.4, 6, 8. Romans 9.5.
the Son is God, and Act. 5.3, 4.
the Holy Ghost is God.

6 Q. Are they then three several Gods?

A. No: they are 1 John 5.7. Matthew. 3.16, 17.
three distinct Persons, yet but Deuteronomy. 6.4. John 10.30. 1 John 5.7.
one God.

7 Q. Whereof did God create Man at first?

A. Genesis 2.7. and 3.19. Eccles. 12.7.
He made man's body of the mould of the earth; but his soul he created
immediately of nothing.

8 Q. In what estate did God then make Man?

A. He made him Eccles. 7.31.
pure and perfect, Genesis 1.26.27. and 9.5.
in his own Image, like himself.

9 Q. Wherein was Man then like unto God?

A. In that he was perfectly Colos. 3.10.
wise, and perfectly Ephesians. 4.24.
good.

10 Q. How came man then to be evil as now he is?

A. Romans 5.12, 18, 19.
By disobeying God, in breaking his Commandment.

11 Q. Wherein did Man break the Commandment of God?

A. Genesis 3.6.
In eating of the fruit of one Tree, Genesis 2.17.
which God had forbidden him.

12 Q. Who persuaded him so to do?

A. 2 Cor. 11.3. Genesis 3.1, 4, 5.
The Devil persuaded the Woman, and Genesis 3.6.
the Woman her Husband.

13 Q. What is the Devil?

A. Matthew. 4.1.
The Devil is an Luke 7.21. and 8.2.
evil Spirit, who being 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6.
damned for sinning against God, does 1 Pet. 5.8. John 8.44.
seek to destroy others.

14 Q. What became of Man after he had thus sinned against God?

A. He became most Genesis 6.5.
wicked, and most Job 14.1. and 5.6, 7
wretched.

15 Q. In what regard wicked?

A. In that Genesis 3.7. Ephesians. 4.22.24.
he lost Gods Image, and was Gen 3.22. Deuteronomy. 32.4, 5.
not now like unto God as before, but John 8.44. 1 John 3.8.
like the Devil.

16 Q. In what regard wretched?

A. In that Genesis 3.23.
he lost Gods favor, and Genesis 3.16, 17, 18, 19 Romans 5.12, 16.
brought upon himself Gods everlasting Galath. 3.10.
curse and Romans 2.8, 9.
wrath.

17 Q. In what state are we all then, since this fall of our first Parents?

A. We are all also Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
by nature most Romans 3.9. -- 20. and 5.12, 19. Titus 3.3.
wicked, and most Romans 3.23. and 5.12, 15, 16, 17, 18.
wretched.

18 Q. When come we to be thus evil and wicked?

A. We are evil and wicked Genesis 8.21. Psalm. 51.5. and 58.3. Esai. 48.8.
from our very breeding and our birth.

19 Q. What do we for this our wickedness deserve at Gods hands?

A. John 5.28, 29. Matthew. 25.46.
Eternal damnation Matthew. 10.28. Apoc. 14.10, 12. and 21.14, 15.
both of soul and body in hellfire.

20 Q. Are we able any way to save our selves from this?

A. No: Psalm. 22.29, and 49.7, 8, 9. Romans 5.6. and 8.3.
we are not able: for we are by nature spiritually Ephesians. 2.1. Col. 2.13.
dead in sin and naughtiness.

21 Q. Is there no means then to deliver us from eternal destruction?

A. Yes: Romans 7.24, 25. Act. 4.12.
we may be delivered Romans 3.24.25, and 5.17-21.
by Gods mercy in Jesus Christ.

22 Q. Who is that Jesus Christ?

A. Jesus Christ is Ioh. 10.30. and 14.9, 10. Heb. 1.3.
the second Person, Prove. 30.4. and 8.23, 24, 25. Matthew. 16.16.
the eternal Son of God.

23 Q. What has he done to save us?

A. Esai 53.4-2. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. 1 Pet. 2.24
He suffered death upon the Cross, Romans 5.8, 9, 10. Galat. 1.4. and 3.13. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Hebr. 2.9, 14, 15. and 9.12.15.
to save us from death and destruction.

24 Q. How could he die being the eternal Son of God?

A. He was both Ier. 23.6. and 33.16. Esai. 9.6. 1 John 5.20.
God and Ioh. 1.10. Gal. 4.4. 1 Timothy 2 5.
Man; and 2 Cor. 13.4. 1 Pet. 3.18.
died as he was Man; but John 2 19. and 10.17, 18
raised himself again to life as he was God.

25 Q. Shall all men then be saved by Christ?

A. Luke 13.23-28. Matthew. 7.13, 14, 21, 22.23.
No: none shall be saved by Christ, but Mark 1 15.
such as Luke 13.3, 5. and 24.47.
repent of their sins, and Mark 16.16. John 3.14 -- 18, 36.
believe in him.

26 Q. What is meant by repenting of Sin?

A. To repent of our sins is to be Act. 2.37. 2 Cor. 7.10.
heartily sorry for them, Psalm. 97.10. Romans 7.15, 20. and 12.9.
to hate and abhor them, and to endeavor carefully Prove. 28.13. John 5.14.
to shun and avoid them.

27 Q. What is meant by believing in Christ?

A. Romans 3.25, 28. and 4.5. and 9.32, 33. and 10.4.9.11.
To believe, or Psalm. 2.12. and 32.10. and 37.22.
to trust in Christ, is Esai. 50.10. Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.
to rely wholly upon him for Heb. 1.2. and 9.14, 26. 1 John 1.9.
the pardon of our sins, and Romans 5.9, 10. Hebr. 9.28.
the safety of our souls.

28 Q. How come we thus to rely on him?

A. By Romans 1.16. and 10.14, 17.
the word of God, Romans 3.21, 22. and 10.5. -- 8. Gal. 3.2.
making known Gods mercy in this behalf toward us in Christ Jesus.

29 Q. What means are there to give us further assurance of the mercy of God
toward us?

A. The Mark 1.4. and 16.16 Act. 2.31. Luke 22.19, 20.
Sacraments give us further assurance of Gods mercy revealed in the Word.

30 Q. What is meant by the word Sacrament?

A. Sacraments are as visible Genesis 17.10, 11, 23. Exodus 12, 11, 13.
Signs and Romans 4.11. Psalm. 50.5. Ier. 34.18.
Seals of Gods mercy toward us in Christ.

31 Q. How many Sacraments are there now in use?

A. There are 1 Cor. 12.13.
two Sacraments; Mark 1.4. Matthew. 28.19.
Baptism, and 1 Cor. 11.20, 23, 26.
the Lords Supper.

32 Q. What is Baptism?

A. Baptism is a Sacrament, wherein Hebr. 10.22. Ephesians. 5.26.
by washing of the Body is signified 1 Pet. 3.21. Romans 6.2-9.
the purging and cleansing of the soul.

33 Q. What is the outward Sign in Baptism?

A. The outward John 1 26, 31. and 3.23
Sign in Baptism is water.

34 Q. What is that a Sign of?

A. Water in Baptism is Matthew 3.11. John 1.33. and 3.3, 5.
a Sign of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6.11. Tit 3.5.
whereby we are inwardly renewed.

35 Q. What is the Lords Supper?

A. The Lords Supper is a Sacrament, wherein 1 Cor. 1.28. and 10.21 Matthew.
26.26, 27.
by eating and drinking is represented 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. and 12.13.
our spiritual Communion with Christ.

36 Q. What be the outward Signs in the Lords Supper?

A. The outward Signs in the Lords Supper are Matthew. 26.26. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.
and 11.26, 27.28.
Bread and Matthew. 26.29. Mark 14.25.
Wine.

37 Q. What are they Signs of?

A. The Matthew. 26.26. 1 Cor. 10.16. and 11.27, 29.
Bread signifies Christ's Body, and the Matthew. 26.28. Luke 22.20. 1 Cor. 10.16
and 11.27
Wine signifies his Blood.

38 Q. What is meant by the breaking of the Bread, and the pouring out of the
Wine?

A. The Bread is broken, and the Wine powered out, Matthew. 26, 26, 28. Luke
22.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.26.
to represent Esai. 53.3, 4, 5, 10. Luke 22.42-45.
the cruel pains and torments, and Phil. 2.8. Esai. 53.12. Matthew. 27.34 -- 50.
the bitter and bloody death that Christ suffered for our sake,

39 Q. To what end are we to come to the Lords Table?

A. First, Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11 24.25.
to be put in mind of Christ's death and passion:

And secondly, Matthew. 26.28. Luke 22.20.
to be assured thereby of the forgiveness of our sins.

40 Q. How ought they to be affected that desire to repair thither?

A. First, they ought Ierem. 3.1.13. Psalm. 51.1, 2, 3.
to see and know their sins;

Secondly, 2 Cor. 7.10. Zech. 12.10.
to be truly and sincerely sorry for them;

Thirdly, Psalm. 97.10. Prove 8.13.
to hate and abhor them, as Esai. 53.4, 5, 6. Romans 4.23. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
the cause of Christ's death;

And lastly, John 5.14. Ier. 34.15, 16, 18, 20. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22. Hebr. 6.4,
5, 6. and 10.26-29.
to resolve not to return again to the practice of them.

FINIS.
THE SPIRITVALL WATCH, OR CHRIST'S GENERAL Watchword.

A MEDITATION on MARK. 13.37. What I say unto You, I say unto All, WATCH.

By THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed for EDWARD BREWSTER. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND Religious his very kind Cozen, Sr. ROBERT COOK
Knight, eldest Son and Heir to that worthy Knight Sr. WILLIAM COOK late
deceased: Long life and good days, with increase of Grace here, and eternal
Glory hereafter.
HOPEFVLL SIR,
THis weak Work was intended your worthy Father now deceased, unto whom so
many bonds of alliance, of dependence, of ancient acquaintance, and of
continued beneficence so straightly tied, so deeply engaged me; and whom
therefore next after mine Honorable Patron, and that Worshipful Society,
wherein I spent so much time, and whereof I remain yet an unworthy and
unprofitable member, I could not in this kind over-slip without some just note
of ingratitude. But since it has pleased God unexpectedly (to our great loss
and grief, though, no doubt, his (...). Philip. 1.23.
far greater gain) to remove him hence, and to receive him thither where he
now rests, as without need, so beyond reach of these Offices, I know none
that may better lay claim to it than your self, who are to rise up in his
room, and to stand in his stead, as Firstborne in that Family, whereof he
lately was Head. I shall not need to add, what inducements and encouragements
I might further receive to address these my poor endeavors that way, from
those pregnant prints as well of piety as other good parts evidently
discovering themselves in your own person, observed by others as well as my
self, and the rather observed, because so rare ordinarily in others of your
years, and of your rank. The consideration whereof, as (...), Menand.
it ministered much comfort to your worthy Father before his decease, esteeming
it no small Honor unto him that God had graced him with a Son of such parts
and hopes in the judgment and by the testimony of so many as well judicious
observers as unpartiall reporters: so it helps not a little to mitigate the
great grief of all his and your friends not without great cause conceived for
the loss (if they may be termed lost, that God finds to their eternal weal
and welfare) of one whom they so highly ever prized, and now so deservedly
desire; and ministers good ground of hope, that you will further in due time,
(as he said sometime of Constantines Sons) (...). Eusebius. in vita Constant.
wholly put on your worthy Parents, so (...). Ibid.
exactly resembling them in their virtuous parts, and treading so precisely in
their religious steps, that both they may seem to survive in you, and you be
known thereby to have come of them. And this the rather it stands you upon
to contend and strive unto, considering (as I doubt not but you do) that as it
is a double (...). Eurip. Herad Et idem Helen. (...). Dos est magna parentum
virtus. Hor carm. lib. 3. ode 24. (...). Eurip. Hipp.
grace for a good man to be well descended, while both his parentage is a grace
to him, and he likewise a grace to it: So it is (...); etc. Plut. de and.
poet. Itane tandem majores famam tradiderunt tibi tui, ut virtute eorum
anteparta per flagitium perderes? Plant. trinum. Teterrimis ignaviae aut
nequitiae sordibus imbuta, portenta nobilia. Val. Max. lib. 3. c. 5. Qui
acceptam a majoribus lucem in tenebras convertant. Ibid. c 4.
a foul disgrace and a double stain for one so descended to degenerate from
the good courses, or come short of the good parts of those he came of, and so
to prove either a blot or a blemish to them that might otherwise have been a
grace and an honor to him, but shall now help rather to condemn him than to
acquit or excuse him. It was the speech of one for a natural man notably
qualified, though but meanly bred, to a dissolute person well borne, upbraiding
him with his birth, Ego primus illustravi domum meam; tu dedecorasti tuam.
Cicero post Iphicratem.
I am a grace to my stock, thou a blot to thy lineage: as another not unlike him
in the like case, (...). Socrates.
My stock is some stain to me, but thou art a stain to thy stock. And indeed
as it were Malo pater tibi sit Thersites, dummodo tu sis Aeacidae similis; --
Quam te Thersitae fimilem producat Achilles. Iuvenal. satyr. 8.
better for a man to come of a Thersites so he prove like Achilles, than to
come of an Achilles if he prove like Thersites: So it had been less evil for
Manasses to have descended immediately from an Achaz or an Achab, than
descending (as he did) immediately from an Ezechias to prove in conditions and
course of life a second Achaz or an other Achab. This consideration may well be
a strong engagement to godliness, where but either parent only has been
religious. For if 1 Cor. 7.14.
either party believing, though the other be an infidel, be of force
sufficient to bring the Children bred between them within compass of Gods
Covenant: surely the godliness of either, though the other were profane, must
needs be no small tiall to oblige their issue the more straightly to that course,
which they stood bound to have taken, though their parents had been both of
them utterly irreligious. But in this kind has God to you been more
abundantly gracious, in blessing and honoring you on both sides with two such
worthy Parents, whose memory as it is and will ever be deservedly honored
with all those that here knew them; so it is justly expected that it be revived
in you especially, and the residue of their issue, as (...). Euripid. Meleagr.
(...); Sophocl. Antigon.
in a lively monument, and one better than of marble or brass, not of their
earthly and worldly, but of their spiritual and worthiest parts. Yea, as 1
King. 1.37.
David's Courtiers sometime wished, that his son Solomon might in state and
honor not succeed only, but exceed David his father: so the like may well in
some regards be expected at your hands, in well-doing and piety not to parallel
only, but to surpass him you sprang from. For, to omit that God has
furnished you with some abilities of learning that he had not, that he has
called you sooner and entered you earlier, you have the more day before you:
Your worthy Father has broken the ice to you, he has laid you to your hand a
good foundation of religious courses in that Family that you are to be Head
unto hereafter; he has settled near you and obliged unto you Mr. T. Baily
sometime Fellow of Maudlins in Oxford.
a man of singular parts, who as he was sometime your Tutor and Governor, so
will not cease now to be a Counselor and Coadjutor unto you, by whose advice
and assistance you may have plentiful means of furtherance in that godly
course that by Gods gracious goodness you have already made entrance into.
Sir, you see what a task is exacted of you, what a necessity of well-doing
and of proceeding in good courses is every way imposed upon you. Let all laid
together prevail with you to make you as the more careful to affect and
embrace all good means of help and furtherance therein; so the more forward
and diligent from time to time instantly and incessantly to crave further grace
at his hands, by whose strength we all stand; who as he has begun this his
gracious work in you, so is alone able to finish it (and I doubt not but he
will so do) to his own glory in you, and your eternal glory with him. And to
this purpose may this loose discourse afford you any the least help, I shall
esteem it a sufficient recompense of my labor in the publishing of it, what
ever the issue be otherwise: If any other beside shall reap benefit thereby, I
desire but that God may have the praise of it, and my self only their
prayers. Howsoever it prove, it shall remain a testimony of the sincere love
and respect that he bears and owes to you and the house you come of, who
both is and shall by Gods grace always continue,

Your Worships hearty well-wisher and affectionate Kinsman, THOMAS GATAKER.

Euripides Helena.
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
Imple tuorum vota, dum refers pii
Mores parentis: namque honoris culmen hoc
Summum, parente siquis editus pio
Pietate patrem and ipse prosequitur pium.
CHRIST'S GENERAL Watchword.
MARK. 13.37. WATCH.


. 1. The Occasion.
THere be Adventus duo: alter in humilitate, alter in sublimitate. Tertull.
Apolog. Adventus Domini duplex. Bern. in advent. sermon. 4. imo triplex, ad
homines, in homines, contra homines, ib. 3. Primus in humilitate, postremus in
majestate, Gregor. Romans mor. l. 17. c. 19. Occultus, quo venit judicandus;
manifestus, quo veniet judicaturus, August. de temp. 220. Venit enim salvator,
veniet damnater, Idem in Joan. tract. 4.
two commings of our Lord and Savior Christ mentioned in Scripture: the former
of them in mercy, Matthew. 18.11. John 12.47.
to save the world; the latter of them in majesty, Matthew. 16.27. John 5.22,
27, 28.
to judge the world.

Some of those that lived in the time of the former, had De illo ab eo
quaesierunt quem sperabant, non de illo quem jam videbant, Aug. epist. 80.
moved question to our Savior himself concerning the latter; Marc. 13.4. Mat.
24.3.
When will the coming of the Son of man be?

Now our Savior, in way of answer unto this question, lays down both the
certainty and the uncertaintie of his second coming: the certainty, that it
shall be; the uncertaintie when it shall be. That, which is wont to be said of
the day of Death, being no less true of the day of Doom; Nihil certius; nihil
incertius. Bern. de Coena Dom. ser. 2. and medit. c. 3. and epist. 105.
There is nothing more certain, and yet nothing more uncertain: Caetera
nostra and bona and mala incerta sunt: sola mors certa est. Aug verb. Dom. 21.
incerta omnia: sola mors certa, cujus etiam hora incerta est, Idem in Psalm. 38.
Nothing more certain than that it shall be: as sure, we use to say, as
Death; and may well say, as Doom: For Mark. 13.31. Mat. 24.35.
Heaven and earth (says our Savior) shall pass away, but so shall not my
word. And yet Poena certa, hora incerta: mors certa, dies mortis incertus, Aug.
ibid.
nothing more uncertain than when it shall be. For, Mark. 13.32. Mat. 24.36.
Of that day and hour knows no man ought, no nor the Angels in heaven, nor
the Son ( (...). Greg. Naz. ad Eunom. sermon. 4. and ex eo Eulogius cont.
Agnoitas apud Photium biblioth. cod. 230. (...). Ephrem. ad Anatol. quaest. 1.
Secundum sormam servi, Aug. de Trin. l. 1. c. 12. In statu humiliationis,
Vorst. apolog. disp. 2.. 33. Parum enim solidum, quod Aug. in Psalm. 36. and in
Genesis contra Manich. l. 1. c. 32. and 83. quaest. 60. sed and de Trinit. l. 1.
c. 12. nescit, i. nescire facit. Neque firmum satis quod Greg. Romans l 8. epist.
42. and Cyril. thesaur. l 9 c. 4. In humanitate norat; sed ex humanitate non
norat.
as he was Quod ante passionem nescit, post resurrectionem novit, Chrysostom. in
Act. 1.7. Et Origin. in Mat. homil. 3. Vise Iansen. concord. Evang. cap. 123.
then) himself.

Hereupon he takes occasion to Mark 13.33. Matthew. 24.42.
exhort his Disciples whom he then spoke to, and Non illis solis dixit, quibus
tunc audientibus loquebatur, sed illis etiam qui fuerunt post illos ante nos,
and ad nosipsos, and qui erunt post nos usque ad novissimum ejus adventum,
August. epist. 80.
us all in and by them, unto circumspection and wariness, unto vigilancie and
watchfulness: Vt semper paratu^ sit cor ad expecta^du^, quod esse venturum
scit, and quando venturum scit, nescit. Aug in Psalm. 36.
that since such a day must once come, and they know not how soon it may come,
wherein they shall all be called to give up their accounts, that therefore they
live in a continual expectation of it, in a perpetual preparation for it;
that whenever it shall come, they may be found ready and fit for it.

Which exhortation having urged and enlarged by sundry arguments of inforcement
and illustration in Mar. 13.34, 35, 36. Matthew. 24.43. etc.
the words before going, he does Mar. 13.37.
here repeat and conclude, winding up the sum of all before delivered in this
one word, WATCH.

The Division.
A word not consisting of many syllables or letters; but containing

The Sense, the Proofs,

The Manner, and the Means: Or,

The Sense.
1. The Meaning of the word, whas it is to watch.

2. The Reasons, why we ought so to watch.

3. The manner, how we must watch.

4. The Means, whereby we may watch.

The two former belong to Doctrine; the two latter to Use.

. 2. For the first of them, to wit, what it is to watch. Watching is, to speak
properly, Corporum est somnus, sicut and mors cum speculo suo somno. Anima
quieti nunquam succedit. Tertull. de anima, c. 32. and 25. Iacet enim
dormientis corpus ut mortui, viget autem and vivit animus. Cicer. de divin.
lib. 1. Somnus siquidem e corpore est, atque in corpore operator, Aug. de
immortal. anim. cap. 14. Corpore autem dormiente anima insomnis agit. Hippocr.
de insomn. Totaque sibi sua est, Iul. Scalig. ad eundem.
an affection of the body; and is by way of metaphor only applied unto the
soul. In regard whereof it will not be amiss to consider briefly what it
imports in the one, that we may the better conceive thereby what it
signifies in the other.

(...), sive (...), ut Phrynichus: Et (...), sive (...). Sicut dormitione
transitur ad somnum, sic exporgefactione transitur ad vigilationem, Aug. in
Psalm. 3.
Watching therefore and waking are two several things: it is one thing to
wake, or to be awake, and another thing to watch. For example: we are all here
(I presume) at this present waking; but cannot properly be said to be watching,
because neither is it now the ordinary time of rest, neither (it may be) have
we any present inclination thereunto. But the Disciples of our Savior the
night before he suffered, are said to have watched with him, Matthew. 26.40.
Could ye not watch an hour with me? because both it was then the ordinary
time of repose, and they very sleepie and drowsy also themselves. Again,
Psalm. 77.3.
the Psalmist complains that God held his eyes waking, or (...)
watching; (but in an unproper sense) that he was forced to keep waking, and
so in some sort to watch as it were against his will. A man lies often awake
when he would feign sleep, but (...), ut Herodot. loquitur, i. insomnia
laborans, ut Caeciliu apud Nonium.
cannot, either through disease of body or distraction of mind: And a man
that is set to watch, may keep awake, but not mind or regard his charge: and
neither of them in such case are said properly to watch. But those that sit by
such a sick man as cannot sleep, to tend him, are said to watch by him: And
the Shepherds are said to have been Luke 2.8. Pastores, dum super gregem suum
vigilant, gregis ipsius pastorem in praesepio invenire, videre, tenere merentur
and autorem. Petrus Chrysol. sermon. 24.
watching over their flocks, when the Angel appeared to them that brought them
tidings of Christ's birth. So that bodily watching (to speak properly and
precisely) is then, when a man striveth to keep himself corporally waking for
the tending or heeding of something, at such time as he is or may be inclining
to sleep.

. 3. But it is no such bodily watching that is here intended. A man may not
watch thus, that keeps himself so awake: and 1 Thessalonians. 5.10. Si dormituri
sumus, quomodo vigilamus? Cord vigilam^^, etiam cum corpore dormimus, August.
de verb. Dom. sermon. 22.
a man may not keep himself so awake, and yet watch. Acts 12.6.
Peter watched thus while he slept in the prison between two soldiers tied
fast with two chains. And so did Psalm 3.5. and 4.8.
David, when trusting to Gods gracious protection, he laid himself quietly
down to sleep. Whereas on the other side, Matthew. 26.47.
Judas sat up all the night long (as Job 24.14. Vigilat fur, and expectat ut
homines dormiant. Aug. in Psalm. 125.
thieves and murderers also do many times) to put his treason in practice,
Matthew. 26.40.
while his fellow Disciples slept; and yet watched he no more, nay not so much
as they did. And 2 Samuel 11.2, 3, 4.
David was broad awake, when he spied Bathsheba from off his terrace; and yet
watched he not so well as before he did, when on his pallet he lay fast
asleep: he rose from one sleep, to fall into another, a worse sleep. It is
not (...). Pythagoras apud Stobaeum, l. 2. c. 1. Est somnus corporis; est and
animae: illud ergo cavere debemus, ne ipsa anima nostra dormiat, August. in
Psalm. 62.
a corporal, but a spiritual; not a proper, but a figurative, a metaphorical
watching, (and yet a watching that has reference to that proper, some
resemblance of that corporal watching) that our Savior here intends.

To apply therefore what was before said of watching, to the Soul, and so to
our present purpose. Sin is in the word compared to a sleep. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6,
7. Peccatores dormientibus similes, Anastas. in Hexam. lib. 1. (...). Clem.
Alex. paedag. lib. 2. cap. 10.
Let not us sleep, as others sleep, says the Apostle: For those that sleep,
sleep in the night: and, We are not of the night, but of the light and of the
day. He speaks as of a spiritual Romans 13.12.
night of ignorance, so of a spiritual sleep of sin. Repentance is said to
be an awaking (as it were) out of this sleep. 1 Cor. 15.34.
Awake to righteousness; and sin not, says the same Apostle. And again,
Ephesians. 5.14. Animam dormientem excitat. Aug. in Psalm. 62.
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, from the deadly sleep of
sin, and Christ will inlighten thee. And Quare vitia sua nemo confitetur?
quia adhuc in illis est. Somnium narrare vigilantu est: and vitia sua confiteri
sanitatis indicium est. Expergiscamur ergo ut errores nostros coarguere
possimus. Senec. epist. 54.
As it is a sign that a man is awaked out of his sleep, when he tells what
dreams he saw in his sleep: so it is a sign, says the Heathen man, of one
truly repentant, when a man makes sincere confession of his former offense.
And lastly, the striving to keep our selves from future relapse, and from
falling back into this our former deadly slumber again, is that which by the
same metaphor is termed watching, as here, so Matthew. 24.42. and 25.13. and
26.41.
elsewhere.

So that it is as much in effect, as if our Savior had said, The Doctrine.
when he wills us to watch; that It is not sufficient for us, that we have
been awaked out of the deadly sleep of sin; but we must with all heedfull
diligence for the time to come strive to keep our selves thus waking. Watch we
cannot till we be awaked; and Nam vigilare leve est; pervigilare grave,
Martial. l. 9. ep. 70.
when we are once awaked, we must ever watch. And so have we both the true
sense and signification of the word; and the point also therein propounded.

. 4. Now the Reasons of this point may be four:

The first taken from the drowsinesse of our own natural disposition. The
Proof.


The second from the diligence of our Adversary the Devil.

The third from the necessity of perseverance.

The fourth and last from the danger of relapse.

Matthew. 26.43.
He came the second time, says the Evangelist of our Saviors Disciples, whom
he had but lately before awaked, and found them asleep again; for their eyes
were heavy. And as it is with those that be of an heavy constitution, of a
drowsy disposition, that though they be awaked out of sleep, yet unless they
use some diligence (yea though they so do) to keep themselves awake, they are
ready ever anon to be napping and nodding, and (if they be not the more
careful) to fall even fast asleep again: So it is naturally with every one
of us in regard of our souls: We are all generally Languido sumus ingenio,
and in somnum ituro, aut in vigiliam somno simillimam: ut Senec. de provid. c.
5.
of a very dull and drowsy disposition, by reason of that lumpish flesh of
ours, Romans 7.17, 23.
that abides much even in the best of us. By means whereof it comes to
pass, that we are often sleeping and slumbring, be we never so careful and
diligent; yea in danger often, after we have been awaked out of this dreery and
deadly sleep, to fall eftsoone back again into the same, if we keep not a
constant watch over our selves and our souls. Beside that the Devil is ready
and busy ever to help forward, besprinkling of our tempels with his
spiritual Opium of evil motions and suggestions, to further the matter, and
to cast us again (if it be possible) into a Lethargy irrecoverable.

1 Pet. 5.8. (...). Joan. Ieiun. de poenitent.
Be sober and watch, says the Apostle, for your Adversary the Devil goes
about continually like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. Vt
jugulent homines, surgunt de nocte latrones: Vt teipsum serves, non
expergisceris? Horat l. 1. epist. 2.
Shall men watch, says the Heathen man, to slay and destroy others? and wilt
not thou watch to save thy self? So say I: Shall Satan be more vigilant in
watching to do us a shrewd turn or a mischief, than we in watching to keep
our selves safe from his malice? Perniciosus nimis est repentinus hostis, nam
aut inscios praevenit, aut incautos praeoccupat, aut opprimit dormientes,
Chrysol. sermon. 27.
Undoubtedly if he watch thus continually to assault us, unless we watch as
constantly on the other side to prevent him, we shall soon come to be
surprised and vanquished again of him. (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 3.
Continual watch therefore is to be held of us, because Psalm. 56.1, 2, 5.
our enemy continually lies in wait for us: nor can we ever in regard thereof
(be we never so watchful) be overmuch wary, yea or wary enough. A thing
the rather to be regarded, because it is not here, as in bodily or in worldly
watch and ward; where Quid quisque vitet, nunquam homini satis Cautum est, in
horas. Hor. carm. 2. 13.
some watch for the rest, and the rest sleep while they wake: as that
Epaminondas.
Greek, Commander sometime said in a general solemnity, that (...). Plut. ad
prefect. indoct. and in Apophthegm. reg. and duc.
he kept sober and watched, that others the whilst might drink and sleep:
And Philip of Macedon used to say, that (...). Ex Carystii histor. Athenae
dipnosop. lib. 10.
he might safely drink deep, as long as Antipater kept sober and watched.
But it is not so in this spiritual watch; we cannot here watch by deputy; no
man can watch for us; but every one must watch for himself.

. 6. But (may some say) are not the Ministers of God in the word called Ezech.
3.17. and 33.2. Ierem. 6.17. Esai. 52.8. and 62.6.
Watchmen? and are they not said Hebr. 13.17.
to watch for our souls?

I answer: True it is indeed; they are called Watchmen: and they are said to
watch, yet not so much for, as (...).
over your souls. Now it is one thing to watch for one, and another thing to
watch over one. To watch for one (to speak properly) is Quomodo Plut. in
Apophth. refert Philippum a somno diuturniore experrectum dixisse, (...). Et
Parmenio Graecu indignantibus quod is interdiu obdormiret, (...).
to watch in his stead that he may not watch: as in a City besieged, or in a
set Camp some few watch by night in their turns that the rest the whilst may
sleep: and as Princeps vigilat ut quiescant subditi. Justinian. in authent
Coll. 2. tit. 2 and Coll 8. tit. 10. Et Bonifac. 8. in prooem. 6. Decret. and
Innocent. 4 ibid. l. 2. tit. 5. c. 1. Omnium somnos illius vigilia defendit,
omnium otium illius labor, omnium delitia^ illius industria, omnium vacationem
illius occupatio. Sen. ad Polyb. c. 26.
the Prince is said to watch, that the subject may rest at ease: or the
Somnosque non defendit excubitor meos. Sen. Thyest.
Princes guard to watch, that he may sleep safely. But to watch over one is to
watch by him to keep him awake; as those that watch Dear to tame them by
keeping them from sleep; or as those that tend a sick Patient in some drowsy
disease, or Vt post elleborum sumptum praecipit Hippocr. aphor. 4. 14.
after some medicine received, or a vein opened, or the like, where sleep may
be prejudicial and dangerous unto him. In this latter manner are we said to
watch over you, and the maine end of our watching is to keep you waking. Which
unless it be therefore by our watching effected, all our watching in regard of
you is to no purpose; no more than their watching about the Patient before
spoken of, if he sleep amids them, while they watch about him. The Pastor
then indeed must watch over his people: but Ierem. 6.17.
the people must watch also with their Pastor, and must be kept waking by his
watching. Yea as Act. 20.28. 1. Tim. 4.13.15, 16.
he must watch over both himself and them; so Matthew. 7.15. and 16.6. and 24.4.
2 Joan. 8.
must they in person also watch each one over himself. To which purpose, if
we should demand of our Savior, as Peter did sometime in the very same case,
and upon the like occasion; Luke 12.41.
Master, speak thou this unto us alone, or unto all? Do thou speak this
to thine Apostles only, or to Pastors alone, that are to watch over others, or
to the people also, to thy Disciples all in general? our Savior would no
doubt answer, yea so expressly he does answer, Mark. 13.37. Quod uni dictum
est, quisque sibi dictum putet. Auson in Jude 7. Sapient. in S^lone.
What I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch. Others may watch over us; but none
can watch for us: each one in person must ever watch for himself.

. 7. To the adversary before mentioned, we might well add the world, as
Exodus 32.22.
Aaron says of his people, 1 Ioh. 2.16. and 5.19. (...). Quomodo Plaut.
Cassin. 2.5. and Merc. 5.3. In fermento tota jacet uxor.
wholly set upon wickedness. This though we be Ioh. 15.19.
not of it, yet are we Ioh. 17.11.
in it, neither can 1 Cor. 5.10.
we go, or (...). Plat. de sera vind.
get out of it, Quomodo ille apud Plut. de Tranquil. (...). Ipse Deus,
simulatque volam, me solvet. Hor. ep. 17. l. 1.
when we will our selves; Ioh. 17.15.
we must stay in it, till it please God Genesis 5.24.
to call us out of it. And so long as we are in it, Pro. 6.28. (...). Arist.
Lysist. Incedis per ignes Suppositos c^neridoloso. Horat. carm. 21.
we tread upon embers, Job. 22.10. Ier. 18.22. Ezech. 2.6. Inter medios
laqueos in hac vita inceditur. Bern in Cant. 52.
we walk among snares, of Phil. 2.17.18.
evil example, of allurement by Number. 227.17.
profit and Prove. 7.18.
pleasure, of shame and abashment by 1 Pet. 4.4. Hebr. 11.36.
derision, scorn and contempt, of terror and affrightment by Ioh. 15.19. and
16.2.
opposition, threats, and discountenance, if we do not as others do. We are
in as much danger (if not much Homo malus ipso est Diabolo nocentior. Iustum
siquidem hominem Diabolus timet, homo malus contemnit. Diabolus homini nisi
permissus non nocet, malus homo nocet etiam prohibitus. Aut. oper. imp. in Mat.
hom 24. Ludolf. vita Chr^sti, 1. 52. and Vor. de Sanct. 2. 10.
more) by evil men as by devils, by Ioh. 6.70.
devils incarnate, as by (...). Contrario sensa quamid Graecieff. ru^t.
devils indeed: they are John 8.44. 1 Ioh. 3.8.
limbs of the devil, and Homo malus telum Diaboli: sine homine adversus
hominem nil potest. Author. oper imperf. hom. 24.
the instruments that he oftest makes use of. Iam. 3.6, 7, 8. Ezec. 2.6. Fera
quavis ipse ferocior est, Qui (ut Martial. spectac. epigr.) jubet ingenium
mitius esse feris. Fera siquidem nisi irritata out same coacta non saevit: homo
gratis crudelis est. Fera habet crudelitatem, sed rationem non habet: homo and
crudelis est and rationalis Fera malum unum aliquod habet, homo omnia. Author
operis imperf. hom. 24
We are more in danger of wicked men for our souls, than they are for their
bodies that live in the wide wilderness, where wild beasts are most frequent.
They were men like themselves that our Savior warned his to beware of, when
he said, Matthew. 10.17. Quid ista circumspicis, quae tibi possunt fortasse
evenire, sed possunt and non evenire: incendium dico, ruinam, and alia quae
nobis incidunt non insidiantur. Illa potius vide, illa devita, quae nos
observant, quae captant. Rari sunt casus. etiamsi graves naufragium facere,
vehiculo everli: ab homine homini quotidianum periculum. Adversus hoc te
expedi, hoc intentis oculis intuere. Nullum enim malum frequentius, nullum
blandius. Tempestas minatur antequam surgat, praenunciat fumu^ incendium,
crepant aedificia antequam corruant. Subito est ex homine pernicies, and eo
diligentius tegitur quo propius accedit. Sen. ep. 103.
Take ye heed of men: for they are they that may do you most mischief. They
were (...). Lycurg. apud Stob. c. 2. Heu quam mala atque dep^avata prorsus est
Natura nostra? -- Putas ne tu interesse inter hominem and seram? Nec paululum,
nisi in figura corporis. Curvantur aliae, inambulat recta haec fera. Lyps.
Lupus est homo homini, non homo. Plaut. Asin. 2. 4. Erras si istorum qui
occurrunt tibi, vultibus credis Hominum effigies habent, animos serarum. Nisi
quod illarum perniciosior est primis incursus, quos transire non q^eunt.
Nunquam enim illas ad nocendum nisi necessitas inigit: aut same aut timore
coguntur ad poenam. Homini perdere hominem libet. Sen. ep. 103
Men-wolves that he forewarned them of, when he told them, that he should
send them out Matthew. 10.16.
as sheep among wolves. And had not they need Ephesians. 5.15. (...).
to walk warily, that Psalm. 57.6. and 141.9. and 142.3. Vigilandum est semper;
multae insidiae sunt bonis. Ex Trag Cic. pro Planc.
have so many snares in their way? Had they not need to stand continually upon
their guard, that have their enemies (...). Thacyd. hist. Vtrinque conciduntur
in medio siti.
on either side, nay Psalm. 17.11. Intus caro extra Satan, mundus undique.
on every side of them? Have they not just cause to Luke 2.8.
watch night and day, that abide there where Psalm. 57.4.
Lions, Wolves, and wild beasts of ravenous disposition are most rife?

. 8. But there is yet a third enemy, as vigilant and diligent, yea more
incessant and more dangerous than either of the former, and that is our own
corrupt nature. For the other two are without us, this is within us, it is an
inbred, an homebred adversary. A man's enemies, says Mica. 7.6.
the Prophet, and Matthew. 10.36.
our Savior from him, shall be those of his own house. (...). Plut. de tranq.
Molestissimum malum intestinum and domesticum. Bern. in Cant. 29.
An household foe is much more dangerous than a forainer, than one out of the
house, though dwelling at the next door. But this enemy of ours is not in our
house, but Matthew. 15.18, 19. Genesis 6 5. Ierem. 17.9.
in our heart, lodged and seated in the very inwardest and secretest closet of
our soul. The other two are professed adversaries, this a pretended friend.
And Aditum nocendi perfido praestat fides. Sen. O^dip. 3. Nullae sunt
occultiores insidiae, quam hae^ quae latent in simulatione officii, aut in
aliquo necessitudinis nomine. Nam eum qui palam est adversarius, facile cavendo
vitare possis: hoc vero intestinum ac domesticum malum, non modo existit, verum
etiam opprimit, antequam per spicere atque explorare possis, Cicer. Ve^rin. 3.
a pretended friend is more dangerous than a professed foe. Psalm. 55.12, ^3.
It was not a professed enemy, says David, that did me this wrong; for then
could I well have borne it: nor was it an open adversary, that set himself
against me; for then could I have shunned him: but it was thou, o man, my
companion, my counselor, my guide, my familiar. And therefore, Mica. 7.5.
Trust not a friend, says the Prophet, take heed especially of a false friend;
put no confidence in a counselor: keep the doors of thy mouth from her that
2 Samuel 12.8. In accubitu mos ille ut accumberent uxores in sinu virorum Lyps ad
Tac. annal. l. 11. Hinc Caesarema Dolobella dictum Spondam interiorem regiae
lecticae, refert Sueton. c. 49. Sic. Joan. 13.23, 25.
lies in thy bosom. But this false-hearted friend of ours lies not in our
bosom, but within our breast. Again, the other two cease sometime their
opposing of us, this is incessant, it never cease. Though there be a
continual Genes. 3 15.
enmity, a perpetual hostility, (...), ut Aesch. in Ctesiph. and Demost. pro
coron. Sive (...), ut Plut. Periel.
a war without truce between Satan and us: yet are we not always actually
In bello perpetuo, at non in praelio. Quo modo Live. hist. l. 30. Non praelio
modo se, sed bello victum.
in skirmish and combat. We are not always in fight, though we be always in
the field. Nor is the devil himself always about us or with us. But (...).
Basil. ep. 1. Quid terras alio calentes Sole mutamus? Patriae quis exul Se
quoque fugit. Hor. carm 2. 16. Recte Varro, Long fugit, quisuos fugit: At
longius, qui se.
our corrupt nature is never from us, it is always Non est extrinsecum malum
nostrum: intra nos est, in visceribus nostris sedet. Sen. epist. 50.
in the very midst of us; (...). Basil. Hoc se quisque mode fugit: at, quem
scilicet, ut sit, Effugere haud potes est, ingratis haret and angit. Lucret. l.
3. -- teque ipsum vitas fugitivus and erro; Frustra: nam comes alra premit,
sequiturque fugacem. Horat. sermon 27. Vitia nos nostra, quotunque transierimus,
secutura sunt. Sen. ep. 50 Nihil tibi prodest peregrinatio, quia tecum
peregrinaris. Peregrinaris cum affectibus tuis: and mala te tua sequuntur. Sen.
epist. 104.
we carry it about with us continually, whithersoever we go, or wheresoever
we become. And In hoc genere militia nunquam quies, nunquam ocium datur. Sen.
epist. 52.
it is never idle in us, but incessantly working on us, continually either
hindering us in well-doing, or provoking and egging of us on unto evil. Galat.
5.17.
The flesh, says the Apostle, lusts and striveth against the Spirit, so that
ye cannot do what you would. And, Romans 7.22, 23.
I find by woeful experience, that when I would do good, evil is present
with me. For mine inner man delights in the Law of God: But I see and feel
another law in my limbs rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me
captive to the law of sin that is in my limbs.

. 9. Lastly, without the help of this traitor (...). Simot. epist. 40. Nec
nolens quisquam laeditur, sed nec volens. Nemo laeditur nisi a se. Tu ipso tibi
ni aliquid facias, malus quid faciat? Aug. homil. 29.
no other enemy can hurt us. Debilis est adversarius, nisi volentem non
vincit. Pelag. ad Demetr. Lege Chrysostom. orat. 67. tom. 6. and orat. 2. tom. 7.
The devil himself cannot foil us, unless we our selves will. Suadere and
solicitare potest, cogere omnino non potest. Aug. hom. 12. Habet astutiam
suadendi, non potestatem cogendi. Idem in Psalm 91. and in Joan. 12.
He may persuade and entice, suggest and provoke, but he cannot enforce or
constrain, nor unless our own heart give consent, cause us to sin. As we
use therefore to say of the Land and State that we live in, that We need not
fear any foraine foe, if we be true among our selves: So may it be said much
more truly of our spiritual estate, Quid a foris conturbare aut contristare
poterit, si intus been estis, and fraterna pace gaudetis? Bern in Cant. 29. Pax
vobis a vobis sit, and omne quod extrinsecus minari videtur, non terret, quia
non nocet. Ib.
we should not need to fear any outward adversary, either world or devil,
if our own heart were, and would be sure to keep true to us. But Diabolus
plus confidit in adjutorio carnis, quoniam magis nocet hostis domesticus: illa
ad subversionem meam cum illo foedus iniit. Bern. medit. c. 14. Huic accedit,
hac utitur serpens malignus: baculo nostro nos cedit, manus nostras cingulo
proprio ligat. Ibid.
it is our own heart within us that is ready to join with our adversaries
without us, and to betray us unto them. Ioh. 14.30.
The prince of this world, says our Savior, has been dealing with me; but
he found nothing in me; and therefore prevailed not against me. But Diabolus
quum aliquid suggerit, tenet consentientem, non cogit invitum. non enim seducit
aut trahit aliquem, nisi quem inven^rit ex ali^ua part jam sibi similent. Aug.
de diverse. 20.
he never comes to assault us, but he finds enough and too much in us;
the maine cause why so often he prevails against us. Hosts intra nos multos
habemus, carnis concupiscentias, carnis fructus Hugo d^ continent. c. 3.
He finds a many Iudasses within us, that are ready to join with him, to
second him, to assist him, to fight for him, to betray us into his hands.
Without this intestine traitor then, the devil himself cannot hurt us: but it
alone is able to hurt us without him. We need no other Tempter to tempt or
entice us to evil: we have Genesis 3.6. Portaemus omnes impressum nobis
cauterium conspirationis antiquae, Eva nostra caro nostra, per que
concupiscentiam Serpenti nos prodit. Bern. in Cant. 72.
an Eve, a Tempter of our own each one within us, more powerful and more
effectual than any is or can be without us, and one that needs not any help
from without. Iam. 1.14, 15. Romans 8.12, 13.
Every man, says the Apostle, is tempted, when he is enticed and drawn aside
by his own lust. And so lust having conceived brings forth sin, and sin
being consummate brings forth death. (...). Chrysostom. orat. 67 tom. 6. Hostem
si foris non habes, domi invenies. Live. hist. l. 30.
No need is there of other devil to delude or destroy us; there is devil
enough in the hearts of every one of us to do either, there is enough in us
without any devils help to effect either.

. 10. We have as much cause then (...). Epictet. enchirid. c. 72.
to watch even against our selves, as against any adversary whatsoever. Since
that as the Heathen man sometime said, (...). Plut. de adulat.
Every man is the first and the greatest flatterer of himself: and others
could never come to fasten their flatteries upon us, if we did not before
flatter our selves: So (...). Anacharsis apud Stob. eclog. tom. 2. c. 2.
every man is the first and the greatest enemy to himself: and other enemies
could never do us any harm, if we did not first conspire with them to hurt
our selves. And if they had need to be exceeding vigilant, and extraordinarily
circumspect, that have not only many open enemies, besetting and assaulting
them on every side without, but many close traitors also, that have busy heads
and working brains, plotting and practicing continually their ruin at home;
then surely no less cause have we to be extraordinarily watchful, whose
case, as we see, is the very same. If Nusquam securitas, neque in coelo, neque
in paradiso, multo minus in mundo. In coelo. n. cecidit Angelus sub praesentia
divinitatis, Adam in paradiso de loco voluptatis, Judas in mundo d^scholae
Salvatoris. Bern. de diverse. 30.
our first parents had cause to watch in Paradise, when there was no adversary
but without: Much more have we cause to watch, and to watch most diligently
now, when we have adversaries 2 Cor. 7.5.
both without and within. For therein is the difference, as Faber in Iac. 1.
Nonnunquam tentatio praevenit concupiscentiam, ut in Eva: nonnunquam sequitur,
ut in Judah.
one says well, between Genes. 3.1, 6.
Adam and Ioh. 12.6. and 13.2.
Judas, so between our first parents and us, that Outward temptation prevented
inward corruption in them, inward corruption preventeth outward temptation in
us. So many adversaries therefore, so vigilant, so diligent, round about us, on
every side of us, before us, behind us, above us, beneath us, without us,
within us, Ire vides quadrato agmino exercitum, ubi hostis ab omni part
suspectus est, pugna paratum. Hoc aliquanto nobis magis necessarium. Illi enim
saepe hostem timuere sine causa. Nobis nihil pacatum est. Tamsuperne quam infra
metus est. Vtrumque trepidat latus. Sequuntur pericula and occurrunt. Sextius
apud Sen. ep. 60.
must needs enforce on us an incessant watchfulness, if we have any care of
our own safety.

. 11. A third Reason may be taken from the necessity of perseverance. Matthew.
10 22. and 24.13. Non qui inceperit, sed qui perseveraverit, salvus crit.
Incipere multorum est; perseverare paucorum. Bern. de grad. obed. Multi enim
magna aggrediuntur, sed in via deficiunt: in desertum multi exeunt, sed ad
terram promissionis pauci perveniunt. Aug. ad fratr. increm. ser 8.
Who so endures to the end (says our Savior, he alone) shall be saved. The
Christian course is compared to a race. Hebr. 12.1.
Let us run with patience (says the Apostle) the race set before us. And 1
Cor. 9.24.
in a race (says the same Apostle) all run; but all win not. If we ask
who win, he tells us elsewhere, that 2 Timothy 2.5.
they only win the wager or get the garland, that run (...). Non certat
legitime, nisi qui certat ad finem usque. Aug. ibid.
according to the laws of the game, to the rules of the race. Now in worldly
races the law of the game is, that none but he gains the prize, that gets
first to the gole: But in the spiritual race the law is otherwise. For Non qui
primus venerit, sed quicunque pervenerit. Chrysan Matthew.
there not who so comes first, but who so holds out to the last, Matthew.
19.30. and 20.16. and 22.14.
be he in order of place or time first or last, is sure to win and to do
well. Apoc. 2.10.
Be faithful to death, and thou shall have the crown of life, says our
Savior to each Christian soldier and soul. Incassum bonum agitur, fi ante
terminum vitae deseratur: quia and frustra velociter currit, qui priusquam ad
metas veniat, deficit. Greg. mor. l 2. c. 40. Non inchoantibus siquidem
praemium promittitur, sed perseverantibus. Isidor. de sum. bon. lib. 2. cap. 7.
As in a race then it is to no purpose for a man to set out with the first, and
to run eagerly a while, if after some time he sit down, and stay at the
midway: yea if he give over when he is within but a foot or two of the gole,
it is all one as if he had never set foot into the field: So here for a man
Gal. 5.7. and 3 3.
to run well for a spurt, and then to give over, yea to break off that good
course that he was entered into but a day or twain before decease, it is
enough to annull all his former proceedings, and to make him to be in no better
estate than if he had never set foot into the good ways of God. For
Perseverantia sola virtutum coronatur. Bern. de temp. 114. Aeternitatis
imaginem perseverantia praese fert. Sola est cui aeternitas redditur. Idem de
consider. l. 5.
it is perseverance alone in well-doing, that carries away the crown. Cedunt
prima postremis. Tacit. annal. l. 13.
The latter part of a man's life over-swayeth the former: and Vita posterior
priori praejudicat. Hieron. ad Furiam.
the former yields it to the latter. Ezech. 18.24. Vides oblivione profunda
sepeliri virtutes, quas perseverantia non insignivit. Bern. de grad obed. Neque
enim incepisse, vel facere, sed perficere virtutis est. Ex Hier. Gloss. ad Mat.
10.22. Atqui non est magnum bonu^ inchoare quod bonum est, sed consummare, hoc
solum perfectum est. Aug. ad fratres in eremo, sermon. 8.
If the righteous man (says the Prophet, or rather God himself by the
Prophet) shall turn from his righteous course of life that before he lived
in, none of his former good deeds shall be remembered or reckoned; but in the
evil that then he does, he shall die. Yea to keep to the comparison that
we have in our text: If a Servant or Soldier appointed to watch for his
Masters coming, or against the enemies approach, shall continue watching till
within an hour or some shorter time of the arrival of the one or the assault
of the other, but shall then chance to fall fast asleep; he shall be no less
in danger either to be shent of the one or to be slain by the other, than if
he had slept all out, and watched no time at all. And the like may be said of
our spiritual Watch; which if we shall for any time intermit, or after any
time give over, we may chance in the interim, to be surprised either by the
justice of God, or by the malice of Satan, and so Non enim ex praeteritis, sed
ex praesentibus judicamur. Gavendum ergo semperque timendum, ne veterem gloriam
and solidam firmitatem unius horae procella subvertat. Hieron in Ezech. c. 26.
be in danger of perishing everlastingly by either, notwithstanding all our
former watch. To which purpose says our Savior in the words next before my
text; that it is in this case Mark. 13.34, 35, 36. Luk 12.36, 37, 38.
As when a man going from home for a time, leaves his servants to keep house,
and sets each one his task, and wills the Porter to watch: and he
warns us all therefore to Luke 21.36.
watch incessantly, (because Mat. 24.42, 43.
we know not what time our Lord and Master may come) lest if he come
suddenly, he take us asleep.

. 12. Joan. 5.14.
Go thy way (says our Savior to the Cripple he had cured) and sin no
more, lest a worse matter befall thee. As we stand continually in no small
danger of relapse, partly through the drowsinesse of our own disposition, and
partly through the diligence of our Adversary the Devil, (as before we have
showed:) so is there Ingens periculum ad deteriora redeundi. Sen. epist. 72.
no small danger in relapse, and in relinquishing this our spiritual watch:
which if ever therefore we give over and fall from, it shall not be barely
all one to us, as if we had ever lien still asleep, but it shall be far
worse with us, than if we had never been awaked. For as it is in the diseases
of the body; so it is likewise in the sickness of the soul. As Gravius
aegrotant ^, qui cum levari morbo videntur, in eum de integro inciderunt. Cic.
fam ep. 30. lib. 12.
in bodily sickness the relapse usually is worse and more dangerous, more
incurable and irrecoverable than the disease it self was at first: so it
falls out commonly, yea so it is ever ordinarily in this spiritual
Lethargy, that the relapse proves more desperate than the disease was in it
self. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21, 22.
For if men (says the Apostle) having escaped these worldly defilements (...).
by the acknowledgement of Christ (or the profession of Christianity) come
after to be entangled and again overcome of them; Matthew. 12.45.
the latter estate of such is worse than the first. For it had been better for
them never to have (...), quod plus est quam (...).
taken notice of the good way of God, than after notice taken of it, to turn
again away from it. Since that such, as the Proverb truly speaks, are Prove.
26.11.
like the Dog that resumeth his own vomit; (...). Iambus est, and poeticum
quid spirat.
and like Swine that after washing return again to their wallowing in the
mire. As if he had said in words applied to the present comparison, It had
been better for men to have lien fast asleep still, snorting securely in
their sin, than having been by the word and Spirit of God, raised and roused
out of it, to fall afterward back again into some deadly fit of it.

. 13. They seldom awake again, that fall the second time so fast asleep.
Partly, for that through their own inbred corruption (the evil humor that
feeds this drowsy disease) waxing commonly in such cases more fierce and
furious than before (like a mastive that breaks loose, when he has been
tied up some time; or like Torrens ab obice saevior ibat. Ovid. metam. l. 4.
the stream of a river that has recovered scope again, where it had found
some restraint formerly, either pent in with arches, or bounded with banks)
this spiritual Lethargy in the return of it grows stronger upon them, and
so harder to be subdued and expelled than at first; like a malady that has
got masterie of, and now contemns those remedies that curbed and abated the
force of it for a while. As also partly through Satan's malicious policy, who
endeavors all he can by plunging of such as have broken or been breaking
away from him (if he can fasten again upon them) as deep as may be in all
manner of impiety and impuritie, thereby to make them surer than ever to
himself: Stella ad illud Luc. 11.24, 25, 26.
like the Jailer, that having laid hold on his prisoner again, that had either
attempted or made escape from him, lays load on him with irons as many as he
may bear, to make him sure from starting aside any more. Yea and partly
through the just judgment of God, who upon such Apostataes (as, though he have
been so gracious and merciful unto them as to awake them out of this deadly
slumber sometime, yet he finds them not thankful to him for it, nor steadfast
and faithful with him, nor careful to keep their watch so as they should,
but willing to sleep again, Esai. 56.10. (...)
delighting in slumber, and repenting that ever they were awaked) is wont Esai.
29.10. (...) perfudit spiritu soporis alti, Iun. (...) dormitare, (...)
dormire, (...) sopore alto teneri. Livel.
to pour out the spirit not of slumber, but of deep and dead sleep; so that
it may be said of them, as of Saul and his troops, 1 Samuel 26 12. Sopor altus
Iehovae. i. maximus and divinitus immissus tun. post Aug. ad Simplic. l. 2. q.
1.
A deep sleep of God was upon them, that they did not awake: as he is said
even Esai. 6.9, 10. Romans 11.8.
to close up the eyes, and to make the very hearts of such (not their heads
only) heavy, that they may not return or repent, that is, be awaked any more
again out of their dead sleep, and so healed of this their spiritual
Lethargy. And no marvel then if they seldom awake or recover, whom God, and
the Devil, and their own corrupt heart, God in justice, the Devil in malice,
and their own corrupt heart out of its own drowsy disposition, shall all
conspire as it were together to withold from waking, and from returning to
their wonted watch.

14. So that whether we regard the drowsinesse of our own natural
disposition; or the diligence of our Adversary ever watching against us; or the
necessity of perseverance, and holding out to the end; or the dreadful danger
of relapse, if we fall from our former forwardness, and either intermit or
give over our watch, and our standing upon our Guard: we cannot but see the
truth of the point formerly propounded, to wit, that it is not sufficient for
us that we have been awaked out of this spiritual sleep of sin, but there
is further need of perpetual care to be had for the keeping of us from
falling back into that deadly slumber again.

The Use.
. 15. Now what may be the Use of all this, but to exhort and excite us to the
diligent practice and performance of a duty so necessary, that so nearly
concerns us, and that is so often and so earnestly exacted of us and pressed
upon us, both by Matthew. 24.42. and 25.13. and 26.41. Mark. 13.33, 35, 37. Luke
12.40. and 21.36.
our Savior Christ himself, and Ephesians. 6.18. Coloss. 4.2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6. 1
Pet. 4.7. and 5.8.
his Apostles, as here, so elsewhere.

Which that we may do the more readily and with the better success, it shall
not be amiss in the next place to consider of, both the Manner, how it is to
be performed; as also the Means, whereby it may be effected.

For the former, to wit, the Manner how this spiritual watch is The manner.
wherein the same does principally consist: The 1. is a due Examination of our
several actions; The 2. a diligent observation of our special corruptions;
The 3. a careful avoidance of the occasions of evil; The 4. a constant
resistance of temptations unto evil;


And of these in order.

. 16. (...). Scitum Bianti^ referente Demetrio Phaelar. apud Stob. c. 3.
Examination of our several actions, before we undertake them, lest we be
otherwise unawares overtaken with sin in them, especially where they may be
doubtful and questionable. Prove. 4.26.
Ponder, says Solomon, the paths of thy feet, that thy ways may all be
ordered aright. And again, Prove. 14.15.
A prudent man (will not run on head, but) will consider his steps. Those
that go in Psalm. 35.6.
ways dark and slippery, and in that regard dangerous, are wont to tread
gingerly and step warily, feel with hand and foot their way before them,
whether it be clear and firm, and will not lift up the one foot, till they
find sure footing for the other. And so should it be with us that are here
traveling through the dark and dangerous way of this worlds wilderness, like
Genes. 14.10.
the vale of Siddim slimy and slippry, and full of limepits, of such pitfalls
and springes as Satan diggeth and sets for us, and of such stumbling blocks
as he lays before us, thereby to maime and to mischief us: (...). Pythag.
aur. carm. apud Stob. p. 2. c. 3. (...). Epicharm. ibid. c. 1. Look ere ye
leap. Alioqui saliens antequam videat, casurus est antequam debeat. Bern. de
bon. deser. Palpebrae praecedunt gressus, cum operationem consilia recte
praeveniunt. Qui enim negligit considerando praevidere quod facit, gressus
tendit, sed oculos claudit, pergendo iter conficit, sed praevidendo sibimetipsi
non antecedit; atque idcirco citius corruit, quoniam ubi pedem operis ponere
debeat, per consili^ palpebram non attendit. Greg. Romans de Pastore par. 3. c.
1. 16.
we have great reason to look about us, and to have an eye to our footing,
that we step not unwarily and unadvisedly upon that that may prove and procure
either our woe or our bane, either our ruin or our ruthe.

. 17. This is that that the Apostle seems to have an eye unto, where he
exhorts some to walk 1 Cor. 5.8. (...).
in sincerity; (as also 2 Cor. 1.12.
he professes of himself that he so did:) and prays for others, Phil.
1.9, 10.
that they may discern those things that differ, to the end they may be (...).
sincere. The word used by the Apostle in both places signifies properly
(...). Etymolog.
sometime tried by the light of the Sun. And it is a Metaphore (as some
suppose) taken from the custom of the Eagle, whose manner is (if we may
believe Aristot. histor. animal. l. 9. c. 34. Et Plin. hist. nature. l. 10. c.
3. and l. 29. c. 6. Nisi quod ill^ (...), hic Haliaeeto tribuit.
those that write the natural story) to bring her young out of the nest before
they be full fledge, and to hold them forth against the full sight of the
sun; the light whereof those of them that can with open eye endure, she
retains and brings up as her own; the rest that cannot brook it, but
wink at it, she rejects and casts off as a bastardly brood. In like
manner should we do with those manifold motions that arise in our minds, and
that are hatched as it were in our hearts, ere we proceed to put them in
practice; Assuescat animus solicita pervigilique custodia discernere
cogitationes suas, and ad primum animi motum vel probare vel reprobare quod
cogitat, ut bonas alat, malas statim extinguat. Pelag. ad Demetriad.
we should bring them forth first to the bright sunneshine of Gods word; let
them look upon that, and it upon them: if they can endure it, we may on in
them with courage and comfort; if not, we must stay both our hand and our
heart too from further following or fostering of them.

. 18. Others think it rather taken from the usual practice of Chapmen in the
view and choice of their wares. A wise and wary Chapman that has to do with a
deceitful Merchant, Draper, or other, one that keeps his wares in obscure
places where the defects of them cannot so easily be discerned, or has false
lights that may help to give a counterfeit gloss to them, he will take no
ware of him upon his word, but he will first diligently view it, toss it and
turn it to and fro over and over, try how it is in the midst as well as at
both ends, bring it forth into the light, hold up his cloth against the sun,
see if he can epsy any defect or default in it; he knows well he may
easily else be overreached. The like should be our practice, because our case
is alike. We have to deal daily with diverse crafty Merchants, Qui cavet ne
decipiatur, vix cavet, quum etiam cavet: Etiam quum cavisse ratus est, saepe is
cautor captus est. Plaut. Capt. 2. 2.
by whom we are sure to be often cozened, be we never so careful, and can never
therefore take heed enough how we deal with them. There is first the Devil,
for his slinesse and subtlety termed Genes. 3.1. 2 Cor. 11.3.
a Serpent, for his experience and antiquity styled an Apoc. 12.9.
old Serpent: one that, Sicut Mercator de falso panno non ostendit emptori
medium neque finem, sed caput tantum: sic Diabolus qui est mercator peccati,
ostendit fatuo peccatori solum caput panni, i. delectationem culpae, non
medium, i, remorsum conscientiae, vel finem, i. poenam gehennae. Bonavent.
diaeta salut. c. 2.
like a deceitful Draper (says one,) to draw men on unto sin, shows them
the present pleasure or profit of sin as the one end of the cloth, but
concealeth and keeps out of sight the middle and the other end of it in the
internal remorse here, and the eternal punishment hereafter. Then there is
the world, which our selves are wont to say is wholly set upon deceit, and the
Spirit of God says 1 Ioh. 5.19. (...).
is wholly set upon sin: of whom we may well say as one sometime of an
Historian, (...). Plutarch. de Herodote.
Both the words and the shows of it are all full of fraud. Yea there is lastly
our own Heart as fraudulent and deceitful as any of them. For, Ierem. 17.9.
The heart of man, says Jeremy, is wicked and deceitful above all things:
who can know it? So deceitful, that oft-times Galat. 6.3.
it deceives a man's own self, and so consequently Iam. 1.26. Read Dike of
Self-deceit.
it self. Having to deal then with such crafty ones, we had need to be
exceeding wary, that they take nothing up from them, that they shall offer to
obtrude on us, either by outward persuasion, or inward suggestion, or
otherwise, especially where there shall be some good ground and just cause of
suspicion, until we have turned it every way, and tried it by the light of
Gods Law, Galat. 6.4. (...).
examined both ends, weighed well every circumstance, and searched every corner
of it; that we may have Romans 14.5. (...). Been siquidem praecipiunt, qui
vetant quicquam agere quod dubites aequam sit an iniquum. Cic. Offic. l. 1.
Tutiusque illud cautissimi cujusque praeceptum, Quod dubites, nefeceru^. Plin.
ep. 18. l. 1.
good assurance, as the Apostle wills, of the lawfulness and the
warrantablenesse of it, before we venture upon the admission of it to consent,
or to practice.

. 20. This was David's course: Psalm. 119.24.
Thy testimonies (says he) are my comfort and my counsel. David was a very
wise Prince himself, 2 Samuel 14.20.
prudent like an Angel of God, as the woman sometime told him. And he had
besides a learned Counsel about him; Achitophel among the rest, 2 Samuel 16.23.
One whose words went in those days for Oracles. But yet had David a
Counselor beyond and above all these, to wit, the voice of God himself in his
word: This had a negative voice in all David's consultations; so that though the
matter propounded seemed good in his own eyes, yea and had the approbation of
his learned Council withal, yet if this his head Counselor went not with it,
it was not for David to deal with. And this Counselor so long as David
hearkened unto (for sometime to his own woe he over-shot himself by neglecting
it; but for the most part he did so) so long he did well, and thrived and
found comfort, and had prosperous success in whatsoever he went about. And
the like must we do, if we desire to fare as he did; make Gods word our
Counselor, if we would have it our comforter: do as worldly-wise and wary
men are wont to do; they will do nothing without counsel; If they dwell
near to a Lawyer, whom they may freely repair and have access to upon every
occasion, and of whom they may have counsel, and cost them nothing, as often as
they will, they will be sure to do nothing of moment, where the least matter
of doubt or suspicion of danger may be, without his advice. And such a
Counselor have we Deuteronomy. 30.12, 13, 14. Romans 10.8.
ever at hand with us, ready on all occasions to advise us, never weary of
conferring with us, Esai. 30.1. and 31.1. Prove 1.25. Non est verendum, ne
dedignetur condiscendere nobis, qui potius si vel exiguum quid absque illo
conamur, indignatur. Bern. in Cant. sermon. 17.
angry with us for nothing but either for not asking or not following his
advice; whom therefore if we shall neglect to consult with, and take counsel
of upon every just occasion, the common wariness of worldly men, yea our own
wariness in worldly things will one day worthily condemn us.

. 21. Yet is this that that most men can be hardly drawn to condescend unto,
to take advice of Gods word, that is so willing to advise them. There is none
but would have comfort from it: and there is none almost willing to take
counsel of it. We like all well to have a Comforter of it; but we have no
lust to make a Counselor of it. But as David, and Gods Spirit by David joyneth
these two together: so Matthew. 19.6.
we must not disjoyne or sever them the one from the other; or if we do, we
shall but delude our selves with vain hopes. For he that takes not counsel
of Gods word, shall never receive comfort from Gods word. He that makes it
not a Counselor, shall never find it a Comforter. The neglect of this has
been the cause that many, wise otherwise and religious, have often shamefully
over-shot themselves, because (with Josh. 9.14.
Joshua and the Israelites in their agreements with the Gibeonites) they have
not been careful to consult with the voice of God in his word. In which kind
comes justly to be censured the unadvised carriage of those that practice
first and advise afterward: run on head into ambiguous actions, and then
after fall to examining whether they have done well, and as they ought in them,
or no. Of which course well says the Wiseman; Prove 20.25. Sero atquestulte
(prius quod factum oportuit) postquam comedit rem, rationem putat. Plaut.
Trinum. 2.4.
It is a snare for a man to devour a thing consecrated, and then afterward to
inquire of the vow. A man is ensnared and entangled now by his own act; so
that he is not so free, -- male verum examinat omnis Corruptus judex. -- Hor.
ser. 2. l. 2.
nor fit now to judge aright of it, because his practice has fore-stalled, and
(as it may fall out) corrupted and perverted his judgment: ready therefore as
Quisque sua in lite est judex corruptus.
one partial in his own cause, or as a Judge that has taken somewhat of the
one side, to pass no sincere, nor indifferent sentence.

. 22. As also their preposterous course comes here not unworthily to be
taxed, that first resolve, and then consult; determine first what they will
do, and then ask advice what they should do. Thus did the Jewish Captains
sometime with Jeremy. Ierem. 42.2, -- 7.
They come to him very demurely, and make deep protestations, calling God
solemnly to witness of the truth of their intention, of their willing mind
and full purpose to put in execution and practice whatsoever God by the Prophet
should advise them unto, were it good or bad. But (as Ierem. 42.20.
Jeremy after truly told them) they dissembled but with him. For they were
resolved before what course they would take; and came only to make trial
whether the Prophet would concur therein with them or no. Which when they
found that he did not, they fly off fairly from him; yea they stick not to
give him the lie, and to tell him to his teeth, Ierem. 43.2, 3.
that the answer he brought them was no divine Oracle, but an untruth of his
own coining at the instigation of Baruc. And in like manner do many now
adays repair to Gods Ministers for their opinion in cases of conscience
concerning the lawfulness of some act that they are resolved on already; that
if they deliver their opinions with them, they may then be able to say, they
had the judgment of good Divines for it, before they did it, or attempted
ought in it, to stop the mouths of those with that may afterward question it:
but whether they concur or no, resolved to go on, and so often do directly
contrary to the judgment and advice of those whom they made show to consult
with. I say not, but that a man consulting with a Divine, if he receive not
good satisfaction from him, is free still notwithstanding his sentence. But
(...) Ariani Epictet. l. 2. c. 7. Et c. 21. (...).
for a man to resort to Malac. 2.7.
Gods Ministers and Messengers for advice, when he is resolved before what he
will do, howsoever they shall advise, or howsoever he may be convinced by
Gods word of the contrary, is no other but a mere mockery both of them, and
of him; yea, and as it falls out often, a means of deluding himself too, and
betraying his own soul to sin: the rather while Ezech. 14.9, 10, 11.
God in his just judgment many times fitteth such hypocritical Consulters
with such corrupt Counselors, as speak not what they deem agreeable to Gods
holy will and word, but what they suppose the party resorting to them is
willing to hear.

1 Pet. 2.11.
I beseech you, brethren, says the Apostle, as Pilgrims and Strangers abstain
from fleshly lusts, that fight against the soul. Sin is the maine enemy and
the 1 Cor. 15.56.
band of man's soul. And Omnia vitia contra naturam pugnant. Senec. epist. 112.
Et cum constet omnes ab omnibus impugnari, diverso tamen modo and ordine
singuli laboramus. Serapion. apud Cassian. collat. 5. c. 13.
all sins in general fight against every man's soul; but some sins more
specially against some than against others. And as in the world, where two
neighbor kingdoms are at open war either with other, there is an hostility
in general between all the Subjects of either, even between those that never
bore arms against, nor ever saw either other; but this hostility is more
specially executed and exercised between those that either border either upon
other, or are up in arms in the field together either against other: So here,
there is a general hostility between each Soul and all Sin, but that
exercised in more special manner between each particular soul and some
peculiar sins; and these commonly of two sorts, the sins of a man's calling
or particular vocation, and the sins of a man's nature, or of his natural
constitution.

. 24. First, the sins of a man's Calling; under which head also may be
comprehended the sins either of the places that men abide in, or of the times
that they live in.

When I say the sins of a man's Calling, it is not so to be understood, as if
the works or duties of any lawful Calling were evil or sinful in
themselves: but that a man by occasion of his place and vocation, or his course
of life and conversation, may have more, and more frequent occasions of some
sins than of others, greater and stronger inducements and inticements to some
sins than to others, which he is therefore more specially to keep watch
against. Thus the Courtiers sin is with 2 King. 5.18.
Naaman to make a God of his Prince, in being content to please the one by
displeasing the other: The Captains sin with 1 King. 2.5.
Ioab, to be a man of blood, ready to use, or abuse his weapon rather, to
private revenge: Luke 3.14. Populatores terrae, quam a populationibus vindicare
debebant. Curt. de gest. Alex. lib. 3.
The Soldiers sin to pill and spoil, and make a prey of those whom he
ought to protect: Patronus praevaricatur and decipit. Cyprian. lib. 2. ep. 2.
The Lawyers sin to betray, or to delay his Clients cause, to draw the more
fees from him: Esai. 1.23. Mica 7.3.
The Judges sin to pervert judgment, or to tefuse to do justice, for fear,
favor, or reward: Ezech. 13.16, 22.
The Ministers sin to sooth up men in their sin, or Ier. 1.17. and 20.9.
to forbear to reprove sin for fear of man's face: The Handy-craftmans sin
to Ezech. 13.11.
do his work deceitfully and unfaithfully, there especially where he thinks
that he cannot be discovered: The Tradesmans sin Amos 8.5, 6. Sirac. 27.1, 2.
to use lying and fraud in the uttering of his wares: Mica 2.1, 2.
The sin of great men to be oppressors of the poor: and the sin of the
meaner and poorer sort Esai. 8.21.
to be discontent with their estate, Est miserorum, ut malevolentes sint, atque
invideant bonis. Plaut. cap. 3.4.
to envy those that exceed them, and to be instruments of evil offices for
their own advantage to others. And so upon each course of life and Calling are
there some special sins attending, which those therefore that follow it are
the more subject unto, and more in danger to be surprised by, than by many, or
ordirily by any other.

Again, when it is said that the sins are to be observed of the times and
places that men live in; it is not so to be conceived, as if all sins were
not in some sort to be found in all places, or Hominum sunt ista non temporum:
nulla aetas vacabit a culpa. Sen. ep. 97.
as if all sins had not been more or less in all ages; but that -- ardet
vitio gentisque suoque. Ovid. de Tereo Metam. l. 6. Omnes gentes peculiaria
habent mala: Gothorum gens perfida est, Alanorum impudica, Francimendaces,
Saxones crudeles. Salvian. de provid. l 7. Gens Saxonum fera est, Francorum
infidelis, Gepidarum inhumana, Hunnorum impudica: omnium vita vitiosa. Ibid. 4.
Sunt tam civitatum, quam singulorum hominum mores: gentesque aliae iracundae,
aliae audaces, quaedam timidae; in vinum, in Venerem proniores aliae sunt. Live.
hist. l. 45.
some sins in some places are rifer than others, some sins in some ages
more in request than some other: as some diseases reign more in some places
than in others, some infirmities are more frequent at some times than at
others: which those therefore that live in such times or such places, must more
specially watch against, as being more in danger to be infected and tainted
therewith.

. 25. The second sort of special corruptions are the sins of a man's nature,
or of his natural constitution, such as he is naturally more addicted and
inclined unto than unto other. For as it is with the body, so is it also with
the soul. As in every man's body there is a general mixture of all the four
humors, Blood, Fleame, and the two Cholers, in some degree more or less, but
there is some one of them predominant, in regard whereof a man is said to be of
a Sanguine, a Flegmatike, a Melancholic, or a Cholerike Constitution: or as in
grounds untoiled and untilled there grow evil weeds of all sorts, but there is
some one commonly that over-toppeth the residue, and grows rifer and rancker
usually than the rest: So in the soul of man (since the fall of our first
Parents (...). Empedoclis vocabulum apud Aristot. de gener. animal. l. 4. c. 3.
a general seed-plot of evil) there are spiritual weeds of all sorts, a
mixture of all vice, the seed and spawne of all sin, Ephesians. 2.12. (...). Et
cupidiomnes, and maligni omnes, and timidi omnes, and ambitiosi; adjice and
impii omnes. Sea. de benef. l. 5. c. 17.
Atheism it self not excepted: but there is Nullum mihi morbi genus ignotum
est: uni tamen morb^ quasi assignatus sum. Sen. epist. 55.
some one pestilent Humor or other lightly more predominant than the rest,
some one maine and master vice, that gives a denomination, in regard whereof
men are said to be, some ambitious, some covetous, some superstitious, some
lascivious, and the like: not as if such persons had no other vice, but that
that they are so named by: for it is most true that the Heathen man says, Qui
habet unum vitium, habet omnia. Sen. de benef l. 5. c 15. Malus quisque nullo
vitio vacat. Ibid. l. 4. c. 27.
He that has any one vice, has all other with it; but, Stultus omnia vitia
habet; sed non in omnia natura pronus est. Senec. de benef lib. 4. cap. 27.
Omnia in omnibus vitia sunt; sed non omnia in singulis extant. Ibid. c. 26.
Omnia omnibus insunt; sed in quibusdam singula eminent. Ibid. c. 27.
because that bears the sway, though the other be all there too in a lower,
and a less eminent degree. This is that which David seems to have aimed at
when he says; Psalm. 18.23.
I was upright also with him, and kept my self from mine own sin. Eastie in
Ps. 51.
Every David (says one well) has his Bathsheba, and every Bathsheba her
David. David had no doubt his sin, Dilecta d^licta.
his beloved, his dear, his darling sin, that which naturally he delighted
in and was addicted unto. And so has every man ordinarily some one corruption
or other, that is the delight of his heart and the joy of his eyes, that he is
naturally most wedded unto, most carried away with. Now Alia in alus vitia
principatum obtinent, tyrannidem exercent: ideoque oportet unumq^emque nostrum
secundum qualitatem belli quo principaliter infestatur, pugnam arripere: utque
vitia in nobis principatum tenent, ita impugnationis modus exig tur, etc. Ber.
de ord. vitae. Et Cass. ^ollat. 6 c. 27.
this maine sin, this master sin is it that we must principally bend our
Watch against; as 1 King 22.31. 2 Chronicles. 18 30. Sic and Agesilius de
Epaminonda, test Plut. in apopth.
the King of Aram bade his soldiers fight neither against more nor less, but
against the King of Israel. For as 1 King 22.36.
when he was once slain, the whole Host was soon vanquished: so if this
master sin be once mastered in us, other petie and inferior ones will the
more easily be subdued.

. 26. But this is it that flesh and blood will not abide almost to hear ought
of. It is in stripping us of sin, as in flaying of a beast, the skin
comes away with ease, till you come to the head. Men are well enough content,
at least outwardly, to conform themselves to good courses, till it come to the
master corruption, to the head sin; to the Hab. 1.16.
fat sin that their profit comes in by, or their Job. 20.12.
sweet sin that they do naturally take pleasure and delight in: but there it
sticks fast, and goes not on, (if at all) without much ado, but with great
difficulty. The worldly minded for other matters will be as conformable as you
will desire: But for his State-sinne, or his Trade-sinne, with 2 King. 5.18.
Naaman, he must have a protection, that must not be stirred, it may not be
touched: he will do any thing else that you will have him; but therein must
God be merciful unto him: It is a thing incident to his trade and course of
life; he cannot do otherwise; it is his living; and it is no other than every
one does: and if he should not do so as well as others, there were no living
for him in the world. A wretched speech of a distrustful heart, refusing to
trust him with the body, whom they would seem to trust with the soul. Fides
famem non formidat. Hieron. ad Heliodor. ex Tertull. de idololat. Matthew. 6.30,
31.
Faith (says one well) fears no famine. Yea a fearful sign of an
ungratious heart, loving and regarding 1 Timothy 6.5.
gain more than godliness, and preferring temporal living before life
everlasting. Matthew. 5.26, 27. and 18.8.9.
It is better, says our Savior, to go halt and blind to heaven, than to go
with health and sight to hell. So it is far better for a man, with Luke
16.20, 21, 22.
Lazarus, to beg and starve in the streets, and so to be conveyed hence to
heaven; than, with Luke 16.22, 23.
the rich-man at whose door he lay, to live in good fashion, or gather a
great estate together here, and then be Luke 12.20.
snatched away hence to hell.

. 27. Yea, but it is not our fault; it is the fault of the times; or, it is the
fault of the Land, or the City, that we do as we do. To omit, that Quaedam
locis and temporibus ascribimus: at illa quocunque transierimus, secutura sunt.
Intelligas tua vitia esse, quae putas rerum. Sen. epist. 50.
we ascribe often those things to the times and places we live in, that indeed
proceed principally from our selves and our own corrupt hearts: like the
Philosophers fool Fatua subito videre desiit; and nescit esse se coecam: ait
domum esse tenebrosam. Ibid.
that complained the room was so dark she could not see, when she had
suddenly by some disease lost her sight. The rifer any evil is in those places
or ages we live in, the more careful should we be to shun and avoid such a
sin. Ephesians. 5.15, 16.
Take heed, says the Apostle, that you walk circumspectly, not as fools, but
as wise men; because the days are evil. Are the times then we live in, or
the places we abide in, more than ordinarily evil in this or that kind? That
gives us no liberty, but should make us walk the more warily; as men that
live in bad aires, or in time of general contagion, are more careful to fence
and arm themselves by taking of preservatives, eating in the morning ere they
go abroad, carrying some things about them to smell to, etc. against danger of
infection: that we may be like Pisces in salo nati and alti, salem tamen non
reserunt. Lips. constat. lib. 2. cap. 16.
the fish, that though it live and swim in the salt sea, yet it tastes not of
the salt: that it may be said of us as it was of Noah, Genes 6.9.
But Noah was a just man in his generation: not, Non juxta consummatam
justitiam, sed juxta justitiam generationis suae. Hier. quaest. in Genesis Sicut
Senec. ad Mart. consol. cap. 1. Illo saeculo magna pietas erat, nihil impie
facere.
a just man as just men went in those days, ( Non est bonitas pessimis esse
meliorem. Senec. ep. 79.
that were but a poor praise of so worthy a Patriarch) but Solus justus, cum
generatio omnis erraret. Ambr. de arca Noe, referente Aug. ad 2. Epist. Pelag
l. 4. c. 11.
Noah was a just man in that generation wherein the whole world was over-growne
with wickedness; he continued just then when there were none almost just but
himself and his family, and Genesis 9.22, 25.
not all of them neither. Let us remember in this case that as it is an height
of impiety and ungodliness for a man Esai. 26.10. and 65.20. esse malum inter
bonos, culmen pravitatis.
to be bad in a good age, and to continue unreformed in a time of general
reformation; so it is a special commendation, and a note of true godliness,
for a man Esse bonum inter malos, culmen pietatis. Nunc licet and fas est; sed
tu sub Principe duro, Temporibusque malis ausus es esse bonus. Martial. epigr.
6. lib. 12.
to be good in a bad age, and to continue uncorrupted in times of general
corruption: yea that it is the office of good Christians (that are in their
kind and degree Matthew. 5.14.
the light of the world, while they are in the world, as, Joan. 9.5. and 12.35,
46.
Christ also was when he was in it) Philip. 2.15.
to shine as lights in the midst of a naughty and perverse nation, striving
to show more sincerity and more zeal and forwardness in the best things, the
more dissolute the times grow, and the more corrupt those are they live among;
like the lamp that shines brightest where the air about it is most dark, or
the room that it is in; and like the fire that burns hottest and scaldeth
most, when the weather is most cold, in the sharpest of winter.

. 28. Again, in the like manner it is with men for their native corruptions.
For to pass from the worldly to the fleshly minded: Come we to the lascivious
and incontinent person: we shall find him affected as Herod was, Mark. 6.20.
ready to hear John Baptist gladly, and upon his motion to do many good
matters: but if you begin once to deal with him about his Herodias, Mark.
6.17, 18.
he can no longer endure you. Some such have not sticked openly and plainly to
profess, that they cannot, nor will not leave their lust and their lechery,
no not for the saving of their souls. So deal we with the drunkard: we may
chance to find him tractable enough otherwise: but if you come once to his
drink, to pull the cup from his mouth, or pluck it out of his hand; you may as
soon Clavum Herculi extorquere. Macrob. Saturn. l. 5. malum Mileni. Plin. l.
7. c. 10.
wring ought out of the fist of some Giant, (...). Eurip. Cyclop.
it is so fast glewed to either: he will make you answer with the vine in
Iothams parable; Non possum relinquere vinum meum. Iud. 9.13.
I cannot leave my wine; nor give over my good fellowship: Malle se vitam sibi
quam vinum eripi Aug. de temp. sermon. 131.
take away my good liquor, and you take away my life. So for the angry man,
that is of an hasty and a furious disposition: reprove him for his furious and
outrageous behavior, his cursing, and banning, and blaspheming of Gods name.
What will his answer be, but this? I confess, it is a fault indeed to do
thus: but you know my nature. I am of a choleric constitution: and sear
fuel is soon fired. 1 King. 8.46. Eccles. 7.20. 1 Ioh. 1.8, 10. Sua cuique
sunt vitia. Quintil. instit. orat. l. 11. c. 3. Nemo nostrum non peccat:
homines sumus, non Dii. Petron. satyr. Nemo sine vitiis est. Senec l. 2.
contro. 5. Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur. Horat. sermon. l. 1. -- nec licuit sine
crimine vitam Degere. Virg. Aen. l. 4. Vnicuique dedit vitium natura creato
Propert. l. 2. Et nullum sine venia placuit ingenium. Sen. ep. 114.
Every man has his fault: that is my natural infirmity: and it must be borne
with. I cannot mend it, and my life lay upon it. Yea men account it an
all-sufficient Apology, and an unanswerable plea for their grossest
corruptions if they can say but, It is my nature. Socrates (as Alex. Aphrodis.
li. (...). Et Cicer. li. de fato. Qui and Stilponem Megaricum natura ebriosum
and mulierosum fuisse; sed vitiosam naturam ab eo sic domitam, ut nemo unquam
vinolentum cum, nemo in eo libidinis vestigium viderit.
they report of him) when there came one Zopyrus to Athens that professed by
men's physnomie to tell how they were affected, and having guessed shrewdly at
the matter with many other, was at length brought to him, and after a diligent
view of his visage censured him for a man blockish, proud, ambitious, vicious
of life, and tainted with many foul matters, whereupon the standers by fell a
laughing at him as now out of his Art; bade them stay their laughter, for the
man, he said, spoke not amiss: true it was, that he was naturally indeed so
affected as Zopyrus had said, but by the help of Philosophy he had altered and
overcome nature. Can a natural man then by natural helps so restrain and
curb his own natural corruptions, that they shall not come to break forth
on him, or to be discovered in him? And cannot Christian men, having spiritual
and supernatural helps, do as much, yea or much more? A foul shame it is for
us, and no small stain to our profession, if by Gods grace assisting us we
cannot do that, which by humane learning alone Heathen men have effected
before us: Not to add, what our Savior says, that, Matthew. 5.20, 46, 47.
unless we go beyond such, we shall never be saved.

. 29. Is it a corruption of thy nature? or is it a sin incident to thy
calling, or to thy course of life and condition? Then it is that sin that God
specially calls thee to keep watch and ward against. For what need or use is
there of watching there, where there is no fear or danger of assault? Were it
not a wise watching, for men to keep watch and ward against such enemies as
are many hundred miles off them, and neglect those the mean while that are
nearer at hand with them, ready every hour almost to be setting upon them? If
there were (as often there has been) hostility between France and us, were it
a wise part, or would it deserve the name of watching, to set some about the
Cinque Ports to keep out Turkish men of war, but to let French bottomes
pass freely in and out to land forces at their pleasure? Sua quisque vitia
fugiat: nam aliena non no^ebunt. Guigo Carth. medit. c. 2.
They are thine own corruptions, not other men's, that wage war against thy
soul: those it stands thee therefore in hand to keep watch and ward
against; because those they are that thou stand most in danger of; and
Variae sunt in hominibus mo um conspersiones; quas attendens Diabolus, ex ea
part tentationem applicat, qua hominem pro conspersionis ratione ad peccatum
inclinantem conspexerit. Bern. de ord. vitae.
those they are that the Devil is readiest to assault thee withal: such as
are the sins either of thy birth and constitution, or of thy breed and
education, or of thy course of life and conversation, or of thy state and
condition, or of the times thou live in, or of the places thou abidest in;
which because they be nearest or dearest unto thee, thou may soonest
therefore be drawn away by them, and can hardliest in that regard be
withdrawn away from them.

. 30. Prove. 22.3. and 27.12.
A prudent man, says Solomon, foreseeth the plague, and hides himself: but
the foolish go on still, and are plagued. And it is indeed a point of true
spiritual wisdom to foresee sin a far off in the occasions of evil, and
Vitare peccatum est vitare occasiones peccatorum. Melanc. in loc. com. 22.
by eschewing the one to prevent the other. Sirac. 21.2.
Fly from sin (says Sirachs son) as from a Serpent. Quousque vicino
serpente tua male securae dormitat industria? Bern. epist. 125. Circa serpentis
antrum positus non eris diu illasus. Isidor. solitoq. l. 2.
He were evil advised that would sleep near the hole where he knew that a
Serpent harbored; or that seeing a Serpent making toward him, would use no
means to keep it from him, till it got within reach of him; alleging for
himself that Noxia serpentum est admisto sangu^ne pestis: Morsu v rus habent,
and fatum in dente minantur. Lucan. bell. Pharsal. l. 9.
he were safe enough, so long as the Serpent fastneth not upon him.
Praeoccupandus est aditus cunctis insid^is, ne host^l^tas prior obrepens,
occurrat improvidis. Author de singular. Cleric.
Nor were they better than stark fools, that should sit still and suffer the
enemy, whom they were informed to be up in arms and coming for them, to
enter their territory, approach their City, sit down before it, and raise
rampires against it; pretending the mean while, that all is well enough with
them (what should they need to fear or care?) so long as their walls are not
scaled, nor the City it self surprised: The latter is like enough soon to
follow, if way be given to the former: In like manner here Qui peccati
occasiones non fugit, nec ipsum a se peccatum semovet. Stella in Luc. 11.
it is but a sorry watching that we hold against sin, unless we keep watch
withal against the occasions of evil. If we wax remiss in our watching
against the one, we shall soon be surprised and subdued by the other. It was
the wile that Gen^s 3.1. -- 7.
that wily one used against our first parents, and by it prevailed with them.
He would have the woman at first but go and see the forbidden fruit; Oculos
tendo, non manum: non est interdictum ne videam, sed ne comedam. Bern. de
humil. grad. 4.
though they were not to eat of it, yet they might lawfully enough look on it;
it was the taste, not the view of it that God had forbidden them. But Quid tuum
malum, o mulier tam intent intueris? quid illo tam crebro vagantia lumina
jacis? quid spectare libet, quod manducare non licet. Bern. ibid.
What meanest thou, O woman, (says one of the Ancients) to eye thine own bane
so wishfully? Why should thou have such a mind to gaze on that which thou
may not meddle with? And indeed it fell out full unhappily with her; as with
the fish, -- (...). -- Oppian. de piscat. l. 3.
that is nibbling so long upon the bait, till at length it be suddenly unawares
caught with the hook. For Etsi culpa non est, culpae tamen occasio est: and
indicium est commissae, and causa est committende. Ibid.
from gazing upon it she proceeded to gaping after it; and from sight and view
to touch and taste, to Hausit virus peritura, and perituros paritura. Bernard.
ibid.
the taking in of that that proved the bane both of her and hers.

And it is the course whereby Satan yet to this day prevails with a many;
such especially as seem to make any conscience of their courses; by drawing
them into bad company, combining and linking them in league with lewd ones,
egging them on to unnecessary contentions and Lawsuits, enticing them to some
kind of lawful, but dangerous delights, and such like wiles at the first
sight not appearing to be such, he leads them into such sins as themselves
at first intended not, nor once dreamed (it may be) that they should ever be
drawn unto.

. 31. To this purpose as the Apostle Paul says of the Ministers of the word,
that they must not 2 Timothy 2.4. (...).
entangle themselves with worldly affairs: thereby implying that the Minister
of God by giving way to multiplicitie of worldly businesses, though he intend
not in so doing to neglect or grow slack in the work of his own function,
yet may come to be so pusseld and snarld in them, that he shall not be able to
get well out again when he is once in, and so may be, beside his purpose,
with-drawne from that which he should 1 Timothy 4.13.
principally attend. So the Apostle Peter of many Christians, that 2 Pet. 2.20.
having escaped the defilements of this world, (that is, such sins as worldly
men are wont to be ordinarily defiled with) by being (...). Saepe familiaritas
implicavit. Saepe occasio peccandi voluntatem fecit. Isid. soliloq. l. 2.
entangled, (to wit, in the like occasions of sin, and such 2 Timothy 2.26.
snares as Satan had in the same set for them) they come at length to be
overcome and vanquished again; to wit, by being drawn again to the practice
of such foul enormities as in themselves they had formerly reformed. In regard
whereof it is that our Savior does admonish his Disciples to Matthew. 26.41.
Watch and pray, that they enter not into temptation. For that Non facile
esuriens posita retinebere mensa: Et multum saliens incitat unda sitim. Ovid.
remed. l. 2.
if they do enter, an hundred to one it is, (such is man's natural weakness
and pronenesse to evil) that they come not out without some foil. And Et
oratione operatio, and operatione fulciatur oration. Hier. ad Thren. 3.41. and
Greg. Romans moral. l. 18. c. 3. and Isidor. desum. bon. l. 3. c. 7.
agreeable to our prayer should our practice be, or else it is but a
mock-prayer, and a mockery of him whom we pray to. As we are taught to pray
that we may not enter into temptation; so must we take heed how we offer our
selves unto temptation. Else Tanta solicitudine petere audebis, quod in te
positum recusabis? Tertull. exhort. ad castit.
what is it but a mere mocking of God, to ask that of God, which we wilfully
deny to our selves, when we might have it? Or (...); Manuel Palaeol. ad fill.
how can we hope that God should hear us when we hear not our selves, when
we refuse to put an Amen to our own prayer? We must 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Quicquid
male coloratum fuerit. Bern. de consid. l. 3.
shun, says the Apostle, and be shie of the very show and shadow of sin: be
afraid, not, with Flammam puellus digito ab exusto pavet, and cavet etiam.
the burnt child, of the fire, and the flame only; but of the very smoke it
self of sin: remembering that Semper, tu scito, flamma fumo proxima est: Fumo
comburi ut nil possit, flamma potest. Plaut. Curcul. 1.1.
though the smoke can do no great hurt it self, yet the fire that may burn
us shrewdly, is not far from it.

. 32. Where comes to be met with the idle plea of those, who when they are
admonished or advised to forbear some courses, some companies, that may in
this kind prove prejudicial and dangerous unto them, are wont to say; Why? Is
it not lawful to do this or that? or, Is it simply unlawful to be in such
and such company? Yea but, says the Apostle to such; 1 Cor. 6.12. and 10.23.
Sicut non omne quod libet, licet: sic non omne quod licet, statim etiam
expedit. Bern ep. 25.
All things (that is, all things in their own nature indifferent) are lawful:
but all (such) things are not expedient. Things in themselves lawful, in the
use of them prove often inexpedient, and then become they in that regard, and so
far forth unlawful to us. The use of a thing and the abuse of it are many
times so close twined and twisted together, that a man cannot lay hold on the
one but he shall be taken with the other; he cannot pull the one to him, but
the other will come with it and accompany it in spite of his heart, though he
do not desire the company of it, or to have any dealing at all with it. Yea
sure it is (as one well says) that (...). Clem. Alex. paedag. l. 2. c. 1.
He that will needs do all that ever he may do, will be soon drawn to do
somewhat also that he ought not to do. And better it were for a man to
forbear many things that he might do; (there is no hurt in such forbearance;
1 Samuel 25.31.
it will never be grief or offense of heart to him, as she said to David in
another case, that he has so done) than by venturing so far between wind and
water, in what he may do, to be but once overtaken in what he should not do;
which may prove a corasive to him as long as he lives. And certainly as Fac te
ambulare, ubi a dextra spatiosa est terra, nec augustias pateris, a laeva locus
est praeceps; ubi eligas incedere? super finem terrae in praecipitii labro, an
long inde? puto quia long inde. Aug. de verb. Ap. 28.
it were but a fond course for a man that is traveling by the way, when he
has a fair broad path to walk in, to press so near Verendum est dormienti
in ripa, ne cadat. Author. de singul. cleric.
the brinke or bank of a brook that runs along by it, and that, Vbi non in
praerupto tantum stabis, sed in lubrico. Senec. epist. 84.
where the ground is slippery, and when the wind is high and blows stiff,
that Proximus periculo diu tutus non eris. Isidor. soliloq. lib. 2. -- nemo se
tuto diu Periculis offerre tam crebris potest. Senec. Herc. fur. 2.
ten to one he is in over shoes, if not over head and ears, ere he go far,
yea that at every step almost he is in danger to slip in: So here it is a very
unwise and improvident carriage, for a man, when he has the Psalm. 119.96.
broad rhoad of Gods law, giving him scope enough to walk at large without
danger in the use of Gods good creatures and in the ordering of his courses,
yet to press needlessly so near upon the borders and confines of sin, that
as David says to Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20.3.
as sure as God lives, there is but a step between death and me; so there is
but a step between sin and them; or as he of men at sea, (...). Anacharsis
apud Laert. -- (...). Arat. Phaenon. 27. i. (...). Theon. schol. I nunc, and
ventis animam commit dolato Confisus ligno, digitis a morte remotus Quatuor,
aut septem, si sit latissima taeda. Iuven sat. 14. Audax nimium, qui freta
primus Rate tam fragiliperfida rupit, Terrasque suas post terga videns, Animam
levibus credidit Euris; Dubioque secans aequara cursu, potuit tenui sidere
ligno, Inter vitae mortisque vias Nimium gracili limite ducto. Senec in Med.
act. 2. Nam propetam letum, quam prope cernit aquam. Ovid. de Pont. lib. 2.
but a three inch plancke between them and death; so but an inch or two
between them and that that may be their bane and the very break-necke of their
soul: and that step or inch further may the Devil soon push them, or the
very swinge and sway of their own corruption may of it self easily carry them.
For Prove. 15.24. (...). Hesiod. -- facilis descensus Averni. Sed revocare
gradum, superasque ascendere ad auras. Hic labor, hoc opus est. -- Virg. Aen.
it is in going to Godward, as in climbing an hill; a man shall be enforced to
stay and breath himself often ere he would; Omne in praecipiti vitium stetit. --
Iuven. sat. 1. Facilis in proclivia vitiorum decursus est. Senec. de ira lib.
2. cap. 1. Per proclive currentium non ubi visum est gradus sistitur, sed
incitato corporis ^ondere se rapit, and longius quam voluit effertur. Idem
epist. 40. Non gradu, sed praecipiti cursu a virtute disciscitur, ad vitia
transcurritur. Vbi semel deerratum est, in praeceps pervenitur, adeo mature a
rectis in prava, a pravis in praecipitia pervenitur. Patert. hist. lib. 2.
it is in walking to sin-ward as in running down an hill; a man shall not be
able to take up his fierce and disordered affections, and to stay himself
where he would: Men's cum ad meliora enititur, quasi contra ictum flaminis
conatur: cum vero ab intention ascendendi resolvitur, sine labor ad
imarelabitur. Quia enim in ascensu labor est, in descensu otium, nisi mentis
contentio ferveat, unda mundi non vincitur, per quam animus semper ad ima
revocatur. Greg. moral. lib. 11. c 28.
A man is carried with the strong stream of his own affections in the one,
he must strive and struggle against the maine current, yea the swift and
stiff torrent of his own corruptions in the other: so that Non vides quam
diversus sit ascendentium habitus and descendentium: qui per pronum eunt,
resupinant corpora, qui in arduum incumbunt. nam si descendas, pondus suum in
priorem partem dare; si ascendat, retro abducere, cum vitio consentire est In
voluptates descenditur, in res asperas and duras subeundum est hic impellamus
corpora, illic refraenemus. Sen. ep. 123.
unless he strive and strain hard, if he grow but remiss, he will soon be
going amain backward; and when he is once going on toward sin, or never so
little gone in sin, it is not easy for him to stop and stay, when he will.
And how careful had we need then to be of keeping aloof off from that, how
fearful of making toward it, or pressing near upon it, which if we do but
approach unto, we shall hardly keep out of, if we once chance to step into,
we shall hardly but go on in,; and if we step but once into, may be, if we
go on in, will be our end. Oh let us consider then how dangerous it is even to
approach near to this whirlpit, where we may so soon be wheeled in ere we
are aware: let us take heed how we be Esa. 11.8.
playing about the hole of the Aspe, or near the den of the Cockatrice: let us
remember that it is in the use even of things indifferent that Satan most
usually sets his snares for Gods servants: and that he prevails against
those that be not grossly profane and ungodly more often by the immoderate
and inordinate use of things in themselves lawful, than by drawing them to
such things as are simply evil and unlawful in themselves. And withal, that
it is as Nam vitare plagas in amoris ne laciaris. Non ita difficile est, quam
captum retibus ipsis Exire, and validos Veneris perrumpere nodos. Lucret. de
rerum not. l. 4.
easier, so safer, for the foul to pass by the snare while she is yet out,
than it is to wind her self out again, when she is once in: She is safe
enough for being caught, if she keep aloof of it; she ventureth catching,
though she be not caught, if she come over-neere it. Prove. 5.8. and 4.15. Id
agere debemus, ut vitiorum. irritamenta ^uam longissime profugiamus. Sen.
epist. 51. Proximus enim a tectis aegre defenditur ignis: Vtile finitimis
abstinuisse locis. Ov remed l. 2.
Keep aloof of her (to wit, the Harlot) says Solomon lessoning his son,
come not so much as once, near the door where such a one dwells. He is in
danger that so does, whether he go in to her or no. And Exponens se periculo
mortalis peccati peccat mortaliter. Gerson. de vita spirit. sect. 4. cor 8.
he sins dangerously that wilfully exposes himself to the danger of any
sin.

. 33. Now in this kind is more special regard to be had, as before of our
special corruptions, so here of such special temptations as we have formerly
found our selves either to have fallen, or to have been in danger of falling
by, Sit verae compunctionis indicium opportunitatis faga, occasionis
subtractio: quia non satis piget cedidisse homin^m, qui adhuc disponit manner
in lubrico Bern de temp ser. 56.
that we may the more warily for the time to come shun such things, as though
not evil in themselves, yet we find to have been formerly occasions of
evil unto us. Psalm. 119.37. Qui d^ponere v^lt desideria rerum omnium, quarum
cupiditate flagravit, and oculos and aures ab his quae reliquit avert^t:
alioqui cito rebellat affectus. Sen. ep. 70.
Turn mine eyes away, says David, o Lord, even from beholding of vanity: not
mine heart only from affecting it, but mine eyes also from beholding it. It is
not likely indeed (though some have so thought) that David penned that Psalm
after his foul oversight with Bathsheba: it may seem rather by the maine
matter of it to have been made during the time of his exilement under Saul,
before he came to the crown. But (...). Plutar. (...). Amphis Com. Nemo
libenter recolit, qui laesit, locum. Phaedr. fabul. 18 (...) Dio Chrysostom. orat.
74. Remember where we last fell or stumbled, to take better heed: so do
passengers when they come by a place where they had a fall, remember it and are
more wary. Eastie on Psalm. 119. -- sic disco cavere cadendo. Goodwin Pneumato
sarcom. Vise and Lactant. institut. 16. c. 24.
well might David, or any other in David's case, calling to mind after the like
offense, what had been the occasion of his fall, how by letting his eyes run
at random, and not watching over them as he ought, he had come to be caught
in Satan's snares; well, I say, might such a one pray earnestly unto God, as
David there does, that his eyes as well as his heart might be kept within
compass, lest by the one Satan might come again to surprise and to seize upon
the other. Yea not only ought such a one so to pray with David, but to join
practice also with his prayer, by Job 31.1.
making (as Job sometime did) a covenant with his eyes, Inutile est crebro
videre, per quae aliquando captus sis. Hieronymus ad Iovinian. l. 2.
that they should no more be fixed and set upon such objects as had been
formerly occasions to him of folly and of fall: and so others in the like case
to forbear such company, cast off such acquaintance, shun such private
familiarities, and break off such needless businesses, as have been the
means formerly to ensnare them unto sin. Remembering what the Prophet says,
describing the man that shall both dwell in safety here, and behold the glory
of God to his eternal comfort hereafter, that Esa. 33.14, 15, 16, 17.
he is such a one, as walks righteously, and speaks uprightly, and refuses
gain by oppression; that shakes his hands from taking of gifts, (he will not
only not consent to do a man wrong, but will Deuter. 16.19. Manus excoecat
oculos sapientum, ((...). Pynd. Pyth. ode 3.) and pervertit verba justorum.
not so much as receive a gift Ne iniquos accepto munere, si non juverit,
ingratus censeatur, si foverit, injustus habeatur. Author de ocul. moral. c. 6.
mirat. 3.
whereby he may be engaged or inclined so to do;) and stops his ears from
hearing of blood; (he will not only have no hand in the shedding of it, but
he cannot endure to hear any communing of it;) and lastly, that shuts his
eyes from seeing of evil: he not escheweth only the practice of it, but he
even (...). Clem. Alex. paedag. lib. 3. cap. 5. (...). Achil. Stat. lib. 1.
Vitiis nobis in animum per oculos est via. Quintil. declam. Illud Ier. 9.21. de
morte per fenestras ingrediente, and Thren. 3 51. de oculo animam depraedante;
uti legit Vulgata: ad Satanam per oculorum fenestras animam depraedantem
accommodant. Clem. Alex. paedag. lib. 2. c 8. Greg. Nazianz. ad Eunom. l. 1.
sermon. in Theoph. de S. Cyprian. and de Greg. N^ss Hieron. ad Iovin. lib. 2.
Ambros. de sug saec. cap. 2. August. homil. 35. and de honest. mul. cap. 4.
Chrysologus homil. 39. Greg. Romans moral lib. 21. cap. 2. and in Psalm. poenitent
4. Bern. de humil. grad. and de convers. cap. 6. and 9. and in Cant. 35. and
medit. cap. 14. and de temp. 68. and 80.
shunneth the very sight of it, so far forth as it may be a means to
inveigle his heart; or the sight of ought that may betray his heart thereunto.

. 34. The fourth and last point wherein this spiritual Watch consists is the
constant resistance of temptations unto evil. Matthew. 18.7.
It cannot be, says our Savior, but that offenses will come: So it cannot be
avoided, walk we never so warily, but that occasions of evil too too many
will be offered. Herein therefore stands a further part of this our Watch, as
in a careful avoidance (so much as in us lies) of the occasions of sin that
they be not offered: so in a constant resistance of temptations and encitements
to evil when they shall be offered, yea when they shall be urged and enforced
upon us; that which the Apostles James and Peter call James 4.7. 1 Pet. 5.9.
(...).
the withstanding of the Devil and his instruments; and the Apostle Paul
Ephesians. 6.13. (...).
withstanding and standing, or standing firm and fast by standing out, in the
evil day, that is, in the time of temptation.

Ester 6.1.
On that night, says the story of Assuerus, the Kings sleep went from him. It
is no watching to speak properly, neither is it thankworthy, for a man to lie
awake, because he cannot sleep: but when long continuance of waking, and the
usual hour of rest, and and the drowsinesse of his own brain, and the
heaviness of his eyes, and the example of others fast asleep by him, shall
all concur and conspire as it were to cast him into a slumber, for a man
Oculos vigilia fatigatos cadentesque in opere detinere, Senec. epist. 8.
then to strive to keep waking is true watching, and is thank-worthy indeed.
So here for a man to keep himself sober, when he cannot come by wine or
strong drink, or when he wants his good-Fellowes to drink with (for this
is one of those sociable sins: there is no life in it without company) it is
Necessitas non habet laudem.
not thankeworthy, the will is as good, or as bad rather, still as ever. But
for a man to be careful not to break the bounds of sobriety, when he shall
be in place where wine is plenty, and no restraint of it, and where company
will be egging him on, and urging him with instance to take more than is meet,
that is true temperance and praiseworthy indeed. In like manner Nunquam negavi
rem alienam: quia sortasse nemo tibi commendavit, vel si quis commendavit, sub
testibus commendavit. Dic mihi, Reddidisti, quod a solo solus accepisti? si sic
reddidisti, si mortuo qui commendaverat, nescienti filio reddidisti; tunc te
laudabo qu^a post aurum non isti Aug. de verb. Ap. 19.
for a man to keep a true man, as we say, because he was never put in trust,
or to deal faithfully, where a due and strict account is taken of his actions;
it is no commendation the one, and it is but a very slender commendation (if
any at all) the other. But for a man that has trust reposed in him, and none
to look after him, or to call him to account (as Genesis 39.6.
Joseph, as 2 King. 12.15.
the workmen about the Temple sometime) to deal then truly and faithfully,
especially when want and penury shall be persuading him to the contrary, Sirac.
31.13. qui transgredi petait, and non transgressus est; and cum posset malum
facere, non fecit; Bonus ille est, qui and quando potest mala facere, non
facit. Aug. in Psalm 93.
that is indeed a matter of high commendation; that is watching over a man's
hands and fingers indeed. Thus also for a man to live chastely and keep
continent, Nulla laus est non facere, quod facere non potes Ex Lactant. instit
l. 6. c 23. Martin. Dum. de mor. Nulla laus est ibi esse integrum, ubi nemo
est, qui aut possit aut co^etur corrumpere. Cic. in Verr. orat. 1.
when he wants his lewd company, or for a woman to live honestly whom no man
looks after, or Siqua metu dempto casta est, ea denique casta est: Que quia
non potuit, non facit, illa facit. Ovid. amor. lib. 3. cleg 4.
because she is otherwise looked after, and a narrow watch is set over her,
deserves not the name of watchfulness in either, yea the heart may be never a
whit the less faulty with either. But for 2 Samuel 13.12, 13, 14.
Tamar to deny Ammons incestuous suit, and to stand out against him, till by
mere force she be constrained Corpora sanctarum mulierum non vis maculat, sed
voluntas. Hieron. quaest. in Genesis Invita virgo vexari pocest, violari non
potest. Aug. ep. 180. and 122. and de Civit. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 18. and demend.
l 1 c. 7, 19, 20. and l. 2. c. 19. Vise and Chrysostom. in Psalm. 95.
to endure rather the dishonest act of another, than to do any of her own;
for Genes. 39. ^, -- 13.
Joseph sued and sought to by his Mistress Vna hac in re blanditur and
supplicat, quae in reliquis imperabat. Pelag. ad Demetriad. nec potuit
extorquere, quod voluit imperare. Ambros. de Joseph. cap. 5.
that had some kind of command over him, yea urged and solicited day after day
to condescend to her adulterous desires, Magnus vir, qui venditus, servile
tamen nescivit ingenium; adamatus non redamavit, rogatus non acquievit,
comprehens^^ aufugit. Ambros. ibid. Vel ut Aug. de temp. 83. M. v. qui v.
servire tunc nescivit, ingenuam a non r. etc.
to refuse to yield to her allurements, (her inforcements I might well say) and
Maluit liber criminis mori, quam potentiae criminosa consortium eligere. Ibid.
to choose rather to hazard loss of present liberty (such as then he had) by
not sinning, than to gain further enlargement and advancement (there might
well be hope of future preferment) by consenting to sin; it was a part and
practice of due watchfulness indeed.

. 35. Where comes to be met with that vain and idle Apology that many are
wont to make in defense or excuse at least of their inordinate behavior, that
they were provoked and urged to do that they did: Are you not ashamed to be
overseene with drink in such sort as to make your self a scorn and a
laughing stock to every one that beheld you, and to become no better than a
beast? Oh; says he, I was urged to it: I was in company with Chapmen
Customers; (they are those that a man lives by) and I could not do otherwise
than I did. Yea but no man could or can ( Infirmus est hostis, nisi volentem
non vincit. Pelag. ad Demetriad. Suadere and solicitare potest, cogere omnino
non potest. Aug. homil. 12. habet astutiam suadendi, non potestatem cogendi.
Idem in Psalm 91. and in Joan. tract. 12.
nor the Devil himself) compel thee to sin, unless thou will thy self.
And there were no need for thee, or for any man to watch against such sins as
these are, if there were no such occasions of falling into them, or if no such
temptations to incite or entice thereunto. Again, says another reproved for
his outrageous behavior in cursing and banning, swearing and swaggering, and
blaspheming, as before; I did nothing but what I was urged and provoked unto:
It would have angered an Angel; it would have made a Saint swear, to be used
as I was, to endure what I did. Alas! and Apoc. 13.10. and 14.12. Luke 21.16,
17, 19. Virtutes quadam ut stellae, quae interdiu latent, noctu lucent. Bern.
in Cant. ser. 27. Apparet virtus, arguiturque malis. Ovid. trist. lib. 4. eleg.
3. Imperia dura toll: quid virtus erit? Sen. Herc. fur act. 2. sc. 2.
what use were there of patience, were there no provokement to impatience? or
what praise is it there to be patient, where there is no occasion (for just
cause none can be) of impatience? Romans 12.21. Ne vincitor a malo. Cur rapis in
te id, quod in alio tibi displicet? iram scil. irasceris ergo quia ille
irascitur: imo jam tibi irascere, quia irasceris. Guigo. medit. c. 1. Passus es
malum? ignosce; ne duo mali sitis. August. in Psalm. 54. and in 1. Joan. tract.
8. Paratus igitur debet esse homo pius and justus patienter eorum malitiam
sustinere, quot fieri bonos quaerit, ut numerus potius crescat bonorum, non ut
pari malitia se quoque numero addat malorum. Idem epist. 5. Ridiculum est enim
odio nocentis perdere innocentiam. Senec. referente Joan. de Tambac. in consol.
Theol. vel potius Martin. Dumiens. lib. de morib. Nullius tam vehement nequitia
est, ut motu meo digna sit. Symmach. l. 9. ep. 105.
Shall another man's wickedness make thee wicked like him? Will thou imitate
him in that, wherein thou condemnest him? and be like him in that which thou
mislikest in him? Yea shall man's wronging thee make thee wrong God? his abusing
thee make thee abuse Gods blessed name? his flying in thy face make thee fly
in Gods face? What watching call we this, for a man to keep no longer awake,
than till his eyes begin to grow heavy, and then of his own accord to settle
himself unto sleep? Or what watching is it to keep watch and ward, to fence
and fortify, where no assault is made, and to set no watch nor make resistance
when we are indeed assaulted? to watch, till we see the enemy whom we
should watch against, approach; and so soon as we descrie him, as John 10.12.
the hireling, when he spieth the Wolf coming, to leave instantly and give
over our watch? No: it is in regard of continual danger that we are in,
either by inward defect or by outward default, that this Watch is required: And
therefore there must watch be most diligent, where is most likelihood of
danger, or where hottest assault is made: Yea continual watch must be held
and joined with resistance, not till assault only be made, but so often as
assault shall be made, and so long as it shall continue: Which because it will
so do ever even till we die, this our Watch must continue also even unto
death.

. 36. Hitherto then we have considered of the manner of this

Luke 21.34, 36.
Take heed, says our Savior, lest at any time your hearts come to be
oppressed or surcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and with the cares of
this life: and so that day come upon you and surprise you unawares: But watch
and pray continually. And surely as it is with the body; so is it also with the
soul. Temperate diet is a great help to bodily watching: and on the other
side (...). Isid. Pelus. ep. 130. lib. 1. Saturitas vigilare nescit. Quippe
cibum. sequitur somnus. -- and multo sopor ille gravissimus extat, Quem saturi
capiunt. Lucret. lib. 4.
when men have over-liberally eaten and drunk, they are wont to be heavy and
drowsy, ready to slumber as they sit, sit for nothing but for sleep. And no
less enemy to this spiritual Watch is such riot and excess. Ephesians. 5.17.18.
Be not filled with wine, (says the Apostle) wherein is excess; but be filled
with the Spirit: as if when the one went in, the other went out; and there were
no room left for the one, when men are filled so with the other. We are wont
to say that When the wine goes in, the wit goes out: but the Apostle says,
that when wine is thus taken in, the Spirit of God is expelled, (wherewith we
should watch) and the Spirit of Satan is entertained, (against which we should
watch) and the Temple of the one is made a stie and a stable for the other. For
such excess is a mean even (...). Basil. homil. 14. (...). Synes. de insomn.
-- nam corpus onustum Hesternis vitiis animum quoque praegravatuna, Atque
affligit humi divinae particulam aurae. Horat sermon. 2.2.
to drown the mind, and by casting reason and understanding into a dead and
deadly sleep, to make men unable to watch against the motions of sin,
Omnibus and virtutibus januam claudit, and delictis aperit. Val. Max. l. 6. c.
5 ex. 10.
to shut the door of the heart against all virtue, and to set it wide open to
all vice. By means hereof came Genes. 9.21, 22. Ad unius ho^e ebrietatem nudat
femora, quae per 600. annos sobrietate contexerat. Hieron. ad Ocean.
Noah to discover his own shame in the sight of his sons, to his disgrace
and reproach. Yea by means hereof came Genesis 19.32, -- 37. per temulentiam
nesciens libidini miscet incestum: and quem Sodoma non vicit, vina virerunt.
Hieron. ibid. Vise Clem. Alex. paedag. l. 2. cap. 9.
Lot in beastly manner to abuse himself by filthy incest with those that came
out of his own loins, and so became he the father of an accursed bastardly
brood. And no marvel if Sin and Satan find free entrance at will, when that
is shut out, or laid up that should watch against either.

. 37. On the other side (...). Basil C^^s. homil 1.
Sobriety is a special help unto vigilancie: which the Apostles therefore
are wont usually to join the one with the other. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6.
Let not us sleep, as others do, says the Apostle Paul; but let us watch,
and be sober. And, 1 Pet. 4.7. and 5.8. (...). Flut. praecept. polit.
vigilantes and sobri^. cic. pro Caelio.
Be sober and watch, says the Apostle Peter. Which sobriety also must be
understood to consist, not in the temperate taking of meat and drink only, but
in a moderate usage of all other temporal blessings, such especially as we
are wont to take pleasure and delight in. For there is (as the Prophet says in
another sense, Thou that art drunk, but not with wine; and, Esa. 29.9.
They are drunk, but not with wine; and they stagger, but not with strong
drink,) there is, I say (as I have showed Of Lots, chap 9. 3.
elsewhere) (...). Consule Drus. in Proverb. 2.3.132.
a drunkenness without either wine or strong drink; yea and a surfeiting too
without flesh or food. A man may surfeit of, and be drunk with prosperity,
with pleasure, with game, with disport, with other the like delights; and may
well be said so to do, when he is so transported with them, so distempered by
them, that he breaks forth into such disordered and outrageous behavior;
as, of immoderate rejoicing, and excessive laughter, of howting and showting,
and of gesture unseemely, or of fretting and chafing, of cursing and banning,
of swearing and blaspheming, or the like, as will not stand with sobriety,
Esai. 51.21.
and such as they could not but condemn in themselves, were they not for the
time in a manner drunk and beside themselves; yea sometime, not such only as
all sober minded men would abhor, but -- dicisque facisque quod ipse Non sani
esse hom nis non sanus juret Oreste^. ^ers. sat. 3.
such as even a mad man himself, if he be not stark mad, will esteem to be
mad carriage.

. 38. Whereas some therefore use to say, when they are rebuked and reproved, as
for their abuse of Gods good creatures, so for their drunken and disordered
behavior at game, or otherwise; Is it not lawful to eat and drink? and, Is
it not lawful to use game? and, Is it not lawful for neighbors to be merry
together? Yes undoubtedly: Christianity enjoyneth not, nor exacteth of us any
Stoicall austerity. God has given and granted us, as Psalm 104.14, 15.
bread to strengthen our bodies, so wine to cheer our hearts withal: he has
liberally afforded us the free use of his good creatures, not for necessity
alone, but for lawful delight too. Non enim sequitur. ut cui men's sapit, ei
palatum non sapiat. Cic. de finib lib. 1.
Neither does it follow, that Gods children take no delight at all in such
outward delights, because they have other more principal ones that they take
far greater delight in. It is promised as a blessing even unto Gods people,
that Zach. 8.5.
there should be boys and girls playing together in the streets of
Jerusalem: and that Zach. 3.10.
they should have liberty to invite and entertain either other, each man his
friend or his neighbor under his vine or figtree, in his orchard or in his
arbor. But can we not use Gods creatures, unless we abuse them, and make that
the bane and poison of our souls, that was given us to be the food and stay of
our bodies? Or Nobis ridere and gaudere non sufficit, nisi cum peccaso atque
insania gaudeamus; nisi risus n ster impuritatibus, nisi flagitiis misceatur?
Nun uid laetari and ridere non possumus, nisi risum nosirum atque laetitiam
scelus esse faciamus? Salvian. de provident. l. 6.
can we not be merry unless we make the devil our play-fellow? Can we not
be merry, unless we be mad? Erras, homo, non sunt haec ludicra sed crimina.
qui jocari voluerit cum Diabolo, non poterit gaudere cum Christo. Chrysol.
sermon. 155.
Is there no mirth at all but in swearing and swaggering, and in blaspheming of
Gods blessed Name? Rideamus, laetemur quantum libet jugiter, dummodo
innocenter. Quae vecordia est and amentia, ut non putemus risum and gaudium
tanti esse, nisi Dei inse habeat injuriam? Salvian. Ibid. An forte infructuosum
putamus gaudium simplex, nec delectat ridere sine crimine? Ibid.
Is our mirth (think we) nothing worth, if it be not mixed with profanenes; if
it be not seasoned, or tainted rather, with impiety and ungodlines, or with
impurity and uncleannes? Such eating and drinking is accursed eating and
drinking: such Luke 6.25. O miseri, quorum gaudia crimen. habent. Maxim. eleg.
1.
mirth is accursed mirth, evill-beseeming any Christian, and such as will at
length Prove. 14.13.
end in mourning and woe, yea in eternal mourning and everlasting woe, if it
be not speedily prevented. As the Apostle says, in regard of others, so is it
no less true in regard of a man's self; Romans 14 20.
It is evil for a man to eat with offense; and with the disa^ling of himself
unto good duties: And it is evil for a man to use game or any other lawful
delight in that manner, as it shall be an occasion, either of stumbling to
others, or of sin and evil to himself. And, Rom 14.21.
It is not good therefore for a man to eat flesh, nor drink wine, nor use
game, nor do ought else, whereby either himself, or any other shall be
occasioned to sin. For what we owe unto others, Romans 8.12, 13.
we owe much more to our selves; being enjoined Romans 13.8.9. Levit. 19.18.
Matthew. 22.39. Galat. 5.14.
to love others indeed, but as our selves. And therefore ought we to have a
care as well to Tit. 2.12.
live soberly in regard of our selves, as to Romans 14.15.
walk charitably in regard of our brethren.

39. The rather are we to be heedfull and careful in this kind, because (that
which made Job 1.4, 5.
Job so fearful and suspicious of his children, lest they should over-shoot
themselves when they were feasting together) Per voluptatem facilius vitia
surrepunt. Senec. epist. 7.
we are more prone to be carried away unto evil in our pleasures and delights,
in mirth and game, in sport and pastime, than amids our sadder and more serious
affairs. With these commonly is Satan tempering his poison to infect our
souls with unto death; under these is he usually hiding his hooks to catch us
withal to our destruction: as those that seek by poison to make a man away
are wont not to minister it alone, but to mix it with such meat as the party
ordinarily feeds on, and takes most delight in, or to give it him in his
ordinary drink; and Et quae piscis eda^ avido male devoret ore, Abdit supremis
era recurva cibis. Ovid. remed. lib. 1. Et sera and piscis spe aliqua
oblectante decipitur. Viscata sunt haec, insidiae sunt. Senec. epist. 8.
as the Fisherman baiteth his hook for each fish with such bait as the fish
usually feeds on, and most greedily gapeth after. Besides that we are in
danger by such means to be soonest surprised of him; as 2 Samuel 13.28, 29.
Ammon was sometime by Absaloms Followers, and 1 King. 16.9, 10.
Elah by Zimry his own traitorous Servant, and Judge. 18.7, 10, 27.
the Citizens of Laish by the children of D^n, for that we are in such cases
commonly most secure, and least mistrustfull; and Tunc maxim oppugnari^, si
oppugnari tenescit. Hier. ad Heliodor.
the more in danger therefore, the less we misdoubt it, or dream of it.

Eccles. 4.9, 10.
Two, says the Wiseman, are better than one. For if the one of them fall, the
other is at hand to help him up again. But woe be to him that is alone. Hic
si solus fuisset, quo adjutore superasset? Hieron. ad Rustic. Est opus auxilio:
turba futura tibi est. Ovid. remed. l. 2.
For if he fall, he has none to help to raise him again. A drowsy person,
if he be alone, is ready presently to fall asleep. But if he be in company,
Magna pars peccatorum tollitur, si peccaturis testis assistat. Senec. ep 11.
Quid heatius, quid securius, quam ejusmodi custodes si null vitae and testes
habere? quibus me totum refundam quasi alteri mihi: qui deviare non finant,
fraenent praecipitem, dormitantem excitent; quorum reverentia and libertas
extollentem reprimat, excedentem corrigat; constantia and fortitudo nutantem
firmet, erigat diffidentem, fides and sanctitas ad honesta and sancta provocet.
Bern. de consider. lib. 4.
the very presence of others, besides their mutual conference and discourse,
is a good means to keep him awake; and if he begin but to nod, some one or
other of the company is ready to jog him on the elbow, and either to keep him
awake, or to awake him soon again, if on a sudden he be sleeping. As it is
dangerous therefore for a man to be left alone, when he is heavy, and sleep
may (as after a vein opened or some potion taken) prove prejudicial unto him:
So Nemo est ex imprudentibus qui relinqui sibi debeat. Senec epist. 10. Nemo
horum est, cui non satiue sit cum quolibet esse quam secum. Ibid. 25.
it is dangerous for us in regard of our drowsy disposition to be solitary;
Omnia nobus mala solitudo persuadet. Senec. epist. 25. Solitudo est, quae virum
etiam fortem fortissime praecip^tat in reatum. Petr. Bles. epist. 9. -- loca
sola nocent: loca sola caveto. Quo fugis? in populo tutior esse potes. Ovid.
remed. l. 2.
we may the sooner be surprised with sinful suggestions, the more easily be
drawn to yield to Satanicall temptations, and the longer may it be (if ever
it be) ere we recover our selves again after them: Whereas if we be in
company with those that be wise and wakefull, it may be a mean to keep us
waking often, when we would otherwise be slumbring, and to recover us the more
speedily when we are suddenly fallen into slumber unawares. To this purpose the
Apostle exhorts Christian men Hebr. 10.24.
to observe either other: that is, Philip. 2.4.
to have an eye one to another, and not each one to himself only; to keep
watch one over another, and not each one over himself only, like cursed Caine
that asks of God, Genes. 4.9.
whether he were his brothers keeper. And to what end would he have them thus
to watch over their brethren? (...).
to whet them up, or whet them on, says the Apostle: (that which we all stand
in need of:) to provoke and egg them on unto godliness and well-doing, to
keep them watching with themselves. And how is that done? Surely, Prove. 27.17.
As iron, says Solomon, whetteth iron; so the very face of a man whetteth his
friend. Nulla res magis honesta induit, dubios and in pravum inclinantes
revocat ad rectum, quam bonorum vir^rum conversatio: paulatim enim descendit in
pectora, and vim praeceptorum obtinet, frequenter audirt, aspici, occursus ipse
sapientum juvat. est and aliquid quod ex magno (bono) viro vel tacente
proficias. Senec. epist. 93.
The very presence of a religious person, and much more his good speech, and
his godly carriage, his holy advice, his discreet admonition, his seasonable
reproof may be a mean to encourage and cheer us up when we do well, to
restrain and stay us up, when we are slumbring and sinking down, to recover
and raise us up again when we are down unawares. In which kind, -- fungar vice
cotis, acutum Reddere quae ferrum valet, exors ipsa secandi. Horat. in art
poet. Allusit ad Isocratis dict^m. (...). Plut. vita Isocr.
as the whet-stone, though dull and blunt it self, yet is able to sharpen iron
tools: so even those that be but dull and drowsy of themselves, but yet
diligent, and desirous to keep waking both themselves and others, may help to
sharpen and qui^ken even those that be otherwise more wakefull (it may be)
than themselves. For as Fieri posse non ambigo, ut aliquid imperito and indocto
cuipiam scire contingat, quod doctus aliquis and peritus ignorant Aug. de orig.
animae l 4. c. 1.
there is none so learned, but he may learn something from the very meanest,
even from those that be far inferior in gifts to himself: Act 28 26.
Apollos though a learned Teacher and well read in the word, yet may be taught
something by a silly Tent-maker and a weak woman, that he was ignorant of
before: and R. David in ru^dic. Mercer. in Pagn th s. and Seldom in praefat. to
Titles of Honor.
the Jewish Rabbines acknowledge that they came to understand a place of the
Prophet Esa. 14.23. (...) ^verram eam. Iun.
Esaias by hearing an Arabian woman mention (...)
a broom, or a beesome in her language to her maid: so there is none so
watchful of himself, but he may have need of others to watch over him, and
may receive benefit in that kind, even from a drowsy soul, one that is less
wakefull than himself. In a word, drowsy persons, if they desire to keep
waking, can better do it in company together one with another, (it is not
likely they should all suddenly fall fast asleep at once) than they can being
severally apart either from other.

. 41. Well therefore and wisely adds the Apostle in that place, Heb 10.25.
Not forsaking the fellowship; as the manner is of many. And again; Heb. 10.39.
But we are not of them that withdraw themselves to their own ruin. Lugentem
timentemque custodire solemus, ne solitudine male utatur.
It is not safe for a melancholy man to be much solitary: and it is a matter of
no small danger for a Christian man to affect a solitariness, or a sullen
kind of privacy and retiredness, and by occasion thereof to sequester
himself from the company and society of others, though it be upon some good
and godly pretense. Thus as in the Church of Rome, at this day many affect a
Monkish course of life, under color of withdrawing themselves from the world:
So among the Ancients we find that some worthy men otherwise had sometime some
cogitations and projects looking and bending somewhat that way, yea that
sometime they made some trial of conclusions in that kind. But what does one
principal man among them confess, writting to another of them out of the
wilderness, whither he had withdrawn himself, how he found himself there
affected? (...). etc. Basil. ep. 1. ad Greg. Naz. Legatur and Senec. ep. 104.
What I do here night and day (says he) I am even ashamed to relate. For the
City business I have shunned as an occasion of many evils: but my self yet I
cannot shun. But it fares with me, as with men at sea that are seasicke
because they cannot brook the sea: when they are in a greater ship, they
think they should be better, if they were in a less bark; it is the rolling
of the great ship they think that makes them so evil: and so out of the ship
they get them into the boat or the bark. But in the ship or in the bark they
are bad still, as evil as ever, (...).
so long as the bitter choler abides with them that pestereth their stomach.
In like manner it is with us. (...).
Carrying about with us our inbred and inmate passions, we are every where
encombred with the like perturbations; and so (...).
gain no great matter by this our solitariness, and sequestring of our
selves. And another of latter and more superstitious times, though a great
admirer and practiser of Monastical life himself, advising a woman that had a
great mind to the Wilderness; Non est sapere, ut opulentiam, ita urbis
frequentiam fugere? an non mea mihi pudicitia tutior erit in eremo, ubi in pace
cum pa^cis aut sola oonversans soli placeam, cui me probavi. Bern. epist. 115.
Is it not Wisdom, says he, peradventure you will say, to eschew as the
wealth, so the throng of the City? will not my chastity be there safer, where
conversing with few or none, I may please him alone whom I desire principally
to approve my self unto? Nequaquam: nam volenti perperam agere and desertum
abundantiam habet, and nemus umbram, and silentium solitudo. Malum quippe quod
nemo videt, nemo arguit. Vbi autem non timetur reprehensor, securius accedit
tentator, licentius perpetratur iniquitas. In conventu vero malum si sacere
vis, non licet. Mox enim a pluribus comperitur, arguitur, emendatur. Bern. ibid.
No by no means, say I: One that will do evil, shall find matter enough in
the Wilderness to work upon, and beside shady shelter in the thicket, and
silence in solitude. For the evil that none sees, none finds fault withal.
And where there is none to find fault, the Tempter is the bolder to assault,
and the fault is committed the more freely. Whereas being in company you cannot
do evil though you would: for you are presently eyed, chid, rebuked and
reclaimed by the rest. Denque aut de fatuis virginibus una es, aut de
prudentibus. Si de fatuis, congregatio tibi necessaria est; si de prudentibus,
tu congregationi. ib.
To conclude, either you are a wise Virgin or a foolish one: if a wise one, the
company has need of you; if an unwise one, you of it. And elsewhere dealing
with some other in like manner affected; Forte vult eligere solitudinem, non
satis attendens propriam infirmitatem, and periculosam Diaboli luctam: Quid
enim periculosius quam solum luctari contra antiqui hostis versutias, a quo
videatur and quem videre non possit? A^ies potius multorum pariter pugnantium
quaerenda, ubi tot sint auxiliarii, quot socii, etc. Bern. de temp. 26
Perchance, says he, you will make choice of solitariness, not well weighing
either your own weakness, or Satan's assaults. For what can be more ieopardous
than to wrestle alone with such a sly adversary as sees us when we see not
him? We had more need to seek out some troop to join our selves with, where
we may have as many Fellow-helpers as fellows. For it is the congregation
that is Cant. 6.3
terrible, as an army well ranged. But Eccles 4.10.
woe be to him that is alone: for if he fall, he has none at hand to help
him up. Quoties been perficientibus invidens daemonium meridianum obtentu quasi
ma oris puritatis eremum petere persuasit? Et cognoverunt miseri tandem, quam
verus sit sermo quem frustra legerant, Vae soli etc. Bern. in Cant. 33.
That which a many find too true by woeful experience, when Ex Psalm. 91.6.
verse. vulgat.
the noonday devil has enticed them out into the Wilderness under pretense
of greater holiness, and strictness of life. And undoubtedly, as there is
none but are more prone to slumber when they are alone, than when they are in
company with others that are awake; so there is no man, if he well consider
himself, but he shall find that he is more prone to be assailed with evil
suggestions and motions, when he is alone by himself, than when he is in
company with others that be religiously affected. In regard whereof it is not
without good cause that the same Author says, Magis timco malum, quod facio in
abscondito, quam quod in aperto. Idem medit. c. 14.
I more fear the evil that I may do alone, than what I cannot do but in
company. Those therefore that shunning the society of others, sequester
themselves, and Vivat necesse est alteri, qui vult sibi. Sen. epist. 48.
will needs live wholly to themselves, do but in so doing deprive themselves
of a maine help unto watchfulness, and expose themselves unwisely, (though it
may be unwittingly) unto the wiles and snares of their subtle Adversary, who is
then with them unseene, when there is no body else by them; and is then
readiest to assault them, when there is none by to assist them.

. 42. But as Crates cum vidisset adolescentem secreto ambulantem, interrogavit
quid illic solus faceret. Mecum, inquit, loquor. Cui Crates, Cave, inquit,
rogo, and diligenter attend ne cum homine malo loquaris. Senec. epist. 10.
Atqui Laert. de Cleanthe, (...). Alterutrum lubens ex altero correxerim.
he said sometime to one that was talking, as he said, with himself, He had
need be well advised, that he talked not with a bad Companion: so here, a man
that not without good cause desires company, (...). Clem. Alex. paedag. lib.
3. c. 11.
had need yet be wary what company he lights on and associateth himself
unto. For Sumuntur enim a conversantibus mores. Nec tam valetudini profuit
utilis regio and salubrius coelum, quam animis parum firmis in turba meliorum
versari. Sen. de ira l. 3. c. 8. Tam honorum enim quam malorum longa
conversatio amorem inducit. Idem de tranq. c. 1.
as the benefit is great that comes by good company, so is the danger and
harm no less that accreweth by bad. Association is of much force both the one
way and the other. (...). Arriani Epictet. lib. 3. c. 16. Non est carbo ita
ignitus, quin aqua adfusa extinguatur; sicut contra vix est carbo ita madidus,
quin prunarum acervo accendatur. Vincent. de vita spirit. c. 17.
Our society with others, and theirs with us, cannot but prevail much either
to make us like them, or to make them like us. Prove. 13.20. (...). Ex Sophocl.
and Eurip. Plato in Theag. and Polit. l. 8 Gell. noct. Attic. l. 13. c. 17.
(...). Theogn. Ea Philosophiae vis est, ut non solum students, sed etiam
conversantes juvet. Qui in solemn venit, licet non in hoc venerit colorabitur.
Qui in unguentaria taberna resederint, odorem secum lociferunt. Et qui apud
Philosophos fuerunt, traxe^unt, aliquid necesse est, quod prodesset and
negligentibus. Senec. ep. 108. Vt qui per solemn ambulant, aut colorem mutant,
aut urentem sentiunt calorem: sic dum consuetudine bonorum utimur, aut dotes
quasdam amando in nos derivamus, aut desiderium aliquod admirando concipimus.
Putaeam. cent. 1. epist. 14.
He that walks but with the wise, says Solomon, shall wax wiser thereby: and
he that keeps company with fools, shall be the worse for it. The very
company of either is wont ordinarily to work even with some efficacy on those
that much or often converse though for other ends with either. A third help
therefore unto Watchfulness may be the shunning of the society and fellowship
of wicked and profane persons. Psalm 6.8.
Away from me, says David, all ye workers of iniquity. And, Psalm. 101.4.
A wicked person I will not know: I will have no acquaintance with any such.
Yea to this purpose, as he inviteth good company to him, Psalm. 119.63.
I am a companion of all those that fear thee, and keep thy precepts. Such as
feared God, were they high or low, were they rich or poor, they were for his
company, he was content and desirous to be acquainted with them. So on the
other side he bids all profane ones away from him, Psalm. 119.115. Velut
muscas molestas a cordis oculis abigit. August in Psalm. 118. conc. 24.
Away from me, ye wicked ones: I will keep the commandments of my God. As if
he could not keep Gods commandments, at least not so well as he would, so
long as the wicked were in company with him. And in this regard as elsewhere
he professes of himself, that Psalm. 26.4, 5.
he would neither sit among, nor go abroad, nor keep any company with such:
so Psalm. 1.1.
he pronounces him a happy man, that neither walks with, nor stands amids,
nor sits among, that in no sort or manner converseth with those, that are
wicked, sinful, and scoffers at goodness and godliness. Not that a man
should by and by in a Inde enim Pharisaei dicti a (...) separare: ut recte
Drus. and Scalig. elench. Trihaeres. Serar.
Pharisaicall humor condemn or contemn every one that comes short of
himself either in knowledge or in practice of sanctification, or should
sequester himself from every one that is not so forward in, or zealous of the
better things, as were to be wished and desired; like those proud Hypocrites in
Esaias, Esa 65.5.
that say, stand aloof of me; come not near me: for I am holier than thou.
Romans 14.1.
Weak ones are to be received, not to be rejected: Heb. 12 13.
to be healed and strengthened, not to be turned out. But for those that be
openly profane with Heb. 12.16.
Esau; scoffers and deriders of religion with Genes. 21.9, 10.
Ismael; by their loose and lewd course of life proclaiming and publishing not
an utter want only of goodness and godliness in them, but a perverseness of
heart, and an averseness thereunto; 2 Timothy 3 5.
such, says the Apostle, should men shun: Vise Chrysostom. in Joan homil. 57.
and Greg in Ezech. hom 9.
lest they corrupt us, when we cannot correct them. For Dum spectant laesos
oculi laeduntur and ipsi: Multaque corporibus transitione nocent. Ovid remed.
l. 2.
the very sight of bleare eyes may hurt those that have whole, but tender,
eyes: when (...). Lippiens sanum afficit; at sanus lippientem haua sanat.
Aphrodiss problem. 1.35.
the sight of the whole will not help the bleare-eyed. Sooner may evil be
fastened upon good ones, weak ones especially, than good things conveyed unto
and wrought into those that be obstinately evil.

. 43. And surely as some bodily diseases are said to be catching and
contagious; a man may soon catch them by being in company of or drinking with
those that have them: So (...), etc. (...). Chrysostom in Joan homil. 57. Res est
contagiosa societas mala. -- dedit hanc co^tagio labem, Et dabit in plures:
sicut grex totus in agris Vnius scabie cadit, and porrigine po^ci; Vvaque
conspecta livorem ducit ab uva. Iuvenal. satyr. 2. -- contagia vites: Haec
etiam pecori saepe nocere solent. Ovid. remed. lib. 2.
it is with most diseases of the soul; this spiritual Lethargy is a
contagious, a catching disease, we take it easily one from another. Non tantum
corpori, sed etiam moribus salubrem locum eligere debemus. Senec. epist. 51.
Sicut enim aer malus assiduo flatu tractus inficit corpus, ita perversa locutio
assidue audita infirmantium inficit animum. Greg. Romans in Ezech. lib. 1. homil.
9. Valetudinem firmissimam ladit aer gravis, aura pestilens: and mentem optimam
conversatio cum malis. Vnde Ben Syra, Vae malo, and eis qui ei adhaerent. D^us.
lib 2. cent. 1. proverb 45. (...). Corrupere probos mores commercia prava. Ex
Menandro in 1 Corinthians. 14.33. (...).
Evil company is infectious, as evil aires are. There is Vt quaedam in
contactu corporis vitia transiliunt: ita animus mala sua proximis tradit.
Ebriosus convictor in amorem vini traxit: impudicorum coetus fortem quoque and
siliceum virva emollit: avaritia in vicinos virus suum transtulit. Sen. de ira
l. 3. c. 8.
a kind of contagiousnesse in loose and lewd companions, as well as in those
that are possessed of some pestilent disease. And we have great reason
therefore, if our souls health be dear to us, (...). Plut. de laud. sui.
Serpunt enim vitia; and in proximum quemque transiliunt. Itaque ut in
pestilentia cavendum est, ne corruptis jam corporibus and morbo flagrantibus
assideamus, quia pericula trabemus, afflatuque ipso laborabimus: ita in
amicorum legendit ingenus dabimus operam, ut quam minime inquinatos assumamus.
Sen. de tranq. c. 7.
to be careful of shunning, so much as may be, such places, and such persons,
or to be very wary in conversing with them, where it cannot be avoided. The
bodily plague is not so soon taken by sitting by the sick man's bedside; but
a spiritual plague, worse far than it, more deadly, more desperate, may much
sooner be gotten by sitting with profane, and debauched persons. (...).
Arriani Epictet. l. 3. c. 16. (...). Plut. de adulat. Nemo non aliquod nobis
vitium aut commendat, aut imprimit, aut nescientibus allinit. Sen. epist. 7.
Convictor delicatus paulatim enervat; vicinus dives cupiditatem irritat:
malignus comes quamvis candido and simplici rubiginem suam affricat. Ibid.
A man shall hardly come with fair apparel amongst colliers, and carters, and
chimney-sweepers, but he shall carry some of their soil and their foot away
from them; but his white apparel will be soyled and sullied at least by them.
And we shall hardly be in company long or often with ungodly ones, but we shall
bear away some tincture of their ungodliness with us. Esa. 6.5.
Woe is me, says the Prophet Esaias, I am undone; for I am a man of polluted
lips, and I dwell amids people of polluted lips: as if a man could not lightly
live among such, but he should in part be such as they were. One slothful
person infecteth another: As (...). Plato Menon. Torpedo piscis contactu suo
torpidum facit. Eras. chil. 3. cent. 4 adag 2^. Visc Aristot. hist. animal.
lib. 3. c. 5. and l. 9. c. 37. Plin. hist. not. l. 9. cap. 42. and lib. 31.
cap. 1. and Oppian. halient. l. 2. and 3 and Claudian cum codem commissum a
Iul. Scal. poet. l. 5. c. 16.
the crampfish benummeth those that touch or come near it. One wicked one
fasteneth his wickedness upon another. The very sight of others sleeping may
make a man sleepy that were wakefull otherwise: (...). Plato Charmid. (...).
Aristot. problem. 7. 1, 2, 6. and Aphrodis. 1. 34.
as the very sight of those that yawne is wont to set others also on yawning.
Yea such is the devilish disposition of man's wicked and wretched heart, that
as some infected and infectious persons have a strong desire to be infecting of
others; and those that have already moyled themselves, take a delight in, and
make a sport of moyling others, that come in with fair clothes among them,
thereby to make them like themselves; so Natural est unumquemque velle sive in
vitiis sive in virtutibus associare sibi consortes. Bern. parv. sermon. 17. Et
peccantibus voluptatem facit simul peccantium consortium. Aug. confess. lib. 2.
cap. 8. Novi ego seculum hoc moribus quibus siet: Malus bonum malum esse vult,
ut sit sui similis. Plaut. Trinum 2. 2.
wicked and profane persons usually desire nothing more, delight more in
nothing, than in transfusing of their wickedness and profaneness unto
others. Besides that Nemo non in vitia pronus est. Lactant. inst. l. 3. c. 17.
Ad deteriores faciles sumus, quia nec dux potest, nec comes deesse. Et res
etiam ipsa sine duce, sine comite procedit. Non pronum est tantum ad vitia, sed
praecept. Sen. ep. 97.
we are prone enough of our selves to take infection without help. Our
corruption within us is as tinder or gun-pouder rather, ready to be on a light
flame, if but the least spark light on it, or it come but any thing near the
fire: like Judge. 15.14.
flax that of it self catches and draws the flame to it, and is all on a
flash, so soon as it but feels the fire.

. 44. As good company therefore ought diligently to be sought and kept; so
evil company ought as warily to be shunned and avoided. Not that we may not
at all have commerce with such: for 1 Cor. 5.10. Solitudinem quaerat, qui vult
cum innocentibus vivere. Martin. Dum. de morib.
he that would so do, must go out of the world: nor yet that we should deny
Christian offices to such: Let. 3.^.
such we were also sometime our selves: and it were inhumane cruelty to shut up
persons infected together, and so suffer them to starve. But as we are wont to
deal with those that are so diseased, though we be careful to releeve them,
and to make provision of things necessary for them, as well physic as food,
to restore health, if it may be, as well as to preserve life; yet we are wary
of coming over-neere them, or conversing so with them, as whereby to take any
infection from them: So here, howsoever by occasion of our calling and course
of life, we may be called and constrained to have dealings sometime with such
as are openly ungodly and professedly profane; and so far forth as we have
opportunity and just occasion so to do, we perform offices about them,
spiritual ones especially, as stands with our duty, and may be for their
good: Yet John. 17.15. 1 John 5.18.
we take heed how we enter into any league of familiarity and inwardnesse with
such, whereby we may through ordinary companying with them take spiritual
infection from them, when we intend it not, ere we be aware. Prove 22.24.
Make no league, says Solomon, with a wrathful man: nor keep company with
one that is of a furious and outrageous behavior, Lest thou learn his ways;
and thy conversing with him prove a snare unto thy soul. For Vt cum in sole
ambulem, etiamsi aliam ob causam ambulem, fieri natura tamen ut colorer; sic
cum istoc libros studiose legerim, sentio orationem meam illorum cantu quasi
colorari. Cic. de orat. l. 2. Noxiae sunt conversationes cum malis: inficiunt
sobriam mentem and decolorant. Ambr. epist. 4 Frequenter accidit, ut quis
contra propositum suum intemperantem audiens, cum velit ipse continentiae d
sciplinam tenere, suco insipientiae coloretur Ibid. Visendus idem de bono mort.
c 9.
as those that walk in the Sun, though for other end and purpose, become
tanned with it and sunne-burnt, whether they regard it or no: so those that
come often in company with profane and evil disposed persons, though for no
evil end, intending nothing less than to become like unto them, yet draw they
a tincture often from them, learn to (...). Plut. de adul.
lispe and to (...). Pindari Schol. Nem. 7. and Plut. de liber. educ Claudo vel
uni si propinquus manscris, Disces and ipse claudicare protinus. Eras. Chil. 1.
cent. 10. a lag. 73.
limpe after them, come in time somewhat to resemble them both in speech and in
practice, and Minuta quedam, ut ait ^haedon, animalia cum mordent, non
sentiuntur, adeo ten^is illis and valens in periculum vis est: tumor indicat
morsum and in ipso tumore null im vul^us apparet. Idem tibi in malorum
conversatione eveniet, non deprehendes quem idmodum aut quando tibi obsit,
obfuisse deprehendes. Sense paucis immutat^s epist. 94.
to have a strange change wrought on them, in regard of what they have been,
though they perceive not how nor when they change. Exodus 32.1, 4.
Isreal's posterity had learned Egyptian superstitions by their long abode in
Egypt: and Psalm. 106.36.
Heathenish impieties from those heathen people among whom they were mingled in
the land of Canaan. Yea Joseph himself by living in Pharaoes Court had learned
to swear at every word almost by the life of Pharao, ( Genes. 42.15, 16.
By the life of Pharao ye are but Spies; and, By the life of Pharao ye go not
hence) as the other profane his Fellow-courtiers usually did. Such -- dociles
imitandis Turpibus and pravis omnes sumus. Iuvenal. sat. 14.
apt Scholars are we all generally, to learn ought that is evil: and so
easy a matter it is even Ante ignem consistens, etsi ferreus sis, aliquando
dissolveris. Isid. soliloq. l. 1.
for the best and the strongest to take taint by such societies; and if not to
become wholly profane like them, yet by often sight of sin to have it wax more
familiar with them, nothing so distasteful unto them as in times past it was;
and so to have the edge of their former zeal and fervor against it abated, and
the intention of their watchfulness consequently in some degree slackned. And
it is one degree unto evil to be less eager against evil; yea Qui aequo
animo malis immiscetur, malus est. Martin. Dum. de morib.
it is no small degree of evil, when a man can well away with evil in others.

Prove. 14.16.
A wise man, says the Wiseman, fears and departs from evil: And Prove.
16.6.
By the fear of God men depart from evil. Metus cum venit, rarum habet somnus
locum. P. Syrus.
There is no affection Omnem formido somnolentiam excutit. Et rapit somnos
pavor. Sen. Herc.
more watchful than fear. Luk 22.45.
Grief and sorrow make men many times heavy and drowsy: but Vigilabis, si
timebis. Aug. de verb. Ap. 28. Cavebis, si pavebis. Romans 11.21.
fear and care are wont to make them vigilant and watchful. Genes. 37.7, 13.
Jacob after he heard news of his brother Esaus coming against him, could not
for his life take any rest all that night long. Yea Judge. 16.19, 20.
Sampson himself when he lay with his head in Dalilaes lap, no sooner was
admonished that the Philistines were upon him, but he start up instantly and
began to look about him, he had little list to continue his wanton daliance
with her, or his sleeping upon her knee. Tutissimum illis iter, quod
suspectissimum est. Senec. epist. 59.
In fear of invasion men are wont to keep due watch and ward: Victor timere
quid potest? quod non timet. Sen. Agam. 4. 1. Nemo enim ceb^rius opprimitur,
quam qui nihil timet. Vell. hist. l. 2. Animus vereri qui scit, scit tuto
ingredi. P. Syrus.
where no such danger is misdoubted, like Judge. 18.7.
the men of Laish, there are they more careless and secure. In like manner is
it here: The fear of God if it be kept fresh in our hearts, it will keep us
spiritually waking, it will make us careful to shun, and fearful to do
ought, that may offend him whom we fear. Job 1.2.
Job was a just man, says the Holy Ghost, fearing God and eschewing evil. And
Hebr. 11.7.
By faith Noe forewarned of things to come long after, moved with fear
prepared the Arc for the safety of him and his. What made him so careful,
when the whole world was so careless, but his faith and his fear? Fides facit
formidinem: formido facit solicitudinem: solicitudo facit perseverantiam.
Tertull. contra Marcion.
Faith bred fear, and fear bred care. In regard whereof, the Spirit of God by
Solomon justly pronounces that man Prove 28.13. Non cito perit ruina, qui
ruinam praetimet. P. Syrus.
a blessed man that fears continually. For who so so does, will ever stand
upon his guard, will never slumber in security. And Sola isthic securitas est
nunquam esse securum, sed semper pavidum and trementem. Rob. Grosthed. epist.
65.
it is our only security, our only safety for us, never to be secure. On the
other side, when the fear of God begins to decay and wax faint in us, then
are we wont to grow less watchful and careful of shunning sin, and
Frequentissimum initium calamitatis securitas Vell hist. l. 2.
to lie more open to all Satan's temptations thereunto. That subtle serpent
could not prevail with our first Parents to induce them to disobedience and
breach of Gods charge, till he had wrought this fear of God out of their
hearts, by persuading them that there was no such danger in the matter, Genesis
3.4. Non moriemini.
they should not die, though they did it. And therefore it is not without cause
that David admonishes his malicious Adversaries in that manner; Psalm. 4.4.
Stand in awe, and sin not: as implying, that this was the reason why they
took such ungodly courses against the godly, because they stood not in awe of
God. And undoubtedly the maine cause of so much looseness in the lives and
courses of most men, is for want of this awe, because Ierem. 2.19.
the Fear of God is not in them.

. 46. Psalm. 36.1.
The wickedness of the wicked man, says the Psalmist, enformeth me in the
very midst of mine heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes. Come
we to any wicked man, that lives never so loosely, and tell him that there is
no fear of God in his heart; he will be ready to cry out of presumptuous and
uncharitable censurers, that take Gods office upon them to see into men's
souls, and to tell what is in men's hearts. But the Spirit of God it self
tells such, that Ex fructibus siquidem arbor dignoscitur: ex ramulis de
radice judicatur. Matthew. 7.20. and 12.33.
their own lives evidently discover to any understanding eye what is within
them; their profane and secure courses proclaim a want of this awe in them.
For were there any the least measure of that fear of God in them, that they
would be thought to have, yea were it but the servile fear only, that Iam.
2.19.
the devils themselves have; they would not, nay they could not continue and
go on so carelessly, so securely in their dissolute courses as they do; Timor
torporem encussit and nollentibus. Nec tutum patitur esse securum pavor.
this very fear it self alone would rouse them up and raise them out of their
spiritual slumber; it would even enforce them to look about them in spite of
their teeth; at least not suffer them so securely to lie snorting in sin. To
this purpose Romans 3.12-19.
the Apostle Paul having ripped up and dissected the natural man from top to
toe, and made as it were an Anatomy of him, finding Psalm. 5.9.
his tongue tipped with fraud, Psalm. 140.3.
his lips tainted with venom, Psalm. 10.7.
his mouth full of gall, Psalm. 5.9.
his throat a gaping grave; Psalm. 55.21. and 57 4. and 59.7. and 64.3.
his tongue as a rapier to run men through with, and his throat as a sepulcher
to bury them in; Esa. 59.7.
his feet swift to shed blood; and Prove. 1.16.
all his ways full of mischief: at length he concludes all with this as the
cause of all this evil both in heart and life, Romans 3.18.
There is no fear of God before their eyes. Which place one of the Ancients
alluding unto says, that Timor Domini janitor animi. Bern. alicubi. and Io.
Raulin quadrag. ser. 8.
The fear of God is as a Porter set at the door of our Soul. If the Porter
that is set to watch at the door to keep suspicious persons out, grow sleepie
and slumber, they will be stealing in that should not, now one and then
another: but if he fall fast asleep, or be knocked on the head and slain
outright, then who will may come in hand over head. In like manner here: When
the fear of God begins to grow faint in the soul, not to be so fresh as
formerly it has been, then evil motions find some entrance and begin to
steal in upon us. But Vbi timor divinus consopitur, indifferenter jam libitis
pro licitis utitur, jam ab illicitis cogitandis, perpetrandis, investigandis,
non animus, manus, vel pedes, amplius prohibentur: sed quicquid in cor, in
buccam, ad manum venerit, machinatur, garrit and operatur, malevolus,
vaniloquus, and facinorosus. Bern. de grad. humil. c. 12. In omnem libidinem
ebullire, solennes voluptates frequentare circi furentis, caveae saevientis,
scenae lascivientis, summus vitae fructus Deum non timentibus. Tertull. ad
Marc. l. 1. c. 20.
if the fear of God be utterly extinct and put out in us, then lie we wide
open, exposed indifferently to all sorts of sins: There is no sin so
heinous, so hideous, that men are privileged or exempt from, where this fear
is once abandoned and abolished. Genes. 20.11.
I thought, says Abraham, there is no fear of God in this place: and
therefore they will kill me to have my wife away from me. Murder and
Adultery, are Exodus 20.13, 14. Deuteronomy. 5.17, 18. Matthew. 19.18. Mark. 10.19. Romans
13.9.
the two foremost sins in the second Table, and such as the very light of
nature does of all other most, and most evidently condemn; and yet is there no
bones made of them in Abraham's account, where this fear of God is wanting, and
much less then of any other that seem lesser and lighter than they.

. 47. So that if the question be, how it comes to pass that such sins and
the like are so rife in these times, we need go no further to seek the cause
of it; it is because Job 6.14.
Men have cast off the fear of God, that should and would otherwise better
keep them within compass. And herein is wicked and wretched man become worse
than the bruit beasts. For whereas Duo animi a Deo dati custodes domestici,
Pudor and Timor.
There be two homebred Tutors as it were that God has set over each of us,
Shame and Fear, the shame of sin, and the fear of wrath: Qui pudorem
amisit, bestiae par est; qui timorem excussit, bestia pejor est.
He that has cast off shame, is no better than a beast; he that has shaken
off fear is worse than a beast: For Oneramus asinum, and non curat, quia
asinus est: At si in ignem impellere, si in foveam praecipitare velis, cavet
quantum potest, quia vitam amat, and mortem timet. Bern. de diverse. 12.
we lay load upon an Ass, and he is well content with it, because he is an
Ass, Hinc Heraclidae Sophistae (...) dixit (...) Ptolomeus Sophista.
a beast made and borne to bear burdens: But if you offer to thrust him down
some steep hill, or to drive him into the fire, he holds back, and shunneth
it all he can, because he loves life, and fears death. Whereas wretched man,
more blockish and senseless than the very Ass, more Ierem. 10.8 (...).
Simocat. ep. 7. (...). Chrysostom. sermon. de ascens. Bestiis bestialior. Bern.
Cant 35. jumentis insensibiltor. Idem de diverse. 12.
brutish than the bruit beast, than the brutishest of beasts, has no fear or
dread of that that may be his eternal bane, that may bring everlasting death
and destruction upon him. Yea wicked man, Joan. 6.70.
a devil incarnate, comes short herein in some sort of the devil himself.
For Iam. 2.19. Mirum est quod homines inferni supplicia non considerant, vel si
considerent, non sormidant; cum tamen demones credant and contremiscant. Author
ocul. moral. cap. 13. contempl. 3.
the devils, says James, believe and tremble: they believe Gods Word, and they
tremble at his wrath. Whereas wicked man, in that regard worse than they,
neither believes the one, nor fears the other; Esa. 5.19. and 28.15. Ierem.
5.12, 13. and 23.33.
makes but a scoff and a jest of either. And no marvel then, if there be no
watching against sin, where there is no fear or expectation of any evil or
danger by sin, no dread or awe of Gods wrath against it.

Psalm. 16.8. -- quaecunque capesses, Testes factorum stare arbitrabere divos.
Silius bell. Pun. lib. 15. In omnibus quae agis, Deum praesentem cogites. Cave
itaque ne vel signo vel facto offendas, qui ubique praesens cernit quicquid
facis. Bern. medit. c. 6.
I have set the Lord always before mine eyes, says David: For he is at my
right hand: therefore shall I not fall. And it would be indeed a sovereign
preservative to keep us from falling into this spiritual slumber, and a
singular means to make us watchful of our ways, if we could at all times
remember and did seriously consider, that Prove. 15.9.
There is an eye of God in every place viewing both good and bad: yea that that
God who is Deus totus est sensus, totus visus, totus auditus. Plin. hist. not.
l. 1. c. 7. Totus auris, totus oculus. Iren. l. 1. c. 6.
all eye, and (...). Hesiod. oper. 1.
whose eye sees all, (...). Eurip. apud Clem. Alex. (...) quod tamen Philemoni
tribuit Justin. (...) Qui and ibid. (...).
that sees all himself unseene of any, is present in all places; 1 King. 8.27.
not penned up in Heaven, but Ierem. 23.25.
filling Heaven and Earth; as Intra omnia, nec inclusus: Extra omnia, nec
exclusus. Hildebert.
without all things, and yet not excluded from any, so within all things, and
yet not included in any; being like Sphaera, cujus centrum ubique,
circumferentia nusquam. Empedocles apud Trithem. ad Caesar. quaest. 1. contra,
and aptius quam Trismegistus apud Scalig. de subtle. exerc. 363.
a sphere, as the Heathen man sometime said, whose Center is every where, and
its Circumference no where. So that as David said sometime of himself, Psalm.
139.7-13.
There is no flying for any man from the face of God; no shunning of the Spirit
or presence of God: if we climb up into Heaven, we are sure there to find
him: and if we creep down into hell, we shall not miss of him there
neither; (full glad would those damned wretches be, if they could) if we
could take the wings of the morning, and fly as far as the world is wide,
yet there should we be sure to find the hand of God ready to catch hold of us.
Or if we imagine that the darkness and the nightly shade may cover and
conceal us from his sight, he is able to turn Amos 5 8.
as the day into dark night, so the dark night into day. Yea Psalm. 39.11, 12.
darkness is no darkness with him; but the night is as clear as the day;
light and darkness, day and night are with him both alike. It is the argument
that Solomon uses with the incontinent person to withdraw him from his loose
and licentious courses; Prove. 5.20, 21.
Why should thou delight, says he, in a strange woman, or embrace a
strangers bosom? Since the ways of a man are before the eyes of the Lord; and
he pondereth all his paths. Yea not his ways alone, but Heb. 4.12.
the secret motions of his mind, and the inward intentions of his heart, they
are all -- (...).
naked and broken up, as the inwards of a beast that is cut up and quartered,
to him that we have to deal with. For Psalm. 139.13, 2.
thou have possessed my very reins, says David, and thou understandest all my
thoughts: yea, Psalm. 139.2.
thou understandest them afar off, or long before: Elonginquo, i. long
antequam animo insederint meo. Iun. Intra hominum mentes non solum tractata,
sed etiam volvenda cognoscit. Ambr. offic. lib. 1. c. 14.
he sees them ere they are, they are conceived of him, ere they be conceived
in us, he knows as well what we will either think or do, as what we have
already thought or done. And Prove. 15.11. Sic certe vivendum est, tanquam in
conspectu vivamus: sic cogitandum tanquam aliquis in pectus intimum inspicere
possit. Quid enim prodest ab homine aliquid esse secretum? Nihil Deo clusum
est. Interest animis nostris, and cogitationibus mediis intervenit. Sen. ep. 83.
Hell and destruction, says Solomon, are before the Lord: and how much more
then the hearts of the sons of men? And it is the argument that Elihu uses
to dissuade and deter men from wicked practices; Job 34.21, 22.
Gods eyes are upon the ways of man; and he eieth every step he takes: And
there is no darkness, nor deadly shade, that can shadow wicked workers from
his sight.

. 49. This was that that kept David in compass: Psalm. 119.168.
I have kept, says he, thy precepts and thy testimonies: for all my ways are
in thy sight. As Psalm. 18.22. and 119 6.
all Gods laws in his sight: so all his ways in Gods sight: Gods laws in his
sight by dutiful regard; his ways in Gods sight through his all-seeing
providence, whereby (...). Greg. Naz. epitaph. Athanas and Potter funer. ser.
like a well-drawne picture, that eieth each one in the room, he eieth in that
manner each one in the world, and all the ways of each one, Sic curat
universos quasi singulos, sic singulos quasi solos, Aug. confess l. 3. c. 11.
Sed and sic spectat, etc. Hinc Greg mor. l. 25. cap. 19. Sic intendit singulis,
acsi vacet a cunctis, and sic simul intendit omnibus, ac si vacet a singulis.
as if his eye were upon none but him alone. This was it that made Joseph so
vigilant and watchful, that he would not yield unto sin, though he were
solicited and urged thereunto, when there was both opportunity and secrecy
withal, none by to see them or to bewray them, and so to incense his Master
against him: Genes. 39.9.
How can I, says he, do this great wickedness, and sin against God? It was
the fear of God arising from the consideration of his presence there, that
kept Joseph at that time from that sin. As if he had said; Though there be no
creature by to see what we do, yet Est profecto Deus, qui quae nos gerimus,
auditque and videt. Plaut. Capt. 2.2. -- (...), -- Hesiod. oper.
there is a God that over-looketh us. And, as he says; (...). Isocr. ad
Demonic. Quid autem prodest non habere conscium, habenti conscientiam? Ex
Seneca Lactant. instit. l. 6. c. 24.
What avails it to have none privy to our evil acts, when we have our own
consciences privy thereunto? So what avails it to have no creature privy to
them, when Quis sur auderet furari, si sciret a ludice se videri? Autoroculi
moral. c. 5. propr. 2.
we have him privy to them who must one day be our Judge, and who as he
abhors them, and Hab. 1.13.
cannot brook or abide them, so Exodus 34.7.
has threatened to punish and take vengeance upon us for them. Cassian. in
collat.
We read of two religious men that took two contrary courses with two lewd
women, whom they were desirous to reclaim from their lewd manner of life. The
one came to the one as desirous of her company, so it might be with all
secrecy: and when she had led him from room to room, and he made still many
doubts, as very shie and fearful, lest at this window, that key hole, this
crevice, or that crany, some or other might chance to peep in and espy them
together, at length she brought him to the inwardest room in the house, where
she said she was full sure that none upon her life could possibly come to pry
in or see ought: but Illum time cui cura est ut videat te, and timendo castus
sis: aut si peccare vis, quaere ubi te non videat, and fac quod vis. Aug. de
verb. Dom. 46. Parietibus oculi hominum submoventur; numen divinum nec
visceribus submovetur, quo minus totum hominem perspiciat and norit. Lactant.
instit. l. 6. c. 24.
then he told her that all the bolts and bars that were could not keep God
out, all the walls and doors that were could not hinder his eie-sight: and
what should they gain by shunning man's eyes, when they lay open still to Gods
eye? The other of them came to another of like condition in like manner, as
desiring her company, but Si honesta sunt quae facis, omnes sciant: si turpia
quid refert neminem scire, cum tu scias? O te miserum, si contemnis hunc
testem. Senec. epist. 43. Populo test fieri credam, quicquid me cons^lo
faciam. Idem de beat. c. 20.
so as she would go out at doors and company with him openly in the street:
Which when Nullus fornicari auderet in oculis hominum, quanto magis confundi
deberet aliquid turpe committere ante Domini conspectum? Ocul. moral. c. 15.
she seemed to reject as a mad man's request; he thereupon told her, that Better
and safer it were to commit that or any other sin in the eyes of a multitude
of mortal men, than in the sight of God alone the immortal Judge of mankind;
in the eyes of the whole world, than in the sight of Genesis 18.25. Magna tibi
custodia necessaria est, magna tibi necessitas indicta probitatis, qui ante
oculos judicis vivis cuncta cernentis. Bern medit. cap. 6. and Boet. consol. l.
5.
the Judge of the whole world, Act. 17.30. 2 Cor. 5.10.
before whom one day we must all be judged. How warrantable the course was, I
stand not to discuss: and what effect it had with them, I remember not now:
But sure I am that it would be very effectual unto us to keep us vigilant and
watchful, and so to preserve us from many over-sights, which for want hereof
we are often overtaken withal, if we could ever seriously consider of this
presence of God with us.

. 50. This would keep us within the bounds of Sobriety and Temperance in the
use of Gods good creatures, in our recreations and disports; if we remembered,
that we eat and drink in Gods presence; that we feast and make merry
together, yea that we play and sport us in Gods presence: that as well, when
we are playing, as when we are praying, we are ever still in Gods eye.
Children, though they take more liberty to be wanton and waggish, when they
are out of their Parents eye, yet are they more careful commonly to carry
themselves more decently even in their sports, when they play in their
presence. And so would we do, were we assured that we were in Gods presence,
and that God over-looked us even at our game. Sic fac omnia, tanquam spectet.
Epicurus. Epicurus ipse. Prodest sine dubio custodem sibi imposuisse, and
habere quem respicias, quem interesse cogitationibus tuis judices Sic vivas
tanquam sub alicujus viri, ac semper praesentis, oculis. Sic facias, quaecunque
feceris, tanquam spectet Cato, aut Scipio, aut Laelius aliquis. Sen. epist. 25.
Aliquis eligendus est, and semper ante oculos habendus, ut sic tanquam illo
spectante vivamus, and omnia tanquam illo vidente faciamus. Idem epist. 11. Et
Bernard. ad fratr. de monte Dei; Elige tibi aliquem, cujus vitae exemplar sic
cordi tuo inhaeserit, reverentia insederit, ut quoties recordatus fuerit, ad
reverentiam cogitati assurges, vitam, ordines, mores componas. Hic praesens
tibi sit quandos unque volueris, occurrat saepe and cum nolueris. Omnia facta,
cogitata tua cum ab eo videri cogitabis, ac si videat, arguat, emendare
cogeris, etc.
The Heathen man advises a friend of his to propound to himself and set
before him some grave man or other, and so to carry himself in all his courses
as he thought he should do, if such an one were then eying him: that when he
were moved to do ought that were indecent, he might think with himself,
Would I do this, or do thus if such an one were in presence? And sure it is
that man's eye many times, such an ones especially as we reverence and stand in
some awe of, is a special mean to keep men in compass. For do we not see
it by common experience, that Sic Philippus rex cum intempessive ludenti
Antipatrum venire obnunciaretur, (...), alveum quo ludebat, in lectum rejecit.
Athen. dipnosop. l. 10.
when men are swearing and swaggering, or otherwise disordered, if one chance
to come in whom they have some reverend conceit of, or one that they know
cannot abide such behavior, they are by and by hushed and quiet, and break off
their disorders, and behave themselves more orderly so long as he is in
presence. Yea if such an one be by unseene behind the back of some one of
them, when he shall rap out an oath, or break a bawdy jest on some other of
the company, will not the rest be ready to say to him, Do not you see who is
behind you? as ready it may be, otherwise to vie oaths with him, and to require
his unsavory jest with the like. Can man's presence then so far prevail with
us? And would not Gods much more, if we were assured of it; or had we the eye
of our soul open to see the one, as we have the bodily eye to see the other?
Or are we not ashamed of our selves, that man's presence should prevail with us
more than the presence of God should? Quovis loco, quovis angulo reverentiam
habe Angelo qui te custodit, ne illo praesente facere audeas, quod me praesente
non auderes. Bern. Hic est magni consilii Angelus, cui patens est ^mnis
angulus. Et qu dam a^t; cum quid turpefacit, quod me spectante ^^beret; Cur
spectante Deo non magis inde rubes? Ocul. mor. ^. 15. propr. 2.
that what we would blush and be ashamed to do in any man's, yea -- siquid
Turpe para^, nec tu pueri contempseris annos, Sed peccaturo obstiterit tibi
filius inf^^s. Iuven. sat. 14. per admenitionem dictum.
in any childs eye, that had but wit enough to conceive what we did, that we
blush not, nor are abashed to commit in Gods sight.

. 51. Again this would keep us Nullum putaveris locum sine test. Martin.
Dum. de mor. Memineris Deum habere te testem. Ex Cicer. Lactant instit. li 6.
c. 24.
from taking liberty to our selves of sinning in regard of screcy and privacy,
were we never so solitary, never so private. It is true that wicked wretches
take occasion by such opportunities to offend the more freely. Job 24.15.
The eye of the Adulterer, says Job, waits for the twilight; and then he
disguiseth himself, and says, No eye shall see him. Yea of God himself they
think, Job 22.13, 14.
He walks aloft on the heavenly tarase, and there is many a thick cloud
between him and us: How can he see or discern what we do in the dark? But
Psalm 94.8, 9, 10. Oculum in se non intendit suum, qui fecit ^uum? Aug. de verb.
Dom. 10.
Understand, ye unwise ones, as the Psalmist speaks; and ye brutish ones,
will ye never be wise? He that formed the eye, shall not he himself see? he
that planted the ear, shall not he himself hear? yea he that made the heart,
knows not he what is in the heart? Or he that framed thy soul, cannot he
see as much and as well as thy soul? But (...). Epictet. Arian. l. 1. c. 14.
when thou art in the dark, does not thy soul see what thou do? And (...);
Clem. Alex. paedag l. 2. c. 10.
does not God then 1 Ioh. 3.20.
that is far above thy soul, Ierem. 17.9, 10.
that knows thy soul better than thy soul knows it self, that Psalm.
19.12. Ioh 9.3, 21.
knows more by thee than thou know by thy self, does he not much more
know, and much more easily and clearly discern what thou do in the dark?
Oh how watchful and wary would we be in all our ways, were our hearts but
once thoroughly possessed with this undoubted persuasion of Gods perpetual
presence with us, of his all-seeing eye ever and every where over-looking on
us? What temptation could prevail against us, were this consideration at hand
with us? If we could follow that good rule though by an Heathen man given, Sic
vive cum hominibus, tanquam Deus videat: sic loquere cum Deo, tanquam homines
audiant. Sen. epist. 10.
So converse with men, as if God over-looked thee; so commune with God, as if
men overheard thee: If we could have that continually before the eyes of our
soul that a reverend and religious man had before his eyes ever in his study;
Noli peccare: nam Deus videt, Angeli astant: Diabolus accusabit: Conscientia
testabitur: Infernum cruciabit.
Sin not; (be thou never so secret) for God sees thee: the good Angels stand
by thee: the Devil is ready to accuse thee; thine own conscience to give in
evidence against thee; and hell fire to torment thee: it would not be so great
a mastery to keep us waking and watchful, as for want hereof usually it is.

. 52. (...). Zale^cus in legum pro^^nio apud Stob. cap. 42.
frequent consideration of our end, and of that last day either of death or
doom, wherein we must every one appear before God to give up our accounts to
him. 1 Pet. 4.7.
The end of all things, says the Apostle Peter, is at hand: be sober
therefore, and watch unto prayer. And our Savior often; Matthew. 24.42. and 25.13.
Mark. 13.33, 35. Luke 21.35, 36.
Watch therefore; for you know not in what hour your Master will come. And it
is the last Argument that the Wiseman uses (hoping, if by any, by it to
prevail) to the unruly youngster, that will needs have his own swinge;
Eccles. 11.9.
But know that for all these things God will call thee to account. As those
therefore that are to give an account of their actions, as Inde. (...) dicti.
Et (...) apud quos rationem quisque reddebat. Visantur Iul. Pollux and Harpocr.
Sic and Dan. 6.2.
at Athens most of their Magistrates did at the years end when they went out
of office, are wont to be more wary and chary how they carry themselves in
their affairs, than those that are not liable to account, nor look ever to
come to reckoning, especially if it be uncertain how soon they may be
called upon to give up their accounts: Semper ita vivamus, ut rationem
reddendam nobis arbitremur: putemusque nos momentis omnibus non in aliquo orbis
terrae theatro ab hominibus, sed desuper spectari ab eo, qui and judex and
testis idem futurus est, etc. Ex Cicer. Verrin. 4. Lactant. instit. l. 6. c. 24.
So ought it to be with us, since we may well remember, yea so it cannot but
be with us, if we shall duly consider, that 2 Cor. 5.10.
we must all of us one day appear at Christ's Tribunal, and there Romans 14.12.
every one give account unto God for himself. And if we shall withal take
notice, what a strict account it shall be, wherein we must answer not for
every wicked work only, but Matthew. 12.36.
for every idle word also, and as well Romans 2.15, 16. 1 Cor. 4.5.
for the very Thoughts of our hearts, as for the actions of our lives; and that
this we know not how soon it may be, (God has prefixed us no set time for
it, (...). Chrysostom. tom. 6. orat. 67. Vltimum diem latere voluit, ut omnes
observarentur. August. homil. 13. Dies ultimus solubriter ignoratur, ut semper
proximus esse credatur. Gregor. mor. l. 12. and Bern. de mod. viv. ser. 69.
he would have the last day hid from us, because he would have us every day
watch for it:) it must needs make us keep a most strait watch, and that
constantly and continually too, not over our feet and our hands only, but over
our hearts, and our minds also, as Prove. 4.23, 25, 26, 27.
the Wiseman does well admonish us.

. 53. Yea but that day, may some say, is not so near yet, 2 Thessalonians. 2 1, 2.
the Apostle Paul himself says so. There are some fore-running signs of it
as yet unfulfilled, as Romans 11.25, 26, 31.
the conversion of the Jews, and Apoc. 18.2.9, 10, 17, 18.
the subversion of Antichrist: And till these have been, it shall not be.

To this I answer, with some of the Ancients; that (...). Joan. Damasc. orthod.
fid l 2. c. 1.
there is a twofold doomes-day: a general Doomes-day, at the end of the world:
and a particular Doomes-day, at the end of each man's life. Every man's
Deaths-day is each man's Doomes-day. For Heb. 9.26.
It is reserved for all men, that once they must die, and then comes
judgment. And Eccles. 12.7.
when the body returns to dust, Genes. 3.19.
whence it was taken, the Spirit goes to God, to give account to him Genes.
2.7.
that at first gave it. And that which is wont to be said, (though, it may
be, Visatur Piscat. in notis.
at first spoken in another sense) Eccles. 11.3.
As the tree falls, so it lies: Qualem te invenit Deus cum vocat, talem
pariter and judicat. Cyprian. de mortal. Qualis quisque hinc exierit suo
novissimo die, talis invenietur in nevissimo saeculi die. Aug. de verb. Dom.
21. and epist. 80. Et Greg. dialog. lib. 4. c. 37. and apud Gratian. did. 25.
as Death leaves thee, so shall the last judgment find thee, and so shall
thou abide then for all eternity. Matthew. 24.48, 49, 50, 51. Luke 12.45, 46.
If the evil servant therefore shall say in his heart, My Master will not come
yet: and shall take occasion thereby either to sleep with the slothful, or to
be drunk with the riotous, which he ought not to do, to give over his
vigilancie, and live more remissely or more loosely; that Servants Master will
come when he is not aware, and by death (...).
cut him in two, sever body and soul asunder, and give him his portion with
Hypocrites, in that place of torment, where is nothing but weeping and wailing
for pain and grief, and gnashing of teeth for indignation and vexation of
Spirit.

. 54. And Et si concluso super-essent tempora seclo, Vt posset longos mundus
habere dies: Nos tamen occasum nostrum observare deceret, Et finem vitae
quemque videre suae. Nam mihi quid prodest, quod longo flumina cursu Semper
inexhaustis prona feruntur aquis? Multa quod annosae vicerunt saecula sylvae?
Quodque suis durant florea rurae locis? Ista manent: nostri sed non mansere
parents. Exigui vitam temporis hospes ago. Prosper ad uxorem.
what shall it avail a man that the world stands still, if he die, and so
the whole world be as good as gone with him? If the river run still that he
dwelt by, the house stand still that he dwelt in, when himself is taken away
from either? Though the last day of the world be never so far off, yet may
the last day of thy life be near at hand. Long est quidem dies judicii; sed
uniuscujusque hominis dies ultimus long esse non potest; quia brevis est vita,
and vitae brevitas incerta. Aug. de verb. Dom. 16. and de 10. chord. 2. and
homil. 28.
Though the worlds Doomes-day come not yet, thine may come long before it:
though it be never so long before that come, it cannot be long ere thine will
come. And if it be uncertain when the general day of doom will be, it is no
less uncertain, yea in some sort more uncertain when thy particular day of
Doom will be. There are both affirmative and negative signs of the one;
there may be affirmative, but there are no negative signs of the other. Of the
general day of Doom there are some affirmative signs; such as argue the
near approaching of it, Matthew. 24.32, 33. Luke 21.30, 31.
as the tenderness of the bough and the sprouting out of the figtree does the
summers approach. And there are some negative signs; such as 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
till they come that day shall not be, as Romans 11.25, 26, 31.
the gathering in of the Jews again; and Apoc. 17.16, 17.
the destruction of the Beast and the woman that sits on her. But of each
man's particular Doomes-day, to wit, of his dying day, there may be signs
affirmative, as decay of nature, old age, and some uncureable diseases; Vise
Celsum de remedica l. 2. c. 6.
by which it may be known that the day of death is not far off. But negative
signs of it there are none, of which we may say, till such or such things be,
a man shall not die: a man cannot say, I am not weak, nor sick, nor old yet;
and therefore I know I shall not die yet. For our Amos 8.9.
Sun may set at noone, as the Prophet speaks in another sense: our life may
be Psalm. 55.23. and 102.24.
cut off in the midst of our years: we may be Job 15.33. and 21.23.
snatched away suddenly in the prime of our strength. 2 Samuel 12.18. Mors tam
juveni ante oculos debet esse quam seni: non enim citamur ex censu. Senec.
epist. 12. Fata enim seriem non servant. Ibid. 63. Quis est adolescens, cui
exploratum sit se ad vesperam esse victurum? Cic. de sen. Senibu^ mors in
januis, adolescentibus in insidii^ est. Bern. de convers. cap. 14. Et sub eodem
pueritiae fato est. Fuscus apud Senec. suasor. 2.
The young goes many times as soon as the old; and 2 Samuel 11.25.
the strong often before the weak. Yea as for one apple that hangs on the tree
till it be rotten or full ripe, there are twenty or more blown down, or
beaten down, or nipped with the frost, or blasted before they be ripe: So for
one man that Esa. 65.20. Pauci veniunt ad senectutem. Cic. de sen.
fulfilleth his natural course, there are an hundred intercepted and have
their lives shortened, by surfeit, by sickness, by the sword, by pensiveness,
by some one casualtie or other.

. 55. Could we then but seriously consider thus much with our selves, that we
know Job 14.1, 2. Psalm. 90.3, -- 10.
our life cannot be long, though we should live the full length of it: Psalm.
39.5.
Our life it is but a hand-bredth; and our whole age it is as nothing in regard
of God: it is but (...). Plut. (...). Punctum est quod vivimus; and adhuc
puncto minus. Sen. epist. 60.
a point to sempiternitie, Matthew. 26.46.
the time after decease that has a beginning, but no ending; it is just (...).
Plut. de sera number. vindict.
nothing to eternity, Psalm. 102.12, 24. and 90.2. 1 Timothy 6.16. Aetas in nobis:
aevum in Angelis: aeternitas in Deo; quae Deus ipse est. Scal. de subtle.
exerc. 359. 7.
Gods age, that has neither beginning nor ending: And again, that we know
not how soon death may come; Erras si in navigatione tantum existimas minimum
esse quo a morte vita diducitur. In omni loco aeque tenue intervallum est. Non
ubique se mors tam prope ostendit; ubique tam prope est. Sen. ep. 49.
it is never far off indeed; Ecce hic ultimus dies: ut non sit, prope ab
ultimo est. Ibid. 15.
The day present if it be not it, yet it is not far off it: but it is nearer
by much many times than we are aware of; it is very near at hand often ere it
appear so to be; (...). Basil. Sell. Indenuntiata sort rapimur. Fuscus apud
Sen. suasor. 2.
it comes frequently without warning, and strikes a man starke-dead ere he
be discerned to be dying: And lastly, that when it comes, we must
instantly come to our reckoning without further respit or delay: for Eccles.
8.8. Nulli jusso cessare licet; Nulli scriptum proferre diem. Senec. Herc. fur.
no man, says Solomon, has power over his own spirit, to retain it in the
day of death: there is no taking or gaining of further time then; Heb. 9.26.
(...). Basil. Sell. homil. 26.
nor shifting off of the account that we are then called unto, and shall be
enforced, will we nill we, then to give up: It could not choose but keep us
continually waking and watching for it, as Incertum est quo te loco mors
expectet itaque tu illam omni loco expecta. Senec. ep. 26. Mors ubique te
expectat, and tu igitur, si sapis, eam ubique expectabis. Aug. de spir. and
anim c. 51. Ocul. moral. c. 7. and Bern. medit. cap. 3.
death waits and watches every where for us; it would make us the mean
while walk wisely and warily, as those that desire to give up a good account
whenever they shall be called to it, which they are sure they shall, but
uncertain how soon they shall be. Deuteronomy. 32.29.
O, says Moses, that men were wise: they would then understand this, they
would think upon their end. As on the other side it is noted as a point of
folly in Gods people, and an occasion of their fall, that Lament. 1.9.
they minded not, nor remembered their end. Yea Quicquid facies, respice ad
mortem. Sen. ep 114. Nulla res magis proderit, quam cogitatio m rtalitatis.
Idem de ira l. 3. c. 42.
did men seriously think on this, it would make them wise. Psalm. 90.12.
Were they so wise as to number their days aright, they would apply their
hearts to further wisdom. Had they Mat. 27.60. John 19.41.
with Joseph of Arimathea their tomb hewed out in their garden, where 1 King
4.25. Zach. 3.10.
the use was in those parts to solace themselves, and to make merry with their
friends, that in the midst of their mirth, they might have their end in their
eye: or were they affected as that Ancient Father was, that said, Sive comedam,
sive bibant, sive aliud aliquid faciam, semper vox illa terribilis auribus meis
insonare videtur, Surgite mortui, venite ad judicium. Hieron. in Matthew. citante
Pepin. de confess.
Whether he ate or drank, or whatsoever he did, he thought he heard in his
ear that dreadful sound of the last trumpet, Arise ye dead, and come to
judgment: it would keep them waking amids their mirth, much better than the
loudest music; it would make them, as the Apostle wills them, 1 Cor. 10 31.
Whether they be eating or drinking, or whatsoever else they be about, to do
all so to Gods glory, as those that once must be, and presently may be called
to render an account of that they then do.

. 56. To this purpose it is a good rule, understood aright, that is commonly
given, that Sic quotidie vivamus, quasi die illa judicandi simus. Hieron. in
Mat. 24. Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum. Horat. epist 4. l. 1. Dies
omnis pro ultimo habeatur. Martin. de morib. Et Sen. ep. 12. Sic ordinandus est
dies omnis, tanquam cogat agmen, and consummet atque expleat vitam. Et de brev.
vit. c. 7. Qui omnes dies tanquam ultimum ordinat, nec optat crastinum, nec
timet.
A man should so live every day, as if that day were his dying day: for that
Prove. 27.1. Iam. 4.13, 14. (...); Anacr. Nescis quid serus vesper vehat. --
Varro satyr. and Live. hist l. 45. Quis scit an adjiciant hodiernae tempora
summae Crastina dii superi? Hor. carm. l. 4. ode 7. -- aetas quid crastina
volvat Scire nefas homini. -- Stat. Theb. l. 3. Nihil de hodierna die
promittitur: nihil de hac hora. Sen. ad Marciam c. 10.
so it may prove, for ought he knows. It is true indeed that an Heathen man
says, Male vivit, quisquis nescit been mori. Sen. de tranquil. c. 11.
He lives but evil, that knows not how to die well. And it is as true that,
as one of the Ancients says, Sic vive, ut quotidie merearis accipere. Qui non
meretur quotidie accipere, non meretur post annum accipere. Ambros. de sacram.
l. 5. c. 4.
He lives not as a Christian man should, that is not fit every day to come to
Gods board; so (...). Musonius apud Stob. c. 1.
he lives otherwise than he ought, that is not every day prepared for death,
that is not ready to go to God every day, if God should call for him that day;
as who knows but that he may? For Genesis 19.23, 24, 25.
how many have risen well in the morning, that never went to bed again? Nonne
multi sani dormierunt, and obdormierunt? Aug. homil. 28. Et mors somno
continuata est. Senec. ep. 66.
how many have gone well to bed, that never saw daylight again? And Cuivis
potest accidere, quod cuiquam potest. P. Syrus apud Sen. ad Marc. c. 9. and de
tranq. c. 11.
look what has befalne one man, may befall any man: Hodie fieri potest,
quicquid unquam potest. Senec ep 63.
that may well fall out this day, that may fall out any day; and 2 Samuel 14.14.
that must needs come to pass one day.

But yet that rule of living every day as if that day were a man's dying day,
must be conceived for the manner of our behavior and carriage, not for the
matter and substance of it. To make this more plain. For the maine matter and
substance of a man's employment, that is, the works, duties and offices to be
performed of him, it is not true. For did a man know that this day should be
his last day, or had he some strong presumption that it were so to be; it
were not lawful for him to follow, either his lawful disports and delights,
or the ordinary works of his special calling; but rather leaving either of
them, he ought wholly to apply himself to the setting of his house in order,
as Esa. 38.1.
Esaias willed Ezechias, and the making of all straight and even between God and
his own soul, to prayer and supplication, and such holy meditations, as the
present occasion should require. But for the manner of a man's carriage in those
duties that he is daily called unto, or is conversant about, it is true; a man
ought continually so to behave himself in them, in being Hoc citra diem mortis
praesta: moriantur ante te vitia. Senec. epist. 27. Vno dic ante mortem
poenitentiam agito. Sapiens quidom Hebraeus. i. omni die. Quomodo enim de die
in diem differendo peccas, cum extremum diem tuum nescias? Aug. epist. 145.
as careful to eschew all evil whatsoever, or to repent him without delay of
whatsoever evil he has been overtaken withal; and Id ago ut mihi insta^
totius vitae sit dies. Nec tanquam ultimam rapio, sed sic illum aspicio,
tanquam esse vel ultimus possit. Hoc animo tibi hanc epistolam scribo, tanquam
cum maxim scribentem mors evocatura sit. Paratus exire sum. Senec. epist 61.
to do whatsoever work he does as sincerely and as circumspectly, as he
would do, if he were to do such duties upon his deathbed or upon his dying
day, or as he would do them, if instantly upon it he were to answer, not
before man, but before God, for the doing of them. And surely a special mean
it would be to keep us in compass, if we could but think with our selves,
when we are about to behave our selves in ought otherwise than we ought, and
than our conscience tells us that we should, Would I do this, or do thus,
if this were to be my last work; were I to die upon the doing of it, or were I
presently to give up an account, and to make mine answer before God for it? And
Dic tibi dormituro; Potes non expergisci. Dic experrecto; Potes non dormire
amplius. Dic exeunti; Potes non reverti. Dic revertenti; Potes non exire.
Senec. ep. 49.
who knows but that that work, whatsoever it be, may be thy last work? Who
can tell but that thou may be taken away in the very act of it, as Number. 25.8.
2 Samuel 6.7.
some have been in the very act of iniquity? Oh how sincerely, how
circumspectly would we in all things behave our selves, did such thoughts
possess our souls?

. 57. Toti incumbamus huic operi, tam sancto, tam necessario, scrutemur vias
and studia nostra: and in eo se quisque judicet profecisse, non cum jam non
invenerit quod reprehendat, sed cum quod invenerit reprehendet, etc. Bern. in
Cant. 58.
to be often sifting and examining our selves, viewing and surveying our hearts
and our lives, taking account of our selves how we watch and how we walk,
how the case stands between us and God, how we go backward or forward in
the good ways of God, and how we thrive or pare in the gifts and graces of his
Spirit. 1 Cor. 11.31.
If we would judge our selves, says the Apostle, we should not be judged. As
Bonum judicium quod divinum praevenit, quod divino subducit. Volo praesentari
vultui ira judicatus, non judicandus. Bern. in Cant. 55.
there is no surer way to prevent the judgment of God, than by our judging of
our selves: so there is no better course to prepare us for the judgment of
God, than by fore-judging of our selves. 1 Cor. 11.28.
Let a man therefore, says the same Apostle, examine himself, and so repair
to Gods board. As examination of our selves is a mean to fit us for Gods
table, so is it a mean also to further us in our account, which we are to give
up unto God. We should live every day, as we would, if we were to go that
day to Gods board; and we should so address our selves when we are to repair
to Gods board, as we would if we were then to go unto God: and the diligent
discussing of our selves and our courses is a good mean to further us in, to
fit us for either.

. 58. Psalm. 4.4.
Stand in awe, says the Psalmist, and sin not: examine your own hearts on
your beds, and be still. And of himself elsewhere, Psalm. 119.59.
I considered my ways, and turned my feet again to thy testimonies. And,
Zephan. 2.1, 2. (...) Excutite vos, iterumque excutite. Iun.
sift or search your selves, says one Prophet, and search again and again,
(for so the words would there be read) before the sentence be executed, and ye
be carried away as chafe; before the fierce wrath of God come upon you, and
the day of Gods indignation overtake you. And, Lament. 3.40.
Let us search and sift our ways, and our courses, says another, and return
unto the Lord. And, 2 Cor. 13.5.
Prove your selves, says the Apostle, whether you be in the Faith or no: that
ye may know whether Christ be in you or no; whether you be sound and sincere,
or but (...).
counterfeit Christians. And again, Galat. 6.4, 5.
Let each man try his own work; that he may have whereof to rejoice in
himself and not in others: ( Vt testimonium perbibeat conscientia propria, non
lingua aliena. August. in 1 Joan. 6.
in that which he knows by himself, not in that which others conceive of
him:) For every man must bear his own burden: And it is 2 Cor. 1.12.
the testimony of his own heart concerning his estate, not the opinion or
report that others have given him or had of him, that must one day before God
either Romans 2.15.
excuse or accuse him, either 1 John 3.20, 21.
acquit or condemn him. No better means therefore by the testimony of Gods
Spirit to keep us in awe, to prevent Gods wrath, to restrain us from sin,
to bring us back into Gods way when we have gone out of it, to stay us from
going out of it again when we are once in it, to uphold us in the state of
grace, to afford us sound comfort of our present estate, to preserve us from
the danger of selfe-deceit and of inward decay in good things; than Coram Deo
judicatur, qui cord Dominum conspicit, and actus ejus sub ejus praesentia
solicita inquisitione discernit, quem tanto quis securius expectat, quanto
quotidie vitam suspectius examinat. Qui n. ad extremum ejus judicium venit, non
jam coram illo, sed ab illo judicatur. Greg. mor. l. 25. c 6.
the often view and surveigh of our own works and our ways, and the diligent
discussing of our daily courses and carriage.

. 59. We see how Avarus totus in rationibus.
careful worldly men are in this kind; I mean, of keeping duly, and often
casting up their accounts. And not without cause: they find much benefit by
it: they come thereby to understand aright their own strength and ability,
which they might be else mistaken in: and if in any matter of expense they
have gone beyond their compass, or have slipped unawares into some course more
chargeable than gainefull, they can soon come by this mean both Quod apud
luxuriosum, sed diligentem evenit, ratio mihi constat impensae. Non possum
dicere, me nihil perdere, sed quid perdam, and quare, and quemadmodum dicam.
Sen. epist. 1.
to discover and to correct it betimes, ere it grow to a greater evil. And on
the other side for want of due care in this kind, men fall often far behind
hand before they be aware of it; so that they are quite sunk many times ere
they perceive themselves sinking; they are gone past recovery ere they discern
that they are going. And were we Luke 16.8.
as careful for the state of our souls, as the children of this world are for
their worldly estates, we would be as careful (much (...). Greg. Ndz. apud
Anton Meliss. l. 1. c. 64. Satius est vitae suae rations, quam frumenti
publicinosse. Senec. de brev. vit. c. 38.
better cause we have so to be) of keeping and often casting up our accounts
concerning the one, as they are theirs concerning the other: That which as it
would much further our growth in grace, and by way of prevention preserve us
from decay and relapse; so for want whereof many that have made fair shows
have fallen backward, and have become spiritual banckrupts ere they have
perceived that they were breaking.

. 60. As Tradesmen therefore and those that have much dealings in the world,
are wont to have their day-booke, to keep particular account of each days
both receipt and expense: So an exceeding great help would it be unto us in
good courses, if we could bring our selves in a constant course to Quotidie
cum vita paria faciamus. Senec. epist. 101.
take every day at Even an account of our selves, how we have spent that day,
and what account we are able to give of it unto God. It is wisdom in worldly
men so to do, even where they are not liable to account; because their worldly
well-being depends much thereupon. But it were much more wisdom Rationem cum
Domino crebro putet. De Villico Cato de re rustic. c. 5.
for that man so to do, that were to give up a strict reckoning of all his
affairs and of his carriage in each of them, and that at an hours warning: he
should by means hereof have his accounts ready by him upon any occasion,
having kept them thus diligently from day to day. It is a point then of double
wisdom in us Animus quotidie ad rationem reddendam vocandus est. Senec. de ira
l. 3. c. 36.
to be diligent in the daily practice and performance of this duty; both for
that our spiritual welfare depends much thereupon; as also for that we are
liable to the most strict account that may be, to be given up, not at an
hours, but at less than an hours warning, if it shall be so called for;
which this course duly observed would be a special mean to fit us for.

. 61. This even Heathen men have done. They have taught it their Scholars:
they have used it themselves. For so (...); Pythag. carm. aur. and Plut. de
curiosit.
Pythagoras enjoined his disciples each of them to rehearse every evening this
verse to himself; What good or ill have I done (this day?) or what not done,
that I should do? And Pythagoreorum more, quid quoquo die dixerim, audierim,
egerim; commemoro vesperi. Cato apud Cic. de senect.
accordingly was it their usual manner at even ever to run over what they
had said, or heard, or done the day past. And Seneca, as Facicbat hoc quotidie,
Sextius, ut consummato die cumse ad nocturnam quietem recepisset, interrogaret
animum suum; Quod hodie malum tuum sanasti? cui vitio obstitisti? qua part
meliores? Senec. de tra l. 3. c. 36.
he tells us of one Sextius a Stoicke, whose daily practice this was, to call
himself at Even, to a reckoning, what evil he had healed in himself that
day, what vice he had withstood or subdued in himself, wherein he was oughts
better, being that he had lived a day longer: So Vtor hac potestate, and
quotidie apud me causam dico. Cum sublatum e co^spectu lumen est, and conticuit
uxor moris mei jam conscia, totum diem jam mecum scrutor, facta ac dicta mea
remetior. Senec. ibid. Et alibi ad Lucil. Scrutor me prius; deinde hunc mundum.
he professes of himself, that it was his usual guise, every night after he
was laid in bed and the light out, when all was quiet about him, to cite
himself as it were to appear before himself, to render an account of his
courses, and so privately with himself to recount and record his whole days
work, all his words and his deeds, passing such censure upon each of them as
the condition or quality of either did require. And Vir bonus and sapiens, --
Non prius in dulcem declinat lumina somnum, Omnia quam longi reputaverit acta
dies; Quo praetergressus? quid gestum in tempore? quid non? Cur isti facto
decus abfuit, aut ratio illi? Quid mihi praeteritum? curhaec sententia sedit,
Quam m^lius mutasse fuit? -- Quid volui quod nolle bonum fuit? utile bonesto
cur malus antetuli? sic dicta and facta per omnia Ingrediens, ortoque a vespere
cuncta revolvens, Offensus pravis, dat palmam and praemia rectis luson. idyl 16.
a Latin Poet describing a wise and a good man, makes this his daily pratice,
Not to suffer his eyes to sleep, till he have run over all his actions of the
whole live-long day past, and taken notice what was well done, and wherein he
had faulted and failed, to approve himself in the one, to reprove himself for
the other.

. 62. Thus have Heathen men done: And as he sometime said, Tanti vitrum, quanti
margaritum? Post Tertull. ad Martyr. Hier. ad Demetr. and ad Salvinam and alibi.
Shall they set se much by their glassie bugle, and not we much more by our
precious pearl? Shall they be so careful to use these means for the
furthering of themselves in matter of mere morality: and shall not Christian
men much more do the like for the helping of themselves forward in the
practice of true piety? A shame it were for us that they should take more
pains and use greater diligence about the nutshell, than we should for the
kernel; that they should be enamored more on the shadow, than we are with the
substance; they ravished more with a dead picture than we with the person whose
picture it is, and whose surpassing beauty and excellency the picture comes
far short of; that mere civility and humanity should prevail more with them
than true Christianity and divinity does or can do with us. As we are to
think therefore daily of that general account; so Si semper hoc, cum opus
est, facis; semper facis. Bern. in Cant. sermon. 58. Nohis enim putationis semper
est ^empus, quia semper est opus. Ibid.
let us call each one himself daily to a particular reckoning. Quid pulchrius
hac consuetudinc excutiendi totum diem? moderatior erit, qui sciat sibi
quotidie ad judicem esse veniendum. Qualis ille somnus post recognitionem sui
sequitur? quam tranquillus, altus, liber, cum aut landatus est animus, aut
admonitus? etc. Senec. do ira l. 3. c. 36.
We shall walk every day the more warily being to pass such a censure; we
shall sleep and rest more freely, more quietly, more soundly, more sweetly,
having past such a censure: we shall be sure, when we have ransacked our selves
in this manner over night, to have no known sin unrepented of lodge with us
till the next day. Yea he that has thus acquit himself ere he lay him down
to sleep, shall be sure to watch even while he sleeps; and though he were
taken away suddenly in his sleep, should be found spiritually awake. In a
word, as the often rubbing of our eyes is a good mean to keep us corporally
waking: so the frequent ransacking of our hearts and lives will prove a
sovereign help to keep us spiritually watching.

matter of evil unto us. For as those that know themselves to be of a weak
stomach, ready to take check at such meats as many other ordinarily are wont
to digest well enough, are very chary of their diet, and careful to eschew and
forbear not such meats only as are simply unwholesome, but even such also as
they suspect or suppose to be hard of digestion, and will not in that regard so
well accord with their weakness: So Panatius adolescentulo quarenti, An
Sapiens amaturus esset; De Sapiente, inquit, videbimus: mihi and tibi, qui
adhuc a sapiente long absumus, non est committendum, ut incidamus in rem
commotam, impotentem, alteri emancipatam, vilem sui. Itaque conscii nobis
imbecillit at is nostrae quiescamus. Quod ille de amore, hoc ego de omnibus:
nec vino infirmum animum committamus, nec formae, etc. quantum possumus, nos a
lubrico recedamus: in si^co quoque parum fortiter stamus. Senec. epist. 116.
the man that is suspicious of himself, and jealous of his own corruption,
will be careful to walk warily, and diligently to avoid not those things
alone that he sees and knows to be simply evil, and in that regard
prejudicial to all in general, but even those things also that, though
indifferent, and in themselves otherwise not unwarrantable, such as may be done
by some sometime without hurt or offense, yet that in regard of the strength of
his corruption, his natural disposition, the weakness of grace in him, and
his pronenesse to slip and be overtaken in them, may in that regard prove
dangerous and prejudicial to him in particular, howsoever Sapienti non
solicit custodire se tutum est: gradum ubi volet, sistet. Nobis, quia non est
regredi facile, optimum est omnino non progredi. Sen. ibid.
others wiser or stronger, or not so affected as he finds and feels
himself, might without danger deal with them. This religious jealousy had
Job of his children, when they were feasting together, knowing how prone youth
are to over-shoot themselves in mirth and disport: Job 1.5.
Peradventure, says he, my sons may have sinned, and (blessed, that is, as
the Hebrews use the word (...). So 1 King. 2.13. Vise sis Drus. observe. l. 16.
c. 7
by a kind of fairness and finenesse of speech) blasphemed God in their
hearts. And the like godly It is a fools best wisdom to be jealous of his
own folly.
jealousy of our selves it is good for each of us to have, as to say with our
selves, when we are moved or solicited to some jeopardous course, though we
cannot condemn it as simply evil; Peradventure I may sin, and be overtaken
ere I be aware; I may fail in it or fall by it, though other stronger than I
may deal in it without danger. Yea the like jealousy had Job of himself: he
was no less suspicious of himself, than he was of his sons. Job 9.28.
Verebar omnia opera mea.
I was afraid, says he, of all my works; knowing, that if I did wickedly,
thou would not acquit me. And this suspiciousnesse of himself no doubt was
it that caused him to Job 31.1.
make a Covenant with his eyes, not to seize on such objects, as might prove
occasion unto him of any spiritual evil.

. 64. Matthew. 26.41.
Watch and pray, says our Savior, that ye enter not into temptation: the
Spirit indeed is ready; but the flesh is weak. As if he had said more at
large; Considering your own infirmity and feebleness, ye have great need to
take heed and earnestly to desire, that ye may not so much as touch upon any
temptation: For such is the pronenesse of your corrupt nature to give way to
them, that if you do but enter into any temptation, though the Spirit purpose
otherwise, yet the flesh faltring with you, it is an hundred to one that you
come not out as you went in, but you receive some foil or other. Do we not
see how careful they are that have gunpowder in their houses, to look that
no fire or candle come near where it is? And in like manner Adversa est
considentia, quae periculis vitam suam pro certo commendat. Et lubrica spes,
quae inter fomenta peccati salvari se sperat. Author de singular. cleric.
did we consider that our corrupt heart is like tinder or gunpowder, apt in
temptation to be soon fired and inflamed, it would make us the more careful
to keep aloof off, and fearful to come nigh ought that might be a mean to
tempt or to entice us unto evil. And on the other side, as those that set such
materials to dry before the fire, as are apt soon and suddenly to take fire,
by the sudden lighting but of a little spark in them, though they be never so
heedy, though they stand still by them and have their eye ever on them, may
chance to have all on a light fire, ere they can help or prevent it: So
falls it out here not seldom, that Vt ignis, ubi foenum vel culmum
arripuerit, sine morae simulac materiam attigerit, flammam lucidam accendit:
ita ignis concupiscentiae fimulac per oculorum intuitum formam elegantem
attigerit, animum statim exurit. Chrysostom. de Ozia sermon. 3.
while we venture too near, and presume as John 18.25, 26.
Peter sometime did to stand bathing himself against the fire in the
Highpriests Hall; we are suddenly caught, as he was, ere we think on it, we
have by some sudden injection our affections so fired, that the very frame of
our heart is all on a flame, ere we are aware of it, or are able now well
either to prevent it, or easily to suppress it.

. 65. Again, this jealousy of our own weakness will make us the more
careful, as to shun all occasions, whereby we may be endangered; so, because
it is not in our power ever to avoid them, to use diligently all good means,
whereby we may be supported and strengthened against them. To which purpose our
Savior joyneth watching and prayer together, as Matthew. 26.41.
there, so Luke 21.36.
elsewhere: as also Ephesians 6.18. 1 Pet. 4.7.
his Apostles often couple them the one with the other. Multos impedit a
firmitate praesumptio firmit^tis. Ne^o a Deo fit firmus, nisi qui se a seipso
sentit infirmum. Infirmatus est in se, ut firmas fieret in te. Non firmaretur,
si non infirmaretur ut abs te in te pe^fl^^retur. August. de verb. Dom. 13.
No man, says one of the Ancients, is enabled by God, that is not enfeebled
first in himself. And no marvel; For so long as we find our selves (as we
suppose) strong enough to stand alone on our own legs of our selves, we
think scorn to use crutches, or to be supported by others: so long as we
think our selves wise enough and able to wade well enough through with our
affairs, Consilii sutis est in ^e misi. -- Arachne apud Ovid. m^t. l. 6.
we regard not to take advice or to seek help and aid from others: So here,
so long as we misdoubt not our own weakness, as we are over-forward to
presume upon our own strength, so we are over-backward and careless of using
those means whereby we might attain true strength indeed. And on the other
side, the more conscious men are to themselves of their own wants, the more
diligent are they wont to be in resorting to those by whom their wants may be
supplied: and the more suspicious we are of our own infirmity and weakness,
the more careful will we be daily and hourly to repair unto him, who alone
is able to confirm and strengthen us, yea who is able so 2 Timothy 4.17.
to enable us notwithstanding our weakness, that 2 Cor. 12.9, 10.
his power and might shall appear in us amids our feebleness, and 2 Cor. 4 7.
our very infirmity shall make much for his glory. And surely, In hac part
expedit plus been timere, quam male fidere. Et utilius est, infirmum se homo
cognoscat, ut fortis existat, quam fortis videri velit, and infirmus emergat.
Author de singular. cleric. Sed and Tertull. de cultu foem. Vtilius si speremus
nos posse delinquere. Sperando enim timebimus, timendo cavebimus, cavendo salvi
erimus. Qui se^u^us agit, non est sollicitus, non possidet tutam and firmam
securitatem: at qui sollicitus est, is vere poterit esse securus.
In this kind, as one well says, it is more behovefull for a man to be
somewhat too fearful and heedy, than to be a little too confident and
foole-hardy: to take notice of his own weakness, that he may become strong,
than while he thinks himself strong in his own conceit, to prove weak. In
regard whereof also the Wiseman, as we said formerly, not unworthily
pronounces him Prove. 28.14.
happy, that continually stands in fear: as Romans 11.21. 1 Cor. 10.12.
afraid, though he may seem to stand fast and firm, lest through infirmity
he should chance to fall.

. 66. The want hereof has been the fault, and has proved the fall of not a
few. For, to pass by that fearful downfall of our first Parents hereby
occasioned: What but this was the maine ground of Peter's miscariage? but
Praesumpsit nescio quid, quod in illo nondum erat. Aug. in Psalm. 55. Posse se
putavit quod non potuit. Bern. de temp. sermon. 88.
this presumption, I mean, of his own might, and neglect of those means
whereby he might have been enabled to stand, while John 13.36, 37.
he trusted to his own strength? A threefold offense some have observed in
his behavior in that business; that (...). Se Christo opposuit, se caeteris
praeposuit; sibi totum imposuit. Chrysostom. in Mat. h^mil. 82.
he opposed himself to our Savior forewarning him of his fall, he preferred
himself indiscreetly before the rest of his Fellow-disciples, and he took the
matter wholly upon himself, as that which he knew himself able well enough to
go through with. Mat. 26.33, 34, 35.
Thou will deny me, Peter, says our Savior; Nay, but I will not, says Peter.
Though all should deny thee, yet will not I deny thee: I will never deny thee,
though I dye for it. And no doubt of it but that Volebat plane pro Domino
animam ponere, volebat: neque enim Deum id posticendo fallebat: sed quas vires
haberet voluntas ipsa nesciebat. August. de orig. animae l. 4. c. 7.
Peter then both meant as he spoke, and spoke what he thought; he misdoubted
not himself, nor his own inability, but he would and should do as then he
said. But Non se norat aegrotus: sed aegrotum norat medicus. Veriorque inventa
est medici praedictio, quam aegrati praesumptio. August. in Psalm. 138.
the Physician felt Peter's pulse, and discerned that in his Patient, which the
Patient did not, nor could then see in himself. And surely, as it befell
Peter, so falls it out with many other. They are like sick men, -- jussus
requiescere, postquam Tertia compositas vidit nox currere venas, etc. Pers.
sat. 3. Qui acuta febre diu laboravit, si morbus per biduum triduum vt
intermiserit, dicit statim, Iam licet ad satietatem edere, etc. Stella ad Luc
11. Quod aegris evenit, quos longa imbecillitas usque eo aff^cit, ut nunquam
sine offensa proferantur; hoc accidit nobis, quorum animi ex longo morbo
reficiuntur. Senec. epist. 7.
that when they have had a good day or two after some fits of a fever, think
they are now perfectly well recovered again, and so presuming contrary to the
Physicians advice to venture abroad into the air, or to cast off their sick
kerchiefe, or to misdiet themselves, either they catch cold or take surfeit, and
so fall back by relapse into their former disease, handling them then more
fiercely by far, and endangering them much more than before. And so is it
here with a many: they think themselves strong enough to encounter with Satan,
especially if they have stood out and come off well (as they think) in a
temptation or twain, and so Qui praesumit, minus veretur, minus praecavet,
plus periclitatur. Tertull. de cultu foem. Timor salutis fundamentum est:
praesumptio impedimentum timoris. Ibid.
grow careless either of eschewing the occasions of evil, or of using means
whereby they may be enabled to withstand them when they are offered: Which
when they so do, it is just often with God to leave them to their own strength,
as the nurse does the child that will not endure to be lead, and so to suffer
them to fall, as soon then they will, sometime to their eternal ruin, that
they may deservedly perish through their own folly and foole-hardines;
sometime to their present pain, but their future amendment, that having had
experience of their own feebleness and inabilitie to stand of themselves,
they may in time to come be more wary, more distrustful of their own
strength, and more careful to resort from time to time unto him, from whom
only true strength is to be had. And for this end no doubt has the Holy Ghost
left upon record the foul slips and falls of many of Gods worthy Saints and
Servants, not that any should thereby be encouraged or emboldned unto sin;
but Vt cautela minorum sit ruina majorum. Greg. mor. lib. 33. c. 15. Scriptae
sunt ruinae priorum ad cautelam posteriorum. Stultus quippe est, qui
praecedentem cadere videt and ipse non cavet. Rad. Ardens post Trinit. 9.
Cautum itaque debet reddere, non sequacem, error alienus. Cassiod l. 7. ep. 2.
Cum magnos cecidisse attendunt, parvi timeant. August. in Psalm. 50. Nimium
praeceps est, qui transire contendit, ubi alium conspexerit cecidisse: and
vehementer infraenis est, cui non incutitur timor alio pereunte. Amator vero
est salutis suae, qui evitat alienae mortis incursum: and ipse est providus,
qui sollicitus sit cladibus caeterorum. Author de singul. cleric. Vita itaque
foveam in quam alium vides cecidisse: aliena pericula in te pertimesce:
alterius perditio tua sit cautio. Isidor. soliloq. l. 1.
that the ruin of such great ones might make weaker ones more wary; that where
we have seen them slip for want of watchfulness, there might we be more
watchful: that when we see others foiled far stronger than our selves, it
might make us the more to distrust our own strength: Which the more we
distrust, the less shall we presume on it, and the more careful shall we
be to use all good means, whereby true strength may be achieved of us and
increased in us.

Prove. 8.13.
The fear of God, says Solomon, is to hate evil: not to forbear it only,
but, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 12.9. (...).
to abhor it. The servile fear may make a man break off the practice of
sin outwardly in his life, (wicked men, had they but it, durst not go on in
their wicked courses as they do) but the filial fear will do more than
that, it will make a man hate and detest it also inwardly in his heart: For
this fear it is a loving fear, Timor Dei cum amore conjunctus. Calvin.
instit. l. 1.
a fear joined with love, yea proceeding from the love of him whom we fear.
And Psalm. 97.10.
ye that love the Lord, says the Psalmist, hate that that is evil. Amas
Deum? debes odisse quod odit. Aug. in Psalm. 96.
Do thou love God, says Augustine; thou must hate then what he hates: Yea
if thou love him indeed, thou can not but hate what he hates. Neither
indeed can we Romans 12.9.
closely cleave to that that it good, till we have brought our hearts to detest
and abhor that that is evil. Which thing if it were once thoroughly wrought
in us, there should not need much Rhetoric to persuade us to watch both
against sin and against all occasions of it: We would of our selves be
careful enough to shun and avoid that, which our hearts abhorred, and could
not brook or abide. For as the meat that a man loatheth, he cannot endure so
much as the sent or savor of it, nay nor, it may be, the sight of it: so would
it be with us in regard of sin, had we the like inward dislike and loathing
of sin in our souls. And Stomachum fecit illi luxuria: cito tamen cum illa
redibit in gratiam. Tunc de illo feremus sententiam, cum fidem nobis fecerit,
invisam jam sibi esse luxuriam. Nunc illis male convenit. Sen. epist. 112.
one maine cause of relapse into sin, and of want of due watchfulness
against it, in those that for some time have surceased the practice of it, is
because they never hated it in heart, though they could not but in judgment
condemn it, being evidently convinced in conscience of the evilnesse of it:
Psalm. 66.18.
their heart looked still after it (though their hand for fear or other
respect were for a while with-drawne and withheld from it) ready therefore
when such respects as before stayed and restrained it, were at any time
removed, to give friendly entertainment unto it again.

. 68. Would we therefore keep a constant Watch against sin? Oh let us
labor then to have wrought in us a true hatred of sin; or such sins
especially, as we have been most addicted unto, or have most delighted in
before. The more formerly we have loved them, the more now let us loath them:
the more we have for the time past delighted in them, the more for the time to
come let us even detest and abhor them. (...). Plut. de virt. mor.
As the meat that we have sometime surfetted of, we not only know now to be
evil for us, but even our stomach rises and goes against it: so those sins
that we have formerly glutted our souls with, let us not only condemn now as
the bane of our souls, but endeavor even so to be affected toward them, that
our very hearts may rise against them upon the memory and remembrance of them.
Let it be with us in regard of them, as it was with Ammon in his affection to
Tamar. 2 Samuel 13.15.
He loved her earnestly at first, though with an incestuous love, or lust
rather: But after, that he had abused her and defiled himself with her, (...).
Clemens Alex. padag. l. 2. c. 10.
his love was in a strange manner so turned into hatred, that the love
wherewith before he loved her, was not so great, but the hatred wherewith he
then hated her, was far greater. So for those sins that we have formerly
defiled our souls with, we should labor to have our love in like manner
turned into hatred; and Si quaeris odio misera quem statuas modum; Imitare
amorem. -- Senec. Med. act. 3.
strive to bring our hearts to it, to abhor them now as much, yea (if it were
possible, as there is good ground for it and just cause of it) much more, than
ever we loved them, or delighted in them before. This could we do with Ammon;
we would do further as he did. 2 Samuel 13.16, 17.
He thrust Tamar instantly out at doors, when his affection was thus altered;
he could no longer endure so much as the sight of her: and not that only, but
he caused the door to be bolted fast after her, that she might not have any
free or further access in unto him again. So were our hearts and affections
estranged from such sins, as they had been linked and fastened unto before,
we would not only be careful without further delay to dispossess our souls
of them, but we would be constantly watchful to keep the door of our heart
surely bolted against them, that they might never be able to gain entrance
again with us.

. 69.

The former is the constant following of the works of our particular Ephesians.
4.28.
Let him that stole, says the Apostle, steal no more; but let him labor
rather and work with his hands some good thing or other, that he may have to
give to him that needs. Let him that stole steal no more: that is well; but
that is not enough. Let him steal no more, but labor rather: because else
though he leave stealing a while, Prove. 23.21. and 24.30. ad finem. Otio nihil
deterius; quod nec nova acquirit, and parata consumit. Pelag ad Demetr.
if he live idle, he will come to suffer want soon, (for Prove. 18.9.
Sloth wastes as well as excess and riot:) and so be falling anon to his
former trade again: Not to add, that (...). Phocylid. (...) Quidam apud
Socratem hist. lib. 4. cap. 23.
he that lives so, even in that he so lives, living like a drone on the
labors of others, is little better than a Thief. Prove. 19.15.
Sloth, says Solomon, causes sleep. And sure as we see it to be with drowsy
persons, that if they sit still and do nothing, they will soon fall asleep:
so is it here; Paulisper vigilantia amittitur, dum a been operandi studio
^essatur. Greg. Pastor. p. 3. c. 1.. 16.
if we give our selves over to idleness, we shall soon come to be
overtaken again with this deadly sleep of sin. Ezec. 16.49.
Fullness and idleness are noted to have been two maine causes of those
filthy sins of Sodom. It is a common byword with us, that Of idleness
comes no goodness: And Nihil agendo male agere homines discunt. Catonis
oraculum, quo nihil verius. Colum. de re ^ust. l. 11. c. 1. (...). Chrysostom.
tom. 6. sermon. 90. Et Sirac. 32.28. (...). Chrysostom. in Genes. homil. 14. and de
provid. l. 1. and in Matthew. homil. 35. and in 1 Cor. homil. 23.
By doing nothing, says the Heathen man, men learn to do evil things. Ab
otiosis ad noxia, a levioribus ad graviora facilis est lapsus. Greg. de pastor.
p. 3. c. 1. 15. and dialog. lib. 3. c. 15.
It is easy slipping out of an idle life into an evil and a wicked life: yea
an idle life, it is of it self evil. For man was made for action, not for
idleness. And howsoever, says one well, we count him Bonum est non fecisse
malum.
a good man that does no evil, he is indeed rather Malum est non fecisse
bonum. Chrysostom. ser. de virt, and vit.
an evil man that does no good. (...). Eustath. ad Homer. Il. (...). Et lethi
consanguineus sopor. -- Virgil. Aen. 6. (...). Basil. Caes. hom. 1. Et Senec.
Her. fur. act. 4. sc. 2. Frater durae languide mortis, Pavidum leti genus
humanum Cogis longam discere mortem. Et Gorgias senex in somnum prolapsus,
(...). Aelian. hist. var. lib 2. cap. 35.
Sleep and death are said to be brethren or Coson-germanes: or the one at
least to be Speculum mortis somnus Tertull. de anima c. 24. Per imaginem.
mortis sidem initiaris resurrectionis. Ibid. c. 25. Quid est mors? somnua
consueto longior. Chrysostom. ad pop. homil. 5. Inde Chrysolog. sermon. 59. Vt
resurrecturum te jugi and vernaculo instruaris exemplo, quoties dormis and
vigilas, toties moreris and resurgis. (...). Menand.
an image and a resemblance of the other. And as 1 Cor. 15.6, 51. (...). Basil.
Sell. homil. 31. Inde (...) dicta.
those therefore that are deceased are said to be fallen asleep: so Hinc
Alexidis griphus de somno, (...). Athen. lib. 10. (...). Eustath. Iliad. (...).
Itaque Plato apud Laert. (...). Ex legum l. 3. Nihili est, qui piger est.
Plaut. Rud. act. 4. sc. 2.
they that lie asleep may well be said to be in some kind or degree of
decease. Now what difference is there (...) esse. Aristot. Ethic. Nicom. l. 1.
cap. 13.
between him that lies fast asleep, and him that is idle though awake? save
that the one is restrained from action by the course of nature, whereas the
other voluntary restrains himself: and that is no sin therefore in the
one, that is no small sin in the other. Slothfulness therefore not only
causing sleep, but being it self of it self Vigilia somno simillima. Senec.
de provid. cap. 5.
a kind of spiritual sleep, it is consequently also Somno delectari est quasi
mortem moliri. Martin. Dum. de morib. Vita enim profecto vigilia est. Plin.
praefat. hist. nature. Et revera plus vigilare, plus vivere est. Nam quid tam
mortis simile quam dormientis aspectus? Quid tam vita plenum quam forma
vigilantis? Chrysolog. sermon. 24.
a kind even of spiritual death: And the idle and slothful may be well said
to be not only spiritually asleep, even when they are awake, but to be
spiritually 1 Timoth. 5.6. Otium sine literis mors est, and vivi hominis
sepulturae. Senec. epist. 83. Itaque de Vacia idem, latente non vivente, quem
tamen solum vivere Asinius aiebat, tanquam de sepulto, Hic situs est Vacia.
Epist. 55. Qui enim latitant and torpent, sic in domo sunt, tanquam in
conditivo. Horum licet in limine ipso nomen marmori inscribas: mortem suam
antecesserunt. Idem epist. 60.
dead also, even while they live: their very waking, while they so wake, being
no better than sleep, and their very life, while they so live, no better than
death: yea worse than natural sleep, (because against nature) for a man to
sleep waking; worse than corporal death, for a man to be as dead ere he die,
Iusta sibi faciunt. Senec. epist. 122. se efferunt. Idem epist. 12. -- se
quisque, and vivit, and effert. Manil. lib. 4. de coeci^.
to be his own Bearer, to wind himself quick, and to (...). Plato. Impii
etsi videantur vivere, miseriores tamen sunt omnibus mortuis, carnem suam ut
tumulum circumferentes, cui infoelicem infoderunt animam suam. Ambr. de Cain
and Abel lib. 2. cap. 9.
bury himself yet breathing.

. 70. Idleness therefore, it is both evil of it self; and it exposes men to
further evils. Matthew. 12.44.
Satan where he finds (...).
the house vacant, that he had before quit, he does easily make a re-entry
again. He does as Vise Ambr. hexamer. l. 5. c. 8.
the Crab, that desirous to prey on the Oister, but finding the fish enclosed
and her self excluded with two such shells as all her power is not able to
pierce, watches the time when she lies bathing her self in the sun and
gaping to take in some pleasant refreshing, while the winds are calm, and the
waters still; then she slily and suddenly casts in some sandy grit that
keeps her two shells from closing again, and by that means comes she to
get in her cleyes, one after another, and so to prey upon the fish. In like
manner does Satan, where he desires to seize upon the soul, but sees some
likelihood of resistance; he watches men's idle times, and when he finds the
heart vacant and the mind free from present employment, then is he busy to
inject first idle and sandy thoughts, by which he makes way for worse matters,
and after wicked and noisome motions, by which he comes many times to take
full seisen of the soul, and to work its utter ruin. In regard whereof it is
no unnecessary counsel that one of the Ancients gives, that Semper aliquid
operis facito, ut Diabolus te semper occupatum inveniat. Hieron. ad Rustic. Res
age, tuti^s eris. Ovid. remed. -- nam si non intendes animum studiis and rebus
honestis, Invidia vel amore vigil terqueberis. -- Horat. lib. 1. epist. 7.
(...). Hipponact. apud Stob.
We be always about some good business or other, that the Tempter whenever
he come, find us not unoccupied.

. 71. Yea for this cause is it that God has ordained that every man should
have some certain course of life wherein to be ordinarily employed. 1 Cor.
7.20, 24.
Let every man, says the Apostle, in that calling wherein he was called,
therein (...).
with God (or, in Gods Name, as we use to say) abide. There is a twofold
calling by the Apostle there mentioned; Vocatio in qua. ad qua^

The calling wherein a man was called, and the calling whereunto a man was
called, when he was converted and became a Christian at first: there is the
general calling of a Christian, that whereunto he was called; and there is the
particular calling or special course of life wherein a man lived, before (as
it may fall out) he was called thereunto. A man must not imagine therefore,
when he is called to be a Christian, that he must presently cast off all
worldly employments, give over the works of his former vocation, and apply
himself wholly (as some Mesaliani. sive Euchetae, de quibus Epiphan haer. 80.
and Aug. de haeres. c 57 and Theodoret. hist. l. 4. c. 11. and Fab. haer. l. 4.
c 15.
Heretics sometime supposed, misled by Luke 18.1. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
some places of Scripture misexpounded) to prayer and contemplation, and mere
matter of devotion: but he must retain the one calling still as well as the
other, follow the one still as well as the other, make conscience as well of
executing the duties of the one as of frequenting the exercises of the other:
and not think that under color of following of Sermons and frequenting of
godly exercises, he may lawfully neglect those necessary duties that by virtue
of his special calling he stands in conscience bound unto.

In a word, each Christian man that is able, must, as the Apostle wills, 2 Thessalonians. 3.12.
earne, and eat his own bread, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
work with his own hands, and follow his own affairs, that is, such
business as to his particular place and special calling appertains: else he
is 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. (...).
branded by the same Apostle for 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, 11.
an inordinate walker, that is, a disorderly liver; 1 Timothy 5.8.
a Denier of the Faith, not in word, but Tit. 1.16.
in deed; and one little better, if not 1 Timothy 5.8.
worse than some Heathen and Infidels, that have even by natures dim light
(...). Pittacus referente Demetrio Phalar. apud Stob. c. 3.
condemned idleness in any.

. 72. But here is great Caution to be used, and due regard to Dum vitant stulti
vitia, in contraria currunt. Et, Incidit in Scyllam, cupiens vitare Charyhdin.
Horat.
lest while we shun a rock, we fall into a whirle-poole: lest while we seek
to eschew idleness on the one hand, we be swallowed up with worldliness on
the other: lost while we labor to keep our left eye waking by the diligent
following of our worldly affairs, we suffer our right eye to close and fall
fast asleep by neglect of religious exercises either public or private.
Zachar. 4.1.
The Angel that talked with me, came again, says the Prophet, and awaked me
as one that is raised out of his sleep. It fared with the Prophet when he was
attending on Gods Angel, as with a drowsy person, who though he be awaked
and set to work, yet he is ready to sleep at it, and to be ever and anon
slumbring, if he be not now and then jogged and stirred up: And in like manner
it is with our drowsy spirits, and will be continually, Excitandus e somno and
vellicandus est animus. Senec. epist. 20. Excitandus est semper animus stimulis
spiritualibus. Oration, lectio, etc. incitamenta ejus sunt. Pelag. ad Demetriad.
if they be not frequently rowsed and raised up by the constant use of
religious exercises. In regard whereof Paul wills Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.6. (...).
Honestarum rerum semina animi nostrigerunt: quae admonitione excitantur, non
aliter quam scintilla flatu levi adjuta ignem suum explicat. Senec. ep. 95.
to quicken by stirring up the grace of God that is in him, (...). Homer.
Odyss. (...). Eustath. ibid.
as men do embers that lie raked up in the ashes.

. 73. Now this is done by means either public or private. First by
frequenting the public ministry of the Word at due times. 1 Thessalonians. 5.19, 20.
Quench not the spirit, says the Apostle: despise not Prophecy: as if the
neglect, or contempt (and it is the contempt of it that is the maine ground of
neglect) of the one were a principal mean of extinguishing and quite
quenching the other. And undoubtedly so is it. For either fire or light is put
out, not by pouring on of water only or some contrary matter; but besides
that, either by withdrawing from it and denying that unto it that should feed
it; (for Prove. 26.20. Deficientibus lignis deficit ignis.
if the fuel fail, the fire will of it self out:) or by neglecting to blow
it, and to stir it up by times; as we often see it fall out that it goes out
of it self also, where yet there is wood and coal enough to have longer
continued, had some such industry been used. And even so is spiritual grace
often impaired and decaieth, not by the practice of sin and wickedness only,
as by water poured on it; but by neglect of the Word, the means that should
foster and feed it, and that by raising and rowsing up our dull and dead
spirits should Psalm. 119.28, 37, 50, 93.
put spiritual life and alacrity, as it were, unto us. And no marvel then,
if, as Solomon says, Prove. 29.18.
Where vision fails, there the people perish: if the grace of God go out,
where these means are neglected; if they fall fast again into this deep and
deadly sleep, though they were sometime awaked out of it, that are not
careful to keep within the sound of Gods Esa. 58.1.
Trumpet, and to frequent the house of God where it may be heard, that, as at
first John 5.25.
it did awake them, so should keep them still awake.

. 74. Neither are those free therefore from danger of discontinuing this their
watchfulness, that out of a vain presumption of their own spiritual parts,
can content themselves with their own private devotions; supposing that they
may as well, and as effectually sanctify a Sabbath by reading and meditating,
and praying apart by themselves, as by being present at, and adjoining
themselves to the public assemblies of Gods Saints. It is a spice of
intolerable pride and presumption for any to be so conceited of themselves.
David was of a far other mind, and therefore led by another spirit, than
they are that so imagine. He was 1 Samuel 13.14.
a man after Gods own heart; and a man of excellent parts. The Word of God not
only Coloss. 3.16.
dwelt plentifully in him; but John 7.38.
flowed abundantly from him: he was able not to Psalm. 16.7.
admonish himself alone, but Psalm. 32.8. and 51.13.
to instruct, direct, and edify others: he could not only sing Psalms, but 2 Samuel 23.1. The sweet Songster of Israel.
pen hymns, both of praise and of prayer: many holy and heavenly meditations
had he in the time of his exilement, as may appear by Psalm. 7. and 22. and 34.
and 52. and 54. and 56. and 57. and 119. etc.
those divine ditties during it composed of him. And yet could not he content
himself with these his private devotions. But, as Psalm. 42.4. and 122.1.
it was the very joy of his heart, when he was at home, to repair to the
Temple, to the public assemblies there held: so nothing made his banishment,
and his abode in foreign parts, more bitter unto him, than this, that by
means thereof he was restrained of repairing unto them, and of joining with
Gods people in such holy duties as were there daily performed. Read diverse of
the Psalms framed by him during that time; and consider well, Psalm. 27.4. and
42. and 63. and 84.
how bitterly he bewaileth his restraint in this kind; how instantly he sueth
to God for freedom of resort; how he blesses those that had liberty of
repair or place of abode there, even the very birds themselves that had
access but to build thereabout: and you will soon see a strange difference
between that worthy man of God and these, that so highly over-prize their own
private devotions, as thus to under-value the public assemblies of Gods
Saints, and the ministry of his Word.

. 75. And yet neither also is this sufficient indeed, that we frequent the
public means: private helps must be added and adjoined thereunto, of
meditation, of conference, of supplication, of examination, of confession, and
the like: that though much of most of the week be taken up with our worldly
affairs; yet we reserve some time amids them constantly every day for some
spiritual employment. For as it is with our clockes and our watches, that
unless they be wound up at certain times, they will slacken their motion, yea
by means of the heavy weights and plummets of lead that hang on them, they
will at length come down to the ground, and so stand stone still: So is it
with our souls; we have our earthy affections and our worldly thoughts, as
heavy weights, hanging so at the heels of them, that unless they be at some
certain times wound up, as it were, by the use of some holy exercises, they
will grow slack and sluggish in their mounting up to Heavenward, yea at
length, it may be, come to an utter cessation of all endeavor in that kind.
For this cause David, as Psalm. 1.1, 2.
he makes this one property of a Blessed man, that he makes Gods Law his
daily, yea and his nightly meditation: So he professes of himself, that it
was Psalm. 119.97.
one of his daily exercises to meditate on Gods Word; and Psalm. 16.7. and 63.5,
6. and 119.62.
it was his nightly employment to be singing of Gods praises. He had certain
set times every day for meditation and invocation, Psalm. 55.7.
at morning, at noone-tide, and at even: And besides those ordinary set times,
he took occasion often extraordinarily, as opportunity was offered, even Psalm.
119.164.
seven times a day, that is, many times, to be lauding of the Lord, either for
his judgments, or for his mercies. And the like should we do every one of
us, if we desire to keep this spiritual Watch fresh in our souls, and Rebus
non me trado, sed commodo. Quocunque constiti loco, aliquid in animo salutare
verso. Cum me amicis dedi, non tamen mihi abduco: nec cum illis moror, quibus
me causa ex officio nata civili congregavit, sed cum optimo quoque sum; ad
illos animum meum mitto. Senec. epist. 62. Et ad Lucil. ibid. 15. Quicquid
facies, cito redi a corpore ad animum: illum diebus ac noctibus exerce.
would not have them wholly dulled with or drowned in the world: we should set
some time apart every day from our worldly affairs, to be spent in reading, in
meditation, in conference (with God, at least) in prayer and invocation of his
name, in search of our souls, in acknowledgement of our sins, etc. And so
intermingle the one with the other, that by over-eager attending the one we do
not wholly neglect the other. It is that that would fit us for the public
ministry, and make it the more effectual with us: As on the other side
Legatur Chrysostom. de Lazaro and Divite, homil. 3.
it is well observed, that the want of such private employments makes the
public ministry altogether unprofitable with many; 2 Timothy 3.7.
who hear much, and are at many Sermons, but gain little by any, because they
are not careful hereby, either to prepare their hearts before hand, to receive
the seed of the Word as into ground fitted for it, or to water and cherish what
they have taken in on the Sabbath, by a constant course of religious offices in
the week following.

. 76. Nor let any man allege here in way of excuse for himself, that for the
works of his calling, they are so many, so manifold, he cannot possibly find
any spare time to spend thus in religious employments. For (to omit what might
be said further in way of answer hereunto) did they esteem so highly of holy
things as the worth of them well deserves, they would find time for them as
well as they do ordinarily for matters of far less weight than it. Yea
(that which is a foul shame to consider) those that will pretend such straits
of time to shift off such employments, can find many of them time enough (if
not more than enough) to follow their vain and idle disports. And can thou
find every day almost spare time enough at large for the one? and can thou
no day almost find the least spare time at all for the other? Undoubtedly that
day may thou well esteem but evil employed, whereof thou spendest more part
in thy vain delights, than in the advancement of thy spiritual good.

To conclude, if we will watch aright and as we ought; as the works of our
special callings must not be neglected, so our spiritual good, and those
means either public or private that tend directly to the nourishing and
improving of it, are to be principally regarded: And therefore so are we to
ply and follow the one, that yet even amids them we take time for, and Sicut
laborantibus manibus nec oculus propterea clauditur, nec auris abstinet ab
auditu: sic, imo and multo melius laborante corpore, men's quoque ipsa sua
intenta sit operi, ut non prorsus vacet. Bern. de diverse. 40.
exclude not wholly all minding and meditation of the other; yea so warily in
their due season to attend either, that neither we be surprised with sloth
and idleness on the one side, nor yet with worldliness on the other.

And thus have we seen both what it is to watch, why we are so to watch; the
manner how we must watch; and the means whereby we may be enabled so to
watch in some measure.

But is it possible for any man living by this manner of watching to keep ever
waking; by thus watching against sin, to keep himself wholly free from
sin?

To pass by here that conceit of some Schoolmen, Exemplum ponitur de
existente in vase perforato, qui licet possit quod libet singulorum foraminum
obstruere, non tamen omnia: dum enim unum obstruit, aliud patens relinquitur.
Scotus in 2 did. 28. q. 1.
of a man enclosed in a barrel full of holes let down under water, that may
with his finger or some other help stop any one hole and keep the water out
at it, which yet he cannot avoid but that it will come in the whilst at the
rest, any of which yet also he may stop if he will. But to pass by this,
which I take to be not all out so sound; for answer hereunto some distinction
must be made.

Sins therefore are of two sorts, either voluntary, Sins.
or involuntary; either with the will, or without it. Some sins are
involuntary, In quibus est voluntas facti, sed non voluntas peccati. Aug.
retract. l. 1. c. 15.
of pure ignorance, and of mere infirmity. Sins of pure or bare Ignorance I
call those in which ignorance is simple or single, not affected, and Et comes
and causa peccati. Navarr. enchirid. cap. 23.. 46.
not a Companion only, but a Cause. It is not with men in them, as it is with
those that affect Ignorance, and please themselves in it; and Vt liberius
peccent, libenter ignorant. Bern. de bon. descr.
that without check of conscience they may more freely offend, are content so
to continue: but they desire to be informed aright, and use the best means
they can so to inform themselves; but yet are mistaken, and so do that out of
ignorance, Si scissent, non fecissent. Tertull. apolog.
which for a world they would never have done, had they known it to be evil.
Sins of mere Infirmity or frailty I call those, Romans 7.21, 23. Gal. 5.17.
Velimus nolimus, habemus illas: titillant, blandiuntur, stimulant, infestant.
Aug. de verb. Dom. 45. Vt non sint, vultis, sed non potestis. Ibid. and de
verb. Ap. 4. Non potes, and velles posse. Ovid. rem. lib. 1.
that a man knows to be evil, and yet is not able by any means to avoid,
though he do what he can, even as much as he would or could if his life lay
upon it. Thus in hearing the Word, a man, it may be, cannot listen so
attentively for any long time together, but that many by-thoughts will come
buzzing and fluttring about him, as Genesis 15.11. Stella in Luc. 11. Hildebert.
ep. 7. Et Berengos. de luce visib. and invis.
the fowls did about Abraham when he was offering of his sacrifice, and will
often, Distinguendum inter cogitationes illas, quibut voluntas favet, quas cum
dilectione amplectitur, and illas quae repugnanti atque invito animo
suggeruntur, quibus men's cum horrore quodam renititur, ut resistat, quibus ut
contristatur admissis, ita gaudet repulsis. Pelag. ad Demetriad. Aliud est enim
nolentem tangi, aliud consentientem animum perimi. Greg. mor. lib. 21. cap. 7.
pressing in upon him in spite of his heart, disturb him and hinder him in
that holy exercise: yea sometime the more a man striveth and bends himself
to banish and beat them away, the more he comes to be pestred and encombred
by them, and his attention to be tainted and infected withal. Thus in prayer
often Psalm. 43.3, 4, 5.
a man cannot shake off that deadness or dullness and drowsinesse of spirit,
that possesses his soul, and depriveth him of that alacrity and fervencie
that ought then to be in him. Thus a man railed upon and reviled, though he can
keep his tongue from breaking out into evil language, and can stay his hand
from striking in way of revenge; yet he cannot for his heart blood, it may be,
do he what he can, Nam neque chorda sonum reddit quem vult manus and men's,
Poscentique gravem, persaepe remittit acutum. Hor. art. poet.
keep down his heart from rising, and Romans 7.23.
rebelling against the law of his mind, or from swelling and boiling with some
wrathful passion and inordinate motion within him. Thus Psalm. 42.5, 6, 11.
Mark. 9.24.
in distress or danger even a godly man many times cannot rest and rely upon
God with that firmness and confidence of faith, and with that quietness and
tranquillity of mind, that he ought, and not only desires with all his heart,
but with all his might and best ability endeavors to do.

. 78. Now sins of this kind cannot be avoided, be a man never so careful,
never so wary and watchful: (a man cannot watch there, where he suspecteth no
evil; nor can his watching avail him beyond his ability:) which 2 Chronicles.
30.18, 19. Nehem. 1.11. Romans 7.17, 20.
God therefore in mercy vouchsafes his children a daily pardon of course for,
and is content graciously to pass by and put up in them; though Luke 12.48.
Romans 7.15.16, 21.23. 1 John 3.4.
in rigor of justice he might deservedly call them to a strict account for
them. And yet by the constant use of this religious watch having our judgments
better cleared, and our hearts confirmed and strengthened, we may come in time
to be less subject to the former sort of them, and less exposed also to the
latter.

Matthew. 13.25.
of negligence and oversight, escaping us through carelessness; Mat. 26.31, 74,
75.
of mixed infirmity, proceeding from temptations of much terror; of Deuteronomy. 17.12.
presumption, Psalm. 19.13. Number. 15.30, 31.
pride, and 2 Cor. 12.21. 1 Timothy 5.6.
wantonness, occasioned by delightful objects and the like. Yea such are the
most, if not all, outward gross sins joined with knowledge, which even a
natural man therefore might forbear if he would; and which it were an unjust
thing for humane laws to forbid and to punish offenders for, were it not in
man's natural power to forbear. And these voluntary sins are those that we are
principally to keep watch against: which if we shall diligently and constantly
apply our selves unto, there will a twofold benefit redound thereby unto us.

Benefit 1.
. 79. First, (...); Joan. Iejun. de poenit. Nemo unquam vigilans laesus est.
(...). Aristot. de epilepticis quibusdam, de somn. c. 3.
we shall avoid many, even a multitude of sins, which for want of this
watchfulness we may be, and are ordinarily overtaken withal. (...). Aristot.
pol. l. 5. c. 11.
Nor should the enemy so often as he does prevail against us, and foil us, if
he found us standing on our guard and keeping duly this watch. To exemplify
this by an instance or two. Compare we first David and Joseph together,
tempted both in the same kind, though not with the like fierceness of assault:
but the one foiled, where the temptation was weaker; the other unvanquished,
where the temptation was stronger. David a man See 2 Samuel 5.4, 5.
well in years, and 2 Samuel 2.2.
a married man too, having the remedy already by Gods ordinance provided to
releeve man's infirmity in case of incontinency; yea enjoying it 2 Samuel 3.2, 3,
4. and 5.13.
not sparingly, but somewhat Deuteronomy. 7.17.
more freely than was fit, having not one wife alone, but 2 Samuel 12.2, 8.
a many, beside 2 Samuel 5.13. and 15.16.
concubines not a few; This David thus furnished, 2 Samuel 11.2, 3, 4.
by chance espieth, not some single woman, but another man's wife, washing her
self: he is not sought unto by her, but he is to make suit unto her,
uncertain of success; and to use messengers to her, that must therefore to
his shame and reproach, and his dishonorable engagement to them, be privy to
his dishonest desires and his adulterous designs. On the other side Genes.
39.7-13. Concupiscitur a Domina adolescens, nec ad concupiscentiam provocatur:
rogatur, and sugit. Vna hac in re and blanditur and supplicat, quae in caeteris
imperabat. Castum animum nec aetas adolescentiae permovet, nec diligentis
autoritas. Non aspectu solum, sed ipso poene complexu provocatus a foemina,
foeminam non concupivit. Pelag. ad Demetriad.
Joseph, a young man, Legatur Chrysostom. de provid. Dei l. 2.
in the heat of his youth, in the prime and flower of his years; Joseph a
single man, not enjoying yet the benefit of (...). Iuventutis portus
matrimonium. Plut. apud Drus. lib. 1. quaest. 18. (...). Chrysostom. de Ozia 3.
marriage, that might help to support him in temptations of this kind; being
not to sue to any other, but sued earnestly to by another, by a Superior, by
his Mistress, by such an one as had no small command of him otherwise;
opportunity offered for the doing of the act desired with all privacie and
secrecy; no fear of danger to hinder, where none were near to take notice of
it; great hope of future benefit, to entice and encourage, by liberty, or
further advancement likely enough by her means to be procured. Now (...);
Chrysostom. de Job and Adam tom. 5. sermon. 90.
in this great inequality of motives and inducements on either side, what is
the reason, why Joseph stands, when David falls; that he holds out
worthily, who is the more strongly assailed, when the other is so foully and
fearfully foiled, who is far more weakly assaulted, or rather, is not so much
assaulted, as is ready to assault the honesty of another: but that the one
stood upon his watch, when the other did not?

It was Non vidisse crimen est, sed cavendum ne origo criminis sit: inciderit
oculus; sed non intendat affectus. Ambros. de poenit. l. 1. c. 14.
no sin for David by chance to epsy a naked woman, his neighbors wife,
washing her self; neither was it a thing in his power (how should he forecast
it?) to avoid: but the object being thus casually offered unto him, David, that
ought (as he prayed sometime) to have Psalm. 119.37.
turned his eyes away from it, Innocens intuitus aspectu sit nocens. Greg. mor.
l 21. c. 7.
wilfully fixed them so long there, where they had occasionally seized, that
his heart came to be tainted with filthy concupiscence, and his affections all
inflamed with lustful desires; and so grew he restless within himself, till
he had brought that about, that Psalm. 32 3, 4. and 38.3.
deprived him of true rest indeed. On the other side Joseph after motion had
once in that kind been made to him by his Mistress, was Genesis 39.9, 10.
both careful to shun all occasions of that sinful act whereunto he was
tempted; (he would not endure to be so much as in company alone with her:) and
again Genesis 39.11, 12.
as constant in withstanding the temptation when it was offered, and Excusatur,
quod ingressus est; praedicatur quod elapsus est. Ambros. de Joseph. c. 5.
the occasion could not be shunned: for though she pressed him to it day after
day, he would not hearken unto her: yea he chose rather to hazard loss of
liberty and life than to yield unto her impious and adulterous desire. In a
word, the one watched, and so did not the other; and therefore the one was not
vanquished so, as was the other. And by watching with the one may others
escape, and might that other have escaped that, which for want of this watch he
was vanquished in.

. 80. Again, as Machetes the Macedonian appealed sometime from Philip, to
Philip, (...). Plut. apoph. reg and duc.
from Philip sleeping, to Philip waking: so compare we now Joseph and Joseph
together, Joseph watching with the same Joseph somewhat neglecting this watch.
Joseph himself that stood thus steadfast in a stronger temptation, yet slipped
after swearing Genesis 42.15, 16.
by Pharaos life in a feebler. But the evil was not so evident, so open-faced
in the one as in the other: and therefore Adversus majora vigilantibus quaedam
i^cautis minutiorasurrepunt. Aug. in Psalm. 118. Dum praecaventur magna, non
timentur minuta. Idem in Psalm. 39 and Ruffin. ibid.
being not so carefully watched against or regarded, by being often heard grew
familiar, and gained admittance with him, who might otherwise in all likelihood
have kept himself free from it, with much less difficulty and danger than
he did from the former. This watch therefore duly and diligently kept, would
keep us from many sins that we are daily over-taken with. And (...).
Chrysostom. de compunct. 2. (...). Idem tom. 6. sermon. 67.
the greatest part of outward sinful acts, that the godly fall into, may be
justly ascribed to the want of it as the maine cause of the most of them, Non
peccabis, si vigilabis. August. de verb. Ap. 28.
which by this course therefore were it constantly observed of them, might be
prevented and avoided.

Number. 15.30. Heb. 10.29.
with an high hand, I doubt much, whether Gods children ever do,) that even
godly men themselves are ofttimes overtaken withal, yet there is great
difference between the watchful and the watchlesse Christian; between the
party that ordinarily keeps this watch, though not so carefully and
constantly all out as he ought, and such as keep no such watch at all: and
that in three things, Ante peccandum, inter peccandum, post peccatum.
before sin, in sin, and after sin.

before sin: For the one, Galat. 5.17. vellet enim omnino nec concupiscere.
Aug. de verb. Ap. 4. and de verb. Dom. 43.
his maine desire and purpose, his general resolution and endeavor is not to
sin at all, howsoever Matthew. 26.41.
of infirmity, or Galat. 6.1.
through oversight, or Ephesians. 6.12.
through violence of temptation, or Romans 7.23. Iam. 1.15, 16.
strength of corruption, he slip and slide into, or be pusht upon, or enticed
unto and ensnared in sin often ere he be aware: whereas the other stands
indifferently affected to sin or to forbear sin, as occasion shall be
ministered and offered of either; or rather inclining, as his corrupt heart
naturally carries him, to the ready embracing of any evil that opportunity
is offered of, and that stands with his own natural desire. So that the one
is like unto a Watchman that being appointed to watch, so soon as he comes
to the place where he should watch, Prove. 27.33. Conserit manus ut dormiat.
(...). Lucian. de mercenar.
lays himself down to sleep, or sits rechlesly, not regarding whether he
sleep or keep awake. Whereas the other is like one that being set to watch,
Non vaco somno, sed succumbo. Sen^c. epist 8.
striveth to keep himself waking, and desires so to do, but yet through the
drowsinesse of his disposition and long continuance without rest, chances
sometime to slumber, though he purposed it not. Or the one is like a man that
goes to Church to try if he can catch a nap there, and so soon therefore as
he is in his seat sets him to sleep, which the sooner he falls into, the
sooner has he his desire: The other is like Act. 20.9.
Eutichus, that came not, in all likelihood, to Paul's Sermon with a purpose to
sleep at it: (if he had purposed it, he would never have made choice of the
place he did to sit in, where he should no sooner slumber but he should be in
danger of down fall and of as much as his life was worth:) but yet through
Paul's long preaching, and his own long waking, he was at length overcome with
sleep, though he little thought or meant, it may be, when he came in, that he
so should. Like the former is that man that keeps not watch at all, like the
latter he that keeps ordinarily some watch over his soul. The one Sic
Homer. Iliad. (...). Et Iliad. (...), etc. Vbi Eustath. (...). Et rursus, (...).
sleep finds; whereas the other seeks sleep.

Cave ne aliquando totus dormias. Bern. de ord. vitae. Animus quo pejus se
habet, minus sentit. Nam qui leviter dormit, and species secundum quietem
capit, aliquando dormire se dormiens cogitat: Gravis autem somnus etiam
insomnia extinguit, animumque altius mergit, quam ut uti intellectu ullo sinat.
Sen. ep. 54. Dulcis and alta quies, placidaeque simillima morti. Virg. Aen. l.
6.
sleeps wholly, as he says: he sleeps a deep and a dead sleep: he is
carried with full swinge of heart and will unto sin. Nulla quies somnis: nec,
non cessura quieti, Cura soporatur: sed in illa pace soporis Pacis eget studii
labor insopitus, and ipso Cura vigil somno libros operamque ministrat. Ex
Architrenio. Author oculi moral. c. 11. cond. 5. Et Putcan. Attic. epist. 1.
Ipsa quies quae curarum sepultura esse solet, securitatem denegabat, dum
periculi imago per somni nebulam aucta ligatum animum non sinebat constantia
sua uti.
The other sleeps but unquietly, like the Watchman that against his will in
part falling asleep, has but an unquiet sleep of it, and even watches in
some sort in his sleep, he is dreaming of the danger that he is or may be in,
and of the enemies approach, whom he is set to watch against. It is that which
we may observe in the Churches sleep in the Canticles; Cant. 5.2.
I sleep, says she, but mine heart is awake. We use to say of children, that
their heart is asleep even when their eyes are awake: contrariwise it is said
of the children of God, that their eyes often are asleep when their heart is
awake: so that though they be outwardly borne-downe and carried away with the
stiff wind, or the strong stream of some violent and untoward temptation,
yet their heart inwardly is not wholly surprised with it, they sin not with a
full and an absolute consent of will in it; there is some secret mislike still
of themselves in that they do, and some inward strife and reluctation (though
not at all times a like sensible) more or less against it, even in the very
act usually of committing it. In a word, Eustath. ad illud Homeri Il. (...).
the one willingly falls fast asleep; the other unwillingly in some sort,
slumbreth rather than sleeps.

1 John 5.18. (...).
he lies sleeping and snoring, securely snorting in sin, without touch or
remorse usually, till by some extraordinary accident of outward affliction,
danger, distress, or the like, as by his Generals alarm or the enemies
assault, he be waked again and roused up out of his sleep. Whereas the
other, as he fell asleep beside his purpose, and was never indeed thoroughly or
soundly asleep, but in a slumber rather than any deep or dead sleep; so he is
easily awaked, as those are that are but slightly asleep, yea Dormientium
quoque insomnia tam turbulenta sunt quam dies. Senec. ep. 56. Et somni quiet
inquieta, ut Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 22. vel pavore ipso
expergiscuntur, ut Plin. hist. not. lib. 10. c. 75.
his own very unquietness, if nothing else, ere long awaketh him again, like
one in a fearful dream, whose very fear many times is a means to awake
him, and to free him from his fear. David's heart smote him, says the Holy
Ghost, as 1 Samuel 24.6.
after his cutting of the skirt of King Saul's coat; so presently 2 Samuel 24.10.
upon his attempt of taking the number of his people: and immediately thereupon,
as one start out of his sleep, he begins to rub up his eyes and to look
about him; and in most humble and submisse manner betaketh he himself unto
God, confessing his fault, craving forgiveness of it, and never resting till
by renewing of his repentance he had recovered himself, and returned again to
his former watch. The one sleeps soundly till he be raised out of his sleep
again; the other awaketh again eft-soones even of himself. And thus much
briefly of the benefit that we may reap by this watch, and how far forth we
may by help of it keep our selves free from sin.

. 84. Now to draw to an end, Conclusion.
and (...). Quod matres facere solent, cum poma, bellaria, vel tale quidpiam in
puerilem sinum immiserint, nequid excidat, contractam undique tuniculam cingulo
subjiciunt: Idem and nos faciamus, orationem in longum protractam contrahamus,
and in memoriae custodiam deponamus. Chrysostom. de Ozia ser. 3. in fine.
to trusse or tucke up as it were in few words, after our Saviors own example
here, the sum of all that hitherto has been handled: Considering the
drowsinesse of our own natural disposition, and how easily in that regard we
may again fall asleep; and the diligence of our Adversary watching
continually against us, by whom we may soon be surprised if at any time we do
sleep; as also the necessity of perseverance, that if we hold not out in our
watch to the end, it is all in vain and to no end, and the danger of relapse,
if we fall back into this spiritual Lethargy, likely to be in worse case and
more irrecoverable than we were at the first. Let it not suffice us, that we
have been awaked out of our sinful and secure courses, but let us be careful
by all good means to keep our selves so waking and watching; by due
examination of our several actions ere we enter upon them; diligent
observation of our special corruptions, that we may contend and strive against
them; careful avoydance of the occasions of evil, that they be not offered;
and constant resistance of temptations unto evil, when we are therewith
assaulted: And that we may the better so watch and hold out in this our watch;
let us labor to keep an holy moderation and sobriety in the use of all Gods
good creatures; hold fellowship with the godly that may have an eye to us;
shun the society of wicked ones that may taint and infect us; strive to
preserve the fear of God fresh in our souls; endeavor to persuade our hearts
of Gods presence ever with us; think often on our end, and our account to come
after it; be often casting up reckonings between God and our souls; have a
jealousy of our own infirmity and proclivitie unto evil; labor to have a
sincere hatred of sin wrought in our hearts; and lastly be diligent in the
duties of our particular vocations, and constant in frequenting of religious
exercises as well public as private. Thus watching we shall prevent and escape
many evils, that for want of this watchfulness, to our woe afterward, we might
otherwise be overtaken withal; we shall have Psalm. 19.12. Matthew 6.12.
a pardon of course daily signed us upon general suit, Peccatae quotidianae
incursionis. Tertull. de pudi^.
for those that either through ignorance or mere frailty escape us: we shall
never sleep wholly, nor rest obstinately in sin, howsoever we may chance
sometime to be overtaken therewith, but shall recover our selves eftsoone
again by renewed repentance: and we shall be continually Luke 12.35, 36, 40.
prepared for Christ's second coming, so that, 1 Thessalonians. 5.10.
whether we sleep or wake, Romans 14.8.
live or die, his we shall be both in life and in death, and with Matthew. 25.10.
the wise Virgins, whenever he comes, being found spiritually waking, shall
be ready to enter in with him into the Bride-chamber of immortality, 1 Thessalonians.
4.17.
there to abide with him in eternal felicity.

FINIS.
True Contentment IN THE GAIN OF GODLINESS, With its SELF-SUFFICIENCIE.

A MEDITATION on 1 TIMOTH. 6.6.

By THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed for EDWARD BREWSTER. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT WORthy and his much honored Lady, the Lady DOROTHIE HOBART, Wife
to the Right Honorable and his singular good Lord, Sr. HENRY HOBART, Knight
and Baronet, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, True Contentment in the
Gain of Godliness, with its Self-Sufficiencie.
GOOD MADAME,
IT is a point by all generally agreed upon, that (...). Aristot. ethic. Nicom.
l. 1. c. 2, 4, 7. (...). Stob. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.
Happiness is the maine end and aim of all men's Actions. And it is a Truth no
less generally confessed and acknowledged, that (...). Arist. ethic. Nicom. l.
1. c. 7. Non est beatus, esse se qui non putat. P. Sir. Si cui sua non videntur
amplissima, miser est. Epicur. Miser est, qui se non beatissimum judicat. Sen.
ep. 10. Nemo foelix est, qui judicio suo miser est. Salv. de prove. l. 1.
Without Contentment of Mind there can be no true Happiness. It is Omnium certa
sententia est, beatos esse omnes homines velle. Aug. de civ. Dei l. 10 c. 1.
and Epist. 21. and 121. Misere vivere nemo vult. Idem de lib. arb. l. 1. c. 14.
Happiness then that all men without exception desire, and Contentment that all
consequently strive to attain. But herein the most fail, that they are
mistaken in the means, that they take wrong courses for the compassing of this
their end and aim, and so vainly weary and tire out themselves in (...).
Arrian. dissert. l. 2. c. 16.
seeking Happiness and Contentment there, where neither of them is to be had. To
reform this error, the Spirit of God in the Word has directed us the right
way to either; to wit, Psalm. 86.11. and 144.14.
by conjunction with God, the author and fountain of all good, Deuteronomy. 30.20.
Psalm. 73.26, 28. Bonum nostrum nullum est aliud q^^m Deo adhaerere, cujus unius
anima intellectualis incorporeo amplexu impletur. Aug. de civ^t. Dei l. 10. c.
4.
by adhering unto him, in whom only the soul of man can find sure and sound
contentment. Now this is done Deuteronomy. 30.20. Adeum dilectione tendimus, ut
perveniendo quiescamus, ideo beati, quia illo fine persecti. Aug. ibid.
by loving him, Psalm. 112.1. and 128.1. Deuteronomy. 10.^0. and 5.29. and 6.24.
Eccles. 12.13.
by fearing him, Psalm. 73.28. and 84.12.
by trusting in him, Deuteronomy. 11.27. and 30 20. (...). Stob. tom. 2. c. 2.
by obeying him, Matthew. 5.48. 1 Ioh. 3.3. (...) statuunt Pythagoras, Socrate^
Plato. Stob. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 3.
by conformity unto him; or more briefly in a word, by Levit. 11.44 and 19.2
and 20.7. 1 Pet. 1.11.
holiness, by 1 Timothy 4.8.
godliness: for these two are in substance one and the same. So that there is
(...). Menand.
no compassing of Contentment or Happiness without God, and there is no way
unto God but by Godliness. For Nutat omne consilium, nec implere nos ulla
soelicitas potest, donec pervenerimus ad bonum illud immensum and insuperabile,
ubi necesse est resistat voluntas nostra, quia ultra summum non est locus. Sen.
epist. 74.
God alone being the chiefest good, and the chiefest good each ones utmost
aim; our desires cannot be stayed till we come home unto him, beyond whom we
cannot possibly go. He being only Genesis 17.1. Nec nisi beatitudine animae
indigentia expletur: nec eidem explendae, nisi Deus, sufficit. Aug. de civ. l.
12. c. 1.
All-sufficient; (and there can be no Contentment where any want is, nor
freedom from want where Sufficiency is not;) we can have no true Contentment,
till we have once gained Him; we can have no full Contentment, till we come
wholly to enjoy Him, that he may be 1 Cor. 15.28.
all in all unto us. And this being Necesse est ut homo inde beatus fit, unde
fit bonus. Aug. ep. 121.
by Holiness, by Godliness only effected, it must needs follow, that the
holier men are, the happier they are; and the more Godly they are, the more
true and sound Contentment they are sure of. Apoc. 20.6. Psalm 119.1. Matthew. 5.8.
We shall never be truly Happy, till we be sincerely Holy, nor fully Happy,
till we be perfectly Holy. We shall never attain true Contentment till we be
truly Religious, nor full Contentment till we be consummate in Godliness. The
consideration whereof should encite all, that desire Happiness and
Contentment, (and Vitam beatam omnem hominem mod^s omnibus velle quis dubitat?
Aug. de lib. arb. lib. 1. c. 14. Beatitudinem nemo est qui non expetat. quis
enim vel potest, vel potuit, vel poterit inveniri, qui esse nolit beatus? Aug.
in Psalm. 118. conc. 1.
who is he, be he never so brutish, that does not?) to bend their maine study
and endeavor this way, for the compassing of this Grace and profiting in it; as
the only means availeable to bring them to that end; Omnes beatitudinem
concupiscunt: sed quomodo ad eam perveniatur, plurimi nesciunt. Idem ibid.
which, howsoever they may wander from, mistaking the way, their whole desire
is to attain unto. To provoke all sorts hereunto, is the maine project
propounded in this present discourse. Which (what ever it be; and I wish it
were much better;) I humbly present to your Ladyship, desiring that it may
help to supply some part of that duty and service, which partly mine own
infirmity and imbecillitie of body, and partly also other necessary and
unavoidable employments, will not suffer me to perform answerably to mine own
desire, and mine Honorable Lords and your Ladyships desert. And so wishing
again and again unto your Ladyship, (for what other, or what better thing can
I wish?) that which the work it self imports, true Contentment from God in
this life, and full Contentment with God after this life; I take my leave for
the present, but cease not to continue

Your Ladyships ever to be commanded in the Lord, THOMAS GATAKER.

TRUE CONTENTMENT.
1 TIMOTH. 6.6. Godliness is great Gain with Selfe-sufficiencie; or, with the
Sufficiency of it self.


THE FORMER PART. The Gain of Godliness.
THe Stoic Philosophy, which Act. 17.18.
Luke the Evangelist makes mention of, Lege Cicer. parad. and Lipsit manuduct.
was famous for Paradoxes, strange Opinions, improbable, and besides common
conceit, Seneca passim, and Arrian. in dissert. and alii.
admired much for them by some, Plut. in Stoic. contradict. and quod Poctae
Stoicis probabiliora loquantur.
controlled and taxed for them by others. Howbeit not Stoicisme only, but
every art and profession, every course of life and learning has some Paradoxes
or other; the world not a few, and In his creber est Chrysostomus: quod notavit
Sixtus Sen. biblioth l. 4.
Christianity many more, as strange, yea stranger, than any that the Stoics
ever held, and yet (...). Agatho. (...). Aristot. rhetor. l 2. c. 26.
Verissimaque sunt non pauca, quae tamen sunt minime v^risimilia.
no less true than strange.

A worldly Paradox the Apostle had mentioned in the verse next before going, to
wit, that some men should hold Gain to be Godliness: unto which he opposes
a contrary Christian Paradox in the words of my Text, to wit, that Godliness
is the only true Gain.

For the former: It is a very absurd conceit indeed, and though too too rife in
the world, yet such as few or none will be acknowne of, and either openly
father, or seem outwardly to favor. But as God at the last day, when the
wicked shall go about to excuse and defend themselves, he will not only take
hold of their words, Ex ore tuo judicabo te, serve nequam. Matthew. 25.26. Luke
19.22.
By thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou thriftlesse servant; and advantage
of their actions, Matthew. 25.42.43.
I was naked and ye clad me not, hungry and ye fed me not, etc. and
therefore had neither Faith nor Love; but he will convince them by their own
Consciences too, Romans 2.15.
Their secret thoughts shall either excuse or accuse them in that day: In like
manner must we deal with those that will seem to abhor and detest this
Opinion, and yet do those things that maintain and uphold it. Psalm. 14.1. and
53.1.
The Fool says in his heart, There is no God; and that is sufficient to prove
him an Atheist, though he never openly maintain any Position of Atheism. And
there be some that Tit. 1.16.
profess they know God, but deny him in their deeds: and Quicscat lingua,
loquatur vita. August. in 1 Joan. hom. 3 (...). Eusebius. praepar. Evang. lib. 1.
cap. 1. Efficacius est vitae testimonium quam linguae. Cyprian. de dupl.
martyr. Et validior vox operis quam oris. Bern in Cant.
that is enough to prove them irreligious, though they never utter that their
impiety in speech. So in this case, the Covetous man's heart says it, and his
practice proclaims it, that Divites facultatibus suis alligatos magis aurum
consuevisse suspicere quam coelum. Minut. Octav. Quid fecisti quod jussit Deus?
quid non facis quod avaritia jubet? Aug. de diverse. 12. -- nam si sacrificem
summo Iovi, Atque in manibus exta teneam ut porriciam, interea loci. Si lucri
quid detur, potius rem divinam deseram. Plaut. Pseud. 1.3.
his Gold is his God, and that his Gain is his Godliness; and that is
sufficient to prove him an Idolater, though he never outwardly bow his knee to
an Idol. In regard whereof, the Apostle expressly pronounces Coloss. 3.5.
Covetousness to be Idolatry, and the Ephesians. 5.5. Lege Chrysostom. ad Ephesians. hom. 18.
Covetous man an Idolater. To reason then in this point, as our Savior
himself does: Vbi thesaurus, ibi and cor. Matthew. 6.21. Nemo enim potest nisi
cogitare de thesauro suo, and quodam cordis itinere divitias suas sequi. Aug.
de diverse. 44.
Where a man's Treasure is, there is his heart; and where a man's heart is, there
is his happiness, that is his God. Since the covetous man therefore Psalm 62 12.
sets his heart on his riches; Psalm. 49.6. Job 31.24.
puts his trust in his treasure: and whereas Prove. 18.10. (...). Basil. in
Psalm. 45.
the faithful make the name of God their strong tower, whereunto they resort
in time of trouble for safety, Prove. 18.11.
the worldly rich man makes his wealth his bulwark and fence, whereupon he
reposeth himself and wholly relyeth: It must of necessity follow hereupon,
that as the Apostle says of the fleshly-minded man, that Phil. 3.19. Romans
16.18. Clem. paedag. l. 2. c. 1. (...). ventrem colunt, quem pro Deo habent.
Cypr. de dupl. Martyr. Quibus Deus venture est, and pulmo templum, and
aqualiculus altar, and saecerdos cocus, and Spiritus sanctus nidor, and
condimenta charis^ata, and ructus prophetia: agape in cacabis fervet, fides in
culinis calet, spes in ferculis jacet. Tertull. de jejun. Whose gut their God,
whose lust their law. Sylvest. week. 2. day. 1. Vise Eusebius. praepar. l. 7. c. 2.
his belly is his God; so of the worldly-minded man, that (...). Theogn. (...).
Euripid. (...). Antiphan. (...). Sophocl. Creusa. Quod autem quisque prae
caeteris colit, id sibi Deum constituisse probatur. Bern. de bonis deser. Ergo
ut voracium Deus venture est; ita cupidorum pecunia Deus justissime dicitur.
Hieron. in Ephesians.
his money, or his penny is his God: And if his Money be his God; his Gain
must needs be his Godliness.

But the Apostle here tells us a quite contrary tale, and learneth us here a
flat opposite lesson; that, howsoever worldly men may think that Gain is
Godliness; yet indeed and truth it is not so; but Godliness rather is Gain,
and great gain. So that the Apostle does (...), propositionem invertere; he
turns the proposition clean backward, and brings it about, as it were.
Gain is Godliness, says the worldly man. Nay, Godliness is Gain, and great
Gain, says the Apostle, and the Spirit of God by him.

But this peradventure will seem a Paradox as strange as as the former. As
very few that will outwardly avow the former; so as few are there that are
inwardly persuaded of the latter. It seems a Paradox with the most. For,
Godliness great Gain? may some man say. The contrary rather seems undoubted
and undeniable, to wit, that Isto tu pauper es, cum nimis sancte pius. Plaut.
Rudent. 4.7. Varro, regustatum digito terebrare salinum contentus perages, si
vivere cum Jove tondis. Pers. sat. 5.
Godliness is a great enemy to Gain. Balaam lost great wealth and honor,
because he would not disobey the Word of God: Number. ^4.11.
I had thought, says Balak, to have advanced thee, and made thee a great man;
but thy God has kept thee from honor. Michah might have been a great man in
Ahabs books, and very richly and royally rewarded by him, if he would have
spoken but two words only, as some other did; if he would but have said, (...)
Ascend in pace. 1 King. 22.12, 13.
Go up in peace. But his Godliness hindered his Gain; and not so only, but
was a mean to bring him into much trouble. So that it may seem, that
Godliness is altogether gainlesse, and Ungodliness the more gainful of the
two. For the Nehem. 13.16.
Merchants of Tire and Zidon for lucre and gain strain courtesy with Gods
Commandment, to utter their fish and wares on the Sabbath. And no doubt of it,
Facilem esse cuique ad divitias viam, quo die bonae mentis poenituerit.
Demetrius apud Senecam nature. quaest. l. 4. praefat.
Gods children, if they would not be so strict and strait laced; if they would
not stand upon nice points and terms; if they would not stick to lie and
dissemble with Act. 5.1, 2.
Ananias and Sapphira; to belly and beguile, as 1 Samuel 16 1, 2.
Ziba, Mephibosheths man did his Master; to swear and forswear, with 1 Macc.
1.61, 62.
profane Antiochus; to steal and purloine with young Judge. 17.2.
Micah of Mount Ephraim; to oppress and murder, when they have jus in
manibus, the law in their own hands, with 1 King 21.
wicked Ahab, and cursed Iezabel; they might as well come to wealth, as many
worldly men do, that scrape and gather much goods together by these means.
But they may well say, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 69.7. Eum qui sit justus ac
bonus, stultum esse. Carneades apud Cic. de repub. l. 3. Vise Lactant.
institut. l. 5. c. 12, 14.
For thy sake, O Lord, are we counted fools; because we stand so much upon
matter of conscience. 1 Cor. 9.15, 23.
Holy Paul says he might have done this and that, but he would not, because
he would not make the Gospel evil spoken of. And the keeping of a man's word
turns oft-times to his loss. The Psalm. 15.4.
godly man swears and fails not, though it be to his own hindrance: that
which a worldly man will not willingly do. So that it may seem then that
godliness is rather a great enemy to Gain, and Ungodliness a great deal the
more gainful. But those that define Loss and Gain on this wise, do not try
them by the right touchstone, do not weigh them out in the Balance of the
Sanctuary, at the Beam of Gods Word: and therefore no marvel, if they take
the Luke 16.11. Divitia nec vera nec vestrae. Aug. de verb. Dom. 35. and de
diversis. and Bern. be bon. deser.
false Riches for the true Treasure. For Genes. 2.19.
man indeed had authority given him to name the Creatures, and he has named
worldly Wealth, Gain: But God that is above man, and that gave man this
authority, he has named godliness, Gain, and not Wealth. As the Apostle
therefore says, 2 Pet. 3.9.
God is not slack, as men count slacknes: so godliness is not gain as men count
gain, but as God counts gain. For 1 Samuel 16.7.
Man sees not as God sees; Esa. 55.8.
nor thinks as God thinks. But as Luke 16.15.
those things that are precious in man's eyes, are abominable in Gods sight: so
1 Cor. 1.28. Psalm. 51.17.
those things that are contemptible in the eyes of man, are 1 Pet. 3.4.
of high account many times in the sight of God. And every thing is, not as man
valueth it, but as God esteems it; not as man reckons it, who is Psalm.
62.9. and 39.5.
vanity it self, and therefore may easily be deceived, yea Galat. 6.3. Iam.
1.26.
oft-times deceives himself; but as God rateth it, Tit. 1.2. Si volunt
invenire, quod omnipotens non potest, habent prorsus, mentiri non potest. Aug.
de civit. l. 22. c. 25. Potenter hoc non potest. Idem de Trinit. l. 15. c. 14.
Magna potentia mentiri non posse. Ibid. 15.
who neither does deceive any, Galat. 6.7.
nor can by any be deceived, being Ioh. 14.6.
Verity and truth it self. Either then we must say as God says, or we must
say as the world says. Either we must say, that Godliness is no gain, or else
we must say, that gain is no gain, when Godliness and gain shall stand forth
together, either in way of comparison the one with the other, or in way of
opposition the one unto the other.

Now, when Godliness and Gain shall in this manner contend, that Godliness
ought to have the day of it, will evidently appear, if it may be showed unto
us:

First, that Godliness is Gain rather than Gain: and Secondly, wherein this
Gain of Godliness does consist.

For the former, to wit, that Godliness is rather to be accounted Gain, than
Gain, may be proved to us by these three Arguments.

First, Godliness may do a man good without gain, but worldly gain can do
a man no good without Godliness. As the Heathen Orator says of bodily might,
that (...). Isocr ad Demonic.
strength of body joined with discretion and wisdom, may do a man much good;
but without it, it is but (...). Plut. de muliebri disciplina apud Stob. tom.
2. c. 90.
as a sword in a child, or in a mad man's hand, rather a means to mischief a
man's self than otherwise: as we see an example in Milo Crotoniates, the
strongest man of his time, -- viribus ille confisus periit, admirandisque
lacertis. Iuvenal. sat. 10. Legatur Gell^us l. 15. c. 16. and Val. Max. l. 9.
cap. 12. Qui concludit, Nimio robore membrorum vigorem mentis hebescere, quasi
abnuente natura utriusque boni largitionem, ne supra mortalem sit foelicitatem,
eundem and valentissimum esse and sapientissimum.
who unwarily assaying, on trust of his strength, to rive a piece of timber
with his hands, which some others with wedge and beetle could not cleave, was
caught fast by the fists, and so devoured by Wolves. So Riches joined with
Godliness and good Conscience, are the Omnia ista bona sunt, sed unde facias
been, non quae to faciant bonum. Aug. de temp 238
good blessings of God, a means Deus bona dat, ut bonos faciat. Salvian, de
provid.
of good to our selves, and of doing good unto others: but being severed from
godliness and the true fear of God, are rather (...). ^uripid. Pleisihen.
(...). Menand. -- opes irritamenta malorum. Ovid. Metam. l. 1.
occasion of evil than otherwise, rather (...). Isocr. ad Demon. (...). Eurip.
Phaethon. Magna cognatio ut rei, sic nominis, divitiis and vitiis. Eucher. ad
Valor.
an instrument of vice, than any furtherance to virtue, a mean to make as our
sins the greater here, so our condemnation accordingly the more grievous
hereafter. So that as the Heathen man says, that Damnum non lucrum est cum
mala fama lucrum. P. Sir.
Gain gotten by loss or hazard of a man's good name, is no gain but loss;
because a man loses therein more than all his gettings can countervaile: since
that Prove. 22 1. (...). ^socr. ad Demon. (...). Menand.
A good name is (as Solomon says) above riches and treasure; of greater worth
than any wealth. So Gain gotten with the breach or hazard of a good
Conscience, when it is Luk, 16.9.
Mammona iniquitatis, the Mammon of iniquity, or Iud. 11.
merces iniquitatis, the wages of wickedness; it is (...). titulus sine re.
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 111.
no gain, but loss indeed. It is, as the Greeks say of (...). Heracl^t. apud
Eustath. ad Iliad. (...).
a Bow, Life in name, but Death in deed; so gain in name, but loss in deed: (
(...). Hesiod. (...). Chilo. (...). Periand. (...). Eurip. Cyclope. (...). Idem
Antigon. (...). Menand. Periculosum semper reputavi lucrum. Phaedrus fab. 85.
Heathen themselves so esteemed it; not Nemo habet injustum lucrum sine justo
damno. Aug. de temp. 215. Lucra injusta putes justis aequalia damnis. Dum
peritura paras per male partae peris. G. Goodwin. Lucrum improbe partum merum
est infortunium. Rittershus.
Christian men only:) Since that a man does in these cases but, as that Roman
Emperor had wont to say, Eos qui minima commoda non minimo sectare^tur
discrimine, similes aiebat esse hamo aureo piscantibus, cujus abrupti damnum
nulla captura pensari posset. Sueton. Aug. c. 25.
fish with a golden hook, and that for a googeon: (...). Demetr. Phalar. apud
Athen. l. 6
he hazardeth more than his whole prey, though he catch it, and (...).
Democrit. Turpe lucrum virtutis est detrimentum. Ambr. in Psalm. 118. Plus in
ipsa injuria detrimenti est, quam in eis rebus emolumenti quae injuria
pariuntur. Cicer. de finib. l. 1. Neque tantum est commodi quod adipisci se
putet, quantum incommodi quod ex eo sibi accersat. Ambros. offic. l. 3. c. 4.
vere itaque Antiphanes, (...).
he may miss of his purpose therein too, can make amends for it, if it
miscarry, be that he get and gain never so much. And for a man to get and
gain never so much one way, if by the compassing of it he lose far more
another way, it is in truth no Gain at all. For this cause as the Apostle
asks the question; Romans 6.21.
Quid profuit? What profit had ye then of those things, whereof you are now
ashamed? nay Si secundum merita tibi daret, damnaret te. Aug. in Psalm. 102.
for which now you should be damned, if you had your desert; for the end of
such things is death: And the damned spirits demand of themselves; Wisdom. 5.8.
Quid prodest? What profit have we now of all our profits and pleasures, that
we enjoyed in the world, when we are hurled headlong into hell? So our Savior
himself asks, Matthew. 16.26.
Quid proderit? What will it profit a man to win the whole world, Luke 9.35.
and destroy himself, Mark. 8.36, 37.
or lose his own Iste omnis hujus questus seculi animarum dispendium est.
Ambros epist. 44. Cave itaque ne dum acquiras pecumam, perdas animam. August.
de temp. 215.
soul? Non potest ulla compendii causa consistere, si constet animae
dispendium intervenire. ubi salutis damnum, illic utique jam nullum lucrum est.
quo enim lucrum capiatur, nisi capiendi seeds inconcussa servetur? Eucher. ad
Valor. O si lucreris totum, quid proderit, orbem, Dum jacturam animae fecerit
ipse tuae. Tale tibi foenus fert lamentabile funus: Hicque illex quaestus
quaestus and aestus erit. Ne perdas perdenda, animam, stultissime, perdes: Nunc
sanum in sano synciput opto tibi. G. Goodwin.
to get all the world beside himself; but by gaining it to lose himself: for
Animus cujusque ipse est quisque. Cic. de amicit.
every man's soul is every man's self: to do as Iona 1.12
Jonas, At contra Aristippus in nave piratica agens cum aurum in mare
projecisset, (...). Laert. Et Crates misso in mare, auro, Abite, inquit, pessum
malae cupiditates, mergam vos, ne mergar a vobis. Hier. in Iovin. l. 2. Pereat
mundi lucrum ne fiat animae damnum. Aug. in Psalm. 103. Per de ne pereas. Idem
de verb. Dom. sermon. 35.
that suffered himself to be cast overboord into the sea, that the ship with
her lading, when he is lost, may come safe to the shore.

On the other side, as another says, Pecuniam in loco negligere, maximum
interdum est lucrum. Terent. adelph. 2.2. Non ego omnino lucrum omne esse utile
homini existimo: Est etiam ubi profecto damnum praestet facere, quam lucrum.
Plaut. Capt. 2.2.
For a man handsomely to refuse money, and forgo gain, it is no small gain
sometime. So for a man in some case to forgo his gain, to refuse gold, to
neglect his own good, though Quis nisi mentis inops oblatum respuat aurum?
so to do may seem folly, when Gain and Godliness will not agree together,
when Aug de temp. 215.
Lucrum in arca facit damnum in conscientia, and Ambros. in Psalm. 218. ser. 5.
lucrum pecuniae dispendium fit animae; when profit in a man's purse would
procure a breach in his Conscience, and the gain of gold prove the break-necke
of his soul; (...). Georg. Pisid. de vanitat. vitae.
such refusal of gain is the greatest Gain that can be. For says an ancient
Father well, Quantumlibet magna amittere, ut majora acquiras, non est damnum
sed negotiatio. Bern. de bon. des.
To let go, though never so great a matter, for the compassing of a greater,
is no losing bargain, but a gainful negotiation. To which purpose the Apostle
Paul having related, what a great man he might have been among his own
people, had he held on in Iudaisme as he began; he concludes at length, that
he deemed all that, and all else, but as (...).
loss, and as (...).
dross and dung; as some Grammarians expound the word there used, as (...).
Suidas.
Dogs-meat, or as others rather, as Dogs-dung, in regard of the assurance of
Gods favor toward him in Christ, the hold he had of him, his conformity with
him, and his interest in him.

Secondly, Worldly gain may be an occasion of evil to us from others,
godliness never but of good. Riches, I say, prove often their owners own bane,
his utter ruin and overthrow. Eccles. 5.12. Sed plures nimia congesta pecunia
cura strangulat, and cuncta exuperans patrimonia census. Iuven. sat. 10. Quanti
eversi sunt per divitias, praeda fortioribus facti? August. in Psalm. 53. (...).
Plut. Paedag.
I have seen riches, says Solomon, reserved to the hurt of him that has
them. (...). Diogenes apud Laert. Aurum avaritia concupiscit, aerumna
perquirit, solicitudo custodit. aurum materia laborum periculosa res
possidentium: malua Dominus, proditor servus. nemo tutum habet, nisi qui semper
abscondit; in pernicie domini fulget aurum, non fides per tenebras quaeritur,
in tenebris custoditur. Aug. de verb. Ap. 26.
They make their Philip. 3.7, 8, 9.
(...). Hesych. (...). Etymolog. (...).
owners life oft-time to be laid for. It was the Heathen man's observation, that
Tyrants deal with their subjects and servants, as men are wont to do (...)
legendum) (...). de Dionysio Diogenes.
with bottles, which they let stand under the tap till they be filled, and hang
them up so soon as they be full: or as Procuratorem rapacissimum quemque ad
officia ampliora ex industria promovebat, quo locuplet^ores mox condemnaret,
and pro spongiis uteretur, quos siccos madefacimus, humentes exprimimus. de
Vespasiano Sueton. c. 16. Idem de populo Athen. Aristophan. Equ^tib.
with Spunges, which they suffer to lie soaking, till they have sucked in some
good store of water, and then squize them out again. 1 King. 21.1, 2.
Exitialis erat apud principem huic laxior domus, illi amoenior villa. Plin.
panegyr.
Naboth might well have lived longer, had it not been for his vineyard: but
that was it that shortened his days, and brought him to an untimely death. And
Pr. v. 1.19. Accessit ut saevitiae causam avaritiae praeberet, and modus
culpae. ex pecuniae modo constitueretur, and qui fuisset locuples fieret
nocens, fieret ^ue quisque merces mortis suae. Velleius hill. l 2. Divisa
percussoribus occisorum bona, ut etiam de suo perirent. Senec. ad Mart. c. 20.
This, says Solomon, is the course of every one that is greedy of gain, to
come by it, he would take the life away of those that are possessed of it.
Piratae navigiis vacuis non insidiantur, mercibus onusta vi omni invidunt.
Chrysostom. de Ozia* sermon. 3.
It is not empty barks, or poor fisher-boats, but ships returning with
treasure, that Pirates seek to surprise. Paucula si ports argenti vascula
puri, Nocte iter ingressus, gladi^m contumque timebis: Cantabit vacuus coram
latrone viator. luven sat. 10. Sic timet insidias, qui se scit far viator
Quod timeat, tutum carpit inanis iter. Ovid. Nuce.
It is the fat Grasier, or the rich Clothier, Nudum latro transmittit: etiam in
obsessa via pauperi pax est. Sen. de paupert. ex epist 14.
not the poor peddler, or the bare passenger, that is in danger of losing limme
and life in his own defense against thieves.

But Godliness is never an occasion of any evil, but of all good to him that
has it. It is (...). Tyrius Max. orat. 1. murus aheneus. Nil conscire sibi.
Horat. epist. 1. l^b 1. Ier. 1.18.
the surest fort and fence, it is Ephesians. 6.14. (...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. hom.
24.
the firmest armor of proof against all evils that may be. For Who will
harm you, says the 1 Pet. 3.13. Et in hoc seculo qu^ nocebit nobis plenis
charitate? Aug. in 1. Joan. Tract. 9.
Apostle, if you follow that that is good? Who will harm you? Nay, Tu ipse
tibi ni aliquid facias, malus quid faciat? August. homil. 9.
Who can harm you? For some would it may be, if they could; so perversely and
malitiously-minded, that they hate the godly, even for this cause because they
be godly, and Psalm 38.20.
because they follow that that is good. But Romans 8.31. Psalm. 27.1, 2. Ierem.
1.18, 19. Act. 18.10. (...). Stob. tom. 2 c. 9.
if God be with them, who can be against them? who can hurt them? who can
harm them? Site Simocatus e^ist. 40. (...).
Men may attempt to wrong them, and wrong themselves while they think to wrong
them; but them they cannot wrong. Though others may seem to wrong them, yet
(...). Simocat. (...). Tyr Max. orat. 2. Sic. Diogenes dicenti, (...). Laert.
are they not wronged, (...). Occidere^me possunt, laedere non possunt.
Sociates apud Epictotum Euchirid. Plut. de tranquil and Tyr. Max. Orat. 2.
no not when they are murdered, because they are never a whit the worse for
their wrongs. No hurt therefore, Luke 2^.18. Illi de animabus suis
pertimescebant; Christus etiam de capillis securitatem ipsts dabat. quid ei
pereat, cui capillus non perit? August. in Psalm. 96. and 1^9
not an hairs harm can befall a man for being good, or by being godly; Nihil
accidere bono viro mal^ potest. Senec. de provid cap. 2.
no evil can accrue unto any by it.

No evil can; but much good may; yea all good shall. For Romans 8 28.
All things work together, and conspire in one, for the good of the godly, of
those that love God, and Nemo se diffidat amari, qui jam amat. libenter Dei
amor nostrum, quem precedit, subsequitur. quomodo enim redamare pigebit, qui
amavit necdum amanies? Bern. de Deo dilig.
whom he loves. August. de tempore.
Omni^? What? all things? says an ancient Father, as if he could hardly
believe it, or made some doubt of it: Etiam mala? what? even evils and
afflictions too? Mala etiam. Yea (says he) even evils and afflictions; Quod
and de morte. Idem de civit. Dei lib. 13. cap. 8.
bonis bona, malis mala: though evil to the wicked, yet good they are, yea
exceeding good to the godly. For Audi Apostolum, audi vas electionis; Hear
what the Apostle says, hear what the elect vessel of God says: (...). 2
Cor. 4.18.
This light and momentanie affliction, that is but for an instant, procures
unto us, (...).
an exceeding excessive eternal weight of glory. He moves the question the
second time, as not fully resolved: Omnia? what? all things? etiam peccatum?
even spiritual evils? even sin it self too? And he makes answer again:
Etiam peccatum ipsum, tametsi non bonum, tamen in bonum. Yea, even sin it
self, though it be not of it self good, yet it tends to their good, Vide
eund. Aug. de corrept. and great. c. 9.
to the good of all Gods elect. For hear what the Apostle says of himself: 2
Cor. 12 7.
There was a (...). Surculus in carne. Beza.
splint left in my flesh to humble me, that I might not be puffed up with pride.
Nonne cooperatur nobis in bonum, unde and humiliores and cautiores efficimur?
Bern. in Psalm 90.
His infirmities were a mean to make him the more humble; and Quanto quis
humilior in se fuerit, tanto apud Deum major erit. Aug. de temp. 2 13. and
Greg. de past. p. 2. cap. 6. and mor l 18 c. 22.
as the more lowly in his own eyes, so the more gracious with God. He asks
yet a third question, as the upshot of all* Omnia? etiam mors ipsa? What? all
things? even death it self, 1 Cor. 15.26.
the utmost enemy of all? And he answers himself as before, or rather
further than before; Mors bonis boni plurimum consert. Aug. ad Bonis. l. 4. c.
4.
Etiam mors vel maxim: Yea, death as much as any thing, nay most of all. For
so says the same Apostle again; Philip 1.21. (...). Quod optime exposuisse
videtur Airay in Philip. lect. 17.
Christus mihi vita, and mors lucrum; as he reads the words; Christ is my
life, and Death is my gain. That Prove. 11.7.
which is the greatest loss that can be to the worldly man, is Philip. 12.3.
the greatest matter of gain that can be to the godly.

Thirdly, Worldly wealth abides with us but for a short time: whereas
Godliness and Illud solum est lucrum, ubi fructus perpetuus, ubi merces est
aeterna. Ambros. epist. 44. Nemo est dives, qui quod habet secum hinc auferre
non potest. quod enim hic relinquitur, non nostrum, sed alienum est. Ambr.
epist. 9.
the gain of it will stick by us, and stay with us for ever. This worlds
wealth, I say, can last but a while with us, and must needs therefore leave us
after a while. Non sunt verae divitiae quae aut possidentem deserunt, aut a
possidente deseruntur. Alcuin. in Eccles praefat.
Either it will leave us, or we must leave it: Finem habent ista omnia aut
tuum aut suum. Bern. de bon. deser. Habebunt suum, non tuum, finem. Sen. nature.
quaest. l. 3.
either it will have an end of us, or we an end of it. 1. Tim. 6.17. (...).
Chrysostom. tom. 5. ser. 19.
Riches are uncertain: (...). Ibid. sermon. 18. (...). Ibid. 19.
there is no hold of them: they are slippery ware; Prove. 11.24. (...).
Chrysostom. sermon. 18.
the faster we gripe them, the sooner they slip often out of our hands: (...).
Ibid.
they are fugitive servants, ready to run away from their master, whom they
leave many times, by their means, deprived, not of living only, but of life
too: Prove. 23.6.
they take them wings, says Solomon, like an Eagle that flies up into the
air, and get them away from us far out of our reach, and beyond all hope of
recovery.

But though they have alas aquilinas, great Eagles wings to fly from us
withal, while we are here; yet have they ne passerinas quidem, not so much as
little sparrowes wings to fly after us, and follow us when we go hence. 1 Timothy 6.7. Nihil attulisti, nihil hinc tolles. August. de verb Dom. 5. and ibid.
41.
As when we came into the world, we brought them not with us; so when we go
out of the world again, we cannot bear them away, but Cedes coemptis
saltibus, and domo, Villaque; -- Cedes: and extructis in altum Divitiis
potietur h^eres. Horat. carm. 2.3. Linquenda tellus, and domus, and placens
uxor: neque harum, quas colis, arborum, ^le praeter invisas cupresses ulla
brevem dominum sequetur. Ibid. 14. Divites ad manes nil feret umbra suos. Ovid.
trist. 5.
must leave them behind us. Psalm. 49.16, 17.
Admire not the man that is risen suddenly to great riches and honor, says
the Psalmist. No? why, who would not admire one that lives in such state and
pomp as Nihil est insolentius noviti divite. Sen. lib. 2. controv. 1.
such are usually wont to do? Vides viventem: cogita morientem. quid hic
habeat, attendis: quid secum tollat, attend. Aug. and Ruffin. in Psalm. 48.
Yea but, when he dies, he shall carry none of that his wealth away with him;
nor shall his pomp and state descend with his corpse. Eccles. 5.14, 15.
As he came naked, so shall he go naked again, and leave all that by his care
and industry he had raked together and heaped up, behind him; and in all
respects go even as he came. It is with us in this world, as it was in the
Jewish fields and vineyards; Deuteronomy. 23.24, 25.
pluck and eat they might what they would, while they were there, but they
might not pocket or put up ought to carry away with them: Or Mundus iste
gardinus est, nos pueri, mors janitor. etc. Guil. Paris. summa de vitiis, and
Alex. Carpent. destruct. vit. p. 4. c. 2.
as with boys, that having gotten by stealth into an Orchard, stuff their
sleeves and their pockets full with apples and pears, well hoping to get out
with them, but when they come to the door, they find one there that searches
them, and takes all their fruit away from them, and so sends them away with
no more than they brought in: Or Guil. Paris. and Alex. Carp. ibid.
as poor men, that invited to a rich man's board, have the use of his plate to
drink in, and silver spoons to eat with while they are there; but if any of
them presume to put up a piece of plate or a spoone, there is search made by
the Porter, ere they are let out, for what is missing among them, and so are
they turned out again as they came in: In like manner is it with us in regard
of these temporal blessings; we have free liberty to use them as we will
while we are here; but when we are to go hence, Mors mundi tonsor, qui oves
ejus in exitu tendet, and attonsas extramundum mittit. Jacob. Genesis domin. 2.
post Pasch. sermon. 1. Mors latro est, qui mundanos omnes omnibus spoliatos nudos
dimittit. Raulin. doctr. mort. tract. 1. cap. 6. etiam vestibus ipsis exutos.
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 48.
there is one waiting on us, that will be sure to strip us, and suffer nothing
to pass with us, unless it be some sorry sheet, or a sear rag to rot with
us, Non magis haec ad defunctum pertinent hominem, quam secundae ad editum
infantem. Sen epist. 92. Istud non sentienti supervacuum est sentienti onus.
Non defunctorum causa, sed vivorum, inventa est sepultura, ut corpora visu and
odore foeda amoverentur. Idem de remed. fortuit. Exhibentur ista non sentienti:
tanquam ornatus dormienti, quiin pannis esse se somniat. Aug. in Psalm. 48. Sed
and unguentum accipis dives, postquam mortuus es, and foetidus es. Berdis
alienam gratiam, nec acquiris tuam. Ambr. de Nabuth. c. 1.
that which yet we shall have no sense of, nor be any whit at all the better
for, than if we were wholly without it.

But Godliness, and the gain of it, will abide by us for ever. Sicut charitas
1 Cor. 13.8. sic pietas non excidit. Ier. 32.40. Psalm. 85.8. Hae sunt verae
divitiae, quas cum habuerimus, perdere non possumus. August. de verb. Dom. 35.
Sapientia non amittitur: in stultitiam non revolvitur. Senec. epist. 76.
It is a grace that we cannot lose or fall from; (...). Plut. de ethic. virt.
(...). Plut. de paedag. (...). Stilpo. Virtus noc cripi, nec surripi potest
unquam, neque naufragio, neque incendio amittitur; nec tempestatum nec temporum
permutatione mutatur. Cic. parad. 6.
a benefit that we cannot be abridged or bereaved of by any. As Josh. 1.9.
Heb. 13.5.
God will never forsake thee; so godliness will never leave thee, if thou
be once soundly and sincerely religious. Vera virtus ad rotam ascendit, ad
equuleum descendit. Vise Cicer. Tuscul. lib. 5.
It will go up with thee to the wheel, it will go down with thee to the
rack: it will keep with thee while thou live; Apoc. 14.13.
it will away with thee when thou die. For Prove. 11.7. Job 27.8. dum sperat
expirat.
when the worldly man dies, his hope dies with him; Prove. 14.32. Job 13.15,
16. dum expirat sperat.
but the godly has hope even in death. And Psalm. 19.9.
the fear of God, that is Godliness, and Psalm. 112.3.
the righteousness of it, in Psalm. 19.11.
the reward of it, that is the gain that comes by it, endures for ever, and
extends it self to all eternity, lasting not only past this lives end, but
past the whole worlds end, with which all worldly wealth and gain must needs
have an end. This world is compared to a Fishing; the Matthew. 13.47.
end of it, to the drawing up of the nets: while the nets are down, there is
nothing said to be caught; for the nets may break, and the Fish escape. But at
the end of the world, when the nets are drawn up, it will then evidently
appear what each man has caught. And then those that have fished here for
riches and gain, may say with Peter, Luke 5.7.
Domine, tota hac nocte laboravimus, and nihil cepimus: Lord, all this night
have we labored, and caught nothing at all. For Praesentia amantei
praesentibus indormiunt, thesauros somniant, tantisper divites, quamdiu non
vigilent: ubi transt^t delectabilis somnus iste, nihil in manibus suis
inveniunt. Aug. in Ps. 76.5.
the worldly rich, when they awake out of their present sleep, wherein they
dream of gold and gain, shall find nothing in their hands. But those that
have here fished for Godliness, may say, as Luke 5.7, 8.
he might afterward have said; Domine, in verbo tuo retia demisimus, and
cepimus: Lord, at thy word, we have let down our nets, and have caught, yea
we have caught abundantly: we have fished for Godliness, and have gotten life
eternal. For Romans 2.7.
Unto those that by patience and perseverance in well doing have sought for
glory, and honor, and immortality, will the Lord give eternal life in that
day.

But let us sift out, and see somewhat more particularly, wherein this
spiritual Gain consists.

First then, the special wealth in this world, is that which comes by
Inheritance. Prove. 19.14.
Riches and possessions, land and living, says Solomon, come from a man's
ancestors. And among those things that may make a man happy, the Heathen man
puts this in the first place, as the chief, Res non parta labor, sed
relicta. Martial. l. 10. epig. 47.
Wealth and goods not earned with ones hands, but left a man by his friends.

But as Virtus non est haereditaria: sed nec pietas. Philosophia non est res
beneficiaria: Senec. ep. 90.
Virtue, so Piety is not hereditarie. The one comes not by kind; neither is
the other left by will: It is a greater legacy, than the mightiest Monarch
that is, can bequeath to his heir. For Psalm. 16.5.
God himself is the inheritance of those that have it. Psalm. 111.5.
God (says the Psalmist) has given a portion to them that fear him. If a
rich man give one a childs part, it is like to be a matter of some worth:
Much more then if God give a man a childs part. But more than that, Psalm.
142.5.
He himself is the portion that he gives unto his. Psalm. 119.57.
Portio mea ipse es, Domine; says David; O Lord, thou art my portion. And, Qui
dedit me mihi, dedit and se mihi. Bern. in Psalm. 90.
He that bestowed my self upon me, has bestowed himself also upon me, says
Bernard. And if Deuteronomy. 10.9. and 18.2.
the Levites need have no inheritance among their brethren, because God is
their portion; (it is sufficient they have him, that is, (...) Genes. 17.1.
El shaddai, God all-sufficient;) and yet that was but in a temporal manner:
Much more then is the godly man wealthy enough, though he have nothing in the
world, though he have no part among worldly men; seeing God is his portion in
a spiritual manner, in a much better sort. He whose portion God is, cannot be
poor. We use to say, that, He cannot lightly want money, that is master of the
Mint: and he can never be poor, Qui (...), ut est in Proverbio; and, cum
Plauti Milite, Auri montes, non massas, habet.
that has a wellspring of wealth. Psalm 34.9. and 84.11. Beatus homo, cujus
est Dominus spes ejus, cui nihil deficit, quia Christus ei sufficit. Petrus
Bles. epist. 102. Quantumlibet sis avarus, sufficit tibi Deus. Etenim vult
avaritia terram possidere totam, add and coelum; plus est qui fecit terram and
coelum. Aug. in Ps. 55. Deum habens, omnia habes. Aug. de temp. 146. Quid tibi
sufficit, si Deus non sufficit. Idem ad fratr. in erem. 51. 2 Cor. 6.10.
Much less then can that man want ought that is good, who is possessed of God
himself, Iam. 1.17. Omne enim bonum aut ipse est, aut ab ipso Aug. de doct.
Chr. l. 1. c. 31. Romans 11.36.
the Fountain of all good. In regard whereof, David having prayed for many
temporal blessings in the behalf of his people, Psalm. 144.12, 13, 14.
that their Sons might be tall and hardy like goodly young Cedars; and their
Daughters fair and comely, like the curious carvings about the Temple; their
Oxen strong to labor, and their Sheep fertile and fruitful; that there might
be no civil commoton nor foreign invasion: at length he windeth up all
indeed with this Epiphonema or Conclusion, Psalm. 144.15.
Blessed be the people that are in such a case: but on the neck of it he
comes as with an Epanorthoma, or a Correction of his former speech, Yea
rather blessed are the people that have Iehova for their God; that have the
Lord for their portion: This one blessing alone is better worth than all those.
So that as when the woman in the Gospel cried out to Christ, Luke 11.27.
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck: Our
Savior, as correcting her speech, (and yet Luke 1.48.
true also that was) says, Luke 11.28. Beatior Maria percipiendo fidem
Christi, quam concipiendo carnem Christi. Luke 1.45. Inde foelix quia verbum
Dei custodivit. Luc. 2.19. non quia in illa verbum caro factum est and
habitavit in nobis; sed quia custodivit Dei verbum, per quod facta est, and
quod in illo caro factum est. Aug. in Joan tract. 10.
Blessed are those rather that hear Gods Word and keep it. So the Psalmist
having pronounced them blessed that be in such a case, as eating in and
revoking his words again, as if he had spoken otherwise than well, Yea blessed
(says he) are they rather whose God is the Lord: As if he had said, That is
indeed an happiness in some kind, in some case: but yet that happiness is
nothing to this blessedness: for that is but external, this is internal;
that is but temporal, this is eternal.

Secondly, the greatest wealth in this world is of a Kingdom: and therefore
said he sometime in the profane Tragedy, that (...). Eteocles apud Eurip.
Phoeniff. Nam si violandum est jus, regnandi gratia violandum est: altis rebus
pietatem colas. Cic. offic. l. 3. Nulla sancta societas, nec fides regni est.
Ennius apud eund. l. 1. Nulla fides regni sociis. Lucaen. l. 1.
If a man might break his word for ought, it should be to atchieve a Crown,
to compass a Kingdom. Yea not to be a King only, but to belong to a King in
some place near about him, is esteemed a matter of great worth and dignity,
and such as may prove a mean of much wealth and commodity to one that can
wisely make use of it. 1 King. 10.8.
They were held happy men that could get into Salomons service. And it is the
greatest matter that Prove 22.29.
Solomon could promise the man that is diligent and industrious in the managing
of his affairs, that he shall stand before, Sic 1 Reg. 17.1. and Dan 7.10.
that is, attend upon Princes, and not serve or wait upon any mean man. If it
be held such a matter then to retain and belong to some one of the Princes of
this world; Deo servire regnare est. Bern de temp. 110. Non maligno aut mundano
principi, sed Christo utique servire regnare est. Idem de bon. deser.
What is it to appertain and belong to God, Apoc. 19.6. 1 Timothy 6.15.
the King of Kings, and Apoc. 1.5.
the Prince of Princes, Psalm. 83.18.
the highest Sovereign Luke 10.21.
Lord of Heaven and Earth; Deponit reges, disponit regna. Dan. 2.37. and 4.22.
that deposes Kings and disposes of their Kingdoms at his pleasure; that
assigns every earthly King the lists and limits both of his regiment and of
his reign? That which the Apostle Paul therefore prefixeth as no small credit
before sundry of his Epistles; and King David as a great grace before some of
his Psalms: Romans 1.1. Philip 1.1. Tit. 1.1.
Paul a servant of Jesus Christ: and, Psalm. 36.1.
A Psalm of David the servant of God: as if it were Sanctitate major quam
potestate. Salvian. de provid. l. 2. Quomodo de M. Antonino Petrarc. fam. ep.
15. lib 7. Imperium adeptus philosophi nomen retinuit, majus aestimans
philosophum esse quam principem. Et de Theodosio Aug. de civit. l. 5. c. 28.
Ecclesiae Dei se membrum esse magis quam regnare gaudebat.
a greater dignity to him, that he was Gods servant, than that he was ruler
and governor of Gods people.

But because Job. 8.35.
the servant is oft-times turned out at doors, whereas the son abides in
the house for ever: And therefore the Father tells his Son in the Gospel;
Luke 15.31.
Son, thou art ever with me: and all that I have is reserved for thee. The
godly man is not only servant to a King, but he is 1 Pet. 2.9.
Son to such a King, and Luke 12.32.
borne, or rather Ioh. 3.3, 5.
newborn, to a Kingdom. And whereas earthly kings, if they have many sons,
can leave the Crown but to one. 2 Chronicles. 21.3.
Iehosaphat (says the holy History) gave great gifts to his other Sons, but
the kingdom gave he to Ioram; because he was the eldest. God makes Apoc. 1.6.
and 20.6.
all his Sons Kings and Apoc 21.7.
Heirs alike. For Rom 8.17.
if we be Sons, says the Apostle, we are heirs too; even coheires with
Christ, Heb. 1.2.
who is Heir of all.

But how can the Godly be so rich, may some say, when he has, as it may fall
out, not a penny in his purse?

Thirdly therefore: A man may truly be said to be Rich in writing; the monied
man, though he have never a penny in the house, but Hinc illud Pallad^e?
(...). Et Poll^ani illud; (...) apud Stob. tom. 2. c. 10.
all out at interest; and the landed-man, though he hold not his lands in his
own hands, but have all let out and in the occupation of others, so long as
he has good security for the one, and good evidence, if need be, to show, for
the other. And as in Writing, so in Reversion. Great sums of money do many
give for the reversions of offices, of lands and leases; and as much may they
make them again away for, if they will. And in like manner may the Godly man
be said to be rich both in writing, and in reversion: yea in either kind he is
Affat^m dives est, qui cum Christo pauper est. Hieron. ad Heliodor. Dives pax,
pietas, fides: fitleli enim totus mundus possessio est. Ambr. ep. 10. Quibus
locis circumscribitur, cui totus mundus divitiarum possessio est? Idem offic l
3. c. 1.
the richest man in the world. For he has all in the world, yea (...).
Antisthenes and Zeno apud Laert Vnus est sapiens, cujus omnia sunt. Senec. de
benef. l. 7. c. 3. Fi^eli homini totus mundus divitiaru^ est: totus plane; quia
tam adversa quam prospera ejus aeq^e omnia serviunt ei, and cooperantur in
bonum. Bern in Cant. ser. 21.
all this world, and the next world confirmed and assured unto him by the word
and promise of God, yea by his deed and bond under his own hand and seal, who
cannot go from his word, or disclaim his hand Tit. 1.1.
to lie, or 2 Timothy 2.13.
to deny himself; though it be much of it in other men's hands yet for a
while. For 1 Timothy 4 8.
Piety or Godliness has the promises both of this life, and of the life to
come, says our Apostle. And again; 1 Corin. 3.22.23.
Be it Paul or Apollos, or things present or future, or this world; (...).
Diogenes apud Laert. (...). Clem. Al protrept. Omnia Christo tradita. Matthew.
11.27. tene eum per quem facta suno omnia, and cum ipso omnia possidebis. Romans
8.23. avare, ecce ^^bes omnia. Omnia quae amas, ut non imp ^diaris a Christo,
contemn, and ipsum tene in quo possis omnia possidere. August. hom. 34 Vise in
Psalm. 48.
all is yours, and you Christ's, and Christ Gods. All the wealth both of this
world, and of the world to come is theirs, ( as (...). 2 Corin. 6.10. Avarus
terrena esurit, ut mondious; fidelis co temnit, ut dommus: ille possidendo
mendicat, ille contemnendo possi det. Bern. in Cant. 21. Commune est omnibus
Christi fratribus, quod de se Christus dixit, Joan. 12.32. quod si ita est, non
putent divites hujus seculi fratres Christi sola possidere coelestia possident
and terrena; and quidem tanquam nihil habentes, sed omnia possidentes, non
mendicantes ut miseri, sed ut Domini possiden^es; eo pro certo magis Domini,
quo minus cupidi. Bern. in Cant. 21. An non omnia possidet, cui omnia
cooperantur in bonum? Idem be bon. deser.
having nothing, says the Apostle, and yet possessing all things) though it
be Romans 8.28. Solerter attend, quod non ad libitum famulari, sed cooperari
dicit ad bonum neque enim ad voluntatem serviunt, sed ad utilitatem, non ad
voluptatem, sed ad salutem, non ad votum, sed ad commod^^ nostrum. Idem de
diverse. 1.
for their good also, withheld from them for a while. Fidelis hominis totus
mundus divitiarum est: infidel autem noc obolus. August. Epist. 54. (...).
Pindarus apud Clement. paedag lib. 3. ca^. 12.
The wicked in right have just nothing, having made forfeiture of all, (...).
Dion Chrysostom orat. 65.
though it please God Matthew. 5 45. Luke 5.35. Act. 14.17.
not to take ever the advantage of it instantly, and Legatur Fr^ a Victoria
reloct, 5. 1. n. 7, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
where he does not, man may not. They are but Hoc certe alienum non est quod
jure possidetur, hoc autem jure, quod just; and hoc just, quod been. Omne
igitur quod male possidetur, alienum est. male autem possidet, qui male utitur,
Aug. epist. 54. Res quem que tetren recte (...) quoquam possideri non potest,
nisi vel jure divino, quo cuncta justorum sunt, vel jure humano, quod in
potestate regum est. Idem epist. 48.
intruders upon and usurpers of Gods goods, and shall one day answer for their
usurpation and abuse of them: or Genesis 39.5. Exodus 12.8. Act. 27.24. Multa malis
tribuit Deus; sed bonis caparaverat: contingunt autem etiam malis, quia
separari non poterant. satius est autem prodesse etiam malis propter bonos,
quam bonis deesse propter malos. Senec. de benef. l. 4. c. 28.
entercommoners by sufferance with Gods children and servants, whom he
principally intends them unto: or Genesis 30.27, 30, 43. and 31.9, 16. Isa.
45.2, 3, 4, 26, 28. Job 27.16, 17. Prove. 13.22. Dei dispensatores; non sibi,
sed aliis divites. quod de bonis Hieron. ad Pelag. l. 1.
Stewards and Treasurers, as ofttimes, for the good of the Godly.

And for Reversion; to omit what he has in present possession, besides 1 Cor.
1.5, 7.
spiritual riches, of worldly wealth, as much Mat. 6.32, 33.
as he has need of, and as much Psalm. 84 12.
as it is good for him to have: Every Godly man, as he is Iam. 2.5.
Rich in faith, so he is far richer by Faith. For Heb. 14.1, 7. Iam. 2.5.
by it he holds and has right to the reversion of such 1 Petr. 1.4, 5.
an everlasting inheritance, reserved for him in the Heavens, as cannot be
purchased with all the wealth of this world; and as goes in worth farther
beyond all the wealth of this world, than the purest gold does the drossiest
dirt.

And thus have we seen, both that Godliness is gainful; and wherein the
gain thereof does consist.

Now the Use hereof is twofold, for Exhortation, for Examination.

For Exhortation first; to stir up all men to labor and take pains to get
Godliness. (...). Sophoc. Creusa. (...). Antiphanes. (...). De nosth. Olynth.
Totus populus in aliam d^scors, in hoc convenit: hoc suspiciunt, hoc suis
optant. Senec. epist. 115. quem vise sis.
All men gape after gain. It is almost every ones song, that the Psalmist
has; Psalm. 4.6. (...). Theocr. idyll. 16. Prima fere vota, and cunctis
notissima templis: Divitiae ut crescant, ut opes. Iuvenal. sat. 10. Lucri bonus
est odor exre Qualibet illa tuo sententia semper in ore Versetur, Diis atque
ipso Jove digna, poetae. Hoc monstrant pueris vetulae poscentibus assem, Hoc
discunt omnes ante alpha and beta puellae. Vnde habeas quaerit nemo, sed
oportet habere. Iuven. sat. 14.
Quis ostendet nobis boni aliquid? Who will tell us of any matter of gain and
commodity? Audite, filii Adam, avarum and ambitiosum genus. Bern. de tempor. 4.
Hearken, says one well, ye sons of Adam, a covetous race, an ambitious brood:
Here is Honor, and true Honor; here is Gain, and true Gain: such as the
Pecuniam ut tu haberes, alius ante perdiderat. Senec. de remed. fort. Bonum
est, quod ut ad te transeat, alius dare debet, aliis amittere? Idem quaest.
not. l. 3. praefat. Lucrum sine damno alterius haberi non potest. P. Syrus.
world cannot show the like; Sic ab omnibus capitur, ut nil singulis minuatur.
Bern. in Cant. 79.
Gain without any loss to, or hindrance of any: here is good Gain, and great
Gain; here is infinite gettings. Labor for Godliness; labor to get and
keep a good Conscience: It is the gainfull'st Trade in the world. Who so
follows this Trade, shall not venture upon uncertainties, he shall be sure to
thrive, and to get infinite Gain. For, Prove. 21.21.
He that follows after righteousness, as a man follows a trade, shall
find Honor and Life, true Honor, and eternal Life.

And here come there two sorts of men to be admonished.

First, the rich, that they content not themselves with their worldly wealth,
but that they seek withal to get the true spiritual riches, that Animus
hominis dives, non area appellari solet. quamvis illa sit plena, dum te inanem
videbo divitem non putabo. Cic. parad. 6. Ex animo rem stare aequum puto, non
animam exre. Auson.
themselves may be rich, and not their purse or their chest only; that they may
not be Luke 12.21. Estote Deo divites, non eum facturi divitem, sed de eo
futuri divites. August. de verb. Dom. 6.
rich to the world only, but rich also to God. Else their earthly Gain will
prove their loss; their worldly wealth will be but a means to hinder their
happiness by keeping them out of Heaven where alone is true and entire
happiness to be had. It is that which our Savior himself says of the
worldly-rich man, that has nothing to trust unto but his riches: (for so to
his Apostles Mark. 10.24.
he expounds it himself:) that Matthew. 19.24.
It is easier for Mark. 10.25. Luke 18.25.
a Camel; or, as some read the word, (...). Suid. Vise Theophylactum, and
Euthymium.
a cable rope, to pass through the eye of a needle, than for such a rich man
to enter into the kingdom of Heaven. As if our Savior should have said; It is
as eosie a matter, nay an easier, to thread a small Spanish needle with a thick
cable, or a great cart-rope, than to get such a rich man in at Heaven gate:
Inepta enim sunt, quae ex Lyrano Author ^nalogi inter Divitem and Pauperem, de
po ta ga^rit Hierosolymitana, cui Acus nomen, per quam Cameli, nisi sarc^nis
prius ^epositis introire neuti ^uam possent.
That great bunched beast, a Camel, may as soon, yea sooner be driven
through a needles narrow eye, than such a rich man be drawn unto God, and be
brought into the state of grace. For so the most and the best read it; and it
is an ordinary byword both with Syrians and Greeks, when they speak of a
thing that they think altogether impossible, to say, (...). Casaubon. in notis
ad N. Test.
An Elephant, or a Camel may as soon creep through a needles eye, as this or
that come to pass. But not so soon, says our Savior, but Difficil^m dixerat,
impossibilem jam dixit. Hieronim Mat. 3. imo impossibili magis impossibilem.
Euthym. in Matthew. c. 41.
sooner may that be done, which Matthew. 19.26. Mark. 10.27.
with man is altogether impossible, than such worldly rich men attain to true
happiness. 2 Cor 8 9. Divitiae illius au^d nobis facturae, cujus pa^ ^ertas
nos divites fecit? Aug de verb. Apost. 15.
Christ (says the Apostle) became poor, to make us Rich. Quomodo pauper
factus est? quom de divites facit? Aug. de temp. 212.
How became he poor? says one of the Ancients; or how makes he us rich? The
same Apostle (says he) shows us, and expounds himself, where he says; 2
Cor. 5.21.
He that knew no sin, for our sake became sin, by taking upon him the
guilt of our sin, that we might become the Puto quod Christi paupertas non
pecuniam nobis attulit, sed justitiam and immortalitatem. Aug. ibid.
Righteousness of God in him. And indeed, to speak properly and precisely, as
the truth is, (...). Chrysostom. tom. 6. sermon. 78. de poenit. 2.
not as the world, but as God reckons, Major and miserabilior egestas nulla
est, quam egere sapientia, and qui sapientia non eget, nulla re omnino egere
potest. stultitia ergo egestas est. August. de beata vita disput. 3. Paupertas
in animo est, non in sacculo. Idem in Psalm. 131. Paupertas in inopia mentis
est, non in quantitate possessionis. Greg in Ezech. l. 2. hom. 18.
the only poverty is sinfulness, and In animo div tiae sunt, non in
patrimonio. Sen. ep. 108. Parvaene divitiae ipsae innocentia? si arcam plenam
auro habueris, dives eris: si cor habueris plenum innocentia, pauper eris? Aug.
in Psalm. 83.
righteousness the right riches. And the rich man therefore that has not a
religious heart, is but like Apoc. 3.17.
proud Laodicea, Quid tibi prosunt exteriores d^vitiae, si te interior premit
egestas? Aug. in Psalm 52. Tanto enim verius, quanto interius indigentes sumus.
Greg. M. mor l. 21. c. 14.
a poor beggarly wretch in Gods sight, and in the sight of those that see so
as he sees, howsoever he may seem rich and glorious in worldly men's eyes.
Yea to him that has it too, that is both rich and religious, may we well say,
as our Savior did to his Disciples, when they vaunted at their return from
preaching the Gospel, that even the Devils were subdued unto them; Luke 10 20.
Rejoice ye not herein, that the Devils are subdued under you: so were they
under Judas too; but herein rejoice, that you have your names entered in Heaven.
So V se supra quo de Theodosio Aug. de civit. Dei l. 5. c 22.
rejoice not herein that thou art rich to the world, or that thou art great in
the world, and have others under thee, and at thy command; that thou art clad
gorgeously, and farest deliciously; (for Luke 16.19.
so did that reprobate rich man in the Gospel:) but herein rejoice that thou
art rich unto God, and 1 Pet. 3 4. Vere dives, au^ in Dei conspectu potest
dives videri. Ambr. epist. 10. sed solum illum divitem Deus novit, qui sit
dives aeternitati. Ibid.
in his sight, that thou fear and servest God, and 2 Corin 1.12.
labourest to keep a good conscience, that thou art a 1 Pet. 4.10.
careful dispenser and faithful disposer of that treasure that God has
entrusted thee withal. Then thou art Paulo sapiens omnis liber, 1 Cor. 7.22.
Petro etia^ dives est. 1 Pet. 3.4. Ambros. epist. 10. (...). Plato Phaedone.
Solus sapiens dives est. Cic. parad 6. and apud Apul de philos (...). etc.
Philo de Noc. Q^i pretiosissima quae sunt possidet, is dives est. atqui
pretiosissima res virtus est: hanc ergo cum sapiens solus possideat; sapiens
solus dives est. Empir. adv. Mathem.
truly rich, when thou art sincerely religious, when thou art truly righteous.

Secondly, the poor, they are likewise to be admonished, to labor for
Godliness: that though they be not Luke 12.21.
rich to the world, they may be rich yet to God; and their worldly poverty
shall be no hinderance to their spiritual preferment. For Iam. 2.5.
God (says the Apostle) has chosen the poor of this world to be rich in
grace, and heirs of his kingdom. And here is great comfort for the poor man,
that lives a godly life, and makes Conscience of his courses, has a care to
please God and to do his will in all things, and to approve himself and his
ways to him, walking faithfully and painfully in the works of his calling, be
it never so mean; that though he be never so poor and bare, though he live
but from hand to mouth, as we say; yea though he have not one good rag to hang
on his back, or one good morsel of meat in a twelvemonth to put in his
mouth, though he have not the least patch of land in the world to sustain him,
or the least hole that may be to hide his head in; Divites dicimus sapientes,
justos, bonos; quibus pecunia vel parva vel nulla: magis enim sunt virtutibus
divites: pauperes vero avaros dicimus, semper inhiantes, semper egentes.
August. de civ. l. 7. c. 12. Pauper est pius? etiam sic dives est: intus dives,
foris pauper: pauper in cella, dives in conscientia. arcam respicis auro
inanem; conscientia respice Deo plenam: non habet extrinsecus facultatem; sed
habet intrinsecus charitatem. Aug. in Psalm. 36. and de temp. 212. Inops auri,
Deo dives est. quid hac virtute pauperius? quid hac paupertate ditius? Matthew.
5.3. Idem de verb. Ap. 26. Nemo apud Deum pauper est, nisi qui justitia
indiget: nemo dives, nisi qui virtutibus plenus est. Lactant. instit. l. 5. c.
14.
yet is he a rich man for all that, richer than Crassus or Croesus, or the
wealthiest worldly man again in the world. For they have but Luke 16.11.
the false riches, he the true treasure; they have but the counterfeit Vitreum
margaritum, non verum. Hieron. post Tertull.
glassie pearl; he has that precious orient pearl, which Matthew. 13.46.
the wise Merchant, when he has found, is content to sell all that ever he
has to purchase it, to forgo all that ever he is worth for the compassing of
it; and yet is he no loser by the bargain neither. For as he is a Merchant,
so is he also a wise Merchant; and therefore knows well what he does in so
doing: he knows that in buying it, he buyeth himself and his own safety,
his own eternal salvation, together with it.

Again, this serves to overthrow the opinion of such persons as think that
there is little or no Gain to be gotten under God, little or no good at all to
be gathered in Gods service. So the worldly men in Jobs day; Job 21.15.
Who is the All-sufficient, say they, that we should serve him? or what profit
should we have by praying unto him? And the wicked in Malachies time; Malac.
3.14.
It is but in vain to serve God: there is nothing to be gotten by keeping his
Commandments, and walking humbly before him.

Yea but, may some say, sure there be none such now a-dayes, especially among
us that make profession of Christianity; and therefore this use of the point
might well be spared.

If it be so with us, Quiescat lingua, loquatur vita. August. in 1. Joan.
Efficacius est testimonium vitae quam linguae. Author de dupl. martyr.
let our actions answer for us; let our practice prove it: And so we will turn
the use from reprehension to examination, from confutation to conviction.

Let every one by these Notes then examine himself, whether he be of this
opinion or no.

First, did men deem Godliness to be a matter of Gain, they would never
think they had enough of it. For (...). Solon. (...). Eusebius apud Stob. tom.
2. cap. 10. -- quantumlibet improbae Crescant divitie, tamen Curta nescio quid
semper abest rei. Hor. Carm. 3.23. (...). Apictet. enchir. cap. 61. Eccles.
6.7. Nemo est cuifelicitas sua, etiamsi cursu veniat, satisfaciat. Senec.
Epist. 115. non potest expleri cupiditatibus, etiamsi expleatur divitiis. Ambr.
de bono mort. cap. 1. Avarus animus nullo satiatur lucro. Senec. epist. 49.
Riches are stintlesse; there is no end of them. We never think that we have
wealth enough, we are still laboring for more. Fortuna multis nimis dat, nulli
satis. Martial. l. 12. epigr. 10.
Many men have too much, and yet no man enough. There is no stint of wealth;
but as Non aliud animal ex minore origin in majorem crescit magnitudinem.
Quidam hoc unum quamdiu vivat crescere arbitrantur. de Crocodilo, Plin. hist.
not. l. 8. c. 25.
some write, though Vise Iul. Scalig. de subtle. exerc. 196.. 7.
fabulously, of the Crocodile, that he grows so long as ever he lives: so
it is too too true of this mystical Crocodile, the desire of gain and wealth,
and of advancing or enlarging men's worldly estates, has no acme, no pitch, but
grows still more and more with men as long as they live, Avaritia morbus
senum proprius, luxuria juvenum: libidinis siquidem ignis paulatim extinguitur,
and cum senectute consenescit: at avaritia augescit continuo, and cum senectute
ipsa juvenescit. Rolloc. in 1 Timothy 6.10. Quid avaritia, quae radix est omnium
malorum, nonne in frigidis senibus tanto ad acquirendum ferventius inardescit,
quanto citius relictura est quod acquirit? Aug. de temp. 246.
rifer often with them than ever, when they are even going out of the world, and
have one foot, as we use to say, already in the grave. But with Godliness men
are soon satisfied; they have soon enough of it. If they have attained to but
a little superficial sprinkling of common Grace, or civil honesty, that
comes as far short of sound sanctification and sincerity, as the shadow does
of the substance; they begin presently to suppose, with selfeconceited Apoc.
3.17.
Laodicea, that they are rich enough and need nothing; that Quomodo proficis,
si tibi jam sufficis? Bern. de consider. l. 2. Omniae illi desunt, qui sibi
nihil deesse putat. Ib.
they have no need to labor for any further matter, they are even as well as
well may be, as need be, at least. No man is afraid of being too wealthy: but
Nosti illud, Nemo pius est, qui pietatem cavet: Cave quidquam putes esse
verius. Cic. de fin. lib. 2. Qui timet esse bonus, non timet esse malus.
Misocosm. de contempt. mund.
many are afraid of being too godly; Eccles. 7.18. Modum esse religionis:
nimium esse superstitiosum non oportere. Cic. pro domo sua. Religentem esse and
portet, religiosum nefas. Gell. lib. 4. c. 9.
Ne sis nimium justus; Be not too just, sticks shrewdly on many a man's
stomach: though spoken Notata est non justitia sapientis, sed superbia
praesumentis. Aug. in Joan. 95.
not of true godliness or righteousness indeed; but of nourishing in us an
over-weaning conceit of our selves; or of Si quem rigidum and trucem ad omnia
fratrum peccata conspexeris, etc. hunc scito plus justum esse quam justum est.
Hieron. in Eccles. Iustitia enim, nisi misericordia temperetur, in crudelitatem
degenerat. Lavat. in Eccles. Huc illud Plinii hist. not. l. 18. c. 6. Nihil
minus expedire, quam agrum optime colere. Et, Agrum been colere necessarium,
optime damnosum.
being over-rigorous in censuring of others; like Luke 18.11.
the Pharisee in the Gospel, who, says an ancient Writer very pithily and
wittily, Dum in se singulariter exultat, aliis arroganter insultat; and se
solum decipit, quem solum exipit, dum alios damnat. Bern. de grad. humil.
exulting arrogantly in himself, insulteth insolently over others, and
deceives himself alone, whom alone he excepteth, while he contemns and
condemns all besides himself.

Secondly, Men would strive one to go beyond another in Godliness, if they
counted Godliness a matter of Gain. For as the Heathen writer well observes,
-- (...). -- Hesiod. V^cinus dives cupiditatem irritat. Sen. epist. 7.
there is a kind of emulation commonly among worldly neighbors, whereby they
emulate such as go beyond them in wealth: one neighbor striveth to out-build
another, one to get and purchase more than another. The covetous man casts
his eye on his rich neighbors, -- bunc atque hunc superare laborat: Vt quum
carceribus missos rapit ungula currus Instat equis auriga suos vincentibus
illum praeteritum temnens extremos inter euntem. Horat. sermon. lib. 1. sat. 1.
as a man in a race does on those that have won ground of him, he striveth to
get even with this man, whom he is yet behind, to outstrip that man, whom he
has got even withal. And the envious man (as those two vices are seldom
asunder) looking through the spectacles of envy on his neighbors goods,
Fertilior seges est alienis semper in arvis: vicinumque pecus grandius uber
habet. Ovid. artis l. 1. Aliena nobis, nostra plus aliis placent. P. Syrus. --
majorque videtur, Et melior vicina seges. Iuven. sat. 14.
thinks every thing that his neighbor has better than his own, and it may
be better than indeed it is, his grounds fertiler, his beasts fairer, his
revenues larger, his gains greater etc. and is ready enough often to say with
himself, Why should not my beasts look as fair as his? why should not my
grounds yield as much as his? why should not I thrive as well as he, having as
good means to thrive by as he has? And even (...). Plato de repub. l. 1.
so would it be with us, held we godliness to be gainful. We would have a
kind of godly emulation and ambition among us, as the Apostle speaks, in
matter of Godliness; we would even (...). 1 Cor. 12.31. (...) 1 Cor. 14 1. Et
(...). 2 Cor. 9.2.
emulate and (...). Romans 15.20. 2 Cor. 5.9. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
ambitiously, as it were, strive and contend to out-goe one another in
goodness and grace. And this were -- (...). Hesiod.
a good and godly emulation, a goodly and a commendable strife and contention
Indeed. We would be eying of those that are got beyond us in grace, and
endeavor to get even with them, yea, if it be possible, to outstrip them, and
to cast them behind us, Qui stadium currit, eniti and contendere debet, quam
maxim possit, ut vincat: supplantare eum quicum certet, aut manu depellere
nullo modo debet. Chrysippus apud Cicer. offic. l. 3.
not by hindering their progress, but by mending our own pace, and Faciamus
quod in itinere fieri solet: qui tardius exierunt, velocitate pensant moram.
Senec. not quaest lib. 3. praefat. Quod facere solent, qui serius exeunt, and
volunt tempus celeritate reparare, calcar addamus. Idem ep. 68.
by straining our selves to run the faster, the later it wat ere we entered
into this race. We would be as ready as they are to say to our selves; And why
should not I be as forward in the fear of God, as zealous, as religious, as I
see such and such are, since I have as good means of being godly as they have,
as many inducements as either they or any other can have? But so stand the most
affected, that they will not by their good will suffer any man to out-goe them
in wealth, in the way of the world: but they will let any man willingly out-goe
them in grace, and in the good ways of God: there only we strain courtesy,
and give every one the way of us. And as our Savior tells the Scribes and
Pharisees, that Mattb 21.31.
the very Publicans and Harlots might go into the kingdom of Heaven before
them: So not a few among us will suffer the very Pagans and Papists, little
better than Pagans, if not worse many of them than they, the very Heathen and
Heretics to go into Heaven before them, ere they will strive to out-goe them
in goodness and godliness.

Thirdly, men would be more affected with it, if they supposed any matter of
Gain to be in it. Populus me sibilat; at mihi plaudo Ipse domi, simulac nummos
contemplor in arca. Horat. sermon. l. 1. sat. 1.
The covetous miser, says the Heathen man, while the people either curse or
hiss at him abroad, yet he pleases and cheereth himself the whilst with the
sight or the consideration of his substance at home. It does a man good at the
very heart, even to think upon his riches, and but Eccles. 5.10.
to look upon his treasure. It will make our hearts to spring and leap within
us for joy, to have sudden news brought us of some rich legacy, or large
patrimony by some means befallen us. But of this spiritual wealth and gain
most men are merely stupide and senseless: No more moved commonly or
affected, when either (if any time at least they so do,) they think on it, or
when they hear it spoken of in the Pulpit, than (as a Philosopher said
sometime of an ignorant Dolt sitting in the Theater, where the seats were of
marble, that (...). Aristippus apud Laertium l. 2.
One stone sat upon another:) than, I say, either the benches that they sit
upon, or the pillars that they lean against: Not once stirred at all to hear
of the heavenly inheritance, or of holiness, the means that must bring them to
heaven, yea that works in men's hearts a kind of Philip. 3.20.
heaven upon earth, and gives Christian men seizin of heaven even while they
live here. An evident argument that either they believe not the Gain of it, or
they believe not themselves to have any share in it.

Fourthly, men would be often taking account of their Gains in this kind, of
their thriving in Godliness, if they held Godliness to be so gainful. Avarus
totus in rationibus.
Worldly men are very frequent and diligent herein, very careful to keep
their books of receipt and expense, poaring ever and anon on them, running often
over their reckonings, and casting up their accounts, to see how they thrive or
pare in the world, how they go forward or backward in wealth. But where we
shall find a man that has the like care of keeping and casting up his
spiritual accounts, of Psalm. 4.4. and 119.59. Zeph. 2.1. 1 Cor. 11.28. 2 Cor.
13.5.
examining himself for his spiritual estate, how he thriveth or pareth with
the graces of Gods Spirit, how he goes forward or backward in goodness or
godliness? And yet would our care be alike for either, did we equally
apprehend the gain of either. But let us look unto it. For whether we call
our selves to account here or no, God will questionless one day call us to an
account. And then not only Luke 15.13.
the prodigal son, and the Luke 16.1.
unfaithful steward, that has the one unthriftily lavished out his patrimony,
and the other riotously wasted his masters wealth; but Matthew. 25.30.
the idle and unprofitable servant too, that has not gained with his Talent,
that has not thriven with the Grace of God bestowed on him, shall be bound
hand and foot, and cast out into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

Fifthly, men would make more account of godliness, if they counted it as
gain. Did they indeed account godliness more gainful than gain, they would
not put godliness away for gain, they would not prefer gain before
godliness. Yea did they deem godliness the gainfullest thing in the world,
they would not forgo godliness for a world of wealth, or for ought else that
were in the world. But it is with it, as it is with Time. It is a common saying
in every man's mouth, that (...). Theophrastus apud Laertium and Anticho apud
Plutarch. Antonio.
There is nothing in the world more precious than Time, and yet Quem mihi dabis
qui pretium aliquod tempori ponat. Senec. epist. 1. Non exiguum temporis
habemus, sed multum perdimus: non inopes ejus, sed prodigi sumus: astricti sunt
homines in continendo patrimonio: simul ad temporis jacturam ventum est,
profusissimi in eo, cujus unius avaritia honesta est. Idem de brev. vit. c. 1.
and 3.
there is nothing generally more trifled away than it. So of Godliness the
most will (in word at least) acknowledge, that there is nothing in the world
more gainful than it, and yet the most of them that so say, stick not to make
it away for mere trifles. Ad mercedem pii sumus; ad mercedem impii. honesta
quamdiu aliqua illis spes inest, sequimur: in contrarium transituri, si plus
scelera promittant. Senec. ep. 113. Et genus and virtus, nisi cum re, vilior
alga est. Horat. sermon. lib. 2 sat. 5.
Godly they are content to be for advantage, so long as godliness brings in
any worldly gain with it, or so long as there is no hope of any the like gain
by ungodliness. But let godliness cease to bring in such gain, they grow
soon weary of it: or let but the least hope of such gain by ungodlines show it
self, and they are ready presently to exchange godliness for it. Matthew. 16.26.
What should it avail a man, says our Savior, to win the whole world, and
lose his own soul? It were no gain for a man to get the whole world by
ungodliness; since he must withal lose himself, his life, his soul for his
labor. But we are ready and willing, the most of us, to part with godliness,
and forgo good conscience, for far less matters than that comes to, for a
penny or an halfe-penny toy now and then; to exchange it for some small piece
or patch of the world, for some sorry snip or shred of the pelf of it, or for
ought else that we have some fond fancy unto, the covetous Worldling for a
little Temporary treasure, and the lascivious wanton for a little transitory
pleasure: like Heb. 12 13. ex Genesis 25.33.
profane Esau, that sold his birthright for a mess of broth, and Prove.
28.21. Frusto panis conduci potest, vel uti taceat, vel uti loquatur. Cato in
Caelium apud Gellium l. 1. c. 15.
Salomons unjust Judge, that would do injustice for a morsel of bread, and
Ezech. 13.9.
the false Prophets in Ezechiels time, that would pollute Gods name for a
handful of barley. That which evidently shows at how low a rate most men
value godliness. For as a Abstem. in fabulis.
scoffing companion sometime told the Bishop that would give him his blessing
when he would not give him an halfe-penny, that If his blessing had been worth
an halfe-penny, he should not have had it. So if worldly men thought
godliness, and the fear and favor of God worth but an halfe-penny, they
would not venture to put either away for an halfe-penny matter: they would not
so readily exchange either for trifles, did they not make but a trifling matter
of either. Neither may the greater sort of such men avoid this imputation, and
wash their hands with Matthew. 27.24.
Pilate from the soil of this sin, because they are wont to make godliness
away for greater matters. To omit (...). Plato apud Plut. de util exinimic.
Thesauris omnibus pretiosior est virtus. Apul. de philosoph. (...). Euripid.
apud Stob. tom. 2. c. 1. Vilius argentum est auro, virtutibus aurum. Horat.
epist. Virtus praemium est optimum: virtus omnibus rebus anteit. Plaut.
Amphitr. 2.2.
that even the greatest of them will bear no weight at all, if they be laid
in the balance against godliness, when the whole world it self is too light
to weigh against it. Thou thy self, who ever thou art, wilt cry out shame on
some poor silly wretch, that shall forswear himself, and so damn his soul,
as thou thy self say, for a penny, when thou do thy self, it may be, in
effect as much for somewhat more. But do thou consider, as (...). Aristippus
apud Laert. l. 2.
Aristippus sometime told Plato, that a penny may be as much to him as a pound
is to thee, and a pound no more with thee than a penny with him: and therefore
do thou value Godliness at as low a rate in stretching and straining of thy
conscience for the one, as he in tentering it for the other.

Lastly, men would be content to take more pains for the compassing and
increasing of it in themselves, if they held godliness to be gainful. (...).
Plut. de seen folitic.
Men can well endure to sit telling and taking money, and it were all day long,
from morning to dark night: but to hear the word, but an hour, whereby the
spiritual gain is gotten, the most can hardly endure: they sit all that while
on thorns, and think every minute an hour, and are never well till all be
done. They say, or think at least with themselves, as the profane Jews
sometime said, (...) Malac. 1.12.
What a toil, or a tediousness is here? what needs so much preaching? what
needs so long praying? they think they might be as well, if not much better,
without either: Yea many cannot endure so long as till the hour be at an end.
To whom God may well say, as our Savior to his drowsy Disciples, Matthew. 26.40.
What, could ye not watch an hour with me? So, Can ye not endure to wait an
hour on me, that watch so many over you? On Si ab illa bora, qua verbum Dei
praedicare ceperim, geminas, vel ^nnulos, vel manilia ^rogarem, an non filii
mei stare and accipere vellent? etc. Aug. homil. 26.
worldly Mammon they could be well content to wait all day long, with
forbearance not of disport only, but of ordinary diet too, that would think
much but half an hour in the day to wait upon him.

Again, (...). Antipho apud Stob. c. 10. Cogitavarities miseros and caeca
cupido Noctes atque dies niti praestante labor. Lucret. de not. rerum lib. 3.
for worldly wealth men can toil and moile all the week long; and yet are
they not weary; they think not the whole week long enough neither: But for
the heavenly gain, for the spiritual thrift, we have but one day of seven,
and we think that too much too: we think the day all too long, the labor all
lost, and the whole time cast away, that we employ and spend to this purpose.
We say as the same Jews at another time said, Amos 8, 5.
When will the new Moon be past; and the Sabbath once over? that we may
return again unto our worldly affairs. Yea many among us have not the
patience to tarry so long, but spend a great part of the Sabbath, that is Gods
Market or Mart-day, for the getting of this spiritual gain, either about
their worldly affairs, or their bodily delights. The Sabbath day, I say, is
Gods Market Day. And those that seek to take away the Sabbaths, attempt to put
down Gods Markets, and so do the Devil good service, whatsoever their intent
be. As frequenting of Markets makes a rich man; so keeping of Sabbaths makes
a rich Christian. And as we count him a bad husband, that follows game on the
Market day: so may we as well count him a spiritual unthrift, that spends
the Sabbath in that sort.

But may some say, when we have been at Church, and heard the Sermon and
Service, is not Gods Market Day then done?

I answer: If the Sabbath be Levit. 23.32. Matthew 28 1.
a day, then is it not so soon done. Debet totus dies festivus a Christiano
expendi in operibus sanctis. Rob. Gros^hed. Lincoln. Episc. in Decalog.
praecept. 3.
Gods Market lasts all day long. Yea, grant the principal, because the
public, of it be past: yet as Market-folks returning from Market will be
talking of their Markets, as they go by the way, and be casting up of their
penny-worths, when they come home, reckon what they have taken, and what they
have laid out, and how much they have gotten: So should we, after we have heard
the Word publikly, confer privately of it with others; at least meditate on it
by our selves, and be sure to take an account of our selves, how we have
profited that day by the Word that has been spoken unto us, and by other
religious exercises that have been used of us. And as the Market-man counts
that but an evil Market Day, that he has not gained somewhat on more or
less: So may we well account it an evil Sabbath to us, whereon we have not
profited somewhat, whereon we have not either increased our knowledge, or been
bettered in affection; whereon we have not been further either informed in
judgment, or reformed in practice, whereon we have added no whit at all to our
talent.

To wind up all in a word. If we hold Godliness to be, as the Apostle here
says it is, a matter of Gain, and of great Gain, that which makes Gain to
be Gain, and without which Gain it self is no Gain indeed; that Omnia
adsunt bona, quem penes est virtus. (pietas.) Plaut. Amphitr. 2.2.
it brings all good with it to him that has it; and that it never leaves
him, but abides with him, and sticks by him for ever: Oh let us labor then
to get of it, and to grow more and more in it; let us endeavor to outgoe one
another in godliness; let us call our selves to a reckoning how we thrive or
pare in it; let us (...). Solon apud Plut. de signis profect. and de utilit. ex
inimic and de tranquil.
not put it away for such trifles and toys as the world or the (...).
Chrysostom. tom. 7. eclog. 30. and tom. 6. sermon. 73. and in Matthew. hom 3.
Devil shall tender unto us to bereave us of so precious a pearl; especially
let us have a care of frequenting Esa. 55.1.
Gods Markets, of observing Gods Sabbaths, the principal means of increasing
this spiritual wealth in us. So shall it come to pass that we shall have God
to be our portion; we shall be heirs of his Kingdom, and coheires with his
Christ; we shall have all the good things both of this life, and the next
assured unto us here, and the full fruition of them for ever hereafter.

The end of the first Part.
THE SECOND PART. The Sufficiency of it in it self.
HItherto of the maine point, to wit, that Godliness is great Gain. Now
because this proposition will not either easily enter into men's minds, or
sink suddenly into their hearts: The Holy Ghost by the Apostle is content to
bring a double proof of it.

The one drawn from the time present; because it is able alone to give a man
contentment here, that which all the world else is not able to do, expressed
in this verse:

The other taken from the time to come; because it will continue with and abide
by a man for ever hereafter, that which no worldly wealth, or ought else in the
world can do, implied in the Verse. 7.
next verse.

Godliness with contentment, or (...).
with Self-sufficiencie: For so it is word for word in the Original; and the
word so properly imports. As if he had said: Godliness and contentment are
two inseparable companions, that continually harbor and keep house together,
that go ever hand in hand the one with other: so that a man cannot have the
one without the other, he cannot want the one if he have the other. There is no
true Godliness, where there is not contentment of mind; no true contentment
of mind, where Godliness is not.

So that the Apostle seems to reason on this wise:

That which of it self is sufficient to content the mind of man, that is true
gain, and great gain indeed: For it is no small matter that will suffice to
stay and settle man's mind.

But Godliness is of it self sufficient to content the mind of man, and does
ever bring true contentment with it to him that has it.

Godliness therefore it true gain and great gain indeed.

Hence then may we deduce these three conclusions to be considered of in order:

1 That contentment of mind is a most precious treasure.

2 That godliness alone can produce and procure this contentment.

3 That true contentment is an undoubted argument of Godliness.

For the first: (...). Epicur. apud Laert.
contentment of mind is an unvaluable, an inestimable treasure. For it is that
indeed that makes riches to be riches. Quis dives? qui nil cupiat. quis
pauper? avarus. Bias apud Auson. in 7. Sap. Divitiae grandes homini sunt vivere
parce Aequo animo. -- Lucret. lib. 5. Non esse cupidum pecunia est: non esse
emacem vectigal est: contentum vero suis rebus esse maxim sunt certissimaeque
devitiae. Cic. parad. 6.
Who is rich, says one well, but he that lives content with his estate? who
is poor, but he that never has enough? (...). Democrit. apud. Stob. c. 95.
That is true wealth indeed, that freeth a man from want. But (...). Chrysostom.
in 1 Cor. hom. 13. Ex animo rem stare aequum puto, non animum ex re. Ausun. Non
qui parum habet, sed qui plus cupit, pauper est. Senec. ep. 2. Instructa inopia
est in divitiis cupiditas. P. Sir.
what wealth call we that, when a man is always in want? Or Semper avarus
eget. Hor. epist. 2. l. 1. Semper inops, quicunque cupit. Claud in Ruff. l 1.
Egentis hoc non abundantis signum est. Cic parad. 6.
how is not that man always in want, that is not content with what he has?

And on the other side, (...). Chrysostom. in Ephesians. hom. 21. (...). Dives a divus,
qui ut Deus, nihil indigere videtur. Varro de ling. Lat. l. 4. Ita it is pauperem
^udicas, cui nihil detst? Sen ep. 119. Locuples est, qui paupertati suae astus
est, and parvose divitem fecit. Ib^d. 108. Cui cum paupertate been convenit,
dives est. Ibid. 2. and Greg. in Ezech. l. 2. hom. 18.
how is he poor, that suffers no want? Or (...). Divitiae sunt maximae
divitiis non indigerc. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 111. Quae sunt maximae divitiae?
divitias non desiderare. Mart. Dum de morib. Ibi vera copia, ubi nulla est
indigentia. Aug. de temp 212. Is maxim divitiis fruitur, qui minime divitiis
indiget. Senec. op. 14. Locupletem illum faciebat non melta possidere, sed
modica desiderare. de Fabricio Val. Max. l. 4. c. 3. Omnia nimirum habet, qui
nihil concupiscit. Ibid.
what wants he, that rests content with what he has? (...). 2 Cor. 6.10.
Sapientem nulla re indigere. Chrysippus apud Sen. ep. 9. Quid deesse potest
extra desiderium omnium posito? quid extrinsecus opus est ei qui omnia sua in
se collegit? Sen. de vit. beat. c. 16. Is minimo eget mortalis, qui minimum
cupit. Quod vult habet, qui velle quod satis est, potest. Idem ep. 108. Sanctus
ergo quisque terrents non indiget, etiamsi haec non habet. pauper est autem qui
eget eo quod non habet. nam and qui non habens habere non appetit, dives est.
Greg in Ezech. hom. 18. Hinc illud Socratis; Quam multis ego non indigeo? Laert
and Cic. Tusc. 5.
Many things may he be without, and yet Carere enim est egere eo quod habere
vetis. Cic. Tuscul. l. 1. Et Indigentia libido inexplebilis. Ibid. 4.
wants he nothing; no more than Non tu dives, and Angelus pauper, quta non
habet jumenta and rbedas and famulos. quare? quia non indiget. tunc vere dives
eris, quando nullius in digens eris. August. de temp. 74.
the blessed Spirits and Angels in Heaven want food or such fare as we can in
no wise live without here upon earth. He is no more poor or unhappy, because
he has them not, than Socrates dicere solitus cum Diis esse si millimum, qui
quam paucissimis egeret, cum Dii nullius egeant rei Animus est qui divitem
facit. pecunia nihil ad animum pertinet; non magis quam ad Deos immortales
terrena pondera ista omnia quae suspiciunt mortales. Senec. ad Helv. cap. 11.
Quae parata nobis sunt, non habet in usu Deus. Idem epist. 74. Si quis de
foelicitate Diogenis dubitat, quod non aurum, non opes habeat, potest idem
dubitare de Deorum immortalium statu, an parum beat degant, quod illis non
praedia, non horti, non rura pretiosa, non grande in soro foenus. Idem de vit.
beat. cap. 8.
God is, or the Angels are, because they have not heaps of gold and silver, and
other such earthly trash horded up by them in heaven.

Again, (...). Aristot. rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 5. Quo mihi divitiae, quarum si
dempseris usum, Quamvis dives opum, semper egenus ero. Maxim. eleg. 1. Legatur
hac de re ^eletis differtatio apud Stob cap. 95.
Riches, as the Heathen man truly observes, consist not so much in the
possession of them, as in the fruition of them. But it is contentment alone
that gives a man a comfortable use and fruition of what he has, that
procures him profit and pleasure of what he possesses. For Vltra se
cupiditas porrigit, and foelicitatem suam non attendit. Sense. de benef. lib 2.
cap. 27. Novis semper cupiditatibus occupati, non quid habeamus, sed quid
petamus inspicimus: non ad id quod est, sed ad id quod appetitur, intenti. Ib.
lib. 3. cap. 3. Quidest quod faciat obl^vionem acceptorum? cupiditas
accipiendorum. Idem epist. 81. Quid aveamus, quam quid habeamus, men's
frequentius cogitat.
where a man rests not content with what he has, there is the mide so
carried after that he further desires and has not, that he no more
regards or joyeth in what he has, Avaro tam deest quod habet, quam quod non
habet. P. Sir. Des^nt inopiae multa, avaritiae omnia. Idem Sense. epist. 108.
than if it were not at all. And where a man is discontent with his present
estate, there is all that he has, be it never so much, rather a burden than
any way a benefit ^^^o him; like meat that agreeing not with the stomach,
lies in it undigested, and not only proves unpleasant and unprofitable,
affording neither good relish nor sound nourishment, but noisome also and
burdensome to the whole body. So that where contentment is not, a man
regards nothing: and where discontent is, it infecteth and tainteth all
things, and so makes them, as if some malignant blast had blown on them,
unsavory and distastefull to him that so has them, rather sick of them, than
endowed with them. And certainly as a Non domus and fundus, non aeri^ acervus
and auri Aegreto domini deduxit corpore febres, Non animo curas. Hor. ep. 2. l.
1.
man diseased in body can have little joy of his wealth, be it never so much;
since as the Heathen man says, (...). Plut. de tranquil.
A golden crown can not cure the headache, nor a Velvet slipper give ease of
the gout, nor a Purple robe fray away a burning fever. And (...). Socr. apud
Stob. c. 92. Non magnis opibus jucunde corpora curant: Nec calidae citius
decedunt corpore febres, Textilibus si in picturis ostroque rubenti Iactaris,
quam si plebeia in vest cubandum est. Lucret. l. 2. Quemadmodum, nihil
differt, utrum aegrum in ligneo lecto, an in aureo colloces; quocunque illum
transtuleris, morbum suum secum transfert: sic nihil refert, utrum animus aeger
in divitiis an in paupertate ponatur; malum suum illum sequitur. Sen. ep. 17.
A sick man is alike sick, wheresoever ye lay him, on a bed of gold, or on a
pad of straw, with a silken quilt or with a sorry rug on him. So no more can
riches, gold and silver, land or living, had a man much more than ever any man
had, minister unto him much joy, yea or any true and sound joy at all, where
the mind is distract and discontent: without contentment there is no joy of
ought; there is no profit, there is no pleasure in ought. Eccles. 2.10.
All without it is but vanity and vexation of Spirit.

Will we see this by an example or two further confirmed to us? Haman, was he
not a most happy man, as the world accounts happiness, Nemo foelix est, qui
judicio suo miser est. Salvian. de provid l 1. Non est beatus, esse se qui non
putat. ^. Sir. Miser est qui se non beatissimum judicat. Sen ep. 10.
if he could have thought so himself? Ester 3.1, 2.
the next man in the kingdom to the King himself, the greatest one of them
that then was; he took place by the Kings appointment of all the Princes his
Peers, and all the Kings Court, by the Kings express command, bowed and did
obeisance to him: Ester 5.13.
he vaunteth himself of his glory, the multitude of his children, the
abundance of his treasure, his especial favor and inwardnesse both with the
King and the Queen: enough a man would think to content any man Egens aeque
est is qui non satis habet, and is cui nihil satis potest esse. Cornif. ad
Herenn. l. 4.
that had not an unmeasurable mind. And yet says he, that is the conclusion
of his discourse, Ester. 5.13. O dives, nescis quam pauper sis. quam inops tibi
ipsi videris, qui te divitem d^cis? Ambr. de Nabuth. cap. 2.
all this does me no good: It was all as good as nothing to him; he was never
the better for all this, so long as he wanted a cap and a courtesy of
Mordecai; because Mordecai bowed not the knee unto him, nor adored him, as
other the Kings Courtiers did. It was with him, (...). Plut. de tranquil.
as with little children, (says an Heathen man well of such) playing in the
streets, who, if some man as he passes by take one of their toys from them,
are ready to cast all the rest away from them, though they have many more left,
and sit crying and whining for that one that is gone.

Pass we from a Kings favorite to a King himself. King Ahab had land and
living enough and enough, (much more than 1 King. 16.16.
his Father Omri was ever borne to,) had he not wanted this contentment of
mind. But 1 King. 21.1, 2, 3, 4.
the little Vineyard of his poor neighbor was such an eyesore to his greedy
affection, that the discontent that he conceived, because he could not
presently compass it, Duos finitimos historia vetus describit, Regem A. and
pauperem N. quem horum pauperiorem, quem ditiorem credimus? alter regali fulcro
divitiarum praeditus, exiguam pauperis vineam desideravit: alter animo
despiciens regias gazas, suo erat contentus palmite. an non hic magis dives,
magis Rex, qui sibi abundabat, cupiditates suas regebat, ut alieni nihil
concupisceret: ille autem egentissimus, cui auram suum vile, alienus palms
pretiosissimus erat? Ambr. epist. 10. Rex sibi egere visus est, quia vineam
habebat pauper vicinus. ille regni opibus affluebat, and tamen cespitem
pauperis flagitabat: pauper nihil de possessionibus concupivit divitis, alter
certe censu pauper videtur, alter pauper est affectu. Idem de Nabuth. c. 2.
made him poorer than poor Naboth, that desired nothing that he had; and
deprived him of his whole kingdom that he had no profit of it, took no
pleasure in it; but, like a man that were in extreme want and necessity, he
gets him home to his house, and shuts himself up in his Chamber, like
one that durst not be seen abroad for fear of arrests; he casts himself
on the bed and refuses his meat, like a man that took thought for the payment
of his debts: He fares, in a word, as the former Author says of such, (...).
Plut. de curiosit.
like a sullen Hen, that having store of barley lying by her, gets her aside
into some corner, and forsaking her meat, scrapeth alone by her self, there to
find somewhat that she may be picking up out of the dunghill.

Yea come we to them that were indeed Lords of the whole world, not in title
only, but in truth, having and enjoying that by Gods free gift, that none
since them were ever able to come any thing near, much less to attain unto.
Genes. 3.1, 2, 3.
Adam and Eve our first Parents, albeit they were in the garden of Eden, (a
place abounding, as (...) Paradisum voluptatis. Vulg. hortos delicatissimos.
Leo Iud.
the word imports, with matter of pleasure and delight) amids all earthly
happiness; and had the whole world in their hands, and all the creatures at
command: yet no sooner had the Devil sown this unhappy seed of discontent
(the very first sin of theirs, as I take it with some other Reverend) in
their hearts, but they began presently to deem themselves poor and in want,
because they had not what they would; they account themselves as deprived and
debarred of all things, if they may not have the fruit of that one tree that
was only denied them, and Genesis 2.17.
of which God had foretold them, that whenever Genesis 3.3.
they touched it or tasted of it, it would be their bane. As if some great rich
man, or mighty Monarke, having wealth in abundance, and the world at will, even
whatsoever heart could wish, yet should think himself streitned and cut
short, but a miserable creature, or not so happy as he might be, because he
cannot, with Harpalum Alexandro mandante omni modo admisum, ut hederam in
paradisis Babyloni adjacentibus sereret, frustra fuisse, narrant Theophr. hist.
plaut. l. 4. c. 4. Plin. hist. not. l. 16. c. 34. and Plut. in Alex.
Alexander, get green Ivy to grow in his Gardens at Babylon; or because he
may not, with Cum medico monente, porcina non apponeretur, ut pote podagrae,
qua Papa laborabat, inimica, Affer, inquit, mihi ferculum, al dispetto di Dio.
Balaeus in Iul. 3.
Pope Julius, feed upon Swines flesh, or some other dish by his Physicians
forbidden him in regard of some disease hanging upon him, likely to be his bane
if he do; and so lie languishing and (...). Quod oenopolae servus de her^ suo,
qui cum vinum venderet, Vappam ipse potabat. Plut. de tranq.
longing after his own evil, when he has good enough at hand, as if it were
misery for a man to want that, though he have no need of it, that would but
hurt him if he had it. Ye see, that a man may be in Paradise, (I might well
say, in heaven too, as the Devil once was,) and yet not be happy, if he have
not a contented mind.

As on the other side, where this contentment of mind is, there is wealth even
in want, much more cheerfulness in wealth: There is as a stay of the desire,
so a resting and a rejoicing in that a man enjoys: and therefore a
comfortable usage of it, be it more or less, because content in it. It is
that alone that seasoneth all: it is that alone that sweetneth all: It is that
that is able, not only to season those things that are sweet and pleasant in
their own nature, but even Animus aequus optimum est atumnae condimentum.
Plaut. Rudent. 2. 3. Nihil tam acerbum est, in quo non aequus animus solatium
inveniat. Senec. ad Helv. cap. 10.
to sweeten also those things unto a man, that are harsh and unpleasant in
themselves. It is contentment therefore only that makes a man truly wealthy,
because it freeth him from want, and gives him comfort of that he has. And
as a (...). Plut. de tranquil.
piece of dry bread is more savoury to a man when he is in health, than all
the dainties in the world are when he is heart-sicke: So a little, says
Solomon, even Prove. 17.1. (...). Menand. Stob. tom. 2. c. 95.
a morsel of dry bread is better and more with quiet and content, than a
whole house full of fat beasts with an unquiet heart, than a whole world of
wealth with a discontented mind.

Now two ways may this point be useful unto us.

First, to inform us, what cause they have to be thankful unto God, be they
rich or poor, whom he has vouchsafed this grace unto, whom Philip. 3.11, 12.
he has taught, in whatsoever estate they are, therewith to be content. For
even the poorest man that lives content with his present estate, is richer
than the richest man in the world that has not a contented mind: he is
happier than Adam and Eve were sometime in Paradise, when they longed to eat of
the fruit forbidden them: Sensit Alexander testa cum vidit in illa Magnum
habitalorem, quanto foelicioris, qui Nil cuperet, quam qui totum sibi posceret
(possidet) orbem. Iuven. sat. 14. Si cui sua non videntur amplissima, licet
totius mundi dominus sit, miser est. Epicurus apud Sen. ep. 9.
he is a greater man than great Alexander himself, and in far better plight
than he, even for the present. For Vnus Pelleo Iuveni non sufficit orbis.
Aestuat infoelix angusto limite mundi, Vt Gyari clausus scopulis, parvaque
Scripho. Iuven. sat. 10. Numquam parum est, quod satis est: numquam multum est,
quod satis non est. ^ost Darium and Indos pauper est Alexander Macedo quaerit
quod suum faciat; maria ignota scrutatur, mundi claustra perrumpit. Quod
naturae satis est, homini non est. Inventus est qui concupisceret aliquid post.
omnia: detecto sine terrarum per suum rediturus orbem tristi, est. Sen. epist.
119 (...). Arrian. dissert. lib. 3. cap. 9.
he, for want hereof, when he had won the whole world, yet as if he had
been pinched and straightened for room, or penned up in a corner or in a prison,
as if the whole world were not able to hold him, (whereas Mors sola fatetur
Quantulae sint hominum corpuscula, mortuus idem Sarcophago contentus erit.
Iuven. sat. 10.
he could not take up so much as ten foot of ground, as In palestra prolapsus,
cum in pulvere corporis vestigium vidisset, Papae, inquit, ut minimam terrae
partem natura sortiti, orbem appetimus universum? Erasm. apophth. l. 4
his father Philip saw, when he fell in the wrestling place, and viewed the
print and proportion of his body there in the dust) Cum Anaxagoram audisset
mundos innumerabiles asserentem, (...); Alexand. apud Plut.
he sat weeping and wailing, like a forlorn person, that he could not find
out a new world to be winning. Whereas, by benefit hereof many a poor child
of God, that has not half that that he had, yea that has not a patch of land
in the world, but lives from hand to mouth by his daily labor, yet passes
his time as merrily, (as that Cynicke sometime told his host at Athens) as if
(...). Diogen. apud Plut. de tranquil.
every day were holy day, or a festival day with him: According to that also
which Solomon says, that Prove. 15.15. (...) sicut Ester 1.10. and 2 Samuel
25.36. Sic (...). Sophocl. Ajace. i. (...). Schol. Idem fere. Prove. 17.22.
A merry heart, or a contented mind, (for it is not spoken directly of a good
conscience, as it is commonly taken; (though it be true also of that, and that
be a mean to procure this;) as may appear both by the opposition of the other
member, and by the sequel of the context) is a perpetual banquet, a
continual feast. The poor man then has as great cause to be thankful to
God for his contentment of mind, as the rich man for his riches. Conceive it
by this comparison. Suppose two men lie sick of the same disease, a burning
fever, or some such like hot disease, as causes drought and desires drink,
and call both instantly for cold water to quench their thirst with. The
Physician coming to them, bids give the one that is more impatient, a good
quantity of cold drink, and yet he cries and calls still for more. To the
other he ministers (...) omnes dies afflicti mali. Sicut Genesis 47.9. and
Matthew. 6.34.
himself a little conserve on the point of a knife, that slaketh his thirst
and asswageth his drought. Whether of the twain in this case is more beholden
unto him? So here; every one almost cries to God for wealth: few pray with
wise Prove. 30.8. pasce me cibo demensi mei (...)
Agur for a competent estate. Now (...). Arrian. dissert. lib. 4 cap. 9.
Congerantur licet ista, nunquam explebunt inexplebilem animum; non magis quam
ullus humor sufficient ad satiandum eum, cujus desiderium non ex inopia, sed ex
aestu ardentium viscerum oritur. non e^im sitis illa, sed morbus est. quicquid
illic congesseris, non finis erit cupiditatis, sed gradus. Sen. ad Helv. cap.
11.
to one that thus prays, God gives abundance of wealth, as a deal of cold
water to quench his thirst, and yet he lies gaping still Ex magnis, ut mo^
est, majorum cupidi. Senec. de benef. lib. 3. cap. 3.
for more, as insatiable, says Solomon, Prove. 30.16.
as the grave, or the barren womb, or the dry land, or Saevior ignibus Aetnae
Fervens amor ardet habendi. Boet. consol. l. 2. metr. 5.
the fire, that never have enough. To another -- multa petentibus Desunt multa.
been est cui Deus obtulit parca quod satis est manu. Hor. carm. 3. 16.
he gives a competencie, some small pitance, but contentment withal, as a
little Physical confection, that stinteth and stays his desire. Whether of
the twain, think we, have more cause to be thankful unto him, and to
acknowledge his goodness toward them? The latter doubtless, as he enjoys
the greater benefit, so he has greater cause of thankfulness to him from
whom he has it.

Again this may serve to incite us to labor earnestly for this contentment,
and to pray instantly unto God for it. And it is hard here to say, whether a
man had more need to persuade the poor man to be content with his poverty, or
the rich man with his riches. For as Matthew. 2.9.
the Star that went before the wisemen, went when they went, and stayed where
they stayed: So (...). Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 14. Neminem pecunia divitem
fecit; imo nulli non majorem sui cupiditatem incussit: plus incipit habere
posse, qui plus habet. Senec. ep. 119. Nunquam dives eris, nunquam satiabere
quaestu: Semper inops, quicunque cupit. Claud. in Rufin. l. 1. Magnas inter
opes inops. Hor. car. 3. 16. Qui vult esse dives, pauper est. Aug. de temp.
Nunquam parum est, quod satis est, nunquam multum est, quod satis non est.
Senec. ep. 119. Qui continebit se intra naturalem modum, paupertatem non
sentiet: ^ui naturalem modum excedet, eum in summus opibus quoque paupertas
sequetur. Idem ad Helv. c. 11.
riches fly the faster from a man, the more eagerly he follows them, but
then stay, when a man's mind is stayed. Till that be, Hagg. 1.6.
all is put (as the Prophet speaks in another case) into a broken bag, that
will hold nothing, or (...). Dion. Chrysostom. orat. 47.
into a bottomless barrel, as the proverb is, that is never a whit the
fuller for all that is put in: And we are but like those that have a flux, that
take in much, but retain nothing, and so thrive not with their meat, are
nothing fuller or fatter for it, till this (...) animi profluvium, quo
laborant, isti, quomodo (...) illi Athen. l. 4.
spiritual looseness of ours be by contentment stayed with us. As Number. 9.17,
18.
the children of Israel therefore passing along the wilderness, marched
forward on their way when the Cloud went that conducted them, but there stood
still where it stayed: So may our affections walk on, while Gods hand goes
before them: but look where God stays his hand and cease to give, there
should our heart stay likewise, and we cease to desire.

To persuade our hearts the rather hereunto, use we a double consideration,
concerning others, and concerning our selves.

Concerning others, either those that go beyond us in riches, or those that
come short of us in wealth.

For the former; Nihil habet dives de divitiis, nisi quod ab illo postulat
pauper; victum and vestitum: Caetera omnia ejus super flua sunt. Aug. de verb.
Dom. 5. -- nil Divitiae poterunt regales addere majus. Hor. epist. 12. lib. 1.
he that has more than thou have, can but live and eat and drink as thou
do. And therefore 1 Timothy 6.8. (...). Pythagor. apud Stob. cap. 99. In quantum
sitis atque fames. and frigora poscunt. Iuven. sat. 14. Corporis exigua
desideria sunt: frigus submovere vult, alimentis famem ac sitim extinguere:
quicquid extra concupiscitur, vitiis, non usibus laboratur. Sen. ad Helv. c. 10.
if thou have, as the Apostle speaks, but food and apparel; (he says not
(...).
cates or (...).
delicates, but (...). Isidor. Pet. l. 2. ep. 57.
food, that that may feed: he says not (...), ornamenta.
ornaments or abillements, but (...), operimenta.
coverings or Garments quasi Gardments. Minshew.
garments, -- toga quae defendere frigus, Quamvis crassa, queat. Horat. sermon.
lib. 1. satyr. 3.
so much as may cover thee and keep thee from cold) thou have as much as the
mightiest Monarke, as the wealthiest man in the world can have. As Exodus 16.17,
18.
the children of Israel gathered Manna, some more, some less, but every man of
them, he that gathered most, had no more than his Homer: So here, though men
gather wealth some more, some less, yet has every man but his Demensam
portionem, a mensura, non a mense dictam, ut Donatus ad Terent.
demean, (...). Xenoph. paediae l. 8. Quid opes opibus aggeritis? non vultis
cogitare, quam parva vobis sint corpora? nonne furor and ultimus montium error
est, cum tam exiguum capias, cupere multum? licet census augeatis, fines
promoveatis, nunquam tamen corpora vestra laxabitis. Sen. ad Helv. c. 10.
heap he never so much up, he can for himself, for his own person have no
more than one man's ordinary allowance: (...). Epictet. enchir. c. 61. and Clem.
Al. paedag. lib. 3. cap. 7. Millia frumenti tua triverit area centum; Non tuus
hoc capiet venture plus quam meus. Horat. sermon. lib. 1. sat. 1. Quid prosunt
multa cubicula? in uno jacetis. Non est vestrum, ubicunque non estis. Senec.
epist. 89. Legatur idem epist. 61.
Though he thresh a thousand quarters of corn, though he have thousands of
fat Oxen and fed beasts in his stalls and pastures, and ten thousands of sheep
in his folds and his fields, yet can his belly hold no more than another man's
may: the rest of it goes to others, and is nothing to him. Eccles. 5.11.
(...). de Alexandre Xenocrates apud Laert. Et Pheraulas apud Xenophontem
paediae lib. 8. (...), etc. (...).
Where there is much meat, there are many mouths; there are many eaters: says
Solomon; and where there is much wealth, there are there many partakers: And
what good has the owner by it, but the name and Cn. Lentulus Augur, divitiarum
maximum exemplum, quater millies HS suum vidit: proprie dixi; nihil enim
amplius quam vidit. Senec. de benef. lib. 2. cap. 27.
the sight of it? Yea to speak as the truth is, (...). Hieroni Pindarus Pyth.
ode 1. Dispensatorem publicum esse se. Alex. Severus apud Lamprid.
the rich man is but a Steward to provide and (...); Philippus Macedo
renunciantibus jumentis pabulum defore si pro libitu suo castra metarentur.
Plut. apoph.
take care for those that appertain to him and have dependence upon him: -- ut
si Reticulum panis venales inter onusto Forte vehas humero, nihilo plus
accipias, quam Qui nil portarit. Horat. sat. 1.
as a beast or a slave that bears provender and food for himself and his
fellows, having but a single share of it only himself. If he have more than
thee and use it moderately, he has no more himself than thou have, unless it
be that he takes more Crescentem sequitur cura pecuniam: Majorumque fames.
Hor. carm. lib. 3. ode 16. Dives a paupere non distinguitur nisi solicitudine
sola. Pauperes ditioribus eo plerumque laetiores, quo animus eorum in pauciora
distringitur. Sen. ad Helv. c. 12. Intelligo me, non opes, sed occupationes
perdidisse. Ibid. 9. -- misera est, magnicustodia census. Iuven. sat. 14.
care than thou take. If he use it immoderately, with the rich glutton in
the Gospel, Luke 16.19.
faring every day deliciously, (to omit that Cibi condimentum fames, potionis
sitis. Socrates apud Cic. de finib. l. 2. Desideriis ista condiuntur. Idem
Tuscul. 5. Et Ibid. Confer cum istis (Anacharsi, cui pulpamentum fames,
Laconibus Persisque quibus cursu, sudore, fame, siti condiebantur epulae)
sudantes, ructantes, refertos epulis tamque opimos boves, qui nunquam sitientes
bibunt, nunquam esurientes comedunt; tum intelliges, qui voluptatem maxim
sequantur, eos minime consequi; jucunditatemque victus esse in desiderio, non
in satietate. Epulis immensis gloriantur, non delectantur. Senec. ad Helv. cap.
11.
he finds the less delight in it,) (...). Teles de divit. and virt. (...).
Socrates apud Stob. cap. 91. Levior jejunio mors est, cruditate dissiliunt.
Senec. de provid. cap. 4.
he does himself the more harm, Ista si quis despicit, quid illi paupertas
nocet? si quis concupiscit, illi etiam paupertas prodest. Senec. ad Helv. cap.
10.
and it were better for him that he had less: For that is verified of him
that Solomon says, Eccles. 5.10. (...). Teles de divit.
The poor laboring man's sleep is sweet unto him, whether he eat more or
less; but the rich man's saturity will not suffer him to rest: -- vides ut
pallidus om^is coena Desurgat dubia? Quin corpus onustum Hesternis vitiis,
anim^m quoque praegravat una, Atque affligit humi divinae partic^lam aurae.
Alter ubi dicto citius curata sopori Membra dedit, vegetus praescripta ad munia
surgit. Horat. sermon. l. 2. Hinc pallor, and genae pendulae, oculorum ulcera,
tremulae manus, furiales somni, and inquies nocturna. Solemn orientem non
vident, and minus diu vivunt. Plin. hist. not. lib. 15. cap. 22.
it breaks him of his sleep, it bereaveth him of his rest, it impaireth his
health, it is a means not to lengthen, but to shorten his life.

Again consider with thy self, how many an one wants that that thou have,
and yet deserves as well at Gods hands as thou do. (...) Favorinus apud
Stob. c. 93.
Thou look on thy rich neighbors to mislike thine own estate, and to
murmur for that thou want: Look rather on thy poor brethren, (...). Plut.
de tranquil. -- majorise pauperiorum Turbae comparet. -- Hor sat. 1. Aspice
quanto major pars fit pauperum. Sen. ad Helv. cap. 12. Pauper fiam? inter
plures ero. Idem epist. 24.
the far greater number, and compare thine estate with a many of theirs, to be
thankful for what thou have. Yea I may well say; Look sometime even on thy
rich neighbor, that lies grieved with the gout, not able to stand on his
legs, or to stir him without much pain on his pallet; thou have health, and
he has wealth; (...). Euripid. Telepho.
whether of the two, think thou, is the greater blessing of God? Thou
would think thy self happy, if thou had his worldly wealth and ability;
and (...). Arrian. dissert. lib. 4. c. 9.
he would think himself happy, and that with much better reason too, if he
had that health and ability of body that thou have. But to return to the
poorer sort, liker thy self. When thou see a rich man, says one, carried in
his chair or on men's shoulders, have an eye withal to them that carry him,
and that run through thick and thin by him: (...).
When thou eyest Xerxes that mighty Monarke with his endless army Velificatus
Athos, epotaque flumina Medo Prandente. Iuven. sat. 14. Sic Esa. 37.25.
digging down hills, and drying up deeps, building bridges over the sea it
self, and lincking shore to shore, Asia to Europe, making the dry land
navigable, and the Ocean passable on foot: cast thine eye withal down on
those miserable slaves, that dig down mount A hos under the whip, and that are
maimed and disfigured, their noses and ears cut off, because the bridge they
made brake as the army passed over it: thou countest him happy; and (...).
Plut. ibid.
they count thee happy. As if he had said, applying it to us and our times:
Thou hear of the king of Spain, what millions of treasure he has every
third year from his Indies: and thou think him an happy man. I say not to
thee, though I might so say, consider withal, how many mouths he has to
feed, how many followers, how many favorites, how many ships and galleys to set
out, how many garrisons to keep, how many souldie^s to pay, how many
intelligencers to maintain, etc. But, think withal upon those poor wretches
that row in his galleys, that tug at the oar end under the whip, or under
worse than it, having scarce a bit of good bread to put in their mouths, or a
whole rag almost to hang on their backs, enduring all the misery there that
can be imagined. Thou think him happy that has that that thou have not: and
they think thee happy that have not that that they have, and yet have that
that they have not. Or, (because (...).
such excessive great ones are not so much regarded, Stellae terra^ propius in
occidente vel orient locatae majores apparent, quam cum ad coeli medium
elevatae fuerint. Ex Alhaceni perspect. l. 7. Author Oculi mor. c. 6. mirab. 13.
the Sun shows not so great when he is at his highest as he does when he is
nearer the edge of the Horizon, (...). Plut. de tranq.
and the Faulcon seems less still, the higher he soreth, when he is once
gone above that that our weak eie-sight can well reach. (...). Aristot. rhet.
l. 2. c. 12.
Those that come nearer us, and are nearer at hand with us, are more in our
eye, oftener Invidendi verbum ductum est a nimis intuendo fortunam alterius.
Cic. Tuscul. quaest. l. 3.
eyed, and consequently more envied of us:) Vicinus dives cupiditatem irritat.
Senec. epist. 7. -- (...). Hesiod. oper. lib. 1.
A rich neighbor or two not much above thine own rank, that dwell by thee,
set thy teeth on edge, and are a shrewd eyesore unto thee, and make thee
think thy self but in evil case, that thou art not as they are, that thou
have not so much coming in yearly as they have, that thou can not fare as
they fare, and do as they do. But thou considerest not withal for those two
or three rich, how many poor and needy ones are on every side of thee, that
come as far short of thee as thou do of them. Which if thou did, thou
might justly say, as the Psalmist, Psalm. 147.20.
The Lord has not dealt so with every Nation; so, The Lord has not dealt so
with every one, no nor with many an one, as he has done and does with me. As
the (...). Laert. l. 6.
Cynick, when he found a Mouse in his sachell, said, he saw well that he was
not yet so poor, but that some were glad of his leavings: So many a poor
hungry soul, yea many a dear child and sincere servant of God, would be glad
of thy leavings, and yet deservest thou no more than any of them do.

Lastly, consider thine own unworthiness. Thou deservest nothing at Gods
hands but hunger and stripes. All that thou have from him, thou have it of free
gift. And therefore are we taught to pray; Matthew. 6.12. Da, non, read. Quia
nisi Deo donante noster non est. Aug. hom. 14.
Give us our bread. If we deserve not then so much as a bit of bread at Gods
hands, can we not be content, when God gives us abundantly both bread and
meat to feed us, and good clothing to cover us, and convenient housing to
harbor us, and friends, and favor, and credit, and countenance in the world,
so much of that that so many want, and so much more than we are worthy of;
unless we may have Iam. 4.3.
to waste on our Coloss. 3.5.
inordinate and extravagant lusts, and to revell and riot, as we see some
others do? We would think that beggar intolerably impudent and insolent, that
coming to our doors to ask an alms, when we have bestowed on him some
broken bread and meat, or some sorry cast coat, yet like those importunate
persons the Psalmist speaks of, that Psalm. 59.15. De talibus ex Callimacho
Zenodotus, (...).
grudge and grumble if they be not satisfied, if they have not their own fill,
and their own will, he should not be quiet and hold himself contented
therewith, unless he might have one of the best dishes of meat from our board,
or one of our own ordinary wearing suits given him. And yet is this the case of
the greatest number of us. Quantumvis dives es, Dei mendicus es. August. de
verb. Dom. 41. and in orat. dom. An non mendicas, qui panem petis? Idem homil.
14.
We come all as Beggars to Gods mercy gate; and God gives us out 1 Timothy 6.17.
abundance of many good things, life, liberty, health of body, strength and
ability of limbs, food and raiment, etc. a courtesy and competencie of each,
as he sees to be fittest for us: and Imprudentia est (Impudentia etiam) ut a
Deo divitias petas: ut panem petas quotidianum imprudentia non est. aliud est
enim unde superbias, aliud unde vivas. Aug. in orat. dom.
yet, forsooth, can we not be quiet, nor think our selves well, unless we
may fare as deliciously as Dives did, or go in silks and sattins as such and
such do. Jacob as good a man as any of us, was far otherwise minded: he
prays to God but for Genes. 28.20. (...). Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 14.
bread to eat, and raiment to cloth him: that if he might have only, he
thought himself well apaid. And what made him so sparing in his petition, but
the sight and consideration of his own unworthiness: Genesis 32.10. Inferior sum
quibusvis beneficiis tuis.
I am less, says he, than the least of all thy mercies. He knew he deserved
nothing, and was therefore content with any thing: he would ask no great
matter, but would hold himself satisfied, with whatsoever it should please God
in mercy and goodness to allot and allow him. In a word; Beggars, as I said
before, we are; no better than beggars the very best of us: And Beggars, we use
to say, must be no choosers, they must not be their own carvers. Rest we must
therefore contented with what God shall see good to assign us, be it more or
less, being more by much than ever we either do or can deserve any of us.

But is Contentment so necessary, and so precious a Jewel? let us in the next
place then consider by what means we may compass it; And so pass we to the
second point before propounded, to wit, that Godliness only can procure and
produce true Contentment.

(...). Plut. de avar.
A man would think that as meat asswageth hunger, and drink allaieth thirst;
so riches should satisfy, and by satisfying slake and quench the immoderate
and inordinate desire of wealth. But it (...). Ibid.
is herein far otherwise, as Solomon himself, and it may well be, upon his
own experience informs us: Eccles. 5.10. (...). Plut. ibid.
He that loves money, says Solomon, shall never have enough of it. Crescit
amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit. Et minus hanc optat, qui non habet,
Iuven. sat. 14. Auri namque fames parto fit major ab auro. Prudent. psychem. Et
crescit cupido censu crescente cupido. Author Oculimor. c. 12.
The desire of more grows, as a man's riches arise. (...). Teles de collat.
div. and virt. (...). Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 14. Sic quibus intumuit suffusa
venture ab unda, Quo plus sint potae, plus sitiuntur aquae. Ovid. fast. l. 1.
Habes aurum, habes argentum; and concupiscis aurum, concupiscis argentum: Et
plenus es, and sitis. morbus est, non opulentia. Sunt homines in morbo: humore
pleni sunt, and semper sitiunt. Quomodo jactas opulentiam, qui habes hydropem
conscientiam? August. de verb. Dom. 5.
As the dropsie-man, the more he drinks, the drier he is, and -- (...)
Aristoph. Pluto.
those that are sick of the greedy disease, canina appetentia, the doggish
desire, as they term it, the more they devour, the more hungry they are; so
the richer men grow, the more commonly they desire, more greedy do they wax
ordinarily of the world, than they were when they had less of it. As Luke
12.18.
when the fruits of their ground come in abundantly on them, they make their
Barnes bigger, and their Storehouses larger to hold more: so withal they beat
out the walls of their hearts to covet more, and Habb. 2.5.
enlarge their desire as the Grave, or as Hell; that never cries, Ho, because
it never has enough; -- Vtque fretum de tota flumina terra; Sic omnes animas
locus accipit ille; nec ulli Exiguus populo est, turbamve accedere sentit.
Ovid. met. l 4.
is never the fuller for all the souls that descend down into it, no more
than the sea is for all the rivers that empty themselves into it. (...). Plut.
de avar. Crescit indulgens sibi dirus hydrops, Nec sitim pellit, nisi causa
morbi Fugerit venis, and aquosus albo Corpore languor. Horat. carm. 2. 2.
As those diseased persons therefore before mentioned, have need rather to be
emptied, to have somewhat purged out, than to have more powered in: the one must
be rid of the watrie humor that possesses his body, ere his drought can be
slaked, the other of the salt and slimie substance that pestereth his stomach,
ere his ravenous appetite can be stayed: So the covetous person, that is Prove.
30.15, 16.
so greedy of the world, and so immoderate and insatiable in his desires, has
(...). Plato apud Stob. c. 10. Et Socrates ut Laertius l. 2. Cleanthes, ut
Stob. cap. 92. interrogatus (...). Sed and Epicurus, (...). Ibid. cap. 17. Si
vis Pythoclea divitem facere, non pecuniae adjiciendum, sed cupiditatibus
detrahendum. Ex Epicuro Sen. ep. 21. Site Arrian. Epict. dissert. lib. 3. cap.
9. (...). Et vere Clemens paedag. lib. 2. 3. (...). Et Democr. apud Stob. c.
95. (...).
not need of more to be heaped upon him, but has need rather of some thing to
be taken away from him: he must have that discontent humor of his purged out
of his head, that covetous affection of his wrought out of his heart, that is
the cause of this his greedy and insatiable desire, ere he can attain to any
true Contentment of mind, ere he can come to have his fill. Till then all
this worlds wealth will be but as (...). Chrysostom. in Romans hom. 13. Scitum est
Scytharum legati, Quanto plus biberint, tanto magis sitire Parthos. Plin. hist.
not. lib 15. cap. 22, Vise Simocatum epist. 52.
wine and strong drink to the drunkard, that further inflameth him, and
increases his drought (...). Eusebius. apud Stob. c. 10. Cupiditas avari ut ignis
est, cui divitiae sunt ut ligna. quibus injectis is vehementius exardescit.
Vorag. de temp. 134. Eo majora cupimus quo majora venerunt: multoque
concitatior est avaritia in magnarum opum congestu collocata; ut flammae
infinito acrior vis est, quo ex majore incendio emicuit. Senec. de benef. lib.
2. cap. 27.
as oil or fuel to the fire, that does not quench or smother it, but feed
it, and make it burn fiercer than at the first.

If no wealth then can stay, or satisfy the mind of man, what must? or what
may? The Apostle points us to it, as here, so elsewhere. Heb. 13.9.
It is good, says he, to have the heart stayed, or ballaced as it were, with
grace, and not with meats, nor with money neither. That that must keep the ship
stiff and steedie on the Sea, must not be leavers and shores without it, but
Numque labant curvae justo sinc pondere naves, Perque mare instabiles nimia
levitate feruntur. Ovid. met. lib. 2.
weight and ballast within it. So that that must stay a man's raging and ranging
desires, must not be the outward supporting of his worldly estate, but the
inward ballacing and settling of the heart and mind; that which Gods grace
alone can do, as the Apostle speaks there, which is the same in effect with
Godliness, of which he entreats here. And in regard hereof it is that the
Psalmist says, that Psalm. 37.16.
A small matter to the godly, the man that fears God, is much better than the
greatest wealth and riches, that the ungodly and the mighty has or can have.
And Solomon, that Prove. 15.16.
a little with the fear of God is much better than great treasures and trouble
or vexation therewith. In which words also Solomon closely and covertly
renders a reason of that which his Father David had before him said, why A
little to the godly man should be of more worth, even the same in effect that
the Apostle here has, because there is no trouble or vexation of mind, but
quietness and sweet contentment withal. According to that which the same
Solomon elsewhere says, Prove. 10.22. (...). Aeschyl. Theb.
It is Gods blessing that makes a man truly rich, and he adds no sorrow with
it. 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 1^.
Without Gods permission and providence no man can have riches: For Deuteronomy. 8.18.
it is God that gives every man power to get wealth. But Et iratus dat, and
propitius negat. August. de diverse. 20.
God gives a man money many times in his wrath: as in the wilderness he gave
the Israelites meat in his anger: And so the curse of God many times makes a
man rich: but those riches are but accursed riches; Multis parasse divitias non
finis miseriarum fuit, sed mutatio. Senec. epist. 17. Dum majore tormento
pecunia possidetur, quam queritur. Idem epist. 115. Nemo solicito bono fruitur.
Idem ep. 14. Tantis parta malis cura majore metuque servantur. Misera est magni
custodia census. Iuven. sat. 14.
there is a curse and carking care ever accompanying such wealth. But where
Gods blessing makes a man rich, there he gives ever withal contentment,
that causes Psalm. 106.15.
comfort and quiet of mind, and makes a man rest satisfied and well apaid
with that portion of wealth, be it more or less, that God has assigned him.
Neither is this a common courtesy that God casts on all sorts indifferently;
but a peculiar blessing that he bestows on those only that love and fear
him, and that are his beloved ones. Psalm. 128.1, 2.
Blessed is every one, says the Psalmist, that fears God, and that walks
in his ways: For thou, that so do, shall eat of the (...). Sept. quod vetus
interpr. Labores fructuum tuorum, male reddidit: Cum (...) illic non fructum
significet, sed partem corporis eam, de quae Aristot. de part. animal. lib. 1.
labors of thine hands: happy shall thou be, and it shall go well with thee.
But, (...). Id quod Augustinum, Prosperumque Latinos latuisse parum fuerit;
Origenem Graecum in Romans c. 1. fefellisse mirum.
Unless the Lord build the house, they labor but in vain that build it: It
is vain for you, as worldly men are wont to do, to rise up early in the
morning, and sit up late at evening, and toil, and moile like an horse, all
the day long, and to eat the bread of sorrow and care; for, it is God that
gives his beloved rest: It is he alone that can give sweet comfort, and
quietness, and contentment of mind, and this grace he vouchsafes to none but
his beloved, to the Godly that love him, and are beloved of him.

It is Godliness then alone, that can cause true Contentment; and that can
cause true Contentment alone.

Godliness alone is able to cause true Contentment: because Godliness alone
brings man home unto God, out of whom true Contentment cannot be had. For the
soul of man, as Genes. 1.26, 27. and 9.5. 1 Cor. 11.7. Ephesians. 4.24.
it bears the Image of God; so Psalm. 17.15. Omnia copia quae non est Deus
meus, mihi est egestas. Aug. soliloq. c. 13. Dei imaginem animam nisi Deus nil
implet. Vise Aug. de civit. lib. 12. cap. 1.
nothing can satisfy it, but he whose image it bears. Fecisti nos ad te; and
inquietum est cor nostrum, donec requiescat in te. Aug. confess. l. 1. c. 1.
Humana quipp^ anima ad illum est suspensa, a quo formata. Et quia ad Deum solum
appetendum facta est, omne autem quod infra appetit minus est, jure ei non
sufficit, quod Deus non est. Greg. mor. l. 26. cap. 36.
Our soul, says Augustine well, was created as by God, so for God, and is
therefore never quiet till it rest in God. As Hinc est quod huc illuc
dispergitur, and ab unaquaque re fastidio impellente removetur. Delectationis
scil. avida quaerit quo pauset; unum vero quem sufficienter habere poterat
amisit. Vnde nunc per multa ducitur, ut quia qualitate rerum non potest, saltem
varietate satietur. Greg. ibid.
man fell at first into this restlesnesse by falling away from God; so Hoc
adepto beata est, quo amisso misera est. August. civit. l. 12. c. 1.
he cannot be recovered of it, but by returning to him again. It is with man's
soul in this regard, as it was with Noah's Dove in the deluge. As Genes. 8.9.
the Dove, after she left the Arc, found no rest for the soale of her foot in
the wide world, being then all a float, till she betoke her again thither,
from whence before she came forth: So neither can man, fallen from God, find
any sure rest for the foot of his soul in the whole world beside, till he come
back to him again Eccles. 12.7. Genes. 2.7.
from whom it came at the first. But it is Godliness alone, that brings man
home unto God; that tieth and knitteth the soul fast unto God; whereof Hoc
vinculo pietatis obstricti, Deo religati sumus, unde and ipsa Religio nomen
accepit, non ut Cic. de not. Deor. l. 2. a religendo. Lactant. l. 4. c. 28. Ad
unum Deum tendentes, and ei uni religantes animas nostras, unde Religio dicta
creditur, omni superstitione careamus. Aug. de vera relig. cap. 55. Qui tamen a
religendo, sive religendo Deum, quem peccando amiseramus, dictam tradit. Idem
de civit. l. 10. c. 4. Sed illud praefert retract l. 1. c. 13.
Religion, say some, has its name; that finds rest and repose for the whole
man in God, which can no where else be found. That which Solomon, out of his
own experience, confirms unto us, who Eccles. 2.10, 11.
having ranged abroad through all those creatures and courses, under the cope
of Heaven, wherein any hope of contentment seemed to show forth it self, is in
conclusion enforced to retire back again to God, Eccles. 12.1.
directing them all to him, that desire to find true contentment, and pointing
them the way to him Eccles. 12.13.
by the fear of him; that is, by Godliness leading them unto God, that they
may with him and in him find true Contentment, as being no where else to be
had.

Godliness then, you see, is alone able to cause true Contentment. But is
Godliness, may some say, able to cause true Contentment alone, without help
and aid of these outward things? Can it make a man content as well in want as
in wealth? whether he have worldly wealth or no?

Yea undoubtedly. That that is sufficient of it self alone to make a man truly
happy, is of it self alone sufficient to give true Contentment, though a man
have nothing else but it. For Aristot. ethic. lib. 1. c. 7. Sed and Aug.
confess. l. 10. c. ^0 and Epist 121. c. 4, 5. and de lib a^b. l. 1. c 18. and
de Trinit. lib. 13. c. 3, 4, 5, 7. and in Psalm. 118. conc. 1.
Happiness is every man's utmost aim: and he that has attained to it, cannot
but rest content with it: Nemo beatus qui eo quod amat (quod avet, quod habet)
non fruitur. Aug. de civit. l. 8. c. 9. Fruimur autem eis in quibus voluntas
delectata conquiescit. August. de trinit. l. 10. c. 10. and Aquin. sum. p.
prima secundae. q. 11. a. 3. Vnde Sen. Nemo fruitur bono solicito.
he were not happy, if he found no content in his happiness. Whatsoever thing
therefore is able to bring us unto happiness, cannot but bring to us
contentment together with it. But Godliness is of it self alone able to make
a man happy. That which (...). Plut^rch. Ad vivendum beat virtus sola
sufficit. Senec. de vit. beat. cap. 16. Beatae vitae virtus satisfacit. Idem
epist. 87. Virtus ad explendam beatam vitam sola satis efficax. Ibid 45.
the Heathen men said of their moral virtue, a mere shadow of it, is indeed
true of true Godliness, it is sufficient of it self to make him that has it
truly happy, though he have nothing else but it. For Apoc. 20.6 Inde beatus,
unde bonus. Aug. epist. 121. Impius and foelix sic simul esse cupit, ut nolit
pius esse, velit tamen esse beatus; Quod natura negat, nec recepit ratio de
Macrino apud Capitolinum.
holiness and happiness, Godliness and blessedness are inseparably lincked
together, and cannot be severed the one from the other. Psalm. 1.1. and 112.1.
and 119.1. and 128.1. Et si videantur ignaris miseri, tamen non possunt aliud
esse quam beati. Salvian. de provid. l. 1. c. 2.
Every holy man is an happy man, every Godly man is in a blessed estate, be he
rich or poor, be he in wealth or in want, whatsoever his worldly estate
outwardly be. So that of true Godliness we may well say, as he sometime of
divine knowledge, the ground of it, it is not earthly gain, nor worldly
wealth, nor gold, nor silver, nor corruptible treasures, but Dic te ista
nescire, sed nosse quomodo etiam sine istis homo possit esse beatus. Aug.
epist. 56.
it is that that can make a man happy without all these. And the Godly man
though he have not these or the like, yet has he that that can make him truly
happy without them, and so consequently that can give him contentment in the
want of them. And certainly if God be (...) Genes. 17.1.
El-shaddai, All-sufficient; then (...). 2 Corin. 12.9.
Gods grace and Godliness that brings a man home unto God, and gives him
interest in God, cannot but be likewise of it self sufficient to make a man
truly happy, and to procure unto him true Contentment.

But will we see yet more particularly by what means Godliness works this
Contentment in those that are truly possessed of it?

First, Act. 15.9. and 26.18.
it purges the heart of him that has it: and so brings with it a sanctified
use of the creature. For unless the vessel be seasoned, it tainteth all that
comes into it; and how can ought taste well then, that comes out of it? So
Hagg. 2.14, 15. Vase foetido, vel oleum, vel vinum facile c^rrumpitur. Ambr.
ep. 3.
unless a man's heart be seasoned with grace, it polluteth and defiles all
that a man deals with. Tit. 1.15.
Unto the pure, says the Apostle, all things are pure, but unto the impure and
the unbeleeving all things are impure, because their minds and consciences are
defiled. Since the worldly man then does but moile and soil and defile
himself with his wealth, does but taint and pollute it, and himself in the
use of it, no marvel, if he find no comfort or contentment at all in it.
Nothing is pure to them, says the (...). Socrates, ex Aristonymi tomariis
Stob. cap. 92. Sincerum est nisi vas, quodcunque infundis, acescit. Horat.
epist. 2. lib. 1.
Apostle, because their heart is impure. Quid relliqui est ^uin habeat, quae
quidem in hom ne dicuntur bona? ^arentes, patriam in olu^^em, amicos, gaenus,
cognatos, divitias? Atqui haec perinde sunt, uti illius animus, qui ea
possidet. Qui uta scit, ei bona, illi qui non utitur recte mala. Terent
beautont 1. 2. Malo nihil prodest, quia pravo usu corrumpit, quicquid ad illum
pervenit. quemadmodum stomachus morbo vitiatus and colligens bilem, quoscunque
accepit, cibos mutat, and omne alimentum in causam doloris trahit: ita animus
caecus quicquid illi commiseris, id onus suum and perniciem, and occasionem
miseriae facit. Senec. de benef. l. 5. cap. 12. Ideo nihil potest ad malos
pervenire, quod prosit; imo nihil quod non noceat. quaecunque enim illis
contigerant, in naturam suam vertunt; and extra speciosa profuturaque, si
meliori darentur, illis pestifera sunt Ibid.
As a foul stomach, stuffed with Choler, turns all into Choler, even the
finest and daintiest meats soonest of any, by means whereof no good
nourishment can accrue to the body by them, nor it grow to any good plight and
health: So a foul heart turns all into spiritual Choler, a bitter humor
and unsavory, that impaireth and hinders the health and welfare of the soul
as much, yea much more than that material choler does the health and welfare
of the body. Whereas Godliness sanctifying and cleansing the heart, and
purging out that corruption that before tainted and polluted it, and so made
all uncomfortable, because noisome and hurtful, unto us, restores unto us 1
Cor. 7.14. 1 Timothy 4 4.
a pure and sanctified use of the creature, and enableth us to such spiritual
nourishment and wholesome juice even out of temporal blessings; which the soul
begins now to find sweet comfort and true contentment in, because it uses
them as it ought.

Secondly, it quieteth the Conscience; which in the wicked, in the worldly man
is ever unquiet; and no true contentment can be till it be quieted.

Job. 15.20.
The wicked man is continually like a woman in travel, says Eliphaz. Etiamsi
poenarum ad tempus immunes videantur and exortes reatus, graviores tamen intra
se poenas luunt, and sibi rei sunt, qui aliis non videntur, atque in se
gravtorem conscientiae sententiam, cum de aliorum peccatis judicant. Ambr. de
bono mort^^. 7. (...). Pl. de tran.
His guilty conscience is ever and anon inwardly griping him, and with privy
pangs and throws pinching and twitching him there, Prove. 18.14. (...). Plut.
ibid.
where pains are most unsupportable, and where Prove. 14.10.
none feels or 1 Corin. 2.11.
sees save himself. And Esa. 57 20
the wicked man's soul, as the Prophet compares it, is as a raging Sea, full
of soil and filth, that is never at rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.
Esa 48.22. and 57 ^1.
Unto the wicked therefore, says the Spirit of God, there is no peace. D. Hall
of Tranquil.. 4.
A seeming truce they may have, true tranquillity they cannot have: Contra
quam Senec. epist. 105. Tulum aliqua res in mala conscientia praestat, nulla
securum. nocens habuit aliquando latendi fortunam, nunquam fiduciam. Verum
istud quoad homines; ex adverso quoad Deum Scelus quis tutum, nullus securum
tulit, P. Sir.
Secure they may seem; but they can never be safe. If at some time they seem
to have rest, and to be at ease; it is but as with the Sea, that seems still
sometime, but indeed never stands still, but is ever rising or falling,
ebbing or flowing, incessantly rolling to and fro from shore to shore: It is as
with the Sea, Noli huic tranqu llitati confidere. momento temporis mare evert
tur; and eodem die ubi luserunt navigia, sorbentur. Senec. epist. 4.
that seems calm and smooth sometime, but upon every breath of air or blast
of wind, is ready to rise and to rage, yea upon some sudden gust sometime
swells so, that ships are there swallowed up suddenly, where they lay
becalmed but a little before. Their seeming tranquillity is but as the health
of a feverous person when he is out of his fit, or the lightsomnesse of a
lunaticke that has his lucida intervalla, and talks by times as a man well
in his wits.

Now what Contentment can there be in ought, while the mind is thus affected,
while the Conscience is unquieted? (...). Plut. de tranquil.
So long as a man is heart-sicke, he can have no joy of ought, find no
relish in ought, be it never so pleasant and delightful otherwise, be it
never so acceptable to him at other times; his wonted company is then but
tedious and troublesome to him, his bed hard and uneasy, his chamber too
close, his usual fare, yea or fare more dainty than usual, is distastefull,
he finds no good taste in ought that he takes: but (...). Plut. ibid. --
valeat possessor oportet, Qui comportatis rebus been cogitat uti. Horat. epist.
2. lib. 1. Sanis suavior est panis, quam pulpamentum aegrotis. August. de verb.
Dom. 4.
come health once, and that sweetneth all again; and then likes he his
company well again, and can endure his bed well, and can feed savourly on a
dry piece of course bread, that loathed his panada, made of fine manchet
before. Qui dolet, aut metuit, juvat illum sic domus, aut res, Vt lippum pictae
tabulae, fomenta podagram, Auriculas citharae collecta sorde dolentes. Horat.
ep. 2. lib. 1. Nihil est miserius quam animus hominis conscius. Plaut. Mostell.
3. 1. Nec Siculi gravius gemuerunt era juvenci; Nec magis auratis pendens
laqucaribus ensis Purpureas subter cervices terruit. -- Pers. sat. 3. Alludit
ad Damoclis historiam, cui ea ratione Dionysius confirmavit, Nihil esse ei
beatum, cui semper aliquis terror impendat. Cic. Tuscul. l. 5. Perpetua
anxietas, nec mensae tempore cessat, Faucibus, ut morbo, siccis, interque
molares Difficili crescente cibo: sed vina Misenus Expuit: Albani veteris
pretiosa senectus Displicet. -- Iuvenal. sat. 13.
In like manner here: So long as a man is soule-sicke, he can have no joy of
ought; be his outward estate what it will, it can no more minister sound
comfort unto him, (...). Plut. de virt. and vit.
than hot clothes or blanckets can give inward warmth to a dead corpse, where
natural heat is utterly extinct: He may force himself sometime to some
seeming mirth, but, Prove. 14.13.
Even in laughter, says Solomon, the heart is heavy. Spem vultu simulat,
premit altum cord dolorem. Virg. Aen. Non been mendaci risus componitur ore:
Nec been solicitis ebria verba sonant. Tibul. 3.6.
He may set a good face on it in outward show to others, when his heart is full
of heaviness and bitterness within him, and Calceus iste nonne vobis
concinnus satis videtur? sed ubi pedem mihi torqueat ipse solus persentisco.
Aemylius apud Plut. de uxore.
wringeth and pincheth him privily there Prove. 14.10. Imus praecipites, qui
quis sibi dicat, and intus Palleat infoelix, quod proxima nesciat uxor. Pers.
sat. 3.
where none is aware of it but himself only that sustaineth and endures it.
And undoubtedly, let a man strive to smother it and smooth it over all that
ever he can, let him strain himself to lightsomnesse by all means that may
be, let him want no outward matter of worldly either support or delight, yet so
long as he has his guilty conscience racking and griping him within; though
Sardonius hic risus est: intus interim eos mordet conscientiae vermis cauteriis
omnibus acrior. Calvin. instit. lib. 1. c. 3.. 3. -- quos diri conscia facti
Men's habet attonitos, and surdo verbere caedit Occultum quatiente intus tortore
flagellum. Iuven. sat. 3.
he may geere and grin outwardly, while he is nipped and galled inwardly, he
can take no more true joy and delight, can find no more sound comfort and
contentment in all his wealth and his treasures, or in his delights and his
pleasures, than (...). Plut. de sera vindict.
a prisoner or condemned person, that sits drinking and swilling, or playing
at cards and tables in the Jaile, while the halter that he is to be hanged
withal, hangs over his head.

But on the other side, to a quiet mind, to a good conscience, any any thing
is acceptable, yea and comfortable, as to him that is now in health. Let the
mind be truly settled, let the conscience be once quieted; and the same man
that before took no joy at all in a large estate, found no relish at all in
great variety of dainties, walked melancholic to and fro in his gardens of
pleasure, had no comfort of friends and acquaintance, or of wife and children,
can now find much sweetness in a far poorer pitance, give God hearty
thanks for an homely repast, walk cheerfully abroad, live comfortably at
home, rejoice with his wife, be merry with his friends, be comforted in his
children. And this quietness of mind and conscience can nothing procure but
sincere godliness. Which therefore, as it gives true ease, and works sound
cure of those inward gripes and galls, not by benumming of a guilty
conscience, nor 1 Timothy 4.2.
scaring it, and making it stupid and senseless, as for a time it is sometime
in the wicked; but by removing the ground of them, Romans 5.1, 2, 3.
by giving a man assurance of the remission of his sin, and of reconcilement
unto God, and so freeth a man from that inward disquiet of mind, that banished
and kept out all true comfort and contentment before; so it brings with it a
sweet and comfortable use of all Gods good Creatures; which a man now enjoys
Psalm. 41.11.
as fruits of Gods love, as effects of Gods favor, and Non tam dono quam abs
te datum: non tam munere, quam abs te missum. Id vere triumphat scrio. Terent.
Eunuch.
in that regard more delightful than the things themselves in themselves are,
as a present sent a man from his Prince.

Thirdly, it brings with it assurance of a greater benefit than all the world
is able to countervaile; to wit, of Gods favor, and of his Fatherly love
toward a man in Christ.

It is the most heavy and the most uncomfortable thing that can be for a man to
be forth of Gods favor. Prove. 19.12. and 20.2.
The wrath of a King, says Solomon, is as the roaring of a Lion; Prove. 16.14.
as the messengers of the Death. And what is the wrath of him then, Psalm. 18.7.
and 104.32.
whose angry look alone is able to shake Heaven and Earth? And if Ester. 7.6,
7.
Haman had little joy of all his wealth and his treasures, when Assuerus
frowned on him, when he was fallen forth of his favor; no marvel if a man
have no joy of ought, find no comfort or contentment in ought, so long as God
frowneth on him, so long as he is displeased with him, while the black clouds
of Gods heavy Ioh. 3.18, 36.
wrath hang over his head?

And on the other side, by Contrariorum eadem est ratio.
the law of contraries, as Gods wrath is most hideous, so his love and favor
is most gracious. As there is nothing more discomfortable than the one; so
there is nothing more comfortable than the other. Psalm. 30.5.
In thy favor, says David, there is life. Yea, Psalm. 63.3.
Thy loving kindness, it is better than life. Matthew. 6.25.
The body is better than raiment, and life of more worth than meat that
maintains life, says our Savior. And, Job 2.4.
All that a man has, as the Devil sometime said, will a man give for his
life. But Gods favor and the assurance of it is a greater blessing than life
it self, and much more then greater than any worldly wealth, that is not at
all truly desirable, but as an help and prop to this present life: Able
therefore alone of it self to stay and support a man, to comfort and cheer up
a man, to give him true contentment, Quid hac Iobi miseria miserjus? quid tamen
hac infoelicitate felicius? perdiderat omnia quae de derat Deus: sed habuit
ipsum qui omnia dederat, Deum. Aug. Data perdiderat, sed non datorem. Idem
Psalm. 66. Omnia perdiderat, and plenus erat. Idem de diverse. 12.
to make him an happy man, in the want of all worldly wealth, though he have
nothing else but it.

The old Graecians that had (...). Eustath. in Iliad. (...). Inde Arcades (...)
dicti. Plut. Caio Gr. (...). Tyr. Max. orat. 11. Fagus and esculus arbores
glandiserae ideo vocatae creduntur, quod barum fructibus olim homines vixerunt.
Isidor. orig. lib. 17. cap. 9.
fed altogether on acornes before, Ceres frumenta invenit, cum antea glande
vescerentur. Plin. hist. not. lib. 7. cap. 56.
after that bread-corne came in among them, Sic odium cepit glandis. -- Lucret.
lib. 5. -- gratae post munus ariste Contingunt homines veteris fastidia
quercus. Iuven. sat. 14. Inde nata Diverbia, (...). Satis quercus. Et, Post
fruges inventas glandibus vesci. Legatur Plin. hist. lib. 16. praefat. etc. 5.
made no reckning of their mast any more, but kept it only for their Swine:
and Corium publica forma percussum apud Lacedaemonios usum numeratae pecuniae
praestat. Senec. de benef. lib. 5. cap. 15. (...). Nicol. Damasc. Formatos e
corio orbs auro modi^o signaverunt. Anonymus dereb bell. Hinc Hieron. ad
Ruffin. Aureos montes pollicitus ne scorteum quidem nummum profers.
leathren and De nummo ferreo videndus Plutarchus in Lycurgo. Legatur and Plin.
hist. not. l. 33. c. 3. and Alex. ab Alex. genesis dier. l. 4. c. 15.
iron coin began to grow out of request, after that gold and silver once came
in use. So when a man has once found the favor and love of God in Christ,
has lighted once on it, and got assurance of it, he cease then to be greedy
of this worldly trash, that is in regard of it but as dross or peble stones to
Gold and Diamonds, as maste to the best bread-corne, yea rather of far less
worth and value to that, than either of these are to it. To which purpose David
says, that whereas the worldly man's song is, Psalm. 4.6.
who will show us any good, who will tell us of any matter of profit? his wish
or request rather was, (with other the Godly) Lord lift thou the Light of thy
face, or thy favor, on us. For that Psalm. 4.7.
he had found more true joy and contentment in the assurance of Gods love, in
the view of his loving countenance toward him, than they had or could reap
comfort by their worldly commodities, their corn and their wine, wherein their
wealth chiefly consisted, though they came in never so plentifully upon them.
Psalm. 4.8. and 27.1. and 3.5.
There was sound rest and assurance of safety by the one, no security in, or
surety at all of the other.

Lastly; In that Socrates ab Archelao ad facultates ampli^res accersitus,
(...), inquit, (...). Arrian. in protrept. apud Stob. c. 95.
it fitteth a man's mind to his means, while it assures him both for the time
present, that that estate, whatsoever it be, that he is then in, is the best
and fittest for him; and for the time to come, that God will continually
provide for him, and never see or suffer him to want ought that he shall stand
in need of.

Heb. 13.5, 6.
Let your conversation, says the Apostle, be without covetousness; and be
content with what you have. For God has promised that Genesis 28.15. Josh. 1.5.
he will never leave nor forsake you. So that you may boldly say, as the
Psalmist, Psalm. 27.1.
The Lord is my protector, I need fear nothing; so, Psalm. 23.1.
The Lord is my Shepherd, I am sure to lack nothing. For Matthew. 6.33.
who so seeks Gods Kingdom and the righteousness thereof, shall be sure to
have all other things cast upon him, that may be for his good, he shall have
the one as an overplus in to the other. It is a great stay of mind to a man
for himself or his son, if the King shall say to him, as David 2 Samuel 9.7.
to Mephibosheth, or 2 Samuel 19.38.
to Barzillai the Gileadite, I will see that thou, or he shall never want, or,
you shall neither of you ever want, if I may help it: What a stay of mind
must it needs be to the Godly man then, when the King of heaven and earth
shall say as much unto him, Psalm. 146.3, 4, 5, 6.
he that is able to make his word good at will, and Heb. 7.25.
lives for ever to perform whatsoever he has promised?

Again, the Godly may say it, and assure himself of it, that whatsoever
estate he is in, that estate for the present God sees to be best and fittest
for him. Quare multa bonis viris adversa eveniunt? nihil accidere bono viro
mali potest, non miscentur contraria. Sen. de provid. c. 2.
If he be poor, poverty is best for him, or else he should not so be: if he
be sick, sickness is best for him then, otherwise God would not suffer him
to keep his sickbed: if in prison, restraint of liberty is then fittest for
him, otherwise the prison should no more be able to hold him, than Act. 5.23,
19. and 12.6, 7.
it was to hold Peter, when the doors were fast locked on him, and a guard of
soldiers set to keep him sure. If riches were good for him, he should be sure
to have them: if health were good for him, he should be sure not to want it:
if liberty, Psalm. 118.5.
God without delay would enlarge him and restore it. Psalm. 34.9, 10.
For there shall nothing be wanting to those that fear God: The Lions shall
lack and suffer hunger; but those that seek the Lord, shall want nothing that
is good. Psalm. 84.11.
God their Sun and Shield will give them grace and glory: and no good thing
will he, (...) Genesis 17.1. and 15.1.
who is God all-sufficient, deny unto them, that walk uprightly before him.

Mark the Apostles argument, that he uses for the proof of this point: Romans
8.32. Qui misit unigenitum, immisit spiritum, promisit vultum: quid tandem tibi
negaturus est? Bern de temp. Nihil unquam ei negasse credendum est, quem ad
vituli hortatur esum. Hieron. ad Damas. de Luc. 15.31. (...); Chrysostom. in Romans
hom. 15.
He that spared not his Son; but bestowed him upon us, how can he but give
us all things together with him? And conceive we the force of it by this
comparison: Suppose a man have a friend, who having but one precious Jewel of
great price, that he makes special reckoning of, is content to part with it,
and bestow it on him for the ransoming and redeeming of him out of captivity:
he is content again, when he is sick, to be at any charge with him for
Physician and Physic; and yet when he is in the fit of a burning Fever, he
will not by any means suffer him to have a cup of cold water. May not such a
one in this case reason thus with himself? Surely if it were good and safe for
me, yea were it not certainly dangerous and prejudicial unto me to drink such
cold and raw drink, this my friend that thinks nothing too good or too dear
for me that may do me good, that is content to be at all this cost and charge
with me for Physic, would never deny me a cup of cold water that stands
him in nothing. And consequently, if he be wise, he will strive against his
own desire of it, and bend himself patiently to endure the want and denial of
it, as done in wisdom by his friend, and out of a tender regard of his good.
And in like manner does the Apostle teach the Godly man to reason: God, that
having but 1 Petr. 1.18, 19.
one precious Jewel, to speak of, Ioh. 3.16. 1 John 4.9.
his own Son and his only Son, was content to bestow him upon me, to shed
his heart-blood for the saving of my soul, if he saw health or wealth to be
good for me, he would never deny it me, Hagg. 2.9. 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12.
being no more than as a crum of bread or a drop of water with him. So that so
long as he withholds it, I know well that it is better for me to want it
than to have it; and therefore (...); Rufus apud Arrianum dissert. l. 1. c. 1.
(...). Ibid. l 2. c. 16.
I will endeavor to keep my self quiet, and rest content with the want of
that, which I want for my good.

This Godliness persuades every Christian unto; and this Godliness enabled
the same Apostle to do: Philip. 4.11, 12, 13.
I have learned, says he, Magnus ille est qui fictilibus sic utitur
quemadmodum argento. nec ille minor est qui sic argento utitur, quemadmodum
fictilibus. infirmi animi est pati non posse divitias. Sen. epist. 5.
to abound: and I have learned to be in want. (Taught it a man must be, ere he
can attain to it; and it is a lesson, that is not easily learned.) (...).
Georg. Pisid. de vanit. vitae.
I have learned to be hungry; and I have learned to be full. (The one had need
to be learned as well as the other: and till a man have learned it, he shall
never be filled) I have learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be
content. I am able to do all things, yet Ille fortis est, qui non inse, sed in
Deo fertis est. Aug. in Psalm. 31. Bonus vir sine Deo nemo est, an potest
aliquis supra fortunam nisi ab ill^ adjutus exurgere? ille dat consilia
magnifica and erecta. In unoquoque bonorum virorum, qui Deus, incertum est,
babitat Deus. Animum excellentem, moderatum, omnia tanquam minora transeuntem,
quicquid timemu^ optamus que ridentem coelestis potentia agitat. Non potest res
tanta sine adminiculo numinis stare. Sen. ep. 41.
not of mine own strength, but through the power of Christ enabling me. And
so pass we to the third Point, that at first we propounded, to wit, that
true contentment is an undoubted argument of Godliness.

A contented mind argues a religious heart; and a discontented mind argues
an irreligious spirit. It is a sign that a man sees not Gods goodness,
considers not his own unworthiness, when he is ever murmuring and
repining, misliking and finding fault with his own estate, and envying those
that be above him. So that where coffeehouse is lodged in the heart, there
is Godliness excluded and shut out of doors. And hereby may a man know
himself to be truly religious, if he have a mind contented ever with his
present estate: not Feras, non culpes, quod vitari non potest. P. Syrus.
Optimum est pati quod emendare non possis. Sen. ep. 107. -- leve fit patientia,
Quicquid corrigere est nefas. Hor. carm. 1.24.
barely because he cannot mend the matter, or ease himself by being
discontent at it; (that is a kind Affectio humana caninae aequanimitatis
stupore sirmata. Tertull. de patient.
of doggish stupiditie, rather than Christian aequanimitie, as one well says:)
but because Psalm. 39.9. and 119.75. Deum quo authore cuncta proveniunt, sine
murmuratione sequi. Senec. epist. 107. Quicquid inciderit, non tanquam malum
aspernabitur, and in se casu delatum, sed quasi (a Deo) delegatum sibi (lubens
amplexabitur.) Idem ep. 120.
God has placed him in it, and sees it fittest and best for him, whose Matthew.
26.39. (...). Arrian. Epictet. dissert. lib. 2. cap. 17. Placeat homini,
quicquid Deo placuit. Senec. epist. 74. ob hoc ipsum quod Deo placeat. Hieron
alicubi. Deus quod vult, qui vult is semper est foelix.
holy will he desires to conform his own to, and Thymarides Pythagoricus,
cum discedenti quidam quasi been precatus, (...) Dii tibi dent, inquit,
quaecunque volueris; at ille, (...). Bona verba; inquit; Velim ego potuis
quaecunque Dii dederint. Iamblych. de vita Pythag. l. 1. c. 28. Magnus est
animus, qu^ se Deo tradidit: pusillus and degener, qui obluctatur, and de
ordine mundi male existimat, and Deos mavult emendare quam se. Senec. epist.
107.
not to writhe and wrest Gods to his; and therefore Job 2.10. (...) Marc. leg.
spir. 159.
is willing to receive as well evil as good from God, and 1 Samuel 3.18. Si Deus
bonus, Diabolus malus, nec a malo boni quicquam, nec a bono mali quicquam
potest provenire. August.
to rest content with whatsoever he does; whom he knows Esa. 39.8.
to do nothing but good, and Psalm. 119.71, 67.
to do all things for his good: that which is true piety, and a good note of
sincerity wheresoever it is found.

But here every man will be ready to say, that he may seem religious, that he
is well content with his estate, and thanketh God for it with Job 1.21.
Job, whatsoever it be. Well; if it be so, as Saint James says, Iam. 2.18.
Show me thy faith by thy works: so let us Aesuanimitas vestra nota sit.
Philip. 4 5.
show our contentment by the effects, by the fruits of it.

Of a note or two of contentment then a word or two, and so an end.

One sign of contentment then is, the use of lawful means only; When a man
desires not, nor endeavors to better his estate by indirect and
unwarrantable courses: when a man does Psalm. 37.1, 8. and 73.12, 13.
not fret to see wicked men rise by bad means, nor is sorry that he may not do
as they do: much less is moved to do wickedly, and to take such courses as
he sees wicked ones thrive withal, while himself and other godly, as
himself seems to observe, either decay, or else stand at a stay. Genes.
14.23.
Abraham, when the King of Sodom offered him some part of his spoils, refused
to take so much as a shoe-latchet of him, that the king of Sodom might not say
that he had made Abraham rich; that men might not say, that Abraham had been
made rich, not by Gods blessing, but by the Kings means; he might thank the
King of Sodom for his wealth. So a godly man will not gain, nor desire to
gain so much as a shoe-string or shoe-thred by profaning Gods Sabbaths with
Nehem. 13.16.
the Zidonian Merchants, by fraud of deceit, by oppression and extortion, by
biting usury, the Devils brokery, or by any other unlawful and indirect
course; that the devil may not say, that he has made him rich; as he said
sometime to our Savior, Matthew. 4.9.
All this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. For Illas
tibi divitias Diabolus dat, quas per furtum, quas per fraudem acquiris. Operis
imperf. apud Chrysostom. hom. 5.
it is of the devils gift, all that is gotten by such means, that is compassed
by such courses: and he has neither a contented mind, nor a religious heart,
that will seek or take ought at the devils hand. As the Number. 9.22, 23.
Israelites therefore traveling through the wilderness toward the land of
promise (which to have gone the next way, had not been a journey of many days,
yet were they many years about) they were to go as God led them, as they saw
the cloud go before them, and not to take that way that seemed best or most
compendious in their own eyes. So must we Observare vias Domini. Psalm. 18.22.
Heb. 11.8. (...). Philo de migr. Abr. Idem and Arrian. dissert. l. 1. c. 20.
(...). Pythagor. apud Boeth. de consol. lib. 1. pros. 4. Laudat and Plut. in
conviv. and Cic. de fin. l. 4. and Sen. de vita beata cap. 15. (...).
Cleanthes, and Epictet. enchir. Duc me, parens celsique dominator poli,
Quocunque placuit: nulla parendi mora est: Assum impiger. fac nolle: comitabor
gemens; Malusque patiar, quod bono licuit pati. Ducunt volentem fata, nolentem
trabunt. Sen. ep. 107.
observe Gods ways in our trading and trafficking, in our walking toward
wealth: we must keep the way that God leads us; go no other way than we
can see him going in before us, follow the line of his Law, though it seem to
lead us in and out, backward and forward, as if we were treading of a maze;
and not take those ways, leaving the guidance of it, that seem gainer and
nearer in our own eyes, and much more compendious than the other. Though we
might compass wealth with a word or two, with the bow of a knee only the one
way, where as we must travel, and toil and moile much ere we come by it the
other way: tho we might attain to it within a day, or a week the one way,
whereas we are like to stay long, many years, it may be, ere we come at it, the
other way: yet this way must we keep, and Matthew. 4.10.
refuse all the world with our Savior, if it be offered us to entice us out of
it. Otherwise as the Number. 14.44, 45.
Israelites, when they went out of Gods precincts, they went withal out of
Gods protection, and so fell before their foes, into whose hands they fell,
forsaking Gods shelter and savegard: So Qui properat ditescere. Prove. 28.20,
22. (...). Menand. Nam dives qui fieri vult, Et cito vult fieri: sed quae
reverentia legum, Quis metus aut pudor est unquam properantis avari. Iuven.
sat. 11.
those that make more haste than good speed to be rich, that balke Gods paths,
and step aside out of Gods way, to compass wealth, shall undoubtedly come to
evil. For Qui volunt ditari. 1 Timothy 6.9. Non ait, qui sunt, sed qui fieri
volunt. Bern. de diverse. 36. Qui volunt, non qui sunt. cupiditates accusat, non
facultates. August. hom. 13. and de temp. 205. Qui augere opes ambit, vitare
peccatum negligit, and more avium dum escam terrenarum rerum avide conspicit,
quo stranguletur peccati laqueo non agnoscit. Greg. pastor. l. 3. c. 1.. 21.
those that will be rich, says the Apostle, that set this down, Vnde habeas,
quaerit nemo; sed oportet habere. Iuvenal. sat. 14.
rich they will be, howsoever they come by it, per fas and nefas, by hook or
crook, as we say, by right or by wrong, they pierce their hearts through with
many sorrows, pester their minds with many fond and noisome lusts and desires,
and plunge themselves into many dangerous snares, that at length drown their
souls in destruction. Yea the very desire of bettering a man's estate by such
means, is an evident argument of discontent: when it grieveth a man at the
heart, that his conscience will not give him leave, or that Gods law will not
suffer him to use those means that he sees worldly men grow wealthy withal.
Malus miles est, qui Imperatorem gemens sequitur. Sen. epist. 107. and de vita
beata cap. 15. (...). Arrian. dissert. l. 2. c. 16.
He is out of Gods way, though he seem to be yet in it, though he stride not
outwardly out of it, that misliketh it, that likes any other way better than
it, that walks in it with an evil will. And Malum opus non est factum nisi
ab iis qui jam mali erant. Aug. de civit. Dei l. 14. c. 13.
as Adam and Eve sinned and were evil even in desiring to eat, before ever
they tasted of the forbidden fruit: So the very desire of liberty for such
courses argues evidently so far forth a mind irreligious, though the heart
never consent to put them in practice.

A second Sign of a contented mind is the use of such lawful means without
care and covetise, without distrustful care, without greedy desire.

It is the saying of some of the Ancients, and it is a true saying, that (...).
Clem. Alex. paed l. 2. c. 10. Adulter est in suam uxorem amator ardentior.
Xystus Pythag. in sentent. In aliena uxore omnis amor turpis est; in sua
nimius. Hieron. ad Iovin. l. 1. c. 1. Intemperans in conjugio adulter est
uxoris suae. Ambr. de Philosoph. contra Platon. Adulterum dicit uxoris eum
esse, qui in ipso quoque usu conjugii nullam verecundiae vel honestatis curam
habet. Aug. contra Julian. l. 2. Libido appetitus est sine judicio, sine modo,
ut si uxorem amem amore meretricio. Iul. Scal. de subtle. exerc. 317.. 2.
A man may commit adultery with his own wife: So a man may commit spiritual
fornication with the lawful means, that he uses and lawfully may use, if he
use them in unlawful manner. For the preventing and avoiding whereof our
Savior Christ bids us, Matthew. 6.25.
Take no care, (or, no thought rather, if you will) what we shall eat or
drink, or wherewith we shall he clad. In which precept, or prohibition rather,
he forbids not the use of lawful means, but the distrustful affection in
the use of those means. Which appears both by some of the instances that
there he makes use of, as that Matthew. 6.26.
of the fowls, that yet Matthew. 24.28. ex Job 39.31, 32. Legatur Aug. de oper.
Monach. c. 22. 23, 24.
labor and fly about for their food and their living, but without
covetousness and care; as also by (...).
the word that he there uses, signifying properly such (...), Etymolog. and
Eustath. Il ad (...).
a carking care, as even divides the mind in twain, and cutteth the very
soul as it were asunder.

For the better and fuller conceiving hereof, we must know, that there is a
twofold care: there is (...).
a studious care, and there is (...).
a carking care, which we call commonly a taking of thought: there is cura de
opere, and cura de operis successu; a care for our work it self, and a care
for the success of it, for the issue and event of it. And it is not the
former, but the latter of the two, that is there inhibited.

There is a care for the work it self, when a man is careful to do his
duty, and to do well that he does, and accordingly does painfully and
faithfully endeavor to effect it the best he can. And thus there is no man
more careful than the Child of God, than the Christian man; because Ephesians. 6.6.
he does of conscience all he does. There is another care about the issue and
success of the work, which our Savior Christ calls elsewhere, (...). Luke
12.29.
an hanging in suspense, and doubt for the event of it, as the meteors do in
the air, uncertain whether to stay there, or to fall down to the ground.
This is then when a man is not content to do his best endeavor, but he casts
doubts, and takes thought for what the issue of it will be; he fore-thinketh
with himself, that if he gain not by such a bargain, he shall be undone; if
such a debtor break or keep not touch with him, he shall be utterly
overthrown; if his grounds take not, or his cattle stand not, he shall not
have bread to put in his belly; if he cannot get the favor of such a Judge, or
such a great man, he shall never have any good success in his lawsuits, or
if he be toward the law, his counsel will grow out of request, etc. Conceive
it yet further by these two examples. Mark. 13.11.
Our Savior forbids his Apostles both (...).
to take care, and (...).
to take thought before hand, when they are to appear before great persons;
both to forecast with themselves what to speak when they come before them,
and to fore-thinke how that they shall speak will be taken when they have
spoken it. Yet the Ministers of the Word now adays are (...). unde meditari.
Lat.
to study before hand what to speak either in Church or Court, if they be
there to appear, because they have it not now ordinarily by immediate instinct
at an instant, as Matthew. 10.9.
they then had: But they are not (...).
to take thought how their speeches will speed, but leave the issue of it to
Gods good will. Again, Matthew. 28.13, 14.
the Priests bid the soldiers say, that Christ's corpse was stolen away by night
while they slept, and promise withal (...).
to secure them, or so to save them harmless, that they shall not need to take
further care in that kind. The Soldiers were yet to plot and devise how to
tell their tale so, as it might carry most show of truth with it, and having so
done, they were to rely on the Priests credit for the rest, who had given them
their word before for the issue of it, that it should no way prove prejudicial
or jeopardous to them. In like manner it is our part to take care how to
perform those offices and duties that God has called us unto in the best
manner that we may: but for the success of it, when we have performed our
part, and done our duty and our endevor, we must, as the Apostle wills us,
(...). Philip. 4.6.
be wholly secure or careless; take no thought for ought, but leave all to
God, and rely wholly upon him, who has commanded us 1 Pet. 5.7.
to cast (...).
all our care in this kind upon him, and promised withal that he will take
this care for us.

This distrustful care breeds that 1 Timothy 6.10. (...). Bron apud Stob. c.
10. (...). Clem. Alex. paedag. l. 2. c. 3. Aviditas materia malorum omnium.
Ammian. hist. lib. 31. parens. Laetus Mauritio. Sicut radix bonorum omnium est
charitas, ita malorum omnium cupiditas. August. hom. 8.
Covetousness that is the root of all evil. Not amiss termed the root, as
some well have observed: because as there is life often in the root, when there
is no sap in the branches: so this vice often lives, when other die and decay.
For Libidinis ignis paulatim extinguitur, and cum senectute consenescit: at
avaritia augescit continuo, and cum senectute juvenescit, quando vitia reliqua
consenescunt. Rolloc. ad 1 Timothy 6.
even old men Avaritia senilis quid sibi velit non intelligo. potest enim
quicquam esse absurdius, quam quo minus restat viae, eo plus quaerere viatici?
Cic. de seuect. Mirabilis sane dementia, gravioribus enim sumptibus se onerare
sestinat, cum jam pervenerit quo tendebat. Aug. de temp. 246.
against reason that have least time to live, are ofttimes most careful for,
most covetous of the things of this life: they think, though they have never
so much, that unless they gather still more, they shall want or starve yet ere
they die; they shall not have meat, says one, to put in their mouths while
they live, nor money to bury them with when they be dead. But neither will such
Philip. 4.5, 6.
carfulness, or such Heb. 13.5.
covetousness stand with contentment: and therefore must be both far from us,
if we would be accounted truly religious. We must banish all such distrustful
thoughts, we must abandon all such greedy desires. We must learn, as Matthew.
6.12.
we pray but for daily bread; so to rest content with it when we have it; yea
to rest content too, when we have it not, with the want of it. We must learn,
when we have done our best endeavor, to leave the issue and event of our
labors to God. As Ioab says to his soldiers; 2 Samuel 10.12.
Let us be of good courage, and fight valiantly for our King and our Country;
and let the Lord then do what seems good in his sight. So must we do what
God has enjoined us to do; and when we have so done, Psalm. 37.5.
commit our way for the issue of it to him, and rely upon him, and he will
bring it about; he will be sure then to give such issue to it as shall be for
our good.

The third and last note of Contentment may be Esa. 53.7.
Silence before the Sheerer. When God comes to sheere a man of his substance,
of his wealth and his riches, if he have a contented mind, he will not murmur
and repine at it, (...). Plut. de avar.
as Psalm. 106.25.
the Israelites ever and anon when they wanted Exodus 17.3.
water, or Exodus 16.2, 3.
bread, or Number. 11.4, 5, 6, 7.
flesh in the wilderness: but rather praise God with Job; Job 1.21. Abstulit,
sed and dedit. Sen. epist. 64. (...); Arrian. dissert. l. 1. c. 11. Tulisti
liberos quos ipse dederas. non contristor, quod recepisti, ago gratias quod
dedisti. Hieron ad Julian.
God gave it, and God takes it: blessed be Gods Name. Vitam reposcenti
naturae, tanquam debtor bonae fidei, redditurus exulto. Julian. apud Ammian.
l. 25.
I return my life to nature requiring it back, said that Apostata, as some
report of him, when he lay a dying, as a faithful debtor with a good will. So
(...). Epictet. Enchir. Vita data est utenda, data est sine foenore nobis
Mutua, nec certo persoluenda die. Pedo ad Live. Non est quod nos suspiciamus,
tanquam inter nostra positi. mutuo accepimus: (non tam data, quam commodata.
Primas. ad 1. Cor.) usus fructus noster est: cujus tempora ille arbiter maneris
sui temperat. nos oportet in promptu habere, quae in incertum diem data sunt,
and appellatos sine querela reddere. Sen. ad Marc. cap. 10.
should we return God his own again, that he has pleased to lend us, as
faithful and thankful debtors with hearty good will; Non moeremus quod talem
amisimus; sed gratias agimus, quod habuimus. Hieron. epitaph. Paulae.
rendering thanks unto him, that we have had them so long, not repining because
we can have them no longer. But we contrariwise, when we have had a long time
the use of Gods blessings, are wont to lay claim to them, and to account them
as our own by prescription; and so, Pessimi est debitoris creditori facere
convicium. Sen. ibid.
as it falls out oft-times by bad borrowers and worse pay-masters, God loses
a friend with us for asking his own of us. Psalm. 39.9.
I was dumb, says David, and opened not my mouth, because it was thy doing. It
is a sign that a man sees Gods hand on him for his good, if he can be silent
when God straitneth and impaireth his estate. And Heb. 10.34.
the faithful Hebrews, says the Apostle, with joy, not quietly only but
cheerfully, sustained the loss of their worldly goods, knowing that they had
better treasure and more durable laid up for them in heaven. It is a sign that
Heb. 11.25, 26.
a man looks at a better matter, when he can so readily and so cheerfully
part with his wealth: as Genesis 45.20.
Jacob regarded not his household stuff and substance in Canaan, when he had
all the fat of Egypt before him.

Shut we up this last point with this familiar similitude. A garment that
hangs loose about a man is put off with ease; but so is not the skin that
sticks fast to the flesh, nor the shirt that cleaves fast to the ulcerous
leper; a tooth if it be loose, it comes out with ease, but if it stick fast
in the head, it is not pulled out but with pain, yea many times it brings
away some piece of the gum or the jaw with it. So here, Tunc vere ostendimus,
quia accepta recte tenuimus, quum aequanimiter ad mementum sublata toleramus
Greg. mor. lib. 2. c. 42. Mihi ^ivitiae si effluxerint, nihil aufetent nisi
semetipsas: tu stupebis and videberis tibi fine te relictus, si illae a te
recesserint. apud me divitiae aliquem locum habent; apud te summum: ad
postremum divitiae meae sunt, tu divitiarum es. Sen. de vita beat c. 12.
a man is content willingly to part with his riches, when Psalm. 62.10. Sapiens
divitias non amat, sed mavult: non in animum illas, sed in domum recipit. Sen.
ibid. 21. Omnia ista nobis accedant, non haereant: ut si abducantur, sine ulla
nostri laceratione discedant. Idem epist. 74.
his heart is not set upon his wealth: but (...). Basil. ad divit. hom. 7.
(...). Hesiod. (...). Antiphanes. (...). Antipho apud Stob. cap. 10. Vtpote
quibus pecunia sua obhasit, nec sine sensu avelli potest. Sen de tranquil. c.
8.
if his heart be glewed to it, it even renteth his heart in two to part with
it, it pulls as it were a piece of his soul away with it. And that is the
reason why Job 1.21.
Job blessed God, when he took away all that ever he had from him, whereas
most men, if God take from them but a small pitance of that they have, are
ready, as Job 1.11.
the devil untruly said that Job would do, even to curse him to his face.

To conclude then: Would we be esteemed truly Religious? Philip. 4.5.
Let our contentment of mind Nota sit omnibus.
appear to the world; in not seeking of these outward things, either by
indirect courses, or with distrustful desire; in patient enduring the want of
them, when God sees good to deny them, and in quiet parting again with them,
when God shall call again for them: assuring our selves that God does all for
our good, as well in withholding or withdrawing of them from us, as in
conferring them upon us, or in continuing them unto us: So shall we be sure of
a comfortable use of Gods good blessings in this life, and of certain
enjoyment of eternal blessedness together with God himself in the next life.

FINIS.
THE JOY OF THE JUST; WITH The Signs of Such.

A DISCOVRSE TENDING TO THE COMFORT OF THE Dejected and Afflicted; AND To the
Trial of Sincerity. BEING THE ENLARGEMENT of a Sermon preached at
Blackfriars London; on PSALM 97.11.

By THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND for FVLKE CLIFTON, 1637.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir HORATIO VERE, late Lord General of his Majesty's
Forces in the Palatinate: And TO THE RIGHT Worthy and religious LADY his Wife:
True Joy in Christ, and full Joy with Christ.
RIGHT HONORABLE, and Nobilis genere, nobilior sanctitate. August. epist. 179.
truly Noble, (for that is the best (...). Greg. Naz. in Gergon. and in Basil.
(...). Idem in Patr. (...). Idem in Heron. (...). Isidor. Pel. lib. 2. epist.
291. Summa apud Deum nobilitas est clarum esse virtutibus. Paulin. ad Celant.
Christianum esse, est vere nobilem esse. Nec genere sed virtute censetur
nobilitas. (...). Iphicrat. Arist. rhet. lib. 2. cap. 23. Quod optimum
nobilissimum. Velleius hist. lib. 2. (...). Antisthen. Laert. lib. 6. (...).
Plato ibid. lib. 3. Quis generosus? ad virtutem been a natura compositus. Non
facit nobilem atrium plenum sumosis imaginibus: animus facit. Semec. epist. 44.
Nemo altero nobilior, nisi cui rectius ingenium, and artibus bonis aptius. Idem
de ben. lib. 3. cap. 28. (...). ^urip. Dictye. (...) Epicharm. (...). Demo^r.
Stob. cap. 84. -- animalia muta Quis generosa putet nisi fortia? Nobilitas
summa est atque unica Virtus. Iuven sat. 8.
Nobility that Christian Grace gives:) give me leave the meanest of many
that wish well to your Lordship, and rejoice in your welfare, with this sorry
Present (though coming somewhat late) to welcome your return home from your
late employment abroad: And therein to join Her with you, whom 1 Pet. 3.7.
(...). Greg. Naz. in Gorgon. (...). Idem in Patr. (...). Idem in convent.
Episc. Itaque quod Hieron. olim praefat. in Prove. paucis immutatis, Iungat
Epistola, quos junxit Conjugium. Imo charta non dividat, quos Christi nectil
amor. Et ad Chrom. and Eusebius. Non debet charta dividere, quos amor mutuus
copulavit, etc.
a spiritual knot, as well as a civil band, has made one with you in Christ.
This the rather, because I assure my self, that you are both of you of the
Persons therein decyphered, and have joint share therefore in the Benefit
therein propounded and promised. For the Work it self; I doubt not, but many
things will be found in it, that to a mere Natural Man will seem to be
(...). Cleanthes apud Arrian. dissert. l 4. c. 1.
strange Paradoxes; which yet every good Christian, having duly weighed, will
easily acknowledge with me, to be agreeable to Truth. So it is indeed that
Opera. Dei sunt in mediis contrariis. Luther. apud Paulum ab Eitzen in Genes.
(...). Greg. Naz. in Cypr.
GODS Works (as that blessed Vere (...). Quod de Bapt. Dominus Joan. 5.35.
Light of GOD Martine Luther, was wont to say) are effected usually by
Contraries. And a Christian Man's Life here (as Aeternitas rerum constat
contrariis. Senec. ep. 107. (...). Eurip. Plut. de tranquil. (...). Menand.
Stob. c. 93.
the Heathen Man said of every Man's) is a mere Mixture of (...). Caesarius
apud Greg. Naz. ep. 59.
Contrarieties. Psalm. 34.19. and 73.14. Luke 9.23. and 21.12, 16, 17. Act.
14.22. 1 Cor. 15.19.
None encumbered with more Crosses; but Luke 9.24. and 21.18. 2 Cor. 1 3, 4, 5.
and 2.14 and 6.10. and 10.4.
none accompanied with more Comforts, and those such as may well not
countervaile only, but even thoroughly weigh down the other. In so much, that
I see not why a Christian Man, though exposed to such a multitude of Crosses,
(were it not for his own, either want of Wisdom, or weakness) might not
well live the comfortablest life of any Man in the World, whatsoever estate or
condition of life GOD has pleased to assign and confine him unto. Nor have
any therefore cause to waive the profession of Christianity in regard of such
Crosses, as a disconsolate and uncomfortable estate. Of Children we use to
say, that they are (...). Plut. de prolis amore. (...). Incertus Author. (...).
Democrit. apud Stob. cap. 74. (...). Evenus apud Plut. de am. prol.
Certain Cares, uncertain Comforts; and yet we see Genesis 15.2. and 30.1. John
16.21. (...); Menand apud Stob. c. 73.
how desirous naturally Men and Women are to have Issue: and that, 1 Samuel 1.6,
7, 8, 11. (...). Idem ibid.
even those also that for outward things mihgt well live comfortably without.
How much more have all cause to desire Christian Grace, when the Comforts that
attend it, are so sure and certain, if men be not their own enemies; yea
when no sound Comfort (as is here showed) can be attained without it;
Unworthie is he of Issue, that (...). Eurip. Oenoma^.
esteems not the Care he takes for his Children, especially (...). --
Eurip. Meleagr. (...). -- Menand.
being toward, dutiful, and inclinable to good things, (...). Eurip. Danae. --
(...). Idem Androm. inde restituendus apud Stob. cap. 74.
abundantly over-countervailed in the Comfort he has or may have of them. Nor
is he worthy of Christ, that accounts not the Crosses that Christianity
and the Profession of it may procure, (for of other Crosses that worldly men
are alike subject to with such, what need I say ought? and yet let these go
also in the same reckoning with those;) all abundantly Romans 5.2, 3. and 8.18.
overcountervailed with those spiritual Comforts, that the assurance of Gods
favor toward him in Christ Jesus may afford him, if the Eye of his Soul be
thoroughly opened duly to apprehend it. This mine endeavor is to show in this
weak Discourse; (the weaker, (...). Languente men's and languet una corpore.
because amids much weakness during my late restraint by sickness, out of
broken Notes, either reserved by my self, or taken by others from my mouth, as
they are wont to be, at the time of the deliverie of it, with addition of such
things as came then further to mind, and seemed not altogether impertinent, it
was by peece-meale put together:) and to encite all good Christians
(notwithstanding such occurrents) to strive and strain themselves Psalm. 13.4,
5. and 42, 5, 11.
by their cheerful carriage in such cases, to seal up the truth of it (which
they cannot but acknowledge;) to those that may question it, or make doubt of
it. This was I the rather enduced to take some pains in, supposing that other
weak ones like my self, (for of such am I bold to judge, as (...). Greg. Naz.
in Julian. 1. (...). Idem post redit. suum. Hoc enim proclivius homo suspicatur
in alio quod sentit in seipso. Aug. in Psalm. 118. conc. 12.
the manner is, by my self;) being ordinarily too too backward herein, might
have need of some quickening and stirring up thereunto. To which purpose if it
shall be availeable unto any the meanest, I shall have cause to bless God for
his Blessing thereupon. If to your selves among others, Persons for Place and
Piety so eminent, (for even (...). Greg. Naz. in Basil.
the worthiest also have their wants; nor do the best joy so much as they
either ought or might in this their Blessed Estate; and Liceat usurpare Pauli
illud Romans 15.14, 15. Martem aere liticen accendit bellantibus Imbellis ipse:
plebsque ignava fortibus Clamore stimulos subdit dimicantibus. Acer, and ad
palmae perse cursurus honores, Si tamen horteris, fortius ibit equus. Ovid.
Pont. 2.11.
the very weakest may help on the worthiest:) much more. Let it howsoever
testify my deserved respect to you both, and my thankful acknowledgement of
your Lordships kindness showed me in my friend and my self, at home and
abroad. So with unfeigned thanks to Gods Goodness for your Lordships Safe
return to us, reserved, I hope, in mercy for further Service to God and his
Church; and hearty Prayer for the continuance of health and welfare, such
especially as 3 John 2.
Saint John wishes his beloved Gaius, to you both; I take leave, and rest ready

To be commanded by you in the Lord, THOMAS GATAKER.

THE JOY OF THE JUST: WITH THE SIGNS OF SVCH.
PSALM 97.11. Light is sown for the Righteous; and Joy for the Upright in
Heart.


AN Musica in luctu, importuna narratio.
unseasonable discourse, says Eccles. 22.6.
Siracks Son, is as music in mourning. And to some, peradventure, it will
seem somewhat unseasonable to treat of (...). Sophocl.
Joy in times of Grief; in such a time especially, when so much cause of
sorrow, that it may well seem a sin not to be in some sort Amos 6.6.
sick of it. And yet it will not (I hope) prove so unseasonable, if all be
well weighed, to treat even in such a time of such Joy, as Gods Spirit here
speaks of. For Math. 9.12. (...); Greg. Naz. ep. 66.
when is Physic more seasonable than in time of sickness? Or when had Gods
Children more need of Esai. 40.1. and 50.4. and 61.1. Temporis officium est
solatia dicere certi, dum dolor in cursu est. Ovid. de Pont. 4.11.
cheering up, than when they are pressed down with the heaviest crosses and
calamities? The very maine Scope and drift of the Psalmist, who ever he was, in
this Psalm.

The Psalm Psalm
is Partim (...), partim (...)
partly Prophetical, and partly Consolatorie.

And may well be divided into Doctrine, Scope.
and Use. Matter.



Doctrine delivered in the Verse. 1.-9.
former Part of the Psalm, is concerning Kingdom of Christ: the Glory,
Greatness, Might, Majesty, and ample extent whereof, verse to the tenth.

Use of the Doctrine is twofold in the rest of the Psalm;

Encouragement,

And partly for Comfort.

Encouragement, Verse. 10.
to incite the Godly to cleave close unto God, and to depend wholly upon him,
with assured expectation of safety and deliverance from him, as being so
Great, so Mighty, so Potent a Prince.

Comfort, Verse. 12.
to cheer up their hearts that so do, amids those manifold crosses and
calamities that they may chance to be exercised here withal for a while.

Text.
Verse. 11.
Between both which is this pithie and golden Sentence inserted, inferred as a
Corollary upon the former, prefixed as an Introduction unto the latter;
Connection.
and so shaking hands, as it were, jointly with either: Light is sown for the
Righteous; and Joy for the upright in heart.

Division.


A Blessing or a Benefit, and that such an one as all desire, Eccles. 11.7.
(...). Eurip. Iphig. Aul. -- (...). Ibid. (...). Dion. Chrysostom. orat. 3.
Light or Joy: for they are both in substance the same: the one put for the
other, as Ester 8.16. Esa. 50.10.
elsewhere often, in the former part; and the one of them expounded by the other
in the latter part.

Persons to whom this Benefit belongs, who may therefore lay claim to it,
and justly hope for and expect it; 1 Cor. 15.19.
those that seem to share least in it, the Just, or the Righteous; that is, as
in the latter part of the Verse it is expounded, all such as are sincere and
upright in heart.

Manner or Measure, how far forth such either do or may partake in it for
the present: It is sown for them: it is as yet but seed-time with them: some
beginnings of it they have already, and the rest they shall have; but their
Harvest is behind yet, the maine Crop is yet to come.

first and the second together. For to speak first apart would be to small
purpose.

third by it self:

Illustration of the second, ending there our Discourse, where the Text it
self ends.

Point then that in the first place offers it self to us, Gaudium bonorum
est. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 14. c. 8.
Light or Joy is the Just man's Lot; And Nisi justus non gaudet. Senec. epist. 59.
The Just Man's Lot alone.

Joy belongs to the Righteous, and to the Righteous only: None but the Godly
have good or just cause to rejoice.

The Righteous have right to it.

There is (...). Greg. Naz. de bapt.
Light and Joy sown for

To them it is promised: Psalm. 68.4.
The Righteous shall be glad and rejoice And, Psalm 64.10.
The Righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and trust in him: and all that be
upright in heart shall rejoice.

To them it shall be performed: Psalm. 126.5.
They that sow now in tears, shall Esa. 35.10.
The redeemed of the Lord shall turn unto Sion: and everlasting joy shall be
upon their heads. Yea when the wicked shall mourn and howl, they shall sing
merrily. Esa. 65.13, 14.
My servants shall rejoice, when you shall be abashed: my servants shall sing
for joy of heart, when you shall cry out for anguish of heart, and shall howl
again for vexation of spirit.

To them it is in part made good for the present. Psalm. 30.11. and 32.7.
There is a snare, a cord, says Solomon, Prove. 29.6.
in the sin of the wicked to strangle their joy with: but the righteous sing
and are merry. And, Psalm. 30.11. and 32.7.
Thou have turned my mourning into dancing, says David, thou have loosed my
sackcloth, and girt me with gladness.

Unto it they are exhorted. Rejoice in the Lord, says the Psalmist, ye
righteous, as Psalm. 33.1.
elsewhere, so Verse. 12.
in the very next words to my Text. And, Psalm. 32.11.
Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous: and shout for joy, all ye that
are upright of heart. And Philip. 3.1.
Finally, says the Apostle, brethren rejoice in the Lord: And, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
Rejoice evermore: And again, Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always: and yet again, I say, Rejoice. Nor would the
Holy Ghost thus incite to it, if there were not good ground for it.

Now the Godly have a twofold cause to rejoice:

Et res plena gaudio and spes. Gaudium in re; gaudium in spe. Gaudium de
possessione, gaudium de promissione Gaudium de praesenti exhibitione; gaudiu^
de futura expectatione. Bern. de temp. 15
In regard of what they have; and in regard of what they hope for:

In regard of the present grace and favor of God:

And in regard of their hope of future glory with God:

They are in present possession of the one; they live in expectation of the
other.

Romans 5.9.
freed from Gods wrath: they are Romans 5.10.
reconciled unto God; they are Romans 5.1.
at one again with him; yea they Ephesians. 1.6.
in special grace and favor with him.

First, they are freed from Gods wrath. Which the more heavy and dreadful it
is, the greater joy it must needs be for a man to be freed from it, that was
before obnoxious, as we are all naturally unto it. Prove. 20.2. and 19.12.
The wrath of a King, says Solomon, is as the roaring of a Lion: ( Amos 3 8.
who when he roareth, who trembles not?) and Prove. 16.14.
as the messengers of death. And what is the wrath then of 1 Timothy 6.15. Apoc.
19.16.
the King of Kings, the sovereign Lord, not of men's bodies only, but of their
souls too, able as Genes. 2.7.
he made both, so Iam. 4.12. Matthew. 10.28.
to destroy both in Hell fire, Esa. 66.24.
where the worm never dies, and the fire never decays, and Apoc. 14.10, 11.
Vbi mors sine morte, finit sine sine, defectus sine defectu: quia and mors
semper vivit, and finis semper incipit, and defectus deficere nescit. Greg.
mor. l. 9. c. 47.
the torment consequently is never at an end? Now what greater joy can there be
to a poor Prisoner, a condemned person, that lies in hourly expectation of
being drawn forth to execution, That through daily fear of death, Heb. 2.15.
1 Cor. 15.31. Quotidie moritur, mortem qui assidue pavet. Perit ante vulnus
pavore, cui spiritum rapuit timor. Sen. Herc. fur. 4. Si quod ab homine timetur
malum, eo perinde dum expectatur quast venisset urgetur: and quicquid ne
patiatur time^, jam metu patitur. Sen. ep. 74.
dies daily before he die, and Morte mori potius quam vitam ducere mortis.
Morsque minus poenae quam mora (quam metus) mortis habet. Maximin. eleg. 1.
Quid enim hujus vivere est, nisi diu mori? Sen. epist. 101.
leads by means thereof an anxious life, little better, if not Insidias
semel subire satius est quam cavere semper. Iul. Caesar. Sueto^. c. 86. Incidi
semel est satius qu^m semper premi. Nemo tam timidus est, ut malit semper
pendere quam semel cadere. Sen. epist. 22. Gravius est aliquem spem mortis
expectare, quam tormentum in cru^el^a sustinere. Cassiod. epist. var. 7.6.
more bitter, than death; What greater Joy, I say, can there be to such an one,
than to have tidings brought him that his Pardon is procured? We read in our
own Chronicles, of Vicount Lisle in Hen. 8. Francise Landav in Annal. l. 1.
and Holinsh. in Hen. 8. an. 34.
some who have been so surcharged and transported with joy thereupon, that
they have even surfetted of it, (as persons that have been long famished,
feeding over-greedily upon good victuals, when they come at first again to
them) and have died with it: Their joy has been more than they were able
Quomodo de Tantalo Pindar. Olymp. 1. (...).
to digest. And what greater joy then can there be to a poor distressed soul,
especially having lien some space of time under the heavy apprehension of Gods
wrath, and so having had some kind of Quomodo Bern. ad illud Psalm. 55.15.
Descendant in infernum viventes. Descendant viventes, ut non descendant
morientes. Ad fratr. de mont. Dei. Sed and Anselm. in deplor. and Gers. super
Magnif 9.
Hell here out of Hell; than to have Ephesians. 1.17.
the pardon of his sins sealed unto him by God, to have 2 Corin. 5.19, 20.
Luke 24.47. Act. 13.38.
tidings hereof brought him by the ministry of Gods Word, and some 1 Corin.
2.12.
assurance of it given him by the testimony of Gods Spirit? To which purpose
David having upon his own experience both of the one estate and the other,
pronounced them to be in a most happy and Psalm. 32.1.
blessed estate, that have their iniquities forgiven, and are cased of their
sins; concludes his discourse with an incitement of all such to Psalm. 32.11.
Joy and to great Joy; as none having better or greater cause than such Act.
2.38, 41, 46. and 16.31, 34.
to rejoice.

Joy then for a man to be freed from Gods wrath. But the Godly are not so
only. They are not freed from Gods wrath alone, but they are received into
special grace and favor with God. And if Prove. 19.12.
the favor of a King, Psalm. 146.3, 4. Esa. 2.22.
a mortal man, whose breath is in his nostrills, be (it is Salomons
comparison) as the dew upon the grass, or the green herbs, that refreshes and
cheereth, and makes all to thrive: What a benefit is it then to be in favor
with Psalm. 30.5.
God, in whose favor there is life? yea Psalm. 63.3.
whose favor is better than life? Since the Godly therefore are Psalm. 5.12.
and 32.10. and 103.4.
girt about, as the Psalmist speaks, with Gods favor, they may well be Psalm.
30.11.
girt about with Joy. And the assurance of it alone being better than life, may
well serve sufficiently to cheer up their hearts even amids those afflictions
that are Eccles. 7.26.
more bitter than death.

have, so in regard of what they hope for and expect. * Rejoice in hope, says
the Apostle: a second Ground of their Joy. For they live in hope and
expectation of Romans 12.12.
Iam. 1.12.
a Crown, of Luke 12 32.
a Kingdom; of 1 Cor. 9.25.
an incorruptible Crown, of 1 Pet. 1.4. Apoc. 15.22. Luke 1.33.
an everlasting Kingdom: of a most happy, a most blissful, a most blessed
estate. (...). Antiph. de chorent. Spes dulcissima oblectamenta. Sen. epist. 23.
Hope, we say, is the very Heart of the Soul, and the very Life of a Man's
Life. It is that that puts Spirit into our Spirits, and makes our Life to
be Life. (...). Miserrimum est timere, cum speres nihil. Sen. Troad. 3. Itaque
postquam adempta spes est, lassus cura confectus animus stupet. Ter. And. 2.1.
An hopeless Life, is an heartlesse Life: And he is a most forlorn man that
has no Hopes. (...). Electra apud Nonnum Dionys. l. 7. (...). Theophyl. ep.
24. (...). Greg. Naz. propauper. Sola spes hominem in miseriis consolari solet.
Cic. in Catil. 4. Vide Ovidium de Ponto 1.7.
It is that that is wont to support men's Souls, and not to stay them only
from fainting, but to cheer up their hearts, and to fill them with joy, amids
many sore crosses and occasions of much grief. And if worldly hopes can do so
much, being so vain, so Spes incerti boni nemen est. Sen. epist. 10. Fallitur
augurio spes bona saepe suo. Ovid. epist. 16. Multa quidem praeter spem sci^
multus bona evenisse. At ego etiam qui speraverint spem decepisse multos.
Plaut. Rud. 2.3.
uncertain: How much more may a Christian man's hopes, (for there is Romans 8.24.
Heb. 11.1.
no man that lives more by hope than he; nor has any man better, or greater,
or surer hopes than he has:) being so great that he cannot possibly hope for
so much, but he shall receive much more; and he shall find, when he comes to
it, as the Queen of 1 King. 10.6, 7.
Saba told Solomon, Ephesians. 3.20. Esa 64.4. 1 Cor. 3.9.
that the one half was not told him: so certain, that he is as sure of what he
hops for, as if already he had it; (for this Romans 5.5. Spes non confundit.
Spes in terrenis incertinomen boni: Spes in divinis nomen est certissimi. Heb.
11.1.
hope never fails: and Romans 8.30. Quia jam fecit quae futura sunt. Aug
decorrept. and great. c. 9.
those that God has justified, those he has glorified; they are as sure to be
glorified, as if already they were.) How much more, I say, may (...). Greg.
Naz. in Julian. 1. Spes inconcussa.
these hopes of the godly, being so good, so great, so sure, so certain, fill
their hearts with joy amids all occasions of grief? Luke 10.20.
Rejoice, says our Savior, your names are written in Heaven. And Matthew. 5.11,
12.
when men persecute you, and put out your names, and revile you, and speak all
the evil that may be of you; even then rejoice ye, and be glad; for great is
your reward in Heaven. And, Romans 5.1, 2, 3.
Being justified by faith, says the Apostle, we are at peace with God, and we
rejoice in hope of the glory of God: yea we rejoice in tribulations. And,
wherein (that is, in the hope whereof) ye greatly rejoice, says S. Peter,
though for a season ye be in heaviness by means of manifold afflictions.

So that if either the enjoyment of Gods present favor, Conclusion.
or the assurance of future glory, may either of them alone severally, and much
more both of them jointly, well and sufficiently countervaile and over-weigh
all matter of grief whatsoever; then it is apparent that the godly being
presently possessed of the one, and as sure to have, as if they were already
possessed of it, the other, can never want, if they could see it, much matter
of joy.

Psalm. 149.5. Gaudeant sancti.
Let the Saints therefore rejoice, says the Psalmist. But, Hosh. 10.1. Etiamsi
laeta tibi obveniant omnia, non est tamen quod laeteris. Riber. ibid.
Rejoice says the Prophet Hoshe, so long as thou go a whoring The Godly may
well joy, but Non potest gaudere nisi fortis, justus, and temperans. Senec.
epist. 59. Stulti ac mali non gaudent. Ibid.
The wicked can have no true joy; the ungodly have no cause at all to rejoice.

First, the wicked can have no true Joy, because they have not Spirit. For true
Gal. 5.22.
Joy is a fruit and an effect of the Spirit. Now where the root is not, the
fruit cannot be: Potest esse radix sine stipite, stipes sine fructu: sed nec
stipes nec fructus sine radice.
there may be a root without a stock, as when Job 14.7, 8. Dan. 4.14, 15.
a tree is hewn down, or a bush cut up; and a stock without leaf or fruit,
as in winter time; but neither fruit nor stock where the root is not. But
wicked men Jude 19.
have not the Spirit. As Romans 8.9.
they are none of Christ's that have it not; so none have it that are not
Christ's. And wanting the root therefore, they cannot have the fruit, which
springing from it, cannot possibly be without it. For (...). Aristot. analyt.
post. l. 2. c. 11. and rhet. l. 2. c. 22.
how can an effect be without the cause of it?

(...). Sept. Esa. 57.21. Gaudere non est impiis. Aug. de Civit. l. 14. cap. 8.
and in Psalm. 96.
there is no joy to the wicked; because there is Non est pax impiis. Esa. 48.22.
no peace to the wicked. For there can be no true Joy, where there is no inward
peace; ( Romans 14.17.
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost: and, Romans 15.13.
The God of Hope fill you with all Joy and Peace: and, Galat. 5.22.
The fruit of the Spirit is Joy and Peace, says the Apostle) no sound and
solid joy, where there is nothing but disquiet and distraction, nothing but
terror and horror, nothing but apprehension and expectation of wrath. But Job
15.20 21.
the wicked man, says Job, is like a woman that is always in travel; there
is a noise of fear ever in his ear. Esa. 57.20, 21. Nihil stultitia pacatum
habet. Tam superne illi metus est quam infra: ad utrumque trepidat latus.
Sequuntur pericula and occurrunt. Ad omnia pav^da, imparata est: and ipsis
terret^r auxiliis. Sen. ep. 92.
They are as the raging Sea that casts up mire and dirt, says the Prophet
Esaias: There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. A seeming Pax infida, pax
incerta. Vti de Romana cum Samnitibus transactione. Live. hist. l. 9.
uncertain peace they may have; but they are never safe, no where sure, seem
they never so secure. Noli huic tranquillitati considere. Momento temporis mare
evertitur; and eadem die ubi luserunt, sorbentur navigia. Senec. epist. 4.
It is but, says the Heathen man, like the calmness of the Sea, that seems
sometimes so smooth that men may play upon it at pleasure, but if there arise
but some sudden flaw or gust of wind, as there does often in an instant, all is
turned topsie turvie, and where men were pleasantly sporting themselves a
little before, there whole ships are now swallowed up. The wicked therefore
having no sound or sure peace, they can have no serious or settled Joy.

Light and Joy are put the one for the other. Ester 8.16.
The Jews had Gladness, and Light, and Joy, says the Story. And there can
be no Joy, where is no Light. Tobit. 5. vulg. edit. (...). Dion. Chrysostom. orat.
4. Nec frustra praedicant mentes hominum nitere liquido die, coacta n^be
flaccescere. Symmach. epist. 31.
What Joy can I have, says blind Tobie, when I sit in darkness, and do not
see the Light of Heaven? Now the Godly indeed as they are called Ephesians. 5.8.
Light, and Luke 16.8. John 12 36. 1 Thessalonians. 5.5.
Children of Light; so they are said 1 Thessalonians. 5.4. 1 John 2.9.
to be and 1 John 2.10.
abide in the Light, and John 12 35. 1 John 1.7.
to walk in the Light, even Psalm 89.15.
in the Light of Gods countenance. But all wicked ones as they are called
Ephesians. 5.8.
Darkness, and the 1 Thessalonians. 5.5.
Children of darkness; the prince they serve is called Ephesians 6.12.
the Prince of darkness, and the State that they live in Coloss. 1.13.
a kingdom of darkness; so they are said 1 John 1.6. and 2.11.
to walk in the dark, 1 John 2.9.
to be and 1 John 2.11.
abide in the dark, Esa. 9.2. Luke 1.79.
to sit in darkness and in a deadly shade. Nor is there hope of ever altering
or mending this their estate, unless they alter and amend themselves. For Jude
13. Job 10.21, 22.
the blackness of darkness, (or darkness as black as pitch, darkness more
palpable than that Exodus 10.22, 23.
of Egypt was) is reserved and laid up for them (not for a few days, but) for
ever. As they Esa. 9.2.
walk in darkness, so they walk unto darkness, Sunt enim modo in tenebris
exteris, unde correctio desperanda non est; quam si contempserint, ibunt in
tenebras exteriores ubi correctionis locus non erit. August epist. 120. cap.
22. Ab istis exteris tenebris in exteriores mittentur, qui ex istis exteris non
ad interiora convertuntur. Ibid. cap. 36. In tenebras ex tenebris infoeliciter
exclusi infoelitius includendi. Ide^ homil. 16.
from spiritual darkness that holds them here for a time, to that Matthew.
8.12.
utter, that eternal Ignis gehennae lucebit miseris ad miseriae augmentum, ut
videant unde doleant; sed non luce^i^ ad consolationem^^t videant unde
gaudeant. Greg. mor. l. 9. c. 49. Isidor. de sum. bon. lib. 1. cap. 31. and
Ludoif. vit. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 88.
darkness, wherein is nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth; which when
they are once entered into, they shall never get out of again. And seeing then
that there can be no joy without light: there can be no true joy to any wicked
man wanting true light.

Joy where it is not to be had; think there is no Joy where it is alone to be
had.

Ixion (...). Videndus Eustath. ad Iliad. (...). Lucian in Deor. dialog. and
Serve. ad Aen. 6.
a cloud in stead of Juno, and (...). Eurip. Helen. (...). Lycophr. Cassand. i.
(...). Vt ex Stesichoro Tzetzes.
a figment in stead of Helen, with Paris, (...). Lycophron ex Sophoclis
Antigonc, quod^s de uxore mala extulit. Oblectamenta fallacia: falsa gaudia. Ex
Virgil. Aencid. 4. Sen. ep. 59. -- and mala mentis Gaudia. Ex eodem Aug. de
civit. l. 14. c. 8. Improprie locutus, cum nullum gaudium malum sit. Sen. ibid.
a counterfeit shadow of mirth in stead of true Joy.

For what sound or inward joy can from outward things accrue? Quodcunque
invectitium gaudium est, fundamento caret. Senec. epist. 23. Fragilibus
innititur, qui adventitio laetus est: exibit gaudium, quod intravit. Ibid 98.
a groundless Joy that comes from them; such as may like a little
counterfeit complexion, alter the look and smooth the face outwardly, but
never thoroughly fill, or truly cheer up the soul inwardly. The ground of all
true and sound joy must come from within, it must have his rooting in the
soul; else it is but (...). Greg. Naz. in Julian. 1.
as weeds that grow on the top of the water, that float aloft, but can take no
sure hold, because they never come at, nor do spring up from the bottom. Cast
as many clothes as you will upon a dead corpse, you shall never be able to put
any natural heat into it. No, (...). Plut. de Virt. and Vit.
the garments that we wear must receive heat from the body before they can
return any warmth again unto it. And there must be matter of joy and comfort
from within, ere any sound joy or comfort can accrue from any thing without.

Romans 8.31.
If God be for us, says the Apostle, who can be against us? But Si contra nos,
quis pro nobis. Petr. Cell. ep. 112.
if God be set against us, who can be for us? What joy could Haman have of the
favor of his fellow-Courtiers, when Ester 7.6, 7.
King Assuerus frowned upon him? He might well have said then, as he had
formerly said in another case, Ester 5.13.
All nothing avails me, as long as Assuerus frowneth on me. Or what comfort
found Baltasar in the furniture of his Table, the honor of his Princes, the
state of his Palace, or the multitude of his Provinces, when the finger of God
writ him his destiny on the wall, Dan. 5.5, 6.
which he feared so much before he heard what it was? What sound joy can there
be to a malefactor condemned to die a most cruel death, and to suffer so much
torture before he die, that Job 3.20, 21. Morsque minus poenae quam mora mortis
habet. Maximin. eleg. 1. Caius non temere in quenquam, nisi crebris and minutis
ictibus animadverti passus est, perpetuo notoque jam praecepto, ita fieri ut se
mori sentiat: qui and mortem deposcenti, Nondum, inquit, tecum in gratiam
redii. Sueton. cap. 30. Hinc Oedi^us Senec. Theb. 1. O^nitte poenas languidas
longae morae, Funus meum ne extend; qui cogit mori Nolentem, in aequo est,
quique properantem impedit. Occidere est, vetare cupientem mori. Non tamen in
aequo est, alterum gravius reor. Mal^ imperari, quam eripi mortem mihi.
the delay of death shall be worse, and more intolerable than death, though he
revell and swagger in the prison, and strive to pass away the time with his
companions, as merrily as he may, while the halter, that he must die by,
hangs over his head? (...). Plut. de sera vind.
It is the state of every wicked one. He is, while he so continues, but a
damned wretch, a condemned person; ( John 3.18. Quotidie damnatur, qui semper
timet. P. Sir.
He that believes not, says our Savior, is condemned already:) (...). Plut.
de ser. vind. Mundus hic malis carcer est, Merita carcerem faciunt. In uno
eodemque habitaculo alteri domus est, alteri carcer est, dum ille custodit,
ille custoditur: alleri domum fecit. libertas, alteri carcerem servitus. Aug.
in Psalm. 141.
He is in this World, as in Gods Prison, whence there can be no escape: he is
there fast under Carcere includitur; reatu ligatur: carcer ejus cor ejus est.
Aug. homil. 40. Nihil est miserius quam animus hominis conscius. Plaut.
Mostell. 3. 1.
the chains of a guilty conscience, ready to pinch and gall him, if they be
but a little streitned: howsoever therefore he riot and revell here, and
strive to pass over pleasantly the time of his restraint, having by his
Jailors leave and permission, the liberty of some part of this his prison; yet
he can never be truly joyful, never heartily merry, so long as he remains
so: His mirth it is not hearty, it is but strained, or it is but a mere
delusion, a fools paradise at the most. There can be no cause in the world
therefore of rejoicing to any man, till he be reconciled unto God. Because
though a man had all the world, yet could all the world do him no good, Anne
magis siculi gemuerunt era tyranni? Aut magis duratis pendens laquedribus
ensis Purpureas subter cervices torruit, Imus Imus praecipites, quam si sibi
dicat, and intus Palleat. infoelix, quod proxima nesciat uxor. Pers. sat. 3.
Allusit ad Damoclis historiam, cui ea ratione Dionysius confirmavit, Nihil esse
ei beatum, cui semper aliquis terror impendat. Cic. Tuscul. l. 5.
so long as the heavy wrath of God hangs over his head, as the sword did
sometime over the head of the Tyrants flatterer, ready every hour to seize on
him, and Hell-mouth gapeth under him, ready as soon to receive him. He may
out of ignorance of his own estate, slumber a while in security, or apply
himself to some flashie pleasures; but if he saw his own estate, if he knew
his own plight, he would rather Iam. 5.1, 2.
houle and weep every hour all his life long.

(...). Philo de malorum insid. Sola virtus praestat gaudium perpetuum,
securum. Sen ep. 27.
There is no true joy but there; no sound mirth to be found in any thing
elsewhere. Thou shall never be truly merry, till thou be truly godly, till
thou art become sincerely religious. Gaudium proprium honorum and piorum est.
Aug de civit, Dei, 14. c. 8.
True Joy is proper and peculiar to the godly alone. It is Galat. 5 22.
a fruit of Gods Spirit; which they alone have: it is Romans 14.17.
a branch of Christ's Kingdom, which they only belong to. As the Heathen man
says, that Amabit sapiens; cupient caeteri. Asram. Solus sapiens scit amare.
Sen. epist. 81. Gaudebit sanctus; caeteri lascivient, vel gestiunt, ut Aug. de
sermon. in mont. l. 1. Gaudium nisi sapienti non contingit. Sen. ep. 59.
A wise man only loves, others but dally and lust only: so others may
revell, the godly only rejoice. Christianity and Piety does Existimas me
nunc detrabere tibi multas voluptates. Imo contra. Noli tibi unquam deesse
letitiam. Volo illam tibi dominasci: nascitur, si modo intra leipsum sit. In
very gaudii possessione esse te volo, quod nunquam deficiat, Ad solidum conor
perducere, quod introrsus plus pateat. Sen. ep. 23. Major est suavitas mentis
quam ventris. Aug. de verb. Dom. 27.
not call men away from joy; but it inviteth them to true joy, to sound joy, to
incessant and everlasting rejoicing. It does Isaacum, i. gaudium jugulandum
tibi formidas? securus esto. Non Isaak, sed aries mactabitur: non peribit tibi
laetitia, sed contumacia, cujus utique cornua vepribus haerent, and sinc
punctionibus anxietatis esse non potest. Bern. de bon. descr.
not quell and kill, or quench our mirth; it does only correct and qualify
it, that it may be such as it should be, and such as is behovefull for us for
it to be. Sapiens laetitia fruitur maxima, continua, sua. Sen. epist. 72.
The Christian man may live as merrily as any man in the world may: yea his
life may well be the merriest of any man's under the Sun. Since that Psalm.
36.9. Hunc ita fundatum necesse est sequatur hilaritas continua, laetitia alta
atque ex alto veniens. Senec. de beat. c. 4.
he draws his mirth from the Wellhead, where there is Joy and Pleasure Gods
plenty; where there is Satietas gaudiorum an ^enissimorum. Psalm. 16.11.
Fullness of most delightful Joys, and Torrens delitiarum. Psalm. 36.8.
Streams of pleasures that flow for ever. For to omit that Godliness does not
^ebar or restrain a man of the use of any honest and lawful natural delight;
much less deprive him of all comfort and Haec quoque fortuit^^ tunc delectant,
cum ^lla ratio temperavit and miscuit Sen. ep. 72.
delight in the use of them. A Christian man has a good right unto, and a just
interest in all things procured for him by Christ, and in him again restored
to him, (though by his first Parents default forfeited) and among other things
also even to the comforts and delights of this life. For all things 1 Cor.
3.22, 23. (...). Antisth. and Zeno apud Edert. Vnus est sapiens, cujus omnia
sunt. Sen. de benef. l. 7. c. 3. (...). Post Diogenem Clemens Alex. in protrept.
says the Apostle, as well things present, as things to come, and even this
world too, (and such honest joys and delights consequently as it is able to
afford) are yours, because you are Christ's, who is Hebr. 1.2,
the Heir of all things, and Apoc. 21.7.
you in him, being Romans 8.17.
Coheires with him; and he Gods. Though his joy depend not upon them, as the
worldly man's does, yet 1 Cor. 7.30, 31. Deuteronomy. 12.21, 22 and 14.23, 26. Neh.
8.10, 11, 12. Zech. 3.10.
he is not debarred of them, and of the free and comfortable use of them: which
Genesis 30.27, 30. and 39.5. Deus multa malis tribuit. Sed ea bonis paraverat.
Contingunt autem and malis, quia separari non possunt. Non possent certis
contingere, nisi and caeteris donarentur. Sen. de benes. lib. 4. cap. 28.
for his sake many times even the wicked worldly ones have more plenty of,
than otherwise they should have had. Non sequitur, ut cui men's sapit, ei
palatum non sapiat. Cic. de fin. l. 1. Sensum enim hominis nulla exuit virtus.
Sen. ep. 85.
Nor does it follow, says the Heathen man, that a wise man's palate should find
no relish in his meat, because Job 12.11. and 34.3. (...). Greg. Naz. ad Eunom.
his mind finds more relish in some other better matters: or that a
Christian man should not find Psalm. 66.13.
much delight and comfort even in these outward things, because Psalm. 4.7.
he has other and better matter of joy and comfort within. He could not be
so Genesis 32.10 and 48.15. Deuteronomy. 32.13, 14.
heartily thankful to God for them, if he found not much comfort, delight,
relief and refreshing in them. Yea (...). Plut. de virt. and vit.
no man may eat his meat with more delight, or use his honest recreations and
disports with more comfort, or have more joy of his worldly wealth and estate,
than the Godly man may: worldly men have these things but as thieves stolen
goods, that they make merry with in hugger mugger; or as a man that has robbed
the kings Exchequer, and by that means enriched himself. Whereas the godly man
has them Genes. 32.10. Psalm. 65.9, 10, 11, 12. Zech. 9.17.
as favors bestowed on him by God, as effects and fruits of his love, which
makes them the more comfortable by much to him, and does exceedingly improve
his joy and delight in them: since Non tam dono laeta est, quam abs te datum;
(non tam munere quam abs te missum;) id vero triumphat serio. Ter. Eun. 3.11.
At illa quanto gratiora sunt, quantoque in partem interiorem animi nunquam
exitura descendunt, cum delectant cogitantem magis a quo, quam quid acceperis.
Sen. de ben. l. 1. c. 15.
it is the Giver often that joyeth a man more than the gift: and a small matter
bestowed on a man out of grace and favor by his Sovereign, does more rejoice
him, than a far greater gotten from him by stealth. And as for such filthy and
beastly delights, such inordinate and brutish lusts, as Non est vera jucunditas
quae secundum seculum jucunditas est. August. in Psalm. 96. Virg. cum mala
mentis Gaudia dixit, improprie loeutus, significavit homines suo malo laetos.
Sen. ep. 59.
have indeed no sound pleasure in them, no more than is found in the scratching
of some unsound or evill-affected part when it itcheth; and Dimitte istat
voluptates turbidas, magno luendas: non venturae tantum, sed praeteritae
nocent. Quemadmodum scelera etiam si non sint deprehensa cum fierent,
solicitudo non cum ipsis abit: ita improbarum voluptatum etiam post ipsas
poenitentia est. Non sunt solidae, non sunt fideles: etiamsi non nocent,
fugiunt. Sen. ep. 27. Oblectamenta fallacia and brevia; ebrietatis instar, quae
unius horae hilarem insaniam longi temporis taedio pensat. Idem ep. 59. Adeo
haec gaudia non sunt, ut saepe initia futurae tristitiae sint. Ibid.
bring much more pain with them commonly at parting, or if not then presently,
not long after: howsoever he may have formerly taken some delight in them, as
worldly men ordinarily do: yet being healed now of his disease, it is no pain
for him to part with them, At non est voluptatum tanta quasi titillatio in
senibus. Credo, sed ne desideratio quidem. Nihil autem molestum, quod non
defideres. Cupidis fortasse rerum talium odiosum and molestum est carere:
satiatis vero and expletis jucundius est carere quam frui. Quanquam non caret
is qui non desiderat. Iucundius ergo non desiderare quam frui. Cic. de senect.
An tu malam optares scabiem, quia scabendi aliqua est voluptas? Erasm. in
colloq.
he desires not the itch, that he may be scratching again; no more than
Saul, when 1 Samuel 10.9.
a new heart was given him, had a mind to be following his Fathers Asses any
more. He is no more troubled with the leaving and forbearing of them, than 1
Cor. 13.11. (...). Clem. Alex. in protrept. sub nutrice puella velut cum
luderet infans, Quod cupide petiit, mature plena reliquit. Horat. epist. 1.
lib. 2.
men grown are wont to be troubled, when they are come to maturitie and
ripeness of years, that they may not now play at cherypit, as they had wont to
do when they were children; or that they must lay aside and leave off such
childish toys, as sometime they made much reckoning of: or than men glorified
in Heaven after the resurrection shall be grieved, that they do Luke 20.34.35.
not eat and drink, and marry, and make merry still in that manner as they
did, while they lived here on earth. These and the like vanities godliness
indeed waineth men, and estrangeth their minds from, and Vanas voluptates,
breves, poenitendas, in contrarium abituras. Ita dico, in praecipiti voluptas
est, ad dolorem vergit. Sen. epist. 23.
by restraining them of such pleasures, freeth them from far greater pains,
that such filthy, froathy, and flitting delights are -- nocet empta dolor
voluptas. Horat. epist. 1.
dearly bought with. But in stead thereof it Tenes utique memoria quantum
senseris gaudium, cum praetexta posita, sumpsisti virilem togam, and in forum
de ductus es. Majus expecta, cum puerilem animum deposueris, and te in viros
philosophia transcripserit. Senec. epist. 4.
furnishes them with other joys and delight, such as do so far surpass
all outward joys whatsoever, as there is indeed Homo erat, qui improbos
gaudere negabat: norat gaudia calicis, mensae, lecti, etc. sed tale gaudium
videbat, in cujus comparatione illud gaudium non erat. Ac si tu nosses Solemn,
and alii laudanti lucernam diceres, Non est lux ista. August. in Psalm. 96. Quae
sunt epularum, aut ludorum, scortorumve voluptates cum his voluptatibus
comparandae? Cic. de senect. Nemo sanae mentis ampliorem credat esse in vitiis
quam in virtutibus delectationem. Bern. de bon. deser.
no comparison between the one and the other: the one is as no joy in regard
of the other. For what is the Kingdom of Christ? nothing but dumps and doubts,
and drooping, and melancholy fits, as many imagine. Or what is the work of
Gods Spirit in the hearts of his Children? To possess their souls wholly with
terrors and fears; or to fill them with grief and pensiveness only? No,
Galat. 5.22.
The fruit of the Spirit is Joy and Peace, says the Apostle. And, Romans 14.17.
the Kingdom of God is Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.
There is true joy, there is sound joy, there is unutterable joy; ( 1 Pet. 1.8.
(...).
You rejoice with a Joy glorious, says the Apostle Peter, and unspeakable; And
2 Cor. 7.4. (...).
I do over-abound exceedingly in Joy, says Saint Paul; as finding no words
sufficient to express his joy with;) such joy, as Illud verum and solum est
gaudium, quod non de terra, sed de coelo est, quod non de creatura, sed de
Creatore concipitur. Cui comparata omnis aliunde jucunditas muror. est, omnis
suavitas dolor est, omne dulce amarum, decorum omne foedum, omne aliud
quodcunque delectare possit, molestum. Bern. epist. 114.
no worldly joy is once to be compared with; such joy, Apoc. 2.17. Ego neminem
arbitror posse vel scire quid sit, nisi qui acceperit. Bern. in Cant. 3. Melius
impressum quam expressum innotescit. Ibid. 9.
as no worldly man is able to conceive what it is. Prove. 14.10.
The soul only, says Solomon, knows it own bitterness; nor does another
feel its Joy. And Mel si non nosses, quam been saperet, nisi gustares non
scires. Lauda verbis quantum potes, qui non gustaverit, non intelliget. Aug. in
Psalm. 30. and 51. Cyrill. ad Joan. lib. 4. c. 38. and Greg. in Evang. 36.
Talk, says Augustine, as long as you will, and all you can, of honey, and of
the sweetness of it, unless a man taste it, he can never conceive what it
is. So undoubtedly it is here: In his non capit intelligentia, nisi quantu^
atemgit experientia, Bern. in Cant. 22. Expertus novit; inexpertus ignorant.
Idem de diverse. 19.
He alone that has tasted it, can tell, what sweet peace and tranquillity of
heart and mind, what unspeakable joy and comfort of spirit is there found and
felt, where the mercy of God in Jesus Christ is once soundly assured and sealed
up to the soul.

Exhortation, Exhortation.
and incitement to Godliness, and to godly Joy; to labor for it, and to Joy
in it.

righteousness, if they desire to attain to true and hearty rejoicing.
Would thou have joy? ( Nemo est qui non gaudere velit. Bern. de diverse. 19.
Who would not? For Nemo est qui non beatus esse velit. Aug. ep. 121. and de
Trinit. lib. 13. cap. 3. Vivere omnes bea e volunt. Sen. de beat. cap. 1.
all men desire happiness: and Beata quippe vita est gaudere veritate. Aug.
confess. l. 10. c. 23.
as there is no full happiness without joy; so there is no sound joy without
true happiness.) then Disce gaudere. Sen. epist. 23. Hujus fundamentum quod
sit, quaeris? ne gaudeas vanis. Fundamentum esse dixi? culmen est. Ad summa
pervenit, qui scit quo gaudeat. Ibid.
learn here the right way to it: then take that course that will bring thee to
true Joy and sound Peace, Matthew. 6.32.
Seek the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof. It is the righteous
man only that can truly rejoice. For Romans 14.17.
The Kingdom of God is Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.
There is Gaudium in sine; sed gaudium sine fine. Bern. de diverse. 19.
Joy in the end, says Bernard, and Joy without end: but Est gaudium de regno
Dei, sed non est primum in regno Dei: de justitia and pace gaudium procedit.
Ibid 18. Laetitia merces; justitia meritum and materia est. Idem de temp. 30.
the way to this Joy is by Righteousness and Peace. From Righteousness Peace
flows, and Joy from Peace. The one is Ipsa est via per quam ad pacem
proceditur, ad laetitiam pervenitur. Idem de temp. 30. Quid viam
praetergredimini, qui ad gaudium properatis? Idem de diverse. 18. Quid
praecipiti saltu justitiam transilientes and pacem, rem finalem in principium
convertere and pervertere vultis. Ibid. 19.
the way, the other is the end; and unless we go the way, we can never come
to the end.

It is true indeed, if there were Eundem cursu diverso portum petas. Plin. lib.
9. epist. 19. Hieron. epitaph. Nepot.
diverse ways that tended to one end, it were no great matter, which of them a
man took: though he should go further about, it may be, and take somewhat the
more pains, yet he were sure at the last to arrive where he would. But when a
man has tried all other courses, he shall find in conclusion, that there is
Gaudium hoc non nascitur nisi ex virtutum conscientia. Senec epist. 59.
no other way but this to attain to true joy, and that all his labor
therefore was lost in beating about and seeking by other courses to compass
it. It was Salomons own case. And Eccles. 2.12.
who can hope after him to discover some new passage that he could not?
Eccles. 1.16. 1 King. 3.12.
He was the wisest man that ever was: 1 King. 3.13. Eccles. 2.1. -- 11.
nor wanted he abundance of all such things as worldly men are wont to take
delight in, and make the matter of their joy. But when Eccles. 1.13, 17. and
2.1, 2, etc.
he had wearied himself in a multiplicitie of by-ways, treading one while in
one path, and traveling another while another, and Eccles. 7.7, 9.
pursuing each as far as any of them would lead, at length he concludes
that there was no true joy, comfort and contentment to be found in any thing
but Eccles. 12.1, 13.
in the fear of God and in doing his Will; and that in all other courses,
carried they never so goodly a show with them, or seemed they to promise never
so great matters, there was Eccles. 1.1, 14, 17. and 2.1, 11.
nothing to be found but vanity and vexation of Spirit, and no more therefore
to be gotten or gained by them. And Ve his qui praetere rediuntur viam, qui
relicta justitia vanam and transitoriam laetitiam quaerunt. Cum enim de
transitoriis quaerunt laetitiam, non poterit non transire laetitia
transeuntibus eis de quibus erat: sic lignis deficientibus deficit ignis. Bern.
de temp. 30. Ad ^audium pervenire cupis; sed erras, qui inter divitias illuc
venturum esse te speras. Inter honores gaudium, i. inter solicitudines quaeris?
Ista quae sic petis, tanquam datura gaudium and voluptates, caussae dolorum
sunt. Omnes tendimus ad gaudium: sed unde magnum and stabile consequantur,
ignorant: Ille ex conviviis and luxuria; ille ex ambitione and circumfusa
clientium tu^ba; ille ex amisa; alius ex studiorum liberatium vana
ostentatione, and nihil sanantibus literis, Omnes istos oblectamenta fallacia
and brevia decipiunt: sicut plausus and acclamationis secundae favor, qui magna
solicitudine and partus est, and expiandus. Sen. ep. 59.
the like shall every one find that Solomon did, Cum fatigaverint se vino and
libidinibus, cum inter vina (vitia Lips.) illos nox defecit, tunc exclamant
miseri Virgilianum illud, Namque ut postremam falsa inter gaudia noctem
Egerimus nosti. -- Sen. ibid.
when he has toyled and tired himself in beating about to find it
elsewhere, that he has but taken pains in vain, and deprived himself of
joy, in seeking joy there, where it is not to be had; as one that seeking for
Matthew. 7.16.
Grapes among Brambles, or for Figs among Briers and Thorns, shall but tear
his clothes, and 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.
prick his hands, but never find any such fruit on them, as he there seeks
for. (...), etc. Plut. de tranquil.
It is not Wit, nor Wealth, nor Honor, nor Nobility, nor Learning, nor any
Worldly thing else, but Righteousness and a good Conscience alone, that is
able to work settled tranquillity, to minister sound comfort, to procure
constant alacrity and cheerfulness of mind. That alone can give a good
relish to any state or condition, be it ne-never so mean, or, in the eye of
the world, never so miserable: whereas the greatest, highest, largest,
gloriousest estates cannot give any dram or drop of pure joy, sure comfort,
or true content without it. Any course of life may be cheerful and lightsome
with it; none can ever be truly comfortable or delightful without it.
Godliness (...). Plut. ibid.
and a good conscience is as a sweet perfume, that can give a good sent even to
rags; ungodliness and an evil conscience, as filthy matter, that issuing from
an ulcerous body, is able to infect and make unsavory the best apparel that
can be, to him especially that wears it. And therefore (...). Plut. de virt.
and vit.
Heap up and gather thee together Gold and Silver, says an Heathen man, build
thee stately Galleries, plant thee pleasant Orchards and Gardens; fill thee thy
house with Servitours, and the whole City with Debtors, till thy mind be
settled and satisfied ( Fecisti nos, Domine, ad te: and inquietum est cor
nostrum, donec requiescat in te. August. confess. lib. 1. cap. 1. Animam nisi
Deus non implet. Hugo Vict. de spir. and anim. cap. 65. non satiat. Aug de
verb. Apost. 16.
nor can any thing but God, and the assurance of his favor settle or satisfy
it:) all will be but (I say not as another says, -- juvat illum sic domus aut
res, Vt lippum pictae tabulae, fomenta podagram, Auriculas citharae collecta
sorde dolentes. Horat. lib. 1. epist. 2.
as curious Pictures to a bleared eye, as exquisite music to an aching head,
that does neither help nor hurt, but) as a cup of neat wine given one in a
Fever, as Honey ministered to one that has his stomach pestered with Choler,
as delicate Meats dressed for a dysenterious person, that can relish nothing,
can retain nothing, receives no strength from them, is but the worse for
them, and put by them to more pain. None of all these will be able to minister
any sound joy or comfort to thee, no more than they could do to Eccles. 2.4-11.
him, that had more of them before thee, than thou can hope ever to attain
unto, until thou come to have part in him, who is the Psalm. 36.9. and 16.11.
Fountain of all joy, and the 2 Cor. 1.3.
God of all comfort, without whom there is no true joy, no sound comfort to be
had.

Psalm. 2.11. and 32.11. and 33.1. and 97.12. and 68.4. and 48.11. and 149.2, 5.
Matthew. 5.12. Luke 10.20. Romans 12.12. Phil. 3.1. and 4.4. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
often, as no one thing almost more. True it is indeed, that it is a very hard
and a difficult thing, especially amids the manifold miseries of this our
present Psalm. 39.11. 1 Pet. 3.11.
Pilgrimage, and the Genes. 47.9. Ephesians. 5.16.
evil days that here we pass rather than live, and the rather also having
so much of that Corpus mortit. Romans 7.24.
dull metal, that 1 Cor. 3.1.
muddie mould of the old Adam remaining still in the most of us, for Christian
men to rejoice so as they ought, and as they have just cause to do. It is a
point that is far more easily preached than practiced. Yet this should we
every one of us strive and strain our selves unto; and to this purpose 2 Pet.
1.10.
Give, as the Apostle advises, all diligent endeavor to get assurance to our
selves of our election and of our calling and conversion unto God; since that
Non est beatus, esse se qui non putat. P. Sir. Miscr. est, qui non se
beatissimu^ judicat. Senec. op. 10. Quid enim resert qualis status tuus sit, si
tibi videtur malus? Ibid. Nemo foelix est, qui judicio suo miser est. Salvian.
de provid. lib. 1. Miser est, si cui sua non amplissima videntur. Epicur.
upon our notice and apprehension of it, does this our joyful and comfortable
estate for the present depend; and for want of it, many that have much cause of
joy and comfort, were they but aware of it, live often times a very heavy and
uncomfortable life, and so are, through their own ignorance and default, many
times most miserable, when yet they are indeed, or at least might be most
happy. And when we find our selves so depressed and dejected, by means of
cross occurrents, that this alacrity and cheerfulness is overwhelmed
therewith, labor to rouse up our spirits, and say, as David sometime said;
Psalm. 42.5, 11. and 43.5.
Why art thou thus dejected and cast down, O my Soul? and why art thou so
distracted and disquieted within me? Trust still in God, and fix thy hopes on
him, who is the Light of thy countenance, and thy God. Yea do as David did,
endeavor at least to do it: when he was in a great streit, his City sacked
and burned, his own wives, and the wives and children of his followers carried
captive; and for ought he or they then knew, all slain; his own company also
conspiring to stone him to death; so transported they were with grief and
passion, each one for his own losses; yet amids all these difficulties it is
said of David, that 1 Samuel 10.6.
He cheered up himself in the Lord his God. And so should ev^ry one do, that
truly and sincerely fears God, and is careful to walk in the obedience of
his Will; though he sit in darkness, says the Prophet, and have no spark of
light, that his outward estate is able to afford, yet Esa. 50.10.
Let him trust in the Lord, and rest him on his God; and even then also
endeavor Psalm. 13.5. (...). Greg. Naz. ad civ. periclit.
to be glad, and rejoice in his favor and mercy, when his present estate
seems to give all cause to the contrary.

This the rather Gods Children should strive and strain themselves

Psalm. 33.1.
Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, says the Psalmist; for it becomes the
upright to be thankful: as if they could not be thankful, unless they were
Beneficia hilares accipiamus, gaudium profitentes: and id danti manifestum sit
ut praesentem fructu^ capiat. Iusta enim causa laetitiae est amicum laetum
videre, justior fecisse. Sen. de ben. lib. 2. c. 22. Gratias agere, gaudentis
est. Ibid. l. 3. c. 3.
cheerful. And certainly we cannot be so thankful to God as we should for his
favors, so long as we have no joy of them, as we take not delight in them. Yea
we are too too Ingrati gratiae: uti saepe Augustine.
unthankful to the grace of God, and value his goodness at too low a rate, if
we suffer any outward thing, what ever it be, and much more toys and trifles,
matters of no moment, to deprive us of the joy that we might and should enjoy
in it.

Psalm. 2.11.
Serve the Lord with fear, says the Psalmist, and rejoice before him with
reverence: And when thou come to appear before the Lord thy God in thy
festivals, Deuteronomy. 16.11.14, 15.
See in any case, says God, that thou rejoice. And Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.
Because thou would not serve the Lord thy God, with joyfulnesse and with
gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things: therefore shall thou serve
thine enemies that he shall send upon thee, in hunger, and thirst, and
nakedness, and in want of all things. It is as 2 Cor. 9.7. Romans 12.8. Qui cum
tristitia manum porrigit, remunerationis fructum amittit. Pulchre and eleganter
in colorando beneficio candor jucunditatis laudatus est voce illa poetica,
(Ovid. Met.) ante omnia vultus Accessere boni. Bern. in Cant. 71.
a cheerful giver; so Tertius obedientiae gradus, hilariter obedire, ut
voluntati cordis, simplicitati operis, vultus bilaritatem adjungas. Idem de
grad. obed.
a cheerful server, that God loves and delights in. And Multum colorat
obedientiam obsequentis, pultus serenitas. Quis imperet libenter tristitiam
efflinti? Bern. ibid. Quitquid facis, cum hilaritate fac: bonum tunc been
facis. Sin autem cum tristitia facis, fit de te, non ipse facit. August. in
Psalm. 91.
it takes away the grace of all holy duties, when with hanging of the wings,
and flagging affections, when with drooping, lumpishnesse, deadness and
dullness we go about them.

Psalm. 13.2.
do David's enemies exult over him, when they see him smitten with sorrow, and
like one at his wits end. It is not so much the crosses and calamities that
befall Gods Church and Children, as Fructus contumeliae in sensu and
indignatione patientis est. Sen. de constant. sap. c. 17.
their taking them too much to heart, and their heartlesse carriage under them,
that heartneth and encourages the adverse party, and gives them occasion to
triumph. As (...). Romans 8.37. (...). 2 Cor. 2.14. and 4.8, 9. Genus ultionis
est, eripere ei qui fecit, contumeliae voluptatem. Sen. de constable. sap. c. 17.
we triumph over them, though they seem to prevail against us, when we show
our selves undaunted and undismaid, notwithstanding their extremest rage, and
Nempe idcirco aliquis te laedit ut doleas; quia fructus omnis laedentis in
dolor laesi est. Ergo cum fructum ejus everteris non dolendo, ipse doleat
necesse est amissione fructus sui. Tertull. de patien. c. 8.
nothing vexes them more, than when they perceive that notwithstanding all
that ever they can do, yet our courage is not quailed: So on the other side
again it puts courage into them, when they perceive us to be discouraged,
it ministers matter of joy and insultation to them, when they see us dejected
and disheartened, and our countenances cast down, as if we despaired wholly of
divine, either protection or deliverance, and were not only at our wits end,
but at our hopes end also.

Number. 13.31.
the Spies that were sent to view the Land of Canaan, by their cowardice and
faint-heartednesse, brought up a slander upon that good land that God had
promised to bestow upon his people, and so Number. 14.1.4.
made the people that they had no desire to set further forward toward it, but
began to entertain thoughts rather of returning back again into Egypt: So
this heavy and uncomfortable state and carriage of Gods Children, causes
religion and godliness to be misdoubted and traduced, as a most heartlesse
and uncomfortable course; is a means to bring an imputation upon the good ways
of God, as if nothing but melancholy fits were there to be found, and that
sullen humor were the only predominant in all pious and religious persons;
and so beats back many from setting foot into good courses, that were
coming on before; yea makes many call in question and doubt shrewdly of the
truth of those things that the Spirit of God speaks so Psalm. 4.6.7. and 68.4,
5. and 89.15, 16, 17. and 118.15. Prove. 29.6 Romans 5.2, 3.
often in the Word, concerning the joy and comfort of the Godly man's estate.

All which well considered, it stands us every one in hand, Conclusion.
that are attained to the state of grace and favor with God, as we desire to
show our selves truly and thoroughly thankful to God for it, and to express
our thankfulness in such a cheerful performance of good duties, as may put
life and grace into them, as we would be loath to hearten Gods enemies, and
add courage unto them, or to dishearten weak ones, and discourage them from
coming on to him; to take notice of our own happiness, and consider well
what a blessed estate we are in, and to stir up our hearts to a joying in it,
in some measure, proportionably to that matter of joy that it ministers unto
us; and to take great heed how we suffer this joy either to be filched from us
by any slight of Satan, or to be drowned in us by occasion of any outward
occurrents.

And here before we pass from this first point of instruction, it shall not be
amiss, to remove that imputation that we even now said is by occasion of the
uncomfortable carriage of some Christians, cast by many upon the profession of
Christianity in general; by answering an Objection that may be and is often
made against the Doctrine before delivered.

For, Joy the godly man's Portion? may some man say. none, it seems, have
indeed less Joy than the godly.

I answer to either Branch severally.

Job 21.7, 12, 13. Psalm. 73.4, 5, 7. Esa. 5.11, 12. Amos 6.4, 5, 6.
live most merrily, and rejoice most of any.

Joy, and are much mistaken, that Tu illum judicas gaudere, qui ridet? Animus
debet esse alacer, etc. Sen. ep. 23.
measure Joy by outward laughter and merriment. A sound substantial joy is one
thing, and a tickling laughter is another thing: There is a pain sometime in
the one, an inward warmth in the other. Itaque recte Cic. de Orat. l. 2.
Ingenii fructus tenuissimus est risus. Et ibid. Locus and regio quasi ridiculi
turpitudine and deformitate quadam continetur. Vide and Quintil. instit. l. 6.
c. 3.
Any ridiculous toy may occasion the one, some weighty matter is necessarily
the ground of the other. Whether delights a man more, or joyeth him more
inwardly at the heart, a bag of gold given him, or an inheritance befallen him,
that it may be, he scarce smileth at the receipt of, or some idle jest told him
that makes him laugh till his heart ache, or till he almost burst again
withal? Res severa est verum gaudium. Sen. ep. 23.
True Joy, says the Heathen man, is, though not a sad, yet a solid and a
serious thing. And there is as much difference between idle merriment and
sound Joy, as between wanton daliance and well grounded love. Wicked and
worldly men may have some kind of Caeterae hilaritates leves sunt; frontem
remittunt, pectus non implent. Ibid.
superficial merriment, some kind of froathie and flashie mirth, such as may
(...). Homer. Iliad. (...).
wet the mouth, but not warm the heart, may smooth the brow, but not fill the
breast; like Hec quibus delectatur vulgus, tenuem quandam habent ac perfusoriam
voluptatem, Sen. ibid. i. leviter aspergentem, non and penetrantem. Lips.
a slight dash of rain, that washes the stalk, but wetteth not the root, and
therefore does the grass little good; or to use Salomons comparison, Stolidi
risus, spinarum sub olla crepitus. Eccles. 7.6. Ecquando ne vidisti flammam
stipuli exortam, claro stre^itu, targo sulgore, cite incremento, sedenim
materia levi, cadaco incendio, nullis reliquiis. Apul in apolog. laetitiae
secularis (...) a^tissima.
like an handful of brush wood or sear thorns under the pot, that makes a
great noise, and gives a great blase, but heateth little, boileth nothing,
leaves the meat still as Psalm. 58 9. Tractum a semicrudis carnibus olla
extractis, priusquam ignis calorem senserint. Drus. proverb. class. 2. l. 2.
prove. 30.
raw as it was when it went in: But true, sound and substantial joy, such as
that is that the godly have, or as is here said to belong to them, do such
never attain to.

Prove. 14.10.
The soul only knows it own bitterness, says Solomon: And Prove. 14.13.
-- medio de font leporum Surgit amari aliquid, quod in ipsis floribus angat.
Lucret l 4. Hilaritas ficta est: aut gravis and suppurata tristitia. Sen. ep.
80.
even in laughter often the heart is heavy. Calceus iste vobis nonne con^innus
admod^m videtur; solus ipse ubi pedem angat persentisco. Aemylius apud Plut. in
vita ejus. and Hier. ad Iovi^. l. 1.
You see all of you what an handsome shoe this is, said the Roman sometime,
but where it pincheth me, I feel only my self. So here, says Ambrose, Vides
convivium, laetitiam: interroga conscientiam. Ambros. offic. l. 1. c. 12.
Perpetua anxictas nec mensae tempore cessat. Iuven. sat. 13.
You see how such feast and revell outwardly; but you consider not what gripes
and twitches their consciences feel inwardly. Their laughter is never better
than a light gigling, many times but a strained grinning, Sardonius hic risus
est: mordet eos interim interius conscientiae vermis cauterlis omnibus acrior.
Calvin. institut. lib. 1. c. 3.
like the laughter of such as have eaten of mad Smallage, which though it wring
them exceedingly inwardly, yet sets them on grinning outwardly, and so
makes them go away with a seeming laughter. Prove. 29.6.
In the transgression of the wicked there is a snare, says Solomon: And Prove.
5.22.
the wicked man is holden in the cords of his own sin. Every wicked man
carries an halter about him to strangle his own joy withal, to mar his
own mirth. The guilt of his sin is as (...). Plut. de tranquil. Vulnus alit
venis, and caeco carpitur igne. Virg. Aen. 4. -- tacitum vivit sub pectore
vulnus. Ibid. -- languescit vulnere caeco, Conscius ipse animus sese dum sort
remordet. Lucret. l 4. -- ilia subter caecum vulnus habet; sed lato balteus
auro Protegit. Pers. sat. 4.
an unseene sore, that puts him to many a privy pang, that himself only
feels; as Evasisse putas, quos deri conscia facti, Men's habet attonitos, and
surdo verbere caedit, Occultum quatiente intus tortore flagellum. Iuvenal. sat.
13.
a silent scourge that gives him many a secret jerke, that none hears or
sees but himself alone.

Quamvis ex honesta causa imperitus homo gaudeat, tamen affectum ejus
impotentem, and in diversa statim inclinaturum, voluptatem voco opinione falsi
boni motam, immoderatam, and immodicam. Sen. ep. 59.
at the best, it is but as the Joy of those that are held, as we say, in a
fools paradise; deluded with a groundless conceit of vain hopes: as of a
frantike person, that has yet some Lucida intervalla.
lightsome turns by times, or is held with Insaniae illis genus hilare
contigit. (qualis illa Argivi cujusdam apud Horatium epist. 2. l. 2.) Sed non
est illa hilaritas longa. Observa: videbis cosdem intra exiguum tempus acerrime
ridere, and acerrime rabere. Sen. epist. 29. Hilarem illis contingit insaniam
insanire, ac perrisum furere. Idem de beat. c. 12.
a merry kind of madness: or of a mad man, that Qualis Thrasylaus ille
Atheniensis qui omnes naves suas credidit, quae in Piraeum appellerent. Athen.
dipnosoph. l. 12.
imagines himself a rich and a great man, when he is indeed but a poor
beggarly wretch: as of children in a siege, that being not apprehensive of the
danger they are in, are as busy at their sports, as their parents are at the
breach, while the city is ready to be sacked; or Peccatores dormientibus
similes. Anastas in Hexam. lib. 1. (...). Clem. paedag. lib. 2. c. 10. Imo and
somniantibus qui pericula vera non extimescunt, vana timent. Herolt de temp. 2.
as of men in a sleep; (it is just the sinners case; his whole life is but as
Ephesians. 5.14. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6, 7. (...). Dion. Chrysostom. orat. 33.
a sleep; he is no more awake though his eyes be open, than those beasts that
are said to sleep so: his estate as Job 20.8. and 27.19. Nocte soporifera
veluti cum somnia ludunt Errantes oculos, effossaque protulit aurum in lucem
tellus, versat manus improba furtum, Thesaurosque rapit, sudor quoque proluit
ora, Et mentem t^mor altus habet, ne forte gravatum Excutiat gremium secreti
conscius auri. Mox ubi fugerunt elusam gaud^a mentem. Veraque forma redit,
animus quod perdidit optat, Atque in praeterita se totus imagine versat.
Petronsatyr Videntur August. in Psalm. 75. and homil. 13. Greg. mor. lib. 18.
cap. 10. Ambr. de Joseph. cap. 6. and Senec. epist. 103.
a dream: that dreaming of strange matters, have many false Joys, and false
fears, which Psalm. 73.19. Esa. 29.8. Absque Dei notitia quae potest esse
solida faelicitas, cum sit somnio similis? Minut. Octav. Vita facinorosi, ut
somnium: aperuit oculos, transivit requies ejus, evanuit delectatio. Ambr.
ossic. lib. 1. cap. 12. Vide Luciam Micyllum.
as soon as they are awaked, do all vanish, and prove just nothing. Scelus
tutum aliquis, nemo securum tulit. Sen. Hippol. Tutum aliqua res in mala
conscientia praestat, nulla securum. Nocens habuit aliquando latendi fortunam,
nunquam siduciam. Sen. ep. 105.
Safe they may be, says the Heathen man, but they are never secure. And,
Secure, say I, they may sometime be, but they can never be safe. As the Peace
they have, is but a seeming peace: so the Joy they have is but a counterfeit
Joy; no true Peace, no sound, no substantial Joy.

Psalm. 6.2, 3, 6, 7. and 13.2. and 42.3, 4, 6, 7. and 73.13.
pensive and sorrowful? and the life of many such to be very uncouth and
uncomfortable?

I answer: Bernard speaks, do but -- Festuca quaerunt, unde oculum sibi
eruant. Bern. de bon. deser.
seek for a straw to thrust out their own eyes with. For do they see and
observe many such, as they say, that live uncouth and uncomfortable lives? They
might as well on the other side, if they pleased, see and observe many more
that have lived wonderful cheerfully 2 Cor. 6.10. and 7.4. Phil. 4.11, 12, 13.
(...). Plut. de virt. and vit.
even in extreme want and penury, in so much that their whole life for the
cheerfulness of it has been as Prove. 15 15. (...). Diogenes. (...) Plut. de
tranquil.
a continual feast; that have carried themselves most comfortably amids many
grievous calamities, that a man would wonder how they could stand upright, or
hold up the head under the weight of them, so as they have done. Romans 5.3. Non
e malis solum liberaberis, sed vinum bibes ex eis, ubi ceperis, in his etiam
gloriari. Bern. de diverse. 18.
Not so only (says the Apostle, having spoken of Christian men's rejoicing in
their hope of glory;) but we glory also even in our afflictions. And the
faithful Hebrews, Heb. 10.34.
with much Joy suffered the loss of their goods. And the Apostles Act. 5.40,
41. Tribulatio pro solatio, contumelia pro gloria, inopia pro abundantia est.
Bern. parv. sermon. 63.
went from the Consistory when they had been beaten, rated and reviled,
rejoicing that they were graced so to be disgraced for Christ. And Many a
Martyr of Christ has gone (...). Gr. Naz. in Julian. 2. Quomodo de Socrate
idem epist. 57. (...). Idem de Pasch.
as merrily to the stake, as others would have done to a feast. Now these men
see and observe the one, but the other they will not see, because they are
willing to pick a quarrel to Christian profession. To use a comparison, used
before me by Dr Burgess on Act. 9.31.
a right reverend Divine. Suppose a man come into one of your shops, and ask
to see some wares: which when he is showed, he finds some fault with; and
though you tell him you will show him better, yet he refuses to see them, and
so goes his way: will you not say that such a one came not to buy, but to
cavil? In like manner, when men to object against Piety and Godliness, as the
mother and means of a most uncomfortable life, shall pick out examples of some
few distressed and disconsolate Christians, that either oppressed with
melancholy, or Bona non sua norunt. -- Virg. Georg. lib. 2.
mistaken through weakness of judgment in their own estates, live pensively,
and shall refuse to take notice of others many more, ten to one, that live
cheerfully, and go on joyfully with much comfort and contentment in a
religious course of life; we may well say and deem of such, that they deal
very unequally, and are bent to cavil only at the practice and profession of
Piety, because Volentes ea vituperant, sibi quae non placent.
they have no love or liking to it.



And not to insist long upon the former, that the godly are often heavy, not
because they are themselves holy, but because others, Act. 26.29.
whom they desire should be so, Romans 9.2, 3.
are not as themselves are. It is not their own holiness, but thy
profaneness that makes them heavy. As 2 Pet. 2.8.
the bad lives of the Sodomites were an heart-sore to Lot, and Psalm. 119.136,
158.
the wicked courses of David's enemies, a great grief unto David. Sicut, Malus
bonum esse vult malum, ut sit sui similis. Plaut. Trinum. 2.2. Ita bonus bonum.
Nor were a man indeed truly good, did he not desire to have others also good;
Magnus bonorum labor est mores tolerare contrarios, quibus qui non offenditur,
parum proficit. Tantum enim torq^et justum alieni peccati iniquitas, quantum a
sua recedit. Aug. insent. Prosper. 122. Itaq^e site ac vere Martin. Dum.
demorib. Qui aequo animo malis immiscetur, malus est.
nor can he be desirous that others should do well, but he must needs be
grieved when he shall see them do otherwise than well. They are one maine
cause of their heaviness, that find fault with them for it. They should have
the less cause to be heavy, and it were not for such as they are.

But to let that pass, it is not so much the sight of their present, as the
consideration of their former estate, that makes good men so sad. They are not
heavy, because they are now holy, but Neminem pudet, neminem poenitet, nifi
quod plane retro non fuerit. Tertull. apolog.
because they were not sooner such: that they have spent, or misspent rather
so much time, in an unholy course of life, which now seeing their own folly,
they seriously repent of, and are sincerely sorry for. Or if their grief arise,
as it may well also, from the sight of the present; it is because they are no
holier than they are. Greenham alicubi.
The godly, says one, are not heavy therefore, because they are holy; but
therefore are they heavy, because they are no more holy; because they are not
so holy yet as they would be: because they see so much (...). Greg. Naz. de
Sasim. Episc.
unholinesse yet abide by them. As Eccles. 5.10.
the love of money makes men think that they have never enough of it; and the
greedy desire of having still more, makes them not regard or take notice of
what already they have. You shall hear the rich often complain that they are
(...). Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. hom. 14. Confessio est paupertatis augendi
cupiditas: omnis enim cupido acquirendi ex opinione inopiae venit. Apul. in
apolog.
but very poor men; and they are indeed in some respect as they say. So the
great love of godliness, and the greedy desire of it, and that even out of
the comfort and sweetness that they have felt and found in it, does often so
possess the hearts and minds of the godly, that it withholdeth them from
seeing and taking notice of what they have, and makes them many times pensive,
because they have so little Quid enim refert quam magnum sit, quod tibi minus
est. Apul. ibid.
as they imagine, though being more than ordinarily stored with it, of that
which so earnestly they desire. Nor ought that heaviness of theirs therefore
be imputed to holiness, which either the true or supposed want of it
produces. It is a very unequal thing, to charge holiness with that that
unholinesse is the cause of, and much more to challenge the godly for that,
which themselves and such as they be, are the cause of.

Foelicitatem ipsi suam non intelligunt. Senec. de benef. l. 2. c. 27.
They judge not aright of their own present estate; they are not yet
acquainted with the voice of Gods Spirit, that speaks peace and comfort to
their souls. As when men come at first into a strange Country, it is some
space of time ere they can understand Psalm. 85.8.
the language, and so come to converse familiarly with the Natives thereof. So
is it with Gods Children often for some space of time, after their first
conversion to God and Godliness, they understand not instantly the language of
Gods Spirit, which they have not been formerly acquainted with; nor apprehend
they therefore presently those sweet comforts and joys that their present
estate and condition affords. It is with them as with a prisoner or a
condemned person, that though he have his pardon signed and sealed, and news
brought him of it, as Genesis 45.26.
Jacob had of Joseph's life and state, yet does not believe it; or when the deed
it self is showed to him, yet because he cannot himself read it, or see his
own name in it, or else because, it may be, he mistaketh somewhat in it,
gives no credit at all to it, and so has no more joy of it yet, than as if it
were not. And we may add also, that even melancholy is many times a cause of
it. For Gods grace, though it renew and change the disposition of the soul,
yet it alters not the natural constitution of the body. Even the godly
therefore, as they are some of them made of a melancholic mould as well as
others, so are they (...). Act. 14.15. Iam. 5.17.
subject, as well as others, to melancholic passions and affections: An humor
that is wont to raise many strange imaginations, groundless griefs, false
fears and frights, senseless surmises; and as Per vitrum viride v sa viridia
videntur. Cardan. de subtle. l. 7.
a piece of colored glass makes all that is seen through it, yea the very
Tinguntur ab eis in quorum oram subeundo venerunt. Plin. hist. not. l. 2. c. 18.
Sunne-beames, that pass in by it, seem all of the same color with it self;
so this black humor represents all things to the eye of the soul Vti de
flava bile Varro in Eumenid. Arquatis lutea videntur, etiam quae non sunt
lutea. Nonius de propr. sermon. l. 1.
as duskish and dark, full of horror and terror, even the very bright beams
of Gods favor, and the lovely fruits and effects of it, picking many times
matter of fear and misdoubt out of those things, that might give it best
assurance. That which See Bright of Melanchol. chap. 17. and 34. and 35.
the Devil also taking advantage of, is not negligent to work upon, and by
means thereof, to possess the minds of such, with such conceits of
themselves, which by reason of their melancholy, having once made a deep
impression, are not easily again removed, as may vex and turmoile them, and
either make them weary of Gods ways, or discourage others from entering into
them. And it is unequal to ascribe that unto Godliness in general, that
proceeds from the Quomodo Cicer. de senect. Non est proprium hoc senectutis
vitium, sed commune vaeletudinis.
special constitution of some few godly ones only, and is no other than is
common to them, with many other profane also, being of the same constitution,
though not in the same condition, that they are. We see scholars many, more
than others ordinarily, subject to melancholy, because their retired courses of
life and privacie of study, is a great means to feed that humor where it is
naturally found: yet neither follows it therefore, that all Scholars live
uncomfortable lives, because some do so, that are possessed and oppressed with
that humor. Nor may that rightly be ascribed to study and learning, which not
it, but the constitution of some students produces.

Genesis 25.22, 23.
Rebekkah did, with two twins, and those such too as cannot agree well
together. No marvel, I say, if there be some Galat. 5.17. Romans 7.23.
striving and struggling, and such as may sometime cause much inward trouble and
distraction, until the better of them have got the upper hand of the other.
(...). Pythagoricum monitum. Plut. de suga. and de sanit. Verum (...) magis,
uti idem de tranquil. Hinc Antonmi Imper. monitum vitae suae l. 12. (...).
Make choice of the best course of life, said the Heathen man sometime, and use
and custom will make it familiar and pleasant. But as it is with milstones,
though they be hewed as fit as may be either to other, yet they grind not at
first so handsomely, till they have wrought sometime together: Or apparel,
though well made, and fit for the body, yet is not so easy at the first
putting on, as when it has been worn a while: Nor do man and wife many
times, especially having some cross qualities, agree so well at first, as they
do afterward, when they come to understand more thoroughly either others
disposition, and have learned to fashion and apply themselves either to other.
So it is here: Matthew. 11.29. Grave dum tollis, suave cum tule^is. Greg. in
Ezech. l 2 hom. 7. Quam male inassueti veniunt ad aratra juvenci?
Christ's yoke, says Gregory, seems heavy at the first taking of it up; it
becomes easy, yea delightful, when a while we have borne it. Gods Spirit
and our corrupt nature do not fadge so well at first: they seem somewhat
uncouth courses that we are entered into, till we have inured our selves unto
them. It is our own Hosh. 10.11.
untowardnesse, and unrulinesse, our Hosh. 13.13.
sticking at the birth, our unwillingnesse to yield our selves up wholly unto
God, Romans 8.7.
the rebelliousnesse of our spirit not reduced so easily to the obedience of
Gods good Spirit, that hinders our comfort, that procures to us that
discomfort, which more godliness admitted and given way to would cure. Sublata
causa, tollitur effectus.
For the cause taken away the effect would soon cease.

Psalm. 119.176.
Gods Children also oft-times straying out of Gods way, as we are wont to say
of children, light into harms way, and come home again by weeping cross.
Even Gods Children are now and then shaking hands with the wicked, and taking
part with Gods enemies, as 2 Chronicles. 18.1, 3, 31. and 19.2.
Iosaphat with Ahab, which they pay full dear for oftentimes before they have
done with it. Yea as our children, so Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Gods Children, when they are full fed especially, are over prone to grow
wanton, and will needs be dipping their finger sometimes in the Devils sauce,
as I may so say; as children sometime out of a lickerish disposition, will be
tampering with such things, Negatis animus inbiat avidius. Bern. in Cant. 67.
Audax omnia perpeti Geus humana ruit per vetitum nefas. Horat. carm. 1.3.
Nitimur in vetitum semper, cupimusque negatum. Quod non licet, acrius urit.
Ovid. amor. 3.4. and 2.19.
as they are forbidden to meddle with, and it is dangerous for them to deal
with; which costeth them afterward many a deep sigh and a salt tear, ere they
can recover again of the evil, and the inward discomfort, that by means
thereof accrueth unto them. It was David's case: Psalm. 30.6, 7.
when he was now at rest and ease, 2 Samuel 11.2, 3, 4.
he was led aside, and fell a dalying with some sinful delights, that Psalm.
32.3, 4.
eclipsed his joy and comfort, and procured to him such discomfort, as made his
life for a long time together most uncomfortable to him, Psalm. 51.8, 12.
it being a long time ere he could thoroughly recover his former state of joy
and comfort again. But what is the true cause of discomfort in such cases? It
is not godliness; it is Causatristitiae peccatum est: causa laetitiae justitia
est. August. in Psalm. 42.
ungodliness. Crudelem medicum intemperans aeger facit. P. Sir.
A disordered Patient, we say, makes a cruel Physician. The Patients disorder
and misdieting of himself, contrary to the rules by the Physician prescribed
him, procures him often much pain, disturbeth the cure of his disease,
hinders his recovery, requires new purgings and potions, yea peradventure
searings and cuttings, that otherwise he should not have needed; which (...).
Greg. Naz. ad cives periclitant.
to lay the fault of, therefore, on the Physician, or the rules of Physic, or
the courses by him prescribed, and of the Patient neglected, were unreasonable
and senseless.

(...). Basil. Caes. homil. 4.
seed of sound joy. Matthew. 5.4. (...). Chrysostom. in Philip. hom. 14.
The way to joy is by grief; as the way by Physic is to health, As the
worldly man's Prove. 14.13. (...). Antipho. Apes pungunt, quia ubicunque dulce
est, ibi and acidum teperies. Petron. Satyr.
Joy ends in grief; so the godly man's Esa. 61.3. Matthew. 5.4.
grief ends in Joy. Greenham observe.
He is not far from true Joy, that can sincerely sorrow for his sin. For as
Bellum contra diabolum pacem patrat ad Deum. Origin. ad Romans 5. Nisi
discordaveris cum diabolo, pacem non habebis cum Christo. August. quaest. N.T.
92. Itaque vere Greg. Naz. de pace 1. (...). Et in apolog. (...).
war with the world procures peace with God; so 2 Corin. 7.9, 10, 11. (...).
Chrysostom. in Phil. hom. 15.
sorrow for sin produces Joy in God. Yea he has much matter of sound joy in
him, as we shall afterward see, that can and does seriously lament and bewail
his own wants, his untowardnesse, his former wantonness, his wickedness.
What say I, there is matter of joy? There is even joy often herein. There are
Genesis 43.30. and 45.2. and 46.29, 30. Communis Iachryma est and moerori and
gaudio. Non solus dolor lathrymas habet; habet and laetitia lachrymas suas.
Ambros. in Satyr. Habet and lachrymas magna voluptas. Senec. Thy. 5.2.
tears of Joy, as well as of grief; and there is also (...). Gr. Naz. in Iul.
1. Ex consideratione alicujus delectabilis cum permixtione alicujus
tristabilis. Aquin. sum. secunda secundae q. 82. a 4.
a mixture often of the one with the other, Men take (...). Basil. Caes. hom. 4.
(...). Isidor. Pel. ep. 8. l. 3. Flebo meos casus: est quaedam flere voluptas.
Expletur lachrymis, egeriturque dolor. Ovid. trist. 4.3.
pleasure and delight sometime even in mourning and bemoaning themselves, as
well as in mirth. And I make no doubt, but that many of Gods Children do many
times take as much (...). Chrysostom. in Phil. hom. 14.
delight, and find as much comfort, even in their Godly grief, and in the
bewailing of their wants, as any worldly men do ordinarily in those outward
pleasures, that their hearts and affections are most carried away with. Nor let
any natural man much marvel hereat. For if such can take so much pleasure, as
I have heard some of them confess, and as Ipse dolor voluptas est. August.
confess. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Augustine observes, in seeing an idle play of some fained subject, that so
affects them, that it draws tears from them, though the thing acted
nothing at all concern them, nor, it may be ever was in truth executed, that
they desire and long exceedingly to see it again; then they need not marvel,
if Gods Children can take much more pleasure in this their holy grief, though
it draw many a tear from them, that so nearly concerns them; and in those
religious tears, which are so pleasing to God, that they cause Luke 15.7.
much Joy in Heaven, and by which 2 Cor. 7.10.
so much benefit accrueth to themselves. They may well be comfortable, that are
Matthew. 5.4.
the procurers of comfort; they may well be pleasant and delightful tears,
that are Luke 6.21.
sure pledges of eternal Joy and delight.

1 King. 6.4. Ezech. 40.16.
the windows that conveyed the light into Salomons Temple, were wider within,
than without they were. Levium metallorum fructus in summo est: illa
opulentissima sunt, quorum in alto latet v^na, assidue before responsura
fodienti. Sen. epist. 23.
The richest veins of Oar lie deepest in the ground. And Solidum gaudium plus
introrsus patet. Ibid.
the greatest joy many times makes outwardly least show. As hypocrites
oft-times 2 Cor. 5.12.
rejoice in the face, as the Apostle speaks, when yet they rejoice not in the
heart; and worldly men many times Spem vultu simulat, premit altum cord
dolorem. Virg. Aen. l. 1. Rebus affectis hilaritatem de industria simulant, and
adversas res adumbrata laetitia abscondunt. Sen. ad Palyb c. 24.
set a good face on it, and make semblance of mirth outwardly when their hearts
are inwardly the whiles pincht with pain: so the godly often times rejoice in
the heart, when yet they rejoice not in the face; ( 2 Cor. 6.10.
as sorrowing, says the same Apostle, and yet always rejoicing:) and have
their souls fraught inwardly with abundance of joy, though their looks
outwardly show it not. Psalm. 45.13.
The Kings daughter, says the Psalmist, is all glorious on the inside. As the
Glory of Gods Church; so the Joy of Gods Children is much, yea or most, inward:
and it is no marvel therefore, if 1 John 3.2.
the World and Worldly men see not either the one or the other; they want 1
Cor. 2.14.
Spiritual eyes to discern either. They think there is no mirth, but where
there is gigling and laughing, or swaggering and revelling, and the like. But
Gods Children may say to them, as our Savior to his Disciples, John 4.33.
I have other meat than you wot of; so, Non novit impius gaudium justi. Aug. in
Psalm. 137.
We have other manner of Joy than you are aware of. The Godly are often merry,
though they make little show of it: yea their mirth is most many times, when it
is least seen. Those that prescribe rules for the choice of Simples, advise to
take herbs in the Spring, flowers in Summer, fruits in Autumn, Vel incunte,
vel exeunte hyeme, antequam in caulem ascendere humiditas ceperit. Cord. in
Pharmacop.
roots in Winter; and why roots for the most part at that time? Surely because
the sap is then gone down; it is most in the root, when it is least in the
stock; it is most of all then under ground, when it is least to be seen above
ground. And so it is oft-times with the Joy of Gods Children, Martyr etiam in
catena gaudet. Gaudebat Crispina, cum tenebatur, cum audiebatur, cum
damnabatur, cum ducebatur. August. in Psalm. 137.
it is most rife many times with them inwardly in the heart, when least show of
it appears outwardly, or discovers it self in their life.

Winter time with them. It is so in some sort generally so long as they live
here. It is Summer here with the wicked, it is Winter with them. Psalm. 37.2.
and 92.12. Foenea quadam foelicitate temporaliter florent. Aug. epist. 120. c.
5. Gramen hyeme viret, aestate arescit: arbor arescente gramine virescit. Idem
in Psalm. 36.
The one is as the grass that is green in Winter, but withers when the heat
of Summer once comes. The other is as the Oak, that in Winter seems sear,
but when Summer comes sprouteth out, and continues fresh and green then,
when the grass is parcht and burnt up, or made hay of. Coloss. 3.3, 4.
You are now dead, says the Apostle; and your life is hid with Christ; but
when Christ, who is your Life, shall appear, then shall you also appear in
Glory with him. As if he had said, It is now Winter time, and the sap lies hid
in the root with you, but when Summer comes, you shall spring out, and be in
your prime as trees and plants are Malach. 4.2.
when the Sun approaches.

But more specially it is Winter with them at some time more than at others. As
in times of affliction, desertion, temptation and persecution. That is the
Winter that in the Cant. 2.11.
Canticles the Spirit specially speaks of. And no marvel if joy and comfort
be then oft-times restrained with them; at least if they do not then so
apparently offer themselves to outward view. Who would expect or require leaves
or fruit ordinarily in Winter time from a tree? Not but that the Godly have
even at such times also good ground even for great joy and much comfort;
howsoever they see it not for the present: or but that they have many of them
many times in many such cases, 2 Cor. 1.5. and 7.4.
as much joy and comfort as ever: (...), arbor, non avis, ut Tertull. de
resurr. (...) Psalm. 92.12. and 1.3. Ierem. 17.8. (...). Plut. sympos. problem.
l. 8. cap. 4. Palmae folia non decidunt. Plin. hist. not. lib. 16. c. 20. Ex
eis quae semper virent, quaedam folia abjiciunt, ut Laurus and Pinus, aliis
clam subnascentibus, palma vero perpetuis vestita foliis, quae semel produxit,
ad finem usque retinet. Glycas ann. p. 1. c. 5.
like the Palm Tree in that regard, that keeps his green hew continually,
and never casts his leaf all the year long. But that then usually joy and
comfort is somewhat obscured with the most, with weak ones especially, who yet
when they are free from such fits, live as cheerfully, as joyfully, as
comfortably as any.

Such occasions and occurents then are the godly subject unto now and then,
that through their weakness often disturb much and dim their joy for a time.
And are not worldly men also subject to many diseases, disasters, crosses,
griefs, discontentments, that set them often off the hinges, and mar all their
mirth? It is an unequal thing then for them to tax religion for that, or to
twit the religious with it, which (...). Simonides apud Plut. de ^til. ex inim.
to all other courses of life is incident as well as to it. An unequal thing
for them to require such an equal tenure of disposition from a Christian man,
in all occurrents and accidents, as no other is able to exhibit. They may
Exigis ut nulli gemitus tormenta sequantur? Acceptoque gravi vulnere flere
vitas? Ovid. trist. 5. 1. Nulla flendi major est causa quam flere non posse.
Pollio apud Se. controv. 4. 1. Misero si flere non licet, magis flendum est.
Cestius ibid. 3. 8.
as well require mirth of a natural man in the midst of some sharp fit of a
burning fever or the like, as require alacrity and cheerfulness of a
Christian in some such cases.

But to come somewhat nearer home to the portion of Scripture Imperfectis adhuc
gaudium saepe interscinditur. Sen. epist. 72.
but Seed-time as yet. And to see to oft-times there is little difference,
though indeed there be much, between an acre of ground that lies still
unsowen, and one that is sown with some precious seed.

Point before propounded, how far forth Gods children do even here partake
of this Joy. Verse. 12.
in the very next words to my Text. And yet they are not come to the whole crop
neither; it is not their Harvest-time yet: that is not till Matthew. 13.39.
the worlds end. Light is sown for them, says the Psalmist.

This Life is the religious man's seed-time.
Joy is but sown for him here.


As Iam. 3.18. Gal. 6.7, 8.
the fruit of righteousness; so Light and Joy are said here to be sown.

And that principally for these causes:

(...). Chrysostom. tom. 6. orat. 42.
corn in the ground, that lies there unseene: it is much clouded and obscured
with many crosses and conflicts.

(...), etc. Chrysostom ibid. Solo sepulta credit quae sunt credita.
an ignorant person, that knew not the nature of grain, and the efficacy that
is in seed, would think it were not sown, but buried and cast away, when it
is cast into the ground, and laid up in the earth.

Terra nunquam sine usura reddit quod accepit. Cic. de senect.
that is nothing in comparison to that that it is expected to come unto.

Psalm. 112.4. Est. 8.16.
it does also here; and in due time produce and bring forth a plentiful
Harvest. For, Psalm. 126.5. Non spes solum fructus, sed and fructus est ipse in
semine. Bern. in Psalm. 90. sermon. 17.
those that sow in tears, says the Psalmist, shall reap in joy. And where
this seed of Light and Joy is now sown, a further larger crop of it shall
there sometime succeed.



Admonition.
or to grow discontent, if they cannot find and feel yet that large measure
of spiritual joy and comfort, that they desire, and expected, yea and in the
word of God is often promised. It is but our Seed-time yet. And would we have
Seed-time and Harvest concur? No, Iam. 5.7.
Behold the Husbandman, says Saint James, how he waits for the precious
fruit of the earth; and expects patiently till Zech. 10.1.
the first and latter rain be passed on it. And in like manner must we have
patience till Gods Harvest-time come, and then shall we be sure to have our
full crop, whatsoever it please God to impart unto us of it before; in the
mean while looking constantly after the spiritual Deuteronomy. 32.2. Heb. 6.7.
rain of the Word, and praying instantly for the sweet dewes of his Spirit, to
descend down upon our souls, for the cherishing and improving of this seed of
joy sown in us. When we have laid our grain into the ground, we do not look
to see it the same day again, much less to reap the same day, (as he says
of the Hyperborean people far North, that Heresbach. de re rust.
they sow shortly after the Sun rising with them, and reap before the Sun
set, that is because the whole half year is one continual day with them:)
no, we expect not the next day, nor the next week neither, to see it again
above ground; but we are content to wait patiently till the year come about;
and are glad when we see it but after a month it may be, begin to peep out of
the ground, living in hope still of the further growth of it, and to enjoy at
length, after the spire and the blade, a full ear. So must we learn likewise
herein patiently to wait Gods good leisure, and though we see a long time but
slender growth, scarce any sight at all of it, yet not to be dismayed therefore
or discouraged, but Spes alit agricolas: spes sulcis credit aratis Semina, quae
magno foenore reddit ager. Tibull. 2.6.
live in hope, as the husbandman does, of further increase of it, and of a
full crop at length, when God shall see it good. And the rather by much may we
live in hope, and Romans 4.24. -- credula vitam Spes fovet. -- Tibull. ibid.
live by hope here than there, because the seed that is there sown, after it
is so sown may miscarry; it may be cast into the ground, and die there, and so
never come up again: ( Joel 1.17.
The grain, says Joel, is rotted under the clods:) it may spring up well, and
Exodus 9 31.
be blasted, while it is yet in the blade: it may be eared, and yet perish ere
it come to be cut: Joel 1.5, 16. -- saepe est Spem mentita seges. Horat. l. 1.
ep. 7.
The meat, says the Prophet, is cut away from your mouth: that is, it is
spoiled and stroyed when it is full ripe, and fit for the sickle, when you make
full account to feed on it, and it is in a manner even in your mouths. But
this spiritual seed of light and joy ( De radi^e siquidem certius dici potest.
quod de fractu Sen. epist 59. Gaudio junctum est non desmere; nec in contraria
verti. Et ep. 23. Nunquam deficiet, cum semel ^^de petatur inveneris. Et epist.
27. Si quid obstat, nubium modo intervenit, qua infra feruntur, nec unquam diem
vincunt.
the maine matter and ground of it, I mean) that is sown in the hearts of
Gods Children, being an incorruptible seed, shall never die and decay, but
though it may seem to lie dead there for a long time together, yet it shall
surely sprout out, and in time show forth it self; yea it is even then
sprouting, when it seems so to lie 1 Cor. 15.36.
dead, and it will daily be growing, as the Mark. 4.26, 27, 28. Gaudium ex se
ortum fidele firmum ^ue est, and crescit, and adextremum usque prosequitur. Sen
epist. 98.
seed cast into the ground, though it be not regarded, or notice taken of it,
till it come to its full growth. For Prove 4.18.
the way of the Just, says Solomon, is as the light, that shines more and
more till it be broad day light. And, Psalm. 37.6, 7.
God will in his due time bring their righteousness forth as the light, and
their judgment as the noonday, that do quietly and constantly rest upon
him, and are content to wait and abide his pleasure. For, Gal. 6.8.
He that sows to the Spirit, shall from the Spirit reap life eternal. And,
Prove 11.18.
He that sows righteousness, shall have a sure reward. And, Gal. 6.9.
In due time we shall reap, if we faint not.

Caution.
by our own wickedness or wantonness disturb wilfully our own peace, and so
eclipse our own light, by Esa. 59.2. Lam. 3.44.
interposition of some grievous enormities, which as Sol interventu Lunae
occultatur, Luna terrae objectu: ita vices redduntur, eosdem Solis radios Luna
interpositu suo auferente terrae, terraque Lunae. Plin. hist. not. l. 2. c. 10.
the dark body of the Earth coming between the Sun and the Moon, may be
a means to restrain the sweet influences of Gods Spirit, that otherwise we
might have enjoyed: ( Vis nunquam tristis esse? been vive. Bona vita semper
gaudium habet. Aug apud Tambac. de consol. Theolog. l. 9. and Isidor. de miser.
hom. l. 2.
Would thou never be sad? says Augustine, have an eye to thy life, be
careful ever to live uprightly: A religious life can never want matter of much
joy.) Or how we grow 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.20.
negligent in the use of good means for the maintaining and feeding, yea 2 Timothy 1.6.
for the stirring of it up, and the making of it burn clear, that so we may
walk cheerfully and comfortably in the light of it. For Zech. 4.2, 3, 12.
light must, we know, be maintained, and often Exodus 27.21.
tended and trimmed, or else it will but burn dim and afford little light.
Yea, if we do find at any time some defect in this kind, some restraint of
spiritual comfort, let us descend into our souls, and seriously examine our
selves, whether we nourish not within us some secret corruption, that may
choke this our joy, and like a thick fogge, or a filthy vapor ascending up
in our souls, may keep the light of Gods countenance from shining in upon us
so brightly as otherwise it would, or peradventure formerly it has done.

Psalmist thereupon here infers, Exhortation.
Verse. 12.
Rejoice ye righteous, and be glad in the Lord. Be not as ground or land that
lies wholly unsowen. Full glad is the Husbandman when he has had a
seasonable seed-time, and has got his grain once well into the ground. But
how merry think you, would he be, if he could have his crop secured? This
should therefore serve again to incite and stir up all Gods Children, to
constant and continual joy and rejoicing, having so sound a seed of joy sown
in them, and being so sure of a large and plentiful crop of it: to say with
the blessed Virgin, Luke 1.46, 47.
My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior:
And with the Spouse in the Prophet, Esa. 61.10.
I will greatly rejoice, and my soul shall be joyful (for why should it not
be so?) in my God; even Habb. 3.18.
in the God of my salvation.

Reprehension.
Yea it may well serve to check us, for that fondly and wilfully we suffer our
selves by every slight and trifling occasion to be bereft of this joy,
whereof Gods mercy and goodness has in part put us here in present
possession. There is Adhuc in nobis non pueritia, sed, quod gravius est,
puerilitas remanet. Sen. ep. 4. Etiam post juventam canosque puerilitas est.
Idem de constant. sap. c. 12.
a childish and peevish humor naturally in every one of us: and some tang and
taint of it we may observe even in Abraham; Genesis 15.1, 2.
Fear not, Abraham, says God himself to Abraham; I am thy buckler, and rich
reward. But, Lord, what will thou give me, says Abraham to God again, so long
as I go childlesse? As if all he had were nothing, or he could have no joy of
any thing, so long as he was without that one thing, so long as he wanted a son
and heir: as Ester 5.12, 13.
Haman had no joy of all his wealth and honor, and grace and favor with King
and Queen, so long as Ester 3.2, 4, 5.
Mordecai crouched not to him, nor fawned on him, as others did. And the like
wayward humor is too rise with the most of us. We are like Contemnenda
miramur, pueris simillimi, quibus omne ludierum in pretio est. Parentibus
quippe, nec minus fratribus, praeferunt parvo aere empta monilia: and tam
nucibus amissis slebunt quam parentibus. Sen. de ira l. 1. c. 12. and epist.
115.
children with whom toys and trifles are more regarded than matters of greater
worth and weight; and who therefore (...). Plut. de tranquil.
if some one of those toys be taken away from them, though they have many
more of them besides, will in a pettish humor cast all the rest away after it,
and sit whining for that one. The loss or want of some one trifle, and that
such sometime as a Christian man or woman might well be ashamed to make any
reckoning or account of, that either we had and have lost, or do want and
would have, I say not of Genes. 37.34, 35. 2 Samuel 18.33. and 19.2-7. Ierem.
31.15.
a child, or of a friend, or a father, or of some worldly means, (that the
most are wont most Ploratur lachrymis amissa pecunia veris. Iuven. sat. 13.
heartily to mourn for) but of a fine ruff, or a new fashion, or of a good
look from some great one, or of a bow of the knee from some inferior one, or
of an hawke, or an hound, or See Guevaraes letter to a Lady, upon such an
occasion; in his golden Epistles. Et de quibusdam Iuvenal. satyr. 6. Morte viri
cupiant animam servare catelli.
a whelpe, (for even so low, and yet lower, do our base affections often deject
us) does so affect us, and go so near to the heart with us, that (...).
Socrates apud Stob. c. 4.
it is a means many, too many, times to abandon all joy and mirth with us, as
if all the Job 15.11.
gracious favors of God toward us in Christ Jesus, and all the Ephesians. 1.18.
rich and glorious hopes of our eternal inheritance with him, were all nothing
in comparison of such a trifle as that, or not able to joy and cheer up our
hearts without it. This childish and sottish quality should we every one of us
take notice of in our selves, of too much pronenesse at least unto it, and Ab
hac te infamia vindica, ne videatur plus apud te valere unus dolor, quam haec
tam multa solatia. Sen. ad Polyb. consol. c. 31.
strive and labor against it, as being worthily ashamed of it, and considering
with our selves, what an unworthy thing it is, that the love and loss of such
pidling toys, yea or of any worldly thing whatsoever, should prevail so far
with us, as to deprive us of that joy and comfort that our blessed estate in
Christ Jesus even for the present may well minister unto us. An Heathen man
tells a Courtier that had lost his Son; that Fas tibi non est salvo
Caesare, de fortunatua queri. Hoc in columi salvi tibi sunt tui. Nihil
perdidisti: non tantum siccos oculos tuos esse, sed etiam laetos oportet. In
hoc tibi omnia sunt; hic pro omnibus est. Adversus foelicitatem tuam parum
gratus es, si tibi quicquam hoc salvo, slere permittis. Sen. ibid. c. 26.
he had no cause to mourn, either for that or ought else, as long as his
Sovereign was in safety, and he in favor with his Sovereign, he had all
things in him; and should be unthankful to his good fortunes, if he were not
cheerful both in heart and look, so long as things stood so with him, as then
they did. How much better may it be said to every true Christian, let his wants
and his losses be never so great, that he has little cause to mourn for
them, so long as he is in grace and favor with God; Deum habens, omnia habes.
August. de temp. 146.
he has all things in him, and Quid hac Iobi miseria miserius? and quid tamen
hac infoelicitate foelicius? Perdiderat omnia, quae dederat Deus. Sed habuerat
ipsum, qui dederat omnia, Deum. Data perdiderat, non datorem. Omnia perdiderat,
and plenus erat. Idem in Psalm. 66. and de diverse. 12.
so long therefore he is happy, and he have nothing else but him. And
exceeding unthankful is he to Gods goodness, if the apprehension of it Act.
14.17.
fill not his heart at all times with gladness; unworthy is he of salvation by
Christ, that cannot Philip. 4.4.
at any time find matter of rejoicing in Christ.

Yea, but how can we rejoice, peradventure will some say, (...), etc. Basil.
Caes. hom. 4. Quem vide ibid. and homil. etiam 5.
amids so many crosses and calamities as Gods Church and Children are daily
vexed and annoyed with, yea and our selves also among the rest? Or how can we
rejoice, when we have so many sins and corruptions to be sorry for? Yea, how
may we lawfully rejoice, when Esa. 22.12.
we are called unto heaviness and solemn humiliation, when we are commanded
and enjoined by God, to mourn and lament? When either our own estate or Gods
Churches is such, that Amos 6.6. See the Spark.
not to be sorry, and to be even sick with sorrow, may well seem a sin?

To this I answer:

1. We must ever remember so to keep one Commandment, that we break not
another. Matthew. 4.17. Mark. 1.14.
Repent, is one Commandment; Matthew. 5.12. Luke 10.20.
Rejoice, is another. And he that commands the one, has enjoined also the
other. As Saint James therefore reasons, Iam. 2.11.
He that said, Thou shall not kill, has said also, Thou shall not commit
adultery; though thou do not kill therefore, yet if thou do commit adultery,
thou art a transgressour. So here, he that has commanded us to be sorry for our
sins, and for the afflictions of our brethren, has commanded us also 1 Thessalonians. 5.16.
evermore to rejoice. And therefore though we fail not in sorrow for our
sins, or for our brethrens afflictions, yet if we wilfully banish and abandon
this spiritual joy which Gods Spirit requires of us, we make our selves
thereby guilty of sin in Gods sight. A sin it may be 1 Cor. 5.2.
not to be sorry at some time: and a sin it is for Gods child at any time
not to joy. They say that Praecepta negativae ligant semper and ad semper.
Affirmativa semper, sed non ad semper. Thom. Aquin. sum. p. prima secundae q.
71. a. 5. and q. 88. a. 1. and q. 100. a. 10. and Gerson. reg. mor.
Negative precepts or prohibitions only, tie at, and unto all times: But this
Affirmative injunction also concerning a Christian man's joy, Continuum vult
esse and non interruptum gaudium nostrum. Gilbert in Cant. 10.
admits no intermission, but tieth unto all times. Sorrow may be sometime
out of season: this spiritual joy, as of some food we say, is never
unseasonable. The godly are at some times Nehem. 8.9, 10.
prohibited the one: they are never inhibited, but enjoined ever the other. Yea
mark what I say; it is undoubtedly true: Albeit few be prone to offend that
way, yet a man may offend even in excessive sorrow for sin, in thinking too
much on his sins, in mourning unmeasurably for his sins. If such thy
meditation of thy sin, and sorrow for thy sin shall so far prevail with
thee, that thou art wholly 2 Cor. 2.7.
swallowed up with it, or by means of it, art either Quomodo Sen. ad Polyb. c.
26. Non licet tibi stere, ut multos flentes audire possi^. Vt periclitantium
lachrymae possint, tibi tuae assiccandae sunt.
detained from, or disabled unto, and made wholly unfit for the performance of
other necessary duties, that thy sorrow does then make thee guilty of sin,
and thou have just cause to be sorry for that sorrow.

Joy and grief, in some degree at least, may well stand together. As true joy
may well stand with some fear. Psalm. 2.11. Sic Matthew. 28.8.
Rejoice before him, says the Psalmist, with fear. So Habemus luctum gaudio
mixtum. Petr. Martyr. in 2 Samuel 24.
true joy may well stand with some grief. 2 Cor. 6.10.
As sorrowing, says the Apostle, and yet always rejoicing. He that has
commanded us to sorrow sometime, would never else have enjoined us Philip. 4.4.
at all times to rejoice. There is joy even in grief; as there is grief even
in joy. Yea, though it may seem strange, yet it is questionless true, the
greater grief sometime the greater joy; and the greater joy, the greater
grief. A man may at the same time both be exceeding sorry for his sin, and
yet rejoice exceedingly in the apprehension of Gods mercy, in the free pardon
and forgiveness of it. Yea, the greater grief a man has for his sins, the
more cause of joy he has even in that regard. And the greater joy a man has
in the apprehension of Gods favor in the forgiveness of his sin, the
greater grief and sorrow for his sin it usually works in him. As where 1
John 4.18.
the servile fear cease, that regards nothing but wrath, there the filial
Hosh. 3.5. Timor ne pecces. Aliud est enim timere quia peccaveris; aliud timere
ne perces. Philip. in Job.
fear of offending grows usually most rife: For 1 John 4.19.
the more a man is assured of Gods love toward him, the more he loves God;
and Genes. 39.9. Psalm. 97.10. Prove. 8.13. Absit enim ut timore pereat amor, si
tastus est timor. August. in Psalm. 118. Nemo melius diligit, quam qui maxim
veretur offendere. Salvian. ep. 4.
the more he loves him, the more afraid is he of offending him: So Cessat
horror, crescit dolor.
where the inward gal^ cease of a guilty conscience, there sincere grief for
sin grows fresher than ever before. To illustrate this by some familiar
comparison. Suppose one that stood guilty of high Treason against his
Sovereign, and that not in some inferior kind, but in the highest degree,
either having made a violent assault upon the person of 1 Samuel 24.7, 11. and 26
9.
the Lords Anointed, or having not by accident, as Adrastus Midae filius,
Gord^i nepos. Herodot. in Clio. Is siquidem Atyn Croesi filium errore pari
intersecit, quo Gualterus Tirrell Gulielmum Rufum Anglorum Regem inter
venandum, interemit. Henr. Hunting. rer. Angl. l. 7. and Rog. Hoveden annal.
part. 1.
he sometime that slew Croesus his Son, but by a malicious train taken away
the life of his only Son that should have succeeded him, having no other
issue in the Kingdom; and having been arraigned and condemned for the same,
yet should by his Sovereign out of his gracious disposition, and at the
earnest suit of some about him, have the fact pardoned him, and his pardon sent
him. This party doubtless, as he could not but exceedingly rejoice in so
undeserved, in so unexpected a favor; so withal, if he had any spark of
grace or good nature at all in him, the very apprehension of his Sovereigns
gracious disposition, would make him mourn for his foul fact more than ever
before, considering with himself how wretchedly and unworthily he had carried
himself toward one whom he found so graciously, beyond and above all, either
expectation or imagination, disposed. The case is ours in effect: and not to
insist long upon application of it: It may hereby plainly appear, how
Spiritual Joy, may well stand with Godly grief, and these two affections that
seem the one contrary to the other, may yet agree well together in a Christian
man's soul: since that the more a man joyeth in the assurance of Gods goodness
toward him, the more he must needs grieve to consider how by his wicked and
rebellious courses, he has demeaned himself wretchedly and unworthily toward
that God, whom he finds so graciously affected toward him.

Compare Psalm. 32.1, 5. with Psalm. 51.1, 2, 17. Passumus simul and dolere in
nobis, and gaudere in Domino. Petr. Martyr. in 2 Samuel 24.
A man may mourn for his sins then, and yet rejoice in Gods mercy; be sorry
for his transgression, and yet have joy of his pardon. And in like manner may
he be grieved heartily for the present afflictions of Joseph, and that even so
as he may be sick with grief again; and yet withal be cheered and comforted
in the consideration of that happy issue of them, that Verse. 8, 10. Esa. 27.1,
3. and 49.15. 1 Cor. 10.13.
Gods Fatherly care of his Church, his Power, his Providence, his gracious
Promise, and his own Faith building thereupon, give him good hope and
assurance, that they shall have in the end. For the Grief of Gods Children in
these cases is not a desperate grief, but Psalm. 102.13, 19, 20. and 119.49,
50, 52, 81.
a sorrow mixed with Faith and Hope. (...). Nubecula est, illico pertransibit.
Athanasius apud Socratem hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 14.
It is but a storm, said that good Bishop, and within a while it will over.
And, Psalm. 125.3.
The rod of the wicked, says the Psalmist, shall not rest upon the Lot of the
Righteous. Psalm. 94.14.
Nor will God utterly cast off his people; Lament. 3.31.
nor forsake his Inheritance for ever. Lam. 3.32.
But though he send afflictions in upon them, Dan. 11.35.
to scour and to cleanse them; yet Mica 7.19.
he will return again to them, and have compassion on them, Psalm. 106.45.
according to the multitude of his mercies; and Psalm. 126.4.
turn again their captivity, as the Rivers in the South. Esa. 10.5, 12, 16,
17, 18.
When he has by their adversaries wrought his own work upon them, (for Ejus
consiliis militant, etiam qui ejus consiliis repugnant. Greg. Agunt quod vult
Deus, sed non volunt quod vult Deus. Bern. de great. and lib. arb.
even such also do his work, though against their own will:) Psalm. 81.14.
he will turn his hand upon them, and Psalm 78.66. and 9.5.
utterly destroy them, Vtitur Deus creatura rationali sed malevola, ut virga,
quam correcto filio pater in ignem, tanquam sarmentum inutile abjicit. Bern. de
great. and lib. arb.
as the Father Puer ergoes, qui nisi virgam qua verberatus es, verberari aut
cremari videris, plorare non desistis. Idem in ecstas.
to please the Child again, and to testify his reconcilement to it, is
content sometime to cast the rod into the fire, that he had corrected it with
before. Yea, the more men take Gods wrath to heart, and the more they are
humbled under his hand, (be the same either on themselves or others,) the more
comfort may they have in their humiliation, as conceiving thereby the greater
hope and assurance, that God will in mercy the sooner hasten the deliverance of
his distressed ones, and the confusion of their oppressors.

And thus again may a man Psalm 119.158, 139.
mourn as heartily for the sins also of others, as he does or would do for
his own, and Psalm. 119.136. Ierem. 9.1.
lament even with floods of tears their folly, and misery like to ensue on it;
and yet Psalm. 119.162, 163, 166. Ier. 16.19.
have joy withal of his own conversion, and assurance of salvation: as Suave,
mari magno turbantibus aequora ventis, E terra magnum alterius spectare
laborem; Non quia vexari quenquam est jucunda voluptas, Sed quibus ipse malis
careas, quia cernere suave est. Lucret. lib. 2. (...). Basil. Caes. hom. 4.
those that are safe on shore, having escaped shipwreck, may at the same time
both commiserate the distress and danger of those that are still wallowing in
the Sea amids the waves, and bickering with the billows there, in jeopardy
every instant to be swallowed up irrecoverably in the deep; and yet the whilst
rejoice also in, and be thankful unto God for their own safety. Joy and
grief therefore may well concur and agree together. Lex leginon miscetur;
(sed nec adversatur:) utraque sua it v^a. Senec. de benes. lib. 6. cap. 6.
Nor do Gods Commandments herein cross or contradict one another. We may
well sorrow sometimes, and yet always rejoice.

Psalm. 112.4 Lux oritur justo, quae non oritur injusto. August. in Psalm. 96.
To the lust, or the upright, arises light in darkness, says the Psalmist.
Esa. 59.10.
The ungodly meet with darkness often in the day: the godly have light often even
in the night: Amos 8.9.
The Sun goes down at noonday often with the one: it rises often even at
midnight with the other. 1 Pet. 1.8.
In whom you trust, says Saint Peter, and rejoice with a joy unspeakable and
glorious; albeit, by occasion of manifold temptations, ye are for a season in
some sorrow. And, Iam. 1.2.
My brethren, says Saint James, count it exceeding Joy, when you fall into
many trials or troubles. And, 2 Cor. 7.4.
Great is my rejoicing; I am full of comfort; I have joy over-abundant in all
my tribulations, says Saint Paul. They may retain joy in them, yea they may
draw matter of joy from them. Sapienti conte^itur gaudium: nulla ru^pitur
causa, nulla fortuna. Sen. ep. 72.
They may retain joy in them: For it is another kind of matter, and a matter
of far greater consequence, that is the ground of their joy. Nunquam
credideris scelicum quenquam ex foe ^itate suspensum: fragilibu^ inn^titur, qui
adventitio laetus est. Ibid. 98.
A Christian man's joy depends not upon freedom from afflictions, but Romans
5.1, 2, 3.
upon the assurance of Gods favor toward him for the present, and upon his
hopes of future matters. Yea they may draw matter of joy from them: Since they
do, or may know that they are good for them, and do work for their good:
Philip 1.19.
I know, says the Apostle, that this shall turn to my salvation. And, Romans
8.28.
All things work together for the good of those that love God. And as the
sick man therefore may rejoice at the coming of the Surgeon, (though he
know full well that he must needs put him to much pain,) that comes to saw
off some part gangreaned, or to cut him of the stone: So may the godly have
joy, not in only, but In ipsa tribulatione spes gloriae est: imo and ipsa in
tribulatione gloria continetur: sicut spes fractus in semine, sic and ipse
fructus in se^ine est. Bern. in Psalm. 90 ser. 17.
of those afflictions that befall them, knowing them to be Heb. 12.6, 10.
(...). Aristot. ethic. l. 2. c. 3. (...). Idem rhet. l. 1. c. 14.
Gods loving and fatherly chastisements of them for their good; and considering
that Heb. 12.11.
though no such chastisement for the time seem joyous, but grievous, yet they
bring forth the peaceable fruit of righteousness in those that are therewith
exercised. And this the rather, when the afflictions that befall them are such,
as tend directly to give them the greater assurance of their future eternal
happiness. As the Apostle tells the Philippians, That Philip. 1.19.
their adversaries rage and fury against them, was as well an evident sign of
the salvation of the one, as of the destruction of the other: and the
Thessalonians, That 2 Thessalonians. 1.5.
their sufferings for Christ and his Kingdom, did evidently show that God had
vouchsafed them a part in that Kingdom, for which he called them in such sort
to suffer: and that 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
their troubles here were a pledge and seal of their eternal rest there. For,
(...). 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.
This is a true and a sure assertion, says the same Apostle; that if we die
with Christ, we shall live with him; if we suffer for him, we shall reign
with him. And why may not Gods Children rejoice then, even in their greatest
afflictions, when they shall consider that 2 Cor. 4 17.
this (...).
light trouble that lasts but for a short season shall procure unto them, as
the Apostle speaks, (...).
an exceeding excessive eternal weight of Glory. For the further confirmation
and fuller illustration of this point, consider we the Nature of that excellent
Creature, one of Genes. 1.3. 2 Cor. 4. (...). Basil. hexam. sermon. 2.
the first of Gods works, that this Joy of Gods Children is compared to in my
Text. Concerning which, I will make bold to insert here a very comfortable
Meditation of a namelesse Author, and that somewhat more largely, because the
Book is not commonly to be had. A Sermon on the Psalm Qui habitat, or Psalm
91. translated out of high Dutch into English, and Printed at London by Leon.
Askell.
We see and prove, says this Author, by daily experience, how powerful and
dreadful a thing the darkness of the Night is. For when it falls, --
luceque pulsa Telluris toti tenebras induxerat orbi Vmbra. Ovid metam. lib. 13.
-- ruit Oceano nox, Involvens umbra magna terramque polumque. Virg. Aen. l. 2.
it covers and muffleth up the face of the whole World; Iam color unus inest
rebus, tenebrisque teguntur Omnia. Ovid. fast. lib. 4. Nocte latent mendae; --
Horaque form^fam (deformem potius) quemlibet illa facit. Idem art. lib. 1. --
and rebus nox abstulit atra colorem. Virg. de quo Iul. Scal. ad Cardan. exerc.
75.. 7.
it obscureth and hides the hue and the fashion of all Creatures; it binds
up all hands, and breaks off all employments; ( John 9.4. Tempus erat, quo
cuncta silent. Ovid. met. l. 10. Vrbe silent tota. Idem amor. 1. 6. --
positoque labor dierum Pacem nocte datam mortalibus orbis agebat. Silius
Punic. l 7. Hinc, Furiosa res est in tenebris impetus. Sen. ep. 110.
The Night comes, says our Savior, wherein no man can work; Exodus 10.22,
23. Omnia noctis erant. -- Varro Argonaut. Quod laudat Ovidius apud Sen.
controv. 16.
it arresteth and keeps captive all living wights, Men and Beasts, that they
must be still and rest there, where it arresteth them; yea Esa. 59.10. Genesis
15.12. -- pueri trepidant atque ^mnia caecis In tenebris pavitant finguntque.
Lucret. lib. 2. Idem omnibus fere accidit, videndi sensu sensuum
praestantissimo, oculique qui corporis dux est, praesidio per tenebras
destituti. Lambin.
it makes them fearful and faint-hearted, full of fancies, and much subject
to frights. It is of all others such a powerful and unconquerable Tyrant, as
no Man is able to withstand. And yet nevertheless, Lux in tenebris lucet. John
1.5.
it is not of that might that it is able to overwhelme, or to quench the least
light in the World. For we see that Sidera nocte micant. Ovid. met. l. 7.
Stellas coeli non extinguit nox. Ex Aug. Prosper. sent. 120.
the darker the Night is, the clearer the Stars shine: Yea the least 2 Pet.
1.19.
candles light that is lighted, withstandeth the whole Night, and not only
suffers not the darkness to cover, or to smother and oppress it, but it
gives light also even in the midst of the darkness, and beats it back for
some space and distance on every side of it: So that which way soever it is
borne, or wheresoever it comes, there must darkness depart and give place
unto the light; all the power and the dreadfulnesse of it, cannot help or
prevail ought against it. And though the light be so weak, that it cannot
cast light round about, or drive the darkness far from it, as in the spark
of an hot coal, yet cannot the darkness cover or conceal, and much less
quench it; but it gives light to it self alone at least, so that it may be
seen afar off in the dark; and it remains unconquered of the dark,
though it cannot help other things, nor give light unto them. Yea (that that
is yet more wonderful) Felium in tenebris fulgent rad antque oculi: quin and
multorum piscium refulgent aridi; sicut robusti caudices vetustate putres.
Plin. hist. not. lib. 11. cap. 37. Sic and Con^hae quaedam in tenebris remoto
lumine fulgent. Ibid. lib. 9. cap. 61. and Lucernae piscis lingua ignea per os
exerta tranquillis noctibus relucet. Ibid lib. 9. cap. 26.
a rotten shining piece of wood, which has the faintest light that can be
found, yet remains invincible of all the power of darkness; and the more it
is compassed about with darkness, the clearer light it gives. So little is
darkness able to overcome or keep down any light; but that it rules, and
vanquisheth, and expels the darkness, which else overwhelmeth, and snareth,
and fettereth and puts all things in fear. Now if this Natural light, but
Esa. 45.7.
Gods Creature, be so powerful and so able to prevail against the darkness
of the Night: Why should not that spiritual Light, that Lucerna Dei in spiritu
hominis. Prove. 20.27. 2 Cor. 4.6.
Gods Spirit does kindle and set up in the hearts of Gods Children? Yea why
should not God himself, John 1.8, 9. Lumen illuminans and non illuminatum. 1
Ioh. 1.5.
the only true and eternal Light, Psalm. 74.16.
the Creator of that Light, and the Psalm. 36.9.
Wellspring of Life and Light, Ephesians. 3 17.
dwelling himself by his Spirit in the hearts of the faithful, Psalm. 18.28.
and 112.4. Non potest defraudari laetitia, cui Christus* est gaudium. Aeterna
enim exultatio est ejus, qui honolaetatur aterno. Aug. apud Prosper. sent. 90.
be able to afford them light in darkness, and to minister sound joy and sweet
comfort unto them, in the very midst of their heaviest and most hideous
afflictions? He can doubtless do it at all times; yea and many times also he
does it. For, 2. Corin. 1.3, 4. Non unius, sed totius consolationes, nec in
hac, nec in illa, sed in omni tribulatione. Bern. de temp. 22.
Blessed be God, says the Apostle, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of Mercies, and the God of all Consolation, that comfort us in all
our troubles: Yea, that not only comfort us, but comfort us in that
manner and measure, that 2 Cor. 1.5,
As our Tribulations abound for Christ, so our Consolations also abound in
Christ. And certainly as Well-water is wont in Wintertime to be warmest; so
many times Gods Children in the midst of their greatest afflictions; some Act.
16.25.
in the Dungeon, some at the Stake, some even Read the story of James Bainham,
and of Rob. Glover, and of Thomas Hauks, and Rose Allen; as also of John
Denley, John Lomas, John Denme, and Thomas Spicer with their consorts, that
sung in the fire: in Foxes Acts and Monum. (...). Greg. Naz. in Iul. exact.
(...). Idem epist. 57. (...). Idem in Iul. Imp. 1. (...). Idem de Cypr. Crucem
multi abominantur, crucem videntes, sed non videntes unctionem. Crux enim
inuncta est, and per gratiam spiritus adjuvantis infirmitatem nostram, non
levis tantum sed suavis fit, and non modo non molesta, sed etiam desiderabilis
and omnino delectabilis. Bern. de temp. 70. and 109. and 111.
in the Fire flaming on every side of them, have found greater comfort than
ever they did when they were free from those afflictions; have had such strange
joys even there and then imparted unto them, as they were scarce ever before
acquainted with. To persuade the godly Martyrs to courage, constancy and
cheerfulness in their sufferings for Christ's cause, the Ancients used a
twofold Consideration. One was, that they could expect to suffer no harder nor
harsher things, at the hands of cruel Tyrants, Horretis omnes hasce carnificum
manus? Number mitiores sunt manus medentium, Laniena quando saevit Hippocratica?
Vivum secatur vulnus, and recens cruor Scalpella tinguit, dum putredo
abraditur. Putate ferrum triste chirurgos meis Infer costis, quod secat
salubriter. Non est amarum quo resormatur salus. Videntur isti carpere artus
tabidos: Sed dant medelam rebus intus vividis. Prudent. Stephan. 14.
than diverse had done, and had been willing to yield themselves unto, upon
advice of the Physician, at the hands of the Surgeon. Another was, that no
cruelty could be exercised upon them, but that some Timebit forsan caro gladium
gravem, and crucem excelsam, and rabiem hestiarum, and summam ignium poenam,
and omne carnifieis ingenium. Sed spiritus contra ponat sibi and carni, acerba
licet ista, a multis tamen aequo animo excepta, imo and ultro appetita, famae
and gloriae causa, nec a viris tantum, sed etiam a foeminis. Lucretia stupri
vim passa cultrum sibi adegit, ut gloriam castitati suae pareret. Mutius manum
suam dextram in ara cremavit, ut hoc factum ejus fama haberet. Minus fecerunt
Philosophi; Heraclitus, qui se bubulo stercore oblitum exussit; Empedocles, qui
in ignes Aetnei montis desiluit; Peregrinus qui non olim se rogo immisit: cum
foeminae quoque mortem contempserint, Dido, and Asdrubalis uxor quae cum filiis
in incendium patriae devolavit. Regulus ne unus pro multis hostibus viveret,
arcae inclusus, quot clavos, tot cruces pertulit. Anaxarchus cum in exitium,
ptisanae pilo contunderetur, Tunde, tunde, aiebat, Anaxarchi sollem: Anaxarchum
enim non tundis. Zeno Eleates consultus a Dionysio, quidnam Philosophia
praestaret, quum respondisset, Contemptum mortis; impassibilis Tyranni
flagellis objectus sententiam suam ad mortem usque signahat Tertull. ad Martyr.
and in apolog.
others, either out of an ardent love and affection to their Country, and a
zeal of the good and welfare of it, or out of a desire to maintain their
credit and reputation, or out of an affectation of future fame and renown, or
Eadem omnia saevitiae and cruciatus certamina, jam apud homines affectatio
quoque and morbus quidam animi conculcavit. Quot otiosos affectatio armorum ad
gladium locat? Certe ad feras ipsas affectatione descendunt; and de morsibus,
and de cicatricibus formosiores sibi videntur. Iam and ad ignes quidam se
autoraverunt, ut certum spatium in tunica ard^nte consicerent: alii inter
venatorum taureas scapulis patientissimis inambulaverunt. Bestias foemina
libens appetiit, and utique horridiores aspides serpents. Tertull ad Martyr.
Inventus est qui slammis imponer^t manum; cujus risum non interrumperet tortor.
Sen. epist. 76.
out of a resolved obstination and obfirmation of mind, had not quietly only,
and patiently, but even cheerfully endured the like. Yea the Heathen man
observes, that not only The Stoics of whom Act. 17.18.
those Philosophers that made Virtue the chief good, but The Epicu eans, of
whom there also.
those also that pleaded wholly for pleasure, and placed all Humane, yea and
Divine Happiness in a manner, wholly in it, yet held that a man might be
cheerful amids the most exquisite torments that might be, Vir fortis and
justus cum mortis suae pretia ante se posuit, in summa voluptate est, and
periculo suo fruitur. Senec. epist. 76. Ignis si singulis membris admoveatur,
and paulatim vivum corpus circumeat, licet ipsum corpus bona conscientia plenum
stillet, placebit illi ignis, per quem fides collucebit. Idem de benes. lib. 4.
cap. 22.
the one in the consideration of his honesty and fidelity that he suffered
for: Si uratur sapiens, si crucietur, in Phalaridis ta^ro si erit, d cet, Quam
suave est hoc? Quam hoc non curo! Epicurus apud Cic. Tuscul. lib. 2. and Sen.
epist. 66. Ex praeteritarum scil. voluptatum recordatione. Cic. de fin. lib. 2.
Quod incredibile est, dicit Epicurus, dulce esse torquerl. Sen. epist. ead.
the other in consideration of those pleasures and delights (a very slight and
sorry comfort indeed) that formerly he had enjoyed, and now cheered up himself
with the remembrance of. And (...). Epicurus apud Laert. Cum illum hinc urinae
difficultas ^orqueret, hinc insanabilis exulcerati dolor ventris, Beatissimum,
inquit, hunc, and ultimum diem ago. Sen. ep. 92.
the Master of that brutish sect, when he lay on his deathbed, amids grievous
torments from the Strangury, that then held him, and inward Ulcers, professed
(if a man might have believed him) that he then lived the happiest life that
ever he did. Now to reason, as the Heathen man himself hence does: Quare haec
incredibilia sunt apud eos qui virtutem colunt, cum apud eos quoque
reperiantur, apud quod voluptas imperat? Sen. epist. 92.
If, says he, such things be found among those with whom pleasure reigns,
why should they seem incredible with those that follow Virtue? Quod si hoc
potest brevis obstinatio animi aliquo stimulo excitata; quanto magis Virtus,
quae non ex impetu, nec subito, sed aequaliter valet, cui perpetuum robur est?
Idem ep 76.
If an obstinate stiffenesse of mind, that lasts usually but for a spurt,
could prevail so much with some; why should not Virtue, well grounded, that is
wont to be constant in her courses, enable others much more to as much? So,
we may well say; Tanti vitreum, quanti verum margaritum? quis non libentissime
tantum pro vero habeat erogare, quantum alii pro falso? Tert. ad Martyr.
If a vain shadow, a livelesse image of virtue could prevail thus far with
some: why may not true Faith and Christian Fortitude effect as much or much
more with others? Si tantum terrenae gloriae li^et de corporis and animi
vigore, ut gladium, ignem, crucem, bestias, tormenta contemnant sub praemio
laudis humanae; possum dicere, m^dicae sunt istae passiones ad consecutionem
gloriae coelestis and divinae mercedis. Tertull. ad Martyr.
If the contemplation of former pleasures, present applause, or future fame, a
vain blast only of man's breath, be able to carry men cheerfully through such
unsufferable sufferings: how much more may (...). Basil. homil. 4.
the present assurance of Gods favor, together with the hopeful expectation
of an eternal reward, be able to maintain a constancy of cheerful
constitution in a Christian man's soul, amids the heaviest afflictions that can
here be endured? If the uncertain hope of recovery of unconstant health, and
prolonging of a miserable life a while, and Mors enim differri potest, auferri
non potest. August. de temp.
not the shunning or shifting off, but the delaying only of death, be a means
to cheer up the patient under the saw, or launcer, or searing iron of the
Surgeon, though the pain he undergo seem unsupportable: how much more may
the assurance of immortality ( Vera sanitas ipsa est immortalitas. Idem ibid.
74.
the only true and sure health) and life everlasting shortly after to ensue,
cheer up the faithful man's heart amids as great or greater matters, if he be
called thereunto? If the Spirit of man possessed with some obstinate humor, can
steel a man's heart (as Servus barbarus As^rubalem quod Dominum suum
occid^sset, interemit. Cumque comprehensus omni modo cruciaretur, laetitiam
tamen quam ex vindict^ ceperat in ore constantissime ret^nuit. Val. Max. memor.
lib. 3. cap. 3. Vltus enim Dominum, inter tormenta exultavit, serenaque
laetitia cradelitatem torquentium vicit. Justin. hist. lib. 44. Atque hic est
de quo Senec. sup. epist. 76. Sed and Live. de eodem hist. lib. 21. Comprehens^s
hand alio, quam si evasisset vultu, tormentis quoque cum laceraretur, eo fuit
habitu oris, ut superante laetitia dolores, ridentis etiam speciem praebuerit.
it is reported to have done) to such a contempt of torments, that no torture
has been able to interrupt his laughter, or to break off his derision of
those that have tired themselves more than him, with torturing of him: what
shall not the Spirit of God and Christ himself, by his Spirit, be able to
strengthen and enable those unto, Romans 8.9, 10, 11.
whose hearts his Spirit, and he by his Spirit possesses? Romans 5.3. (...).
We therefore even glory, not rejoice barely, in afflictions, says the
Apostle, Romans 5.5.
because the Love of God is shed forth into our hearts, by the Spirit that is
given us. And. Philip. 4.13.
I am able, says the same Apostle, to do (yea and to endure also) any thing,
(yet not by mine own strength, but) through Christ enabling me. Colos. 1.11.
Being strengthened with all might by his glorious power unto all patience and
long-suffering even with joyfulnesse.

evermore and at all times, had not such at all times good reason to rejoice. 1 Thessalonians. 5.16.
Rejoice evermore, says the Apostle: and, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18.
In all things give thanks. And surely, if we ought, as the same Apostle
elsewhere says, Ephesians. 5.20.
At all times and in all things to be thankful; then questionless we ought
at all times and in all things to be joyful, as well in adversity, as in
prosperity, as well in afflictions, as in freedom from them, as well when
things fall out cross, as when it fares with us as we would. The Godly man
then has at all times good and just cause of joy: it is apparent. For, (...).
Greg. Naz. ep. 62.
Gods injunctions are not unreasonable. But I go a step further, and dare be
bold to aver it, that every righteous man, every one that is truly religious,
has at all times, if he could himself see it and apprehend it, much more
matter of joy, than he has of grief, or can have. For what does or can
minister more matter of grief, than Gods favor and love in Christ may afford
matter of joy? And those therefore that are ever in the favor of God, (what
should I need to add; and that live in hope of eternal Glory with God?) can
at no time have so great cause of grief, but that they have even at the
selfsame time much more cause of joy. But every Godly man is ever in favor
with God: Huc Illud Sen. epist. 59. Docebo quomodo intelligas te non esse
sapientem. Sapiens ille est, qui plenus gaudio, qui inconcussus, qui nunquam
moestus est: ad omnem incursum munitus and interritus: non si paupertas, non si
luctus, non si ignominia, non si dolor impetum faciat, pedem referet:
interritus and contra illa ibit and inter illa.
Every Godly man therefore has ever and at all times, if he were so wise as to
apprehend it, more ample matter of joy by much than of grief.

Just or the Righteous man, will peradventure some say, that must, that may
thus rejoice: And where are any such? Prove. 20.9.
Who can say, says Solomon, I have so purified mine heart, that I am wholly
free from sin? No: Eccles. 7.20.
There is no man Just or Righteous on earth, that does ever well, and 1 King.
8.46. (...). Greg. Naz. de pace 1. (...). Idem de plag. grand. (...). Idem in
Basil.
never evil. A vain thing may it seem then to exhort men to rejoice, when
the condition annexed is such as excludes all from rejoicing. To what end is
it to incite the Just to rejoice, when there are none such that may rejoice?

Just are meant all such as are upright in heart.

Which clause is added;



And partly to temper and qualify the rigor of the term before used, if it
were strictly and exactly taken. Illustration.


So that it is a note as well of Extent, as of Restraint:

Restraint, Restraint.
to exclude from this joy, and all right thereunto and interest therein, all
dissemblers, all counterfeit Christians, all hollow-hearted Hypocrites; that
repent in the face, but not in the heart; Matthew. 6.16. (...). Esa. 58.3, 5.
that make a sour face, that they may seem to fast, says our Savior; that
Luke 16.15.
Justify themselves in the sight of men, but God sees their hearts what they
are, and sees them to be far other than either they should be, or they
pretend themselves to be.

Extent, Extent.
to extend and enlarge this Joy, the ground of it and the right to it, to all
that are single and sincere-hearted: and so to give and afford a share and a
portion in it as well to those that are sincerely righteous on earth, as to
those that are perfectly righteous in Heaven.

It is as a Key to let in the one;

It is as a Bolt to spar and bar out the other.

To clear this further by a distinction or two of Bernards and Ambrose.

six either Sorts or Degrees of Justice or Righteousness.

Ficta, sed non recta: Ficta, non recta.
A righteousness fained or counterfeit, but not sound and sincere. Such as
Matthew. 23.27, 28. Ficta, sucata, non vera, sincera. (...). 2 Timothy 3.5.
the Pharisees was. Multi hominibus justi videntur, pauci Deo. Aliter enim
hominibus, and aliter Deo. Hominibus secundum externam speciem and faciem: Deo
sec. internam veritatem and virtutem. Ambr. in Luc. 1.6.
A righteousness in outward show and semblance, but not in inward truth and
substance. Like (...). Nihil enim simulatum and fictum verae virtutis esse
certum est. Ambr. offic. l. 2. c. 22.
counterfeit coin, that has the Kings stamp indeed, but is base and bad
metal, and is therefore naught worth.

Recta, sed non pura, non perfecta: A Righteousness, sound and sincere, but
not perfectly pure. When, Recta, non pura. Vera and recta; sed non pura, nec
perfecta.
though sin do Romans 7.17.
remain still with men, yet it does Romans 6.14. Psalm. 119.133. Manet peccatum
dejectum quidem, sed non ejectum; evulsum, non expulsum tamen. Bern. in Psalm
90.10.
not reign in them. There is a mixture in them, as of Light and Darkness,
dimnesse at least, in a painted glass, died with some obscure and dim
color: it is transparent and gives true, but not clear and pure light. And
Nostra, si qua est, humilis justitia recta forsitan, sed non pura: quomodo enim
pura, ubi non potest deesse culpa? Idem de temp. 104.
such is the righteousness of all faithful persons while they live here.

Pura, sed non firma: Pura, non firma.
A righteousness pure and perfect, but not firm and permanent. Such was the
righteousness of our first Parents before their fall. Nam primi hominis in
initio non modo recta, sed etiam pura fuit, quamdiu ei datum est nec sentire
peccatum. Bern. ibid. nedum inservire, aut consentire peccato.
Pure and perfect it was: for Genes. 1.27. Ephesians. 4.24.
such did God create them: they had no sense at first of any evil motion at
all in them, much less did they yield or give any consent to any such. But Sed
quia firma non fuit, and puritatem facile perdidit, nec rectitudinem retinuit.
Ibid.
firm and permanent it was not: (it might have been, if they would:) for
Eccles. 7.29.
they changed wilfully that estate that God created them in, and so fell away
from that their Original Righteousness.

Firma, sed finita: Firma, sed finita.
A righteousness not pure only, but firm too, yet finite: Such is Matthew.
25.31. 1 Timothy 5.21. Apud Angelos recta, pura, and firma, sublimis, sed divina
tamen inferior. A Deo collata, non ipsis innata. Iusti ex eo, non coram eo;
munere ejus, non in comparatione ejus. Bern. ib.
the righteousness of the elect Angels, and of Heb. 12.23. Iusti perfecti.
the blessed Saints glorified in part now in Heaven: and shall be of Luke
20.36. Angelis pares.
all the Elect as well Men as Angels after the last day.

Infinita: Infinita.
An infinite righteousness. Such is the righteousness Dei solius. Ipse sibi
justitia est, cujus voluntas non tam aequa, quam ipsa aequitas: and utraque non
aliud quam ipsa substantia. Bern. ibid.
of God alone; of him that is not righteous only, but even righteousness it
self: and the righteousness of all Creatures both Men and Angels put
together, is as 1 Samuel 2.2. Matthew. 19.17.
none in regard of his, being the same with himself.

The first of them is, in this term, excluded from sound Joy; the second is
admitted to it, as well as the third or the fourth, yea therefore rather than
the third by much, because it is sure in time to attain to the fourth: and it
may well therefore constitute a distinct sort or degree to make up the number
propounded at first, to wit, imperfecta, sed firma, or firma, sed non pura, non
perfecta: Firma, non perfecta.
Philip. 3.12. Cum haec omnia desiderio affectus impleverit, non ex omni part
perfectus, sed perficiendus. Prosper. de vit. contempl. l^b. 1. cap. 8.
An imperfect righteousness, but yet firm; or a firm and permanent
righteousness, though not yet pure and perfect: Since that the Grace of God
begun here in the hearts of his Holy ones, though never so infirm and weak in
it self, yet being 1 Pet. 1.5. Firmior est fides quam reponit poenitentia.
Lactant. institut. l. 5. c. 13.
supported and upheld by the power of his Spirit, is sure never wholly or fully
to fail: but as the light that the Moon receives from the Sun, though to
our seeming but very little at first shortly after the change, as we term it,
yet it increases more and more daily, till it come to the full; so shall Prove.
4.18.
The Light of Grace in Gods Children, though Tanquam (...) non (...), ubi plus
luminis quam tenebrarum, sed (...), ubi plus tenebrarum quam luminis: uti
distinguunt Grammatici ad Homerum. Eustath. Odyss. (...).
but little, scarce sensible at the first either to others or themselves, yet
it shall grow on till it come to it full growth; which when it has once
attained, (that which will not be in this life) it will never (herein contrary
to the manner of the Moon) impair or abate again.

Point that hence arises is this, that
And to the Upright only.


Upright; that is, as well to those that be sincere-hearted, righteous: yea to
all upright, be they strong or weak ones, be they well grown, or but newborn babes in Christ Jesus.

For whereas there are two ranks of Men truly righteous: Righteous.


righteous ones as never fell, never sinned: the 1 Timothy 5.21.
the Elect Angels, that Luke 15.7.
need no repentance, that like the Prodigals elder Brother, Luke 15.31.
never left their Fathers house, Luke 15.29.
nor ever offended him in ought.

righteous ones (...). Greg. Naz. apolog. (...). Idem de plag. grand. and in
Iul. 2. Prima virtus peccata non perpetrare sed vitare; secunda perpetrata
corrigere. Greg. mor. lib. 6. cap. 17.
as have fallen indeed, but are risen again, through Gods mercy in Christ
their Savior, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. and 2.1, 5, 6.
restoring them in part, and raising them up again by Quem poenitet peccasse,
pene est innocens. Sea. Agam. 2.2.
repentance: the state of all the faithful in part Imo plus est propemodam a
vitiis se revocasse, quam vitia ipsa nescivisse. Ambros. in Psalm. 118. ser. 22.
renewed, and regenerate, and restored again to their Original Righteousness:

Or to come nearer to the Point;

The former of those that are Iusti habitu perfecto.
righteous in regard of a perfect habit, or an absolute perfection of
righteousness: And 1 Pet. 3.11. Act. 3.14. 1 John 3.5.
so our Savior Christ only here on earth was; and Heb. 12.23.
the Saints saved now in heaven

The latter of those that are Iusti desiderio, studio, conatu.
righteous in regard of the desire, study, rather than perfection of
righteousness: Such as sincerely desire to fear, and to serve God; and
endeavor constantly to do his Will: as have respect to Gods Commandments: and
think upon them to observe them: though they cannot keep or fulfill them so
as they should: that follow after righteousness, as a worke-man does his
trade, that he has bound himself an apprentice to, though he be not yet his
crafts-master: And so Job 1.1.
Job is said to be Just, though he had his infirmities and failings, by his
own confession, Job 9.3.
not a few. So Luke 1.6.
Zachary and Elizabeth are said to have been righteous in Gods sight; that
is, truly and sincerely, though not perfectly, righteous: for they were Luke
1.20. Vide Aug. ad 2. Epist. Pelag. l. 4. c. 7.
not also without their wants. And even these latter also have right to, and
may have part in the joy here propounded as well as the former, though the
former enjoy it far more fully than they do. For, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19.
God will be merciful, yea he has already been, and is merciful, to those
that set their hearts aright, and Nehem. 1.11.
that desire to fear his Name. And, 1 Chronicles. 28.7.
I will be with him, says God of Solomon, if he endeavor to do my Will. And
Psalm. 119.6.
Then, says David, shall I not be confounded, when I have respect to all thy
Precepts: and Psalm. 22.23.
When I am upright with my God. And, Psalm. 103.17, 18.
The loving kindness of the Lord is from ever and for ever, upon those that
think upon his Commandments to do them. And, Prove. 21.21.
He that follows after Righteousness shall find Honor and Life; true
Honor, and eternal Life. For Romans 2.8.
unto those that by patient perseverance in well-doing seek Honor, and Glory,
and Immortality, will God render Life eternal.

And therefore to such also, even in express terms is joy promised; and such
also in express terms are enjoined to rejoice. Psalm. 64.10.
The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and trust in him; and all (without
exception) that are upright in heart, shall rejoice. And as here, Light is
sown for the righteous; so elsewhere, Psalm. 112.4.
Light in darkness arises to the upright. And again, having in the beginning
of the Psalm pronounced them blessed, not that never sinned, but Psalm. 32.2.
that have sincerely repented them of their sins; in whose soul there is no
guile: he concludes with an incitement, yea an injunction laid upon all such
to rejoice: Psalm. 32.11.
Be glad ye Righteous, and rejoice in the Lord; and be merry, yea shout for
Joy, all ye that are upright in heart. And if there be Luke 15.7.
great Joy in Heaven for such; sure there may well be much Joy also here on
earth unto such.

And this may be further confirmed unto us, if we shall consider,

quantity, as the quality and sincerity of his grace in us that God
principally regards. Melius est pallens aurum quam fulgens aurich alcum.
Bern. in Cant. 61. (...). Greg. Naz. apolog.
A little pale and course Gold is of much more worth than much bright Copper,
than much fine Brass. And De Noa Basil. Sell. homil. 5. (...). Valentinus apud
Iren. l. 1. c. 33.
a good piece of Gold is true Gold, though it be bemired and besmeared with
dirt; an ingot of Gold, is good Gold, though it have much dross still mixed
with it. Nec vinum rejicimus, et si foecem habeat; nec aurum quamvis lutosum
existat. Spin. de justit Christ.
Nor will a man that is in his wits cast away his money, be it Gold or Silver,
for the foulness of it, or the Goldsmiths his wedge for the dross that is
mixed with it: but where he meets with never so little good Gold, and it be
but a grain or two, mixed with never so much dross, he will not leave the Gold
for the dross, but keep the dross with the Gold, till he have fined it, and
so severed and freed the one from the other. In like manner here: Gods grace in
the hearts of his Children, though it be mixed still with many infirmities, yea
and corruptions, yet is it true Grace, and much better than all those seeming
Simulacra virtutis. Cic. de offic. l. 1. Vmbra est and imago justitiae quod
ill^ justitiam putaverunt. Ex Cic. ipso Lactant. institut. l. 6. cap. 6.
shadows, and though glorious, yet but counterfeit shows of it, that are
found either in Heathen men's lives, or in the courses of Hypocrites. Nor will
God therefore, in regard of those infirmities and corruptions mixed with it,
reject it, but rather have a care of them in whom it is, Esa. 1.25. and 4.4.
and 57.18. Ierem. 9.7.
to cure and to correct them, that his Grace by the removal and amendmenr of
them, may grow daily more pure, till it come at length unto Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
a perfection of purity.

Voluntas pro facto reputatur. Bern. ep. 77. and depass. cap. 32. Voluntas
faciendi reputatur pro opere facti. Pelag. ad Demetr.
the will is accepted for the work, and the desire and endeavor for the deed.
As it is in evil; Studium nocendi nocentem facit. Sacrilegi dant poenas,
quamvis nemo ad Deos manus porrigat. Latro est etiam antequam manus inquinet,
qui ad occidendum jam armatus est, and habet spoliandi atque interficiendi
voluntatem. Exercetur and aperitur opere nequitia, non incipit. Sen. de benef.
lib. 5. c. 14. Potest aliquis nocen, fieri quamvis non nocuerit. Omnia scelera
etiam ante effectum operis, quantum culpae satis est, perfecta sunt. Idem de
constant. cap. 7. Nam scelus intrase tacitum qui cogitat ullum. Facti crimen
habet. -- Iuvenal. sat. 13. In malesiis cogitata etiam scelera, non adhuc
perfecta vindicantur, cruenta mente, pura manu. Apul. florid. 4. Nunquam men's
exitu aestimanda est, satis probasse animum parricidae. Quintill. declam. 271.
Actionis crimine cogitatio condemnatur a Domino. Pelag. ad Demetr.
the very study, desire and endeavor of doing evil, makes a man to stand
guilty of evil doing in Gods sight, albeit he do not, because he dare not or
cannot do what he desires. Matthew. 5.28. (...). Greg. Naz. in Cypr. (...).
Clem. constit. apost. lib. 1. cap. 1. Decrevisti facere, jam perfecisti.
August. verb. Dom. 43. Incesta est etiam sine stupro, quae cupit stuprum.
Senec. controv. 6. 8.
He that looks but on a woman to lust after her, says our Savior, has
already committed adultery with her. And, 1 John 3.15.
He that hates but his Brother, says Saint John, has already murdered him
in his heart. Res mira: ille vivit, tu tamen homicidaes: illa casta est, tu
tamen adulter es. Aug. de verb. Dom. 42. and 43. Non venenum parasti, non cum
gladio processisti; non ipsum scelus fecisti: tantum odisti, and tu prius te
quam illum occidisti. Idem de temp. 235. Si quis cum uxore, tanquam cum aliena
concumbat, adulter erit, quamvis illa adultera non sit. Aliquis mihi venenum
dedit: sed vim suam remixtum cibo perdidit: venenum illud dando scelere se
obligavit, etiamsi non nocuit. Non minus latro est, cui telum opposita vest
clusum est. Sen. de constant. cap. 7. Illo es homicida, venenum quo misces die.
Frustra est ergo Greg. Naz. (si is saltem est) qui in sermon. de Bapt. iniquum
censet, (...). Et Cato Censor apud Gellium lib. 7. cap. 3. haud aequum censet,
poenas dare quenquam ob eam rem, quod arguatur male fecisse voluisse. Verum hic
leges humanas cogitat, quibus Cogitationis nemo poenam luit. De poenis lib. 18.
Nec fugitivus habe^ur servus, qui fugiendi consilium habeat. De verb. sign.
lib. 225.
A strange matter, says Augustine, the Woman is still honest, and yet art thou
an adulterer; the man is alive still, and yet thou art a murderer. So is it
also Nisi forte putetur in malo quam in bono efficacior inveniri voluntas apud
Deum, qui charitas est, and promptior esse ad ulciscendum quam ad remunerandum
misericors and miserator Dominus. Bern. epist. 77. Vide Platonis cum Dionysio
de Aescbine dissertationem apud Plut. de adul.
in goodness: the study, desire and endeavor, the constant study, sincere
desire, and earnest endeavor of holiness and righteousness, make a man
esteemed holy and righteous in Gods sight, though he cannot yet attain to that
measure of it that he would. God regards more what he desires and
endeavors to be, than what he is; he respects more what he desires and
endeavors to do, than what he does.

Mat. 25.15, 16, 17.
He requires not the gain of ten talents, where he has given out but
five, or the profit of five, where he has conferred but one only. (...).
Greg. Naz. in Caesar.
He is content to accept of his what they are able to afford, in grace and
mercy pardoning, passing by and remitting the rest. Malach. 1.14.
Cursed is the Deceiver, or the Coosener, says the Prophet, that having a
Masculum, i. masculum pinguem and integrum. sicut, lana, pro lana candida. Esa.
1.18. D. Camius in Mal.
sound or a fat Male in his flock, brings a corrupt carrion or a lean
starveling to God for a sacrifice. But (...). Greg. Naz. de eutax. Non
impotentes sed nolentes condemnabuntur. Bern. de pass. Dom. c. 32. In vitae
libro scribuntur omnes, qui quod possunt, faciunt, etsi quod debent, non
possunt. Idem de Deo dilig. c. 2.
he is not accursed that brings no berter, because he has no better to
bring. Yea observe we in the legal sacrifices and oblations, how low in mercy
God descends. It is true that if men should serve God and sacrifice to him,
according to his state and his greatness, Esa. 40.15, 16.
All the wood of Lebanon would not serve to burn, nor all the beasts that be
in it suffice for a sacrifice; yea little enough would all the wood in the
world be, and all the cattle therein to it, to make up but one sacrifice. Yet
see how low God is content to stoop herein, in regard of man's beggerlinesse,
not able to give or offer ought worthy of God. Levit. 5.6, 11, 12. and 14.10,
21, 30, 31. (...). Greg. Naz. de Eutax.
He is content to accept of a sheep or two, or a lamb or two for a sacrifice;
or if a man be not able to bring so much, he is well pleased with one; or if
he want means for a lamb, he is not unwilling to take a pair of Turtle
Doves, or two little Pigeons in stead of it; yea if a man's ability be not able
to reach so far neither, Immunis aram si tetigit manus, Non sumtuosa blandior
hostia Mollibit adversos Penates Thure pio and saliente mica. Horat. carm. 3.
22.
an handful or two of flower, with a corn of salt or two, shall suffice as
well as ought else, where it is brought and offered with an honest heart. And
it is more than once or twice inculcated for the comfort and encouragement of
weak ones, (...). Greg. Naz. de bapt. and apud Anton. Meliss. c. 33.
of the poorer sort, that were not able to offer as the rich did, and might
doubt therefore of the like acceptance: Levit. 14.22, 30, 31, 32.
Look what he is able; according to his ability; even what his hand is able to
reach unto; and it shall be accepted. Luke 21.1, 2, 3.
The poor Widows two mites were as acceptable to God, as the largest
offerings of the richest. (...) Greg. Naz in Iul. exact.
He measures the gift not by the worth or the greatness of it, but by the
might and the mind only of the giver. And 2 Cor. 9.12.
If there be in a man a willing mind, says the Apostle, it is accepted not
according to what he has not, but according to what he has. God regards in
his not so much what they should, as what they can and are willing to do. And
Quicquid vis and non potes, factum Deus reputat. August. apud Joan. de Tambac.
in consol. Theolog.
what thou would do but can not do, says Augustine, God accounts as
done.

Righteousness in regard of the worth, dignity, and excellency of it, much
less in regard of any purity and perfection in it, but Si proprie appellantur
ea quae dicimus merita nostra, sunt spei quaedam seminaria, charitatis
incentiva, occultae predestinationis indicia, futurae glorificationis
praesagia. Bern. de great. and l. arb.
as it is a fruit of Gods Love, a token of his Favor, a sign and mark of our
Adoption and Justification, and a pledge and pawn of our future Glorification,
that is the ground and matter of our Joy: not it self so much, as that, that
it gives us assurance of.

a sign and a seal of our Adoption. For our Regeneration whereby this
Righteousness is restored, wrought and begun in us, does ratify and seal up
our Adoption unto us. Since that 1 Ioh. 3.1, 3, 6.
none are the Children of God by Adoption, but those that are so also by
Regeneration. And Ioh. 1.12, 13.
all that are so by Regeneration, are by Adoption also such. The least and
lowest degree therefore of sincere and sound Romans 8.13, 14, 16.
Sanctification being an effect and fruit of Regeneration, is a certain sign
of Adoption, and may minister a sure argument to him that has it, that he is
the adopted Child of God. Now Patriam amat quisque, non quia magna, sed quia
sua. Sen. epist. 66. Sic and prelem.
as Parents love their children, not so much for their wit or comeliness, or
the like qualities, as because they are theirs; so does God love his Children,
even because they are his Children: yea Ezech. 16.4, 5, 6. Si non dilexisset
inimicos, nunquam possedisset amicos: sicut nec quos diligeret, essent, si non
dilexisset, qui nond^m erant. Bern. in Cant. 20. Qui nominem bonum invenit,
neminem salvat, nisi quem praevenit. Idem de great. and lib. arb.
had he not loved them before they had any good quality in them, for which
he might affect them, they had never come to have any such. And as Parents
affect as well, and Fructuosior est adolescentia liberorum, sed infantia
dulcior. Senec. epist 9.
delight as much in their little young ones as in those that be well grown or
at man's estate, as well in those that are not able to earne the bread that they
eat, as in those that are able to do them the best service: Quis tam iniquam
cens^ram inter suos agit, ut filium sanum quam aegrum magis diligat? procerumve
and excelsum quam brevem and modicum? Foetus suos non distinguunt ferae; and se
in alimentum pariter omnium sternunt: aves ex aequo partiuntur cibos. Sen.
epist 66. Pater liberos non rejicit, quod aegroti claudi, debiles, deformes
sint; sed chariores habet and mollius tractat, imperfectionis infirmitatisque
intuitu. Spin. de Iustit. Christian.
nor is any father so unnatural, that because his child being weak and
wearish, sickly and crasie, as being full of bleach or some other such like
troublesome infirmity, is in regard thereof somewhat waspish and way-ward,
especially being a good natured and a dutiful child otherwise, will for that
cause the less either regard or affect it: no we are wont rather to be the
Quorsum haec? ut scias virtutem omnia opera sua, velut foetus suos iisdem
oculis intu^ri, aeque indulgere omnibus; and quidem impensius laborantibus.
Quoniam quidem etiam parentum amor magis in ea, quorum miseretur, inclinat.
Virtus quoque op^ra sua quae videt affici and premi, non magis amat, sed
parentum bonorum more, magis amplectitur and fovet. Senec. ibid Inclinat
animus, quo sors deterior trahit. Sen. Theb. 3. (...). Greg. Naz in Heron.
more affectionate toward them, and the more tender and charie of them, when it
is so with them. Yea, I say not, what infirmity, but what disease almost is
there so loathsome, as will keep a mother from tendering and tending her
child? In like manner is it with our Heaxenly Father, whose love and affection
to his, goes infinitely beyond the love and affection of any earthly father or
mother whatsoever. For, Psalm. 103.13.
as a Father, says the Psalmist, is pitiful unto his Children; so is the Lord
pitiful to those that fear him. And Esa. 49.15.
the most natural mother, the kindest and tenderest Parent that is, may sooner
forget or not regard the fruit of her own body, than he can forget or not
regard them. And, Malac. 3.17.
I will spare them, says he, that fear me, and think on my Name, as a man
spares his own son that serves him. He loves and delights in his little
Ezekiel 34.16. Esa. 40.11. Non agnamve sinu pigeat, foetumve capellae Desertum
oblita matre refer domum. Tibull. ^leg. 1.
weak ones, his novices, his young 1 Cor. 3.1, 2.
Babes in Christ, that can scarce almost creep, much less go well alone yet,
as well as in his great ones, his strong, his well grown ones, that are able
to help and to tend others. For Psalm. 147.11.
The Lords delight is in all those that fear him, and that rely upon his
mercy. He is content to accept of at their hands what they are able. As a
little done by a Son, gives his Father much better contentment, than a great
deal more done by a mere stranger or a servant. And there is the difference
between a Son and a Servant; that a Servant if he cannot do his Masters
work, 1 Samuel 30.13.
his Master will not keep him, he must go seek him some other service;
whereas a Son, albeit he be not able to do ought, yet John 8.35.
he is not therefore cast off; his Father keeps him not for the service that
he does or can do him, but he keeps him because he is his Son. Yea it is
not the wants and infirmities and imperfections, or the remainders of sin and
corruption in Gods Children, that can cause God to cast them off or to abhor
them. Peccata nobis non nocent, si non placent. Aug. de temp. 181. Et apud
Joan. de Tambac. in consol. Theolog.
Our corruptions shall not hurt us, if they do not please us, says Augustine.
Nor is it so much our corruptions as our pleasing of our selves in them, that
makes God to be displeased with us. Any beginning of sincere sanctifying Grace
then argues Gods Child; and a weak Child of God being yet a Child of God,
as well as a strong, has good cause and great cause therein to rejoice.

Iustitia inchoata, non consummata.
inchoate Righteousness, or (...). Romans 8.23.
first fruits of Gods Spirit, is as a sure Sign and Seal of Justification and
Adoption, (for 1 Cor. 6.11. and 1.30.
Justification also and Sanctification are never sundred or severed; all that
are truly Justified are sincerely Sanctified; and all that are sincerely
Sanctified, are truly Justified also:) so is it a firm pledge and pawn, or
Aria potius quam pignus, quia pignus redditur, arra retinetur. Hieron. in Ephesians.
1.14. Aug. de verb. Ap. 13. and de visione Dei, apud Bedam in Ephesians.
earnest rather, of future Glorification, and of whatsoever of Gods gracious
Promises remains yet to be made good. Christ is, as I may so say, (...). Heb.
7.22.
the Surety we have for them. He is as Coloss. 2.14.
our Surety to God, for the discharge of our debt: so Gods Surety to us, for
the performance of his Promises. And Gods Spirit in the Graces of it, is the
earnest that he has given us already beforehand, for the better assurance of
what is to follow. 2 Cor. 1.20.
All the Promises of God are in Christ, Yea and Amen, that is, firm and
stable, says the Apostle. And, 2 Cor. 1.21, 22.
It is God that establishes us with you in him; who has also anointed and
sealed us, and put the earnest of his Spirit in our hearts. And Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
this holy Spirit of Promise, wherewith we are anointed and sealed, is the
earnest of the Inheritance by Christ purchased for us, for assurance of
possession. As a penny therefore given in earnest binds as firmly as a
pound; if the party at least be a sure and sufficient man that one deals
with: so even the smallest measure of sincere grace being Gods own earnest,
binds him in regard of his Promise accompanying it, (for Nam, ut
Iurisconsulti, pignus donum est verbo vestitum. Nec potest esse sine pacto
pignus.
without some such word of agreement and promise, it could not be an earnest:)
to the making good of all his gracious Promises, made to the faithful in
general, to those that have received it in particular; and may as well
therefore 2 Thessalonians. 2.16.
minister good Hope, and give undoubted assurance of the performance thereof
unto them in due time. And as a weak, but a true Faith, may as well lay hold
upon Christ, and receive him by God offered, as well as a strong; as Fides
licet exigua and infirma, accipit nihilominus quae largitur Deus: haud secus ac
puerulus parvula, vel scabiosa mendicus manu, ille panem, hic stipem porrectam
accipit, perinde ac si major aut sanior esset. Spin. de Iustitiae Christ.
a feeble and a shaking hand may as well receive a Kings alms, as the lustiest
and the ablest man's hand that is: So even a weak beginning of saving and
sanctifying Grace, if it can be discerned and discried amids a multitude of
wants, may as well give assurance both of present Grace and Favor, and of
future Glory with God, as the greatest measure that may be. And as a piece of
Gold that such a poor sick man's weak hand receives of the Kings gift, may
as much glad him at the heart, stand him in as much stead, and do him as much
good, as that that is received with a better: So Gods gift by a weak Faith
received and apprehended, may as well comfort a man's soul, and as well joy him
at the heart, being it may stand him in as much stead, and be as beneficial to
him for his good, as being received by a stronger. Yea, the maine and
principal matter of our joy here, being grounded upon not so much what we have
already, as what we Romans 5.2. and 12.12.
hope for, and shall have: though a piece of gold be better worth, and a man
therefore may do more good with it, than he can with a small piece of silver,
yet the latter may altogether joy a man as much as the former, in regard of the
inheritance that is assured unto him by either: So a poor quantity of Grace,
though it cannot for the present so much benefit a man, either to do so much
good to him, or to others by him; as a richer and larger portion of grace may;
yet in regard of the Heavenly Inheritance and future Glory, that it is an
earnest of, the one may well minister as much joy as the other, because the one
gives good assurance of the very selfsame in effect and substance with the
other.

Every sincere Christian then, be he weak or strong, has much matter and good
ground of Joy. Psalm. 64.10. and 30.11.
Let all, says the Psalmist, that are upright-hearted, rejoice. But

The Hypocrite has no cause to rejoice.

Simon Peter told Simon Magus, Act. 8.21.
Thou have no part nor portion in this business, for thine heart is not
upright in Gods sight: So the Hypocrite has no part nor share in the Joy of
the Just, because he is not upright-hearted, his heart is not single nor
sincere in Gods sight. Job 20.7.
The Joy of the Hypocrite is but momentanie, says Zophar in Job; it is no
true, no sound, no permanent Joy. As their repentance is, so is their
rejoicing: as their godliness is, so is their Joy. As Matthew. 6.16.
they repent in the face, but not in the heart: So 2 Cor. 5.12.
rejoice they may in the face, but not in the heart. As their Godliness is all
in outward show, nothing in substance nor in truth, and (...). Greg. Naz. Nihil
fictum diuturnum. Ambr. offic. l. 2. c. 22. Caducasunt, quaecunque fucata sunt.
Cyprian ad Donat. Ficta omnia celeriter tanquam slosculi decidunt: nec
simulatum potest quicquam esse diuturnum. Cic. offic. l. 1.
therefore it is of no constancy at all, of no continuance. ( Hosh. 6.4.
Thy goodness, says God, is as a morning cloud, that is dissolved as soon as
the Sun breaks forth, and as the dew, that melts and is dried up, as
soon as the Sun shines on it.) So is their joy only a superficial, a
seeming rejoicing, and it shall not therefore last long, but it shall fade and
fail soon, as their goodness and godliness does.



For, 1. Whence arises the Joy here spoken of? Yea, whence springs all true,
sound and constant Joy, but as before was showed, Romans 3.1, 2.
from the present Hinc (...), the joy of Faith. Philip. 1.25.
assurance of Gods favor here, and Hinc (...), the joy or glorying of hope.
Heb. 3 6. Spes justorum laet^tia. Prove 10.28.
the hopeful expectation of eternal happiness hereafter? But the Hypocrite
has neither Faith nor Hope; neither Faith that may give him assurance of the
one, nor Hope that may put him in expectation of the other. No Faith, no such
Faith at least, as may give assurance of Gods favor. For the Faith that does
that, must be (...). 1 Timothy 1.5. 2 Timothy 1.5.
a Faith without hypocrisy, a Faith unfeigned: And how can his Faith be
without hypocrisy, when he himself is but an hypocrite. No hope, such at
least as is certain and Romans 5.5.
unfailable, such as is the hope that is Heb. 11.1.
founded on Faith unfeigned. For Job 27.8. (...). Antipho. de chorent.
What hope can the Hypocrite have, though he have heaped up never so much,
says Job, when God snatcheth away his soul. Prove. 14.32. Improbidum spirant
sperant: justus etiam cum expirat, sperat. (...). Basil. Sell. hom. 4.
The Just man has hope even in death, says Solomon. But then do the
Hypocrites hepes fail him, if not before; Prove. 11.7. (...). Theocrit. Batto.
(...). Eurip. Troad.
When he dies, says Solomon, his hopes all die with him. Where no Hope then,
no Joy: where no Faith, no Hope: and the Hypocrite therefore having neither
Faith, nor sure Hope, cannot have any sound Joy.

Psalm. 4.6, 7.
light of Gods Countenance is the Joy of the Godly. Psalm. 89.15, 16.
Blessed are they, says Ethan, that walk in the light of thy Countenance, O
Lord: such may indeed continually rejoice in thy Name. But the Hypocrite as he
cannot delight in God, so he can have no list to come into Gods sight, much
less to walk before him, or in the light of his face, as those do, and well
may, that are upright. For Job 27.10. Est and talium poena Deus. Lux est enim.
Et quid talibus tam invisum? Bern. de consid. l. 5.
how can the Hypocrite, says Job, delight himself in the All-sufficient? Or
what heart can he have at all times to call upon God? Or consequently to depend
upon him? And again, Job 13.15, 16.
Though God slay me, yet will I trust in him; and I will approve my ways in
his sight: (to wit, for the integrity, for the sincerity of them:) And he
shall be my Savior and my salvation; when the Hypocrite shall not dare to
appear in his presence. And indeed with what confidence can any hypocrite
appear before God, when though he may delude man, yet he cannot beguile God?
For 1 Samuel 16.7. (...). Plut. de sera^ vindict.
God sees not as man sees: Man sees the face, but God sees the heart.
(There is no deluding of him with vain shows, no more than cozening of
Sapiens nummularius Deus est: nummum fictum non recipiet. Bern de grad. obed.
a skillful Mint-man with counterfeit coin) When all that they do is most
loathsome and abominable in Gods sight? when all their masked devotion is so
far from pacifying Gods wrath, that it is but a means rather to aggravate and
exasperate it against them? For Job 36.13. Nemo enim magis iram meretur, quam
amicum simulans inimicus. Bern. de convers. c. 27.
the hollow-hearted, says Elihu, do but heap up and increase wrath. What joy
can the hypocrite then have to come into that light, Ephesians. 5.13. John 3.19, 20.
that discovers his hypocrisy, that lays open his deceit Job 24.16, 17.
The light, says Job, is as the shadow of Death to such. Or what assurance can
hypocrisy give of Gods favor, when there is nothing that does more than it
procure his displeasure? Matthew. 24.51.
His Lord will give him his portion with hypocrites, says our Savior, when he
would intimate that such an one should most surely, most severely be punished.

righteousness the root of Joy? Romans 14.17.
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy, says the Apostle. And does Joy spring
from righteousness? Then can the hypocrite have no true Joy, because he has
no true righteousness. For as counterfeit coin is no coin; nor will in
payment go as current for the procuring of ought to him that has it; so
counterfeit righteousness is in deed and truth no righteousness, nor will to
any good purpose stand him that has it in stead. Yea as Romans 10.3. Apoc. 3.17.
(...). Greg. Naz. apolog. Nemo est illo insanabilior, qui sibi sanus videtur.
Greg. in Psalm. poen. 4. Puto multos ad sapientiam pervenire potuisse, nisi se
putassent jam pervenisse. Sen de tranq. c. 1.
he is farthest off from attaining to righteousness that supposes himself to
have it when indeed he has not: so is that man farthest off from being indeed
righteous, that makes show of being such when he is indeed nothing less.
Simulata sanctitas, duplex iniquitas. Gregor. a Tambac. and aliis citatus.
Simulata aequitas non est aequitas, sed duplex iniquitas: quia and iniquitas
est, and simulatio. August. in Psalm. 63.
Dissembled holiness, says that ancient Father, is double ungodliness. For
it is one point of ungodliness for a man not to be godly; and another point of
it, being not godly, to make show of being such; and shall therefore have
Matthew. 23.14.
a double share in Gods wrath. And Malus ubi bonum se simulat, tunc est
possimus. P. Sir. Aperte quando malus est, tunc est optimus. Nam, Bonitatis
verba imitari major est malitia. Idem.
a wicked man, says the Heathen man, is then worst when he seems best; he
is never worse than when he makes show to be that which he is not. If there
can be no sound rejoicing then, where righteousness is not; no hypocrite being
most unrighteous can ever soundly rejoice.

Use of this Point (passing by all other) shall be, to stir us up every one
diligently and seriously to examine himself whether his heart be sincere and
upright with God or no, Exhortation to Examination.
that so he may come to know whether he have part or no in this Joy, whether
he have good and just cause or no to rejoice.

Motive.
This the rather should we be content, and it stands us upon, to take the more
pains in, because there is much deceit and delusion, yea and collusion too, in
this kind.

2 Cor. 2.1.1.
Satan is full of wiles. And Ierem. 17.9.
our own heart also is exceeding deceitful. Many there be that Iam. 1.26.
beguile themselves, and Galat. 6.3.
think themselves to be somewhat, yea to be great ones, (as Simon Magus gave
himself out to be, (...). Act. 8.9.
some great one,) when indeed they are just nothing, but Apoc. 3.17.
are most miserably deluded. And there is (...). Chrysostom. tom. 6. orat. 67.
Initium salutis notitia peocati. Epicur. Nam qui peccare se nescit, corrigi non
vult. Deprebendas te oportit, antequam emendes. Sen. ep. 28.
no means whereby Satan keeps more out of Gods way, than by bearing them in
hand, and making them believe that they are in it already.

Iam ibi sunt, unde non est retro lapsus. Sed hoc illis de se nondum liquet:
and scire se nesciunt. Iam contigit illis bono suo frui, nondum confidere. Sen.
ep. 75.
a man may have Grace, and yet not know that he has it; (as the Embruo or the
Infant in the womb has life, and yet knows not that it lives;) yea he may
think that he has it not. As we seek sometime for keys, when they are in
our pocket: and Hayward, Strong Helper, chap. 22. As we are said to have lost a
thing, when we know not where it is, though it be safe still in our own
custody.
we think that we have lost some Jewel, when we have it safe locked up in
our chest, or in our deske; yea or as the Butcher looks about him for the
candle that sticks in his hat, and he carries about with him on his head,
and seeks it by the light of that which he seeks, as if he had it not
about him, not remembering suddenly where he stuck it. So the Godly are often in
their own conceit at a loss, when yet that they deem lost is still sure and
safe; they miss many times Gods grace in them, and seek for this grace by the
light of the same grace, which yet they see not in themselves. And this is
another wile of the Devil, whereby he labors to delude such, by calling in
question their sincerity, as he sometime did Job 1.9, 10, 11.
Jobs, and moving, yea making them many times to their great discomfort to
doubt of it, by persuading them that they are out of Gods way, when they are
indeed in it; and out of favor with God, when they are as much in favor with
him as any; that so either he may, if it be possible, make them grow desperate
and careless; or else that he may make the way to the heavenly Canaan as
tedious, toilesome and troublesome unto them as he can, when by no force or
wile of his he is able to push or tice them out of it.

That both sincerity therefore may be discerned, and hypocrisy discovered, to
the consolation of the one, and the confusion of the other: it shall not be
amiss here to annex some Notes, whereby those that desire to be truly informed
of their estate, may be able to judge of their own sincerity, and of the
uprightness of their heart.

Note then of Sincerity Notes of Sincerity.
may be Universality: Universality.
when our repentance and obedience is not partial but general, when we are
careful to shun, not one or two only, this or that sin, but all known
sin whatsoever, and to endeavor our selves to walk in all the good ways of
God, without exception of any. So it is said of Josias, that 2 King. 23.25.
he turned unto God with all his heart, all his soul, all his mind and his
might, according to all that was contained in the Law. And so says David of
himself, Psalm. 119.101.
I have refrained my feet, not from one or two, but from every evil way, that
I might keep thy Statutes. And, Psalm. 119.6.
Then shall I not be confounded, when I have respect unto all thy Precepts.
And, Psalm. 119.128.
Therefore do I esteem all thy Precepts concerning all things to be right;
and every wrong way do I even abhor. And hereby does he approve unto God his
sincerity and the uprightness of his heart with God. Psalm. 18.2^, 22, 23.
I have kept the ways of God, and have not wickedly gone away from my God. For
all his Commandments were before me, and I put not any of his Statutes
wilfully away from me: But was upright before him, and kept my self from mine
own sin. And of Zachary and Elizabeth it is said, Luke 116.
They were righteous in Gods sight, walking blamelesly in all Gods
Commandments and Ordinances. For as it is said of Vices, Qui habet unum
vitium, habet omnia. Sen. de benes. l. 5. c. 15.
He that has any one of them, has all of them. Stultus omnia vitia habet.
Idem ib. lib. 4. c. 27. Omnia omnibus insunt. Malus quisque nullo vitio vacat.
Ibid. c. 26.
A fool, says the Heathen man, is free from no fault. Fraterna enim quadam
sibi copulantur necessitudine tum vitia, tum virtutes. Ambros. de Abra. l. 2.
c. 6.
So it is much more true of Virtues, (...). Chrysip. apud Plut. in Stoic.
contr. Qui unam habet, caeteras habet. Sen. ep. 95. Didicimus, cui virtus
aliqua contingat, omnes inesse. Plin. in paneg.
He that has any one of them, has all of them; and consequently, Vt si un^m
virtutem confessus sis te non habere, nullam necesse sit te habiturum. Cic.
Tuscul. l. 2.
He has none, that wants any. For Vices indeed are contrary and adverse one
to another; as Hinc Aristot. prior. l. 2. c. 2. (...). Ex falsis falsum,
verumque aliquando lo sequetur: Ex veris possent non nisi vera sequi.
False-hood is to False-hood, though Truth never to Truth. (...). Aristot
ethic. l. 2. c. 6. Virtus est medium vitiorum, and utrinque reductum. Horat.
epist. 18. l. 1.
Vices are Extremes, Virtue is the Mean. And (...). Aristot. ibid. c. 8. Bonum
malo contrarium est, malum and bono and malo.
Extremes cross either other, as well as the Mean. And therefore De vitiis
ambigitur: quia and virtuti uni vitia duo opponuntur; and vitium vitio
tollitur. Aug. epist. 29.
of them there is some doubt made (though See the Spiritual Watch, Point 2..
20. and Aquin. infra.
there need not) by some: but Constans scitum Philosophorum, Inseparabilitas
virtutum. Aug. ibid.
of the other it is generally agreed by all; that as he says of Habent arts
omnes commune quoddam vinculum, and cognatione quadam continentur. Cic pro Arch.
Arts and Sciences, so moral (...) Chrysip. apud Plut. and Zeno apud Laert.
(...). Stoici apud Stob. Virtutes individuas esse, and inter se connexas. Apul
de Philos. Individuus est virtutum comitatus. Sen. epist. 68. Omnes inter se
nexae and conjugatae sunt. Cic. Tuscul. l. ^. Sic copulatae connexaeque s^nt
virtutes, ut omnes omnium participes sint: nec alia ab alia possit separari.
Idem de fin. lib. 5. Connexae sibi sunt concatenataeque virtutes, etiamsi vulgi
opinione sejunctae; ut qui unam habet, plures babere videatur. Ambr. offic. l.
2. c. 9 and in Luc c 6. Et cognatae sibi iuvicem sunt virtutes. Idem offic l.
1.27.
Virtues much more, have a kind of consanguinitie and natural neernesse
between them; they are tied in such an indissoluble band together, that they
cannot possibly be severed or dis-joyned one from another. And therefore Non
singula vitia ratio, sed omnia pariter prosternit; in un versum semel vincit.
Sen. ad Helv. c. 13.
any on Virtue, where it enters, expels all Vice, Virtus ergo ubi una
ingressa fuerit, quoniam secum caeteras ducit, vitia ibi ^adunt omnia. Aug. ep
29. Prudentia enim nec ignava, nec injusta, nce intemperans esse potest:
Fortitudo nec injusta, nec imprudens, ne intemperans, etc. Aug. ibid and Ambr.
offic. l. 1. c. 27 and lib. 2. cap. 9. and Greg mor. l. 21. c. 1.
because no one Virtue ever enters alone, but it brings ^ver in somewhat of
each other Virtue with it. Nor is it so in Moral Virtues only, as they are
commonly termed; but it is so in Spiritual Graces also. There is Coloss.
3.12. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 9.
a Concatenation as well of the one, as of the other; they are so inseparably
linked and chained together in an holy band, in a divine league, that Vna sine
aliis nulla est. Greg. mor. l. 21. c. 1. Nec veraulla virtus est, si mixta
virtutibus aliis non est. Ibid. l. 1. c. 39.
one cannot nor will not be without the other. And therefore 1 Cor. 1.7. Iam. 1.4.
every true Christian has each sanctifying Grace in some measure. Perkins on
Matthew. 5.48.
As a Child, so soon as it is borne, is a perfect man for integrity of parts
and entirenesse of limbs, though not for bigness and bulk of body: So every
good Christian that is indeed truly John 1.13. 1 Pet. 1.23.
regenerate, is no sooner soundly converted, but he is in part A new man in
every one, Ephesians. 4.23.24. Coloss. 3.10.
renewed in all parts, and has in some degree or other a beginning of all
Christian Grace, though he be not any thing yet near his Ephesians. 4.13, 15.
due and full growth in any: And Qui unam habet, omnes habet: and qui unam non
habet, nullam habet. Aug. ep. 29. In qu^ aliqua harum principalis est virtus,
in eo etiam caeterae praesto sunt: quia ipsae sibi sunt connexae concretaeque
virtutes. Ambr. de parad. c. 3.
he has not any as yet consequently, if he wholly want any: as also on the
other side again, if he have any one spiritual grace, he is in some degree
freed from An old man put off. Ephesians. 4.22. Coloss. 3.9, 8. (...).
every spiritual Vice. For Quod sanitas in corpore, sanctitas in cord. Bern.
de diverse. 16.
as Health is in the body, so is Grace in the Soul. Sicut ad corporis
sanitatem non est satis, ut peste quis, vel pleuritide careat, sed ab omnibus
in universum morbis immune esse oportet: Sic ad animi sanitatem requiritur
sordium ac vitiorum omnium in universum obdicatio. Spin. de just. Christ.
As Health freeth from all diseases, according to the degree of it: (for Vise
Galenum de sanit. tuend. lib. 1. contra Erasistrati sententiam agentem.
in it also there are degrees:) So sanctifying Grace freeth from all Vices that
are contrary thereunto, according to the measure and proportion of it. Non est
cardiacus (Craterum dixisse putato) Hic aeger: recte est igitur, surgetque?
negabit; Quod latus aut renes morbo teneantur acuto. Horat. sermon. l. 2. c. 3.
Nor is a man therefore said to be in good health, so long as any one disease
holds him and hangs on him; Leprosus si part ulla tantum sit immundus,
extra castra ablegatur. Hesych. in Levit. l. 4. c. 13.
nor clean, while the Leprosy possesses any one part of him: nor a Saint,
(and yet 1 Cor. 1.2 and 6.10, 11.
such an one is every true Christian) Romans 6.2, 6, 7, 12.14.
so long as any Vice, what ever it be, rules and reigns in him, or he
wilfully lies and lives in any one Sin.

Again, as it is in Christian Graces; so (...). Eustath. in ascet. Et ex eodem
Simeon Magist. Homil. 1.
is it also in Gods Commandments. Lex tota est ^n a copulativa. Illyric. in
Clav. Script. and in Gloss. N. T.
The whole Law, say they well in the Schools, is one Copulative. The Law for
the sanction indeed is disiunctive; for the Injunction it is Copulative. The
sanction runs in the Disiunctive, Esai. 1.19, 20. Deuteronomy. 28.15, 58, 59.
Either do thus, or die: the Injunction in the Copulative, nor either do this
or that; but, Do both this, and that too. Mark. 18.33. Luke 10.27.
Love God above all, and thy Neighbor as thy self. Decalog. Exodus 20.2-17.
Deuteronomy. 5.6-21, 33.
Take the true God alone for thy God: and worship him according to his Will:
and use his Name reverently, and Sanctify his Sabbaths, etc. And therefore
says our Savior to the Pharisees, Matthew. 23.23.
These things ought ye to have done, and not to have left the other undone. Now
it is a rule in the Art of Reasoning, that In omni conjuncto, s^ve copulato, si
unum est mendacium, etiamsi vera sint caetera, tota esse mendacium dicitur. Ex
omnibus vero quae disjunguntur, unum esse verum sufficit. Gell. noct. Attic. l.
16. cap. 8. Ve um enunciati copulati judicium pendet ex omnium partium
veritate; falsum saltemex una part falsa. Ram. dialect. lib. 2. c. 5.
in a Disiunctive, if any one part hold, the whole is held to be true; in the
Copulative, if any one part hold not; the whole is held to be untrue. So in a
Disjunctive Injunction, if a man perform the one part, he is freed thereby
from the other; the Woman that was enjoined to bring for her Purification
Levit. 12.8. Luke 2.14.
a pair either of Turtles, or of Pigeons, was thereby bound to bring the one
only, she needed not to bring both: and in the legal sanction, Ezekiel. 21.11.
Galat. 3.12.
he that does, dies not, Deuteronomy. 27.27.
he that dies, does not; for no man is thereby bound to both, both to do, and
to die, to do the one, and yet to endure also the other. But in a Copulative
Injunction it is far otherwise; Delinquens in part, in totum reus est.
Regula generalis. Gloss. ad Digest. l. 29. tit 5. l. 3. Si quis unum custodiat,
and reliqua praevaricetur, nih. lei prodest. Amb. in Psalm. 118. sermon. 13. and
Hesych in Levit. lib 4. cap. 13.
nothing is done to any purpose, if a man observe not every part: It is as in a
Lease that is grounded upon many conditions, ten or twenty suppose, any one of
them not observed, make a forfeiture of the whole. He is Deuteronomy. 27.27.
accursed that persisteth not in every thing contained in the Law of God to
fulfill it. And Ezekiel. 18.10, 11, 13.
though he do not all these things, says God by the Prophet, if he do but
any (...). Marc. de leg. spir. 135. (...). Plutarch sympos. probl. l. 7. cap. 5.
one of them, because he has done any of these abominations, (for so I take
it, the words would be read) he shall die. Yea, Saint James therefore goes
further, and sticks not to affirm, Iam. 2.10.
That whosoever keeps the whole Law, but fails only in one point, he is
guilty of the whole. Which words of his yet are not so to be taken Hieron.
contr. Pelag. l. 1.
as if Quod in ascet. ^ustath. (...). Et Simeon Logoth. sermon. de virt. and vit.
a man in stealing did break the Commandment of not committing adultery, or
in telling a lie, the Commandment of sanctifying the Sabbath: or Dod on the
Decalogue.
as if a man that did at any time of infirmity sin against any one
Commandment of God, (as 1 King. 8.46. (...). Crates apud Laert.
who does not Iam 3.1.
often, even 1 John 1.8, 10.
the holiest that is?) did stand guilty in Gods sight as a wicked wretch, and
one that had no regard at all of any. But his meaning is, that that man that
would seem to make conscience of keeping all the Commandments of God save
one, but makes no conscience, or has no care of keeping that one, Nisi enim
attentisuerimus in omnibus mandatis ej^s, suerint q^ae alia praeterita, alia
pro voluntate observata, rectum justificationis ordinem non tenemus. Hilar. in
Psalm. 118. Nulli siquidem servorum licet, ex his quae Dominus suus imperat
eligere pro arbitrio, and quod placuerit assumere, quod displicuerit repudiare;
and jussiones ex part audire, ex part contemnere. Si enim pro arbitrio suo
servi Dominis obtemperant, neque in eis quidem in quibus obtemperaverint,
obsequuntur. Salvian. de provid. lib. 3.
does not in deed and truth, whatsoever he may pretend or seem to do, make
conscience of any, no not of those that in that manner he seems to observe.
The reason that the Apostle adds there is indeed very forcible. It is Iam.
2.11.
the same God that enacted and delivered the whole Law, that has enjoined one
good duty as well as another, has inhibited one sinful act as well as
another. If a man therefore for Conscience of Gods Will and Word do exercise
himself in anyone good duty, he will consequently exercise himself in all
other good duties that concern him; because the same God in his Word has
alike enjoined all. If for Conscience of Gods Will and Word he forbear or
abhor any one sin, Omnem odit iniquitatem, qui habet hanc gratiam. Bern.
Qui autem omnem viam iniquitatis odit, ad universa Dei praecepta corrigitur and
emendatur. Ambr. in Psalm. 118.
he will for conscience of the same Word and Will of God, forbear and abhor
all other Sins; because the same God in his Word has alike forbidden all.
And on the contrary therefore, he that does not either exercise himself in
every known duty that concerns him of the one sort, or is not careful to
shun every kind of evil act of the other sort, does not either observe
ought in the one kind, or eschew ought in the other kind, out of any true
care or conscience of his duty and obedience to God, but for some other by
ends and by-respects. It is a good Rule in the Schools, Vbi unum aliquod
peccatum remittitur, ibi omnia remittuntur. Impossible est unum sine aliis
remitti. Thom. Aqum. sum p. 3. q. 86. a. 3.
He that has any one sin remitted, has all sins remitted: And so, Peccata
quamvis non sint connexa quantum ad conversionem ad honum conmutabile, sunt
tamen quantum ad aversionem a bono incommutabili: and in hac part habent
rationem offensae, quamper poenitentiam oportet tolli Aquin ibid.
He that has sincerely repented of any one sin, has repented him of all.
And he that has not repented him of all known sin, has not repented yet of
any. For what is true Repentance, but Ezekiel. 18.21, 27, 28, 30, 32. and 33.11.
a returning again into the right way? And how is it possible for a man to
return into the right way, Psalm 119.101. -- passim. Palantes error recto de
tramite p^llit. Horat sermon. l. 2. sat. 3.
as long as he wandreth still in any by-path? Or how can a man repent of this
or that particular sin, because it is contrary to Gods Will, or offensive in
his sight, but he must needs withal repent him of whatsoever he knows to
be in like manner a breach of his Law, and a business that he abhors? Nor
does that man indeed study sincerely and out of a love of God to please him in
any thing, that does not as the Apostle Paul prays in the behalf of the
Colossions, endeavor and strive Coloss 1.10.
to fructify in every good work, that he may please the Lord in all things.
Quando servus ex Dominisui jussi^ ea facit tantummodo quae vult, jam non
Dominicam implet voluntatem. sed suam Salvian. de provid l. 3.
He does not Gods Will, says Salvian well, but his own Will, that does it no
further than himself will: that does not by laboring with the Apostle Paul,
to keep Heb 13.18.
a good conscience in all things, 2 Cor. 5.9, 11. and 6.4.
endeavor to approve himself and his courses unto God, as well in some things
as in others. This Universality therefore of care and endeavor is a good
argument of Sincerity. As on the other side it is a shrewd sign of
unsoundnesse and insinceritie, Sciendum quia quisquis virtute aliqua pollere
creditur, tunc veraciter pollet, cum vitiis ex aliqua part non subjacet. Greg.
mor. l. 21 c. 1.
when men will seem to make conscience of performance of some good duties, and
yet are wholly careless and regardlesse of others: or when they will seem to
make conscience of the forbearance of some sins, and yet lie and live in the
ordinary practice of others, which yet they cannot be so ignorant as not to
know, or so unmindfull, as not to consider to be sins. Thus was Herod's
hypocrisy detected and discovered. He stood in some awe of John, knowing him
to be a very holy man: and because he would be esteemed religious, and would
seem to respect him, Mark. 6.20.
he heard him often, and at his motion did many good things: yea and it is like
enough that he outwardly reformed many things amiss, that John found fault
with, either in his Court, or in himself. But yet he would not leave the
keeping of his Brothers wife for all that; and therefore Mark 6.17.
when John began to deal plainly with him in that point, he then brake off
all, and committed John to ward; and made it evidently appear thereby, that
all his former reformation and well-doing, was but in show only, and for other
ends. And hereby also was Iehues zeal descried to be unsound. He made a great
show a while of zeal for God and his worship: and 2 King 10.16.
Ionadab must needs along with him and see it. He was zealous 2 King. 10.28.
against Baal, that was 1 King. 16.31, 32, 33.
the ruin of Ahabs house, and 2 King. 10.11.
against Ahabs house, which it was (...). Aristot. rhet l. 1 c. 15. and Herod.
Clio. and Philip. Maced.
not for his safety, as he thought, to let stand, or to leave any remainder
of: but 2 King. 10.31.
he gave way to the Calves, though no less abominable in Gods sight, and as
dishonorable unto him, because 1 King. 12 27, 28.
that seemed to be the stay of his estate. And so he showed thereby that all
his Piety was no better than mere Policy; and that he sought but his own
ends in either. And in like manner when men and women shall be content to
reform their lives, and conform themselves to the Will and Word of God in
some things, but stand out wilfully in some other things, refusing to practice
the like reformation, or to show the like conformity in them, albeit they be
in heart and conscience convinced of their duty therein, it is an evident
Argument of unsoundesse.

Note of Sincerity is Uniformity. As an Universality, so an Uniformity in
well doing: Uniformity.
when a man keeps Virtutem ostendit constantia, and omnium inter se actionum
concordia; quando idem semper quis est, and in omni actu par sibi. Sen. epist.
120. Tunc directae sunt viae nostrae, cum par fuerit in omnia aequalisque
custodia. Hilar. in Psalm. 119. Omne bonum quod fit propter Deum, in omnibus
rebus aequaliter observatur. Quod autem in omnibus rebus non aequaliter
observatur, propter homines fit. Author oper. imperf. in Mat. hom. 45.
an equable tenor in his courses and carriage, not strict in some things, and
slack in other, though it may be, not wholly regardlesse of them; but holds
an even hand generally in his care and observance of things enjoined him by
God. 1 Timothy 5.21. Non est justa causatio, cur praeferuntur aliqua ubi facienda
sunt omnia. Salvian de provid. l. 3.
I charge thee, says the Apostle to Timothy, that thou observe all these
things, without preferring one before another, and that thou do nothing
partially. And says David, as before, Psalm. 119.128. True Christianity
esteems all alike. Greenham in Psalm. 119.
I have all thy Precepts concerning all things in esteem; and I forbear not
only, but even abhor all wicked ways. And again, Psalm. 119.104.
By thy Commandments I get understanding; and therefore I abhor not some one
or two, but each wicked way. His zeal was not partial, but indifferently
against all. And it is (...). Psalm. 119.139. (...). Eustath. in ascetis. l. 2.
q. 165.
an evident sign, says one of the Ancients, that our zeal is of God, when in
like manner we find our selves alike affected in regard of all sin,
whatsoever God may be dishonored by, as well in one kind as in another.

But on the other side, when men will seem wonderful earnest and eager for
the observation of some of Gods Ordinances, mavelous strict and precise in
the keeping of some precepts, extreme fiery in their opposition against some
enormities, excessive in their hatred and detestation of some sins, yea
sometime but supposed sins, even to the (...). Greg. Naz. in apolog.
the abhorring of men's persons for them; but have nothing the like intention of
zeal and fervor in other matters, though of as great moment, or against other
sins, though no less heinous than those; albeit they will not seem wholly
careless or altogether regardlesse either of the one or of the other: And
especially when men will seem to be so double diligent in less matters,
things of ceremony and circumstance only, when they are but negligent the
whiles in far greater; very strait-laced in the one, but over-loose-girt in the
other: It is a shrewd argument that their hearts are not upright in either: but
that they are carried away with (...). Plut. de iracund. (...). Idem de
tranquil.
some corrupt humor or other, self-love, or emulation, or vainglory, or the
like, that shrowdeth it self in the habit of Piety and zeal. Thus our
Savior discovered the hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees in his time.
Matthew. 23.23. Luke 11.42.
Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hyprorites, says our Savior; for you
tithe Mint and Anise, and Cumin, and every kind of Potherb; but judgment,
mercy, fidelity, and the weightier things of the Law ye neglect; Matthew. 23.24.
ye strain at a Gnat, and Qu modo (...) Proverbio Graeco dicitur.
swallow a Camel. They were very precise and curious in paying their Tithes,
even of trifles; (wherein they shall one day rise in judgment against not a
few Christians, and Quanta damnatio a damnatis damnari? Author de singul.
Cleric.
condemn them therein, though themselves too be condemned) and in some other
like businesses of lesser moment; but in other matters more weighty they
showed nothing the like strictness, and are by our Savior therefore censured
for no better than hollow-hearted hypocrites. And assuredly as inequality of
the pulse argues much distemper in the body; so this inequality of carriage
argues little soundness in the soul. Ea vero non est religio sed
dissimulatio, quae per omnia non constat sibi. Author de duplici Martyrio.
It is no true Religion or Piety, but dissimulation and hypocrisy, that is
not in all things like it self; says an Author that pretends to be Cyprian,
though indeed he be Turcarum siquidem meminit. Quod and observarunt Pamel.
Grav. Cocus, Rivet.
not, speaking of some that were very nice and curious, even to some taint and
spice of superstition, of but touching an image, or tasting ought that had any
seeming reference to an Idol; but were overloose and careless of their
carriage otherwise. Every true Christian as he is renewed in part in all parts,
so he has a kind of proportionable growth in each part, as Ephesians. 4.16.
the Apostle speaks of the mystical body of Christ in general. As he is not
as a maimed person, one that wants tongue, or legs, or hands, or some other
limbs, but as one that has a whole entire organicall body: So he is not as a
Monster, (...). de Cancro Poeta apud Plut. de adulat. Et de Papavere Symphos.
aenig. 40. Grande mihi caput est, intus sunt membra minuta.
one that has the head or hand, back or belly bigger than the whole body
besides, but has a comely symmetrie of each part with part. As there are W.
Bradshaw.
no Dwarfes in Christ's Body, none that grow not at all, but stand ever at a
stay: So in the Christian soul no Grace does so stand at a stay while the rest
grow, much less do they all so stand at a stay, while some one grows, that
any one should so excessively outstrip all the rest, Vt membri unius totus homo
quasi lacinia videatur, uti Petron. in Satyr.
that the rest in regard of it should scarce be seen. Neither is a Christian
man like a new upstart Courtier, who because he is not able to furnish
himself all over completely at first, is feign to wear his apparel unsuitable
in the several parts of it. Yea rather, as it is an argument of affectation of
wealth when men go well and richly apparelled, in some one part of their
apparel, but have not the rest suitable and correspondent thereunto: so it is
an argument rather of affectation of Holiness, than of true Holiness indeed,
when men are so unequal and unsuitable in their courses and dispositions, in
some one or two things demeaning themselves as exceedingly restrict, but in
many others, or the most things again as remiss; when their care and
conscience in some things, is not in some sort proportionable and correspondent
to that that they make show of in other things: Nor does the one prove, much
less make a man the richer; nay (...). Plut. de profect.
it hinders rather, and is a means to cast him more behind hand: nor does
the other prove, much less make a man truly religious; nay it hinders
rather, while with a general neglect of growth in, or regard of other good
duties, a man's study and care is wholly set and spent upon some one particular
that he pleases himself in; as where the matter that should nourish and
support the whole body, is conveyed all to some one part, not so much to feed
it, as to feed a wen that grows upon it.

Note of Sincerity, is Vbiquitie: Vbiquitie.
when a man is in some measure alike in all places, as well Bonus non fuit,
quem malorum pravitas non probavit. Greg. in Evang. 38. Neque enim perfect
bonus est, nisi qui fuerit and cum malis bonus. Idemin Ezech. l. 1. hom. 9.
in bad company as in good, in private as in public, in Church, out of Church,
at home and abroad. To this purpose it is that David says of himself; Psalm
16.8.
I have set the Lord always before my face. And, Psalm. 119.168.
All my ways are in thy sight. As Psalm. 18.22.
all Gods ways in his sight; so all his ways in Gods sight: and therefore
wheresoever he was, as Prove. 15.3.
being ever in Gods eye, he endeavored to approve himself unto God. Those
things that are natural follow a man whithersoever he goes, and accompany him
constantly wheresoever he become. Coelum, non animum mutant, qui trans mare
currunt. Horat. l. 1. ep. 11. Hinc Socrates; Quid miraris peregrinationes tibi
non prodesse, cum te circumferas. Sen ep. 28.
Change of place, says the Heathen man, causes not any change of mind. As it
is with the motion of the heart and the lungs in the body; they are of
themselves beating and stirring wheresoever a man is, or whatsoever he is
about, and it is painful to a man therefore to restrain the work of them, or
to hold his breath for any time: so it is a good sign that Godliness is
grown to a kind of connaturalnesse with us, when our religious disposition
continues with us in all places, and is in some sort working in us,
wheresoever we are: so that it is with us, as with David it was, who says of
himself, that Psalm. 39.1, 2, 3.
howsoever he had purposed to forbear speaking of ought that was good while he
was in company with some wicked, and some profane ones were in presence, yet
it was no small pain to him, and he was hardly able to restrain or to contain
himself. It was with him as it was sometime with Jeremy in somewhat the like
case, but of greater necessity; when he saw what evil entertainment the Word
of God found with the most, Ierem. 20.9, 10.
he had once resolved he says, not to mention Gods Name any more to them; but
he could not for his life keep long that his unwarrantable resolution; Gods
Word was as a fire in his breast, and as a flame Strangulat inclusus dolor,
atque exaestuat intus: Cogitur and vires multiplicare suas. Ovid trist. 5.1.
Quoque magis tegitur, tanto magis aestuat ignis. Idem met. l. 4.
shut up in his bones, so that he soon grew weary of it, and he could not by
any means keep it in. Not that at all times and in all places men are bound
Ester 2.10.
to discover themselves in this kind, or (...). Greg. Naz. ad Eunom.
to maintain matter of religious discourse in all companies. It was one of
Pythagoras his precepts, that (...). Pythagoras.
a man should not bear Gods Image or Name about him on the Ring that
ordinarily he wore. And Matthew. 7.6. Huc illud monitum Pythagoreum, (...).
Plut. paedagog.
Holy things, says our Savior, are not to be offered unto dogs, nor pearls
cast before swine. No: we must be wary where and before whom we speak; and
take heed how by our indiscreet carriage in such kind we wrong religion it
self, and make it ridiculous. But that even Quomodo de Platone Plut. de
adulat. (...).
among such we retain still a religious disposition; and the restraint of good
employments be grievous unto us, though no necessity lie upon us, as upon
Ierem. 1.17. 1 Cor. 9.17.
Jeremy there did, having no just opportunity for such employment at the
present; which may be a means to seal up our sincerity unto us. In like
manner when we shall be religiously affected, not when we are in the Church
only, or about some solemn part of Gods service, (at which time the
solemnity of the action, and the very sight of others enforces a kind of
conformity and outward semblance of holiness on those many times that are
most profane,) but even out of the Church also, and out of Gods solemn
service, even when we are about our ordinary affairs: Nor when we shall be
in the presence only o^ others, either good or bad, familiars, or strangers,
but when we shall be retired also and alone by our selves.

For a true Christian is, as the Heathen Philosopher says of a good man, like
(...). Arist. eth. l. 1. c. 10. and Rhet. l. 3. c. 11.
a Cube or a Square, or, if you will, like a Die, that falls alike every way,
and keeps the same site, wheresoever or which way soever you seat it: He is
as (...). Chrysostom. tom. 6. orat. 42.
Gold, says Chrysostom, which cast you it into the Fire, it will not waste;
lay it you in the water, it will not rust; it will retain still it own
purity, wheresoever it be kept.

But on the other side, when men are like the (...). Plut. de adulat. Colorem
mutat subinde Chamaeleon, redditque quemcunque proxime attingit. Plin. hist.
not. l. 8. c. 33. and Solin. Poly. hist. c. 43.
Chamaeleon, ready to change their live with every one that they company or
converse with; like the (...). Theogn. apud Plut. de amic. Polypus enim colorem
mutat ad similitudinem loci. Plin. l. 9. c. 29. (...). Plut, cause. not. q. 19.
Hinc and Pindar. (...). Ibid. and de solert anim. (...). Gregor. Naz. de sede
Constant. Contra Phocylid. (...). Et Ion. (...). Athen. dipnosoph. lib. 7.
Polypus, that resembles every stone that it sticks to; like the (...).
Plut. de adulat.
Water that conformeth it self easily and instantly to the shape and fashion
of every thing that either it is powered into, or that is dipped in it; or like
(...). Greg. Naz. in Athanas.
Pictures cunningly and curiously drawn, that seem to turn their eyes every
way, and to fix them on every one that comes in the way, or that casts his
eye on them; can be religious among such, and profane among other such, be
such ever as the company is that they are in: Or like the (...). Idem ib.
(...). Lucian. Pseudolog.
Buskins anciently used in Tragoedies, that would serve either leg alike; are
as fit for one society as for another: Or like the Hi quibus sceptrum and
chlamydem in scena fabulae assignant, cum praesente populo elati incesserunt
and cothurnati, simul exierunt, excalceantur, and ad staturam suam redeunt.
Senec. epist. 76.
Plaiers that used them, such as acting Princely parts, wear royal apparel,
keep state, and demean themselves gravely and soberly so long as they are in
public view upon the Stage; but when they have done Acting, are no sooner off
the Stage, but they pass presently into another, a clean contrary, habit,
retain neither Prince-like behavior nor apparel, but are most beggarly, base
and debauched, either in private by themselves, or among their companions like
themselves: In the Church and public assemblies, carry themselves very
devoutly, and in the presence of others affect a show of religion, but out of
the congregation are far from all show of Godliness, or in their private
conversation have little or no care at all of ought in that kind; it is a sure
sign of no soundness at all in such as be Quidam alternis Vatinii; alternis
Catenes sunt. Sic maxim coarguitur animus imprudens: alius prodit atquealius;
and, quo turpius nihil judico, impar sibi est. Senec. epist. 120.
so variously affected: acting like those Stage Players, sometime one part, and
sometime another, as either by others they are assigned them, or as the places
that they are in put upon them for the present. Non est vera religio, quae cum
templo relinquitur. Lactant.
It is no true devotion, says Lactantius, that leaves a man at the
Church-doore. Where religion is not showed in the actions of a man's life, in
the course of his calling, as well as in the Congregation and in his
Church Service, Such Iam. 1.26. (...).
religion (Saint James says it,) is but vain and unsound. Nor is that
religion any better that affects view and sight, that loves to be seen;
(it was the Pharisees devotion Matthew. 6.1. and 23.5.
that did all so as men might see what they did:) that is loud and talkative in
company, silent in secret, in presence of others operative, idle in private. As
the Heathen man says of one that Amissum non flet. cum sola est, Gellia
patrem: Si quis adest, jussae prosiliunt lachrymae. Martial. epig. 34. lib. 1.
never wept or mourned for her father, but when there was some body by to see
her; Non dolet hic, quisquis laudari, Gellia, quaerit: Ille dolet vere, qui
fine test dolet. Ibid. Testes doloris quisquis captat, haud dolet.
He mourns not heartily that affects to be seen mourning, and mourns
not therefore but where some may see it: He mourns indeed heartily, that
mourns then when there is none by to take notice of it, and to bear witness
that he mourns. So in this case, he is not sincerely religious, that
affects to have his religion seen, and that never therefore carries himself
religiously, but where others are by to take notice of it: he is truly
religious that is careful to carry himself religiously, and is frequent and
diligent in holy duties, even then when he is alone by himself, as well as
when he is in the presence and company of others; that Sic vive cum hominibus
tan^uam Deus videat: sic loquere cum Deo, tanquam homines audiant. Sen. epist.
10. Praeceptum est Philosophiae: Sic loquendum esse cum hominibus, tanquam Dii
audiant; sic cum Diu, tanquam homines audiant. Macrob. Saturn. l. 1.
converseth so with men, says the Heathen man, as if God over-looked him,
communeth with God so even in private, as if men overheard him. And certainly,
howsoever it be true indeed, that Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. Psalm. 29.9. and 84.1.
and 84.7, 10.
the public Service is of exceeding great benefit, and therefore 1 Thessalonians.
5.20, 21. Psalm. 27.4. and 122.1.
highly to be esteemed, as Psalm. 89.7. Heb. 4.12. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25.
having a more powerful, lively and effectual work of the Spirit in it, and
Matthew. 18.20. and 28.20.
a more special blessing of God promised and annexed unto it; in regard
whereof, David though a man 2 Samuel 23.2.
full of the Spirit of Grace, yet could not during his exilement content
himself with his own private meditations and devotions, but Psalm. 42.1, 2, 3,
4. and 43.4. and 63.1, 2. and 84.2.
longed exceedingly, and prayed most instantly to have free liberty of access
again to the public assemblies of the Saints: yet when upon a man's sick or
deathbed Satan shall be busy about him, and calling his sincerity in
question, a man may in such case be more comforted, and receive better
assurance of his sincerity, by consideration of his frequencie and diligence
in holy duties in private, because in them there can be least danger or
suspicion of hypocrisy, Matthew. 6.6, 18.
which none but God and his own soul has been privy unto, than by all that
he has performed either publikly or privately in the presence of others.

Note of Sincerity is Perpetuity, Perpetuity.
Constancy, permanence, continuance: when we are not godly and religious by
fits and starts only, upon some special and extraordinary occasions, but
Qualitatis verae tenor permanet: falsa non durant. Sen. epist. 120. Perpetua ac
solida sunt, quae verasunt: simulata non perseverant. Ambr. offic. lib. 2. c.
22.
in a constant and continued course, at all times, even when such occasions
cease. Psalm. 119.112.
I have applied my self to keep thy Commandments continually, says David:
And, Psalm. 119.117.
I will delight my self continually in thy Commandments, which I love. And,
Prove. 28.14.
Blessed is the man that fears continually, says Solomon. This constant
delight in the Word of God, this constant applying of our selves to the doing
of the Will of God, this continual standing in awe of God, is a sound note of
sincerity. But Magnam rem puta unum hominem agere. Praeter sapientem nemo nuum
agit: caeteri multiformes sunt. Modo frugi videntur and graves; modo prodigi
and vani. Mutamus subinde personam, and contrariam ei sumimu^ quam exuimus.
Senec. epist. 120.
when men seem to be so affected only upon some extraordinary occasions, and
when those are once over, all is gone again, it is a shrewd sign that nothing
was ever sound or sincere with them. And this well weighed will easily discover
the unsoundnesse of many sorts that yet make a great show for a season. Some at
the first hearing of the Word seem to be wondrously affected and ravished with
it. The noveltie and the strangeness of the Doctrine delivered, (as they say
at Athens, Act. 17.18, 19, 32.
We will hear thee once again, because thou tellest us of new Doctrine, such
as we never heard of before;) or the eloquence and powerful delivery of the
Preacher, (some Act 18.24.
Apollos, it may be, or some Mark. 3.17.
son of Thunder, Matthew. 7.28, 29. John 7.46.
one that speaks so as they never heard man speak before;) or the
consideration of such Heb. 6.5.
glorious matters as are in it propounded, of an Heaven and an Happiness, and
Blessedness beyond conceit, and without end; may much affect even a natural
man, at the first hearing especially, and make him to be wondrously delighted
in it: and yet may the Word have no sound or saving work on him: all may prove
but a flash, and so be by and by gone again. Matthew 13.5, 20, 21. and 8.6, 13.
Quae simulata sunt, diuturna esse non possunt, sed tanquam ad tempus virentia,
cito decidunt. Quod fictum est, in principio vernat, in processu tanquam
flosculus dissipatur and solvitur: quod autem verum and sincerum, alta radice
fundatur. Ambros. de offic. l. 2. c. 22.
Those that receive the seed on the stony ground, hear the Word at first with
some delight, but shortly after they dwindle and wither away, because they want
root. This their delight is not permanent, because the Word had no root in
them. Yea thus, as Greenham observe. title Sermons.
a reverend Divine well observes, and Quidam ad magnificas voces excitantur,
and transeunt in affectum dicentium, alacres vultu and animo: nec aliter
concitantur, quam solent Phrygi^ tibicinis sono Semiviri, and ex imperio
furentes. Rapit illos instigat que rerum pulchritudo, non verborum inanium
sonitus. ^uvat protinus, quae audiunt facere. Afficiuntur illi; and sint quales
jubentur, si illa animo sorma permaneat, si non impetum insignem protinus
populus honesti dissuasor excipiat. Pauci illam, quam conceperant, mentem domum
perferre potuerunt. Sen. epist 108.
an Heathen man also in effect the same long before him, as some are said to be
Sea-sicke; so others may be said to be Sermon-sicke. Sea-passengers that do
not well brook the Seas, so long as they are upon the water, are faint and
sick, and out of frame, so as that they think they shall sure miscarry with
it, they make account to die no other death; but when they have gotten on land
and reposed them a while, they are as well again as ever they were. So is it
with some mere natural men sometime at a Sermon. Hearing some powerful
Divine, that strikes somewhat home with them, that thundreth and lightneth, as
he said that De quo Aristophanes Acharn. (...). Fulminabat, tonabat,
permiscebat Graeciam. Cic. Orat. Vnde and Olympius dictus est. Plut. Fericle.
Pericles did, their mind is troubled, and their conscience touched, and their
soul melts, and they grow heart-sicke, and have much inward remorse, and
begin to bethink themselves of taking a new course; but no sooner the Sermon
is done, and they are come out of the Church, and have taken a little the fresh
air of the world again, but all is over and gone, they are restored to their
wonted estate, and retired to their former courses again. It is with them, as
with those that have (...). Plut. sympos. problem. l. 3. c. 8.
taken a small quantity of some purging Physic beneath the due dosis, enough
to stir and trouble them, but not enough to purge or to work ought out of
them. You may see some such thing in Foelix, Act. 24.25.
when he heard Paul discourse very powerfully (as right well he could) of
Justice, Righteousness, Repentance, and the judgment to come, he was cast
into a trembling fit withal for the present: and not able well to brook
either the matter of his Doctrine, or the manner of his delivery of it, he
caused him to break off; but that he was never the better for it afterward,
appears hereby, in that notwithstanding it Act. 24.26.
he persisted in his accustomed bribery, and other the like corrupt courses.
Again thus some for a brunt at their first coming on to the profession of
religion, having some special motive to incite them thereunto, seem very
fervent and zealous, even (...). Romans 12.12. fervidi.
seething hot, as the word is; but after a while prove Tepidi. Apoc. 3.15, 16.
lukewarm, and at length even Frigidi. Qualis Balduinus ille Cantuariensis,
ad quem Vrbanus PP. Balduino Monacho serventissimo, Abbati calido, Episcopo
tepido, Archiepiscopo remiss. Girald. Itiner. Camb. l. 2. c. 14.
key-cold: Greenham p. 2. c. 51.. 5.
like Snailes that thrust out as it were a long pair of horns before them;
but pull them instantly in again, as soon as they meet with ought that
opposes: like Peter that would needs be John 18.10.
fighting and slashing at the first, but shortly after Matthew. 26.56.
fled away, left him, yea Mat. 26.70, 72, 74.
denied and forswore him, whom he was so forward to fight for before. But he
presently after Matthew. 26.75.
repented, and came on again, and so Act. 5.41. John 21.18, 19.
continued, which these do not. His foul fall was but for a fit, a fit of
infirmity it was only in him. Whereas on the other side, their fierce
forwardness is but for a fit, a sudden fit of heat it is only in them. Thus
many again, as an Nuper me amici cujusdam languor admonuit, optimos esse nos,
dum infirmi sumus. Quem enim infirmum aut avaritia, aut libido solicitat? Non
amoribus servit, non adpetit honores, opes negligit, and quantulumcunque, ut
relicturus, satis habet. Tunc Deos, tunc hominem esse se meminit. Invidet
nemini, neminem miratur, neminem despicit, ac ne sermonibus quidem malignu aut
attendit, aut alitur, etc. Innoxiam in posterum, si contingat evadere,
beatamque destinat vitam. Vtinam tales esse sani perseveremus, quales nos
futuros profitemur infirmi. Plin. epist. 26. lib. 7.
Heathen man also has observed, when they lie deadly sick, oh then they seem
wondrously well affected, they are very sorry for their sins, seem even to
hate and abhor them, very devout and frequent in Prayer to God, taxing and
censuring themselves for their former carelessness in that kind, and now if
God would vouchsafe to continue life, and restore health to them, they would be
new men, leave their sins, and their former lewd courses, and lead another
manner of life than ever they did. But it is with them, as it is with Seamen
sometime in a storm, that out of fear of danger and desire of safety Ion.
1.5. Act. 27.19, 38. -- jactu decidere cepit Navitae cum ventis, imitatus
castora, qui se Eunuchum ipse facit cupiens evadere damno. Iuvenal. sat. 12.
cast all that ever they have over-boord, which when the storm is once over,
they strive and labor as fast, if by any means they can, to get up again.
Plerique futuri supplicii metu peccatorum conscii poenitentiam petunt: qui
videntur maelorum petisse poenitentiam, bonorum agere; and ipsius poenitentiam
agere poenitentiae suae. Ambr. de poenit l. 2. c. 9.
When they are once free from that fear, that before affected them, they
return to their former courses afresh, as if it repented them now that ever it
had repented them of them. Psalm. 78.34-37.
When God slew them, says the Psalmist, then they sought him, and returned,
and enquired after God early. But they flattered him only with their mouth,
and lied unto him with their tongues. For their heart was never upright with
him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. And therefore well did Apud
Spinaeum alicubi ni male memini.
the Emperor Sigismunds Confessor answer him, when being in a sore fit of
sickness, and having made many goodly fair promises and protestations of
future reformation upon recovery, and amendment of life, he desired of him to
be informed, whereby he might discern whether such his repentance were
sincere; If, quoth he, you be as careful to make good in your health, what you
now promise, as you are forward now in your extremity to promise. And in like
manner is it with many others in some outward danger and distress. Ionaes
Seamen distressed by that sudden and strange storm, Iona 1.5.
Call every one on his God, then every man to prayer, a man would think no
devouter men again in the world; but when the danger is once over, nothing but
swearing and swaggering, blaspheming and tearing of that Name, that before so
reverently they invocated, none prophaner than some of those that a little
before seemed so devout. It is that which God complains of in Judah and
Ephraim: Hosh. 6.4.
O Ephraim what shall I do with thee? or how should I deal with thee, O
Judah? for your goodness is as a morning Cloud, and as the early Dew it goes
away. No longer than Gods hand was heavy upon them, and the night of his wrath
did in fearful manner overspread them, was there any show at all of goodness
or godliness to be seen in them. A particular and pregnant example of such
carriage we may see in the Inhabitants of Jerusalem: Their City was ^erem.
34.1.
besieged and begirt by the Chaldeans, and in great danger to be surprised.
Hereupon ^er. 34.7, 9, 10.
admonished by the Prophet, they repent them of some sins, reform some
abuses, Ierem. 34.15, 18.
renew their covenants with God, seal it up with a solemn sacrifice, Sic
Abraham Genes. 15.10. Hinc (...) Scindere foedus: sicut, icere, ferire Latinis:
a perco percusso. Vnde tamen perperam volunt Foedus nuncupatum: cum fit (...),
Vt and Fidus (...).
cutting a Calfe in twain, and passing between the two sides so sundred: But
no sooner was Ierem. 37.5.
the siege broken up, and the City releeved by the access of some aids from
Egypt, but Ierem. 34.11, 16.
they return again to their wonted bias, slipping away, and Psalm. 78.57.
starting aside like a deceitful or a slippery bow, as the Psalmist speaks
of the Israelites, whose Maximum indicium est malae mentis fluctuatio, and
inter simulationem virtutum, amoremque viliorum, assidua jactatio. Senec. ep.
120.
inconstancy also he makes an Argument of their insinceritie. And what he
says of one sort of them, may be well said of them all. Psalm. 78 8.
They had not set their heart aright, and therefore their spirit was not
constant with God. Their religion and devotion is but as the motion of a
winde-mill driven with the wind, that makes grist no longer than the wind
blows upon it: or as the motion of (...), sive (...). M. Anton. vitae suae l.
7. Sigillaria, quae per se (...) verticillis quibusdam ac nervis moventur.
Casau. ad Pers. sat. 5. Duceris ut nervis alienis mobile lignum. Horat. sermon.
lib. 2. sat. 7. Hinc Athen. dipnosoph. l. 9. site admodum ait Otos aves
saltatrices and imitatrices, (...). Quod interpres baud est asscutus.
an Image that goes with a device, that stirs no longer than the force
lasts of the screw or the spring that sets it a stirring. And that is the
difference between Natural and Artificial motions: the motion of the pulse,
and the breath in man's body, and the motion of an Image, or a Mill, and the
like: a free motion and a forced one. The ground of the motion in the one is
from within, of the other from without: there is some stresse and straining
required to the staying of the one; and there is some like stresse and strain
required for the stirring of the other: and the one therefore stirs
constantly till it be staid; the other stays and stands still till it be
stirred: and when that force and stresse is gone, the one again stirs, when
that force and stresse is gone, the other again stays. The motion of the
godly, in the good ways of God, is like the pacing of a beast broken and
brought to a true pace, or naturally ambling of it self, he keeps to his
pace constantly, and though he may be forced out of it, yet he does nothing
so well with it, Quomodo Senec. ep. 121. Animalia quaedam tergi durioris
inversa tamdiu se torquent, ac pedes exerunt and obliquant, donec ad locum
repenantur. Et inquieta est desiderio naturalis status testudo supinata; nec
ante definit niti, quatere se, quam in pedes constitit.
nor is it for his ease, but he is ever and anon making offer to come into it
again, and so does so soon as he finds himself free from such enforcement.
Whereas the motion of Hypocrites in Gods ways, is as the pacing of a beast not
truly paced, that being forced to pace, shuffleth but, and though he may be
kept a while to it, yet cannot long hold out with it, is ready, if he be not
held hard to it, at every step to go out of it, and is never well till he be
in his trot again. Exodus 9.27, 28. and 10.16, 17.
Pharaoh himself would relent somewhat while Gods hand was upon him, but Exodus
8.15, 32. and 9.34, 35.
he hardened his heart again as soon as that Hand of God was gone: he was
like the iron, that though it melt while it is in the fire, yet grows stiff
again after it has been but a while out of it: because (...). Greg. Naz. in
Basil.
Iron it was before, and Iron it is still. It is true indeed that a man,
especially one suddenly converted, may be much more feelingly affected
presently upon his conversion, than he shall, it may be, ever after again: as
one that has lived long in the dark, when he comes first into the light.
And Genesis 28.16, 17. 2 Samuel 6.9. 2 Chronicles. 20.3. and 34.19, 27. Ierem. 26.19.
Act. 5.11. Heb. 12.21.
that the fear of God is much more fresh at some times upon special
occasions, even in the hearts of his servants, than at other times it is. But
where there is an utter falling away from former forwardness, and as it was
with the Israelites even Number. 11.6.
a loathing of that Manna, that at first they seemed so much to like, to love,
to long after, that Exodus 16.27.
even on the Sabbath they would needs go to seek it; with Number. 11.5.
a preferring even of Egyptian Leekes before it, and a longing after them
again: where an utter casting off of all fear of God and care of good
courses, when such occasions, as put them into it, are once blown over; it
gives just ground of suspicion, that the former forwardness in Gods cause was
no sincere love of God, but a sudden fit of passion only in the one; the
fearfulness of Gods wrath no sanctified fear, but a servile and slavish
disposition only in the other.



(...). Synes. epist. 139.
the more familiar every thing grows to be with us, the less sensible is
the power and the work of it upon us. In this kind therefore also is there
great difference between those that are at an instant converted, as Act. 9.4,
6. and 16.30-34.
Paul was, and those that with 1 Timothy 4.6. 2 Timothy 3.15.
Timothy, have the grace of God wrought into them by degrees. The league that
was naturally between the soul and Satan, is violently rent asunder in the
one, it is gently Sicut Cic. de Amic. Magis decere censent sapientes amicitias
sensim dissuere, quam repent disscindere.
unript and unsowed in the other. The one are suddenly Jude 23.
snatched out of the Devils claws, the other are sweetly won and (...)
Alliciet Deus Iaphetum. Genesis 9.27. Hosh. 2.14.
ticed out of his hands. The Prove. 5.22.
cords of sin, wherein the soul was held 2 Timothy 2.26.
captive are burst with strong hand and maine might, as Judge. 15.14. and 16.12.
Sampsons were, in the one; they are easily fretted by little and little, as
Psalm. 73.4.
the bands of life that hold body and soul together in persons weak and far
spent, in the other: the one have their spiritual fetters at once knock off
by force, the other filed off (...). Gregor. Naz. in Mat. 19.
by degrees. And hence it is that the one are oft-times more sensible of what
is wrought upon them, and done in them at their first conversion, than
afterward; the other find and feel their own growth and progress better
than they. Nor are any to be dismayed or to misdoubt themselves therefore, those
especially of the former sort, so long as they can find in themselves a
continued love of Gods word, a constant use of good means, and care of good
courses, albeit good things seem not so sensible with them, as they did at the
first.



Fear of God should be more fresh with us, and more than ordinary at other
times, when special occasions thereof occur. 1 Chronicles. 13.12.
David feared God that day, says the Story; what time Vzza was so suddenly
smitten and slain. He feared him before, but his fear was then much more
than ordinary, by occasion of that extraordinary judgment. Yea, for a man not
to have his fear of God in some sort proportioned to the various and diverse
occasions of expressing and exercising it; as for a man to fear no more, or no
otherwise, when some eminent judgments of God discover themselves either
incumbent or imminent, on himself or on others, than he does ordinarily at
other times; were a strange kind of stupiditie, and a shrewd argument of
unsoundnesse. It is one thing to cast off all fear and regard of God at other
times; and another thing not to have his fear so fresh in us at other times,
as on such occasions we find and feel it to be.

servile fear, as it is usually termed, is Timor servilis materialiter non est
malum. Riber. in Malach. 1.6. Timor servilis secundum substantiam suam bonus
est. Aquin. sum. p. secunda secundae q. 19. ^ 4.
not simply evil of it self. Though where it is unsanctified, by occasion of
man's corruption, as being joined with Quem enim metuunt odere; quem quisque
odit perisse expetit. Cic. offic. l. 2.
an hatred of him whom it fears, it is evil, and produces many evil and
sinful effects. For it is a thing in nature, (and I speak now not of nature
corrupted, but of nature created) for Ab interitu natura abhorret: hinc
ingenita cuique cura sui, metus mortis, fuga mali, etc. Cic. de fin. l. 5.
Nullum animal ad vitam prodit sine metu mortis. Omne animal constitutioni suae
conciliatur. Simul autem conciliatur saluti suae quidque, and quae juvant, illa
petit, laesura formidat. Sen. epist. 121.
each thing to fear that that tends to it own evil. Yea it were an evil
and an ungracious thing in a child, even in Gods child, (...). Greg. Naz. in
Nyssen.
not to stand in much awe of his fathers wrath, or not to fear his fathers rod.

Psalm. 32.3, 4.
the apprehension of Gods heavy indignation do so drown the consideration of
their own transgressions, that they can hardly amids those terrors and Psalm.
55.4, 5.
horrors that their hearts and minds are possessed with, descrie and discern
their grief and sorrow for their sins. Psalm. 119.119, 120.
When thou take away the wicked of the world like dross; My flesh, says
David, trembles again for fear of thee, and I am horribly afraid of thy
Judgments. And, Habb. 3.16.
When I heard of it, says Habbakuk, my belly quaked, and my lips quivered, and
I trembled and shook, so that my bones seemed to be not out of joint, but even
rotten again. And (...); Greg. Naz. ad cives periclitant.
if it were so with such Worthies, no marvel if the like sometime befall weak
ones.

Grace does not wholly strip us of this Fear, so it does not cross us, but
concur rather with us in the use and exercise of it. And it follows not
therefore that a man's sorrow for his sin is not sincere, because his fear of
Gods wrath is greater or rifer in him than it. It is a Question propounded by
Perkins Cases of Conscience, lib. 1. c. 5. quaest. 1. sect. 2. case 3.
a worthy Divine, whether a man's grief for his sin may be deemed sincere or
no, when he can weep more for the loss of some dear friend than for it. And
his Answer is, which may well also serve, because the reason will hold, here;
that it may, because nature and grace concur in the one, whereas nature and
grace cross in the other. Since that grace therefore does not wholly either
inhibite or restrain a man either from fearing of outward judgments, or being
sensible of outward evils, so that grace and nature cross not but concur
rather therein; whereas in godly sorrow for sin, corrupt nature concurreth
not with grace, but is cross rather and averse thereunto: it is not to be
marvelled, (especially where grace yet is but weak) if that fear and grief
be greater, or more sensible at least, (for Casus leves loquuntur, ingentes
stupent. Sen. trag^d.
the greatess grief is not always the most sensible, nor makes always the
most show; Plus sensum afficit dolens digitus ab aciculae punctiuncula, quam
integra corporis totius incolumitas. Spin. de justit. Christian. Hinc apud
Plut. de audien ille (...).
a man may fear more, and be more heartily sorry for a consumption that he
misdoubteth himself to be far gone in, than for a felon on his fingers end,
that puts him to more pain, and goes, as we say, to the very heart with
him, for the present,) wherein two agents concur, than wherein the one is
alone, and the other hinders more than helps.

Note of Sincerity, may be a Jealousy of ones own Hypocrisy: when a man is
suspicious of himself, Jealousy of Hypocrisy.
and timorous lest he should be unsincere. As the Disciples of our Savior,
when he told them, Matthew. 26.21.
One of you will betray me; though they knew themselves far from any such
thought or purpose at the present, yet every one of them began to suspect
himself, that he might be the man that our Savior Christ meant, and Matthew.
26.22.
to ask thereupon, Is it I, Lord? or Is it I? Judas that was the man indeed,
was most silent of any; though at length Matthew. 26.25.
he ask also for company, lest by not asking when each other did, he might
move suspicion, and so bewray himself by his silence. And in like manner is it
here, Hypocrites do least question their own sincerity of all others. They
most misdoubt it usually that are furthest of all from it. Psalm. 119.80.
Oh, let mine heart be upright in thy Statutes, says sincere David; (as
suspecting or misdoubting himself, lest it might prove otherwise;) that I may
not be shamed. Madmen are not wont to question whether they be in their
right wits or no. Yea, Non est insanus, insanum quise dicit. Apul. in apolog
aut etiam putat. Quid? caput abscissum demens quum portat Agave Gnati
infoelicis, sibi tum furiosa videtur? Horat. sermon. l. 2. sat. 3.
they are not mad, says one, that think or suspect that they are. And
certainly this godly jealousy, this shienesse of unsoundnesse is so good and
so sure an argument of sincerity, that I know none better, none surer than it.
For such careful and anxious inquiry, such fearfulness of hypocrisy,
argues a strong desire of sincerity: and the desire of Grace, as we shall
see afterward, is generally agreed on to be Grace. Yea even overmuch
timorousness and superfluous curiosity in this kind, when men cannot
satisfy themselves with any thing, no not with the pregnantest proofs of it,
and are therefore thereby much disturbed, perplexed, and distracted, though it
be an infirmity, and ought therefore with all good endeavor to be remedied,
because it dismayeth, disheartneth, disturbeth the peace of the mind,
depriveth the soul of alacrity, dulleth and dampeth the spirits, and
hinders much in the performance of many necessary good duties; yet as they
use to say of shamefastness, Mala causae bonum signum.
It is a good sign of an evil cause, though it proceed from an (...).
Aristot. ethic. l. 4. c. 9. (...). Idem rhet. l. 2. c. 6.
evil cause, a consciousnesse commonly of some defect; yet it is Hinc
Verecundiae ruborem (...) dixit Diogenes. Et (...) Pythias Aristot. filia apud
Stob. cap. 31. and Laert. Et (...). Cato Plut. apophth. (...). Menand.
Homopatr. (...). Homer. Quorum men's honesta, eorum imbecilla frons est.
Symmach. lib. 1. epist. 84.
a sign of some Grace; so is this, though of it self a weakness, yet a sign
of much grace and goodness: it is like some weeds, that though they be weeds,
of no good use, but unprofitable, and such as hinder the growth of better
things, that might succeed in their room, if they were once removed, yet are
(...). Plut. de sera vindict.
signs of a rich and a fat soil, and howsoever therefore they may discourage
an unskilful person from dealing with it, yet will give a wise and an
experienced man encouragement thereunto.

Note of Sincerity may be a sight and sense of ones own Incredulity and
Impenitencie, Sight and sense of Incredulity, and Impenitencie; with Grief.
with a serious grief for it. It was the poor man's speech to our Savior in
the Gospel; Mark. 9.24.
I believe, Lord; help my unbeleefe. His Faith he found and felt mixed with
much infidelity and incredulity; and the sense of his infidelity, with the
grief for it, argued his Faith. And Vide Antoninum sum. histor. part. 3. tit.
18. cap. 6. Hartman. Schedel. aetate 6. and Petr. Mart. in 2 Samuel 24.
it is reported of the Mother of three men of great note, that when she told
her Confessor, that considering what rare Scholars and Men of note her three
sons, whom she had by unlawful means begotten on her, had proved; the one
Petrus Comestor Magister Historiarum.
the Master of the Stories, another Petr. Lombardus Mag. Sententiarum.
the Master of the Sentences, and the third Gratianus Decreti Compilator.
the Collector and Compiler of the Decrees, she could not be so sorry for her
sin as she should; he made her answer again, and it was no evil answer; Dole,
quod non doles; quod dolere non possis.
Be sorry for this then, that thou art, or can be no more sorry. And
undoubtedly as when we have best believed, yet we shall have cause still to
repent us of our unbeleefe: so when we have repented the best we can of our
sins, we shall have cause to repent us even then of our impenitencie, of a
want of repentance in us. But this ignorant, unfaithful, impenitent persons
are not usually apprehensive and sensible of. They believe and repent, they
say, (and (...). Greg. Naz. de sede Constant.
it may well be they think and believe as they say,) as well as the best. And
shall I tell you what is the cause of it? Peccatores dormientibus, somniantibus
similes. Joan. Herolt. de temp. 2. Jude 8.
Sinners, says one, are sleepers. They are as men in a dream: and there is
Somnianti nihil difficile. Magna etenim saepe in somnis faciuntque geruntque,
Reges expugnant, arcesque and praelia miscent. Et in noctis caligine Cernere
censemus solemn lumenque diurnum; Conclusique loco caelum, mare, flumina, montes
Mutare, and campos pedibus transire videmur. Lucret. l. 4.
nothing difficult with dreamers. Men may dream, and many do often, that they
fly in the Air, and swim over the Sea: but are far enough for all that from
doing or being able to do either, as they will soon find, when they are once
awaked out of their dream. In like manner is it with these silly deluded
souls. They lie fast Ephesians. 5 14.
asleep in sin, and so doing Quomodo de Platone Lactant. insiitut. lib. 5.
c. 14. Somniaverat Deum, non cognoverat. Et de quibusdam Bern. Cant. 18.
Dormiens in contemplatione Deum somniat.
they dream yet of faith and the fear of God and repentance, and other graces
of Gods Spirit, they dream, I say, that they have these things as well and as
much as any, yea so well as better needs not to be had. Whereas others that be
awaked out of this imaginous sleep, and do now indeed truly repent and
believe, find many wants, much defectivenesse, in their Repentance, their
Faith, their Hope, their fear of God, their dependence upon God, and the other
graces of his Spirit, truly indeed, but imperfectly as yet begun and wrought in
them. Yea, as Hinc Socrates ille de quo Oraculum (...), de se, (...). Laert.
the more knowledge a man has, the more he comes to know his ignorance; the
more skill he has, the more he comes to discover his own unskilfulnesse:
Hinc illud Menedemi, (...). Plut. de profect.
A young Scholar when he has gotten his Seton or his Ramus once by heart,
thinks he has as much Logic as his Tutor can teach him; but when he
comes indeed to understand things, he sees his own error: So (...).
Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 25.
the more men believe, the more they come to see and feel their own
unbeleefe, the further they wade on in the study and practice of repentance,
the more they find out and discover their own impenitence, and complain of
the hardness and untowardnesse of their hearts: the more they labor and make
progress in sound Sanctification, the more come they to apprehend and to see
into the depth of their corruption. And this very sense of the want of Grace,
is a good argument of Grace. It is a sure sign of Grace, to see no Grace, and
to see it with grief. For, Matthew 5.3.
Blessed, says our Savior, are those that are poor in spirit; even as well
as those Matthew. 5.8.
that are pure in Spirit. The one, he says, Matthew. 5.8.
shall see God, and the other has a present right to the Kingdom of God,
which is the same in effect: Matthew. 5.3.
For the Kingdom of God is theirs. He says not, Blessed are the rich in
Grace; though that also be most true: but, Blessed are the poor in spirit:
that is, such as are spiritually poor, humbled, dejected, cast down in the
sight and sense of their own wants, apprehending nothing so much as the want
of Grace in themselves. Such are blessed, because such are Vt verum sit hic
quod Prove. 13 7.
rich, though they cannot yet come to see and apprehend their own wealth. And
this he says no doubt, that if any weak one be not able yet to discern the
purity of his own heart, he may yet be comforted in the very poverty of his
Spirit: the serious sense whereof may assure him that he is in part come out of
his sin, and is entered into the state of Grace. For Quare vitia sua nemo
confitetur? (nemo pervidet) quia adhuc in illis est. Somnium narrare vigilantu
est: and vitia sua confiteri sanitatis indicium est. Expergiscamur necesse est,
ut errores nostros coarguere possimus. Sen. ep. 54.
it is a sure sign that a man is awaked out of his sleep, when he discovers
and sees the errors of his Dream. And it is in these cases with men
commonly, as it is in drawing up of water; as long as the bucket is under water
we feel not the weight of it, but so soon as it comes above water, it
begins to hang heavy on the hand: when a man diveth under water, he feels
no weight of the water, though there be many tun of it over his head;
Elementa in loco suo gravia non sunt. Vide Syrianum and ^tolomaeum apud
Simplic. ad Aristot. de Coelo l. 4. c. 16. and Scortiam. de Nilo l. 2. cap. 11.
The Element, they say, weighs not in his own proper place; whereas half a
tub full of the same water taken out of the River and set upon the same man's
head, would be very burdensome unto him, and make him soon grow weary of it.
In like manner, so long as a man is over head and ears Act. 8.23.
in sin, he is not sensible of the weight of sin, it is not troublesome at
all to him; but when he begins once to come out of that state of sin,
wherein he lay and lived before, then begins sin to hang heavy on him, and
he to feel the heavy weight of it. So long as sin is in Peccatum intantum
voluntarium est malum, ut nisi fuerit voluntarium, non sit peccatum. Aug. de
vera relig c. 14. Hinc Bern. de temp 58 Toll malam voluntatem, and non erit
infernus. Mala enim voluntas malorum omnium and vitiorum origo. Idem de vita
solit. Manifestum est ex voluntate mala tanquam ex arbore mala fieri omnia
opera mala tanquam fructus malos. Aug de nupt and concupisc. l. 2 c. 28 and
Lombard. sent. l. 2. d. 34. B. Ergo in voluntate praecipue consistit peccatum.
Ibid. d. 35. C. and 39. B.
the will, the proper seat of sin, a man feels no weight of it, Prove. 2.14.
and 4.16.
he takes rather delight in it, Prove. 10.23. and 15.21.
It is a sport and a pastime to fools to do evil, says Solomon; and it is a
good sign therefore that Sin is removed out of his seat, out of his Chair of
estate, Psalm. 38.4. and 40.12.
when it becomes ponderous and burdensome to us, as the Elements do, when
they are out of their own natural place. Nemo aegre molitur artus suos. Sen.
epist. 121.
A living member is not burdensome to the body: a man's arms are no burden to
him, though they be massy and weighty: but a withered arm, or a limme
mortified hangs like a lump of lead on it. So long as (...). Arist. rhetor.
l 3. c. 4. In animi morbis, contra quam in corporis, quo quis pejus se habet,
minus sentit. Senec. epist. 54.
sin lives in the soul, unkilled wholly and unmortified as yet, so long our
corruption is nothing at all cumbersome to us; but when it is once mortified in
a man, it begins to grow burdensome unto him, and to hang like a lump of
dead flesh upon his soul; and then begins he poor soul, pestred and
oppressed with the weight of it, to cry out with the Apostle, Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am; when shall I be once freed from this (...), Corpus
mortis, p^o mortuo, sive cadavere.
carcass of sin, that hangs so heavy upon my soul? It is with him as with
one that has had a fit of the falling sickness, or that begins to recover
again after a dead Palsy. So long as a man is in a fit of the falling
sickness, though he be for the time in such lamentable plight, that he lies
along like a beast, unable to stand on his legs, or to lift up himself, or do
ought to help himself, foaming and sprawling, and beating his own body, a
rufull sight to all that see him; yet is he all the while himself insensible
of ought: but when the fit is once over, and the man is come to himself
again, then he begins to find and feel himself all out of frame, his
head heavy and giddy, his eyes staring and distorted, his brain and whole body
disturbed and strangely disposed, all which before he was not sensible of: As
also while a man lies, rather than lives, held with a dead Palsy, though he
be not able to stir hand or foot, yet (...). Plut. de profect.
has he himself no sense of it; but when those dead parts of him are in some
measure revived again, the passages being opened for the vital Spirits to
repair to them, and so sense and motion restored to them in part, then making
offer to go or to stir, he begins to feel and complain of the stiffenesse
and starknesse of his limbs and joints, and a general unwealdinesse
throughout his whole body. And in like manner is it here. So long as a man is
wholly Ephesians 2.1. Coloss. 2.13.
dead in sin, albeit he be as much disabled unto the doing of any holy duty,
as a dead man is unto the actions of this life, yet he finds it not, Mortuum
est membrum, quod dolorem non sentit. Bern. medit. c. 12.
he feels it not, he apprehends no such either disability in himself, or
difficulty in the duties that he should do; but when any measure of Spiritual
life is once infused into the soul, whereby Romans 6.11.
he lives now to God, that lay before spiritually dead, now striving to apply
himself unto Gods work, and to walk in the good ways of God, he begins
to find and feel, with much pain and grief of mind, his own infirmity and
weakness, the strange blindness of his mind, the dullness and drowsinesse of
his spirits, the untowardnesse of his heart; the rebelliousnesse of his will;
the sense whereof is a sure argument of Spiritual life begun in him. For as
Augustine says well, though in another case and upon another occasion; Potest
esse vita sine dolor; dolor sine vita esse non potest. Aug. de Civit. l. 19.
c. 13.
There may be some life without grief; but there can be no grief without
life. So there may be some spiritual life without any sense of pain or
grief at all, as with the glorified ones in Heaven it is: but there can be no
2 Cor. 7.10. Argumentum salutis est vis doloris. Greg. mor. l. 6. c. 17.
godly sorrow or sense of spiritual pain and grief, where no beginning at
all of spiritual life is. And therefore it is that our Savior also
pronounces them Matthew. 5.4.
Blessed, that thus mourn: nor does he say that they shall be, but that they
are already in a blessed estate, and that in due time Ibid.
they shall have comfort. Yea, undoubtedly these very heavy and uncomfortable
signs are of all other the surest signs of true grace and sincerity, because
least subject to deceit and delusion of any.

Note of Sincerity, is an earnest desire of Grace. Desire of Grace.
Though a man cannot discern yet any Grace in himself, yet if he do
seriously and earnestly desire Grace, it is a good sign of some beginning of
Grace. For it is Grace, even to desire Grace. It is the first step unto Grace,
for a man to see no Grace; and it is the first degree of Grace, for a man to
desire Grace: when a man's heart does with an holy Echo answer Gods voice as
David's did: Psalm. 27.8.
Seek my face; say Thou. O Lord, thy face will I seek. And, Psalm. 119.4, 5.
Thou have commanded us diligently to keep thy Law. Oh that my ways were so
directed, that I might keep thy Statutes. When it can say seriously with
Augustine; Lord, enable Da, Domine, quod jubes, and jube quod vis. Aug.
confess. l. 10. c. 31. and de persever. c. 20.
me to do what thou enjoynest me, and then enjoyne me what thou will. Pars
magna bonitatis est velle fieri bonum. Sen. ep. 34. Quid tibi opus est, ut sis
bonus? velle. Idem epist. 80.
It is a principal part of goodness, says the Heathen man, for a man to be
willing to be good. And Iusta vita, cum volumus, adest, quia eam ipsam plane
velle justitia est. Nec plus aliquid perficienda justitia est, quam perfectam
habere voluntatem. August. ep. 45.
it is the very essence of Righteousness, says Augustine, for a man to be
willing to be Righteous. It is not an help only unto health, but even a
degree of health, though (...). Arist. ethic. Eudem. l. 7. c. 2.
not in the body, yet in the soul, for a man Pars sanitatis velle sanari fuit.
Sen. Hippol. 1. 2. Corpus enim multis rebus eget ut valeat: animus ex se
crescit, se alit, se exercet. Sen ubi supra.
to be willing to be healed. As Pars est morbi nolle sanari: pars sanitatis
velle sanari. D^ Iackson the Creed, p. 2. l. 2. c. 6.. 3.
it is a principal part of our sickness to be unwilling to be cured: so is it
a principal part of health with us here to be willing to be healed: When we
can in sincerity of heart answer that question of our Savior to the sick
man, John 5.7.
Will thou be healed? with a Sana me, Domine, Ier. 17.14.
Heal me, O Lord, as Jeremy, and I shall then be healed: And, Psalm 41.4.
Heal my soul, as David, for I have sinned against thee. Nehem. 1.11.
Let thine ears, O Lord, says Nehemie, be attentive to the prayers of thy
servants that desire to fear thy Name. And, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19.
The good God, says Hezekias, be merciful to that man that sets his heart
to seek the Lord. And surely, as Bernard says well, discoursing on those
words of the Prophet; Lam. 3.25.
The Lord is good to those that wait on him, and to the Soul that seeks him:
For as it is elsewhere, Prove. 8.17. 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
those that so seek him, shall find him. Si tam bonus quaerenti, quid
invenienti? nisi quod hoc mirum est, quod nemo te quaerit, nisi quiprius
invenerit: Vis inveniri ut quaeraris; vis quaeri ut amplius inveniaris. Potes
quaeri and inveniri, praeveniri non potes. Bern. de Deo dilig. c. 3. Non pedum
passibus, sed affectibus quaerit, nec desiderium sanctum extundit, sed extendit
foelix inventio. Idem in Cant. 84.
If God, says he, be so good to those that seek him; what will he be to
them, when they find him? But this is a strange thing, that no man can so
seek him before he has found him. And surely, as no man can sincerely seek
God in vain; so no man can sincerely desire grace in vain. Quid tibi jubet
Deus? dilige me. Aurum diligis Quaesiturus es forte, nec inventurus. Quisquis
me quaerit, cum illo sum. Me ama: Ipse amor praesentem me tibi facit. August.
in 1 Joan. 6. Hinc Guigo medit c. 17. Ama quod amando carere nequeas, i^ Deum.
A man may love gold, and yet not have it: but no man loves God, but he is
sure to have God, says Augustine. Prove. 13.4.
Wealth a man may desire, and yet be never the nearer it: but Grace no man
ever sincerely desired and missed of it. It is true here that the Psalmist in
another case says; Psalm. 10.17.
Lord, thou hear the desire of the poor; thou have prepared their heart,
and thine ear hearkneth to their prayers. It is God that has prepared the
heart, and wrought this desire in it; (for Philip. 2 13.
It is God that works such willingness in us:) and he will never frustrate
the desire that himself has there wrought. Yea, as no man, says he, can
seek God but he that has found him; and it is a sign therefore that a man
has already found God in part, when seriously and sincerely he seeks him: So
Huc usque te faciente profeci, ut desiderem desiderare te. Quid est autem
desiderare desiderium? Si enim desidero esse desiderans, jam invento me
desiderantem. Sed nunquid desiderium tui desiderantem, quasi non habeam, aut
desiderium majus quam habeam? Gulie^m. de S. Theodor. de amor. Dei c. 2.
no man can desire Grace, but he that already has grace: (for he that
desires Grace, has grace to desire it:) and it is an infallible sign
therefore, that a man has already some measure of Grace, that does seriously
desire to have it. He would never desire to fear God, that stood not in some
awe of him already: nor desire to feel in himself a love of God, that did not
in some measure already love God: Nor could a man ever truly desire sanctifying
Grace, were not his heart already sanctified by the Spirit of Grace, which has
wrought also in him that desire of it. Not to add that the Christiani sumus
affectu magis quam effectu. Et maxima pars Christianismi est toto pectore ^elle
fieri Christianum. Itaque site August. in 1. Joan. tr. 4. Tota vita boni
Christiani sanctum desiderium est. Et Bern. in Cant. 84. Magnum bonum quaerere
Deum: primum in donis, ultimum in profectibus est. Virtutum nulli accedit,
cedit nulli. Cui accedat, quam nulla praecedit? cui cedat, quae omnium magis
consummatio est? Quae enim v^rtus ascribi potest, non quaerenti Deum? aut quis
terminus quaerenti Deum? Psalm. 105.4. Sed and Lactant. instit. lib. 6. cap. 5.
Virtus nostra tota posita est in voluntate faciendi bona.
greatest part of a Christian man's perfection in this life, (witness Romans
7.15, 18, 19, 21. Philip. 3.12, 15. Duplex est perfectio, una quae est in
expletione virtutum, quam se negat assecutum; altera cum quis proficit, and ad
anteriora nititur. Origin. in Romans Et imperfectum and perfectum se dicit;
imperfectum cogitando quantum sibi ad justitiam desit, cujus plenitudinem
esurit and sitit; perfectum autem quod and imperfectionem confiteri non
erubescit, and ut been perveniat, been procedit. Aug. ad 2. Ep. Pelag. l 3. c.
7.
Paul's own ingenuous confession of himself: and who went ever beyond him? How
far at least come the most short of him?) consists rather in will, than in
work, and in desire and endeavor, more than in deed.

True it is indeed, that any natural man may desire happiness, glory,
salvation, and eternal well-being. Number. 23.10.
Oh, says Balaam, that I might die the death of the righteous, and that my
latter end might be like his: ( Optabat sibi extrema justorum, sed non ita and
principia. Mortem spiritualium optant sibi carnales, quorum vitam tamen
abhorrent. Bern. in Cant. 2. Non curant quaerere, quae tamen desiderant
invenire: cupiunt consequi, non and sequi. Ibid.
he desired indeed to die their death, but to live their life he could not
endure:) (...). Aristot. ethic. l. 1. c. 1. and polit. l. 1. c. 1.
it is natural for every one to desire his own natural good. But to desire
spiritual Grace, Holiness, sound Sanctification, Faith unfeigned, the true
Fear of God, serious Repentance, is more than any natural man ever did or can
do. And therefore Blessed are they, says our Savior, as, Matthew. 5.3.
that are poor in spirit, and Matthew. 5.4.
that mourn for their spiritual defects; so Matthew. 5.6.
that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, after Spiritual Grace, after a
supply of them. Now what is (...). Aristot. de anima. l. 2. c. 3.
hunger but a want of food with a sense thereof, and an earnest desire of it?
or what is thirst but a drought, a want of drink, and a vehement desire of it?
For in hunger and thirst there are these three things: first, an emptiness in
the one, and a want of moisture in the other: for Hinc (...). Plut. sympos.
probl. l. 5. c. 3. Et inde Sitiendi verbum deduci, (...), quia ^ibum sequitur
sitis. Iul. Scalig. de cause. ling. Lat. c. 126.
it is not want of food simply, but want of wetting that causes this:
secondly, a sense of this emptiness and want of moisture, with a special
kind of pain and grief in the body proceeding from it: For a man may be
empty bodied, and yet not affected thus with it, as (...). Plut. ibid. c. 2.
in some diseases, and where natural heat is much wasted: and thirdly, a
vehement desire of such either nouriture or moisture, whereby this emptiness
may be filled, or this drought slaked: For a man may be empty, and sick
again in some sort with it, yea ready to die of it, and yet have no appetite
to his meat neither, but Quanto inanior, tanto fastidiosior. August. confess.
l. 2. c. 1.
a loathing of that rather, whereby he might be refreshed and releeved: he may
be empty of food, and yet feel it not; he may feel it in some sort, and yet
not desire food. But in hunger and thirst ordinarily do these all three
concur. Yea, so vehement and violent is this desire of such supply often in
hunger and thirst, that 2 King 6.25, 28, 29. Lament. 1.11. Hinc Lysimachus siti
laborans cum post se suos que hosti deditos bibisset, (...); Plut in apophth.
for a bit of bread, or a cup of drink, men have many times been content to
part with the dearest and pretiousest things that they have been possessed of.
In like manner is it in this spiritual hunger and thirst. There is first
spiritual poverty, a vacuitie, an emptiness of Grace, to sight and sense it
may be, utterly of all, in deed and truth of some degree of it: there is
secondly a Fames and sitis dolores sunt. Aug. confess l. 10. c. 31. Vide and
eundem de Music. l. 6. c. 5.
grief and painfulnesse in the heart and soul arising from the apprehension
of it, a mourning and bemoaning of ones self for the want of it: and thirdly,
Est sitis interior, uti and venture interior; quia est homo interior. Aug. in
Joan. 32. Ipsum desiderium sitis est animae. Idem in Psalm. 62.
an earnest desire of it above all things in the world, so that as a man
thoroughly an hungered counts all nothing in regard of meat, a man heartily a
thirst all nothing in comparison of drink, he would give any thing for it: so
the soul thus affected, with the blessed Apostle counts Philip. 3.8, 9, 10.
all nothing but dross and dung, in comparison of Christ, the knowledge of
him, faith in him, and conformity unto him. It is with it, as with (...).
Macar. hom. 45.
a Kings child, that though it be never so richly arrayed, and have never so
many costly jewels hanging about it, yet all is as nothing to it, nothing but
the nurses breast can still it, when for want of food it is out of quiet. So
nothing but spiritual Grace can here satisfy the soul, and all other things
are esteemed as nothing to it. Or as with some women that go with child, and
are subject to longing; they will part with any thing for that that they long
for, and are ready even to sink down, to faint, to go away, yea Quomodo
Rachel de prole. Genesis 30.1.
to die, if they have it not: So here spiritual Grace and the sense and
assurance of it, is the thing longed for, and that they would give a whole
world for to obtain, if they had it, and they are ready even to faint and
sink under that heavy weight of grief that surchargeth their distressed
souls, because they cannot yet find and feel that in themselves, which yet
undoubtedly they have. For certainly whosoever they be that can find
themselves in this sort affected, Verba Domini sunt; non est fas fidem
suspendere. Credant, quod non experiuntur, ut fructum quandoque experientiae
fidei merito consequantur. Bern. in Cant. 84.
either they must confess themselves to be in a blessed estate, and
consequently in the state of grace, (for what true happiness out of it?) or
else they must contradict our Savior, and charge John 14.6.
Truth it self with untruth, who has pronounced them blessed that are so
affected. And this I desire to have well weighed and seriously considered for
the staying of many troubled souls. What is it that does so much trouble thee,
and in this lamentable wise distress and distract thee? Oh, says he
presently, I have no Faith, no Repentance, no Love, no fear of God, no
sanctifying, no saving grace in me. Why? do thou see a want of these things
in thy self? Yes, that is it that so grieveth me: that I cannot love God,
stand in awe of him, trust in his mercy, repent of my sins as I should. Yea
but, do thou not seriously and unfainedly desire to do thus? Oh yes, I
desire it above all things in the world, and I would be willing to buy, and it
were with a whole world, the least measure, a dram or a drop only, of such
grace. And Quaerit anima verbum, sed quae a verbo prius quaesita sit. Audi
profugam and deviam, quid doleat, and quid petat. Psalm. 119.176. Nec expositam
omnino nec relictam dixerim quae reverti cupit, and requiri petit. Vnde enim
haec voluntas illi? nisi quod a verbo visitata sit and quaesita. Noc otiosa
quaesitio, quae operata est voluntatem, sine qua reditus esse non potest.
Meminerit ergo se and quaesitam prius and prius dilectam, atque inde esse quod
and quaerit and diligit. Cant. 3.1. Bern. in Cant. 84. Nec repellet
requirentem, qui contemnentem requisivit. Ibid.
who is it, I pray thee, that has wrought this desire in thee? Not the Devil:
he would rather quench it all he could in thee: Not thine own corrupt heart:
that is naturally most averse thereunto: It must needs then be the work of
the Spirit of God, and of him who affirms them to be all in a blessed plight
that thus hunger and thirst after grace, and assures them withal, that they
shall one day be satisfied. Luke 8.55.
Give her meat, said our Savior, when he had raised Iairus his daughter, In
signum verae and perfecta sanitatis. Iansen. har. cap. 34.
to show that she was not revived only, but recovered. A good stomach, we
say, is a sign of good health. And as hunger is a sign of health in the body:
so is this spiritual hunger of health in the Soul.

Note of Sincerity may be a desire and endeavor of growth in grace: Desire and
endeavor of Growth in Grace.
Desire, I say, and endeavor; for where desire indeed is, there endeavor also
will be: there cannot but be a serious endeavor, where the desire of the
heart is sincere. But 2 Pet. 3.18.
grow in grace, says Saint Peter, inciting hereunto, and in the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ. And, 1 Pet. 2.2.
Desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may thereby grow. And it is the
joint prayer of the Apostles to their Savior and ours; Luke 17.5.
Lord, increase our faith, therein craving a further improvement of that Grace
that already they had received. And the Heathen man himself makes it a note
of a good man, that -- (...). Euripid. apud Aristot. Rhet. l. 1. c. 11.
he studieth daily how he may grow better than he is, not contenting himself
with any degree or measure of goodness. Yea the Apostle Paul tells us, that
Ephesians. 4.16.
the whole Body of Christ (whereof Romans 12.5. 1 Cor. 12.27.
every true Christian is a limb) is so (...).
compact together in it self, and so firmly fastened with certain spiritual
nerves and ligaments to the head, that from it there is by them conveyed to
each part a continual supply of spiritual Grace, both sufficient to furnish
it, and to further the growth of it.



for all that. (...). Greg. Naz. epist. 65. (...). Basil. Caes. homil. 3. Vt
oculus, sic animus se non videns, alia cernit. Ex Cic. Tuscul. l. 1. Joan.
Sarisb. metalog. l. 4. c. 20. Corporis oculus alios oculos videt, se non videt:
non sic men's. Aug. de Trinit. l. 9. c. 3.
The eye can see other things, but it cannot see it self: Oculis corporis
magis alii oculi noti sunt, quam ipsi sibi. Nunquam enim praeter specula se
vident. Aug. de Trin. l 10. c. 3. Facies nisi in speculo non videtur. Absens
enim ab aspectu nostro etiam facies ipsa, quia non ibi est quo dirigi potest.
Ibid. c. 9.
We can easily see the face and the countenance of another, we cannot behold
our own, but by reflection only. Christians many times better discern how
others grow in grace and come forward, than how themselves do, though it may
be growing as fast or faster than they. Qua vehimur navi fertur, cum stare
videtur: Quae manet in statione, ea propter creditur ire. Et fugere ad puppim
colles campique videntur, Quos agimus praeter navim, velisque volamus. Lucret.
rer. not. lib. 4.
The Boat that crosses us on the River, seems to go far swifter than
ours, though our own go as fast or faster than it; and Vides ne navem illam?
nobis stare videtur. At eis qui in navi sunt, moveri haec villa. Cic. Academ.
lib. 4. Gemina his habet Origin. in Psalm. 36. hom. 5.
the land it self to pass by us, while we stand still, when indeed we pass
by it, and it stands still. Strangers that come by starts, some continuance
of time between, to us, can better judge of the growth of our Children than
our selves, who have them continually in our eye. And it is the manner
therefore of curious Artists, Picture-drawers and the like, (...). Greg. Naz.
in Cyprian. (...). Basil. homil. 3. Homines neque proxime^ assita, neque
longule dissita cernimus. Apul. florid. 1.
to stand sometime aloof off viewing their work, yea or (...). Plut. de
iracund.
to go wholly away from it, and to leave it a while, and after some space of
time to return to it again, that they may the better discern any the least
defect in it. (...). Ibid. Aliena nobis, nostra plus aliis patent. Aliena
quisque melius cernit quam sua. Ter. beaut. 3. 1. Aiunt homines plus in alien^
negotio videre quam in suo. Quaedam sunt quae sapientes etiam in alio quam in
se diligentius vident. Senec. epist. 109. Facilius est de alienis judicare quam
desuis. Lactant. instit. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Our continual conversing with our selves, makes our own growth many times
to be not so discernable of our selves as of others. Which may the rather
befall us, because this spiritual growth in the most is ordinarily but (...).
Plut. de profect.
by insensible degrees. A man may stand gasing a long time upon the Dial, and
yet not perceive how the hand there stirs, though it be stirring all that
while: he may in warm springing weather sit night and day beside the young
green grass, and yet not discern the shooting up of it, though by the warmth
of the weather it be continually sprouting.

Thou may well therefore be growing, though thou do not Magna pars est
profectus velle proficere. Senec. epist. 72. Ambulare proficere est. Sedet is,
qui proficere non curat. Id caveto, and si morte praeventus fuerit, in
refrigerio eris. Omnes enim qui in desiderio inveniuntur proficiendi, si morte
praeoccupati fuerint, in eo quod eis deest sunt perficiendi. Bern. in Cant. 49.
If thou do so, it is certain that Amando bonum meliores efficimur. Aug. in
Psalm. 143. Ambulas si amas. Non enim passibus ad Deum, sed affectibus currimus.
Idem de Cant. nov. cap. 2.
thou do grow, and art growing, howsoever thou see it not. To use Quando
peregrinatur quis ad S. Iacobi, aliquando proficiscitur viam recogitans;
aliquando progreditur, nihil recogitans; aliquando nec progreditur, nec
recogitat, dum dormit. In primo est continuatio naturae and moris actualis; in
secundo naturae actualis, moris virtualis; in tertio discontinuatio motus
naturalis, sed continuatio motus moris habitualis; quia non est apposita
opposita voluntas. Gerson. de valor orat.
Gersons similitude, or one somewhat like it at least: A man is bound for the
East Indies, and shapeth his course thitherward; but by the way is put off often
by cross winds to the Westward, he is compelled to put into diverse harbors,
and to make some stay by the way there, either to shift off stormy weather, or
to take in fresh water. And yet all this while we say, he is going onward on
his way, because his purpose and resolution still continues the same. It is
much more so in spiritual things, because our very growth it self in them
consists much even in resolution and desire. The strength of desire never a
whit furthereth the Seaman so long as he lies winde-bound to the making of
his Port; but Omnis amor aut ascendit, aut descendit. Desiderio enim bono
levamur ad Deum, and desiderio malo ad ima praecipit amur. Aug. in Psalm. 122.
Non enim ambulando sed amando ad Deum itur. Idem ep. 52. Non pedibus, sed
affectibus, nec migrando, sed amando ad eum venimus. quanquam secundum
interiorem hominem, and quiamat, migrat. Aliud enim est migrare corpore, aliud
cord. Migrat corpore, qui motu corporis mutat locum: migrat cord, qui motu
cordis mutat affectum. Idem in Joan. 32. Hic non solum ire, sed pervenire,
nihil est aliud quam velle ire. Idem confess. l. 8. c. 8.
the very strength of our desire may conveigh us near to God, may carry us
higher, as with Eagles wings, up toward Heaven.

Quaeris quid sit quod oblivione acceptorum nobis faciat? cupiditas
accipiendorum. Cogitamus non quid impetratum, sed quid impetrandum sit. Sen.
epist. 81. Solebat Attalus hac imagine uti: Vidisti aliquando canem missa a
Domino frusta aperto ore captantem? quicquid excepit, protinus devorat, and
semper ad spem futuri hiat. Ibid. 72. Vltra se cupiditas porrigit, and
foelicitatem suam non intelligit: quia non unde venerit respicit sed quo
tendat. Idem de be^. l. 2. c. 27.
the earnest desire of what men would have, makes them forgetful of what they
have. Philip. 3.13.
I forget what is past, says the Apostle, and press on to what is before.
Their eye is more upon what they want, than upon what they have. It is with
good Christians in this case, as with rich worldlings, that Instat equis auriga
suos vincentibus, illum Praeteritum temnens extremos inter euntem. Horat. sermon.
l. 1. sat. 1.
like men in a race have their eye on those that be before them, not on those
that come after them; they are ever eying those that seem to outstrip and
out-goe them in wealth, and think they have nothing, they are but poor men,
so long as they come short of such and such. And so is it with these; they are
often eying those, whose either examples they read of, or whose courses and
graces they are in some sort eyewitnesses of, and think that they have
nothing, they make no progress, at least worth speaking of, so long as they
come behind, and keep short of such: And this is it often that makes them
complain so much of their wants and their slow progress, and that they cannot
perceive but that they stand still at a stay. Which yet complaint of theirs,
and fervent desire of growth in grace, is a sure argument of sincere and
undoubted grace in them. Yea it is an argument that they love not life only but
Grace, that they love Grace for it self, that they love Grace as it is Grace,
when they desire so much to increase and to grow in Grace, especially supposing
themselves to be in the estate of it already.

Whereas on the other side, it is an argument of insinceritie and unsoundnesse,
when men having gotten some small measure of speculative knowledge, or having
attained to some slight degree of superficial conformity, far enough indeed
from any sound sanctification, they can quietly sit down by it, and have no
mind to go any further: yea how much soever they have attained to, if they
can set down their rest there, sing a requiem to their souls, and say with
the rich Glutton in the Gospel, Luke 12.19.
Soul, thou have much good; or, Genes. 33.9. Si dixisti, sufficit, defecisti.
Bern. de consid. 2.
I have enough, with Esau: what should I labor for any more? It was the Church
of Laodiceaes song, Apoc. 3.17. Quomodo enim proficis, si tibi jam sufficis?
Ibid.
I am rich, and full, and need nothing. He is Galat. 6.3. 1 Cor. 8.2.
nothing worth indeed that so deemeth of himself. Omnia illi desunt, qui sibi
nihil de esse putat. Bern. de consid. l. 2.
He wants every thing, he has not any thing, that thinks he wants
nothing; says Bernard. The same is to be said of those that think themselves
Satis nos consequi. si inter pessimos non sumus. Senec. epist. 76. Non est
bonitas pessimis esse meliorem. Ibid. 79. Perfectum nolle esse delinquere est.
Hieron. ad Heliod. and ad Julian. (...). Greg. Naz in Matthew. 19.11, 12.
well enough, if they be but a little better than those that are stark naught,
that are grossly impious and extremely profane: That use to ask when they
are incited to a more frequent and diligent use of the means, for the
furtherance of their Christian growth: Why? may not a man be saved, though he
know no more than this, and this? Or though he have no more than such a measure
of Faith, or though he do not live so precisely as such and such do? For such
evidently show, that it is not Grace but Life, not Sanctification that they
desire, but Salvation only. They serve God, only to serve their own turns
upon God. It is not the pleasing of God, but the saving of themselves that they
do not so much affect, as they are content to have grace for. Qui melior esse
non cupit, nec est bonus. Vbi incipis nolle fieri melior, ibi desinis esse
bonus. Bern. epist 91. Vbi sunt qui dicere solent, sufficit nobis, nolumus esse
meliores quam patres nostri? non vis proficere? vis ergo deficere. nolle
proficere, deficere est. Sic, inquis, mihi vivere volo; and manner in quo
perveni: nec pejor fieri patior, nec melior cupio. Hoc ergo vis quod esse non
potest. Quid enim stat in hoc seculo? Homo nunquam in eodem statu permanet.
Nolle ergo proficere, non nisi deficere est. Idem epist. 254.
He was never indeed good, that desires not to be better. Yea, Qui melior esse
non vult, pro certo non est bonus. Bern. epist. 91. Imo, qui non vult esse
optimus, non est revera bonus. Injust^s est, qui non desiderat amare te quantum
ab aliqua creatura rationali possibile est te amari. Desiderat ergo etiam
minimus quisque, quicunque ille est, tantum te amare, quantum amat, quicunque
pl^s eo amat, non aemula insectatione, sed pia and devota imitatione. Guliel.
de S. Theod. de amor. Dei cap. 3.
He is stark naught, that desires not to be as good as the best. For he
cannot be good, that loves not goodness. Nor can any man truly love it, but
he must needs desire more of it. For, Eccles. 5.10. Avarus animus, nullo
satiatur lucro. P. Sir. Senec. epist. 94. Nil satis est. Horat. sermon. 1. Semper
avarus eget. Idem epist. 2. (...). Plut. de profect.
He that loves money, says Solomon, will never have enough of it: Nescit
virtus mensuram gratiae. Ambr. in Luc. l. 5. c. 6. Amori nihil satis est: Amor
exaestuat; se non capit; immensitatem aemulatur, dum metam nescit affectui
ponere: non excusat, sed accusat se de infirmitate; no^ capit de
impossibilitate remedium. Gilbert. in Cant. 19.
And so he that truly loves Grace, will never think he has enough of it, and
will consequently be ever desiring to grow in it. Which desire of growth in
grace, as it is a good sign of sincerity of grace, so the want of it is too
sure an argument of unsoundnesse.

no true Christian, yea, that Job 14.2. Nihil stat, nihil fixum manet. August.
in Joan. 31. Non stat vel temporis puncto, sed sine intermissione labitur,
quicquid continua immutatione sensim currit in finem non consummantem, sed
consumentem. Idem de pecc. mer. and remi. lib. 1. c. 16.
no man at all ever stands at a stay: But that every one as he is Job 9.26.
Vita nostra navigationi similis est. Is namque qui navigat, stat, sedet, jacet,
vadit; quia navis impulsu ducitur: ita and nos, sive vigilantes, sive
dormientes, etc. per momenta temporum quotidie ad finem tendimus. Greg. in
registr. lib. 6. epist. 26. Nam vita morti propior est quotidie. Phaedr. fab.
l. 4. Velut secundo cymba vecta flumine Sensim propinqu^t litori: sic indies
Vivendo morti appellimur propinquius. Rittershus.
continually going on toward his end, so he is Inter profectum and defectum
nihil medium invenitur. Sed quomodo ipsum corpus nostrum continue aut crescere
constat aut decrescere: sic necesse est and spiritum aut proficere semper, aut
deficere. Bern. epist. 254.
continually growing either better or worse: like the Angels on the Genesis 28.12.
Vidit Jacob in scala Angelos ascendentes and descendentes: stantem vel
residentem nominem. Idem epist 91. and de vit. solit. Vnum ergo e duobus
necesse est, aut semper proficere, aut prorsus deficere. Idem de diverse. 36.
Plut. ipse de profect. (...).
Ladder that Jacob saw, whereof some went upward, some downward, but none of
them stood still. And with me the declination to the worse side is too
evident: For I find that I am not able to continue in prayer, or to keep my
mind long bent to any intention of meditation, yea that I cannot endure to
hold out in hearing, or to retain or call to mind again what I have heard,
as I formerly have done, or have been able to do. It is the usual complaint
of many good Christians held with lingering infirmities and such bodily diseases
as waste the spirits, weaken the senses, decay the memory, and disable the
functions of those faculties of the soul that are wont to be in these holy
exercises employed.

Indefessum proficiendi studium, and jugis conatus perfectionis (profectus, imo
and) perfectio reputatur. Bern. epist. 254. Et si studere perfectioni persectum
est esse, uti Idem ibid. certe and Profectui studere, ipsum est prosicere.
where an earnest desire and endeavor of growth is, there is no standing at a
stay. It follows not, because persons cannot perform outward, yea or inward
actions as formerly they have done, that therefore there is a decay of
Spiritual grace in them. For Animi imperium, corporis servitium. Salust.
Catill.
the Soul, we know, while it abides in the body, works by it and the parts
of it. And the working of it therefore cannot be other, than the affection of
those parts, it works by, will afford. As Aristot. de anima, l. 1. c. 4.
the Heathen Philosopher therefore well observes, that it follows not that
either the soul it self, or the faculty of seeing in the soul (for it
(...). Menand. apud Plut. de fortun. and Cercida apud Stob. c. 4. Animum videre
and audire; non eas parts quae quasi fenestrae sunt animae. Cic. Tuscul. l. 1.
is not the body, nor the eye it self that sees, to speak properly, but the
soul that sees by it) is grown weak and decayed, because it cannot see so
well by or with an old eye, as it could do and did by or with a young one:
(...). Arist. ibid.
Give it a young eye again, and it will see as well as ever. Nor does it
follow that Vt quamvis tacet Hermogenes, cantor tamen, atque Optimus est
modulator: ut Alfenus vafer, omni Abjecto instrumento artis, clausaque taberna
Suitor erat. -- Horat. sermon. l. 1. sat. 3.
a workman has either lost or lessened his skill, because either he wants
tools, and therefore he cannot work, or has bad tools, and cannot
therefore work so well as he could, when he had better than now he has: that
a Musician is not so good or skillful an Artist as he was, because he cannot
make so good Music with his Viole or Citharne, being now cracked and crased,
or evill-stringed, as he could when it was new and sound, and well-stringed at
first. So neither does it follow that Spiritual Grace is therefore abated or
decayed in the soul, because it cannot hold out now with that continuance of
attention, or strength and vigor of intention in meditation, invocation, or
other the like holy exercises, Corpus enim tunc instar organi Musici, non jam
contemperati, and recte dispositi, sed quasi confracti and inutilis. August.
nomine de spir. and anim. c. 14.
the body being, by age, or sickness and feebleness accruing from either,
much decayed and disabled, as it could formerly, when the parts and functions
of it were fresh. I say not, (for I would not herein be mistaken) if the
desire of doing what it has done, but cannot now do, what it is now
restrained of, or disabled unto, be not as fervent as formerly. For the desire
usually rather on such occasions increases. And it is a shrewd (...). Plut. de
profectus indiciis.
evil sign, as even an Heathen man also could observe, when men restrained of
the means or the use of them, or disabled unto their wonted performance of
such duties, are not at all therewith moved, but can well enough endure such
want. It was by one deemed Ne nunc quidem vires desidero adolescentis: non plus
quam adolescens etiam vires tauri aut elephantis desiderabam. Cic. desenect.
as unequal for an old man to desire the strength he had when he was young,
as for a young man to desire the strength that an Ox has, or an Elephant. But
for a man here not to desire to do as he has done, may well minister some
suspicion, of an heart not very sound, which they that thus complain of, by
this their complaint do evidently show themselves not to be free only, but to
be far from. (...). Plut. de profect.
The very absence and restraint of things loved, longed after, and delighted
in, is a great means to incense and inflame much the desire. Nor can there be a
decay of grace, though the work of it may be restrained or suspended, where
the desire continues such. Spiritual grace is of the same nature, in some
sort, with the Soul: As that is an immortal substance; so is this (...). 1
Pet. 1.23.
an incorruptible seed. Nor is it therefore any physical or natural defect,
though such may either in whole or in part Hinc illud Virg. Aen. 6. -- quantum
non noxia corpora tardant; Terrenique hebetant artus, moribundaque membra.
restrain the operation, that can possibly either destroy, or decay either by
some natural defects indeed, (such as either suspend or abandon the use of
reason and understanding, and make a man by that means incapable of
instruction,) a man may be Romans 10.14, 17.
disabled in ordinary course, (for extraordinary workings we leave unto God;
who as he gave Number 22.28. 2 Pet. 2.16.
power of speech and utterance sometime to a dumb beast, and his Luke 1.15. In
utero priusquam nasceretur renatus. Greg. mor. lib. 3. cap. 4. Quod tamen Aug.
impossible censet. Nemo, inquit, ante renatus quam natus. Et, Renasci nemo
potest antequam fit natus. Aug. ep. 57. and de verb. Ap. 14. Verum regenitum si
dixisset Gregorius, and id est proprie loquendo (...), contradictionis speciem
omnem sustulisset.
sanctifying Spirit to a Babe yet unborne, so Divina potentia non est mediis
alligata. August in Genesis ad lit. l. 6. c. 13.
is able to work in this kind as he will:) unto the attaining of saving
Grace, whereas yet it is not. But where it is already wrought, there cannot any
such natural defect, either crase it, or wholly raze it out again. It were as
absurd to imagine that a fit of the dead Palsy continuing with a man some good
space of time, and depriving him thereby of ability unto the performance of
holy duties, should of it self therefore make him Actiones enim corporis;
animi virtutes and vitia. Aug. nom. de spir. and anim. c. 14.
less holy than he was when it first seized upon him; as to suppose a man well
affected to be less Etiam in maximis angustiis liberalis est animus. Sen. de
benef. l. 1. c. 8.
liberally minded, because being fallen into poverty, he cannot now do that,
which before he was wont to do, when he had better means and a more
plentiful estate. It is not therefore any disabilitie arising from such
defects and infirmities, that argues any decay of grace.

Note of sincerity may be an endeavor to find out and discover our own
corruptions; Diligence in Discovery of Corruptions.
and a gladness when we have discovered them by the light of Gods Word, or
such other good means as God shall offer us. This business had David been
busy about, what time he brake out into that exclamation; Psalm. 19.12.
O, who can tell how often he sins? or, What man is he that understands his
own errors? Spinaeus de Iustit. Christian. Postquam diligenter cubiculum
everrimus, id nobis perpurgatum videtur. At sole per fenestras illucente,
radios atomorum sordibus infinitis permislos videmus.
It fared with David, says Spina, as with the Houswife that having diligently
swept her house and cast the dust out at doors, can see nothing amiss now, no
specke of dust in it; whereas if the Sun do but a little shine in through
some cranie in the wall, or some broken quarrel in the window, she may soon
see the whole house swim and swarm with innumerable motes of dust floating
to and fro in the air, which for dimnesse of light or sight before she was
not able to discern. And so fared it with David; he was a man of no loose
life, but even from his younger years careful of his courses, 1 Samuel 13.14.
Upright and after Gods own heart; so that little might seem to be amiss,
or to require reformation and amendment with him: yet when he came to look
more intentively into Gods Law, a little beam of light reflecting upon his
soul from it, discovered unto him such Psalm. 40.12.
an innumerable company as well of corruptions in his heart, as of errors and
over-sights in his life, that it made him, as one amazed, cry out in that
manner, as guessing by what he now saw, that he had not seen before, how much
corruption remained yet in him unseene. In like manner had he been sifting of
himself, when he said; Psalm. 119.59. Nos contra. Dissimulamus Domini quaerere
voluntatem, dum and nostram facere, and aliquam de ignorantia excusationem
habere volumus. Bern. de diverse. 26.
I considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies. And of the joy
that he conceived, when upon such view and search he had light upon somewhat
that he was ignorant of before, and came to the notice of some duty
concerning himself, that before he was not aware of: Psalm. 119.162.
I rejoice, says he, at thy Word, (to wit, when somewhat from it is discovered
unto me,) as one that finds a great spoil; that has gotten a rich booty.
An allusion to rich spoils taken from the enemy in the field, wherein the
pleasure is usually as much as, or more than the profit. And he says further
therefore, That Psalm. 119.7.
he will praise God with an upright heart, when he shall have learned his
righteous Testimonies: He will thank him heartily, when he shall by his Law
inform him of ought. Yea how glad was he when Abigail had discovered unto him
his error, and by that means stayed his hand from an unwarrantable act, that
in his heat of passion he had before resolved to execute? And 1 Samuel 25.32, 33.
how does he bless her, and bless God for her, her, as a messenger of God,
and God, as one that had sent her to meet him, and so to withold him from
that outrage? And (...). Plut. de profect. indic.
this is also a singular good note of a sincere heart, when a man is careful
to search into his own corruptions and oversights, is willing to be informed
of them, glad to see them discovered, and ready to reform them when they are
evidently discovered to him, and his conscience convinced of them out of Gods
word. As on the contrary part when men Vt liberius peccent, libenter ignorant.
Bern. de grad humil. c. 2.
are not willing to have their corruptions discovered to them, cannot endure
those that are dealing in any sort with their sins, Psalm. 32.9. Amos 5.^0.
Prove. 9.7, 8. (...). Plut. de profect. (...). Ib.
fume and storm against those that even in the kindest and most Christian
manner inform them of them, albeit they cannot wholly excuse them or deny them
to be such: when men will of set purpose forbear, yea and forswear to, the
hearing of those, whose plain dealing and powerful delivery of Gods Word,
has begun to lay open to them their corruptions, and to touch them a little to
the quick: Or when (as Augustine well observes of some, speaking of those
words of the Psalmist; Psalm. 36.2, 3.
He flattereth himself in his own eyes, till his iniquity be found
abominable; and he refuses to understand:) Quasi ^onantur quaerere, and timent
invenire. Aug. in Psalm. 35.
they will seem to search, but are loath to find; and therefore, as Matthew.
19.22.
the young man in the Gospel, that moved a question to our Savior, Multos
cognovi veritate aguita tristiores discessisse, quod jam confugere ad
ignorantiae excusationem non liceret. Bern. in Cant. 74.
they are sorry that ever they sought, and go away with heavy hearts, when
they find not as they would, when they have not an issue and an answer to
their own minds: and as Ierem 42.2, 3, 5, 6. and 43.2, 3, 4.
the Jewish Captains that repaired for advice and direction to Jeremy, refuse
thereupon to follow what they are informed of, or to reform what upon such
search they meet with, and find to be amiss with them in heart or life: It is
a fearful sign that their heart is not upright, and Quia dolose agebant, ut
invenirent. ubi invenerint, non oderunt. Si enim sincere and non dolose
agerent, quod invenirent, odissent. Aug. in Psalm. 35.
their seeming search was never made in sincerity.

Note of Sincerity shall be a love of God and good things, and of the Children
of God for God; together with a steadfast purpose to depend still upon God, to
continue constant in the frequent and diligent use of all the holy Ordinances
of God, and to persever and go on in the good ways of God, though a man
cannot yet find or feel in himself any assurance of Gods special favor
Love of God, and Gods children; with purpose of constant adherence unto him,
even in want of assurance of his special favor.
toward him, or any comfort in the Ordinances of God that he uses.

These I am the rather willing thus to pile up together, and to comprehend
under one Head, though they might severally be insisted on, because I would
hasten to an end, fearing that I have been overlong in what is past already:
The work growing greater than I made account it would have done.

That our Love of God Love of God.
is a sure argument of Gods special Love of us it is most evident. Prove. 8.17.
I love them, says the Wisdom of God, that love me. And, John 14.21, 23. and
16.27.
He that loves me, says our Savior Christ, both the Father and I will love
him. Nemo se fallat. Non nos Deum diligeremus, nisi ipse prius nos dilexisset,
and sui dilectores fecisset. Aug. de great. and lib. arb. c. 18. Nisi prius
quaesita non quaereres; nisi prius dilecta non diligeres. Bern. in Cant. 69.
A man could not love God, did not God first love him, and Romans 5.5. Charitas
Dei donum Spiritus Dei. Bern. de humil. grad. 3. Non amatur Deus nisi de Deo.
Aug. de diverse. 2. Non habet homo unde Deum diligat nisi ex Deo. Idem de
Trinit. lib. 15. c. 17. Prorsus donum Dei est diligere Deum. Ipse ut
diligeretur dedit, qui non dilectus dilexit. Idem in Joan. 102.
work this very love of himself in him. Nihil dilectae, nihil diligenti
timendum. Paveant, quae non amant. Quae amat, ne timeat, quia amat; quod non
amata omnino non faceret: Itaque etiam amatur. Quae amat, amari se ne dubitet,
non magis quam amare. Bern. in Cant. 69. and 84.
Nor need any man, that truly (though Nos etsi te minus diligimus, quam
debemus, diligimus tamen quantum valemus, tantum autem valemus quantum
accepimus: petimusque and expetimus, ut a te amplius accipiamus, unde amplius
diligamus. Bern. ep. 85.
but weakly, yet so well as he is able, or rather as God has enabled him;)
loves God, doubt but that God loves him. For Nemo se diffidat amari qui jam
amat. Libenter Dei amor nostrum, quem praecessit, subsequitur. Quomodo enim
redamare pigebit, quos amavit necdum amantes? Bern. epist. 107. Ejus amor
nostrum and praeparat and remunerat. Idem de dilig. Deo cap. 3.
how can he choose but love them again, when they love him, whom he loved even
before they loved him? How can he but love them, when they love him, that 1
John 4.9, 10. Potest nondum diligere etiam dilectus: sed nisi ante dilectus
diligere non potest. Bern. in Cant. 71.
loved them, when they loved not him; that loved them so dearly when they
Psalm. 81.15. Tit. 3.3.
hated him, and Romans 5.8, 10. and 8.7.
were enemies to him, as to give his Son to die for them. If God, says that
Bradford Sermon of Repentance.
blessed Man and Martyr of God, so loved us when we hated him and fled away
from him, that he sent his Son after us to seek us, and with loss of his
own life to redeem and reduce us, how can we think otherwise, but that now
loving him, and lamenting because we do no more love him, he will surely love
us for ever?

And that the Love of Gods Children for God, Love of Gods children for God.
is a good Sign of the love of God, it is no less apparent. 1 John 5.1.
He that loves him that begat, says Saint John, loves him also that is
begotten. And he that loves him that is begotten, say I, loves him also that
begat. It was 2 Samuel 9.3, 7.
for Ionathans sake principally, that David loved and favored Mephibosheth.
Nor could a man for God love the Children of God, if he did not first love God
himself. In regard whereof also Saint John makes this Love of Gods Children a
Sign that a man 1 John 2.10.
is in the light, to wit, of Gods favor; that he 1 John 3.14.
is past from death to Life, is in the state of salvation; that he 1 John 4.7.
is borne of God, is regenerate, is the Child of God; that 1 John 4.12.
God dwells in him, he abides in his heart by his Spirit; and that he does
Ibid.
Sincerely love God, and is beloved consequently of God. And as David
testifies the sincerity of his Love unto God, by his loving, Psalm. 16.2, 3.
and 119.63.
liking of, and delighting in the Saints of God: so he makes Psalm. 15.1, 4.
the honoring and respecting of those that fear God, a note and mark of such
as are free Denisons of the heavenly Jerusalem.

Purpose of Dependence.
The like might be said severally of Deuteronomy. 4.4. and 30.20. Psalm. 73.27, 28. Act.
11.23.
the steadfast purpose of depending upon God, and Psalm. 1.2. and 119.15, 16.
Esa. 58.13.
of continuing constant in the diligent use of the Ordinances of God, and Psalm
119 8, 40, 44, 48. and 128.1.
walking carefully in his ways. But that which I here in this last Note
principally aim at, and will therefore most insist on, Constant use of Gods
ordinances.
is this, that then the Sincerity of a man's heart herein does most evidently
appear, when he persisteth thus constantly in loving God, and Gods Children,
cleaving to God, following him, frequenting his Ordinances, and depending upon
him, though God seem not to regard him, And observance of Gods ways.
nor do reveal himself yet unto him in that comfortable manner, Psalm. 1^9
132.
as he does frequently and usually unto those that be his. Esa 8.17.
Yet will I wait upon the Lord, says the Prophet Esaias, though he have hid his
face from us. And, Job 13.15.
Though he slay me, says Job, yet will I still trust in him: Notwithstanding
want of assurance and comfort.
Yea, Job 13.24. Nec sic probatus ab offi^io recessit. Tu, inquit, avertis
faciem tuam a me, sed ego non sum aversus a te. Ruffin. in Psalm. 29.
though he hide his face from me, and carry himself toward me as an enemy.
Hereby do the People of God in the Psalm approve their Sincerity unto God,
and the uprightness of their hearts with him, in that Psalm. 44.17, 18, 19, 20,
21, 24 Nec iratum colere destiterant numen: uti Sen. ad Marc. c. 13.
though God seemed to have clean forgotten them, and to have utterly cast them
off, yet they had not left him, nor taken occasion thereby, either to neglect
him or to stray from him, either in heart or in life, and to seek to any other
helps. And it is certainly an argument of a great measure of Grace, when a
Christian Soul, though finding in it self so weak encouragement, in regard
of comfort or assurance, to depend upon God, yet can firmly resolve constantly
Esa. 50.10.
to rely and rest wholly upon him: when though Psalm. 77.3.
it feel little or no comfort at all in ought that it does, yet Psalm. 119.81,
82, 83.
it will not thereby be discouraged from persisting in the observance of holy
exercises, and the performance of good duties, content with Patience, and yet
not without a kind of Psalm. 6.3. and 13.1. Subtractio namque rei quam amas,
augmentatio de siderii est: and quod ardentius desiderat quis, aegrius caret.
Bern. Cant. 51.
religious impatience too, Psalm. 62.1, 5, 6, 7.
to submit it self to Gods good pleasure, Psalm. 40.1.
wait his holy leisure, and Lament. 3.26, 27, 28, 29, ^0.
expect when he shall see it fit and seasonable in mercy, further to reveal
himself, and to minister unto it the inward comforts of his Spirit. As on the
other side it is a shrewd Sign of insincerity and unsoundnesse, when men are
ready to cast off all religious regard, if they cannot in good exercises find
present comfort; or shall be ready, if God do not instantly answer them
according to their desires, to say with Iorams profane Pursuevant, 2 King 6.33.
What should I do waiting on God any longer? Or with Saul, 1 Samuel 28.6, 7.
to leave God, and betake them to other courses, yea those, such as he in his
Word has expressly inhibited.

Neither are we to think that the Prayers and other holy exercises of such so
affected, as before was said, in regard of the want of that alacrity and
cheerfulness of Spirit in them, are therefore either altogether unprofitable
to themselves, or unacceptable in Gods sight. For to omit, that there is often
more true Spiritual vivacitie in the prayers and other exercises of persons
even so affected, than in the prayers and exercises of many others; Videatur
similitudo de Aqua tubis and canalibus conclusa; apud Greg. Naz. orat. 31.
Chrysostom, contra Anomaeos orat. 5. and Greg. Romans in Pastore p. 3 c. 1.. 1^.
their inward sense of their wants and instant desire of having them supplied,
putting a great deal of spirit and life more than ordinary into them: An
hungry belly, an empty maw, will make a beggar beg more earnestly, than
when he has been feeding but a little before. Read but Psalm. 42. and 44.
and 63. and 77. and 84. and 88. and 89. and 102. and 119. etc.
the Psalms and Prayers that the Saints of God have made and penned in such
cases, and upon such occasions, and mark what a deal of spiritual vigor and
vivacitie appears in them. Not to stand, I say, upon this; Even the weakest
and the feeblest that are, must for their comfort and encouragement in this
kind be informed, that Spinaeus de Iustit. Christian. translated into English
by Mr I. Field. A book that I wish were reprinted again.
as the broths, and meats, and medicines that sick persons take, though they
delight not the taste, nor do they find any good relish in them, by reason of
their present infirmity and weakness, yet may do them much good, and be a
means both to preserve life, to keep from fainting and further weakness, and
to strengthen also in some measure: so holy actions though performed with much
infirmity and weakness, yet with an holy and religious diligence, may much
benefit the soul so performing the same, albeit it find little spiritual
relish in them, or feel no comfort from them for the present. Yea, howsoever
it be true, as I said Motive 2.
before, that the want of alacrity and cheerfulness in performance of holy
Duties, especially procured by some wilful neglect, or by some peevish and
wayward disposition, framing matter of grief to it self from idle toys and
trifles unto the disturbance of it self in such duties, does much diminish,
and take away much the grace of them: yet it is no less true that Quibusdam
lac, quibusdam vinum apponitur. Lac suaviter bibitur, dulciter liquatur, sine
laesione, sine amaritudine; vinum asperius est, and minus suave. Lac bibunt qui
in sancto proposito suaviter incedunt, dulciter currunt, etc. Vinum bibunt, qui
vias vitae aggressi, and ingressi, corporis animae que tribulationibus
contorquentur, sed non cedunt, neque recedunt tamen. Sed quis horum tibi
videtur vel ille qui in suavitate, vel ille qui in asperitate currit viam
mandatorum Dei? primus foelicior, secundus fortior; uterque tamen justus,
uterque pius, Bern. de conscient. c. 3.
the constant and conscionable persisting in performance of such duties,
notwithstanding that all good means used, the poor Christian soul cannot
attain to that alacrity that feign it would, may make them no less
acceptable, if not more acceptable to God, than if they were done even with the
greatest delight. Suppose two persons attend the King in his hunting, or at his
sports, the one that takes much delight in the game, the other that has
little or no delight in it: or the one lusty and healthy, and that attends
him therefore with ease; the other weak and faint, or lame, or having some
hurt about him, in regard whereof he cannot follow him but with much pain and
difficulty, and yet will not give over, but be hard at his heels still, as
ready and forward as the former. His Voluntas est, quae apud nos ponit
officium. Senec. de benef. lib. 6. c. 12.
will may be every whit as good as the other, and his Sovereign is no less,
if not more, for such his service beholden to him, than to the other. Nor may
the service of such a poor soul therefore be the less acceptable to God,
because it cannot perform it with such alacrity and delight as Quomodo de
aegroto Aug. in Psalm. 118. conc. 8. Aegrotus qui fastidio laborat, and vult
evadere hoc malum, concupiscit defiderare cibum, dum concupiscit non habere
fastidium. Et appetit animus, ut appetat corpus, quando appetit animus, nec
appetit corpus.
it desires. And in like manner for Faith and dependence upon God. It is not
an argument of no Faith, when a man cannot yet attain to a full persuasion and
assurance of Gods special favor toward him, and of the free remission of his
sins in Christ, that many other faithful Galat. 2.20. 1 John 3.14. and 5.19,
20.
have had, and many doubtless also ordinarily have. This is a consequent
rather of Faith, that as Non praecedunt justificandum, sed sequuntur
justificatum. Aug. de fid. and oper. c. 14.
Augustine says of works, rather follows the person justified, than
precedeth and goes before Justification, as Faith being Romans 3.28. and 3.1.
an isntrumental cause of producing it as an effect does. It is a consequent,
I say, of it, deduced from it, as the same Father well Servator loquitur,
Veritas pollicetur: Qui audit verba mea, and credit ei qui misit me, habet
vitam aeternam, transiit de morte ad vitam, and in judicium non veniet. Ego
audivi, credidi; infidelis cum essem, factus sum fidelis: Transii ergo a morte
ad vitam, and in judicium non veniam, non praesumptione mea, sed ipsius
promissione. Aug. in Joan. 5.24.
shows, by a Syllogism, wherein Faith is assumed, and this persuasion
concluded from it: and that not simply and absolutely necessary neither, but
such as is, by general consent, often severed from it. But for a man, though he
cannot yet attain to it, yea though he never should so long as he lives, yet
to resolve Act. 11.23. Hoc suaderi, a verbo quaeri; persuaderi, inveniri est.
Bern. in Cant. 84.
to cleave unto God with full purpose of heart, to stick close unto him, to
depend wholly upon him, and not to give over still seeking and suing to him for
it, and the constant use of all good means to attain it; Psalm. 13.1, 5. and
43.2, 5.
like a Courtier, who though the King show him no Countenance, but seem wholly
to neglect him, and not at all to regard him, yet will still follow the Court,
and tender his service, and resolve to give attendance, hoping yet to find
acceptance at length, yea to do it constantly, whether he shall find
acceptance or no; or like Matthew. 15.22-28.
the woman of Canaan, that would follow Christ still, and would take no nay of
him, though he seemed not only not to regard her, or any other that made suit
for her, but to reject and put her off with much disgrace: it is a sound
argument of a true and a lively Faith, and of no small measure of the same.

trusting to, and dependence upon God, may stand with the want of such
assurance; I shall not need to say much, because the Argument has by Mr
Chibald Trial of Faith.
a reverend Brother been of late handled at large.

Comparison. Put case a poor man has occasion to make use of some great
Courtier for the effecting of some business of great consequence for him, even
as much as his life lies on, or all that ever he is worth, as suppose the
procuring him his pardon for some capital crime from the Prince. And this
great Courtier tells him, that though he be but a stranger, one that can
claim no such thing from him, yea one that has deserved many ways evil of
him, yet if he trust only to him, and rely wholly upon him, he will do that
for him, which the poor wretch requires of him. This poor man now in this
case may trust only to him, and neglecting all other means that either others
may advise him to, or himself sometime think on, rely wholly upon him; and
yet he may not be fully persuaded that he will effect it for him neither. The
consideration of his own want of worth and evil desert, -- quod nimis miseri
volunt, Hoc facile credunt. Immo quod metuunt nimis, Nunquam amoneri posse, nec
tolli putant. Prona est timori semper in pejus fides. Senec. Herc. fur. 2.1.
Nec tutum patitur esse securum pavor. Idem de gaudio. Luke 24.41.
his immoderate fear arising from the apprehension of the great danger that
he is in, and the subtle persuasion of others that would bear him in hand
that he will but delude him, and not do for him as he says, may either
severally or jointly be a means to hold his mind in suspense, and to keep
him from such assurance, Yea his very mistaking and misconstruction of the
great man's meaning, when he says, If you will trust to, or rely upon me alone
for it, being possessed with a conceit that his want of a full persuasion that
he will do it, which he cannot yet for his heart-bloud bring his mind to
any settled assurance of, does evidently show that he does not trust to him,
may be a means to make him believe, that he will never do it for him,
because he does not, what he supposes is therein absolutely required of him,
which to that great man also, if he should be demanded of it, not daring to
tell an untruth, would appear. And yet for all this he may resolve to stick
to his mediation only, and to rely wholly upon him, and not to seek or try
any other way, whatsoever any man shall persuade him to the contrary, or
whatsoever the issue and event of it shall be. And even so may it well be, and
is questionless with a Christian soul many times. John 3.16, 36. and 5.24.
God has proclaimed and published a Patent of Pardon and salvation by Christ,
to all that trust to him for the same. A man may so do, encouraged thereunto
by this gracious offer and the condition to it annexed, yea many an one so
does, and yet partly out of the sight and consideration of his own
unworthiness, partly out of a kind of timorousness and pusillanimitie of
Spirit, partly by reason of some strong melancholic imagination, and partly
also through some powerful delusion of Satan, not be able possibly to
persuade himself that Christ is yet his, or that he has interest in him,
has his sins pardoned for him, and shall live eternally by him. Yea the very
mistaking of the true Nature of saving Faith, and supposing the very essence of
it to consist in this particular persuasion, (which yet is only an effect and
a fruit, yea such a fruit of it, as does not necessarily always spring from
it, Psalm. 31.22. and 77.7, 8, 9. and 88.14. and 116.11.
nor is at all times of the year ever constantly found on it,) and that
therefore he does not trust in Christ so long as he wants it, is a maine
means to keep many from it, and from the comfort of it, which yet have true
Faith, and do unfainedly trust in Christ for all that: As by many other sound
and undoubted Arguments, which if they be questioned with and urged to it, not
daring to deny them, lest they should lie against their own Conscience, may
be drawn from their own confessions and answers concerning themselves, (when
there is no fear of Hypocrisy, lest they should therein dissemble, being more
prone to charge than to clear, and to allege matter against themselves, than
to produce any thing for themselves;) will evidently appear. Among which
Arguments also even this, though it come last, yet is none of the least, if
their Conscience unfainedly can testify for them, that though they have not
yet such a persuasion and assurance of Gods mercy toward them in Christ for the
remission of their sins and the salvation of their souls, yet they Psalm.
51.11, 12.
unfainedly desire, and 2 Pet. 1.10.
labor instantly for it, and though they cannot yet attain to it, yet they
Ephesians. 6.24.
love the Lord Jesus heartily, and Coloss. 1.4.
his members for his sake, and 2 Chronicles. 14.11.
rest and repose themselves wholly upon him, and Gods mercy in him, Act. 4.12.
John 6.68.
renouncing all other means of remission of sin and salvation without him,
with Job 13.15.
a full purpose of heart and resolution still so to do, Psalm. 40.1.
expecting when God shall in mercy be pleased to look graciously upon them,
and to vouchsafe them that assurance that as yet they have not. Prove. 16.10.
Who so trusts in the Lord, says Solomon, O blessed is he. And what a great
measure of grace is it for a man to trust thus in God, This is that certainty
of adherence, distinct from the certainty of evidence, of which Mr Hooker on
Abakk. 1.4.
and cleave fast unto him, while he lies yet under the sense and apprehension
of his wrath?

Conclusion.
Those therefore, whatsoever they are, that having by these or the like Notes
and Signs examined themselves, have found their hearts to be sincere and
upright with God, albeit this their beginning of Grace be mixed with much
weakness, they may know thereby and assure themselves that they have right to,
and interest in the Light and Joy of the Just here spoken of: and they may
therefore safely lay hold on it, admit it, give way to it, receive it and
harbor it in their hearts; yea that they wrong themselves, Gods grace in them,
and his goodness toward them, when Psalm. 77.2.
they refuse and repel it, having so good and sure ground for it, having so
great cause, as we have here showed, to rejoice.

Light and Joy being sown here, not for the righteous alone, but for all that
are upright in heart.

Which Joy the Lord in mercy vouchsafe Esa. 61.3.
to all in Sion that yet want it, and increase it daily in the hearts of all
those that already have it, until we come all to meet and partake together in
that Psalm. 16.11.
fullness of Joy, which shall never again be interrupted or eclipsed in us,
John 16.22.
shall never in whole or in part be taken again away from us, Amen.

FINIS.
Jacobs THANKFVLNES TO GOD, FOR GODS GOODNESS TO JACOB.

A MEDITATION ON GENESIS 32.10.

Wherein by the way also the Popish Doctrine of Man's Merit is discussed.

By THOMAS GATAKER, B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND for FVLKE CLIFTON, 1637.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sir WILLIAM WHITMORE, of Appley in Salope, Knight;
And Mr. GEORGE WHITMORE of London, Alderman; Saving Health, true Honor, and
eternal Happiness.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, I stood obliged to the Stock you both sprang from, before I
was able to apprehend what such obligation meant. Your worthy Mother was one of
those that presented me to the sacred Laver, and that undertook there in my
behalf. She answered there for me, (...) Priusquam respondere possem: uti
Iunius vertit. Psalm. 119.67.
when I could not answer for my self; and did further also then seal up her
free affection to me with a real testimony of her Love. Neither did her
kindness toward me then and there expire; but as it was often renewed in her
life time, when occasion thereof was offered, so it ceased not until her self
deceased. She performed one of the first religious Offices for me soon after
my birth: and it was one of her last Pious works to remember me, among others
whom she had performed the like Office for, at the time of her decease. Some
monument of my thankful acknowledgement hereof being desirous to have extant,
whom should I address it unto rather than your selves; the only two Principals
now left of that Family? Being therefore moved to make public two of my weak
Discourses, containing the explication of two portions of Scripture, of some
near relation the one to the other; the one of them relating a memorable
example of the performance of that that is promised in the other, to wit, of
Gods blessing of those with temporal things, that are careful to look after
the spiritual: This of the twain I chose the rather to present your Worships
The Worshipful Company of Haberdashers.
withal; partly, because at the motion of the one of you, being then Head of
that worthy Society, which I acknowledge my self also a debtour unto, it was
by word of mouth at first delivered; and partly also, that it may help (for
the best also, even Genes. 35.1.
Jacob himself, in this kind need helps) to egg you on, whom God has
blessed with so large a portion of his bounty, unto those religious offices,
that by occasion of Jacobs example, men of your rank are therein encited
unto, whether risen from mean estate, as with him here it had been, or from
the first largely and liberally endowed, as your selves. The Work indeed is
grown much larger, than at first was delivered, by reason that a Question
between us and the Romanists, concerning Man's merit, is therein now discussed,
which was then but touched upon and pointed at only; neither the streights of
time admitting overlong discourse then, nor such matter of controversy so
well befitting the occasion that then was. The rest, without any material
alteration or addition, is the same for substance that then it was. Which
recommending entirely, as now it is, to your Worships, together with my Love
and Christian service to you both, and mine hearty Prayers to God for the
welfare, spiritual especially, of you and yours, with the rest of the
Branches of that Family, wheresoever now transplanted, I take leave of you for
the present, and rest

Your Worships ever in the Lord, THOMAS GATAKER.

JACOBS THANKFVLNES TO GOD, FOR GODS GOODNESS to JACOB.
GENESIS 32.10. I am not worthy of all thy Mercies, and all thy Truth, which
thou have showed unto thy Servant: For with my staff came I over this Jordan;
and now am I become two troops.


THese Words are parcel of a Prayer conceived by the Patriarch Jacob, in a
time of distress, Coherence.
after his departure from Laban, when Verse 6.
tidings were brought him that his brother Esau was coming in arms against
him with four hundred men at his heels.

His Prayer consists of four parts. Jacobs prayer. Parts 4.


There is in it;

Protestation concerning the ground of his journey, and his leaving of Laban,
to wit, Tu ^h^isti. Verse. 9.
Gods own Word: he had not done what he did of his own head, but by Chap.
31.3, 13.
Gods special direction: a good argument to assure him that God would therein
secure him, having his Word and Warrant for the ground of his Action. Summa est
Deum sequi ducem secaritas. Incedit tut^s qui ducem sequitur Deum. Ambr. de
Abraam, s. 1. c. 2.
He walks surely, that walks warily: He walks warily, that walks with
warrant.

Confession and Verse. 10.
acknowledgement of Gods goodness toward him; illustrate and amplified by his
own unworthiness of it; and so Indignitatis agnitio, ingratitudinis amolitio.
a secret insinuation of his thankfulness for it.

Supplication to God, that he would vouchsafe to stand by him in his present
distress, and Verse. 11.
deliver him out of the great danger that he was in at that instant, walking
in no other way, than that God himself had set him in.

Allegation of Verse. 12.
Gods gracious promises Chap. 28.14, 15.
formerly made him; which might seem likely to fail, and to be utterly
frustrate, if he were now left to the mercy of his merciless Brother, who
minded nothing, but the destruction of him and all his.

The words of my Text Text.
are the second Part: Particulars; Particulars.


1. His own Unworthiness; I am not worthy:

1. Jacobs unworthiness.
2. Gods Goodness; 2. Gods goodness.
laid down,

1. In the Grounds Grounds 2.
of it, Mercy, 1. Mercy.
and Truth; 2. Truth.
Mercy in promising, Truth in performing:

2. In a Fruit Fruit.
and Effect of it; Jacobs Jacobs Penury.
present estate, now at his return from Laban, compared with what it was, when
he went thither: He went over Jordan with his staff alone,
And he was now become two bands, or two troops.


Gods bounty.
Where first in General General.
observe we, ere we come to the Particulars, (...). Chrysostom. tom. 8. sermon. 14.
Jacobs Jacobs thankfulness.
Thanksgiving promised before his Petition;

How before he come to crave what he would have of God, he does in thankful
manner mention what already he had received.

And withal note we, Arrogans oration, si ab homine quid petiturus, dicas
statim, Da mihi, Hoc peto, Debet inchoari Oration a laud Dei, ut sequatur
supplicatio. Ambr. nomine de Sacram. l. 6. c. 5.


So Moses; Psalm. 90.1.
Lord thou have been our refuge from one generation to another. And the Saints
elsewhere; Psalm. 85.1.
Lord thou wast sometime favorable to thy Land, in bringing again the
Captivity of Jacob, etc. And Psalm. 44.1.
We have heard, O God, from our Fathers reports, what wonderful works in
times past thou wroughtest for them. And David; Psalm. 71.18, 19.
Lord, thou have kept me from my childhood up till now: Therefore will I talk
of thy wondrous works. Forsake me not now until mine old age, nor when I am
gray headed, etc.

Partly, in regard of God; And partly, in regard of themselves.


Thankfulness to him, and Deum siquidem ad ampliora dandum provocamus, quando
sibi de praeteritis gratias referamus. Sicut agricola terram illam diligentius
colit, quae uberius fructum reddit. Alex. Carpent. destruct. Vit. Par. 6. cap.
4.
to incite him thereby the rather to vouchsafe them further favor, being so
thankful for the former. For Optima petitio ipsa gratiarum est actio.
Thanksgiving is the best, and Efficacissimum genus est rogandi gratias agere.
Plin. Paneg.
the most effectual form of Prayer. And Ascensus gratiarum descensus gratiae.
Invitat ad magna, qui gratanter suscipit modica: and spem de futuris recipit,
qui transacta beneficia recognoscit: nec desperatione frangitur, qui magnorum
munerum consolatione roboratur. Cassiod. Variar.
the ascent of our thanksgivings to God, is a means to procure a more
plentiful descent of his mercies upon us. It is as a little water powered into
the Pump, when the Springs lie low, that brings up a great deal more
together with it: Or as Mirabili natura, si quis velit reputare, ut fruges
gignantur, arbores fruticesque vivant, in coelum migrare aquas, animamque etiam
herbis vitalem inde defer. Plin. hist. not. lib. 31. cap. 1.
the Vapors, that ascending up from the earth, are a means to bring down
rain for the watering of it, where it was parched and dried up; and so making
it fertile, where it was barren before.

Secondly, in regard of themselves, to strengthen their Faith, in assurance of
future favor and safeguard from God, upon ground and experience of his former
goodness. For Sequentium rerum certitudo est praeteritarum exhibitio. Greg. in
Evang. hom. 1. Ex perceptione praeteritorum munerum firma fit expectatio
futurorum. Bern. de Temp. 18. and in Psalm. 90. Sermon. 7.
the receipt of former mercies Psalm. 4.1.
Hear me, says David, when I call, Deus justitiae mi, i. Deus mi justissime.
Sicut Coloss. 1.13. Heb. 1.3. Esa. 2.20. and 31.7. Quanquam potest exponi
etiam, Deus vindex and assertor justitiae meae: uti Iun. and alii.
O my righteous God, or God of my righteous cause. Thou have formerly delivered
me when I was in distress: Have mercy therefore now again on me, and give
ear to my Prayer. And, Psalm. 27.9.
Thou have been my succor; leave me not now, nor forsake me, Deus salutis,
pro salutifero: ut turris salutum, pro omni modo salutifera. 2 Samuel 22. ult.
O God my Savior. And, 1 Samuel 17.37.
The Lord that delivered me from the claws of the Lion, and the paw of the
Bear, will deliver me also out of the hand of this uncircumcised Philistine.
So the Apostle Paul likewise; 2 Cor. 1.10.
Who delivered me then, and does yet deliver me, and I trust that he will
further deliver me again. And again; 2 Timothy 4.16, 17, 18.
The Lord stood by me, when all forsook me: and I was delivered out of the
mouth of that Lion: Yea the Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and
preserve me to his everlasting Kingdom.

That which may serve to teach us;

(...). Carneades apud Plut. de tranquil. Quod Budaeus perperam est
interpretatus, dum (...), esse existimavit. Sic qui pomum in manu suae die
dimidia tenuerit, reliqua dici part pomi servabit odorem. Bernard. de Temp. 31.
Civet boxes, which though the Civet be taken out of them, yet retain still
the sent of it: The sweet sent of Gods mercies and gracious deliverances should
remain still in our minds by a faithful and careful remembrance of them,
even when the act it self is over.

And this should we the rather do, Inducement.
that we may thereby be encouraged the more constantly and confidently to
depend upon God and his goodness for the time to come. For this is one maine
cause of our usual distrust of Gods Providence in times of trouble, or in
danger and distress, that Psalm. 78.7, 8, 10, 11, 12. Quod scimus cum necesse
non est, in necessitate nescimus. Bernard. de Consider. l. 2.
we remember not what God has in former times done either for others, or for
our selves. This it is that makes men ready, when charge begins to come on
them, and things go backward with them, Psalm. 125.3.
to put their hands to iniquity, and by fraud and deceit, or by exaction and
oppression, or by becoming instruments of evil offices to great ones, to
seek to repair their losses, or to enlarge their estates: And men are wont to
pretend a kind of necessity of so doing; they should Largitio fontem ipsum
benignitatis exhaurit. Ita benignitate tollitur benignitas; qua quo in plures
usus sis, eo minus in multos uti possis. Cic. Offic. l. 2. and apud Lactant.
Instit. l. 6. c. 11. Hinc Hieron. ad Paulin. Etiam liberalitate perit
liberalitas.
not be able to defend the world (as they speak) unless they so did; there
would be no living for them in the world, if they did otherwise. As if God were
not as well able to provide for them then, as before-time he had been: as if
either continuance of time had weakened his hand, or by his former bounty his
wealth and treasury were exhausted or wasted: As with man it often falls out.
No: Esa. 59.1.
Gods hand is not shortened; his Power is not impaired: Mat. 6.30. (...).
but thy trust in him is straightened; thy faith is not strengthened. It is not his
might, but thy faith, that fails. And one reason thereof is, because thou
call not to mind, what God has formerly done for thee, which he is able
also to do for thee still. And surely if we did but consider seriously, who it
was that Psalm. 22.9, 10.
kept us and fed us in our Mothers womb before we were borne, when neither we
could shift for our selves, nor our Parents do ought for us, we might well
reason thus with our selves; He that preserved and maintained me without any
care or travel either of mine own or others for me then, while I was yet in
my Mothers womb, is much more able by mine honest labors and endeavors to do
the same now for me and mine: he is able now to give me (...). 2 Cor. 9.8.
sufficiency by them, that then provided sufficiently for me without them.

Gods goodness continued unto us, or enlarged toward us? Let us be careful
then to show our selves thankful unto him for mercies formerly received. For
(...). Grata mente nihil est Deo gratius: Et gratiarum actio est ad plus dandum
invitatio. Chrysostom. in Genes. hom. 52.
thankfulness for former mercies, is a strong inducement to move God to confer
further favors. Psalm. 67.5, 6.
Let the people (says the Psalmist) praise thee, O God; yea let all the people
join together in the praising of thee: And then shall the Earth bring forth
her increase; and God will show himself to be our God, by multiplying his
mercies and blessings upon us. As on the other side, the want of it lies as a
block in the way between God and us to debar us of further blessings. For
Indignus est dandis, qui ingratus est pro datis. Aug. de Temp. citante 10.
Herolt. de Temp. 112. Non est dignus dandis, qui non agit grates pro datis.
Greg. laudante Gul. Perald. Sum. tom. 2. tr. 6. p. 3. c. 1. and in epist. Dom.
18. Pent. ser. 1. and in Evang. dom. 14. Trinit. Ser. 1. Accipiendis indignus
est, qui fuerit de acceptis ingratus. Bern. de Diverse. 27. and Iac. Genuens. de
Temp. 150.
he is unworthy of future favors, that is not thankful for former mercies.
And Gratiarum enim cessat decursus, ubi recursus non fuerit. Bern. de Temp 40.
the course of Gods gracious goodness stops, where no recourse of
thanksgiving is. It is our unthankfulness Ingratitudo ventus exurens est,
exiccant sibi rorem misericordiae, fluenta gratiae. Bernard. in Cant. 51.
that stays and stauncheth the streams of Gods bounty, that they flow not so
freely as otherwise they would; In Halesina regione fons est quietus and
tranquillus cum siletur; si insonent tibiae exultabundus ad cantus elevatur,
and ultra marginem extumescit. Solin. Polyhist. cap. 11.
being like Ita fons divinae bonitatis ad laetam gratiarum actionem exuberat,
and beneficiorum suorum aquas inundat; subsidit, ubi ea deficit. Alex. Carp.
destruct. vit. par. 6. cap. 4.
the Spring Solinus speaks of, that rises and runs over while men sing
and play to it, but falls and sinketh again as fast, so soon as they cease.
Petitionibus effectum negat, quod ingrati invenimur. Bernard. de Diverse. 27.
That is it that causes our prayers, though we pray long, and sue hard, and
cry loud, often to fail; and causes God Quid sibi vult quod minus erga suos
liberalis nunc divina clementia vidcatur, ut quibus tanta contulit nec
vocantibus, nunc orantibus, obsecrantibus, postulantibus saepissime, imo
continue, minora multo denegare videatur? Bern. ibid.
not to answer them according either to our desires, or to his own wonted
dealings with others of his in times past; not that Non quod aut manus
abbreviata, aut mutata voluntas, aut imminuta facultas. Sed quia non est
inventus, qui gratias agat. Idem ibid.
he is become either more Number. 11.23. Esa. 50.2. and 59.1.
short-handed, or close-fisted, or hard-hearted, now than heretofore he has
been; (for he is Semper idem. Psalm. 22.2, 3. and 102.27. Mal. 3 6. Heb. 13.8.
Iam. 1.17.
ever the same;) but because, with those Luke 17.17.
nine Leapers, we are more frequent and fervent in Prayer than in Praise, more
forward and earnest to sue for what we desire, than to return thanks for it
again when we are heard: Vt accipiant, importuni; donec acceperint, inquieti;
ubi acceperint, ingrati. Bern. de Consider. l. 4.
Importunate to have; unquiet, till we have; and unthankful, when we have once
gotten what we could have. Yea (...). Philo de vita Mosis.
this it is that causes God, Quae contulit gratis, tollit ingratis. Quod illo
dante sit nostrum, nobis superbientibus sit alienum. Aug. Homil. 14. Nec tantum
nihil augetur ingrato; sed and quod datum est, tollitur. Bern. de Temp. 40.
to bereave us often of those benefits and blessings that he has formerly
bestowed on us; as being but Quia dedisse poenitet, quod perisse videtur.
Nunquid enim non perit, quod ingrato donatur? Idem ibid. 79. (...). Lucian.
anthol. lib. 1. cap. 30.
cast away with us, as those things are, that on unthankful persons are
conferred. Hosea 2.8, 9.
Because (says God of the unthankful Israelites) they say, I will go after
(...) amasios meos.
my Sweet-hearts, that give me my meat and my drink, my wool and my flax, my
wine and mine oil; and consider not, that it is I that gave them these things:
Therefore Revertar and tollam, id est, tollam denuo, recipiam. Sicut Dan. 9.25.
revertetur and aedificabitur, id est, reaedificabitur: uti Livel. in Chronol.
Pers.
I will come and take these things again away from them. And Ezech. 29.3, 9.
because Pharao says, The River is mine own; Esa. 19.5, 6.
Therefore, says God, will I dry up the River. For the better understanding
whereof, and of some other the like passages in the Prophet, I shall tell you
that, that (it may be) will seem very strange to many of you, and yet to some
here present peradventure as well known as to my self. There is some Country
in the World where it never raineth all the year long. (...). Ctesias in
Indie. apud Phot. Biblioth. Cod. 72.
Of some it is by some reported without certainty or truth. But it is
certainly so in Egypt: and even Moses himself intimates as much, where Deuteronomy.
11.9, 10.
he says that the Land of Canaan was therein unlike it. (...). Herodot. Thal.
Vnde and Nilus, (...) dictus, quia creditus est, (...). Idem Euterp.
It never raineth there ordinarily from one end of the year to the other; And
(...) habitum est, quod Psammenito regnante, (...) Thebae Aegyptiae, (...).
Idem Thal.
it is recorded therefore as a strange miracle, a thing never the like heard
of, that some once in such a Kings reign it so did. But to make amends for
that defect, and supply the want of it, once a year at a certain time the
River (...) 1 Chronicles. 13.5. and Ier. 2.18. (...). Dionys. Perieget. Siris Nilus
Aethiopibus, and Homero Aegyptus. Plin. hist. Not. l. 5. c. 9. Id nominis habet
ab aquarum nigredine; prout and Graecis a color vulturino, (...), sed and
(...) dictus est. Vide Scalig. ad Fest. Nam frustra sunt. qui apud Eustath.
Graecam voci exoticae tribuunt originem.
Shichor or Nilus (...). Greg. Naz. ad Egypt. adven. Aegypti siccitatem Nilus
temperat, Minut. Octav. Nili fluvii opibus and foecunditate pascitur, Ruffin.
hist. l. 2. c. 23. Nilus coloni vicefungens ((...), Herodot.) i^ Solstitio
evagari incipit, primum lent, deinde vehementius quamdiu Sol in Leone est, mox
pigrescit in Virginem transgresso, atq. in Libra residet. Plin. hist. Not. l.
18. c. 18. Hinc Nilus (...), dictus Aegyptiis. Gregor. Naz. in Athanas.
Imbriser, quod imbrium vices suppleret; and Spiciser, quod fruges produceret,
Martial. l. 1. ep. 62. and l. 10 ep. 74.
overfloweth all the low land, and so both fills their Ponds and Cisternes,
and watreth their grounds for them; and Proinde aut sterilis annus, aut
fertilis est, prout ille magnus influxerit, aut parcior. Sen. quaest. Not. l.
4. c. 2. Si 12. cubita non excessit, fames certa est, nec minus, si 16.
exuperavit. Tanto enim tardius decedit, quanto abundantius crevit, and sementem
arcet. Plin. hist. Not. l. 18. c. 18. and Solin. Polyhist. c. 34. Hinc Greg.
Naz. in Epiphan. (...) (male vulgo (...).
if it fall short, it produces a dearth; if it stay overlong it delayeth
seed-time, and so causes a late Harvest. Now in regard hereof, because in
Greece they had no such River that overflowed their land, but their grounds
were watered with Rain from Heaven, (...). Herodot. Euterp.
the Egyptians used in mockery to tell the Greeks, that if God should forget
to rain, they might chance to starve for it. They thought the rain was of
God, but Quanquam Hom. Odyss. N. Nilum (...) appellat. quod and Strabonotat
geogr. l. 17.
not the River the rain that came down from Heaven, that came indeed, they
thought, from him; but the Water of the River, they thought came not from him,
they had that of their own, and Aegyptus alendis augendisque seminibus ita
gloriata est, ut nihil imbribus coeloque deberet. Siquidem proprio semper amne
perfusa, nec alio genere aquarum solita pinguescere, quam quas ipse devexerat,
tantis segetibus induebatur, ut cum feracissimis terris, quasi nunquam ceffura
censeretur. Plin. Paneg. Hinc Tibull. l. 1. cl. 7. sic Nilum alloquitur, Te
propter nullos tellus tua postulat imbres: Arida nec pluvio supplicat herba
lov^. Quia scil. Non nubium illa imbribus, sed terrae ipsius sudore and Nili
fluminis incrementis foveretur. August. nomine de mira^. S. Scr. l. 1. c. 6.
Itaque Aegyptus in hoc spem suam habet. Nemo (ibi) aratorum caelum suspicit.
Senec. quaest. Not lib. 4. cap. 2. Quo loco memoria lapsus Ovidio tribuit, quod
est Tibulli.
were not beholden to him for it. For this cause therefore does God threaten to
dry up, (that is, restrain) their River (as Biennio continuo non ascendisse
regnante Cleopatra, constat. Per novem annos superioribus seculis non
ascendisse, Callimachus est author. Sen. quaest. Not. lib. 4. c. 2. Hinc Ovid.
Art. l. 1. Creditur Aegyptus caruisse juvantibus arva Imbribus, atque annis
sicca fuisse novem.
at some times also it appears by stories he did) whereon Quantum crevit
Nilus, tantum spei in annum est. Nec computatio fallit agricolam: adeo ad
mensuram fluminis respondet, quam fertilem facit Nilus. Is arenoso and sitienti
solo and aquam inducit and terram. Nam turbulentus cum fluat, faecem relinquit,
and quicquid pingue fecum tulit, allinit: juvatque agros duabus ex causis, and
quod inundat, and quod oblimat. Ita debet illi Aegyptus fertilitatem suam: and
quicquid non adiit, sterile ac squalidum jacet. Sen. ibid. Mira natura
fluminis, quod cum caeteriamnes abluant terras and eviscerent, (Limum non
invehunt Euphrates Tigrisque sicut in Aegypto Nilus; sed praepinguem densamque
ubertatem diluunt. Plin hist. Not. l. 18. c. 17.) Nilus contra vires adjicit.
Ibid.
the fruitfulness and fertilty of their Land did depend. And if we would not
have God to deal in the like manner with us, let us take heed how we be
found faulty in this kind, as they were. Let us call our selves rather to a
due and a strict account, how thankful we have been for Gods mercies toward
us fore-passed, how thankful we are for his favors which we enjoy at the
present; and how we come short and fail (as upon due search we shall find
that we do much the very best of us all) in either; that we may both repent
us of our unthankfulness toward him, and grow up daily more and more in
thankfulness for them. That will be (...). Chrysostom. in Matthew. hom. 25.
the best means to continue them unto us; that will be Beneficia plura
recipit, qui scit reddere. P. Sir. Meliora siquidem and majora meretur
accipere, qui collata bona de cord probatur non emittere. Cassiodor. in Psalm.
Et fidelis in modico, munere dignus ampliore censetur. Bernard de Temp. 40.
Sicut contra, Infidelis in modico, quod maximum est accipere non meretur. Ibid.
91.
the best means to increase them upon us: For Ant. Rous. Oil of Scorp.
Consid. 2. sect. 4.
thankfulness, as good seed, being bred of Gods blessings, does not preserve
only, but increase also, that that bred it.

And thus much for the General.

Particulars. Particulars.


Where first we find, Jacob confessing his own unworthiness: Jacobs
unworthiness.
Minor sum cunctis miserationibus tuis. Vulg.
Less than all those favors, (for so are (...)
the words in the Original) that God had vouchsafed him, and heaped up so
plentifully upon him.

Sense.
Less than them, or any of them: Because Minor sum, i. indignus sum
miserationibus tuis mihi impensis. Hug. Car. Excedunt miserationes tuae merita
mea. Propter substantiam hoc dicit, quam sine meritis dedit. Hier. Oleast.
Indignus in quem tot tantaque conferret. Calvin. Piscat.
altogether unworthy as not deserving, nor having right to require ought, (and
much less so much as he had received,) by way of due debt and desert at Gods
hands.

Less than them, because Inferior, i. Imparsum omnibus beneficiis his. Iun.
unable to requite them: For (...).
God and our Parents (says the Heathen man) cannot be requited. Psalm. 116.12,
13. Quaerebat quid retribueret, and non inveniebat. Imo quasi aliquid invenit,
remansit in action gratiarum: nam in relatione defecit. Gratias agere licet,
refer non licet: non enim potes. August. in Psalm. 44.
David sought sometime how he might; but he could not devise how. Quid dicam
aliud quam gratias gratiae ejus? Nos enim gratias agimus: non damus, nec
reddimus, nec referimus, nec rependimus gratiam. Idem in Psalm. 88.
Thanks alone he could return (a poor requital) and no more.

a second practice of Gods People; When the godly repair to God for ought by
Prayer, they are ever confessing and acknowledging their own vileness and
baseness, their inabilitie and weakness, their indignity and unworthiness.

So Jacob here: and so his Grandfather Abraham before him; Genes. 18.27.
How should I that am but (...) and cinis.
dust and ashes, presume to speak to my Lord? And, 2 Samuel 7.18.
What am I? says David; or what is my Parentage, that thou should afford
me such favors? And Psalm. 8.4. and 144.3. Job. 7.17, 18. Misericordiae tuae
est, non meritorum ipsius. Aug. de diverse. 20.
What is man that thou should regard him? or the son of man that thou
should once think on him? Matthew. 3.11.
I am not worthy, says John the Baptist of our Lord Jesus, to carry his shoes
after him; or Mark. 1.7. Luke 3.16.
to untie but his shooestrings. Matthew. 8.8.
Unworthy, says the Centurion, that thou should come under my roof; or,
Luke 7 7.
that I should come once in thy presence. Luke 5.19, 21.
Unworthy, says the Prodigal Child, to be called thy son. 1 Cor. 15.9. Sic
de se Ambr. de Poenit. l. 2. c. 8. Indignus vocari Episcopus.
Unworthy, says the Apostle Paul, to bear the name of an Apostle.

And what is the Ground of all this? Doubtless it arises,

Partly from the Consideration of their own unprofitablenesse and
abominablenesse;

And partly from the Consideration of Gods Majesty and Greatness.

First from the Consideration of themselves.

(1) Their vileness and abominablenesse in evil. (2) Their poorness and
unprofitablenesse in good.
1. Their vileness and abominablenesse by reason of Sin. In regard Job 39.37.
Behold, I am vile; says Job. what should I say? Psalm. 51.5.
Bred in sin, says David, and borne in iniquity: And Job 15.14, 15.
If the very Heavens themselves, and Job 25.5, 6.
the Stars (the brightest and cleerest part of them) be not clean in Gods
sight: How much more is Man Lumbricus. Iun.
a mirie worm, unclean? Yea, Job 15.16.
how much more (I say) is man abominable, that drinks in iniquity like water?
Cui peccatum aeque familiare ac cibus and potus est. Iun.
With whom sin is as familiar as his ordinary diet, his daily meat and drink
is? Whereupon well says Augustine, entreating of those words of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 138.8.
Reject not, O Lord, the work of thy hands: Opus tuum in me vide, Domine, non
meum. Nam meum si videris, damnas me: Tuum si videris, coronas me. Nam and
quaecunque sunt bona opera mea, abs te mihi sunt: and ideo tua magis quam mea
sunt. Aug. in Psalm. 137. Add quod Bern. de Temp. 48. Necesse est credere quod
aeternam vitam nullis potes operibus promereri, nisi gratis detur and ipsa.
Merita enim omnia dona Dei sunt: and ita homo magis propter ipsa Deo debtor
est, quam Deus homini. Quod idem and Durand. habet in Sent. lib. 2. d. 28. q. 1.
Regard, O Lord, in me not my work, but thine own: for if thou regardest my
work, thou damnest me; if thine own work, thou crownest me. Since that
whatsoever good I have, I have it from thee: and it is therefore rather thine
than mine. For Romans 7.18.
I know, says the Apostle, that in me, that is, in this flesh of mine there
dwells nothing that is good.

poorness and unprofitablenesse even in the good that they do or have.

1. The poorness and imperfection of that grace and goodness that is yet in
them, and of all that they do consequently, while they live here. For our
Sanctification is here but in part. As 1 Cor. 13.9.
we know but in part: so we are purged but in part. Philip. 3.12.
I am not yet perfect, says the Apostle. And, Prove. 21.9.
who can say, I have so cleansed mine heart, says Solomon, that I am wholly
free from sin? Yea as Maxima pars eorum quaescimus, est minima little quae
ignoramus. Aug.
the most that any know is the least of that they know not: so the most of the
sanctifying Grace that we have, is the least (for the most part) of that that
we want and should have. There are relics and remainders of the old man still
even in the best. They are not so Ephesians. 4.22. -- ut lubricus serpens Exuit in
spinis vestem. Lucret. de rer. Not. lib. 4.
stripped of their old garment, of their Genes. 41.14.
Prison apparel, but that many a rag of it hangs still upon them, and Heb.
12.1.
sticks so close to them, that they will not off all, till they go altogether
for good and all, till Romans 6.7.
death do that all at once, that 2 Cor. 3.18. and 4.16.
grace does now by degrees. Though Psalm. 19 13. and 119.133. Romans 6.12, 14.
Tit. 3.3.
sin reign not in them, as Romans 6.17.
formerly it has done: yet it remains with them, and Romans 7.17, 20.
dwells still, like a bad Inmate, within them. Habitat; sed non regnat:
manet; sed non dominatur aut praevalet: Evulsum quodammodo, necdum tamen
expulsum; dejectum, sed non prorsus ejectum tamen. Bern. in Psalm. 90. sermon. 10.
Eradicari siquidem aut extirpari penitus e cordibus nostris malitia non potest.
Idem de Temp. 45.
It remains, says Bernard, even in the best, though plucked up by the root,
yet not wholly pulled out; though dejected and thrown down in regard of its
regencie, yet not ejected or cast out in regard of inherencie. It is (...).
Method. apud Epiphan. haeres. 64.
like a wild fig tree, says Proclus in Epiphanius, that has so pierced into
the stone-wall of a fair Temple, that though it be cut away, the boughs, body
of it, and the maine stumpe of it pulled out, yet some of the strings of the
root, Romans 7.19, 20, 21, 23.
ready ever anon to sprout out again, will abide there, do what can be done,
till the wall it self be dug down. It is as Levit. 14.36. -- 45.
the fretting Leprousie in an house, that though the walls be scraped over and
over, again and again, yet will not away, until the building be it self
wholly demolished. And Hagg. 2.15.
as we are our selves; so is all that comes from us. There is a tang and
taint of this rotten root in all that we do: as there is Tinguntur solis
radii, corumque trahunt similitudinem, in quorum oram subcundo venere. Plin.
hist. Not. lib. 2. cap. 18.
a tincture of the stained glass in the light that it gives, and in the rays
of the Sun, though pure otherwise themselves, that pass through it. Si de
his divinitus districte discutimur, quis inter haec remanet salutis locus?
quando and mala nostra pura mala sunt, and bona quae nos habere credimus, pura
bona esse nequaquam possunt. Greg. Moral. lib. 35. cap. 26. Quousque enim poena
corruptionis astringimur, quamlibet rectis operibus insudemus, veram munditiam
nequaquam apprehendimus, sed imitamur. Ibid lib. 9. cap. 28.
Our evil actions are merely evil, says Gregory, but our good actions (are
not, nay) cannot be purely good. They are but Ipsa and virtutum gandia vulnus
habent. Prosper. in sentent.
maimed; says Prosper. They are Terret me vita mea. Namque diligenter discussa
apparet mihi aut peccatum, aut sterilitas fere tota. Quod si quid fructus in
advidetur, sic est aut simulatum, aut imperfectum, aut aliquo modo corruptum,
ut possit aut non placere, aut dispticere Deo. Anselm. de miser. homin.
so imperfect, and some way or other corrupt, says Anselme, that God might
well be displeased with them. Sed quid potest esse omnis justitia nostra coram
Deo? Nonne juxta Prophetam, velut pannus menstruatae reputabitur? Et si
districte judicetur, injusta invenietur omnis justitiae nostra, and minus
habens. Bernard. de Temp. 94.
Our righteousness is all (even the very best of it) in Gods sight, says
Bernard (alluding to the words of the Prophet Esa. 64.6.
Esaias) but as a menstruous clout (that is, as a filthy, beastly, abominable
ragge) if it should strictly be examined: Nostra justitia, siqua est, humilis
justitia, recta forsitan, sed non pura. Nisi forte meliores nos esse credimus
patribus nostris qui non minus veraciter quam humiliter aiebant, omnes
justitiae nostrae, etc. Bernard. de Verb. Esa. 5. Sic etiam explicant, huc
applicant saltem verba illa Prophetae Orig. in Romans cap. 3. Hieron. in Esai.
cap. 64. August. nom. soliloque cap. 28. Bernard. in dedic. Eccles. 5. Ex
Pontificiis Hugo Cardinal. in Job 9. Albert. Mag. in Miss. d. 3. tr. 2. cap. 5.
Perald. Sum. tom. 2. tr. 6. Par. 3. cap. 3. Pigh. Controv. de Fid. and Justice.
Ferus in Joan. cap. 3. and Matthew. cap. 12. Quod delet Index Expurg. Hisp.
Unless we esteem our selves better than our forefathers, who have no less
truly than humbly confessed so by themselves. And, if our best righteousness
be such; (no better than Sciunt Sancti, quia omnis justitia humanae injustitia
esse deprehenditur, si divinitus districte judicetur. Gregor. Mor. lib. 21.
cap. 15.
unrighteousness; says Gregory; a kind of Injusta justitia. Bernard supra.
unrighteous righteousness, says Bernard:) Quid ergo de peccatis erit, quan
done ipsa pro se poterit respondere justitia? Bernard ibid.
what is our unrighteousness then? If Matthew. 6.23.
the light that is in us burn so dim, how is it with our darkness, which
for the most part is more than the light, even in those that have most?

Again, they consider as their poorness and imperfection in Grace;
unprofitablenesse, even in the good that they do out of Grace. For, Luke 17.10.
When you have done all that ever you can, says our Savior, say that you are
(for Sed hoc, inquies, propter humilitatem monuit esse dicendum. Plane propter
humilitatem. Sed nunquid contra veritatem? Bernard. de Diverse. 17. Nam quod
Chrysostom. in Ozian. hom. 3. (...): nihil huic repugnat sententiae; cum and ipse
alibi fateatur; (...). In Mat. hom. 3. i. non tam humilitas id erat quam sanum
judicium: uti vertit Bern. Brix. ad pop. Ant. hom. 38.
so indeed you are, but) unprofitable servants. It is a Question moved by
Eliphaz in Job, Job 22.2, 3.
Whether a man can be profitable to God, as he may be profitable to man, either
himself, or any other. And it is well resolved and answered by Elihu in the
Negative: Job 35.7. Iustitia nostra Deus non indigeti. Totumque quod recte
colitur Deus ab homine, prodest homini, non Deo. Neque enim fonti se quisquam
dixerit profuisse quod biberit, aut luci, si viderit. August. de Civit. lib.
10. cap. 5.
If thou do well, says he, what good do thou to God? or what is he the
better for it? And again, Job 35.6. Sed quae flagitia in te, qui non
corrumperis? aut quae adversus te facinora, cui noceri non potest? Sed hoc
vindicas, quod in sese homines perpetrant; qui cum in te peccant, impie agunt
in animas suas. Idem Confess. lib. 4. cap. 8.
If thou do evil, what hurt do thou to him? Be thy sins never so many,
what is he the worse for it? No: Psalm. 16.2. Nec ille collato eget, nec nos ei
quicquam confer possumus. Senec. de benef. lib. 4 cap. 9. Nec eget bonis, nec
timet a malis. August. in Psalm. 80.
All my well-doing, says David, or my goodness, is nothing to my God. Ideo
Deus meus, quia bonorum meorum non indiges. Omne enim bonum nostrum aut ipse
est, aut ab ipso. August. epist. 5. and de doctr. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 31.
He were not God, says Augustine, if my well-doing could do him any good. For
Nos cum te amamus, a te ad te afficimur, qui possumus misero aliquo modo esse
and non amare te, hoc est, esse and male esse. Tibi autem qui semper idem es,
nihil accedit si amando proficimus ad te, nihil decedit, si non amando
deficimus a te. Guilelm. a S. Theodoric. de amor. Dei, cap. 8. quod Bernardo
perperam tribuitur.
God (says one well) being ever the same, is neither the better for our
goodness, nor the worse for our wickedness. He neither gains ought by us,
when we love and serve him, and cleave close to him: nor loses he ought by
us, when we love him not, but leave him and fall away from him. For Nec crescit
Deus, accedente te; nec decrescit decedente te. August. in Psalm. 145. Si fueris
sine Deo, minor eris: Si fueris cum Deo, major Deus non erit. Non ex te ille
major: sed tu sinc illo minor. Reficieris, si accesseris: deficies, si
recesseris. Integer manet te accedente; integer manet and te cadente. Idem in
Joan. 11. Non erit major, si placet tibi; sed tu minor eris, si displicet tibi.
Ib. 18.
he can be well enough without us: but we can by no means do well without him.
And therefore he cannot be the better for us; howsoever we may be the better
for him.

consideration of Gods infinite Majesty and Dignity, his worth and his
greatness, that dampeth and obscureth Psalm. 8.3.
Goodly Creatures are the Stars, and (...). Basil. Sell. hom. in Transfig.
(...). Isidor. Pol. lib. 1. epist. 257. Sol reliquae sidera occultat; quibus
and lumen suum foenerat. Plin. hist. Not. lib. 2. cap. 6. Minuta lumina
claritas Solit obscurat. Senec. epist. 67. Sic cum Sole perit sidericus decor.
Idem Medea. Per diem fulgorem Lunae Stellarumque omnium Sol exortus abscondit,
Ambros. Hexam. lib. 4. cap. 3. Simulque ut Sol ortus sui signa praemiserit,
omnes Stellarum ignes sub unius luminaris fulgore vanescunt. Ibidem cap. 6.
Clara latent sub Sole corusco Sidera. Dracont. Hexam. Et, Hujus ab aspectu
languescunt. Ibid. Inde Sol dictus, quasi solus sit. Cic. de Not. Deor. lib. 3.
Quia postquam exortus est, reliquis obscuratis sideribus solus apparet.
Cassiod. in Psalm. 103. Iul. Firmic. de Error. Gent. Isid. Origin. lib. 3. cap.
70. Verum Sol potius a Graeco (...). Bibliand. de rat, ling. l. 3. c. 2.
Priscis enim Sell dicebatur, ut and Apollo, Hemo, helus. Auson. Popma de antiq.
loc. l. 1. c. 1. and Meurs. animadv. lib. 3. cap. 8.
they shine bright in the Night, but when the Sun is once up, all their light
and luster is gone, it is no more to be seen, than as if they were not: Nor
do those worthy Saints of God, whom we justly deem as bright Apoc. 1.20.
Stars, retain their glorious luster that yet dasleth our eyes, when they
appear in the presence of the Act. 7.2.
God of Glory. The nearer therefore Gods Saints approach to God, and consider
his worth and his greatness, the more apprehensive are they of their own
meannesse and unworthiness. And as (...). Plut. pracept. conjug.
the Moon never casts less light, than when she is nearest the Sun, from
whom she has it: so never does ought, (ought, I mean, that excels, that is
ought,) less appear in any of us, than when we approach nearest the Iam.
1.17.
Father and Psalm. 36.9.
Fountain of Light, from whom we have received whatsoever we have. For Nusquam
se melius deprehendit modus imperfectionis humanae, quam in speculo visionis
divinae. Bernard. ad frair. de Mont. Dei.
no where does Man better or more fully see his own meannesse, than in the
glass of Gods Greatness. (...). Greg. Naz. de Sasim episc. Si vel terram
despicimus medio die, vel intuemur quae aspectui nostro circum circa patent,
validissima perspicacissimaque acie videmur nobis praediti: at ubi in Solemn
suspicimus atque arrectis oculis contemplamur, vis illa quae egregie in terra
valebat, tanto fulgore protinas constringitur and confunditur, ut fateri
cogamur, illud nostrum in considerandis terrenis acumen, ubi ad Solemn ventum
est, meram esse hebetudinem. Idem in reputandis nobis contingit, etc. Calvin.
Institut. l. 1. c. 1.
While we sit here in the Church together, and look one upon another, or upon
other things here about us, we may well seem to be well-eyed and quick-sighted
the most of us. But if the Sun should shine bright abroad, and we should go
out and look full on it, our eyes would be soon obscured and darkened, and
all our sharp-sightednesse would prove nothing but mere dimnesse and
darkness. And surely, if the very Seraphim themselves, though so glorious
Creatures in themselves (that Dan. 10.7, 8, 11, 16, 17. Luke 1.12. Act. 10.4.
their presence when they appear but in some glimpse only of that their
celestial Glory, is wont to strike such terror and astonishment into those to
whom they appear in that manner) yet when they cast their eyes on that most
Glorious Malac. 4.2.
Sun of Righteousness, this Psalm. 8.3. and 74.16.
Suns Creator, the Author of its excellency, and Esa. 24.23.
infinitely therefore more excellent than it, they are so abashed at the
consideration of their own vileness in comparison of it, that Esa. 6.5.
they clap their wings on their faces, ( (...). Chrysostom. in Esa. cap. 6.
as men are wont to do their hands, when the lightning flasheth in their eyes)
as wholly overwhelmed with it, and not easily enduring it. No marvel if 1
King. 19.17.
Elias, when God spoke unto him, (though in no terrible manner, but with a
still voice, yet) cast his mantle over his face, as abashed at his appearance;
and if other the Saints of God, when by Prayer they repair unto God, and Ier.
36.19. Act. 10.33. Eccles. 5 2.
set themselves in his special presence, Psalm. 16.8.
beholding God as it were then looking with full eye upon them, and Psalm. 27.4.
and 42.2.
looking him in a manner full in the face, do then especially, as take notice
of, so confess and acknowledge, their unworthiness to approach so glorious a
Presence, and to require or expect ought from the hands of such a Majesty,
being so mean, so vile, so base, so abominable, as they are, and do then
especially see themselves to be. Luke 5.8.
Lord depart from me; I am a sinful wretch; says Saint Peter to our
Savior, when in a strange draught of fish only, he saw some print of his
Deity. And, Job 42.5, 6.
I have often heard of thee by report; says Job to God: but now mine eye sees
thee: And therefore do I even abhor my self; and repent me in dust and
ashes; in Genesis 2.7. and 3.19. and 18.27. Sirac. 10.9.
such as my self am. Men are then (...). Pythag. apud Plut. de Superstit. and
de defect. orat.
holiest (says Pythagoras) when they repair unto God: they are humblest sure
(say I) when they approach nearest to him.

Now this may serve first to teach us Humility. For if so worthy Saints and
servants of God account themselves unworthy of ought, and think and speak so
meanly of themselves; what does it behoove us to do, that come so far short
of them? There are two Virtues especially, that our Savior Christ has by his
own example commended unto us, to be imitated of us; Humilis venit. Zach. 9.9.
Mat. 21.5. humilitatem docere venit. Matthew. 11.29. August. in Joan. 25. Discite
a me, inquit. Quid discimus a te? nescio quid magnum a magno artifice. Nunquid
ut eadem cum illo faciamus? Qui potest, quae solus Deus facit? Hoc disce a me,
quod sactus sum pro te. Quid prodest, si miracula facis, and humilis non sis?
Idem hom. 34. Nolo a me discatis, facere quae feci; sed quod factus qui feci,
ne perirent quae feci. Idem de verb. Ap. 12.
Humility in his Life, and Ioh. 13.34, 35.
Love or Charity at his Death: Which we may well therefore term Quo modo de
Fide Basil. apud Greg. Naz. in Epitaph. (...). Et de Charitate and Pace,
Chrysostom. in Heb. hom. 31. (...).
Christ's cognisances; and the marks and badges of those that be his. And
certainly where Humility is wanting, that is wanting that Gods Children have
ever most of all abounded and excelled in. All their speeches and sayings
generally (if you mark them) savor strongly of it. Pulvis and cinis. Genesis
18.17.
Dust and ashes, says Abraham. Vermis, non Vir. Psalm. 22.6.
A worm, and no man; says David. Iumentum, non homo. Prove. 30.2.
Not a man, but a beast; says the wise man Agur, and Psalm. 73.22.
Asaph. Minimus Sanctorum. Ephesians. 3.8.
The least and last of the Saints; and Minimus Apostolorum. 1 Cor. 15.9. Sic de
se Ambr de Poenit. l. 2. c. 8. Minimus Episcoporum omnium, and infirmus merito.
of the Apostles; says the Apostle Paul of himself: but Primus peccatorum. 1 Timothy 1.15.
the first and Primus, quo nullus prior. Gerson, consol. Theolog. imo, quo
nullus pejor. August. de verb. Ap. 9. and 10. Nec hoc dixit mentiendi
praecipitatione, sed aestimandi affectione. Qui enim perfect examinando
semetipsum intelligit, suo peccato nullius peccatum par esse existimat, quod
non sicut suumintelligat. Bernard. ad Fratr. de Mont. Dei.
chiefest of Sinners.

And where men therefore are so prone to stand upon terms of comparison; I am
as good a man as such and such: and, I deserve as well as they: and, I see no
reason why I should not be respected as well as any other: and are so ready to
thrust themselves forward; and not Romans 12.10. Phil. 2.3.
in giving honor to others, as the Apostle exhorts, but Hebr. 5.4.
in taking honor to themselves, which the Holy Ghost reproves, strive to go
beyond others: it savoureth not of Matthew. 11.29. Col. 3.12, 13.
the Spirit of Christ, not of that Romans 8.14.
Spirit that Gods Children are led by; but of the Spirit and humor rather of
those, who in the Gospel are reported to have Matthew. 23.6, 7. Mar. 12.38, 39.
affected the chief rooms at feasts, and the highest seats in the Synagogues,
to be crowched and cringed to, and to be called, Rabbi Rabbi: the Luke 11.43.
and 20.46.
Scribes and Pharisees, I mean, Qui dum in se singulariter exultant, aliis
arroganter insultant. Bernard. de Grad. humil.
who in comparison of themselves, scorned and contemned all others; Non sum
sicut caeteri, non sicut isle. Luke 18.11. (...). Basil. Sell. hom. 34.
I am not like other men; nor like this Publican: says he. Such should
remember that Vbi timor, nullus tumor. Bern. in Cant. 23. Quid est enim timere
nisi non tumere? Gilbert. in Cant. 19.
where the fear of God is, Pride is not: and consequently, that where such
pride is, there is a great want of sincerity. And consider withal, that as
there is, (...). Chrysostom. tom. 6. Orat. 83. Quanto quis humilior in se fuerit,
tanto in Dei conspectu major erit. Superbus vero quo gloriosior inter homines
fuerit, eo apud Deum despectior crit. August. de Temp. 2 13. and Greg. Moral.
lib. 8. cap. 22.
no Virtue more acceptable and well-pleasing to God than Humility: so there is
Prove. 6.16, 17. and 8.13. and 16.5. Exosa semper est Deo superbia, Cassiod.
Var. lib. 3. ep. 3.
no Vice in Gods sight more abominable than Pride. It is a strange thing, says
Augustine, entreating of those words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 138.6.
Though the Lord be on high himself, yet beholds he the lowly: as for the
proud and haughty, he knows them a far off. Videte magnummiraculum: Altus
est Deus; erigis te, and fugit a te: inclinas te, and descendit ad te. Humilia
de proximo respicit, ut attollat: superba de long cognoscit, ut deprimat.
August. de Temp. 175. Fulgent. de Ascens. Sed and eadem fere August. in Psalm.
74. and de Diverse. 36. and de Temp. 213. and in Joan. 10. and 15. Vis tibi
propinquet? humilia te. Nam tanto erit a te altior, quantotu clatior. Idem in
Psalm. 137. Nescio que pacto familiarius semper humilitati propinquare solet
divinitas. Bernard. ep. 42.
It is a strange thing, says he, and yet as true as it is strange: God he
sits aloft himself in Heaven: and yet the higher a man lifts himself,
the further he is from him; the lower a man stoopeth, the nearer he is to him.
We have a very pregnant instance of it in the Pharisee and the Publican, by
our Savior propounded. Luke 18.11, 13.
The proud Pharisee pressed as near God as he could: the poor Publican, not
daring so to do, stood aloof off. And Pharisaeus contempsit de longinquo
stantem, cui Deus confitenti propinquabat. Pharisaeus de propinquo stabat; sed
Deus ad illum de propinquo non stabat. Publicanus de longinquo stabat: sed Deus
ad illum de long. non stabat. August. in Psalm. 31. Publ. de long. stabat, and
Deo tamen propinquabat. Publ. de long. stabat: sed Dominus illum de propinquo
attendebat. Idem de verb. Dom. 36.
yet was God far from the proud Pharisee, but near to the poor Publican.
Luke 18.14. Ille laudabitior, qui humilior, and justior, qui dejectior. Ambros.
de poenit. lib. 2. cap. 10. (...). Basil. Sell. hom. 34.
The latter went away justified rather than the former. For Psalm. 34.18.
the Lord is near unto all those that be of a contrite heart: And Esa. 57.15.
Quid miramur magnum in angusto habitare? magis in minimis habitat. Ideo altus
habitat in humili, ut exaltet humitem. August de diverse. 36.
he will dwell with him that is of an humble spirit. Iam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5.
He reststeth the proud: but he gives grace (that is, Patet ex antithesi,
Prove. 3.34, 35. unde Apostoli sumpserunt. Videantur Mercer. and Piscat. in
Prove. sed and omnium plenissime reverendus socer meus Catol. Pinner sermon: in 1
Pet. 2.17.
honor and respect) to the humble. Excelsa siccantur: depressa rigantur.
August. de verb. Ap. 2. and Bernard. de Temp. 47.
The Low valleys are watered, when the high hills remain thirsty: And Luke
1.53.
the poor and lowly are satisfied, when the proud rich are sent away empty.
In a word; (...). Greg. Naz. de Eutax. Non est periculum quantumcunque te
humilies, quantumcunque reputes minorem quam sis. Est autem grande malum,
horrendumque periculum, si vel modico plus vero te extollas. Bern. in Cant. 23.
much danger there is in Pride; there is not the like in Humility, albeit a man
should abase himself somewhat more, than were meet or requisite for him to
do. Quemadmodum enim si per ostium transeas, cujus superliminare nimium bassum
sit, non nocet quantumcunque te inclinaveris; nocet autem si vel transversi
digiti spatio plus quam ostii patitur mensura erexeris, ita ut impingas and
capite quassato collidaris. Sic in anima non est plane timenda quantalibet
humiliatio; horrenda autem nimiumque pavenda vel minima temere praesumpta
erectio. Bernard. ibid. Humilis est janua Crhistus Dominus. Qui intrat per hanc
januam, humiliet se oportet, ut sano capite intrare contingat. August. in Joan.
4^.
In coming in at a low portall, if a man stoop never so low, there is little
danger in so doing; but if he hold up his head an inch only too high, he may
chance to get a sound knock, if not a broken brow by it.

Micha 6.6, 7, 8. Orandi disciplina reprobatrix superbiae, justisicatrix
humilitatis; Deum docet orare in humilitate, ut allevatorem humilium, non
insuperbia, ut destructorem superborum. Tertul. in Marc. lib. 4.
because we are not so humbled as we ought to be, ere we come to commence
them; because we are not so affected as Jacob here, with any serious
consideration or apprehension of our own indignity and unworthiness: The want
whereof breeds Eccles. 5.1, 2.
irreverence and Esa. 58.2, 3. Praesumptio enim arronganti propior est quam
roganti. Ambros. de Poeniten. lib. 2. cap 8.
presumption in us, the very bane and pests of Prayer.

There are three special faults in Prayer, says Bernard, that hinder the
success of it; Est trepida, est tepida, est temeraria oration. Bern de Temp.
43. Terror, te^or, tumor. Gilbert. in Cant 33.
faintness, coldness, and boldness:

There is first a faint, a fearful, a distrustful Prayer:

There is secondly a cold, a formal, a superficial Prayer:

And there is thirdly a bold, a proud, a presumptuous Prayer. And this last is
the worst.

Trepida nec procedit quidem, nedum ascendit.
The faint and fearful prayer cannot get out, much less get up: it sticks
fast between the teeth, or in the throat rather.

Tenida procedit, sed in ascensulanguescit and deficit.
The cold and formal prayer comes forth fast enough, but it cannot get up: it
freeseth (for want of spirit and fervor) by the way, ere it come to appear in
Gods presence. Iam. 5.16.
A good man's prayer is effectual, says S. James, but provided it be fervent.

Temerdria ascendit, sed refilit: nec tantum non obtinet gratiam, sed meretur
offensam. Bern. ibid.
The bold and presumptuous prayer flies up apace; but it is as fast beaten
back again, for presenting it self over-boldly and sauoily in Gods sight;
and in stead of a blessing, it brings back a curse with it. (...). Basil
Sell. hom. 34. Velut dignus, qui cum Deo cominus colloqueretur. Erasm. Paraphra.
Such was that proud Pharisees prayer before spoken of: Luke 18.10.
He went up, says our Savior, into the Temple to pray. But when he was
arrived there, Non inveniebat quod peteret. Gilb. in Cant. 33. Gratias, inquit,
ago, quod nihil peccavi: Non habeo quod ignoscas. Optat contr. Parmen. l. 2.
Aut sui oblitum, aut a clispis ablutum dicas. Bernard. de Grad. humil.
he had nothing to ask. He thrusts himself forward, and offers God a
sacrifice of praise indeed; but of his own, not of Psalm 50 14, 23.
his. He (...). Basil. Sell. ubi sup.
spends the time not with Jacob in the confession of his own unworthiness,
but in (...), etc. Idem ibid. Purae putae Pontificidrum Votariorum ampullae:
Quibus optime quadrant and Chrysostom. illa de Compunct. 2. (...).
commemoration of his merits and good deeds unto God; for fear lest God should
forget them, or not esteem of him as his worth (he thought) well deserved
that he should.

True it is indeed, that even Gods sincere Servants, as Esa. 38.3.
Ezechias, Neh. 13.14, 31.
Nehemie, Job 10.7. and 23.10, 11, 12.
Job, and Psalm. 44.17, 18, 20.
others do upon special occasion sometime make mention, and that in Prayer
too, of the sincerity of their hearts, their upright carriage, and their
careful endeavor for Gods glory, and the good of 1 Timothy 3.15.
his House, the Church. But if we shall advisedly compare these and the former
together, we shall find a far different strain and spirit in either; we
may discern as much difference between the one and the other in their
prayers, as Plurimum interest inter barbaricam immanitatem, affect isque
impotentes, qui faciant ut vel mortem impavidi perferant; and Martyrum
modestissimam constantiam in se imbecillem, in Christo fortem. Cypriani nomine
de duplic martyr.
between the vainglorious confidence of Heathen Philosophers, and Scilicet
contemptum mortis in multis vi^eas. Sed placidum illud, ac mansuetum, illud
humiliter sublime, and sublimiter humile nisi in Christi Martyribus non
videmus. Ibid. Magnitudo cum mansuetudine. Senec. epist.
the religious constancy of Christian Martyrs in their ends. There is a
vaunting Pride joined with a scorn of others in the one: There is a necessary
and lowly touch (either in way of Psalm. 7.3, 4, 8. and 17.3. and 26.1, 2, 3.
just apology, or Psalm. 26.8, 9. and 27.7, 8, 9.
to strengthen their faith in some hope of speeding with God, and having their
suits heard of him) of their own sincerity and integrity in the other. And
howsoever therefore we may likewise on the like occasions do the like, so be
we remember withal to do it also in the like manner as they did: Yet Eccles.
5.1, 2.
we must take heed how we offer to press over-boldly and presumptuously into
Gods presence; lest as Jacob speaks else where, and upon another occasion,
Genesis 27.12.
we bring a curse upon our selves in stead of a blessing: Rather Omnino
siquidem oportet nos orationis tempore curiamintrare coelestem, in qua Rex
regum stellato sedet solio, circundante innumerabili and ineffabili beatorum
spirituum exercitu. Quanta ergo cum reverentia, quanto timore, quanta illuc
humilitate accedere debet e palude sua procedens and repens vitis ranuncula?
Bern. de diverse. 25.
consider we the greatness and the gloriousness, on the one side, of that
unconceiveable Majesty that in prayer we approach unto; and on the other side,
our own vileness, indignity, and unworthiness; that being truly humbled in
the view both of the one and the other, our Prayers so seasoned, may both find
freer access to God, and return with better success to us.

Popish conceit of Merit, properly so termed, of matter of worth and desert in
Man. Non sum dignus; I am not worthy of ought; says Jacob: and Legatur
Chrysostom. in Matthew. hom. 3. and hom. 25. and tom. 8. Sermon. 16.
it is the common and general note (as you have heard) of Gods Servants.
Whereas our Romanists teach their followers to plead to God for themselves, as
the Jews did sometime for the Centurion to our Savior; Luke 7.4.
Dignus est; He is worthy; he deserves, that thou should do this for him.
Apoc. 4.11.
Dignus es: Thou art worthy to receive honor and glory; sing the Saints of God
to God. But, Digni sumus; We are worthy; do they sing, and teach theirs so to
sing: We are worthy, that God should confer honor and glory on us: We
deserve by our well-doing, not grace only, but glory too, even eternal glory:
And Quo modo Bellarm. ratiocinatur de Poenit. l. 2. c. 8. Si opera justorum eam
vim habent, ut vitam aeternam vere and proprie mereantur; nullo modo negari
potest, quin etiam efficacia esse possint ad satisfaciendum pro rea^u poenae
temporalis: Siquidem long majus est gloria aeterna, quam poenae temporalis
remissio. Absurdum ergo quod Thom. sum. par. prima secundae q. 114 a. 3. c. 10.
Vitam aeternam sub merito cadere; bona temporalia non cadere.
much more than any temporal benefits and blessings whatsoever, that come
far short of either. Psalm. 115.1. 1 Cor. 15.10.
They give all to God: these take all to themselves. There is on their parts
nothing but indignity with the one; nothing but condignitie with the other.
Jacob deemeth himself unworthy of ought; and they esteem themselves Worthy of
the Crown; worthy of the Kingdom; worthy of heaven; worthy of salvation;
worthy of God himself; as meriting and deserving all this. Rhemists on 2 Thessalonians. 1.5. and Apoc. 3.4.
worthy of any thing. There was nothing that he could; and there is nothing but
that they do, or can deserve it at Gods hands. He knows not how to requite
what already he has received: they are able not to requite it only, but to
merit also much more. A strange presumption, whereby men dare arrogate and
ascribe that unto themselves, that none of Gods holy ones, whose stories are
recorded in Gods Word, ever did, or durst do.

Take we Example in this kind, but by one of them for all. Job, the only man
of note in the time he lived in, for Job 1.1.
a just, and an upright, or a perfect man, one that feared God, and eschewed
evil: Job 1.8. and 2.3.
no one like him (by 1 Ioh. 5.9. 2 Cor. 10.18. (...). Chrysostom. de Compunct. 2.
Gods own testimony) in the whole world then besides. And yet Post tam magnum
de illius justitia Dei testimonium, quid de se ipse? August. de Pec. Mer. and
Rem. lib. 2. cap. 10. (...), (Job -- 31.) (...). (Job 9.15.) Chrysostom. ubi
supra.
how he stood herein affected, his own words will best show: wherein observe
we how in stripping himself of all matter of merit, worth, or desert, he
proceeds and goes on as by certain taires and degrees.

Job 9.2.
How can any man, says he, be justified, if he be compared Hebr. Quomodo
justificabit se homo cum Deo? i. Quomodo justus invenictur, ficum Deo
conferatur? Vatabl. Quanquam potest etiam exponi, cum Deo, i. apud Deum, vel
coram Deo, ut Psalm. 143.2. Et sic August. ubi supra. Ante Deum.
with God? Job justitiae Dei comparatione hominis justitiam nullam esse
declarat. Annot. in Vatabl. Bibl.
He shows that man's justice is just none, says the Scholiast, if it be
compared with Gods justice. For, Cujus participatione justi sunt, ejus
comparatione nec justi sunt. August. contr. Priscil. and Origin. cap. 10. ex
Job 4.18. unde site Hug. Card. ex Greg. Moral. lib. 9. cap. 1. Homo Deo
suppositus justitiam percipit, compositus amittit. 1 Samuel 2.2.
Even those that are just by participation from him, are not just at all, if
they come once in comparison with him, says Augustine.

infinite depth of justice that is in God, but by the exact rule of
righteousness, that of man God requires, and is contained in Gods Law? Job
9.3.
If a man, says Job, would go to law with God, or if God should call man to a
strict account, man were not able to answer God for one of a thousand. Among a
thousand of his works, though having done Job 31. per totum.
so many good works, could not Job pick out any one, of which he durst say,
This I dare be tried by; or, I dare offer this to the strictest trial. Sanctus
vir omne virtutis meritum esse vitium conspicit, si ab interno arbitro
districte jud cetur. Gregor. Moral. l 9 c. 1.
The holy man, says Gregory, saw that all our worthy virtues would prove
vicious, yea vices, if they were brought to a strict trial. And, Qui de
perfectione se erigit habere se been vivendi nec initium indicat. Idem ibid.
Cum itaque de bone vitae perfectione extollimur, hanc nos nec inchoasse
monstramus. Ibid.
The man therefore that vaunteth himself of his perfection, thereby shows
that he has not yet so much as begun to lead a good life. So that, Job 9.20.
If I would justify my self, says Job, mine own mouth, (if according to Os
meum, id est, conscientia mea. Hugo Card.
mine heart it speak) must needs condemn me for so doing; when I see my
self, so much amiss with me, when I know so much evil by my self.

But suppose he were not guilty in this manner to himself, that Job 9.21.
If I were perfect, says he; yet do I not know mine own soul. As if he
should say, as Saint Paul sometime did; 1 Cor. 4.4.
Though I knew nothing by my self, (as Nihil mihi conscius sum infidelis
dispensationis, Cajetan. Nullius malae fidei aut negligentiae in fungendo
Apostolatu, Piscat.
in some kind and case the Apostle professes of himself, to wit, for his
demeanure toward the Corinthians, his faithful carriage in his Ministry, and
those things especially which the false Apostles charged him with, as 2 Cor.
1.12.
he elsewhere expounds himself:) yet were I not thereby justified. Or as
David, in Augustines Paraphrase of him, Quantumlibet rectus mihi videor,
producis tu de Thesauro tuo regulam; coaptas me ad eam, and pravus invenior,
Aug. in Psalm. 142.
How right and straight soever I seem to my self, thou bring a rule out of
thy treasury, which when thou layest me to, I am found faulty. For, Psalm.
19.12.
Who (says the Psalmist) understands all his own errors? Ierem. 17.9.
Man's heart (says the Prophet) is deceitful above all things: so deceitful,
that Galat. 6.3. Iam. 1.26.
it deceives often even it self. And Saepe ipsa justitia nostra ad examen
divinae justitiae deducta injustitia est: and sordet in districtione judicis,
quod in aestimatione fulget operantis. Greg. Mor. l. l. 5. c. 7.
those things, says Gregory, that make a goodly show, even in a man's own
eyes, appear many times but foul, slubbred and sullied in Gods sight. Tanta
est profunditas in homine, ut lateat ipsum hominem in quo est: sed Dominum
latere non potest. Ier. 17.9.10. Herv. in 1 Cor. 4.
No man sees exactly the depth of his own heart. But 1 John 3.20. Quantum
possunt homines de alio judicare, plus homo utique de se. Sed Deus plus de
homine, quam homo de se. Herv. ibid.
God is greater than our heart, and sees often that in it, and in the actions
that flow from it, that we see not in it or them our selves; and Ille magis
novit me, qui est scrutator cordis mei. Philip. in Job 9.
knows consequently more by us, than we know by our selves. As Paul
therefore, so Job, though he could neither be justly taxed for ought by
others, nor did know ought amiss by himself; though it had been so, I say,
with him (as yet Job 9.2, 20, 28, 29, 30, 31.
far otherwise it was) that he had passed well both Tria sunt judicia,
humanum, proprium, divinum: de exterioribus quae sensui patent, judicat
humanum: de interioribus etiam hominis ipsius spiritus; sed long praestantius
Deus; cujus nondum fatetur Ap. evasisse judicium, qui tamen jam humanum
transcendisset and proprium: porro humanum contemnebat, nec proprium timebat,
divinum tantum restabat. Bern. de diverse. 32. Vide Thom, Aquin. in Job 9. Lect.
3. and Greg. Mor^l. 5. c. 7.
man's judgment, the strictest censure of others, and his own too, the
testimony of his own Conscience; yet durst he not, for all that, offer
himself to Gods judgment, there to be tried by the rigor and severitie of
Gods justice; well wotting that for all this there he might fail, as both
having deceived others, and having been deceived in himself; whereas there he
was Heb. 4.12.
to deal with him, who is so Act. 1.24. and 15.9.
well seen in man's heart, Psalm. 33.15.
his own work, that he Gal. 6.7. Ier. 17.9, 10.
cannot possibly by any means be deceived therein.

Lastly, Job 9.15.
Though I were never so just, says Job, yet would I not argue Petendo
justitiam.
by demanding justice; but make suit, Petendo misericordiam, Lyra.
by craving mercy, says Lyra. I would not argue, Confidens in meritis meis.
trusting to mine own merits; but make suit, Plus confidens in ejus
misericordia, quam in meritis meis, Hugo Card.
trusting rather, says Cardinal Hugh, to his mercy. Quoniam misericordia
nobis necessaria est, August. in Job 9.
For it is mercy that we stand in need of, says Augustine: it is that that
must stand us then in stead. Since that, Vt saepe diximus, Omnis humana
justitia inj^stitia esse convincitur, si districte judicetur, Greg. Moral. lib
9. cap. 14.
All man's righteousness will appear to be but unrighteousness, says
Gregory, if it should strictly be examined. And Prece igitur post justitiam
indiget, ut quae succumbere discussa poterat, ex sola judicis pietate
convales^at, Gregor. ibid.
therefore for all a man's righteousness he had need yet to pray; that, that
that might in such strict trial fail, may by his Judges mercy alone hold out
and be made good. For it is all one, says he, as if Job had there said, Velut
si apertius fateatur dicens; Etsi ad opus virtutis excrevero, ad vitam non ex
meritis, sed ex venia convalesco. Idem ibidem.
Albeit I grow up and attain to good works, yet it is not of merit, but of
mercy, that I do atchieve life. And such Preci itaque innitendum est, cum
recta agimus, ut omne quod just vivimus, ex humilitate condiamus. Ibid.
Prayer therefore must we lean unto, even when we do well, that even all our
holy life may be seasoned with humility: Which the contrary presumption belike
then of merit, desert, worth, and dignity, is in Gregory's judgment a great
enemy unto.

But so absurd and even sottish is the Popish doctrine in this Point, that some
of their chief Champions, as half ashamed of it, seek sometime to qualify
it, and sometime flatly deny it.

Sometime, I say, they seek to temper, and to qualify, and to correct it, as
Apothecaries do Nam and ipsa venena inferuntur medicamentis. Isidor. Orig.
lib. 12. cap. 4.
poisons, when in desperate cases they minister them to try conclusions with
forlorn Patients. Thus Bellarmine having at large discussed the Point; laid
down a good distinction for the clearing of the difference between us and
them, when we say, that Calvinus docet nullam in propriis meritis fiduciam
esse locandam. Institut. lib. 3. c. 12.. 3, 4.
No confidence is to be put in man's merits; and they say, Nos aliquam etiam in
meritis poni posse docemus. Bellar. de Iustif. l 5 c 7.
that some may be; to wit, that Aliud est fiduciam nasci ex meritis: aliud in
meritis ponendam. Bellar. ibid.
it is one thing for confidence to be put in them, and another thing for
confidence to arise from them: and with a trembling kind of assertion affirmed
the former, that not only confidence may arise from them; but that In bonis
meritis, quae vere talia esse compertum sit, fiducia aliqua collota i^ potest,
modo superbia caveatur. Ib.
some confidence also may be placed in them, if men be certain that they are
such, and so that they be not proud of them: (And yet how sorteth this their
doctrine, I pray you, with their Prayers, where they say; Deus, qui conspicis,
quia in nulla nostra action confidimus. Collect. in Sexages.
God that see that we trust in nothing that we do? Or what is this then, but
even to mock God to his face, when they tell him they do not that, which
indeed they do?) At length he comes to conclude that we have the safest
course on our side. As Vtilissimum est coram Deo non justitiam praetendere, s^d
misericordiam postulare, Bernard. ep. 42.
it is the best and behovefull course, says Bernard, not to pretend merit, but
to request mercy: So it is the surest and the safest course, says Bellarmine,
not to trust in any work or worth of our own, but to rely wholly upon Gods
mercy. For, Propter periculum inanis gloriae, and incertitudinem justitiae
nostrae; Tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate
reponere, Bellarm. de Iustif. lib. 5. cap. 7.
In regard, says he, of the uncertaintie of our own righteousness, and the
jeopardy of vainglory, it is the safest course for a man to repose his whole
trust in the mercy and goodness of God alone. And he produces to this purpose
the speeches and practices of diverse holy men of God lying upon their
deathbeds: (as indeed the most, even Papists also, yea and some Popes too,
whatsoever they were taught or held otherwise while they lived, are glad (to
prevent the worst) to die Protestants in this Point, and to renounce all their
pretended merits, worth, and works then, when they should stand them most in
stead:) For so Ambrose at point of death, says he, spoke to his people; Non
fic vixi, ut me pudeat inter vos vivere: nec mori timeo, quia bonum Dominum
habemus, ^aulin. in vit. Am.
I have not so lived among you, that I should be ashamed to live longer with
you: nor am I afraid to die, because we have a good Master. Which speech of his
Augustine used much to admire and commend; affirming that Ambrose so said, Ne
crederetur praesidens de suis purgatissimis moribus praesumere, Possidon. in
vit. August.
that he might not be thought presumptuously to put confidence in his course of
life and carriage, though never so pure. So Augustine likewise himself to his
adversaries; Ad existimationem hominum magna testium, qui me noverunt, suppetit
copia: ad Dei vero conspectum sola conscientia; quam contra vestras
criminationes cum intrepidam geram, non me tamen sub oculis omnipotentis
justificare audeo; magisque ab illo effluentem misericordiae largitatom, quam
judicis summum ^xamen expecto, Aug. contra Crescon. l. 3. c. 80.
For my reputation among men, I have witnesses great store, that have known
me, to testify for me: but in the sight of God my Conscience alone can speak
for me; which albeit I bear fearlesse against your false accusations, yet dare
I not justify my self before the eyes of the Almighty, but expect rather a
largess of mercy flowing from him, than a strict judicial trial. And Bernard
of himself; Praetendat alter meritum; sustinere se jactet pondus dici and
aestus. Mihi adhaerere Deo bonum est, ponere in Domino Deo spem meum. Bern. in
Psalm. 90. Sermon. 9.
Let others plead their merits, and boast and brag that Matthew. 20.12.
they have borne and endured the heat and the burden of the day: but Psalm.
73.28.
it is good for me to cleave to God, and to put my trust in him. And when he
was even at deaths door, writing to some of his friends; Orate Salvatorem, ut
tempestivum jam exitum non differat, sed custodiat. Curate inunire vobis
calcaneum nudum meritis, Bern. epist. 310.
Pray ye my Savior not to delay now my timely departure, but to keep and
protect me in it. Be careful by your prayers to fence mine heel being bare of
Merits it self. Vbi B. Bern. ex conscientia bonae vitae optat non differri
diutiu^ mortem. Et tamen adeo non confidebat in meritis, ut existimaret se
nudum esse meritis. Bellar. de Iustific. l. 5. c. 7.
Where Saint Bernard, says Bellarmine, howsoever out of the Conscience of his
good life he desired to have his death no longer delaied, yet was so far from
trusting in his Merits, that he made account he had none. And again, Cum
extremum jam trahere spiritum videretur. Gulielm. in vit. Bern. l. 1. c. 13.
when he was even now (as it were) at the last gasp; Fateor, non sum dignus
ego, nec possum propriis meritis regnum obtinere coelorum. Caeterum Dominus
meus duplici jure illad possidens, haereditate Patris and merito passionis,
altero ipse contentus, ulcerum mihi donat. Bern. ibid.
I confess, says he, that I am not worthy of, nor can by mine own merits
obtain the Kingdom of Heaven: But my Lord Jesus Christ, who holds it by a
double right, the Inheritance of his Father, and the merit of his Passion,
contenting himself with the one, bestows on me the other. This then has
been, by our adversaries their own confession, the ordinary practice of Gods
People, even the greatest, the godliest, the worthiest of them. And can we
imagine but that their Faith and their Doctrine then at other times was
correspondent thereunto? No undoubtedly. Thus they did, and thus they died
themselves: and thus taught they their people to do, and to die. Yea thus were
our Ancestors here in England above five hundred years agone taught to prepare
themselves for death, by Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, who then lived.
Among other Questions he wills that this be demanded of the sick man that
lies a dying; Credis and speras venire ad salutem aeternam non t^s m^ritis sed
Christi? Dicat, Sic. Ansel. ut refertur in Tract. de Art moriendi Impress.
Bisuntii, Anno 1488.
Do thou believe and hope to be saved, or to come to life eternal, not by
thine own merits, but by Christ's? To which Question he advises the sick man
to say, yea. And then turning his speech to him by way of instruction and
exhortation; In sola Christi morte te totum contege: huic morti te involve: Et
si Dominus Deus te voluerit judicare, dic, Domine, mortem Domini (...) Jesus
Christi objicio inter te and me and judicium tuum, aliter tecum non contendo.
Si dixerit, quod mereris, damnationem, (...), Mortem D. mei I. C. objicio inter
te and me and mala merita me^: ipsumque dignissimo passionis meritu mosser^ pro
merito, q^od ego habere debuissem, and (heu) non habeo. Ibid.
Cover thy self, says he, all over with Christ's death, and wind up thy Soul
in it. And if God offer to judge thee, say thou; Lord, I set the death of my
Lord Jesus Christ between me and thee, and thy judgment, and I will no
otherwise contend with thee. If he say, thou deservest damnation; say thou; I
set the death of my Lord Jesus Christ between thee and me and mine evil
deserts: And I tender the Merits of his most worthy Passion in stead of the
Merit that I should have, but (alas) have not. This then was the Doctrine and
Practice of those Ancient Fathers; and this it was that our Ancestors and
Forefathers were taught, contrary to that that the Church of Rome teaches and
maintains at this day. Yea this, that firebrand of the Christian world, Pope
Hildebrand made profession of, when he writ on this wise (as Baronius reports
of him) to the Abbot of Clugny, Ita me gravatum propria actionis pondere
invenio, ut nulla remaneat spes salutis, nisi de sola misericordia Christi,
Greg. PP. 7. in ep. ad Hug. Cluniac. apud Baron. tom. 11. An. 1075. number 7.
I find my self so depressed with the weight of mine own actions, that I
have no hope of safety left, but in the mercy of Christ alone.

But let us examine Bellarmines cautelous conclusion a little.

1. Is this the surest and safest course? why condemn they us then as
Heretics for taking and teaching it? Why Index Expurg. Hispan. In libro qui
inscribitur, Ordo baptizandi: Deleantur illa verba; Credis non propriis
meritis, sed Domini Christi virtute and merito ad gloriam pervenire? Index
Belg. ex Iac. Fabr in Romans 4. dele; Tu, sisapis, neque in fide, neque in
operibus, sed in Deo confide. Et ex Comment. in Gal. 3. Qui confidit in
operibus, in seipso confidit, and baculo nititur arundineo. Et ex Comment. in
Ephesians. 1. Quid igitur laudabimus? Nunquid nos, aut opera nostra. etc. Nequaquam.
cross they out of their own Writers such speeches as tend this way? Would
they not have men go the safer way? It is their Canonists rule, and their
Casuists common note, that In duviis and ambiguis via tutior eligenda este
Clemens. 3. in Decretal. lib. 5. tit. 10. cap. 12. Gerson in Reg. Mor. Martin.
Navar. Enchirid. cap. 27.. 284.
The safest side, where any doubt may be, is to be held. And that much doubt
may be, yea must needs be here, himself tells us, when he teaches, that
Non possunt homines in hac vita habere ^ertitudinem fidei de sua justitia, nisi
ea speciali revelatione. Bellarmin. de Iustificat. lib. 3. c. 3. Nemo absque
revelatione cerio scire potest, se habere verae morita. ibid. cap 5. Hoc scire
impossible est, nisi ad. sit revelatio. Ibidem cap. 8.
Man's Merits are ordinarily very uncertain; yea so uncertain, that without
special revelation a man can have no assured certainty of them. So that our
fault belike herein is only this then, that we are not so venturous, or
foole-hardie rather, as they are.

2. Is it a sure, yea the surest and safest course that can be, to trust in
Gods mercy alone? Then is Gods mercy alone belike able to save a man without
merits. For in vain were it to trust in it alone, if it alone were not
sufficient to save: according to that excellent saying of Bernard, speaking of
those words of the Psalmist; Psalm. 37.40.
He will save them because they trust in him. He Salvabit eos. quare? quibus
merit^? Audi quod sequitur; Quia speraverunt in eo. Dulcis causa* attamen
effi^me; attamen irrefragabilis. Nimirum haec est justitia, sed quae ex fide
est, non ex lege, Bern. in Psalm. 90. Sermon. 9. ^^in and August de verb. Ap. 7.
Miserere mei. Quare? Quia virtutem habeo, qua te promerear? quiae voluntatis
arbitrium ger^ unde gratiam tuam meritum meum praecedat? Non: quoniam in te
speravit anima mea. Psalm. 57.1.
will save them; says he: Why so? For what merits of theirs? Mark what
follows: Because they trust in him: A sweet cause, but effectual and
irrefragable. This is the righteousness indeed, not of the Law, but of Faith.
Hoc totum est hominis meritum, si totam spem ponat in de, qui totum hominem
falvum fecit. Bern. Idem ibid Sermon. 15.
This is man's whole merit, that he set his whole hope on him, who has saved
the whole man. And Haec est vera hominis fiduciae, ^se deficientis, and
innitentis Domino suo; ut non nisi in fola Dei misericordia respiret. Idem de
temp. 50.
This is man's true confidence, to fall from himself, and rest on his Lord,
refreshed in nothing but his mercy only. And elsewhere; Non (...) quod queras,
quibus meritis speremus bona. Sufficit ad meritum scire, quod merita non
sufficiant. Idem in Cant. 68.
No man need as he for what merits of ours we expect good things at Gods hands.
It is merit sufficient, to know, that no merit is sufficient. And again, Me^^m
meum miseratio Domini Ibid. ser. 61.
Gods mercy is my merit. Et si mihi meritum deest, sed non illi miseratio.
Ibid. ser. 14.
Though I want merit, yet wants he no mercy. Non sum pla^^ meriti inops,
quamdiu ille miserationum non fuerit. Quod si misericordia Domini multae,
multus nihil ominus ego in meritis sum. Ibid. ser. 61.
Nor can I want store of merit, so long as he has store of mercy. Much merit
have I, since that he has so much mercy.

3. But why should they trust thus in Gods mercy alone? or why may they not
trust safely enough in their own merits also? For so his Assertion was, that
in them men might trust to; and that there was ground good enough for them so
for to do. Propter justitiae incertitudinem. Bellarm. ubi sup.
In regard, says he, of the uncertainty of a man's own righteousness: Quia
multi salluntur, dum putaent se habere quod non habent. Idem de Iustif. l. 3.
c. 8.
because a man may be mistaken in it, and imagine that he has it, when he has
not. But certain or uncertain, how can man's merit be the ground of his
salvation, if his salvation depend upon Gods mercy alone? Or how is man's merit
necessarily required unto salvation, if by Gods mercy alone he may be saved
without it?

4. Propter periculum inanis gloriae. Idem ubi sup.
In regard also, says he, of the jeopardie of vainglory. In which clause he
acknowledges that this their Doctrine of man's merit is a dangerous Doctrine,
(as Bernard also terms Stultum and periculosum est suis quenquam confidere
meritis Bern de Diverse. 32. Periculosa habitatio eorum, qui in meritis suis
sperant; periculosa quia ruinosa. Idem in Psalm. 90. Sermon 1.
the practice of it both foolish and perilous) and such as may soon puff up
men's minds with vainglory, yea Discamus de nostra omnino industria, maegis
autem de nostris diffidere meritis, Bern. de Temp. 75. Nam sibi quidem ipsi
fidere, non fidei, sed perfidiae est: nec confidentiae, sed diffidentiae magis
in semetipso habere fiduciam. Is vere fidelis est, qui nec sibi credit, nec in
se sperat, factus sibi tanquam vas perditum. Id quod sola facit humil^tas
cordis, ut non sibi fidelis anima innitatur, sed descrens semetipsam, and super
dilectum innixa ascendat de deserto, Idem de Temp. 16.
with pride and presumption, (he might well have said) the very bane of all
true confidence, grace, goodness and godliness. And consequently as a most
dreadful De Pharisaeo Chrysostom. tom. 8. Ser. 14. (...).
rock threatening ship-wracke of salvation, to be most warily shunned and
eschewed of all those that are jealous of miscarying, and desirous of eternal
well-doing.

I will add here but the Confession of one or two of their own Writers: Ego
prorsus existimo pie and Christian dici, quod debeamus niti, tanquam restabili
quae sustentat nos, sustitia Christi nobis donata, non autem sanctitate and
gratia nobis inhaerente. Contaren. Card. de Iustific.
I am wholly of this mind (says Cardinal Contarene) that it is a pious and a
Christian-like saying, that we ought to rely, as on a thing steadfast and able
to support us, on Christ's righteousness bestowed upon us, not on holiness or
grace inherent in us. On this alone, as certain and steadfast ought we to rest.
And Summo consensu vereres omnes tradunt, fiduciam remissionis peccatorum etiam
eorum que post regenerationem admittuntur; and spem veniae and vitae eternae,
in sola Dei mis^ricordia and merito Christi esse collocandam, Cassand. Consult.
art. 6.
All the Ancients with general consent, says Cassander, deliver, that
confidence for remission of sins, and hope of pardon and life eternal, is to
be placed in Gods mercy alone and Christ's merits. To which purpose also he
alleges a place of Pope Gregory, to this effect; Non in fletibus and actibus
nostris, sed in Advocati nostri allegatione considimus, Greg. in Ezech. hom. 1.
We trust not in our own tears or deeds, but in our Advocates plea. And as
for trust in ought else, says Adrian of Vtrech, who was Bishop of Rome also
afterward; Sunt merita nostra veluti baculus arundineus; cui dum quis innixus
fuerit, confringitur, and perforat manum innitentis, Adrian. de Traject. in 4.
Sent.
Our merits are but as a staff of reed, which if a man lean to or rely on, it
knappeth asunder, and runs through his hand that relieth on it. It is the
surest course, says Bellarmine; it is the only sure course, say we, to trust
only in Gods mercy. So said the Ancients before us (as some of their own, you
see confess) with us. And to teach men in stead of it to trust in their own
merits, is to teach them Bain. spirit. Armor.
to exchange a rock for a reed. Nor can there be any safety at all in so
doing; unless it be safe to rely on so deceitful and dangerous a stay as is
sure to serve them all (by their own Adrians confession) that trust thereunto,
as Esa 36.6.
Rabsake says Egypt did, as (...). Plut. Apophth.
the Spartan said Athens would have done, if Greece should have relied on it.

Thus then sometime they seek to salve and qualify this their pestilent and
poysonfull doctrine, which at other times, as not half, but wholly ashamed to
own it, they do utterly deny and disclaim.

It is Octavum Philippi Mendacium. In art. 20. Confess. Iubent. Catholici
Doctores mereri remissionem peccatorum operibus, Bellar. in Iudic. de Libr.
Concord.
Philip Melancthons eighth lie, says Bellarmine, that our Teachers will men to
merit remission of sins by their works. These words, I find not at all in
the place out of which they are alleged. Neither know I what Edition of that
Confession he follows. But suppose that Philip say so. Why is it a lie? Is
it not true that they teach so? Yes doubtless. Bellarmine himself elsewhere
confesses, that Andr. Vega l. 13. in Council. Trident. c. 36 contendit, satis
fieri pro culpa. Bellar. de poenit. l 4. c. 1.
some of their Doctors teach, that men by their own works make satisfaction
to God for the fault or offense it self. Others, Docet Rua^d Tapper. insignis
Theologus in explic. art. 6. Lovan. posse hominem satusacere Deo pro culpa and
poena aeterna per actus quosdam, etc. Bellarm. ibid.
that they satisfy both for the fault or offense, and for the punishment also,
yea even the eternal pains thereunto due: Others again (whom he gives his
voice with) Nos Council. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 14 and Sess. 14. c. 13. sequentes,
Per opera poenalia vere ac proprie Domino satisfieri pro reatu poenae, qui post
culpam dumissam remanet expiandus. Idem ibid. l. 4 c. 7.
not for the fault it self indeed, but for the guilt of such penalties as
remain due for the same, after that the fault is forgiven, Id est, pro poena
sensus, ut Cajetan. recte de Contrit. q. 4. quam in Gehenna pati debuisset
peccator, remota solum aeternitate. Ib. c. 1.
that is, says he, for the pains that a sinner should in Hell else have
suffered, the eternity of them only taken away: that which he terms out of
some Prove. 16.6. Dan. 4.24.
places of Scripture both Nam redimendi verbum neutrobique reperitur.
mis-translated, and Vise Iun. in utrumque: Et Baium infra.
mis-expounded, Bellar. ibid l. 4. c. 8.
a redeeming or buying out of men's sins; and maintains Idem ibid. l. 2. c.
12. and l. 4. c. 8.
remission of sins to be by such redemption purchased and procured.

Again, that Apertissime agnoscit satisfactionem condignam esse debere, and
eam proportionem cum peccato exigere, ut vere per eam offensio compensetur, de
Poenit. l. 4. c. 9.
men by their works make such condign satisfaction for some sins, Vt
injuria Deo facta compensetur, and divinae justitiae satisfiat, Ibid.
that thereby the offense and wrong done to God is truly recompensed, and his
justice fully satisfied; and that Accedente gratia vere possumus aliquo modo
exoperibus propriis Deo indebitis, and ad aequal tatem, ac per hoc just and ex
condigno satisfacere Ib. cap. 7.
through Gods grace they do in some sort by works of their own, which they
owe not to God, truly or equally, and therefore justly also and condignly
satisfy; for that Quia quatenus a spiritu procedunt, habent quandam
infinitatem, ac per hoc aequalitatem cum injuria, qua Deum peccando
afficiebamus, ibid.
such works have a kind of infiniteness (or infinite worth) in them, and
consequently an equality with the wrong that they did God by their sins, in
sundry places he himself avoweth: which what is it but to merit remission of
sins? For has not he merited remission that has made such satisfaction?

Yea the Objection being made, that then Vel sunt duae satisfactiones simul
junctae, una Christi, altera nostra; vel una tantum. Si duae, ergo bis punitur
eadem culpa. Si una tantum, vel illa est Chr^sti, and tunc nos non
satisfacimus; vel nostra, and tunc exclud^tur Christus; aut vere dividemus cum
Christo honorem, nam ille solvet pro culpa, nos propaena. Bellar. de Purgat l.
1. c. 14.
either there must be two joint satisfactions, the one Christ's, and the other
ours; or but one only; and that either Christ's, and then we do not satisfy;
or ours, and then Christ's is excluded; or else we divide the honor between
Christ and our selves, that he pay for the fault, and we for the punishment:
The Cardinal says, that hereunto three Answers are given.

For 1. some say, Quidam asserunt esse unam tantum. and illam Christi esse; ac
nos proprie non satisfacere, sed solum facere aliquid cujus intuitu Deus
applicat nobis Christi satisfactionem. Ita Michael Baius de Indulg cap ult.
that there is one only satisfaction, and that is Christ's: and that we, to
speak properly, do not satisfy at all, but only do somewhat in regard
whereof God applies Christ's satisfaction to us: And Quod est dicere, Nostra
opera non esse nisi conditiones, sine quibus non applicaretur nobis Christi
satisfactio, vel ad summum, esse dispositiones.
so, says he, should our works be nothing but conditions, or dispositions at
most, without which Christ's satisfaction should not be applied to us. That
which is indeed in effect the same that we say. But Quae sententia erronea mihi
videtur, Bellarm. ibid.
this he holds to be erroneous.

2. Some say, that Alii dicunt quod sunt duae, sed una ab altera dependent.
there are two satisfactions, but the one depending upon the other; the one
Christ's, and the other ours: Nam etiamsi una sufficiat, tamen ad majorem
gloriam Dei, cui satisfit, and majorem honorem hominis satisfacientis, placuit
Christo conjungere nostram.
for though the one were sufficient; yet for greater honor to us, God will
have ours added to his. And Qui modus non videtur mihi improbabilis, Bell. ibid.
this he holds to be not improbable.

3. Some say, and Tertius modus videtur probabili^r; quod una tantum sit
actualis satisfactio, and ea sit nostra, Bellar. ibid.
that is the more probable, (and that therefore he goes with) that there is
but one actual satisfaction alone, and that ours. Et tunc Christus excluditur.
And so Christ consequently is excluded, and shut out at doors, as in the
Objection before was said. Yea he says moreover, that as Non erit absurdum si
Sancti viri Re^emptores nostri esse dicantur, cum aliquo modo passionibus suis
delicta nostra possint redimere. Bellarm. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 4.
the Saints may well be termed our Redeemers, because that by their
sufferings they may redeem or buy out our sins: So Homo sui ipsius Redemptor
and Salvator appellatur: nec propterea ulla fit Christo injuria. Idem de
Purgat. l. 1. c. 14.
a man may well be said to be his own Redeemer and Savior, and yet no wrong
done therein to Christ, when by his own works Condign satisfacit. Ibid. cap.
13.
he makes condign satisfaction to God in this manner for his sins.

And now judge you, whether Philip Melancthon lied or no, when he said (if at
least he did so say) that they will men to merit remission of their sins by
their works. But let us hear further how not Melancthon, but Bellarmine lies
himself, where he charge Melancthon with lying. Non id habet Catholica
doctrina ut operibus illis, quae fiunt sine fide and auxilio Dei gratuito
mereri possint homines remissionem peccatorum. Bellarm. in Iudic. de lib.
Concord. Mendac. 8.
We teach not, says he, that by works done without faith or Gods free help,
men may merit remission of sins. Huc accedit, quod istis etiam operibus, quae
fiunt ex fide and auxilio Dei, hon tale tribuimus meritum, ut ei respondeat ex
justitia merces; sed meritum solum impetrationis, ut Augustinus loquitur, quod
Scholastici meritum de congruo, non de condigno nominare solent. Bellar. ibid.
Nor do we ascribe even unto those works that are done of Faith and by Gods
aid, such a merit, as that the reward does of justice or right answer it; (that
is, the merit of condignitie) but the merit of impetration only, as Augustine
speaks; which the Schoolmen are wont to call not the merit of condignity,
but the merit of congruity. Neque in hoc ulla est inter Catholicos differentia,
ibid.
Nor is there any dissent among Catholics herein.

I might here take occasion to show somewhat largely, in what sense the Ita
Hieron i^ Hosh. 4.14. Grandis offensa, postquam peccaveris, iram Dei non
mereri. Ambr. in Luc. l. 10. c. 22. O aqua, quae sacramentum Christi esse
meruisti. Collatio Carth. cognit. 1. art. 8. Proponant, qui ista elicere
meruerunt. Ibid. cognit. 3. art. 16. Quis s^pplicavit, quis legem meruit? Quis
judicium postulavit? Et Sedul. and alius nescio quis Hieron. nomine in Rom 4.
Magna beatitudo est sine labor legis and poenitentiae, Domini gratiam sola
fide promereri; sicut siquis aliquam dignitatem gratis accipiat.
ancient Fathers, as also Pacem sub hac lege meruit, ut captivos nostros
redderet. Ammian. hist. l. 17. Pacem quam ipse meruit, ei quoque debere
proficere, Ibid.
other Writers of those times do ordinarily use the word to Merit (because our
adversaries so much press the use of that Phrase in the^, as if it implied
such Merit as they maintain) to wit, as Augustinus explicat quom^do fides
mereatur, cum dicit eam impetrare remissionem peccatorum. Bellar. de Iustif. l.
1. c. 21. Sed and Bellarm. ipse ibid. l 5. c. 2. exponit illud Vulg. versionis
Heb. 13.16. Talibus hostiis Deus promeretur, i^ ut Oecumenius, placetur Deo.
Bellarmine himself, with Quodsi aliquis veterum vocabulo promerendi usus est,
non aliter intellexit, quam consecutionem de facto. Stapleton. prompt. Fer. 5.
post Passion. Dominic. Videatur Vega infra.
others of his own side also acknowledges, for to atchieve or obtain ought
on any terms whatsoever, be it of free favor, or of due debt and desert:
which is the Merit of Impetration, that he says Augustine speaks of; and
Multum interest inter meritum and impetrationem, Bell de Bon oper. in particul.
l. 1. c. 9.
differs much from Merit or Desert strictly and properly so termed, as
Bellarmine himself also grants: Since that, by their own confession,
Impetramus etiam quae non meremur. Tho. sum par. prima secundae q. 114. a. 9. A
man may impetrate, and not deserve: and a man may deserve and not impetrate,
Anonymus Author contra Bellii Ruinam Papismi. Meritum enim inuititur justitiae;
and non ^otest Deus homini negare quod meruit, etc. Sed impetrare est
liberalitatis divinae: si det, est gratiae; si non dei, non potest argui
injustitiae. Adrian. quod lib. q. 8.
it is one thing to impetrate or obtain, and another to merit, that is, to
deserve: And therefore in such sense as they use the word Merit, Veniam
Arbitione precante meruerunt. Ammian. hist. l. 15. Quia Dei filium Iudaea
contemosit, Gentilit ^s promeruit. Greg. in 1 Reg. 2. Maria sola matter Domini
fieri meruit. Eusebii Emiss. nomine in Dominic. 4. Advent. Parere meruit eum,
qu^m constat nullum habu^sse peccatum. Aug. de Not. and Great. c. 36. Ipsum Deum
hominem fact^m and co^cipere and parere non h^manis meritis, sed concepti
nascentisque ex ea summi Dei dignatione promeruit. Fulgent. de Great. and
Incarn. c. 7 Letiores interim quod virgas evaserint, quam quod meruerint
principatum, Bernardus De pueris ad praelaturam promotis, Epist. 42. Itaque
ingenue Vega de Iustificat. lib. 8. cap. 8. agnoscit, usurpari apud Patres
nomen Meriti, ubi nulla est ratio Meriti, neque de congruo, neque de condigno.
a man may be said sometime to merit, that is, obtain and impetrate, what he
deserves not; and again, Miles Gallicanis sudoribus nec donativum meruit, nec
stipendium. Ammian. histor. l. 17.
not to merit, that is, obtain and impetrate what yet he has well deserved.
As also in this sense Solent meritum appellare quemlibet actum bonum, ratione
cujus aliquid aliud accipimus: ut ex Augustino perspicue patet, Bellar. de
Great. and lib. Arb. l. 1. c 14.
they are wont (Bellarmine himself also acknowledging it) to call all good
works Merits, for which we receive ought, though the reward be, as Mercedem
quandam esse dicimus, quae magis debetur ex gratia, quam ex justitia; sive quae
imputetur sec. gratiam, and non sec. debitum. Idem de Iustific. l. 1. c. 21.
he grants also that it may be, not of desert, right, or due debt, but of
favor and grace only. Wherein Bernard singularly well expounding their
meaning, and his own too, where he uses those and the like terms; Si
proprie appellentur ea quae dicimus merita nostra, spei quaedam sunt seminaria,
charitatis incentiva, occultae praedestinationis indicta, futurae
glorificationis praesagia, via regni, non causa regnandi, Bernard. de Great. and
lib. arb.
If we speak properly, says he, those things that we use to call Merits, are
certain seeds of Hope, sparks of Love, signs of our hidden Predestination,
presages of our future glorification; the way to the Crown, not the cause of
our Crowning.

I might also insist on that which Bellarmine has elsewhere, that Quod nos
dicimus mereri, Graeci dicunt (...), Bellarm. de Iustific. l. 5. c. 2.
to merit, as they speak, is no more than that which the Greeks call (...),
which word signifies not (...), i. dignum esse. Idem ibid. imo dignari: ut
Cicer. de orat. l. 3.
to be worthy, as he says, contrary to all use and authority, but (...),
Schol. Thucyd. (...), Suid (...). Schol. Sopho. l.
to be vouchsafed, reputed or esteemed as worthy, as also Non ait, ut digni
sitis, sed ut digni habeamini, Cajetan. in 2 Thoss. 1.5.
Cajetan himself therein following their own vulgar Latin, expounds it.
And whereas the same their vulgar Translation has it in bad and barbarous
Talibus hostiis promeretur Deus, Heb. 13.
Latin, and their Rhemists version in as bad or worse English, Rhemens. Heb.
13.
with such hosts God is promerited: Sensus est, talibus hostiis delectatur,
sive placatur Deus, ut habet commentarius Chrysostomi: vel talibus hostiis
placetur Deo, ut exponit Oecumenius, Bellarm. de Iustific. l. 5. c. 2.
The meaning of it is, says Bellarmine, that with such Sacrifices God is
delighted, or pacified, as Chrysostomes Commentary has it, (though indeed in
Chrysostomes Commentary, there is no such word, or any one word of exposition,
but the same word it self only) or is pleased, (well-pleased, it is word for
word in the Original) as Oecumenius expounds it. And Significat. Deum
delectari bonis, eisque conciliari, and induci ad benefaciendum iis qui been
operantur, Ibid.
it signifies, says he, that God is delighted in good works, and is
therewith conciliated, (that is, moved to befriend, as we say) and induced
thereby to do good unto those that do well. Which is that that we mean, when
we say that works are meritorious. Well it were indeed if they either meant or
maintained no more than is here said. Little controversy would there then be
between us and them.

But to let these things pass, lest I be in this point overlong. Do all
Catholics deny indeed even to works done of Faith and Grace all merit of
condignity? And is there no difference at all among them therein? Yea does not
Bellarmine himself maintain the contrary? Or does he not know that there is
difference among them herein? and that the most of them (of later times
especially) go the other way? Yes undoubtedly. But he deals herein, as he
does in the point of Adoration of Images. It is a Imagines coli eadem cultu cum
Prototypo, sive quo coluntur, quorum sunt imagines; Christi and Dei latria: est
opinio communi Theologorum sententia recepta. Sic Thom. Albert. ^alud. Almam.
Marsil. Maiol. Capreol. Cajetan. and caeteri juniores. Azor. institut. lib. 8.
cap. 6. and Greg. de Valent. de Idolatr. lib. 2. cap. 6.
common Tenent among them, that Images are to be worshipped with the self
same worship that those are worshipped with, whose Images they are: and so
consequently the Images of God and Christ with divine Worship. And Bellarmine
himself, though a little qualifying it, both allows and defends it, Si de
reipsa agatur, admitti potest Imagines posse coli improprie vel per accidens,
eodem gene^e cultus, quo exemplar ipsum colitur, etc. Bellarmin. de cult.
Sanct. lib. 2. cap. 23.
that by accident, or improperly they may be and are so worshipped; to wit,
either Quando imago accipitur pro ipso exemplari, cujus vicem gerit, Ibid.
as those Images are Gods or Christ's Deputies, and so receive for God or Christ
himself the worship due to either; or Cum exemplar consideramus quasi imagine
vestitum, etc. Ibid.
as men conceive God or Christ clad in that Image, as a King in his roabes, and
so worship the Image in the same worship together with either. But yet, says
he, Quantum ad modum loquendi, praefertim in concione ad populum, non est
dicendum imagines ulla^ adorari debere latria; sed e conirario, non debere sic
adorari. Bellarm. ibid c. 22.
you must not in any wise tell the people so in the Pulpit, that any Images are
to be worshipped with Divine worship; but the conrtary rather, that they are
not to be worshipped. And why so? Forsooth, Offendit aures Catholicorum.
because many good Catholics cannot endure to hear that Images should so be
adored: and again, Praebet occasionem haereticis liberius blasphemandi, Ibid.
Because it gives Heretics occasion to speak more freely evil of them.

And in like manner deals he in this matter of Merit. Because our Writers
justly tax them for extreme arrogance therein. Bellarmine here flatly denies
it, and says that none of them maintain it, and we do but belly them in
charging them with it. And yet, to pass by what before was alleged out of
him; and what he says elsewhere again, that Remissio venialium justo Dei
judicio redditur bonis meritis justorum. Bellarm. de Iustific l. 1. c. 21.
the remission of some sins is even in Justice due to man's good merit; Where
professedly he handles the Controversy concerning the merits of man's works,
he concludes the direct contrary to what here he avoweth, and condemns what
he averreth here, as no better than Heresy.

The very Title of his Discourse is, Opera justorum ex charitate facta esse
meritoria vitae aeternae ex condigno. Bellar. de Iustif. l. 5. c. 16.
That men's works done of charity do condignely merit or deserve Life eternal;
and that, Non solum ratione pacti, sed etiam ratione operum, Ibid. c. 17.
not only in regard of Gods Covenant, but in regard of the works themselves.

In the Discourse it self he tells us, that Catholici omnes agnoscunt, opera
bona justorum esse meritoria vitae aeternae, Ibid. cap. 16.
All Catholics hold that they merit life eternal. That Aliqui censent non
esse utendum vocibus his de condigno and de congruo. Sed absolute esse
dicendum, Opera justorum esse and meritoria vitae aeternae ex gratia Dei. Ita
Thom. Waldens. de Sacram. tom. 3. cap 7. and Paul Burg. addit. ad Lyr. in Psalm.
35.
some of them indeed would have no mention made either of condignitie, or
congruitie; Alii volunt esse meritoria de condigno largo modo, quod respectu
condigni proprie sumpti dicatur congruum, respectu congrui possit dici
condignum. Ita Durand. in 2. Sent. d. 27. q. 2. Et Greg. Arimin. in 1. Sent. d.
17. q. 1. art. 2.
Some go a middle way between congruity and condignity; and Quidam
distinguunt inter dignum and condignum, and meritum ex digno admittunt, non ex
condigno.
some again would distinguish between dignity and condignity. But that
Communis sententia Theologorum admittit simpliciter meritum de condigno.
Bellarm. ibid.
the common opinion of their Divines admits merit of condignity: which he
also concludes with.

Again he says that Quidam existimant opera bona non esse meritoria vitae
aeternae ex condigno ratione operis, sed tantum ratione pacti, and
acceptationis divinae, Bellarm. de Iustific. l. 5 c. 17.
some of their Divines hold, that such works do not merit life eternal
condignely, in regard of the work it self, or the worth of it, but in regard
of Gods Covenant and his acceptance of them only; And that Ita Scot. in 1.
Sent. d. 17. qu. 2. quem alii quoque ex veteribus scholasticis sequuntur.
thus only the Ancient Schoolmen held. Non defunt qui censent esse meritoria
ex condigno ratione operis, etiamsi nulla extaret divina conventio. Ita
Cajetan. in Thom. p. prima secundae q. 114. a. 1. and Dominic. a Soto de Not.
and Great. cap. 7.
Others, that they merit it condignly in regard of the work it self, and the
worth of it, albeit that God with man had made no such agreement at all. Nobis
media sententia probabilior videtur, esse scil. meritoria ex condigno ratione
pacti and operis simul, Bellar. ibid.
He himself thinks best to go the middle way, as he says the Council of
Trent does; to wit, that they merit it condignely, in regard both of the
agreement and the work jointly together. And that we may not mistake his
meaning herein, he tells us further, that he does Non quod sine pacto and
acceptatione non habeat opus bonum proportionem ad vitam aeternam ex operis
dignitate, Ibid.
not thus determine, as if he held, that such works did not in regard of the
dignity and worth of them well deserve life eternal, albeit no such agreement
were; but merit it in regard of Gods gracious acceptance only: Detrabitur de
gloria Christi, si merita nostra sint ita imperfecta, ut non sint meritoria ex
condigno, nisi ratione acceptationis Dei, Ibid.
for it were a disgrace to God, if his grace in us should be so poor and
imperfect as to merit no otherwise: (as the Lovaine Professors also, too base
and beggarly for us Absit ut justi vitam aeternam expectent sicut pauperes
eleemosynam, multo namque gloriosius est ipsos quasi victores and
triumphaetores eam possidere, tanquam palmam suu sudoribus debitam. Ruard.
Tapper. explic. art. L^van. tom. 2. c. 9.
to crave it and have it as an alms:) and that they therefore deserve it,
because Ita ut in bono opere sit quaedam proportio and aequalitas ad praemium,
vitae aeternae, Ibid.
there is a kind of proportion and equality; yea not Satis est proportionalis
aequalitas, Ibid. c. 18.
a proportionable only, but Modus futuri judicii erit sec. justitiam
commutativam, quoniam Deus non solum constituet proportionalem aequalitatem
inter merita and praemia, sed etiam absolutam aequalitatem inter opera and
mercedes, Ibid. cap. 14.
an absolute equality (for so he says in express terms elsewhere) between
the work and the wages: And that is properly merit of condignity indeed, Vbi
opus est per se aequale mercedi, Ibid. l. 1. c. 21. vere par mercedi, Ibid. l.
5. c. 17.
when the work is equal of it self to the wages: which merit of condignitie
he says therefore is Meritum vere and proprie, Bellar. de poenit. l. 4. c. 8.
truly and properly, Simpliciter and absolute tale. Idem de justific. l. 5. c.
18.
simply and absolutely so termed; Meritum ex justitia and sec. debitum. Ibid.
l. 1. c. 21. Ex justo Dei judicio, Ibid. l. 5. c. 16.
Merit in Justice, or of right and due debt: which Meritum ex gratia magis quam
justitia: meritum imperfectum, Ibid l. 1. c 21. Meritum impetrationis tantum,
Ibid. and in Indic. de lib. concord. sup.
that other of congruitie is not. And such works therefore, say our Rhemists,
are Rhemens. in 2 Timothy 4.8.
truly and properly meritorious, and full worthy of everlasting life, so that
Heaven is the due and just stipend or recompense, which God by his justice
owes to persons so working; and that Iidem in Hebr. 6.10.
so far forth, that he should be unjust, if he should not render Heaven for
the same: Albeit Damnatum Parisiis an. Dom. 1354. Fr. Guidonis enunciatum hoc:
Quod homo meretur vitam aeternam de condigno: quod si non daretur ei, fieret
injuria, and quod Deus faceret sibi injuriam. In Bibliothec. Patr. tom. 4.
edit. 2.
that assertion was by the Divines of Paris almost 300. years since condemned
as false and heretical; and by Durandus, says Bellarmine himself, Temerarium
and blasphemum esse dicere, Deum fore injustum si meritis hominum justorum non
reddat mercedem, etc. Ex Durando Bellarm. de Iustific. l. 5. c. 16. Vide
Durandum in 2. Sent. d. 27. q. 2. Nam quod Bellarm. promissam, addit, de suo
est.
it is censured (and that not unjustly) not as bold only, but as blasphemous.

But why is Gods agreement needful then? or why does Bellarmine require that
also? He tells you himself; not for any defect or want of worth in the
work; but Requiritur pactum and conventio: nisi enim id praecesserit, non
potest ex justitia commutativa, neque ex distributiva etiam, opus alterum
obligare, quantumvis eximium sit, and aequale mercedi, Idem de Iustific. l. 5.
c. 14.
because that without some such agreement no reward or wages can of right be
claimed for any work, albeit of it self otherwise it be never so worthy.

Lastly, he tells us that Non desunt gravissimi Autores, qui sentiant, Omne
opus bonum hominis justi and habitu charitatis praediti, vitae aeternae
meritorium esse, Ibid. c. 15.
there want not very grave Authors, who think that every good work of a just
man endued with Charity, meriteth or deserves life eternal. Probabilius
videtur ad meritum exigi, ut opus bonum, vel tunc cum fit, actu imperetur a
charitate, atque in Deum ut finem ultimum referatur; vel certe nascatur ab actu
imperato a charitate, atque in Deum ante relato; quod est virtute non actu in
Deum referri, Ibid.
Which he thus far forth also subscribeth unto, if this condition be added,
that not only the party doing it be endued with Charity, but the very work
it self also do actually, or virtually at least proceed from Charity, and be
done for Gods sake. So that not only the whole course and tenor of a godly
man's life uprightly and religiously led, being laid altogether in one lump,
but every particular such action of it, considered alone by it self, should by
this their doctrine deserve no less than Heaven at Gods hands. And then belike
so often as they have done any good work merely for Gods sake, so often have they
deserved an Heaven at least of him. It were absurd and senseless for a sorry
beggar to imagine (that I may use Bellarmines own comparison) that by weeding
though a whole day in the Kings garden at White Hall, he had in regard of the
worth of the work done by him, deserved an hundred Iacobusses, because his
Majesty had promised for his days work to give him such wages. Si opus
aliquod sit multo inferius mercede ex conventione promissa, ut si Dominus
vineae conduceret operariors, and non denarium diurnum, sed centum nummos
aureos pro mercede promitteret, non esset meritumex condigno ratione operis,
Bellar. de Iustific. l. 5. c. 17.
Bellarmine himself will not deny it. But it were much more absurd for such an
one to imagine, that for every weed that in that his days work he had pulled
up (were it done out of never so much love to his Sovereign) he had deserved,
I say not an Earldom, or a Dukedom, but a Crown at least or a Kingdom. And
yet is there far greater disproportion here between the work that we do,
and the reward that we expect, than could there be between the work and the
wages: Since that Finiti ad infinitum nulla est proportio. itaque recte
Fulgent. ad Monim lib. 1. Tantum ibi gratia, divinae retributions exub^rat, ut
incomparabiliter atque ineffabiliter omne meritum quamvis bonae and ex Deo
datae humanae voluntatis and operationis excedat.
between finite and infinite there is no proportion at all. And therefore
says our Countryman Thomas of Walden, though no friend to Wickliffe; for he
wrote professedly against him; Quid dignum facimus ut participes coelestibus
fieri inveniamur? etc. Thom. Wald. citante Vega de merit. q. 4.
What can we do that should be worthy of heavenly things, which the Apostle
says, that Romans 8.18.
The sufferings of this life are not worthy of? Reputo igitur saniorem
Theologum, fideliorem Catholicum, and Script. sanctis magis concordem, qui tale
Meritum simpliciter abnegat, Idem ibid.
I account him therefore the sounder Divine, the better Catholic, (and the
Protestants belike then are the better Catholics herein), and one that agrees
more with Gods Word, that simply and utterly denies such Merit. Totis licet
animae and corporis laboribus desudemus, totis licet obedientiae viribus
exerceamur, nihil tamen condignum merito pro coelestibus bonis compensare and
offerre valebimus, Eus. Emiss. nomine, hom. 3. ad Monach.
And though a man, says an uncertain Author, but alleged commonly by them,
as Eusebius Emissenus, should with all the strength of body and mind exercise
himself to the utmost, in obedience to God all his life long, yet could he
bring out nothing, that by way of condign merit could countervaile Heavens
happiness. For, considering the extent and continuance of it, Quanto labor
digna est requies quae non habet finem? Si verum vis computare and verum
judicare; aeterna requies aeterno labor recte emitur. Sed noli timere: in
sericors est Deus, Aug. in Psalm. 93.
if we cast our reckonings up aright, says Augustine, it should be eternal
travel at least, that should purchase eternal rest. And considering the
dignity and excellency of it, Si homo mill annis serviret Deo etiam
ferventissime, non meretur ex condigno dimidiam diem esse in regno caelorum,
Anselm. de Mensur, c^uc. c. 2.
Though a man, says Anselme, should serve God in most fervent manner for a
thousand years together, yet should he not thereby condignly merit to be but
half a day in Heaven. And (...), Chrysostom. in Matthew. hom 79.
though the godly have done a whole million of good deeds, says Chrysostom,
yet that such a Crown, such an Heaven, and so great Honor should for so small
pidling matters (in comparison thereof) be conferred on them, it is of Gods
free Grace, and (as he there also implies) not of due debt, or of their
des^rt. For, (...). Idem ibid.
It is of justice, says he, that the other are punished; it is of grace that
these are crowned, that is, there is Non tibi reddit debitam ^oenam, sed donat
indebitam gratiam, Aug. in Psalm. 31.
deserved pain, as Augustine speaks, repaid the one, Grace undeserved freely
bestowed on the other. Anselme, it seems, thought he could not in an hundred,
nay in a thousand years, do that, that they are able to do in less than an
hour. He thought and taught that a man could not in a thousand years, by all
that ever he did, or could do, merit half a days abode in Heaven; and they
think and teach (if they think at least as they teach) that a man may in much
less than half a days space do that, that shall merit more than a thousand
thousand years, even an eternal abode in Heaven. Chrysostom thought a man
could not with a million of good works do that, that they think they can do
with any one alone. For so many thousands of them, says he, cannot in justice
deserve the Kingdom of Heaven. Any one alone, say they, of those that we do,
can do it. Jacob deemed himself unable with all that he had done or could
do, to require those favors, even in his Temporal estate, that God had
conferred upon him: These men hold that they can by some one good deed of
theirs alone, not requite God only for what they have already received of him,
(for Facilius and minus est reddere aequivalens ejus quod quis accepit ab ali^,
quameum constituere debitorem: quia ad constituendum eum debitorem requiritur
quod plus reddat quam acceperit, ut sic ratione plurium alius efficiatur
debtor, Durand. in 2. Sent d. 27. q. 2.
that must be done first, Etsi proximo forte videatur quis reddere plus quam
debeat; Deo tamea nemo unquam reddit quod debet. Bernard. de Diverse. 36. Et
hinc Thom. Bradward. de Cause. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 39. Nullus potest reddere
plenarie debitum quod accepit a Deo, quare nec quicquam mereri ab eo ex pure
debito and condigno.
which no man indeed can do, ere they can merit ought at his hands) but engage
him also to do further deservedly for them, even to the conferring of life
eternal, and celestial glory on them.

Thus we have seen, both what they hold, howsoever they seem sometime ashamed
of it, and therefore one while deny, what another while they affirm: As also
how contrary their presumptuous conceits and positions in this kind are to the
humble confessions and acknowledgements of Gods sincere Servants, as well
recorded in the Word, as reported elsewhere, yea Vide supra ex Bellarm. de
Iustific. lib. 5. cap. 7.
related, alleged, and taken notice of by themselves.

Superbiae species est, qua quu credit habere pro meritis suis bona, quae a Deo
habet. Gul. Perald sum. tom. 2. tract. 6. part. 3. c. 2.
proud and Pharisaicall fancies, and return home again to our selves; this
lastly should persuade us with the Apostle Saint Paul, Philip. 4.11.
to rest content with whatsoever estate God shall see good to place us in, with
whatsoever he shall please to confer on us, and afford us, or whatsoever he
shall think fit to call us unto; considering that we are not worthy of ought,
but unworthy wholly of whatsoever we have, be it more or less. And if we be
unworthy of what we have, be it never so little; then have we more than we are
worthy of, even when we have least: And if we have more than we are worthy
of; then have we no cause to repine, murmr, grow discontent, or complain,
if we have not so much as such and such have; if we cannot go, or fare as
such and such do; if we have not so good trading, or our houses so well
furnished, our wives and children so apparelled, as such and such have.

(...). Hesiod. Oper. lib. 1. Vicinus dives cupiditatem irritat. Sen. epist. 7.
each one striveth to go beyond another, in pride of apparel, in building, in
expense in all kind of superfluity and excess; that Instat equis auriga suis
vincentibus; illum Fraeteritum temnens extremos inter euntem, Horat. Sat. 1.
like men that run in a race, we cast our eyes forward on those that go
before us, but we forget to look back unto those that come short of us. (...).
Plut. de Tranquil.
Men and women look upon those many times that are of higher degree than
themselves, and would feign match them, and go even with them. Or suppose it
be but on those, that are of the same rank with themselves: they see how
they go, how they fare, how they spend; (and it is many times much more than
they are well able to do, or than their means will well afford) and because
they are loath to come behind any of their own degree; (that they deem were a
disgrace to them;) they begin to think thus with themselves; What difference
is there betwixt us and them? and why should not we then do as they do? And
hence arises (...). Chrysostom. in 2 Thessal. Homil. 2. Quod enixe concupiscunt
ut sit, centabescunt quod esse non possit, Gilbert. in Cant. 19.
a discontent in their minds, because they want means to do what they desire.
Which their discontent, with their present estate, together with the inordinate
and immoderate desire of that which they have not, and feign would have, only
because they see others have it; is not only an occasion (...), Plutarch. de
Tranquil.
to deprive and bereave them (with Ester. 5.13.
Haman, and k Ahab) of the comfort and benefit of what they have; but (...).
Plut. ibid. Quantumlibet saepe obligati, si quid unum neges, hoc solum
meminerunt quod negatum est, Plin. epist. 4. lib. 3. (...), Basil. Caesar. hom.
5. Qu^d facit oblivionem acceptorum? cupiditas accipiendorum, Senec. epist. 82.
Non quid habeamus, sed quid petamus, inspicimus; non in id quod est, sed quod
appetitur intenti. Nec ea intuemur que nos aliis praeposuere; sed ea solum quae
praecedentium fortuna ostentat. Non potest quisquam and invidere and gratias
agere. Idem de benef. lib. 3. cap. 3. Non quod habet numerat; tantum quod non
habet, optat. Manil. Astronom. l.
it is as a grave also, to bury in the thankful remembrance of those manifold
mercies that God has vouchsafed them, above many other, (it may be) even of
their own rank; as if God had done nothing for them, (as those murmuring
Jews charged him, In quo dilenisti nos? Malac. 1.2. Et sic isti, (...); (ita
quippe legendum.) (...), Plut. de Tranquil.
Wherein have thou loved us? that is, showed any love to us, done ought for
us?) unless they may spend, and go, and be maintained in it, as such and such
do. Yea so far often does this corruption prevail with not a few, that with
Inops potentem dum vult imitari perit. In prato quodam rana conspexit bovem, Et
tacta invidia tantae magnitudinis, Rugosam inflavit pellem; tum natos suos
interrogavit, an bove esset latior. Illi negarant; rursus intendit cutem majore
nisu. -- Novissime indignata dum vult validius inflare sese, rupto jacuit
corpore. Phaedr. Fab. 28. Vide^tur and Horat. sermon. l. 2. Sat. 3. Hinc Martial.
l. 10. epist. 79. Grandis ut exiguam bos ranam ruperat ^lim; Sic, puto,
Torquatus rumpet Otacilium. Sanum itaque Greg. Naz consilium de Eutax. (...).
the Frog in the Fable, 1 King. 21.1 -- 4.
they stretch their states so far to get even with others, that at length all
cracketh and comes to naught, and both they and theirs rue it in the end.

Again, others having sometime had more plentiful means, Matthew. 26.39.
(...); Epictet. Arian. dissert. l. 2. c. 17. Deus quae voluit qui vult, semper
est foelix. Sic enim homo ab humanis in divina dirigitur, cum voluntati humanae
voluntas divina praefertur. August. in Joan 52. Vide quid aequins sit, aut te
voluntati divinae conformando subdere, aut quod ipsa tuae subserviat voluntati,
Gerson. consol. Theol. l. 2. c. 1.
Not my will, but thy will be done, and so practice what they daily Mat. 6.10.
pray; and with Job, Job 1.21. Abstulit: sed and dedit. Sen. ep. 87. Tulisti,
quoniam tuus erat, Bern. de Temp. 110.
God has given, and God has taken again; blessed be his Name; and (...).
Epictet. Enchir. (...); Idem Arian. dissert. l. 1. c. 11. Ita Hieron. ad
Julian. Tulifti liberos quos ipse dederas. Non contristor quod recepisti; ago
gratias quod dedisti. Et Julian. Imper. apud Ammian. l. 25 Vitam reposcenti
naturae, tanquam debtor bonae fidei redditurus exulto.
so return God his own with thanks: Yet out of a pride of heart and
stoutnesse of stomach, ( Quanti humiliantur, and humiles non sunt? Bern. in
Cant. 34. Et nec fractis cer vicibus inclinantur, Hieron. ad Aug. ep. 26.
Many are humbled, says Bernard, yet are not humble:) not enduring to strike
sail, or to stoop an inch, they will strive to live still according to their
former means, and shape their expense not by what they have, but by what they
have had: and so whereas the Lord in mercy had yet left them a competency
still, (...), Plut. de Tranquil. Merito itaque Comic. Stich. 1. 2. Eam mulierem
sapientem praedicat, quae aequo animo pati potest sibi esse pejus quam fuit.
they cast the helve (as we say) after the hatchet, and overthrow all: Or
(...), Dion. Caff. hist. l. 57. Apicius cum sestertium millies in culinam
congessisset, aere alieno oppressus, rationibus inspectis, superfuturum sibi
festertium centies computavit, and velut in ultima fame victurus si festertium
centies vixisset, veneno vitam finivit, Sen. ad Helv. c. 10. Hinc Martial. lib.
3. epist. 22. Dederas, Apici, ter trecenties ventri: Sed adhuc supererat
centies tibi laxum. Hoc tu gravatus ut famem and sitim, far, summa venenum
potione duxisti. Nil est, Apici, tibi gulosius factum.
they grow into such inward grief and discontent, because they cannot do
still as formerly they have done, as either breaks their hearts and shortneth
their days, or altogether disableth them unto the cheerful performance of any
good office either to God or man.

All which corruptions might soon be helped, if we could with Jacob here say,
and think as we say; Non sum dignus, Domine; Lord I am not worthy of ought.
If we would look out abroad, but (...), Plut. de Tranquil. (...), Favorin. --
majori se pauperiorum Turbae comparet, -- Horat. Sat. 1. Si vis gratus esse
adversus Deum, and adv. vitam tuam, cogita quam multos antecesseris. Cum
aspexeris quot te antecedant, cogita quot sequantur, Senec. ep. 15. Aspice
quanto major pars sit pauperum. Idem ad Helv. cap. 12.
cast our eyes now and then on those that have far less than we have. As
Aristippus, when a friend of his came to condole with him for some land that he
had lost, demanded of him what he had to live on himself, and when he made
answer that he had but some one small close only, he told him, that (...);
Aristip. apud Plut. de Tranquil.
there was cause rather for Aristippus to bemoane him, than for him to bemoane
Aristippus, who had more than thrice as much land still left him to live on
than he had. It is hard but we should find some, with (...), Diogen. apud
Plut. de prof. not. de muribus; quos and reliqis suis vescentes parasitos suos
appestitabat, Laert.
the Cynick, yea not a few be we never so needy, that would be glad of our
relics. Or* if we would but (...), -- Homer. Odyss. (...). and Diog. apud
Laert. and Plut. de Sanit. tuend. Domum redeamus, Cic. Bruto.
cast our eyes home-ward, and consider our selves, and our own unworthiness
of ought, we might soon see how little cause we have to be discontent in such
cases. For have we but little left? It is more than we deserve. Has God taken
much from us? he might well have took more. As Anytus, a Gentleman of Athens,
told his guests that were at table with him, when Alcibiades a young Gallant
came in a revelling humor and took away the one half of his plate that stood
either for show or service upon the cupboard, and they marvelled much at it,
that Anytus could so take it, affirming that he had dealt very unkindly with
them, (...), Athen. Dipnosoph. l. 12 Vel ut Plut. in Alcib. (...), Pulo, tamen
Plut. ex Athen. castigandum: qui and in Erot. sic extulit, (...) Xyland.) (...).
Nay rather, quoth he, he has dealt very kindly with us, that he has left us
half, when he might have took all: for it was all his, or at his command. So
it is here indeed. He takes part, that Act. 17.25. 1 Timothy 6.17.
gave all; and that might therefore as well take all as part; because 1 Chronicles.
29.12, 14, 16.
all is but his own. They tell of a Jewish Doctor, that was called Rabbi Gam
zoth, ex ore D. Leifeild.
Rabbi This-too, because he used always to say, whatsoever befell him, (...)
Etiam hoc bonum est, Et hoc etiam; Et hoc; Sic Ezech. Esa. 39.8. Et Antigonus
morbo correptus leviusculo, (...). Plut. Apophth. (...), etc. Plut. de
Tranquil.
This is good too, and this too, and this too, and this too, etc. And in like
manner may we well say, how little soever be left us, This is more than I am
worthy of, and this too, and this too, etc. If God shall again and again
too, never so often, impair our estates, and by peece-meale withdraw from us
what he has formerly conferred on us: And consequently as Doles quod
amisisti? gaude quod evasisti, Sen. excerpt. do remed. fortuit.
he said to one that though with loss of goods, had in safety yet escaped
himself to the shore, (...), Plut. de Tranquil,
not repine or murmur for what is lost, but be thankful to God Esa. 1.9.
Lament. 3.22. Ezra 9.13, 15. Nehem. 9.31.
for what is left, and (...), Greg. Naz. Epita. Patr. Habere siquidem eripitur;
habuisse nunquam, Sen.
for what formerly we have had.

Hitherto we have considered of Jacobs unworthiness, by himself Gods
goodness.
we come now to see Gods undeserved goodness to Jacob.

Wherein there offer themselves to our consideration; 1. The grounds of it, and
2. The fruit and effect of it.


The grounds of it are two; Gods Mercy, and Gods Truth:


His Mercy in promising what he had now performed; his Truth in performing
and making good what he had promised.

Mercy: where observe we that whatsoever we have or hope from God, it is all
of mere mercy. Gods Mercy.


Unworthy of all thy Mercies; says Jacob. And, Psalm. 103.4.
who Coronat te. Vulg. and Vatabl. quia (...) corona. Vnde Aug. de verb. Ap. 2.
Post redemptionem ab omni corruptione quid restat nisi corona justitiae? Ipsa
certe restat; sed etiam sub ipsa vel in ipsa non fit caput turgidum, ut
recipiat coronam. Dicturus erat, Coronat me; merita mea fatetur, etc. debitum
redditur non donatur. Audi, etc. De miscricordia te coronat, de miseratione te
coronat. Non enim dignus fuisti quem vocaret, and vocatum justificaret, and
justificatum glorificaret. Et de sp. and lit. c. 33. Hoe fiet in judicio, ubi
necessarium fuit commemorare miseric. and miserat. Vbi jam exigi debita and
reddi merita sic possent videri, ut nullus esset misericordiae locus.
Necessaria itaque est nobis Salvatoris misericordia, sive cum convertimur, sive
cum praeliamur, sive cum coronamur. Idem de Corrept. and Great. cap. 13.
crowns, or Cingit, vel circumtegit, Iun. (...) sicut Psalm. 5.12.
Benevolentia tua tanquam umbone circumteges eum.
invironeth thee rather, with Mercies; says the Psalmist: and Psalm. 103.10.
does not deal with thee according to thy deserts. Nam si secundum merita tibi
daret, damnaret te, August. in Psalm. 102. Si quod debetur redderet, utique
damnaret. Idem in Psalm. 31. Si vellet pro meritis agere, non inveniret, nisi
quod damnaret. Idem in Psalm. 94.
For if he should so do, he should damn thee; says Augustine. And, Psalm.
32.10.
who so trusts in the Lord, Mercy shall (...)
encompasse him on every side; says David.

Now this point, Confirmation.
that all that we either receive or expect is of Gods Mercy, howsoever it be
by the former consideration sufficiently confirmed. For Vise August. supr. de
verb. Ap. Sermon. 2.
if we be not worthy of ought, then is nothing of merit. And if nothing of
merit, then all consequently of mercy.

Yet consider we for the further proof of it these two things; The manner of
Gods Promises, and The prayers of Gods Saints.


Promises of God run all upon Mercy. Exodus 20.6. and 34.7. Deuteronomy. 5.10.
Gods promises.
Showing mercy to thousands, with them that love him, and keep his
Commandments. And, Luke 1.50.
His mercy is for ever and ever on those that fear him; Psalm. 103.17, 18.
and keep Covenants with him, and think upon his Commandments to do them.
And, Malac. 3.17.
I will spare them (and there is mercy then) that fear me, and think on my
Name, as a man spares his Son that serves him. Iam. 2.13. Misericordiam qui
non praestat alteri, tollit sibi. Chrysol. ser. 42.
There shall be judgment without mercy to those that show no mercy. And, In
illo judicio, in que justi coronantur, and injusti damnantur, alii cum
misericordia, alii sine miseric. judicandi. Nam cum dicit, Iudicium erit sine
miseric. iis qui non fecerunt misericordiam manifestatur in his, in quibus
inveniuntur bona opera misericordiae judicium cum misericordia fieri, ac per
hoc ipsam etiam misericordiam meritis bonorum operum reddi, Aug. de Corrept.
and Great. c. 13.
If without mercy to those that show no mercy; then with mercy even to those
also that show mercy; says Augustine. Yea so says our Savior himself; Mat.
5.7.
Blessed are the merciful; for they shall have mercy showed them. And, Romans
6.23.
The grace of God is ( Sicut Joan. 12.50. and 17.3. Quod and Piscator observat.
that is, brings) life eternal; says the Apostle. Which place Augustine
entreating of, Mors merito stipendium, quia militiae Diabolicae mors aeterna
tanquam debitum redditur. Vbi cum posset dicere, and recte dicere, Stipendium
justitiae vita; maluit dicere, Gratia Dei vita aeterna, ut hinc intelligeremus,
Deum nos ad vitam aternam, non pro meritis nostris, sed pro sua miseratione
perducere, August. de Great. and lib. arb. cap. 9. and Gloss. Ordin. in Romans 6.
The Apostle, says he, having said, the wages of sin is Death; because
everlasting death is repaied as of debt due to the service of Sin and Satan; he
does not say, albeit he might also so have said; but the reward of
Righteousness is Life eternal: But he chose rather to say, Gods Grace (or
Gratia nisi gratis sit, gratia non est, August. Enchir. c. 107. Gratia enim
vocatur, quia gratis datur. Idem in Joan. 3. Quomodo est ergo gratia, si non
gratis datur: quomodo est gratia, si ex debito redditur? Idem de Great. Christi,
c. 23. Nisi gratuita non est gratia. Ibid. c. 31. Nullo modo est gratia, nisi
fuerit omni modo gratuita. Idem de pecc. Orig. cap. 24.
free favor) is Life eternal; that thereby we might learn that God brings
us to Life eternal, not for our Merits, but of his Mercy. In regard whereof
Tertullian also very fitly terms (alluding to military matters) Mortis
stipendium; Vitae donativum. Tertul. de Resurr. carn. Quo vocabulo usus est and
Durand. in 2. Sent. d. 27. q. 2.
the one a Stipend, the other a Donative; because, as Bernard says well,
Aeternam vitam nullis potes operibus promereri, nisi gratis detur and illa,
Bern. de Temp. 48. Vnde and site subjungit Idem ibid. Ipse enim peccata
condonat, ipse donat merita, and praemia nihilominus ipse redonat.
it cannot be had but by donation, or free gift. And Merces ex dono nulla est,
quae debetur ex opere. Hilur. in Matthew. Can. 20.
if of free gift, then not of due debt, or desert for any work done, says
Hilarie. For, Debitum and donum non consistunt, Faber. in Romans 8.
gift and debt cannot stand together; says Faber. Yea Cardinal Cajetan
himself on those words of the Apostle, Non dicit, quod stipendia justitiae
vita aeterna: ut intelligamus non ex nostris meritis, sed ex gratuito Dei dono
assequi nos vitam aeternam, Cajet. in Romans 6.
He says not, The wages of righteousness is Life eternal; but the grace,
that is, the gift of God, is life eternal; that we may understand that we
attain life eternal not by our merits, but by Gods free gift. For which cause
also he adds, In Christ Jesus our Lord. Ecce meritum; ecce justitia, cujus
stipendium est vita aelerna: nobis autem est don^m ratione ipsius Christi Jesus.
Idem ibid.
Behold the merit; behold the righteousness, the wages whereof is life
eternal; but to us in regard of Christ himself it is a gift. And lastly, to
add one place more of so many as might be added; Psalm. 62.12.
With thee is mercy, says the Psalmist to God: for thou will reward every man
according to his works. Concerning which words Gregory, (on that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 143.8.
Make me to hear thy mercy in the morning; which Greg. in Psalm. Poenit. 7.
he expounds the resurrection) having moved this Question; Si illa Sanctorum
foelicitas etc. misericordia est, and non meritis ^oquiritur, ^bi erit, quod
scriptum est, Et tu reddes etc. Si secundum opera redditur, quomodo
misericordia aestimabitur?
If the happiness of the Saints be of mercy, and not of merit, how is it said,
Thou will render to each one according to his works? If according to men's works
it be rendered, how may it be deemed mercy? He thus answers; Sed aliud est
focund^m opera reddere, and aliud propter ipsa opera reddere, Greg. ibid.
It is one thing to render according to works, and another thing to render the
reward for the works themselves. In eo quod sec. opera dicitur, ipsa operum
qualitas intelligitur, ut cujus apparuerint bona opera, ejus sit and retributio
gloriosa, Ib.
In the one is noted only the quality of the work, (a far other exposition
than (...) recte vertitur, secund. in meritum, vel promerito and dignitate
operum. Quid est enim reddere sec. opera, nisi reddere sicut opera merentur?
Bellarm. de justific. l. 5 c. 2.
Bellarmine gives of it) that those that have done well, shall receive a
royal reward. (And in the other then consequently should be implied an
equality between the work and the wages. But) Illi namque beatae vitae, in
qua cum Deo and de Deo vivitur, nullus poterit aequari labor, nulla opera
comparari, etc. Greg. ibid.
No labor or work of ours, (nothing that we can either do or endure) by the
Apostles own testimony, can be equal to, or once compared with that blessed
life, wherein men shall live of God and with God. For, Rom 8.18. Minora sunt
omnia quae patimur and indigna, pro quorum laboribus tanta rependatu futurorum
merces bonorum, Amb. epist. 12.
the sufferings of this life, (yea Ne si unus quidem universas sustineret,
Bern. de Temp. 48.
all of them, if any one man could and should undergo them all, says Bernard,
(...), Macar. homil. 15.
from the very beginning of the world too, says Macarius, unto the worlds end)
are not worthy, says the Apostle, of the Glory that shall be revealed (
(...). Non dicit, nobis, sed, in nobis. Neque enim crimus otiosi spectatores,
sed participes glo^iae, 1 Joan. 3.2. Bern. de Praecept. and Dispens.
not, unto us, as he also well observes, but) in us. And, Quid sunt merita
omnia ad tantam gloriam? Non sunt talia hominum merita, ut propter ca vita
aeterna debeatur ex jure; aut Deus injuriam faceret, si eam non donaret, Bern.
de Temp. 48. Itaque site Prosper. in Psalm. 102. Per candem misericordiam
dantur corona meritorum, per quam data sunt merita coronarum.
what are all man's merits then, says Bernard, to it; that it should of right
be due to them: or that God should do men wrong, if he bestowed it not on
them? as Rhem. in Heb. 6.10.
our Rhemists before affirmed that he should. Neque gratia salutis operibus
debetur, sed solius Dei bonitati, Iac. Faber. in Luc. 3.
The grace therefore of salvation is not due to works, says Faber, (
Deleatur, Index expurg. Belgic.
which the Popish purgers cross out of him) but to the goodness of God alone.
Non in Meritis, sed in misericordia Dei salus humana consistit, Origin. in Romans
l. 9. cap. 11.
Nor does man's salvation consist in man's merits, but in Gods mercy, says
Origin.

prayers of Gods Saints strike all upon this string. Of David, Chrysostom
observes, The Saints Prayers.
that though he were (...), Chrysostom. de Compunct. 2.
a man of singular parts for sincerity and piety, by 1 Samuel 13.14.
Gods own testimony of him; and (...), Idem in Psalm. 12.
had many good deeds that he might have alleged, yet (...). Ibid.
in all his prayers ordinarily (...), Ibid.
he has recourse only to Gods mercy, (...), Ibid.
that alone he pleads, that alone he relieth upon, (...), Idem de Compunct, 2.
and desires to be saved by. (...), Chrysostom. in Psalm. 12.
Let others, says he, allege and plead what they list; Psalm. 13.5.
I will hope in thy mercy: that I plead and allege, and that do I hang all
mine hope upon. And, Psalm. 4.2.
Have mercy on me, and hear me; and Psalm. 6.2.
Have mercy on me, for I am weak. And, (...), Chrysostom. in Psalm. 6.
The same song, says he, have we need to sing every one of us, albeit we had
done ten thousand times ten thousand good deeds, and attained even to the
very highest pitch and perfection of righteousness: (...), Idem in Psalm. 4.
for it is yet of mercy and loving kindness still that we are heard, and that
we are saved for all that. So the same David again elsewhere, Psalm. 109.21.
But thou Lord deal mercifully with me for thy Names sake. And, Psalm. 6.4. and
31.16. and 109.26.
Save me for thy Mercy sake. Propter misericordiam tuam, non propter meritum
meum, August. in Psalm. 6. and Ruffin. ibid.
For thy mercy, not for my merit, says Augustine. In misericordia tua, non in
justitia mea. Ruffin. in Psalm. 30.
For thy mercy, not for my righteousness, says Ruffine. (...), Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 108. Non quia ego sum dignus, sed quia tu es misericors, August. in Psalm.
30. Conc. 3.
Not because I am worthy, but because thou art merciful, says Chrysostom.
(...), Chrysostom. ibid.
He flies only to Gods goodness and his loving kindness: Gratuita gratia
commendatur, non ex operum debito, Prosper. post Aug. in Psalm. 108.
Commending Gods free grace, not claiming ought as due to his good deeds, says
Prosper. It is as if he had said; Non de meis meritis conf^dens, ut me salvum
facias supptico, sed de sola misericordia tua praesumens impetrare, quod non de
meritis meis spero, Greg. in Psalm. Foenit. 1.
I entreat thee to save me, says Gregory, not trusting to mine own merits,
but presuming only to obtain that of thy mercy, which by mine own merits I
have no hope to obtain: Or, Noli me audire secundum judiciariam severitatem,
sed sec. misericordissimam bonitatem, Aug. in Psalm 30. and ex eodem Lombard.
ibid.
I entreat thee to hear me, not in thy judiciary severity, but in thy most
merciful bounty; says Augustine. Negat merita sua, Cassiod. in Psalm. 30.
He renounceth his own merit; and Salvum se petit fieri, non sec. merita sua,
sed propter divinam misericordiam: in qua dum fixa spes ponitur, venia facilius
impetratur, Idem in Psalm. 6.
he desires to be heard, says Cassiodore, not according to his merits, but
for Gods mercy sake: whereon when our hope is fixed, pardon is the easilier
obtained. And, Psalm. 119.41.
Let thy mercy also betide me, and thy salvation, according to thy Word.
Secundum verbum tuum, non sec. meritum meum, August. in Psalm. 118.
According to thy Word, not according to my merit; Filius esse vult
promissionis, non elationis, Ibid.
A child he would be not of pride, but of the promise, says Augustine. And
again; Psalm. 25.11.
For thy Name sake be merciful to my sin: for it is much. Propter nomen
tuum, non propter meritum meum, Ruffin. im Psalm. 24.
For thy Name, not for my merit; says Ruffine: and Bernard; Sed and
quantumlibet poeniteat, quantumlibet se afflictet and maceret, Propter nomen
tuum, non propter meritum meum propitiaberis peccato meo, ait justus, Bern. de
Diverse. 22.
Be I never so penitent, and afflict and macerate my self never so much. Totam
salutem suam hic attribuit misericordiae salvatoris, Hugo in Psalm. 24.
He attributes his whole salvation to the mercy of his Savior, says
Cardinal Hugh. And, Psalm. 25.7.
In mercy remember me, or think upon me, for thy goodness sake, O Lord. Non
secundum iram, qua ego dignus sum; sed sec. misericordiam tuam, quae te digna
est, Aug. in Psalm 24.
Not in wrath, as I am worthy; but as is worthy of thee in thy mercy; says
Augustine. Non propter meritum meum, sed propter bonitatem tuam. Ex Aug.
Alcuin. and Gloss. Ordin. Lomb. in Psalm. 24.
For thy goodness, not for any merit of mine; says Peter Lombard. For,
Dicendo, Propter bon. t.D. fecit intelligi, Non propter mer. meum. Cassiod.
ibid.
When he says, For thy goodness, his meaning is, and he would so be
understood, Not for my merit; says Cassiodore. Who thence also observes that,
Vnde nullum fas est aliquando praesumere, nisi quem graviter contingit errare,
Idem ibid.
No man without grievous error, may presume at anytime thereon. And yet
again; Psalm. 31.3.
For thy Name sake guide and conduct me. Propter nomen tuum, non propter
meritum meum, Aug. in Psalm. 30. Conc. 1. and Hugo ibid. and in Psalm. 142.
For thy Name, not for my merit; says Augustine, and Hugh the Cardinal after
him: Non quia eo sum dignus; sed ut tu glorificeris, Idem ibid.
Not for my worth, desert, or dignity, but for thy Glory. And Hilary on those
words of his, Psalm. 119.149.
Hear my voice according to thy mercy, or thy loving kindness, O Lord. Nos si
semel jejunamus ut hominibus placeamus, aut exiguum nescio quid damus, dum
pulsantem fores nostras inopem non sustinemus; deberi nobis ut audiamur
existimamus, Hilar. in Psalm. 118. part. 19.
We, says he, when we have fasted some once, out of vainglory, or given
ought to a beggar for his mere importunity, think that God is bound by and
by to hear us; Post haec etc. in operibus bonitatis totius perfectus, totum de
Deo sperat, totum ex misericordia ejus expectat, omnem in ea spem reponit,
audiri secundum eam vocem suam rogat, Ibid.
Whereas David after all his hearty crying, his night watchings, his early
meditations, his continency in his younger years, his diligent inquiry into
Gods Statutes, and his careful keeping of his Testimonies, having attained to
a perfection in all kind of goodness, yet has his hope wholly in God, and
expects all from his mercy, places all his hope in it, and desires to be
heard according to it. And Chrysostom preaching upon the Prayer of Eleazer,
entreating Genesis 24.12.
mercy and kindness for his Master Abraham; ( See Sermon on Eleazers prayer.
and whose merits might better have been pleaded than his?) (...), etc.
Chrysostom. tom. 8. sermon. 15.
That you may not imagine, says he, that he demanded it as a debt, Deal
mercifully or show mercy, says he, to my master Abraham. (...), Ibid.
Though we had done ten thousand good deeds, says he, yet is it of grace that
we require to be saved, and of loving kindness, not of debt or desert, that we
look to receive this. So the Apostle; 2 Timothy 1.16, 17.
The Lord show mercy to Onesiphorus his family. (The Lord show him mercy,
because he showed me mercy.) For he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of
my chains; but when he was at Rome he diligently sought me and found me; and
in how many things he steeded me (or supplied me) at Ephesus, thou well
know. And, Ibid. 18.
the Lord grant therefore, that he may find mercy with the Lord in that day.
Vt sicut Apostolum requirens invenit, sic and misericordiam quaerens inveniat
apud judicem, Ambr. nomine in 1 Timothy 1.
That as he sought me and found me; so he may find mercy when he shall seek
it at the hand of his Judge; says one that bears the name of Ambrose. (...),
Chrysostom. in 2 Timothy hom. 3.
That as I found mercy with him, so may he find mercy with God; says
Chrysostom: And mark you, says he, how he says, (...).
nothing, or not any thing but mercy: Eleemosynam, that is, word for word,
Alms, that which Ruard. Tapper. supra. Absit, ut tanquam pauperes eleemosynam
expectent.
the Popish Professor so much scorned before: Mercy in that day, wherein (...).
we shall have much need of it; (...), Chrysostom. ibid.
if Onesiphorus for all these his good works, we (the most of us) much more.
There is mercy as well for those that help him, as 2 Timothy 4.14, 16. Aliter
enim de eis, qui ex malitia obstiterant; aliter pro eis, qui ex infirmitate
deliquerant, uti and Aug. observat. in Josh. quaest. 30.
for those that forsook him; as well mercy in rewarding the one, as mercy in
pardoning and not punishing the other. So Daniel also, Dan. 9.18. Vide Hug.
Card. in Job 9.21.
We present these our prayers unto thee, not for any our righteousness, (that
is, any righteous works of ours; (...), Greg. Naz adv. Eunom Orat. 4.
for we have none, says Gregory Nazianzene; such at least as we dare plead
the worth of) but for thy tender mercies. Whereupon also says Aquinas,
Impetratio orationis innititur misericordiae; meritum autem condigni innititur
justitiae. Et ideo multa orando impetrat homo ex divina misericordia, quae
tamen non meretur secundum justitiam. Tho. sum. part. prima secundae q. 114. a.
6.
Obtaining by prayer indeed rests upon mercy; whereas merit of condignitie
rests upon Justice or Righteousness: and therefore by prayer do men obtain
many things of God in mercy, which yet in justice they deserve not. Yea so the
Papists themselves in their Liturgy, (retaining yet still some broken relikes
of Antiquity) contrary to their Schoole-learning, desire God Non meriti
aestimator, sed veniae largiter, Missal. in post. commun.
not to ponder their merits, but to pardon their misdeeds; and so consequently
Psalm. 65.3.
to be merciful (as the Psalmist speaks) to their sins. And, a Popish
Writer commenting upon that place; Quid meriti apud Deum poterimus obtendere,
cui debemus omnia? Luc. 17.10. Quid nobis de bonis operibus poterimus
applaudere, cum universae justitiae nostrae sint quasi pannus menstruatae apud
Dominum? Esa. 64.6. Nulla igitur in Deum sunt nostra merita, cui debita sunt
omniae quae praestamus. Iodoc. Clicthov. in Canon. Miss.
What merit, says he, can we pretend or plead to God, whom we owe all unto? Or
how can we applaud our selves in our good deeds, when all our righteousness
is but as a filthy ragge in Gods sight? Our merits therefore are none to God,
whom all that we do, is due unto, etc. And it is a good rule that Bernard
gives for Prayer in general: Qui petit, primo debet attendere, ut pro suis
meritis nihil accepturum se putet, sed de Dei misericordia tantum, quicquid
rogaverit, impetraturum. Bern. in Sentent.
He that comes, says he, to ask ought of God, must in the first place have
an eye unto this, that he look not to receive ought for his own worth or
merits, but hope to obtain whatsoever he craves, only of Gods mercy. And
when we come to pray (says Aquinas) we must Causam excogitare quare debeat
concedi: and hoc non merita nostra, sed miseratio Domini, Aquin. in 1 Timothy 2.
devise some cause why our suit should be heard, and that must be not our
merit, but Gods mercy: according to that of Daniel above mentioned, which he
also there alleges.

It is all of mercy therefore, that God promises: It is all of mercy that
Gods children pray for. It is Heb. 4.16.
a Throne of grace that they repair unto; and it is Ibidem.
mercy that they there sue for. It is for mercy all that they pray; And to
mercy it is, that they ascribe all: whatsoever either by prayer they obtain at
Gods hand, or Fides aliquando recipit, quod oration non praesumit, Bernard. de
Grad. humil. Et instat in Laz. resuscitato, Joan. 11.23.
without prayer they have voluntarily conferred on them by him, (as Jacob here
much more than ever Genes. 28.20. Vberior semper est Dei gratia, quam nostra
precatio, Ambros. in Luc. Et instat in latrone in Paradisum translato. Luc.
23.42, 43. Sic 2 Paral. 1.12. Psalm. 21.4. Luc. 15.19, 22.
he did or durst ask,) they acknowledge all to come of mercy. Genes. 33.6.
They are the children, says Jacob, that God has of his mercy given thy
Servant. And, Genesis 33.11.
God has been merciful to me: and therefore have I all this. And here in my
Text; All the mercies, that thou have showed me. Even Iusti nihil tribuent
meritis suis. Non tribuent nisi totum misericordiae tuae, Aug. in Psalm. 139.
the just, says Augustine, will ascribe nothing to their merits, but give all
only to Gods mercy. For, Deest gratia, quicquid meritis deputas, Bern. in Can.
67.
All is taken from the one, that is ascribed to the other, says Bernard.

Romish Doctrine of Merit. For mercy and merit (as they understand it) by their
own confession cannot stand together. Id quod ex condigno quis meretur, non ex
miseratione, sed ex merito accipit, Thom. sum. part. prima secundae q. 114. a.
3.
That which a man meriteth, say they, he has not of mercy. And, it is,
Secundum judicium justitiae, Thom. ibid Impetratio orationis nititur
misericordiae; meritum autem condigni innititur justitiae, Idem ibid art. 6.
according to the judgment (not of mercy, but) of justice, that man's merit is
rewarded. Where to omit that Etiam merces nostra gratia vocatur. Si gratia est,
gratis datur. August. in Psalm. 31. Nam gratia sic nominatur, quia gratis datur,
Idem in Psalm. 43. Opponitur autem gratia debito, Bellarm. de Great. and lib.
arb. l. 1. c. 1. ex Romans 4.4. and 11.6.
even the reward, that we expect for our well doing to receive, is, as
Augustine from the Apostle Romans 4.4. and 6.22, 23.
Paul's speech observes, and Augustine. de Civitat. lib. 12. cap. 9. Scripsit
ipsam beatitudinem hominibus nunc esse donum, quae merces meriti futura erat,
si primus homo stare voluisset, Bellarmin. ibidem, lib. 2. cap. 17.
Bellarmine himself also from him acknowledges of grace or free favor,
(which before also was showed:) and consequently by their own grants also,
Quaerimus misericordiae meritum, and non invenimus: quia nullum est
misericordiae meritum, ne gratia evacuetur, si non gratis donatur, sed meritis
redditur, Lombard. Sent. lib. 1. d 41. A. ex Aug. ep. 105.
not of merit, but of mere mercy. As the Apostle reasons concerning
Election; Romans 11.6. Omne meritum repugnat gratiae, Thom. sum. part, prima
secundae q. 114. a. 5.
If it be of grace, then it is not of works: for else grace were no grace. If
it be of works, then it is not of grace: for else work were no work. So here,
Si misericordia est, meritis non acquiritur, Greg. sup. in Psalm. P^^n. 7. Vide
and quae Thom. sup. Quod redditur potius ex liberalitate dantis quam ex debito
operis, non cadit sub merito de condigno stricte and proprie sumpto, Durand. in
Sent. lib. 2. d. 27. q. 2.
That which is of mercy, is not of merit: for else mercy were no mercy. And
that which is of merit, is not of mercy: for else merit were no merit. Since it
is no mercy to afford a man what he has merited: no just merit that has need
of mercy. Or thus; Miseremini mei; non quia dignus, sed quia inops; non quia
merui, sed quia egeo. Iustitia meritum quarit, misericordia miseriam, Bernard.
epist. 12.
If it be of right, then it is not of mercy: for else right were no right. If
it be of mercy, then it is not of right, or due debt: for then mercy were no
mercy. Since Si dantur hominibus bona pro meritis eorum, quae gratia Dei erit?
Sicut si paterfamilias solvat operario operationem quam ipse meruit, in hoc
nullam gratiam ei facit, Guil. Perald. sum. tom. 2. tract. 6. part. 3. cap. 2.
it is no point of mercy to give a man his due: nor needs he crave or sue
for mercy, that demands but his due, and requires consequently but his own:
As merit therefore leaves no place for mercy: ( Non est quo gratia intret,
ubi jam meritum occupavit, Bernard. in Cant. 67.
there is no entrance for grace, says Bernard, where merit is once got in.) So
mercy likewise leaves no place for merit: the rather since that also, (as well
Primasius observes) a man does no more than his due, when he has done all,
and can claim nothing as due therefore for what he does of due debt. For Cum
justificat impium divina miseratio, locum meriti non potest habere praesumptio.
Debtor enim est, antequam pareat praeceptis: and nisi paruerit, damnatus est.
Si autem fecerit, non habet gloriam, quia inutilis servus est, qui nihil
amplius operatur, Primas. in Romans 4. and Hieron. nomine ibid.
he is a debtor (says he, and (...), Romans 8.12.
the Apostle before him) and stands bound to do what he does, before he do
it; and is justly and deservedly damned, if be do it not; and when he has
done all he can, he has nothing to glory of, because he has done nothing but
what he stood bound to do. It being most true that 59. Bern. in Ser. de
quadrupl. deb. demonstrat pluribus de causis in solidum, omnia opera nostra
bona esse debit^ Deo, ita ut possit omnia exigere, etiamsi praemium nullum dare
velit, Bellarm de Iustific. lib. 5. cap. 13.
Saint Bernard, says Bellarmine, shows in a Sermon of his, that for sundry
respects, the good works that we do are all due to God, and God might
therefore well require them of us, though he rendered us no reward for them: and
therefore cannot we challenge any reward at Gods hand for them. And Quid ergo
de nobis sentiendum qui non omnia servamus, qui multorum rei sumus? Non
inutiles tantum, sed minus quam inutiles nos esse Cajetan in Luc. 17.
how much less then can any man by way of condign merit or due debt claim
ought at Gods hand, when Nemo Deo totum reddit quod debet, Bernard. de Diverse.
Sermon. 34. Nullus potest dicere quod debebam feci, nisi qui exemptus est a
dicendo, Dimitte nobis debita nostra, Cajet. in Luc. 17.
no man does any thing near so much as he ought?

Vide Bernard. in Psalm. 90. ser. 9. sup. Sed and Ambr. in Psalm. 118. p. 20.
Nemo sibi arroget; nemo de meritu glorietur: sed misericordiam invenire
speremus omnes per Dominum Iesum: De illo veniam, de illo indulgentiam
postulabo.
Let who will, therefore trust to merit: Sic Luke 18.13. Publicanus (...),
Basil. Sell. ser. Tota humilitate ad misericordiam recurramus, quae Sola potest
servare animas nostras. Bern. in Cant. 14.
let us fly to, let us rely upon mercy. For Quid faciat justus and misericors
Dominus; altera gloriante in lege and applaudente justitiam sibi, nec indigente
misericordia, sed despiciente ipsam qua indiget; altera e regione propria
cognoscente delicta, confitente indignitatem, renuente judicium, flagitante
misericordiam? Quid, inquam, faciat judex, cui and judicare and misereri aeque
familiare utrumque? Quid possit sane convenientius, quam ut pro suo quaeque
accipiat voto, judicium illa, ista misericordiam. Illi judicium quaerunt, and
habeant: nos autem super misericordia bonoremus Deum. Est and judicium, ut qui
contemnit Dei misericordem justitiam, and suam volunt statuere, quae non
justificat, sed accusat, eidem suae justitiae relinquantur, opprimendi magis
quam justificandi, Bern. in Cant. 41.
as it is a point of mercy with God to vouchsafe mercy to such as submissely
and sincerely sue for it, seek to it, and rely wholly upon it: So it shall be
just with him to turn them off to their own merits, and to deal with them as
they deserve, that renouncing his mercy rely on their own merits, and offer
themselves to be judged by his Justice alone: (And Psalm. 130.3, 4. and 143.2,
3. Inest quippe Deo and misericordia judicanti, and judicium miseranti. Nam
quisquis velut nimium justus judicium sine misericordia quasi securus expectat,
iram justissimam provocat, August. epist. 29. Itaque, Vae etiam laudabili vitae
hominum, si remota misericordia discutias eam? Idem Confess. l. 9. cap. 13. Si
enim remota tunc pietate discutitur, in illo examine etiam justi vita
succumbet. Greg. Moral. l. 9. c. 11.
in a woeful estate are all those, that come so to be judged:) That renouncing
expressly as well Christ's merit as Gods mercy, (they do so in precise terms,
I do them no wrong) Si non pro meritis operum, sed in gratiam fidei and
justitiae Christi misericorditer imputatae vita aeterna daretur, non justitia
Iudicis, sed misericordia Patris, vel liberalitate Principis opus esset,
Bellarm. Apolog. adv. Sereniss. Reg. Britan. c. 7. Assumat Pontificius quivis:
videbis statim quid sequatur, Nihil opus scil. alterutra.
expect and look for a reward of their works, not from the mercy of a father,
nor from the free bounty and liberality of a Prince, (they are Bellarmines
own words) but from the justice of a Judge; Merces ob Christi meritum non
datur, Suarez in 3. Thom. Disp. 41.. 3.
not for Christ's merit, (for life eternal, say they, is not given for Christ's
merit, In retributione bonorum ad Christi meritum non aspicitur. Quod operibus
bonis vita reddatur aeterna, id non Christi meritis ascribendum est. Mich.
Baius de merit. oper. lib. 1. cap. 9.
nor is it to be ascribed thereunto) but for the worth of their own works.

Yea let us the rather abhor this pestiferous Doctrine, which so strongly
savoureth of the Matthew. 16.60. Luke 18.11, 12.
Pharisaicall leven; For that as Omnia Deo tribuit, etc. quod cum facere
oportet, qui novit gratus esse, and ut par est, in bonorum confessione gratias
agere, Faber de Paulo in Ephesians. 1.
the acknowledgement of Gods mercy here was the ground of Jacobs thankfulness:
so Nimius sui suspectus ingratos, and maxim, facit. Inde est, ut omnia
meruisse se homines existiment, and in solutum accipiant. Sen. de Benef. l. 2.
c. 26. (...), Chrysostom. in Matthew. hom. 25.
this conceit of man's merit is the very bane of true thankfulness, and (...),
Idem in Psalm. 5.
their own bane therefore that are possessed with it, and cause of much
unthankfulness to God for his mercies. For Teneri neminem ad gratias reddendas
pro ea re, quam, ex condigno meruit, recte docet Thom. Bradward. de Cause. Dei.
lib. 1. cap. 39.
how can a man be truly thankful to God for ought, that thinks he has
nothing from him, but what he has deserved, he has deerly earned, is of
right due to him, and he should have wrong if he had it not? And let us
acknowledge, (as other the faithful servants of God have done before us) that
it is, as our highest 1 Cor. 3.18. Sapiens ne sit, ut sit sapiens, Augustine. de
Consens. Evang. lib. 2. cap. 31. Stulti estote, ut sitis sapientes, Tertull. ad
Marc. lib. 5. Hoc ipsum sapere est, insipientiam agnoscere, Bernard. in Cant.
20. (...), Gregor. Nazianz. de sede Constant.
wisdom to see our own folly; our best 1 Cor. 8.2. (...), dixit Bion.
Contra, (...), Basil. hom. 24. Hinc Socrates sapiontissimus est habitus, quod
hoc unum stire se profiteretur quod nihil sciret, Laert. and Plut. ad Colot. In
omni si quidem neg^tio pretiosissimum est, intelligere quemque nescire se quae
nesciat. Colum. de re rust. lib. 11. cap. 1.
knowledge for us to know our own ignorance, and how little it is that indeed
we know; our greatest Phil. 3.12, 13, 15. (...). Chrysostom. in Philip. hom. 12.
Virtus quae nunc est in homine justo perfecta hactenus nominatur, ut ad ejus
perfectionem pertineat etiam ipsius imperfectionis and in veritate cognitio,
and in humilitate confessio. August. contr. ep. Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 7. Haec
hominibus sola perfectio est, si imperfectos esse se noverint, Hier. ad
Ctesiphont. c. 3. Beda in Luc. 17. and Aquin. in Caten.
perfection to discover and find out our own imperfections, how far we come
short of that we should be; our maine Philip. 3.9. Tunc justi sumus, quando nos
peccatores fatemur; and justitia nostra non ex proprio merito, sed ex Dei
consistit misericordia, Hieron. contr. Pelag. Dialog. 1.
righteousness to acknowledge our own unrighteousness; and our chief
Puritatem hic accipimus, ut per omnia quae agimus, injustitiam nostram (i.
impuritatem) ^ure and humiliter Domino consiteamur, Bern de Diverse. 16.
purity sincerely to confess our own impurity: so our only Sufficit ad
meritum scire, quod non sufficiant merita. Ber. in Cant. 68. Ve ei, cum
sufficere sua videtur insufficientia. Idem de Diverse. 27.
Merit to know the insufficiency of our Merit, to believe that we have no such
Merit as the Popish sort imagine; and our only 2 Cor 12 11. Gal. 6.3. (...).
Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 25. Dignisunt regno Dei, qui gloriam ejus scientes,
nullam condignam esse putant passionem, Primas. in 2 Thessalonians. 1. Nos digni
sumus, sed dignatione ipsius, non dignitate nostra, Bern. de Temp. 116.
worth and dignity, seriously to apprehend and sincerely to acknowledge our
own want of worth and indignity, to account our selves with Jacob here
unworthie of ought, and to ascribe it therefore not to our own merit, but to
Gods mercy that we have ought.

a second use of this point; which may again serve to teach us lowliness,
thankfulness, and contentment of mind. Genesis 31.38, -- 40.
What we have earned dearly and is owing us, we may justly expect, and claim
as of right due to us: and we think much when we come to demand a debt of one
that owes it us, Molestum verbum est, and onerosum, and demisso vultu
dicendum, Rogo, Sen. de Benef lib. 2. c. 2.
to crave it in any submisse manner; and much more to be denied it, when we
make demand of it: for we are wont to say in such cases, that Meum peto. Plaut.
Mostest. 3. 1.
we ask but our own. But when we come to crave a courtesy, to request a
kindness (from a superior especially) of one that is no way indebted or
engaged unto us, we are glad to come with cap in hand, and A^di voces
petentium: Nemo non victuram semper in animo suo memoriam dicit: nemo non
deditum se and devotum profitetur, and si quod aliud humilius verbum quo se
oppignoraret, invenit. Senec. de Benef. l. 3. c. 5. (...) Palad. Antholog. ib
1. cap. 42. (...), Ibid.
use all terms of submisnesse and engagement: nor have we cause to be
discontent, if he deny us; and (...). Theophyl. epist. 73. (...), Gregor. Naz
pro Pauper. (...), Idem epist. 45.
we are wont to be well content (if but in part he please to grant our request)
with what he is willing to afford us; and think that we have cause to be
thankful to him for it, whatsoever it be, be it never so mean; because it is
more than of right we could challenge or demand of him. So here, Audacter Deum
roga, nihil illum de alieno rogaturus, Senec. epist. 10.
if we could claim or challenge ought at Gods hand by way of Merit or due debt
upon desert, it were somewhat; some color we might have to repine, when we had
not what we would have, or Iustitia enim in aequalitate consistit Thomas sum.
par. secunda q. 57. a 1. and q. 62. a. 2.
when we have not as others have. But when as God is no way thus indebted to
any; 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 14, 16.
all is absolutely his own; and Matthew. 20.15.
he may do as he will with it: when as we come to him as (...), Greg Naz. pro
Pauper. Mendici Dei sumus. Et quod petitur a nobis, a Deo nos petimus, August.
de verb. Dom. 5. Quantumvis dives es, Dei mendicus es, Idem ibid. 41. and in
Orat. Dom. An non mendicas, qui panem petis? Idem homil. 14.
beggars do to us, to ask alms, to crave all of mere mercy: we have great
reason now to repair to him in the submissest manner that may be: we have no
reason to repine, if he give us less than we would; ( Beggars, we say, must
be no chusers:) or Nemo alii aut participium, aut parilitatem, (aut
praeeminentiam etiam) invideat. Quis enim meritum praetendat, ubi in munere
sola est gratia? Gilbert. in Cant. 27. Ita enim erga alios largitas, ut erga
alios nulla iniquitas, Aug. de Persever. cap. 4.
than he gives to many others. We would think much that any man should take
upon him to control us in the disposing of our alms; (albeit oft-times Multi
sunt, qui non donant, sed projiciunt, Senec. ep. 120.
we err much therein, and Errat, siquis existimat facilem rem esse donare.
Plurimum habet res ista difficultatis, si modo consilio tribuitur, non casu and
impetu spargitur. Idem de Beat. c. 24. Multi perdere sciunt, donare nesciunt.
Tacit. hist. l. 5.
had need therefore of advice from others:) Great Potentates especially would
take it in foul scorn, that every base fellow should take upon him to direct
them where and how to confer their favors. Much more it is extreme arrogance
and presumption in us, when we will take upon us to control God in the
distribution of his mercies, as if he did not distribute them so equally as he
ought. Whereas we should rather endeavor (...), Aristot. Stob. c. 3. Transeamus
in ea, in quae nos casus (imo Deus ipse) deduxerit. Sen. de Tranq. c. 14.
(...). Epictet. Arian. dissert. l. 1. c. 12. Hinc Thymarides ei qui dixisset,
(...), Dii tibi dent quae velis; respondit, (...). Imo velim ego, quae Dii
dederint. Iamb. vita Pythag.
to bring our heart to his hand, and shape our will to his pleasure: that where
he stays his liberality, there we stay our desires; as in the wilderness
Number. 9.17, 18.
the Israelites made stay where the Arc stayed: and when he enlarges his
hand, we in thankfulness enlarge also our hearts: being thankful to him for
whatsoever we have, be it more or less; since that it is all of mere mercy;
not discontent for what we have not, or for what we see others have.

ground of Gods goodness, his Mercy: the latter follows now, his Veracitie,
his Fidelity, his Truth.

Truth has here reference to a word of Promise. Gods truth.
And we may do well to observe how these two are still coupled and yoaked
together, Mercy and Truth. Psalm. 25.10.
All the ways of God are Mercy and Truth, Mercy and Truth.
says the Psalmist; and that even to those that keep covenant with him. And,
Psalm. 36.5.
Thy Mercy, O Lord, reaches unto the Heavens, and thy Truth or Faithfulness
unto the Clouds. And, Psalm. 40.11.
Withdraw not thy tender Mercies from me, O Lord: but let thy Mercy and thy
Truth always preserve me. And, Psalm. 138.2.
I will praise thee for thy Mercy and thy Truth, etc. The one is the ground of
Gods gracious Promises: the other is the ground of the Performance of what
therein he has promised. It is his Mercy that he does ought at first, and that
he promises further to do ought: And it is his Truth and his Justice, (for
Ephesians. 4.24, 25. Veritas, sive veracitas pars est justitiae. Ex Cicer. de
Invent. Thom. sum. part. secunda secundae q. 109. a. 3.
Truth is a part also of Justice) that he performs and makes good what he
has promised.

A second ground of Gods goodness, unto those whom by promise he has
vouchsafed to tie himself unto, His Word and his Truth.

Psalm. 43.3.
Send forth thy Light and thy Truth, says the Psalmist, to bring me again to
thine holy Hill. And, Psalm. 54.5.
Destroy mine enemies in thy Truth. And, Psalm. 89.24, 28.
My Mercy and Truth, says God, shall always be with him: and my Covenant
shall stand firm with him for ever. For, Psalm. 89.33, 34.
I will not break my Covenant; nor will I falsify my Truth. And, Psalm. 146.5,
6.
Blessed therefore is the man, whose hope is in the Lord, who keeps his Truth
for ever. It is his Mercy that moves him; it is his Truth that binds him. It
is his Mercy, I say, that induces him to promise: it is his Truth that
obliges him to make good what he has promised. A sure tie-all. Mark. 13.31.
Heaven and Earth may fail sooner than Gods Truth; than Josh. 23.14.
he should fail to make good ought that he has promised to his.

For first, it is against the very nature of God to do otherwise. Confirmation.
Psalm. 94.9, 10. Non ergo audit, qui fecit tibi undo audias? and non videt, qui
creavit unde videas? Oculum in te non intendit suum, qui fecit tuum? Aug. de
verb. Dom. 10.
He that made the ear, says the Psalmist, shall not he hear? and Job 35.9.
he that teaches man wisdom, that gives man understanding, shall not he
understand himself? So he that John 8.40, 46.
teaches man Truth, and of man Psalm. 51.6. Zech. 8.16. Ephesians. 4.25. John 4.24.
requires Truth, shall not Psalm. 89.33.
he keep and observe Truth himself? Yea how is it possible he should do
otherwise who is Truth it self? who as he is (...) Psalm. 31.5. (...) Esa.
65.26. (...), Apoc. 3.14.
a God of Truth and (...) Deus veritas. Ier. 10.10. Ioh. 14 6.
Truth it self, so his Word also is Iam. 1.18. Apoc. 21.5. and 22.6.
a Word of Truth and Ioh. 17.17.
Truth it self: And therefore Titus 1.1.
he cannot lie, 2 Timothy 2.13.
nor deny himself: It were (...), Isidor. Pel. lib. 2. epist. 117. Haec posse
impotentia est, Anselm. Prosol. cap. 7. Nec est infirmitas ista, sed firmitas,
qua falsa esse non potest Veritas. Magna potentia non posse mentiri, Aug. de
Trinit. lib. 15. c. 14, 15. Ideo enim vere omnipotens est, quia impotens esse
non potest, Gomar. de Provid. cap. 3.
an impotencie in him, if he were able to do either. Matthew. 7.11.
If you that are evil know how to give good things to your children; how much
more, says our Savior, shall your Heavenly Father, who is (...), Solus,
bonus, Matthew. 19.17.
Goodness it self, give good things to his? So if Psalm. 15.4.
an honest man will be careful to keep his word, one that has but some small
drop of this divine Truth distilled into his heart, which flows infinitely in
God, how much more shall he do so, who is 1 Ioh. 5.6, 7.
Truth it self, and who Vult Deum non esse Deum, qui vult eum aut impotentem,
aut injustum esse, aut insipientem, Bern. de Temp. 58.
can no more cease to be true or to be just than he can cease to be God.

Mercy as unto wrath; to do good as to Esa. 45.7. Mala ultoria, non
peccatoriae: poenae, non culpae; supplicia, non delicta, Tertull. in Marc. l.
2. and 3. Mala, non peccata, sed supplicia, August. epist. 120. c. 19.
Iustitiae, non malitiae mala, quae quia justitiae sunt, nec mala, sed bona
sunt, Tertull. ibid. Malum quippe malo non male redditur. Et ei cui redditur
malum est; quia supplicium est; and ei a quo redditur bonum est, quia recte
factum ejus est, August. ad epist. Pelag. lib. 2. c. 17.
do evil; to bless as to curse; to fulfill his promises, as to execute his
threatenings and his menaces; to cause to prosper, as to punish? Yes
undoubtedly, and (if we may say so) Exodus 34 6, 7. Psalm. 30.5. and 86.15. and
103.8. and 145.8. (...), Greg. Naz. Epitaph. Patr. Est piger ad poenas Deus,
est ad praemia velox. Ovid. Pont. lib. 1. el. 3.
much more. But Gods threatenings against the wicked shall undoubtedly take
effect. God has even Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. and 32.40, 41, 42.
by a solemn Oath bound himself thereunto: and that Psalm. 68.21. Mat. 25.46.
they shall find to their endless woe one day unfailable, that now either
deny it, or make doubt of it. And much more then shall his free promises be
made good all to the godly: The rather since that Heb. 6.17, 18. Jurat nobis,
per quem Juramus: nec potest ab eo quisquam falli, quo invocato non licet
impune mentiri, Athalar. apud Cassiod. var. l. 8. ep. 3.
he has bound himself by Oath as well to the fulfilling of the one, as to the
effecting and executing of the other.

consideration may first serve to clear many places of Scripture, where Gods
children seem to require God even Psalm. 143.1, 11.
in justice to hear, and help them, and do for them, and deliver them: And
where God is said to be 1 Ioh. 1.9.
just, either in remitting of men's sins, or Heb. 6.10. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. 2 Timothy
4.8.
in rewarding of their works. Which places Bellar. de Iustif. l. 1. c. 21. and
l. 5. cap. 3, 16. Rhemens. in Heb. 6. and 2 Thessalonians. 1. and alii.
Popish Writers are wont to abuse and produce for the justification of their
pernicious Positions concerning man's merit, and the worth of men's works. As if
in those places Gods Children pleaded unto God their own merits, in regard
whereof God in justice might not deny them their suits, they requiring nothing
but what by their own righteous actions they had even in justice deserved at
Gods hands: Or as if Gods justice it self so tied him to the rewarding of
their works, in regard of the very worth and dignity of them, that God could
not without some taint of injustice do otherwise. But Apertum est qua ratione
justitiam Domini petebat, qui dicit, Ne intres in judicium, etc. Nam si
justitia judicium significasset, hoc petere non poterat, quod pavebat.
Cassiodor. in Psalm. 142. Et causa reddita est, quare noluerit ad judicium
venire cum Domino, ut non sola potestatis reverentia, sed ipsa etiam videatur
justitiae regula formidata, ib.
that the justice or righteousness that the Saints and Servants of God speak
of in those places, neither is, nor respects simply the justice or
righteousness of their persons, in regard whereof, and for the worth of which,
God in justice, were engaged to do for them what they require of him, is
hereby apparent, in that in some of those very places, where they require or
plead this justice, Psalm. 143.2, 8. Non contendit judicio, nec praetendit
justitiam; recusat judicium, Postulat misericordiam: facilius sibi veniam
impetrare posse, quam justitiam vendicare confidens. Bern. epist. 42. Qui and
subjungit; Sola profecto quae non solet gloriari, non novit praesumere,
contendere non consuevit, gratiam inventura est in oculis pietatis humilitas.
they sue yet for mercy, and renounce their own righteousness, and refuse to
be tried by the precise Rule of Gods justice.

But what justice or righteousness will some say, then is it?

I answer: It is sometime Psalm. 4.1, 2. Deus just mi: vel Deus justitiae mea,
i. causae justae meae, ut Iun. and Piscat. Sic Psalm. 119.121.
the justice of their cause; when being falsely accused, and wrongfully
charged, by their malicious Adversaries, with such crimes as they never either
committed or imagined, they dare Psalm. 7.3, 4, 8.
appeal even to Gods justice, and offer themselves to be tried thereby for
their innocence therein.

Sometime it is Gods Justice and Righteousness, that is, his Truth, or his
Faithfulness; which the Psalmist therefore Psalm. 143.1.
joyneth together, (it is Veritatem and justitiam pro eodem accipit, Hugo in
Psalm. 142. and ex cassiod. Lombard. ib.
Hugh the Cardinals observation) as one and the same. For Bellar. ipse ex illis
verbis Neh. 9.8. Et implesti verba tua, qu^niam justus es, de Iustif. l. 5. c.
16.
Truth or Faithfulness is (as before was said) a branch and a limme of Justice
or Righteousness. That which even our Adversaries themselves also confess and
acknowledge, expounding some such places so also themselves. 1 John 1.9.
If we confess our sins, says Saint John, God is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us (how but by Ibid. verse. 7. Apoc. 1.5.
Christ's blood?) from all iniquity. Here Verba illa, Iustus and Fidelis,
referuntur ad promissionem divinam, Bellar. de Poenit. l. 3. c. 6.
those words just and faithful, says Bellarmine, are referred to Gods
Promise: Ideo enim Deus fidelis and justus dicitur, quia peccata confitentibus
remittit, quia stat promissis, nec fidem fallit. Bellar. ibid.
For therefore, says he, is God said to be faithful and just, because he
stands to his word, and breaks not his Faith. Though therein Loquitur de
remissione venialium, quae justo Dei judicio redditur bonis meritis justorum.
Idem de Iustif. l. 1. c. 21.
he crosses himself again elsewhere; and he adds wretchedly, yea impiously
in the same place, that Promissio de remittendis peccatis eis qui confitentur
Deo, non videtur ulla extare in divinis literis, Bellar. ubi sup.
there seems to be no promise at all extant in Scripture concerning remission
of sins upon confession of them made unto God. In like manner where the Apostle
says, Heb. 6.10.
For God is not unjust to forget your work and labor of love, which you show
to his Name, in ministering to his Saints. Manifest significat eum injustum
fore sis^cus faceret, Bellarm. de Iustific. l. 5. c. 16.
He shows manifestly, says Bellarmine, that he should be unjust, if he did
otherwise. And therefore Non est temerarium and blasphemum, sed pium and
sanctum dicere, Deum fore injustum, si non servaret promissa, ibid.
it is neither bold nor blasphemous to say, that God should be unjust, if he
should not keep his promises: to confute which assertion, See Durands own
words at large in the end.
falsely fathered upon Durand, whom therein he does wrong too, he produces
that place. Again whereas Saint Paul says, 2 Timothy 4.8.
There is a crown of Righteousness (and so it may be, and yet (...), Chrysostom.
in Psalm. 5.12.
a crown of Mercy too, says Chrysostom) laid up for me, which the just Judge
will render unto me in that day; and not to me alone, but to all those that
love his appearance; Est quam Paulus expectat coronae justitiae, sed justitiae
Dei, non suae. Iustum quippe est, ut reddat quod debet: debet autem quod
pollicitus est, Bern. de Great. and l. Arb.
It is not his own righteousness, but Gods righteousness, says Bernard,
that the Apostle here builds upon. For it is a just thing for God to pay that
that he owes. And he owes that that he has promised. Qui credidit
promittenti, 2 Timothy 1.12. fidenter promissum repetit: promissum quidem ex
misericordiae, sed j^^ ex justitia persolvendum.
It was out of mercy indeed promised, but it is of justice to be performed. Et
haec est justitia, de qua praesumit Apostolus, promissio Dei, Ib.
And this is the justice that the Apostle here presumes of, even Gods Promise.
For, Just jam and ex debito requiritur, quodcunque vel gratis, promittitur,
Bern. ibid.
that may well be of justice and due debt required, that was freely promised at
first. To which purpose also even Bellarmine, Quod ex gratia facit Deus, potest
non facere. Sed tamen cum promiserit, profecto si non absolute, certe tamen
ratione promissionis and pacti non potest non facere, Bellar. de Poenit. l. 1.
c. 14.
That which God does of grace or free favor, says he, that he may not do:
(or he may choose whether he will do or no.) But yet when he has promised once
to do it, he cannot now but do it, though not simply and absolutely, yet in
respect of his promise. Hence is that that Augustine, and Fulgent. ad Monim.
praefat. Idem author est debiti, qui author est doni. Nam and scipsum sua
largitate dignatus est facere debitorem. Et Gregor. in Evang hom. 37. Eum cui
ipse debtor suerat, ex promissione debitorem habere jam ceperat.
others after him, so often have: Audi Dei m^sericordiam and veritatem. Donator
est indulgenti^^, redditor coronae. Vnde debtor? accepit aliquid? Cui debet
aliquid Deus? Ecce videmus quiae tenet eum Paulus debitorem. Consecutus est
misericordiam, 1 Timothy 1.16. Iam exigens veritatem, Reddet, ait, 2 Timothy 2.8.
Quid tibi reddet, nisi quod tibi debet? Vnde tibi debet? Quid ei dedisti? Quis
prior dedit ei and retribuetur ei? Debitorem Dominus ipse se fecit, non
accipiendo, sed promittendo August. in Psalm. 83. Tenes certum promissorem, qui
se fecit promittendo debitorem, Idem in Psalm. 74. Dignaris eis, quibus debita
omn^a dimittis, etiam promissionibus tuis debtor fieri. Idem Confess. l. 5. c.
9. In his quae habemus laudamus Deum largitorem: in his quae nondum habemus,
tenemus debitorem. Debtor enim factus est, non aliquid a nobis accipiendo, sed
quod ei placuit promittendo. Idem de verb. Ap. 16. Non debendo, sed promittendo
debitorem se fecit, Idem de verb. Dom. 31. Promissorem tenemus, ut debitorem
exigamus. Promissor Deus debtor factus est bonitate sua, non praerogantia
nostra, Idem de Temp. 151.
God, says he, albeit he be debtor to none, yet has he made himself a debtor
to us. But how? Not by receipt, but by promise. Not by receiving of ought from
us; but by promising what he pleased and thought good himself unto us. In
regard whereof very pithily and piously says Bernard, Ius meum voluntas
judicis mei. Quid justius ad meritum? Quid ditius ad praemium? Bern. in Cant.
14. Et Chrysostom. in Psalm. 143. (...).
My Judges will (or good will) is my right. What can be righter? What can be
richer? What righter for merit? What richer for recompense? Now Aliter dicimus
homini, debes mihi, quia dedi tibi, and aliter dicimus, Debes mihi, quia
promisisti mihi. Ibi a te processit beneficium, sed mutuatum, non donatum. Hic
tu nihil dedisti, and tamen exigit. Bonitas enim ejus, qui promisit, dabit; ne
in malitiam fides convetatur. Qui autem fallit, malus est. August. de verb.
Apost. 16.
it is one thing to say to one, You owe me this or that, because I have
bestowed somewhat upon you, or have done this or that for you, and have thereby
deserved it: and another thing to say, You owe me this or that, because you
promised to bestow it on me. In the one, the ground of the debt arises from
the work or deed and desert of the party that claims it: in the other, from
the word and promise of him, of whom it is claimed. Deo igitur quid dicimus?
Read mihi quia dedi tibi? Quid dedimus Deo, quando totum quod sumus boni, ab
illo habemus? Non est quemadmodum ista voce exigamus debitorem Deum. Quis enim
prior dedit ei, etc. Illo ergo modo possumus exigere Dominum nostrum ut
dicamus; Read quod promisisti, quia fecimus quod jussisti, and hoc tu fecisti,
qui laborantes javisti, August. de verb. Ap. 16. Non possumus ei dicere, Read
quod accepisti; sed possumus dicere, Read quod promisisti, Idem in Psalm. 83.
and de verb. Dom. 31. Hoc est quod ex Lomb. Tho. Bradward. de cause. Dei, l. 1.
c. 39. Non esse Debitorem nobis Deum nisi ex promisso, non ex commisso. Non est
debtor nobis, nisi forte ex promisso: nos vero ei ex commisso debitores sumus,
Lombard. Sent. lib. 1. d. 43.
In the former sense, says Augustine, can no man claim ought of God: because
no man can by any such means tie or engage God to himself. But in the latter
sense some may, in regard of his promise past to them, by which, though free
otherwise, Omnis enim vera promissio fert secum obligationem: and ideo ex
justitia implenda and servanda est, Bellarm. de Iustific. l. 5. c. 16. Et hoc
est quod Ambros. de Poenit. l. 2. c. 8. Tanquam ex Syngrapha fides impetrat.
Ita David, Psalm. 119.49, 50.
he has bound himself to do for them, to the performance whereof, his Truth
and his Justice do now tie him. By virtue of which Truth and Justice Gods
Saints often require that of God, which in justice otherwise they durst not, nor
could claim or challenge at his hands as of due debt or of desert.

use to all Gods dear children and faithful servants to hearten and encourage
them quietly and contentedly to rest and repose themselves wholly upon him and
his Truth, for the making good of all his gracious promises unto them. Heb.
13.5, 6.
Let your conversation, says the Apostle, be without covetousness, (yea or
distrustfulnesse either;) and rest contented with what you have. For he has
said, (and what he has said, concerns us, as well as either Genesis 28.15.
Jacob or Josh. 1.5.
Joshua, to whom it was said) (...), Heb. 13.5. Negativa, quod rarissimum est,
ter repetita ut confirmatissima fit stipulatio divina.
I will not leave thee, nor in any wise will I forsake thee. Heb. 13.6.
So that we may boldly say (yet not presuming of our own merit and worth, but
on his Mercy and Truth) with the Psalmist, Psalm. 23.1.
The Lord is my feeder; I am sure to want nothing: and, Psalm. 27.1. and 118.6.
The Lord is mine helper; I need not fear any thing. He has said it: and that
is enough; we need no other security, his bare word is as good, yea better
than any bond. For he is Psalm. 31.5.
a God of Truth; and 2 Timothy 2.8.
cannot go from his word. And Esa 28.16.
those therefore that trust in him shall not need (as the Prophet speaks) to
Non praefestinabit, i. ex infidelitate and impatientia ad res presents
confugiet, Iun.
make haste; by seeking to unlawful and indirect courses for the releeving of
themselves, when they are in some want; or for the recovering of themselves,
when they are fallen behind hand; or for the enlarging of their estates, when
charge begins to grow upon them: Sicut natare nescii ubi mergi jam ceperint,
quicquid occurrit, vitae retinendae cupidi, temere arripiunt, Cyrill. Alex. ep.
29 Similes his qui submersi periclitantur in aquis, quos tenere videas,
quicquid primum occurrerit manibus, licet tale sit, quod omnino prodesse non
possit, Bernard. de Temp. 1.
like those that to save themselves being in danger of drowning, catch hold of
whatsoever comes next hand, such things often as are means rather to enwrap
and entangle and so to wind them further in, than to bear them up, or to
help them out. Nor shall they need (...), Luke 12.29. Animi pendere, and dubio
ac suspenso animo esse, Beza. Sic (...) Thucydid. l. 2. (...). Vti recte H.
Steph. Nam frustra est ibi Schol. qui de spe exponit, quasi spe erectum esse.
Imo, inter spemque metumque dubium esse. Strigel. Atque ita Thucyd. l. 6. (...)
Neque rempub. dubiam and quasi pendulam in discrimen adducere. (...) Schol.
to hang (as our Savior Christ speaks) in suspense; as (...).
the Clouds do in the Air, Ne in aere vagamini cogitationibus vestris, Piscat.
hovering to and fro, as the wind drives them, and uncertain whether to hang
still there, or to fall down on the earth: perplexed and distracted with
Matthew. 6.25. Luke 12.29.
carking care and thought for the things of this life how they shall have
wherewith to maintain their charge, and to feed and cloth them and theirs;
especially if dear times come, and further charge grow upon them, or if
trading decay and wax dead with them, or if those break that they have
dealings with, and the like: As if God were tied to these means; or as if the
performance of Gods Promises depended upon these things? But walk they may
well cheerfully in the Psalm. 37.3. 2 Samuel 10.12.
careful performance of those duties that God has in their several places
imposed on them, (for there is (...): solicitudo diligentiae: quae praecipitur,
and probatur, 1 Timothy 5.8.
a diligent care as well as (...), solicitudo diffidentiae, quae prohibetur and
damnatur, Phil. 4.6.
a diffident; the one enjoined, the other inhibited) and so Psalm. 37.5. and
55.22. 1 Pet. 5.7.
leave the issue and event of all to God and his blessing: Psalm. 34.9, 10. and.
37.25, 26. and 84.11, 12.
who will be sure to provide for them, and will suffer neither them, nor theirs
(for Deuteronomy. 32.4. 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. 2 Thessalonians. 3.3.
he is a God of his Word, and that Psalm. 18.30. and 34.22.
all shall find, that trust to it) to want any thing at any time, that shall
be fit for them.

These then were the two grounds of Gods goodness to Jacob, Fruit and Effect
of Gods goodness.
his Mercy and his Truth. Now follows a fruit and effect, and so a proof and
experiment of this Mercy and Truth, and consequently of his Goodness in
general. For I went, says Jacob, over this river Jordan with my staff only
in mine hand; and now am I become owner of two troops, or two bands.

Where we have, first,

An humble acknowledgement of his mean beginnings. Jacobs Penury.


He came into the Country (...), Chrysostom. Quomodo missi Apostoli Marc. 6.8. In
baculo suo, i. fine ulla supellectile, sine divitiu, sine armentis and
pecudibus, sine servis, solo baculi comitatu, Oleast.
with his staff only, like a poor Pilgrim, Genesis 28.20.
he thought himself well apaid, if he might have but meat, drink and
apparel only, every servants allowance.

Which he mentions, as 2 Samuel 7.18.
other Servants of God, do sometime the like;

Partly to testify the inward humility and lowliness of his mind, not puffed
up (as the Primus vermis divitiarum superbia, Aug. de Temp. 205. Omne pomum,
omne granum, omne frumentum, omne lignum habet vermem suum. Alius est vermis
mali, alius pyri, alius pisi, alius tritici. Vermis divitiarum est superbia.
Idem hom. lib. 12.
manner is) with that great mass of wealth, that Psalm. 131.1. Morbus
divitiarum est superbia. Grandis animus est, qui inter divitias isto morbo non
tenetur: Magnus dives est, and major divitiis suis, qui non ideo magnum se
putat, quia dives est, Idem de Temp. 212. Ardua enim res est, opibus non
tradere mores, Martial. l. 11. Epigr. 6.
his heart was not altered, albeit his estate were: Jacob continued the same
man that he was when he came over Jordan: he had not forgotten his former
estate: his mind remained still the same that it was.

goodness of God toward him, who from so mean and bare an estate had
advanced him and raised him, to that wealth which he now had.

Psalm. 113.7.
from the mire and muck hill, the dung-cart or the dunghill, as the Psalmist
speaks; when they are once gotten up, Humili loco natus homo, ubi ad
dignitatem aliquam ascenderit, genus suum audire erubescit, patrem agnoscere
dedignatur, Author oper. imperf. Chrysostom. nom. hom 54.
are ashamed now to be acknowne of their beginnings, can endure no more to
hear of their Parentage and their offspring; refuse to take notice of their
poor kindred, that are yet as the were. Yea De Largio Macedone, Plin. ep. 14.
l. 3. Superbus Dominus and savu^, and qui servisse patrem suum, parum, imo
minimum meminisset.
so far in these cases forget not a few what formerly they have been, this
Prove. 30.21.22. (...), Solon. (...), etc. Theog. quod tamen Homero tribuit
Pindari Schol. Olymp. 13. (...), Thucydid. quod tamen ille de civitatibus
extulit. bell. Pelop. lib. 3. (...), Philistus apud Clement. Alex. Strom. lib
6. Sed and Aristot. apud Stob. cap. 3. (...). Asperius nihil est humili cum
surgit in altum. -- nec bellua tetrior ulla est, Quam servi rabies in libira
colla furentis, Claud. in Eutrop. lib. 1. Divite novitio nihil est insolentius.
Ruffinus Vibius apud M. Serve. Controvers. 9. Quantum ingenium est, compertum
habeo, humillimos quosque maxim, ubi alta accesserint, superbia atque
ambitione immodicos esse. Aurel. Victor. in Dioclet.
none are many times more insolent, or more arrogant than such, none more
imperious, or more scornful toward others, even those that have been sometime
their betters, as if they had never been other than they are or had ever been
such as now they are.

But let such take heed, lest they hear from God as Saul sometime by Samuel, 1
Samuel 15.17. Parvulum se prius in oculis suis viderat; sed fultus temporali
potentia, jam se parvulum non videbat. Miro autem modo, cum apud se parvulus,
apud Deum magnus; cum vero apud se magnus apparuit, apud Deum parvulus fuit,
Gregor. de Pastor. part. 2. cap. 6. q.d. Magnus mihi fuisti, quia despectus
tibi: sed nunc quia magnus tibi es, factus es despectus mihi. Idem Moral. l.
18. c. 22. Vnde enim despectus crigitur, dignum est, ut erectus inde
destruatur, Ibidem l. 9. c. 1.
When thou wast mean in thine own eyes, I advanced thee, etc. And lest, as
he for his disobedience, so they for their pride and ingratitude and
haughtiness of spirit, Luke 1.51, 52. Sequitur superbos ultor a tergo Deus,
Sen. Herc. Fur. 22.
be plucked down, and stripped, and laid as low again as ever they were. Let
them remember what the Wise man says; Prove. 16.18. and 18.12. (...), Gregor.
Naz. Stelit. 1. Itaque quod apud Pindar. Olymp. 13. vulgo legitur, (...), H.
Steph. Sched. lib. 5. cap. 14. sanius legit, (...). Alta praesumptio quid nisi
ruinosa est praecipitatio? Bernard. de Consid. lib. 2. Illa prorsus ruina quae
fit in occulto, praecedit ruinam quae fit in manifesto. Ipsum quippe extolli
jam dejici est, August. de Civit. l. 14. c. 13. Allevatio ipsa ruina est, Greg.
Registr. lib. 1. epist. 5. Elatio siquidem dam extollit, dejicit, Idem Mor.
lib. 23. cap. 16.
Pride ushereth destruction; and an high mind forerunneth a fall. And our
Savior in the Gospel: Matthew. 23.12. Luke 14.11. and 18.14.
He that lifts up himself, shall be laid low; and he that abaseth himself
shall be exalted. And, Miserum est fuisse foelicem.
a miserable thing it is, as the Heathen man speaks, to have been happy, or
as the Holy Ghost, Psalm. 49.12, 13.
to have been in honor. For De excelso gravior est casus: de alto ruina
major, Bernard. ad Soror. cap. 39. Quo gradus altior, eo casus gravior. Ocul.
Mor. cap. 12. Et gravius summo culmine missa ruunt. Maximin. eleg. 1.
the higher a man sits, the heavier he falls: And, Proverb. 25.7. Luke
14.8, 9, 10.
better not to rise, than to rise and fall. But Multipliciter miser sum, si nec
miserabilis sum, Bernard. epist. 12. Sisque miser semper, sed nec miserabilis
ulli, Ovid in Ibin. Miserum esse, nec miserabilem, est miserrimum.
a double misery it is to be miserable, and yet not commiserated; to be in
pitiful plight, and yet not to be pitied. That which is usually (...), Gregor.
Nazianz. de Pace 3. (...), Idem de Bapt. Neque enim ulla miseratio contingit
illis, qui patiuntur injurias, quas posse fieri faciendo docuerunt, Senec.
epist. 81.
the lot of such when they do fall: The more scornfully they have carried
themselves toward others while they were aloft, the less are they pitied of
any when they come down. For by such their carriage having made themselves
(...), Plut. in Praecept. Polit.
not envious only, but odious, as they were an eyesore, while they stood, so
they become a laughing-stocke, when they fall.

Which things considered, let such therefore among you, as are Jacob, and to
do as he here did. Look back to your beginnings. 1 Timothy 6.19. Psalm. 7^.4, 5.
Altus sedens, altum sapiens ne sis. Bern. de Consider. l. 2.
Be not puffed up in pride, in regard of your present wealth: Nor take you
occasion thereby Psalm. 123.4. 1 Samuel 25.10.
to contemn or disdain others, that come short of you therein. But Quid fueris
cogites, non quid sis. (...), Greg. Naz de Bapt Quam mul^a consecutus sis
recordare. Quid tibi cum caeteris? te ipse antecessisti, Sen. epist. 81.
remember what you have been sometime your selves; and how far beneath not a
few of those, whom you have gotten now so far above. It is hard, if there be
not some in this place, (for my part I know none: but sure I am, many such
there have been, and some such there may here be) that may say with Jacob, I
came into this City with a staff in mine hand, and a freeze coat on my back,
(yea it may be in far meaner estate yet than he) with neither hose nor
shoes on my feet, and scarce a penny in my purse; glad if I might get into any
almost, though never so mean service. And now God has given me a large and a
plentiful estate: he has made me a Master of many servants; he has richly
clothed me, provided liberally for me, etc. And En quis es? Sed noli oblivisci
etiam quid fueris. Opportune enim cum eo quod es, etiam quod ante eras,
consideras. Non oportet ut illa extundat istam in s^rut^nio tui, Bern. de
Consider l. 2.
let not then what you are now (if it have been and be thus with any of you)
make you forget what you have been. But as (...), Plut. de Laud. sui, and in
Apophth. Fama est fictilibus coenasse Agathoclea Regem, Atque abacum Samio
saepe onerasse luto. Quaerenti causam respondit, Rex ego sum Sicaniae, figulo
sum genitore satus, Auson. Epigr. 8.
Agathocles being by birth but a Potters son, and yet having by his prowess
attained to be King of his own country, caused his cupboard to be furnished
with earthen cups, and his table, to be served with earthen dishes, that he
might thereby be put in mind of his mean and poor parentage. So do you
cast your eyes back on your mean beginnings, that by consideration thereof
you may the rather be moved, both unto thankfulness to God for what you now
have; and Haec te consideratio teneat intra te, nec avolare sinat a te, Bern.
de Consid. lib. 2.
to humility, modesty, and lowliness of mind, (...), Synes. epist. 24.
Fortunam reverenter habe, quicunque repent Dives, ab exili progrediere loco,
Auson. ibid. Tenor idem animi moresque modesti Fortuna crescente maneant. Stat.
1. Sylv.
to carry your selves the more moderately toward those, that are still as you
once were, or that were once as you are now, but are now as your selves were
once.

Such then was Jacobs penury, and his mean beginnings at first.

Now follows Gods bounty Gods Bounty.
toward him, in so enriching him, Master and owner of two troops.

Whence observe we, that

God is able to raise from low degree; and from mean estate and small
beginnings to bring to great matters.

Psalm. 113.7, 8. (...), Dion. Chrysostom. orat. 64. (...), Plut. sup. sigulo
genitore satus, Auson.
He raises, says the Psalmist, the needy out of the dust; and lifts the
poor up from the dunghill: to seat him with Princes, even with the Princes of
his people, and 1 Samuel 2.6.
to make him inherit the Throne of Glory, says Anna. He took 1 Samuel 9.3. and
10.1.
Saul from seeking his Fathers Asses; and 1 Samuel 16.11, 13.
David from feeding his Fathers Sheep, and Psalm. 78.70, 71. (...), Greg. Naz.
in Arian. (...); Dion. Chrysostom. orat. 64.
following the Ewes great with young, to feed his people in Jacob, and his
inheritance in Israel. And by his means says Solomon, Eccles. 4.14.
Out of the prison come some to reign, and out of the dungeon some to sit in
the chair of estate; as we know what Genes. 41.14, 41. and 45.9. Psalm. 105.17,
-- 22.
Joseph sometime did.

g Nor is it any hard matter with him so to do.

For he is the Deo nihil difficile, Tertul. ad Prax.
Psalm. 75.7
supreme Judge, that sets up and pulls down. Psalm. 22.28. Apoc. 11.15.
Dan. 4.22. Ier. 27.5. Ille regna dispensat, cujus est and orbis quiregnatur,
and homo qui regnat, Tertull. Apolog.
he disposes them at pleasure. No Prince can so easily ruin, or raise, as he
can both them and their favorites also; for if them, much more then those that
depend upon them. 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12.
Thine is the kingdom, says David; and thou reignest over all: and in thine
hand it is to make great, and to give might unto any, even the meanest.

Again, all the wealth in the world is his. For, Hagg. 2.8.
gold is mine, says he by Haggie. And, 1 Chronicles. 29.12.
riches and honor are thine and of thee, says King David. Yea Psalm. 24.1. 1
Cor. 10.26, 28.
The earth is the Lords, says the Psalmist, and the fullness thereof. And,
Psalm. 50.12.
The whole world, says he, is mine, and whatsoever therein is. Matthew. 4.9.
Luke 4.6.
The Devil may pretend title to it, but has of right nothing to do with it;
Matthew. 8.31. Luke 8.32.
nor has he or any other whosoever power to dispose of ought in it, further
than he permits.

1 Timothy 6.17.
Charge the rich men of this world, says the Apostle, not to be high minded;
nor to trust in uncertain riches: so uncertain, says Nazianzene, that (...),
Greg. Naz. de Ira Praesid. and pro Pauper. and epist. 51.
a man may as well trust to the weather-cocke, that stands continually in the
wind, or to figures and characters not Plus creed literis scriptis in glacie,
quam mundi fragilis vanae fallaciae, Bernard. an Mapes. de Contempt. Mundi.
drawn, as another speaks, in the ice, but In vento, and rapida scribere
oportet aqua, Catull.
written in the running water, as to the wealth of this world. Since that
Iovem, qui donat and aufert, Horat. epist. 18. Qui dedit hoc hodie, cras, si
volet, auferetidem, Ibid. 15. Dari bonum quod potuit, auferri potest, Lucil.
Senec. epist. 8.
he that gave them can again resume them. ( Job 1.21.
God gave, and God has taken, says Job.) Qui elevarit, and dejicere potest,
Bernard. de Consid. lib. 2. Psalm. 73.18. and 102.10. (...), Hesio. oper. 1.
He that set up, can as well and as easily pull down. For this is easier
(whatsoever Corporalia facilius destruuntur quam construantur: Spiritualia
facilius construuntur quam destruantur, Innocent. 3. Decretal. l. 1. tit. 7. c.
2.
the Canon law says to the contrary in some cases) Esset aliquod
imbecillitatis nostrae rerumque nostrarum solatium, si tam tarde perirent
cuncta quam fiunt. Nunc incrementa lent exeunt; festinatur in damnum, Senec.
ep. 91. Quicquid longa series, multis laboribus, multa numinis indulgentia
struxit, id unus dies spargit and dissipat, Ibid. Vincendo didici magna momento
obrui, Agamemn. Sen. Troad. 2.2.
than that. Eccles. 4.14.
Out of the Prison, says Solomon, there comes one to reign, when (...),
Nicet. and Glycas:
he that was himself borne a King is abased. As he that was so poor is here
stored and made rich: so Job 1.3, 13, -- 17. Nempe dat, and quodcunque libet
fortuna (Deus ipse) rapitque: Irus and est subito, qui modo Craesus erat, Ovid.
Trist. 3.7. (...), Chrysostom. in Oziam. 4.
he that is most rich, may as soon be pulled and made poor, and left barer than
ever Jacob was when he came to Laban at first.

Psalm. 62.10.
not by unlawful and indirect courses. Since that 2 Chronicles. 25.9.
God is as well, yea far better able to enrich by the one, than the Devil
is, or can be by the other. He that thus enriched Jacob, notwithstanding Genesis
31.41, 42.
Labans hard, cross, and unjust dealing with him, is 2 Cor. 9.8, 11.
no less able still (for Number. 11.23. Esa. 50.2 and 59.1.
neither is his hand now shortened, nor his treasury exhausted) to do the like
for those that depend, with Jacob, upon him, and Psalm. 18.21.
walk no other way toward wealth, than they are directed by him, Psalm. 37.17,
22. Exodus 1.11, 12
notwithstanding all the affronts and oppositions that the world and worldly
men, whom they live either among or under, and have occasion to deal with,
shall be ever able to make against them.

(...), Theophil. ep. 2.
who is the same still, for those that were his. It is hard if thou have not as
much as Jacob had here to begin with, and we see what God brought it to. Be
thou thankful therefore to God for that little that thou have; ( (...), Greg.
Naz. ad Doarens.
in thankfulness a poor man may be as rich as a richer) and that may prove
an effectual means to improve it. Endeavor thy self Genesis 17.1.
to walk uprightly before him, and Act. 24.16.
to keep a good conscience in the course of 1 Cor. 7.24.
thy calling. And thou shall see, he will Exodus 1.20.21.
build thine house for thee, and so Deuteronomy. 28.8.
bless thine endeavors; that Job 8.7. Ex minimis seminibus nascuntur ingentia
Flumina magna vides parvis de fontibus orta, Ovid. Remed. l. 1.
though thy beginnings be small, yet thy latter end (if he see it to be good
for thee) shall be great; as Bildad told Job; and as in Job God made it good,
Job 42.10, 11, 12.
setting him up again with nothing; after those his great losses, but the
contribution of his friends; and raising him thereby and his blessing on it, to
a larger estate than ever he had enjoyed before time.

Jacob? Take heed how you Habbac. 1.16.
sacrifice to your yarne, and burn incense to your net: how you Job 31.27.
kiss your own hand; and ascribe your wealth and your raising, Deuteronomy. 8.17.
to your own forecast and industry, and so make an idol of it. Remember that
which Solomon says, that Prove. 10.22.
it is the blessing of God that makes a man rich: and that Psalm. 127.1, 2.
(...), Greg. Naz.
all man's labor and care is nothing without it: that Deuteronomy. 8.18.
it is God, as Moses speaks, that gives you power to get wealth. Learn not
the language of the rich worldling, Habes multa, Luke 12.19.
Soul, thou have much good; or of Esau, a mere natural, Satis habeo, Genesis
33.9.
I have enough; and no more: but the language of Job rather, Job 1.21.
The Lord has given; the language of David, 1 Chronicles. 29.16.
Of thine hand, O Lord, and thine, is all that we have; the language of
Eleazer, Abraham's servant, Gen 24.35.
God has blessed my Master greatly, and he is thereby become great: He has
given him flocks and herds, and gold and silver, and servants, etc. the
language of Jacob; Genesis 33.5.
The children that God of his grace has given me: and, Genesis 33.11.
God has been good to me, and therefore have I all this. Gratiam pro gratia
referamus, and suae reddantur origini fluenta gratiae, ut uberius fluant.
Alioqui nisi ad fontem redeant, exiccantur, Bern. de Temp. 91.
As you have received all from God; so ascribe all unto God; and be thankful
to him for all. Let the streams of Gods bounty lead you (as Amnem sequatur
qui viam vult ad mare, Plaut.
the watercourse does, either to the spring upward, or downward to the maine
Ocean) to Origo fontium and fluviorum omnium mare est, donorum and bonorum
omnium Dominus Deus. Bona omnia fontis illius sunt rivuli. Quodsi copiae
aquarum secretis subterrancis recursibus incessanter ae juora repetunt, and
inde rurs^s advisus ususque nostros jugi and insatigabili erumpunt obsoquio:
Cur non etiam spirituales rivi, ut arva mentium rigare non desinant, proprio
fonti sine fraud and intermissione reddantur? Bernard. in Cant. 13.
the sourse and fountain from which they do flow. Return a tribute unto him,
from whom you receive all, as Eccles. 1.7. Fretum de tota Flumina terra
Accipit, Ovid. Met. lib. 4. Quisnam est is fluvius, quem non recipiat mare?
Plaut. Curcul. 1.
the Rivers do to the Sea, from whence they have their first rising. (...),
Greg. Naz. epist. 79. (...), Idem de Bapt.
That may be a good means to secure the rest to you; whereas the withholding
of it, as (...), Idem de pace 3. Facit idem quod illi, qui inscriptum e portu
exportant clanculum, ne solvant portorium. Lucil. Satyr. l. 27.
the Merchants non-payment of the Kings custom, may prove the utter loss of
all. Let him, I say, that gave all, (...). Idem pro Pauper.
receive a part again from you of that that is 1 Chronicles. 29.16. (...). Idem
ibid. De suo poscit, non de tuo. Omnia enim quae habes, ab illo habes, August.
in Psalm. 102. Homo non suum reddit; Dominus suum recipit, Salv. ad Eccles.
lib. 1.
his own, by Matthew. 25.35.
the relief of his poor members, by the support and maintenance of his
Ministers; it is that in effect that Genes. 28.22.
Jacob so solemnly vowed to show his thankfulness in. Not that he needed it,
Act. 17.25. Ipsa suis pollens opibus, nihil indiga nostri, Manil.
who needs nothing himself; no more than (...), Greg. Naz. in Basil. Et ad
Basil. epist. 25. (...).
the Sea does the Rivers that run into it: but that your thankful minds
thereby may be testified, and he incited to be the more beneficial to you,
Malac. 3.10.
who desires any good occasion of doing you good. Return him part; said I?
Nay, (...), Greg. Naz. pro Pauper.
dedicate all to him, as you have received all from him; by Ad illius gloriam
omnia referas: and illuc unde flumina exeunt, revertantur, Petr. Bles. in
Canon. Episc.
employing all to his Glory, Quicquid feceris propter Deum facias; and ad
locum, unde exeunt, gratia revertantur, ut iterum fluant, Bernard. de Temp. 14.
(...), Greg. Naz. pro Pauper.
using all after his Will: Romans 11.36.
For of him, and through him; and therefore unto him are all things: and to him
be glory for ever. Amen. Malach. 3.8, 10.


THE IVDGEMENT OF A great Schoole-man, concerning the Merit of man's works;
contrary to that which the Church of Rome now holds. Durandus in Sentent.
lib. 2. did. 27. quaest. 2.
MErit of condignitie strictly and properly taken, is such a voluntary action
for which in justice or of right a reward is due to one, so that if it be not
rendered, he that should render it does wrong, and is simply and properly
unjust. And such merit of condignitie is found among men, but is not in man
toward God.

That which hereby appears, because that which is rendered rather out of the
liberality of the giver, than out of any debt due to the work, comes not
within the compass of Merit of condignitie strictly and properly taken.

But whatsoever we receive from God, be it grace or glory, or good temporal,
or spiritual (whatsoever good work done for the same go before in us) we
receive rather and more principally from Gods liberality, than rendered as due
for the desert of the work.

And therefore nothing at all comes within compass of Merit of condignitie
so taken.

The Major appears by the definition of Merit of condignitie before assigned.

The Minor is thus proved: because it is an easier and a less matter to make a
full recompense for that that one has received from another, than to make him
a debtor. For to make him a debtor, it is necessary that one return him more
than he has received from him, that so in regard of that overplus the other
may become his debtor.

But no man can fully recompense God; according to that which the Aristot.
Ethic. lib. 8. cap. 14.
Philosopher says, That God and our Parents can never be sufficiently
recompensed.

Therefore much less is it possible, that by any work of ours God should
become debtor to us, so that he should be unjust, if he paid us not somewhat
for it, that were due unto us for the same.

The reason hereof is, because what we are, and what we have, be it good
actions, or good dispositions, or the use of them, etc. it is all in us of Gods
liberality, both freely bestowing it on us, and freely preserving it in us. And
because by a free gift no man is bound to give more: but the receiver rather is
thereby bound to the giver.

Therefore by good dispositions, or good actions, or the good use of either
bestowed on us by God, God is not bound in any bond of justice to give us ought
else, so that if he should not give it, he should be unjust; but we are rather
thereby bound to God. And to think or say the contrary, is bold and
blasphemous. And if God therefore to a man dying in grace should deny glory, he
should do therein no wrong: nor should he be unjust, if he should withdraw
glory from one that already has it. And if any should complain hereof, God
might say unto him, as it is in the Gospel, Matthew. 20.15.
May I not do as I will with mine own? And the party that should suffer it,
ought to say as Job did, Job 1.21.
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken; he has done as he pleased:
blessed be his Name. For since that every good thing is of Gods free gift, God
is not bound thereby, because he has given some thing, to give other some
also, so that he should be unjust, if he gave them not. And if any thing be
bestowed on us, or returned to us for our good works, it is rather and more
principally out of Gods liberality that gives it, than out of any debt that is
due to our works.

If any shall say, that albeit God become not a debtor by any work of ours,
yet he becomes a debtor by his own promise Iam. 1.12.
expressed in Scripture.

It is of no force, for two causes:

The first is, because Gods promise in Scripture implies no such obligation,
but imports only a liberal disposition in God.

The second is, because that which is rendered, is not rendered for the due
desert of the work, but for the promise precedent. It is not, I say, rendered,
for the condign merit of the work, but only or principally for the promise:
And so it is not such debt, as we now speak of.

That it appears that Merit of condignitie strictly and properly taken, to
wit, for a voluntary action, for which a reward is of justice due to the doer,
so that if it be not paid, he that should pay it, does wrong, and is simply
and properly unjust; is not in Man toward God, yea that it is altogether
impossible for any such to be.

FINIS.
(...) DAVID'S Remembrancer.

A MEDIDATION ON PSALM 13.1.

Delivered in a Sermon at Sergeants Inn in Fleet Street.

By THOMAS GATAKER, B. of D. and Pastor of Rotherhith.

ESA. 62.6, 7. You that are mindful of the Lord, be not silent: Give him no
rest, till he repair Jerusalem, and till he make her the praise of the earth.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND for Edward Brewster, 1637.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir JAMES LEY Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief Justice
of his Majesty's Bench.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
ALbeit Speech have no small advantage of Writing; in that Habet nescio quid
latentis (...) viva vox; and in aures discipuli de autoris ore transfusa
fortius sonat. Hieron. ad Paulin. Viva illa, ut dicitur, vox lectione before
alit. Quintil. institut. lib. 2. cap. 2. Quod memoria lapsus Ciceroni quasi ex
Tuscul. lib. 2. tribuit Erasm. in Hieron. and in Adag. Atqui Cic. epist. ad
Attic. lib. 2. epist. 8. Vbi sunt qui aiunt, (...); Quanto magis vidi ex tuis
literis, quam ex illius sermon quid ageretur?
it has a greater vivacitie accompanying it, than the other has by much: the
latter seeming to be but as (...). Gregor. Nazianz. epist. 52. Et (...). Idem
epist. 38.
a dead shadow of the former; Elocution Acti^ quasi vita quedam est orationis.
Quintil. institut. lib. 11. cap. 3.
the very vital spirit and chief grace of an Oration, and that, which (...).
Dionys. Halicar. de Demosthene. Oratorem plaue perfectum, and cui nihil admodum
desit, Demosthenem facile dixeris. Cic. declar. Orat. Qu^ ne Athenas quidem
ipsas magis credo fuisse Atticas. Idem de perfect. Orat. Graecorum Oratorum
praestantissimi sunt ii qui fuerunt Athenis; eorum autem princeps facile
Demosthenes, admirable est quantum inter omnes unus excellat. Idem de opt. genesis
Orat. Cujus commemorato nomine maxima eloquentiae consummatio audientis anim^
oboritur. Val. Max. memorab. lib. 8. cap. 7.
that most eminent Orator and Quomodo Facundiae Parentem Ciceronem. Plin. hist.
not. l. 7. c. 30. Atqui, cum Demosthenes Graecae, Cicero Latinae eloquentiae
Frincipes extiterint; Demosthenes and prior fuit, and ex magna part Ciceronem,
quantus est, secit. Quintil. institut. lib. 6. cap. 3. and lib. 10. cap. 1.
Father of eloquence, esteemed not the prime part only of Oratorie, but in
effect Actio in dicendo una dominatur. Huic primas dedisse Demosthenes dicitur,
cum rogaretur, quid in dicendo esset primum, huic secundas, huic tertias. Cic.
de Orat. l. 3. and de clar. Orat. Val. Max. memor. l. 8. c. 10. Quintil.
instit. l. 11. c 3. and Aug epist. 56.
all in all, and the sum of all, being Hinc Val. Max. lib. 8. cap. 10. In
Demosthene magna pars Demosthenis abest, quia legitur potius quam auditur.
wanting in it: In regard whereof, it is not wont to make so deep an
impression, or to work upon the affections so powerfully as Nulla res magis
penetrat in animos, cosque fingit, format, flectit. Cic. de clar. Orat. Tantum
dictis adjicit gratiae, ut infinite magis eadem audita quam lecta delectent.
Quintill. instit. lib. 11. cap. 3. Multo magis, ut vulgo dicit^r, viva vox
afficit. Nam, licet acriora sint, quae legas, altius tamen in animo sedent,
quae pronunciatio, vultus, habitus, gestus etiam diccutis adsigit. Plin. epist.
4. lib. 2. Hinc Aeschines Demosthenis orationem, quam eis recitasset,
adm^rantibus Rhodiis, (...); Quid si ipsum, vel, Quid si bestiam ipsam
audivissetis? Cic. de Orat. lib. 3. Plin. hist. not. l^b. 7. cap. 30. Val. Max.
lib. 8. cap. 10. Plin. jun. epist. 4. lib. 2. Quintil. instit. lib. 11. cap. 3.
and Hieron. ad Paulin.
that does; and it is accounted therefore but (...). Ignat. epist. 1. (...).
Eustath ad Odyss. (...) ex Pausania.
a second shift, and as sailing with a side-winde, where a direct fore-winde
fails. Yet herein has writing the ods of Speech; in that by it we may
speak as well to the absent as to the present; by it men restrained by
sickness, weakness; or otherwise from public employment, yet may
notwithstanding much profit the public, and sitting themselves still at home,
benefit others abroad; yea by it, not the Sola res est quae homines absentes
praesentes facit. Turpilius de vicissitudine literarum. Quid enim tam praesens
est inter absentes, quam per epistolas and alloqui and audire quos diligas?
Hieron. ad Nitiam. Sunt literae doctrina quaedam, qua quisque valeat quamvis
long absenti verba mittere manufacta in silentio, quae rursus ille cui
mittuntur, non auribus, sed oculis colligat. August. de Trinit. lib. 10. cap.
1. Voces signa sunt, per quae praesentibus loquimur: inventae sunt literae, per
quas possemus and cum absentibus colloqui. Ibid l. 15. c. 10.
living only may converse with the living, (...). Homer. Iliad. (...).
though never so far both by Sea and Land severed either from other, but the
living also may have profitable commerce and dealing with the dead, as Hinc
illud Luc. 16.29. Habent Mosem and Prophetas: audiant illor. Mortui siquidem
loquuntur adhuc: quod de Abele Spiritus Sanctus Heb. 11.4. and de Samuele
Siracides Eccles. 46.20.
we have by means of their writings still extant with those that died and
departed this World, even thousands of years since, to our exceeding great
comfort and inestimable gain. Being therefore moved by some that heard of it,
and the matter delivered in it, but could not be present at the deliverie of
it, to make this weak discourse, by help of Pen and Press, more public, as
dealing in an Argument not unfitting the present times, and such as they
desired to be more fully either instructed or directed in, which by means
thereof they supposed that both themselves and many other might be; I was the
rather induced to condescend to this their desire, that by presenting of it to
your Lordship, the prime Member of that grave and reverend Society, where it
was by word of mouth delivered: I might give some poor pledge and testimony
of my due and deserved respect to your Honor, and of my thankful
acknowledgement of such favors, as have from time to time, by your Lordship
been showed me, as well during the time of mine employment at Lincolnes-Inne,
(where your Lordship was one of the first whom I received kind acceptance
from, being Reader at the time of my first access thither,) as since also.
Having therefore during my late restraint by some infirmity and weakness that
constrained me to keep home, and to intermit my public employment, taken some
time to review, supply, and enlarge my former Meditations of the Subject then
handled, (which I could not so well find time for before) I make bold to
tender them here (such as they are) unto your Lordship, and entreating only
your courteous acceptance of them, without further troubling your Honor amids
so many weightier affairs, commit both your self and them to the gracious
protection and holy direction of the Highest.

Your Lordships to command in the Lord, THOMAS GATAKER.

DAVID'S Remembrancer.
PSALM. 13.1. How long, O Lord? Will thou forget me for ever? How long will thou hide thy face away from me?


THIS Psalm, Occasion.
as appears by the whole tenor of it, was composed by the Prophet DAVID
during the time of some grievous and tedious temporal affliction; and that
accompanied also (as may seem) with some spiritual desertion. And it may well
for the subject matter Matter.
of it be termed

(...) Sicut Psalm. 38. (...)
DAVID'S Remembrancer;

As being penned by him for this end, to put God in mind of him, and of his
present forlorn and distressed estate.

The Psalm consists of three principal Parts.

Verse. 1, 2.
a grievous complaint Complaint.
of his present condition; propounded by way of expostulation;

1. Verse. 1.
In regard of God; who seemed not to regard him.

2. Verse. 2.
In regard of himself, by means thereof driven to his shifts, and in a manner
at his wits end.

3. Verse. 2.
In regard of his adversaries; who took occasion thereby to triumph and insult
over him.

Verse. 3, 4.
an humble suit and request commenced by him to God, and conceived in three
distinct parts, answering the three branches of his former complaint. For 1.
Verse. 3.
Request.
He requesteth God that he would Respice, refertur ad, Vsque quo avertis
faciem? Exaudi, ad, Vsque quo oblivisceris? Aug. in Psalm. 12.
Behold and hear; that he would vouchsafe to regard him, and turn his face
again toward him, and not send him away, inaudita querela, unheard and
unanswered.

2. He adds some Reasons why he desires and requires God thus to hear and
regard him.

Verse. 3.
In regard of himself, that he sleep not in death: not meant, as some think,
of De somno peccati. Ruffin. in Psalm. 12. In peccato. Aug. in Psalm. 12. and
contr. advers. leg. l. 1. c. 11. Cassiod. and Remig. and ex utroque Lombard. De
somno peccati qui ducit ad mortem. Acacius Caesar. quaest. collect. 4. apud
Hieron. epist. ad Miner. and Alex.
sleeping in sin; though 1 Thessalonians. 5.6, 7. Ephesians. 5.14. 1 Cor. 15.34.
sin in Scripture be often compared to sleep; nor, as others, Theodoret. and
Euthym.
of the death of grief and despair; though that be said too to be a kind of
death; and Genesis 27.46. Job 3.20, 21. Eccles. 7.28.
makes a man's life often no better, yea more bitter than death: nor yet as
others, Cum in peccato, quod est ad mortem irrevocabiliter perseveratur. Bern.
in Cant. 52. Ne poenitentiam ad mortem d fferens, dormiam cum morte peccati in
inferno, Hugo Card. in Psalm. 12.
of dying eternally, of being everlastingly damned: but Iun. Calvin. etc. Vide
Drus. lib. 3. quaest. 27. and Hereshach. in Psalm.
of temporal death, (that is usually termed 1 Cor. 15.6, 51. John 11.11, 14.
a sleep; and is nothing indeed but (...). Quid mors est? Somnus est consueto
longior. Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. de imag. sermon. 5.
a sleep longer than usual; yea in some sort Ier. 51.39. Nobis cum semel
occidit brevis lux, Nox est perpetuauna dormienda. Catull. epig. 5. Quicunque
nascimur, brevi post lumin^ Aeternus impedit sopor. Ben. Lam. pride.
a perpetual sleep, because to continue Job 7.9, 10. and 14.1^.
as long as the world lasts:) that Job 10.20, 21. Psalm. 39.13.
he might not die in this distressed and discomfortable estate.

Verse. 4.
In regard of his malicious and evil affected Adversaries; Psalm. 38.16.
that they might not have longer or further cause of joy and triumph in his
overthrow, as having now without all help or hope of recovery, gotten the
upper hand of him.

Verse. 5.
a cheerful and a comfortable Conclusion, Conclusion.
wherein as recollecting himself, and controlling the voice of sense with the
voice of faith;

Profitetur.
He professes his trust and confidence in God.

Pollicetur.
He promises himself assured help and deliverance from God.

Paciscitur.
He prayseth God for it, as if already he had received it: (...). Vides animum
been sperantem? Petit, and prius quam acceperit, tanquam qui accepisset,
gratias agit. Chrysostom. in Psalm. 12. Contraquam Bern. in Cant. 10. Gratiarum
actio beneficium non praecedit, sed sequitur.
See the picture of an hopeful heart, says Chrysostom, he craveth aid of
God, and before he have it, he renders thanks for it, as if already he had it.

And thus have you the sum and substance of the Psalm, with the several
parts of it.

To return to the first branch of his complaint, which I purpose only to
insist on.

Manner.
First, for the manner of it, or phrase it is conceived in; there are four
several readings, though in effect for sense and substance much the same.

Graec. Sept. Lat. Vulgat. Aug. Genev. Reg. Bibl. Calvin. alii.
How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? But they both neglect the
pause in the Hebrew; and beside make no very good sense.

Vsquequo, Domine, oblivisceris me? In finem? Remig. in Psalm. 12. Erit hoc
usque quo in aeternum? Hugo Card. Ibid. Sic Vatabl. and Leo Iudae.
How long, O Lord, will thou forget me? for ever? As elsewhere, Psalm. 74.10.
How long, O God, shall the Adversary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy
Name for ever? But the pause here in the Original, is after Domine; not after
Oblivisceris.

an Aposiopesis, that is, a broken or imperfect sentence, not unfit to express
passion. Quousque, Domine? subaudi, non intu^beris? Oblivisceris mei in
aeternum? Iun.
Quousque, Domine? How long, O Lord? As if he had said; How long will it be
ere thou mind me? In aeternum oblivisceris? Will thou never again think on
me? How long will thou hide thy face away from me? And the like we may find in
diverse other places; Psalm 79.5.
How long, O Lord? will thou be angry for ever? Shall thy jealousy burn like
fire? And, Psalm. 89.46.
How long, Lord? Will thou hide thy face for ever? Shall thy wrath burn like
fire? Yea the very selfsame Aposiopesis apparently, where he says; Psalm 6.3.
But thou, O Lord, how long? And Psalm 90.13.
Return O Lord: how long? And let it repent thee concerning thy servants: As
also often Ier. 13.2. Apoc. 6.10.
elsewhere.

Reduplication, Per epimonen repetendo ingeminat. Cassiod.
(a form very fit also to express the vehement affection of a soul
surcharged with sorrow, and pincht in with pain;) enclosing the middle part of
the verse within a Parenthesis: How long, O Lord? (will thou never remember
me?) how long, (I say) will thou hide thy face away from me? And the like
Reduplication is found also elsewhere, where he says, Psalm. 94 3.
How long shall the wicked, O Lord? How long (I say) shall the wicked exult?

Either of the two latter may well stand with the Context of the words in the
Original.

Secondly, For the Matter and substance of it: Matter.


1. There are two things complained of: Substance.


1. That God had forgotten him.

2. That he had hid his face away from him. Both Nec oblivio, nec aversio cadit
in Deum. Remig. in hunc Psalm. Neutrum Deus revera facit, sed more nostro
Scriptura loquitur. August. and Ruffin. in hunc locum. Per (...) de Deo perinde
ac de homine loquitur. Humanum siquidem oblivisci, and faciem ab eo quem oderit
avertere. Muscul.
humanitus dicta, spoken by way of resemblance from the manner of men, and the
one going a degree beyond the other. Gravius est aversionem faciei, quam
oblivionem sentire. Muscul. in hunc loc.
It is more to hide his face from him, than not to remember him. Genes. 40.23.
and 41.9. Hinc quaestio apud Senecam, an obliti ingrati sint dicendi. de benef.
l 3. c. 4, 5.
We may out of unmindfulnesse sometime forget one, whom we wish otherwise
well unto: but when we do wittingly and willingly Esa. 58.7. and 53.3. (...);
Dion. Chrysostom orat. 38.
turn, or hide our face away from him, it is a sign that either we hate and
abhor him, or at least desire not to mind or remember him. In oblivione
remissio est benevolentiae and curae, in aversione faciei indignatio and odium.
Muscul.
There is an implication of bare neglect in the one; an intimation of anger and
indignation, of displeasure and evil will in the other. For God therefore to
forget DAVID, not to mind him, or look after him, is much! If his eye be never
so little once off us, the spiritual adversary is ready presently to seize on
us, Aeriae potestates tanquam milvi circumvolitant, ut pullum infirmum
abripiant. August. in Psalm. 62. and in Psalm. 90.
as the Kite on the Chicke, if the Hen look not carefully after it. But for
God, DAVID'S Psalm. 4.6, 7. and 18.18. and 73.2^ (...). Theophyl ep. 30. ex
Homer. Odyss. ^.
only joy and stay, to turn his face away from him, that he may not mind him,
as if Psalm 27.9.
in anger and evill-will toward him, he had cast off all care of him, yea were
resolved to reject him, and were willing to expose him to the will of those
that would Psalm. 38.16.
rejoice in his ruin: this is much more. There is an unmindfulnesse of him
implied in the former; an evil mind toward him implied in the latter. And
surely, if Psalm. 30.5.
in the favor of God there be life; yea Psalm. 63.3.
his favor is better than life it self: then undoubtedly (...). Theophyl.
epist. 37.
such apprehension of his disfavour and displeasure must needs be as death, yea
more bitter than death it self to the soul so deserted.

Circumstance.
2. Both these are further aggravated by the circumstance of time; the long
continuance of either.

1. For the time past; he had been long in this estate already.

2. For the time to come; it was uncertain how long it would last.

Now for God Esa 54.8. Psalm. 30.5.
for an instant to be angry with some of his, and to hide his face from them,
cannot be but most (...). Theophyl. epist. 37. (...). Idem ep. 24. Nam
fruendis voluptatibus crescit carendi dolor. Plin. epist. 5. lib. 8. Et, Tum
est tormentum carere d vitiis, cum illas jam senseris. Sen. controv. 6.
heavy to those that have formerly enjoyed it, and been before in his favor:
(for In carcere natus ac nutritus puer, de matris suae anxietate miratur. Bern
de diverse. 12.
as for others; those, we say, that were never out of hell, think there is no
other Heaven.) The least frown of his face, or bending of his brows, is a
very hell it self to such: Psalm. 30.7.
Thou turnedst but thy face away, says DAVID, and I was troubled. But to have
it last and continue so for a long time together, what a daunting and dismaying
must it needs be to that soul, that shall esteem it self in a manner to lie
so long in hell, and to have in some sort an hell so long here out of hell,
where it had a kind of heaven before? And yet further again, though this
heavy and disconsolate estate should last long, and were yet to last far
longer; yet if there were some certain stint of time set how long it should
last; the eye of the soul being fixed upon that term, it would be some
comfort to consider how the time wore away. But where the eye of the mind
meets with no object to stint it, but (as it is with persons distressed at
sea in a thick fog, that have rowed and wrought long till their hearts ache
again, and beaten to and fro, but can descry no shore; or as it is Quibus
cruciatu^ and ad finem per tormenta properat, and sine fine deficiens durat Ita
sit miseris mors sine morte, sinis sine fine, defectus sine defectu: quia and
mors vivit, and finis semper incipit, and deficere defectus nescit. Greg mor. l
9. c. 47.
with those that are in hell, whose torments have no stint, but are boundless
and endless) it is as far from an end still, for ought it can descry, as at
first; it has lasted thus long, and Psalm. 74.9.
it is uncertain how long longer it may last: This is that that might break
an heart of stone or steel, that might enforce the forlorn soul to sink
down under the heavy burden and unsupportable weight of it, overwhelmed with
horror, and swallowed up with despair, were there not somewhat else (even
Psalm. 37.24.
an hand of God himself) to support and uphold it. And yet was this, as we see
here, DAVID'S estate at the present. He complains that God had forgotten him,
yea he had hid his face from him: this discomfortable estate had lasted long
with him already, and it was uncertain yet how long it would last.

Gods Church and dearest children are often in that case, what for outward
afflictions, what for inward desertions, that both in the sight of others, and
to their own sense and feeling, God seems to have rejected them, and not to
regard them.

Aliorum judicio. Calvin. in Psalm. 13. Sic Esa. 53.4.
In the sight, I say, of others: for so say the profane proud, oppressing and
pursuing the poor; Psalm. 10.11.
God has forgotten them; he has hidden away his face, and will never more
look after them. And DAVID'S enemies of him, (if he were Author of that
Psalm;) Psalm. 71.11.
God has forsaken him; let us pursue him, and seize on him: for there is none
to deliver him. Yea to Ex sensu^ proprie. Calvin. in Psalm. 13.
their own sense and feeling. For so Sion Galat. 4 26.
the Mother of the faithful complains; Esa. 49.14.
The Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me. So the children of
the Church, and those no (...). Matthew. 12.39.
bastardly brood neither, but such as continued firm unto God, and faithful
with him, complain also, That Psalm. 44.17, 18, 24.
though they had not forgotten God, nor dealt disloyally with him, yet God had
forgotten them and hid his face away from them. So DAVID, 1 Samuel 13.14.
a man after Gods own heart, and (as his name sounds) the Lords Darling, or
(...) amasius vel amabilis. Vnde Dido Poenis. Inde and Solomon (...) 2 Samuel
12.25.
the beloved of the Lord, yet makes grievous complaints oftentimes unto God,
and in holy manner debateth the matter, and expostulateth with God, both here
and elsewhere: Psalm. 42.9.
I will say to God my rock; Why have thou forgotten me? And, Psalm. 88^ 5.14.
Lord, why rejectest thou my soul, and hidest thy face away from me? I am like
to the dead that lie slain in the grave; that are cut off from thine hand, and
thou remembrest no more. Yea not Psalm. 22.1, 8.
DAVID alone as a Type of him; but the only begotten of God himself, Coloss.
1.13. Ephesians. 1.6. Matthew. 3.17.
his Son of Love, as he terms him, his dearest Darling, (though Romans 8.32.
O quantum dilectus, pra^ quo filius ipse, aut non dilectus, aut saltem
neglectus? Bern. de temp. Vide and Salvian. de provid. l. 4.
he thought him not too dear for us) when he was on the Cross, not in his
enemies eyes and account only, Matthew. 27.43.
that twitted him with his trust in God, who seemed then not to regard him, but
to his own sense and feeling too, seemed neglected and forgotten, as by that
bitter and lamentable complaint that he then made, appears; Matthew. 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And if it were so with Christ,
Psalm. 110.1. Matthew. 21.45.
DAVID'S Lord; no marvel if the like also sometime befell DAVID: if this
betided the head, no marvel if it betide the body too: If it were sometime the
state of the Psalm. 2.8. John 1.14.
native Son, that had never been other; no marvel if it be the state often of
adopted Sons, of such as have Galat 4.6.
of Servants been made Sons, of such as have from Bondslaves been advanced
to that honor.

Which yet we are not so to understand, Explication.
as if God could forget any man, or as if God could forget ought. Oblivio in
Deum non cadit. Aug. in Psalm. 9. and in Psalm. 118. Conc. 15. Et Mus^ul. in hunc
loc. Nihil Deus ignorant, nihil obliviscitur. Greg. Mor. l. 25. c. 4. Neque
oblivio in Deum cadit, quia nullo modo mutatur, neque recordatio quia non
obliviscitur. Aug. in Psalm. 87.
Oblivion is a defect, and cannot befall him, who is perfection it self. But
as we are said to forget things when we do no more regard them, or take
notice of them, or look after them, than if we had forgotten them: Psalm 45.11.
Forget thy people and thy fathers house, says the Psalmist to Pharaohs
daughter; And rich men are said to forget their poor kindred and acquaintance:
So Tunc meminisse dicitur Deus, quando f^cit; tunc oblivisci, quando non facit.
August. in Psalm. ^7. and in sentent. Prosper. 108. Oblivisci dicitur, cum non
miseretur. Hugo Victor. de essent. divin.
is God said to forget men, when he does not respect them, when he takes no
care of them, when for good he no more regards them than if he had clean
forgotten them.

Now in this manner does God indeed forget some; Distinction.
some he seems to forget, though indeed he do not forget them. As Ambrose
says, That Quosdam deserit, quosdam deserere videtur. Ambr. in Psalm. 118.
God does wholly forsake some: as he did Matthew. 27.5.
Judas and 2 Samuel 7.15.
Saul, whom he utterly cast off. Some he seems to forsake, but he forsakes
not indeed. As our Savior Christ, albeit Esa. 53.4.
God seemed to have forsaken him, when not only Act. 2.23.
he left him in his cruel enemies hands, and Luke 22.53.
suffered them to work their wills upon him, but even 2 Cor. 5.21. Esa. 53.6,
10.
powered out his own heavy wrath and indignation upon him; and he complained
therefore as before, That Mark. 15.34.
his God had forsaken him; yet was he not indeed then forsaken, but even then
Heb. 5.7.
heard and helped; John 16.32.
nor was he ever left alone; but though Matthew. 26.56.
his Disciples all forsook him, and fled from him; yet his Father forsook him
not, but abode ever with him: And DAVID, though Psalm. 22.1.
he complain sometime in the same terms that our Savior did; yet elsewhere
Psalm. 31.22.
he acknowledges that howsoever he had said in his haste, (in the heat of
temptation,) that he was cast out of Gods sight, yet even then did God hear
him and grant his requests. In like manner, some God thus forgets indeed.
(As Hosh 8.14.
they forget him; so he forgets them.) Hosh. 1.6.
Call the child Loruchamah, says God to Hoshea; for I will have no more mercy
on the house of Israel; but (as the Vulgar Latin has it) Oblivione
obliviscar. Vulg. tanquam esset a (...) dextra. quum sit a (...) sinistra.
I will utterly forget them: or rather (after the Original) Vt omnino condonem
Iun and Livel. Sed prorsus tollam eos. Leo Iud. a facie scil. me^. Vatabl.
I will never forgive them: but Hosh. 4.6, 9.
because they have forgotten the Law of their God, I will forget them; when I
have visited their ways on them, and rewarded them for their deeds. Minatur
and memoriam damnandorum, and oblivionem damnatorum. Ruffin. in Hose.
God threatens, (says Ruffine) both to remember to damn them, and to forget
ever to show mercy upon them, when he has once condemned them. Some he
seems to forget, when he does not. Deus bonos non negligit, cum negligit. Nec
obliviscitur, sed quasi obliviscitur. Ruffin. in Psalm.
He neglects not the godly, no not when he neglects them: Yea, Obscuris
super nos dispositionibus Deus saepe undenos aestimatur deserere, inde nos
recipit; and unde nos recipere creditur, inde derelinquit: ut plarunque hoc
fiat gratia quod ira dicitur; and hoc aliquando ira sit, quod gratia putatur.
Gregor. mor. l. 5. c. 5.
he remembers them then best, when he seems least to regard them, when he
seems most of all to forget them. Though the wicked, when he has his will
on the poor, thinks that Psalm. 10.11.
God has forgotten them, and does not at all mind them; yet Psalm. 9.18. and
10.12.
the poor, says the Psalmist, shall not always be forgotten; nor the hope
of the afflicted perish for ever. But Psalm. 9.12.
God when he makes inquisition for blood, will make it appear then that he
remembers them, and that he does not forget the poor man's complaint, nor will
ever fail any of those that Psalm. 9.10.
seek to him and trust in him. And Esa. 49.14.
though Zion complain that her God had forgotten her; yet the Lord tells
her, and assures her that even then Esa. 49.15, 16.
he had her as fresh in mind, as if she were In manibus sculpsi te. Humanitus
dictum. Iun.
written upon his hands, and her present estate was never out of his eye: yea
that he could no more forget her, than a woman could her child, or than the
kindest and tenderest (...). Greg Naz. orat. 31. Et si filius minus interdum
quam debeat filialem affectum exhibuit; matter tamen pro suu visceribus maternum
deserere non debet, sed nec valet, affectum. Bern. ep 300.
mother that is the fruit of her own womb.





Ad examen.
to try their sincerity, their confidence in God, their constancy with God,
whether their hearts be sincere toward him, and upright with him, or no;
whether they will keep constantly in Gods ways, though God seem to neglect
them, or seek to indirect courses, because God seems not to regard them. 2 Chronicles. 32.31.
God left Hezekiah, says the holy Ghost, to try him and to know, that is,
Tentat Deus ut sciat, i. ut scire nos faciat; non ut sciatipse, quem nil latet,
sine tentatione enim nemo satis probatus esse potest, sive sibi ipsi, sive
alii. Aug. in Genesis contr. Manich. l. 1. c. 22. and de Trinit. l. 1. c. 12. and
ibid. l. 3. c. 11. and in Genes. quaest. 57. and 83. quaest. 60. and in Deuteronomy.
quaest. 19. and in Psalm. 36. and in Psalm. 58. and in Psalm. 44. and de sermon Dom.
in mont. l. 2.
to make known, what was in his heart. And Deu. 8.2. and 13.3.
the Lord tempts you, says Moses to the Israelites, to humble you, and to
prove you, and to know what is in your heart, whether you love him heartily,
and will constantly keep his Commandments or no. As a Father will sometimes
cross his son, to try the childs disposition, to see how he will take it,
whether he will mutter and grumble at it, and grow humorous and wayward,
neglect his duty to his Father, because his Father seems to neglect him, or
make offer to run away and withdraw himself from his Fathers obedience,
because he seems to carry himself harshly and roughly toward him, and to
provoke him thereunto: So does God likewise oft-times cross his children, and
seems to neglect them, to try their disposition, what metal they are made
of, how they stand affected toward him: whether they will neglect God, because
God seems to neglect them, forbear to serve him, because he seems to
forget them, cease to depend upon him, because he seems not to look after
them, to provide for them, or to protect them: like Iorams profane Pursevant;
2 King. 6.33.
This evil, says he, is of God, and why should I depend then on God any
longer? Or whether they will still constantly cleave to him, though he seem
not to regard them, nor to have any care of them; and say with Esaias; Esa. 8.17.
Nec sit praebatus ab officio recessit. Tu, inquit, avertis faciem tuam a me,
sed ego non sum aversus a te. Ruffin. in Psalm. 29.
Yet will I wait upon God, though he have hid his face from us, and I will
look for him though he look not on us; for Esa. 30.18.
they are all blessed that wait on him; and he will not fail in due time to
show mercy unto all them that do so constantly wait on him. As 1 Samuel 13.8, 10.
Samuel dealt with Saul; he kept away till the last hour, to see what Saul
would do, when Samuel seemed not to keep touch with him. So does God with his
Saints, and with those that be in league with him; he withdraws himself
often, and Psalm. 10.1.
keeps aloof off for a long time together, to try what they will do, and
what courses they will take, when Psalm. 89.19, 38, 39, 49.
God seems to break with them, and to leave them in the suds, as we say,
amids many difficulties much perplexed, as it was with DAVID at this time.

Thus was Saul's hypocrisy discovered. He would seem to depend on God; and 1 Samuel 28 6, 7.
sought to him in his troubles and asked advice of him. But when God seemed to
neglect him, and gave him no answer, neither by dream, nor vision, nor by Vrim
and Thummim, neither by Prophet, nor by Priest, then left he God and sought to
the Sorceresse, and by the Sorceresse to Satan.

Where a question may be moved, 1 Chronicles. 10.14.
Saul did not at all ask counsel of God. 1 Samuel 28.6.
Saul asked counsel of God, says one place; but the Lord gave him no answer:
And, 1 Chronicles. 10.13, 14.
Thus died Saul in his sin, says another place, which he sinned, in that he
asked counsel of a witch, and asked not of God; and therefore the Lord slew
him.

Rules of the Civil Law.

1. Ficta pro factis non habentur. Facta haud videntur, facta quae sunt subdole.
That is not deemed done, that is not sincerely done; or Non videtur fieri quod
non legitime fit. Reg. Iur.
that is not done so as it should. God accounts that as not done, that is not
done in sincerity. Take it by the like: It is said of the idolatrous Heathen
that were placed in Samaria, that 2 King. 32.33.
they feared the Lord, and yet served their own idols too; and yet in the very
next verse again it is said of the very same persons, 2. King. 17.34.
Neither they, nor their children fear God to this day. Non colit rem sanctam,
qui non sancte colit. Salvian. de provid. l. 4.
Their fear was no fear, because no sincere fear: and so Saul's seeking to
God no seeking, because no sincere seeking. Psalm. 145 18.
The Lord is near to all that call on him, but that call on him in sincerity.
And John 4.24.
, The true worshippers are such as worship in Spirit and Truth. But Sapiens
nummularius Deus est: Nummum nec fallum, nec fractum recipiet. Bern. de temp.
109.
no counterfeit coin will go for current with him.

Factum non dicitur quod non perseverat.
That is not done, that holds not out, that keeps not firm. Nihil dicitur
fuisse factum, quamdi^ aliquid superest faciendum.
There is nothing said to be done, as long as ought is yet undone; Perseverance
is all in all. Matthew. 24.13. Apoc. 3.10.
He is faithful indeed that holds out to the last. Prove. 17.17. Vere amicus
semper amat. Drus. Prove. l. 2. cent. 1. pr. 16. Verus amor nullum novit habere
modum. Propert. eleg 3
He is a true lover, that loves ever. But (...). Eurip. Troad. Aristot.
Rhetor. l. 2. c. 21. Amavit nunquam, jugiter qui non amat.
He never loved truly, that loves not continually: He was never a true
friend, that ever cease to be a friend, that is not a friend always, that
loves not in adversity, as well as in prosperity, nor is content to take
part with him, whom he seems to love in either: So he never truly trusted
in God, that ever cease to depend upon him, that dares not trust God as well
at sea as on land, as well in adversity as in prosperity, that is ready to
leave and give over relying on God, so soon as God leaves in outward show at
least to look after him.

On the other side, thus was I^bs sincerity approved. Job 13.24.
Why, says he to God, do thou hide thy face away from me? and carriest thy
self as an enemy toward me? Surely for no other end, Job, but to try thy
sincerity; and to make it manifest what thou art. The Devil slandered Job, and
traduced him, as if he had been but an hireling, Job 1.9, 10, 11.
one that served God only to serve his own turn upon God; and would
therefore soon leave God, if God should seem to leave him, yea would not
stick to ourse God, if he should but a little anger him, to his face. But the
Devil proved a liar, like himself: it was far otherwise with Job: As he was
no hireling, so -- (...). Eurip. He^ub.
he proved no changeling. As the Heathen man says of one, Neciratum colere
destitit numen. Senec. ad Marc. c. 13.
He ceased not to worship even an angry God: Job 13.15.
Though he slay me, says Job, yet I will trust still in him. And thus the
Saints of God approve unto God their own sincerity; in that Psalm. 44.17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 24.
though God had forgotten them, yet they had not forgotten him; though
Percussisti, i. percutiendo dejecisti. Verba enim Hebraica saepe motum
consignificant. Sic Genes. 38.9. and Psalm 89.39.
he had smitten them, (that is, by smiting thrown and thrust them down) to
the very bottom of the Sea, the place where the (...) cetus. prout Genes.
1.21. Psalm. 74.13. Ezech. 29.3. and 32.2. (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 148.
Whales lodge, and had overwhelmed them with the shadow of death; and suffered
them to be butchered and massacred all the day long, as if they were no other
than sheep sent to the shambles, and set apart for the slaughter; yet for all
this, they would not from him, nor seek to any other but him: As Diogenes the
Cynicke sometime told his Master Antisthenes, (...). Diogen. Laert. Nullus tam
durus erit baculus qui a tuo me obsequio separet. Hieron. adv. Iovin. lib. 2.
there was no cudgel so crabbed that could drive them way from him.

Ad exercitium.
to exercise the gifts and graces of his Spirit in them. For many graces of
God, as patience, confidence in God, and the like, are like torches and tapers,
that show dim in the light, but burn clear in the dark; or like the Moon,
and Stellae interdiu lat^nt nocta micant. Ita vera virtus non apparet in
prospetis, eminet in adversis. Bernard. in Cant. 27.
the Stars, that are not seen in the day, but shine bright in the night.
Patientiae in prosperis nullus est usus. Gregor. mor. l. 11. cap. 19. In malis
quae quisque patitur, non in bonis, quibu^ fruitur opus est patientia. Aug. in
Joan. 124.
There is no use of patience when all things go well with us. Iam. 5.11.
Ye have heard of Jobs patience, says James. But we had never heard of it,
had Job never been in trouble. Ibi fides non habet meritum, ubi ratio humana
praebet experimentum Greg. in Evang. 2^. Haec est enim laus fidei, si id quod
creditur non videtur. Nam quid magnum est, si id credimus, quod videm^^? Aug in
Joan. 79. Ioh 20.29. Facile enim credimus quod videmus. Ambr. in Luc. l. 10.
There is no sight of faith, when we do sensibly see and feel as it were the
love and good will of God toward us in the pregnant and plentiful effects and
fruits of his favor. Virtus fidei credere quod non vides; merces fidei videre
quod credis. August. in Psalm. 109. and de verb. Ap. 27.
It is the efficacy of faith, says Augustine, to believe what we see not; for
it is the reward of faith for us to see what we believe. But when Putas, hic
est? non potest non esse, sed latet. hyems est; intus est viriditas in radice.
Aug in 1. Joan. 9.
it is winter time with us, and the s^p is all down in the root, little sign
or show of it to be seen abroad, or above ground in the branches; when all
outward, yea and inward signs of Gods love and favor toward us, and of his
care and regard of us shall seem to fail and be withdrawn from us; when we
shall see and feel nothing, but arguments of his anger and wrath, 2 Cor. 7.5.
troubles without and terrors within, Gods face turned from us, or his angry
look toward us; yet even then through these thick and black clouds to
descry and discern the bright sunshine of Gods favor; and contrary to
sense and reason, carnal sense, and corrupt reason, to believe that Heb. 12.6.
Apoc. 3.21.
God loves us, when he lowreth onus, and seems even to loath us, that we are
in favor still with him when he knitteth the brows and frowneth on us, that
he remembers us and thinks on us when he seems to forget us, that he is a
gracious God and Job 13.16, 15.
a sure Savior to us, when he seems bent to destroy us; this is the
excellency of faith indeed. And for the exercise of this and other the like
graces in his, does God often withdraw himself from them, as the Nurse does from
the child, to teach it to exercise the feet, and learn to stand and go of it
self without help or hold. Or as the Eagle with her young ones, which when
they are grown fledg, she turns out of the nest, nor bears them ever on
her wing, though Exodus 19.4. Deuteronomy. 32.11. Aquilae pullos suos in alis portant,
alites reliqui inter pedes. Munster. in Schol. ex R. Solomon.
sometimes she so do, but to enure them to fly, (...) etc. (...). Basil. Sell
homil. 21.
flies from them, and leaves them sometime to shift for themselves. God led
you along the wilderness, says Moses to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 8.2, 3.
to humble you, and to teach you, that man lives not by bread, but by Gods
Word; to teach them Pueris, qui nare discunt, scirpea induitur ratis. Plaut.
Aulul. 4.1. -- ast ubi jam duraverit aetas Membra, animumque tuum, disces sine
cortice nare. Horat. sermon. 1.4.
to swim without bladders, to go without crutches, to depend upon the bare
word of God, when bread and water should fail; and to learn, as, with the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.9.
not to trust in themselves, so (...). Basil. Sell. hom. 21.
not to trust to the means, but in him that works by them, and that can as
well work for us without them, when they fail.

Ad patientiam edocendam.
to enure us to patience, and holy obedience, and submission of our wills to the
good pleasure of God. As a father sometime will cross his child in those
things that he has a mind to, yea and it may be are not evil for him neither
otherwise, and d^ny him some things that he does most of all desire, though
they be such things as he is willing enough, yea and has a purpose afterward
to bestow on him, only thereby to enure him to rest contented with his will,
and to submit and refer his desires to his pleasure: So does God oftentimes
withdraw and withold long from his children outward joys, inward comforts,
the light of his countenance, the fruits of his favor, the things they most
desire, and that he purposes one day to bestow on them, though he keep them
back for the present, thereby to enure them to patience and childlike
submission, that they may learn to practice what Matthew. 6.10. (...). Heraclit.
apud Stob. c. 3.
they daily pray, and what our Savior as well by practice as by precept, has
taught them to say, Matthew. 26.39, 42. (...), Thymaridae quidam. Thymarides
contra, (...). Iamblych. in vita Pythag. Vide q^id aequius est, tene divinae
voluntati conformando subdere, an ut ipsa tuae subserviat voluntati. Gerson.
consol. Theol. l. 2. cap. 1. (...); Epictet. Arian. lib. 2. c. 17 Deus quod
vult qui vult, semper est foelix. Sic enim homo ab humanis in divina dirigitur,
cum voluntati humanae voluntas divina praefertur. Aug. in Joan 52.
Not my will, but thy will be done. For as Rom 5.4.
patience makes trial; so Iam 1.3.
trial breeds patience. As (...). Pind. Olymp. 4. Marcet sinc adversario
virtus. Tunc apparet quanta sit, quantum valeat polleatque, cum quid possit
patientia ostendit. Sen. de provid c. 2.
by patience, and by nothing more, is our sincerity approved: (nothing puts
our piety to the proof more than patience:) so such trials as these do enure
to patience and obedience: (As it is said of our Savior, That Heb 5.8.
though he were the Son, yet (...).
he learned obedience by those things that he suffered:) (...). Eurip. Hecub.
Quam male inassueti veniunt ad aratra juvenci?
a lesson at the first not so easily learned of us, till by continuance of
sufferings we have been enured to the yoke. By these and the like courses
therefore God enureth and instructs his children to bear quietly such
burdens as he pleases to lay on them; as also to wait his leisure, and abide
his good pleasure, who knows what is best for them, and Psalm. 34.9, 10. and
84.12.
will deny nothing Psalm. 145.15.
in his due season unto them; but Prorsus tanquam aegretum reficiens medicus,
and quod opus est hoc dat, and quando opus est, tunc dat. Aug. in Psalm. 144.
as a wise Physician, says Augustine, dieting his patient, will both give them
what is fit for them to have, and give it them then when it is fit for them to
have it.

Ad majorem peccati detestationem.
to work in them a greater hatred and detestation of sin, whereof this hiding
of his face from them, is often a fruit and an effect. Esa 1.15.
When you stretch forth your hands, says God by the Prophet, I will hide mine
eyes from you, and though you make many prayers, I will not hear you, because
your hands are full of blood. And says the same Prophet, speaking in the
person of Gods people; Esa. 64.7.
Thou have hid thy face from us, and have consumed us because of our
iniquities. Yea in the Lamentations the people of God complain, that Lament.
3.24, 43, 44.
God had overwhelmed them with his wrath, and covered himself with a cloud,
that their prayers might not pass, nor have access to his Highness; because
they had sinned and rebelled against him, and he therefore had not spared them.
And certainly that is one principal cause, the sins of Gods Church and
Children, their rebellious courses, their untoward carriage, their wickedness,
their wantonness, their evil demeanure toward him, that makes God to turn
away his loving countenance from them, and that not only for a time to look
off them, till they humble themselves before him, but Multa cogitur homo
tolerare etiam remiffis peccatis: quamvis ut in eam veniret miseriam, primum
suerit causa peccatum. Productior est enim poena quam culpa, ne parva putaretur
culpa, si cum illa siniretur and poena. Ac per hoc vel ad demonstrationem
debitae miseriae, vel ad emendationem labilis vitae, vel ad exercitationem
necessaria^ patientiae, temporaliter hominem detinet poena, etiam quem jam ad
damnationem sempiternam reum non detinet culpa. Aug. in Joan. 124.
even for some space of time after also, to look strangely upon them. He does
as a wise and discreet Father, who when his Son has offended him, though
upon his submission he be reconciled unto him, and be inwardly as well
affected again toward him, as ever, yet will make some show of anger still,
it may be, and lowre and frown on him for a long time after, that he may not
suddenly take heart to grace, as we say, again; but may by that means be
drawn to be both more seriously sorry for his offense past, and more fearful
for the future of offending his Father. So deals God with his Children, when
they have done amiss and run riot, though upon their repentance he be at one
again with them, yet he concealeth it long many times; neither is his
countenance often the same for a long time after toward them, that formerly it
had been. Thus dealt DAVID with Absalom; and thus God himself with DAVID. 2 Samuel 13.38, 39.
After that Absalom by a train had made away his brother Ammon, and was fled
upon it to Geshur; DAVID a Father but too indulgent, ( 1 King. 1.6. 2 Samuel 18.5.
that was his fault, and he smarted shrewdly for it) after some space of time,
when the sorrow for his son Ammon was over, began to earne inwardly after
Absalom; and since that Ammon was gone, he was loath to lose the comfort of his
Absalom also, whom he loved but too well, and far better than his Absalom
loved him. And though he strove to conceal it, yet Sed male dissimulat: quis
enim celaverit ignem, Lumine qui semper proditur ipse suo? Ovid. ep. 12.
Apparet facile dissimulatus amor. Ibid.
he could not but discover it. 2 Samuel 14.1, 2, 3, 19, 20.
Ioab wisely discerned it, and used the woman of Tekoa as a Midwife, to deliver
DAVID'S heart of that that Ita Christus (...) dicitur. Basil. Sell. homil. 19.
it went great with, and was full of pain withal; and to draw that from him
as by constraint or importunity, which DAVID was of himself over-willing unto
already. 2 Samuel 14.21, 22.
Thus Absalom his exile must be called home at length, though with some
difficulty: and the matter must proceed not as from DAVID, but from Ioab:
DAVID'S affection to Absalom must by all means be concealed: Yea, after Absalom
was returned, though DAVID, no doubt, longed still after him, and in some sort
doated on him, and was more seriously and sincerely desirous to see Absalom,
than Absalom was to see DAVID; yet, 2 Samuel 14.24, 28.
Let him turn, says he, to his own house, and not see my face. And so dwelt
Absalom, DAVID'S best beloved son, (for he had not yet Solomon) for the space
of two years in Jerusalem, where the Court most was, and yet might not all
that while so much as see the King his Fathers face, or have access once to
his presence. DAVID, no doubt, was perfectly reconciled in heart to him, and
counted it no small cross that he must thus be deprived of him; but knowing
Absoloms disposition, how soon he might be returning to some such like
practice, if he were suddenly taken into grace again, was content to enforce
himself to this harsh and unpleasing carriage toward him, (unpleasing, I say,
as well to DAVID himself, as to Absalom) to prevent some such further
mischief (if it might have been) that might otherwise both befall himself
and Absalom, as upon the change of his countenance toward him shortly after
ensued. Now look how DAVID dealt with Absalom, so dealt God himself with
DAVID. After that foul abuse of Bathsheba, and the murder of Vriah, albeit 2 Samuel 12.13.
DAVID had to Nathan freely confessed his offense, and Nathan from God again
assured him of the free and full forgiveness of it; The Lord has taken away
thy sin, thou shall not die for it: Yet the Lord, the more thoroughly to
humble him for it, and to make him the more wary for the time to come of
shunning that that might produce again such fearful effects, Est quidam etiam
tranquilli maris tremor, aut lacus qui ex tempestate requievit, Sen. de
tranquil. c. 1.
did not look upon him so lovingly for a long time after, as before he had
wont to do. Read but the Psalm that he made after Nathan had been with him;
and see how earnestly and instantly he cries and calls upon God still, Psalm.
51.1, 8, 9, 11, 12.
to turn his face away from his sin, and to look in mercy upon himself,
not to cast him wholly out of his sight, nor to take his good Spirit utterly
away from him, to restore unto him again those inward comforts and joys,
which Psalm. 4.6, 7.
through the light of Gods countenance he had formerly enjoyed, but had in a
manner clean lost, and was wholly deprived of for the present. And in like
manner does God deal with many other of his dear servants, after some heinous
and notorious crimes by them committed, he withdraws often his face and
favorable countenance away from them, not till they repent only, but even
after they have repented of them, to make them wiser and warier for the time to
come, and to detest their own folly the more for the present.

Ad crucis opus consummandum.
That the cross incumbent may have its full and perfect work on them, which
if it were sooner removed, it would be the worse for them, as when the
corrasive plaster is pulled off ere the dead flesh is eaten out: and indeed as
it were to no end for the Surgeon to clap on a corrasive, if he should pull it
off again instantly, before it have done ought; it were to no purpose for the
Finer to put his gold into the fire, if he should either pull it out again, or
put out his fire, before the ore he melted, and the drossie matter severed: So
it would be to small purpose for God to lay crosses on us, for the bettering
and amending of us, if he should presently again so soon as we feel the
smart of them, and begin to whine under his hand, remove them away instantly,
ere we be at all bettered by them, or have that effected on us that God
intends in them. Iam. 1.2, 3, 4.
Count it matter of much joy, my brethren, says James, when you fall into many
trials, or troubles. Since you know that the trial of your faith brings
forth patience: And let patience have her perfect work, that you may be sound
and entire. And Omnipotens Deus quid nobis profaturum sit sciens, dolentium
exaudire vocem saepe dissimulat, ut utilitatem augeat, dum per poenam vita
penitius purgatur. Greg mor. l. 14 c. 18. Vota differens cruciat, crucians
purgat, ut ad percipiendum quod desiderant, ex dilatione melius convalescant.
Idem ibid. l. 8. c. 17.
for the furthering and consummating of this work, does God oftentimes thus
withdraw himself, as it were, out of the way, and seems to keep aloof off,
when he is yet near at hand with us. He does as the Physician or Surgeon does
with his Patient, when he meets with a sore festred or full of dead flesh: He
applies some sharp corrasive to purge the wound, and to eat out the dead
flesh, that would else hinder the cure. Quomodo cum medicus epithema molestum
and ardens imposuit, aeger ubi medicamento cruciari ceperit, rogat medicum ut
tollat emplastrum: Molestum est, inquit, mihi istud emplastrum; tollas, quaeso.
Rogat ut tollat, and non tollit. Ego, inquit, novi quem curo. Non mihi det qui
aegrotat consilium. Opus est diu ibi sit, aliter enim nil proficiet. Aug. in
Psalm 90. and in Psalm. 98. and in Psalm. 130. and in 1 Joan. 6.
Which being done, the Patient, it may be, impatient of pain, as soon as he
feels the smart of it, cries to have it removed. But he tells him, No, it
must stay there till it have eaten to the quick, and effected that thoroughly
for which it is applied. And to this purpose having given charge to them that
be about him, to see that nothing be stirred till he come again to him,
withdraws and retireth himself till it be full time to take it off again.
Mean while the Patient lying in pain, counts every minute an hour till the
Surgion come back again, and if he stay long, thinks that sure he has
forgotten him, while he is taken up with other Patients, or is otherwise
employed, and will never in any time return again to him: when as the
Surgion, it may be, is all this while but in the very next room to him, there
by the houre-glasse, to that purpose set up, attending but the time, till the
plaster have wrought that that it is to effect. And in the very selfsame
manner does God deal often with his dearest ones. Thus 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9.
Paul buffeted by Satan, (it was no small corrasive and heart-sore, you may be
well assured, that troubled so much so magnanimous a spirit as his was) was
instant with God more than once or twice to be rid of that evil. But Non est
ablatum, quod volebat auferri, ut infirmitas illa sanaretur. August. in Joan.
7. Ita Deus and denegans exaudit, and exaudiens denegat; tribuens aufert, non
tribuens donat. Simon Cass. in Evang. l. 5. c. 24.
the answer he had from God was, that he must patiently abide it: he should
not want his grace that should enable him to undergo it. But it would be
worse with him, if it were otherwise; he would be in much peril of being
puffed up with pride, if he were wholly freed from it. Yea thus DAVID, when
Gods hand was sometime upon him, and he felt it harsh and heavy, he cries
earnestly unto God, to have it removed from him: Psalm. 39.10.
Take, says he, thy plague away from me; I am even consumed with the stroke
of thine hand. And he pleads with God, as the Patient would do with the
Physician, when he is full of pain with that that is applied, he is sure that
the plaster has done enough by this time: Psalm. 119.71, 67.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted. This affliction surely has
done me much good, I am very much amended by it. For Psalm. 119.67.
Before I was afflicted I went astray; but since I have been thus troubled, I
am grown more careful of my courses; now I keep thy Commandments. But Non
se norat aegr^tus; sed aegrotum norat medicus. August. in Psalm. 138. Inspecta
vena quid intus ageretur in aegroto, medicus noverat, aegrotus non noverat.
Idem in Psalm. 44.
God saw that in DAVID, that he, it may be, saw not in himself. He saw much
dead flesh, much corrupt matter behind, that was yet to be eaten out, or it
would be ready soon to break forth into some outrage, as also afterward it
did, when DAVID came to be free from that harsh course of cure, and hard and
strict diet, that God had a long time before held him to.

True it is that Esa. 48.10. Conflabo te, non cum argento tamen, i. Non agam
summo jure tecum: quia si ab omni scoria, ut argentum, expurgandus esses, totus
disperires. Iun. ibid. (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 7.
God deals not with us in this kind, as the Finer does with his oar, who
never linneth melting it, and passing it through the fire again and again, as
long as any drossie matter remains mixed with it; or as those that boil
broths or curious confections for sick persons, that never leave blowing and
boiling so long as any scum at all arises on them. If he should so do, we
should never be any of us out of the furnace of affliction; even the very best
of us should be ever either in, or over the fire, always burning or boiling
as long as we lived. For so long as we live here, we shall retain some of
this dross still: Eradicari siquidem aut extirpari penitus e cordibus nostris,
dum hic vivimus, non potest. Bern. de temp. 45.
nor will our scum be utterly purged out of us, while we abide here. But yet
howsoever God does not go so exactly to work with us, (the cross would
sooner eat our hearts out of our bodies, than work all spiritual filth and
dross out of our souls) yet he will have that he does in this kind, work to
some purpose with us, he will not have us come out of the fire as we went in,
he will not endure we should come off the fire as foul and as full of scum, as
we were when he set us on. And that the cross may have this effect indeed on
us, Non deserit, etiamsi deserat. Aug. in Psalm. 90.
he does in mercy to us, till it be done, withdraw himself from us, that his
wonted manner of presence may not hinder the work of it.

Ad zelum accendendum.
to stir up and kindle their zeal, to make them more fervent in prayer, and in
seeking unto him, and to take away that coldness and remissness that usually
grows upon them, when they are free from such afflictions. Thus Judge. 20.21,
25, 26. Terga dederunt sceleratis ultores sceleris, and plures paucioribus.
Bernard. de consider. lib. 2. Sed recurrunt ad Dominum and Dominus ad eos. Ibid.
he neglected the Israelites, though fighting in a just quarrel, and suffered
them to fall before their brethren, the Benjamites, maintaining a bad cause,
till they fasted and prayed more earnestly, and by a kind of holy and
religious importunity wrested aid and assistance from God. Thus Matthew. 15.22,
23. (...). Basil. Sell. homil. 19.
he delayed and put off the poor woman of Canaan crying after him: he would
neither hear her, nor the Disciples making suit for her: he answered her at
first with a Matthew. 15.23. (...). Basil. Sell. ibid.
seeming kind of sullen silence; then with a cutting answer, sharper than his
former silence; Verse. 24.
I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of Israel: And, Verse. 26 (...). Basil.
ibid.
It is not fit to take the childrens bread, and cast it to dogs. But (...).
Basil. ibid. Beneficium distulit, ut desiderium accenderet. Stell. in Luc. 24.
Sic ignis flatu premitur ut crescat. Greg. mor. l. 20. c. 15.
those speeches were but as blasts of the belowes, not to blow out, but to blow
up the fire of her faith, and to make it so to blaze, as should astonish those
that saw it. And Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. and 5.6. Dissimulatio est, non indignatio.
Non est reversus sponsus ad votum and vocem revocantis; ut desiderium crescat,
ut probetur affectus, ut amoris negotium exerceatur. Bern. in Cant. 75.
Desiderium differtur ut proficiat, and tarditatis suae sinu nutritur ut
crescat. Abscondit se sponsus cum quaeritur, ut non inventus ardentius
quaeratur, and differtur quaerens sponsa ne inveniat, ut tarditate sua capacior
reddita, multiplicius quandoque inveniat quod quaerit. Greg. mor. l. 5. c. 3.
it is a dissimulation, says Bernard, not an indignation, a concealment of
affection, no abatement of love, that Christ in the Canticles often withdraws
and hides himself from his dearly beloved, and is not found of her, nor
returns to her, so soon as she calls; it is but to exercise her love, to
inflame her affection, to make her more eager in seeking up and down after
him. He does as a father that has a son at the University, who though he
understand, by his Tutor or some other friends, of his wants, yet will not take
notice of them, till from his son himself he hear of them, Let him write,
says he, himself for them; and it may be he shall write twice too before he
have what he desires, because he will by such means have him both to learn to
know his duty, and to exercise his pen also for his own good: So our heavenly
Father, though Matthew. 6.32.
he know well enough what we have need of, Matthew. 6.30. Psalm. 34.9, 10.
nor will he suffer us to want ought that shall be needful for us, yet
Philip. 4.6.
he will have our wants made known to him by suit and supplication, ere he
will take notice of them, yea he will make us sue long many times ere he
fulfill our desires, because he will have us to exercise his Zech. 12.10.
Spirit of Prayer in us. Or as the Nurse, who perceiving that the child
begins to neglect her, withdraws her self aside, and keeps some while
out of sight, yea and lets the child, it may be, cry a good ere she come
again to it, to make it grow more fond on her, when it has been afraid of
losing her: So DAVID, when Psalm. 30.6.
in his prosperity he began to presume more than was meet on Gods favor, and
to grow somewhat retchlesse in that regard, as if God were now so firm to him,
that he were sure never to lose him, nor to have the effects and fruits of it
ever withdrawn from him, albeit he were not altogether so careful to use all
good means to retain it, as formerly he had been. Psalm. 30.7, 8.
Thou turnedst, says he, thy face from me: and then being sore troubled, he
sought earnestly with strong cries and salt tears, to recover and regain again
the sense of Gods favor, which by his own neglect he thus had lost. Or D.
Meriton Sermon. on 1 Thessalonians. 5.17.
as a Father, says one, that holding an Apple in his hand, which the child
would feign have, lets him toil and tug at it, and with much ado unloose
finger after finger, yea, and it may be, whine and cry heartily ere he come by
it: So does God many times with us, to make us (...), Romans 15.30. Certatim
cremus. Aug epist. 121. Vt misericordiam exigamus. Idem in Psalm. 39.
wrestle with him, and as Genesis 32.24, 25, 26. Hosh. 12.3, 4. Talibus Jacob
funiculis Angelum detinebat, qualibus Moses resticulis Dominum ligaverat, Exodus
32.10, 11. Simon Cass. in Evang. l. 14.
Jacob sometime by intention and eagerness of prayer wring favor away from
him; and as Luke 18 4, 5, 7.
the poor widow did by the unjust Judge, even by our importunity overcome
him. Or as Luke 24.28, 29. Finxit selongius ire, cum mallet cum discipulis
remanere. Bern. de grad. humil. Longius iturum sinxit, ut in desiderium sut
discipuli magis excitarentur. Stella in Luc.
our Savior Christ dealt with the two Disciples, when he made as though he
would go further, though he meant not to leave them, to make them the more
instant on him, to press him to stay with them: So does Idcirco recedit, ut
avidius requiratur. Bern. in Cant. 17.
God many times make as though he were leaving, or had left us, to incite us
to a more fervent and instant usage of all holy means, whereby we may either
keep his favor with us, while we yet have it, or fetch it again when it is
gone.

Ad gratiam commendandam. Cum dat tardius, commendat dona, non negat. August.
de verb. Dom. 5. Site enim Senec. de benef. l. 1. c. 11. Lenocinium est muneri
antecedens metus. Et, Metus muneri pondus imponit.
to commend to us his mercy, to teach us to make more account of his favor,
when by the want of it we have felt what a bitter thing it is to be without
it, and after long miss of it, come to re-enjoy it again. (...). Greg Naz.
orat. 6.
The present evil is ever the greatest: and the fit we felt last seems
usually the sharpest. But the present good is deemed commonly the least; and
Malunt homines semper quae reliquerunt. Sen. ep. 115. Aliena nobis, nostra plus
aliis placent. P. Sir. -- maiorque videtur Et melior vicina seges. Iuven. sat.
14.
that that goes from us better, than that that abides by us: and albeit
(...). Plut. consol. ad uxor. (...). Idem de tranq.
the departure of ought from us, make it never a whit the better, yet any good
thing seems better when it is going, and better yet when it is gone, than it
did while either there was yet no fear of losing it, or it had not yet left
us. Desideria in manibus constituta nescimus. Ennod. l. 7. ep. 17. Plus
sensimus quod habuimus, postquam habere desivimus. Hieron. Consol. Pa^m. Tunc
denique omnes nostra intelligimus bona; Quum quae in potestate habuimus, ea
amisimus. Plaut. Capt. 1. 2. Discordia fit charior concordia. Nesciunt homines
quantum boni fraternitas habeat, qui nunquam dissederunt. Quintil. declam. 321.
Amicitiae, consuetudines, vicinitates quid habeant voluptatis, carendo magis
intelligimus quam fruendo. Cic. post redit.
We never understand the worth of any thing so well, as by the want of it.
Homines neque proxime assita, neque longule dissita cernimus. Apul. apol.
(...). Basil. Caes. hom. 5.
The eye cannot so well judge of an object, if it be sited too near it; nor
(...). Plut. de iracund.
if it be continually without any intermission in the eye. (...). Arist.
rhetor. l. 2. (...). Synes. epist. 139.
The continued and continual enjoyment of the best things, yea and of those
that best please us, though not always the best indeed, without intermission
or enter-change, is wont to breed, if not a surfeit, yet a glut and a satiety,
that so dulleth the souls appetite, that it makes us as less apprehensive
of, so (...). Basil. Caes. homil. 1. Ignoratur honorum sapor in prosperis. Vix
dignoscitur qualitas beneficii ^^ntenetur. Post migrationem cupita dulcescunt.
Ennod. lib. 7. epist. 17. Voluptates commendat rarior usus. Iuven: sat. 11.
less affected with the benefit that we enjoy in them. Quod boni habeat
sanitas, languor ostendit. Hier. consol. Pa^m.
Health is never known what a jewel it is, till by sickness we have been
some time deprived of it. Nor do Gods children know so well, what a blessing
they have of the sense of Gods favor, till by some spiritual desertion they
have been a while bereft of it. But as (...). Heraclit. apud Stob. c. 3.
Gratior est reddita quam retenta sanitas. Et fessum quies plurimum juvat.
health is better esteemed when we have been sick some time: and -- post
frigora dulcior ignis. Mantuan. eclog. 1.
fire is more comfortable when we have been a while in the cold: and (...).
Basil. Caes. hom. 1. Prove. 27.7* Hinc Artaxerxes cum post inediam diuturniorem
in ficus aridas panemque hordeaceum incidisset, (...). Plut. apoph. Et Socrates
cibi condimentum famem, potionis sitim dixit. Cic. de fin. l. 2.
our meat is then best relished, when we have fasted longer than ordinary: and
rest is most delightful, when we have been toyled and are tired: and (...).
Herodian. Pertin. Acriores sunt morsus intermissae libertatis quam retentae.
Cic. offic. l. 2.
liberty is more welcome when we have been some time restrained of it, than
when without interruption we have constantly retained it: So Gods favorable
aspect is much more acceptable and comfortable, when (...). Basil. Caes. hom.
1. (...). Greg. Naz. de Cypr. Post tempestatem dulcior est serenitas. Quintil.
declam. 321. Et dulcior lux est, quod aliquando de sinit, quam si jugiter
permaneret. Ennod. lib. 1. epist. 11. (...). Plut. erotic.
the sunshine of his favor begins to break forth again, after some black
and bitter tempests and storms of his wrath; especially when they have been
of long continuance, and much pains has been taken for the recovery of it
again. Desiderata magis grata. Diu desiderata dulcius obtinentur. August. de
verb. Dom. 5.
Things long looked for are most welcome, when they come at the last: And that
is commonly sweetest, that is gotten with most sweat. 1 Samuel 1.2, 11, 26, 27,
28.
Samuel was the dearer to Anna, because she had stayed long for him, and by
earnest suit at length obtained him, when she was almost out of hope of him.
So was Luke 1.7, 13, 14.
John Baptist to his Parents, who had long sought him of God, and were
vouchsafed him in their latter years. Genesis 35.18. and 44.20, 30.
Jacob loved Benjamin, because he paid so dear for him; he bought him with the
life of his beloved Rachel that died of him: and both him and Genesis 37.3. (...).
Eustath. in Iliad. (...). Hesych. (...). Suid. and Plut. de amic.
Joseph, because he had them in his old age; yea so full of joy was Jacob, when
he saw Joseph again, whom he had long wanted, and had clean given over for
gone, that Genes. 46.30.
he desired not to live a day longer. It is a good note of Ambroses, from 2
Cor. 1.11.
a speech of the Apostles, that Amat Deus, ut pro uno rogent multi. Ambr. de
poenit. lib. 2. cap. 10.
God loves to have many sue to him for one, that he may have thanks again
of the more. So Dare vult; and quod dare vult differt, ut amplius desideres
dilatum; ut desideranti det, ne vilescat quod dat. August. de verb. Dom. 29.
Servat tibi Deus quod non vult cito dare, ut and tu discas magna magne
desiderare Idem ibid. 5. Solent enim protracta desideria amplius crescere.
Gilbert. in Cant. 6.
God loves to have his blessings and favors begged long ere he part with
them, that we may learn the better to value them, and to make more account of
them, and to be more thankful to him for them, when we have them. For when
they come unsued for, we are wont to make the less of them. Merx altronea
putret. Hieron. ad Demetr. and in quaest. Hebr. Cito data vilescunt. Aug. de
verb. Dom. 5.
Proffered ware, for the most part, is but slightly esteemed of. We make light
of the first and the latter rain, of the constant course of the Sun, and the
seasons of the year, though on these things depends the stay and the staff
of our life, because they come commonly in a constant and an ordinary course:
But when a little dash of rain comes after fasting and prayer upon a long
drought, we are usually as more affected with it, so more thankful to God for
it, than for all the sweet dewes or the plentiful showers that Job. 38.37.
Gods flagons shed down upon us the whole year before. Oh, says DAVID, when
he had some space of time found a restraint of Gods favor, that before he
had enjoyed, now if God would vouchsafe to look lovingly upon him, and restore
him the wonted sight and sense of his favor again, Psalm. 51.13, 14, 15, 16,
17.
he would teach sinners Gods ways, and his mouth should set forth Gods
praise; and he would offer up to God any thing, that he should desire and
would accept of. And for this cause, no doubt, among others, does God make us
many times sue long for it, and cry with DAVID, How long, Lord? before it do
come; to make it more welcome to us, and us more thankful for it when it does
come.

Ad cautelam acriorem.
to make us the more careful to keep his favor, and the sense of it, when we
have it, and the more wary to shun and avoid all such courses, whereby we
may either lose it or hazard the loss of it: Quam cara sint, ubi post carendo
intelligunt; Quamque attinendi magni dominatus sicut. Terent. apud Cicer. de
Orat. perf.
when we shall find by woeful experience, that being once gone, it is not
usually so easily recalled or recovered. (...). Greg. Naz. contr. Eunom 2.
Diligentius cufloditur, quod difficulter acquiritur. Quod venit ex facili,
faciles segnesque tenemus; Quod spe quodque metu torsit, habere juvat. Ovid.
amor.
That that is hardly earned, is wont, to be more carefully kept. A man will not
in haste or unadvisedly spend his penny, that he has labored hard and taken
much pains for; especially if he know not how to get so much again, but with
the like difficulty when that is gone: But lightly come, we say, and lightly
gone; young Gallants that never knew what the getting of money meant, are ready
when they come to it, to let all fly abroad, as if they could have it again
with a wish or a word, when they would. If God, when (for just causes best
known to himself, and for the most part for evil desert and bad demeanure on
our part) he has turned his face away from us, and carried himself strangely
toward us, he should by and by suddenly upon the first and least bend of our
hamme, or formal sob, or superficial sigh, or a forced tear or twain, or
some faint and heartlesse prayer turn it again toward us, and look kindly
again on us; -- nocet indulgentia nobis. Ovid. amor. 1. 19.
it is to be feared that even the best of us would be overmuch careless of
retaining it when we had it. But now when we shall find by woeful and
dreadful experience in the bitterness of our spirits, that Gods face being
once clouded toward us, or turned from us, it must, or may at least cost us
many a deep sigh, and a salt tear, long looking, and much longing, even Psalm.
119.81, 82, 123.
till our heart faint, and our eyes fail, much anguish of mind and perplexity
of spirit, much striving and struggling with our own corruption and weakness,
and much straining and wrestling by earnest suit and supplication, by fasting
and instancy of prayer, ere we can come to prevail so far with God, as to
have those thick clouds of his wrath dispelled, and that loving and amiable
aspect of his vouchsafed us again; this cannot but make us (if we be not
desperately retchlesse) exceeding careful of all good courses that may keep
and retain it with us, when we have it, and no less fearful of ought that
may again estrange it away from us. The Spouse in the Canticles, when after
long search, with much ado, she had at length lighted on her beloved, Cant.
5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and 3.1, 2, 3.
whom by her neglect of him, she had unadvisedly given occasion to withdraw
himself from her: Cant. 3.4. Tenui, nec dimittam cum.
I took hold on him, says she, and I will not let him go again. And, Psalm.
^0.18, 19. Irae interveniunt, redeunt rursum in gratiam. Verum irae si quae
forte eveniunt hujusmodi inter eos, rursum ubi reventum in gratiam est, Bis
tanto amici sunt inter se quam prius. Plaut. Amph. 3.2.
Turn away from thy wrath, say the people of God to God in the Psalm, and Let
thy face shine forth once again on us: and then will we never go back from
thee again, nor give thee the like cause to turn thy face again from us.

And thus you see both in what sense God is said to hide his face from his, and
for a long time often (as both to themselves and to others seems) to forget
them; as also for what causes he is wont so to do.



Dan 4.24. Sanctus Sanctorum.
the Saint of Saints, when he bare the burden of our sins. So that, as DAVID
speaks, Psalm. 73.15.
if we should so deem, if we should go by this rule, and thereby judge of
men's estates, we should condemn, not Gods only Son only, which Esa 53.4.
some sometime did, as forth of Gods favor, but the whole progeny of Gods
Children, the whole race of the righteous, whose lot and portion it has often
been to be in this woeful condition, and Matthew. 20.22, 23.
to drink of this bitter cup, that John 18.11. Amarum poculum prius bibit
medicus, ne bibere timeret aegrotus. Aug. in Psalm. 98. and in Psalm. 48. and in
Joan. 3. and homil. 34.
Christ their head began to them; and to pass 1 Petr. 4.10.
this sharp trial, this fiery and bloody Matthew. 22.23. (...). Origin. apud
Eusebius histor l. 6. c. 4. Secunda intinctura. Tertull. de patient. Martyrium
enim qui tulit, sanguine suo baptizatur. Cyprian. ep. 2.
Baptism, that Luke 12.50.
their Savior past before them. If we cannot see how such courses may stand
with Gods love: we must remember that Rom 11.33.
Gods ways, and his works, and dealings with his, are wonderful and
unsearchable, far above our reach, and such as we are not able to comprehend.
For Esa. 55.8, 9. Et quomodo humana temeritas reprehendere audet, quod
comprehend^re non valet? Bernard. de Consid. lib. 2. Pie ergo ac modeste ex
Epicteti sententia Gell. noct. Attic. lib. 2. cap. 18. Non esse omnes Deo
exoso^, qui in hac vita cum aerumnarum varietate luctantur; sed esse arcanas
caussas, ad quas paucorum potuit pervenire curiositas.
my ways, says he, are not as your ways, nor my thoughts as your thoughts.
But look how far the heaven is higher than the earth, so far are my ways
above your ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts. And yet may we in some
sort even by humane courses conceive, how such things as these are, may well
stand even with the greatest love. For Paternum animum, maternum affectum.
Aliter patres, aliter matres indulgent. Illi excitari jubent liberos, ad studia
obeunda mature, feriatis quoque diebus non patiuntur esse ociosos, and sudorem
illis, and interdum lachrymas excutiunt. At matres fovere in sinu, continere in
umbra volunt, nunquam flere, nunquam tristari, nunquam laborare. Patrium habet
Deus adversus bonos viros animum, and illos fortiter amat. Sen. de provid. c. 2.
God, as the Heathen man well observes, has as well a fatherly discretion, as
a motherly affection. His love is not a foolish and an undiscreet love, such as
many fond mothers have, but a wise, a discreet, a Sapiens vir judicio conjugem
(sed and liberos) amabit, non affectu Hieron. advers. Iovin. lib. 1. q 1.
judicious love, such as wise and prudent parents have. He so loves his
children, as he has a care of their good; and disposes and administreth all
things so as may be for it. A fond mother would have her son always by her
good will at home with her, and never out of her sight; would have him crossed
in nothing, but let him have his will in every thing, though it be to his own
evil. But the wise parent drives him out at doors, sends him forth to
school, binds him apprentice, it may be, or boordeth him abroad, where he
sees him but seldom, breaks him often of his will, frowneth on him and
corrects him when he does otherwise than well; and yet Quis magis amat? pater
an matter? matter ardentius, pater constantius. Gerson modo viv. conjug. Illa
te^erius, ille fortius and virilius. Miraris tu, si Deus ille bonorum
amantissimus, quos optimos esse atque excellentissimos vult, fortunam illis,
cum qua exerceantur, assignat? Sen. de prove. cap. 2.
loves he him no less than the fond mother does, yea Heb. 12.6. Apoc. 3.19.
Dilectione, non odio flagellamur. Aug. epist. 48. Non studio nocendi, sed
desiderio sanandi. Ibid. Non erudit pater nisi quem amat, non corripit nisi
quem diligit. Hieron. ad Castrut. Molestus est and medicus furenti phrenetico,
and pater filio indisciplinato, ille ligando, ille caedendo, sed uterque
diligendo. August. epist. 50. Filius enim castigatione dignus, plus amatur, si
saepius castigatur. Ambr. sermon. 6.
he does all that he does in this kind out of love.

Again, further it may stand well with such a fathers love, not to correct his
child only for his faults, when he does amiss, but, when some disease shall
require it, (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 148. Medicum etiam urentem and secantem
diligimus. Imo etiam ad urendum secandumque conducimus.
to hire the Surgion to cut him, and to leave him fast bound in his hands, and
either to withdraw himself, while the thing is a doing, or if he be by, to
refuse to unbinde him, or to do ought for him, when being in fear or in
pain, he shall cry and call upon him to stay the Surgions hand, or to help to
untie him. (...). Dion. Chrysostom. orat. 78.
Nor would the Surgion himself, were he to cure or cut his own child, use a
blunter launcet in the cutting of him, or not cut him so much, or so deep, the
disease requiring it, as he would do with a mere stranger. And why may it not
stand then with the love of God to deal thus harshly and sharply with his
dearest children, when either their outward evil courses, or their inward
corruptions, by way either of correction, or of cure, (and yet what is (...).
Aristot. ethic. lib. 2. cap. 3. (...). Idem rhetor. lib. 1. cap. 14. Et Aeneas
Gaz. de animae immort.
correction it self but a kind of cure?) shall require it? He may love them
no less, though he hide himself from them, than the nurse, or the mother
does her child, when she hides her self a while from it, and yet to save her
own life, would be full loath to lose or to leave it. Not to add, that the
courses that God uses in this kind, are oft-times (...). Simplic. in Epictet.
as well exercises for those that be in health and good plight for the
present, as Physic for those that be crasie and sick, surprised with some
deadly or dangerous disease.

Psalm. 89.30, 31.32, 34. and 99.8.
If we carry our selves saucily or stubbornly toward him, he will not bear
it; if we take bad courses, he will not endure it. He will not suffer us
through his forbearance of us to be hardened in evil: but by some means or
other he will be sure to bring us home again, if at least we belong to him and
to his election of love. And though he cast us not off utterly, though he damn
us not eternally; yet he may so seem to forget us, so estrange himself from
us, so withdraw and withhold from us the light of his countenance, that the
bright beams of his favor may never shine forth again on us, as formerly
they have done, so long as we live, and ^o may we come to have not a
purgatory, but a very hell in our souls while we live here, Esa. 38.15.
go drooping and dwindling, distressed, distracted and dejected all our life
long, and be in little better case for the time than the reprobate often are,
yea than the very devils and damned souls in hell themselves. Though we
escape with our lives, yet the cure may be so costly, and the course of
Physic and Surgery that God shall take with us, may be so harsh and
unpleasant, may put us to those bitter pangs, and unsupportable pains, that it
may make us curse the day that ever we did wittingly and willingly that that
might provoke such a wrath, or require such a cure, and wish a thousand and a
thousand times that we had been, not fast asleep in our beds, but dead and
buried in our graves when we did it.

It is a vain thing therefore for any man to presume so, as to say or think;
God will never sure deal so roughly with me, though I carry my self otherwise
than I ought toward him. Yea it is most fearful and dangerous upon such
impious imaginations to presume to displease and provoke him to wrath. For to
omit that An quia Deus bonus est, ideo tu malus? Ambr. de poenit. lib. 2. c.
11. Pravi cordis est, ideo malum esse, quiae Deus bonus est. Bern. in Cant.
it is a note of a most ungracious disposition, for a man therefore to be
evil, because God is good; and to take liberty to himself to wrong God,
because God loves him. Art thou dearer to God than DAVID was? Art thou deeper
in Gods books, or higher in his favor than he? Yet how sharply God dealt
with him; how roughly, yea how rigorously (as might seem to fleshly reason) he
handled him, having provoked him to wrath, and incurred his displeasure, may
appear by those Psalm. 32.3, 4. and 38.2-8. and 51.3, 8, etc.
Psalms wherein at large he complains of it. And how long it was in these
cases ere he could recover his former estate of inward comfort and sense of
grace with God again, appears likewise by his earnest suit, so often and so
instantly commenced for it, both here and Psalm. 51.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, etc.
elsewhere.

Isreal's at other times. That we be not daunted and disheartened, though we
meet with many afflictions and distractions, as well 2 Cor. 7.5.
troubles without as terrors within, and shall see no sign of Gods
assistance, but all show rather of the contrary, the fruits of Gods favor and
love being all with-drawne and withheld from us, and God seeming to carry
himself not as a friend, but Job 13.24.
as a foe toward us, writing bitter things against us, and suffering fearful
things to befall us. But learn as the Prophet Esaias speaks, Esa. 50.10.
when we sit in darkness, and have no light, when we can find no light of
joy without, nor spark of comfort within, yet even then to trust in the Name
of the Lord, and to stay our selves upon our God. We must remember that, as the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5.7.
We walk by faith, and not by sight: So Habbak. 2.4. Romans 1.17. Gal. 3.11.
Heb. 10.38.
we live by faith, and not by sense. Faith goes not by feeling; nay it goes
often against feeling. And this is the very pitch and height of faith, as for a
man with Abraham, Romans 4.18. (...). Quod Heraclitus (...), apud Clem. protrept.
and Theodor. de Graecur. l. 1.
above hope to believe under hope, so to believe all contrary to that that we
see and feel, to believe that God then loves us, is a kind Father, and Job
13.15, 16.
will be a sure Savior unto us, when we feel his hand heavy on us, and he
seems even bent to destroy us.

Romans 8.24.
We are saved by hope, says the Apostle; but hope that is seen is no hope.
And so Ephesians. 2.8.
we are saved by faith; and though this Fides, vides. John 8.56. 2 Cor. 4.18.
Heb. 11.27.
faith be a kind of spiritual sight, and that surer and certainer than bodily
sight; and Fides non est quod creditur, sed qua creditur, and illud quod
creditur illa conspicitur. Aug. de Trinit. l. 14. c. 9. Habet enim fides oculos
suos, quibus and ea videt, quae nondum videt, quibus videt tamen, se nondum
videre quae credit. Aug. ep. 222. Et cum propterea credere jubemur, quia id
quod credere jubemur, videre non possumus, ipsam tamen fidem quando inest in
nobis, videmus in nobis, quia and rerum absentium praesens est fides, and rerum
quae foris sunt, intus est fides, and rerum quae non videntur, videtur fides.
Idem de Trinit. l. 13. c. 1.
those things that are not seen by it, are Melius videntur quae non videntur,
quam quae videntur. Ambros. nomine de sacram. l. 1. c. 2.
better seen, than those things that are seen; yet Enervis est and debilis,
sed nec sides dicenda, quae credit quod videt. Aug. de peccat^me^rit. lib. 2.
c. 31. Quod videtur, sciri potius quam credi dicitur. Greg. in Evang. 32.
the faith (to speak properly) that is seen is no faith: for Heb. 11.1.
Faith is the evidence of things unseene. For a man therefore to believe that
he is in grace with God, when he has pregnant proofs of Gods favor, it is a
matter of no mastery. But 1 Pet. 1.8.
to believe then when he sees not, yea to believe it then when he sees and
feels all to the contrary in the apprehension of carnal reason, this is the
praise and commendation of faith indeed. We must consider what is or should be
the ground and stay of our faith: not these outward props, which we are wont
so much to lean on and to trust to, (...). Chrysostom. in Matthew. hom. 82.
not our own sight or sense, that often fails and deludeth us, but Gods Word
and his Truth, and the stability of his Promise, which Matthew. 5.18.
though Heaven and Earth should pass away, and all things should return to
their first Chaos again, yet shall Josh. 23.14.
never in ought fail any of those that depend upon it. Psalm. 119.49, 50.
Remember thy Word, says DAVID, unto thy servant, wherein thou have made me to
put my trust: That is my comfort in my trouble; for thy Word puts life into
me. And, Psalm. 119.114.
Thou art my shelter and my shield; and my trust is in thy Word. And learn we
herein to imitate the earth that we tread on. Though being a massy body, it
hangs in the midst of the Air, environed with the heavens, and yet keeps
his place steedily, and never stirs an inch from it, having no props or
shores to uphold it, no beams or bars to fasten it, nothing to stay or
establish it, but the bare Word of God alone. For Heb. 1.3.
by his powerful Word, says the Apostle, he upholdeth all things. And, Thy
Word, says the Psalm. 119.89, 90, 91. (...); Basil. hexam. 1. (...). Gregor.
Naz. ad Eunom 2. Quid est quod totam terrae molem sustinet? and universus orbis
cui innititur? si est aliquid quod sustineat caetera, ipsum a quo sustinetur?
non invenitur nisi virtutis verbum omnia portans. Bern. in Psalm 90.
Psalmist, O Lord, abides for ever. And, Thy Truth is from age to age: thou
have laid the foundation of the earth, and it stands still. It abides by it
to this day by virtue of thine Ordinance. And in like manner must we learn to
depend upon the bare Word of God, when all other props and stays shall be
pulled away from us: to trust him upon his bare promise without pledge or
pawn. Else we deal with him no otherwise than any Usurer will with the
veriest beggar or banckrout that is, when he comes to borrow money of him.
Though he dare not trust him on his word, nor on his bond neither (it is naught
worth; nothing better than his word;) yet on his pawn or his pledge he dare
trust either the poorest or the unfaithfullest man that is. But as Augustine
says well, That Meretricius amor, plus dona dantis quam amantis affectum
diligere. August. meditat. cap. 5. annulum magis qu^m sponsum amare.
it is but an harlotrie love for a woman to love the gift more than the giver;
and so to love the giver no longer than he gives: So it is but an harlotrie
faith for a man to trust Gods pledge or pawn more than God himself, and so to
trust him no further than he sees or feels what he does. Yea the truth is,
that in these cases, when we dare trust God no further, nor rely on him any
longer than we have some pledge or pawn of his providence, we trust not him,
but we trust his pledge, Cum rogo te nummos sine pignore, Non habeo, inquis:
Idem si pro me spondet agellus, habes. Quod mihi non credis veteri fidoque
sodali, credis ^oliculis arboribusq* meis. Martial. epig. 25. l. 12.
as he trusts not the poor man, but trusts only his pawn, that dare not
lend him ought but upon his pawn. And hereby may we try and examine the
sincerity and the soundness of our faith, what it is indeed that we rely upon,
what it is that we trust to: If we can say, as DAVID here afterward in the
shutting up of the Psalm, That Psalm 13.5.
we then trust in Gods mercy, and expect safety from him, even when he seems
to have forgotten us, and to have hidden his face from us; if we can then 1 Samuel 30.6.
comfort our selves in the Lord our God, when all other aids and comforts have
taken their leave of us. It is a feeble faith that cannot stand without stilts,
a lame faith that cannot go without crutches. Hereby will appear whether a
man's stilts bear him up or no, if he be able to stand, when they are taken
away from him: if he can, it is a sign he rested not on them, though he made
use of them; if he cannot, it were they, not his legs that upheld him. And
hereby may it appear what our faith and confidence is founded on, whether on
Gods word or his pledge, his pawn or his promise: If when the pledge or the
pawn is gone, yet our faith abides still firm, it is a sign that it was
fixed on God himself, and not on it: But if when it is gone, our faith falls
to the ground, it is a sign that our faith was wholly founded on it, not on
God or Gods Word, which abiding still firm, our faith were it thereon founded
would continue steadfast with it. For Psalm. 125.1.
Those that trust in the Lord, says the Psalmist, are as mount Sion, that
stands fast, and never stirs. And this is that that we should by all means
labor and strive unto, that our faith may 2 Chronicles. 14.11. and 16.8. Psalm
18.18. (...)
rest and rely on God himself, and his infallible and unfaileable Word of
promise, not upon the outward pledges and pawnes of his providence, nor on the
ordinary effects and fruits of his favor, that so when these shall be
withdrawn, yea and withheld long, it may be, from us, so that God may Psalm.
27.9.
in anger seem to have hid his face from us, and to have forgotten us, which,
as we see, has been oft-times the state and condition of Gods children, yet
we may not be disheartened, but see Psalm. 112.4.
light even in darkness, and be able (...). Theophyl. epist. 30.
to discern the sweet Sunshine of Gods favor even through the thickest
clouds of his fiercest wrath.

So likewise for the Church of God, when we shall see it either in general,
or in some principal parts of it, so left unto the fury and rage of her
malicious and mischievous-minded adversaries, that God seems not to regard
it, or what becomes of it, but even suffers them to have their own will
upon it; in so much, that as Gregory Nazianzen says of his time, (...). Greg.
Naz. ad Nectar.
Gods former providence and care of keeping his Church may seem utterly to
fail, and that he has ceased and given over to do for it in these days as
he had wont to do in former times: yea when we shall see it left in such
plight, not for a short space only, but for so long a time together (her
enemies might and malice Psalm. 74.23.
daily growing more and more, and her means on the other side daily more and
more failing, and her might and power daily more and more impaired and
impoverished) that God may seem clean to have forgotten her, and to think no
more of her, but even Psalm. 73.1. and 77.7, 8, 9.
to have cast her off for ever: yet (...). Apollodor.
must we not despair even then of her preservation, and of the raising of her
up again. But as Iehoshaphat in his straights, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Psalm. 25.15.
have the eyes of our faith fixed upon God, and his Word: who has promised
(and Psalm. 111.7, 8.
his promise shall never fail, or prove false) Josh. 1.9. Heb. 13.5. Psalm.
94.14. 1 Samuel 12.22.
never to leave or forsake his, though for a time Judge. 6.13.
he may seem so to do. Qui nil potest sperare, desperet nihil. Senec. Med.
2.1. Magnae indolis signum est, sperare semper. Flor. hist. lib. 4. c. 8.
And we must withal remember that this is no new matter, but the same that
oft-times has befallen the Church of God formerly. That man's extremity is
Gods opportunity. Psalm. 119.126.
It is now time for thee, says DAVID, Lord, to put to thy hand, when men have
even destroyed thy Law. So then is Gods time to help his Church, when it
seems ready to be destroyed and even utterly swallowed up for ever. Then is
the fittest time for Genesis 22.10, 11.
the Angel to call to Abraham to stay his hand, when the knife is even at
Isaaks throat, and he given up now for Heb. 11.19.
dead. And then is the seasonablest time for God to set in foot for the
rescuing of his Church and Children, and the deliverance of his chosen ones,
Psalm. 37.12, 13, 14, 15.
when the enemies dagger is at their very heart, and they seem now given up
for gone. As (...). Ex Iosephi antiq. l. 18. Eusebius. hist. eccles. l. 2. c. 5.
Philo sometime told his people, That he was verily persuaded that God would
now do some thing for them, because Caius was so earnestly bent against them;
yea that then Gods help is nearest, when man's is furthest off. As it is
commonly said, Vbi desinit Philosophus, ibi incipit Medicus.
Where the Philosopher ends, there the Physician begins; and Vbi desinit
Medicus, ibi incipit Theologus.
where the Physician ends, there the Divine begins: So Vbi desinit
humanum, ibi incipit divivum auxilium.
where man's aid ends, there Gods aid begins. Deliverance is often nearest,
when destruction seems surest. It is never fitter time for God to put to his
helping hand, than when all humane helps, that are wont to be as vailes and
curtains drawn between our eye and Gods hand, do utterly fail. Esa.
59.14-18.
When Judgment, says the Prophet, was turned back, and Justice stood aloof
off, and Truth was fallen in the streets, and Equity could not enter, and all
true dealing failed; and Non potest esse salvus, qui non vult esse malus. Salv.
de provid. l. 5.
by refraining from evil men made themselves but a prey to the evil: and the
Lord saw it, and wondered that no man would stand up or put forth himself to
stand for the Truth: Then did he himself put in to save by his own arm, and
by his Justice to support those that were ready to sink. Then put he on
Judgment as a Corslet, and Salvation as an Helmet; and Vengeance as a Roabe,
and Wrath as a Cloak: to repay the fury of his adversaries, and to recompense
his enemies. Then, says the Prophet, God did thus: and why not till then?
Surely (to omit all other ends) to get himself the more glory. Esa. 59.19.
That they might fear the Name of the Lord from the West, and his Glory from
the Sunne-rising; when with a blast of his breath, he should suddenly turn the
tide again, and the Spirit of the Lord should drive back, yea and carry away
the enemy, that brake in like a flood, had surrounded a great part, and was
like to overflow and over-whelme all. That Psalm. 76.10.6.
man's fury, as the Psalmist speaks, might turn to Gods glory, when by his
bare rebuke with a word of his mouth, both horse and chariot are cast into a
dead sleep, and Psalm. 68.30. Increpa catervam armidiferam: i. sagittis
armatam, ut tun. caetum hastatum, post D. Kimchi Leo Iud. lancearios vel
jaculatores. Calvin.
the troops of archers are utterly discomfited, and the remnant of their rage
is contrary to expectation restrained. That Psalm. 46.1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 9, 10.
he may be known and magnified for a mighty God, and a powerful Protector;
when, though the nations rage, and the kingdoms are in such a commotion, that
the earth seems to shake withal, and the very mountains to be removed, and
swallowed up in the Sea; yet he suddenly stilleth all; breaks their bows,
knappeth their spears asunder, and burns up their chariots, and by a
general desolation, and destruction of his enemies, setleth such peace the
whole world over, (for the behoof of his Church, and the freer passage of his
Truth) as was Cuncta atque continua totius generis humani aut pax fuit aut
pactio. Flor. hist. lib. 4. cap. 12.
in Augustus time, when Esa. 9.6.
the Prince of peace came into the world.

Ierem. 2 31. Nihil est in nobis cord fugacius, quod a nobis (a Deo etiam)
toties recedit, quoties per pravas cogitationes defluit. Greg. pastor. cur.
part. 3. c. 1.. 15.
prone to stray from him, when he deals kindly with them; and to make them
more earnest and fervent in those things, that they had waxed remiss and
retchlesse in before, when they were free from such afflictions; that as (...).
Greg Naz. orat. 31. (...). Chrysostom. contra Anomaeos 5. Humana men's, aquae more,
and circumclusa ad superiora colligitur, quia illud repetit unde descendit; and
relaxata deperit, quia se per infima inutiliter spargit. Greg. ubi sup.
water pent up in a pipe, shoots up higher than it would otherwise, had it
scope and space to disperse it self; so our thoughts and desires that would
otherwise be straying abroad and wandering in the ends of the world, being by
affliction and anguish straightened and restrained, might be carried higher to
heavenward, as Aqua diluvii arcam ad sublimiora sustulit. August de temp. 181.
Noah's Arc was with the waters of the Deluge, and confined unto him, whom they
were wandering from before, as Pulli a matre liberius divagantur, donec milvi
supervolantis impetum formident.
the Chicken from her damme, till she be frighted with the Kite. And this is
the use therefore that we should make of such desertions, that we be thereby
incited to strive Apoc. 3.2, 3.
to hold that the faster, that we seem in danger to lose; that Esa 64.7.
we stir up our selves to take faster hold on God, as those that look down
from some steep place, when they feel their heads begin to swim, or find
themselves in danger of falling, are wont to take better hold of the rail that
may stay them; cling closer about him, Fingit matter se filium quem in ulnis
gestat, in terram dejecturam, ut ipse tenacius haereat. Simon Cass. in Evang l.
14.
as the nurse-childe hangs on the nurse or the mother, when she seems about
to leave it, or threatens to throw it down; and as the Rota ab unda rejecta in
amnem revolvitur.
wheel of the water-mill, the more violently the flood drives it away from
it, the more violently does it still turn again upon the stream: So the more
violently God with both hands seems to thrust and shoove us away from him,
the more instantly and eagerly should we enforce our selves to press upon
him. Since for that end he does it, Non deserit, ut deseratur. Simon Cass in
Evang. lib. 8. cap. 37. Deserit potius, ne deseratur. Ideo videtur deserere,
quia non vult deseri.
not that he desires to be rid of us, but that he may not lose us, that we
may come nearer home to him, abide firmer with him, and sit closer by him than
formerly we have done: like the father, that when his son has some way
displeased him, bids him away out of his sight, (though he would be loath he
should so do,) not to drive him away indeed, but to make him draw nearer to
him, and by humble submission more earnestly endeavor to pacify and appease
his fathers wrath, and seek to regain his favor and good will again: or like
as he did with Moses, when Exodus 32.10 Dissimulat Dominus exaudire rogantem,
and feriendi licentiam quaerit a Mose, qui secit Mosem* Bernard. de temp. 83.
Quid est servo, Dimitte me, dicere, nisi deprecandi ansam praebere? Greg. Mor.
lib. 9. c. 12. Sine me, inquit, and dispergam eos, ut ille postulando and
semetipsum offerendo non sineret. Tertull. contra Marc. lib. 2.
he bade him let him alone, that he might destroy that rebellious and
idolatrous people; not that Moses should so let him alone indeed, but rather
that he might not leave him, but be the more earnest in suit with him on his
peoples behalf, and not give over till he had obtained his suit for them.

And in like manner should we be affected also in regard of Gods Church, when
we shall see it to be in such estate as was formerly observed. We should make
her case our own; and take occasion thereby, to be the more instant with God,
that his face may be turned to it, that seems to be turned from it, and
that in mercy and goodness he will remember and think upon her as his Spouse,
whom now, when Lament. 1.1, 2.
like a widow forlorn and desolate, she sits weeping and wailing, he
seems to have forgotten, and not at all to regard. Thus may we observe that
DAVID concludes diverse of his Psalms made when he was in such estate
himself with suit and supplication for the Church of God in general. Psalm.
51.18.
Oh be favorable, for thy good pleasures sake, to Sion; and build up the walls
of Jerusalem. And, Psalm. 25.22.
Deliver Israel, O Lord, out of all his troubles. His own present condition
was a mean to put him in mind of the afflicted and distressed estate of other
of Gods servants. And the like use should we all make, either of Gods hand on
our selves, or of his dealings in this kind with his Church and children
abroad, albeit we our selves remain free: Esa. 62.7, 8.
You that are mindful of the Lord, says the Prophet, what ever you be, be not
silent; be importunate with him, and give him no rest till he repair Sions
breaches, and set up Jerusalem again to be the glory of the world. For to this
very end does God often as it were wink, and withdraw himself from his people,
that we may with strong cries on all hands awake and fetch him again. True it
is indeed that God is not as Baal, of whom Elias sometime said to his Priests,
1 King. 18.27. Quid sibi volunt excitationes illae, quas canitis matutine;
collatis ad tibiam vocibus? obdormiscunt enim superi, remeare ut ad vigilias
debeant. Quid domitiones illae, quibus been ut valiant auspicabili salutatione
mandatis? Somni enim quiet solvuntur, occupatique ut hoc possint, lenes
audienda sunt naniae. Arnob. contr. gent. l. 5. Sic Homer. Iliad. (...). Et
Iliad. (...) clamore bellico.
Cry aloud; peradventure he sleeps, and you must wake him. No: Psalm. 121.4.
(...). Basil. Sell. hom. 21.
he that has the charge of Israel neither slumbereth nor sleeps. And yet he
winketh, if I may so say, and seems sometime to sleep, as Matthew. 8.24.
our Savior slept in the ship, when his Disciples were like to have been cast
away the whilst, and he does thus sleep to make us awake; he seems to
sleep, Vt excitetur, quae dormit, fides nostra. Aug. de temp. 245. (...).
Basil. Sell. homil. 21.
to make us awake out of our sleep, and cry the louder to wake him out of his
seeming sleep. Psalm. 44.23, 24.
Up, Lord, say they, why sleep thou? Awake, we beseech thee; and stand not
aloof off for ever. Why do thou hide thy face away from us? and forgettest
what misery and affliction we are in? As the Disciples to our Savior, when
they awoke him out of sleep; Matthew. 8.25.
Save us, Master: Mark. 4.38.
Carest thou not that we perish? And again, Psalm. 78.65.
The Lord awaked, as one that had been asleep. Thus at this very present does
God seem to be asleep, while the enemies of his Church daily prevail and
get ground of her, and triumph over her. He seems, I say, to sleep, and he
would by our outcries be awaked. And sure it is to be doubted that we have not
yet cried long enough or loud enough, that he seems to sleep still, and does
not yet rouse and raise up himself for the deliverance of his distressed ones.

Cuivis potest accidere, quod cuiquam potest. P. Syrus apud Sen. ad Marc. cap.
9. and de tranquil. c. 11.
nothing in this kind befalls one, but what may befall any: whose estate may
not that be, that was (...); Gregor. Naz. ad Naz. periclit.
DAVID'S once? yea rather that was DAVID'S often? The consideration hereof then
should stir us up every one to labor before hand to get good assurance of
Gods favor while we are free yet from such afflictions, from such spiritual
desertions. As Xenophon says (and it was a good speech though of a mere
natural man,) That (...). etc. Xenoph. Cyripaed. l. 1. Ad quem locum
respiciens Plut. de tranquil. (...). Et Mevand. (...). Huc illud Ben-Syrae,
Honora medicum dum non indiges ejus, i. juxta Schol. Ebr. Cole and precare Deum
priusquam ejus auxilio tibi opus sit. Nam Iure venit cultes ad sibi quisque
Deos. Ovid. Pont. 1. 3. Honora medicum dum sanus es, ut in morbo tibi libentius
adsit. Sirac. 38.1. (...). Drus. in Sir. and in Ben-Syr. (...).
it stood rich men upon to make God their friend in prosperity, that so they
might be sure to find a friend of him in adversity. So it stands us upon to
get good assurance of Gods favor and love toward us, while we are free from
afflictions, that when they shall befall us, we may have comfort of that
assurance which formerly we have gotten. For it is with Gods children commonly
in this case, as it is with one that has received such a blow or wound on the
head, as that though it be not deadly, nor depriveth him wholly of life, yet so
astonisheth him for the time, that albeit he have life in him with Acts 20.10.
Eutychus, yet he has no sense of it: or as with one in a swoune, that
discerns not the light of the Sun, though it shine full upon him, nor can
see ought, or take notice of those that stand about him and take pains with
him. Or as it is with (...). Greg. Naz. de Pace 3. (...). Idem pro pauper.
(...). Idem in Heron.
those that have been Sea-sicke, and are giddy when they come first ashore,
all seems to turn round with them, and the earth it self to reele and roll
up and down as the ship did. And even so is it usually with them at such
times, though they have spiritual life of grace in them, yet Accidit inter dum
ut Christum in nobis sentiamus, qui sensus illico nullus fit, Residet tamen in
nobis, ut anima in corpore dormientis, licet nec ipsa, nec ulla ejus operatio
sentiatur. Spin. de justit. Christ.
they feel it not; ( Psalm. 51.10.
Create in me, says DAVID, O Lord, a new heart, as if all were to be begun
again:) though they be in Gods favor, yet they see it not; they are not able
to discern (there is such a mist over their eyes) the beams of Gods love and
favor toward them, though it shine out brightly even then full in their face,
nor his provident eye over them, and care of them, though even them also it be
working about them for their benefit, as effectually as ever. (...). Greg. Naz.
de cathed. Constant.
All seems to be shaken with them, even Gods eternal love it self toward
them, though more firm than the pillars of heaven and earth it self are. It
is no time therefore then for a man to take trial of his own estate, when his
thoughts and affections are so disturbed and distracted, as Psalm. 13 2. and
77.2, 3.
DAVID confesses that it was with him at this time. But it is a fit time for
him to make use then of his former trial. For that man that has before-time
taken sound trial of himself, and upon due and diligent search, has found
himself to be in the estate of grace, and consequently in favor with God; he
may then yet take notice therefore, and reap comfort thereby, Non reputatione
praesentium, sed recordatione praeteritorum.
not regarding what then for the present he feels, but remembering what upon
such enquiry he has formerly found; and assuring himself, since that Romans
11.29.
the gifts and graces of God are without repentance; and that Semel electus,
semper dilectus.
once elected, and ever beloved; for John 13.1.
Whom God loves once, he loves for ever; Malach. 3.6.
he is no changeling in his love; that therefore the grace that once he had is
not utterly gone, though he cannot now discern it; nor the grace that he once
was in with God is not utterly lost, though it be so concealed, that for the
present he cannot now descry it. And Mulier foetum conceptum non semper
molitantem sentit: ubi tamen semel and iterum sensit, pragnantem se esse non
ambigit. Spin. de Iustit. Christ. and Taffin. Marks of Gods children. cap. 4.
as women that go with child, when they have sometime felt the child stir
in the womb, do thereby know that they have quickened, and have truly
conceived, though they do not always so feel it. So if once we have found
upon due and sound trial good assurance of Gods grace and favor by the
effectual and powerful work of his good Spirit upon our souls, and by the
comfortable motions thereof in our hearts, though we have not the like
always, (as Heu, Domine Deus, rara hora, and brevis mora. Bern. in Cant. 23.
Tenuis magis exhalatio, quam pinguis conspersio. Ibid. 14. Sapit quidem
suavissime, sed gustatur rarissime. Ibid. 8.
Alas, says religious Bernard, they come but seldom with many a one, and when
they do come, they are soon gone again) yet we may be assured that we have
conceived and are quickened, and that spiritual life is not gone again, though
we find it not so sensibly to work in us at all times, yea the rather here may
we build upon it, as having far better assurance, than women can in such
cases have of the life of that they go with; because that that is conceived in
them being bred (...). 1 Pet. 1.23.
of mortal and corruptible seed, though it have been quickened, yet Aliquis
intra viscera Materna letum praecocis fatitulit. Sen. Theb. Job 3.16. Psalm.
58.8.
may die and miscarry, ere they be delivered of it; whereas that that is by
Gods Word and his Spirit bred and conceived in us, being bred (...). 1 Pet.
1.23.
of immortal and incorruptible seed by the Word of God that lives and lasts
for ever, if it be once there conceaved, Renatus non denascitur. Si de Deo
conceperu, certus erit partus tuus, non erit aborsus. Aug. de verb. Dom. 20.
can never die nor decay again, but 1 Pet. 1.24, 25. (...). Clem. Alex.
protrept. Quod de virtute Isocr. ad Demon. (...), etc.
endures to eternity, as he himself does, by whose Spirit it is begotten and
bred in us. Or as one that has at leisure times cast up and balanced his
accounts, and brought all to one entire sum, is at any time ready, if on a
sudden he be called to a reckoning, though he have not time or leisure then
amids many distractions otherwise to run over his reckonings, or to cast up
the particulars, yet to tell how things stand with him; (...).
it requires no more but the bare reading, he need not stand to recount it,
being sure that it was well and truly cast up before: So he that has
before-time truly tried his own estate, and made his reckonings up concerning
the same with God and his Word, may thereby know then how it stands with him
in regard of God, by calling to mind only the issue of his former
examination, when by reason of disturbance and distraction through the violence
of temptation, he shall have little leisure or liberty to take any exact
trial or proof of it at the present.

Exceeding injurious therefore are they herein to themselves, that defer and
put off the trial of their estate till such times; and by reason that then
either their Nec litant, nec laetantur, qui non tempore suo sacrificant. Vise
Drus. proverb. class. 1.
sacrifice affords no good signs, or they light on an evil Interpreter,
that turns all to the worst, by such their delay they miss then of much
comfort, that otherwise they might have had, if they had taken trial of
themselves and their estates in due time, but by means of their neglect thereof
they are then deprived of, when they have most need of it. And surely did men
know beforehand what need they should have, and what want they may find of
comfort in such cases, and how unfit and unapt they are like then to find
themselves for such employments, they would be questionless more careful to
sift and examine themselves before such times of trial, and by good assurance
of Gods grace and favor gained beforehand, treasure up some store of comfort
that may then stand them in stead, when there shall be Exodus 16.25, 26, 27.
no Manna found abroad in the fields, nor such sweet 1 King. 17.1. Aiunt
cochleas, cum sitiunt aeris, atque illis de coelo nibil illiquitur, succo
proprie victitare. Symmach. lib. 1. epist. 27. Quasi cum caletur, cochleae in
occulto latent, Suo fibi succo vivunt, ros si non cadit. Plaut. Capt. 1. 1.
dewes dropping down upon their dry and thirsty souls, as there has done
formerly. It is a wise and prudent course, Prove. 6.6, 7, 8. -- formicae farris
acervos De populant, hyemis memores, tectoque reponunt. Virg. Aen l. 4. Ore
trahit, quodcunque potest, atque addit acervo, Quem struithaud ignara, ac non
incauta futuri. Tum simul inversum contristat aquarius annum, Non usquam
prorepit, and illis utitur ante Quaesitis. Horat. sat. 1.
in summer to lay up against winter; Ephesians. 6.11, 12, 13. (...). Chrysostom. in
1 Thessalonians. hom. 3.
in time of peace to provide for war; and (...). Plut. de iracund. (...).
Socrat. apud Stob. c. 3. (...); Plut. ibid.
before storms come, for men to furnish themselves with such necessaries as
they may then stand in need of. And it will be our best wisdom to get and
lay up such matter of comfort beforehand, that whenever such times of
trouble and trial shall come, we may have that at hand then, that may stand us
in stead, and not be driven to seek for it, when we should make use of it,
and shall find it hard to come by, if we were not furnished with it before.

God hears us, even when Ne surdum agat. Psalm. 83.1.
he seems to be deaf toward us; Non exaudit ad voluntatem, ut exaudiat ad
salutem. Aug. in Psalm. 80. and in 1 Joan. 6.
He hears us to our profit, though not to our pleasure; and to our behoof,
though not according to our Deus and cum differt adest; and id quod differi,
adest; and in eo quod differt, adest. Idem alibi.
desire: He is present with us, even when he delayeth us; yea he is present
with us, in that he does delay us; and that is better then present with us,
that for the present is denied us. (...). Greg. Naz. adv. Eunom. 2.
It is a point of mercy in him, that he is not so forward to show mercy. There
is no cause therefore for us to be impatient, since that Heb. 12.10.
all is for our good; yea Patience it self is good for us; which hereby God
does not 1 Pet. 1.7. Apoc. 14.12.
try only and exercise, but Romans 5.3. Iam. 1.3.
work in us, and enure us unto. And Lament. 3.27, 28, 29.
it is good for us to learn quietly to bear Gods yoke, to sit down by it,
yea to lie down under it, and thrust our mouth in the dust, assuring our
selves that so doing we shall have a good issue of it, and shall do well in
the end.

Luke 21.19. Psalm. 74.12. O servum illum beatum, cujus emendationi Dominus
instat, cui dignatur irasci, quem admonendi dissimulatione non decipit.
Tertull. de bn. patient.
Patience, I say, is for our good: But (...). Pindar. Pyth 2. (...). Bion.
Laert. Malum non posse far, non leve est malum. Perdidisti tot mala, si
nondum misera esse didicisti. Sen. ad Helv. c. 3.
by impatiency there is no good to be gotten. It will be but a means (...).
Eusebius. apud Stob. cap. 123. (...). Aeschyl. Prometh.
to make God lay harder and heavier things on us, when we begin to grow
impatient under his hand. As a discreet Father, when his son shall take pet
at some small matter that his father has crossed him in, may well thereupon
take occasion, yea and many times does, to give him some further and greater
cause of discontent, to bring him thereby to know himself and his duty, and to
teach him to rest content with that that his father will have: So when God
sends smaller and lighter crosses, and men wax waspish and wayward under
them, God is wont to second them with greater and weightier afflictions, to
work patience into them, and to enure them to the yoke; which being Vnum est
levamentum malorum ingentium, pati, and necessitatibus suis obsequi. Sen. de
ira. lib. 3. cap. 16. Pati Durum: sed levjus fit patientia, Quicquid corrigere
est nefas. Horat. carm. 1. 24. Posse pati facile est, tibi ni patientia d^sit.
Ovid. remed. lib. 2. Nam Patiens quisquis novit pati, pepulit vires, pondusque
mali. Sen. Her. Oet.
patiently borne, will become lighter unto us, and may the sooner in all
likelihood be removed from us, having taken out that lesson that God thereby
would learn us. Whereas Indignatio in tormentum suum proficit: and imperia
graviora sentit qui contumacius patitur. Sen. de ira. lib. 3. cap. 16. Nihil
tam exasperat fervorem vulneris, quam serendi impatientia. Hegesip. excid.
Hier. lib. 2. cap. 9. Impatientes, dum mala pati nolunt, non efficient, ut a
malis eruantur, sed ut mala graviora patiantur. Patientes autem qui mala malunt
non committendo far, quam non ferendo committere, and leviora faciunt quae
per patientiam patiuntur, and pejora evadunt, quibus per impatientiam
mergerentur, bona vero aeterna and magna non perdunt, dum malis temporatibus
brevibus non cedunt. Hugo Vict. de patient. cap. 2.
by impatience it will but grow more grievous unto us, as Vtque suum laqueis,
quos callidus abdidit auceps, Crus ubi commisit volucris sensitque teneri,
Plangitur, ac trepidans astringit vincula motu. Ovid. metam. lib. 11. Sic
laqueos sera dum jactat astringit: sic aves viscum, dum trepidantes excutiunt,
plumis omnibus illinunt. Senec. de ira, lib. 3. cap. 16. Impensius in ipsis
agrestibus feris arctissima vincula, si se excitent, imprimuntur; si quicscant,
relaxantur. Sixtus apud Hegesip. lib. 2. cap. 9.
the snare is to the foul, that by fluttering and straining makes the string
straiter, to her greater torment, and yet is never the nearer getting out
again; as the yoke is to the beast, that (...), ut Theophyl. ep. 41. Nullum
tam arctum est jugum, quod non minus laedat ducentem quam repugnantem. Sen. de
ira. l. 3. c. 16.
by striving and struggling with it, has galled her neck, and yet is compelled
to draw still in it, with more pain then from her own folly, than from the
weight of it, or of that that she draws in it: And we shall but thereby
procure to our selves the more evil; as Gravis quoque febrium vis tolerando
minuitur, inquietudine augetur. Idem ibid.
the sick man in a burning fever, while by tossing and tumbling to and fro, he
seeks to find ease, does but exasperate the disease, and increase his own
grief.

Let us beware therefore of impatience; But let us take heed Saul to Satan, by
putting our hands unto wickedness, or using indirect courses, for the salving
and easing or releeving of our selves. It was the Devils policy that he used,
but without success, with our Savior; Matthew. 4.3, 4.
to bear him in hand that his Father had cast off all care of him, thereby to
persuade him to depend no longer upon his providence, who if he did love him or
regard him, would not so suffer him to starve. And it is one of the flights
that even to this day he uses often with Gods servants, thereby in time of
affliction to withdraw them from relying on God, who seems not to look after
them, as if they were sure to perish, if they shifted not for themselves, but
trusted still to him, that had no care at all of them. And howsoever by this
engine he prevailed not with our Savior, yet by it with many other, too many,
too often he prevails, and makes them commit much folly. For while Esa. 28.16.
Non praefestinabit, i. ex impatientia and infidelitate non ad res praesentes
confugiet, nec festinatione praepropera Deum antevertet. Iun.
through weakness of faith, and want of patience, they are loath to wait Gods
good leisure, and desirous to be rid, in all haste, of the present affliction,
they put their hand often to such courses as produce fearful effects, and use
such sorry shifts for the releeving of themselves, as do but plunge them
further and deeper into such a labyrinth of evils, as they are many times never
able to get out of again. So that it fares with them, as with Natare nescii,
ubi demergi se sentiunt, temere quicquid occurrit, vitae cupidi retinendae
arripiunt. Cyrill. Alex. epist. 29.
persons unskilful in swimming, that having ventured past their depth, and
being in danger now of drowning, while hastily and inconsiderately they catch
at what comes next hand, to save themselves with, lay hold often on weeds, that
do but entangle them, and draw them deeper under water, and there keep them
down from ever getting up again, till they be (that which by such means they
sought to prevent) indeed drowned. This subtle slight of Satan we must be
careful in these cases to discover, and say to our selves, when such things
shall be suggested unto us: Psalm. 77.10.
This is but my weakness, or Satan's wickedness: Lament. 3.31, 32. Non
deserit, etiamsi deserere videatur. Aug. in Psalm. 44. and Gregor. Mor. l. 5. c.
5.
God I know has not left me, though he may seem not to look after me. Deuteronomy.
8.2. and 13 3, 4.
He now tries me whether mine heart be upright with him or no, whether I will
cleave constantly to him, though he do nothing but cross me, and abide
still with him, though he seem wholly to neglect me; or whether I will leave
him, and give over adhering unto him, if he do not use me as I would that he
should. And therefore I will resolve, that I may not prove unsound, to keep
constantly with him, and not hearken to Satan, nor yield to such indirect
courses, as by him shall be suggested, for the procuring either of ease or of
delivery, whatsoever shall come of it. Such constancy shall seal up unto us
our sincerity; and shall not want with God a rich and a royal reward. For he
that shall so continue depending upon God, when all humane helps shall fail
him, and all lawful means of releef; choosing rather to endure grief and
pain all his life long, and to live a life more bitter than death it self,
than to make trial of any unlawful course to procure ease and relief; such a
man so dying, says Chrysostom, (...). Chrysostom. cont. Iud. orat. 5. Male
interpres, Proximo post martyrs loco consistet.
shall have his place in heaven among the Martyrs; yea such a one is no other
than (...). Idem ibid. (...). Ibid. Non martyrium sola sanguinis effusio
consummat; nec sola dat palmam exustio illa flammarum. Aug. de Sanct. 46. Multi
ducunt martyrium in lecto, etc. Idem de diverse. 39. vise and Chrysostom. in 1 Thessalonians. homil. 3.
a Martyr indeed; he is as good a Martyr as he that leaves his head on the
block, or is burnt to ashes at a stake for the testimony of Gods truth, and
the keeping of a good conscience. All the difference between the one and the
other is this; that to the one it is said, Deny Christ, or thou shall die; to
the other it is said, Do evil, or thou shall live wretchedly, thou shall live
a life little better, if not worse, than death. He is once for all a Martyr,
that will rather endure the one; he is often, yea every day a Martyr, as Paul
says of himself, that 1 Cor. 15.31. (...), Chrysostom. in Psalm. 95. and cont.
Iud. 5.
he died daily, that chooses rather to undergo the other. Too prone we are
Ier. 2.31.
to stray from God, when he uses us well, when he deals lovingly with us:
but a most blessed thing it is, when our hearts are so linked to him, that we
will not stir an inch from him, though he seem to carry himself never so
harshly toward us.

Deuteronomy. 32.15, 18. Hosh. 4.6. and 8.14. Zech. 12.7, 13.
our forgetfulness of him, and our duty to him, is for the most part the
cause that moves him to forget us. As indeed Quid est quod nos queramur de
Deo, cum Deus magis queri de nobis omnibus possit? quae ratio est ut dolcamus
nos non audiri a Deo, cum ipsi Deum non audiamus? and susurremus non respici a
Deo terras, cum ipsi non respiciamus ad coelum? and molestum sit despici a
Domino preces nostras, cum praecepta ejus despiciantur a nobis? quid dignius?
quid justius? non audivimus, non audimur: non respeximus, non respicimur.
Salvian. de provid. lib. 3.
what can be more just, or what more equal, than for God to forget us, when
we forget him, and to neglect us, when we regard not him; to refuse to hear
us, when we refuse to hear him? Or how can we with any color complain of
the one, when we are guilty of the other? Yea when God seems to have
forgotten us, if we would have him again remember us, Psalm. 22.27. Apoc. 2.5,
4. Ezech. 36.31. Deuteronomy. 30.1, 2.
Let not us then be backward to remember our selves: But let us apply our
selves to make a right use of the cross; help to further the effect of it,
do not cross or hinder the work of it. The more speedy success Gods hand
has with us, the sooner it is like to be removed away from us. Psalm. 32.3, 4.
Define dissimulare. Deus crudelius urit, Quos videt invitossuccubuisse sibi.
Tibull. eleg. 1. 8. Cedam aculco, ne bis pungar. Bern. de diverse. 20.
DAVID'S struggling with it, and hanging back, and refusing to yield to that
that God thereby required of him, was a mean to continue it the longer upon
him, and to put him to the more pain. And this undoubtedly is one maine cause
of the long continuance of many evils, that Multi humiliantur, and humiles non
sunt. Bern. in Cant. 34.
men are humbled, as Bernard speaks, and yet are not humble; Plectimur a Deo,
nec flectimur tamen: corripimur, sed non corrigi^ur. Salvian. de provid. l. 5.
Non cessant vitia civium usque ad excidia civitatum. Prius est interire quam
corrigi: Prius ipsos quam in ipsis vit ia non esse. Ibid. Multo facilius
fregeris, quam flexeris. Buchan. Bapt.
they will break in sunder, ere they will bow or bend under Gods hand. Let us
apply our selves therefore to that which by the cross God requires of us, if
we desire to have the cross removed again away from us.

Now this that we may do,

find out the cause of the cross, and the ground of Gods aversion of his face
away from us. Languorum nullus inveniet medelas, nisi prius morborum cognoverit
causas. Origin. in Romans lib. 1. Non potest scire quomodo morbos curare
conveniat, qui unde hi sint ignorant. Corn. Cells. de remed. lib. 1. Absque
causarum observatione morbos nec praecavere, nec curare licet. Fernel.
patholog. l. 7. cap. 11.
A disease can never be well cured, till the cause of it be discovered: Nor can
we take any right course for the removal of a cross, unless that that has
procured it be in some sort discovered. Mica c. 9.
The voice of the Lord, says the Prophet Micah, cries unto the City. God by
his judgments preaches not verbal, but real Sermons unto us. (...). Basil.
Sell. homil. 5.
He preaches even without preaching, as Basil speaks. As he is said Psalm.
50.21. Esa. 42.14. Quid est, Tacui? non judicavi, non vindicavi. Non tacet in
verbo; tacet in vindicta, tacet in verbere. Aug. in Psalm. 74. and 93. and 100.
and in Joan. tr. 4. and homil. 2.
to hold his peace, though he do speak, when he does not punish; so is he
said to preach, though he speak not, when he does punish. Esa. 26.9. and
28.19.
His very judgments are real Sermons of reformation and repentance. They have
a voice, says the Prophet: But every one understands not this voice. Quomodo
Bern. in Cant. 79. Graece loquentem non intelligit, qui Graecam non novit, nec
Latin loquentem, qui Latinus non est. Sic lingua amoris ei qui non amat,
barbara est, sicut aes sonans, aut cymbalum tinniens.
They spoke in a strange language to many, to the most; as Act. 9.7. cum 22.9.
Ita conciliat post Calvinum Piscator; melius, puto, quam Chrysostom. Theophyl.
Oecum. Lyra, Hugo, Beza, alii, qui ad Pauli vocem coactius referunt.
Paul's companions, when Christ spoke to him, they hear a noise and no more.
Psalm. 92.6. (...). Heraclit. apud Clement. in protrept. and Theodor. de curand.
Graec. l. 1.
The foolish, says the Psalmist, conceive it not, and the brutish understand
it not. But Mica 6.9.
a man of wisdom, the wise man, says the Prophet, knows what it means.
And as the Psalmist speaks of Gods works of mercy; Psalm. 107.43.
Who so is wise to observe these things, such shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord: So of his works of judgment says Jeremy, Ier. 9.12.
Who so is wise to understand these things, to him the mouth of God speaks,
and he is able to declare what this Voice of God says. And of both of them
the Prophet Hoshe, Hosh. 4.10.
Who so is wise, will understand these things: and who so is of understanding,
will know that the Lords ways are Esa 26.7, 10. Ezech. 18.25.
strait and even, and the just shall walk in them, but the wicked shall fall
in them. To use Chrysostomes comparison, yea and Augustines too; (...), etc.
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. hom. 7.
Lay you a book open before a child, or one that cannot read, he may gaze
and stare on it, but he can make no use of it, because he understands nothing
at all in it. But bring it to one that can read, and that understands the
language it is written in, and he can read you many stories or instructions
out of it. It is as dumb and silent to the one; it speaks to, and talks
with the other. In like manner is it with Dei opera admiranda qui non aspicit
tantum, sed and intelligit, quasi legit. Aliter enim videtur pictura, aliter
videntur literae. Picturam cum videris, hoc est totum vidisse, laudasse.
Literas cum videris, commonera eas and legere: quod si forte non nosti, Quid
putamus, inquis, esse, quod hic scriptum est? Interrogas quid sit, cum jam
videas aliquid. Sed aliud tibi demonstraturus est, a quo quaeris agnoscere quod
vidisti. Alios ille oculos habet, alios tu. Apices similiter videtis; non
similiter signa cognovistis. Tu vides and laudas; ille videt and laudat, legit
and intelligit. Aug. in Joan. 24.
Gods judgments, as Augustine also well applies it: all sorts of men see
them, but few are able aright to read them* ^r to understand them what they
say.

But what is it that the wise man is by them admonishe^? Surely, Mica 6.9.
to listen to the Rod, says Micah; and Quis accersat. Iun.
who, or what it is that has procured it: to enquire, says Jeremy, what is
the cause, Ier. 9.12.
why the land is spoiled, and lies burnt up like a wild wilderness, that no
man passes through; that is, to search out the cause of the present cross. To
which purpose also Gods people in the time of their captivity, Lam. 3.40.
Let us search, say they, and sift out our works and our ways. They had
before entered into some discourse and dispute with themselves, what might be
the cause of that their calamity. And first they lay down this for an
undoubted and undeniable position, That Amos 3.6. Quicquid malorum poenarumve
perpetimur, censura est divinae manus. Salvian. de provid. l. 8. Quicquid
patimur venit ex alto. Sen. Oed. 5.2.
there is no evil that befalls any, either person or people, but the Lord
has his hand in it. Lam. 3.37, 38.
Dare any man, say they, say, that Matthew. 10.29.
ought comes to pass, and the Lord has not appointed it? Does not (...).
Homer. Odyss^o.
both good and evil come out of his mouth? But what then? Does God as Heb.
12.10.
earthly fathers do, who in an idle humor sometime correct their children
without cause? Or Lam. 3.34.
does God take pleasure in stamping upon his people, and in vexing and grieving
of them? No: Lam. 3.33.
he does not willingly, or from the heart punish, and afflict the sons of
men. Est placidus facilisque pater, veniaeque paratus; Et qui fulmineo saepe
sine igne t^nat. Qui cum triste aliquid statuit, fit tristis and ipse: Cuique
fere poenam sumere poena sua est. Ovid. P^nt. 2.2. Est piger ad poenas Deus,
est ad praemia velox. Quique dolet quoties cogitur esse ferox. Multa metu
poena, poena qui pa^ca coercet: Et jacet invita fulmina rara manu. Ibid. 1.3.
Torqueris ipse, cum tam lenis irasceris. Plin. ep. 21. l 9.
It is a grief to him to be grievous unto us; it is a pain to him to be
punishing of us. It goes as much against the heart with him to afflict, as it
goes against the hair with us to be afflicted. Why but, what is the cause
then that he deals so harshly with us, that he carries himself so austerely
toward us? Lam. 3.39.
Wherefore is the living man afflicted? Man suffers for his sin. Lam. 3.42.
Victa tamen vilio est hujus clementia nostro: Et venit ad vires ira coacta
suas. Ovid. Pont. 2.2. Ergo illum demens in me sevire coegi, Mitius immensus
quo nihil orbis habet. Idem trist. 4.8. Nunc quoque nil fecit, nisi quod facere
ipse coegi. Nec minus infestus, quam fuit, esse potest. Idem de Pont. 1.3.
Exacerbamus Deum impuritatibus nostris, and ad puniendos nos trabimus invitum.
Salvian. de provid. l. 4. c. 5.
We have sinned and rebelled against him: and he has not spared us. Deus
bo^us de suo, saevus de nostro. Tertull. de resurr. (...). Basil. C^s. homil.
8. (...), Greg. Naz. orat. 6.
God is good of himself; he has his harshnesse from us; it is our corruption
that requires it. Crudelem medicum intemperans ager facit. P. Sir.
A disordered patient makes a cruel Physician. By our disordered courses,
Esa. 27.4. Ier. 7.19. Cum ejus naturae sit meus Dei atque majestas ut nulla
iracundiae passione moveatur; tanta tamen in nobis peccatorum exa^erbatio est,
ut per nos cogatur irasci. Vim, ut ita dixerim, facimus pietati suae, ac manus
quodammodo afferimus misericordiae suae. Cum ejus benignitatis sit, ut velit
nobis jugiter parcere, cogitur masis nostris scelera quae admittimus vindi^^re.
Salvian. de provid. lib. 4. cap. 5.
we enforce him to anger, in whom anger is not; and even wrest and wring that
from him, that in some sort is not in him. Ierem. 30.14.
Therefore, says he, have I smitten thee with the wounds of an enemy, for the
multitude of thine iniquities, and because thy transgressions are grievous.
What these sins of theirs therefore were, do they desire and purpose to make
Lam. 3.40.
Search, that so coming to understand the true cause of their calamity, they
may set upon some course for means of recoverie. And in like manner ought we
to do upon the like occasions, say as Job does; Job 10.2. Non sententiam
causatur, sed causam scrutatur, erudiri flagellis petens non erui. Bern in
Cant. 33. Percussionis verbera acceperat, and causas verberum nesciebat. Greg.
mor. l. 23. c. 17. Quamvis peccatorem se sentiat and fateatur, non cognoscit
tamen pro qua specialiter culpa percutitur. Ibid. lib. 9. cap. 34. Vise sis
eundem ibid. cap. 30. and Isid^r. de sum. bon. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Show me, O Lord, or make known to me, wherefore thou contendest with me: do
as DAVID did, when in Israel they had had a long time of dearth; 2 Samuel 21.1.
He went to ask of God for what cause it might be: make a search into, take
surveigh of our hearts and our lives; labor, as Solomon speaks, 1 King 8.38.
to find out the plague, the cause of it at least, in our hearts, and in our
courses.

And for our better furtherance herein we may consider,

sins especially God has in his Word threatened such judgments against, as
are present on us, or any part of his Church. For if such sins be now found
rife or reigning among us, there is just cause to suspect that Fidem verbis
verbera saciunt. Gregor. in Evang. 37.
God by such judgments does make good his word; Job 33.16. Ezech. 12.22, 24,
25, 28. and 5.13. and 6.10.
seals up the truth of it; and thereby shows, that Deuteronomy. 32.47. Non sunt
vanae minae dominicae. Polan. in Malac. 1.
His menaces are not vain, or uneffectuall; that Ierem. 5.12, 13, 14.
his Prophets words, as the profane people sometime spoke, are not (...).
Plut. de and. Translatum ab evis irritis, ex quibus nihil gignitur, quae (...)
Graeci vocant. Plin. hist. not. l. 10. c. 58. quidam and vento ea putant
genetari, qua de causa etiam (...) appellantur. Ibid. c. 60. Sed and (...).
Plato in Theaet.
windy.

sins God has formerly inflicted the like plagues for on others: which if
these times be found to imitate those in, it may well be deemed, that Ier.
7.14. Quid miramur, si paria perpetimur, qui paria perpetramus? Bern. de
consid. l. 2.
God in justice, as he finds us like them in practice, so he makes us like
them in punishment; as he finds the like sins among us, so he powers the
like plagues upon us; as he finds us sick of the same sores, so he plieth
us with the same plasters.

an analogy and a proportion between men's practices and Gods punishments,
between their transgressions and his judgments. Look Wisd. 11.13. In quib^s
peccamus, in eisdem plectimur. (...). Dion. Chrysostom. orat. 55.
wherein men offend, therein usually are they punished. And blessings abused
are turned often into curses, as Exodus 4.3.
the staff sometime into a Serpent, (...). Greg. Naz. orat. 6.
that men may be crossed and plagued in those things, which they were not
thankful for, or used not well, when they were blessed in them. 1 King. 1.6. 2 Samuel 18 5.
DAVID was too indulgent a father to his children, and he smarted shrewdly for
it in 2 Samuel 13 14.
Ammons rape of Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.28, 29.
Absoloms murder of Ammon, and both 2 Samuel 15.10, 12.
Absoloms, and afterward 1 King. 1.5, 9, 11.
Adoniaes rebellion. H^sh. 2.8, 9.
When Gods people abused those temporal blessings of gold and silver, corn
and wine, wool and flax, that he had bestowed on them, God threatens to
return, and take them again away from them. And in like manner he threatens
them, when they observed not his Sabbaths, that Levit. 26.35.
their land, during their captivity, should rest and lie waste untilled and
untoiled, because it rested not on their Sabbaths, when they dwelt in it: As
also that because they set light by the word of God when they had it, he would
Amos 8.5, 11.
send a famine of hearing it, when they should be constrained to seek far
and near for, and yet not find that, which they then refused when they might
have had it, or made no reckoning of, when in great plenty they had it: And
Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48.
because they did not serve the Lord their God with a good will, and with a
cheerful heart in the abundance of all things; they should therefore serve
their enemies, which he should send upon them, in hunger, and thirst, and
nakedness, and want of all things: And Ier 5.19.
as they had served strange gods in their own land, so they should serve
strangers in a land that was not their own.

Esa. 33.1. Ier. 30.16 Quod quisque fecit, patitur: autorem scelus Repetit;
suoque premitur exemplo nice^s. Senec. Herc. fur. 3.2. Quae scelere parta est,
scelere linquetur domus. Idem Med. 1. ferox Theseus qualem Minoidi luctum,
Obtulerat mente immemori, talem ipse recepit. Catull. nupt. Pel. and Thet.
there is a just retaliation often in such cases with God. And Deuteronomy. 19 19, 21.
Iam. 2.13. (...). Pindar. Nem. 4. (...). Euripid. Orest. Non est injuria pati,
quod prior feceris. Sen. de ira, l. 2. c. 30. Qui praedo vult esse, merito fit
praeda. Aug. in Psalm. 38. -- neque enim lex justior ulla, Quam necis artifices
art perire sua. Ovid art. 1. (...). Pythagor. an Rhadamanth. Aristot. Ethic.
l. 5. c. 5.
there is nothing more equal than such requitals. 2 Samuel 12.10, 11.
DAVID abuses the wife of Vriah; and 2 Samuel 16.22.
his own son abuses his in the same sort. 2 Samuel 12.9, 10.
He slays Vriah himself with the sword; and for the slaughter of Vriah the
sword haunteth his house. Judge. 1.6, 7.
Adoni-bezeks cruelty on those that he had conquered, was requited with the
like, executed through Gods just judgment on him by those into whose hands he
fell: and even he himself acknowledges the equity of it. And Exodus
22.22.24. Tolerabilius est siquis patiatur quod fecerit. Miramur si nos barbari
capiunt, cum sratres nostros nos faciamus captivos? Diu id oppressione
plurimorum elaboravimus, ut captivando alios etiam ipsi incipiamus esse
captivi. Sentimus enim quae fecimus; ac labores manuum nostrarum manducamus;
and justo judice Deo solvimus quae debemus. Miserti exulum non sumus; ecce ipsi
sumus exules. Peregrinos fraud cepimus; ^ecce ipsi peregrinamur* Praejudiciis
alios circumvenimus; ipsi praejudicia nunc timemus. Salvian de provid. lib. 5.
God threatens such as oppress poor widows and orphans, That their wives
shall be widows, and their children orphans.

of the Word, or privately by good offices of friends or others, yea or
inwardly by the voice of our own heart, or the motions and suggestions of Gods
Spirit, and yet we have not regarded to amend and reform. For it is an usual
thing with God, when his Word takes not place, nor prevails with us, A
verbis ad verbera progreditur. Esa. 50.1.2. Ier. 26.3, 4, 5.
to second it with the Rod, as thereby Vt fidem verbis verbera faciant, dum
corporis plagae testes sunt veritatis and culpae. Gregor. in Evan. 37.
to seal up and confirm the truth of it; so Esa. 28.19. Vexatio intellectum
dat auditui, quia tunc peccator intelligit quod audivit, cum se jam pro
contemptu vexari doluerit. Greg. mor. l. 15. c. 22.
to make us the more attentive unto it. He does as Absalom did with Ioab, 2 Samuel 14.30, 31.
when he would not come at him, having sent once or twice for him, he caused
his servants to set his corn on fire, and then comes Ioab to him without
further sending for, to know what he would with him, and why he had so served
him. And so, says Elihu, does God; Job 33.14-22.
he calls upon men many times to break off their bad courses, either by
outward admonitions, or by inward suggestions; (...). Basil. Caes. homil. 12.
which when men regard not, he lays some affliction upon them, that
continues with them, and sticks by them, till it have Aures poena aperit,
quas voluptas clauscrat.
opened their ears that were stopped before, and pulled down their pride, or
taken down their stomach, and made them to say with Saul stricken down to the
ground, Domine, q^id vis faciam? Act. 9.6.
Lord, what is it that thou would have me to do?

Gods judgments, as his Mercies; how we have either refused or neglected to
hearken as well to the sound of Gods rod as to the voice of his Word; what
afflictions have formerly been inflicted on us, whereof little or no use at
all has been made by us. For that is also usually Gods manner, when men
profit not by such crosses as he has formerly exercised them with, Ier. 5.3,
6. Esa. 9.17-20. Hosh. 5.12, 13, 14. Amos 4.6-12.
to proceed from shorter to some of longer continuance, from milder to sharper
courses. He deals with the sons of men, as the Physician does with his
patient; Si malum morbi fortius creverit, majorae remedia quaeruntur, and pro
salute hominis solicita fortius se medicina opponit: asperi cibi, potus
ingeruntur amari: Et si convaluerit malum, and ignis adhibetur and ferrum.
Firmic. de error. Gentil.
who when he finds that the potion which he has given his patient will not
work with him, he secondeth it with some stronger purge; when he perceives
the disease to be so settled, that sudden courses will not serve, he prescribes
him a course of some longer continuance. So our Savior forewarned the poor
man, whom he had healed, That John 5.14.
if he sinned again, some worse matter would befall him: his not profiting by
the former, would procure unto him some further, some far heavier cross. And
Levit. 26.18, 27, 28, etc. (...). Greg. Naz. orat. 6. (...). Ibid.
God threatens his people, that if lighter matters would not amend them, he
would lay harsher and heavier things on them, till they were even in a manner
wasted and consumed withal.

labor to remove the same, (...). Gregor. Naz. orat. 22. Vt sublata caussa
tollatur effectus.
that the cause being taken away, the effect also may cease; and that Gods face
that is now turned from us, may be turned again toward us. For this should be
the end of our search, to discover what is amiss; and this the end of our
discovery, to amend and remove the evil discovered, either in our hearts or
in our lives. Dolose quaerit, qui timet invenire quod quaerit. Sunt enim qui
iniquitatem suam quasi conantur quaerere and timent invenire. Qui quia dolose
agebant ut invenirent, ubi invenerint, non oderunt. Si enim non dolose sed
sincere agerent, quod invenerunt odissent. Aug. in Psalm 35.
Otherwise our search is but vain and frivolous, and our inquiry unsincere.
Yea, better were it for us never to have been so forward to search, if we be
not as forward to redress, what upon search we have found to be otherwise than
well with us. It must needs aggravate wrath, when we are showed, or see what is
amiss, and are not careful to amend. Lam 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways, say they, and return unto the Lord: (as
DAVID of himself, Psalm. 119.59.
I considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy paths, where upon such
consideration, I found that I had swarved from them:) And then Lam 3.41.
Explorandum, Deplorandum, Implorandum. Alsted. System. Theol.
Let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto the Lord our God in heaven. As
if it were to no end for them to seek unto God by prayer, till they had pulled
down Esa. 59.2. Peccata sola separant inter homines and Deum. Aug. de pecc.
mor. l. 1. c. 20. Tollatur ergo de medio quod interest, and pax est. Bern. in
Cant. 4.
the partition wall that severed between them and him; and hindered their suits
from getting access to him, or obtaining success with him: until they had,
as searched out, so reformed and removed such evils, as upon their search had
presented themselves to their sight, and as came to view upon this their
surveigh. And indeed till this course be taken, Orans and non operans, iram
non placat, sed provocat. Gregor. mor. l. 18. c. 3.
it is to small purpose to pray. It is Sicut nullum proficit medicamentum, si
adhuc ferrum in eo sit; ita nihil proficit oration illius, cujus adhuc dolus in
mente, vel odium manet in pectore. Isidor. de sum. bon. l. 3. c. 7.
as if the person pricked or wounded should cry and call upon the Surgion to
have some ease of his pain, but would not endure to have the splinter or the
arrow-head pulled out that sticks fast in his flesh, and causes his grief:
or as if people should pray to God to stay the rage and fury of the burning,
when an house or town is on fire, and themselves the mean while power on
oil, or throw on fuel to the fire. This God himself notes, as the maine
cause of the continuance of his heavy hand upon his people, Ierem. 3.4, 5.
Thou criedst, says he, unto me; O my Father, and the Guide of my youth, Non
sic abibunt odio? vivaces aget Violentus iras animus? and saevus dolor Aeterna
bella pace sublata geret? Sen. Herc. fur. 1.1.
Will thou retain thy wrath always? will thou be angry for ever? This thou
sayedst; but thou did evil more and more still. And, Hosh. 7.14.
They houle to me on their beds for their corn and their wine: but they
rebel against me still. And again; Esa 9.12, 13.
Therefore is not the wrath of God yet turned away, but his hand is stretched
out still; because the people turn not to him that smites them; nor are
turned away from their sins. And surely so long indeed there is no hope of
prevailing with God; Psalm. ^6.18.
If I see iniquity in mine heart, says DAVID, (and Job 20.12, 13.
be loath to leave it;) or, If with my heart Aspicitur in cord iniquitas, cum
mentu oculis placet. Quae enim diligimus, libenter aspicere solemus. Ruffin. in
Psalm. 65. Quid est videre, nisi ind^sinenter intueri? non videre per judicium,
sed videre per appetitum. Gregor. mor. l. 22. c. 3. Conspicere ut acceptetur,
quod despici dignum est ut calcetur. Aug. in Psalm. 65.
I look after it, (as we are wont to look after such things as we love and
delight in, and are not willing to forgo;) the Lord will never hear any
prayer of mine that I make to him. As Olim offensum sentimus, nec placamus
Deum; nec amputamus causas morbi, ut morbus pariter auferatur. Hieron. epit.
Nepot. Medicus quando aegritudinem discutit, si curet quod per aliquam causam
factum est, and ipsam causam per quam factum est non c^ret, ad tempus videtur
mederi, sed causa manente morbus repetitur. Aug. in Joan 25. Purget humorem,
detrahat causam, and non erunt ulcera. Ibid.
the cause therefore of the disease must be removed, (and it can be dealt with
till it be discovered) ere there can be any sound cure of the disease, or such
as shall constantly continue: So our sins must be removed that turn Gods
face and favor from us, and withdraw his regard of us, ere we can hope to have
his carriage toward us altered for the better, or any end of our present
evils. Poenas peccaterum suorum plurimi perferunt; and intelligere causas
poenarum nemo dignatur. Causa est, quia and si jam aliqua patiamur, nondum
tamen patimur, qualiae meremur. Agnoscere nos Deus peccata nostra mavult quam
sustinere, and ostendere potius quid mereamur, quam infligere quod meremur.
Ille invitat ad veniam: nos cumulanus offensam. Vim Deo facimus iniquitatibus
nostris: iram in nos divinitatis armamus: Nolentem ulcisci cogimus; par^^e
volentem non permittimus. Salv de provid. lib. 5.
We enforce him to continue his hard dealing with us while we do otherwise, we
restrain him from doing that, that of himself otherwise he would do, and is
of himself in his own nature most ready and willing unto, did not we our
selves withhold him from it. So that while we continue still in our sins and
excesses, our own practice crosses and hinders the effect and fruit of our
prayers; and we are like those heathen, of whom the Cynicke observed, that
(...). Diogen. apud Laert. lib. 6. Quod and Democrit. apud Stob. cap. 18. (...).
they prayed indeed to their Gods for health; but at the very same time when
they so did, they used such excess as could not but greatly impair health,
and so wilfully deprived themselves of that that they prayed for.

Prove. 21.1.
our heart is not in our own hands, Ierem. 10.23.
nor is it in man's power to direct his own paths, Psalm. 90.11. Ier. 5.3. and
2.30.
nor are afflictions able of themselves to effect grace in us, or to work good
on us without the aid of Gods Spirit working together with them; we should be
earnest with God by prayer, that he will be pleased, Psalm. 25.4, 5. and 86.11.
and 94.12.
as he does correct us, so withal to instruct us; Psalm. 90.7, 8, 9, 12.
as he sends crosses, so that he would vouchsafe grace, whereby we may make a
good use of them, and Esa. 48.17.
learn to profit by them; as Job 10.2. Ier. 31.19.
to show and make known to us what he aims at in them, so to enable us in
some measure to do that which he requires of us; Ier. 31.18.
to turn us unto him, that he may return unto us.

Psalm. 25.4, 5, 7, 11, 16, 18, 20, 21. and 39.8, 10. and 41.4, 10.
deal with the Lord for the removal of the evil it self, be it outward or
inward. Ier. 29.12, 13, 14.
Then may we seek to him with good assurance of success, because we seek
him as we should; Esa. 58.9.
we may then praying hope indeed to be heard, those Lam. 3.44.
clouds of our iniquities being dispersed and dispelled, that before hindered
the passage of our prayers. In a word, thus we Ier. 18.8.
repenting of, and Ion. 3.10.
turning from our sins, that have turned God away from us, and Ier. 3.1.22.
returning to him that has hid his face from us, he will Psalm. 86.16.
turn again in mercy and goodness unto us, and Psalm. 80.19.
make the light of his countenance again to shine forth upon us; we Psalm.
22.27.
remembering our selves, Psalm. 9.18.
he will cease longer to forget us; Yea, he will begin Psalm. 25.7.
in mercy again to remember us, who Esa. 54.8. Lam. 5.20.
in wrath seemed to have forgotten us; and show that he so does to our comfort,
and the confusion of our foes, by Psalm. 41.10.
raising of us, and Psalm. 3.3.
lifting up our heads again, and Psalm. 41.11.
not suffering them to triumph over us, as formerly they have done.

FINIS.

