THE VANITY OF THOVGHTS DISCOVERED: WITH THEIR DANGER AND CVRE:

BY THO: GOODWIN, B. D.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. Dawlman, and L. Fawn, at the sign of the
Brazen Serpent in Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

The Contents of the Book.
THe Heart compared to a house of common resort, Page 1, 2. The Heart must be
washed, not swept only, 3, 4 We must not lie down with unclean Thoughts, 5, 6
The vanity of our Thoughts, 7, 8 What is meant by Thoughts, 8, 9, 12, 13, 15
Their frame, or how conceived, 15, 16 When ours, and not the devils, 16, 17,
18, 19 How evil thoughts oft-times are punishments of the neglect of our
Thoughts, 18, 19, etc. Vanity what; and how diversely taken, 20 1, For
unprofitablenesse, 20, 21 2. For lightness, 22, 23 3. For folly, 23 4. For
inconstancy and frailty, 23, 24 5. For wickedness and sinfulness, ^^ Thoughts
are sins, 25 7. Reasons for it. 1. The Law judges them so, 25 2. They are
capable of pardon 25 3. They are to be repented of, 26 4. They defile the man,
26, 27 5. They are abominable to the Lord, 27 6. They hinder all good, 27, 28
7. They are the first motioners of all evil, 28, 29
A Heart sanctified, will (out of all objects that are put into the Thoughts)
distill holy and useful medirations, 31, 32 The vanity and sinfulness of the
mind appears in an unwillingnesse to entertain holy meditations, 37 What a
hardness there is to holy meditations, 39, 40 How little while we are intent
in them, 41 Not steadfast, but like one looking on a Star through an
Optique-glasse, held with a Palsy hand, 43 We must watch, and that chiefly in
Prayer, 45, 46 The vanity of mind in good things, is, To think of them
unseasonably, 46, 47, 48 The difference of Christ's, and Adams, and our
Thoughts, 49 Of the positive vanity of our thoughts, and whereby it discovers
it self, 50, 51 And this is seen in 5. things. 1. It its Foolishness, 51 2.
In its Independency, 54 3. In its Curiosity, 62 4. In its taking thought to
fulfill the lusts of the flesh, 71 5. In its representing and acting over sins
in our thoughts, 74
This representation of our sins to our thoughts does 3. things, 1. It makes
the heart of man vain and empty, 76 2. It makes our desires impatient, 78 3.
It makes them sinful and corrupt, 79
The seeming comforts which men have in speculative enjoying of pleasures,
appear In three things, 1. In things present; 80 2, In things past, 83 3. In
things future, 8^
A sure way whereby to know our natural inclinations, 101, 102. The Uses of
the Discovery of the vanity of our Thoughts, 102 Use. 1. To be humbled for
them, 102, etc. The Reasons why we should be humbled for them, 104, 105 Use.
2. To make conscience of them, 109, 110 The Reasons why, 111, 112, etc.
Remedies against vain Thoughts, a p. 116 ad finem.
The Scriptures that are enlightened in this Treatise.
Genesis 6. 5. page 10. 40. 14. 10 Exodus 18. 18. 153 Deuteronomy. 6. 67. 121, etc. 1 Samuel
9. 5. 10, 11 2 Samuel 15. 4. 96 Job 6. 3. 106 17. 11. 41 20. 2, 3. 12 21. 1^. 38
Psalm. (...) 124, 125 50. 18. 96, 97 62. 9. 22 92. 1, 2, 5, 6. 34 138. 17. 21
139. 17. 126 144. 4. 23
Prove. 6. 14. 15, 119 6. 22. 13 16. 3 136 16. 30. 42 17. 22. 51, 52 30. 21.
102, 103
Eccles. ^. 1, 2, 3* page 20 9. 10. 132
Isay 32. 7. 72, 73 56. 12. 85 66. 18. 9
Jer. 31. 19. 103 Matthew. 13. 35. 118 15. 18. 71
Mark. 7. 22. ^, 21 13. 33. 45
Luke 10. 40 135 Acts 17. 21. 68 Rom 3* 19. 103 13. ult. 71
1 Cor. 4. 5. 116 Ephesians. 4. 26. 5 1 Timothy 5. 13. 132 Hebr. 12. 13. 53 Iam. 4.
13. 85
THE VANITY OF THOVGHTS.
JEREM. 4. 14. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?
IN these words he compares the heart unto some house of common resort, made
as it were with many and large rooms to entertain and lodge multitudes of
Guests in; into which, before conversion, all the vain, light, wanton,
profane, dissolute thoughts, that post up and down the World (as your
thoughts do) and run riot all the day, have free, open access, the heart
keeps open house to them, gives them willing, cheerful welcome, and
entertainment; accompanies, them, travels over all the world for the daintiest
pleasures to feed them with; Lodges, harbors them, and there they, like
unruly Gallants, and roysters, lodge, and revell it day and night, and defile
those rooms they lodge in, with their loathsome filth and vomits. How long,
says the Lord, shall they lodge therein? Whilst I with my Spirit, my Son,
and train of graces, stand at the door and knock, Rev. 3. 20. and cannot
find admittance; of all which filthiness, etc. the Heart this house must be
washed; wash thy heart from wickedness. Washed, not swept only of grosser
evils (as Matthew. 12. 43. the house, (the unclean spirit reenters into) is
said to be swept of evils that lay loose and uppermost) but washed, and
cleansed of those defilements which stick more close, and are incorporated, and
wrought in, into the Spirit. And 2. those vain and unruly guests must be
turned out of doors, without any warning, they have staid there long enough;
too long; How long? and the time past may suffice, as the Apostle speaks, they
must lodge there no more. The house, the soul is not in conversion to be pulled
down, but only these guests turned out; and though kept out they cannot be,
they will still enter whilst we are in these houses of clay, yet lodge they
must not: if thoughts of anger and revenge come in, in the morning or day time,
they must be turned out e're night, Let not the Sun go down upon your
wrath, Ephesians. 4. 26. For so you may come to lodge yet a worser guest in your
heart with them: Give not place to the Devil, (for it follows) who will bring
seven worse with him. If unclean thoughts offer to come to bed to thee, when
thou lie down, let them not lodge with thee. To conclude, it is not what
thoughts are in your hearts, and pass through them, as what lodging they have,
that does difference your repentance: many good thoughts and motions may pass,
as Strangers through a bad man's heart; and so likewise multitudes of vain
thoughts may make a thorow-fare of a believers heart, and disturb him in good
duties, by knockings and interruptions, and breakings in upon the heart of a
good man; but still they lodge not there; are not fostered, harbored.

My scope in our ordinary course is, to discover the wickedness and vanity of
the heart by nature: in the heart we are yet but in the upper parts of it, the
understanding, and the defilements thereof, which are to be washed out of it,
and the next defilement, which in my broken order I mean to handle, is that
which is here specified, the vanity of your thoughts: for the discovery sake of
which only, I chose this Text, as my ground; That is it, therefore, which I
will chiefly insist upon. A subject which, I confess, would prove of all else
the vastest. To make an exact particular discovery of the vanities in our
thoughts, to travel over the whole Creation, and to take a survey, and give an
account of all that vanity abounds in all the creatures, was (as you know) the
task of the wisest of men, Solomon; the flower of his studies and labors: But
the vanity of our thoughts, are as multiplied much in us; this little world
affoords more varieties of vanities, than the Great. Our thoughts made the
creatures subject to vanity, Romans 8. 20. therefore themselves are subject to
vanity much more. In handling of them I will show you, 1. What is meant by
Thoughts. 2. What by vanity. 3. That our thoughts are vain. 4. Wherein that
vanity does consist, both in the general, and some particulars.

First, what is meant by thoughts, especially as they are the intended subject
of this discourse, which in so vast an argument I must necessarily set limits
unto: 1. By thoughts, the Scriptures do comprehend all the internal acts of
the mind of man, of what faculty soever, all those reasonings, consultations,
purposes, resolutions, intents, ends, desires, and cares of the mind of man,
as opposed to our external words and actions, so Isay 66. 18. All acts are
divided into those two, I know their works and their thoughts: what is
transacted within the mind, is called the thoughts; what thereof do manifest
themselves, and break out in actions, are called works. And so Genes. 6. 5.
Every imagination of the thoughts, (omne figmentum) all the creatures the mind
frames within it self, purposes, desires, etc. (as it is noted in the margin)
are evil; where by thoughts are understood all that comes within the mind,
(as Ezech. 11. 5. the phrase is) and so indeed we vulgarly use it, and
understand it, so To remember a man, is, to think of him, Genesis 40. 14. to have
purposed a thing, we say, I thought to do it. To take care about a business,
is to take thought, 1 Samuel 9. 5. And the reason, why all may thus be called
the thoughts, is, because indeed all affections, desires, purposes, are stirred
up by thoughts, bred, fomented, and nourished by them: no one thought passes,
but it stirs some affection of fear, joy, care, grief, etc. No, although
they are thus largely taken here, yet I intend not to handle the vanity of them
in so large a sense at present: I must confine my self, as strictly as may be,
to the vanity of that, which is more properly called the thinking, meditating,
considering power of man, which is in his understanding or spirit, that being
the subject I have in hand: Thoughts not being in this sense opposed only to
your works, but unto purposes and intents, so Hebr. 4. 12. as the soul and
spirit, so thoughts and intents seem to be opposed. And Job 20. 2, 3.
Thoughts are appropriated to the Spirit of understanding. And again yet more
strictly, for in the understanding I mean not to speak of, generally, all
thoughts therein, neither, as not of the reasonings or deliberations in our
actions: but those musings only in the Speculative part.

And so, I can no otherwise express them to you, than thus. Those same first,
more simple conceits, apprehensions that arise; those fancies, meditations,
which the understanding by the help of fancy frames within it self of things;
those whereon your minds ponder and pore, and muse upon things, these I mean
by thoughts, I mean those talkings of our minds with the things we know, as
the Scripture calls it, Prove. 6. 22. those same parleys, enterviews, chattings,
the mind has with the things let into it, with the things we fear, with the
things we love. For all these things our minds make their companions, and our
thoughts hold them discourse, and have a thousand conceits about them; this I
mean by thoughts. For besides that reasoning power, deliberating power,
whereby we ask our selves continually, what shall we do? and whereby we
reason and discuss things, which is a more inward closet, the Cabinet and
privy council of the heart, there is a more outward lodging, that presence
chamber, which entertaines all comers, which is the thinking, meditating,
musing power in man, which suggesteth matter for deliberations, and
consultations, and reasonings, which holds the objects till we view them, which
entertaineth all that come to speak with any of our affections.

2. I add, which the mind frames within it self, so the Scripture expresses
their original to us, and their manner of rising, Prove. 6. 14. Frowardness is
in his heart, fabricatur, he forgeth mischief, as a Smith does Iron, hammers
it out: and the thoughts are the materials of this frowardness in us; upon
all the things which are presented to us, the mind begets some thoughts,
imaginations on them; and as lusts, so thoughts are conceived, James 1. Isay
59. 4. They conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity, and hatch Cochatrice
eggs, and weave Spiders webbes. And verse 7. he instanceth in thoughts of
iniquity, because our thoughts are spunne out of our own hearts, are eggs of
our own laying, though the things presented to us be from without.

And this I add to sever them from such thoughts as are injected, and cast in,
only from without* which are children of another begetting, and often laid
out of doors: such as are blasphemous thoughts cast in by Satan, wherein if
the soul be merely passive, (as the word Buffeting implies, 2 Cor. 12. 7.)
they are none of your thoughts, but his; wherein a man is but as one in a room
with another, where he hears another swear and curse, but cannot get out from
him; such thoughts, if they be only from without, defile not a man. For
nothing defiles a man, but what comes from within, Matthew. 15. 18, 19. or which
the heart has begotten upon it by the devil, as thoughts of uncleannes, etc.
Wherein though he be the father, yet the heart is the mother and womb; and
therefore accordingly they affect the heart, as natural children do, and by
that we may distinguish them from the other, namely, when we have a soft
heart, an inward love unto them, so that our hearts do kiss the child, then
they are our thoughts, or else when the heart broods upon these eggs, then
they are our thoughts, though they come from without.

Though this is to be added, that even those thoughts, wherein the soul is
passive, and which Satan casts in, which we do no ways own, wherein he
ravisheth the heart, rather than begets them on us, (if there be not any
consent to them in us, then it is but a Rape, as in law it is not) I yield
those thoughts are punishments often of neglect of our thoughts, and of our
suffering them to wander; as Dinah, because she went cunningly out, to view the
Daughters of the land, was taken and ravished, though against her will: yet it
was a punishment of her curiosity: or else they are the punishment of the
neglect of good motions of the spirit; which resisting, we thereby grieve him,
and so he deals with us, as we with our children, suffers us to be scared
with bugbeares, and to be grieved by Satan, that we may learn what it is to
neglect him, and harbor vanity. Lastly, I add, which the mind, in and by it
self, or by the help of fancy, thus begets and entertaines, because there are
no thoughts or likenesses of things at any time in our fancies, but at the same
time they are in the understanding also reflected unto it: As when two
Looking-glasses are placed opposite and nigh each to other, look what species
appears in the one, do also in the other.

Secondly, let us see what vanity is, take it in all the acceptations of it; It
is true of our thoughts that they are vain.

1. It is taken for unprofitableness. So Eccles. 1. 2, 3. All is vanity,
because there is no profit in them under the Sun, such are our thoughts by
nature, the wisest of them will not stand us in any stead in time of need, in
time of temptation, distress of conscience, day of death or Judgment, 1
Corin. 2. 6. All the wisdom of the wise comes to naught, Pro. 10. 20. The
heart of the wicked is little worth, not a penny for them all, whereas the
thoughts of a godly man are his treasure: Out of the good treasure of his
heart, he brings them forth. He mints them, and they are laid up as his
riches. Psalm. 138. 17. How precious are they? he there speaks of our thoughts
of God, as the object of them thy thoughts, that is, ( of thee) are precious.

2. Vanity is taken for lightness. Lighter than vanity is a phrase used,
Psalm. 62. 9. and whom is it spoken of? of men, and if any thing in them be
lighter than other, it is their thoughts which swim in the uppermost parts,
float at the top, is as the scum of the heart; when all the best and wisest,
and deepest, and solidest thoughts in Balthazar a Prince, were weighed, they
were found too light, Dan. 5. 17.

3. Vanity is put for folly. So Prove. 12. 11. Vain men, is made all one with
men void of understanding. Such are our thoughts among other evils which are
said to come out of the heart, Mark. 7. 22. (...) is reckoned as one,
foolishness, that is, thoughts that are such as mad men have, and fools,
nothing to the purpose, of which there can be made no use, which a man knows
not whence they should come, nor whither they would, without dependence.

4. It is put for Inconstancy, and frailty, therefore vanity and a shadow are
made Synonomaes, Psalm. 144. 4. such are our thoughts, flitting and perishing,
as bubbles, Ps. 146. 4 All their thoughts perish.

Lastly, they are vain, that is, indeed, wicked and sinful; vanity in the
Text here, is yoaked with wickedness: and vain men, and sons of Belial are
all one, 2 Chronicles. 13. 17. And such are our thoughts by nature. Prove. 24. 9. The
thought of foolishness is sin. And therefore a man is to be humbled for a
proud thought, Prove. 30. 32. For so laying hand on the mouth is taken, as Job
39. 37. for being vile in a man's own eyes.

And because this is the sense I chiefly must insist on, in handling the vanity
of the thoughts, and also men usually think that thoughts are free; I will
therefore prove this to you, which is the only Doctrine raised, that Thoughts
are sins.

1. The Law judges them, Hebr. 4. 12. rebukes a man for them, 1 Cor. 14. 25.
and therefore they are transgressions of the Law: and so also did Christ rebuke
the Pharisees for their ill thoughts, Mat. 9. 4. which argues the excellency of
the Law, that reaches thoughts.

2. Because they are Capable of pardon, and must be pardoned, or we cannot be
saved, Acts 8. 22. which argues the multitudes of Gods compassions, seeing
thoughts are so infinite.

3. They are to be repented of, yea repentance is expressed, as to begin at
them. So Esaias 55. 7. Let the unrighteous man for sake his thoughts; and a man
is never truly and thoroughly wrought on, (as 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.) till every
thought be brought into obedience; which argues that they are naturally
rebellious, and contrary to grace. And this also argues the Power of grace,
which is able to rule and to subdue so great an Army as our thoughts are, and
command them all, as one day it will do, when we are perfectly holy.

4. They defile the man: which nothing defiles but sin, Matt. 15. 15, 16, 17.
Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, these defile the man.

5. They are an abomination to the Lord, who hates nothing but sin, and whose
pure eyes can endure to behold no iniquity, Prove. 15. 16. as good Meditations
are acceptable, Psalm. 25. ult. so by the rule of contrary, bad are abominable.

6. They hinder all good we should do, and spoil our best performances.
Vain thoughts draw the heart away in them, that when a man should draw nigh to
God, his Heart, by reason of his thoughts, is far off from him, Esaias 29. 16.
A man's heart goes after his covetousness, when he should hear, as the
Prophet speaks, because his thoughts thus run. Now nothing else but sin
could separate, and what does estrange us from God, is sin, and enmity to him.

7. Our thoughts are the first motioners of all the evil in us. For they make
the motion, and also bring the heart and object together; are panders to our
lusts, hold up the object, till the heart has played the adulterer with it, and
committed folly, so in speculative uncleanness, and in other lusts, they hold
up the images of those gods they create, which the heart falls down and
worships; they present credit, riches, beauty, till the heart has worshipped
them, and this when the things themselves are absent.

To come now to those Particulars wherein this vanity of the thinking,
meditating power of the mind consists.

First, I will discover it in regard of thinking what is good, how unable and
loath, etc. it is to good thoughts; and secondly, in regard of the readiness of
it to think of evil and vain things.

For the first, first in a want of ability ordinarily, and naturally to raise
and extract holy and useful considerations and thoughts from all ordinary
occurrencies, and occasions; which the mind, so far as it is sanctified, is
apt unto. A heart sanctified, and in whose affections true grace is enkindled,
out of all Gods dealings with him, out of the things he sees and hears, out of
all the objects are put into the thoughts he distilleth holy, and sweet, and
useful meditations: and it naturally does it, and ordinarily does it, so far
as it is sanctified. So our Savior Christ, all speeches of others which he
heard, all accidents and occurrences did still raise and occasion in him
heavenly meditations, as we may see throughout the whole Gospels: when he came
by a well, he speaks of the Water of life, John 4, etc. Many instances might
be given; He in his thoughts translated the book of the creatures, into the
book of grace, and so did Adams heart in innocence: his Philosophy might be
truly termed Divinity, because he saw God in all; all raised up his heart to
thankfulness and praise: So now in like manner our minds, so far as they are
sanctified, will do. As the Philosophers-stone turns all Metals into Gold; As
the Be sucks honey out of every flower, and a good stomach sucks out some
sweet and wholesome nourishment out of what it takes unto it self: so does a
holy heart, so far as sanctified, convert and digest all into spiritual
useful thoughts; this you may see, Psalm 107. ult. That Psalm gives many
instances of Gods providence, and wonderful works which he does for the
sons of men; as deliverances by Sea, where men see his wonders: deliverance
to Captives, etc. and still the foot of the Song is, Oh that men would
therefore praise the Lord for the wonderful works he does for the sons of
men. Now after al these instances, he concludes, that though others pass over
such occurrences with ordinary slight thoughts, yet says he, The righteous
shall see it, and rejoice: that is, extract comfortable thoughts out of all,
which shall be matter of joy, and who so is wise will observe those things,
that is, makes holy observations out of all these, and out of a principle of
wisdom he understands Gods goodness in all, and so his heart is raised to
thoughts of praise, and thankfulness, and obedience. Now compare with this the
92. Psalm made for the Sabbath (when in imitation of God, who that day viewed
his works, we are, on our Lords day, still to raise holy praisefull thoughts
out of them to his glory, which he that penned that Psalm then did, verse. 1.
and 2. and) ver. 5. How great are thy works, etc! A brutish man knows not,
nor will a fool understand this: that is, he being a beast, and having no
sanctified principle of wisdom in him, looks no further than a beast into
all the works of God, and occurrences of things; looks on all blessings as
things provided for man's delight by God: but he extracts seldom holy
spiritual and useful thoughts out of all, he wants the art of doing it.

If injuries be offered us by others, what do our thoughts distill out of
those wrongs, but thoughts of revenge? we meditate how to requite it again.
But see how naturally David's mind distills other thoughts of Shemeis cursing, 2 Samuel 16. 11. God has bidden him, and it may prove a good sign of Gods favor.
God may requite good for it. When we see judgments befall others, severe
thoughts of censure our minds are apt to raise against our brother, as Jobs
friends did. But a godly man whose mind is much sanctified, raises other
thoughts out of it, Prove. 21. 22. Wisely considers, etc.

So when outward mercies befall us, the next thoughts we are apt to have, is
to project ease by our wealth, thou have goods for many years: and when
judgments befall us, we are apt to be filled with thoughts of complaint, and
fears, and cares how to wind out again. But what were the first thoughts Job
had, upon the news of the loss of all? God has given, and the Lord has
taken, blessed be the Lord for all.

Such thoughts as these (which all opportunities hint unto) a good heart is
apprehensive of, and does naturally raise for its own use. So far Barren as
our thoughts are, so far vain.

Secondly, the vanity, and sinfulness of the mind appears in a loathnesse
to entertain holy thoughts, to begin to set it self to think of God, and the
things belonging unto our peace; even as loath they are to this as
Schoole-boyes are to go to their Books, or to busy their minds about their
lessons, their heads being full of play; so loath are our minds to enter into
serious considerations, into to sad solemn thoughts of God, or death, etc. Men
are as loath to think of death, as thieves of the execution; or to think of
God, as they are of their Judge. So to go over their own actions, in a review
of them, and read the blurd writing of their hearts, and to commune with them,
at night in the end of the day, (as David did, Psalm. 119. 59.) men are as
loath to do this, as Schoole-boyes are to perse their lessons, and the false
Latins they have made, Job 21. Depart from us (say they in Job) unto God, from
their thoughts they meant it, for it follows, we desire not the knowledge of
thy ways. They would not think of him, or know them by their good wills; and
therefore our minds, like a bad stomach, are nauseated with the very scent of
good things, and soon casts them up again, Romans 1. 28. They like not to
retain the knowledge of God: let us go and try to wind up our souls, at any
time, to holy meditations, to think of what we have heard, or what we have
done, or what is our duty to do, and we shall find our minds, like the peggs
of an Instrument, slip between our fingers, as we are a winding them up, and
to fall down suddenly again, ere we are aware of it: yea you shall find,
that your minds will labor to shun what may occasion such thoughts; even as
men go out of the way, when they see they must meet with one they are loath to
speak withal; yea men dare not be alone, for fear such thoughts should
return upon them. The best shall find a gladness, for an excuse, by other
occasions to knock off their thoughts from what is good: whereas in thinking
of vain earthly things, we think the time passes too fast, clocks strike too
soon, hours pass away ere we are aware of it.

Thirdly, the vanity and sinfulness of the mind appears in the godly, that
though they entertain good thoughts, yet the mind is not, will not be long
intent on them. Some things there are, which we are, and can be intent upon,
and accordingly dwell long upon them, and therefore in Job 17. 11. The thoughts
are called the possessions of the heart, (so it is in the original, and noted
in the margin) such thoughts as are pleasing, the heart dwells on them; yea so
intent are we often, that they hinder our sleep: as it is said of wicked men,
They cannot sleep for multitude of thoughts, Eccles. 5. 12. So, to devise
froward things, Solomon says, Prove. 16. 30. That a man shuts his eyes, that
is, is exceeding attentive, poreth upon his plots; for so a man does use to do,
to shut his eyes when he would be intent, and therefore it is so expressed.
But now let the mind be occupied and busied about good things, and things
belonging to our peace, how unsteady is it? which things should yet draw out
the intention of the mind: For the more excellent the object is, the stronger
our intention should be. God is the most glorious object our minds can fasten
on, the most alluring. The thought of whom therefore should swallow up all
other, as not worthy to be seen the same day with him: But I appeal to all
your experiences, if your thoughts of him be not most unsteady, and are, (that
I may so compare it) as when we look upon a Star through an Optique glass,
held with a palsy shaking hand: It is long ere we can bring our minds to
have ken of him, to place our eyes upon him, and when we have, how do our
hands shake, and so loose sight ever and anon? So whilst we are in never so
serious talk with him, when all things else should stand without, and not dare
to offer entrance, till we have done with him, yet how many chinkes are there
in the heart, at which other thoughts come in? and our minds leave God, and
follow them, and go after our covetousness, our credit, etc. as the Prophets
phrase is, Ezech. 33. So when we are hearing the Word, how do our minds ever
and anon run out of the Church, and come (...) again, and so do not hear
half that is said? So when we are at our callings, which God bids us to be
conversant about with all our might, Eccles. 9. 10. yet our minds like idle
truants, or negligent servants, though sent about never so serious a business,
yet go out of the way to see any sport, run after the Hares that cross the
way, follow after Butter-flies that buzze about us.

And so when we come to pray, Christ bids watch to prayer, Mark. 13. 33. that
is, as if we were at every door to place a guard that none come in and
disturb (...) knock us off. But how often does the heart nod, and fall asleep,
and run into another world, as men in dreams do? Yea so natural are
distractions to us, when we are busied about holy duties, that as excrements
come from men, when very weak and sick, ere they are aware of it; so do
worldly thoughts from us, and we are carried out of that stream of good our
mind was running in, into some by creek ere we are aware of it.

Fourthly, the vanity of the mind appears, in regard of good things, that if
it does think of them, yet it does it unseasonably. It is with your thoughts
as with your speeches, their goodness lies in their placing and order, Prove.
25. 11. If fitly spoken, they are as Apples of Gold in pictures of silver. And
as a man is to bring forth actions, so thoughts in due season; as those fruits,
so these buds should come out in season, Psalm. 1. Now the vanity of the mind
appears in thinking of some good things, sometimes unseasonably; when you are
praying, you should not only have no worldly thoughts come in, but no other
than praying thoughts. But then happily some notions of, or for a Sermon will
come readily in: so in hearing, a man shall often have good thoughts that are
heterogeneall to the thing in hand; So when a man is falling down to prayer,
look what thing a man had forgotten, when it should have been thought of,
will then come in, or what will affect a man much comes in to divert him. This
misplacing of thoughts (suppose they be good) is yet from a vanity of the
mind; did those thoughts come at another time, they should be welcome: we
find our minds ready to spend thoughts about any thing, rather than what God
at present calls unto. When we go to a Sermon, we find we could then spend
our thoughts more willingly about reading; or happily searching our hearts;
unto which at another time, when called to it, we should be most unwilling to.
We could be content to run wild over the fields of meditations and
miscellanious thoughts, though about good, rather than to be tied to that
task, and kept in one set path.

In Adam and Christ no thought was misplaced, but though they were as many as
the Stars, yet they marched in their courses, and kept their ranks. But ours
as Meteors, dance up and dowve in us. And this disorder is a vanity and sin,
be the thought materially never so good. Not every one that has the best part
must therefore first step up the Stage to Act, but take his right cue. In
Printing, let the letters be never so fair, yet if not placed in their order,
and rightly comp^sed, they mar the sense. Soldiers upon no terms should
break their ranks: so nor should our thoughts, Prove. 16. 3. There is a promise
to a Righteous man, that (as some read it) his thoughts shall be ordered.

And so much for the first part, The privative sinfulness in our thoughts, in
respect of what is good.

Now secondly, I proceed to discover that positive vanity, which appears in
our thoughts; in regard of what is evil. And here it is not to be expected,
nor indeed can it be performed by any man, to reckon up the several
particularities of all those vain thoughts which run through man's heart; I
will insist only on some more general discoveries, to which particulars may
be reduced, for a taste of the rest.

First, the vanity of them discovers it self, in that which Christ calls,
Mark. 7. 22. (...) foolishness: that is, such thoughts as mad men have, and
fools; which foolishness is seen, both in that unsettled wantonness and
unstayednesse of the mind in thinking, that like quicksilver it cannot fix,
but as Solomon says, Prove. 17. 24. A fools eyes are in the ends of the earth,
are garish, and run up and down from one end of the earth to the other,
shooting and streaming, as those Meteors you see sometimes in the air. And
though indeed the mind of man is nimble and able thus to run from one end of
the earth to another, (which is its strength and excellency) yet God would not
have this strength and nimblenesse, and metall-spirit in curvetting and
tumbling, (as I may call it) but in steady directing all our thoughts straight
on to his glory, our own salvation, and the good of others; he gave it this
nimblenesse to turn away from evil, and the first appearance of it. As we are
to walk in Gods ways he calls us to, so every thought, as well as every
action is a step: and therefore ought to be steady, Make straight steps to
your feet, says the Apostle, Hebrews 12. 13. turning not to the right hand,
nor to the left, until we come to the journeys end of that business we are
to think of. But our thoughts, at best, are as wanton Spaniels, who though
indeed they go with, and accompany their Master, and come to their journeys
end with him in the end, yet do run after every Bird, and wildly pursue
every slock of sheep they see. This unsteadinesse, it arises from the like
curse on the mind of Man, as was on Caine, that it being driven from the
presence of the Lord, it proves a vagabond, and so men's eyes are in the ends of
the earth.

This foolishness or (...) is also seen in that Independence in our thoughts;
they hanging often together as ropes of sand; this we see more evidently in
dreams: And not only then, but when awake also, and that, when we would set
our selves to be most serious, how do our thoughts jangle and ring back-ward?
and as wanton Boys, when they take pens in their hands, scribble broken words
that have no dependence. Thus do our thoughts: and if you would but look over
the copies thereof, which you write continually, you would find as much
nonsense in your thoughts, as you find in mad men's speeches. This madness and
distemper is in the mind since the fall (though it appears not in our words,
because we are wiser) that if notes were taken of our thoughts, we should
find thoughts so vagrant, that we know not how they come in, nor whence they
came, nor whither they would. But as God does all things in weight, number, and
measure, so does his Image in us, so far as it is renewed. And, by reason of
these two, the folly, unsetlednesse, and independence of our thoughts, we
bring our thoughts often to no issue, to no perfection, but wilder away our
time in thinking (as you use to say) of nothing, and as Seneca says of men's
lives, as of Ships that are tossed up and down at Sea, it may be said they have
been tossed much, but sailed nothing; The like in this respect may be said of
the thoughts: Or as when men make imperfect dashes, and write nonsense, They
are said to scribble, they do not write: So, in these follies and
independencies, we wilder and lose our selves, we do not think.

But 2. on the contrary if any strong lust, or violent passion be up, then our
thoughts are too fixed and intent, and run in so far into such sinful
objects, that they cannot be pulled out again, or any way diverted or taken
off: which is another vanity. For our thoughts and our understanding part was
ordained to moderate, allay, and cool, and take off our passions, when they
are a playing over, to rule and govern them. But now our thoughts are
themselves subjected to our affections, and like fuel put under them, do but
make them boil the more. And although our thoughts do first stir up our
fears, joys, desires, etc. yet these being stirred up once, chain, and fix,
and hold our thoughts to those objects, so as we cannot loosen them again.
Therefore says Christ to his Disciples, Why are you troubled, and why do
thoughts arise in your hearts: For perturbations in the affections cause
thoughts like fumes and vapors to ascend. Thus if a passion of fear be up,
how does it conjure up multitudes of ghostly thoughts which we cannot conjure
down again, nor hide our eyes from? But which haunt us, and follow us up and
down, where ever we go, so as a man runs away pursued by his own
thoughts, the heart then meditates on terror: As Isay 33. 18. So when sorrow
is up, how does it make us study the cross that lights upon us? which to
forget, would be an ease unto the mind. But a man's passions makes his thoughts
to con it, and to say it by heart, over and over again, as if it would not
have us forget it. So when love and desire is up, be the thing what it will,
we are taken with, as preferment, credit, beauty, riches, it sets our thoughts
aworke to view the thing all over, from top to toe (as we say) to observe
every part and circumstance, that does make it amiable unto us: as if a picture
were to be drawn of it. So when joy is up, we view the thing we rejoice in,
and read it over and over, as we do a Book we like, and we mark every
tittle, we are punctual in it; yea so inordinate are we herein, as often we
cannot sleep for thinking on them. Eccles. 5. 12. Abundance of riches will not
suffer him to sleep, for the multitude of thoughts in his head, speaking of a
man who is covetous: how do thoughts trouble the Belshazzers and
Nebuchadonezers of the world? Dan. 4. 19. so Proverbs 4. 16. They sleep not
unless they have done mischief; if their desires remain unsatisfied, they
do disturb their thoughts, like froward children by their crying: so as,
often, these which men count free (as the most do thoughts) do prove the
greatest bondage and torment in the earth unto them, and do hinder sleep, the
nurse of nature, eat out, and live upon the heart that bred them, weary the
spirits, that when a man shall say (as Job 7. 13.) My bed shall comfort me, by
putting a parenthesis to his thoughts, and sad discourses, which he has when
awake, yet then they haunt a man; and as verse. 14. terrify him. A man cannot
lay them aside as he does his cloak: and when men die they will follow them to
hell, and torment them worse there; your thoughts are one of the greatest
executioners there, even the worm that dies not.

Thirdly, the vanity of the mind appears in curiosity, a longing and itching
to be fed with, and to know (and then delighting to think of) things that do
not at all concern us. Take an experiment of this in Scholars (whose chief
work lies in this shop) how many precious thoughts are spent this way? as in
curiosity of knowledge, as appears by those the Apostle often rebukes, that
affect, as 1 Timothy 6. 4, 20. oppositions of science falsely so called
curiosities of knowledge of things they have not seen. So Coloss. 2. and 1 Timothy 4. 7. he calls such issues of men's brains, they dote on, old wives
fables: because as fables please old wives, so do these their minds, and of
that itch they have in them, even as women with child, in their longings,
content not themselves with what the place affords, or the season, with what
may he had; but often long after some unheard of rarity, far fetched, or, it may
be, not at all to be had: Thus men not contenting themselves with the wonders
of God discovered in the depth of his Word and Works, they will launch into
another Sea, and world of their own making, and there they sail with
pleasure, as many of the Schoolmen did in some of their speculations,
spending their precious wits in framing curious webs out of their own bowels.

Take another instance also in others, who have leisure and parts to read
much, they should ballast their hearts with the Word, and take in those more
precious words of wisdom and sound knowledge to profit themselves and others,
and to build up their own souls, and whereby they may be enabled to serve
their Country: but now what do their curious fancies carry them unto, to be
versed in, but Play-books, jearing Pasquils, Romanses, fained stays, which are
the curious needle-worke of idle brains, so as they load their heads with Apes
and Peacocks feathers, in stead of pearls and precious stones; so as a man may
say as Solomon Prove. 15. 14. The heart of him that has understanding seeks
knowledge, but the mouth of fools feeds on foolishness. Foolish discourses
please their ears and eyes to read: all these being but purveiors (as it
were) for food, for the thoughts, like Camelions men live on air and wind.

To leave them, how do others out of mere curiosity to know and please their
thoughts, listen after all the news that flies up and down the world, scum all
the froth that floats in foolish men's mouths, and please themselves only with
talking, thinking, and hearing of it.

I do not condemn all herein: some their ends are good, and they can make use
of it, and do as Nehemiah did, who inquired how things went at Jerusalem, to
rejoice with Gods people, and mourn with them, and pray for them, and to know
how to fashion their prayers accordingly. But I condemn that curious itch that
is in men, when it is done, but merely to please their fancies, which is much
delighted with new things, though they concern us not; such the Athenians
were, Acts 17. 21. How do some men long all the week, till they hear events
and issues, and make it a great part of the happiness of their lives, to study
the state more than their own hearts, and affairs of their callings: who take
actions of State as their text to study the meaning of, and to preach on
wherever they come. I speak of those that yet lay not to heart* the miseries
of the Church of Christ, nor help them with their prayers, if at any time they
happen.

The like curiosity is seen in many, in desiring to know the secrets of other
men, which yet would do them no good to know, and who do study men's actions
and ends, not to reform, or do good to them, but to know them, and think and
muse thereof, when alone, with pleasure; this is curiosity, and properly a
vanity of the thinking power, which it mainely pleases; and is indeed a great
sin, when much of men's most pleasing thoughts are spent on things concern them
not. For the things we ought to know, and which do concern us, are enough to
take up all our thoughts alone, neither shall we have any to spare: and
thoughts are precious things, the immediate fruits and buds of an immortal
nature; and God has given us power to coin them, to lay them out in things
concern our own good, and of our neighbors, and his own glory; and thus not
to spend them is the greatest waste in the world; examine what Corn you put in
to grind, for God ought to have toll of all. Prover. 24. 8. He that devises
evil shall be called a mischievous person, not always he that does a
mischievous action, but that devises it: and verse 9. he aggravates it, a
minori, for every thought is sin, then a combination and conspiracy of wicked
thoughts is much more.

But 4. there is a worse vanity than this, and that is that intimated Romans 13.
ult. Taking thought to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, (...) [To make projects
for it.] For thoughts are the Caterers for our lusts, and lay in all their
provision, they are they that look out where the best markets are, the best
opportunities for sinning in any kind, the best bargains for credit, for
preferment; for riches, etc. For example, would a man rise? his thoughts study
the art of it, men frame their own ladder to climb withal, invent ways how
to do it, though often it proves as to Haman their own Gallows. Would they
be rich? what do they study? even all cheats and tricks on the Cards, (as I
may so speak) that is, all the cunning tricks of the world, all the ways of
oppressing, defrauding, and going beyond their brethren, so to pack things in
all their dealings, that they themselves shall be the winners, and those that
deal with them, the losers, Isay 32. 7. It is said, that the Instruments of
the churlish are evil, and he devises wicked devices to destroy the poor:
would a man undermine his opposite, as one that stands in his light, and who
hinder his credit? he will dig and fall a pioning, with his thoughts, his
engines, in the night, dig a pit, as the Scripture phrase is, and dig deep to
hide his counsel, to blow him up in the end, and so as he shall not know who
hurt him; and this is worse than all the former, this studied artificial
villainy. The more devising there is in sin, the worse: therefore the fact
about Vriah, not so much that of Bathsheba, is objected against David, because
he used art in it; he took thought for it, but in the matter of Bathsheba,
thoughts took him.

Fifthly, the fifth is the representing or acting over sins, in our thoughts
and imaginations, personating those pleasures by imagination, which at present
we enjoy not really, faining and imagining our selves to act those sinful
practices we have not opportunity outwardly to perform: speculative
wickedness Divines do call it, which to be in the power of imagination to
do; is evident to you by your dreams; when fancy plays its part most, and to
allude to what the Prophet says, makes us believe we eat when we are an
hungry, to drink when our souls are thirsty. Isay 29. 8. But I mean not to
speak of the power and corruption of it; as in our dreams: it were well if,
as the Apostle speaks of Drunkenness, that this speculative wickedness were
only in the night. But corrupt and distempered affections do cast men into
such dreams in the day, and when they are awake, there are then (to borrow the
Apostles expression) filthy dreams, Jude 8. that defile the flesh, even when
awake: when, their lusts wanting work, their fancy erects to them a stage,
and they set their imaginations and thoughts a work to entertain their filthy
and impure desires, with shows and plays of their own making, and so reason
and the intention of their minds, sit as spectatours all the while to view
with pleasure, till their thoughts inwardly act over their own unclean
desires, ambitious projects, or what ever else they have a mind unto.

So vain and empty is the heart of man become, so impatient are our desires
and lusts of interruption in their pleasures, so sinful and corrupt.

First, vain and empty it appears to be in this; for take all the pleasures
of sin, when they are never so fully, solidly, really, and substantially
enjoyed, they are but shadows, a mere outside and figure, as the Apostle calls
the world. It is opinion of imagination that casts that varnish of goodness on
them, which is not truly in them. So Felix and Bernices pomp is te^^ed (...);
but now this speculative enjoying of them only in imagination, (which many
men's hearts take so much pleasure in,) the pleasing our selves in the bare
thoughts and imaginations of them, this is but a shadow of these shadows, that
the soul should Ixion-like embrace and commit adultery with clouds only; this
is a vanity beyond all other vanities, that makes us vainer than other
creatures, who, though subject to vanity, yet not to such as this.

Secondly, it argues our desires to be impatient, to be detained from, or
interrupted of their pleasures. When the soul shall be found so greedy, that
when the heart is debarred or sequestered from those things it desires, and
wants means or opportunities to act its lusts, as not being to stay, it will
at least enjoy them in imagination, and in the interim, set fancy to
entertain the mind with empty pictures of them drawn in its own thoughts.

3. Thus they appear also to be exceeding sinful and corrupt; an outward act
of sin, it is but as an act of whoredom with the creature, when really
enjoyed: But this is Incest, when we defile our souls and spirits with these
imaginations and likenesses which are begotten in our own fancies, being the
children of our own hearts.

And yet (my brethren) such speculative enjoying of pleasures, and acting over
of sins the mind of man is full of, as will appear in many particulars.

First, look what comforts men have at present in their possession, and at
command, what excellencies or endowments, men love to be alone to study, and
think of them, and when they are sequestered from the present use of them, yet
they will then be again and again recounting and casting of them up, taking
a survey of their happiness in them, applauding their own hearts in their
conditions. And as rich men, that love money, love to be looking on it, and
telling it over; so do men to be summing up their comforts and privileges they
enjoy, which others want; as, how rich they are, how great, how they excel
others in parts and gifts, etc. Oh how much of that precious sand of our
thoughts run out this way! Thus he in the Gospel, he keeps an audit in his
heart; Soul (says he) thou have goods laid up for many years. So Haman,
Ester. 5. 11. takes an Inventory of his honors and goods, he talks of all the
glory of his riches, and all the things wherein the King had promoted him. So
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 30. as it may seem, he was alone walking and talking
to himself, like a fool, saying to himself; Is not this the great Babell
which I have built by the might of my power, for the glory of my Majesty.

And as thus upon their comforts, so also upon their excellencies, as their
learning, wisdom, parts, etc. Men love to stand looking upon these in the
glass of their own speculation, as fair faces love to look often and long
in Looking-glasses: which, as it arises from that selfe-flattery is in men; so
also that they might keep their happiness still fresh and continued in their
eye; which thoughts, when they raise not up the heart to thankfulness to God,
and are not used to that end, but are bellows of pride; they are vain and
abominable in the eyes of God, as appears by Gods dealing with those
forementioned; for to the one he says, Thou fool, this night; the other,
whilst the word was in his mouth, (giving him no longer warning) he strikes
with madness and brutishness: and Haman, you know, was like a Wall that does
swell before it breaks, and falls to ruin and decay.

Secondly, this speculative enjoying of pleasures, and acting over sins thus
in fancy, does appear in regard of things to come; which when we have in
view, or any hopes of men's thoughts go forth before to meet them, with how much
contentment do men's thoughts entertain their desires, with vain promisings
and expectations aforehand of their pleasures, that are in view and in
possibility to be enjoyed. So they in Esaias wind up their hearts to a higher
pin of jollity in the midst of their cups, in that their hearts thought and
promised them, To morrow shall be as to day, and much more abundant, Isay 56.
12. So they, James 4. 13. they say with themselves, We will go to such a
City, and continue there a year, and get gain. And the promise of this, and
the thoughts of it aforehand feeds them, and keeps up their hearts in
comfort. When men rise in a morning, they begin to forethinke with much
pleasure, what carnal pleasures they have the advousion and promise of that
day or week, as to go to such company, and there be merry; to go such a
pleasant journey, enjoy satisfaction in such a lust, hear such news, etc. And
thus as godly men live by faith in Gods promises, Hab. 2. 4. Isay 38. 16. By
these men live, and this is the spirit of my life, says Hezechiah, even what
God has spoken, verse. 15. So do carnal men live much upon the promises of
their own hearts and thoughts aforehand, (for to this head of vain thoughts,
these vain promisings are to be reduced, Psalm. 49. 11. Their inward thought
is, their houses shall continue for ever, and this thought pleases them:) what
pleasure almost is there, which a man makes much account of, but he acts it
first over in private in his own thoughts? and thus do men foolishly take
their own words and promises, and so befoole themselves in the end, as Jeremy
speaks, Ierem. 17. They take up beforehand in their thoughts upon trust, the
pleasures they are to enjoy, even as spend-thrifts do their rents, or Heirs
their revenews before they come of age to enjoy their lands, that when they
come indeed to enjoy the pleasures they expected, either they prove but
dreams, as Isay 29. 6. they find their souls empty; or so much under their
expectation, and so stale, as they have little in them, that there still proves
more in the imagination than in the thing, which arises from the vastness and
greediness of men's desires, as the cause hereof; for that makes them swallow up
all at once. So Hab. 2. Enlarging his desires as Hell, he heaps up all
Nations, swallows them up in his thoughts. So an ambitious Scholar does all
preferments that are in his view.

Thirdly, this speculative wickedness is exercised in like manner toward
things past, in recalling namely, and reviving in our thoughts the pleasure of
sinful actions passed; when the mind runs over the passages and
circumstances of the same sins long since committed, with a new and fresh
delight; when men raise up their dead actions long since buried, in the same
likeness they were transacted in, and parley with them, as the Witch and Saul
did with Satan in Samuels likeness. And whereas they should draw cross lines
over them, and blot them out through faith in Christ's blood, they rather copy
and write them over again in their thoughts, with the same contentment. So an
unclean person can study and view over every circumstance passed in such an
act, with such a person committed; so a vaineglorious Scholar does repeat in
his thoughts an eminent performance of his, and all such passages therein as
were most elegant. And thus men chew the cudd upon any speech of commendation
uttered by others of them. And all this even as a good heart does repeat good
things heard or read, with the remembrance also of what quickness they had in
such and such passages, and with what affections they were warmed, when they
heard them; or as a godly man recalls with comfort the actions of a well-past
life, as Hezechiah did, Lord I have walked before thee with a perfect heart;
and thereby do also stir and provoke their hearts to the like temper again:
So on the contrary, do wicked men use to recall, and revive the pleasingest
sinful passages in their lives, to suck a new sweetness out of them: Then
which nothing argues more hardness and wickedness of heart, or provokes God
more. For,

First, it argues much wickedness of heart, and such as when it is ordinary
with the heart to do thus, is not compatible with grace: for in the 6. of the
Romans, ver. 12. the Apostle shows that a good heart uses to reap no such
fruit of sinful actions past, But what fruit had you of those things whereof
ye are now ashamed? The Saints reap and distill nothing out of all those
flowers, but shame and sorrow, and sad sighs: when Ephraim remembered his sin,
he was ashamed, and repented; and can thou in thy thoughts, reap a new
harvest and crop of pleasure out of them, again and again?

Secondly, it argues much hardness of heart; nothing being more opposite to
the truth and practice of repentance, the foundation of which is to call to
mind the sin with shame and sorrow, and to recall it with much more grief,
than ever there was pleasure in the committing of it: and whose property is to
hate the appearance of it, and to inflame the heart with Zeal and revenge
against it. And thereby it provokes God exceedingly, our hearts are thereby
embrued in a new guilt, we thereby stand to, and make good our former act:
even so, by remembering it with pleasure, we provoke God to remember it with a
new detestation of it, and so to send down new plagues; who, if we recall it
with grief, would remember it no more: we show we take delight to rake in
those wounds we have given Christ already; to view the sins of others with
pleasure, Romans 1. ult. is made more than to commit them: But much more to view
and revive our own with a fresh delight: and therefore know that how-ever you
may take delight here to repeat to your selves your old sins, yet that in Hell
nothing will gall you more, than the remembrance of them; every circumstance in
every sin will then be as a dagger at thy heart. This was the rich man's task
and study in Hell, to remember the good things he had received, and his sins
committed in the abuse of them. And if godly men here be made to possess the
sins of their youth with horror, as Job, and to have them ever before them,
as David, how will wicked men be continually affrighted with them in hell?
whose punishment is in a great part set forth to us, by this Psalm 50. 20. I
will set them in order before thee.

Fourthly, the fourth thing wherein this speculative vanity appears, is in
acting sins upon mere imaginary suppositions men faigne, and contrive to
themselves, and make a supposition to themselves in their own thoughts, first
of what they would be, and then what they would do. Men create fools
paradises to themselves, and then walk up and down in them; as, if they had
money enough, what pleasures they would have; if they were in such places of
preferment, how they would carry themselves. To allude to that Absalom said, 2 Samuel 15. 4. Oh if I were a Judge in the Land, I would do this or that, etc.
doing this with a great deal of pleasure, almost as much as those that really
enjoy them. This may well be the meaning of that Psalm 50. 18. where of the
hypocrite (who outwardly abstaines from gross sins) it is said, that he
consents with the thief, and partaketh with the adulterer, namely, in his
heart and fancy, supposing himself with them, and so desires to be doing what
they do. Thus take one who is naturally ambitious (whom both nature, parts and
education have all made, but a Bramble never to rule over the trees, and has
fixed in a lower sphere, as incapable of rising higher or being greater, as the
earth is of becoming a Star in Heaven, yet) he will take upon him in his
own heart, faining and supposing himself to be, and then act the part of a
great man there, erect a throne, and sit down in it; and thinks with himself
what he would do, if a King or a great Man, etc. So take a man that is
unclean, but now grown old, and a dry tree, and so cannot act his lust as
formerly, yet his thoughts shall supply what is wanting in his strength or
opportunity. And he makes his own heart both Bawd, Brothel house, Whore,
Whoremonger, and all: so a man that is naturally voluptuous, loves pleasures,
but wants means to purchase them, yet his inclinations will please themselves
with the thoughts of what mixture and composition of delights he would have;
he will set down with himself his Bill of fare, how he would have, if he
might wish, his cup of pleasure mingled, what ingredients put into it. So a man
that is revengefull, and yet wants a sting, yet he pleases himself with
revengefull thoughts and wishes, and will be making invectives and railing
dialogues against him, he hates, when he is not by. A man in love, in his
fancy he will court his Paramour though absent, he will by his imagination
make her present, and so frame solemn set speeches to her.

In a word, let men's inclinations and dispositions be of what kind so ever,
and let the impossibilities and improbabilities be never so great of being what
they desire; yet in their fancies and thoughts they will discover themselves
what they would be. Totumque quod esse desiderant sibi apud semetipsos
cogitationibus depingunt, men will be drawing Maps of their desires, calculate
their own inclinations, cut out a condition of life which fills their hearts,
and they please themselves withal: and there is no surer way to know a man's
natural inclination, than by this.

First, which yet first is as great a folly as any other, imitating children
herein; for is it not childish to make clay pies, and puppets? what else are
such fancies as these? and to be as children acting the parts of Ladies and
Mistresses, and yet such childishness is in men's hearts.

2. And secondly, a vanity also, because a man sets his heart on what is not:
the things themselves are not, if a man had them, Prove. 23. 5. but to please
themselves with suppositions is much worse.

Thirdly, this argues the greatest incontentation of mind that may be, when
men will in their own thoughts put themselves into another condition than God
ever ordained for them.

Use. 1.
HAving discovered the vanity of your thoughts and your estates thereby, be
humbled for them; This I ground upon, Proverbs 30. 21. where Agur teaches us
to humble our selves as well for thoughts as actions. If thou have done
foolishly in lifting up thy self, or if thou have thought evil, lay thine
hand upon thy mouth. Now as smiting upon the thigh is put for repentance and
shame and sorrow in Ephraim, Ierem. 31. 19. so is laying the hand upon the
mouth put for greater and deeper humiliation, as arguing full conviction of
ones guilt, Romans 3. 19. Every mouth must be stopped. Having nothing to say, not
to plead and excuse, that thoughts are free, and it is impossible to be rid of
them, etc, but as Ezechiel, 16. 65. To remember and to be confounded, and
never to open thy mouth more! to be vile, and not to answer again, as Job 39.
27, 28. this is to lay thy hand on thy mouth, that is, to humble thy self.

And indeed there is much cause, for your thoughts they are the first begotten,
and eldest sons of original sin, and therefore the strength of it, as Jacob
called Reuben the firstborn; yea also, and the Parents and begetters of all
other sins, their brethren; The first plotters and contrivers, and
Achitophels, in all the treasons and rebellions of our hearts and lives; the
bellows and incendiaries of all inordinate affections; the Panders to all our
lusts, that take thought to provide for the satisfying of them; the disturbers
in all good duties, that interrupt and spoil and flyblow all our prayers, that
they stink in the nostrills of God.

And if their heinousness will nothing move you, consider their number, for
they are continually thus: which makes our sins to be in number more than the
sands: the thoughts of Solomon's heart were as the Sand, and so ours; not a
minute, but as many thoughts pass from us, as in a minute sands do in an
Houre-glasse. So that suppose, that taken severally, they be the smallest and
least of your sins, yet their multitude makes them more and heavier than all
your other. Nothing smaller than a grain of Sand, but if there be a heap of
them, there is nothing heavier, Job 6. 3. My grief is heavier than the Sand.
Suppose they be in themselves, but as Farthing-tokens, in comparison of gross
defilements: yet because the Mint never lies still, sleeping nor waking,
therefore they make up the greatest part of that treasure of wrath which we
are a laying up: and know that God will reckon every Farthing, and in thy
punishment bate thee not one vain thought. And that God looks upon our
thoughts thus, see but the indictment he brings in against the old world; which
stands still upon record, Genesis 6. when he pronounced that heavy judgment of
destroying the old world, does he allege their murders, adulteries, and
gross defilements chiefly as the cause? Their thoughts rather; which because
so many, and so continually evil, provoked him more than all their other
sins. Go down therefore into thy heart, and consider them well, to humble
thee, to make thee vile, and if in one room such a treasure of wickedness be
found laid up, what in all those other Chambers of the belly, as Solomon calls
them? consider them to humble thee, but not for all this their multitude to
discourage thee. For God has more thoughts of mercy in him, than thou have had
of rebellion, Psalm. 40. 5. Thy thoughts to usward, (speaking of thoughts of
mercy) are more than can be numbered. Thou begannest but as yesterday to think
thoughts of rebellion against him, but his thoughts of mercy have been from
everlasting, and reach to everlasting: and therefore in Esaias 55. verse. 7.
having made mention of our thoughts, let the unrighteous man forsake his
thoughts, and he will have mercy on him; because this objection of the
multitude might come in to discourage men from hopes of mercy, therefore
purposely he adds, he will multiply to pardon; and to assure us that he
has thoughts of mercy to outvie ours of sin, he adds, for my thoughts
exceed yours, as Heaven does the earth.

Use 2.
LEt us make for ever conscience of them, so Job did, Job 31. 1. I made a
convenant with mine eyes, why should I think upon a Maid? Solomon gives in
especial charge, above all keeping, keep thy heart, Prove. 4. 23.

First, thou art to keep the Lords day holy, thy self unspotted of the World.
To keep thy brother, to keep all the Commandments, but above all to keep
thy heart, and in it, thy thoughts; for this is the Great Commandment, because
it extends it self (as the foundation) unto them all: for as in the same
Commandment where murder is forbidden, a malicious thought is also, and so of
the rest; So in keeping the thoghts, thou virtually keep all the
Commandments: as original sin is said to be forbidden in all the
Commandments, so are thy thoughts taken order for in all.

Secondly, out of it are issues of life; thoughts and affections are the
spring, speeches and actions the stream: as are our thoughts, so are our
affections; for these are the bellows: so also our prayers, so all, for they
are in the soul as the spirits in the body, they run through all, move all,
act all.

Thirdly, if you look to God, our thoughts are that spot of ground, which he
proclaims himself sole Lord of, and makes it one of his greatest titles, that
he knows them, and judges them. Kings attempt to rule your tongues, to bind
your hands, and rule your actions; but God only your thoughts. By them we
chiefly sanctify him in our hearts, by them we walk with God, and shall we
not make conscience of them?

Fourthly, if you look to the work and power of grace, wherein lies it, But
in bringing every thought into obedience? 2 Cor. 11. 4. This is the glory of
our religion above all other in the world: wherein lies the difficulty of it,
the strictness of it, what makes it so hard a task? but the observing and
keeping the thoughts in bounds: wherein lies the difference between sincere
hearted Christians and others? but the keeping of our thoughts, without which
all Religion is but bodily exercise. Papists may mumble over their prayers,
hypocrites talk, but this is godliness.

Fifthly, if we look to things we have a care of; if we have a care of
speeches, because Christ has said, we shall answer for every idle word; why
not also for the same reason, should we have a care of thoughts? which are the
words of the mind, only they want a shape, to be audible to others, which
the tongue gives them, for which you must answer as well as for words, Heb. 4.
12. 1 Cor. 4. 5. If you be careful what companions you have, and whom you
lodge in your houses, and who lie in your bosoms, then much more of your
thoughts, which lodge in your hearts, which are not yours, but Gods houses;
built for himself, and for Christ and his Word to dwell in: seeing also the
things you think of have the most near intimate fellowship and converse with
you. And therefore when you think of the Word, it is said to talk with you,
Pro. 6. If you be careful of what you eat, because such blood you have, etc.
then be careful what you think, thoughts being Pabulum animae, as Tully calls
them. Thy words did [I eate] says Jeremiah, speaking of meditating on it.

Sixthly, if you look to the issue of things: what shall be the subject of
that great inquest at the Day of Judgment? the thoughts and councels, 1 Corin.
4. 5. And after the Day of Judgment, men's thoughts shall prove their greatest
executioners: what are the cords God lashes you with to all eternity? your own
thoughts; thoughts accusing, whereby you study over every sin; and every one
will be as a dagger, Isay 33. 18. the Hypocrites torment, is to meditate
terrors, to study Gods wrath, and the Saints blessedness, and their own
sins and misery.

Remedies against vain Thoughts.
THe first is to get the heart furnished and enriched with a good stock of
sanctified and heavenly knowledge in spiritual and heavenly truths: For a good
man (says Christ) has a good treasure in his Heart, Matt. 13. 35. that is,
he has all graces, so many precious truths which are as Gold in the Ore,
which his thoughts, as the Mint, does coin and beat out, and which words bring
forth. A good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good
things. If therefore there be not Mines of precious truths hid in the heart,
no wonder if our thoughts coin nothing but dross, frothy vain thoughts, for
want of better materials which should feed the Mint, are wanting. Therefore
Solomon says, Wicked men forge, mint, or hammer wickedness, Pro. 6. 14. so
Iunius reads it: or if men have store of natural knowledge, and want
spiritual useful knowledge, to themselves; although in company with others,
they may bring forth good things in speeches, yet when alone, their thoughts
run not on them. For this, take a place of Scripture, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. which
shows, that laying up the Word in the heart, and being much conversant in it,
and getting knowledge out of it, is an effectual means to keep our thoughts
well exercised when we are alone: for the end why these words are commanded to
be laid up in the heart, ver. 5, 6. is, as to teach them to others, so, to
take up our thoughts when we are most retired, and alone, and when a man can
do nothing, but barely exercise his mind, in thinking; for when a man is a
riding, or walking, or lying down, and rising up, (which are often and usually
our most retired times for thoughts, and are wholly spent in them, for many
ride alone, and lie alone, etc.) yet then, says he, thou shall talk of the
Word: which command he that is alone cannot do, therefore the talking there
meant is not only (...), outward conference with others (though intended) as
to talk to thy bedfellow of it, and to thy companion: but suppose thou have
none, then to talk of it to thy self, for thoughts are (...), talking of the
mind; and so comparing Prove. 6. 22. with this place (which will fitly
interpret it) it appears; for Solomon exhorting to the same duty of Binding
the Word to the heart, uses this motive, which is the fruit thereof, That when
thou awakest, it shall talk with thee, that is, by thy thinking of it, it will
talk with thee when thou and it art alone: So as thou shall not need a better
companion, it will be putting in and suggesting some thing.

Secondly, endeavor to preserve and keep up lively, holy, and spiritual
affections in thy heart, and suffer them not to cool; Fall not from thy first
love, nor fear, nor joy in God; or if thou have grown remiss, endeavor to
recover those affections again. For such as your affections are, such
necessarily must your thoughts be: and they incline the mind to think of such
or such objects as will please them, rather than others; therefore says David,
Psalm. 119. 97. How do I love thy Law! it is my meditation day and night. It
was his love to it made him think of it so frequently. So Mal. 3. 16. Those
that feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name, are joined: For what we fear
we often think of, and also speak of often; therefore it is added; They
spoke of one to another; fear made them think much of his name, and thinking
of it made them speak of it: such affection, such thoughts, and such speeches,
as they both are. And indeed thoughts and affections are Sibi mutuo causae,
the mutual causes of each other: Whilst I mused, the fire burned, Psalm. 39.
so that thoughts are the bellows that kindle and inflame affections: and then
if they are enflamed, they cause thoughts to boil, therefore men newly
converted to God, having new and strong affections, can with more pleasure
think of God than any.

Thirdly, of all apprehensions else, get thy heart possessed with deep, strong
and powerful apprehensions and impressions of Gods Holiness, Majesty,
Omnipresence, and Omniscience. If any thoughts be of power to settle, fix,
and draw in the mind of man, they are the thoughts of him. What is the reason
that the Saints and Angels in Heaven have not a vain thought to eternity, not
a wry stroke, his presence fixes them, their eye is never off him? Take a
wanton garish loose spirit, let him be but in the presence of a Superior whom
he fears and reverenceth, and it consolidates him. Job made therefore
conscience of his thoughts, that he durst not look awry, Job 31. 1, 2.
because God sees it, says he. This drew in and fastened David's thoughts, Psalm.
139. from the first to the twelfth, he manifests what continual apprehension
he had of Gods Greatness, Majesty, and Omnipresence; and what effect had
this? When I awake I am even before thee, verse 17. Look what objects they
are, have most strong and deep impressions in the mind, of those when a man
awaketh, he thinks of first. Now such strong impressions had David's thoughts
of God, that still when he awaked, he was with him, and therefore we find
it by experience to be a means to avoid distractions in prayers, to enlarge a
man's thoughts in his preparations before, or at the beginning with a
consideration of Gods attributes and relations to us: and it will and does make
us serious.

Fourthly, especially do this when thou awakest, as David did there, when I
awake I am still with thee: to prevent wind which arises from emptiness, men
use to take a good draught in the morning, which the stomach feeds; so to
prevent those vain, windy, frothy thoughts the heart naturally ingenders, and
which arise from emptiness; first fill thy heart with the thoughts of God; Go
down into his Wineceller: observe it when you will, when you first open your
eyes, there stand many suitors attending on you, to speak with your thoughts,
even as Cliants at Lawyers doors, many vanities and businesses; but speak
thou with God first, he will say something to thy heart, will settle it for
all day: and this do before the crowd of businesses come in upon thee. Of some
Heathens it is said that they worship that as their God, for all day, which
they first see in the morning; so it is with the idols of men's hearts.

Fifthly, have a watchful eye, and observe thy heart all day, though they crowd
in, yet observe them, let them know that they pass not unseene; if a man would
pray aright, he must watch also, who comes in, and who goes out: where strict
watch and ward is kept, and Magistrates observant, the Marshall and Constable
diligent to examine vagrant persons, you shall have few there; that such
swarms of vagrant thoughts make their rendevous, and pass, is because there
is not strict watch kept.

This is in a manner all thou can do, for they will pass however, but yet
complain thou of them, whip them, and give them their pass.

Sixthly, please not thy fancy too much with vanities and curious sights, this
engenders vain thoughts; therefore Job says, Chap. 31. verse. 1. That he made
a covenant with his eyes, lest he should think of a Maid, Prove. 4. 25. Let
thine eyes look right on.

Seventhly, be diligent in thy calling, and what thine hand finds to do, do
it with all thy might, as it is, Ecclesiastes 9. 10. that is, putting to all
the intention and strength of the mind that may be in it. Let all the stream
run to turn about thy Mill; the keeping thy thoughts to that channel, keeps
them from overflowing into vanity and folly, 2 These. 3. 11. Those that labor
not are busy bodies. And 1 Timothy 5. 13. Idle, wandering, (...), they are not
only called (...), Idle only, because not busy about what they should, but
(...), as intent on things they should not; they go from house to house: so
their bodies do, because their minds do wander, having no center. When David
walked alone, what extravagancy did his spirit run into? let the ground lie
fallow, and what weeds will there soon grow in it? God has appointed us our
callings to entertain our thoughts, and to find them work, and to hold them
doing in the interims, between the duties of his worship, because the spirit
and thoughts of men are restless, and will be busied some way; as therefore
Kings keep those men that have active spirits in continual employment, lest
their heads should be working and plotting amiss: so did God appoint even in
Paradise the active spirit of man, a calling to keep him doing. God hereby
hedgeth in man's thoughts, and sets them to go in a narrow lane, knowing that
if they are unconfined and left at liberty, they would like wild Asses snuff
up the wind, as Jeremy speaks, Jeremy 2. 24. only take heed of encumbring thy
mind with too much business, more than thou can graspe. It made Martha
forget that one thing necessary, being cumbred with many things, Luke 10. 4.
this breeds care (...), which distracts the mind, (so the word signifies
(...), as dividing it, and so causes wandering thoughts nothing more, so that
the mind is not it self. For this weakens it, enervates it, and this being
vanity, Exodus 18. 18. said Iethro to Moses, when encombred with business, Thou will fade away as a leaf, out of which the moisture is dried up, even that
juice which should be left for good duties will be exhausted: as dreams come
through multitude of business, Eccles. 5. 3. so do a multitude of thoughts
from a cumber of business.

Eighthly, in thy calling, and all thy ways, for the success and thy ways
therein, Commit thy ways to God, Prove. 16. 3. Commit thy way unto the Lord,
and thy thoughts shall be established, or ordered: that is, kept from that
confusion and disorder, and those swarms of cares, which others are annoyed
with: and thereby thy aims may be as well accomplished: a few thoughts of
faith would save us many thoughts of cares and fears, in the businesses we
go about, which prove therefore vain, because they forward not at all the
business we intend. When such waves toss the heart and turmoile it, and the
winds of passions are up, if a few thoughts of faith come into the heart, they
calm all presently.

FINIS.
Perlegi hunc tractatum, cui titulus est ( The vanity of thoughts) in quo nihil
reperio, quo minus imprimatur.

Ex Aed. Lamb Iul. 1. 1637. Rever. in Chapter Patri and Dno D. Ar. Cant. Sac. Dom.
IOH. OLIVER.


