A Brief discourse of certain points of the religion, which is among the
common sort of Christians, which may be termed the Country Divinity.

With a manifest confutation of the same, after the order of a Dialogue.

Compiled by George Gifforde.

Imprinted at London for Toby Cook, dwelling at the Tigres head in Paul's
churchyard and are there to be sold. 1582.

To the Right honorable his very good Lord, Ambrose Earl of Warwick, Master
of her Majesty's Ordinance, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of
her highness most honorable privy Council, George Gifford wishes increase
of al true happiness and honor, with the continual comfert of a good
conscience.
I Nothing doubt (right honorable) but that it will seem great rashness unto
some, and no small folly, to offer and present so simple and slender a book as
this is, unto your Lordship: for what does it seem to bring with it worthy
the person of a Noble man? There is no pomp in the manner of speech, for it is
rude and country like: the matter it self is not handled as a disputation
between deep divines, but after the manner of plough men and cartars: a great
absurdity therefore appears in this, that an honorable person of great
dignity should be called for, as it were to stand by and hear such speak. Good
cause there is therefore that I should render some reason of this my boldenes,
which I will willingly do, to use that which the heathen Poet says:

Si canimus syluas, syluae sunt consule dignae. Will not suffice: for although
respecting the things which I handle, because they belong to the trees that are
planted in the Lords Orchard, they do as far excel the woods and groves, as
the vine does the bramble bush, yet nevertheless he has so richly decked his
base and beggarly matter, he has so clothed it in silks from top to toe, and
has hanged so many jewels upon it: that it shall find entertainment, and be
thought meet for the courts of princes, where as mine being very porely clad,
will be rejected. I will express therefore a better reason of my doing, which is
this. As those which have corn fields, think it not a thing vnmecte to be
told by their servants of thistles and weeds, which would hinder and mar the
corn, if they provide not to have them plucked up: eue^ so I know that it is
not an unworthy thing to show unto those which are of high calling, the
hurtful and dangerous weeds which would ouergrow and choke the heavenly seed
of the gospel, sown in the Lords field. When as our church therefore and
common wealth, being the Lords husbandry, is ouergrowne with weeds and almost
laid waste, I see no cause wherefore I may justly be blamed, for giving notice
thereof in so^e part unto your honor. Seeing their principal causes and
sountaines from whence corruptions flow are to be taken away and dried up by
those who^ God has placed in the highest rooms. Among which the want of a
sincere ministry of the word is the greatest through absence of which,
there is a flood of ignorance and darkness, ouerflowing the most part of the
land: the fear of God is banished from the greatest part: the wonderful
heaps and piles of sin, which should be washed and cleansed away by the
word, do undoubtedly with one voice cry alowd in the ears of the Lord, for
vengeance upon the whole realm. The papists cannot be converted, but hardened
and turned out of the way, there is so foul disorder, and so many stumbling
blocks cast in the way. The Devil has elbowe room to spread abroad, to
plant and water all kind of errors, so few there be to withstand him. But to
come to that particular which I handle in this treatise: there are the most in
number, who having Popery taken from them and not taught thoroughly and
sufficiently in the Gospel, do stand as men indifferent, so that they may
quietly inioye the world, they care not what religion come: they are like naked
men fit and ready for any coat almost that may be put upon them. The life
of these is exceeding profane they have hardened themselves in their sins,
by reason which they gather partly out of their own brain, and partly out of
some sayings in the word, by which they cloak and defend their own corrupt
ways. I have therefore gathered the most common principles of their faith and
religion, by which they arm themselves, against true repentance, and right
understanding: I have not noted all, neither have I meddled with those several
gross absurdities, which each has proper to himself, for that should be
infinite. I trust your Lordeship will rightly construe my good meaning, and
take in good worth this simple treatise: pitying the case of the poor church
of Christ, which is so full of grievous sicknesses and sores, that unless she
be relieved and cured, she will scarce be able to continue life. She cannot but
most humbly crave his duty at the hands of those which are near about her
dear Nurse: From whom she has now long time received wonderful protection
and defense against adversaries: that they make known her state, and labor
the recovery and retaining of her health. Because it does stand not only with
their eternal glory in the world to come, but also with their honorable
estate in this life. Which cannot be established to flourish in continuance,
unless the Lord God have his thro^e so erected in the midst of her that she
may florishe. For where he is dishonored and despised of those whom she
nourishes in her bosom, her case is dangerous, for it is against al wise
policy to make him an adversary, who has all power, and of himself is able
to root out and destroy mighty kingdoms: so that if she keep in favor and
league with him, there is no fear of any other.

This Lord of Lords, and most mighty king increase abunda^tly in ye al
heavenly and spiritual graces, with increase of honor in this world, to his
glory etc your eternal comfort Amen.

Your honors most humble to command George Gifford.

A brief discourse of certain points of the religion, which is among the
common sort of Christians: which may be termed the Country divinity: with a
plain and manifest confutation of the same, after the order of a Dialogue.
Zelotes. Atheos. Zelotes. Well overtaken my friend.


Atheos. I thank you Sir.


Zelotes. How far doeye^ travel this way?


Ath. Iwentie miles.


Zelot. Do you dwell in Essex.


Ath. Yea, not far from Clelmeforde.


Zelot. What call ye the Town where ye dwell?


Ath. G. B.


Zelot. Have ye a preacher there?


Ath. We have an honest man our Curat.


Zelot. Does he teach his flock?


Ath. He does his good will, and more ye cannot require of a man.


Zelot. Ye did commend him even now, to be an honest man.


Ath. Commend him: yea I may commend him: I am persuaded we have the best
Priest in this Countreye, we would be loathe too forgo him for the
Learnedest of them all.


Zelot. I pray ye let me hear what his virtues be, for which ye do
commend him so highly.


Ath. He is as gentle a person as ever I see: a very good fellow, he
willnot stick when good Fellows and honest men meet together too spend his
groate at the Alehouse: I cannot tell, they preach and preach, but he does
live as well as the best of them all. I am afraid when he is gone we shall
never have the like again.


Zelot. Be these the great virtues which ye do commend him for, he may
have all these, and yet be more meet for too keep swine, then too be a
Sheaphearde over the flock of Christ, is he able to teach the people, and
does he instruct them in Gods word?


Ath. I know not what teaching ye would have, he does read the service,
as well as any of them all, and I think there is as good edifiyng in those
prayers and Homilies, as in any that the Preacher can make: let us learn
those first.


Zelot. That is not all which is required in a Minister, for a boy of ten
years old can do all this: does he not teach them too know the will of
GOD and reprove naughtiness among the people?


Ath. Yes that he does, for if there be any that do not agree, he will
seek for too make them friends: for he will get them too play a game or
two at Bowls or Cards, and too drink together at the Alehouse: I think it a
Godly way, to make Charity: he is none of these busy Controulers: for if
he were, he could not be so well liked of some (and those not of the
meanest) as he is.


Zelot. Do ye call the Preachers of Gods word busy Controulers? do they
go further then Gods word does lead them?


Ath. We may call them busy controllers, I think we shall do nothing
shortly, as poor a man as I am, I would not for fortye shillinges that we
had one of them, there be more of my mind.


Zelot. Some poor men perhaps.


Ath. Nay, the best in the Parish, who would not so well like of our Curat, if
he should meddle that way.


Zelot. I perceive now what manner of man your Curat is, and I see like master
like scholar.


Ath. Why so I pray ye?


Zelot. Why so, I smell how unmeet he is, and also how ignorant you are. Let
me question a little while with ye concerning that which ye have uttered.


Ath. I trust I have uttered nothing but that which does beecome an honest
man.


Zelot. Nay all your speech does beewraye that you are a carnal man, for you
have made a very fine description of a good Curate, what mean ye when ye
say he is a good fellow, and will not stick to spend his money among good
fellows, is it not because he is a pot companion?


Ath. Do ye mislike good fellowship, is it not lawful for honest men to
drink and be merry together?


Zelot. I do not mislike true friendship, which is in the Lord, knitte in
true Godliness, but I mislike this vice, which ouerfloweth every where, that
Drunkardes meet together and sit quaffing, and the minister which should
reprove them, to be one of the chief: when he should be at his study, to
be upon the Alebench at Cards or dice.


Ath. I perceive you are one of those curious and precise fellows, which will
allow no recreation, what would ye have men do? we shall do nothing
shortly. You would have them sit mooping always at their books, I like not
that.


Zelot. Nay my friend, I do not allow that recreation, which profane men
call so, which is no recreation, but a torment to a Godly mind, to see men
drunken, to hear them swear, and rail, to spend their goods and their time
so lewdelie, and he that should teach them, to be a Ringleader: as there be
many as it seems, which are entered into the ministry, for none other
purpose, but to live an idle life, to have leisure to play at Cards, or
Tables, and Bowls all the Week. And therefore they have no skill to teach,
but like unsavory salt, are not good even for the dunghill.


Ath. These things were used before you were borne, and will be when you are
gone. So long as men think no hurt when they play and be merry.


Zelot. I perceive ye are of the right stamp, ye are light upon an
argument, which may well be termed old Suersebee, because it brings a
reason which does stick by many, when all other reasons forsake them. But
let us pull this old fellow out of his new coat, and ye shall see what a
lean shrimpe he is, and so feeble, that he cannot go on stiltes: these
things were used say you, before you were borne, so were all other naughty
vices, are they now good because they be old? Because men committed them
before I was borne, and will do when I am dead.


Ath. I mean not so, but there were as wise men, and wiser then he now among
our Forefathers: and they would not have used nor allowed such things, if they
had not been good: they knew well enough what they did. Let not us be more
precise the^ they were.


Zelot. I perceive you ground your faith and your doings upon men, and not
upon Gods word.


Ath. I pray GOD I may follow our Forefathers, and do no worse then they
did: what should we seek for too be wyser or better then they: I would we
could do but as well as they did.


Zelot. Do you not think that there were among our forefathers, thieves,
murderers, adulterers, drunkardes, and such like?


Ath. I think there have been always evil dooers: and will be while the
worlds end.


Zelot. Would ye have us to follow those, and to take their vices?


Ath. We are not to follow any thing but that which is good: and those which
were godly and wise.


Zelot. Is there any thing good, but that which God sets down in his
word? and were any wise and Godly, but such as did follow the will of GOD
expressed in his word?


Ath. There is nothing good but of GOD, and such as do as he commands.


Zelot. Then you see old suresebee laid flat upon the ground, and your
lustye champion is manifested to be but k^^ne and bones, and the same draugh
rotten: for now by your own confession does follow that the word of God
is the only rule, and we must follow our Forefathers no further then they
follow the word of God. You must not follow David nor Abraham in every
thing they did. Furthermore also these naughty vices and corrupt customs
came from the wicked forefathers, and not from the godly, which followed gods
word.


Ath. That is true, but I will follow our forefathers, now there is no love,
then they lived in friendship, and made merry together, now there is no
good neighborhood: now every man for himself, and are ready to pull one
another by the throat.


Zelot. There are but a few of your mind in this thing, are there?


Ath. Yes the greatest part: for I know almost none, but they will affirnie
this matter.


Zelot. If the greatest part to be of your mind, wherefore is there not then a
great deal of love and freendshippe where you say there is none: why do ye
not being the most in number, repair the ruins of that old faithful
friendship, which ye say is decayed? ye say that there was love and
friendship, and ye seem to lament the want of them, and yet there is none
in your selves: for ye be very full of malice and strife? is there any
buzzarde so blind, but that he may epsy your gross folly and vanity in
this point: when with open mouth, ye cry for love, love, and be the greatest
enemies thereunto your selves.

Moreover ye follow your own fond and doting opinion, that ye imagine a
thing which never was, for the World has ever been like it self, full of
debate and strife, a very few in all ages which have had true love: Again,
you call none love, but that carnal love, which is in eating and drinking,
and other foolish delights. That which is the true love, you condemn to be
hatred: For if a man admonish and reprove you for any naughty vice, which
is the greatest love: by and by ye stamp and stare like mad men, and say
now there is no love, except a man do flatteryee, and be partaker of your
foul and beastly sins, ye are at deadly hatred with him. But let us
return again too Sir Robert, ye said he was as good a liver as the best of
them all.


Ath. I say so still, for he is content with his living: many of your
spiritual men are never satisfied: for with that poor living he has, he does
keep a good house and does feed the poor.


Zelot. You prove him to be a good Liver, by comparing him with those which
are worse: It is all one as if a man would proof a thief which has
stolen twenty pound too be a good thief, because he is not so evil as
he, which has stolen a thousand pounds.


Ath. Ye do not well to compare true men with thieves.


Zelot. Is not he a thief which does take the hire and does not that which he
should do for it?


Ath. He is as good as a thief, I think so.


Zelot. Do not they rob them which take the living and do not feed the
flock? Let me ask ye a question, if a man rob and steal and then keep a
house, and feast his neighbors with it, and be a Murderer, will his good
house keeping make him a good Liver?


Ath. No that it will not.


Zelot. Let me ask ye another question, which is the worse murderer, he
which does murder the body, or he which does murder the soul?


Ath. He which does murder the soul.


Zelot. Then he which should feed men's bodies committed unto him, and does
pine them to death, is a murderer: and he which should feed men's souls and
does sterue them, is a greater murderer, and so his good house keeping cannot
make him a good man, robbing so many, and killing so many.


Ath. I will not believe that he does kill any.


Zelot. That is because ye will not believe the saying of Christ: if the
blind lead the blind they both fall into the ditch, nor that God will save
men by the word preached.


Ath. I hope we be not blind, I trust we believe all well.


Zelot. You are blind and should have a guide to lead ye the way to heaven,
and to instruct ye in true godliness.


Ath. I will not learn the way to heaven of any man, for I hope I have as
good a faith and as good a soul to Godwarde as the best learned of them all.


Zelot. Whereby do you try your goodness and your faith, any other way then
by your own blind fantasy?


Ath. I mean well: I hurt no man: nor I think no man any hurt: I love God
above all: and put my whole trust in him: what would ye have more? they
preach and teach, they can tell us no more but this: when they have all said
what they can.


Zelot. Now ye tumuble it up together in deed: I see well it is no small
trouble to bring an ignorant man, for to see his folly.


Ath. I have uttered my conscience: if I say not well, I am ready for too
learn.


Zelot. What need you learn when you know all before hand even as much as all
the preachers can tell ye?


Ath. Ye take me at the woorst, the wisest of us all may learn.


Zelot. You said that ye love GOD above all: and you think no man no hurt, I
take it your meaning is, that ye do love GOD with all your heart, and your
neighbor as your self, and more then this cannot be taught.


Ath. We should do this, if we do it not, God forgive us.


Zelot. This is all, is it not, what needs any more teaching.


Ath. Let men do this first, and afterward, if they will learn more, let
them.


Zelot. Ye give very grave advise now, if there were any to follow it.


Ath. I have no learning, but I think if men would do this, it would not be
so evil as it is.


Zelot. If every thing which is spoken truly, be spoken wisely, then you have
uttered a very wise saying, for I am sure there cannot be a truer. I believe
indeed ye have no learning, and I am sure as you say, if men should do
that, there would not be so much evil among us.


Ath. Ye think peradventure that I speak like a fool, I would I were as
wise as those which I hear say so.


Zelot. Have ye many of these great Wise men, which would have men first
fulfill the ten Commandments and then run to hear sermons.


Ath. All things are well spoken which are well taken: if they be not wise I
pray God make them wise: I have naught to do with them.


Zelot. Ye are a plain man and have skyll in outward things, will ye give
me leave to ask you a question in a matter wherein ye have understanding?


Ath. I thank God I dare answer to a question.


Zelot. Are ye a carpenter or a mason?


Ath. I have no skill that way.


Zelot. Then if there be a great house of timber and stone, to build, you can
not build it?


Ath. If there were no better builders, then I, there would not be so many
gaye houses.


Zelot. If one should say here is a very fair house too be builded, it is
no more but to lay a good foundation, too raise up the walls and to finish
the roof, you know this all: therefore ye can buyld it for ye know all.


Ath. I know this is all: but I can do never a whit of it, unless a carpenter or
a buylder do teach me.


Zelot. Ye say well, even so to love GOD with all our heart, with all our
mind, and our neighbor as our self, is all, but we know not how to do
one iotte of it, unless we be taught it out of gods word.


Ath. God grant we may, for there be over many which do not regard it.


Zelot. Let me now ask you further, put case one should say unto you,
thus, you know all that is to be done in buylding an house: the foundation,
the walls, and the roof, do these first, if ye will learn any more, ye
may go to some Carpenter.


Ath. There is no man so foolish, to give a man that counsel.


Zelot. It is the Counsel you gave, and the wise men which ye spoke of, which
would have men first to do and afterward to learn.


Ath. Nay to do that they know, and afterward to learn more: for there was
never more knowledge and less doing.


Zelot. It is a very pitiful case to see, how the world is blinded, ye
bring not this out of your own bouget: for there be very many wise and
iollye heads, which stand much upon this which you speak: they never
understood that which Solomon says, Proverb, 1. cap. 22. ver. Ye fools be
enemies unto knowledge, or hate* knowledge. Neither do they know that which
Saint Paul speaks. 1, Cor. 8, 2. If any man think he knows any thing, he
knows nothing as yet, as he ought to know. They never considered what the
holy Ghost says in the latter end of the fifte Chapter to the Hebrwes. ver.
12. Where he does sharply reprove them, because they were children in
understanding. Neither do they know that all well doing proceeds from faith,
and faith does increase through knowledge: it greeueth me to stand upon the
matter, the saying is so buzzardly.


Ath. You would have all men divines. I think it is not for plowme^ to meddle
with the Scriptures.


Zelot. You think so, but I pray you to whom speaks the Lord by the
Properer Esaias, when he says: My people perish for want of knowledge. Unto
whom speaks the Lord by the Prophet Hoseas. Chap. ^^. 1. 2. When he says:
there is no truth, there is no mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land, But
swearing, lying, killing, thee^^ing, committing adultery, etc. Unto whom
wrote Saint Paul, saying* Brethren be children in malice, be not children in
understanding, and unto whom wrote Saint Peter exhorting so much unto knowledge?


Ath. I think knowledge does make men the worse, for there be no worse men
then many that be great scripture men: none will deceive a man sooner then they:
they will speak a man fair before his face, and be ready behind his back
for to cut his throat.


Zelot. It seems that you are no small man, there is a great deal of good
stuff in you if you would utter it.


Ath. I tell ye my mind plainly, I will not flatter any man.


Zelot. Ye need not tell me that, I know what manner of man ye be. Let us come
to your last words, ye did speak very lewdly, do ye think that knowledge
does make men worse?


Ath. I hear many say so: if I speak ^ew^ lie, there be a number more beside
me, that do so.


Zelot. If knowledge make men the worse, then is it a thing that is not good
of it self, for that which is good can not make a man evil: is there any
beast which will say, That to know GOD or the will of God which is most holy
and pure, can make ^ man the worse? No these men are more then beasts.
Again, the more a man knows of God the worse he should be, a very filthy
blasphemy.

Moreover you are greatly deceived, when ye think that all those which can
talk of tho Scriptures have knowledge, for there be very many carnal
Pratlers, which seem for to know much, and yet are as blind as Buzzardes:
these are naughty men, not because they have knowledge, but because they want
knowledge.


Ath. I cannot tell, a man shall hear them say a great deal out of the
Bible.


Zelot. No doubt a great deal more the they understand: now when such do not
live well, does it follow that Gods word makes them worse? nay ye be all
blind Asses which cannot see, that because there is very little true
understanding of Gods word among men, therefore there is so much uncleanness:
For as the holy Ghost says Psalm. 119. 9. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse
his way even by taking heed thereto according to thy word. Now when men do not
understand the word, how shall they take heed to their ways, for to guide
them by the same. And when GOD says the word does cleanse us, his meaning
must needs be, that all such as are not purged thereby, are foul and filthy
in his eyes.


Ath. Ye have of your preachers, tr^^ pulpit men, and can say very well: but
their deeds are as evil as other men's, for who is more covetous then they:
they are never content until they have heaped living upon living.


Zelo^. Such skillful men as you, think if a man can preach or rather (as a
number do) prattle and have a rolling tongue and can make some show of
learning, that by and by he is a trime man, and has great knowledge: when as
in deed he has no true knowledge. For I count him to have true knowledge,
which has so learned Christ, that he is become a new creature. Therefore
Saint John in the 3. Chapter 5. 6. verses, of his first Epistle speaking of
Christ, says: That he was made manifest to take away our sins, and in him
is no sin: Whosoever abides in him sins not. Whosoever sins has not
seen him nor known him. Likewise in the first book of Samuel. cap. 2. verse.
12. It is said by the sons of Elye, that they were the sons of Beliall,
and knew not God: and yet they were instructed in the law, and taught the
people. And for mine own part I could never perceive that any wicked man
could preach worth a button* I mean concerning, the chief thing required
in preaching, which is the declaration of the power of the spirit which ought
for to appear, to the conversion of sinful men. For to lay open points of
doctrine, they may do it well.


Ath. It is not for us that are simple men for to judge who does well, and who
does no^.


Zelot. Yes that it is, for Saint John says, try the spirits whether they
be of God* Our Savior Christ says, my sheep hear my voice a stranger they
will not hear. Whereupon it does follow that he which knows not when pure
doctrine and wholesome is uttered, is not as yet among the number of the sheep
of Christ. For if he were endued with the spirit of God, he should by the same
spirit feel when wholesome doctrine is delivered unto him.


Ath. If a man be learned, then he shall be able to judge what is sail
rightly: otherwise he cannot tell.


Zelot. It is not learning alone which must judge of sound preaching, for
there be many learned men which cannot judge well, as also there be many
unlearned, which are very well able to discern, all lies in this point the
doctrine is of God, and not of men, and therefore those do feel it, and judge
rightly whether they be learned or unlearned, whom God does inwardly teach with
his spirit: for this cause S. Paul. 1, Cor. 14. does show that the word of
God is so to be laid open in the congregation, that if there come* in a man
unlearned or an infidel, he may be reproved and judged, and the secrets of
his heart made manifest. For if the word be not preached unto the consciences
of men, it goes away like a dead sound. But we go into many matters, I have
not forgotten your former words: but perhaps ye would be loath to come to
that again.


Ath. I am not ashamed of any thing, which I said, and I hope I need not.


Zelot. No, your wares are so fine, ye need not care who view them, you love
God above all, and with all your heart.


Ath. That I do, or else I were a beast, I would he were hanged which does
not* that.


Zelot. Ye love your neighbor as your self?


Ath. If I do not I pray GOD forgive me, I am sure no man can accuse me.


Zelot. Then you look by this means to come to heaven?


Ath. I hope if there be but three in all this country, go to heaven I shall
be one of them, I mean so well.


Zelot. Ye know the commandments of God* and fulfill them also do ye not?


Ath. I thank God I know them: and will fulfill them as nigh as God shall
give me grace.


Zelot. Do ye break none of them?


Ath. We break them all of us daily and horuely* for there is no man which
can keep them all.


Zelot. You break some of them, and keep other some. Ye keep the greatest,
do ye not* and break the least?


Ath. I keep the greatest, and therefore I hope God will bear with me in the
rest.


Zelot. Which do ye take for to be the greatest, that ye are so clear in?


Ath. I am no thief, nor murderer, nor traitor: I pay every man his own* I
think this is Gods bidding.


Zelot. Are there no greater then these?


Ath. I take him for an honest man which does keep these, and he that does
not I defy him.


Zelot. Even so will I take you to be, when I know that you do keep them* But
I marvel ye are so bold for to bid defiance to so many.


Ath. Do not you des^e them al? and all other evil doers?


Zelot. If I should do so, you and I should be together by the ears by and by.


Ath. Then belike ye count^^ee to be such an one: ye ought not to judge.


Zelot. A man may know the tree by the fruits: but let this pass: I pray ye
tell me is not he which has more Gods then one, as evil as a murderer?


Ath. I take him to be worse.


Zelot. Then the first commandment is greater, then those which you named?


Ath. If a man think there is any God* but one, he is very far wide.


Zelot. You have none other Gods but one then?


Ath. It were pity of my life if I should not be of that belief. If all the
commandments were as easy to be kept as this, we should do well.


Zelot. Then ye never brake the first Commandment.


Ath. Never in all my life: neither shall ever any make me to be but of Gods
belief: for they which believe there be many Gods are not of a right mind.


Zelot. Can you then keep the greater and no^ the less? I do no^ doubt but
if a man can keep the first he can keep all, for the first is as hard as any
of the rest, although such skillful Clearkes as you, count it to be very easy.


Ath. Then it were an easy matter to keep them.


Zelot. What if I prove unto ye that you break it, will you confess your
folly?


Ath. I will never be made believe that which I know is contrary.


Zelot. ^e^ me ask ye this question* whether that man* does keep this
Commandment, which thinks there is but one God* and yet gives that honor
and worship unto other things, which he should give unto him alone.


Ath. I did never put any trust in images, nor I never thought they could do
me any good.


Zelot. I do not speak of that outward giving away of Gods worship: but of an
other which is inward in the mind.


Ath. I have always had God in my mind, and I trust I have never woorshipped
any besides him.


Zelot. Is not that a man's God which he loves best: and which he does most
delight in?


Ath. Look what a man loves best and takes most delight in, I think he
makes y^ his god, because we ought to love god best.


Zelot. Do ye not think that the thing which a man most sets his mind
upon, and most seeks after, is that which he most loves?


Ath. I suppose every man looks after that which he most loves.


Zelot. Then he which seeks the world more then God, loves the world more
then God: and therefore in very deed makes the world his God?


Ath. God forbid that any man should make more account of this world, then of
God, I hope few do so.


Zelot. You hope few do so, but a man may easily prove that you do so, and
I am sure the most do so.


Ath. I trust ye shall hardly prove it by me, although ye judge so evil of
me.


Zelot Can a man seek after God, or set his delight upon God any other way,
then by seeking after the knowledge and obedience of Gods will, which he has
revealed in his word? or can a man love God, and not love his word?


Ath. Gods word is good, we must love that al of us and be ruled by it, for it
does tell us nothing but that which is good.


Zelot. How slilie you wind out of the matter I ask one thing which ye do
not aunsweare: and that is whether a man can seek God, and not seek him in
his word?


Ath. Every man cannot be a Divine, we that be unlearned men are not for to
meddle with so high matters.


Zelot. Now ye speak in your kind, we be unlearned men, we have naught to do
with God, we may not meddle with him.


Ath. You take all things wrong, ye do not hear the say so.


Zelot. Do I take ye wrong, do ye not say so? tell me is not God as high a
matter as his word?


Ath. God is above all.


Zelot. Can we have to do with God, to serve him any way but by his word?


Ath. The word of GOD does tell by what we are to do.


Zelot. Then it follows when ye say we may not meddle with so high
matters, that ye were even as good for to say, we have naught to do with
GOD. We owe him no duty of obedience, we need not care to know his will:
because he is as high a matter as his word.


Ath. You put in a great deal more then I said, and take me still at the
woorst.


Zelot. Nay you are so deep in your speech, that ye utter more in a word,
then a man can well lay open in an hours talk: Again I take ye not at the
worst, for make the best of it you can, and it must needs follow, that those
which care not for the word of God, care not for him, neither do they delight
in him, or love him which do not delight in him nor love his word.

Moreover how shall a man take delight for to know the word, but it will
cause him for to seek to know it, that which is a man's jewel he will some
times look upon it: but there are a number of ye which are in deed very
Atheistes, and set no^ a straw by the knowledge of Gods will: for let a man
tell ye of any duty which ye should be taught out of the holy scriptures, by
and by, this is your aunsweare, those things are not for us to meddle withal:
it is not for us to talk of such points. But we are gone a great way from
the beginning of this matter, which is, that where ye did affirm that ye
love God with all your heart, and that ye have none other Gods besides him:
Now the conclusion is proved, that ye love him as much as an old shoe, and
that in deed ye make the world your God, because ye seek most after that.


Ath. Ye do not use me well in saying that I love GOD no better then an old
shoe, I would ye should know I love him as well as the best of ye all,
though indeed I cannot say so much.


Zelot. Be not angry man, for it is but a small fault, for a great sort more
do bear ye company, ye go not alone. But because ye make so great boast* I
pray ye tell me this, ye have servants have ye not?


Ath. I have a poor household.


Zelot. What do you require of your servant?


Ath. To obey my will and to do that which I command him.


Zelot. What if he care not so much, as to know your will, but will say: I
will not meddle with so high matters, nothing regardyng to know your pleasure:
will ye say he loves ye, or he is a good servant?


Ath. I cannot say that he is a good servant, for if he were he would not take
skorn but be glad to hear my will.


Zelot. Ye say right, but why do ye not consider that, when God has set down
his will and you care not for to know it, that ye love him as well and do him
as good service, as such a servant should do unto you.


Ath. God help, if this which you say he true.


Zelot. It is most true, not only that men make the world their GOD, because
they seek more after it then they do after Gods kingdom, but also S. Paul
calls the Devil the God of this world, as also in another place he says,
there be some whose God is their belly.


Ath. God forbid that any man should take the devil to be GOD, or do him
such honor.


Zelot. They are no small number which make him their God.


Ath. You may say so, but I could never come into that man's company yet, which
would not utterly defy him.


Zelot. If I should profess great kindness unto you now, and in the mean time
draw my dagger and break your pate, would ye believe I were your friend?


Ath. I pray God keep me from such friends: which give good words and do
evil deeds, I had rather they told me their hatred.


Zelot. Then ye answer that we must not look what men say, but what they do.


Ath. They had better not speak well, then speak well and do evil.


Zelot. Likewise I answer you that we must not look to men's words, when they
defy the Devil, but to their deeds by which they obey him and do his will:
for when they defy him in their words, they honor him for God in their
works.


Ath. If there be any such, I pray GOD amend them, for that is the woorst
which I wish them.


Zelot. I could like your prayer well if it were not only for a fashion, as
ye use many such like. For when it comes to the trial, you will easily be
found among the number of such.


Ath. If ye think me to be such an one, ye judge worse then ever any man
did, I thank GOD I can bring many to testify that I am an honest man and
always have been, I will be found as good as your self, though ye find
so great fault with other, as though ye were not like other men.


Zelot. I judge nothing but that which is easy to see, in you and in a number
more, and which I can, and will prove to your face.


Ath. Ye are a stranger unto me, will ye judge of me, and know not what my
works are.


Zelot. He which cannot spy ye, has but a simple understanding: I pray ye
tell me, such as do the works and will of the Devil, are they not of the
Devil? Saint John 1. Epistle 3. says, He that commits evil is of the
Devil. Likewise our Savior Christ tells the obstinate Jews, Ioh. 8. Which
boasted themselves to be the children of Abraham, and the children of God,
that they were of their father the Devil, and why? because they did his will.
Even so you take part with such as are evil, and wicked. Shall ye ask a
little question?


Ath. Yea, ask what ye will, and judge what ye like best: but I will
aunsweare as well as I can.


Zelot. Do ye not think that al whoremasters, Drunkardes, Dicers, Raylers,
Swearers, and such like, are the Devils army, as on the other side, such as
profess gods word and live godly, are his soldiers, and do fight under his
banner?


Ath. They are well helped up which serve such a master.


Zelot. Why are you so unwise then as to serve him: for all those which take
part with those wicked men, and rail upon those which are godly, do fight
under the same standerd, and seek to uphold the kingdom of the Devil,
laboring for to overthrow the Gospel, and to banish Gods word?


Ath. They are worthy to have their ears cut from their head, which rail
upon honest men or seek to slander them.


Zelot. This is a common thing among all the pack of ye, if there be any man
which has a care to know God, and seeks after his word, and will not commit
those beastly sins which over flow in all places, then you which cannot abide
to have Gods word set forth, denise a number of lies and slanders against
them, calling them Puritanes, rascals, and many such like. On the contrary
part, let a man be a common drunkarde, a Dicer, an ignorant beast which has no
knowledge of God, a wretched worldling, or any kind of such person: he is an
honest man: for they be those whom you would have a man lose his ears for: he
is now counted the honest man which lives as the most do.


Ath. There be a number go so far they cannot tell what they may do: they
will not do as their honest neighbors do, they will be wiser then their
betters: what should they meddle with Gods word, it makes ^hembusie in
checking every man. It was never merry since men unlearned have meddled with the
scriptures.


Zelot. I marvel how far you would go if a man should follow ye, ye are
like a puddle, which the more a man stirs it, the more filthy mud arises:
ye are like a sink, where the more a man stirs, the more is the stink.


Ath. What mean ye by that?


Zelot. I mean that your heart is full of foul slinking and rotten matter,
which flows out at your mouth. I confess that those men be not to be
allowed which meddle with that which they should not: but I know whom you
mean, when ye say they go so far, that they know not what they may do: ye
speak of them which seek to know GOD, whom ye think to be half mad.


Ath. There be some of them which are not book learned, what should they do
otherwise then their fathers before them: I knew some of their fathers, honest
men, and never troubled themselves that way.


Zelot. I did know your mind well enough: for all your spite is against those
which learn out of Gods word to know their duty toward the lord: and because
as S. Pet. says, 1. Pe. 4. they do not run with ye to the same exces of riot,
ye think it strange and blasphemy. Again, ye cannot abide to be admonished,
when ye commit any naughty thing. Ye know not that God has appointed his word
for all sorts of me^ to be instructed in it thoroughly, for the holy Apostles
exhort every where unto great knowledge in the word.

Again ye know not that which the Lord commands in sundry places, that we
should admonish, and reprove one another, if any do amiss: and not as you
blind obstinate men, which when a man does after a godly manner admonish ye:
he is by and by a busy medler, what has he to do, he shall not answer for
you. And because ye may not do what lewdnes ye list, uncontrolled, ye say
it was never merry since every man might, read the scriptures. It is marvelous
that men should so become beasts without all understanding.


Ath. It would not grieve me to be reproved by those which are learned, but
now every Jack will be meddling.


Zelot. If you be reproved justly by Gods word, then is it God which does
reprove, ye are not to look upon the man. But when ye call them Iackes, and
give them other reproaches, it is because ye are blind, and can discern
nothing but that which is of this world: For if ye could see how great
glory the poorest true Christian is called unto, to be the child of God, ye
would not revile those whom God honors.


Ath. They will be meddling in small matters, if it were for great saults it were
somewhat, but a man may not be merry now.


Zelot. Being utterly blind, and void of grace, ye count those sins which
are foul and gross, for to be small: swearing railing, talking in your
filthy ribaldty, singing soul and beastly songs, these and such like are
your pety faults: this is your my^th wh^^n must not be hindered: For it is
death to ye to have any godliness spoken of, if it be, ye cannot be merry.
This dunghill mirth is that which men complain of to be molested, and say it
was happy in old time, when men were not reproved for such things, now there
be so many scripture men, that a man cannot tell what to say or what to do.


Ath. There are none of ye all as holy as ye would seem for to be, but
have faults, ye see not your own, but other men's.


Zelot. He which does not repent and correct his own vicious nature and
strive to obey God, is no good reproouer of others: But when ye say, men seem
to be holy and give it as a matter of reproach, therein ye go almost beyond
the Devil himself: for you see that I gainesaie ye, or else ye would not
inure it, but ye would even Power out your stinking and rotten poison like
blasphemous and venomous beasts: ye would speak after this manner you that
are so full of the spirit, you that are Saints and such like. What are you
diuelles, are ye of the flesh? no doubt ye are until God convert ye. But we
may see how diuelishly men are become wicked: when a man cannot make any
appearance to be godly and holy, but it is reproched as though it were a
shameful thing to be led by the spirit. For otherwise why do they so obiecte
an honest thing to live after the flesh, a shameful matter to be guided by
the spirit.


Ath. God help us if none be good but such, I hope honest and quiet men shall be
saved as well as they, although they cannot talk so well, nor run not to
hear Sermons.


Zelot. Nay you would have others in berter case then they, for you judge them
that are zealous in the Gospel and would fainest of all other please God, to
be the worst men, and the more careful a man is to be holy to the Lord, the
more he is disdayned and misliked. Which does evidently show that such as you
are led by the spirit of the Devil. Ye lead me so from one matter to
another, that we are gone from something which ye uttered. I remember ye
said ye put your whole trust in God.


Ath. I said so, and so I say still: though I have no learning, yet I trust I
believe as well as any scripture man of them all.


Zelot. Ye brag very boldly, I pray ye tell me this, are ye sure ye shall be
saved?


Ath. No, nor you neither, nor the best of ye all, we must commit that too
God.


Zelot. What is it that ye put all your whole trust in him for? Is it not
this, that GOD has promised unto ye eternal life, and that ye believe he will
perform his promise?


Ath. That he does love me and gives me all things.


Zelot. Are ye not sure that he does love ye?


Ath. I hope he does love me: but I am not sure.


Zelot. Does not the scripture say that whosoever does trust in him shall be
saved?


Ath. God says so indeed, and I believe it is so.


Zelot. You know do ye not, that ye put your whole trust and belief in him?


Ath. I know I do: and I hope I shall always do.


Zelot. If God can not lie, when he says all that trust in him shall be
saved, and you know that ye put your whole trust in him, Wherefore do ye
not then know that ye shall be saved?


Ath. That which God says, is true, for he cannot lie: I put my trust in none
but in him: I hope to be saved, what would ye have more? I will believe never
a one of them all when they say they know they shall be saved: I think they
would make them selves Gods.


Zelot. Nay such as you make your selves Gods, when ye join things so
contrary together and can make them agree: fire and water may lodge together in
one bed, at your inn, and agree well together: For they are no more contrary
then that which ye affirm, when ye say God has promised that all which
believe in him shall be saved, you are sure ye believe in him and that ye put
all your whole trust in him and yet ye can not tell whether ye shall be
saved. But I can not greatly marvel at this, for ye know as well what faith
is, as does a Goose.


Ath. I trust I know, and I mean well, God knows my meaning howsoever you
take me.


Zelot Let me ask ye this question, when a man prays if he do not
beeleeue that which he says, does he well?


Ath. We must believe that which we speak when we pray, or else it is
nothing worth.


Zelot. When Christ teaches us too pray, and too call GOD our Father, ought we
not for to know that he is our Father?


Ath. We ought for to know, that which GOD teaches us and to believe the
same.


Zelot. Must we not believe it without doubting or wavering, as S. James says
he that doubts is like unto a wave of the Sea tossed with the wind, neither
let that man think that he shall receive any thing?


Ath. We must not doubt, for he that doubts is in a wrong belief, we must
put all our trust in God.


Zelot. Then when ye call GOD Father ye believe that surely which ye speak, then
are ye sure that he loves ye, for a father does love his child, even men
which are evil do give good gifts unto their children when they ask,
because they love the^, much more, the heavenly Father which is perfectly good
does love his children, that is, those which believe in him: then I reason in
this wise, he that believes surely that GOD is his father, he is sure that
GOD loves him: he that is sure god loves him is sure of everlasting life:
therefore all those which pray aright, are sure they shall be saved.


Ath. I pray God we may call upon him.


Zelot. Tell me further what ye think, was not Abraham sure he should be
saved, likewise David, Paul, and others?


Ath. Every man cannot be like those. Can you say ye are like unto Abraham?


Zelot. Does not the scripture say, that Abraham is the father of the
faithful, and that those are the children of God, which walk in the steps
of faithful Abraham? I confess in deed that every one cannot attain to so
great a measure of faith as those had: but yet we must come to the same faith,
because we have the same GOD, the same covenant and promises, the same spirit
is given unto us which believe, Saint Paul in the 4. chap. the Ephesians
says: there is one God, one faith, one baptism. If there be but one, then
ours must be the same that theirs was.


Ath. Yea, but for all that it is presumption for men to say they know they
shall be saved.


Zelot. I see that popish dung does stick still between your teeth, when they
teach men that it is presumption to be out of doubt.


Ath. What tell ye me of the Pope, I care not for him, I would both he and
his Dung, were buried in the Dunghill.


Zelot. I know there be many which care not for the Pope, but yet believe
much of his doctrine: they be those which we call Athiests, of no religion,
but look whatsoever any prince does set forth, that they will profess.


Ath. I think that is good, ought not we for to obey our Princes, and would
ye have us to take upon us for to be wiser then they and their Counselors?


Zelot. I did know ye were an Athiest, setting up men in the place of God
worse then a Turk.


Ath. Wherefore do ye say so?


Zelot. Tell me this, are we for to obey men if they command that which is
contrary to that which God commands?


Ath. I think not so.


Zelot. Is there any mo then one truth, or one religion, which is the right,
and that which God commands?


Ath. There can be but one truth, that is certain.


Zelot. Then when one Prince commands one religion, another arises
afterward and commands the contrary: Will ye without difference obey them
both? is not this for to deny God? is not this for to be worse then a Turk?


Ath. I am sure ye will not deny, but that we must obey.


Zelot. He which does disobeye the Prince, does disobey GOD, unto his
damnation, where the prince sets forth and mainteyneth Gods word. But if
there be a prince which makes laws against the laws of God, we must obey
GOD rather then men. But there are many as I said before which in any Princes
days will speak thus, if religion should turn (say they) as God forbid it
should, but if it do, it is our parts to be obedient. Are not these
Atheistes, have they not denied GOD, when they set men in his place? And look
no higher but what men command. But ye have drawn me away again from the
matter we were in hand with, where ye said it is presumption for a man to say
he knows he shall be saved: I may ask ye a question I know ye will answer
very boldly.


Ath. I know no cause why I should not answer boldly.


Zelot. Ye say true, for blind bayarde is the boldest horse in the cart,
although he be almost drowned in one slow yet he will not stick at another,
he will through when all the rest will strain courtesy. But let us come to the
matter whether is it greater presumption for to believe that God is true, or
for to doubt of the certainty of his promise? and whether does that man
honor GOD most which gives credit to his word, or he which doubts whether
he will perform the same?


Ath. It must needs be granted that he which believes God of his word does
well, and he that does not does evil.


Zelot. Ye say true, for if a Prince make an offer unto some man, who^ he
favors, and he should make aunsweare, I doubt of it, I scarce believe the
performance of your promise: would not the Prince think him self greatly
dishonored to have it doubted, whether he be a man of his word? If he should
swear for the performance of his promise, and the party not trust him, he
would never put that up, or bear such an injury. Then it must needs follow
that when God has bound himself both by promise and by oath, as it is said
Heb. cap. 6. ver. 17. How great presumption is it not for to believe him? it is
all one as too think God may lie, or that he may be forsworn, which is
horrible blasphemy.


Ath. I grant this is true, if God should tell any man that he should be
saved, if he did not then believe him. But where is that man which can say God
ever told him so? Does he tell any one man so?


Zelot. Yea that he does, for that which he sends unto al in general, he
se^deth unto every one in particular: for is it not all one, if a man be
condemned for treason, to have his pardon sent him being but one man alone, or
having a great sort mo condemned unto death with him, a general pardon is sent
for the^ all*


Ath. That is al one, for he has his part in it.


Zelot. Even so is it between God and us, we were all condemned, he has sent
a general pardon to as many as believe the same, that whosoever trusts in
Christ he shall be saved. God therefore has told some men, that is, such as
believe that they shall be saved, and such as doubt of his promise and his oath
they shall be damned. Therefore is it al one in those which believe, as if he had
sent a particular message unto them.


Ath. I never heard so much in all my life before.


Zelot. I believe so* For S. R. can no great skill in this gear: he can whippe
over a new pair of cards nimbly, and tyrle a dye: but he should be the
messenger of the Lord of hosts, even as the Prophet says, his lips* should
keep knowledge, and men should enquire at his mouth, he* should open all
the Counsel of God unto the people, and not let them run headlong as they do
unto destruction. He should instruct them in all the doctrine of faith, and
repentance, and so guide them in the fear of God.


Ath. Al men cannot do alike, we must accept their good will, every man cannot
be a Preacher.


Zelot. Because ye care not for seeking after eternal life, ye are content to
accept of nothing: and because ye love your lusts, and hate to be reformed,
ye abhor the use of preaching, and as poor a man as ye are, ye would not
for xl. shillings ye had a Preacher among you.


Ath. Ye ever take me at the woorst, I allow preaching* it is good now and
then, but some can keep no measure nor tell when they have done: Again they
be over hott and severe, and preach damnation to the people. Likewise they
meddle with such matters as they need not, as Election and Predestination,
what should such matters be spoken of among the people, they make men worse?


Zelot. I think the Devil is the cunningest schoolmaster in the world.
Other schoolemasters cannot bring gross heads and dullards to any pass, but
content themselves with the finer wits, for to train them up in learning: but
a man can almost light upon none of his scholars, be they never such
blockheads, but they have their lesson at their fingers ends.


Ath. I thank ye Sir for your good word: But I never learned it of the
Devil, nor never was any of his scholars: I trust I have as little to do
with him as you or any other.


Zelot. Where did ye learn it then, if not of the Devil?


Ath. I have heard honest men speak it, and some Preachers preach it.


Zelot. Then I perceive ye learned it not of the Devil himself, but at the
mouth of some of his Vshers.


Ath. Wherefore do y^e call them the Deuilles U^hers? the have skill in the
word of God, and ought to know what they say.


Zelot. I call them so because they teach the precepts of the Devil. And
although they have some knowledge in the word, yet they never learned these
things which you speak out of the word.


Ath. Did the Devil teach them berause they have it not in Gods word?


Zelot. It is the doctrine of the Devil, because it is against Gods word. For
GOD never teaches* men those things which are contrary to the doctrine which
he has set down in his word.


Ath. I think ye will hardly pro^^^* these things for too be against Gods
word.


Zelot. I would you could as easilye prove yourselfe to be a good man: for
then we should soon agree.


Ath. You are not for to judge of me no more then I am for to judge of you:
but there be many now a days which will take upon them for to judge men: they
do not learn that out of Gods word, I am sure.


Zelot. If I see a man drunken, or hear him swear or rail and such like, and
say, he is a naughty man, do I judge: shall I account him a good man, when I
see he is naught?


Ath. When a man does see those naughty vices, he may boldly say that such men
are naught.


Zelot. In like manner when a man hears one which holds evil and
abominable opinions against the truth, he may as boldly say he is naught:
because they have given judgment of them selves, and have showed what they
are. Nay they be such as you which take upon ye for to judge: for let a man
be more careful then your selves for to serve GOD: and by and by you will
enter into the secrets of his heart, which God only does know, and ye will not
stick for to pronounce that he is an hypocrite. In the mean time, let a man
tell you that ye are wicked, when he does see your wickedness, ye answer, ye
ought not to judge: but I will come for to prove that the things which ye
speak against preaching, are very diuelishe and wicked. Ye said thus, I
allow preaching, it is good now and then, but some can keep no measure, nor
will never have done.


Ath. I said so in deed, I will not deny my word, and I think so still. For
a man may have overmuch of any thing, and enough is as good as a feast.


Zelot. A very little is enough for you, if the Preacher do pass his hour
but a little, your buttokes begin for to ache, and ye wish in your heart
that the Pulpit would fall.


Ath. Ye may guess twice before ye guess so right.


Zelot. Nay I can guess somewhat near in such a man as ye are: but I pray
ye did ye never sit at Cards all night?


Ath. Yes that I have, and thought it but a short night too.


Zelot. The cause why ye think an hour so long at a Sermon, and a whole
night so short at Cards, is, that ye delight in the one and care not for the
other: the carding is joined with much sin and service of the Devil, the
other is for to bring us unto the knowledge and fear of GOD: Mark now how
much by your own confession ye love the Devil more then GOD? for him do ye
love most, whom ye delight to serve most.


Ath. Can we not serve God without so much preaching? I see they are never the
better which run most after sermons, they talk much, but I would have them
leave talking and fall to doing, we see no doing but men are still even as
evil as before.


Zelot. Can your servant serve you unless he know your will?


Ath. No that he cannot.


Zelot. No more can you serve GOD without the knowledge of his will, and as for
the rest of your speech, when ye cry out against preaching of Gods word,
that it makes men never the better, and ye would have them leave talking, and
fall to doing: I confess there be a number which are counterfeite professors
which live not according to the Gospel, and most commonly they be such, as
have but a little smacke of the Gospel, and yet think they know much, because
they want the means, having the word either seldom or loosely preached. But
I will confute your vanity another way in this point, tell me, are not these
your sayings? where the word is sincerely preached* if any seek to frame
their lives after the same, when they do either by word reprove your evil
ways, or by deed refuse your lewd manners: These men are full of the Spirit,
these are precise fellows, these are holy Saints, these think them selves
Gods fellows: these think them selves better then all other men.


Ath. We say so in deed, there is good cause why.


Zelot. Then I pray ye tell me how these two things can hang together, when
ye say there is no amendment of life, and yet ye complain that they be over
full of the spirit, over precise, and such like. May not every man see, that ye
pronounce things directly contrary the one to the other? that there is no
amendment, and yet in effect, ye say, they amend over* fast.


Ath. We do not say that any do amend over fast.


Zelot. When ye say they are over holy, and what should men be so curious and
full of the spirit, what is this but to say, that they amend over fast? Is
not this to amend when men by due instruction out of Gods word come to
repentance of their former vices? and have a care to keep them selves from
the spots of the rotten flesh and filthy world. Do not you and such as you
are after a sort blaspheme, when ye reproach men with the spirit? Is it a
shame for a man now a days for to have any thing to do with the spirit of
God? While a man does walk after the flesh in the lusts of uncleanness, he
is an honest man: But so soon as he is endued with any grace, ye wonder at
him as crows do at an owl, ye are ready to floute and mock him out of his
skin. And as if the spirit of GOD were a spirit of dishonor and shame, ye
mock men with him. We may wonder at the long patience of GOD, which has
thus many years suffered himself to be dishonored, his spirit reviled, his
word despised, and has not been revenged, but no doubt the longer he has
^aried, the heavier will the stroke be.


Ath. Men are men, what should they make themselves more holy then they be?


Zelot. If ye mean one way ye say right, for it is a naughty vice for men to
seem to be holy when they are not, or to seem to be more holy then they be:
but if ye mean another way (as I think ye do) that because men are sinful
by nature, why should they seek for to be better, then do ye speak very
wickedly. For God calls men to repentance, to turn from their evil ways:
God guides his servants at all times with his spirit, therefore S. paul says
Romans 8. There Is no condemnation now to those which are in Christ Jesus,
which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. And again in the same
chapter, As many as are led by the spirit of God, are the sons of God. He
says that if we live after the flesh, we shall dye: in other places he does
show, which are the works of the spirit, and which are the works of the
flesh: And you like blasphemous wretches allow those which walk after the
flesh, and condemn those which are led by the spirit.


Ath. Are none endued with Gods Spirit, but such as run to hear preaching?


Zelot Whosoever has the spirit of God, can not but delight in the word of
God, which the same spirit has uttered: The Lord says, he which is of
God, hears Gods word: The happy man is he (as we have in the 1. Psalm)
which has his delight in the law of the Lord, and which does meditate in
the same day and night? We have in the psalm 112. Blessed is the man which
fears the Lord, he has great delight in his commandments.

Moreover, the spirit of GOD does not guide men without the word. And
therefore it is said Psalm 119. Thy word is a lantern unto my feet, and a
light unto my paths. S Peter says, I. Epist. 1. He has beegotten us again
not of mortal but of immortal seed, which he affirms to be the word of
God that indureth for ever. Likewise S. James says cap. 1. of his own good
will begat he us, by the word of truth. Seeing therefore that the holy Ghost
does guide men by the word, it follows that all those which set light by the
word, are led, not with the spirit of God, but with the spirit of the
Devil. I might allege a number of testimonies of Scripture to prove that
such as you which make so small account of the sacred word of God, as there
be a number, yea the greatest number which do not set so much by it as they
do by an old shoe, are despicers of God, worse then brute beasts.


Ath. Cannot men be lead by Gods spirit and serve God, unless they know the
Scriptures* GOD forbid that all those should be awry which are not learned:
is it not enough for plain country men, plow men, taylours, and such other,
for to have their ten commandments, the Lords prayer, and the belief: I
think these may suffice us, what should we meddle further: I know men
which are no scripture men, which serve GOD as well as the best of them all.
Will ye condemn such?


Zelot. I said before that men can not be lead by Gods spirit, and refuse to
know the Scriptures: Neither can they truly serve him until such time as
they know how for to serve him: for GOD teaches how he will be served, and
he teaches only in his word: his will is that we shall learn to know him by
his word. And therefore he has appointed the Ministry of the word to
continue for ever in his Church, that by it men may be built up in Christ, as
ye may read Ephe. 4. For this cause S. Paul* exhorts Tymothie to be
instant in teaching in season and out of season: he traveled himself night
and day, he makes a very fer^e^^ prayer to God continually for the
Collossians, that they might be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will, in
all wisdom and spiritual understanding. Collos. ver. 9. For this cause he
exhorts the Christians to be children in malice, but not to be children in
understanding. The holy Ghost does sharply reprove the Hebrews as we may
see, in the latter end of the 5. chap. of that Epistle: because they were yet
children to be taught, when for the time they should have been teachers.
Again there is a notable sentence in the beginning of the second chap. of the
proverbs, where a man may playnlie prove, that none can come to the fear of
god, but such as do earnestly endeavor for to know God. The words be these.
My son, if thou receive my words, and hide my commandments with thee, to
incline thine ears to wisdom, and to bow thy heart to understanding: if thou
call for understanding, and utter thy voice for knowledge: if thou seek her as
silver, and dig for her as for hid treasures: Then shall thou understand
the fear of the Lord and find the knoweledge of God. If a man do not
receive the word and commandementes of God uttered by his Ministers, if he
do not keep and lay them up, if he do not cry and call upon God for
understanding, if he do not incline his ears and bend his heart thereto, if
he do not search and dig after her as men do for treasures: he shall not
come to the knowledge of the fear of God.


Ath. All men cannot come to these things which you speak of.


Zelot. All men which will please GOD must come thus far, that can say with
the Prophet David in the 119. Psalm. I have hidden thy word in my heart*
that I might not sin against thee. Also in the same place when he has asked
the question. Wherewithal a young man shall cleanse his ways, he
answers, by taking heed there to according to thy word: where by it is
most evident, that all those are vnpure in their ways, and sin grievously
against God, which have not laid up his word in their hearts, nor cleansed
their ways by the same.

But let us come to some other of your sayings, which I am grieved for to hear.


Ath. Ye need not to be grieved, for I do not hurt ye.


Zelot. I can not but be grieved to see your gross and palpable blindness:
and I am the more grieved when I remember that many which are otherwise very
wise men use much your doltishe sayings, and think they speak very wisely.
They say what should unlearned men meddle further then to say their ten
commandments, the Lords prayer, and the articles of the faith. And you are of
the same mind.


Ath. I trust to do as well with these, as other with all their learning.


Zelot. Do ye think that ye shall do well even because ye can say them:
although ye do not understand them?


Ath. Nay if a man say them, and do not understand them, he is little the
better. I know not why I should not understand them, so long as God has
given me my five wits: I am no child, nor I am no fool.


Zelot. In deed he that has one good wit, is no fool, much less are you
which have five: you must needs know all and more: For I think ye mean,
that ye are able by reason to understand those things.


Ath. I trust I understand by that reason which God has given me, so much as
is sufficient: I can tell when I do well, and I can tell when I do evil.


Zelot. I perceive you are a fre will man, one of those which think by
natural understanding too conceive the mysteries of GOD: And ye do in deed
understand so much as is sufficient: not for to save ye, but as S. Paul says
Romans 1. to make ye without excuse: and so to condemn ye. You know some sins:
and likewise ye can tell some things which are good, but ye can never tell any
thing which ye have done that is good.


Ath. I trust GOD will be more favorable then you are: and that he will not
forgette the good deeds which I have done.


Zelot. A very little box I warrant you will hold all your deeds, if ye have
no more old deeds then you have good deeds.


Ath. Are not these good deeds, when a man does give to the poor, and is
ready to do his neighbor a good turn? when a man does live honestly, serve
God, and think no man any harm.


Zelot. Now ye speak of cost: now ye are hit into your right vain again,
even where ye would be, to boast of those things which ye have not: for none
of all those or such like are good in you, because they do not proceed of
faith: for S. Paul says Romans 14. ver. 23. Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.


Ath. How can ye prove that mine are not of faith?


Zelot. Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word Romans 10. 17. where a man
despises the word, there can be no faith: because faith is grounded upon the
word, and does not believe things conttarye unto the word. Moreover, they
be not your five wits, (as you term them) which can make ye able for to
understand the mysteries of Gods word. For they cannot be understood as Saint
Paul teaches. 1. Corinthians. 2. 11. Unless God reveal them by his spirit: for
even the wicked which seem to know them, do not know them aright. But let us
come for to see how well ye do understand the ten commandments. Do ye not
look to come to heaven, by doing of them?


Ath. I do them as nigh as God will give me grace, I trust God will not
require more at my hands then I am able for to do: I am as he made me? if he
had made me able for to do better I should do more.


Zelot. Now ye are in a deep piece of divinity, ye think this is so equal
which ye utter now, that all the Doctors in the world are not able for to
controllye. Ye say ye do what ye can, more God cannot require at your hands:
you mean as if one should make this comparison: a father can require no
more of his child then his strength will serve, a Prince can command his
subject no impossible thing: if a father should whippe his child for not
doing that which he is not able, it were cruelty: if a Prince should put a
subject to death for not doing his commandment in a matter vponssible, it
were tyranny: the father will say. My child did his good will I can ask no
more: The Prince will say he has done that which a man might, and further I
cannot require. Likewise you think GOD should deal straightly with ye, if he
should condemn ye for breaking the Law, which ye are not able to observe:
and that he cannot look for more at your hands then he has made ye able to
perform.


Ath. I mean so in deed, flesh is fr^ile. we cannot do all things.


Zelot. I pray ye tell me, do ye think any shall go to hell and be damned?


Ath. The Scripture says there shall, does it not?


Zelot. Wherefore do ye think they shall be damned?


Ath. For breaking Gods commandments.


Zelot. Are they able for too keep them?


Ath. No man is able for to keep them.


Zelot. Shall they then be damned for ever in hell fire, for breaking those
laws which they were not able to keep?


Ath. Not if they had done their good will: For then they could not be blamed.


Zelot. How the Devil has muffled you too keep ye from seeing the danger
of eternal damnation which ye are in: have ye never heard that which GOD
says by Moses, which S. Paul cites in the 3. Chap. to the Galath. Cursed is
every one which abides not in all things which are written in the book of
the law for to do them: by which ye may see that God with his own mouth does
lay his curse (which is da^natio^) upon every one which does break never so
little of the law.


Ath. GOD is merciful, he is not so senere as you would make him for to be.


Zelot. Do ye not think that he is a just and a true God?


Ath. I must needs think so.


Zelot. Do ye think that when he has uttered his justice, that he can by his
mercy go from it; and so be sound un true? Nay there be many of ye which in
all things cry God is merciful, GOD is merciful, which never consider with
what conditions GOD has promised mercy, neither how it may stand with his
justice and truth: ye think GOD offers mercy without exception.


Ath. If God be not merciful we are but in an evil case.


Zelot. He is a most merciful and gracious God, but yet not unto any, but
such as he has promised mercy. How many thousandd there be, which are carried
headlong to hell with this error, which not knowing the justice and truth of
GOD, do bless them selves where God has accursed them. For these things
which you have now v^tered, are even of the principal reasons which Satan does
seduce men withal; and hold them from the truth. They think thus, I do what
I can, God has made me able to do no better, God is merciful, they know not
this, that God made us able in our first creation to keep and obey his will
wholly, and that although we can now keep no part of it, yet he may justly
accurse and condemn us unto eternal fire, for transgressing any part of it:
ye are not as he made ye, and therefore ye deceive your self when ye think
that he requires no more at your hands, then ye are now able for to do. Ye
deceive your self, when ye think that GOD can be merciful unto ye, and you
live without repentance.


Ath. You would make a man despair, if ye would put him out of hope in the
mercy of God.


Zelot. I would not bring ye out of hope in the mercy of God, but I would bring
ye ou^ of your vain hope, which is not that which will save ye, but does harden
and blind ye unto damnation.


Ath. How can a man's hope and faith hi God, ha^^en and blind him unto
damnation? Now a days there is nothing among many of ye but damnation,
damnation. It is well that God has not given you power for to condemn (...).


Zelot. If it were a true faith, it must needs (...) them, but being a faith
which is blind, it blinds those which have it, and hard ^^^h then ^in their
sins, and keeps them from the seeking after the knowledge of Gods will, and
stays them from returning home unto God by true repentance, because it
breadeth this in the hearts of men, to think and to say, we are welynough, we
(...) God^ (...), we believe as well as the best of them all: when as if they
were ridd^ out of this notable snare of the. Devil, and brought for to see the
wrath of GOD bent against them, they would then be glad with fear and
trembling to seek after the Lord in his word, and to be afraid to
commit those things which might displease him. Where as now a man may^
cry until he rende* his throat ag(...) t^^ir contempt of the Lords word,
and against their foul sins, before he i^ an move them at all: and why?
because the devil has gotten them within this fortress: GOD is merciful, God
is merciful. And for your other foolish words, that there is now nothing but
damnation damnation: Do ye think that men are ever, the sooner cast into
damnation; because they are told of the great danger thereof?


Ath. I pray ye^ let me see what good can come thereof.


Zelot. If I should mee^e ye by the way and perceive that ye were going into
the way where ye should light among thieves, which would murder ye: which
were most profitable for you, if I should tell ye, thus, ye be well, ye be
well, or to show ye that ye be in danger of your life, if ye pass that
way?


Ath. That were a wicked part for to let a man go where he should loose his
life and not for to tell him.


Zelot. Wherefore do ye not see then that those which do show ye the danger
of damnation do it for your profit, as well as they which teach ye to avoid
some outward danger. If a man tell ye thus, go not that way, ye will be
robbed, ye will be killed, does it follow that he will rob or kill ye? because
ye say, men now utter damnation* and that it is well they have not power too
condemn men. And know this for certainty, that if God in his word do
threaten damnation, and the preacher do not show it to the people, and teach
them how to avoid the same, their blood shall be required at his hand. But
let us come back again to the former matter to see how well ye understand
your x commandments. I would know this of ye, whether it be good for men to
know the law, seeing it does nothing but curse and condemn us: if there
were no law, there could be no sin. I speak both of the law of nature,
and of the law written, and if there were no sin, there could be no
condemnation: For this cause the law is called the ministry of death and
condemnation, and it is called the letter which kills 2. Corinthians. 3. Seeing
it does work all this, what profit can it bring for to know it, or why
should it be preached?


Ath. I pray ye tell me you, for I am unlearned, and you are learned. If it be
as you say, I think it were good not to preach it: if it do condemn us.


Zelot. What a shame is it that a man of your age should have so little skill,
as not to know to what purpose the law serves, It is a token ye understand
your x. commandments well. I will tell ye, when a man knoweeth the law, it
does bring him to see that he is altogether corrupted with sin, both in
body and soul, that he is under* Gods heavy indignation and (...)* and that
in himself there is no help at all, it casts him into fear and terror of
Gods judgments, and so inforceth him to seek for remedy in Christ, whom
before he did not greatly seek after* For look how a man which does not
think himself sick nor in danger of sickness cares not for a Physician:
so he which does not know his damnable estate by the law, cares not for
Christ: This is the cause why Christ says: The whole need not the
Physician, but the sick, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance* Therefore to such as have wounded consciences, the Gospel is
sweet and comfortable; and Christ in the latter end of the eleventh Chapter
of S. Matthew, calls such unto him, saying: Come unto me all ye which
travel and be heavy laden, and I will refreshe ye. But such as have no
feeling of their sins, or which are blinded and hardened, ye shall perceive
small joy and delight in them for to hear the word preached: they had rather
be at Bearebayting.


Ath. Ye say well, I would I could remember your words.


Zelot. There be many which will seem to be desirous for to learn, but a man
shall see, they continue even as careless as before: But I will go on with
this matter. The Scripture says, that a sorrowful spirit is a sacrifice to
God: and that God does not despise the humble and contrite heart: But men are
afraid to be brought to the knoweledge and feeling of their sins for fear
as they say, least they should be driven into despair: as though that were a
safe protection for them for a time to* be in a senseless security: and as
though they were in the better case, because they make no conscience of their
sins. Whereas indeed those which are pricked and wounded with their sins,
are in the way to repentance, when the other are far off.


Ath. I could like your wor^es the better, but that ye would have men not to
trust to their faith: is it not good to believe well?


Zelot. There is nothing good in men, unless they believe well: and we can
not trust too much unto says: but you do not understand what faith is.
Tell me this, does faith believe according as God sets down, and speaks
in his word, or does it believe contrary to that which God utters?


Ath. It does not believe contrary too that which God utters.


Zelot. Let us see then, when God sets down and shows which are the works
of the flesh, and threatens damnation unto all those which walk in them: when
God sets down that the de^pisers of his word shall be condemned: and yet men
which are defiled with the filthiness of the flesh, and walk after their
corrupt lusts do boldly brag that they believe to be saved: and setting
naught by Gods* word, say they trust in God: is this faith? God affirms one
thing, and yet they believe the contrary: but see the blindness of men now a
days, when they hear vain and brutish men boast of their faith, ye do well
say they, to have a good belief, when as in deed it is no more but a proud
presumption, wherewith God is highly displeased, because by it they would make
him a Liar. When the son of man comes, shall he find faith in earth? If
this be faith, he shall find great plenty of it every where. For the
Idolater, the swearer, the drunkard, the proud, the Adulterer, are as full of
faith as they can be thrust. For every one of these does brag that he has
as good a faith to God as he which is the most holy of all.


Ath. These may repent and be saue^, or else God for bid.


Zelot. I do not speak what God is able to do in calling as he does call
some such unto repentance: but what they have in them presently. But I will
see a little further how great skill you have in the law* of God, because ye
need so little preaching* What say ye unto the second commandment, is it
lawful for a man to worship idol^?


Ath. I thank God I do not worship any, for that is ^^atly forbidden.


Zelot. What say ye for the making of any image or picture of god, do ye think
that is (...)*


Ath. For making it is no matter* so that a man have no confidenee in them.


Zelot. How do ye then understand the words of the commandment, which say,
Thou sha^^ not make to thy self any graven image, etc.


Ath. He^^aneth that we should not make any gra^en Image (...) worship it.


Zelot. That is your own addition* for there is no such exception expressed,
neither can the order of the commandment bear it: for he does not say, Thou
shall not make to the intent to worship, but thou shall neither make not
worship.


Ath. If ye take it so, then why are Paynter allowed to make any picture* how
is it lawful to have* the image of the Prince in coin?


Zelot. I will show ye your error, you do not understand that the law was
divided into two Tables and that in the first Table, which has 4.
commandments, there is nothing commanded or forbidden, but that which
respects immediately the woorshippe and honor of God, he medleth not with
any civil or pollitike matter* he does absolutely forbid to make as I may
(...) it any divine image, any similitude for to represent God, or to be like
him: because as the scripture shows, there can no likeness or similitude be
made of God. For he ^^ spirit of glory* infinite, incomprehensible, Which
dwells in light, which none can come unto: and therefore ye may read in
the Epistle to the Romans cap. 1. how horrible a sin it was to set up any image
or liknesse of God: therefore the pictures of the trinity and such like are
very abominable. But to let this pass, what say ye for the worshipping of
the^: whether is it idolatry, or not, if a man mean to woorship God by the
image, and not the image it self?


Ath. How can that be idolatry* when a man (...) worship none but God, he
knows that the image cannot help him.


Zelot. Then your meaning is, that, unless a man do either worship the very
image it self* or else some false God in the image that it is no idolatry?


Ath. I see no reason to the contrary: and I thank GOD I never was so ^o^
lis^^ as to take a block or a stone for to be God.


Zelot. Then ye think your self cle^t^ in this commandment, ye were
never, any idolater: ye never kneeled or played (...) any idol?


Ath. I have kneeled before them* and prayed before them, but I never took
them to be God, neither did I pray unto any* save unto the Lord God. I trust
God will (...) charge me to b^e an idolater.


Zelot. All you Athiestes which have no knowledge of God, are crammed as full
of popish dross as ye can hold, saving that ye will not abide by it, but go
with the laws of princes, afraid to loose the world* because ye have made the
world your God.


Ath. I defy popery as much as the best of ye all.


Zelot. Even as much as ye defy the deuel, whom ye serve daily. For ye use
popish reasons to excuse your falling from God by Idolatry, and whereby a man
may easily see that you ^re ready unto it again if time served.


Ath. I see I must let ye alone to judge what ye lust.


Zelot. Nay ye use the very popish reasons: whereby they would prove when
we charge them with the breach of this commandment, that they do not
commit Idolatry: for say they, when the Scripture does condemn that sin,
it is meant of such as worship fained Gods, as the heathen men did, or such as
do worship the image it self, and take it for to be God. But I will deal with
ye by Gods word. What do y^e suppose of the children of Israel, when they
came to Aaron, to have him make them Gods to go before them, when Moses tarried
so long in the mount: did they commit this great sin of Idolatry?


Ath. They did commit idolatry, and the book says they were destroyed, a
great number of them.


Zelot. What? was their intent to worship any besides the true God?


Ath. That it was, for they desired Aaron for to make them Gods.


Zelot. What think ye they took Aaron for to be, a man, or a God?


Ath. That is a question in deed: how could they think him to be a God?


Zelot. Did they think that Aaron being but a man had power for to make a God?


Ath. If they thought so, they were but fools.


Zelot. And if you think they thought so, ye shall prove no great wise man.
For which way can a man persuade any, that a man can make a God? Or could they
become more brutishe then a calfe, for to believe that the car^^inges of gold
turned into the similitude of a calfe, were now become GOD? No my friend it is
very plain, that they meant no more but an image of God and that which should
represent God, and put them in mind of him ye must not think they were so
foolish, although they were very foolish as the holy Ghost in one psalm.
charge them, that they turned their glory into the similitude of a calfe
which eats hay: This then is plain enough, that they, meant not for to
worship the golden calfe it self, but God in the Calfe. Let us see then, did
they mean for to worship any other by the calfe, besides the true God?


Ath. It seems they did, or else why should they say Gods, for there is but
one God.


Zelot. Now ye are light upon a very poor shift: for we may as well say: This
is thy God O Israel, or make us a God to go before us. For the Scripture it
self, in the Hebrew tongue, although it teach that there is but one God, yet
speaks of him in the plural number, and says Gods, for excellency or
dignities sake, as we see Princes here in the world when any of them speaks,
he does not say, I, but we, not my person, but our person. For the phrase of
the Scripture, I might allege diverse places, but you cannot understand, but
in your own tongue^ nevertheless I will cite one it is in the Pla^^ Elohim
Shophetim Hu: God is the iudge^ but the words are Gods, he is judge.


Ath. Can you prove that they meant to worship none but the true God?


Zelot. It is easy to be proved, both by the words of the people themselves,
when they say, these be thy Gods O Israel, which brought thee out of the land
of Egypt: they meant not to change their GOD which brought them out from
Pharao, and led them through the red Sea: neither did they think that the
calfe which Aaron hadd made, was he which divided the Sea, and drowned Pharao
with his host, but they took it for an image of that God, and not of any
feyned God, and also by the words of Aaron, when he says. To morrow shall be
a feast to Jehovah, which name was never given to any, but to the God of
heaven, at the least in those days, the God of Israel had that name peculier
unto himself. Then ye may see, they worshipped not the Idol it self, but God
in the Idol, they meant not to woorship any false God, but the God of heaven,
which had delivered them, and yet they did commit foul Idolatry and fell from
God, in so much that God was exceeding wrath with them. Likewise in popery ye
fell from God when ye bowed unto images.


Ath. I hope not, because I did not as they did, they put a devotion in it, I
meant no such thing, but too be obedient too a law.


Zelot. The^ your meaning is, that you kept your heart and conscience to God,
and went with your body but for fashion?


Ath. So long as I did keep my conscience and heart to God, I trust I did well
enough.


Zelot. Then you think God requires not to be woorshipped but with your
soul, and that you may serve the Devil with your body. Ye think also that
God does not require the outward confession of the mouth, although it should
be with loss of life.


Ath. Ye do not hear me say, that we may woorshippe the Devil with our
bodies.


Zelot. You might hear your self say so, but that ye say ye know not what:
for herein ye are ignorant, that the woorshippe of images is the woorshippe of
Devils. But I know there be many trim wise heads, which excuse the matter
and clear themselves this way, that they make no devotion of the image, or any
other thing in the service of the Pope, their conscience is free to GOD, they
serve and fear him* what does it hu^e them, although they come outwardely with
their body, unto the other: what should they endanger themselves in so small a
matter? But will ye hear me what I can say out of Gods word against you, and
such fellows?


Ath. I will hear you gladly. I am not so wilful, as not to hear.


Zelot. There were amongst the Corinthians, diverse Christians which were
persuaded that it was a matter indifferent to go to the Idol temple, and
there to sit at the feast with the infidels* which they made in honor of the
Idol, and to ^ate of the meat which had been ^l^^^ in sacrifice unto the
Idol: They excused the exact in this wise, that they had knowledge, they
understood well that the Idol was nor GOD, they went not of any devotion at
all, as touching the worship and service which the heathen men did use, but for
friendship and neighborhood sake ^^^ they would not refuse to eat with such
as were th^^^ kinsfolks or acquaintance. Now although S. Paul does mildly
(...) with them, and aunsweareth their reasons in the ^ and ^. chapter: yet in
the 10. Chap. hec deals very roughly with them, setting before them the
terrible example of Gods wrath upon Idolaters, and shows plainly, that they
were partakers of the table of devils, and that they dra^k of the cup of
devils, howsoever they thought they kept them selves and their consciences free
and unpolluted. Even so I conclude, that these worldlings which use this shift,
now little devotion soever they have, yet they have no less then the
Corinthians had in the Idol feast, therefore, when S. Paul affirms, that
they committed idolatry, it must needs follow that these do much more.


Ath. Well, if the matter be heard, that it be an offense, I trust God will
forgive us.


Zelot. It is your manner although a sin be never so foul, yet to make small
account of it, but like a dog, that is wounded, ye think ye can by this
means lick your selves whole, if ye can but say, I hope GOD will forgive us.


Ath. If you say true, then al our forefathers should be condemned, because
they did worship images. I doubt not but God was as merciful unto them, as he
is unto men now: I think they pleased GOD better then we do now: let us not
stand so much in our own light.


Zelot. It is a meruellous thing for to see, how the Devil does dazzle men's
eyes, and how he does bewitch them. These things which you utter, and such
like, are even like a veil before your eyes, so that ye are not able for to
have any sight into Gods word. How gross and doltishe soever the matter
be, if ye can say thus, our forefathers did it, will ye condemn the^, then
all is safe enough. But see how ye are over seen, all our forefathers did
not fall from God by idolatry, for even in the pride of the reign of
Antichrist, there were some stood up against him, in diverse countries. There
were always some who^ God lightened to see the abhominatio^s of the man of
sin, and so to repent and take hold of Christ: and God who is always like
himself received them to mercy. And doubtless God is more now displeased with
such as do now wilfully kick and spurn against the truth, and seek for to
quench the glorious light of the Gospel, then he was with the^, from who^ the
word of God was taken away, and being blind, they were made for to believe
every lie, and therefore now when God offers his grace, and seeks by his
word to expel that gross darkness, it were good for such as you, not to
stand in your own light, and obstinately to refuse the knowledge of GOD. Our
forefathers had that great plague came upon them, which S. Paul did foretell.
2. These. 2. Namely, that there should be a falling away, that Antichrist
should deceive the world, and bring them to damnation: for GOD (he says)
should send them strong delusion, even for to believe lies, because they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved: and now when God
offers his word again, men do not joyfully and thankfully embrace it, and
therefore God does send them shepherds even after their hearts desire: not
to feed them (for they cannot) but to fleese the^ for that they can skill off:
not to be salt for to season them, but to be even like doung cast upon them
for to corrupt them: not to give them light, seeing themselves are blind. The
greatest number of you are as far from God, as they were even in the blindest
time of Popery, and that is confessed by your own mouth, when ye say ye
would follow our forefathers: For ye mean not those Forefathers which did
know and woorshipp God aright, but those which were seduced, and fell from him
by Idolatry. I am very loath for to question with ye any further in the
commandementes, ye are so exceeding blind in them. For I know that in our
land, let all the people be numbered, and five parts of ye do understand so
much in the commandments, Lords prayer, and articles of the faith, that it
were a great shame for a godly man to have a child of x. years old for to
know no more.


Ath. How can ye tell that? I think ye go beyond your book, have ye posed
all?


Zelot. I go not so far beyond my book, as you think I do. And although
I have not posed all, yet I have posed so many, that I know what the state of
the most is. This I find that in the best and most religious towns
generally, the greatest part have very little zeal. This I find, that where
there is one of these towns which are forward, there be five which are not,
because they want teaching. This further I know by experience, that those
which are the willing ones, and as it were the daily hearers for a long time
are very raw when they be examined. The^ judge you what is in the rest, which
are very seldom taught, or refuse for to be taught. And if this be not true,
let me loose my hand. And yet there be idle bellies, which are not ashamed
with open mouth to cry that less preaching would serve, and that there is
knowledge enough among the people: when the poor people do not understand so
much as the Lords prayer: unless they would hold them still in popery, they
can be no more ignorant.


Ath. I could like the better, if the preaching might be only upon the sabbath
day: but now they run in the week days, and leave their business, and beggar
themselves: they go to other towns also, which is a pity that it is
suffered: it is a great disorder.


Zelot. He is said to be blessed, which has his delight in the law of the
Lord, and which does meditate therein day and night. I confess that ye sabbath
day is the chief time to seek for knowledge. But that man which has so
little love to the word, that he cannot bestow one hour in a week for to
hear it, and yet can bestow diverse hours in vain talking, drinking and
gaming, is but a dull scholar upon the Sabbath day: I warrant ye, if a man
look well unto him, he shall find it hard to judge whether he or the seat he
sat on, carried away most: and for leaving their business so far as they may
conveniently, would ye have them forget the precept of our savior christ,
first seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and then al these things
shall be cast upon you: The soul with you is less to be cared for, the^ ye
body: ye prefer this life before eternal life: and as for this, that me^ come
for to be beggars by following sermons, yt they sell their kine, and that they
are feign to be gathered for in the Church: ye have a bowget full of these
lies, and ye need but even a mill for to grind them. They are taught by the
word preached, to follow their labors painfully, and the blessing of God is
upon men's labors, which do seek him and the knowledge of his word: and
although it sometime does hinder them one hour, yet it saves them and gayneth
them many hours, which they were wont to bestow vainly.


Ath. I do not like this so evil as ye other when they run from town to
town so disorderly.


Zelot. I pray ye tell me if there were a dearth of corn, how far would
ye go to fetch corn, rather then statue? I believe, as far as the sons
of Jacob, when they went out of the land of Chanaan into Egypt.

At. I count him a fool, which will not go a great way of to buy his corn,
rather then starve.


Zelot. He is a stark fool, which will not go a great way rather the^ starve
his body: but he is not a fool which will not once step out at his door for to
seek the everlasting food of his soul.


Ath. Those are not alike, we must needs seek for to live.


Zelot. Noe, you cannot see them for too be a like: you see well in things of
this world, but for heavenly things, ye see nothing: but to come to the
matter, it is great pity in deed, that there should be such disorder, as
that men should run from town to town to hear sermons: Our Savior Christ
pitied them when they came into the wilderness for to hear him, because he
says, they were as sheep without a sheepehearde. But you and your mates are
not grieved with the same pity: ye are as like a malicious dog as can ^ee,
which lies upon the hay, and will ear none, neither will suffer the Ox
which would. Woe be unto ye Scribes and Pharisees, ye Hypocrites, ye shut
up the kingdom of heaven before men, ye enter not in your selves, neither
do ye suffer those which would enter. Mat. 23, 14.


Ath. You say they go to seek food for their souls, and to learn for to
know God: but they do it of vain glory.


Zelot. There be always some no doubt, which do not seek of a sincere mind
but of vain glory, and do abuse their knoweledge, and are vainelie puffed up
in themselves, with an opinion of those things which are not in them: but will
you give sentence against all, because some are such: Is this a good argument?
men give alms for vain glory, men come to the Church, and pray of vain
glory: Therefore alms and prayer are to be left: for doubtless some do
those things for vain glory, even as our Savior Christ accuses the
Scribes and Pharisees.


Ath. But Christ bids us do those things. Now will ye prove that we are
commanded to do this.


Zelot. I know no place which has in plain words, Go unto other countries
or towns for to hear preaching, and why: because the will of God is that
they should have preachers come home unto them, and be appointed over them for
to feed them. I might allege examples of good men which sought after Christ,
whom he did not forbid. Do ye think when the Lord commands us to seek
him so earnestly, and that in the mystery of his Gospel, that a few miles
ought for to stop us. How far think ye men run for a little earthly
substance? How far do they run on heaps, both men and women, unto feasts,
maygames, dauncings, plays, bearebatings, and other such vanities?


Ath. Youth will be doing, ye must not blame them, they have time enough to be
holy hereafter. I have had as great delight my self ere now in those things
as one, but now I wax old.


Zelot. I was sure ye would allow this kind of running from town to town,
this is no disorder at all: how many are there of ye, which cry out with
open mouth, against such as seek after the word, and seek for to trouble
and punish them for so doing, which once open your mouth against these foul
abuses? Whereas ye say, youth will be doing, ye say true, and so will many aged
likewise, but does it follow therefore that they must be suffered to do the
things which are evil? In that ye say, they have time enough to be holy
hereafter, therein you show yourselfe to be a right worldling, a very epicure,
an ignorant man: for thus your worldly Epicures do speak, youth will have
their race, let them alone, what should young men and maidens do with the
scriptures? clean contrary unto that which God speaks by his Prophet.
Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? even by taking heed thereto
according to thy word. Likewise by Solomon in the book of Ecclesiastes chap.
11. Remember thy creator in the days of thy youth. But now a days it is a
principal point of divinity, that youth may walk after the lusts of the
flesh, so long until through custom of sinning, they are so besotted and
hardened in their wicked lusts, and their concupiscences are grown so strong,
that there can no grace enter into them, and so it seems for to be with you,
for I dare warrant, you are able to tell a long tale of your youth tricks.


Ath. Well, I am as I am, you cannot make me better, and I trust ye shall make
me no worse. Ye speak as though none could be good but scripture men.


Zelot. None can be good but such as fear God, such as seek for to obey him:
None fear God, which set light by his ordinances and cast them behind their
backs: None can obey GOD, but such as do seek for to know and follow
those precepts which he utters in his word. None are godly, but such as
are cleansed, and guide their ways by the word. He which is of God hears
Gods word.


Ath. If they be so good and godly, how comes it to pass then, that there
is so much debate among them? for I know towns my self, which are even
divided one part against another, since they had a preacher, which were not so
before. This they gain, that whereas before they loved together, now there is
dissension sown among them.


Zelot. Now ye discharge your greatest ordinance: I trow ye have now paid
it home: It is hard if Satan cannot with this engine overthrow and beat
down Preaching. But I pray you tell me, can ye put fire and water together
but they will rumble? Will ye have light and darkness for to agree as
companions together?


Ath. What is this to the matter?


Zelot. Would ye have God and the Devil agree together? would ye have the
godly and the wicked for to be at one? this ye must do, ye look where the
fault is to be laid.


Ath. I think the fault must needs be laid upon the preaching, because
they agreed before that came.


Zelot. If their agreement together before had been good, then no doubt the
preaching that should break it, could not be good: for one good thing cannot
destroy another. But the former peace was not in GOD, but in the flesh:
neither was it so great as you would seem for to set it forth, because that
the worldlinges are always at strife, and one ready for to cut another
throat: but yet their hatred is so exceeding great against the Gospel, that
in respect of the mind, which they carry toward the professors thereof, they
seem among themselves to be at peace, and one to love and make much of
another.


Ath. Where is the fault then for to be laid?


Zelot. Upon the wicked which fret and rage against the word, because it lays
open and discloseth their filthiness, and bewrays them. For the light (as S.
Paul says) does manifest all things. They pretend other excuses, as though
they hated the professors for some evil conditions: but this is very evident,
a blind man may almost discern it, that so long as a man is void of religion,
and makes profession of no more then they; so long, although he be full, and
swarm with great vices, he is an honest man, but let him follow the word,
and be careful for to amend, then there is not a lewder fellow upon earth,
diverse flaunders shall be raised, things shall be reckoned up, which he did
seven years agone: and now they hate him like a dog. Light is come into the
world, and men love derkenesse more then light, because their works be evil.
Will ye charge Christ and his Gospel, because as he says, he came not to
send peace, but a swoorde, to set the father against the son? Math. 10. Or
will ye lay the blame upon those which love the light? Will ye blame S.
Paul and his preaching because there was stir and hurly burly almost
wheresoever he came? Was he to be blamed, or the wicked infidels, which could
not abide to have their sins reproved?


Ath. There be some places where they have grave and learned preachers, and yet
there is no such contention in their parishes: I like that well.


Zelot. You like that well: so does your master also.


Ath. What mean you by that? whom do ye call my master?


Zelot. Even the Devil, for he is content those preachers should ride upon
his back, because he is sure they will not spure* gall him: they be very
gentle riders. Do ye not think, that if they should set forth Gods word as
they ought, and spread the light: that all wicked men (of which their pari^he
are full) would storm and fret against them? the Devil himself would fiske
about, if they should spur him but a little. But they can tell a smooth tale
in the pulpit, garnished with some merry story, for to make the people merry, or
else some old rotten allegory: or some far fetched matter out of some great
writers, that the people may be at their wits end, and admit them. A man
would think to see the people come out of the Church blowing, that they were
fed as full as tickes; when they go home with empty bellies. This I dare
warrant, if it be not so, let me lose both mine ears, that go through the
parishes of these grave and learned divines, and except such as run to fetch
their victuals other where, ye shall not find five among fiuescore which are
able to understand the necessary grounds and principles of religion: and yet
the people will say they be excellent deep men: But I love not those* Wells
which are so deep that a man can draw no water out of them.


Ath. I see you like better of young rash heads and troublesome fellows, then
ye do of grave stayed men: for now a days there are a number which take
upon them to preach, which in deed do but prattle: and for my part, I will
believe none of them: but I will rather give credit to that which ancient
learned men do speak.


Zelot. I do utterly mislike, that any rash head should have the office of
preaching* which is a thing of so great dignity, as to be the mouth of God
unto the people, to utter the counsels and mysteries of the Lord, and to teach
them the way to salvation: and great dishonor to God and his Gospel it^ is,
if there be many such, as you say there be: but if they be godly, learned,
grave, discrete, and wise, and do faithfully and zealously* dispose the
manifold mysteries of God, the^ the matter is not whether they be young or
old: for the docttine which they do teach and expound, is not their own,
but the doctrine of Christ, the authority is not of them, but of GOD which
has given it. But I know your meaning: you count all those to be ignorant,
and to prattle, which do not preach according unto your humor* such as do
sharply inu^igh against your vanities: and those which do not, they be
lear*ned and grave men, let us believe them: and so ye look not what God
says, but what men say: and surely those kind of grave men do great hurt: I
mean such as carry a great show of learning in them, and scarce: any are the
better for it.


Ath. And surely I think they do much good.


Zelot. You think they do much good: but I know they do very much hurt: the
blind and unlearned Ministers are hurtful, those which are popish priests do
hurt; they which follow evil vices, as drunken ministers, swearers,
quarellers, adulterers, gamesters, and such like do hurt, but yet these which
you speak of, do more hurt: I will tell you how, where there is such an one
as those above named, the people have no great opinion of them, for they can*
easily say, alas our minister is not able nor meet for to teach us, and so
they are willing to hear and to be informed by others: but those which have
one of your profounde Clearkes, the people so much hang upon him, that they
will hear none other: This they say, our preacher is as profounde a man as any
of the^ all: if we were out of the way, he would tell us, if so much ^eaching
were needful, would not he teach us? If such things were evil, would he use
them? And so they conclude, that they care not for learning ought saving at his
mouth, when as in deed he teaches them little or nothing, peradventure he
gives them a cold collation once a month, and when a man shall take the proof
of them, he shall find that they are no better then such as have a dumb I
doll to their shepherd.


Ath. Is it not better for to have a sermon now and then, and to have it a
learned sermon: then for to have many without learning? I think one such
sermon does more good the^ an hundredth of those flying sermons.


Zelot. I grant thus much, that the word of God is to be handeled with great
care, men are not to step forth and to speak rashly, and without sure and
undoubted knowledge of the things which they utter.

Moreover, there ought to be such learning and discretion, as shall be
sufficient to open and to manifest the power and dignity of the word unto the
consciences of the hearers: he must be able for to make plain the sense of the
scriptures, and he must apply it to the hearers which does preach. For to
handle the holy mysteries of God unskillfully is a vice greatly to be condemned,
and I think such, although they preach never so often, shall do but little
good. But I pray you let me know which you count a learned sermon: and which ye
call a flying sermon?


Ath. That is a learned sermon, when the Preacher does lay open the matter
learnedly.


Zelot. You mean when he is able to speak much Latin, and to allege all
sorts of writers?


Ath. I count those learned fellows in deed, I will not give a button for
those English Doctors, which can allege no more but out of Paul and Peter.


Zelot. It would be a notable learned Sermon then, if the Preacher should
speak^ all latin.


Ath. Then we which do not understand latin should be never the better.


Zelot. If so little could pleasure you, then no doubt a whole sermon would
edify ye much. But such vain men as you. do show your vanity, when ye
look more after those things which should feed your ears, then for to have
your souls converted. Is that to be used which cannot edify at all, but
serves for a vain show, and disturbeth the mind and memory of the diligent
hearer? But let this go, and let us see the other, for alleging of writers,
in this matter ye have sundry grave men of your side, which count those
Sermons learned, which are set forth with all sorts of authorities, and those
which bring the bare word out of the Bible, they make but verbal Sermons: But
doubtless they may show some gravity in their beard, for there is none in
the matter.


Ath. Are they not thereby known for to be learned men, every Plowe man now
a days can allege out of Saint Paul.


Zelot They are thereby known for to be unskillful men, and such as are not
rightly instructed in the doctrine of S. Paul. They make a great show of
learning and yet want the knowledge of the dignity of gods word. When as they
bring in the sayings of Plato, and Aristotle, as fellows and companions with
the oracles of God uttered by his Prophets and Apostles, and as though there
were greater and deeper matter in those, then in the Bible, whereas all the
heavenly mysteries and counsels of God are uttered, they stick not to count
that unlearned which is brought from thence: and great learning to be in the
sayings of the other. For this cause they do also seek for to ga^^ish their
sermons, and as it were for to set them with pearl, when as in effect they do
nothing else, but as if a man should mingle lead with pure gold, and claye
with precious oil. And because ye speak or learning* tell me what ye think,
whether Saint Augustine or Saint Paul, was the better learned.


Ath. You should ask that question of such as are learned: would y^e have m^e
tell y^e?


Zelot. Is not he which does allege sentences out of Augustine, Ambrose,
Hierome, and Cyprian, better learned then they which allege out of Moses,
Esaias* Peter, Paul, or John?


Ath. I told ye before that every man can allege out of these, and if I
could ceade, and had a Bible, I could do it also: but to allege out of the
other, none can do that, but such as are great Clearkes.


Zelot. Then it seems that they were better then Paul, and Peter, or Moses,
or else why should they be esteemed to be better learned which do cite them?


Ath. If I might shoot my bolt* I think they were the l^arn^der, because
their writings are so pro^oun^e.


Zelot. I would you did think so alone, but in deed the people have been so
deluded with such as would make a show of learning, that multitudes are of
your mind* which brings in a vile and shameful abasing of the most holy and
sacred Bible. But let me ask ye certain questions. Do ye not think that
if the writings of those men were to be read in our tongue, that every man
then could be able to allege out of them, as they do out of the Bible?


Ath. I think they might then be able.


Zelot. Do ye suppose those should by and by be esteemed for to be learned*
which do then allege sayings out of them?


Ath. I s^e no cause why then they should not be counted so.


Zelot. Is he learned in the Bible, which can allege many sentences?


Ath. A man may speak much and know little.


Zelot. You might see likewise that men may allege sayings out of great
Doctors, and yet themselves be great Dawes: for he is learned whom God does
teach for to understand the heavenly mysteries uttered by the Prophets and
Apostles* and in uttering them, does follow the steps of Paul and the
rest. The Doctors had all their true learning out of the Bible: for in it is
se^^e forth that* wisdom which is above all.


Ath. The Scriptures are dark and hard, and^ therefore men now do not
understand them as the Doctors did. And for this cause, I have heard preachers
say, they are to be vouched.


Zelot. Those Preachers might have bin wiser, then for to maintain two so
gross opinions* The first, accusing the Scriptures of such darkness, as
though they could not b^e understood, whereas in deed the principal and
most necessary points, the Lord has spoken so clearly, that very simple
men may be taught for to see the plain evidence of the word. The other
depriueth the Church of the true interpreter of the word, which is the
spirit of God, as though the Lord did not now give such gifts as he gave to
those Doctors: which is a popish opinion also: for so long as God gives his
word to the Church, so long he gives the interpreter of the same* although
not in all ages alike: but whosoever is not blind, may easily see, that* in
this age there be as great gifts bestowed upon the Church, as ever were in
any* since the time of the Apostles.


Ath. Then you are one of those which deface the old Fathers, when ye will
not allow them for to (...) the* Sermons. To what use then should ^^^ read
them?


Zelot. That is a very false accusation* should a man be accused for
de^^^ing the honor of the Lord Chancellor, because he would deny him the
dignity and honor of the prince* Likewise shall a man be say de for to
iniu^ie or deface* the Doctors, because he will not give them the dignity
which does belong unto God alone? The preacher is the mouth of God unto the
people, and not the mouth of men? he is not* for to utter doubtful matter and
vncertay^e, but such as may be most evident. He must say, and prove even unto
the conscience of the hearer, thus God speaks, and thus he means. He can
not say Augustine says it, therefore God says it, Augustine says it,
therefore it is undoubtedly true: for Augustine might and did err many ways.
But he may say, Saint Paul says it, therefore GOD him self says it, S.
Paul says, therefore it is undoubtedly true: for look what he says, or any
other Apostle* Evangelist or Prophet, God has set it down, by them, it is
his, and not theirs: they are but the instruments which he used for to utter
and pen his will* his spirit in them ruled* the whole in this case, so that
they did not, nor could not err: now when the preacher does lay open their
saying, not he, nor they, but GOD* speaks: as they were the mouth of God for*
to set it down, so is he now again the mouth of God, for to recite and
declare it*


Ath. The word of God is certain and* sure, because God cannot lie, but how
shall* I ^^^we which is their ^^ sense of it ^ shall* I believe every man
which does interprer* the word* shall I not the better believe (...) if he say
it is not my interpretation, but S. Jerome he says so, S. Augustine he says
so I promise ye, he shall have the greater credit with me, for they were
other manner of men then he.


Zelot. I cannot but ^^ruell to see how gross and dull your head is for to
learn the truth, and how readily you can bring out such matters as this: ye
speak not of your own head. I would there were no greater learned men then
you blinded in this matter. But let me show ye your gross error* Ye say
the word is certain and sure: but the interpretation thereof ye make
doubtful: but what are we the better that the word of God is sure and
certain, unless it be sure and certain unto us, which cannot be except the
interpretation be so? It is as good for you to say the word is doubtful, as
for to say the sense is doubtful: Now when as ye hang the sense upon men*
can ye deny but that still it is in doubt? This must needs arise in the
mind, those Doctors said so, but they might err, and therefore I am not
certain that this is the sense. If this shall be admitted in the Church, what
shall become of that (...)* or full certainty of faith, which the word of
GOD does require to be in us, it is grounded upon the word of God, for it
cannot stand otherwise.

Moreover, faith is sure what God means, or else it is no faith: therefore
such as would hang men's says upon the authority of men, where they must
needs still be in doubt, and when they are at the furthest, they come but unto
this, it is (...) like for to be true, because such notable men speak it, do
not know a right what faith is, for that ye say, he shall have the more
credit with you, if he say, It is not my saying, but the saying of Augustine:
therein ye were even as good say, that your faith is built upon men, and not
upon God. For if ye do believe, because some great learned or Godly man,
tells ye the matter, this is no true belief, for we must be fully
persuaded that God him self does tell us, or else we be never the near.


Ath. How shall I know when GOD speaks, ^^ which God speaks* you come and
preach one way, another comes and* he does, proache another way, ye
preach one contrary to another: you say God speaks, he says God speaks,
which shall we believe* Is not ^ee to ^e^ best believed, which can show that
those great doctors are on his side.


Zelot. See what a ground you leave unto, you know not when GOD speaks, not
what God speaks: and therefore ye will have some of the old Doctors for to
tell: are ye sure he tells ye right? if ye be, it is because he shows
ye the word of God, why he tells ye so, the credit must be given unto the
word, and not to the man. But you say ye can not tell when one does allege
the word in the true meaning, how then, can ye tell when one alleges the
doctor in the true meaning: he which will falsify the word of God in the
Bible, he will not stick for to falsify the meaning of the Doctor: you may
search the scriptures, to see whether the testimonies alleged be so, as the
men of Berea did, when Paul preached Act. 17. 11. You cannot, neither are ye
commanded for to search the doctors. And unless ye see the manifest (...)
of gods word, ye are not bound for to believe, but if it be plainly showed,
that God has spoken, then ye are bound under the (...) of damnation, for to
give credit unto it. Christ says* My sheep, hear my voice, a stranger
they will not hear. John 10. Also S. John says, brethren, believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of God. 1. John 4. he therefore
which says, I cannot tell when the voice of Christ is uttered, it is all one
as if he should say, I am none of the sheep of Christ, because (as he says)
Every one of his sheep do know his voice. He that says, I know not which
Preacher does preach truth, and which falsehood, he may even as well say, I am
none of those, to whom the holy Ghost speaks, and says: Try the spirits
whether they be of God, it is a general precept given unto all Christians.


Ath. Ye shall never make me believe that every man is for to judge, whether
the Preacher speak true or false.


Zelot. I know not what I shall be able for to make you believe, but I am sure
I can plainly show what ye ought to believe. First, mark this, the word
came not from man, neither can a man teach it ye, unless God reveal it by
his spirit: if it were the wisdom of the world, or of the flesh, then the
spirit of the world which is in man and knows the secrets of man, could
teach it: but because it is the mystery of GOD, none can make ye learn it,
but the holy Ghost, which searches even the deep things of God, as S. Paul
teaches. 1. Cor. 2. 10 S. John in his first Epistle, Chap. the second, having
told them that there were even then many Antichrists, he comfort them with
this. You says he, have received an anointing from the holy one, and know all
things. Like as therefore none of those can learn, who^ God does not inlighten
with his spirit: so on the contrary part all those which are taught within by
the spirit, do feel when the doctrine which the same spirit has taught, is
uttered: he knows his own, and he seals it up in their hearts and
consciences, which being instructed by him, must needs consent thereto fully.
For this cause there is great difference between such as set all upon the
authorities of men, and such as preach, as S. Paul says he did with the plain
evidence of the spirit, and of power, 1. Cor. 2. 4. he adds the reason in the
next verse, that their faith should not consist in the wisdom of men, but in
the power of God. If faith may not hang upon the wisdom of men, and therefore
the intising speech which man's wisdom teaches, is to be avoided in setting
forth the Gospel, then can it not stand upon the authorities of men.


Ath. Is it not lawful in any respect for to allege them?


Zelot. Yes, no doubt there are circumstances, which may make it sometime very
needful I speak only against this, that they are alleged when as we may
allege the same things out of the word it self. And when they are alleged,
for men to build their faith upon, or to make men think that there can be no
certainty in the interpretation of the word, but where as they are made for
to speak: When as in deed the Preacher in his Sermon must come with such
evidence and make his proof so plain and so strong, that it must needs
convince the conscience of the hearers, in such wise that of necessity he
shall be forced for to say, undoubtedly that which this man utters, is that
which God himself speaks: for so says the Apost. 1. Cor. 14. 24 If, says
he, all do prophecy, and there come in an infidel, or one unlearned, he is
reproved of all, he is judged of all: and so the secrets of his heart are made
manifest, and falling upon his face, he will worship God, confessing that God
is verily among you. This testimony does show that the force of Gods word
uttered nakedly is* such, that it conuicteth the heart of the infidel, and
co^pelleth him for to confess that God is with the^ which speak it.

The word of God is described in the Epistle to the Hebrwes Chap. 4. 12. after
this sort: the word of God (says he) is lively and mighty in operation,
sharper then any two edged sword, and enters in unto the dividing asunder of
the soul and the spirit, of the joints and the marrow, and is a discerner of
the thoughts and intents of the heart. Men might understand by this, that by
whom soever this sword of the spirit be drawn forth, if it be rightly
handled, it will pearse through, and through both the bodies and souls of the
hearers, and will move every vein in the heart, even of the wicked. So that he
needs not for to grind it, or make it sharp upon the grindstone of Ambrose
or Hierom.


Ath. Then you destroy learning, if ye take away the writings of the
Doctors, for they serve to no use: if it be as you say, why should students
read them?


Zelot. There is great benefit in the reading of them, for to help us to the
true understanding of the scriptures.


Ath. If they help ye to understand the scriptures, wherefore do ye not when
ye expound the scriptures, tell which is theirs? Ye rob them, and take the
glory to your selves.


Zelot. Now ye reason as bussardlike as can be, ye may be a Doctor of
Dunces, for this argument. Does the Preacher come in his own name, must he
tell his own will, or is he to seek his own glory or the glory of any other
man? If other have helped him to find the knowledge of Gods will, which he
must utter, it is therefore become theirs, because they have showed it unto
him: If he now set it forth in the name of the Lord alone, whose it is, does
he rob them? For look whatsoever a man finds in the ancient writers in
expounding, he is no further to believe them then they prove their exposition
out of the Bible: so that it continues still not theirs, but the Lords* and
if we should ascribe it unto them, we should rob the Lord, and be thieves
for other men. Therefore in this matter, we must follow the precept which the
Lord gives. 1, Peter 4. 11. He that speaks let him speak as the words of
God.


Ath. Is that so meant, that it is not alow^^to cite any thing out of other
books besides the word?


Zelot. I told ye before that it is not simply unlawful for to cite or
allege a sentence out of a Doctor. But the manner and end of the dooyng of
it is all: I say likewise that a man may in some sort allege a saying out of
any Heathen or profane Writer: for we have the example of Saint Paul Acts.
17. 1. Corinthians. 15. Titus 1. Alleging the sayings of profane Poets. But we
must see to what end: does he reason thus, the Poet says it, therefore are
ye to give credit unto it: no man would be so foolish as to make their
words being Heathen men, to be of such authority: but he shows that even
their own Doctors consented with him in those things. And therefore a shame,
and foul reproach for them too be ignorant of the same. When the Papists do
charge us to be gone from the faith of the old Fathers, although we are to
confute them this way, namely, by showing their treachery and lying, when we
are able to prove by the writings of the ancient Fathers that in the chief
points they fully agree with us: yet this is not the way which God has
appointed and sanctified for the conversion and education of his people: this
engine is over weak to rear up the Temple of the Lord: we must take heed we
leave not the mighty word it self, and lean unto a tottering pillar: Saint
Paul shows the power of the word. 2. Corinthians. 10. where he says, although
we walk in the flesh, yet we war not after the flesh: for the weapons of
our warrefare are not carnal, but mighty in God for to throw down holds:
which he expounds in the verse which follows, to be the imaginations and
every high thing which is exalted against the knowledge of God, and every
thought, which (he says) they lead captive unto the obedience of Christ.
There is no power nor any authority can do these things, but that which is
in the word of God it self. Which is to be made so evident by the Preacher,
that it may bring this thing to pass.

The miserable experience in our time of such as fly from the strong power of
the word, and fight with the weapons of men, may reach us, because it
does manifestly appear unto all which have eyes too see, that they are not
strong enough to throw down holds, and to lead captive unto the obedience
of Christ the rebellious thoughts and imaginations of men's minds: they cannot
show a man by them converted sincerely and thoroughly from errors and evil
manners: by alleging the authorities of men. It was not the practice of the
ancient and godly fathers in their Sermons for to leave the testimonies of the
mighty word, which is able to rent the stony rock in pieces, and to cleave to
the authorities of weak men, which were gone before them. But what should a
man say? The word is thought to be of no power unless it be strengthened
otherwise.

But let us leave this and come back again to some of your other matters. I
remember ye did lay this as a great accusation against the preachers that they
meddled with predestination.


Ath. I did so and not without cause, for they do great hurt thereby unto many,
when they teach such things.


Zelot. What hurt can ye show, which comes by preaching of predestination.


Ath. If a man be chosen for to be saved, let him do as evil as he can he
shall not be damned: and if a man be appointed before he was borne to be
damned, let him do never so much good he can not be saved: and therefore
when ye teach this doctrine, ye were even as good tell the people that they may
live as they lust: Let them never hear teaching, to what purpose should it
serve?


Zelot. How proud and presumptuously bold ignorance does make a man? It
might seem to be a rare thing that a mortal man, which is but claye and
dust, yea a rotten Carrion should advance himself against God, even the Lord
of infinite wisdom and glory, but that we see it daily for to be common.


Ath. Do not accuse me for to be proud, I would I were as free from all other
faults if it pleased God.


Zelot. If ye were as sick, as ye be proud, a very little meat would give
ye your supper. But I know you do not see your pride.


Ath. I marvel why ye should count ^^ proud, ye see how plain I go.


Zelot. You think that pride is in the coat, when it is in the heart, a man
may have a kings heart in his breast, and yet a beggars coat upon his
back. There is cause why ye do not go gay, ye are not able: for take the
ragged dest beggar in the world, and give her the same wing which the great
Ladies have, and ye shall see her fly the same flight. There is pride against
GOD, and against men, and you are in the deepest of them, even against God.


Ath. Prove that, because ye condemn me so sore.


Zelot. Ye take your self for to be wise, and the Lord indiscreet and
unwise. For ye charge him with folly when as ye say this doctrine does
overthrow all, and yet he has expressed it in sundry places of his word.
If it be so exceeding hurtful, then surely Christ was to be blamed: Saint
Paul, and saint Peter with the rest of the Apostles were very indiscreet,
because they have set it forth. It seems that it had been good for them to
have taken advise of the deep heads of the world, which might have
foretold them the danger which would follow, and have said, Masters take
heed how ye deal with such doctrine, it will turn ye unto discretite. O
foolish wise flesh, this matter is over far beyond thy reach, thou can
never come within the smell of it.


Ath. Smell, or smell not, let me hear ye aunsweare the matter.


Zelot. You suppose that your reasons are unanswerable, and that causes ye
to be so fresh and ready, but alas man, your halfepenie is no good silver,
ye are in a wrong box, I will show you how childishly ye err.

Forsooth say you, if God has chosen a man to salvation before he was borne,
then let him do as evil as he can, he shall not be damned: and whereas the
nature of man is prone and ready to seek after the liberty of the flesh,
this does open a door unto him, and a wide passage unto all evil, because he
needs not to care what he does, it is appointed before hand what shall
become of him.

This mighty and invincible reason of yours has never an eye to see with all,
and although it seem for to have good legs yet is it but an old Criple: be
not led by it for ye shall both fall into the ditch. Did ye never hear what
S. Paul says, Ephesians. Chapter I. 4. these are his words, as he has
chosen us in him, before the foundations of the world were laid, that we
should be holy and without blame before him through love. How stand these
two things together, when you say if men be chosen they may live as they lust,
and God says by his Apostle, that he has chosen them for to be holy and
blameless in their conversation. And this is undoubtedly true, that those whom
God has predestinate to be heirs of glory, he has sealed them with the
holy Spirit, as ye may read in the same Chapter. They are freed from the
bondage of sin by the spirit, they walk in the spirit, they are led by the
spirit, they show forth by the fruits of the spirit, that the flesh with
the lusts and concupiscences thereof is crucified in them, and that they are
regenerate and (...) again of the spirit, and so become new creatures in
Christ, sin is abominable unto them, they hate and loath it no less then
deadly poison, they pant and breath to be wholly set free from the remnantes of
it. Righteousness is dear and precious unto them, their joy and hearts
delight is in it. They sigh and groan, because they can not reach unto the
perfection of it. The word of God does plainly teach, that the elect are thus
as I have showed: and yet men say that election takes away all care of Godly
life.


Ath. I like not this, that men will say, they know God has chosen them: how
can they tell? Can any man tell what God will do with him? Did God ever tell
them, that they are elected:


Zelot. How should you like of this, when as ye like of no goodness? How
should you which are but a natural man, judge of things spiritual? You
think a man can not tell what GOD will do with him: because you are blind and
see not the way: ye suppose all other are so: you are an Infidel, or else ye
might plainly hear GOD speak in his word, and tell which shall be saved, and
which are in the way to damnation. Do ye suppose that it is uncertain when
the scripture tells a man how he shall know that he is chosen, if the
word of God tell him he is chosen, has not God himself then told him? Read
the first Chapter of the second Epistle of Peter, and there ye shall see how
a man shall know certainly that he is elected, and that he shall never fall.
For if a man feel that GOD teaches him by his spirit, and renews him by
repentance, he is sure (because God says so) that he is chosen to eternal
life: if at any time he feel the grace of GOD weak in him, then does he
doubt and stagger, but yet his faith gets the upper hand. On the other
side, when a man lives in sin, and obeys unrighteousness: God tells him
plainly that he is in the way to damnation. And therefore all those which do
not find in them selves the spiritual birth at the least begun whereby they
may assure them selves that they be chosen: May certainly say, that as yet
their state is damnable.


Ath. How can ye say their state is damnable, so long as they believe? Can
men do more then believe?


Zelot. They do not believe: for if they believe, then are they sure that GOD
loves them, what is it else which they believe? if they know they be in
favor with God, it is because he chose them in Christ. If they doubt of Gods
favor then do they doubt whether God hears their prayers, and therefore
they shall not receive any thing at the hands of GOD, as ye may learn in the
Epistle of Saint James. Chapter 1. verse 6, 7. and although many of the
faithful do doubt and stagger oftentimes, yet they are not like the
unfaithful which continue in the same, but they get the upper hand, they
strive by prayer, and by all other means which god has appointed, to
strengthen and increase their faith, their knowledge, their repentance, and so
far to grow in grace, until they come to assurance that God has chosen
them. As for the wicked they know of no such faith, that a man may atraine to
assurance of his election: they labor not about any such matter, but continue
still in their blind doubts, setting all upon hazard: and as for their doing
what they can, it is nothing, they cannot but sin, and therefore be damned,
howesoeuer they seem for to do good works, yet before God they are no good
works, because they proceed not of faith, but from the flesh* they are not
grafted into the true vine, Christ, and for that cause can bring forth no
fruit. Ioh. 15.


Ath. If GOD had chosen men before ^^^ world ^o be saved* Wherefore did
Christ dye for to save them? If they should be saved before, his death was
more then needed. Wherefore should men be taught, wherefore should they pray^
all these are in vain.


Zelot. You are like unto a man which does make strife and debate between
brethren and friends: you would set prayer and teaching, and the death of
Christ, together by the ears with Gods election: but do what ye can, all
these will agree well together, they be so unseparably knit in friendship. God
has chosen men for to be redeemed in his son. For the scripture shows that
we are chosen in Christ. He has chosen men to be instructed and called by
preaching the word, he has chosen men for to call upon him and to worship
him, in holiness and righteousness, all the days of their life.


Ath. Ye speak much of preaching, preaching as though it were so needful: Can
they make the word of God better then it is? Is there not enough set down in
the Bible for men to read, wherefore should they add more? Can not men read
that? Is not reading preaching?


Zelot. Now ye seek new starting holes* There is some Colt so wild, that he
will trouble half a dosen light men of foot for to drive him: he will in at
every gappe, turn at every lane, and out at every gate. Even so I can liken
the reasoning with such as you are: ye have so many by shifts, so many
cauils, so many turninges, that ten of the best learned in this land, shall
hardly be able to keep ye in the way. But we must not leave ye thus but
bring ye into the way again. Preaching is not so needful, they can make the
word of God no better then it is: why man they do not preach for to make the
word better, but for to make you better. There is enough set down in the
Bible, but you understand little enough of it. Men may read it, as a great
number do which pervert it, and are nothing bettered by it, because they seek
not help for to understand it. Reading say you is preaching. Truly then I
know a man which has a little daughter that is a trim Preacher. I perceive
our land is full of Preachers: but yet in deed not such as Saint Paul
describes. For the little girl is not apt to teach, able to instruct, to
exhort, to convince, not to divide or cut the word of God aright, nor to open
the Mysteries of it. If ye leap over many of these ditches, ye will break
your neck in the end: ye are a very skillful man, when ye take expounding
and applying the word of God, for to be adding: for ye ask why they should
add.


Ath Are not men allowed which are but readers, even by the learned in the
land? Do ye find fault with the Bishops? or are ye one of those which
do not allow of Bishops? for such fellows there be now a days.


Zelot I would ye should know that I am none of those which disalow Bishops:
when as the word of God does set it down to be a worthy work: it is a very
reverend office, and exceedingly they are to be blamed, which do contemn it,
or deface it. God has ordained the office of Bishops in his Church, for to
govern and feed his people: such as would abolish this ordinance of God, do
resist God, and are enemies unto the Church of Christ.


Ath. By my faith, I like ye the better for that.


Zelot. I like you never the better for your swearing.


Ath. I am not so precise as too make any account of swearing by my faith.


Zelot. I think so, for faith is no more account made of, then as a
packehorse, all is laid on his back.


Ath. I pray God we may do no worse, and then I hope we shall do well
enough: are you without sin? I doubt not but ye will commit as great offense
to GOD as this, or ever the week be ended. Pull the beam out of your own
eye: If every man would look to himself, there should not be so much
finding fault one with an other.


Zelot. Where learn ye that prayer in the scripture? The Prophet David, Psalm
19. Prays to be cleansed from his secret sins, although they be never so
small. Where learned ye to speak after this sort, no worse, and that ye
hope then to do well enough: Is it nothing to break so straight a rule of
Christ? Do ye not think that children dying in their infancy, before they
can speak or work are damned for less sins. I speak of such as are not of
Gods Church. When as they have only original sin* You know not from how evil
a root this ^inne does spring: neither doee ye know the foulness of sin,
and therefore ye cannot tell how much God does abhor it, and condemn it. For
this cause, being as full of filthy vices and profane sins as ye ca^ be
thrust, and of such in deed as God does curse and hate: because they seem
small unto you, ye suppose ye shall do well enough. What if I have greater in me
or that I shall commit greater as you say before the week be ended, does that
excuse you? I have many secret sins in me, which I do not see because I do
not perfectly understand the law of God: for these I do earnestly entreat the
Lord to make them known unto me, by giving me more perfect understanding of
his will, and also to give me power for to cast them out. I have also many
sins in me which I see and know, that clean so fast, that I cannot utterly
cast them forth: notwithstanding I hate and abhor them, I am weary of them,
I fight against them, I groan and sigh in my heart with sorrow for them, I
feel no sweetness in them: for they are more bitter then Gall unto my soul.
I am exceeding glad when I can suppress them, I have professed and vowed a
continual war against them, and although I prevail not so far as to be
utterly rid of them, yet I labor by meditation in gods word, and by hearty
prayer, to bring them under, that they reign not over me, nor that I may not
agree with them: and although I be not able to become perfect, yet with all the
might I can, I strain and breath to come as nigh perfection as I can: my
desire is good to reach it, and although I find that I come many degrees short,
yet I approach nearer and nearer. This is true repentance, this is that which
S. Paul sets forth in himself. Romans 7. Philip. 3. With this I know God is
pleased* without this there cannot be any service done to God.


Ath. I like not when men will spy a mote in another man's eye.


Zelot. Our Savior Christ does not forbid to epsy a mote in an other man's
eye, for we are commanded to admonish one an other, what soever it be wherein
we do amiss: but such as you, which can not abide to be admonished, do ever
allege that saying of Christ, as though he had spoken it unto this end,
that one should not admonish an other. It is a ^oule hypocrisy for a man to be
curious in reproouing small faults in other, and make no conscience of great
and foul vices in him self. Every man ought to look unto himself, and
every man is bound by the word of God, and charity, to look unto others,
and to convert them from their sins if they can. To convert a sinner from
going astray, and to save a soul from death. As S. James speaks. Chap. 5.
verse. 20. And so to cover a multitude of sins, is a blessed thing, and ought,
to move men with diligence to use charitable admonition.


Ath. If they would do it in charity, I could like of it: but men have no
love, they do it because they are precise and captious.


Zelot. Let a man see ye commit any foul crime, and reprove ye, your
answer is by and by, ye may not judge: when as the matter is plain and does
judge it self: Now when a man does admonish you, according as God
commands, ye are bold with the same mouth, which said, ye ought not to
judge, for to judge him, affirming that he does it of a captious and
quarrelling mind: the thing being so exceeding good of it self: who made you
able for to see into the heart of a man, and to find that he does it not well.
You are those of whom the Prophet speaks, Woe be unto those which call good
evil, and evil good, If he be a man spotted with vices himself, and does
reprove another, not caring for to amend, ye may boldly say he does it of an
evil mind: for can he be charitable unto other men, to seek their
conversion, and not to be charitable unto himself to seek his own
salvation: Or can he hate ungodliness in other, and not hate it in himself?


Ath. Well, the best of us all may be amended, we have all infirmittes: what
would ye have more then this, at the last for to call for mercy: If a man be
sorry and ask God forgiveness, is he not even as well as they which are the
most precise: the mercy of GOD must save all: and what would ye have a man
care for more then to be saved: I pray God I may have time to repent in the
end.


Zelot. Here is good stuff, here is sound divinity: I may well term this
reason even the porter of hell, for it opens even the widest* gate, that a
thousand may go in on a rank.

This is true, that the best of us all may be amended, and that we have all
infirmities: but ye do wickedly apply it, for when ye should reason thus,
the best may be ameded, the most holy are spotted, and therefore as Saint Paul
does teach, they must endeavor for to proceed forward: for the word of God
wills men to strive and contend even against all uncleanness, and never to
cease, but to come as nigh perfection as is possible. But you reason quite
contrary, that because the best are sinners, therefore men are to make small
account to amend. Ye should think thus, the most godly have need to sorrow
and mourn, and proceed in repentance, therefore how much need, have such
as are gross sinners. For our Savior Christ does show, John 8. That whosoever
commits sin, is the servant of sin: Now so long as a man is the
servant of sin, so long is he not the servant of God, for no man can serve
two so contrary masters. Saint John says, he that commits sin, is of the
Devil. Where learned ye this, that a man may continue in his vices all his
life, and at the last call for mercy? God commands men to repent speedely,
and not to put of from day to day? He threatens exceeding sharply, in the
first Chapter of the Proverbs, that when he has called and cried unto men for
to return from their evil ways, and they have refused, that at the last,
they shall call and not be heard: he will laugh when their destruction
comes upon them: they shall seek him, but not find him. Do you think
that when God has called and we refuse, that we shall not call and he refuse?


Ath. The scripture says, that what time soever a sinner does repent him of
his sin, God will forgive him.

Zelot. If the scripture speak any thing to the comfort of the sorrowful
heart, the Devil does teach the impenitent for to abuse it to their
hardening. It is most true that at what time soever a sinner does repent, his
sins are all forgiven, but is it in a man's choice for to repent when he
will, can he take a new heart when it does please him can he have the new
birth, and a right spirit when he will? It is God which does create a man a
new, or makes him a new creature in Christ, when it pleases him. A man
needs, not for to care for any thing but to be saved, but that is not so
easy a matter as men think. Strive for to enter in at the straight gate
(says Christ) for many shall strive and shall not enter. The way is narowe
and the gate is straight which leads unto life, and few there be which
find it: and if this be true which you say, that a man may live in sin all
his life, and at the last be saved even for vtteling a few words: Then the
way is broad and easy, who cannot find it, who almost does not walk in it*
But alas, it is a broken staff which men do lean unto. God is very
merciful, but not to those which despise his Gospel, for vengeance belongs
unto such: it is impossible (says the holy Ghost. Hebr. 2.) that such should
escape. And although ye have never so long time to repent, if God do not work
it in ye, you shall die in that blindness and hardness of heart in which
ye have lived: we must seek in our life time to be begotten by the word:
for the scripture says God does beget his children by that.


Ath. Shall not man hope for to repent at the last?


Zelot. Mark what repentance is: and try whether ye can repent now, it ye
cannot, what moves ye to think that ye shall be able then?


Ath. I hope I do repent now, and shall do at the end.


Zelot. Repentance is a returning home unto God from all evil vices and
corrupt desires which are in the flesh and in the heart. To be renewed by
repentance, cannot be but where a man is renewed in knowledge, for that is one
part of the image of GOD which must be restored in us: Read in the 4. Chapter
to the Ephe. from the 17. verse forward. If a man continue in darkness, he
does not repent: He which commits his foul sins still, although it be but
in the desire of his heart, has not repented. He which does not feel sorrow
and grief, and has not a broken and contrite heart, and a sorrowful spirit,
has not repented: he which does not eschew evil and do good, has not
repented: All these are taught by the word, for that is it by which we must
cleanse, our ways: and therefore ye may boldly say, that he which learneth not
out of Gods word to repent, cannot repent: for although if it were possible
he could repent for all other sins, yet this one sin, to set light by the
instruction of the Gospel, will make still worse then they of Sodom, as our
Savior does tell us* Math. 11.


Ath. Will you condemn those which call for mercy at their end which never
repented before?


Zelot. We may not pronounce upon any one man, because GOD only sees what
is in man. But yet we may boldly go so far as the word of God does lead
us: and by it we may see what GOD requires and what God does condemn. We
may see that the common and general repentance which all profess at their
end is not so much as a shadow of true repentance: repentance cannot be in
a man, especially upon a sudden, but he must needs feel a wonderful
change in him self: he must needs be able for to say I have repented, I
know and feel that I am a new man, and therefore because I know most
certainly that there is repentance in me, I know most certainly that I
shall be saved: for GOD promises salvation unto every one which does
repent. In the common repentance men feel no such thing: But are still (as they
may be well enough) in doubt of salvation.


Ath. Shall not all such as call upon God be heard? surely I dare not but
think they shall.


Zelot. I am sure because the Lord does speak it. That whosoever does call
upon him shall be saved. But yet ye must put this in, that then they must
pray in faith, as for the prayers of a wicked man which does not repent, and
therefore has not the true faith they are no prayers before GOD, although he
cry loud, or call never so often: for unto such the Lord speaks in the
first Chapter of the Prophet Isaiath, When ye stretch forth your hands, I
will turn away mine eyes from ye. Also if ye multiply your prayer I will
not hear. Likewise the holy Ghost says by Solomon in the Proverbs that the
sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination. And in the same book it is said.
He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be
abominable, and therefore in the latter end of the fourth Chapter of
Ecclesiastes, he advises men when they come into the house of GOD, to take
heed to their fe^ete: and to be readier to hear then to offer the sacrifice
of fools. For (says he) they know not that they do evil. Now ye shall
find many m^n* ^rye in their miseries and make great confession of their
ungodly life: but yet without true repentance, as it is manifest, for so soon
as the prosper again, ye shall see them return to their old by as: if they
had truly repented, then should it ever continue with them, many that live
in malice, so soon as they be daungerously sick, will be ready to ask
forgiveness, and to forgive all the world. They know it booteth not to bear
malice any longer, but so long as they be able to craulle out of their bed,
and to stand upon their legs, ye shall see their old withered malice (as
it seemed) spring a fresh again, which is a strong proof, that they never
truly repented, howsoever they thought they did. And even so is it in all
other sins, they seem unto men for to repent, they ask* GOD forgiveness,
but yet the heart abides still the same that it was before God: there is no
change in them before God: they have not put of the sinful body of the
flesh: there is no change in them before God: howesoeuer they seem to be
changed before men. This counterfeit repentance makes men bold all their life
to despise the holy word of God, which should instruct and guide them: it
causes them at their end not to fear the wrath of God, no^ the vengeance to
come: because they think GOD is satisfied with this repentance, and also
because they know not their sins, they suppose that they are but over the
shoes, when as they are drowned in the goulfe of uncleanness over head and
^ares.


Ath. God help us if it be thus how shall poor men do then?


Zelot. Men must apply them selves all their life to seek for the knoweledge
of GOD, to increase in says and repentance, that when they come to their
end, they may have a testimony of conscience, that they have feared God.

Likewise, when ye come to a sick man and ask how he does, if he can but
say, as it pleases GOD, ye answer, that is enough neighbor, hold ye
there: If he say I have offended GOD, and I pray GOD have mercy upon me,
there needs no more as you think. Ye should teach them the Law, that
they may see how they have offended God, ye should show them the fearful
curse, and horrible ^^^^gea^^^^ due unto sin, that so they may (...)ken with
remo^^e and sorrow* ye should show them also the glad tidings of the
Gospel, and what Christ offers unto the penitent sinner: ye should teach
them what holiness GOD requires at their hand, how they may come unto it,
what promise they have made unto GOD of it in baptism. Ye should instruct
them in all the principal points of the faith. That so they may have the
renewing faith which shall justify and save them.


Ath. What difference can you show between those which are taught as you
would have them and such as have knowledge, they can no more but repent, call
for mercy, and believe? And this do they as well as the other.


Zelot. You think there is no difference, but there is this difference, that
the one part does believe and repent in deed, and the other but in word: as
our Savior Christ Matthew. 15. alleges the saying of God by his Prophet.
This people draw near me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips,
but their heart is far from me.


Ath. That is meant when a man does speak with his mouth, and means not with
his heart, but these have a good meaning in their mind.


Zelot. It is meant when a man approaches with his mouth, and has still a
wicked heart, and an evil conscience, for those do remove a man so far from
God, that no blind intent can make him near unto him. God looks for great
things in the hearts of those which call upon him.


Ath. I think God accepts the prayer of the honest poor man as well as of
any other, and will hear him as soon, as he will hear the prayer of those
which know most, and are the best learned.


Zelot. God is no accepter of persons, he hears the poor as well as the
rich, the unlearned as well as the learned, so that their prayers be made
aright. But if ye speak of those honest men which are so called, and yet are
void of all knowledge of Gods word, and of religion, it is an easy matter
for to prove that their prayers are not good.


Ath. Can ye have any better prayer then the Lords prayer, when they pray
that, can ye require more?


Zelot. There can be no better prayer then the Lords prayer, and he which
prays that right must needs be saved. But let me ask you this question,
what if a man pray the Lords prayer with his mouth and regards it not in his
heart, shall his prayer be good?


Ath. His prayer cannot be good, he does but mock God.


Zelot. Then tell me this, a man prays thus, hallowed be thy name, in word
he seems to desire that the name of God may be sanctified and honored: he
goes his way, and blasphemeth the name of GOD, or hears it blasphemed and
never cares, rayleth upon his word, dishonors him, do ye not think that
he made a sweet preyer? In the like manner he says, thy will be done in
earth as it is in heaven, he goes away and is so far from desiring to do the
will of God, that he never cares for to know it. Whereby it is evident that
he little meant with his heart that which he said with his tongue.

Moreover, he would seem in words to crave of God, that he and others
might do the will of God in earth, as the Angels do in heaven: and yet tell
him when he breaks the will of God, and his answer is, I am not so
precise, I am not so curious, I will not be so holy, you are full of the
spirit: and then he will even reproach that which he seemed for to pray for.
And these are the prayers of those poor honest men which you think God
hears as well as the prayers of any other. I might go thorough all the
petitions and find the like. It is exceeding great pity that men want
instruction: for a great multitude do trust to their prattling prayers, when as
they do not either understand what they lay, or else mean the contrary.


Ath. If a man labor all the week truly and honestly, and upon the Sabbath
day come to the Church and make his prayers, shall we say God regarded not
his prayer, because he does not understand what he prays: his intent is
good, he does his good will: he has a wife and children to provide for, he
must follow the world, and let preaching go, or else he shall beg: and so
long as he does hurt no man, but deals uprightly: I think God does
require no more at his hands. Such as have naught else for to do let them
seek for knowledge.


Zelot. Ye are like unto a hedge which is full of briars and pricking thorns,
a man cannot lay hold on ye unless ye bring his hedging gloves, and his
bill. Ye have many things to shroude your self under, and to keep the truth
from touching of ye, as the Lord in his word has set forth the whole armor
for a Christian soldier: so likewise Satan does by suggestion teach men to
arm themselves against the Lord. But ye must be stripped of your armor, at the
least ye must be showed that it is no armor of proof. Ye say that if a man
labor truly and honestly all the week, those labor so which do it not alone
for necessity, but because God requires that men should painfully travel:
and which have the word of God as a lantern for to guide their steps: for
what soever a man does, if it be not in obedience of God in his word, it is
sin. To pray upon the Sabbath for fashion sake, is very detestable, because
we are in continual danger, and in continual need, and want help
continually from the Lord, upon whom our salvation does daily depend: we
are commanded to pray continually, or to have our hearts watching thereunto.
To pray without understanding, is not praying, but mumming. You speak as
though it were a thing which God does allow, that men should seek more after
the world them after God: and so make the world their God. And because they
have wife and children to provide for, therefore they cannot seek to know God.
As though we were not commanded to seek first, the kingdom of God, that is to
seek that chiefly, and more then the world, and then GOD has promised, that
all these things shall be cast upon us. How shall any man be excused when God
makes this promise unto all: as he does perform it unto as many as do trust
him. I have been young (says the Prophet) and now am old, yet did I never see
the righteous forsaken, and his feed begging their bread. When ye say he must
follow the world, and let preaching go, ye were even as good say, he must
follow the Devil, and let God go. And if an ignorant man could come so far
as to deal up rightly, and to hurt no man neither in word nor need, (which
notwithstanding they come nothing near) yet this would not serve the turn:
for there is a God who will be known and woorshipped in that religion which he
teaches. Have ye so fleshly eyes that ye can look no higher? Do ye think
God requires no more but an honest and civil conversation toward men. God
requires even of the poor laboring man that he should (if he will be
blessed) meditate in his Law, or his doctrine day and night. Psalm 1. Likewise
when he says that the man is blessed which fears the Lord, to the end we
might know which that man is, he adds immediately, he has great delight in
his commandments. But the most part of your honest men now a days, delight
so much in the word of God, and meditate so much in it, that they care not a
button though they never hear it: they love it and set as much by it as they
do by an old shoe. And are not so forward as you do allow, to seek for the
knowledge of God, when they have naught else for to do: for you think ye
grant a liberal allowance to God.


Ath. Would ye make me believe that God does require that men should leave
their business: when they be poor and have charge of children, and give
themselves to reaping, and hearing of preachinges. Would ye have him let his
children sterue?


Zelot. God does not require that men should leave their business, but as they
have times to seek for the things of the body, so also are there times, for
to seek for heavenly things: God has not made men for this life, but for the
world to come. He has set the promises of eternal life before them that
seek the^ painfully in his word, men must not be as brute beasts all for
the belly.


Ath. What if there be no preaching where a man dwells?


Zelot. What if there be within three or four mile?


Ath. Shall he run three or four mile after that:


Zelot. Ye go about three or four mile to the market for to provide meat
for the carrion body, but ye would not allow a man upon that day which is
the market day for the food of the soul to go half so far. Ye are the
children of the world, earth, worms, those which labor for the meat which
perishes, but will not labor for the meat which indureth for ever. John.
6. Ye love the world and the things which are in the world, and therefore as
Saint John says in his first Epistle, The love of the Father is not in ye, ye
cannot serve God and Mammon.


Ath. Let them run that will, when I see them agree better together, then I
will hear them: when they cannot agree among themselves, they are unwise which
hearken unto them.


Zelot. Ye might be a counselor for your grave wisdom, who is able to
aunsweare you in this matter: when ye dash forth so strong an argument
grounded upon so great reason, and infallible principles: but I pray ye what
would ye have done if ye had lived in the time of Jeremy the prophet, and
also of other Prophets, when there were the Priests and the rulers in the
temple, with many which took upon the^ to be prophets, and to speak in the
name of the Lord, set against a few of Gods messe^gers? What would ye have
done when Christ preached, and the Pharisees and Priests, and all the learned
against him? Would ye not have heard Paul, because he disagreed with the
false Apostles? The Scriptures have foretold that there shall be heresies,
sects, and false teachers in the Church even to the worlds end. Your great
skill has taught ye to make so good a choice of the time when ye will hear,
and to take so long a day, for I warrant ye it will not be two weeks before
the day of doom. Ye should speak plainly and say. Ye never mean for to
hear, and that ye would wish all other for to be of the same mind: and
then ye should be little troubled with Gods word. Cry out against the
preachers, but let your meaning be against preaching it self. The Devil is a
very skillful woorkeman, he does not teach his scholars to say, fie upon Gods
word: but to find excuses how to shift themselves from hearing the same.


Ath. If they would teach men how to believe better, then I could be
content for to say as you say: But they would drive men into despair, and
bring them out of belief with the fear of damnation.


Zelot. This wedge has been driven often enough already, nevertheless,
because ye are so knottie, and crabbed a piece to cleeue, I will give it one
blow more: the matter is hainously taken that men preach sharply in
reprehending the vices which now rain. They are now said to preach nothing
but the Law, which in deed cannot convert a man from ungodliness, but of it
self is the strength of sin: they are said to be murderers, because they
preach but the dead letter which does kill. No doubt whosoever does preach
no more but the Law, and so damnation, is no minister of Christ. But here
lies all the matter, men would be flattered and soothed in their sins, they
are loath for to here of any judgment of God against wickedness: and as they
be like unto the people of the Jews when the Prophets were sent unto them,
corrupt and corrupting themselves, and grudging against the Messengers of God
when they threatened vengeance, and willing them not to preach so, but to
preach pleasunt things: even so are there now which lay pillowes under
their elbowes and preach peace, peace, when all is corrupt in their lives, and
therefore there can be no peace. He which shall read the Prophets, shall
find the state of the Church then, and ours now, in all these things very
like: First, all foul vices over slowing, as among us: Secondly, the people
presuming upon their blind faith, and counterfeit repentance, and
hypocritical prayers, as they do now: Thirdely, the Prophets sent of God
exceeding sharply reproouing them, and denouncing the judgments of God
against them: Fourthly, the people repining there at, and thinking them selves
hardely dealte withal: desiring to be more tenderly handeled as to hear
pleasant things, and to have them prophecy of wine and strong drink:
Lastly, certain Preachers sit for the turn, healing up, and smoothing up all
with sweet words, and telling them all is well, all is well. He which does
but lightly read over the Prophets, and cannot find all these things, is
but a simple man. In like manner, he which does dwell among us at this day,
and perceives no such matters, is but a stranger.


Ath. Nay you that are precise Puritans do find fault where there is none:
you condemn men for every trifle.

Whereas ye are but men, and have your infirmities as well as other: yet ye
would make your selves as holy as Angels.


Zelot. I abhor the error of the Catheristes or Puritans, I confess that I
am laden with corruptions: if that be your meaning, to charge me with that
opinion, which is wicked and diuelishe. But if ye take the name Puritan for
one which has more care to obey God, then the common sort, and therefore
labors to keep himself pure and unspotted of the world (as Saint James
speaks) then look to it, that ye be not found among those which revile not
men but God. If ye mean by precise men, those which are so scrupulous, as to
make sin where there is none, as your words do plainly show, then do I
utterly renounce that name for to be called precise, and I disalowe such fond
persons, whosoever they be. But I know you mean those which walk precisely
as Saint Paul wills, and do take heed to their ways: not condemning men,
but admonishing them, not in trifles, but in weighty matters: although you
count them trifles. The commandments of God (at the least some of them) are
but trifles with you. You see not, nor consider how great the Lord God is,
and therefore ye dare affirm diverse sins done against him to be but trifling
and small, ye measure not sin with a true measure, when ye do measure it
after the rule of a man. Ye do not know wherefore there is eternal death
threatened against every small sin: ye marvel at that, because ye are
blind and cannot judge how great he is, whose will is disobeyed. Let me set
it before ye: Do ye not suppose that if one of your degree should say some
thing against ye that were a reproach, as for example, call ye knave, were it
not an offense?


Ath. I think I may well say he does offend, for he ought not to deal so
with his neighbor.


Zelot. Then he is worthy some rebuke for his evil tongue?


Ath. Yea, and to confess his fault also.


Zelot. What if he should give such language to a Justice of peace? or to some
inferior Magistrate? Ye will confess the fault is greater: because it is
against a higher person?


Ath. No doubt the fault should be greater, and he were worthy to sit by the
heele^ for it.


Zelot. What if he should do it to a noble man, as one of the chief
Counselors of the Prince, were it not then much greater?


Ath. I must needs confess so: and such a villain were worthy for to lose
his ^ares.


Zelot. What if he should do it unto a Prince?


Ath. He were worthy then for to lose his life.


Zelot. Do ye not know that GOD is in an infinite degree above Princes, they
are but dust before him?


Ath. I know that well enough.


Zelot. Wherefore have ye not the reason then for to consider, that those
sins which seem to be very small, are exceeding great, because they be
done against his infinite Majesty. the ignorance of this point causes many
men for to make but alight account of diverse sins, and even to laugh at them:
likewise to mock at those which make conscience of them, counting them over
precise and nice. Such men do not know the Lord aright in his most high
majesty: They know not the waightinesse of his law, even in the least point
in it. And it is over childishe which they object against the godly, have not
you infirmities? are you not men? What would they gather hereby, that because
men have infirmities, therefore they may not reprove such as wilfully and
carelessly offend. The rest of your speech is a mere slander, a device which
the Devil has found out for to shame true godliness. For let a man have but
the tenth part of the zeal, which the word of God requires, or never so
little a spark of endeavor for to walk uprightly, and he shall have it castin
his teeth, that he thinks him self half a God, and takes him self to be
as holy as an Angel.


Ath. A number do so indeed, or else they would not be so ready for to
check every man: and esteem so well of them selves.


Zelot. Does that bone stick in your throat still, take heed that it do not
choke ye. Ye take it for a sore check, when any does refuse to take part
with you in your wickedness: following the counsel of Saint Paul, when he
says, have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them. Light is come into the world, and men love darkness
more then light, because their works be evil. How well they esteem of
them selves you can not tell: this is most certain, that although a godly
manne has nothing of his own for to boast of, because it is the grace of the
Lord, which has put the difference, yet ye may well think better of him
self, then of the wicked. And such as have no regard to serve God but in a
few words.


Ath. Do ye think that there be none which are over precise: which would
seem for to be so holy, and yet are not.


Zelot. The Devil is a cunning woorkeman, when he seeks for to bring the
truth into discredit, he can play on both hands, he can deceive on every
side. And therefore he has some vain and curious brains which are over
precise in things which are no sin, passing by foul and great sins in
themselves, which is a great vanity, and under color of godly zeal, which
they would seem for to have, they cover their bitterness even of wormwood,
and Gall: which uncharitably sometimes they cast forth upon such as are
more Godly then them selves. But this ought not for to be any discredit unto
such as are zealous and earnest against those things which are vices in
deed, although they seem for to be never so small: as for example, when one
does swear as you did, by his faith, or by bread, or fire: tell him of it:
what is his answer: ye are over precise: I mean no hurt neither to God nor
men: I speak earnestly, I do not lie: If it be a sin, it is but a small
sin. But see how gross an excuse this is, he breaks the commandment of
God, and yet he means no hurt: Christ our great teacher does straightly urge
it, and yet he says it is but a small sin, a thing not to be regarded. How
much dishonor is this to our heavenly Master, to say that he taught things so
small and trifling, that they are not to be regarded?


Ath. Well, it is happy that we shall be saved by faith in Christ, although we
be sinful: he has shead his blood for us: I lookefor to be saved by him,
what would ye have more?


Zelot. It is happy in deed for those which have faith, for they are cleansed
from their sins. But such as you seek no more but to make the death of
Christ as an easy score to set all upon: for ye are like to the man which
thinking that he should have all of his hostis for scoring up, took very
liberally: ye think the reckoning is now so easy, that ye may set cock a
howpe, all is paid for. But if I should try your faith by the word, ye
should see that ye have little enough: and therefore your score will fail in
the end, and grow to a greater payment then ye suppose.


Ath. Whatsoever you say, ye shall never drive me from believing in Christ:
nor all the sort of ye.


Zelot. I would not for ten thousand worlds be the man which should drive
any one from the faith in Christ, I do seek to bring ye unto the faith in
Christ.


Ath. Ye may keep such seeking to your self, and let me alone: I believe as
well as you, take care for your self, you shall not answer for me.


Zelot. Now ye are sure I trow, for this night, ye have stopped my mouth, and
given me a bone to gnawe upon. But I pray ye shall not I answer for you in no
respect? What if I see ye are blind and ready for to fall into the pit of
eternal destruction, and will not put forth my hand for to succor ye, is it
not to be laid unto my charge, that I wanted love? Therefore I can easily pull
your bridle out of my mouth: and be so bold as for to meddle with ye: we will
a little try, because ye brag so stoutly, how well ye believe. Ye believe
Christ was crucified, and suffered upon the Cross: but are ye able for to
prove that ye believe in Christ crucified?


Ath. I say I do, are you able for to disprooue me?


Zelot. Sin is not slain in ye, therefore ye do not.


Ath. How prove ye that sin is not slain in me?


Zelot. Because it does reign in ye, therefore it is alive.


Ath. I know not what ye mean by that.


Zelot. Ye are led by sin, ye delight in it, ye have not mortified the
lusts and concupiscences of the same. And therefore ye have not learned
Christ, as S. Paul speaks. Ephesians 4. Ye have not put of the old man, and
put on the new man. The death and passion of Christ has not slain sin in
ye, for to believe in Christ crucified, is for to be crucified with him, as
the Apostles do teach in sundry places. The reason is this, Christ was not
crucified for to slay sin in him self, (for he had none) but in his members,
which are joined and knit unto him by faith, in them the force and power of his
death does show it self: now he which has not this work of the death of
Christ in him, that he feels himself crucified concerning the body of
sin, his faith in the passion of Christ is but a dead faith, and cannot save
him. This is the cause why S. Paul faith, Romans 8. That those which are in
Christ, walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. S. John says, 1.
Epistle, cha. 3. Ye know that he was made manifest to take away our sins, and
in him was no sin. Whosoever abides in him sins not, he that sins has
not seen him, nor known him.


Ath. Then by that reason, ye would prove that all that believe in Christ
are perfect without sin. I think all are sinners.


Zelot Whosoever is borne of God sins not. 1. John. 3. 9.


Ath. Is there any man which can say that he is without sin?


Zelot. Not one which lives in this flesh.


Ath. Then ye are contrary unto your self: for even now ye said. That
whosoever abides in Christ sins not, and he which is borne of God sins
not: and now ye confess that all are sinners so long as they live.


Zelot. I am not contrary unto my self but your blindness causes ye for to
think so. Look in the Epistle to the Romans Chapter 7. and there ye shall
find how S. Paul coupleth both these things together in himself, which you
judge to be so coutrary, that by no means they may be found in one man
together at one time. He confesses that there was a law in his members,
rebelling against the law of his mind, and leading him captive to the law of
sin. And yet a little before in the same Chapter he says, That he did not
commit the evil, but sin which dwelt in him. The reason which he makes is,
that he did consent unto the law, and would have done the good, but he did
the evil which he hated. To make the matter plain, thus it is. Saint Paul
was regenerate, but yet not in full perfection, for the remnaunt of sin did
abide in him: that which the part regenerate did, or coueted to do, or
consented unto, that he says he did: and that which the corruption which did
still remain in him, forced him for to do, that he says he did not, but
sin which dwelled in him. He does esteem himself in the part regenerate,
he counts the remnaunts of the old man, to be but as excrements, or as a dead
carrion, which did abide in him, and anoy him. His delight and desire was upon
the good, he hated the evil, and therefore when he did sin, because it was
against his consent, and against his will, it was no obedience which he gave
unto it: he did not therefore serve sin, neither did sin raygne over him, but
exercise a certain ^iranny over him, which he could not speak of.


Ath. I know not what ye mean when ye have said what ye can, all must be
sinners.


Zelot. Ye may very easily persuade me to believe that ye know not what I
mean: If your five wits were fifteen, they would help nothing in this case.
Because ye know not what this means, ye know not what faith in Christ
crucified means, ye know not what repentance means, ye can see no
difference of sinners: all are sinners say you, and the death of Christ is that
which saves, not considering that the death of Christ first kills those
whom it makes alive. For this cause men are greatly ouershot oftentimes, when
they come unto a sick man, they think if he say, I believe Christ died for
my sins, and shed his blood for me, that then all is as well as may be. If it
were faith in deed in the blood of Christ, they must needs be in good case:
for all that believe in him, shall be saved. But they stay upon a bare fantasy,
which is a dead and weak faith, not making them to feel the power of the death
of Christ. Ignorance is so deeply settled in men's minds, that let a man be
never so wicked, never so far from true knowledge of God, if he can make but
some general confession, they never look further. And because they see almost
all, (howesoeuer they live) find this, it makes them also to be careless, and
never for to think of the new birth, of which Christ speaks, when he
says unto Nicodemus: except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom
of God: This new birth is shut out at the doors, and therefore no doubt God
does shut them out of his kingdom which make no account of it.


Ath. Make your self never so skillful, yet ye cannot tell which man God
saves and which he condemns.


Zelot. It is not the will of God, that we should take upon us for to
pronounce upon any man, and to say he is damned: because we must leave the
secret counsel of God unto himself, who is not bound unto us, to give any
account of his doings. But I pray ye let us a little consider how this
headless bolte of yours is shot forth against true godliness. Thus you
reason, no man can tell who are saved, and who are damned, therefore we are not
for to care for trial of our faith and repentance: and that therefore the rules
which are given in the word of God in these points are nothing worth. Every man
may search and know in him self, whether he be in good case or not: and we
ought every one for to try our selves by that which the word teaches so
plentifully. I would wish ye to consider what the cause is why the greatest
multitude go to destruction: even because they know not these things, and
therefore see not the great danger which they be in, but can boldly bear
themselves in hand that they shall do well enough. Many do laugh even in the
midst of destruction, I mean that they can sport them selves even in doing
those things which are their bane: and all because they trust to this belief
which you brag of. For as on the one side true faith and true repentance,
and conversion unto God, do salve all the sores and sicknesses of the soul:
even so the common dead faith and counterfeit repentance may be called the
devils plaster by which he does a little in the top, for a time, salve the
deep and deadly wounds, but they rancle within, and bring utter destruction.
It is great pity that the word of God is not laid open in all places, that
the people might come to the understanding of Christ and his power, in
translating them out of the power of darkness, into his kingdom of light:
which is wrought with great and diligent teaching, because men are made of a
dull metal, and hard to conceive spiritual and heavenly things.


Ath. Well, I must leave ye now: ye have dealt very hardly with me: it were
good that you Puritanes should consider your selves, and become better
subjects to ye Prince.


Zelot. I am like to have a very good farewell at your hands, for all my
travel in teaching ye. But I looked for none other reward from ye: the
black Moore can not change his hew, nor the Cat of the mountain her spots.
I must suffer your reproach, for if they have called the good man of the house
Beelzebub, how much more those which be of his household.

Those which consider not them selves, are worse then madd men: I told ye
before, that I do not allow that vice. For your slanderous accusation, I
scorn and defy it: I may boldly take the Lord as a witness unto my
conscience, that I do honor and obey the prince, and that I do condemn,
hate, and accurse all disobedience unto the higher powers. But this has ever
bin the ready way which the devil has used for too bring those which fear
God into hatred: by his instruments to charge them for too be enemies unto
Princes. Christ was accused of treason, and condemned as an enemy to Caesar.

Saint Paul diverse times, was thought to be a man which did trouble the state.
And whosoever shall read the ancient stories of the Church, shall find that
this continued still from time to time.


Ath. Are not there many which count themselves very holy, and yet break the
Queens laws?


Zelot. What if it should fall out, as it does fall out some times, that godly
Princes command some thing which is contrary unto Gods word, should we obey God
or men? It is a very gross thing to think that a man for obeying God does
disobey his Prince. I would know this also, whether the breach of every
particular law, does make a man by and by an evil subject to his Prince? if
it should, I think true subjects might soon be numbered. Likewise, I would
know this, whether a man which is disobedient unto God and despises his
laws, can for conscience sake be obedient unto his prince? Having bin found
unfaithful too God, shall he be judged faithful to men? And where as such as
you cry out against those which profess the Gospel, that they break the
Queens laws, and are not the Queens friends? I answer ye thus. I will
adventure all that I have, that let proof be made, and those which have this
most in their mo^thes the Queens laws, the Queens laws, as though they were
altogether made of obedience, shall be found to break two for their one, whom
they accuse. If ye did cry out in this matter moved with a good conscience,
then would ye be careful for to keep the laws yourselues, and if ye have
care of princes laws, the^ would ye have care of Gods laws.


Ath. Wherein can ye accuse me?


Zelot. I mean not to accuse you, but to speak that which I know by a number,
they break her majesty's laws in their apparel, in their meat, in their
words being blasphemers and raylers, in quarrelling and fighting, in dicing
and carding, and bowilng, and in many such like. And because ye speak often
of this, who are the Queens friends? I say none but such as fear God: for
the wicked and ungodly do provoke God unto anger against the realm, and do
procure the destruction of it, God hears the prayers of such as fear and
love his laws, when they cry unto him for their Prince: therefore there can be
no more utter enemies unto Princes, then such as are wicked against God. Now
this is a very preposterous thing, that you which are rebels against God
should bear men in hand that ye be the friends of the prince, and that
such as are godly, they must be counted enemies.


Ath. I can say no more but god bless and save her.


Zelot. Amen. I pray God for his mercy sake grant, that we may be thankful
for those exceeding great blessings which he has by her heaped upon us, both
for body and soul: and the Lord give us loving and obedient hearts toward
her. And also I beseech God to keep her out of the hand of her enemies, to
govern her with his blessed spirit, that she may exalt and magnify his
glorious Gospel more and more, and repair the ruins of his Church and so
glorify him in this world, that in the world to come she may be glorified for
ever. Amen.


FINIS.

