To the faithful brethren which by word and work are prompt and ready to
declare them selves unfeigned folowers of the truth revealed. Anthonye Gylbye
wysheth peace and strength from the Lord.
I Did write of late a rude Comentarye upon the godly Prophet Micha (dearly
beloved) wherwyth many worldlings (as I am enfourmed) are very mutche grieved
and sore offended, because that Prophet does freate and chayffe the old sores
of their cankered consciences and holow hearts: Especyally certain Charmers and
Enchau^ters, which would be named wisemen and Astronomers, have so far
uttered their malice, and spyt forth their poison, that they are not content
to rail against me (which were a right small matter in mine own cause and
business) but they dare lift up theymselues (blind bussardes, not able to see
their own snares) against God his sacrate majesty, against his glorious truth
revealed to his saints, against his holy spirit, foreseing al things,
gouernyng all things, yea reuealyng all things long before they do come to
pass, always to some of his chosen, both the salvation of the good, and the
perdicion and destruction of the wicked reprobate, the Charmers Children as
Esaias calls them. Emo^ges this number even of the learned sort, such as the
Devil has styrred by the name of Gospellers and the vain title of learning,
to shame the Gospel and good learning (for there is no good learning against
thy Lord god be thou sure) such I say as have the show of knowledge and
relygion, but feel not the power thereof, has been so shame less, that they
durst compare the false head of deuylyshe lies to the infallible truth of god
his holy prophets, the writyngs of their wiserds, to the holy scriptures of
the euerlyuyng and ever seeing God: Comparynge vile chafe unto pure wheat, as
Hieremi speaks. Hiere. xxiii. Their marlynes, their nolhardes, their walsh
David's and Daruel Gadders (whom they with like foreheades dare pronounce to be
bygotten, borne, brought forth, instructed and taught, by the wicked spirit)
the dyuel in plain english, dare they confer and prefer to the children of
God, begotten and borne a new, neither of flesh nor blood nor any carnal or
internal operation: But by a celestial heavenly and divine birth, regenerate
and new begotten by the good spirit of God. Whom we must needs confess
most able to search and teach, not only the secrets of man's heart, but the
depth of God his great judgments. Of these beware (dear brethren) the days
are evil.

And no marvel though ye wicked devil do roar, rage and raill, now
especially in this time, when his arts, maskes, and subtle deuyses, begin
by God his holy word to be uttered, discovered and defaced. For he always
strives for his kingdom of darkness against the children of light, the true
prophets of God ever since the beginning, and has evermore in his members
challenged a knowledge and wisdom above the wisdom of God, as appeared in the
Sorcerers of Egipte resystynge Moses, in zedechia and such like children of the
devil, resystynge Michea and ye true prophets, especially when this old
serpent in his own parson tempted our master Christ, caryeng him from place to
place, byddyng him fall down and worship, and he would give him all the kingdo^s
of the world and al their glory. How be it the devil in all these, does
bestirre him in vain, and fails of his purpose. Yea, our Lord and mighty
God does always at his appointed time and good pleasure, stop and stay this
raging devil, and causes his arts to fail his crafts to be uncovered, the
wisdom of his wyserdes to appear foolyshenesse, and makes his oracles false,
his aunsweres he utters to be most vain and deceyuable, as we read in the
fall of Cresus and other heathen Idolaters deme^ted with like madness. And to
our singular comfort which be Christians, in the birth of our savior Christ,
he compelled all the idols which before time by the devils subtlety did delude
simple people to be dombe and unable to give any answer to their worshyppers,
and at the sendyng forth of Christ's Apostles, all the Charmers, Sorcerers and
Enchau^ters, were made dombe and speechless. So strongly did our lord by this
his mighty captayn, bind in chains, and keep captyue this armed Giant, and
spoill his house and temple. Now therefore howsoever the devil or the wicked
world shall take it, after ye burden of the prophet Micha, I do bring another
burden grievous and heavy against al wytches, Charmers and Enchaunters, and
against al wedlock breakers, fornicators and adulterers, against al perjured
and vain swearers, against all extorcioners, oppressors and brybers, finallye
against all that fear not the Lord, all and synguler wicked worldelynges. I do
bring a burden I say; from whence neither learned nor unlearned, neither
priest nor people shall pluck forth their necks. The burden I do mean, of
the weighty word of the great God brought down unto men, by no blind
nolhardes, or wicked Marlines, but by ye angel of god, by the messenger of the
hye king, and Lord of the whole earth, which utters the terryble time of
Justice and vengeance against all the proud people and wicked doers. How be
it unto you (dear brethren) that do fear the Lord, I do bring this glad
tidings, that the sun of righteousness unto you shall arise, and salvation
shall be under his beams. Walk in his light therefore whiles you have light, for
for your sakes these evil days shall be shortened.

And though the proud do rage and raill against my former treatise, because my
rude simplicity void of eloquence, my plain kind of writing, tastyng of my
plough gadde, lame in learning, long banyshed from the schools, far from the
Logician subtyltye, Rethorycall assentacion, or courtelye flatterye, has
skraped tender and daynetye ears with sharp bytynge treuthe, and caused them
to kycke, yet because the poor simple souls, which cannot attain to the
high wrytynges of learned clarckes, has confessed them selves some thing to
have learned thereby, both to fear God his sacrate majesty, and to walk more
warely in their vocations and callynges: It has encouraged me again to offer
my self a laughing stock to the wicked worldelynges, a spittynge stock to
the spytefull Papystes, and to a rabble of such, as shall be pynched with the
wayghtye burden and heavy yoke of God his great vengeance.

The which most woorthelye shall be laid upon their necks in the declaratyon
of this Prophecye. Wherefore I beseech thee O heavenly Father, the father of
Spyrytes, so to lyghten my heart with thy holy spirit, that I may have the
true understanding of the secret mysteryes of the spirit hid in this
Prophet. Grant also such larges of thy spirit that I may to the profit of
my poor brethren, dyspose this thy heavenly treasure and boldly and
consta^tly set forth thy truth to the glory of thy most holy name. So be it.

The words of the mighty God by his holy Prophet.
THe burden of the word of God by the hand of the prophet Malaky. The text,
This is the burden and wayghty embassage, Commentary.
from the euerliuynge Lord and almightye God, this is the terryble threatening
of God his great wrath, against all the wicked of the world, both chosen Jews
and holy priesthode, proud Pammie and wicked Miscreant, thunderynge fourth the
fearce wrath of the terryble coming of the Lord of hosts unto judgment,
written by the hand of the Prophet Malachy. The which Malachy as the word
sounds and signifies an angel, so the deuyne Sentenses and misteryes in
these few lives contained: has caused some writers to suppose, that the
author hereof was an aungel, and nommortal, and so is Malaky named (...) amongs
the other Prophets and a^ ^owarde an angel in the first cha^^^^ the fourth
book entiteled to Ezra the scribe: but we knowing by the word of god that the
very aungelles, are mynystrynge spyrites, set to minister for their sakes,
which shall be the heirers of salvation. And that all Prophecye is enspyred from
god, poured down by the sprite of god into the hearts of his elect and chosen
sede of Abraham, do value the aucthoryty of every one of God his holy
Prophets, embassaders and messengers so hyghlye as an aungel coming down
from heaven, yea thereis such abundance and sufficiency of heavenly
doctrine in the holy Prophets, such concord and agreemente betwyxe Moses
and the Prophets, and betwixe the prophets and the Apostles, that if an angel
should come from heaven to teach any new doctrine, strange from theyres
taught heretofore? we ought to abhor him as accursed. Wherefore we do take
this our Malaky, to be such an aungel as is named in the second chapter. The
lips of the priest shall keep knowledge, and they shall require my law of his
^outhe, for he is Malaky the angel of (...) Lord of hosts. Though there
be (...) an high Majesty in this little ^^^^hete, speaking every word of
this Prophecy in the parsone of the mighty good, like an angel calling and
crying s^^^e heaven, to bring the children (...) appear with power, like the
gouldesmythes fire, trying, pourginge and fynynge the gold and silver from the
dross of your earthye mettayle, which is the chief matter of the two last
Chapters. This is the sum then and ho^le purpose of our Prophet, first to
warn his own people of their wyckednes. Than to rebuke the Priests, which
caused the people to sin, in that they traunsgressed the law, and caused
other to do the like, by this means to bring al flesh unto the fear of the
Lord, and to call them to repentance before the time of the terrible
indingnacion of the mighty God shall brenne like a fyry furnace, co^sumyng and
deuouryng the provide and disobedient like straw and stubble, both root and
branch together, as is said in the last chapter. Wherein we must mark
diligently.ii. times described openly and euidentlye by our Prophet. The
first is a time of grace, wherein God chewseth Iaacob, cherysheth him, teaches
him by his word, admonysheth him, calls him to repentance the other a time
of severe justice and straight judgment, the which time who is able to abide?
Or to bear the day of his wrath? The first time therefore wherein we are
louonglye called by the word of God, may not be negletted nor despised least
this sharp sentence be denounced against us. Here, here, o ye dispisers and
pearish. For a another time there is whereof we be here warned, wha^ fatherly
mercy is departed, and fearce wrath against sin by the just judgment of God
must be powered upon the heads, and laid as a burden most heavy and a yoke
most grievous upon the necks and shoulders of the children of wrath and
disobedyence. This felt Caine in his desperate wanderinge. This felt Esau
after he had sold his heritage, for he cold find no grace after that time,
though with tears he did seek it. Gene. xxvii. Hebr. xi. Judas had an
acceptable time of grace offered unto him, when he accompanied with Christ,
when he did eat of Christ's own dyshe, at his own table, but despysynge this
time, he betrayeth his master, and therefore deserves to feale of the terryble
time, even in this life for an example to others. The wicked world likewise,
which would not receive the warnyng of Noah, promising mercy to the repentaunte
sinners, was worthily over whelmed and destroyed in the terrible time of God
his sore vengaunce, raynynge down from heaven until that all flesh of man
and beast was destroyed, save only Noah and his family: which embraced the
word of salvation sent unto them, and regarded the time of mercy. This has
been the decay, fall, and destruction of all and synguler natyons and
countries. First always warned by the spirit of God, of their wyckednes: and
for their rebellyo^ against this spirit speaking in his servants and
Prophets: have they brought upon them selves worthy desolatyon. For the
wicked always do account the Prophets seditious parsons, and disturbers of the
common wealth, and ye word of god sent unto them, a burden most heavy and
intolerable.

And even so repynynge against: God his justice, uttered in this world, they
begin an infernal and helly torment to their own conscyences, which shall
in the world to come, gnawe and grate, boil and broyle, and blasphemoustly
(...) forth against the just iudgmente of the almightye God.

This is the heavy burden which shall be felt in that terryble time, when the
wrath of the Lord shall brenne like a brennynge chymnay, or an hot flaming
furnace. When for the wayghte of this grievous burden, nothing shall be hard
emonges the wicked, but weeping wailynge, and gnashinge of teethe. This is the
porcyon of the wicked says the lord of hoostes.

The text.
I have loved you says the Lord, and you have asked wherein I have loved you?
Was not Esau brother to Jacob, says the Lord: And I do love Jacob, and I do
hate Esau. I have made wast his hills and his heritage a wild wilderness
fordragons. If Edom shall say we are wasted, but we will return and buyld
our desolate places, thus says the Lord of hosts. They shall build and I
will destroy, and they shall be called the wicked border and ye people against
whom God is angrye for ever. And your eyes shall see it, and you shall say:
God be magnifyed, extolled, and praised upon the borders of Israel. We do
read. Gene. xxv. That Isaac did pray unto the Lord for his wife Rebecca,
because she was long barren, and god gave unto her two children, who^ she felt
to strive and wrestle in her wo^ be, wherefore she asked council of the Lord
what this thing might mean. And the Lord answered two nations are in thy
womb, and two diverse people shall be separate from thy bellye, and the one people
shall overcome the other, and the greater shall serve the less. And when the
time of her travail did come, Loo she brought for the two children. The one
was read colored, and all heyrye and roughe, and his name was Esau, the other
did come forth holding his brother by the foot, and therefore was he called
Iaacob. Esau was an hunter, and a tylman, but Iaacob was an heardman, and upon
a time when Jacob had made him potage, Esau comes from the fyelde all wearye
and fortyered, and says to his brother Iaacob, give me some of this red
potage, where upon he had his second name Edom. But Iaacob knowing by the
appointed will and pleasure of the Lord of all, this necessity to be laid
upon Esau, that he should thus become subject unto him, takes this occasyon of
extremyty to serve god his worckynge, and demands his birth right, who
gives it him without delay. So that Iaacob now by right, has recovered
the enheritaunce, wherefore he did wrestle in the womb. And the Lord God is
hielye to be magnified, renoumed and praised, who has exaulted his chosen
Iaacob, and rejected this rough Esau, this read blouddy Edome, which did no
more pass upon his birth right, then of a mess of pottage, though
afterward, when it was to late, he did seek for it with tears and could not
have it, by the just iudgmente of the almyghtye. Thus much for the declaration
of these two parsons and their names.

Now must we behold the two kinds of people, which did spring of these two
brethren, and had their names of them ever after. Of the Edomites, and their
increase from Esau their father, and how many Dukes and captains did come of
him, we may read. Genesis xxxvi. Their beginning was from the mount ^ei^. Iosue
xxiiii. A roughe and cruel people. They did live, by the swearde as Isaac
their father did forse and prophecye. Genesis xxvii. Cruel against their brethren
Numeri. xx.xxiiii. Against who^ Esaiah xxxi. Ieremi. xlix. Ezechiel. xxv xxxv.
And the hoole Prophecy of Abdiah is written, only to utter the wrath of God
against such crueltye as did appear in the father and children, both Esau and
his of spring: wherefore the Lord says: I have sworn by my self, that
Bozra the chief city of Idumea shall be a wilderness, a shame, and reproach,
a desert, and curse, and all the other cities shall be for ever desolate and
destroyed, and so shall Idumea be destroyed, as Sodom and Gomorra were. Iere.
xlix. Again Shame shall come upon the, for the malice that thou vtterest to thy
brother Iaacob, yea for evermore shall thou pearyshe and that because of the
time, when thou dyddest set thy self against him, and the like threatenynges.
Through the whole Prophecye of Abdiah. Of Jacob and his posteritye it is
written, and of his.xii. sons, whereof came the.xii. trybes or kynreds. Genesis
xxxv. And through out the whole Bible we may learn, how god cheuseth calls,
leads and tries this Jacob and his posterity, to make them an example of a
spiritual Iaacob, and a peculyer people, which he then had determined to
chewse unto him self, to worship and serve him in spirit and truth, to
have their hearts circumcysed from all fleshelye lusts, too make them
Israelites (that is to say) over comers of God, by faith, constancy,
patience, and hope in God his own promyses. Will you know then wherein God has
loved Iaacob? In many things doubtless. First when he made him in his mothers
womb, he did chewse him before his brother Esau. Gene. xxv. Roma. ix. God
brought his brother by necessytye into subieccyon unto him. God caused his
father to bless him. God led him into his iornay when he fled from his
brother. God did increase him and bless him ever more, when Laban thought to
be gyle him. God did deliver him from Laban, when he did pursue after him. God
did give him the victory, when the angel did wrestle with him, geuyng him the
name of Israel, pronouncyng that he had prevailed against God. God defended
him from the malice of his brother, and caused him to find favor in his
syghte. God increased Iaacob with. xii. sons, which replenished the whole
land of Canaan, whence he did drive forth the enhabitauntes and gave it to
their children in possessyon. Namely the land of the Cananites, Hethites,
Amorites, Pheresits, Gebusits, and Gyrgosites.

God did plage Egypt for Iaacob sake He drowned Pharao and his army in the red
see, god caused the seas to stand like walls, and made paths for his Iaacob.

God caused the floudes of Jordan to stop, and stay their course, and to rise
up like mountains, to make passage for his people the children of Iaacob. To
passover how god fed them.xl. years in wilderness, that they neither wanted
garment to their body, neither shoe to their foot, how he sent them Manna from
heaven, and spredde the air with quayles, when they desired change of meat,
how he did give them and drink forth of the hard stone.

God did give him a law, to lead his life, and to teach him parfyte wisdom
above all nations. Yea the Lord his God never left him, neither did forsake
him, but always went before him in a fyry pyller by the night season, and in a
cloud by the day time. As for the battayles which the Lord has foughten
from heaven for Iaacob and his children: they are without nombre.

And the wonderful acts which from time to time God has wrought for his
chosen Iaacob, they can be contemed in no books nor wrightinges. God did
speak face to face unto him, he sent for him his Prophets and messengers, and
at the length God sent down his own son to take flesh for his sake, of his
seed and lineage.

What could he do more for Iaacob that he has not done? Read the whole book
of Exodus. Deutero. Iosue. Judges and kings, and a brief rehersall of God his
great worckes.ii. Ezra. ix. And especially note the love of God toward Iaacob.
Exodus xix. where the Lord appearing with thondre, fire, and smoke, says unto
the house of Jacob: you shall be mine before al people, you shall be unto me a
priestly kingdom, and an holy people. The which sentence is alleged in the
new Testamente.i. Peter.ii. Of the spiritual Iaacob, saying. You are the
chosen kindred, the kingly priesthode the holy people, a people won for this
purpose, that you should show forth his power, which has called you into this
marvelous light. Which sometime were not his people, but now are ye people of
God. Which once were without his mercy, but now have you attained mercy.

Wherefore as it was then said to the carnal Iaacob and outewarde Israel: I
have loved Iaacob, and he asks wherein I have loved him, forgetful of my
benefits, even so now under this complaynt of the carnal Iaacob, the spirit
of God doothe charge us and condemn our ingratitude, which will be accounted
the spiritual Israel and the true Jacob, not after the letter and flesh but in
spirit and truth. Where we do know that the almyghtye maker of heaven and
earth so loves us, that he is content we should be called his children, the
sons of the highest. And is so careful over us that he that touches us,
touches ye Aple of his eye. And that he so hates our enemies, the bloody
Edomites, that he will destroy them with everlasting destruccyon. Yea he
makes the heavens above the holy angels in the heavens to minister unto us. He
causes the earth beneathe, the air the seas to serve us. And over all
creatures he gave us the lordshippe and dominion, to bear his image and to be
as it were earthlye Gods. And which surmounteth and far passes all the
woorckes that ever were wroughte in heaven or in earth.

This mercyefull Lord our God (when we were not his people but his enemies,
not seekynge after his mercy but going a straye from him in our fleshly
vanities) has so loved us that he has not spared his only begotten son, but
most lovingly has given him unto death for us, to deliver us from the Egypt
of sin, and the helly Pharao, to bless us, to sanctifyt us, to make us his
children. To deliver us from cruel Esaw and all Edomites. To bring us into the
country promised, salf from seas, floods and waves of this world. To feed us
with heavenly Manna of his own flesh, to give us drink forth of his own side,
for Christ the son of our god is the stony rock, of whom all the faithful.
Israel does drink, and are satisfied. Yet we not wythstandinge this great
love and manyfolde mercyes, do live careless of God his commandments, as
though there were no cause why we should love God or obey his pleasure,
which is thonlye trial whether we do love him, or no, as Christ our savior
his dearly beloved son teaches. Iho. xiiii xv. Not much unlike to our first
father Adam, who thought that God had not loved him, when he did forbid him
the tree in paradyse, but deluded by the subtle serpente, supposed that God
had enuyed his furtheraunce in knowledge, and therefore believed the devil to
love him better, and to counsel more for his profytte then his creator, maker
Lord and God.

Likewise are we all most ready to run whether our lusts leads and
this old Serpent does hiss and whystle us. But the word and will of God is
unto us an heavy burden, so that we hear and take it not as a louinge
lesson taught by a father or a friend, but as a grievous yocke and burden laid
upon our backs by some tyrant, or rather a friend. So that in our deeds we
clearly deny that we do love God, or that he has deserved any love or
service at our hands,

Thus did the Jews and carnal Iaacob our spectable and glass to look upon,
though their father was chosen in his mothers womb, and his posteritye with
marvelous miracles fostered, cheryshed and set upon high above al natyons,
dispyse their loving Lord, who of his only free mercy had chosen them in
Iaacob and refused Esau with all his posteritye, before that either of these
two children were borne into this world.

And because they despised their God and would not confess unto his glory
wherein he loved them: Therefore are they worthelye reiecte, cast away, and
scattered a broad from the face of God, and driven from his holy temple unto
this day. The which obstynate ingratitude, and wicked unthankfulness of this
carnal Iaacob, together with their worthy desolacyon, ought to stir our hard
hearts and to move our careless minds, to remember wherein our most merciful
father utters his love so many ways unto us. Especially seeing by the fall
of the same Iaacob, salvation is come unto us (which ones were under the
shaddowe of death before their bows were broken) yt we being wild olyues,
might be grafted in the^, and be come partakers of the root and the fatness
of the olyue kyndlye and natural. This report of the great love of God toward
us, which are the chose^ Iaacob and spiritual Israel, how he has refused his
own children, naturallye borne of Iaacob, as concerning the flesh, and taken
us to him self, which were his open enemies and strangers from that people, as
it is greatelye comfortable, so it is also very terryble. For therein also
must we considre how they did fall for their vnthanckefulnesse, and
mysbelief, that we be not proud, but tremble and fear, and always knoweledge
the loving kyndenesse of our Lord toward us. For if God have not spared the
natural branches, beware least it happen by any means that he do not spare
thee, which art of nature a wild Olyue, Loo therefore the love of God, and
his goodness toward the, if thou abide in goodness myndful of the louinge
kyndnesse of the Lord God: Or else contrarywyse shall thou be cut of, and they
grafted in again, which are the natural branches, if they do turn from
their mysbeleue, and confess how greatelye god loves them.

For we gentyles are this same Esaw and Edom here mentioned, if we be
unthankful, unfaithful and forgetful of god his benefytes, where as we
huylde, the Lord will destroy, and we shall be called the wicked borders, and the
people against whom god is angrye for ever, as our Prophet Malachy speaks.
But if we only can be tha^kful for all his loving kyndenesse, and confess and
knoweledge the benefytes received: than shall we be the true Israel,
circumsised in heart, the chosen Iaacob, the holy people, which were won
and purchased to preach forth his praise, which has called us forth of
darckenes into his maruaylous light.

And our eyes shall see the Edomites (that is to say) all the unfaithful of
what manner of Nacyon, Country, or kyndred so ever they be utterly destroyed.
Then shall we renown, praise, laud, and magnify the Lord our God in all our
borders, because he has so wonder fully showed his power, his might, his
justice and just judgment upon the wicked Edomites, the vessels of his wrath,
and in contrary sort, has he showed the ry hes of his glory toward us the
vessayles of his mercy, whom he has prepared and appointed unto glory, whom
he has chosen before the world began, called in ye end of the world, loved
with love unspeakable, that he would be conuersaunte and set his tabernacle
among us. And be our god, and make us his people. To him must we cry
holy, holy, holy, just are thy judgments O Lord. To recompense the wicked
their evil ways, and to keep thy promise with thy chosen. To judge the mighty
Edomits after their own merits, and defend the simple Iaacob from all
violence, and to show mercy abou^dantlye to thy people, whom thou have chose^
to be the spituall Israel cyrcumcysed in hearts by thy spirit to do service
and honor to thy holy name, Amen.

Of Eleccion and Reprobacyon.
HEre is a just occasion offered to entreat of reprobacion and Election, in
that the Lord says by his prophet, I have loved Iaacob, and I do hate Esau.

And though the matter seameth to many learned men most dangerous of all
other to be entreated and taught among the unlearned, yet because I have my
self thereby attained to such fealynge of the mighty god his marvelous
woorkynge, to such a fear of his majesty, rejecting and refusing, electyng
and chewsyng whom it lyketh him. Even as the potter may make and break
without resistaunce of the vile claye, which he with his hands forms and
fashyoneth as the Prophet speaks. Therefore have I thought it my dewty, not
to envy unto any, but to utter the same unto other my brethren, children of
the same father, servant of the same Lord, and pottes made of the same
moulde, and metal that I am and by the same only workemaster. Nether do I
thyncke the unlearned so unmeet to receive heavenly doctrine, as we do make
them. Unless it be through their negligence, which will no more, dylygently
teach them, for like as they deny this doctrine to the unlearned in the Latyne
tongue, though some such has as much fealynge of the excellencye of the
knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, as any Doctor that ever I did know, yet I
say as they do deny this and say: that it is perylous for the unlearned, so
have they within this few years, denied the word of God, the testament of
our heavenly father to the lay men unlearned in the tounges.

And yet we all do see, and know at this day (the Lord our God be
praised) that there be many unlearned in the tongues (either Latyne or Greek,
who has attained to such a deap knowledge of God his will and pleasure opened
in his scriptures, that they may be compared not with the meanest but with
many of the great learned sort. And (I pray you) had it been well done, that
such bees had benne prohybyted these flowers of these comfortable pastures?
Because that some poisoned spythars, had gathered poison in the same. Nay
Doutelesse. For by the same reason, Christ should not be preached at all,
Because he is a stomblynge stone unto some and the savor of death unto death.

But Consider that it hurts only the wicked and the^ it drives toward
their Iornayes end, to the pytte of hell, whether they be learned in the Latyne
tongue or no, for among both the learned and unlearned, we must know that
there be both good and bad, holy and wicked, elect and reprobate, wherefore
unto nether ought the truth of God his holy word to be denied.

But that it may be a testemonye toward condempnacion to the one, and the
glad tidings of salvation to the comfort of conscyences to the other: it
ought unto al to be offered, opened, and publyshed. Wherefore by the good will
of GOD, we entende to speak of this great matter, none other ways, neither
in any other sort, then the open-scriptures shall approve our sayings. And
we do say with the holy Apostle Sayncte Paul as it is written:

Blessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us
with all spyrytuall blessings in heavenly things unto Christ, like as he
has elected and chosen us in him him before the foundations of the world were
laid, that we should be holy and blameless before him by love, who has
predestinate us, that he might freelye chewse us to be his children by Jesus
Christ. Ephesians. i. And though there come some wicked men which were long before
appointed to this judgment, which do turn the grace of our god to
lasciuiousnes and wantonness, as holy Judas says, yet know we that we are
chosen by Jesus Christ, that the glory of his grace, his favor and mercy
toward us might be praised. For we are the elect and chosen kyndred and his
people by purchase, that we should show the virtue of him which has called
us forth of darcknes into this marvelous light.

For this Elect people only was Christ sent into this world. To them
only is the word of saluatyon sent, as Peter says to the elect by the
for knowledge of God the father. i. Peter. i. Then to know what this election
of God is, and what in the scriptures it doothe sygnyfye: We describe and
defyne Eleccyon to be the fre choice of the good will of the almyghtye God
appoyntynge and prescrybynge in the book of life before the beginning of the
world, whom he will have to be saved and accounted among the just. This
choice, this chewsynge, this before appointed purpose and ordinance of God, is
a boundantlye set forth in the first chapter to the Ephesians. That this
comes of the fre will of god and his only grace, freely without our
deseruynge, Contrary to the vain oppinion of the scole men, the same chapter
and the next chapter followyng does playnelye testyfe. Ephe. i.ii. And most
euydentlye, the Lord in his Majesty, speaking to his servant Moses.
Exodi.xxxiii. declares all this to stand of his mercy, saying: I will have
mercy upon whom it lyketh me, and I will show mercy where it shall be my
pleasure, for so is the meaning of those words, I will have mercy upon whom I
will have mercy. Paul also declarynge this place the work of God betwixt
these two children Iaacob and Esau. Romans.ix. Says thus of this free
Election, when Rebecca was with child with one and the same father Isaac
before the children were borne, when they had neither done good nor badde,
that the purpose of god which is by Election might stand, it was said to
her: not for the cause of works, but by the grace of the caller, the elder
shall serve the younger. As it is written says he: Iaacob I loved, but Esaw I
hated. Of the book of life, Moses speaks. Exodus. xxxii. And Christ him
self Luke. x. Saying to his Apostles: Joy you and be glad, for your names
are written in the book of life in the heavens. And in the, lxix. Psalm, it
is spoken against the wicked. Let the^ not be written among the Just, and
put them forth of the book of life. And against the false Prophet.
Ezechyell. xiii. He shall not be in the counsel of my people, nor written in
the book of the house of Israel.

Now it is to be noted and marked dylygentlye, that this word eleccyon is
taken after two sorts in the scripture, some times as it sygnyfyeth
absolutelye the free choice, will, and appointment of God, without the respect
of the reuelacyon of the word and message of salvation. And thus speaks the
holy Apostle Sayncte Paul of eleccion, saying of the carnal Iaacob: They
were enemies concerning the gospel for your cause, but concerning the
eleccion, they are beloved for their parents. For the gifts of God, and his
calling are such, that he can not repent. Even as you once were mysbeleuers
from god, but now have attained mercy by their mysbelyefe, that they should
attain mercy also.

This eleccion expresses absolutelye the course of god his woorkeyng, without
the respect of reuelacion of the word or any of our works following. Under
this first kind of eleccyon were those hundredth and twentye thousand, which
god did chewse and keep unto him felfe in Nineue among the Idolaters and
the.vii. thousand which god did leave for him self in Israel in the third
book of the kings the.xix. chapter. Yea, those that yet are not, are thus
elect, chosen, and among al nanacions both Jews in this long blindness, and
banyshement from their country, emonges the Turckes in their Idolatrous
wickedness, yea among ye Edomytes, the Sabees, the Indyanes, and Ethiopians.

And in the late blyndenesse of the popyshe church, wherein we together with
our fathers were all together Idolatours, all Hypocrytes and counterfayte
Christians, this absolute eleccyon whereby the merciful LORD God did reserve
and keep his chosen unto him in all places, all ages, al countries without
respect of parsones did most euidentlye appear. How be it this secresy of
eleccion must only be left to the Majesty of God, where, when, how and whom,
he thereby saves and shows his mercy. For to the blind iudgmente of man,
al these people rehearsed and such like seems reiecte, reprobate and cast
away, as appears by Jonas condempnynge the Ninevites, by Elyas condempninge
the Israelites and a long while, until God had by miracle from heaven delivered
him from that error unto the chief Apostle Peter, judging all the gentyles
to be a polluted people far from the favor of God.

The second kind of Eleccyon is set forth and known euidente and open by the
spryte of God, worckyng in the hearts of the elect and chosen by faith and
trust in God his promyses, teaching us that we are the children of God, chosen
to him self by Jesus Christ from the begynynge, and therefore preparynge us to
an holy and blameless life to the land and praise of the grace of god. The
which eleccion besides the daily experience of our consciences may be approved
by ye testimonies of these scriptures compared together. Esaias. lix. Romans viii.
Ephe. i. Collossi. iii. and a very brief and parfit dyscripcion of this
Eleccio^. ii. These. ii. in these words. We ought to thank God that he has
chosen you from the beginning by the santefyinge of the spryte and the belefe
of the truth to the which he has called you, by our gospel to attain the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, by this gracyous eleccyon was Jacob dearly
beloved in his mothers womb, and Hieremy known unto God before he was
fashyoned in his mothers womb. Hieremi. i. And to be short, al other the
elect of god are thus chosen, santefied, and beloved from the beginning, from
before the foundacyons of the world, from everlasting to everlasting. For
there is no change of time with God, seeing that all things are present in
his sight. For unto him a thousand years are but one day, but the course and
change of times are in us, our deeds, our knowledge in man's chaungeable
wisdom.

This Eleccyon must of necessytye drive down the pride, we have of our own
strength, our own power, our own nature, or own fre will, our own merits,
our own iustificacio^, of our own works and bring us to the fealynge of the
mighty power of God, which works all in all things, to the restoringe of al
things in our Christ, both in heaven and earth, by whom we are called into
this state, long before appointed according to his purposed pleasure, by
whose power all things be wroughte, that we may boldly say with the Apostle,
who dare lay any thing to the charge of the elect of God? It is God that
justifies, who is he that can condemn? who can separate us (which are
this chosen Jacob) from the love of God.

Can affliccion? can anguyshe? can parfecucion? can hunger? can nackednes?
can peril? can the swearde? For I amparswaded says he: yt nether death nor
life, nor angel, nor power, nor things present, neither things to come,
nether heighe nor depth, nether any creature can separate us from the love of
God in Christ Jesus our Lord, lo this is the love wherewith the Lord loves his
Jacob whereby we say: O heavenly father, Lord of heaven and earth, it has
pleased the that thou might show thy great goodness, most liberallye and
freely toward us, before that we were. And therefore before we had done
either good or ill, without any our merytes or deseruyngs, only thorough thy
free mercy to elect and choose, ordain and appoynte us heirs of everlasting
life, and thereby to make all things perteynyng to our salvation so fyrme and
sure, that they can not stagger nor waver nor fail, Where contrarywyse if
they did hang of our worthynesse, we should ever be doubtefull, because
every manne is a liar, and all our righteousness is like a spotted clothe,
and nothing but counterfeyte hyprocrysy, wayed in the balaunce of thy severe
justice. But the grace of this thy fre eleccyon makes us most certain and
sure, seeing no creature is able to take out of thy hand, O God. Wherefore
we do land and magnyfye thy name world without end.

So be it.

Now after this doctrine of electyon, and love of God toward Iaacob, the
haysynge and reprobatyon of Esawe must likewise be declared, and though the
adversaries of this doctrine do seem to deny, that there is any such
reprobacio^ of the wicked, yet ye words are so plain, both here in this
prophet and Romans ix. That nothing can be more euydent. For what can be more
playnelye spoken for this purpose, then that god should say before the
children were borne that he hated Esaw. What was this hatred, but the
reprobacion, reieccion and condempnacion by god his own mouth of this wicked
Esaw, like as in the last verse of ye first psalm, where it is said: that the
Lord knows the ways of ye just (that is) he has the^ written in his book
in the heavens, he loves them as is said of Iaacob, he has such care over
them, that they can not fall, but unto the glory of god, and their own
commodity, and by the course of the co^traries compared together in that
Psalm: it should be added, the Lord knows not the wicked, like as Christ
says: it shall be answered unto the^, I know you not. The latter part of the
verse is, that the way of the wicked shall peryshe, so that it appears to be
al one, not to be elected, accepted and known of god, and to perysh, and to be
as a reprobate conde^pned. And Felinus forth of kymhi does note that that
part of the last verse of the.ii. Psalm. God being angrye, you shall peryshe
forth of the way, does expound this of the first psalm, so that the
election knowledge, love and favor of god and eternal salvation cannot be
separate: Like as his anger and hatred, reprobacion and condempnacion
consequently do follow, in Cain, Esaw, Pharao, Judas the Phariseis, and like
obdurate persons, so manifestly uttering the^ selves to be of that sort whom
god always hated: The children not of Abraham, but as Christ answers unto
them of their father ye devil, who was a murderer before the beginning of the
world like as his children has been also ever sith the beginning of the
world, and therefore must of necessity be hated of the most merciful Lord,
who is compelled by the order of his works, to use these wicked rods and
cruel scourges, for the chastysement of his children, doing many times the
work strange from his nature, that he may do his work of marcye, peculyer
unto his nature. And than utterly break, hate, reject and cast away into
everlasting fire and utter destruction, this rod and scourge, like a most
marcyfull father, fauouryng his children and hating the rod. Like as he
says by his Prophet: Woo unto Assure the rod of my fury and the staff of my
indingnation, and after promyseth to break the staff and cast away the
rod. Psa. x. Suffering in the mean season yet these instruments of his
wrath prepared unto destructyon, with great pacyence for this end that he
may utter the riches of his glory toward the vessayles of glory, which he
has prepared unto glory.

Thus was Pharao ye manifest scourge and rod of God, to correct, to
chastyse, and to exercise the Israelites, and to spread the power of God
through all the world. Therefore was Moses sent unto him with the rod of God
his mighty mercy, to break in sondre this rod of chastisemente. And the
Lord said unto Moses, I have appointed the to be the God of Pharao, and
Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet, thou shall speak unto him, all that I
command the. And he shall speak unto Pharao, to let go the children of
Israel for the of his land. But I will harden his heart says the Lord and
I will multiplye my signs and wonders in Egypt and he shall not hear you.
And I will lay my hand upon Egypt and I will bring mine army and people
forth of the land of Egypt, by most great judgments, and the Egiptians
shall know that I am the lord Exodus.vii.

Again the Lord says. Now shall I stretche my hand to stryke the, and thy
people with a plage, and thou shall peryshe from the earth, for therefore have
I caused the to stand (for so is the Hebrew word) that I may show in the my
strength and that my name may be renowned through all the earth. Exodus ix. Then
the lord sends a great hayle so that fealynge the hand of God the tenthe
time, Pharao was compelled to cry the Lord is just, and I and my people are
sinners as follows in the same chapter. Yet for all this the Lord hardneth his
heart, that he pursues the children of Israel to his own destruction.
Exodus. xiiii. So that resystyng the power of god he perishes in this world,
and in the world to come he is appointed to the everlasting fire prepared for
the devil and his aungelles by the just judgment of the almyghtye Lord: who
being refused and so openly resisted: justly does give over the wicked to
their own reprobate minds with greadynes to fulfill their fleshlye desires,
and obstynat purpose to prosecute that which the Devil and the world wylleth
them to do, and so causes them to hepe upon their own heads their own
damnation, treasuryng and storing up al their life long, works deseruynge the
wrath of god against the day of his wrath and vengeance, as the Apostle says
to the Romans.

This reprobacion then is the declaracion of god his severe Justice, and just
judgment against the serpent and his seed, whom by the word of his eternal
wisdom, he has accurssed from the beginning and appointed to everlasting
torment. The which work necessary for the procedyng of god his holy
providence, eternal and never ceassynge regyme^t and gouerna^ce, because it is
the work of the will of the mighty god, which is the very law equity and
justice it self, free from all affectyons, far from all fault, crime or
sin. It ought to be known unto us al, that all flesh may tremble and
consider before whom it stands, even before that great Lord and mighty
god, who has power both over the body and soul to cast into hell fire. To
whom no man may say: what do thou? Being like the clay in the poters hand,
or the staff or axe in the hand of the smiter. Who offends against no law,
because his godly will is the law it self, and to know his pleasure, is to
know the law, to follow his will, is to do ye law, so that of necessity
this great Lord is so far and free from al sin, that nothing is good but
that which is wrought by him, nothing can be evil that he worcketh in his
creatures. No the fall of Lucifer the father of the reprobate does utter his
Majesty, does show his Justice, which old Satan and father Devil, was
woorthelye cast down into the bothome of hell and eternallye condemned to
everlasting pain and tormente, because he did so ambiciously and proudly
clymbe up above his appointed place in the heavens. And where the malice of
this old serpente caused Adam the first manne to mount above his estate, to
desire to know good and evil like a God, the marvelous mercy of God and
inestimable love toward mankind caused and compelled this wicked woorcke of
the Serpent to serve his glory and to turn to our great commodytye and
profytte, in that he rayseth of the seed of man, a another Adam, most innocent,
and holy, against whom no devil, nether any helly power may prevail, by
whom we are not only reconcyled unto God and do obtain pardon for this
offense, but we are borne a new, and as it were again created into greater
glory by far then we were at the first, for the first man had only a
promise to live in the earthly gardine so long as he did not eat of the
forbidden fruit, we have the promise of the heavenly paradyse, and everlasting
pleasures. He had earthly meat and fruit, we have the heavenly Manna which
feeds into life everlasting. He was created to work in the gardyne works
natural, we are renewed unto works supernatural, above nature, heavenly, and
celestial. He was over come by the serpent, we do overcome and triumph over
the serpent, Sin, Devil, Death and Hell. He had the gift of reason and
understanding, we have the rytche wisdom of God his holy spirit, whereby we
dyscerne our own infirmity and weakness, and his almightye power, mercy, and
goodness. To be short, where he did run from God, hyd him, and sewe fig
leaves to cover his shame, following his fond fantasye. We do boldly behold
the course of god his woorkyng in our nakedness, sin, and infyrmitie, and
magnify, renown and praise our Lord god which shows his grace, by our
sin, which utters his power by our weakness, his wisdom by out
foolyshnes, which sets forth his elect vessels, his chosen Abels, by
Caynites the vessayles of his wrath. In wych Cain the first murthetherar, and
therefore manifestly of the serpents seed, appears euydentlye the just
judgment of the almighty god, accurssyng and condempnynge, in Satan and Cain,
al sin and wyckednes. To utter that he abhors sin, and hates it, being
so far contrary from his nature, which is Justice it self, contrary from his
will which is equity, and his law which is judgment. In Pharao a child of
the same father, reprobate indurate, and accurssed, whom god styrred up for the
declaracion of his great power and mighty arm, as well in the manifold
miracles wrought for his people, which nothing had needed, neither had been
occasyoned, if there had not ben such a tyrant so indurate and so obstinate,
to wythstande God and his Servants, as also by the submercion and drownyng of
him and his people in the read sea, a sign and token first of the eternal and
inevitable destruction and damnacion, whereunto the wicked are appointed, then
of the salvation assygned and sealed up for the elect and chosen, we do learn
here by also the power of god which the very Sorcerers, the enemies of god were
compelled to confess before Pharao. Exodus viii. We do learn more over ye
justice of god, which justice Pharao him self was compelled against him self,
to denounce and affirm. Exo. ix. And finally we may se expressed most
manifestly ye fatherly mercy of ye god of Iaacob, which did give the king and
the whole people of Egypt a price for his chosen Iaacob. Loo the love toward
Iaacob, and the hatred toward Esaw. What shall we speak of Judas and other
manyfestlye reprobate, which are compelled by the testymony of their own
consciences, to pronounce them selves wicked, and therefore to fear god his
seueare justice and just judgment. And to fly there from by the terror of
their evil consciences, which is more sore then a thousand witnesses, against
such as god does leave to their own selves. The which terrible examples, the
elect of god, having before their eyes, has great cause to praise their
heavenly father, through his son Christ, who has sent them his hollye
spirit of comfort, which will never suffer them to be tempted above yt they
are able to suffer and to bear.

But where we have two kind of me^, that be adversaries to this doctrine of
reprobacion. The one sort vtteryng the^ selves most manyfestly reprobate,
obstinate, and wylfully wicked: cryinge and blasphemyng, we will follow our
lusts, what need we to care how we live, or what we do? if we be elected with
Iaacob, we shall be saved, if we be reject and curssed with Esaw, we shall be
dampened. These Lucifers, not submyttynge them selves to the governance of god,
careless what becomes of them, must be bette down with the consyderacion of
the majesty and mighty power of God, which suffers not one sparowe to fall
upon the earth without his will and providence, neither one hear to fall from
the head of his elect and chosen, how fearcelye so ever they shall rage
against them.

Wherefore (O you Serpents seed) how so ever you shall be offended with this
yt I shall speak, know this: yt as the mighty God has made the skattered
sons, able inoughe to stay the ragyng seas: so shall your proud waves of your
boylyng stomakes, and over busye heads, be broken and brought full low, where
and when it shall like the Lord of al flesh, by these his weak vessels. And
license must you ask, as did your father the Devil, executynge his tyrranny
upon the good man Job, as we read in the first chapter of that history, before
you can lay hands, either of body or goods of any of his chose^, and therein
shall you be lymitted and appointed (as there appears) how far you shall be
able to extend your violence. For God holds your hearts in his hand, be you
never so great tyrauntes, and can soon cause you to faint and fail from your
fury, turnyng your hearts round about as him lyketh best. And because thus
you blaspheme God, both in words and deeds, followyng your father Lucifer,
abusing Gods creatures, and despysyng his benefytes, his tollerance, and his
long sufferaunce, which might move you to repentance (as holy Paul warns)
you treasure up for yourselfe even wrath and vengeance against the day of
vengeance. I do fear nothing at al to offend you with my writing, neither do
you pas any thing at al what is written or spoken, though you use to swear,
sta^pe, and stare for a little space in a furious rage, when you hear and feel
things contrary to your poyso^. But the scriptures of God, al good wrytinges,
al truth unto such dogs and hogs ar uttered to this purpose, yt they may
be a testimony of co^de^pnatio^ of the light of God his truth rejected and
despised. Therefore for the elect of god yt they may understand the course of
God his woorckinge in all his creatures, and reverence his majesty, and magnify
and renoume his holy name, is this written. Yet doutles do I know amongst the
chief vessayles and chosen children of God, there be many, which have not
attained to this point of doctrine of eleccion and reprobacio^, who^ I am very
loathe to offend, and therefore I desire the^ for the love of god to suffer me
quietly with out their grief, to utter unto other the comfort of mi
conscience, which I have here by undoubtedly received: like as I have many times
harkened unto them, in the contrary. First praying thus both of us together
unto our heaue^li father, knowledging our own infirmity and weakness O father
in the heavens, what so ever we are, what so ever we have, what so ever we
know, it is only by thy fre grace, for we were by nature the children of wrath,
and we are not borne a new of flesh and blud either of the seed of man, or of
the will of man, flesh and blood cannot reveal ye mysteries of thy heavenly
kingdom unto us. But by thy blessed will, are we yt we are, and by the same
know we that we know Therefore (O father) do we commytte into thy hands
only our salvation. If our knoweledge be small, yet we doubt nothing,
but that we are the children of thy everlasting kingdom, and therefore by thy
mighty power, we shall grow when it shall be thy pleasure, to a more full and
ryper knowledge of a more perfyte age, wherein our faith shall be fullye able to
comprehend and perceive the breadth, depth, light, and largeness of thy great
mercies, and gracious promyses. But seeing this power of full knowledge, and
parfite reuelacion, passes al powers natural, and remains only in thy
power, and the light of thy spirit (O Lord.) Do thou what shall please the,
to open to us thy servants and children, depending of thy hands, so much of
the light of thy countenance, and at such times as shall seem good to thy
wisdom, and fatherlye mercy. In the mean time thus restyng hollye upon the,
neither can we despair, neither will we be to much careful, although we can not
attain to the knowledge of many of thy works, neither to the understanding
of many places of the scriptures, but we will confess unto thee, the weakness
of our faith, wayghtyng always for further reuelacion of thy glorious light,
to be uttered unto us when thou shall thyncke of thy fatherly benevolence and
goodness, mete and convenient, knowing most surely that thou wylt pyttye our
chyldyshe infansye, and cause the same to serve for thy glory and our great
commoditye, seeing that we do err, and are chyldysh, as sons before such a
father which cannot put of his fatherlye pyttye, but rather as thou have
bought us unto the, to be the heirs of thy kingdom by the blood of thy
natural son, so we be most sure that thou wylt lyghten us in the end, with
the full fruition of the bryghte light of thy countenance, that we may see the
and know thee as this thy son our redemer knows the, yea, see the our
father face to face, and know as we be known. Thus rest we only of thy hand
to encreace our knowledge at thy good pleasure, O mighty Lord and most
merciful father. So be it.

If you can thus submit your selves good brethren, to the wisdom of God,
woorkyng in us weakelyngs what him lyketh. All the stomblyng stocks which might
offend you, may easily be removed. There be two things especyallye which do
seem to stand against this doctrine of eleccion and reprobacion, or of God
his governance and providence, for all is one in effect, the one touches God,
the other man. The tyrst and principalis, lest that ye wicked do make God the
author of sin in the reprobate, the which doubt, we may remove four
manner of ways.

First, by the authoryty of scriptures. Secondlye, by the testimonye of their
own consciences which be the reprobate. Thyrdlye, by the nature of sin.
Fowrthly, by the majesty of god which is bound to none of his creatures, to
make him this or that vessayle. For the first Saint James says: Let no man
say when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God, for God, as he cannot be
tempted with evil, so neither does he tempt any man. But every manne is
tempted, drawn away, and entysed of his own lust and concupiscence. Then the
lust when it has conceived, brings forth sin. James. i. And even thus it
appeared in the first fall of mankind. First, though the Lord our God had
warned and commanded the contrary, our old enemy styrreth the concupiscence
and lust of the woman, with the goodness, pleasa^tnes and beawty of the aple,
then her lust co^ceiuing this, brings forth sin, entising also her housba^d
to the breaking of God his co^mandeme^tes. Genesis iii. But co^trarywise says
James in ye same place. Ia. i. Lest you should err and co^eeyue any evil
opinion of God, every good gift and every parfyte gift is from above,
descending from the father of light, with whom is no varyablenes, neither
change into darkness, that he should give now good things, now evil, now
light, now darkness. No, says the Apostle Paul, let God be true, and al men
liars. Can God be unjust? How shall he then judge the world? Romans iii. Again,
God says by his prophet Ezechyel: I will not the death of a sinner, but I will
rather that the sinner convert, repent, and live. And unto wicked Iherusalem
says our savior Christ: O Iherusalem Iherusalem, which sleyest the
Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto the: How often would I have
gathered together thy children, as the Hen gathers her chykyns under her
wings, and thou would not. Lo, thy house therefore is left desolate. Math.
xxiii. Loo, here appears the goodness of the living Lord, so dylygently
calling the wicked to him by his word, by his Prophets, by his messengers,
and at the length by his own son, that he cannot in any case be accounted
the author of their evil, nor cause of their fall. But contrary wise their own
wylful and wicked stobbernes, is the cause of their evil and the only
occasion of their fall, as it is written: Thy perdicion and destruction is of
thine own self, but only of me is thy salvation. And infinite scryptures to
the same purpose appertaynyng. That we may say with Danyel: unto the O lord,
belongs ryghtuousnes, and to us the shame and coueryng of our faces. Dani.
ix. Secondly. The testemony of the consciences of the wicked, which shall accuse
or excuse them at the great day, which is always of the force and valor of a
thousand witnesses, which is the woorme that shall never dye but gnawe the
wicked for ever. Esa. lxvi. This conscience (I say) of theyres shall condemn
the wicked, and what shall God then do? Or wherein is his dreadful majesty to
be charged? Cain by his own conscience, is compelled to confess: greater is
my wyckednes then can be remytted. Thou castest me from the face of the earth
(says he) and I must hyde me from thy face. Lo, the just judgment of God and
his worthy condempnacion, openly confessed. Who dare then blame God. Cain dare
in no wise do it. Neither yet proud Pharao, who condemned in his own heart and
conscience, accuses him self and his people, and iustifyeth god delyuerynge
all men from this wicked blasphemye, saying openly: I have sinned now, the
Lord is just, and I and my people are wicked. Exodi. ix. What does Judas? Does
he not cry likewise I have sinned, betraying this innocent blood. Math. xxvii.
And to utter in deed that thing he felt within his breast, he is compelled to
take aduengeance, and execute a judgment most terrible against him self,
vtteryng to all the world him self most wicked, and that the justice of God,
punyshyng such wicked traitors and murderers: ought most worthelye to be
feared, magnyfyed, and reverenced, throughout the whole world. Like as all the
other wicked and desparate parsones, which for anguyshe of heart, and terror
of conscience, do murder them selves, does euyde^tly and continually witness
unto the worlds and, that there is a just Lord, the god of judgment, whom they
do fear, and before whose face they dare not appear, to accuse him of any
sin, but rather taking the crime, blame, shame, and punishment, unto
themselves, who worthelye by their own conscience, have deserved it, does
thus tormente them selves, and with vyolente hands, aduenge the sin they
have committed in their own synnefull souls and bodies. Thus must God always
be found just, and overcome when he is judged, by the testimony of our own
conscience, which shall accuse or excuse us at the great day. Roma. ii.
Wherefore let no man be so foolyshe, to say, that God is the author of evil,
unless he will be accounted woursse then Cain, more proud then Pharao, more
wicked then Judas, or any other the reprobate from the beginning.

Thyrdly, the nature of sin, being defyned by the authority of scriptures,
to be a thought, word, or deed, contrary to the will of God. For such things
only defyle the man, as Christ our master says. Mathewe. xv. and therefore
are only to be accounted sin. No such thought can be attributed or
ascribed unto God, as can be against his will, therefore no sin can be his
work. Neither can he be the author of evil, which therefore is called god,
because he is the author and geuer of all good, so contrary to the nature of
sin, and so far from evil, that he tourneth all our evil to some good,
our sin to the vtteryng of his grace, our lies, to the declaracio^ of his
truth. No, this is the parfyte work master which woorketh al things
without fault or trespass, all other do fail, fault, and trespass, and
sin in all their works, that he may be justified in all his doings, and al
creatures fall down before his face and presence. Who though he do work all in
all things, yet does he work the same to such godly end and purpose,
known only to his majesty, that thought we be compelled to say God is the
author of the fact, yet must we answer: but not of the crime. Because he is
the master of the house. and Lord over the family, and therefore may do any
thing without the blame of his servants.

And like as that which is no fault in the Master of the house, is a great
fault many times in any of his servants, because it is breakyng of their
Masters commandment. Even so doubtless the self same work is sin in God
his servants and creatures, which to God is no sin, but an ordynary work
appointed for some special purpose, either for the manyfestacion of his power,
as was the hardenyng of Pharao, or for the declaracio^ of his mercy, as was
the fall of David, of Peter, of Marye Mawdelen, and all other repentaunt
sinners. And wherefore (I pray you) may not this Lord, thus use his own
Servants, without any blame of sin, saying that he has created and made
them all only to serve his glory, his justice and his mercy. Or how can he be
unjust, or the author of any sin, by whom all the world must be judged and
brought to the balance of justice and equity. When the first world shall be
condemned for their sin and iniquitye, and we now living shall be judged
for our sins: especyallye all those which not only do evil the^ selves, but
are authors and fautours to wicked doers. Roma. i. Fourthly. The majesty of
God can be subject to no sin, be cause it can be under no law, And that
only is worthelye called sin, which is done against a law, therefore no
work that God does, ought to be accounted evil, either that he is the
occasion of any evil, which only is the mind, sense, and spryte and power of
the law, without whom no law of it self is good. For every good law is the
mind, will and commandments of God, and what so ever law is not the mind,
will, and commandment of God, as was the laws of the Scribes and Pharyseis,
and of our late Papists, the same be wicked: who of necessitye were set up the
body of antechrist to vttre their unrighteousness, that Christ the son of
rightousnesse, the head of his body, in his manyfolde mercies, more playnelye
might appear, and shine with more glory. Again to define sin to be the
affeccion, mocion, or operacyon of any reasonable creature, against the law of
God: his majesty must needs be secluded and excused, who is the law maker, the
creator, no creature, having no evil mocion, nor led with any affection, which
might make his work evil. Like as the creature is for the most part blame
worthi, because eue^ when it does the best of all. It is subject to some
affection either self love, or hatred of some other, yea the Lord God may use
any of his creatures in any work, without the blame of any evil, as well as
the smithe may make his colles to flame, or to quench them, either the same
peace of iron, sometimes his hammer, sometime his tongues or stythye.

Wherefore though very much might be said in this part, that as the potter may
make of one piece of claye what him lyketh, the smythe may make of his yro^
diverse instruments, yet following the godly wisdom of. S. Paul, I think it
more mete, to beat down man's subteltyes, with the contemplation of the
majesty of the mighty God, pronouncing boldly that such as say (if my lies and
sin, setforth his glory, why am I then judged as a sinner, let us do evil
that good may come, and so in their wicked words dare make God the author of
evil, has their worthy dampnacion al ready as Paul says. Roma. iii. For
of necessity which their eyes can not see, such diversity of sin and grace,
of rightousnes and unrighteousness, of the contraryete and chaung of things,
must be in this wonderful creation of heaven and earth, by the high Majesty
of God appointed and opened, For what neaded the goodly creature of light? If
there had been no darkness, or how should this benefyte have been felt or
perceived? what matter or cause of vtterynge justice might have been found?
without sin and vnryghtousnes? how should grace have been showed if no
wrath had been deserved? No, the mighty God thereby most evidently utters
his majesty, in that he shows how the heavens fall in to darkness without him,
the earth into dust, the angels into devils, the me^ into sin, and so finally
without him all things to come to naught, yt he might be magnified creating
all things, his son our savior renoumed who has redeemed us al, his holy
spirit exalted who has renewed al us, yt be his elect and chosen. Now to
what creature is ye majesty of god bound and found debtor of his spryte. If he
with hold it from any, his dreadful majesty may rightly with hold it, for who
has given him first to ask any thing again of debt or duty? If his majesty do
give his spirit, it is of his fre mercy and grace. If ye earth fall into dust,
if man fall into sin yt al things may be known to be nothing without god: what
blame deserves god or who dare accuse him? No, let al flesh fall down before
his majesty and co^fes. Al things does only rest upon the o Lord god, thou have
created all things of nothing, so that without the they all do fall to their
original, to show them selves vayn and nothing worthy, weak, wretched and
miserable, wherefore if we have any good thing it comes of thy mercy, if we
have any weakness sin or infirmity, it comes of our own concupiscence,
lusts and vanity, our perdition is of our selves, our sin is of our selves,
only of the is our salvation, thou made us claye, pots and vessails to thine
use. Do thou with us as you shall think good in thine eyes, and the shame shall
fall upon our own faces The second cause which concerns man, (whereby many
mistake this doctryn) is that God exhorts man always in his scryptures to
good, and forbyddeth evil with many terryble threatenings, which things
seems not to be needful (say they (seeing the elect shall be saved and the
reprobate condemned, by decree and sentence given upon them before they be
borne. To this we do answer that these exhortacions and comninations, are very
necessary to both twain, because God leads us men always, like reasonable
creatures, not like in sensible stocks or stones. And to the elect they are
most necessary Pryckes and spurs, to stir the dull flesh toward his
deuty, as all good men fealeth and can bear witness. To the reprobate they
are testymonies of the good will of the almighty God to them opened and uttered,
but openly resisted, refused and rejected, according to the saying of our
savior Christ. If I had not come and spoken to them, they had had no sin
but now they have no pretense or excuse for their sin, Peradventure you will
answer me: they can not obey unto it. What is the cause thereof I pray you?
because they lack the spirit of Christ to lead them, you will say. I dare
easily grant you, but will they grant this? will they (think you) submytte
them self under poor Christ, and the folyshenes of the cross and not
rather boaste and brag their wisdom, their knowledge, and their up right
dealyng, and rightousnes. Are not these the men that dare thus boste? We know
as well as the Preacher can tell us. Is the sprite of God departed from us to
speak with him (as was said to Micha.ii. of the kings.xxii. chap. Or as the
Phariseis did aunsweare unto Christ are we blind? to whom our savior
says again. If you were blind you had no sin, but now you say you see,
therefore your sin remains. Io. ix. Thus doubtless they are so far from
the submission and subieccyon to poor Christ, that contrary wise they do
willinglye and naturallye follow their father Lucifer, Who did lift him self
arrogantly above Christ the son of righteousness, and evermore fyghteth
against Christ, though the mighty power and high wisdom of God turns his
evil will and al theyres to his glory and good purposes. None other ways then
bodilye and natural darkness which by the wonderful wisdom of God, clearelye
sets forth the bright son shine, and yet laboreth by continual course to
shadow the son and to cover the whole earth. Wherefore the Lord God to drive
a way this natural darcknes from manne, exhorts to justice and equitye,
which is his nature and the image which man ought to cou^terfait. And always
commands things thereunto agreeable. And forbids that he is not, that is
to sai iniquiti, and behorteth there from by his Prophets and preachers
publishing his will and pleasure, which is the light and law most perfect to man
his noble creature, whom he has made for his honor and glory, whom he
has appointed to bear his Image upon earth of justice rightousnes and
innocence. But because this image cold by no creature parfytlye be expressed,
onles the same were fully replenished with ye self same godhead, because that
all things besides forth had some inperfection, bewraying their original the
darcknes as John calls it the Tohu and Bohu. as Moises does it name, The
vain vanity, and wild deformite, whence they were by creacyon altered,
recovered, and brought into light and life, as apeared in Adam falling from
truth to lies straight at the beginning, now of necessity the son of God
(who only is good of nature, becomes man, and takes this office to bear the
image of god invisible. Col. i. And to be the head of that spiritual perfection
which was to be wrought in mankind, by his a fore appointed purpose, and
becomes the first begote^ of al creatures, for by him were al things created
both in heaven and earth, visible and invisible majesty, Lordship, rule and
power, by whom and in whom al things are created, and he is before all
creatures and in him al things have their being. And he is the head of the
body, he is the beginning and first begotten of the dead, that in all things he
might have preeminence For it pleased ye father that in him should dwell al
fulness, and by him to reconcyle al things to him self. And to set at peace by
him through ye blood of his cross both things in heaven and things in earth,
for eue^ you says Paul which in times past were strangers, because your
minds were set in euel works, has he now reco^siled in the bodi of his flesh
through death, to make you holy and vnblameles and without fault in his
sight. Seeing then that this cannot be denied to be the course of god his holy
woorking to drive away this darkness, and to bring man to his light to take
away sin, and to bring man to a life blameles the state of innocency and his
own liknes: shall it not be most nessessarye to have preachers and teachers to
tell us this same, and admonyshe us whereunto we be called seeing of our selves
and our own reasons no such thing can be perceived. Therefore have we
preachinges and exhortacions as Paul says: for when the world through
wisdom knew not God in the the wisdom of God, it pleased God through the
foolyshnes of preaching to save them that believe.i. Corin. i. And as he also
says of him self in another place: We do preach this rytches in Christ the
hope of your glory, warnyng al men, and teaching al men in all wisdom, to make
al men parfyt in Christ Jesus.

Thus serves then exhortacions, dehortacions, co^minations and publicacions of
the laws and will of our Lord God: that he may be known the Lord and
governor over all the things he has created, and the only law maker among
his creatures publyshyng unto all that parfyt equity and justice which ought
in no case to be resisted. Whereunto if they cannot attain, they must confess
and knowledge their own infyrmytye and weakness, and submyt them selves
under the mighty hand of God, and so doing they shall be received as
children of the most loving and most merciful Father, in such degrees of
parfection as he has appointed to the beawtefying of the body of his son
our head. So that the Lord God does teach all, and lyghten all men that
come into the world both chosen and reprobate, with such a knowledge as does
the good Prince, which unto all his subjects proclaymeth his statutes, and
publysheth his laws: but like a good and tender father, he leads his
children (regenerate and borne a new, neither of flesh nor blood, nor the
will of man) and guydeth them with his fatherly spirit in the paths of the
same laws, writing in their hearts what is his good will and pleasure.

In the which course of God his wonderful work, the wicked has no cause to
complain, for as their father whom they do follow is named ye prince of this
world, so they have the world at will, and are rytche roysters, and wealthye
worldelynges, tramplynge under their feet poor Abell, and the despised
Christians: neither will they change their estate with any such, no when they
are called from darckenesse to be partakers of light, of life, and the
heavenly daynties, laid up in poor Christ they despise that estate excusing
their purchases, their marchaundyse and their earthelye lusts and delytes.
Luke.xiiii. Wherefore in the other world, they that here are oppressed, shall
have comfort and the other torment.

Such is the order then of God his woorkeynge that by the contrayetie of the
chosen and reprobate, of Iaacob and Esaw, of Pharao and Israel, and the
wisdom of God, and the wisdom of the world, he will set forth his
majesty, his power, his divinity, his Godhead so mutche as may be known
unto man (that is to say) in his wisdom, Justice, mercy, and almyghtynes.
For comparynge his wisdom to any other wisdom, now appears, the
contrary, that it is very foolyshnes, even darkness compared unto light, death
unto life, lies unto truth, as Paul says: When they accounted them selves
wise, they were made very fools, and changed the truth with lies, the glory
of the immortal God, to mortal and corruptyble creatures. They following
their own ryghtuousnes could not come to the ryghtuousnes of God in Jesus
Christ.

Wherefore of necessitye God did shytte all under sin that his mercy might
flow over al. And that his mighty power might appear, he has created the
heavens and earth, wherein we do se light and darkness, death and life, shame and
glory, weakness and strength, lies and truth, ryghtuousnes and unrighteousness
to serve to the setting forth of his glory, that man may be driven to say with
Paul: O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God. How
inco^prehensible are his ways? How unsearchable are his judgments. For who
has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counsailour. Or who
has given him ought before hand? that he might be repayed. For by him and
through him and in him, are all things, to him be praise for ever. Amen.

And as this holy Apostle Paul does submyt him self to the great depth of the
wisdom of God and his wonderful regyment and prouydence, and would beat and
drive down all flesh by the consideracion of the same. So also al our fathers
from the beginning has laid this the only fou^dacio^ of their faith.
Wherefore Moses begins to stablish the faith of man at the history of the
creacion, and so forth by thorder of god his present governance about the
things made and created. And David for a confession of his faith pronou^ceth
of this providence Psa. xcv I do know that thou art a great Lord and a Lord
above al Gods. Althyngs what soever the lords pleasure was he has made in the
heavens thearth, the seas, and the bothomles waters. Again, by the word of God
al things were set in their places, and by the spirit of his mouth all the
powers that be in them. And Paul considering most deeply, and pronouncing
most playnelye this deuyne governance of the creatures, and godly providence
of the creator, in all things for his elect and chosen says thus. Roma. viii.
We know that all things work for the best unto them that love God, who also
are called of purpose, for those which he knew before, he also predestinate
that they should be like fashyoned to the shape of his son. Moreover, who^
he has predestinate, those has he called, and whom he called, them he also
has justified, whom he has justified, those also has he gloryfyed.

So that this appears to be no new learning or vain doctrine of God his
providence and election. But the only ground of faith and certayntye of
conscience in all conflyctes against the world, the flesh and the dyuell,
against Sin, Death, and hell, as thapostle uses it in the latter end of
the same chapter and all the fathers from the beginning has felt it. For how
could Ada^ by any other work or creature, either by comfort of any other
doctrine, stay his conscience? but in that the Lord God promised to provide
for him, and to save him from his enemy (who once had overcome him) by the
blessed seed which not by merytes, but by mercy and grace, and therefore of
his free purpose before appointed, should be sentte unto him to break the
head of the serpent. Why? should Abraham have left his country and his own
fathers house if he had not felt this divine providence, fatherly care, free
choice and eleccion of him and his seed? By the which lively felyng of God his
careful providence, and free choice, sendyng him seed when he was past hope of
seed (concerning his dead body and all the works of nature) and by the
stedfastnes of faith in the temptacions about the same seed to be made a
slain sacrifice, and other grievous temptacio^s and adversities from time to
time laid upon him, this chosen vessayle Abraham is called the father of all
faithful. As by his historye appears a fatherly care of our god, for all his
people, both for bodies and souls, for wife and child and all together. And
Isaac his son, that chosen seed, in whom all the nations of the earth were
promised to be blessed long before the child was borne, has this promysse of
enherytaunce given him by favor, that the promise might be sure to all the seed
as Paul says. To. xiiii unto whom and his faithful seed this free promys and
fatherlye eleccion and predestinacion (or what else you will call it) was again
revealed and opened. Genes. xxvi. in these words: through thy sede shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. And the lively sense and feelyng of this
eleccion and fatherly care of God, for him, did then especially shine in his
heart when the Lord said unto him: Go not into Egypt tarry here, I will be with
the, and will bless the, and through thy sede shall all the nations of the earth
be blessed. Gene. xxvi. And after that grievous temptacion undoubtedly wherein
he was compelled for fear of the Philistines, to deny his wife and call her
sister, and after the manyfolde contencyons with the Philystynes, wherein his
God did preserve him, and at the end in the wonderful miracle of his
children, whose birthe right was altered by the unsearchable prouydence of God
the manifest notes and tokens of the free Eleccyon and choice of God did
apeare. And Iaacob chosen and beloved in his mothers womb felt this fre work
of God his great favor, who had chosen him before he was borne, and taking
occasion of the necessitye of his brother, seeks the birth right, the which
God had unto him before appointed and promised renouncing the course of
nature, the^ does he leave and forsake his fathers house and patiently takes
all troubles offered unto him, In the which oftentimes undoubtedly he fealeth
the heavy and grievous temptations that his fathers Abraham and Isaac had
before (for no creature more often suffers trouble than the very elect of
God) for the experimentes of his faith, whereby the lyuelye sense and undoubted
tokens of his favorable eleccyon after many battayles and vyctoryes might be
made certain and sure, through present comfort always ministered unto him
either by secreate inspiration or manifest revelation, wytnessynge the syngular
care of his heavenly father over him his dearly beloved and chosen child, as
his wonderful vision of the ladder and the angels dessendynge from heaven does
declare, and the other vision wherein the aungel did show him the party
colored sheep for his porcio^ to multyply and increase his substance, as also
when God byddeth him go into his own contry from this disceitfull Laban, and
defends his Jacob from him, and finally the glorious vyctory given unto him
over the aungel, comforting him against ye fear of his brother Esau, does
bring forth unto his heart and conscience the assured signs and tokens of his
heavenly father, first electinge and chusyng, and after evermore gouernynge,
guydynge and preserving by the free mercy of his dyuyne prouydence.

Iheremy also chosen in his Mothers womb as appears in the first chapter of
his Prophecy, where it is said from the mouth of God (before I fashyoned the
in thy mothers womb I did know the. And or ever thou wast borne I did
sanctifye the, and ordained the too be a Prophet unto this people, then felt
the most lyuelye signs and tokens of his eleccion, when his flesh repyned,
grudged and feared to take in hand the execution of this great and dangerous
e^bassage, and the power of God his spryte does touch his heart, and opens
his mouth to the pla^ting and rooting up of al people and kingdoms to break,
destroy and make waiste, and raised him as a fensed town, a brazen wall an
Iron pyller against the kings, priests and people of the land. Now though
some times his flesh does grudge for the burden of his office and anguish of
heart as though he had been an abiecte or reprobate, yet always after the
brunte of temptacyons vtteringe his weakness, he fynedeth the merciful
providence of his heavenly father, to take a continual care for him and not
only comfort and assist him but also most evidently to punyshe his ennemies.

And to be short all the elect of God are thus chosen and called guyded and
governed from their mothers womb, according to the saying of the princelye
Prophet. Thou art he that take me from my mothers womb, thou wast my hope,
yet when I hanged upon my mothers breasts. I have been left unto the ever
sense I was borne thou art my God even from my mothers womb. And then do they
feel most sensybly and lyuelye this their election, when temptacions and
adversities does assayl and assault them, in the which conflyctes (...)
bring to an earthlye prince, and compare then with the prince over al earthly
and heavenly things, the Lord of al Lords, the king of al kings, what comely
offerynges would be brought to his deuyne majesty. Would any of our earthly
Dukes be well pleased with the present of a lame dog or blind horse? Nay
doubtless: they would think the^ selves utterly dispysed and shamefully
dishonored by him ye should offer them any such. If nothing then be acceptable
among worldly men in worldly gifts, save that only which of it self is
commendable: how mutch more before the Lord of hosts, the Lord over al dukes
and kings must we be careful what we do bring? least he being displeased, do
reject us together with our offering.

Now go to, and pray before the face of God, that he may have marcye upon us.
This is done by your hands, will he receive your faces, says the Lord of
hosts. Yea, hear what the Lord of hosts and armies, the great and terryble
God, the mighty Lord says unto you by his prophet, you priests come to the
temple and to the aultare to pray for the people, there you do offer, you
drenne incense, you make vows as though you would move me to have mercy upon
you, and grant your peticions, but thus careless you do come bringing the
same and blind, pollutynge the bread of my table with your leven of
hipocrisy, making my table despised with your vile offerynges, yt I neither
can of my Justice, nor will of my mercy, receive the faces of such feigned
hypocrytes, neither any such skornefull gifts. No, I your God am a just
God, I do not hear the wylfull sinners. And to the wicked I have said: why
do thou take my name in thy mouth? I abhor the praises, the sacrifyces,
and the offerynges of the sinner. First pourge thy self therefore, and then
bring a pure offering to mine altar if thou wylt have me to receive thy face.
O give ear you priests, you are negligent in your offices, and that causes
this word of God to be like an heavy burden to you.

Deceive not your selves and your people, abiding still blind and halting
of both sides. Betwyxte God and the world, the Spyryte and the flesh, the
living Lord and Baal, neither flatter your selves, thincking that God will
receive your fair faces and hypocritical gestures void of true holiness. No, be
sure you hypocrites, that if the earthlye Dukes and Lords will have no lame
horses when you prole for your benefits, neither will the Lord of heaven and
earth hear your prayers, neither grant your requests for your blind and lame
offerynges, your haltyng doctrine, and crooked lamenesse in the course of your
vain life and evil conditions. But thus says the Lord God to you priests
again.

Who is there also among you, that will shut the doors for naught, or
set light upon mine aultare? I have no pleasure in you says the Lord of
hoastes, and I will allow none offering of your hands. Lo, what ca^ be spoken
more plainly or more wayghtely against your covetousness and ambicio^? O prestes
seeing no man but the Lord of al men, the Lord of all hoastes and armies, be
they never so fearce, speaks these words: I have no pleasure in you nor
your gifts, I will none of them, because you do not serve me, but your
avarice and your belly, for were not that, you would not ons shut the church
door, no now in these evil days, many prestes will not do so much as shut the
doors of their churches, but gapynge still for gain more and more, abide
abroad in courts and great men's houses, and though they have great lyuynges
and mutche advantage by their churches, yet will they not once look in at the
church door, where they are named the pastors and shepeheardes, but like thieves
come only thither to rob and to steal, where thou ought as thou have
freely taken, so freely to minister. This ought to be thy special respect,
namely to do good and profyt without offense (though all other men must
likewise consider that the true and good laborer is well worthy his deue and
just reward) yea, and if thou will be a good shepeheard thou must not only
seek thine own gain, but thou must be prompte and reddy to ieoparde thy
life for thy sheep, else art thou an hyrelyng and a thief.

Wherefore. O priests, this prophet and messenger of God tellethe you plain,
that so long as you neglecte your duties toward Christ's flock, and only
seek your own gain and to saciate your covetous mynds the lord God will
have no pleasure in you nor your offerynges, be you Papystes, be you
protestants, exammyne your own consciences with this question of the Prophet.

Who is there among you that will do any thing for naught? And fear the
mighty Lord which thus charge you. And let some one be found among you,
which follows no gain but laboreth for love in the vyneyarde of the Lord.

For from the east to the west my name is great among the heathen, and
every where they brenne incense unto my name, and a pure offering, for great is
my name amongs the heathen says the Lord of hosts: and you polluted it in your
words saying: the table of the lord is polluted, and the word of the priest
is that the meat thereof is despised. This prophecy as al other the sayings of
the prophets, are general and agrees first to the time when it was spoken,
and so consequently the truth thereof remains unto all ages, the priests in
that time thought that in Jury only did remain the true worship of God: but
hear is answered as in the tenthe chapter of the Acts unto Peter, being of
the same oppinion it was by reuelacion declared, that there is no regard of no
place or parson before God, whether it be Jew or gentle, but in every nation
he that fears God and works justice, he is acceptable unto him. This fear
and reverence of god his sacrate Majesty, is the sweet incense and pure
offering which the lord God requires from the one side of the world to the
other. Therefore says the Apostle Paul of this general acceptacion of al
nations, glory honor and peace to every one that works good both to the
Jew and also to the Gentil, so that in eueri place god accepts the just and
hears him, but he abhors the sinner with his sacrifice, which is the sense
and meaning of our prophet, threatnyng to cast away the priests with their
fained holiness, and to receive such worshippers which in any place should
worship in sprete and truth according to the saying of our savior Christ to
the woman of Samaria Iho. iiii. Examples have we right many, that the mercy of
God, is much farther delated and spread a broad, then the holy wordlyngs,
who only will be accounted holy alone supposes. For unto Jonas (not able to
consider this mystery) it was by the mouth of God said and pronounced: Shall
not I have mercy of Niniue the great cyty wherein there be mo then a hundredth
and twenty thousand men which do not know betwyxt the rightha^d and the left
hand? Though to our wicked cities and unrepentant contraryes, this example
ought to be no comfort but a condempnacyo^, as Christ our master warns the
pharisees. For if one poor Jonas could cause Niniue the great to repent and.v.
hundredth Prophets, apostles and preachers cannot pearse our flyntysh hearts,
what deserve so stubborn people? The Ninevites did repent in ashes and
sakcloth both Prince and people, we gettte us into Harness and gather great
horses to resyste God his wrath.

They weped for the preacher, we laugh at the preacher, They fasted we feast,
They mourned, we play the hoiters like brainsyk beasts, yea in the kings court
where should begin repentance and in the contrye for their mourning, we
mutter, we murmur, we grudge, and we groan against God, against our heads,
against our preachers against our guids The Ninevites did cry unto the Lord
myghtelye (says Jonas) and commanded every man to torn from his evil way
and from the vyolente oppressyon of his brethren. We neither cry nor call but
show our selves unwilling, weary and very loathe to come to comune prayers, to
hear godly preachings. Ah this comparison to our cities is far unlike, and
nothing but a manifest condempnation of our wicked world. Though among the
most wicked, God has his chosen children as he had Loath, among the
Sodomites. For the Ninevites had a great noumber both of their heads and
inferioure people fearing the Lord of heaven and earth, and therefore was
Jonas readilye received. We have not one niste (as the Psalm says) no not
one, God looks down from heaven and sees us al unprofitable, all declining
from the way, all workynge wickedness, neither priest nor writer working the
worthy works of repentance. To conclude all in two words. They did cease
from sin, we do all increase our sin, which is our condempnacion, yet in
our own country we nothing doubt, but God has his chosen and knows
them, and causes them to confess his holy name, to call their brethren too
repentance, and to glorify the mighty power of God. In many other countries we
have examples also yt God has always had his people, which did offer unto
him acceptable sacrifice emonges the heythen, as in Siria Naman, the queen of
the Southe, Hyra the king of Tyrus. In Madian Iethro, the father in law of
Moises, the wydowe of Sarephta, and in diverse other regions, which as they
were all made for the glory of God, so was there always sum among them,
that by marking his wo^derous woorckes in the creation of the world and
governance of the same, or else by secret inspiracion, where there lacked
open teaching, did magnyfy his name and offer the calves of their lips, that is
to say: contynuall praises and rehearsynge of his marvelous works, with due
obedience unto the general rules of his commandments, which he always
prefers to al sacrifices, and counts it most pure incense, and an
offering most pleasant. Wherefore the Jews warrefarre deceived, which
thought them selves only the people of God, because they had the circumsicion
and the sacrifices, likewise we Christians may not boaste of our name, of our
profession, of our baptime despising all other people, and lyuinge contrary to
the will of God, uttered by Christ, contrary to our professyon promised in
baptysme, for as the Lord God had many of his people at this time of our
prophet scattered from the East to the West, though never in flesh
cyrcumcysed, and as our savior Christ says to the Jews bragyng of their
father Abraham, that god his father was able to raise up stones to be sons
unto Abraham, so may it be said unto us counterfayte Christians, which with
our Lascivious life do pollute our profession. For we must know that neither
circumcision neither vncircu^sicion, neither washing nor not washing of the
flesh is any thing, but a new creature renewed with God his holy spirit is
all together, which in all places is ready to offer a pure offering of
thanckes geuynge, ministryng justice, and working mercy. In the time of
Malachy the table of the Lord was despised by the covetousness of the priests,
his name was polluted by their Lascivious life, the priests said: the meat of
the Lords table is not to be regarded, it is no living but beggary to serve the
Lord, we will not labor therefore in the Lords house, we will not shut the
door for naught, neither light a candle upon his table without some reward.

Even as our priests at this day (unworthily concerning their office, but
worthily concerning the wicked spoils of their livings) do lament that the
layitie will bring them to extreme penury and beggarye. And some not worthy of
v.li. lyuinge, from the church, can say what is, xl. pound, what is an
hundredth pound, and some Lordlye Bishops can say what is D. mark. Now where
the lay men do wyckedly in taking any thing from you: Doubtless you do much
the worsse in causinge the word of God to be despised through your couetouse
desires. Whereby you do make the Table of the Lord despised, and make all
men unwilling to ministre meat to your sacryfices that is to say to aid
and to releaue you to the increase of your lyuynges.

I do pass over because I would have it buried in silence, how the table of the
Lord was polluted of late in our popish time, both with the blindness of the
things offered there upon, and the dombe Popish ceremonies heaped as it were
wode heaps, the word will and ordenaunce of God utterly despised, and so many
as God has opened their eyes, does behold it and lament. Yet you pope holy
Papists say.

Loo our great pain and wearynes do we bring. As the Pharisey say in the
Gospel magnifying him self and his works, loo I do fast twyse in the weak,
and I give the tithes of all that I have, and our Pharisees and poope holy
prelates selling their lyppe labors, their prayers, and fastings, and such
other holiness to other me^, believing their lies following the precepts and
doctrine of men, which has an outward show of wisdom by supersticion and
humblinge of their selves do bring laborious and paynful works as they think.

But the Lord of hosts says, you might blow it away. Such are the works
you do boaste, so weak and vnweyldye, that they are not of so much force and
strength as one blaste of wind, no not your God your Idol your popish wafer
cake, was able in all his power to wythstande one blast of wind, and how much
less then was all your will holiness and other popish chaffer. Yea the whole
kingdom of Antechriste shall be blown a way and their king destroyed with
the breath of God his mouth. And the blaste of his spirit.

And you have brought the rauine the sick, the lame, and bringing such an
offering, shall I receive it of your hand favorably, says the Lord? No cursed
is the deceitful, which has the male in his flock, and does vow and offer
corrupcion unto the Lord, for I am a great king says the Lord of hosts: and
my name is terrible among the heythen. The Lord will have nothing gotten by
rauyne, by robberye, by spoil and by bryberye, no he allows no such
sacrifyce, no such offering as is gotten of the spoil of our brethren. This
is not his honor, no it were much his dishonor to admit such servants.
This were as pleasant a thing to him, as it is to a natural father to rob
or to sleye the natural child in the eyes of his father, and to bring to his
father part of the spoil for a present. Think thou the carnal father will
receive this tha^kfully? nay doubtless. No more will the heavenly father
receive any offering, sacrifice, prayers or alms favorably, which such
Priests and Bishops brings, as taking great lyuinges, forth of poor men's
labors, does no part of there duty, which is plain theft and robbery. But
as the Just Lord hates all disceite in all men, and that which comes
under the cloak of holiness especially, and as the blind, lame, and maimed
beast, is an vnseamelye sacryfyce to be brought to the mighty God, as all
such sacryfycers with their presents, sacrifices and offerynges are to be
dyspised among the people. So much more the priest, who should appear


