AN INGLISH DISPUTING, of the FAITHGOODES, AND THEIR LAWS, The Which I have
Written according to the nevve invention of the magnifyk and great Doctor, and
Aduocat Sir Philippe Glaum, etc. (...) and quickelie, the thenth day of my
Inglish, that is to say.

The third day of month called Februarii, in the year of our Lord a
thousand, six hundred, three and twenty: Thervp I Will answer even well in my
English, with the grace and healp of the holy ghost. by the shoole at
Hearbourn, at the seven tenth day of the same month.

STEVEN GEORGE.

Printed at Fraunkofourd, by John Carll Ounkel, in the year of our lord. 1623.

Illustrissimis, celsissimis and generosissimis Principibus, Comiti, and
Dominis, Dn. Philippo, Hassiae Landgrauio, Comiti in Catzenelnbogen, Dietz,
Ziegenhain and Nidda, etc. Dn. Augusto, Principi Anhaltino, Comiti Ascaniae,
Domini Seruestae and Bernburgi, etc. Dn. Adolpho, Comiti in Bentheim.
Teclenburg, Steinfurt and Lymburg, Domino in Rheda, Weuelinghouen, Hoya Alpen
and Helfenstein, L. Baroni in Lennep, praef. col. hered. etc.

Principibus, Comiti and Dominis suis clementiss.

Hanc, de Feudis and ipsorumiure, Anglicam disputationem, 10. die a se
conscriptam.

Subiectissime and humilime dedicat, Stephanus Georgius Embdensis, author and
Respondens.

An Inglish disputing, of the FAITH GOODS, AND Their Laws.
THE ENTRANCE.
SERING that i have until now learned nine days the Inglish tounghe,
according to the nevve way and invention of the Doct. Philippe Glaum, etc.
(which desires novvse, that any man shall think of him more, then as he
sees in him, or that he hears of him) ard concluding by me, that i will
write an Inglish disputing, and dispute the same, so much as it is possible,
in one speech that there is unknown to the greatest part: Have i would take
the materie of the faithgoodes and their laws God, the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, geeue me bis grace. Amen.

THE FIRST SETTING.
At the beginning is hear to know, that this right or law be an vnvvriten
right, (...): Nevertheless is it a general right and, in the judgment of the
faithgoodes, is the same law of more ualue, as there is the written law, that
may only be used in such case, if the laws of the faithgoodes, and the lyknes
of the same laws lack, (...).

THE SECOND SETTING.
It is uncertain, whence the laws of the faithgoodes have his first
beginning so is it also not profitable for to wit: Nevertheless is the commone
meaning of the lawyers, that these laws of the faithgoodes have been comen
from the Longebeardes.

THE THIRD SETTING.
Of greater profit is it, thalmen know the definition, which also loudeth:
A Feodum Chr. Laur. vel praestarium, ein Lehen, a praestando: sed Ital.
prestar, and prester Gal. est commodare. Beneficium, ann. Fr. beneficium
Castrense L. ein Burglehen: aliud est Vollehen. L. q. Fahnen, Lehen.
faithgood is a benefitie, that there is given in such wise to any man of a
benevolence, that the propriety of the ground: good, vvkich is given in
benefitie, remains by the lord, bot the fruitful use of the same, passes
so to the taking, that it pertai^eth in all times to him and his heirs, so
well vvamen as women, sif that is said namely: to thind, that he and his
heirs serve faithfully to the lord, if that service be expressed namely, of
what sorth it shall be, either be promised vndeterminedlie.

THE FOURTH SETTING.
The faithgood is propre, or vnpropre: Her after is it vvamanly, or vvomanly:
for a male receives a Wamanlie faithgood. At the third is it Worldly, or
churchly, (...), etc. At the fourth is it noble, or unnoble. At the fifth, is it
nevve, or fatherly, the which some any has gotten from one of his parents
through the succession. * item a manor. Cl. verb. praedium.


THE FIFTH SETTING.
Touching the persons, the which may geeue the faithgoodes, is li it know,
that all they, Which have the administration of his goods, (...), may also
well geeue his goods in benefitie, without any difference, vvhither the same
be nobles, or vnnobles, vvamanlies or Womanlies, Worldlies or churchlies.

THE SIXTE SETTING.
On the contrary so may other persons not geeue faythgoodes: to wit, that
theare not have the free vvilling administration of is goods, as there are
they, which be under the might of their father or In Chr. Laur. Mundeburde, i.
e, defensio, tutela: simile Ger. Mundbar, and Gal. manburnie.
defenders. Lykvvise none prelat may geeue any faythgood of the gooder of his
church, without the case of need. (...).

THE SEVENTH SETTING.
But every Vassalli, ann. Fr. leodes leutte, sed alii sunt litones. Alb. abb.
Stad. liti vel lidi. Laur. id est, proprii homines, item ministeriales,
dienstientte, L. v. Si ministeriales, de pac. ten. Sed and alii sunt mansuarii
(a mansus vel mansum, ut mansum regale, dominicum est, etc.) vel manentes. L.
and vicissim alii burgenses and ciuitatenses, qui opponuntur comitatensibus.
Alii iterum marhenses and marchiones ann. Fr. hodie hohe men. Ital. marchese.
(...), Niceph, a marca, nn. Fr. diegemarck.
man can receive a faithgood, the which understands a little of the affair:
for that cause, while that faythgood is a benefitie and gift, thvvhich may
receive they, which theare be over seven, years: (...). Bot if the giving of
the faithgood is a contract, is the geuer oblished alone, but the receauer as
then, when, he shall have accomplished the five and twentieth year of his
eage.

THE EIGHT SETTING.
And in such manner is in the person, that receauetha faithgood, none
difference, of what stat or quality the same be: with understanding, while
the geeuer may it know before.

THE NYNTH SETTING.
A faythgood can be given or Adtractus, alias compatatum. Laur.
receined through a proctour, if he has ar express charge for to make a new
faithgood.

THE TENTH SETTING.
Lyk as the persons may geeue a faithgood, which there may alienat, and to
gether present in gifts their goods: After the same fashion the goods can be
given in ben fitie, the which may be Derittum vel drictu^, in priuil. Lud.
Imp. dato Castr. i.e. ius q. ius directum, ab Ital, dritto.
alienated and given in gift. Then if there is any fault in the one or the
other, can the faithgood not be given. 2. F. 3. in the beginning.

THE ELEVENTH SETTING.
The goods shall be a ground (as is said above in the definition) or the which
are Coniecta, ap. Masson. 2. ann. q. ein zuschos, i.e. fodrum, annona
commeatus: precariae beede, hodie necessariae: simile steura, stevver, ann.
Henr. Regalia Brun. in host. bell. Sax. id est, reditusregni, ut regnumnon, cui
nulla regalia, per eund. similes Fisci, Laur. Regalia etiam pto ornamentis ad
inaugurationem pertinentibus, ut sunt corona, globus, sceptrum, lancea. etc.
vviterb.
compted among the ground goods, as hear be toll, tribuit, etc.

THE TWELUETH SETTING.
Further more shall they be such goods, of the which men can fetch any
profit or honor, lyk as in the power to judge of the life, for the which
often times more is spended, as theare is vvorthie the taken profit.

THE TRETTENTH SETTING.
It is one mood only for to obtain a faithgood, to wit, the inuestiture, if
the possession be ouergeuen: and this is the, propre inuestiture. In an other
manner is made the inuestiture, when the lord gives another Festuca, i.e.
calamus, quo veterib. alioqui cessio and traditio solennis fiebat, mit mund vnd
halm: hodie hand: unde exfestucare. Firmitas chartae. Chr. August. i.e.
documenta, handfest.
bodily thing, as a pike, A Gal. estendart. q.ab estender. banderium vel
banerium. Burchard. Notar. Imp. Frid. i.e. vexillum, vel etiam bandum, Ital.
bandera, Gal. baniere. Sed aliud bannum regium. Laur. id est, edictum,
interdictum.
standerd, etc. saying that he gives the faythgoods profession.

THE FIFTENTH SETTING.
It is compared to the inuestiture a possession of thirty years, or the
conquessing of the lord-ship of any thing, by continuation of time, etc. and a
sentence of the ordinary judge.

THE SIXTENTH SETTING.
I Will now prate a little of the succession. The succession has his
comparison to the getting (...). I set this rule, of the Which may be
determined much demandes. And there succed in the faythgood the childen only,
and novvse the fathers.

THE SEUENTENTH SETTING.
Moreover succed the sons, and not the daughters: the Worldlies, and novvse
the clerckes. For he that becomes a clerck, loses moreover the faythgood, the
Which he has. Bot, if a prelat the first receaueth a faithgood, may then not
succed in the same here after any prelat? I thrust say so: for a daughter can
after the same fashion succed in that faythgood, the Which a Wife did get: And
even the same durst i speak of the prelates and clerckes.

THE EIGHTENTH SETTING.
More beyond succed the boorne of a lavvfull marriage, either the Which are
made after Ward lavvlies through a lavvfull marriage.

THE NYNTENTH SETTING.
And for to speak generally, so shall the successors be such men, that there
can serve to his lord, at time of the VVerra v, Alb. Gent. de iure bell. unde
guerra Ital. Hinc forte vverigeld. Laur. (q. pecunia pro bello seu contentione)
id est, mulcta pro homicidio: cons. Tacit.
war, in his own person: for that cause, the which can never serve he
selves, in his propre person, the same may not succed, as theare be the
vnperfytes, blindes, dombes, deafes, etc.

THE TWENTIETH SETTING.
The Nepotes, id est, filii fatris. ann. Franc. iuniores. L.i.e, liberi,
heredes.
somnes of the brethren (if they succed alones without any other fathers
brother) succed to the fathers brother in singell heads, and not in other
manner.

THE ONE AND TWENTIETH SETTING.
In the right of the faythgoodes are reckened the stayers of the succession,
according to the law of the Emperors, and not, according to the law of the
Popes? For also in the territory of the Popes, the steps of the succession,
be accounted, according to the laws of the Emperors.

THE TWO AND TWENTIETH SET.
I will now speak of the Afterknovving or aknovvledging of the faithgood:
For the which has gotten a faythgood, or succed in any faithgood, shall be
thankful to wards the lord for such faithgood: whence also the Feudum, a
faith. i.e. fides: velfeede, Sax. foeden.
faithgood is called. A such thank fulness consistheth almost in three parts:
to first in the afterknovving, in case of the lords death; (...): secondly,
that he in his own person (if he is Eo spectat hereschilt. Laur. i.e. clypeus
militaris. die Macht von Lehenleuten. Simile in suo genere, die Reich Matricul.
required) serve unto the lord of the faithgood: and leastly, that he use it,
as a good faithful hous-bolder.

THE THREE AND TWENTIETH SETTING.
Therefore if the faythman does not, what he shall in these cases, as then
loses he his faithgood, and it returns to his lord. After, the same
fashion, when the faithman has Idem. in. Vadio. L. i.e. pignore, vadiare,
Chr. August. and in vadium dare. c. 1. extra de pignor.
alienated the faithgood, and ouergeuen the possession of the same, or if he
denies the faitgood: be he punished in that portion, the Which he has
alienated or refused.

THE EOURE AND TWENTIETH SET.
Moreover are other Ways to loose a faythgood, that theare turns to back to
the lord: as, if he makes a great damage to the lord in his goods: or When
he has done a great injury to, him, in his own person, either in the person
of his Wife, or his daughter, or his sons Wife, or his sister, the Which is
yeat unmarried. And the injury is judged to be great, according to the usance
of the nations and provinces.

THE FIVE AND TWENTIETH SET.
If the faithman has not sinned against the lorden, nor his persons, as there
is, told: bot aganis an other, as, if he can not stand honestly in the lords
court, per chance, having do a killing of his parents, or an incest, or When
he for other great failles is infamied through the clear right, either is
condemned through the sentence of the judge: As then loses he his faythgood,
the Which pertains then to the frindes on the fathers side, that there are in
the fourth degree.

THE SIX AND TWENTIETH SETting.
Because that the frindes on the fathers side. consistinges within the fourth
step of the frindship, are judged by some sort, for one person With the
faithman, that there failleth. (...).

THE SEVEN AND TWENTIETH SET.
And that, as much is does belong the moodes of the losing. Bot in this place
is to mark, that the argument of the correlatiues be of great ualour in the
laws, in such manner, hat the lord loses his propriety for likes offenses
and amisses, for Which the faith man loses his faithgood, excepted per
adventure three cases.

THE EIGHT AND TWENTIETH SET.
I Will now say a litte of the judgment. Here is a such rule, that noman can
be any judge in his Der some self uidner om sig, da er sit vidnisbyrde icke sant.
own sake: and co sequentlie, if any debate is among the faythmen of a
faithgood, as of the faithgood, as then is the lord a judge: bot if any
contention is among the lord, and one of the faithmen, as then be Iudices etiam
pro Doctorib. Burch Peth, de Vin. lib. 3. ep. 11. ann. Godefr. in pr. V. cap.
17. ext. de elect. in 6. iunct.. 8. Instit. de inf. N. G. and C.
judges the other faithmen of the same court. The pleading men may also choose
some certain persons of many faythmen: And from the beginning a bargain can
be made of the judges persons.

THE NINE AND TWENTIETH SET.
The oath of the calumny, (...), is not sworn in this judgment: for even
that cause believe i that the faithma^ may call to the law his lord, without
any special leave

THE TRETTIETH AND LEAST SET.
The faithgood in a doubt some case do We judge to be propre. Wamanly,
Worldly, noble, fatherly, etc. Further more is observed in this judgment the
same Ut mannire, Laur. q zum manngericht laden, id est, in ius vocare: sed
mallus. L.i.e. tribunal. q. die mahlstadt: unde ad mallatus, i.e. citatus.
Ding, unde ding hoef: hinc ungebodending. Laur. id est, curia non indicta, a
gebiethen.
manner of the judgments, the Which is Written in the civil laws, in such
Wise, that moreguer it can be appealled from the inferior judge to the higher
judge, and if none higher is, as then to the judge of the same place or
country.

THE CONCLUSION.
And also With the appealling make, i an end of my reasoning, commanding me to
the Worship of the belooued Read. r. the Which shall consider, that i,
according to the ordinance of our collegie, have Written this disputing the
tenth day of my Inglish: And pray, that every one will prove him self, (...),
and vsa the same right be selves, the Which he has spooken against me: in
other Ways appeall i to a such judge, that there is more discreat and human,
(...), nowse doubting that i may at the least obtain the uictorie of the cause.

THE END.

