THE CONQVEST of Temptations: OR Man's victory over Satan, Especially, the great
Assaults, at the Agony of DEATH.

Full of very strong and effectual Consolations, to sustain and comfort the
weakest heart, in the greatest conflicts which can befall a Christian in the
whole course of Life, and approach of Death.

Gathered by the holy and devout labor of JOHN GERARD, Doctor of Divinity,
and Super-intendent of Heldburge.

Newly Englished by Rich. Bruch, Minister of GODS Word.

He that dies before he dye,
Shall not dye when he does dye.
LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Roger Iackson, and to be sold in Fleetstreet
near the great Conduit. 1614.

TO THE MOST RELIGIOUS AND worthy KNIGHT, Sir Thomas Vauasur, Knight-Marshall:
and to the most pious and well-affected Lady his Wife, the Lady Mary Vauasur.
R. B. wishes here on Earth the beginning, and in Heaven the complement of all
happiness.
Right Worshipful:
SInce it is in man's life, Seneca.
as it is in an Interlude, that it skils not how long, but how well it be
acted, and that the word of truth gives out this for a truth, Eccl. 7.10.
the end of a thing is better then the beginning; it concerns all men to
strive to make good that which they cannot make long, and having begun well,
to persevere so doing, lest they leese the things that they have wrought, 2
John. v. 8 Heb. 3.14.
if they keep not sure unto the end, the beginning, wherewith they are
vpholden. Surely, the number of our years is known to GOD alone, our days
are in his hand; this only remains unto us, while we are in this world, to
keep our selves unspotted of the world, Psa. 119.1 Job. 17.9.
immaculati in via, upright and undefiled in the way, holding on our way with
the righteous, and with the pure of hands, increasing our strength. Which that
we should not do, the old enemy of mankind, full of all subtlety and
malice, does by all means labor still to hinder; who, though he be very busy
with us to auert us from the good, and to make us forsake our own mercies in
the whole course of our lives, yet he does especially insidiari calcaneo, trip
at the heel, lay wait at the end, to make us then let go the hold that we
have, and the hope of assurance, if (...) cannot before hand make us to deny
the faith, and make shipwreck of good conscience: Ephesians. 6.13.
whom that we may not only know how to resist, but also resisting to overcome
in the evil day, and finishing all things to stand fast, whose fiery darts
that we may quench, this little Book gives us both the shield of faith, and
other spiritual armor, in which kind though I have read and seen others
written, yet never did I peruse any done so full and so feelingly, so succinct
in the fullness, and in so good order and method. This when I had first turned
into our English, being thereunto requested: in the next place, when I thought
to whom I might best offer it, your Worthiness (most religious Knight and
Lady) came into my mind, persons as in your rank and place eminent, so much
more eminent in your virtues, who in the example of your zeal in Religion, and
love of the truth, your piety and charity, your meekness and affability
are a pattern unto others, and do in the integrity of your lives, being full
of good works, Lib. de conuer. a seculo, ad Theo. Sen.
multum militare acquisitionibus Christi, as says Fulgentius, Purchase much
for Christ, and purchase to your selves in the world, with the testimony of a
good conscience, that feasts your souls continually, the sweet savor of a
good name; Pro. 15.15
which two things are better unto you then all riches. We that are of your
neighborhood know and see the care that you have of religious duties, and the
works of charity which you do; your lowliness in your wealth and Honor,
and other your remarkable virtues: It remains only, that you that have so
well begun, and hitherto so well continued, do now strive to persevere unto
the end, that you may receive a full reward, that you may crown the good that
has gone before in you with a good conclusion, and that ouercomming the
difficulties that are yet behind, you may at last bring your ship to the Haven
where you would be: Which that you may the better do, you shall find no small
help and furtherance in this small Book, which every where breathing
Consolations, will arm your souls against all Temptations, and against the
time of your dissolution come so compose your souls to Death, that you shall
sleep sweetly in the Lord, in the peace of a good Conscience, in sure and
certain hope of eternal life: unto which the Lord of his mercy give you an
entry with all Saints, through his Son Christ Jesus, our Lord and Savior.
AMEN.

Your Worships humbly devoted and wishing your best good R. Br.

To the very Reverend and famous men, excelling in Piety, Learning and
Authority: Mr. JOHN SCHRODER, a famous Divine, and most worthy Minister,
appointed of the Church of Norinberg. Mr. MARTIN GVNGE, the most deserving
Preacher of the Court of Saxo-Coburg. Mr. JOHN ALDENBVRG, his most faithful
fellow Minister of the Church of Coburg: His Masters, Plato in Phaedone. (...).
friends and Brethren in Christ, singularly beloved.
IF any man (Reverend and most famous men, my Masters Friends and Brethren in
Christ to be had in singular honor) would accommodate that same Platonicall
definition of Philosophy, that it is a Meditation of death, to the true
Theosophie of Christians, he may do it, as I think, with the good leave of
the truth, seeing as it were the beginning and end thereof, does consist in the
Meditation of death. Now I understand under the name of death, both the death
of Christ, and our death also. The death of Christ and his Passion, is the
weight of the Christian name, 1 Cor. 2.2.
thence the Apostle did judge, that he knew no other thing among the
Corinthians, then Christ crucified and dead. By the death of Christ was made an
expiation of our sins, a destruction of the power of Satan, a confirmation of
the new covenant, and an easing of the terrors, which are wont to be present
in our death: therefore the Meditation of the death of Christ ought never to
depart from our memory. Neither let us any time of our life forget our own
death, that as Death expects us every day, so we may also expect that again
each day. Hieron. Epist ad Pauli.
He which remembers daily that he shall die, he does easily contemn all
earthly things, he prepares himself by true and earnest conversion to a
blessed death: he gives his mind to sincere piety: he does patiently endure
all manner of adversity, and is set on fire even from the heart, with an
ardent desire of eternal life. Psa. 90.12.
Teach us, O Lord, prays Moses, to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom: therefore a great part of Christian wisdom consists in
the perpetual Meditation of death. That must a long time be learned, which
that it may once rightly be done, stands upon our eternal salvation. It is
appointed for all men once to dye: but to dye godlily, to dye in Christ, to dye
blessedly befalls not all men; therefore our mind must be prepared to that
blessed good disposition of dying, yea it must be guarded with the shield of the
Word and Prayers. For if at any, surely in that last time of our life, the
enemy that has a thousand wiles, does lay a snare for our salvation, and
endeauours with all his strength to wrest the possession thereof from us,
whether some of the ancients do apply it, that the infernal Serpent is said
especially to bite the heel, for he knows very well, I say he knows, that
all the matter is in safety if that last conflict be valiantly overcome of us:
on the other side that it will be joined with our everlasting reproach and
loss, if the other parts of our life, as it were of a Comedy, being well
acted, we behave our selves not so comelily and valiantly in this last
Catastrophe. Hence come those diverse tentations, with which as it were with
Rams, he assaults our hearts in diseases, and in the agony of death: hence
come those fiery Darts, which he casts against us with all his strength: hence
comes that horror and anguish, which we feel when we are set before the
gates of Death. Blessed is he, which shall here overcome, blessed is he which
shall be faithful to death, Apoc. 2.3.
he shall be made partaker of all those good things which are promised to the
stout Soldiers of Christ in the Revelation.

What is our life? it is Death we do deface,
Our age by dying, life and death do pace
Hand joined in hand. But Christ the Captain is,
And gate of life; our death is slain by his.
He that does firmly trust in him shall be
From wound of death eternal safe and free.
But this our hope with diverse storms is tossed,
When in Deaths agony we are near lost.
To overcome these storms will most avail us,
Least life in life's first entry chance to fail us.
Wherefore whereas I have endeavored by such an explication of the History of
the Passion and death of Christ as I could make, which I did set forth of late,
to instill into godly minds the Meditation of the death of Christ, I have
thought that I shall do a work worth the labor, if I propose unto them also
the Meditation of our death. To which end I have written this Manuell of
Consolations to be opposed to the terrors of death, and tentations in the
agony of death, for mine own private use only, for I carry about a sickly
body, a weak vessel. Moreover, Death now of late has made a very lamentable
slaughter in my house, and there are some causes for which it is feared, that I
shall not live long; Therefore I would prepare and arm my mind betimes to
this last battle; and hemmed in as I am with so many domestique evils, I
bestowed some days on the godly Meditation of this Book, which Meditations of
mine, such as they are, seeing (perhaps) they may also be profitable to others,
I have not gaine-sayed that they should be made common: But this I would have
men admonished in the very entrance of this writing, that I have not written
these things to secure impenitent and hard hearts, but to the contrite, broken,
and weak consciences. Exhortations to true piety have another place; this
whole labor is employed in consolations to be opposed to death, and
temptations in death. Whosoever therefore desires to receive this oil of
Consolations, let him bring the vessel of a contrite heart. For what is
consolation unto him, which is not yet contrite, broken, or made sad? But to
you men very Reverend and most famous, Masters, Friends, and Brethren in
Christ, singularly beloved, I would entitle this Manuell, that there might be
extant a public testimony of that most straight friendship and brotherhood
which hitherto we have observed between our selves one to another: seeing that
of all, and amongst all, I esteem you dearest in this world, as of whose
piety, courtesy, faithfulness, and other many virtues I have had plentiful
experience in our five years conversation. You also carry about you a sickly
body, neither can it choose but that the memory of Death should daily come into
your minds. Therefore I do not doubt, although your faith does not want those
props which I have gathered together in this little Book for mine own, and
other men's use; yet that the reading thereof will not be unpleasant unto you.
Especially seeing whatsoever is in it, it does proceed from a friendly and
well-affected mind. The Lord Jesus with his grace, and with his spirit every
way bless us, and the labors of our Ministry. Given at Coburg the Kalends
of May. Anno. 1611.

RR. VV. DD. Studiosiss. I. G. D.

THE TABLE of Temptations.
1 THe forerunners of death. 2 The three-forked Mace of death. 3 The vexation
of sin. 4 The memory of Actual sin. 5 The doubting of the application of
the benefits of Christ. 6 The false persuasion of faith. 7 Insufficient
grief. 8 The weight of grief. 9 Desperation. 10 Blasphemy. 11 The
particularity of the promises. 12 The absolute decree of reprobation. 13 The
application of the merit of Christ. 14 The want of the evidence of the words.
15 Falling out of the covenant of Baptism. 16 Uncertain taking into the
covenant of Baptism. 17 The unworthy use of the holy Supper. 18 The weakness
of faith. 19 The want of the feeling of faith. 20 The want of power to believe.
21 The small number of good works. 22 The want of merits. 23 The accusation of
the Law. 24 The accusation of conscience. 25 Too late repentance. 26 Doubting
of the grace of God. 27 Defect of due preparation. 28 The doubting of the
inhabitation of the holy Spirit. 29 The doubting of perseverance. 30 The snares
and strength of Satan. 31 The Apostasy of many. 32 Doubting of the writing
into the Book of life. 33 The fear of Death. 34 The sting of death. 35 The
sorrows of death. 36 Too timely death. 37 Services farther due to the Church.
38 Our life abridged by our own default. 39 The love of this life. 40
Separation from Wife, Children, and kinsfolk. 41 The stopping up of the ears
in death. 42 The apparent inutilitie of the redemption. 43 The horror of the
dust. 44 The absurdity of the resurrection. 45 The flames of Purgatory. 46 The
rigor of the last judgment. In conclusion is added a prayer in sickness.
FINIS.
Consolations, to be opposed to all Temptations in general, but more specially
to Death, and to the Temptations in the agony of Death.
I. The forerunners of Death.
The Tempted.
A Disease, 2 Cor. 1.9.
the usher and forerunner of death, has oppressed me: I have received the
sentence of death in my self. I see that I must leave this life; then which
nothing is more sweet; I must leave this world; then which nothing is more
pleasant, I must leave this house of my body; then which nothing is more dear.

The Comforter.
THou were created of God, not for this wretched and momentany, Sap. 2.23.
but for a blessed and eternal life: for God framed the first Parent of our
kind in corruption to immortality: neither were thou redeemed of Jesus Christ
for this frail and miserable, but for that perpetual and most happy life,
which is to be expected in the heavens, seeing it is a certain and indubitate
saying, 1 Timothy 1.15.
that Jesus Christ came into the world, that he might save sinners: neither
were thou called of the holy Ghost, through the word, to the kingdom of Christ
for the most short use of this light, but that hereafter thou might pass
out of the kingdom of grace into the kingdom of glory, out of the Church
militant to the Church triumphant, out of the valley of tears into the field
of joys: for if in this life only we believe and hope on Christ, we are the
most miserable of all men. 1 Cor. 15.19.
Wherefore, when thou see that thou art to be led through the gate of death
to that life, for which thou were created of the Father, for which thou were
redeemed of the Son, for which lives sake thou were sanctified of the Spirit,
do not (I pray thee) despise the friendly counsel of God against thy self,
Luke 7.30.
but most readily obey and follow God that calls thee.

II. Of the three-forked Mace of death.
The tempted.
THe thought of death does terrify me, the terrible shape of that enemy does
vex my soul; 1 Cor. 15.55.
he shows me his sting, which is sin; he threatens me with his cruel
threeforked Mace, while he casts before mine eyes and my heart the wrath of
God; the accusation of the Law, Romans 6.23
and the heinousness of my sins: seeing death is the wages of sin, and
through sin death has entered into me, Romans 5.18.
as it has done also into the whole world.

The Comforter.
But I admonish thee, that being seriously and from the bottom of thy heart
contrite, for the sins that thou have committed, thou behold him, which was
dead for thee on the Altar of the Cross, that thou might not be subject to
eternal death. Turn thine eyes away from the outward shape of death, and turn
them to Christ, Heb. 2.14.15.
which by his death has destroyed him which had the power of death, that is
the Devil; and has delivered us which through the fear of death were all our
life subject to bondage: Hose. 13.14. Ioh. 11.25.
he is death to our death: he is a sting to that Hell which we have deserved:
he is the resurrection, and the life, he that believes on him, verse. 26.
although he were dead, yet he shall live, and every one that lives and
believes in him, 1 Cor. 15.22.
shall not dye for ever. Therefore as in Adam, that is, for sin derived out
of Adam into us, and for actual sins heaped upon this, all of us are subject
unto death, and are constrained, at the last, to dye: so also in Christ, the
Captain of life, and the Conqueror of death, we are all quickened by faith,
that which also, our Captain of life confirms with a grave and serious oath:
Verily, verily, I say unto you, John 5.24.
he which hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has eternal
life, and comes not into judgment, but has passed from death to life, Ioh.
8.51.
And again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, If any man shall keep my word,
he shall not see death for ever. Believe Christ therefore, John 14.6.
which is the truth: believe him promising, believe him swearing: Heaven and
Earth shall pass away, Luke 21.33
but the words of Christ shall not pass away.

III. The vexation of Sin.
The Tempted.
THE remembrance of my sins does come into my mind; for I was not only
begotten, Psa. 51.7.
conceived, and borne in sin, but I have increased this sum of original
and hereditary debt, with diverse debts of manifold and most grievous sins,
through the course of my whole life: how therefore can I hope that God will be
favorable unto me, whom I have so often offended? How can I perceive any
comfort in death, seeing death is the wages due to my sins, and to those that
are not reconciled to God, the beginning of the second and eternal death?

The Comforter.
BEhold Christ hanging on the altar of the Cross, and pouring out for thy
sins the price of thy redemption, that is, his precious blood. 1 Ioh. 1.8.
The blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God, does cleanse thee from all sins:
2 Ioh. 2.2.
he is the propitiation for thy sins, and for the sins of the whole world:
for neither came he into the world for that end that he would be ministered
unto, but that he might minister to others, and give his soul a redemption and
price for the sins of many. And lest there should arise or remain any doubt
in thee of this matter: therefore from heaven which is the Throne of truth, by
an Angel, which is a Spirit of truth, that name of Jesus, most sweet, and most
full of consolation was brought, and given to this our Mediator before he was
conceived in the womb; and what other thing is Jesus then a Savior? Luke 2.31.
for therefore this name was given to Christ, because he saues his people from
their sins. Mat. 1.21.
This is that Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world. Ioh. 1.29.
This is that Jesus Christ, which therefore came into the world, that he might
save sinners. This is the high Priest of the new Testament, 1 Timothy 1.15. Ephesians.
5.2.
which has delivered himself for our sins to be an offering and a sacrifice
of a sweet smelling savor unto God. It is Christ, which has powered out his
own blood for the remission of sins: Mat. 26.28 1 Pet. 2.24
which has borne our sins in his body on the wood: which was wounded for our
iniquities, and was broken for our sins: Esa. 53.5.
God has laid upon him, and as it were, by a troop made he has made to fall
upon him the iniquities of us all: Him that has not known sin, God has
made sin for us; that is, 2 Cor. 5.21
he has imputed our sins to him, he has laid upon him the punishment of our
sins, he has made him a sacrifice for our sins: neither has Christ resisted
this counsel and decree of his heavenly Father, but has fulfilled his will
with a most ready mind, Psalm. 40.9.
and loved us, and has delivered himself for our sins, Gal. 1.10.4. Can.
2.20.
he has loved us, and has delivered himself for us: he says, I will be
baptized with a certain baptism, and how am I straightened till it be
fulfilled? Luc. 12.50
This was the baptism of the Cross and tribulation, into which our most
benign Savior was altogether plunged, not for any other cause, but out of his
great and ineffable love toward us: this is that which has so straightened
him, and driven him; how great soever his outward grief was in his passion,
yet always his inner love toward us was greater and more ardent, through
which he was ready to sustain more things for our sins, if the price for
our redemption which he paid had not seemed sufficient. But there is no cause
that we doubt of the sufficiency of the price; with him there is altogether
plentiful redemption, because not a drop but a stream of blood has flowed
largely through five parts of his body, Born. ser. 22. sup. cant. col. 554.
he has cried out, that all things were finished in the Cross and through
the Cross, and therefore he has made by himself a full and perfect purgation
of our sins, with one offering has he for ever perfected those which are
sanctified; Heb. 1.3. Cap. 10.14. Apoc. 1.5.
he has washed us from our sins in his blood. Believe therefore, so clear,
so perspicuous, so express words of the holy Ghost, and resolve firmly, that
by the death and passion of CHRIST, there is wrought a sufficient satisfaction
for thy sins.

IIII. The memory of Actual sins.
The Tempted.
PErchance Christ has taken upon himself original sin only, so that for
actual sins I my self must either satisfy or burn. Although therefore I
resolve firmly that through Christ I am washed from that original spot, yet
those actual sins do vex and press me, which I have committed through the
whole course of my life, in number many, in weight most heavy, for desert
damnable. Christ is opposed to Adam, therefore the benefit of Christ will not
spread it self more wide then the fault that was derived from Adam into us.
Another man's fault may be healed by another man's satisfaction, but a man's own
fault will require a man's own satisfaction.

The Comforter.
NAy, the blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, 1 Ioh. 1.7.
does cleanse thee altogether from all thy sins, not that only which is
derived from Adam, but those also which are heaped upon this of thee. God has
set forth Christ the propitiatory by faith in his blood, Romans 3.25.
to that may we draw near by true faith, and having obtained remission of our
sins be reconciled to God, as often as the weight and heap of our sins does
press us down: we may come to this throne of grace with confidence, that we
may obtain mercy, Heb. 4.16.
and find grace in the seasonable time of help. Furthermore, what redemption
would this be? what reconciliation, if Christ had satisfied for one only kind
of sin, we our selves being yet bound, and obliged to make satisfaction for
all the rest far more grievous, and more copious? the redemption of Christ is
not so maimed, imperfect, and to halues, Heb 10.12 14.18.
but offering one sacrifice for sins, by that one oblation he has perfected
for ever those that are sanctified, and has obtained such a remission of
sins, that there is not any other oblation necessary for sins. 1 John.
2.1.2.
We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, he is the
propitiation for our sins, not for our sins only, but also for the sins
of the whole world. Therefore if having slipped into sins out of the infirmity
of the flesh, we do earnestly repent us, we have a refuge set down for us
in Christ's intercession, the foundation of which intercession consists in
Christ's merit and satisfaction, for from thence and therefore is Christ's
intercession effectual for us, because a full and perfect satisfaction was
performed by him for our sins; from thence and therefore the force of the
Divine justice and severe judgment, due to our sins, is not shaken against
us, because Christ couers our sins with the cloak of his mercy, the price
of the obtained and deserved redemption being paid of him. Let this therefore
abide firm and sure, that Christ by his death, the only most true sacrifice
offered for us, has purged, abolished, August. 4. de Trinit. ca. 13.
extinguished whatsoever there was of sins, from whence the principalities
and powers did by right withold us to suffer punishment; therefore in him and
through him we obtain remission not only of original sin, 1. De peccamer.
etremiss. ca 13. Tit. 2.14.
but also of the rest of the sins that we have added thereunto. For he
(which thing day up in thy deepest thoughts) has given himself for us, that
he might redeem us from all iniquity. Infinite is the person that has
satisfied, how then shall not his Passion be of infinite merit? What is so
deadly, that may not be healed by the death of the Son of God, which is life
it self? what is so bloody and so foul, but that it might be cleansed by the
precious blood of the Son of God?

V. The doubting of the application of the benefits of Christ.
The Tempted.
But how may I be made partaker of that most precious treasure? Christ has
died for all, but now that fruit of the death of Christ does not redound to
all, whence therefore shall I be assured, that the benefits of Christ do also
pertain to me? whence may it appear that I am in very deed and most
certainly a partaker of all those things actually, which Christ has deserved
for us by his Passion and death?

The Comforter.
GOD offers unto thee the word of the Gospel, and in the same all the
benefits of his Son. Es. 6.5.2.
He spreads forth his hands all day, he calls, he inuites, verily therefore
also he calls, he inuites, he inticeth thee. That therefore which GOD offers
unto thee with the hand of his mercy, that embrace thou with the hand of firm
confidence. Bern. Ser. 31. sup. can. Col. 597.
As far as thou shall stretch forth the foot of confidence in the goods of
the Lord, so far forth shall thou possess. God does not put the oil of his
mercy, unless it be in the vessel of confidence. Id. Sermon. 3. in Annunc.
Col. 113.
Thou shall possess so much of the goods of the Lord, as thou do gather in
the vessel of confidence. For faith does apprehend Christ, in Christ God
favorable, the remission of sins and life everlasting. Hear concerning this
thing, the words of the eternal and unchangeable truth. So God loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, Ioh. 3.16.18.
that every one that believes in him should not perish, but have eternal
life. He that believes in him is not judged, but has life eternal, Ioh. 1.12.
for he has given power to all that have received him to be made the Sons
of God, to those which believe on his name. This adoption comprehends all
things, which are necessary for us to everlasting salvation: for if we be the
Sons of God, then are we also borne of God. Tertul. in apolo. c. 17.
For not the carnal generation, but the spiritual regeneration makes the
Sons of God. If we are the Sons of God, then have we also God favorable
unto us. For does not a Father take pity of his Sons? Psa. 103.13
If we are the Sons of God, then has he also given us his spirit, for so
says the Apostle, They which are lead by the spirit of God, these are the Sons
of God, Romans 8.14 15.
for ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have
received the spirit of adoption, in which we cry, Abba, Father. And again,
Gal. 4.6.
Because you are Sons, God has sent the spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying Abba, Father.

To conclude, Romans 8.13
if we are the Sons of GOD, then are we also heirs, heirs of GOD, and
heirs annexed with Jesus Christ; for who is he that is truly a Son without an
inheritance? All these so precious, so copious, and so various benefits are
bestowed upon us in Christ, Ephesians. 3.17.
and through Christ, which dwells in our hearts, and is borne in us spiritually
through faith, which therefore the Scripture does so often preach and commend
unto us. Verily, verily, Ioh. 5.24.
I say unto you (says Christ) he, which hears my word, and believes on him
that has sent me, has eternal life, and comes not unto judgment, but has
past from death to life. He that believes in me, Ioh. 11.25 26.
although he were dead, yet shall he live, and every one which lives and
believes in me, shall not dye for ever. Ioh 7.36.39.
He that believes in me, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living water,
which our Savior speaks of the spirit, which they receive that believe on
him. Every one that believes in me, Ioh. 12.46.
does not abide in darkness, suppose it in the darkness of ignorance, in the
darkness of sin, in the darkness of eternal death, but by the light of
faith he is lead to the life of saving knowledge, to the light of true
righteousness, to the light of everlasting life. Nay, the Apostle witnesses
plainly, that all those things which are written in the Gospel, of the
sayings, doings, and sufferings of Christ, are therefore written that by faith
on his name we may have life. Because God has given unto us eternal life, 1
Ioh. 5.11 12.13.
and this life is in his Son. He that has the Son has life; from thence
we know that we have everlasting life, because we believe on the name of the
Son of God.

And not only the Apostles and Evangelists, but also all the Prophets, give
testimony to Christ. That all that believe o^ him, Act. 10.43
receive remission of sins through by name. That therefore which Paul and
Silas sometimes said to the keeper of the prison at Philippi, the same say I to
thee: Believe on the Lord Jesus, Act. 16.31
and thou shall be saved.

VI. The false persuasion of Faith.
The Tempted.
But I have heretofore perceived that very many do put on a vain persuasion
of Faith, and deceive themselves with a false boasting, what if I should also
be in the number of them? from whence may I be assured, that my says is a true
and saving faith, and not a vain and dead Image of faith?

The Comforter.
TRy and examine thy self, whether thou be in the faith, try thine own self,
2 Cor. 13.5.
do thou not know thine own self, that Jesus Christ is in thee? There want
not firm and infallible instructions, by which ^rue and saving faith may be
tried, known and discerned from idle and vain boast^ng of faith. First, then
this is the nature of true faith, that it purifies the heart, Act. 15.9.
and desires to purge it clean from the dregs of sins. For s^^ing that faith
does carefully seek and desire remission of sins, surely he that truly
believes shall feel a serious sorrow for the sins that he has committed.
The Gospel is preached to the poor, that is to say, Matthew. 11.6. Matthew. 5.6.
to those that are poor in spirit, which hunger and thirst after
righteousness, which bring and offer to God a contrite heart, and an humbled
spirit. Behold therefore the looking glass of the Law, and the deformity of
thy crimes will appear. Behold the shining face of Moses, and it will appear,
that for the works of darkness which thou have followed, thou can not bear
that light. Behold thy self, how grievously the disease has afflicted thee,
which is the just punishment of thy sins, the scourge of the revenging God,
and the wages due to thy life which has been spent in sins. He which sins
against his Creator, Eccl 38.5.
falls into the hands of the Physician. We have lost our health, because we
have offended our Creator. They which follow the flesh, are scourged in the
flesh. They sigh in that, in which they have sinned. The censure of the
punishment is in that, in which was the cause of shine. By how many thoughts,
by how many words, by how many deeds have thou offended God? How faint host
thou been above all things in the fear and love of God? How slack in
Prayers, and other exercises of piety? How barren in good works? How often have
thou followed the persuasion of Satan, the seducing of the flesh, the deceiving
of the world? Those members which thou have oftentimes given as weapons to
iniquity and unrighteousness, by the just judgment of GOD are now tormented
with grief and infirmity. Acknowledge this and grieve, for if there be true
and serious acknowledgement of sin in thy heart, immediately grief of
consciences and detestation of sin will follow it. God is earnestly angry
with sins, therefore out of the feeling of the wrath of God earnestly bewail
thy sins. GOD does severely punish sins, therefore punish in thy self by
just grief, that which thou do observe that thou have committed against
God. Psa. 119.137.
Acknowledge the judgment of God to be just, and be thou humbled under his
mighty hand. Neither have respect only to thy outward faults, but acknowledge
the contagion of original sin, the fountain of all evils; Psa. 90.9.
that indeed is hidden, but God places it in the light of his countenance,
through it all the powers of soul and body are so weakened, that out of thy
self, and by thy self thou can begin no good, much less perform it:
through it thou art made subject unto death, and to all that troop of
calamities, miseries, and diseases, which goes before death.

VII. Grief insufficient.
The Tempted.
I Acknowledge and feel, that I am not only borne and conceived in sins, but
that I have offended God by diverse, manifold and great sins. I feel this,
and I earnestly grieve, but that grief perhaps is not sufficient, seeing it
does not answer the fault, neither is it an aequiualent price for my sins.

The Comforter.
NAy, grief rising out of the acknowledgement of sin, and vexation of
conscience shall never be able to answer the grieuousnesse and deformity of
sins, seeing God the infinite good, is that which is offended; sin the
infinite evil, is that which is committed: the infinite punishment of Hell is
prepared for sinners, how then by thy contrition might thou satisfy the
infinite justice of God, and expiate his infinite wrath? Christ has performed
that, which of thy self, and by thy strength, thou could not perform: he
has paid the infinite and equivalent price for thy sins. If by thine own
self thou could have satisfied, if by thy contrition and by thy grief thou
had been able to abolish sin, what needed CHRIST to descend from heaven,
and to labor so long under the burden of his cross? Esa 43.24: Esa. 63.3.
Thou have put him to pain in thy sins, and pressure in thine iniquities; he
has trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the people there was none with him.
Take heed therefore to think only, that the grief of thy contrition either
can or ought to be such that it may answer to the grieuousnesse and deformity
of thy sins; but therefore, and to this end, God requires true
acknowledgement of sin, and earnest contrition of the heart, that place may
be given to the free remission of sins, which is given unto thee through
Christ, apprehended by faith. Christ preaches the Gospel, Esa 61.1.
but to the poor, that is, to those that are humbled in spirit, he heals,
Luke 4.2.18.
but the contrite in heart: neither have they that are well need of the
Physician; Mat. 9.12.
that is, which think that they are well: He preaches liberty, but it is to
the captives; that is, to those that acknowledge the spiritual captivity of
sin, for he desires not to go forth of bondage, which supposes himself by
all means to be free: He preaches sight, but it is to the blind; that is, to
those that bewail the spiritual blindness of the heart, for they which say
they see, their sin abides: They which say that they are rich and wealthy,
ohn 9.41.
and want nothing, they do not know that they are wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked: He preaches forgiveness, but it is to the
broken, and contrite in heart. 1 Samuel 2.6.
God kills and makes alive, he leads down to hell, and brings back again:
he kills by contrition, that he may make alive by consolation; he leads down
to hell by the hammer of the Law, that he may bring back from hell by the
comfort of the Gospel.

VIII. The weight of Grief and Sorrow.
The Tempted.
TRoubles have compassed me round about, my heart is vexed and troubled, my
sins are always before mine eyes, which do grievously torment my conscience,
and labor to beat me down to hell; Psalm. 32.3.
there is no peace in my bones for the terror of the Lord; my soul refuses
to be comforted: I am troubled, Psalm. 77. verse. 2. ver. 3.
and my spirit does afflict me: I see no place whereto I may fly, and seek a
remedy of my sins.

The Comforter.
IF thou will fly, fly to CHRIST, he friendly inuites all that labor under
the weight of their sins, Mat. 1.27
which are pressed with the yoke of iniquity, an evil Mistress. Be thou hid
in his wounds, and the tempest of the wrath of God will pass away. Christ is
the propitiatory, Rom 3 25
to which thou may fly with true faith, and rest under the shadow of his
wings. As the Heart desires the fountains of waters, Psalm. 42.1.
so let thy soul, exhausted with the heat of thy sins, and of the wrath of
God, thirst after Christ the fountain of living water springing forth to
everlasting life. If thou come unto him, he will not put thee back, he
will not repel thee; for thus go his promises: Apoc 22.17. Cap. 21.6.
He that thirsts let him come, and he that will, let him take the water of
life freely. I will give unto him that thirsts of the Well of the water of
life freely. Come unto me all ye which labor, Mat. 11.27
and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you; in me, and by me you shall
find rest to your souls. Him, John 6.37.
that comes unto me, I will not cast forth of doors. Embrace these words of
Christ, which are the words of the eternal and unchangeable truth, with a
faithful heart. Let thy heart set before him these his promises, Psalm. 27.8.
and seek the face of the Lord. Set Christ as it were, in the midst between
thee a sinner, and thy angry God: appeal from the Throne of Gods severe
justice, to the Throne of mercy, prepared for thee in Christ, and through
Christ. The internal Hawke does urge and pursue thy soul, Cant. 2.14
let it fly therefore like a fearful and affrighted Dove to the holes of the
Rock, which are the wounds of Christ. Moses does accuse thee, sigh therefore,
Bern. Sermon. 64. sup. Cant. August in meditat.
that Christ may make intercession for thee. Thy conscience is troubled, but
let it not be tumbled down from his hope and confidence, but let it remember
the wounds of Christ: let all the assurance of thy confidence be in the wounds
of Christ, which do abound with the streams of mercy; neither want there holes
through which they may flow out. Idem Sermon. 22. sup. Cant.
Let the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ be thy last refuge, and only
remedy of thy sins: wisdom failing, righteousness not sufficing, the
merits of holiness not holding out, that will be able to help and succor
thee.

And this is the other, and indeed essential property of true Faith;
forsooth, to behold with the eye of the heart, Christ hanging on the Cross,
out of his wounds to hope for, and draw the medicine of her wounds, to rely on
him with a true confidence of heart, and to wrap her self as it were, in his
most holy merit; for this is the voice of true faith: Behold me, thou which
hangst upon the Tree, Bern. Sermon. 22. sup. Cant.

And let my sins in thy side hidden be:
My sick soul thirsts for thee, my guilt forgive,
My sinne's my death, but in thy blood I live.


Therefore, if having compunction for thy sins, thou hungerst and thirstest
after righteousness, thou may believe on him which justifies the wicked,
and being justified by faith alone, thou shall have peace with God. Confess
that thou art not worthy, neither can thou by thine own merits obtain the
kingdom of heaven; but let this be thy confidence, that Christ thy Lord does
obtain it by a double name, that is, by the inheritance of the Father, and by
the merit of his Passion: with the one, he himself is content, the other he
gives to thee: from whose gift challenging it to thy self, thou shall not be
confounded.

IX. The temptation of Desperation.
The Tempted.
THE Devil does solicit me to desperation.

The Comforter.
I would have thee despair but in thy self, and of thy self, because thou art
a sinful man, Romans 5.21
but not in God, whose grace does abound above sin: for as much as a drop is
to the Sea, Chrysostom. Hom. 3. de Poen.
so much is man's malice to Gods mercy. The Sea though it be great, yet it has
a measure; but the clemency of God has no measure: neither despair thou of
Christ, and in Christ, which came into the world, that he might save sinners; 1 Timothy 1.15.
whose blood does more prevail to the reconciliation of God, then the sins
of the whole world to his displeasure. Although thy sins be great, and
diverse, and oft-times doubled, yet they are not greater or more grievous then
that thou may obtain pardon and forgiveness of them, seeing the goodness of
God is greater then the iniquity of all men. Sins are in their fall, but the
grace of God is in its rising. Sins are in the works of the Devil and Man; to
take pity, to spare, and to remit are the works of God: by how much therefore
God is more mighty then the Devil and Man, by so much also his mercy is
greater then our malice. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, Psalm. 103.8
verse. 9.
slow to anger, and of great kindness. He will not always chide, neither
will he keep his anger for ever. verse. 10.
He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us after our
iniquities. verse. 11.
For as high as the Heaven is above the Earth, so great is his mercy toward
them that fear him. verse. 12.
As far as the East is from the West, so far has he removed our sins
from us. The Heaven is incomparably greater then the Earth, which is no bigger
then the least point in respect of Heaven: so the mercy of the heavenly Father
is incomparably greater then all sins: far be it, far be it therefore
from thee, that thou say, Greater is mine iniquity then the piety of the
pitying God. Thou shall find God more kind then thou art culpable. Bern.
sermon. 11. sup. Can. Col. 5 18. Gerson. de remed. contra Pusilla.
So great is the mercy of God, that if thou had all the sins of the world
upon thee, and did grieve, that with thy sins thou had proudly offended
thy God, so good a Lord, and should firmly purpose hereafter to abstain,
God would never condemn thee. What? August. in Psalm. 55.
do thou so forget the satisfaction performed of Christ, that thou will
prefer thy sins before Christ's merit, that is, thy self before God? Do
thou see the greatness of the disease, and do thou not see the power of the
Physician? Great are thy sins, far greater is Christ, which has satisfied
for thy sins. Diverse are thy sins, but Christ also has suffered diverse
things for thee. GOD is the infinite good whom thou have offended by thy
sins, but Christ is an infinite person, which has reconciled thee to God:
sigh therefore to thy heavenly Father, and pray in the name of his Son thy
Savior: if thou do despise me, Ansel. de redemp. genesis hum. fol. 96.
O eternal God for mine iniquity, as I have deserved, regard me at least,
taking pity on me, for the love of thy beloved offspring. Regard that in thy
Son which thou may be merciful unto in thy servant. See the sacrament of
his flesh, and forgive the guilt of my flesh, remember what thy good Son has
suffered, and forget what thine evil servant has wrought.

X. The tentation of Blasphemy.
The Tempted.
I Am constrained to confess that I am not only provoked to desperation, but
that I am also sometimes tempted with the spirit of blasphemy; for such
thoughts do arise in my heart, as are injurious against God himself my
Creator, and my Savior. I would choose to dye a thousand times, that I might
be freed from this tentation.

The Comforter.
THese cogitations are not the actions of thy heart, but rather the most bitter
passions, seeing thou art not delighted with these cogitations, but do feel
out of them sorrows more bitter then death it self. They are the scourges of
Satan, with which he does afflict and torment thee, they shall not be imputed
to thee of the Lord for sin. And be it, that some impatience of the heart do
arise out of the infirmity of the flesh, yet God knows thy groanings and thy
sighs: yea, the weight of tentations has wringed out of Job and Jeremy hard
words, which the most benign God has fatherly forgiven them. Observe out of
them, how thou have altogether no strength to good out of thy self, that with
the whole trust of thy heart thou may learn to cleave unto God. This is the
force and highest degree of the fight against Satan, take heed thou faint not
here, the mighty God that appoints thee to this combat, will be present with
thee, neither will he leave thee destitute of his help. Expect patiently and
humbly, till thou may be freed from the fiery darts of Satan; in the mean
time, Ephe. 6.16
let the grace of the Lord suffice thee. 2 Cor. 12.9.
It is the flesh which does thus wrestle with the spirit, and shows it self
ready and pliable to take the darts of Satan: the sin that dwells in thy flesh
shall not be imputed unto thee, if thou will mortify by the spirit the deeds
of the flesh, and wilt not give consent to these blasphemous cogitations.
Extinguish those fiery darts of Satan in the blood of Christ, turn against
them the Buckler of faith, and as soon as thou shall perceive any such
blasphemous cogitation to arise, betake thy self to prayers, by which thou
may trample it down, as it were in the first growth.

XI. The particularitie of the Promises.
The Tempted.
I Feel some consolation of the spirit in my heart: I observe a certain trust
in my soul, which forbids me to despair, when I behold the mercy of God
abounding above sins, and the merit of Christ, which is of infinite price and
value. But I doubt whether that promise in the Gospel of the mercy of God and
merit of Christ does pertain to me also: for God is not only merciful, but
also a most just and severe revenger of sins; and that all are not made
partakers of the benefits of Christ, experience, to my great grief, does
witness.

The Comforter.
TAke heed that thou give no place to those seducing thoughts of the restraint
of the promises of the Gospel. God calls all unto him, he desires all to
come unto him, he offers the word of the Gospel to all, and in it the
benefits of Christ: neither does he this fainedly, but in earnest: not
hypocritically, but with a mind to communicate them: I live (says the Lord) I
will not the death of a sinner that dies, Eze. 18.31 32. cap. 33. ver. 11.
but that he may be converted and live. Thou hear the serious oath of the
divine truth: Thou hear that their conversion is expected and desired of
God, which dye in their sins by their own fault: thou hear that serious
entreaty twice repeated: Come unto me, all ye (says our Savior, the mean
and messenger of the heavenly Father:) Come unto me, all ye, all ye which
labor, Mat. 11.28
and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Thou hear that the way lies
open to Christ for all that labor under the yoke of their sin, and that
refreshing and rest of soul is promised to them. God will have all men to be
saved, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.4
being taught it in the third Heaven, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth. He has shut up all under unbelief, that he might have mercy upon
all. Romans 11.20.23.
Thou hear, that the salvation of all is desired, and sought of God, that
the mercy of God is open unto all: no body is excluded here, but he which does
exclude himself:

There is one GOD of all, therefore he desires that all should be saved whom
he has made. Primas. in H. L.
One has given himself the price of redemption for all, therefore he would
have all to be partakers of that price. GOD would not have any to perish,
says Peter, being taught by his own example, 2 Pet. 3.9.
but that all return to repentance.

Thou hear, that the long suffering and goodness of GOD does inuit all to
repentance, and that GOD would not the destruction of any. Take heed that thou
speak not against this so clear and so manifest a truth, against these
sayings of the holy Ghost, written as it were, with a beam of the Sun, let
the consolations of the Scripture be of more force with thee, then the thoughts
of thine own heart: for the Scripture is the word of the living God, which
never deceiues, but our heart is lying, and deceives.

XII. The absolute decree of Reprobation.
The Tempted.
THe promise indeed outwardly is offered unto all, but God has made from
everlasting a decree of the Reprobation of some men, whom having cast from him,
he has adjudged them to eternal torments, to these though he offer the word
outwardly, yet they cannot communicate or partake of the good things in the
word. Perhaps I also am in the number of those reprobates?

The Comforter.
THE secrets of heaven, let no creature on earth presume to pry into: Enough is
revealed both for our consolation and salvation. Whom God has predestined,
we know not; it is a secret of Gods Privy Counsel, where-into we are not
admitted. And how far forth, and in what manner God may please to work and
bring about a purpose of his own, without the endeavor and purpose of man, we
know not, that also is a secret of Gods Privy Counsel, where-into we are not
admitted. And therefore as Moses says, that the secret things belong to the
Lord our GOD; so to him and his wisdom, be content to leave them. But this we
all know, that S. Peter bids us make our election sure by the practice of good
works, and holy duties of Religion; and tells us, that he that does those
things, shall never fall. 2 Pet. 1.10. that is, such a one shall never fail of
grace or glory. And therefore while thou endeauourest to live in all good
conscience according to Gods will; thou may have peace of conscience in Gods
promises and mercies. And this we know, that our Savior commands, and
promises; Ask and ye shall have; seek and ye shall find; knock and it
shall be opened unto you: And therefore if thou use the means, thou can not
doubt of the end.

Finally, this we all know also, that God protests upon his word, yea upon
his oath, that he desires not the death of him that dies, or takes any
pleasure that the wicked should die, but that he may return and live. Ezekiel
18.23.32. and Ezekiel. 33.11. And therefore God is so far from rejecting thee
before thou have sinned; that he is most ready to admit of thee after thou
have sinned. Only then endeavor to do the works of him that sent thee into
the world; beg and crave for grace and mercy from the Father of mercies;
search thy heart, find out thy sins, and each day renew thy repentance: and
then be assured, that the outward offering of grace will ever be accompanied
with the inward working of the spirit. For the promises of Gods mercies are
general to all that believe on him. Romans 10.11. To all that call on the name
of the Lord Rom 10.13. To all that labor and groan under the burden of their
sins. Matthew. 11.28. To all that fear God, and works righteousness. Act.
10.35. etc. And the merits, and death, and Passion of Jesus Christ, as they
are offered, so they are bestowed on all generally, that lay hold on him for
their Savior. Ioh. 3.16.

XIII. The doubting of the application of the merit of Christ.
The Tempted.
LEt the merit of Christ be, and be said to spread it self wide, in the mean
time I do not yet see for mine own particular that the benefits of Christ are
offered and applied to me. Many things are offered to men in general, which
notwithstanding do not pertain to every man in particular.

The Comforter.
NAy, from the general we may well proceed to the particular, from that which
is common, to that which is more restrained. Therefore because God would have
all to be saved, thou may rightly and most firmly subsume, that he would
have thee also to be saved. Because Christ is said to have died for all, thou
may rightly and most firmly subsume, that he also died on the Cross for
thee, and will cleanse thee from all thy sins by his blood: and because he
calls all repenting; he will receive thee repenting. And because he promises
grace and life to all that believe, depend, and rely on him; therefore he will
perform it to thee, when thou do rest and rely on him for his mercies.
Yea, and that which God promises to all in general by his word, that he
applies to thee is particular in the Ministry of the word. Only submit thy
self to the wholesome Ministry of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18.
which God has committed to the Ministers of the Church, Verse. 20.
to the keys that he has delivered to their t^^st, to the office of Embassage
that the^ undergo in the name of Christ, God exhorting, and as it were
entreating us by them. And then that which is specially offered unto thee, do
not doubt but that specially it belongs unto thee. When (...) the serious
sorrow of thy b^^^t, ((...) hears the voice of the Minister, pronouncing
remission of sins in the name of Christ, resolve that thou hear Christ
himself: what so is here done in the name of Christ, that does Christ do. It
is Christ which pronounces the remission of sins unto thee, the Minister
does only lend his voice to Christ. If any doubting would insinuate it self
into thy heart thereof, attend to the words of Christ, speaking to the Apostles
and their Successors: He that hears you, hears me. Luke 10.16 Matthew. 10.20.
Ioh. 1.23.
It is not you that speak, but the spirit of my Father. Attend to the words of
the Baptist: I am the voice of a crier. There is another which does preach and
cry by me, the Ministry is mine, but the force and benefit of the Ministry
dependes of another. Attend to the words of the Apostle. For Christ (that is in
the name and place of Christ) we are Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 3.20.
God as it were exhorting by us, we beseech you for Christ, be you reconciled
unto GOD. He therefore which contemnes, 1 These. 4.8
contemnes not man but God, which has given his holy spirit into us. Believe
therefore, that even at this day Christ says to thee, that which heretofore
he has said to the man sick of the Palsy, Matthew. 9.2. Luc. 7.48.
and to the womansinner, Thy sins are forgiven thee. Because there is no
difference between that, and this which the Minister vtters, for this is not
pronounced of man, and that of Christ. When therefore thou hear the Minister
pronounce unto thee the remission of sins, do not think that thou hear
the voice of the Minister, but the voice of Christ.

XIIII. The want of the evidence of the promises of the word.
The Tempted.
I Confess that there is great and notable consolation offered unto me in the
Ministry of the word, as yet notwithstanding my faith wauers, neither does it
so firmly embrace the promise of the Gospel, that it excludes all temptation:
for my flesh whispers unto me; that the promises are only words, which thou
perceiuest with thine ears, but thou do not as yet see the good promises
subject to thine eyes.

The Comforter.
INdeed, they are words: but the words of the most true and everliving God.
They are words indeed, Ioh. 6.69.
but the words of Spirit and life. They are words indeed, but more firm and
durable then this heaven which thou beholdest, then this earth whereon thou
stand. Luke 21.33
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away, says
the truth. Esa. 40.8.
The word of our Lord God abides for ever, says the Prophet. He which foldeth
himself in this word, he which embraces it with true faith, the same may be
saved for ever. Neither has God only set forth unto thee his word, but to his
word he has added Sacraments, Augustine. tract. 80. in Johan.
which are as it were the visible word, visible signs of the invisible grace,
and seals of the promises of God, instituted for the confirmation and
nourishment of thy faith. By Baptism thou art received into the covenant of
the grace of God, thou art made a Son and heir of GOD, thou art washed by
the blood of Christ from thy sins, thou are regenerated and renewed by the
holy Ghost, and as I may speak in a word, art made truly partaker of al
heavenly goods. For Christ attributes to Baptism, that it is a mean of
regeneration. Ioh. 3.3.
Unless a man be borne again of water and of the spirit, he shall not enter
into the Kingdom of heaven. Therefore he which is borne again of the water of
Baptism and the spirit, is written an heir of eternal life, because it is a
means of salvation. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved.
Mar. 16.16
The Apostles do attribute to baptism, Tit. 3.6.
that it is the lauacre of regeneration and renouation in the holy Ghost, when
we are baptized into the remission of sins. Mar. 1.4.
Let every one of you be baptized, says Peter, Act. 2.38.
in the name of Jesus, into the remission of sins, and you shall receive the
gift of the holy Ghost. Baptism does save us, 1 Pet. 3.12
(says he in another place) which is not the putting off of the filth of the
flesh, but the request of a good conscience, or a covenant to Godwards, through
the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Be thou baptized, Act. 22.16
and wash away thy sins (says Ananias.) As many of you as are baptized have
put on Christ, Gal. 3.27.
and by faith ye are the sons of God, says Paul. For Christ sanctifies his
Church, Ephe. 5.27
clensing it in the Lauer of water in his word. Out of all which thou may
firmly conclude, that baptism is the price of redemption to the captives,
Basil. (...). tom. 1. part. 446. Cyril. Hierosolym. in praefat. Catech.
the forgiving of debts, the death of sin: regeneration, the bright clothing
of the soul, a seal that cannot be infringed, the chariot to Heaven, the
procurer of the kingdom, the free gift of adoption. Illumination or Baptism
is the brightness of souls, the change of life, the request of the conscience
unto God, the help of our weakness: Illumination is the putting off of the
flesh, the following of the spirit, Nazian. orat. in S. Bap. p. 615.
the communion of the word: Illumination is the restitution of the Image, the
deluge of sin, the participation of light, the loosing of darkness:
Illumination is the Wagon or Chariot unto God, the peregrination with Christ,
the foundation of faith, the perfecting of the mind, the glory of the kingdom
of Heaven, the change of life, the taking away of bondage, the loosing of
bands, the instauration of the covenant. Tertull. 4. Aduer. Marc. p. 231.
It is the original of true life and of true justice, it is a compendious
washing, it is the sacrament of life, and salvation eternal.

The holy Ghost into this Brook does come
From Heaven, August. 21 contra Crescen. c 18. Paulinus Epist. 12 ad Sever.
and brooding on the front celestial
Does heat the holy waters: they become
Conceived of GOD, and in their liqours crystal.
Bring forth an holy Brood, an holy Nation.
Of the eternal seed the propagation.
For what the grace of God does work inuisibly in our baptism, that has
been showed in visible signs in the Baptism of Christ. Ch^mnit. in cap. 17.
Harmoni.
The water of baptism was sanctified by the touching of the Lords body, for
what things soever Christ has deserved and purchased in the body of his flesh,
he has as it were, laid them down in baptism. He took upon him baptism
with us sinners, that he might witness that by baptism we are made his
members. As the eternal Father in the baptism of CHRIST uttered this voice:
This is my beloved Son, so as yet this day, all that do believe and are
baptized, he does adopt for Sons. As in the baptism of Christ Heaven was
opened, so as yet at this day by the Sacrament of Baptism the gate of the
heavenly Paradise is opened unto us. As in the baptism of Christ the holy
Ghost descended upon him in the shape of a Dove, so the holy Ghost is present
in our baptism, and works therein effectually our regeneration and
renouation, so that by this reason, in Baptism do concur the grace of the
Father adopting, the merit of the Son clensing, and the efficacy of the holy
Ghost regenerating. Therefore if thou art baptized, thou may not doubt of the
grace of God, the remission of sins, and the promise of eternal salvation, so
thou continue in that faith which there thou did profess. Baptism is the
Lauer of regeneration, where there is regeneration, there is the remission of
sins, there is the grace of God, there is perfect justice, there is renewing,
there is the gift of the holy Ghost, there is adoption, there is the
inheritance of eternal life.

XV The falling out of the Covenant of Baptism.
The Tempted.
I Believe indeed, that I am received into the covenant of Gods grace by the
Sacrament of Baptism, that I have attained remission of my sins, and am
written in the Book of life, but by my sins I have again fallen out of the
grace of this Covenant, by committing offenses again: I have made the
remission past of none effect, and have often deserved that I should be blotted
out of the Book of life.

The Comforter.
NAy, the Covenant of GOD is an everlasting covenant, Genesis 17.13.1. Col. 2.11.
to which after thy sins thou may again betake thy self by true and
earnest repentance. For even as God speaks of the Sacrament of circumcision
that it is an eternal covenant: so let us not doubt but that God will enter
into and stablish with us an everlasting covenant in baptism, which has
succeeded in the place of circumcision: I will marry thee unto me for ever,
says he by the Prophet, Hose 2.19
I will mary thee unto me in righteousness, and judgment, in mercy, and in
compassion. I will marry thee unto me in faith. The hills shall be moved, Esa.
54.10.
and the valleys shall tremble, but my mercy shall not depart from thee, and
the covenant of my peace shall not be moved, says thy Lord that takes pity.
God forbid therefore, God forbid, Romans 3.3
that we say that the faith of God can be made of none effect by the
incredulity of men: If we do never so much take away credit from his words,
or depart from him, 2 Timothy 2.13.
he remains faithful, always like himself, true and constant, he cannot
deny himself, Therefore though thou sometime sin out of thine inbred
infirmity, thou do not forthwith fall out of the covenant of God. Indeed,
by sins committed against knowledge and conscience, thou do grievously
provoke GOD against thee, and make him to be sometimes angry, but by true
repentance thou returnest again into his grace and favor. The ship of
Baptism does not floate away from us, Secunda post naufragium tabulu.
although we leap out of it into the Sea of sins, therefore by repentance,
which in this sense may be called a second planke after shipwreck, we may
return again to the same ship of baptism, that in it we may be brought
to the haven of everlasting salvation.

Hier. in ca. 3. Esa. ver. 9. Tertu. lib. de poenit. p. 479.
Therefore, embrace repentance, as he that is shipwreck the help of some
board, or plancke, this will lift thee up, being overwhelmed with the waves of
thy sins, and will bring thee into the haven of the clemency of God. Peter had
denied his Master, 1 Pet. 3.21
but being converted, he does nevertheless seek the promise of salvation in
baptism. The Galathians had fallen grievously, and likewise the Corinthians:
notwithstanding the Apostle does set before them consolation, derived out of
Baptism, after that they were again raised up by repentance: Gal. 3.17.
pronouncing as many of them as were baptized, to have put on Christ: nay,
manifestly affirming, that they were cleansed, and baptized in one spirit, into
one body, that is to say, a mystical body. Out of which it evidently
appears, that the efficacy of the covenant of Baptism does extend it self to
the time to come, neither is it made plainly of no force, and abolisht by the
fall of man into sin, but that that covenant abides lastingly, firm, August.
1. de nupt. and concupis. cap. 33.
and ratified of the part of God. That therefore which Paul says, that Christ
did cleanse the Church in the Lauer of water in the word, is so to be taken,
that by the same Lauer of regeneration and word of sanctification all the evils
of regenerate men are altogether cleansed and healed, not only the sins past,
all which are remitted in Baptism, but also those which are afterward
contracted by humane ignorance or infirmity, not that baptism so often as men
sin may so often be repeated, but because by that which is once given, the
pardon of what soever sins is obtained for the faithful, not only before,
but also afterward, upon their true and unfeigned repentance. Acknowledge
therefore, and bewail thy sins, yet neither deny the covenant of grace that
was begun with thee in baptism, nor forget it: but though thou fall a
thousand times, yet return and go back. Return unto me, Ier. 3.12.
O thou soul that art turned away, says the LORD, and I will not turn away
my face from you, Psalm. 27.8.
because I am merciful, says the LORD, and I will not be angry for ever. Let
thy heart set this word before GOD, 2 Timothy 2.13.
and he will take pity upon thee, being mindful of his promise, for he
cannot deny himself and his word.

XVI. Uncertain taking into the Covenant of Baptism.
The tempted.
BUT whence may I be ascertained, that after I have fallen, by true repentance
I may be received again of God into favor? I would to God my heart might be
confirmed by some certain seal, I would there were some Sacrament by the
participation whereof that promise of grace might be sealed up unto me?

The Comforter.
YEa, there is such a Sacrament, that is to say, the most holy Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, in which Christ gives unto thee his most precious body and blood.
Wherefore, when they receiuest the most holy price of thy redemption, that is
to say, the body and blood of Christ in that holy supper, thou may be sure,
that thou art made truly partaker of all those things, which Christ has
deserved on the altar of the Cross, by the delivering up of his body, and
pouring out of his blood, that is, the favor of God, remission of sins,
righteousness, life, and everlasting salvation. When thou drinkest that blood,
by the pouring out whereof the covenant of grace was stricken and confirmed:
how can thou doubt whether thou be again received into that covenant, and
into the favor of God? What is more near unto God then his only begotten
Son? as who is in his bosom, Ioh. 1.18.
which is in the Father, and the Father in him, which is one with the Father.
Again, what is more near to the Son of God, Ioh. 14.10
then flesh and blood, or the humane nature which he has assumed? Ioh. 10.30
as which he has coupled to himself in a personal and indissoluble league.
Therefore, by eating the flesh of Christ, and drinking his blood thou art
joined most straightly unto God. These things being taken, and taken down,
Hilar. 8. de Trin. p. 141.
make that Christ abides in thee, and thou in Christ. What is more near unto
us, then that which we eat and drink, as which is either converted into the
substance of our flesh, as natural and elementall meats, or else does change
and convert us into it, as that spiritual food of the body and blood of the
Lord, which we eat indeed, but we do not change it into our substance, but
we are changed into it. Therefore, by eating the quickening flesh of Christ,
thou receiuest spiritual life from the same, by drinking the precious blood of
Christ, thou come to the Fountain of life.

Christ has taken upon him the humane nature of us, in it he has condemned
sin, he has destroyed death, he has repaired life, and has filled the same
with the fullness of grace, and heavenly good things: the same nature taken
from us, and repaired in himself, sanctified and filled with heavenly
treasures he sets before thee again in the holy Supper, that thou may be
ascertained that those things do truly pertain unto thee, which he has laid
down into the same, as it were into a certain rich storehouse; he does as it
were, ingraft thy wretched and depraved nature into his most holy and
quickening flesh, that out of it thou may draw the juice of life, and an
antidote of the spiritual poison that lies hidden in thy flesh. He is the
Vine, we are the branches, he that abides in him, John 15.5
and he in whom he abides, this man brings forth much fruit. The vncleannnesse
of thy nature is shadowed and covered by that most holy body of Christ which
thou receiuest, and by that most precious blood, which thou drinkest, least it
appear before the tribunal and in the sight of God. Liturg. utter. Damas. 4.
fid. Orthod. cap. 14.
Therefore thou receiuest the flesh and blood of Christ for an apology that
will easily be admitted, and the earnest of eternal life: to the sustaining
and keeping of the body and the soul, to the forgiveness of sins, and to
life everlasting. Nay, in the holy Supper is given thee a certain wholesome
provision for thy journey, seeing the tokens of the future resurrection are
exhibited unto thee, Can. Nicen.
by which the right of acquaintance and hospitality which is to be expected in
the heavenly country, is confirmed unto thee. John 6.54.
He which eats my flesh, says Christ, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life, and I will raise him up again in the last day. It cannot therefore come
to pass, I say, that thy body should abide in the grave, seeing it is
nourished with the body and blood of our Lord, that is to say, with that food
which is the medicine of immortality, the antidote that we should not dye, but
live in God through Christ, the purgation that drives away all evil. By this
food thy weakness shall be comforted, that thou may come through with
Elias, 2 Reg. 13.21.
to the hill of the Lord. The bones of Elizeus, yea, even when he was dead, did
give life, by how much more the flesh of Christ living and quickening, received
by faith, shall quicken thee to everlasting life.

XVII. The unworthy use of the holy Supper.
The Tempted.
I Acknowledge that in the true and wholesome use of the holy supper, the godly
are made partakers of these benefits, but it does not a little trouble me,
that the Apostle does affirm, that they which eat this bread unworthily, 1
Cor. 11.27
and drink this cup of the Lord unworthily, are made guilty of the body and
blood of the Lord. I fear therefore, lest that I be an unworthy guest of this
heavenly banquet.

The Comforter.
BY acknowledging and bewailing of thine unworthiness, thou may escape the
spot and imputation of an unworthy guest: for the Apostle calls unworthy, not
those which are weak in faith, whereas this sacrament was instituted for the
confirmation of faith, and comfort of the weak, but those which do not prove
themselves neither do discern the Lords body, that is, which come to this holy
Supper, 1 Cor. 11.28.29.
as it were to a common banquet, without true repentance and lively faith,
without the hatred of sin, and a serious and earnest purpose of amendment of
life, which do not discern this heavenly banquet from other common food,
that they may acknowledge the true excellency thereof, and use due preparation
of the heart thereunto. Such unworthy guests of this banquet, do nothing less
sin in eating and drinking unworthily the flesh and blood of Christ, then the
Jews in crucifying Christ. But far be it from thy piety, far be it, I
say, that thou should be in the number of them. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 11.
Thou do acknowledge also the spots of thy sins, thou do bewail the
uncleanness of thy nature, thou sighest unto Christ the Physician of thy
soul, that he prepare a sit lodging for himself in thy heart, thou weighest
the greatness of those things which are present and set before thee in the
holy Supper, and considerest the amplenesse of the heavenly gift, thou hungrest
and thirstest after righteousness, Mat. 5.6.
therefore also thou shall be filled, the sins shall not hurt thee, Luke
15.20
which do not please thee: thou make haste with tears to thy heavenly
Father, thou bewailest thy sins, and desire that the hunger of thy soul
may be refreshed with his heavenly food: that most kind Father, verse. 22.
doubt not, will meet thee, he will kiss and receive thee with joy, he will
give unto thee the first long garment of innocence, he will cloth thee with
the garments of salvation, he will give thee a ring on thy hand, he will
seal thee with his holy spirit, he will give thee shoes for thy feet, he
will direct thee in the way of peace and righteousness, he will fill thee with
the flesh of that sacrifice which was slain on the altar of the Cross, verse.
23.
and was offered unto him for a sweet smelling savor. Lay aside therefore all
fear of unworthy eating, he which is most unworthy in his own eyes he is
accepted before God: he that displeases himself pleases God: he that is
cast down in himself in true contrition of heart, he again is raised up by
the most loving hand of God.

XVIII. The weakness of Faith.
The Tempted.
FAITH is altogether required to the wholesome use of the Supper, and fruit of
the promises of the Gospel, seeing the hand of the giver is not sufficient to
the parricipation of alms, but there must of necessity also come the hand of
the receiver: but now my faith is weak, the ship of my heart bruised with
diverse storms of tentations, does ofttimes waver, and castes me down from
the firmness of faith.

The Comforter.
Weak faith notwithstanding is faith, neither does faith therefore apprehend
Christ, and in Christ the grace of God, remission of sins, and everlasting
life, because it is strong, but because it is faith: strong faith does more
strongly embrace Christ, nevertheless weak faith also does not reject Christ,
but wholesomly apprehend him. The faithful servant of God, Christ our Savior,
does not break a bruised Reed, Esa. 42.2.
nor smoking Flax he does not quench, but he does most benignely receive him
that is weak in Faith. The least spark of faith is the work of the holy
Ghost, Romans 14.3.
because of our selves, as it were of our selves we cannot so much as think
any thing that is good, 1 Cor. 3.5.
but to will and to perform is of God: therefore God will not despise his
work, Phil. 2.13.
which he has begun in thy heart by the holy Ghost, but will perform it,
and confirm it. Even as a Mother tendereth her Children, Esa. 66.13.
so God comfort us: but now a mother does far more tenderly handle an
Infant, and takes greater care thereof, then of the rest that are big grown:
so God does not turn himself away from him that is weak in faith, but
endeavors to heal and confirm him as it were a sick man. If you shall have
faith as it were a grain of Mustard seed; Mat. 17.20
and shall say to this hill, pass from hence thither, and it shall pass, and
nothing shall be impossible unto you, says the truth. If miraculous faith can
do so much, that it can transpose hills, if it be scarce as big as a grain of
Mustard seed, why cannot saving faith do the same, that it transpose the
hills of tentations and doubtings, howsoever it be very infirm and weak? The
power of God is performed in our weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9
take heed therefore that thou be not cast down in thy mind for the
weakness of thy faith. But rather regard the power of God, God can water that
which is dry, heal that which is wounded, bend that which is stiff, cherish
that which is cold, govern that which is out of the way. Acknowledge only
the infirmity of thy faith, and lean so much the stronger on the staff of
the word of God, for the word as it is the seed, so also is it the nourishment
or food of faith. Pray with the Disciples of Christ: Luke 17.5 Mark. 9.24
O Lord increase our faith, and with the Father of the lunaticke child, I
believe Lord, help mine unbelief.

XIX. The want of the feeling of Faith.
The Tempted.
MY faith is not only weak, but sometimes I do not feel any faith at all in
my heart, neither do I call upon God with that heat of the spirit which may
pierce the clouds. I fear therefore, least then my faith have perished, and be
utterly ex^inct; but if my faith be extinct, what hope or salvation can there
remain for me? I prove my self, and behold I do not feel faith in my
heart, therefore I shall be of the number of the reprobate.

The Comforter.
THe spirit helps our infirmity, as it were with a hand put under, for even
as we know not what we may pray for, or how we ought to pray, Romans 8.26.
yet the spirit makes intercession for us with sighs that cannot be uttered:
so what or how we may believe sometimes we do not feel, but the spirit does
cherish and conserve faith in our heart. A spark lies sleeping and hidden
under the ashes, although outwardly it does not appear, so faith sometimes
dwells in the innermost corners of the heart, although it cannot be felt of us,
therefore from the want of the feeling of faith, thou may not gather, that
thy faith is perished and extinct, when as yet thou do desire, sigh, and art
willing to believe, that desire, that sighing, that willing does come from
faith. Furthermore, it is one thing not to feel faith, another thing to put
away believing; that happens to him that wrastles, this agrees to him that is
stubbornely rebellious. Ephesians. 3.17.
Christ dwells altogether by faith in thy heart, although thou do not
manifestly feel that inhabitation of grace, even as the holy Ghost, that
inward Comforter, has an holy house in thine heart, although sometime he does
withdraw from thee the feeling of that consolation. Romans 4.18
As Abraham the Father of believers believed against hope in hope, so thou
ought to rely on the word against thine own sense. As we ought to
captiuate all our understanding under the obedience of faith, so thou may
also captiuate that want of the feeling of faith with faith, that is, thou
may receive the word in thy heart, and cleave firmly thereunto. The seed
lies hidden under the clods of earth, although it does not as yet thrust forth
the blade utterly: so the seed of faith lies hid in thy heart, although the
fruit thereof as yet does not fully and plainly appear. In sleeping thou
do not feel faith, but far be it from thee that thou should say, that
then thy faith is perished; so in this temptation, as it were a certain
sleep, has oppressed thy soul, that thou can not feel the moving of thy
faith, but far be it from thee, that therefore thou should think that thy
faith is utterly extinguished.

XX. The want of power to believe.
The Tempted.
TRuly I do sigh to my Savior, but I do both feel and grieve that I cannot
believe; I would wish truly that I might be made partaker of the benefits of
Christ, but I do not feel that I can apprehend them by faith.

The Comforter.
OF thy self thou can not, but on him which strengthens thee, Christ, thou
can do all things. Phil. 4 13.
God would have thee altogether, and in earnest would have thee to believe, for
to that end he offers to thee his word, that through it, by the efficacy of
the holy Ghost, he may kindie faith in thy heart, only do not thou put away
that word, neither resist the working of the holy Ghost, in short time thou
shall feel most plentiful fruit of the word. For if God seriously would have
thee to believe, surely he will also work in thee that belief, if thou do
not resist his will with actual stubbornness. Thou say that thou can not
believe, and yet thou art constrained to confess, that thou do sigh unto
Christ, and desire his benefits, that same sighing, that same desiring is the
beginning of faith. The holy Ghost will bring to pass, will surely bring to
pass that work of faith, which he has begun in thee; take heed only that
thou do not put by his wholesome operation. Thou ought not to resolve, that
the sense and moving of faith kindled in thy heart, is first to be expected,
before that thou will hear, meditate, and receive the word of the Gospel.
This is a perverse opinion, which take heed that thou suck not in, that thou
put not upon thee: this is a perverse order, which take heed, that thou do
not follow. In the School of the holy Ghost we must take our beginning from
the hearing and meditation of the word, by that means thou art brought unto
faith, by faith unto the feeling of faith. Thou say that thou can not
believe, therefore thou ought to hear the word, meditate on it, and receive
it into thy heart, that thou may believe. GOD gives his holy spirit to those
that Luke 11.13
ask, and yet without the grace of the holy Ghost we cannot ask: so God gives
faith to them that sigh after it, and yet without the beginning of faith we
cannot sigh after it. For a surety faith rises with a certain wrestling in
the heart, it is increased with wrestling, it is performed in the heart with
wrestling, and that which we cannot do of our selves, we are able to do by
his gift, which has said: No man comes unto me, unless the Father draw
him. Ioh. 6.44.
Every one that hears of my Father and learneth, he comes unto me, him that
comes unto me, I will not cast forth. If thou art not yet drawn, pray that
thou may be drawn: hear and learn, that thou may come unto Christ.

XXI. The small number of good works.
The Tempted.
TRue and lively faith always works by love, on the other side that faith
which has not works, is dead in it self. Gal. 5.6.
As the body without the soul is dead so faith without works is dead. Iac.
2.17. Verse. 2^. Romans 9.21 Verse. 18.
But now I do not see a great number of good works, which may give manifest
testimony of my faith. Evil cleaues unto me, that am willing to do good, to
will is present with me, but I find no power to perform that which is good.

The Comforter.
THou do well, that thou do esteem the light of faith, out of the beams
of good works. For as works which are not done of faith, are not truly good
works: so faith which is without works is not true faith, but a vain
persuasion, Math. 7.16
and empty shadow. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, 2 Pet. 1.10
says our Savior; Do your endeavor, says Peter, that you may make your
calling and election sure. Therefore out of works we must judge of faith, and
this is the third property of faith, that as it has contrition to usher it,
and true confidence on Christ in stead of an Essential form, so it always
has new obedience to follow it. Therefore thou do well, as I have said,
that thou do esteem the light of faith, out of the beams of good works,
but take heed thou do not think, that those are only good works, which are
great in their outward show in the eyes of men, and free from all spot of sin
cleaving unto them. Under the name of good works is especially understood the
inward renewing of the heart, and the kindling of those spiritual motions in
the hearts of the regenerate by the holy Ghost. Therefore an holy cogitation, a
good purpose, the true fear of God, sincere love, ardent invocation are truly
good works, although they are not perceived and seen of men. Psa. 45.14
The glory of the Kings daughter is within, the outward works do give
testimony of that inward glory of the revelation. Therefore if thou have
nothing else that thou can offer unto God, offer unto God a good will, and an
holy purpose to live godlily. Offer to God thy heart, and thou have offered all
things. Submit thy self wholly to the will of GOD, cleave unto him, resign thy
will to him, and thou shall be one spirit with him. 1 Cor. 6.17
This if thou shall do, the outward works will readily follow, because the
spirit of God dwelling in thee, will drive thee to all manner of good works,
but where there is not an outward faculty of working, there the inward good
will to God suffices. Neither is there any reason why thou should hope that
thou can be free from the spot of all infirmity in this life. Our works do
please God, not because they are absolutely perfect, but because they do
proceed out of true faith in Christ, and are offered of beloved Sons in
stead of a sacrifice of thanksgiving. Acknowledge therefore the testimony of
good works which they give of faith, least thou be cast down in thy mind,
acknowledge the imperfection of the same, and the spot of sin cleaving unto
them, least thou be too much lifted up in thy mind.

XXII. The want of Merits.
The Tempted.
Just is God, and just are his judgments, therefore he will give to none the
reward of eternal life, unless there go before the merit of good works.
What therefore is my hope, what is my confidence, when my works are imperfect,
foul, many ways contamined, and no way meritorious?

The Comforter.
Romans 6 23 Bern. Ser. 1 in Annunc. Col. 106.
NAy, eternal life is not the due wages of our deserts, but the free gift of
God in Christ and for Christ. For neither are the merits of men such, that for
them eternal life is due of right, and God should do injury to some man,
unless he should give him it. For that I may not speak of this, that all
merits are the gifts of God, and so man is more a debtor unto God for them,
then God to man, what are al merits to so great glory? All the Saints do
confess, Exodus 34.7. Esa. 64.6.
that before God no man is innocent, that all their righteousnesses are before
God like the cloth of a menstruous woman, that no man can stand before the
judgment of God, if he will impute sins, that when they have done all things
that are commanded of God, Psa. 130.3. Luke 17.10
they are nevertheless unprofitable servants, what place therefore can there
be here for merits? who can presume of sufficiency to salvation either of his
own wisdom or righteousness or holiness? Bern Sermon. 22. in cant. Col. 555.
Gerson li. 4. de consola. Theolog. pros. 1. Romans 8.18
who can show his own righteousnesses as it were in boasting unto God, more
then a woman the cloth of her confusion to a man? neither our doings nor our
sufferings are worthy of the future glory which shall be revealed on us.

We cannot deserve that crust of bread which we eat, by our obedience, but are
constrained to beg it by daily Prayers, of God, how much more incomparably
less can we deserve the reward of eternal life by our merits? Therefore if
thou will fall from grace, brag of thy merits. August. in Ps. 31. Id. de
verb. Apost. Ser. 15. Fulgen. 1. ad momin. page 21.
God gives altogether freely, saues altogether freely, because he finds
nothing for which to save, and he finds much for which to damn. Of grace is
given not only to the justified good life, but also to the glorified eternal
life: and therefore death is said to be wages, but eternal life is said to be
grace, because that is rendered as due, this is given as free. Bern. Ser. innat.
Mar. Col. 213.
Therefore let another seek for merit, do thou study to find grace, let the
mercy of the Lord be thy merit, thou art not plainly poor in merit, as long
as he is not wanting mercies. Sermon. 67. in Cant.
There is no place for grace to enter where merit has already taken up the
room, Thou do detract from grace, whatsoever thou do depute unto merit.
It suffices to merit, Sermon. 68. in Cant.
to know that merit does not suffice. Place all thy confidence altogether on
God. Embrace his mercy, seek thy merits in the wounds of Christ, and thou
shall not have any want of merits.

XXIII. The accusation of the Law.
The Tempted.
I Acknowledge our works not to be meritorious, neither to appease God, but
that out of faith they may please him. And how can they choose but displease
him, when they are not perfectly conformable to the law of God. The law is an
eternal and unchangeable rule of justice, condemning all whatsoever is not
conformable thereunto. Therefore the dart of damnation is shaken against me,
and my works, unless thou show me, what shield I may oppose against it.

The Comforter.
Gal. 3.13.
CHrist has redeemed thee from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for
thee, Cursed is every one that hangs on the wood. When the fullness of time
came, Cap 4.4.
God sent his own Son, borne of a woman, made under the Law, that he might
redeem those which were under the Law, Ver. 5. Romans 10.4. Cap. 8.1.
that we might receive the adoption of Sons. The end and fulfilling of the
Law is Christ to righteousness to every one that believes: Therefore there is
no damnation to thee and all, which are by faith in Christ, and walk not
according to the flesh, Verse 2. Verse. 3.
there is no fear of the Law, the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus,
has freed thee from the Law of sin and death. For that which was impossible
to the Law, because it was made weak through the flesh, that has GOD
performed, Verse. 4.
sending his Son in the likeness of the flesh of sin, and by sin
condemned sin in the flesh, that the justification of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.
Therefore if by true faith thou do apply the benefits of Christ unto thy
self, there is no cause that thou should fear the curse of the Law. The
sting of Death is sin, 1 Cor. 15.55 56.
the strength of sin is the Law, but thanks be unto God, which has given us
victory through Jesus Christ our Lord: He has overcome our death by his
death, he has satisfied for our sins by his Passion, and he has most
perfectly fulfilled the Law in our stead, by his most holy obedience. Neither
yet is there an abolishment of the Law made, but a translation only. Neither
do the Law and the Gospel destroy themselves mutually, seeing the Law is not
against the promises of God, Gal. 3.21.
but is established by faith.

For what the Law does require of us, Romans 3.31
that the Gospel does tell us was performed of Christ in our stead. What the
Law commands, this Christ obtaines. The Law condemns sin, and us for sin,
Christ does perform satisfaction for sins, and gives his righteousness unto
us. The Law therefore is satisfied by the obedience of Christ, because it is
perfect: Again, that fulfilling of the Law through Christ, is performed for us
to good because it is not due. Chyt. li. 1. de vita et morte, p. 43.
Therefore as thou ought not to behold death in thine own body, but in
Christ raised up again, the conqueror of death, and the giver of life and
salvation eternal: sin not in thine own conscience, but in Christ the Lamb
of God, bearing and taking away thy sins, and the sins of the whole world:
hell and the tentations of being everlastingly cast away, not in thy self, and
in that innumerable multitude of the damned, but in Christ sustaining on the
Cross, and ouer-comming for us the tentation of being cast away: so thou
ought to behold the Law not as it is written in thy heart, but as it is
fulfilled by Christ, and with him fastened to the Cross.

XXIIII. The accusation of Conscience.
The Tempted.
MY conscience does witness, together with the accusation of the Law, that as
an vncorrupt judge rises up against me, Chrysostom. hom. 64. in Genesis
and is an accuser of me, while no man reproues me, or brings any thing forth
against me. I cannot escape that domestical judgment seat: In this great
volumne I see and altogether tremble at all my sins, Nazian. orat. 26. Bern.
de conuers. ad Cler. c. 3. Col. 114
written with the style of truth: wretch that I am, who shall deliver me from
this Court of judgment, in which the same is the guilty, the pleader, the
witness, the judge, the torturer, the scourge, the executioner, the hangman?

The Comforter.
Ioh. 3.20.
IF thy heart does condemn thee, yet God is greater then thy heart. If the
memory of thy faults passed, does accuse and torment thee, yet Christ the
Redeemer, which has satisfied for thy sins, is a mightier, Col. 2.14.
he absolues thee, frees thee, and saues thee. He indeed has blotted out that
handwriting which was written against, and was contrary to us, he has taken
it clean away, and has fastened it with him to the Cross. By the nails of
Christ crucified is that accusing handwriting of thy conscience together
fastened, that it is of no force and validity before God; Romans 5.1.
for being justified by faith, thou have peace with GOD, peace of conscience,
quietness of heart, and the most blessed tranquillity of the soul, which Christ
the conqueror of sin, death and Satan, has brought back with him from the
grave, and given the same to his Disciples. Therefore, Bern. de conuer. cap. 6.
col. 415.
if thou feel the worm of conscience, thou ought to strangle him
forthwith in this life present, not cherish him to immortality, for a
putrified conscience begets the immortal worms.

Strangle therefore the worm of conscience by serious repentance, pray to God
for rest of the heart, and forgiveness of sins, and take heed of the new
wounds of conscience, that is, the worst relapse of sins. In this life there
is as yet a time of pardon, a time of grace, a time of quieting the conscience.
In this life the book of conscience may as yet be amended out of the book of
life, Apoc. 20.12.
but in the last judgment the books shall be opened, and amongst these also
the book of conscience, in which, before the whole world, graven with great
letters, shall all the particular faults and offenses of men be seen, which
are not blotted out in this life by true contrition, by faith, and amendment
of life. Before that day of judgment come, and the time of grace pass away,
thou may have as yet excellent hope and sure confidence, that the blood of
Jesus Christ, Heb. 9.14.
which through the eternal spirit, has offered himself without spot to God,
will cleanse thy conscience from dead works, to serve the living God.

XXV. Too late Repentance.
The Tempted.
TRuly, I am earnestly sorry for so many wounds inflicted on my conscience; I
do earnestly desire the cure of my wounds, I have an earnest desire to keep a
good conscience hereafter, but I fear lest that my repentance be too late: I
fear, lest the grace of God so oftimes rejected of me, do again reject and
forsake me. August. de vera and falsa poenit. cap. 17.
Late repentance is wont to deceive many, and that repentance which proceeds
from a dying man, he must fear, lest that also dye.

The Comforter.
NAy, there is nothing too late which is true and earnest. Cyprian. tract. 1.
contra Demet.
No repentance is to late for him that abides yet in this world; there are some
which are called, and come at the eleventh hour of the day into the Lords
Vineyard, Mat. 20.9.
and receive the reward of Grace. No length of time does preiudicate either
Gods equity or his piety. Fulgent. Epist. 7.
Repentance is never too late with GOD (...) in whose sight as well the things
past, as the things to come, are always held for present. Behold the example
of the Thief on the cross, which confessing Christ with his mouth, upon whose
utmost lips, as it were, his soul dwelt, ready to depart, gods the pardon of
his sins, and the (...) pr^mise of the heavenly paradise. As long as that to
day is named, Heb. 3.13.
so long God does earnestly look for our conversion. As long as the heavenly
Bridegroom does as yet defer his coming, Mat. 25.5.
so long the gate of Grace and indulgence, does as yet lie open: The whole time
of our life, yea the last hour thereof is granted us to the space of
repentance. Esa. 65.2.
God spreads forth his hands all day, neither does he cast forth him that
comes unto him at what time soever he come. John 6.37.
Therefore take thou care of that, that thy repentance be true and earnest, and
then thou need not fear, lest it be too late. If when the hour of death
draws near, thou therefore repentest thee, because thou art destituted of the
occasions of sinning, that repentance is false, for by this reason thou do
not leave thy sins, but thy sins forsake thee. If thou therefore repentest
because thou see the punishment of thy sins near; that repentance is
likewise false, for it proceeds out of the love of thy self, not out of the
sincere love of God: it proceeds not out of the hate of sin, but out of the
irkesomnesse of most just punishment. Therefore, that thou may repent truly
and earnestly, grieve for thy sins so often committed, and therefore grieve,
because thou have so often and so grievously by them offended God the chiefest
good, see^e in Christ the remission of thy sins, and seriously propose to thy
self, whatsoever shall remain of thy life, to (...) it out wholly on the
service of God, submit thy self to God: and be humbled from thy heart before
him: permit it to his will, what and how great punishments, a thousand times
deserved of thee, he will inflict upon thee, that it may appear that thou
do repent out of the hatred of sin, and not out of the hatred of
punishment. Psalm. 51.19
Such a contrite and humbled heart will be a most acceptable sacrifice unto
God, for so he says by the Prophet, Esa. 66.2.
To whom shall I have respect, but to the poor and contrite in spirit, and him
that trembles at my words?

XXVI. The doubting of the grace of God.
The Tempted.
TRuly I feel in my heart serious contrition and grief for my sins, neither
do I altogether despair of the mercy of God, yet my heart is shaken with the
waves of doubtings, neither as yet am I certainly assured of the free
remission of my sins. Indeed, well I hope, in the mean time humbly I doubt
the consideration of Gods mercy does lift me up, but the thought of mine own
unworthiness does again cast me down. I am converted unto God, therefore I
hope well, but I am converted too late, therefore I doubt as yet in part.

The Comforter.
But I will set most firm props under thy wavering faith, on which thou may
rely thee against all the tempests of doubtings: for neither is that doubting
an humble confession of our unworthiness, but a dangerous oppugning of the
faith that ought of right to be given to Gods promises: neither is there any
reason of doubting of sufficient strength in late conversion and repentance,
when the mercy of God does offer to all that are earnestly converted a most
certain promise of the remission of sins. First of al, therefore, attend to
the immovable verity of the promises of God. Whosoever they are that
acknowledging and bewailing their sins, do seek remission of them in Christ,
and conceive a firm purpose of amendment of life, to them God has promised
his grace, forgiveness of sins, and eternal life. Whosoever believes on
the Son, Ioh. 13.15 18. 1 Ioh. 5.12 Mar. 16.16
does not perish, but has life eternal. He that believes on him, is not
judged. He that has the Son, the same also has eternal life. He that
shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved. He that has promised these
things is God, whose word is more firm then heaven and earth, which is the
truth it self, 2 Timothy 2.11
which is faithful, and cannot deny himself or his word. That therefore which
God offers with indubitate promises, that must thou entertain with indubitate
faith: neither must thou pretend the infirmity of thy nature, which cannot
embrace the promises of God, with such an assurance of trust, for this fault of
thy nature must be corrected by the efficacy of the holy spirit. As thou do
not believe on CHRIST out of the strength of nature, but out of the working of
the Holy Ghost: so by the grace of the same spirit thou may be assured of
the mercy of the Heavenly Father against all doubting that is inherent in thy
deprived nature. 1 Ioh. 5.10.
He that believes not God makes him a liar. As Much as thou doubtest, so much
is diminished of thy trust, therefore thou must resist that doubting, neither
is that to be set forth under the specious name of humility: verily, Humility
ought to arise out of the consideration of our unworthiness: in the mean
time, out of the meditation of the promises of God, ought there nevertheless a
firm confidence to arise. Therefore God has comfort from the hidden seat of
his majesty, and has manifested his will in his word, that we might be sure
of his will.

Therefore, God has promulged not only legal promises, which have added unto
them the condition of perfect obedience, and therefore to us are made
unprofitable, but also Evangelical, which are free, that with firm confidence
of heart we might rely upon them. Rom 4.16
Therefore of faith freely, says the Apostle, that the promise may be firm.
Psa. 116.11
Men's promises are uncertain and doubtful, because every man is a liar, but
the promises of God are certain and immovable, because God is truth it self.
As God is true in threatenings, so is he also in promising. As without Christ
certain damnation does hang over al unbelieving impenitent persons, so in
Christ certain salvation is proposed to all that are converted unto God and
believing. Cypr. sermon. 4. de morta. pa. 209.
Do thou doubt that these things will come to pass, which God promises,
which is true, whose word is eternal and firm to them that believe. If a grave
and laudable man should promise thee any thing, thou would put trust in his
promise, neither would thou think that thou should be deceived of him
whom thou should know to be constant in his words and doings. Now God
speaks with thee, and do thou perfideously waver in thine incredulous
mind? Furthermore, attend to the stabilitie of the oath of GOD: I live, says
the Lord, Ezech. 33.11
I will not the death of a sinner, but that he may be converted and live.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, says Christ, he which hears my word, John
5.25.
and believes on him, which sent me, has life eternal, and shall not come
into condemnation, but has passed from death to life. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, if any man keep my word, he shall not see death for ever. Ioh 8.^1.
This has God said, this has he promised, if that be little, he has sworn
it: August. in Psalm. 88.
Blessed therefore we, for whose sakes God swears, but O most wretched if we
do not believe GOD then when he swears. Tertul. lib. de poeniten.
Acknowledge therefore the wonderful and never sufficiently praised mercy of
God, that he willing to show more abundantly to the heirs of the promise the
immutabilitie and immobilitie of his counsel, has added an oath, Heb. 6.71.
verse. 18.
that by two immovable things (for it cannot come to pass that God should
lie) we might have most strong comfort, which have fled to lay hold on the hope
that is set before us.

XXVII. The want of due preparation.
The Tempted.
ALL these things do easily persuade with me, that I do not doubt of the
firmenes of the promises of God in themselves: in the mean time I am yet
uncertain, whether they be so firm and immovable to me, and whether I am in
the number of them to whom God does promise and offer so great things.

The Comforter.
NAy, but because God promises these things to all that fly unto Christ with
true repentance and faith: 2 Cor. 4.13.
therefore also he promises them to thee, seeing thou also beleeuest in
Christ. Attend therefore farther to the inward sealing of the holy Ghost: for
the spirit does not only testify outwardly in the word, but also inwardly in
thine heart. Romans 8.16.
The spirit it self gives testimony to thy spirit that thou art the son of
God, Gal. 4.6.
therefore also an heir. Thou have received the spirit which is of God, that
thou may know the things which are given to thee of God. He which does
confirm and strengthen thee with all that are truly godly in Christ, and he
which has anointed thee is God: which has also signed thee, and confirmed
thee as it were, with his seal, and given the earnest of the spirit in thy
heart. Because thou art the son of God, 1 Cor. 2.12
therefore God has sent the spirit of his son into thine heart, crying, Abba
Father. Believing the word of truth, and the Gospel of salvation, thou art
sealed by the holy spirit of promise, Cap. 4.30.
which is the earnest of thine inheritance for the purchased redemption, by
which thou art sealed against the day of redemption. Even as the Bridegroom
which has given the promise of marriage to the Bride, gives her an earnest,
which is a pledge of the marriage to come: so God has espoused or betroathed
himself to thee in faith: Ose. 2.19.
he has betroathed himself to thee in mercy, Apoc. 19.7
but as yet the marriage of the Lamb does not appear: therefore he gives
unto thee the earnest of his holy spirit, by which thou may be confirmed
concerning the fulfilling of the promises, and the leading to the heavenly
marriage which is to come. This is the spirit of Adoption, because it does
witness that thou art adopted for the Son of God. This is that seal by which
the promises of God are sealed in thy heart: this is that earnest by which the
word of truth is confirmed unto thee. 1 John 4.13.
By this thou know that thou abidest in God and God in thee, because he has
given to thee of his spirit.

XXVIII. The doubting of the inhabitation of the holy Ghost.
The Tempted.
BUT from whence may I be certain that my heart is the temple and house of the
holy Ghost? the spots of sin do cleave unto me, and I feel that in my flesh
dwells no good, how therefore shall that holy Spirit, which is holiness and
purity it self dwell in me?

The Comforter.
Romans 8.23
WE receive the first fruits of the spirit only in this life, we expect the
full measure and perfect tenths hereafter in the life eternal, there remains
in this life the wrestling of the flesh and the spirit, Romans 7.14
we remain as yet in part carnal, and sold under sin; yet nevertheless,
for the benefit of regeneration and renouation, we are temples of the Holy
Ghost. Furthermore, from thence thou may know, that the Spirit of God dwells
in thee, because thou do bewail and detest thy sins, Sapi. 1.4. 2 Cor. 4.13.
because that holy Spirit dwells not in the body, subject unto sin, because
thou do believe on Christ, and love him, for it is the spirit of faith,
because thou call upon God the most benign Father with earnest sighs,
Zach. 13.9
for it is the spirit of grace and prayers, and cries in the hearts of the
godly, Gal. 4.6.
Abba Father: because thou art led with the desire of all good, for they that
are the temples of the holy Ghost, are led by him, surely to good; because thou
often times do feel a foretaste of eternal life in thy heart, Romans 8.14
for the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, Romans 14.17.
but righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost. Wherefore, if thy soul
has sometimes felt in the secret of thy conscience the spirit of the Son, Ber
in Can. sermon 8. col. 509.
crying Abba Father, let her presume that she is beloved with a fatherly
affection, when she perceiues that she is affected with the same spirit, with
which is also the son. In the spirit of the Son she may know her self to be
daughter of the Father, and the spouse and sister of the son. And although
all these things are sometime weak and languishing, yet be not out of heart,
but ask for increase of the spirit, Luke 11.13
for God will give this spirit to those that ask him. Stir up the gift, 2 Timothy
1.6
that free and gracious gift of the spirit which is in thee, that is, by
asking, by seeking, by knocking, by meditating on the word, by resisting evil
concupiscences. There is here no perfection, but a continual way to
perfection. Beside this inward seal and testimony of the holy spirit, God has
given thee the Sacraments, which are the seals of the heavenly promises, the
wagons of the benefits of Christ, bringing them unto thee, and the means of
the begetting, cherishing, and confirming of thy faith, that thou may be sure
that the benefits of Christ do pertain in special unto thee: Cypr sermon. de
mort. pa. 209.
Thou were received into the Church by baptism, and fed in the Lords Supper
with the body and blood of Christ: being confirmed by these seals, believe the
word of the Gospel surely and without all doubt. Why do thou doubt? why
do thou waver? this is that God should not altogether be, this is to offend
Christ the Master of believers, with ye sin of incredulity, this is, for him
that is placed in the Church, not to have faith in the house of faith. Attend
moreover to the infallibility of the promised hearing. God has promised even
with an oath put thereto, that he will hear our prayers, and that whatsoever we
ask according to his will shall be given unto us: Verily, verily, I say unto
you, says Christ, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, Ioh. 16.23
Mat. 18.19
he will give unto you. If two of you shall consent upon earth on any manner
of thing, whatsoever they shall ask, it shall be done to them of my Father,
which is in heaven. This is the trust which we have unto God, 1 Ioh. 5.14
if we ask according to his will, we shall obtain it. The very same which has
promised hearing, has commanded us to ask forgiveness of sins: therefore what
place of doubting will there remain of the remission of sins? how should
Christ have commanded to join to prayer the word Amen, if he would have had
us to doubt of hearing?

To conclude, attend to the property of true faith, as by which we have access
unto that grace wherein we stand, and glory of the hope of glory, Heb. 4.16.
promised of God, through which we come with trust unto the throne of grace,
that we may attain mercy, and find grace, through which we are kept by the
power of God unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.
through which we know that we are translated from death to life: 1 Ioh. 3.14
through which we are most certainly persuaded, that neither death, Romans 8.38
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
verse. 39.
nor things to come, neither height, nor depth, nor any other creature, can
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. August. in
Psalm. 148.
Weighing all these things, let thy frailty lift it self up, let it not
despair, let it not bruise it self, let it not turn it self away. Christ
has promised thee, that thou shall be there where he is. What has God
promised unto thee O mortal man? that thou shall live for ever. Do thou not
believe? believe, believe, it is more now which he has done, then what he
has promised: What has he done? he has died for thee: What has he promised?
that thou shall live with him: it is more incredible that the eternal has
died, then that the mortal can live for eternity. Now thou hold that which
is more incredible, why do thou doubt of that which remains? God has
promised thee heaven, he has given thee his Son, which is a greater gift then
heaven and earth.

XXIX. The doubting of perseverance.
The Tempted.
TRuly I do nothing doubt, but that by my Mediator Christ, there lies open to
me access to GOD; I surely trust that I am in the grace of God, yet I cannot
but doubt of perseverance. Matthew. 10.22. cap. 24. v. 46.
I know that it is perseverance alone that is crowned, I hear that they only,
which shall persevere to the end shall be saved. Not to have begun well, but to
go through well is the part of virtue. Aug. Ser. 8 ad frat. in Erem. Hiero. in
Epist. ad furiam. Theol. mist. Harp. c. 34.
Neither is the beginning but the end required in Christians. Judas began well,
but he ended ill; Paul began ill, but he ended well. Without perseverance
neither he that fights obtains victory, nor the Conqueror the palm. I
hear the ouer-seer and appointer of our masteries crying: hold that which thou
have, least another take thy crown. I hear and I fear, I fear and I doubt:
Apoc. 3.12
I doubt and I cast away the confidence of my heart.

The Comforter.
Bern. Sermon. 3. de sep. frag. miser. Col. 183.
COnsider three things ^n which thy whole hope does consist, the charity of the
adoption, the truth of the promise, the power of performance. Now let thy
foolish thought murmr as much as it will, saying? who art thou, and how great
is that glory, or by what merits hopest thou to obtain it? and do thou
answer confidently: I know whom I have believed, and I am sure that in the
abundance of his charity he has adopted me, that he is true in his promise,
that he is powerful in performance. This is the threefold cord, which is not
easily broken, which I pray thee, that thou hold firmly fast, being let down
to thee out of our Country, even into this dungeon, that it may lift thee up,
that it may draw thee even to the beholding and sight of the glory of the
great God. This is the most firm Anchor of thy hope, these are those three
pillars on which thou may rely against the floods and storms of doubtings,
that is to say, the good will of God adopting, his sure faithfulness
promising, and his infinite power to fulfill his promises. The good GOD has
promised good things, Phil. 2.13.
he has begun to work a good work in thee, he that has begun will
perform it, according to his good liking. The good GOD has promised good
things, 1 Cor. 10.15.
he that has promised is faithful and true, he will not suffer thee to be
tempted above thy strength, but will give an issue with the temptation, that
thou may be able to bear it. 2 Timothy 1.12
The good God has promised God things, he that has promised is able to
fulfill his promises, Therefore be thou sure that he can keep that which is
committed unto him, even unto that day of judgment. Ioh. 10.28 Verse. 29.
No man shall snatch the sheep of Christ out of his hands, the heavenly Father,
which has delivered them to the Son, is greater then all, and no man can
snatch them out of the hand of the Father. Ioh. 17.20


Christ the only high Priest of the new Testament has asked for all, which
were to believe on him, through the word, that they may be with him, and may
see the glory that is given to him of the heavenly Father. 1 Ioh. 5.10
Wherefore seeing thou do believe on Christ, thou have the testimony of God
in thine own self, that Christ has also asked for thee: how then can thou
doubt that that prayer is heard of the heavenly Father? Ioh. 1.18. Math. 3.17
Heb. 5.7.
Should not the Son which is in the bosom of the Father be heard of the
Father? Should the Son in whom the Father is well pleased, be put back with
his prayers? far be this away, far be it, nay rather in the days of his
flesh, offering prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears to his
Father, he was heard for the thing that he feared. Therefore Christ has asked
for thee, he has asked and has obtained, that in time to come thou may
live with him, partaker of the heavenly glory.

XXX. The sleights and strength of Satan.
The Tempted.
I Hope truly that I shall be conserved as a faithful sheep in the hand of my
Shepherd, yet in the mean time I fear the lying in wait of Satan, 1 Pet.
5.8.
which like the infernal Lion compasses, seeking whom he may devour; I
fear his strength, seeing he is an enemy, in boldness most ready, in
strength most strong, in sleights most cunning, in diligence and swiftness
infatigable, most full of all devices, most quick and nimble in the knowledge
of fighting: how shall I be able to take heed of his snares, and to escape his
strength? Sometimes he does impugn and persecute me openly and violently,
sometimes hiddenly and fraudulently, but always maliciously and cruelly.

The Comforter.
Ioh. 10.28
NO man (says Christ) shall snatch my sheep out of my hands: therefore
neither that infernal Wolf, although he be every way furnished with sleights
and strength. Ioh. 14.29
The Prince of this world came, and he had not any thing in Christ: therefore
neither in them, which are by faith in Christ, and in whose hearts Christ
dwells by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
shall he have any thing at all. It is Christ, which fights for thee, and in
thee, believe, believe, the Devil shall not be stronger then he. Math. 4.2.
Christ was tempted of the Devil, and overcame him valiantly, the victory of
the Lord is the triumph of the servants. Heb. 2.14.
By his death Christ has destroyed him which had the power of death, that is,
the Devil: he has spoiled the Principalities, and has made a show of the
powers, openly, confidently, Col. 2.15.
triumphing over them in himself: as it were an heavenly David, he has
overcome the infernal Goliath, with the sword of the Cross: this fight of
Christ, this victory is healthful to the whole Church, whereof this is the
Song of conquest and triumphant verse. Apoc. 12.10.
Now is there made salvation and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the
power of his Christ: because the accuser of our brethren is cast forth, which
did accuse them, before the sight of our GOD, day and night. Verse. 11.
And they have overcome him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their
testimony. Iac. 4.7.
Therefore let all the assurance of thy trust, and boasting of thy hope, be in
this victory of Christ. Resist the Devil in the power of Christ, and he will
fly away from thee: Ber. in meditatio deuotis. c. 14. Col. 1205.
As often as thou resistest, thou ouercommest the Devil, thou make glad the
Angels, thou glorifiest God; for he exhorts thee to fight, he helps thee to
overcome he beholds thee striving in the battle, he lifts thee up when thou
do faint, he crowns thee when thou do overcome: Gregor. Nyssen. li. de
Beatit. p. 68. Ephesians. 6.10.
he is the Chiefetaine and Governor of those that strive, and the Crown of
those that do triumph. Be thou strengthened therefore in the Lord, and in the
power of his might. Put on the whole Armor of God, Verse. 11. Verse. 12. Verse.
13. Verse. 14. Verse. 15. Verse. 16. Verse. 17.
that thou may be able to stand against the assaults of the Devil. For thou
wrastlest not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against
powers, and against the worldly governors, the Princes of the darkness of
this world, against spiritual wickednesses, which are in high places. For this
cause take unto thee the whole armor of GOD, that thou may be able to
resist in the evil day, and having finished all things, stand fast, Stand
therefore and thy loins girded about with verity, and having on the
breastplate of righteousness, and thy feet shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of peace. Above all things take the shield of faith, wherewith thou
may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, and take the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. In this
armor come forth to the single fight, and thou shall return most surely
conqueror; Christ has fought and overcome for thee, he will fight and
overcome in thee, he will put upon thee the crown of glory.

XXXI. The Apostacy of many.
The Tempted.
But how many Soldiers of Christ could I reckon, which being circumuented by
the craft of the Devil, have returned out of this battle not Conquerours, but
conquered? How many could I number which have begun well, but afterward have
fallen again from the grace of God, and the reward of eternal life? I fear
therefore the hidden counsels of God; and considering his secret judgments, I
do wholly tremble in soul and boby.

The Comforter.
TRuly thou do well, Phil. 2.12.
that thou workest out thy salvation with fear and trembling, in acknowledging
the infirmity of thy flesh, and the power of Satan that lays wait for thee,
as also by beholding narrowly the examples of those, which sliding into sins,
have fallen from salvation; yet take heed, that thou do not so observe thine
own infirmity and other men's falls, and backe-sliding, that thou do not
with-all have respect to Gods mercy and power to hold thee up, and make thee to
stand: I will show thee therefore what thou shall do. Be thou sure in the
spirit of the gift of perseverance, and the reward of eternal life, that
notwithstanding thou become not thereby carnally secure. The infallible
promises of God do free thee from doubting: the exhortations and comminations
of God do free thee from carnal security. There is security no where in
this life, but in the hope of the promises of God alone. August. in Psalm 94.
Id. 2. de bono persevere. c. 13.
In this life which wholly is a tentation upon earth, he that seems to stand,
let him take heed, least he fall: therefore those that will not persevere, are
mingled by the most provident counsel of God with those which shall persevere,
that we may learn to be not loftily wise, but agreeing with the humble, and
work out our salvation with fear and trembling. Therefore with one eye of
thine heart behold the mercy of God, but with the other the justice of God:
out of the faithful beholding of the mercy of God, let there arise in thine
heart the confidence of perseverance; out of the fear of the justice of God,
let there arise in it the flight of carnal security. Let the fear of God
wound thy flesh, least the love of sinful flesh deceive thee. Psa. 147.11
The delight of the Lord is in them that fear him, and hope in his mercy. Let
the inward man hope and trust, let the outward man fear and tremble.

XXXII. The doubting of the writing in the Book of life.
The Tempted.
THey alone do persevere and receive the Crown of perseverance, which are
written in the Book of life. But how may I know that I am written in that
Book?

The Comforter.
Apoc. 13.8 cap. 21.27.
THat Book of life is Christ, from whence it is called the Book of life of the
Lamb. The writing into this Book of life is nothing else but the election of
the believers in Christ to eternal life. Ephesians. 1.5. Apoc. 17.8
For even as the faithful are said to be chosen in Christ before the
foundations of the world were laid, so their names are said to be written in
the book of life, from the beginning of the world. Therefore we must judge as
of election, so also of the writing into the Book of life, not from that which
goes before, but from that which follows after. Bern. Sermon. 1. Septuag.
There are manifest signs and tokens of salvation given, so that it is without
all doubt that he is of the number of the chosen in whom those signs shall
remain. For as many as are elected from eternity to life, they do hear the
word of salvation in time, they believe on Christ, they show forth the fruits
of the spirit, they persevere in faith. 1 Ioh. 5.10
He therefore which believes on the Son, has the testimony of God in
himself, for the holy Ghost does testify in the heart of believers, that they
are the Sons of God, Romans 8.16.
and written into the Book of life. Those whom God has predestined from
eternity, Luke 10.20 Romans 8.29
and whose names he has written in heaven, those does he call in time by the
word, and justify by true faith on Christ; that faith shows it self forth by
true invocation of God, by patience in the Cross, by the study of holiness.
Therefore let the holy and wholesome meditation of election and the Book of
life, begin from the wounds of Christ hanging on the Cross, he that believes
on him, and perseueres in faith, is justified and written into the Book of the
living. Romans 10.9
Have thou not been received by Baptism into the covenant of grace, washed
with the blood of Christ from thy sins, regenerated and renewed by the holy
Ghost? This is an evident sign, that thou art written into the book of life.
Gal. 3.26.27.
For we are all the Sons of God by faith, seeing as many as are baptized have
put on Christ. How comes it to pass that falling into sin, out of
infirmity after Baptism thou have not been bruised? Sauanar. in Psalm. 31.
who has put under his hand? who has received thee again into grace? who but
the Lord? This is a great sign of thine election, the elect when he shall fall
shall not be bruised. God has written not the Tables of the destinies, or the
decrees of Rhadamantus, but the Book of life, when he chose us in Christ
before the foundations of the world were laid. Therefore seek in Christ, by
faith, the election of thee to life, and writing of thee into the Book of
life: walk by faith, that thou may come to predestination. Ex Aug. Lom.
6.1. sent. did. 41. D.
They which rashly, and without the limits of the word do search the depth of
God, are plunged at length over head and ears into the deep.

XXXIII. The fear of Death.
The Tempted.
IT is good for me to clean unto Christ, I will not let him depart out of my
heart before he bless me. I have decreed with true faith to persevere in
Christ, that it may be my lot to reign together with him. In the mean time I
confess that I am not yet free from all terror of death, neither do I feel
so great strength and help of the Spirit, that with the Apostle I desire
ardently to be dissolved.

The Comforter.
Indeed this is the infirmity of our flesh, and property of our corrupt
nature that we are more desirous of this life fading, then of the life to come
that is not flitting: Hence comes that fear and terror of death, which that
thou may overcome by the power of the spirit, and may grow in the
strength of the inner man, weigh those things diligently, which I shall propose
unto thee out of the storehouse of the heavenly truth. First, Math. 10.30. Job.
14.5.
it is certain that even the hairs of our heads are under an account with
God, the number of our months is appointed of him, he has set us down a
bound, which we can by no means pass, a^ our days were written in his
Book, Psa. 139.5.
before any one of them was. Therefore good reason thou should rest thy
self in this fatherly will of God; of his grace he gave thee life, he brought
thee forth wonderfully out of the close places of thy Mothers belly, as long as
he would have thee to be in life, he has kept thee safe and sound from a
thousand dangers; he does now ask again the soul, which heretofore he has
given thee, surely he does not take away that which is thine, but he asks
again that which is his own; now what action can there lie against him, which
asks for that again which he has lent? Furthermore, the soul which he does
require of thee, he does translate into the joys of the heavenly Paradise,
and will restore the same again to the body in the time to come, adorned with
greater glory; and with more shining gifts. That body which is reposed into the
Chamber of the grave, shall in time to come be a far more glorious, worthy,
and precious habitation for thy soul. 1 Cor. 15.42. Verse. 43. Verse. 44.
It is sown in corruption, it rises again in incorruption. It is sown in
dishonor, it shall rise again in glory. It is sown in weakness, it shall
rise again in power* It is sown a natural body, and it shall ris^ again a
spiritual body. Therefore commend humbly and readily thy soul created of God,
redeemed of his Son, and made the habitation of the holy Ghost, into the
faithful hands of God, as it were a certain pledge, saying with David and
Stephen, nay, rather with Christ thy head: Into thy hands I commend my spirit,
Psa. 31.6. Act. 7.59. Luke 23.46
thou have redeemed me, O God of truth. Note this also that in the very agony
of death thou may most surely promise to thy self the presence and help of
God; for seeing thou do embrace Christ thy Mediator with a true faith,
being most certainly persuaded, that with his death he has overcome thine,
and has restored unto thee righteousness and immortal life by his
resurrection, Romans 5.1.
therefore justified by this faith, thou have peace with God, and thou may
be raised up in the midst of death by the help of thy heavenly Father, Job.
13.15. Psa. 91.15.
that thou may say with Job: Although the Lord shall kill me, yet will I
trust in him. I am with him in trouble, says the Lord, I will deliver him, and
I will glorify him; with length of days will I fill him, and show him my
salvation. Romans 8.39
From this love of God, neither life, nor death, neither any creature shall be
able to separate or to pull thee away, seeing it is in Jesus Christ, which is a
king eternal, and our Savior for ever. The accusation of the law makes the
shape of death terrible, that I say, and the deformity of sin, 1 Cor. 15.55.
and the tentation of being everlastingly cast away, seeing the sting of death
is sin, the strength of sin is the law: but call to thy memory the
consolation which is before opposed to these monsters, and all that outward
hope of death, terrible to be beheld, will vanish, and will be changed into a
most pleasant sleep.

XXXIIII. The sting of Death.
The Tempted.
BY sin death has entered into the world, and is the due wages of sin, how
therefore should I not be sore afraid of death?

The Comforter.
TRuly, death in it self, and by it self, is the wages of sin, and the
revenging scourge of the angry God, but to those that believe in Christ it is
changed into a most sweet sleep. For although the regenerate and those that
believe in Christ, do as yet carry about the relics of sin in their flesh,
from whence also their body is dead, Romans 8.10
that is to say, subject to death for the sin that dwells in it, yet the
spirit is life for righteousness, that is, because they are justified from
sins by true says in Christ, and resist the lusts of the flesh through the
spirit, therefore that sin which yet remains in the flesh is not imputed
unto them, Gregor. Nyssen. in orat. de mort.
but is covered with the shadow of the grace of God: therefore by death the
true and spiritual life of the soul does not dye in them, but does rather
begin, to which death is constrained, as it were, to do the office of a
Midwife. Thence flow those most sweet appellations by which the holy Ghost,
which is the spirit of truth, does describe the death of the godly: for they
which before the eyes of fools do seem, and of them are said to dye, the
holy Ghost says, Genesis 25.8. Cap. 35.29. Cap. 49.33 Tertull. lib. de patient.
p. 12. Cyprian. de mortal. p. ^^4. Chry. hom. 45. in Genesis Col. 375. Hilar in
Psalm. 140. Ambr. de boum. ort. cap. 10. 2 Pet. 1.15
that they are gathered or congregated to their people, that is, to the company
of the blessed and triumphing Church in Heaven, to come to those which have
deceased before them in the true faith, or rather have gone before them. It is
but the taking of a journey, which we think to be death, it is not an end, but
a passage; it is not so much an emigration, as a transmigration from worse
things to better, a taking away of the soul, and a most blessed carrying of it
from place to place, not an abolishing, for the soul is taken away and
transposed into a place of rest, it is not killed up. It is a passage and
ascension to the true life. It is an outgoing, because by it the godly pass
out of the slavery of sin to true liberty, even as heretofore the Israelites
out of the bondage of Egypt into the promised Land.

Ioh. 5 24. Esa. 57.2.
The godly are said by death to come to peace, and to rest in their chambers,
that is, because they come out of that daily warfare upon earth to a place of
peace: out of the most troublesome sea of this life to the haven: out of the
most laborious prison of this life to a place of rest: Phil. 1.23.
they are said to be loosed and to come to Christ: seeing they are led out of
the Inn of this present life, to the heavenly Country, and out of the dregs
of wicked men, to the most blessed society of Christ in Heaven: they are
loosed by death out of the bands of the body: for even as the Cattle when they
have discharged the labors of the whole day, at last about the evening are set
free, and even as they which are bound in prison, are loosed of their fetters:
so the godly are led forth by death from the said yoke of the labors and
sorrows of this life, and out of the filthy prison of sin, Heb. 11.5. 2 Cor.
5.8.
and by a most sweet translation are carried to a better life. They are said to
go forth of the land of their pilgrimage by the dissolution of the tabernacle
of their body, and to be present with the Lord, and that because they come out
of the ruinous habitation of the world to the heavenly palace, out of an house
of clay to a city made without hands, eternal in the heavens, out of the
tabernacle of an earthly body, to the heavenly Jerusalem, and the most blessed
society of Christ abiding therein.

It is his property therefore to fear death, which would not go to Christ:
Cypr. seru^. demortal. pa. 208.
It is his property not to be willing to go to Christ, which does not believe
to begin to reign with Christ. They are said to rest from their labors, for
not the man, but the misery of a godly man dies. If this life be full of
burden, Caeciliae vox. Ambros. de bono mortis. cap. 2. 1 Cor. 15.38.
then the end is the ease thereof: but death is a good ease, but death is an
end, death therefore is good. They are said to be sowed into the earth, or field
of the Lord by death and burial, seeing the bodies of the godly, as it were,
precious grains of Wheat shall again bud forth hereafter to life.

Stigeliu^.
This Corneth immortal glory of the flesh,
Does show from liueles body springing fresh,
Under the clods is cast the saplesse seed,
Of which a man would think could nothing breed:
Yet this does rise by hidden motion growing,
Increased in strength and body from the sowing:
Likewise our bodies laid in hollow grave,
Thence rising, lasting life and glory have,
First drowned in death, now life's true badge they wear,
And before God eternal bliss do share.
The bones of the godly shall bud forth and flourish in the time to come, Esa.
66.14. 2 Reg. 7.12 Esa. 26.20. Dan. 12.2. Matt. 9.24. Ioh. 11.11 1 Cor. 15.6. 1
Thessal. 4.13.
when the spring of the life eternal shall begin: finally, they are said to
slumber and to sleep a certain sweet sleep, for even as in sleep we rest from
labor, we gather our dejected strength, the soul in the mean time
exercising her operations: so by death being lead to rest from all the labors
and sorrows of this life, we gather new strength of mind and body, to
execute those works more readily and perfectly, to which we were in the
beginning created and redeemed by Christ, the soul in the mean time living
and rejoicing in Heaven. Even as in sleep we do not care what is done about
us, neither are we troubled with the troubles of humane businesses: so they
that are godlily dead in the Lord do rest from all care and trouble, neither
are they further subject to the evils of this life. Even as we are again
raised up out of sleep, so death shall not be a perpetual sleep, but the
hour will come, in which we shall hear the voice of Christ calling us out of
the grave, and we shall come forth again to life. August. ser. 44. de ver.
Dom.
No man does so easily raise up one that lies upon his bed, as Christ the dead
out of his grave. Out of al which it clearly appears how truly the Apostle
has called the death of the godly advantage, Phil. 1.21.
seeing it is advantage to have escaped the increase of sin: it is advantage
to have avoided worse things: it is advantage to pass to better. The death of
the godly is precious in the sight of the Lord, Psa. 116.15.
and to them it is good for rest, better for security, best of all for
blessedness.

XXXV. The sorrows of Death.
The Tempted.
I Fear not death but the sorrows of death; for I have often seen the eyes
of dying men waxing dim, their ears waxing deaf, their tongue waxing
stiff: I have seen the sweat and anxitie, the horror and nakedness of men
that dye: I have oftentimes heard the howling and complaint of the soul,
compelled to go forth of the house of the body.

The Comforter.
THose that believe in Christ are kept from those sorrows of death, or surely
the sorrows are mittigated unto them. Christ has taken upon himself that
which was most bitter in our death, that is to say, the sense and feeling of
the wrath of God: Exodus 15.25. John 5 51.
let us cast the wood of the Cross, on which Christ dyed for us, into our
death, and behold, it will be unto us a pleasant sleep. Verily, verily, I say
unto you, says Christ, if any man keep my word he shall not see death for
ever: that is to say, he shall not only not see eternal death, but also
neither that cruel and horrible shape of temporal death. And if so be some
small taste of bitterness be offered unto us out of the cup of death, what and
how little is that in respect of that brook, of which Christ drank for us in
the way of this life? Psalm. 110.7.
how little is that small draught to be esteemed in respect of that cup, which
the heavenly Father has offered unto Christ to be drunk up wholly in our
steed? Mat. 26.42.
Our death is as it were a certain medicinable purgation of the soul and of
the body, The saying of Methodius.
seeing by it the poison of sin is as it were, purged out of our flesh, what
marvel is it, if some Aloes be mixed with this purgation? Our death is the
midwife to eternal life, what marvel is it if the same happen unto us, which
happens to an infant borne into the world out of the narrow places of his
Mothers womb, which must in part bear the sorrows of travel. There is no
birth without all grief: that sharp fit will endure but a short moment, and
behold the day of our deeth will be the birthday of eternal life. Narrow is
that gate which leads us to life, what marvel is it if we feel some trouble
in the going out thereof? Mich. 2.13
Christ is our Captain, and he that has broken up the way for us, he lays
open the journey before us, we must cleave unto him by true faith, that we may
pass through the gate of death together with him, and find the way to
eternal life, known unto him. Sin does as yet dwell in our flesh, Psa. 16.11
what marvel is it, if for the remainder of sin we are constrained to
suffer some sorrows of death? Romans 5.1. Ephesians. 2.14.
In the mean time our conscience has peace in Christ, which is our true
peace, which rising again from the dead, has brought to us the gift of peace.
There remains no dart to Death, by which it may wound our soul, it fastens
his teeth in our heel, but the poison is taken away from it of Christ, that it
cannot power it into us, together with the teeth that it has fastened.

XXXVI. Too timely Death.
The Tempted.
ME thinks I am called back too timely out of this life, Psalm. 102.25. Psa.
58.23.
God snatcheth me away in the midst of my days, I fear therefore least this
be a sign of the wrath of God, seeing it is written: men of blood and deceit
shall not live out half their days.

The Comforter.
NOthing is too timely with GOD, which is ripe. Long life truly is the gift of
God, yet short life is not always a token of the wrath of GOD, seeing GOD
sometimes also commands the godly, and those that are beloved of him to depart
timely out of the house of this world, that being freed from the danger of
sinning, they may be set into the security of not sinning, neither be
constrained to have experience of public calamities oft-times more grievous
then death it self. Esa. 26.20.
The people of GOD goes, and enter into their Chambers, they shall shut the
doors upon them, they are hidden for a moment, till the indignation pass away.
Esa. 57.1.
The just man perishes, and there is no man that considers in his heart: the
merciful men are taken away, and there is none which does understand. Verse. 2.
The just man is taken away from the face of evil: peace shall come unto him,
he that walks uprightly, Sap 4.7.
shall rest in his Chamber. The just man although he be prevented by death,
shall be in refreshing: Verse. 8.
For reverend old age stands not in the length of days, neither is it
reckoned in the number of years. Verse. 9.
The understanding of a man is his gray hairs, and old age is the undefiled
life. Verse. 10.
He pleased GOD, and was beloved, and living amongst sinners, he was
translated. He was taken away least wickedness should change his
understanding, Verse. 11.
and least fayning should deceive his soul. Verse. 12.
For wickedness by bewitching obscureth the things that are good, and the
unsteadfastness of concupiscence peruerteth the simple mind. Verse. 13.
Though he was soon dead, yet fulfilled he much time, for his soul pleased
GOD, Verse. 14.
therefore hasted he to take him away from wickedness.

The dry unhappy Tree which yields no fruit,
Is hewn down, and falling does condemn
Her barren boughs, they spare the fruitful Tree:
The Law of Heauen's contrary.
Therefore the godly man dies well, whether he die in a good age, or in the
first flower of his youth. Sph. Philos c. 36. p. 411.
What other thing is our life, but strife? What is our carcass, but a grave?
What is our body, but bonds? What is our generation, but a thrusting forth
into the earth? Will thou take it in evil part that thou art timely freed from
these evils and bonds? By how much the more timely the heavenly General does
call thee back out of the station of this life, by so much the sooner does he
place thee into a place of rest, peace and victory.

XXXVII. Services farther due to the Church.
The Tempted.
I Might in my place by mine endeavor, such as it is for the time to come
further profit the Church of God, for this end therefore I could wish, that the
space of a longer life might be granted unto me.

The Comforter.
ALL this must be commended to Gods disposing, that is, how long God will have
thee to remain in health and life for the Ministry of his Church. The words
of Ambrose at his death, as mentions Posidon, in the life of August. C. 27.
Phil. 1.23.
Say therefore with that old Doctor of the Church, and well-deseruing Bishop. I
have not so lived that I am ashamed to live amongst you, neither yet do I
fear to die because we have a good Lord. He that has furnished thee with
the gifts of teaching for the profit of his Church, knows also to furnish
others with the same. Therefore if thou art straightned with the Apostle, that
thou know not which of these two thou should choose: having a desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ, which is better for thee, or to abide in the
flesh, which is more profitable for the Church; know that to die is advantage
to thee, but to live is profit to the Church. Romans 14.7
No man of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself. For whether we
live, we live to the Lord, (to the end that we may gain more souls to him in
the Church) or whether we dye, we dye to the Lord (that we may obey his
fatherly will, calling us out of our station) whether therefore we live, or
whether we dye, we are the Lords (that most gentle and mighty Lord, Verse. 8.
from whose love neither life nor death can separate us. Thou have hitherto
obeyed the will of the Lord, most faithfully spending thy services on the
Church; obey him further, most readily embracing his will that calls thee to
the society of the Church triumphant. Thou art rightly careful out of
charity for the increase of the Church, notwithstanding thou ought out of
faith to commit the care of governing and conseruing the Church to God. There
is nothing here more wholesome, nothing better, nothing more conformable to
piety then for a man to resign himself wholly to the will of God, and to
commend the full power of disposing of our life and death to him with godly
prayers. Bern. in meditat de votiss. c. 6. Col. 1196. Psa. 37.5.
One of these two things we may undoubtedly hope for, either he will give us
that which we ask, or that which he knows to be more profitable. Commend thy
way to the Lord, and hope in him, and he will do it.

XXXVIII. Shortness of life drawn on by our own accord, or our life abridged
by our own default.
The Tempted.
I Fear least that I have made my life shorter by my sins, how then can I
hope for the presence and help of God in death? they that are guilty of their
own death, shall not find a better life after death.

The Comforter.
AYe, but that is to be understood of them which out of impatience lay violent
hands upon themselves, and compel their soul to go out of the house of their
body against the will of GOD, far be such a purpose from thy piety; August.
1. de ciu. Dei. ^^.26.
for it is lawful for no man to bring upon himself voluntary death, as it
were desiring to escape temporal troubles, least he fall into the everlasting;
this is lawful for no man for other men's sins, least he begin to have this
most heavy sin his own, whom other men's sins did not pollute: this is
lawful for no man for sins past, for which he has more need of this life,
that by repentance they may be healed: this is lawful for no man for the
desire of a better life, which is expected after death, because they that are
guilty of their own death, shall not find a better life after death. But if
thy mind be troubled with those thoughts, that thou have made thy life shorter
by immoderate use of meat or drink, or by any other disorder, bewail this
with earnest sighs, and place all thy trust on Christ's merit, conceiving
firmly a purpose of a better life, and GOD will be merciful to thine
iniquities, which has promised pardon of all their offenses to them that truly
repent. Manasses a man of blood had broken off the thread of his life, yet
earnestly repenting he has obtained the glory of the eternal life. Luke 23.41
The Thief on the Cross had received things worthy of his doing, yet being
earnestly converted unto God, he entered into Paradise with Christ. Genesis 3.15.
And had not our first Parents drawn death upon themselves and all their
posterity, nevertheless embracing that Evangelical promise of the bruiser of
the Serpents head, they were lifted up again by quickening consolation. The
word of Ambrose to Theodosius the Emperor.
Wherefore if thou have followed these in their sins, follow them also
repenting with tears. The hand of God is not yet shortened, neither has his
mercy failed in the number of years: the gate of indulgence is not yet
shalt, seeing there is yet granted a time of repentance.

XXXIX. The love of this life.
The Tempted.
I Could wish that I might yet enjoy a more lasting use of this life, and the
profits thereof. I could wish that I might possess yet longer the blessings of
God granted unto me in this life.

The Comforter.
TAke heed that thou do not make it manifest by the inordinate love of this
life, that thou do not truly love the chiefest good. Anselm. de mensura
crucis lit. E.
So do we owe our whole heart to the love of God, that whatsoever is given
thereof to another, is withdrawn from God. He loves God the less which loves
any thing with him, which he loves not for him. Thy heart is a vessel, but it
is full of the love of the world, therefore there is no place for the true love
of God to enter: power out the love of the world, that the love of God may
enter. What does this present life so much delight thee, which is wholly a
dangerous and hard warfare? What other thing is it to live long, then long to
be tormented, Cypria. Sermon. de mortal. page 215.
and long to sin? If in the house of thy dwelling, the walls should shake
for age, the roof above thee tremble, the house being now wearied, and
fainting under the buildings that slide down with age, should threaten a ruin
near at hand, would thou not go forth with all have? If while thou were
sailing, a troublesome and stormy tempest, the waves being raised up by the
force of the wind, should fore-shew shipwreck to come, would thou not make
toward the haven with all have? Behold, the world shakes and slides away, and
testifies the ruin of it self, not now by the old age, but by the end of
things, and do not thou give God thanks, do thou not rejoice on thine
own behalf, that being taken away with a more timely end, thou art saved from
ruins, shipwrackes, and imminent plagues? Ambros. in ca^ 8. ad Romans
Even as the Sea stirred up by contrary storms does rise, and makes a
tempest to those that sail: so the world being stirred by the conspiracy of
the treacherous, does trouble the minds of the faithful, and the enemy
deals so peruersely, that we are ignorant what we should first shun. For
if power does cease to be against us, he stirs the minds of private men; If
these be appeased, he blows up a combustion by those of our own house. And
if this also be allayed, by his cunning he makes discord between brethren
themselves, so that the house being shaken at the four corners, one some part
begins to fall: wherefore with one consent Christians must fly hence. For they
ought to follow the example of the holy man, Simeon.
which knowing that they do here wage war against treachery, required that
he might be let to depart in peace. Surely this life appears to be a precious
Nut outwardly, but if it be opened with the knife of truth, there will be found
nothing in it, but vanity and emptiness. If there be any good in this life,
that is eminently, nay incomparably better in that other. That is in faith,
this in fight; that in the time of peregrination, this in the eternity of
mansion: that is in labor, this is in rest: that is in the way, this in the
Country: August. trac. vlt. in Ioh.
that is in the work of action, this in the reward of contemplation: that
declines from evil, and does good, this has none evil from which it may
decline, and it has great good, which it may enjoy: that fights with the
enemy, this reigns without an enemy: that is valiant in adversity, this
feels no adversity: that bridles carnal lusts, this spends the time in
spiritual delights: that is troubled with the care of ouercomming, this is
secure in the peace of victory: that is helped in tentations, this without any
tentation rejoices in the helper himself: that helps the needy, this is
there where it finds none needy: that forgiues other men's sins, that her
own may be pardoned unto her, this neither suffers that which she may
forgive, nor does that which she may require to be forgiven unto her: That is
scourged with evils, least it should be lifted up with prosperity, this in so
great fullness of grace wants all evil, that without any tentation of pride it
may cleave to the chiefest good: That discernes good and evil, this sees those
things which are only good. Choose therefore which is to be preferred before
other. Lay aside the inordinate desire of the fading life, least thou leese the
inheritance of the abiding. So hold those things which are of this world, that
notwithstanding thou be not held by them: Let the earthly substance be possessed
of thee, but let it not possess thee: Let that which thou have be under the
dominion of thy mind, least thy mind, while it is overcome with the love of
earthly, be it self more possessed of the things themselves. Cypria. Sermon. de
morta.
Why do thou not make have to better things? Now heavenly things succeed
earthly, and great things the small, and eternal things the perishing.

XL. The separation from Wife, Children, and Kinsfolks.
The Tempted.
I Must leave my most sweet children; I must leave my most faithful wife; I
must leave my most pleasant kinsfolks; who shall provide for my wife and
children? who will be their defender and Patron?

The Comforter.
IT is God which calls himself the Father of Orphans, Psa. 68.6.
and the defender of widows, commend them to his Patronage and defense. God
which is thy God, Gen 17.
will also be the GOD of thy seed. Thy children are not thine only, but they
are also Gods, nay they are more Gods then thine, seeing he has bestowed more
things upon them, can thou therefore doubt of the fatherly care of God
toward them? The Prophet of the Lord does testify, that he has been young,
and also old, Psa. 37.25
yet never did he see the righteous forsaken, or his seed to beg their bread.
Psa. 112.2
The generation of the righteous shall be blessed at length. God has promised
to thy children the heavenly treasures, he will not suffer them, believe me,
to perish for hunger. He has given them life, he will not deny them the
maintenance of life: he has given the^ a body, that which he has wonderfully
framed, he will also kindly sustain. But take heed, that thou be not so
careful for the bodily safety of thy wife and children, that in the mean time
thou neglect the care of thy soul. Luke 14.26
If any man come to me, says Christ, and does not hate his Father, and Mother,
and Wife, and Children, and Brothers, and Sisters, yea and his own soul, he
cannot be my Disciple: Matthew. 10.37.
that he expounds elsewhere so: He that loves Father or Mother more then
me, is not worthy of me: and he that loves son or daughter more then me, is
not worthy of me. Behold God calls thee by death, take heed thou do not so
love thy wife and children, that therefore thou refuse to follow God, calling
thee, with a ready heart. The love of the heavenly Father must be preferred
before the love of children; Ambro. in cap. 12. p. 111. Bern. Sermon. 26. in
Cant. Col. 569. August. Epist. 6. ad Vid.
the love of our Bridegroom Christ must be set before the love of wife, the
benefit must not more be loved then the benefactour. What shall I speak of
kinsmen? if thou leauest those that are dear, thou shall receive them
hereafter more dear. For we do hope on a most faithful promise, that when
we go out of this life, whence being to depart, we have not lost, but sent
before, some of ours, that are departed: we shall come to that life, where by
how much they shall be better known of us, so much they shall be dearer unto
us, and without the fear of any dissension, amiable. If thy kinsmen be dear
unto thee, let Christ be deerer, which is thy brother. If it be a pleasant
thing to be here conversant with thy kinsmen, Heb. 12.22
let it be more pleasant unto thee, that thou come to the mount Sion, ^er.
23.
and City of the living God the heavenly Jerusalem, and to the company of
innumerable Angels, and to the congregation of the first borne, which are
written in heaven, and to God, the judge of all, and to the spirits of just and
perfect men.

XLI. The stopping up of the ears in Death.
The Tempted.
I Fear lest that my ears waxing deaf in the agony of death, I shall be
destituted of all consolation of heart, and too much vexed with the terrors of
Satan.

The Comforter.
THe inward comfort of the spirit is of greater force then all outward
consolations. Romans 8.16
The holy spirit gives testimony to our spirit that we are the sons of God:
the same spirit does raise up our spirit, when we begin to wrestle with
death, and to be troubled in heart, for he is the true and greatest comforter.
Ioh. 15.26
When thine eyes wax dim in death, the holy Ghost will give unto thee the
true illumination of the heart: when thine ears wax deaf in death, he will
give unto thee the quickening consolation of the soul. Where man's consolation
shall cease, there Gods consalation will begin. Behold the examples of the
Martyrs, how prompt and ready they were to the most exquisite punishments: the
wheels seemed to them Roses: the sparks of fire spiritual bracelets: the
iron chains, golden crowns, the torments, ornaments, the two edged swords,
beams of the heavenly light: who has wrought this in their hearts, who has
comforted them in sorrows but the holy Ghost? His consolation is of greater
force then the accusation of the whole world; yea, of the prince of the world.
What? Do thou think that the holy Ghost does only lift up our hearts in
the course of this life, and does idly rest in the agony of death? Do thou
think that the habitation of the holy Ghost is destroyed, Gal. 2.20.
when the tabernacle of the body is destroyed? Ephesians. 3.2.
Christ lives in thee, and dwells by faith in thy heart, grace is powered out in
his lips, in the fragrancy of this grace, he will make glad thine heart, Psalm.
45 9.
although thine hearing perish: his speech will ^ierce to thine heart, although
the doors of thine ears be shut. Esa. 61.1.
The spirit of the Lord is upon him, the Lord has anointed him to preach the
Gospel to the afflicted, he has sent him to bind up the broken in heart, to
preach freedom to the captives, and opening of prison to those that are bound.
Esa. 50 4.
The Lord has given unto him a learned tongue, that he may know to comfort
and sustain the afflicted in a seasonable time. Clean to him with firm
confidence of thy heart, commend thy self to him with godly prayers, he will
comfort thee in the seasonable time, he will raise up thine heart with the word
of the Gospel, when the arrows of death are fastened in it, he will bind up
thy heart, when the wounds of death are inflicted on it, he will preach
deliverance to thy heart, when thou art led captive of death, as it were, a
pray, he will preach opening to thy heart, when thou art thrust into the prison
of death.

XLII. The apparent in utility of Redemption.
IF Christ has redeemed us from death, why must I as yet dye? How shall death
be overcome by Christ, when he shows his daily prays, as it were the
trophies of his victory?

The Comforter.
EVen as Christ has saved his people from their sins, Mat 11.21
not that sin may no more dwell in their flesh, seeing in this life they
remain sold under sin, but that he may not condemn them for everlasting,
as being regenerate and believing: so also he has redeemed us from death,
Romans 8.10
not that we should not any more be subject to temporal death, seeing that our
body is dead, or subject unto death for sin, but that we might be free from
the bands of eternal death. The death of the soul is the true death, from
this Christ has redeemed us, sustaining the punishment for us. Sweet Jesus
has also made temporal death it self sweet unto us, that it is death in name
alone, but in very deed sleep, nay the end of death, and the beginning of true
life. Those that are truly godly do dye daily, 1 Cor. 15.24.
by reason of those continual calamities, by which they are oppressed in this
life, therefore their death is the end of death: but by the gate of death they
pass to a quiet and eternal life, Ose. 13.14.
therefore their death is the beginning of true life.

The death of Christ is the poison of our death, although therefore this poison
has not altogether killed our death, for it does as yet move it self and
fastens his dart in our heel, yet this poison is gone to the heart of death,
it will come to pass therefore, 1 Cor. 15.26
that at length, by the force thereof, it dye: death is that last enemy, whom
Jesus Christ at length in the last day shall utterly destroy, Luke 11.22
and coming upon this strong armed man with greater strength shall take away
powerfully from him all his pray. Death must be beheld with spiritual eyes,
and it will appear that his wrath is but vain, without strength, as being
captiuated and overcome of Christ. It lays snares for the life of the godly,
and behold, it brings them to the true life. It attempts to kill their soul
and body with his darts, and behold the soul being tree and without hurt of
all wound of death, the body alone is wounded, which same also in the time to
come shall be snatched out of the Jaws of death. It endeauours to deliver the
godly to eternal death, and behold, it delivers them to eternal life.

LXIII. The horror of the Dust.
The Tempted.
Whatsoever it be I see that I must be laid down into the earth, and be
brought to dust. A bed shall be made for my body in the grave; therefore have I
said to corruption, Thou art my Father, and to the worms, Job 17.14.
ye are my Mother and my Sister.

The Comforter.
Do not regard that dust and ashes into which thou art to be brought, but
regard that future resurrection out of the dust and ashes, which we expect by
faith. If thou have said with Job, to corruption that it is thy Father, say
with the same, that thy redeemer lives, Job 19.25
which in the last day shall raise thee up again out of the earth, shall
compass thee about with thy skin, that in thy flesh thou may see thy God.
The sayings of the Scriptures, the moments of arguments, and the examples of
those that were raised again, do prove this blessed resurrection of our
bodies. The sayings of the Scriptures in the old and new Testament are in a
readiness, in number many, in weight most great, in perspicuitie most clear.
Genesis 4.10 Chap. 25.8 Chap. 35.29. Chap. 49.33.
The blood of Abell does cry to the Lord, in whose sight as yet he lives. The
Patriarchs are gathered by death unto their people, therefore by death they do
not cease to be the living people of the living God. God is the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Iaacob: Exodus 3.6.
now God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: therefore Abraham,
Isaac, Mat. 22.31
and Iaacob, do live before God: they live, I say, in their better part, and
their bodies in the time to come shall be called back again to life: nay,
they are already called back, Mat. 27.53
seeing that Christ being risen again, they are risen again with him. I know
(says Job) that my redeemer lives, Job 19.25.
and in the last day I shall be raised up again out of the earth. Esa. 26 19.
Thy dead shall live (says Esayas) my slain shall rise again. Awake and
sing, Esa. 66.14.
ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of green herbs: your
bones shall flourish like an herb. For this says the Lord, Ezekiel. 37.5.
of the dry bones: Behold, I will send my spirit into you, and ye shall live,
and I will lay sinews upon you, and make flesh grow upon you, and cover you
with skin, and put breath into you, that ye may live, and ye shall know that
I am the Lord. Dan. 12.2.
Many (says Daniel) of those which sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake,
some to life eternal, others to everlasting shame. The greatest King of the
world (say the seven Martyrs in the Maccabees) will raise us when we are dead,
2 Mac. 7.9.
to eternal life, of God do we hope that we shall receive our members. Ioh.
5.28.
The hour comes (says the Truth) in which all that are in the graves shall
hear the voice of the Son of man, verse. 29.
and shall come forth, they that have done good to the resurrection of life,
but they that have done evil to the resurrection of judgment. This is the
will of the Father which has sent me, Ioh 6.39.
that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it
up again at the last day. Ver. 40.44
But this is the will of my Father which has sent me, that every one which
sees the Son, and believes on him, have life eternal, Ver. 54.
and I will raise him up again in the last day. I am the resurrection and the
life, he that believes on me, although he were dead, John 11. verse. 25. verse.
26.
yet shall he live, and every one that lives and believes on me shall not dye
for ever. I have hope on God, (says S. Paul) and I look for the resurrection
to come of the just and unjust. Act. 24.15
This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality, 1 Cor. 15.53.
then shall be fulfilled the word which is written, Death is swallowed up into
victory. 2 Cor. 4.14
We know that he that has raised up our Lord Jesus, he also by Jesus will
raise us up. Our conversation is in Heaven, Phil. 3 20.
from whence also we look for our Savior the Lord Jesus Christ, Verse. 21.
which shall change our vile body that it may be like his glorious body,
according to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.
1 These. 4.14.
If we believe that Jesus is dead, and risen again, even so them which sleep
in Jesus will God bring with him. John saw the dead, great and small, standing
in the sight of God, and the books were opened: Apoc. 20.12.
and the Sea gave up the dead which were in her, and death and hell gave up
then dead. To these sayings of Scripture written as it were, with a beam of
the Sun, may be added immovable props of reasons: for so the Apostle
concludes, 1 Cor. 15.12.
If Christ be risen again, we also shall rise again, teaching the
resurrection of Christ to be the key of our sepulchers, and the example of our
hope. Tertul. de carne. p. 33. 1 Cor. 15.20 Exodus 23.19. Leuit. 23.20. August.
20. de Trinit. cap. 17. Ephesians. 2.6.
CHRIST is become the first fruits of those that sleep, says the Apostle. As
therefore the harvest, by the ordinance of God, did follow the oblation of the
first fruits: so the harvest of the universal resurrection shall follow the
first fruits of the Lords resurrection. Christ is our head, that which has
gone before in the head, shall follow in the members, and hence the Apostle
does confidently pronounce, that we are raised together with Christ, and placed
in the glory of the heavenly Paradise. For there is in the man Christ the
flesh of every one of us, Maximi. in sermon. de resurrect.
the blood and portion. Where therefore our portion reigns, there do we
believe to reign, where our blood bears rule, we feel our selves to bear
rule, and where our flesh is in glory, we know that we are glorious. 1 Cor.
15.21.
Besides, as by one man, that is to say, the first Adam, came death: so by one
man, that is to say, the second Adam, came the resurrection. As in Adam we
dye, so in Christ we rise again. The fall of Adam was of power to bring in
death, shall not the resurrection of Christ be able to deserve the raising
again to life?

Christ in his glorious resurrection has showed himself the conqueror of all
his enemies, therefore also of death, which also at length he shall altogether
abolish. Christ is an eternal King, therefore he shall raise the citizens of
his kingdom from death, that they may live with him for ever. Christ has
freed not only our soul, but also our body from the yoke of sin, and has
ordained it to the inheritan^e of eternal life, therefore it must be raised
out of the dust, that it may enter into the possession of this life, deserved
for it of Christ.

Out of all which it evidently appears, Theodor. in 1 Cor. 15. tom. 2. page
77. 1 Cor. 3.16
that Christ is the surety and pledge of our resurrection: furthermore, our
bodies are the temples and houses of the holy Ghost, he will not suffer this
his Temple to lie hidden in the dust and ashes, but will build it up again,
and make it a great deal more glorious then it was in this life. Hagg. 2.4.
Even as the latter temple at Jerusalem had a greater glory then the former. 1
Reg 6.32.
In Salomons temple there were incorruptible palms, so the bodies of the godly
shall not be subject to eternal corruption, seeing they are the habitations of
the eternal spirit. Iren. lib. 4. cap. 34.
This also is somewhat that our bodies are sanctified by the body and blood of
Christ, in the wholesome use of the holy supper, how therefore shall they
remain in the grave? how shall the flesh be said to come into corruption, and
not to taste of life, which is nourished with the body and blood of the Lord?
Even as the bread which is of the earth, after the word is added to it, is now
no common bread, but the Eucharist, consisting of two things, an earthly and an
heavenly: so our bodies receiving the Eucharist, are not now corruptible,
having the hope of the resurrection.

Ioh. 6.54.
Surely, the flesh of CHRIST is quickening food, therefore he which eats this
flesh has eternal life, and Christ will raise him again in the last day.
Lactan. lib. 4. institut. cap. 48.
Add that the soul in this life by the body and with the body does work
either good or evil, seeing it is put into the body, therefore the justice of
God requires that those which were joined together in the work, be joined
together in the reward, those that are joined together in the fault, be joined
together in the punishment. Therefore all of us shall appear before the
judgment seat of CHRIST, 1 Cor. 15.10. Tertul. in Apol. c. 45. p. 337.
that every one may receive those things which he has done in his body,
whether they be good or evil. The souls have not deserved without the flesh,
in which they have done all things: finally, to these immovable props of
Arguments may be added the examples of those that have been raised up again,
whom Christ by his own, the Prophets and Apostles by the power of GOD have
called back to life, Tertul. de resurrect. p. 44. Lactan. 6. dico. institu.
cap. 18.
for testimony of the future resurrection, which these partakers of
immortality and eternity do exhibit unto us which are joined unto them in
faith and confession.

XLIIII. The absurdity of the Resurrection.
The Tempted.
THe article of the Resurrection of bodies does most strongly oppose nature and
humane reason, from whence also the hope of the resurrection is sometimes not a
little weakened in my heart by the storms of diverse cogitations.

The Comforter.
THE foundations of our faith are the oracles of the holy Ghost, not the
predicaments of our own reason. We believe the resurrection of the dead, under
the obedience of this faith we ought to captiuate all our reason. 2 Cor. 10.5.
GOD can do above all things superabundantly more then we ask or understand.
Think therefore on him that promises, and thou shall have him to perform
whatsoever things GOD says, they are not words, but works. Let us grant that
GOD can do something, Ephesians. 3.20 Phil. lib. de decal. p. 477 August. Epist.
3. Bern ser. 4. de not. col. 43. 1 Cor. 15.37
which we may confess that we cannot find out, in such things all the
reason of the deed is the power of the speaker. It will be an easy matter for
him, by whom the mother her self has not lost the corruption of flesh by
bringing forth, that this corruptible also may put on incorrution by rising
again. It is somewhat also that in nature her self diverse representations of
the resurrection are set forth unto us.

Verse. 38.
That which thou sowest is not quickened, unless it first dye: and what sowest
thou, Verse. 39.
not the body that shall be, but bare Corn, that is to say, of Wheat, or of
some other. August. de verb. Apost. sermon. 34.
But God gives to it a body after his own pleasure, and to every seed his
own body. He therefore which quickens the dead and putrified grains of seeds,
by which thou may live in this world, will much more raise up thine own
self, that thou may live for ever. The light that daily dies shines forth
again, Tertul. in Apol. c. 45. p. 73 etc.
and the darkness by even turns departing, does return: the stars that are
put out begin again to live: the times begin where they are ended; the
fruits are consumed and do return; surely the seeds unless they be
corrupted and dissolved, do not arise so fruitfully: all things are saved by
perishing, all things are reformed from death. The day dies into the night, Id
lib. de resurrect. car. page 54.
and is buried round about with darkness, the honor of the World is polluted
and all the substance thereof is made black. All things are foul, silent, and
amazed: every where there is a vacation, and rest of things: so the light that
is lost is mourned for. And yet again with her attire, with her grace, with
the Sun, the same both sound and whole does begin to be renewed to the whole
world, killing her death, the night: opening her grave, the darkness: being
heir to her self, until the night also be renewed again, she likewise with
her attire. For the beams of the stars also are again made to flame, whom
the mornings light had extinguished. The absence also of the constellations is
brought back, which the destinction of times had taken away. The mirrours also
of the Moon are trimd a new, which the number of the days of the month had
worn out. The Winters and Summers, the Springs, and the Autumnes return in
their season, with their own strength, manners, fruits, yea the earth is
taught of Heaven to cloathe Trees, after they are made naked, to give fresh and
new tinctures to the Flowers, to give the herbs again, to bring in the same
seeds which are consumed, and not to bring them in before they are consumed.

A wonderful matter! Of a deceiuer she is become a sauer: she snatcheth away
that she may restore: she destroys that she may keep: she corrupts that
she may make whole: she first lauishly consumes that afterward she may make
it more. Surely, she restores things more plentiful and more fair, then
those she did consume. Of a truth, I may say at once, the condition of all
things is restored again by death, which is increase, and injury which is
Usury, and loss which is gain. Whatsoever thou meetest with now, has been,
and whatsoever thou shall leese, there is nothing but it shall be again. All
things return into their state, when they shall depart. Therefore are they
brought to an end that they may be new made. Nothing perishes but that it may
be saved. Therefore this whole order of things which is in revolution, is a
witness of the resurrection of the dead. God has prescribed it in his works
before he wrote it in letters: he has preached it by his strength, before he
uttered it in words. He sent Nature before to be thy Mistress, meaning to
send Prophecy after: that so much the more easily thou may believe
Prophecy, being the Scholar of Nature: that thou may by and by entertain
when thou hear, that which every where thou now see: and not doubt but
that GOD will be a raiser again of thy flesh, All this Tertull.
which know him to be the restorer of all things. Are such lypes as these to
be thought to be set out in vain in the whole state of things? Is GOD to be
judged weaker then Nature? Nay, look upon thy self, and know a testimony of
the resurrection in thy self. Id in Apolo. aduer. gentes. c. 45. p. 737.
Remember what thou were, before thou wast, surely nothing: for thou might
have remembered it if thou had been any thing. Thou therefore which wast
nothing before thou had thy being: being made nothing, when thou shall cease
to be, why can thou not be again of nothing by the will of the same founder,
which would have thee to be of nothing? What new thing shall happen unto thee?
thou which were not, were made: when again thou shall not be, thou shall be
made: Render a reason if thou can, which way thou were made: and then shall
thou demand, which way thou shall be made: and yet more easily shall thou be
made that which sometime thou have been, which were not hardly made, that which
never thou had been. Id de resur. carnis p. 54.
If God has made all things out of nothing, he can again frame the flesh
brought to nothing, out of nothing. Surely he is fit to restore which has
made, how much more is it to have made, then to have restored; to have given
beginning then to have new framed, so thou may believe that the restoring of
thy flesh is easier then the first making thereof.

XLV. The flames of Purgatory.
The Tempted.
I Fear the punishing flames of the fire of Purgatory after death; Psalm.
143.3.
for seeing I am compast about with diverse infirmities of sins, I fear least
God should therefore enter with me into his judgment, and most justly adiudge
me to the flames of Purgatory.

The Comforter.
THose with whom God does enter into judgment, that is, which are not in this
life reconciled to God, those does he not adiudge to the fire of Purgatory,
there to be tormented for a certain finite time, but to the infernal and not
to be quenched fire, there to be broiled for all eternity. But they which do
acknowledge their sins seriously, and believe truly on Christ, they have the
handwriting of Christ their Savior, that they need to fear no place of
sorrow and torments after death, for so he says: John. 5.24
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he which hears my word, and believes him
which has sent me, has life eternal, and comes not into judgment, but
has past from death to life. The tables of truth do acknowledge two ranks of
men only, that is to say, the good and the bad, the penitent and the
impenitent, the believing and the unbelieving: two receptacles only after
death, August. lib. 3. hypog. Id ser. 8. de verb. Apost. Id. 21. de ciuit. Dei.
cap. 25. Id. 1. de peccat. merit. and remis. cap. 28.
that is to say, of consolation and torment, of reward and pain, of Heaven and
Hell: We are utterly ignorant of, neither do we find in the Scriptures, a
third kind of men and places: there are but two dwellings, one in the kingdom
everlasting, the other in the everlasting fire: therefore is not any place in
the midst of these for any where he may not be in punishment, which shall not
be placed in the kingdom, that he cannot choose but be with the Devil, which
is not with Christ. He that shall believe, Mar. 16.16
says CHRIST, and be baptized, shall be saved, but he that does not believe,
shall be condemned. He that believes in the Son is not judged, Ioh. 3.18.
but he that does not believe is judged already, because he does not believe
on the name of the only begotten Son of God. verse. 36.
He that believes on the Son has eternal life, but he that does not
believe on the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God remains upon
him. Chap. 5 29
They that have done good, shall come forth to the resurrection of life, but
they that have done evil to the resurrection of judgment. Mat. 25.46
The blessed shall go into everlasting life, and the cursed into everlasting
fire. And that this immediate separation of the godly and ungodly is to be made
not only in the last day, but also by and by after death, the example of the
rich glutton does teach us, Luke 16.23
whose soul is thrust into Hell, and of the godly Lazarus, whose soul is
translated of the Angels into Paradise: the example of the converted Thief
does teach us, Luke 23.43
to whom Christ promises the ingresse into Paradise, on that very day wherein
he was to dye: Apoc. 14.13.
the spirit of Truth does teach us, pronouncing them henceforth blessed that
dye in the Lord. There is none other purgation or expiation of sins, then in
the blood of Christ, 1 Ioh. 1.7. Esa. 53.5. Romans 5.1. 1 John 3.14. Sap. 4.1.
which washes us altogether from all our sins, the chastisement of our peace
is upon him, that he might be peace to us: therefore he which believes on him
is justified, and has peace with God, is translated from death to life,
neither need he fear any torment after death.

LXVI. The rigor of the last judgment.
The Tempted.
I Fear the rigor and terror of the last judgment. Above me will be the
severe judge, beneath me gaping Hell, within me my Conscience gnawing,
without me fire burning, on my right hand my sins accusing me, on my left hand
the Devils terrifying me, round about me the good Angels driving me to hell,
and the evil drawing me to the same. Satan will accuse me, my sins will
accuse me, Bern. in Rithm.
my conscience will accuse me. I fear much the countenance of the severe
Judge, from whom nothing that is hidden shall be kept close, neither shall any
thing remain unrevenged. No man shall be able to escape his power, to deceive
his wisdom, to turn his equity, or to revoke his judgment.

The Comforter.
IF thou beleeuest on the Son, thou shall not be judged, Ioh. 3.18.
that is to say, with that severe and condemning rigor of judgment. If thou
hear the word of Christ, Ioh. 5.24.
and beleeuest him, thou come not into judgment, thy cause shall not be
discust in that rigorous examination of judgment, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. August in
Psa. 100.
seeing Christ has freed all that believe on him, from the wrath to come:
Truly the day of judgment is to be feared of the wicked for the punishment,
but is to be loved of the good for the crown: to them it shall be a day of
grace, and of large remuneration. Luke 21.28
Lift up your heads, says the Son, and know that your redemption draws
near. The Bride does not fear the coming of her Bridegroom, now thy soul
is espoused to Christ by faith, he will appear in the day of judgment to
that end, Apoc. 197
that he may bring her in as it were ^^is Bride to the heavenly marriage, what
place therefore can there be here for terror or fear? That day shall be the
day of deliverance, because it shall free us altogether from the wretched
captivity of sin and death. Into the perfect service of Christ, it is the
day of deliverance, because it shall pluck us away from all the heap of
evils, and weight of calamities: it is the day of deliverance, because it shall
redeem us wholly from that continual wrestling of the flesh, and perilous
warfare. It is the day of refreshing, because it shall set us thirsty and out
of breath, into a place of rest, by the fountain of living water, from the
heat of calamities. Act 3.20. Apoc. 22.2
Therefore let our Bridegroom Christ come, let him come, whatsoever soul is
the true Spouse of Christ, sealed by the earnest of the spirit, led by the love
of Christ, let her say, Come Lord Jesus. August. in Psa. 147.
If we love Christ truly, surely we also desire his coming, for it is a
perverse thing to fear least he come whom thou love: to pray, let thy
Kingdom come, and to fear least thou be heard. But from whence is the fear?
because he is to come a Judge? What is he unjust? does he bear us ill will?
is he envious? does he expect to know thy cause from another, least perhaps he
whom thou have instructed, either deceive thee by collusion, or failing in
lesser elequence or ability, be not able in words to show the goodness of
thine innocence? None of these. Who therefore is to come? Wherefore do thou
not rejoice? Who is to come to judge thee, but he which came to be judged for
thee? Fear not the accuser, of whom he has said, the Prince of this world is
cast forth. Fear not an evil Advocate, for he will be thine Advocate, which
shall be thy Judge. He will be both thy self, and thy cause. The word of thy
cause, the testimony of thy Conscience. All this of Augustine.
Whosoever therefore thou be that fear the Judge to come, correct now thy
conscience. There is no cause therefore why thou should fear the Judge to
come. He shall be thy Judge, which also is thine Advocate. He shall be thy
Judge, which has given a promise to his Saints, that by his testimony and
example they are to judge the world. He shall be thy Judge, in whom from
everlasting thou were chosen to life. He shall be thy Judge, which was thy
King, how shall a King destroy his own people? He shall be thy Judge, whose
true member thou art by faith, how shall the head destroy his members? Romans 8.33
Who shall accuse the chosen of God? It is God which iustifies, who shall
condemn? It is Christ which is dead, nay which is risen again, which is at
the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us, how shall he destroy
those whom he has taken into his tuition, for whom, least they should be
destroyed, Romans 2.16.
he came into the world? Christ shall judge according to the Gospel, but now
the believers have not despised it, but received it with true faith. They have
heard the voice of Christ inuiting them to conversion; Matthew. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye which labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh
you: therefore they shall also hear his voice inuiting them to the heavenly
possession. Come ye blessed of my Father, Matthew. 25.34.
receive the inheritance of the Kingdom of heaven, which was prepared for you
from the beginning. He shall be the Judge, before whose face go grace and
truth, grace has abolisht the sins of the believers, truth has given unto
them the promises of eternal life. Neither is there any cause, that thou fear
the horrible universal destruction of heaven and earth. Heaven and earth shall
pass away, Luke 21.33 Esa 40.8.
but the words of Christ shall not pass away. The word of the Lord abides for
ever, if thou stick to this word with true faith, thou likewise shall abide
for ever. Thou have lost nothing, where by inordinate love thou have possessed
nothing, thy treasure is not the riches of this world, but the delight of the
heavenly Kingdom: let the world be on fire, it is sufficient for thee that
Christ thy treasure lives. Let the frame of heaven and earth perish, fly,
pass away, thou have most faithful promises of a new heaven, and a new earth.
Esa. 65.17. 2 Pet. 3.12 Apoc. 21.1.
Behold I create a new heaven and a new earth, says the Lord, in which shall
dwell righteousness, so that no man remembers the former things any more. Let
the lodging of thy pilgrimage fall down, the everlasting house of the heavenly
Country does abide. Neither is there any cause, why thou fear the accusation
either of Satan or of the Law, or of thine own sins; thy sins are cast
into the depth of the Sea, suppose into the bottomless p^t of Gods mercy.
Mich. 7.19 Es. 38.17. Eze. 18.24. Psa. 32.1. Psalm. 51.1.
GOD has cast them behind his back, so that he will not remember them
hereafter. Believe, Satan shall not draw up those sins out of the Sea, nor
dare to bring them into the sight of the Judge. Thy sins are forgiven, they
are covered, they are blotted out, they shall not be brought again into
judgment. The accusation drawn against the godly, of the Devil, shall be
vain, because the blotting out of the handwriting made by the blood of
Christ, Colos. 2.14
shall be turned against it. The accusation of sin shall be vain, because
the pardon given by Christ shall be turned against it. The accusation of the
Law shall be vain, because reconciliation with God through faith has gone
before in this life. To conclude, there is no cause that thou fear the sudden
return of Christ to judgment, for although the day of the Lord shall come as a
Thief in the night, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2.
yet God has not appointed us to wrath, but that we may attain salvation
through our Lord Jesus Christ, Verse. 9.
which has dyed for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we may always live
with him. The day of judgment is not to be feared of them for whom the
Kingdom of heaven was prepared from the beginning, Matthew. 25.34. Ephesians. 1.4.
which were chosen in Christ before the foundations of the earth were laid.
Commend therefore into the faithful hands of God, the precious pledge of thy
soul, he will keep it in death and judgment, and he will bring it united to
the body into the Palaces of the heavenly Court, to everlasting glory.

FINIS.
A PRAYER in Sickness.
Hear me, O God, giver and restorer of life, in whose hands is life and
death, health and sickness. Hear me, not according to the desire of my will,
but according to the good pleasure of thy will. If thou will thou can make
me whole; say but one word only, and I shall be whole; thou art the length of
my days, in thy hands are my lots; but if thou now call me by the way of
Death to the heavenly Country, mortify first in me all inordinate love of
this life; give me the strength of the spirit, that I may overcome the sorrows
of death, and in the midst of the darkness of mine eyes, when they wax dim,
kindle and increase in me the light of heart, with thee is the fountain of
true life, and in thy light I shall see light. Thy death, O good Jesus, is the
medicine of my death, and the merit of eternal life. I embrace thy word with
a faithful heart, therefore I am sure that thou dwell by faith in my heart,
I will not let thee depart out of my heart, before thou bless me, and lift me
up with quickening consolation. Thou have said, He that believes on me shall
not die for ever; this word my heart does set before thee, and in this faith I
draw near to the throne of grace, thou will not correct nor put back him that
comes unto thee. Let thy precious blood vvash me from my sins, let thy
wounds hide me from the wrath of God and rigor of judgment, I will die in
thee, thou shall live in me; I will abide in thee, and thou shall abide in me;
thou will not leave me in death and dust, but wilt raise me up to the
resurrection of life. Thou have fought and overcome for me, now fight and
overcome in me, let thy strength be performed in mine infirmity: My soul
cleaues unto thee, I will not suffer my self to be plucked away from thee, let
thy peace, which passes all understanding, keep my heart and senses. Into thy
hands I commend my spirit, thou have redeemed me thou God of truth, take up the
poor soul, which thou have created, which thou have redeemed, which thou have
washed from sins with thy blood, which thou have sealed with the earnest of the
holy Ghost, which thou have fed with thy body and blood; It is thine, thou have
given it unto me, take up that which thine is, and remit the guilt of my
sins wherewith I have defiled it. Let not the fruit of thy Passion perish in
me, let not thy precious blood wax barren in me. In thee O Lord have I hoped,
let me not be confounded for ever. Amen.


