HEAVENS SPEEDY Hue and Cry sent after Lust and Murder.

Manifested upon the sudden apprehending of Thomas Shearwood, and Elizabeth
Evans, whose manner of Lives, Death, and free Confessions, are here expressed.

Also some new Additions, concerning the man that was tide to the Gibbeit, with
a discovery of those places where such kindof lude people haunt and resort
unto, and by what signs and tokens you may discover them: disclosed by this
Sherwood a little before his death.

Who were Executed the one upon the 14. and the other on the 17. of this Month
of April 1635. near to the place where the facts were committed, and he now
hangs in chains at Ring-Crosse.

Written by H. G. their daily Uisiter, at the time of their Imprisonment, and
several days of Execution.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed by N. and I. Oaks, dwelling in Well-yard in little St.
Bartholmews, near unto the Lame Hospital gate, 1635.

IF one smite another with an Instrument of Iron, that he Dye, he is a
Murderer, and the Murderer shall dye the Death. Or if he smite him with an
hand-weapon of wood whereby he may be slain, if he dye, he is a Murderer,
and the Murderer shall dye the Death. Numb. 35. v. 16.

two figures hanging off gallows poles Countrey-Tom. Canberry Besse.



weapon The form of the instrument of wood and iron that he used to hurt with.



The Preface.
I Haveresumed my Pen which I resolved in this Nature for ever to be silent:
But the Common good, and preservation of my Countries welfare, incites me unto
this officious service. As one that stands Centinell in the Night unto whom
Fidelity and Trust is reposed, and the safety of the whole Army depends:
(Even so am I) to discover the private and sudden approaching of the Enemies.
Like a Watchman to observe all comers in and out, into the Gates of the City,
to unvaile pernicious passengers, which days and nights uncessantly pass
through the Streets, and in the secret corners of the same privily lurk, and
watch an opportunity to cozen, rob, and murder. I presume not to instruct the
prudent and wise, that were absurd and ridiculous: But the Level of my
intention is to make the vulgar Ignorants so wise, as to walk warily and
circumspectly; which plain path they may knowingly see, and discern by this
sequent discovery of such notorious offenders, that live upon the spoils of
such Passengers, and Travelers resorting up unto London upon their necessary
affairs. A new kind of invented wickedness, and fearful mischief, but I
hope by Gods mercy, and the late exemplary Justice, strangled in the birth, is
the Narration of Country Tom, and Besse of Canberry, so termed by those of
their base disposition. A woman, Oh shame unto her modest tender Sex! to
become a setter, or set on such a brazen face, that upon a man unknown unto
her, she seazeth in the open Streets, and with her deceitful smiles, and
salutes, so inchants, and incaptivates, and leads him unto slaughter. Like a
decoy Ducke, she is alone going abroad, but not alone returning, associated
with multitudes homeward: The bargain she strikes up, and goes before, to a
secret appointed place, upon whom unawares, to the seduced person, attends a
merciless strong Thief, and most barbarous cruel Murderer, that at once
strikes and slayes: of whose cunning practices, secret snares, and subtle wiles
I labor to give all people a light and true insight; God Almighty give it a
blessing unto his good pleasure and thy benefit, unto whom I am thy true
professed friend during the time of my mortality.

H. G.

Certain pregnant inducements, out of the Holy Scripture against murder and
Manslaughter
THe first is, the direct words of Gods Commandments, thou shall not kill.
Exodus 20. WHo so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. For in
the image of God has he made Man. Genesis 9. 6. HE also that kills any Man, he
shall surely be put to Death. Leviticus 24. 17. YE are of your Father the
Devil, and the lusts of your father you will do: He has been a Murderer from
the beginning, etc. Ioh. 8. IF any kill with the sword, he must be killed by
the sword: Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints.
And therefore,

LEt all bitterness, and anger, wrath, and evil speaking be put away from
you, with all maliciousness.
THE EXAMINATION AND Confession of Thomas Sher wood, and Elizabeth Evans.
BEFORE I enter into the listes of the ensuing Relation, there are of these two
most miserable Catifes, remarkable Observations in their several lives:
(lives did I say?) to say so I do grossly mistake; for although they were
living, yet then dead they were in most foul and abominable sins, and
clamorous crimes, that sent hot pursuit after them at all times, and in all
places without intermission, to sweep them from off the face of the earth.

The Observations.
1. Note.
First, what a viperous brood of Sins were engendered, conceived, and brought
forth by these Monsters Male and Female: what a Chain of sins is here linked,
and twisted one to each other.

2. Secondly, the Stygmaticall mark that Heaven did set upon them both in
their two several names. 1. First, Idleness the indulgent Mother, cannot she
is so indigent of her self, be able to give bread, or clothing to her
pampered and poisoned little ones in youth with Sloth, but like a cursed
Stepmother sends them out of doors, to seek bread in desolate places.

2. The Original of all vices.
Secondly, Sloth or Idleness scorns to work, especially with the hands, for
that is not gentilelike: yet work they see they must for necessities sake, and
and a master they have at hand, (the Devil) that safely as they suppose,
sets them on work.

3. Thirdly, from Sloth springs forbidden Theft.

4. Fourthly, from Theft springs beastly Lust.

5. Fifthly, from filthy Lust they lanch out into the deep, to Bloodshed and
Murder.

6. Finally, thus by degrees they finish their destruction, and the full Cup of
Gods heavy wrath and displeasure, forcibly they drink up.

2. Observation.
On both their Names, behold what a Brand is set on them by Heaven: high scorn
and derifion; perishing before they perished, forgotten before they were dead:
For by the Names of Countrey-Tom, and CanberryBesse, they were known unto the
World: The honest Stock, and Parents from which they descended, forgetting,
and denying. Scripture says, The memorial of the wicked shall perish: Let him
be wiped out of the Book of Remembrance, and that, because his mind was not
to do good. Thus with them.

of God. No fear No thought No care No love

And therefore for them,

No memory, No loss, No place of Burial, No mourning, to say, Alas my
Brother, or alas my Sister.
The narration of the manner of the course of their lives.
AS they confessed, their Names were Thomas Sherwood, and Elizabeth Evans, the
one borne in Staffordshire, there brought up by his Parents, a laborious
Husbandman: The other borne in Shropshire, of a very good parentage descended,
who carefully for her good education, and future preferment, sent her up unto
London, to some friends, who settled her in a good service, as she confessed at
her Death: But unfortunately it happened, that she grew acquainted with a
young man in London, who tempted her unto folly, and by that ungodly act her
sudden ruin insued.

By reason of such her folly, her Friends failed, and frowned on her: Oh
unnatural blemish! thus to forsake, cast off, and forget their own dear
flesh, all means of livelihood failing, her left thus destitute, and out of
all, credit, friends, money, apparel, and service: A base loose course of
life she resolves on, and therein as she freely confessed, continued the
space of 4. years, until at last she unhappily happened to get into
familiarity and acquaintance with this Countrey-Tom, otherwise Thomas Sherwood;
with whom she constantly accompanied day and night for the term of a year, or
there abouts. And having obtained such a mate fit for his own humor and
inclination, secretly these two combined, resolved, and put in practice their
new invented mystery of Iniquity, as follows.

Whenever they went forth out of their Lodgings, they severed not themselves,
but kept within sight one of another always, both hunting for one prey; and
frequenting and watching such places, and houses, for persons fitted for their
occasion, and to make use of.

The places they resorted unto, 1 To Play Houses. 2 To Tavernes. 3 To Innes. 4
To Alehouses. 5 To the open Streets. 6 To the Fields.

If by chance they did meet with one that had been that day too busy with
the Pot, such an one was fish for their Net: then the brazen-face Strumpet
presently claims acquaintance, that she knew him of long time, whose face she
never saw before; and so farther into familiar discourse, and complements they
proceed, that further courtesies are desired, and promised in some secret
place, to pass between them. This new guest, and acquaintance thus taken up
in the way by her, away she hastens with her prize, and carries him unto the
Chambers of death: As witness the Murdering by such her slights, these
Gentlemen of great Note, and good quality, Eminent in place and substance,
Master Rowland Holt a Merchant, and Citizen of London, whom they murdered in
Clarkenwell fields, in January last past: Likewise Master Thomas Claxton
Gentleman, a Lieutenant, in Grayes Inne-fields, the first of this instant
April, 1635. Also to another Gentleman, whom they robbed of his Cloak and Hat,
by name Master Michael Low, at the pitch of the Hill going down to Hockley
Hole in Clarkenwell Parish, at which place they gave him his Deaths wound, and
had not aid upon his outcry hastily come upon them, they had without doubt
slain him; but within one quarter of a year afterward Master Michael Low
dyed of the same wound in his Head then by Country Tom, so forcibly struck,
that Master Low did then very narrowly escape bleeding to death.

The free Confession of Thomas Sherwood, after the time of his apprehending.
TWo Months, and two Weeks were completely expired, before it could be
known what barbarous hand had acted that acinorous Fact on the body of Master
Row and Holt found dead, and with blows very much bruised.

This Hound of Hell, that did this cruel murder, flesht thus, greedily
seeks for more Man's flesh, and thirsts afresh after more blood. He thought,
that in that little space God, and the People had forgotten Mr. Holts blood, as
himself had; who securely again starts out, and he with his constant
mischievous Companion, to their damnable former resolutions in all Impieties,
puts on the habit, that now to kill a man, (tush) it is not worth the
talking of, or taking of notice as so it may be conjectured of them; who in so
short a space, to the first murder added the second, the places both of them
being with in the sight of each other, which might deter them from such their
unnatural and ungodly intention and determination, from the shedding of more
innocent blood.

Upon Wednesday at Night, in Easter week last past, 1635. about the hour of
Nine, these two inhumane Creatures did meet about the Kings Gate which is by
Blomesberry, a pproper costly apparrelled Gentleman, Master Thomas Claxton, a
Soldier, and Lieutenant, who that day and time that this Monster of her Sex
interchanged discourse, and with familiar complements (oh lamentable to speak)
had drunk to much, The form his weapon which lay secretly in his breeches.
as these two vild wretches confessed.



Words past betwixt Master Claxton and that Harlot Besse of Canberry, together
those two go, but who followed them both, the poor Gentleman was altogether
ignorant, and little suspected; After them both Country Tom hasteneth, with a
short Trunchin, or Bastinado under his cloak, and finds companying together
his Harlot with Master Claxton, whom she had treacherously trained into Grayes
Inn fields, a stones cast wide from the Highway, where what they did, I so
charitably am opinionated of the deceased Gentleman, that to their slanderous
calumniations, and traducings concerning him, I give not the least credence.
For those to believe, whose hands were so foully stained with blood, their
breath unworthy to blast the good name, or brand the good that the world
conceived of the reputation of such a Gentleman as Mr. Claxton was. Inhumanely
with a short Trunchin of Iron which Sherwood carried under his cloak by his
bloody polluted hands, with this weapon he instantly deprived master Claxton of
life, and after that done, they both fell to rishing the pockets, and uncivilly
strip, (all humanity laying a side) the body bare and naked, and in that manner
left it, and so fled away.

When he had recollected his distracted thoughts and throbbing hard heart,
within two hours after, (as he said) he returned unto the place, to behold
that sad spectacle of master Claxtons slaughtered body, who (as he said) was
not slain outright, for he heard him sleep and snore, and that he had turned
himself on his Belly after he left him; and had not the wind taken his
wounds, he might very well have been recovered unto health. But perceiving
life was extinct in him, flight is become the chiefest comfort, and refuge:
She flies to her old acquainted lodging, at St. Giles in the fields, and he
takes his course another way.

The Morning ensuing, betimes he dispatcheth a speedy messenger unto his
Copartner in mischief, appointing his matchless Mate to meet with him
forthwith in Moore-fields, which according unto his appointment, she did at the
place, and time by him prefixed. And observe how thither he comes with his
understanding so infatuated by the irefull Judge of Heaven, that with the
apparel he comes on his back that morning, of the Gentleman's whom he slew
the Night before, and wait was laid for such fashioned apparel, which he
wore, and proffered to sell in Houndsditch so inconsiderately, suddenly was
apprehended. Preparation he was making to travel down into the Country: For
he bought a new Peticoate for her that dearly earned it; and he proffered unto
Sale the Apparel which he never bought, nor paid for; to put himself into
money like wise, to bear both their charges for their intended journey.

But as Equity and Justice commanded, they both together were apprehended, and
by the Authority of Magistracy presently sent unto Newgate, unto whom thither
an industrious, judicious, and discreet Gentleman Master Long, a Commissioner
of the Peace, in the County of Middlesex, frequently resorted, and took there
their several Examinations so carefully, punctually, and truly, that both the
Malefactors out of their own mouths, against themselves confessed the same,
totally just: I touch here but briefly upon them; for I intended not at all
^omention much of their confessions, for fear my brevity should wrong, or
entrench upon his prudent discussion and politic insinuations into them, by
which forcibly he discovered all their Villainies, and made the truth apparent.

There was a great Rumor spread, that this Sherwood had slain diverse persons
else, besides Mr. Claxton, and Mr. Holt, as the woman at Lambeth, that was
slain in her house the last Winter, a Child also; for which two were executed,
all these are but flying Tales. To give therefore the World satisfaction, I
have here set down his free and voluntary confession of such persons he slew,
which he confirmed at his Death: besides many great Robberies he was guilty of,
whereof master Long has his free confession.

The day of his conviction, I heard it in the Sessions yard reported, that
Sherwood had slain a Gentleman master Michael Low, whose Father was sometimes
Lord Mayor of London, and himself of late collated into the place of Secondary
in the Counter of Woodstreete.

I was entreated by master Lowes friends to be instant with Sherwood, to
discover if he could, the person that robbed and wounded him. His Answer
concerning that unto me, was thus; that he knew the parties that did it, and if
I would at Night repair unto to him, he would really make them known unto me.

Hereupon I addressed my self unto master Long, and acquainted him what I had
done, and that, as I suspected by my discourse with Sherwood, that he could
not be guiltless of the Robbing of master Low. That very Evening although
late, master Long went to Sherwood to Newgate, where, there as at his death, he
said, he with Elizabeth Evans Robbed master Low of his Hat and Cloak by the
Lady Hattons wall about Michaelmas Term last: and further said, he thought
that the wounds he then gave him in his Head with this Instrument, or the
like, was the cause of his death: which generally is so voted, because he died
within a quarter of a year with an Impostumation in his Head, the wound being
cured, but inwardly rankl'd and festred. For money, he said, he took none at
all from him, for that day a little before he had delivered up all his money
unto his Servant.

Freely he confessed the muthering of Master Rowland Holt in Clarkenwell
fields: The murdering of Master Thomas Claxton in Grayes Inn fields, and
robbing and wounding of Master Michael Low by the Lady Hattons wall: Besides,
guilty of many Notorious Felonies and Robberies, committed in Middlesex, to a
great number. Further, discovering many base persons of his condition, and the
dispersed places of secret harboring such unprofitable obnoxious members unto
a State and Commonwealth.

At the place of his Execution, and what he there said, the Relation.
THere was no profit at all in his life time to his Country, but in his
Discovery and Death, I hope some use, and good service unto the Country may
redound. His associates, I hope, shall be banished, which he has branded, and
with them, their Receivers and Harbourers. His Death and hanging up now in
chains, an example to deterie others not so to offend, which I pray God give
such a blessing to all the people. Amen

Being brought unto the place of his Death, he there minded nothing else, but
how to dye, desiring of the people that they would not press him unto further
confessions, to debar his Soul of better meditations, but to rest satisfied
with his confessions, which he had made unto Master Long and my self, and
nothing else but truth contained in them, confirmed by a serious asseveration
proceeding then out of his mouth. This done he turned himself toward the
people, speaking unto them, and praying for them very heartily, withal
admonishing all that did see him that day, to beware of Whores, for they were
the worst Company in the World, wishing all to beware by his fall, and not to
be seduced, or blindfold led, as he was by such bewitching Creatures, to
irrevocable ruin. In the Posture of his Body, he expressed true Humility, for
all the time of Prayer, he prayed kneeling. In his Prayers unto God, he
expressed an unexpected fervency by these words, and short eiaculations unto
Heavens mercy seat, sensibly feeling the heavy Burden of his Sins, most
heartily implored, at the hands of Almighty God, his mercy and forgiveness for
them I will do him this right, to express the Ardency of his Soul, when the
word Mercy was uttered: this Eiaculation from his own mouth proceeded, the
hearing of the word Mercy, was sweet and savory unto his sorrow full Soul, for
in the great anguish of Soul he prayed, and only relied saying thus: O Lord
my sins are so heinous, great and many, if thy Mercy help me not, what will
become hereafter of my poor Soul. To that I fly unto, and only trust thy
mercy did save the whole World of sinners, and Lord I hope my great sins cannot
exceed thy great mercies. After these speeches he returns with Hearty
requests unto God to forgive him his harnous sins: He beseeched all the
People that were there present, all to forgive him, whom he had offended, and
to join with him in hearty prays unto the Almighty in his behalf, to forgive
him, and to receive his Soul to mercy.

After these holy exercises accomplished, the first part of the 51. Psalm was
sung, and after that by his request was sung the Lamentation of a sinner. That
ended, I asked him if he was willing to dye, to which he made answer, most
welcome death was unto him; for all the while he lived, his life was as a kind
of Hell unto him, and most uncomfortable. But his death he joyfully embraced,
and mortal life cheerfully did surrender up, and sent his soul out of his
Body flying, calling on the name of the Lord Jesus to receive him. And all the
people speaking to God for him, likewise with their loud voices, and strong
acclamations, Lord Jesu take mercy on him, sweet Jesu forgive his sins, and
save his Soul.

Hereendeth the Narration of Thomas Sherwood, who now hangs in Chains at
Battle-bridge, near Pancras Church.

A brief observation for all persons, both in City and Country, to know lewd
tempting persons lurking in the Streets and Highways, by these tokens
following.
FIrst, if they be Cheaters, look if they be not Gentile-like clothed: then
if they entice you to play at Cards or Dice for a Pot of Beer, or Pint of
Wine, beware of such, and if by such tricks you chance to be deluded, take
notice of that house.

Secondly, if a Woman in the day time complements with you, and sends after
you, a messenger to say, that one would speak with you, beware of such.

Thirdly, take heed of such as boldly stand at their doors to entice you, or
say, some Friend is in their houses that would speak with you: that is a true
token of some ensuing mischief, to pick your pocket, and to bring you unto an
Harlot.

Fourthly, if any Woman meet you late in the evening, to ask of you what time
of the Night it is, then watch over your purse and person, that your pocket be
not picked.

Fifthly, if a Woman come unto you alone, with enticing fair promises of
Curtezan courtesies, to meet you in the Fields, or some other private remote
places, remember the case of Mr. Claxton, and Mr. Holt.

Sixthly, remember the Suburbian places, where these abominable Creatures
attend their prey, by day and night.

This has been often confessed by those who have used the same course, and
dyed for some of these facts.

An intimation of such places, in, and about the City of London, that Harlots
watch their opportunities to surprise men, confessed by this Malefactor.
FIrst, at West Smithfield within the Railes, and Duck-lane end.

Second, and thirdly, by the Tavernes in Smithfield, and Cooks shops in
Pye-corner, and Cloath-faire, a great harbor for such.

Fourthly, by Smithfield Pond, and sheepe-pens.

Fifthly, by the little conduit in Cheapside in the evening Sixthly, St.
Antholins Church when the shops are shut up.

Seventh, and lastly, remember London Bridge, over which you must necessarily
travel into the Southern parts: Beware you go not by Night with a cloak-bag,
but in your hand, nor behind you on horsbacke, lest you be iustled against the
wall by a cutpurse in the habit of a Gentleman and so lose it: Beware likewise
of your Hat and Purse in a fray stirred up purposely in the street, to allure
people into concursions, in plain to speak, Pick-pockets deceit, and
cosenage. In Middl. toward Pancras Church, in the fields: At Cow-crosse
toward the Butchers, at Bloomesberry in St. Giles in the fields, beware of
such like offenders; and so much of my advertisment unto all passengers coming
in, and going out of the Suburbs of the City of London.

Likewise at this Sessions, there were executed for coining of Six-pences, and
Shillings, two Frenchmen and an Englishman, who were drawn and hanged for
that fact of Treason; a just reward for such wicked persons, that usurp the
Kings Royal prerogative.

Now to the particular Narration of Elizabeth Evans the impious Fellow-mate of
Thomas Sherwood.
COncerning her, I have very little matter offered to dilate; I found this
Sherwood and her so different in their several confessions unto me, that I
wonderfully admired, that two always unseparable in such prosecutions of
evil, should be so contradictory one unto each other. But I easily reconciled
the doubt, in the particular observation in their two several manners of dying.

A Woman she was that died, for whose weak and timorous Sex sake, something
must be allowed tolerable: Yet something I found in her worthy of note, at
the time of her confession, a perfect hate, and exclamation against all
Thieves, which caused her destruction. And furthermore in sign of such her
detestation, of such unholy courses, proceeded from her mouth a most serious
request unto all then present assembled, advising all poor simple women to
marry an honest man, though but a Ragge-gatherer, rather then a lewd man or a
Thief, rendering the reason of such her earnest admonition, because an
honestman may make an evil woman turn from her evil ways, but it was hard
for an evil man, to make a wicked woman good, with diverse other admonitions to
the wonder of the slanders by, considering what a life she had lived in.

Concerning what she said at the place of Execution.
ONe thing she here expressed very remarkable, concerning her old Companion in
Mischief, Thomas Shearwood; who on Candlemas day last pressed amongst the
Jurers, at the Christopher Tavern in Turnmill Street alias Turnebull Street to
view the dead Corpse of Master Rowland Holt, by him murdered, Sherwoods Nose
immediately gushed out with such issues of blood, that he feared there by to be
discovered, and returning unto her said, I have suffered such a thing this day
about Master Holt, we must of necessity, leave of this course of life.

I found her with the fears of Death very much perplexed and amazed,
distractively casting her eyes here, and there, at last she espies the high
Elmes near which place Master Claxton was slain, and fetched a deep sigh and
said, would to God I had never seen that place. I found both Shearwoods, and
her Confession to agree both in the Murdering of Master Holt, Master Claxton,
and Master Low, only they differed, in the striping of Master Claxton; for
Shearwood in the receiving of the blessed Body and Blood of Jesus Christ with
her, then affirmed to her face, that she helped him, for to take Master
Claxtons clothes off, she there confidently, denied the same, and confirmed at
her Death, whereunto as also unto other base aspersions on the dead, I give no
credence, thus of her who died very penitent, and after her execution was
conveied to Barber Surgions Hal for a Skeleton having her bones reserved in a
perfect form of her body which is to beseene, and now remains in the
aforesaid Hall; of whom I hope, God did take mercy.

A general Admonition.
Dear Country men, what I have here done, is intended for a general good,
Cautionary for all.

1. Parents. 2. Children. 3. Masters. 4. Servants.
1 Parents, cast not off your Children, neither leave them to shift in the
wild world in their Youth, knowing how subject Youth is unto temptation, and
to be seduced in the times of necessity, and extreme want. 2 Children, obey
your earthly Parents: unto such as obey, God has promised his twofold
blessing: first, Life temporal: Secondly, Life eternal. 3 Masters
terrestrial, be good to your earthly Servants, knowing ye have all one
Master, which is Christ in Heaven, that shall one day judge you for the good
and evil ye have done. 4 Servants, obey your earthly Masters, and the Masters
authority is known by obedience to their Commandments: Whosoever resists,
receives the greater condemnation.
One thing more I will commend unto you, the modesty of a milke-woman, in
finding him naked covers him with her approne.

CONCLUSION.
Thy God fear to offend,
To him do daily pray,
He will thee send an happy end,
And live with him for aye.
The Habeas corpus, or Remove of Country Tom into the Country.
GOod Reader, to the preceedent, give leave to add these succeeding true
Relations: Since the execution of the horrid and unheard of pair of Murderers,
the Coy-duck, or divellish allurer to sin and confusion, was dissected, and
her dried Carkase or Sceleton of Bones and Gristles is reserved, in proportion
to be seen in Barber Surgeons Hall.

As for the dismal accomplisher of her damned plots, he was hanged in Chains
near Pancras Church, being a just reward for his vile attempts.

One thing of note I here speak of; Two Gentlemen coming early in a Morning
that way, were astonished at a sad object, committed by a company of villains:
Oh pity! still running on to more mischief, having such a fearful spectacle
before their eyes as Country Tom, which should rather have frighted and
hindered them from doing this bold and insolent act upon a Butcher coming that
way, though late; who said only thus, that it was no matter if all such rogues
were served so, which words when these lurking villains heard, presently
seized on him, and took his clothes, and bound him naked to the Gibbet with a
gagge in his mouth, bidding him watch the Coarse: but as this poor man said,
he lost no money; because he had a little before bestowed it other ways; and
thus he was hampered by a cursed crew, who lurked there-abouts for their prey.

But this was not the reason of his remoove; for the adjoining Inhabitants much
damnified and annoyed by his hanging there, labored and obtained the same. And
indeed the chiefest cause, was the spoil and depopulating the growing fields
there abouts, stripped of all fences; and the grass trodden down, and made
level by the infinite confluence of all sexes from all parts, which caused the
Farmer and those that took grounds, to petition to the King and Council for
redress, who out of pity and compassion, graciously granted the Habeas
corpus, and remove of the said murdering Monster which (to avoid confusion of
Spectators) they performed in the Night, carrying the hated spectacle to the
place assigned them, to the Ring-crosse beyond Islington: where those that are
not yet satisfied, may see Country Tom got farther into the Country.

Thrice removed, first to Grayes Inne-fields, next near Pancras, last, to
Ring-crosse, to parallel his base inhumane Murders in diverse distinct places.

-- Nec enim lex iustior ulla,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
Sceletos, quasi cadaver assicatum, est ossium corporis humani invicem
cohoerentium universarum universa compactio.

FINIS.

