A Dialogue bewteene a Papist and Protestant, applied to the capacity of the
unlearned.

Made by G. Gifford, Preacher in the Town of Maldon.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Field, and Felix Kingstone. 1599.

To the right Honorable and his very good Lord, Thomas Earl of Sussex, Vicount
Fitzwater, and Lord Egremont, and Burnell, Knight of the most Honorable order
of the Garter, Captain of all the Queens Ma. Gentlemen Pencioners, and
Gentlemen at arms: Chief Justice and Justice in Oyer of all her Ma. Forests,
Parkes, Chases, and warrens by South Trent: and L. Chamberlain to her
Highness, grace and peace in our Savior Christ.
MAny in these days, with great learning, have encountered the Papists, and
strongly confuted their errors: It may be marvelled therefore, what should
make me so bold as to attempt any such matter, after so great clearkes, being
far unable to come nigh that which they have attained. I answer in mine own
defense, that my travel is not to this end, as though I would make pretense
of equal learning with those: but rather to put the stone and sling into the
hands of little David, to conquer great Goliath withal, when as he is not able
to weld the weighty armor of Saul. The battle is hot and fierce every where,
between Israel and the uncircumcised Philistines. Great armor and weapons are
prepared for the soldiers wherewith to arm and defend themselves: yet for the
most part, not such as do fit young David. For whereas sundry men of fame have
showed deep skill, in setting forth their books to confute the Papists, full
of learning out of the ancient Doctors, Councels, Hystoriographers and others:
it does not so well serve the turn of the simple unlearned man, neither can he
defend himself therewith, because it is beyond his reach. This is the thing
which has moved me to write somewhat of these matters: applying my self to
the capacity of the unlearned, dealing only out of the word of God, which
lies open unto them as their Armorie. This also has caused me to deal in
those points which do most commonly trouble them, omitting the great points in
controversy: persuaded that I perform a duty therein. For like as when an
house is on fire, the weak which is not able to throw a bucket of water to the
top of the roof, may yet by no means be excused, if he stand and look on:
because he may do somewhat in the lower parts of the walls: Even so I think
my self not discharged, for this, that I am not of ability for to set forth
any thing, which may reach so high as to encounter with the principal
adversaries, and to further the learned: seeing I may profit the simpler sort,
for whose sakes, and in respect of whom, I have taken this travel. I present
this simple and poor treatise unto your honor, not as though I did esteem it
worthy to bear the name and title of so noble, so honorable, and so great a
personage, and of so high estate. But only (having no other way or mean) to
signify and show forth a thankful mind, for that great aid and honorable
assistance which I have received from your Lordship, in the furtherance and
maintenance of the Gospel. It has pleased the God of heaven, the Lord of the
whole earth, to appoint me being very weak to build in the desolate places,
and to spread the light of his glorious Gospel, even there, where it
appears by the abundance of iniquity that of long time Satan has had his
throne. How unwilling he is to be displaced, and to give over the room unto
Christ, may evidently appear, even by this, that he stirs up his warriers,
which like wild Bores would root up all that may be planted, which with
malicious intent, and subtle craft, conspire what mischief soever they can,
thrusting forth their bold instrument, which with an iron face, is so hardy
that he dare attempt any thing; which could no way be danted in his venturous
attempts, nor their fury qualified, until such time as he was fallen into the
hands of your honor, to come to his account for his manifold misdemeanors,
and to receive some wages for his travel. I trust therefore your honor will
think the best of this my boldness, considering it is what I am able. If I
could in more ample manner testify my good will, and in any sort to be
thankful, agreeable unto that which of duty I owe for your great kindness,
then would I be glad. But I leave the full recompense unto him who is able
indeed to reward whatsoever is done for his name sake, and for the defense of
his Gospel, and succor of his little flock, which is always compassed about
with so many enemies, that they are able to devour and eat it up, and yet their
bellies no whit the fuller. Some do wonder how it should come to pass, that
among us there should be so many, which being borne since the Gospel was
restored in this land, are so zealously addicted unto Popery, which they never
did know: and so utter enemies unto the Gospel, which they hear: but if they
weigh the causes of this deadly mischief, they will cease wondering at that,
and rather wonder, that there be no more. For how can it be, so long as there
be so many abuses in the ministry, but that many shall stumble and loath the
Gospel: for from thence, as it is manifest, the chief cause of this evil
does spring. True it is, that our ministry, does fight against them, but yet
in such sort, that it does greatly increase them, seeming and pretending to
tread upon those cockatrice eggs, for to break them, and so to destroy
utterly the viperous generation, when as indeed, they sit upon them, and so
hatch the broodes of this evil kind, and bring them forth in great plenty.
For behold a number cry out against Popery, and proclaim utter defiance in
speech, but their doings are such, that for every one which they convert to the
Gospel, they cause an hundred to revolt, to be hardened in their errors, or
fall into flat Atheism: while many contrary to the profession which they made
when they entered, setting aside the care of souls, not esteeming, nor
regarding what become of them, study most how to clime high, and to satisfy
their ambitious desire of honor: raking together livings, couetously and
greedily: not caring who feed the flock, so they may come by the fleece.
Moreover, the door has been opened also to let into the Church, a rowte and
swarm of such as are more like the priests of Jeroboam then ministers of the
Gospel, not only unlearned Idols, which have mouths and speak not, which
being weary of their occupations and covet to live easily, and to that end are
entered, but also riotous dicers, gamsters, quaffers, quarrellers, adulterers
and such like. If the matter were secret, I should do amiss to make it
manifest, but when as it is open in the sight and view of all men, who can
complain justly, when it is spoken of? The Lord put into the heart of our
governors to redress it. The same Lord heap his graces upon your Lordship,
with increase of honor in his world, and everlasting life in the world to come
Amen.

Your Honors most humble to command. GEORGE GIFFORD.

A Contention between a Papist, and a Professor of the Gospel.
PAPIST. I Am glad to see you well Sir, for old acquaintance sake, which I
would be content to renew again.


Pro. I am glad also that you are in health, I saw you not a great while before
now.


Pa. I pray ye what news? were ye at London lately? What is become of the
Catholics? I hear there has been great disputation in the Tower.


Pro. There has been disputation indeed, by reason of a proud challenge
which was made.


Pa. Ye might term it a proud challenge, if he had not been able to make his
part good. But I hear he behaved himself very learnedly, and with great
victory against all which were set upon him.


Pro. Ye have heard more lies then that, but I perceive ye are a Papist, or at
the least a favorer of Papists, for they brag that he did excellently,
although in very deed, he was there showed to be but an obstinate cauiller.


Pa. Wherefore should ye call me Papist, I am obedient to the laws, and do not
refuse to go to the Church.


Pro. Then it seems you are a Church Papist?


Pa. A Church Papist, what mean you by that?


Pro. Do you not know? I will tell ye: there are Papists which will not come at
the Church: and there are Papists which can keep their conscience to
themselves and yet go to Church: of this latter sort it seems you are:
because ye go to the Church.


Pa. How can you tell what is in men's consciences, you take upon ye to judge
very deeply?


Pro. Nay there needs no deep judgment, they are so shallow that a man may
easily sound them to the bottom. Although the Church walls be thick, yet a man
may epsy them by some creuise.


Pa. Whereby do you know them so easily? I pray by what notes can ye discern
them?


Pro. Some of them will not stick to maintain such popish opinions, as they
know there is no great danger of law for. The simple sort which can no skill of
doctrine, speak of the merry world when there was less preaching, and when all
things were so cheap, that they might have xx. eggs for a penny. Other there be
which never name Papists, but Catholics, and if ye reason with them, they do
it but for arguments sake, not that they say so, but the Catholics say so.
Another sort there are, and those are as pestilent as can be for to the end
they may do the greater mischief, they are Protestants: but yet if any
Preacher do zealously beat down Popery, he does reaile, he is cholerike, he
is uncharitable, and so they devise all means possible to disturb him: these
and suchlike, are the notes to discern a Church Papist.


Pa. You call them zealous Preachers, and they be very scismatikes, and seduce
the people with false doctrine, and therefore such as be wise, quiet, and stayed
men, cannot abide them.


Pro. I see well that you are not of those which to it but for Arguments sake,
you will not show what the Catholics say, but what your self says. Had ye not
great cause to be offended when I said ye were a Papist?


Pa. I think plain dealing is best, in very deed I take ye to be heretics, I
am a Catholic.


Pro. You take us to be heretics, but in very deed I am able to prove that
you are foul and rank heretics your selves: and far from true Catholics.


Pa. Ye do us great wrong to call us heretics, for we hold and be of the
Catholic Church, which has ever condemned all heretics. If Catholics be
heretics, then are we also heretics: but this latter belongs to you, and
all other which forsake the truth.


Pro. Nay, those which hold the Catholic faith are of this Catholic Church,
and the doctrine of the Catholic faith we hold, which has always condemned
heretics: and therefore ye do us as great wrong in calling us heretics, as the
Pharisees and Sadduces did unto Saint Paul when they counted him so. Act.
24.14.
You have forsaken the true doctrine of the old Catholic faith, and therefore
ye are no Catholics.


Pa. We are they which hold the ancient Catholic faith, yours is new
doctrine: we believe as all our forefathers did: If your doctrine be true, then
all our forefathers were damned, for they always believed contrary to that
which you believe.


Pro. The manner of you Papists is, to affirm things very strongly, but when
ye should prove them, then are ye exceeding weak, and can bring forth naught
but poor stuff. Ye are as able to prove these things which ye affirm, as I
am to remove mountains.


Pa. We may say so of you more rightly, because you affirm much and prove
little. I am able for to make good all that which I have spoken.


Pro. Are you content to make trial who bring strongest proves, if ye be, let
me hear how ye can disprove our faith, and afterward I will show what I have
to disprove yours, and so it shall be seen which hold the Catholic faith, and
which be heretics.


Pa. I am very well content, tell me what I shall begin withal.


Pro. Begin with those things which ye affirmed even now: prove that our
doctrine is new: that you believe as all the forefathers did: that our doctrine
does condemn all our forefathers, and every wise man will grant that yours is
the Catholic faith: if ye cannot prove this, then confess that your doctrine
is come from the father of lies, and not from the God of truth For there is but
one truth, which is Gods word, all other doctrines are of the devil.


Pa. If that faith which you believe, and doctrine which you profess, be not
new, then was it believed and known in the days of our forefathers: but it
was not heard of in their days, neither was it known until such time as
Luther did set it abroach. Therefore the proudest heretic of ye all shall
never be able, to show that it is of antiquity.


Pro. Here are ruffling words: the proudest heretic of the^ al is not proud
enough to deal with you: but indeed if your proud conceit were no sturdier
then your argument, ye might easily be dealt withal. I confess your Mayor,
or first proposition of your argument to be true, which is this, if the
doctrine which you profess be not new, then was it believed in the days of
our forefathers. But your second, which is this, that our faith and doctrine
was not heard of in the days of ye forefathers, until Luther did set it
abroch, is most false, for our doctrine is the holy word of God, delivered to
the Church by the Apostles and Prophets. We believe as Adam, Seth, Enoch, and
the rest of ye holy fathers did believe before ye flood: we believe as Abraham,
Isaac and Iaacob did believe, and the other godly patriarchs before the time
of Christ: we believe as the blessed Apostles of our Lord, and other holy
teachers in the Church a long time after the^ did. But you Papists when you
speak of the forefathers, let pass all these, which are the most ancient and
most principal, and draw us to a few of your own, which have been within
these seven or eight hundred years: in which time religion has been
corrupted, and the great Antichrist, for the most part of this time has
prevailed. If we cannot prove our faith to be the faith of Abraham, let it be
counted new, and let us be taken for heretics.


Pa. If this were true, that you believe as the holy fathers before the flou^d,
as the Patriarchs after the flood, as the Apostles of Christ, then doubtless
you are in the right way: but these are but words, how will ye prove this? we
say still you are heretics and fallen away from the faith of these: and we
prove it by this reason, because ye are fallen away from the faith of those
forefathers which succeeded these. For the fathers of our Church are the
successors of the Apostles, therefore you being fallen from them, are fallen
from the Apostles.


Pro. Then ye grant, that those have the truth on their side, which believe as
the Apostles, Prophets, and Patriarchs did. It remains only in trial which
of us hold that faith which they did. We prove that we do, because we
acknowledge nothing but the holy doctrine of the Bible, upon which their faith
was grounded. You bring for your proof ye doctrine and succession of some me^,
for certain hundred years. Let us now see who brings ye best and surest
proof, say what ye can to weaken ours, and then I will show that the fathers
which you boast of, from whom we separate our selves, are no successors of the
Apostles, and therefore in departing from them, we depart not from the
Apostles: whose doctrine we hold.


Pa. What are ye the better to say ye bring the Scriptures, and ye believe
nothing but the Scriptures, and ye will be tried by the Scriptures? By this you
prove that you believe as the Apostles, and Prophets did, your reason is not
good, because the Scriptures are hard to be understood, who shall judge which
is the true sense and meaning of them? who shall tell ye how the Apostles and
forefathers did understand them? Shall not the Church? If ye may take them
after your own interpretation, then ye will do well enough: but the Church
(which we are) is to interpret them, and therefore we do still condemn you
and all other heretics, although ye allege the Scriptures never so much,
because you do but abuse them, as the devil did when he tempted Christ.
Therefore ye must bring better reason then this, to prove that ye hold the
ancient Catholic faith, for this does not prove it.


Pro. Oh what a trim shift is this: here is as pretty a iugling cast as ever
the devil could play to bleare the eyes of the simple and unskillful, to make
them believe that the scriptures are nothing without the interpretation of the
Church of Rome: Each man must light his candle there, or else he shall go in the
dark. This is one of the most subtle and crafty cauils which you Papists can
make, and one of the strongest pillars which your kingdom is built upon: For
when ye cannot deny but yt the Scriptures do speak for us, then ye fly to
this, that they are hard to be understood: ye would make us believe that when
they speak of one thing they mean another: when they speak of good they
mean evil, when they set forth heaven, they mean hell.


Pa. It is like you will answer truth, when ye charge us with so great and
manifest a lie, where can ye show that ever any of our side has spoken or
written, that when the scripture speaks of one thing it means another?


Pro. Is that such a lie, I pray you what is the cause why ye tell us the
scriptures are hard, when they speak so fully, so plainly, and plentifully,
and with such consent and agreement in those things which are the principles of
our faith, if it be not, that when they speak of one thing they mean another?
Wherefore should we not understand what God says unto us, if he deal simply?
Wherefore did the Lord speak by his Prophets and Apostles to the simple and
common people if they could not understand what he said? I cannot tell, what
other reason ye can show, why they should be so dark as you make them.


Pa. Are ye then in good sadness of this mind, that the scriptures are not
hard to be understood? and are they not uncertain, because they may be
expounded diverse ways?


Pro. I do not deny, 2. Pet. 3^
but that as S. Peter says, There be some things hard to be understood, which
the unlearned and unstable do pervert, as they do other scriptures to their
own destruction. I confess with the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
Heb. 5.
That there are things hard to be understood, because we be dull of hearing.
Also the just judgment of God upon the wickedness of men, as it is set forth
by the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 5.
in hardening their hearts and blinding their eyes, that in hearing, they may
hear and not understand, in seeing they may see, and not perceive, and also in
causing the word of God to be unto them as a sealed book, sa. 29 I.
does make the Scriptures hard to be understood. Now although they be hard
also in some sort even to the godly and diligent man, and those whom God does
teach, yet they are not hard as you make them, that is to say, that in no wise
they may be understood or have any certainty in them, but by the interpretation
of the Pope and his clergy. For that is most blasphemously to take away the
light from the most pure and clear word of God. This therefore is but
devilish craft, by which ye would drive us from Gods word, which stands sure
on our side, and makes flat against you. The Scriptures can be expounded
rightly but one way: having but one sense.


Pa. That which you do allege out of Saint Peter does make for us, where he
says, That the unlearned and unstable do pervert not only those hard things,
but also all other Scriptures to their destruction. 2. Pet. 1.
Likewise the same Apostle says, That no Scripture is of private
interpretation. S. Paul says, 1. Tim. 3.
That the Church is the pillar and ground of truth. Then I reason thus, the
unlearned do pervert the scriptures, therefore they are not to deal with them:
no private person is to interpret the Scriptures: therefore none but the
Church, or those which have the authority in the Church: and because the Church
is the pillar of truth: whosoever does separate himself from the Church, does
depart from the truth. And by this we do still prove that you are all
heretics and scismatikes, and do pervert the scriptures, because you take
them not as the Church does expound them. The scriptures seem to be on your
side, but they are not, they seem to be against us, but they are not.


Pro. This is very sound stuff, you make three strong conclusions out of three
sentences of the scriptures. In the first ye reason thus, the unlearned do
pervert the scriptures, therefore none can understand the scriptures but the
learned: by this, your meaning is to shut out all the layitie as you call them
from judging of doctrine, and to allow understanding of the scriptures to none
but the learned, that is, the Clergy of Rome, for that we shall have by and by.
But ye ouershoote your self much when ye think that Saint Peter by unlearned
men, does mean such as have not bin brought up in school learning, and so put
that difference between clergy and layitie: No he counts all those learned
which are taught of God, both of the common sort of people and other: and all
those are unlearned which are not taught of God: although otherwise they abound
in all knowledge of tongues and arts, or whatsoever. Such as have learned
Christ Jesus, and him crucified, and so are become new creatures in Christ,
they are learned: Col. 2.
For in him are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. He that has not
learned Christ, he is unlearned. If he be not newborn, but as S. John says,
1. John. 3.
commits sin he has not seen him nor known him: although otherwise he be
never so studied a man in the scriptures. Math. 11.
For this cause we see that the poor Publicanes are called the children of
wisdom, because they embraced the doctrine of Christ, when the great Doctors
the Scribes and Pharisees, were stark blind. They said, none followed Christ
but the multitude, which knew not the law, John. 7.
which were accursed: when as indeed they were blind and accursed themselves:
and so fares it now with the Pope and his shauelings: they say the people
cannot understand the scriptures, when themselves do not. The next sentence
upon which you conclude is out of Peter also, where he says* No scripture is
of private interpretation. From hence you fetch an invincible argument to prove
that none of us may interpret, but Rome only: No private man is to interpret
the scriptures, because no scripture is of private interpretation: all those
which are not of the Popish Clergy, or which have not authority in the Church
from the Pope, or do not expound as the Church, are private men: therefore none
of those are to interpret the scriptures. Here the Pope like a greedy
cormorant will have all to himself. But ye deal deceiptfully, or at the least
unskillfully with the text which ye allege: for Saint Peter when he says
private, does not speak it to make this difference between men, as though for
interpreting the scriptures, some should have authority, and some should be
private: but he sets men against God, calling that private which is of man.
For he does reason thus: the scripture was not given by the will of man, but by
the spirit of God: therefore the interpretation thereof must be of God, and
men must not bring that which is their own. If the interpretation be by the
spirit, then is it not private: if it be out of man's brain, although it should
be the Pope and al his Cardinals, yea, ten thousand Popes, it is still private,
after the sense in which S. Peter does call private. For let any skilful man in
the greek tongue look upon the word, which is idias epiluseos, and he will
confess, that it does signify, that which is ones own. Then the sense is
plain, and it is also manifest how peeuishly you pervert the word of God. What
manner of argument is this? a man may not in the interpreting of the Scriptures
bring that which is his own: therefore none may interpret them but ye Church
of Rome. Your last reason is not worth answering: for although it is most true,
that ye Church is the pillar of truth, and yt those are void of truth, which
abide not in the Church: yet this is as false, yt the Pope and his company are
the Church of Christ, as the other is true, and therefore we are no heretics
nor Schismatikes for departing from you, which are a den of thieves, which have
conspired against the truth.


Pa. Two gross things and strange I gather out of your words, the one, that
you would have the people of themselves, to judge of doctrine: the other, ye
will have no other interpreter of the sense of the Scriptures, but the Spirit.
I pray ye, I am an unlearned man, and would feign know which is the truth, I
hear you allege the scriptures in one sense, and you say you have the
spirit, our men allege them in another sense, and say they have the spirit:
the Anabaptists, they have the spirit, the Arrians they interpret by the
spirit: what shall I do? here is every man has the spirit, and yet every one
goes a contrary way. It is manifest therefore that here needs a more
certain thing to lean unto, or else the simple man cannot tell which way to
turn him. What shall he do now, but look how the Church believes, and rest
in that. For he must have that which may teach him to know which of all these
has the true spirit, or else he is never the nearer.


Pro. Ye find two gross things in my words, one of them is, that I say the
people can judge of doctrine, when it is preached. What does our Savior Christ
mean when he says, John. 10.
My sheep hear my voice, a stranger they will not hear. they fly from
strangers? Ca^ they know the voice of the true shepherd from the false, and
can they not discern doctrine? The other is, that I will have none other
interpreter of the sense of the scriptures but the spirit. 1. Cor. 2.
S. Paul says: the ear has not heard, nor the eye has not seen, neither
came into man's heart, ye things which God has prepared for them that love him:
but God has revealed them unto us by his spirit: for the spirit searches
all things, yea the deep things of God. And the great doubt which you put
forth in the simple man, which would feign understand the truth, and which of
all those four that ye named have the spirit, I answer, that if he himself
have not the spirit of God to teach him, he shall not be able to judge: but if
the spirit do teach him, then can he find it, for the spirit which does teach
the one to utter the doctrine, which is his, does teach the other to know that
doctrine, and in them consents unto it, being his own: and therefore Saint
John says to all ye Christians: 1. John. 4.
Try the spirits whether they be of God. By your saying the people should not
be able to try them, and so he would teach them that which did not belong unto
them.


Pa. What a trim color you set upon the matter, and how pretily ye can
shift: but I will lay open your subtlety. To prove that the velearned people
can judge of doctrine preached, you allege the saying of Christ, My sheep
hear my voice etc. I pray ye Sir, if a man should demand of you, whether he
means that this shall be immediately or not, and whether, when he says they
shall be all taught of God, does he exclude the ministry of men or not? I know
ye will say the voice of the great Shepeard is heard when those which he has
appointed to be shepherds do utter his doctrine. Ye will also say, that
although God teach, yet he does it by the ministry of men. Then I answer, that
the unlearned people are to hear the voice of Christ from the Pope, who is
their great shepherd under Christ, and God does teach them by him: they are to
stick and cleave to his determination: of themselves they cannot judge, but
they must do it by him: he must tell them which is the woolfe, and which is
the false Prophet: they cannot tell which comes with the true spirit, or
which spirit is of God, but as he does direct them. And for this cause we say
still, that ye have not the true Catholic faith, nor the scriptures on your
side, nor the true sense, because ye are gone from the only true expou^der of
them.


Pro. All that I have brought is but a color and a pretty shift, and easily
disclosed with one poor distinction of mediate and immediate. But I pray ye
Sir, how does this hang together, the voice of the true shepherd is heard when
it is uttered by men, therefore the way to know it is by men. God teaches by
men, therefore God teaches to discern the spirits by men: or if it be so, must
this needs follow, that the Pope and his Clergy are those men which must do
the deed? This is a strange thing, Christ Jesus, S. Paul, S. Peter S. John and
others, do foretell the people of false prophets the only way and remedy to
avoid them, as you say, is to hang upon the Pope, and yet none of all these or
any other, has so much as once noted it, or tell the poor people by whose
direction they might be safe in so extreme danger.


Pa. There was no need so long as Christ or his Apostles lived to tell them
so, for they taught them this thing, or how can you tell they did not: they
might, though it be not written: is all written which they did teach?


Pro. Here is mighty strong gear, this were able to set up a Pope, if he were
thrown down, and to revive him again, if he were hanged. No marvel forsooth
Christ nor his Apostles did not tell ye people, yt the Pope and Church of Rome
should be their refuge when heretics should seek to seduce the^, because
there was no need so long as they lived: this were somewhat if they had told
only of ye false teachers of their time: but when they foretell the great
dangers and mischiefs which should be in the Church long after their days,
being above all things most chary of the safety of the same, this were very
absurd, Acts. 20.
not once to give any note of the surest remedy. S. Paul says to the elders of
the Church of Ephesus, that he did know, that after his departure there should
enter in grievous wolves, not sparing ye flock, and there should rise of
themselves which should speak peruerie things, and draw disciples after the^:
and yet he speaks of no remedy but yt which was banished in your Church,
namely careful and dilligent teaching: for he says, therefore watch and be
mindful, etc. S. Peter says, as there were in times past false prophets among
ye people, so shall there be false teachers among you: 2. Pet. 2.
and afterward he shows this remedy, not willing them to hang their faith
upon his chair, or successor, but to call to remembrance the words that had
been told them of the holy Prophets, and by the Apostles of Christ. Saint John
says, 1. John. 2.
little children, it is the last hour, ye have heard that Antichrist shall
come, I say there are already many Antichrists in the world: and a little after
he tells them how they shall escape the danger: but (says he) you have
received an anointing: what, from the Pope, or his greasy oil? no, but from
the holy one, and know all things. Again, ye need not (says he) that any man
teach ye, but as the annoynting do teach ye. Christ Jesus foretells, Math. 24.
that there should rise false Prophets, and do such wonders, that if it were
possible, even the elect should be deceived: but yt (as his words do most
plainly show) is impossible: and why? does he say, because I will leave a
vicar, and as many as hang upon his sleeue shall be safe? not so, but because
God has chosen them: for he does keep them, John. 10.
and none is able to take them out of his hand. He says in another place:
Beware of false Prophets, which come unto you in sheep clothing, but
inwardly are ravening woolues: and whereby, shall men know them: Math. 7.
He says, by their fruits. But how know we whether he did tell them so or
not, he might, though it be not written? alack, alack.


Pa. I know your sect make but a scoff at the traditions of the Apostles which
were not committed to writing: but let that go, it is but a folly to persuade
those to believe, which have denied the faith, and despise the Catholic Church.


Pro. The Pope of Rome has a great chest full of traditions, which S. Peter did
not put in writing, but he has: and whosoever does not believe these, has
denied the faith, and dispiseth the Catholic Church. This is not your best
way, your best way is to stand to this, that the Pope has authority to decree
what he will: and so your traditions shall stand sure though they be flat
against the word of God. But I am content to let this go also, and to return
to that which we had in hand: and because I would have the matter made a little
more plain, I will demand a question or two at your hands. Was there not a
Church in the world before the coming of Christ?


Pa. Who does deny that? the Jews were the Church and people of God.


Pro. Then tell me further, whether had they the word of God or not, to
instruct them and to ground their faith upon?


Pa. They had the books of Moses, they had the books of the Prophets: they
were bidden to hear them.


Pro. Who were appointed in the Church to expound the law and the Prophets unto
the people?


Pa. The high Priest, and other Priests, and Levites, which God appointed to
have that office.


Pro. Did the high Priests which succeeded Aaron depart away from the truth
and seduce the people at any time, and likewise the other Priests and Levites?


Pa. What though they did? they cruc ified Christ: yet it follows not that
the Pope and his Clergy can err, because Christ promised to be with them to
the end of the world.


Pro. I will come to that promise afterward, but tell me how did the Church in
the mean time, when the high Priests and rulers taught contrary to the truth?
what were they to lean unto now? where was the Church?


Pa. It was in Christ, and those which believed in him, these were the Church
and he that joined himself to these did right, and had the true faith.


Pro. The high Priests and Rulers in the Church could fetch their authority and
succession from Aaron, which was many hundred years. When Christ taught
against these, and they against him: alleging that they were Moses desciples,
Mat. 21.
they did know God spoke to Moses, as for him, they did not know whence he
was: John. 9.
they were the Church and had authority, they demanded of him by what authority
he did those things, and who gave him that authority: they said he seduced the
people, and none followed him but the common people, which knew not the law,
Mat. 15.
which were accursed: they accused him that he brake the tradition of the
Elders, he brake the Sabbath, and such like. How did the people know who had
the truth, he or they?


Pa. They might know by the miracles which he wrought, when he cast forth
devils, and healed diseases.


Pro. They said, he did it by the power of Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils:
John. 10.
and so blinded themselves and all other whom God did not teach by his holy
spirit: and therefore he says unto them: John. 8.
Why do not ye hear my voice: because ye are not of my sheep. Also in another
place, those that are of God hear the words of God, ye therefore hear them
not, because you are not of God And whereas you speak of miracles which he
wrought: John. 10.
how did the people know that John Baptist was of God, seeing he wrought no
miracle? there can be nothing more plain then this, that the people did not
stay their faith upon the succession of the Priests, nor upon the antiquity
of traditions in the Church ordained by the fathers, nor upon the consent of
the Clergy, or any outward thing, for then they should have refused Christ:
John. 6.
but they were given unto him of his Father, and taught by him, and therefore
heard his voice, and believed in him. Blessed art thou Simon, John. 10.
flesh and blood revealed not this unto thee, Mat. 16.
but my father which is in heaven. Even after this manner do the Romish
Pharisees deal now against the Gospel and the true believers: we are the
Church, we are the successors of Peter, ye must be judged by us: your
doctrine is new: ye break the traditions of the Elders, ye are seducers and
heretics: but when you have said all that ye can, we stand still upon the
rock of Gods truth, which flesh and blood has not revealed unto us, but the
Father by his spirit.


Pa. Here is much a do, and yet nothing to the purpose. You made a comparison
between our Church and the Church before Christ: and because the people then
did not stay upon the rulers of the Church, therefore they must not now, how
follows this? do ye not know that there is great difference Christ made
promise, that he would be with our Church unto the end of the world: Matthew. 28.
and therefore it can not err. Now because the Church cannot err, all those
must needs be heretics which depart from it.


Pro. There is great difference between our Church say you, and the Church of
the Jews: Is the great difference in this, that yours are the greater
Pharisees? no say you, our Church can not err, because Christ has promised to
be with it to the end of the word? I marvel much in what scripture a man shall
find that same promise, where Christ says, I will be with my holy vicar the
Pope to the worlds end, and he shall never err: I suppose a man shall find it
either in Legenda aurea, or in some such Canonical scripture. I know you will
say, it is in the new Testament for Christ did promise his Apostles yt he would
send them the Comforter, John. 16.
and that he would be with them unto the end of the world. Ye reason thus,
Christ promised to be with the Church, therefore with the Church of Rome, your
conclusion is very nimble, and comes skipping in before it be called, but it
must be sent away like a skipiacke, and be taught better manners. Is there also
(as you say) so great difference, that the Church before Christ had no such
promise? was the true Church ever without the spirit of God? had they no
promise that way? what says God by the Prophet, Psalm..132.
or what means this, I have chosen Sion, here will I rest, here shall be my
habitation for ever. Isay. 49.
And likewise when the Prophet Isay says, but Sion said, God has forsaken
me, and the Lord has forgotten me: what does the Lord answer? Can a mother
forget her child, and not pity the son of her womb? though these should
forget, yet will not I forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon my hands,
and thy walls are ever in my sight. Are these no such promises as yours have?
You see for all these, the builders refuse the stone, Psalm. 118.
which is made the chief corner stone: the rulers in the Church and such as
succeeded the holy Priests of God, fell away, nevertheless God preserved his
Church: so the Pope, his Cardinals, his Bishops, and Priests, became and are
very hell hounds, and yet God does preserve his little flock: they should be in
a most miserable case if they had none other guide but that horned beast of
Rome: the Church, that is the elect cannot err to destruction; but the Pope is
a Captain of heretics.


Pa. This is your spiteful spirit by which ye do blaspheme, but the holy
father is never the worse for your railing: it is all the reason ye have
against him.


Pro. As great railing and blasphemy, as if a man should call the devil a
Dragon: for Saint John does call the Pope Therion, which is a fierce and savage
beast. But let us come to the matter again, when ye charge us with new
doctrine, and make the cause to be this, that we depart from that doctrine
which your Church has believed now certain hundred years, against which we
allege the eternal word of God, then ye shift us off with this, that we
cannot understand the word, unless we receive the meaning thereof from your
Church: and although we have the most clear testimonies of the Scriptures
against you, yet ye set light thereby, and all because your Church cannot err,
and you expound them otherwise. Therefore there is by your doctrine no rule
left for a man to build his faith upon, but the exposition of the governors
in the Church. Answer me directly unto this, were there not false Prophets
in old time among the people of the Jews?


Pa. The Scripture does show that there were sometime a great number at once,
and the Church of God did ever condemn them.


Pro. But tell me, how did the people know who were the true Prophets and who
were the false? the one side comes, and they say, thus says the Lord: no
says the other side, that is false, thus says the Lord quite contrary to the
other: and not only at some times a multitude of false Prophets against one
true servant of God, but also the high Priests and other Priests and
governors in the Church, taking part with them against the true Prophet. Where
was then your golden rule, which ye would have ye common sort to measure their
faith by, I believe as the Church believes: I cannot judge: I must not meddle
with the meaning of the Scriptures?


Pa. Prove this which you have said: it is an easy matter to affirm, and you
are ready to do that, but your proofs come slowly. Can you show that the high
Priests and governors in the Temple did join with the false prophets, against
the true Prophet?


Pro. They come a little faster then you would gladly have them: or else you
would not be so calm, if there were but a little matter of color against us
for want of proof, you would set up your bristles by and by, and you would
crow: but when the matter brought out does choke ye, then ye say there is
nothing brought: ye bid me prove, that when there were false Prophets, and that
sundry against one, they had the Priests and rulers of the Church on their
side. Read Ieremias the Prophet, ye shall find the false Prophets against him,
and the Priests also: and even as you say against Luther, and other which
embrace the holy Gospel, they be heretics, the Pope cannot err: so say they
for themselves against Ieremias, Iere. 18.
come let us imagine some devise against him: for the law shall not perish from
the Priest, nor the counsel from the wise, nor the word from the Prophet.
Were the godly people now which forsook the Priests, Iere. 1.
Princes, and Prophets, and gave ear to Ieremias, apostats? Did not the Lord
tell him at the first when he sent him, that he should have the people, the
Priests and Princes against him? Also ye may see it very fully and plainly
expressed, Iere. 20.
that Pashur the Priest, which was appointed, chief in the house of God, did
smite Ieremias, and put him in the stocks, when he heard him prophecy: here
was a right Pope, and a stout Bishop: that durst set Gods Prophet in the
stocks. This thing is set forth in sundry places of the Prophets, how the
Priests and the false Prophets were linked together against the true
messengers of the Lord. For ye may see how the Priests and Prophets, and people
lay hold on Ieremias, Iere. 26.
and would have put him to death: for the Priests and Prophets accused Ieremias
before the Princes, that he was worthy of death. Eze. 22.
The Prophet Ezechiel also complains grievously of ye Priests and the
Prophets. Also long before the time of Ieremias and Ezechiel, the Lord
complained of ye Priests and Prophets for their wickedness. For thus he
says by Mica, Mica 3.
the Princes judge for bribes, the Priests teach for reward, and the Prophets
do prophecy for money. Behold also what God complains against ye Priests and
Prophets, even in the days of the most godly king Iosia: as ye may read in
the Prophet Sophanie. Sopha. 3.
Likewise where the holy Ghost shows the cause of the great destruction which
came upon Jerusalem: 2. Chro. 36
he says that all the chief Priests and people, committed many transgressions
according to all the abominations of the heathen, and defiled the house of God
which he had sanctified in Jerusalem: and how God sent unto them his
Prophets, but they would not hear them. See then, if the wickedness of the
Priests draw the Lord out of his Temple, unto which he had made so glorious
promises, and which he had chosen to be the place where he would be worshipped:
shall we now tie him to that chair, from which there have come the most
horrible villainies against God, almost that ever were committed in the world?
shall we say that the most pure and most holy God, has fastened himself to
the mother of whoredoms, and abominations?


Pa. Ye take great pains to small profit, for a man may in a word overthrow
all that you have built: ye have showed how the Priests and governors in the
Temple did corrupt their ways and joined with the false Prophets against the
true messengers of the Lord. You gather out of this, that there was no rule
left in the Church for the people to try the worship and service of God by,
but this conclusion of yours does not follow, because the corruption of manners
and withstanding the true Prophets, did not hinder but that they remained still
the Church, and the worship appointed in the Temple was not to be despised, for
if any did forsake it, they were indeed Apostats: for when they were even at
the worst, Christ sends such as he had cleansed of the leprosy to show
themselves to the Priest, and to offer the gift which Moses had commanded. This
must needs be so, for otherwise, how should that saying of Christ, Math. 18.
dic ecclesiae, tell the Church, be a perpetual rule to all the people: if
there be once no Church visible to tell that cause unto, where is then the
doctrine and precept of Christ? Here therefore, I say still ye be heretics and
apostats, insomuch as ye have departed from the holy mother the Church: ye have
forsaken the fellowship of the faithful: and that which ye pretend the abuses
of the Church, is no excuse at all: for will ye forsake your mother, because
she wants perfect beauty, or because there is some deformity in her? the
abuses are to be reformed, the thing must not be destroyed. I would wish ye
therefore to return, and to submit your selves again, and not to cast away
your souls, for ye be all damned heretics which be out of the Church.


Pro. The breath of your mouth is very strong, when as with one blast ye are
able to overthrow whatsoever a man can bring out of the word of God. But ye
deceive your self greatly, for Gods truth will stand when you shall fall. Your
poor and silly shifts will stand ye in no steed: you make your reason after
this manner, when the Priests were most corrupt, either in manners or
withstanding ye true Prophets, yet they remained still the Church, and the
service and worship in the Temple, was not to be despised: if any did, they
were apostats. This ye confirm by such as Christ having cleansed he sends to
offer to ye priests, and then by a perpetual rule which Christ gave, dic
ecclesiae tell ye Church. Hereupo^ ye conclude again yt we be heretics, because
we have forsaken the Church of Rome, where ye tell us that ye abuses should not
drive us to do so, we must not forsake our mother, for some deformity, and want
of beauty: I will answer ye, yt this argument may easily be denied, when you say
those which did forsake the worship in the Temple were Apostats, therefore
those which forsake the Church of Rome are heretics and Apostats: for to make
this hold, you must first prove that God has tied his religion now to Rome, as
he had then to the Temple, and that he has chosen Rome, as he then chose mount
Sion: which ye shall never be able to do, because it is most false. And then ye
must prove, that your worship which you maintain, is yt which God has
commanded, and then doubtless he that shall depart from that, is an heretic.
For if any did depart from worshipping in the Temple, he was not an apostat
for departing from wicked Priests, but for refusing that which God had
appointed him to do. We depart not but from a den of thieves, and from an heap
of damnable errors, and not from that which God has commanded: and so Christ
sends the Leapers which he had cleansed, to fulfill the law of God commanded
by Moses, which was to be done, and to be done no where but in the Temple where
the Priests bare the sway. The other reason which ye bring, as a perpetual
rule of Christ, dic ecclesiae, tell the Church, is of no value, for although
the rule be perpetual, does it therefore follow, that it can always be put in
practice? Has Christ by that rule, where he says if thy brother offend
against thee, reprove him, if that do not serve, take one or two with thee, if
he will not hear them, tell the Church, etc. set down that there shall be
ever a true and visible Church, which will correct the offenders? How say ye to
the Church of Israel in ye days of the Prophet Elias, 1. King. 19.
when he complained to God, that they had killed his Prophets, dug down his
Altars, and that he only was left, and they sought his life: God made him
answer, that he had a Church among them: I have left unto me seven thousand in
Israel, etc. which Elias did not see. Where was Dic ecclesiae now become? Must
they bring their Dic ecclesiae to those which are fallen away from God, and
will excommunicate the children of God, John. 9.
as the Pharisees did the blind man? Did he ever come unto them to be absolved?
When your devilish sinagogue do excommunicate us, we be the nigher unto
Christ. It is true which ye say, that the true Church must not be forsaken for
certain abuses, but if the abuses be such as utterly destroy the faith, as
yours are, then is it no longer the Church of Christ: but a company of wicked
hell hounds: and therefore ye do but loose your labor when you exhort us to
rerurne to your Church, which is no mother of ours, but she is the whore of
Babylon, which has filled the earth with her fornications. There are none
blessed unless they depart from her, her ways are the ways of damnation:
Revel. 18.
come out of Babylon says the Angel of our God.


Pa. I could answer ye again with words, but so I should but spend time,
neither do I like of long circumstances without matter, which is the fashion
of you heretics, when ye have no sound reasons, then to make a show of speech,
and fall to railing.


Pro. You cannot abide words without matter: neither can your meek spirit
tell which way to fall to railing: but let any indifferent man read over the
books which your great Catholic Doctors set forth, and he will confess, that
in many words there will be found little matter. Take away your untruths,
slanders, and spiteful raylings, there will be but a little left behind. If
we speak of you, that which the Scriptures pronounce against you, by and by we
rail. Did John Baptist rail when he called the Pharisees, Math. 3.
The generation of Vipers? But seeing ye ione matter, let us see it, to prove
our doctrine to be new: ye must bring stronger reasons then that the Church of
Rome for certain hundred years has not allowed it: there is no point of our
faith, but it is far more ancient then your popish decrees: your bauld and
doltish shift, to drive us only to your exposition of the Scriptures is not
worth a straw, Gods holy spirit has bestowed great gifts upon his Church in
these last days. Proceed with your matter.


Pa. Nay you shall not so slily convey your self: ye make small account of the
interpretation of the Church of Rome, which agrees with all the holy Doctors
and Teachers even from the time of the Apostles. Your exposition of the word
began of late in Germany, and therefore is not to be taken for Catholic.


Pro. Seeing ye must needs lie, it is good to lie for somewhat: all holy
Doctors and Teachers from the Apostles are on your side: this all does signify
none: For the very truth is (as every man that can read their writings may
see) that they be (except in a very few points) all against ye: saving such
holy devils, as within these latter times have been the Popes own Doctors. Our
exposition is the same which the godly fathers (before Antichrist had gotten
the upper seat in the Temple) did use: and therefore Catholic: although your
mother disallow it.


Pa. Nay heretics be liers, we say the truth when we do challenge the ancient
Doctors and Fathers to be on our side: we succeed them, we honor, love, and
commend them more then you, we pray for their help, you seek to deface and
pull down all remembrance of them: let all the world be judge whose side they
are like to be of, ours or yours, when we have them in so great and high
estimation, and you set so light by them. Can we be fallen from them (as you
say) being so ready to do them all the homage we can? our hearts do witness
that we do it in simplicity. Moreover, all your matter is not worth a straw
which ye have brought out of the Church of the Jews: ye have showed that in
Israel Elias could see no Church: that in the Temple, the Priests and false
Prophets did conspire against the true messengers of the Lord. This were
somewhat if you could show it in our Church, unto which Christ has made his
promise, never to forsake it: but to give it his spirit to the worlds end:
Your matter is too weak to overthrow so great and manifest truth.


Pro. It is indeed a certain and sure thing, that heretics will lie, and
therefore you Papists, whose Religion is a very hotch potch, and dunghill of
all gross heresies, will not stick at that. But here is a great reason
brought, to prove that the holy Saints of God are on your side and not on ours.
The holy Fathers are like (as all men may judge) to be on their side, which
succeed them, which do most love them, honor them, and commend them, but
therein who knows not that ye go beyond us, which ye accuse to deface their
honor? And therefore they be on your side, and must needs take you to be their
special friends. Indeed we confess yt you do give that honor to the Saints
which we deny them, and therefore ye seem to love them more then we. But when
the matter comes to the due trial, every man shall easily perceive, that it
does not therefore follow, that they be on your side: because it is no true
love nor right honor which ye give unto them: nor such indeed as they can in
any wise accept of: for when as all their delight and joy was that God alone
should be worshipped, and have all his whole honor reserved to himself: how
can they take it well at your hands, when ye play the arrant thieves, and most
villanously rob God to give unto them? Are there any good me^ hear in earth
which would be content to see thieves spoil other men's goods, and to bring
the same to them? if not, how should the blessed Virgin, the holy Apostles, and
other Saints of God count those sacrilegious wretches to be their friends,
which rob and spoil God of his honor, and thrust Christ from his office, to
bestow upon them? No, those honor them which follow their steps, in giving all
honor to God, they loved and held the truth, which was dearer to them then
their lives, and therefore are on their side which walk in the truth. Moreover
your love and honor which you give and bestow upon them, is even such as the
wicked Apostates among the Jews did bestow upon the holy Prophets of God. Thus
Christ speaks: Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 23.
ye Hypocrites, because you build the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and garnish
the Tombs of the righteous: and ye say, if we had been in the days of our
Fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
Prophets. Will you say that these did love the Prophets, which did so much hate
Christ? did they honor the Prophets, and dishonor Christ? Even such are you,
ye honor the holy Saints of old, but if they were alive on earth, ye would
murder them. In the next place you make that to be nothing which I allege
concerning ye Church of ye Jews ye require that I should show some such thing
in your Church. What say ye to this, 2. These. 2.
that S. Paul says there should be a falling away: the man of sin should be
set up. Revel. 13.
And when Saint John speaking of the same apostasy says, that all the world
wondered and followed the beast. And again in the same Chapter he says, that
whosoever would not worship the Image of the beast they should be killed,
Revel. 13.
and he caused all both small and great, rich and poor, bond and free, to
receive a make in their right hand, or in their forehead. And that none might
buy or sell, but he which has the mark or the name of the beast, or the
number of his name. Ye will not deny also but that which Saint John speaks of
the woman persecuted by the Dragon, Revel. 12.
is meant of the Church, for the place does plainly interpret it self, when
he says in the last verse of the Chapter, That the Dragon was wrath, and went
and made war against the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments
of God, and have the testimony of Jesus. Behold, how he shows there that this
Church should be nourished in the wilderness for a time, times and half a
time, from ye presence of the Dragon Where was then the visible Church? Where
was now dic ecclesiae tell the Church, if ye will understand it so fully?


Pa. Must those things needs be expounded against us? Can it not be taken but
against the Church of Rome?


Pro. That Prophecy of S. Paul, of the apostasy by the man of sin, and the
description of the kingdom of Antichrist by S John in the Revelation, cannot
with any show be turned upon any other save the Pope and his Clergy. But I
will come unto this thing more particularly afterward. Ye cannot now deny but
that there might be and was, so great decay of truth by Antichrist, that a man
could not always see a visible government of the Church, seeing Antichrist
was the head, and al things were done at his will and appointment.


Pa. You would make the world believe what you list: but let them believe ye
that will. It is a like matter that God would forsake the Church so many hundred
years, and suffer all our forefathers which were better then we to be deceived
and to perish. No, no, I would we were like them: they were wiser then we are.
It is marvel that they should be so far wide, and no man to reprove them.
There is no wise man, but he will take it to be the more surer way to cleave to
so many godly and wise forefathers, and good Saints, then to take part with a
few scismatikes and new fangled rash heads, which will not stick to condemn
and overthrow all good orders, be they never so ancient. Oh, this corrupt age,
whither will it tend at the last?


Pro. What we go about, or would make the world believe, God himself is both
witness and Judge: to him and to his holy truth we appeal. It is not like
that God would forsake his Church so many hundred years: no he never forsook
it one hour, no not even when it seemed to be quite destroyed and wasted by
Antichrist. He never suffered all our forefathers to be seduced and to perish:
neither did he ever suffer any one of our godly forefathers to perish: he
forsook Antichrist and his brood, as a den of thieves, which forsook him: he
forsook all those which received not the love of the truth that they might be
saved: and sent them strong delusions to believe lies: that so they might be
damned: as S. Paul sets it forth. 2. These. 2.
This was neither all the forefathers, nor yet so many hundred years as you
seem to note: for the most part of your Antichristian religion has not as yet
seen six hundred Summers: And in those times there were ever some which cried
out of your corrupt doctrine and wicked manners He is the right wise man which
does not leave to, nor depend upon the multitude of men: but does cleave to the
word of truth, and to those which embrace the same, although they be never so
few. If we condemn any thing but that which the Lord himself does condemn:
and overthrow any orders but such as he tells us to be disorders, although
they have had long continuance, you might well term us schismatikes and new
fangled: but seeing we do nothing but that which is warranted by his mouth,
your blasphemies are against him. This corrupt age (as you term it) if God
prosper his Gospel, will never cease until it have plucked down the Romish
monster.


Pa. By your own words then they have been deceived these five or six
hundred years: could all the world so damnably err thus long? or is it to be
thought, that in all those years, the most part, or as you say, almost all
were cast away, for they were always very few in number which have refused to
obey the Church of Rome?


Pro. Within that compass of time which I named (as it is most evident by many
ancient writers) the most part of your abominable abuses have been
established: yet ye cannot gather that all the world have erred so long,
because we say your Romish Sinagogue has: for you never had any more indeed
but a corner of the world under your Pope: your dominion was only in Europe: as
for Asia and Africa, which refused to be of your faction, they are far the
greater regions as the countries of Grecia, India, Chaldea, Egypt, Ethiopia,
and a great number besides these. Let a man reason with you thus: either all
these were deceived or else you: so that of necessity you shall be forced to
confess, that God suffered so great multitudes to err. But what absurdity is
there in that, seeing the holy Scriptures do show that of old God chose the
seed of Abraham only to be his Church, and cast off the Gentiles to walk
after the vanities of their own heart: these were a far greater multitude
then ever your Popish rout, and three times as many hundred years as you, they
might allege for the antiquity of their religion. Might not these have
objected against S. Paul and the rest of the Apostls: what, were all our
forefathers for these thousands of years cast away? they never heard of this
new religion of Christ, were there not a number of great wise men among them?
Shall we forsake all these, and the faith which they have taught us, in so many
learned and excellent books, and follow a few of you? No doubt a great
multitude of mad fools, such as you Papists are, did reject and condemn
the Gospel of Christ with that reason. I say still therefore, that he is wise
which sticks fast to Gods word, and not to the multitudes of men: nor to the
antiquity which they can allege.


Pa. It pleases you to term us what ye list: but it is no matter, your words
are no law. I could answer you well enough, but I perceive it is but to
small purpose: a man were as good to hold his peace for let never so great
reason be alleged, you are so blind that you do not understand it.


Pro. Indeed you do but loose your labor, if you think to persuade me unto
your mind: your stuff is over course to entice any wise man from the truth. Ye
may seem to old simple souls (whose eyes ye have put out) to be excellent
men, and they will nod, and sooth your sayings, when ye tell them this and that
of forefathers, and what a goodly world it was, and yt your religion has ever
since Christ bin continued: although indeed ye need not tell so great a lie to
persuade them: for it is even enough to draw them wholly, to say but this, your
father, your grandfather, and your great grandfather believed thus, will not
you do as they did? but show your words once to a man, although a simple man,
which has but even a little tasted, and has but some smacke of Gods word, and
he will judge them by and by to be counterfeit, and very bables, so that they
can move none but children and fools. And therefore seeing as the Apostle S.
Peter says, 2. Pet. 2.
Ye should beguile but unstable souls, and such as Saint Paul does say, are
like children carried away with every puffed of vain doctrine: Ephesians. 4
all men are to be exhorted to grow and increase in understanding of Gods holy
will, that they may be able to epsy such draffe and filthy dregs as you
offer them, not to be wholesome unto the soul.


Pa. Then you are able to make a simple man to be so well lettered (as you say
by the spirit) as to judge in so high causes: you that can do so much, can be
able to absolve me in a great doubt, or else you shall show your self to be a
very vain man. Tell me then, how shall a man know whether he has the spirit
of God or not, and when he believes this doctrine or that doctrine, and is
persuaded that the spirit of God does teach him: how shall he be sure as you
say, that he has the right spirit? all sorts of heretics do persuade
themselves that they have the spirit. May not a man be deceived, and suppose
he has the spirit of God, when it is a spirit of error?


Pro. Here is a great doubt, and a meruellous hard question propounded: how a
man shall know whether he has the spirit of God, etc. This is so hard a case,
that a man had need to take long deliberation to make answer. Well may this
be one question and doubt in your religion, and a matter so far beyond your
reach, that you do suppose an impossibility: it does manifestly declare yt your
acquaintance has been very little or rather none at all with the spirit of God,
that ye neither know him, nor yet can perceive how he may be known? Ca^ ye
know fire from water, or can ye know an Appletree from a Crabtree?


Pa. Ye have made a great speak. What if I can know fire from water, and a
Crabtree from an Appletree? Does this reason follow, because a man does know
these, therefore he may know the other? Is your comparison equal? These
things we see, feel, handle, and taste, the other we do not. Ye must bring
other manner of gear then this, or else a man may crave leave to laugh at ye.


Pro. I cannot let ye to laugh, if it be your pleasure even your belly full,
but yet it must be at your own folly. For the matter well waied and
understood, peradventure ye may show your teeth, but not laugh very heartily.
Ye can know fire from water, and why, because the nature and working of the one
is contrary to the other: ye are able to know an Appletree from a Crabtree,
because ye taste of the fruit, and they are the one sweet and the other
sower. Is there such a working, and quality in the creatures that they may
thereby be known? Is there such certainty to try the tree and to know it by
the fruit? And has the spirit which made them, and preserves them, so lost
his power, and are his qualities and operations so weak, that he cannot be
discerned from the spirit of the devil? Are his fruits such as they cannot be
discerned from the rotten fruits of the flesh, and the works of darkness?
Ephesians. 1. Romans 8.
Saint Paul says, that we are sealed with ye holy spirit of promise, he
wills me^ to walk after the spirit, and not after the flesh: he sets
forth the fruits of the flesh, Galath. 5.
and the fruits of the spirit. Romans 8.
He says, that this spirit does bear witness unto our spirit, that we are
the sons of God. This should be but a weak witness if we should not be
able to know whether we have him or not. But perhaps all these scriptures and
many other which I could cite, have not light enough in them for your blind
eyes: and therefore I will show ye the thing more fully thus. A man hears the
word of God preached, 1. Cor. 12.
it strikes his heart and conuerteth him: whereas before he was as blind as a
beetle, now he sees ye light: whereas before he had no love to the holy word
of God, now his heart is inflamed with zeal and delight in it: whereas before
his care was of this world, and covetousness did cause him greedily to seek
unlawful gain, now his mind is bent upon heavenly things, and after them he
seeks: whereas before he was full of adulteries, riot, wantonness, vanity, now
his wicked affections are tamed and altered, he much abhors such filthiness:
and whereas before he could never cease doing evil, he was never at ease, but
when he delighted himself in some ungodliness: now he is a man quite changed,
he does much lament and sorrow that ever he was so wicked to despise God: all
his joy is now to do good works, the fear of God is before his eyes: now
feeling this wonderful change in himself, that he is newborn to God, that
he is a new creature, he knows right well that he is lead by the holy spirit
of GOD, and that he has wrought this new work in him.


Pa. It seems by your talk that such as have received the spirit are so sure
that they cannot be deceived. To what purpose then was Saint Paul so careful
to warn the true Christians to take heed? yea we may see, that there were
diverse of them seduced. This is quite contrary to that certainty which you
do speak of.


Pro. There is no co^trariety in these things: for if any were seduced, and
drawn away from the truth unto destruction, it is most certain they were
never sealed with the spirit, but had some small taste. He labors with the
other, to have them grow strong, to be grounded and rooted in the truth, not
to be as children, carried away with every blast of vain doctrine: for the
blessed Apostle Saint Peter describing such false Teachers as you, 2. Pet. 2.
shows that they shall beguile unstable souls. Such therefore as will not
be seduced, neither by you nor any other heretics, must abound in knowledge
and grace: for so we are willed. If the wisdom of the holy Ghost be in us,
and has enlightened us, the subtlety of the devil, and the power of
darkness shall not overcome us: the power of the holy Ghost is greater then
the power of Satan, and for this cause we are sure of victory. If this were
not, we could have but small comfort: we should he but in woe case. It is not
your greasy pope which could help us: which himself is overcome of the
devil, and obeys his will.


Pa. Well, well, for this matter, I say still that your doctrine is new, that
ye condemn all our forefathers: and whereas you would seem to prove that it
is the ancient Catholic faith, because ye prove it by the Scriptures, I say
you prove nothing: for the Scriptures can prove nothing without the
interpretation of the Church, you can not interpret, neither can ye judge, but
the great shepherd, whose voice ye should hear, must give the sense:
therefore I say still that ye be heretics all the pack of ye: and but that I
spare ye I could bite ye a little better, I am sorry ye be so wilful.


Pro. When ye have spent all your powder, then ye retire back again into
your castle, which is so sure as you suppose, that nothing can batter the
walls: but when a man does view them well, he shall find them to be but
painted clothes. For in very deed ye stand obstinately and frowardly upon
certain bare affirmations. And when a man has never so strongly confuted and
disproued them, yet ye allege them still. But let this go, and come to the
rest. Ye say ye could, but that ye spare me (or else that ye are musled) bite me
a little better, I fear not your teeth, for I trust your biting will not
ranckle, not because they be not venime, but because I am so well defensed,
that ye cannot fasten your teeth upon me. But spare not, power out all your
poison, and do your worst.


Pa. Ye do but gibe and mock at those things which I speak: it is even
according to your profession, ye are deriders of good things and of the true
Catholic faith: take heed, it is better for ye to repent, and to turn home
again to the holy Church, which ye have and do dishonor. I said that I did
spare ye, and it shall appear now, for I will touch ye a little nearer, and
yet but with the truth: not with all that I might say neither: for it were
infinite to rehearse all your abominable ways which ye walk in, and are to
be charged withal. A little shall suffice: I say by your wicked and carnal
doctrine, even your new Gospel, ye teach all loosenes, and licentious liberty
to the flesh. As for example, ye deny the merits of good works, ye teach that
men are justified by faith, without good deeds: ye teach Election, and
Predestination, and deny freewill: and so by this means, the people are
brought to have no care of good works but to live as they lust: for thus it
does follow, if we be justified by faith alone, what need we care for good
works? If we be chosen and predestinate, and have no freewill left in us, to
choose or refuse, then let God alone, we cannot further nor hinder our selves,
what should we ear, let us then set cock a hoope, and take our pleasure
while we be here: this is your sweet doctrine, thus ye teach.


Pro. I need not marvel to hear ye threaten to bite me: when ye dare open
your mouth to blaspheme the Lord God, and to bark like a most filthy and
profane dog against the most glorious Gospel of Christ. Which (howsoever ye
belie it) does teach all heavenly purity, and care of good works. They be
conclusions of your own framing, which neither we teach, neither do they
follow of that doctrine which we deliver. The devil and the flesh reason
thus: God has chosen men, they have no power of themselves, they cannot
deserve or merit by their good deeds, but are justified by faith alone in the
merits of Christ, therefore let them care for no well doing, but walk after
the carnal desires and lusts of the flesh: what should they care, they can
neither further nor hinder themselves? But the holy spirit of God concludes
thus: God chose us when we were his enemies, of his own good will, when we
were not able so much as to think a good thought: therefore we are bound to
yield all praise and honor unto him. He has of his infinite love given us his
dear and only be gotten son, for to redeem us, and to justify us:
therefore we ought to show our selves loving and kind unto him again, to
serve, honor, and obey him, in all true obedience, and holy conversation. What
should I stand to recite testimonies of Scripture to prove these conclusions,
and to overthrow yours, when as every poor man which has any delight in ye
sacred Bible, is able for to see them? They be worse then brute beasts which
have not learned this out of the word, that God has chosen his people, has by
his free grace redeemed and justified them, to the end they may be holy, and
zealous of good works: although not to merit withal, which they cannot, yet
to glorify GOD, as Christ says: Let your light so shine before me^, Matthew. 5,
that they may see your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven. Likewise he says: Herein is my father glorified, John 15.
that ye grow and bring forth much fruit. We teach with S. John, 1. John 3.
he that works righteousness is borne of God, he that commits sin is of
the devil. We teach with Christ, John 8.
that he that commits sin, is the servant of sin. We teach with Saint Paul,
Romans 8.
that those which are in Christ walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit. We teach with S. James, James 2.
that that faith which is without good works is dead, and therefore cannot
justify and save a man. It is not faith but a dead picture and show of faith,
which the devils have. The true faith cannot be without good works. So that
we teach a necessity of good works: not to merit or to justify, but to show
forth the fruits of our calling.


Pap. Ye say that ye do not teach liberty to the flesh, nor give men leave to
live as they will: nor that your doctrine does not destroy good deeds: but
shall we give more credit to your words, or to the success, and fruits
which we see to follow of your doctrine? He that will rightly try what your
doctrine is, let him look what fruits it does bring forth. What better and
more sure trial can a man require then this? I trow ye will not refuse to be
tried by this rule. Then let us come unto it, your holy doctrine, how comes
it to pass that it does bring forth so many sour fruits? Was there ever more
sin committed? What foul wickedness is it which does not flow in your
streets? You may compare with the Sodomites, for your gluttonies, wantonness,
whoredoms, pride, covetousness, and such like. What good thing can a man see
in your Clergy, which should give good example to others, and whose pure
conversation should be a pattern for other to follow? How many of them are
there which are men void of all learning and grace? who having spent their
time lewdly, and consumed their substance, when they cannot tell how to live,
step into the ministry, or at the least coveting to live at ease, and
shunning to work, being scarce sit for the plow, much less for the pulpit,
yet are admitted by your heavenly Gospel, to be masters in Israel. How many
wanton fleshly adulterers are there among them? How covetous, how worldly, how
ambitious are your learned men? Do not all men see how they preach and take
on, until such time as they be laden with livings, and are got up as high as
they can, and then as though they had won the vpshot, they put up their
arrows into their quiver, and unbend their bows: they need not any further
to trouble themselves? But what need I speak, when the matter it self does
as it were make open proclamation? Your common people, seeing they have no
better examples, are given over to all kind of naughtiness. If ye can prove
this to be wholesome doctrine, which does bring forth and allow such things as
these, I will be no longer a Catholic.


Pro. If I should answer ye only with this, that your evil fruits do far
pass ours, although it were most easy to be proved, yet should I make but a
slender answer: because that in overthrowing you, we should also condemn our
selves. For this I must needs confess with ye, that the doctrine which does
bring forth evil fruits cannot be good. And a good trial I do confess of
the doctrine, to be in the good fruits which it does bring forth. When ye
charge us that all abominable sins do flow in our streets, we do also with
great grief acknowledge it. And this far I allow your sayings: but when ye
ascribe these things to our doctrine, as the fruits, which it does bring
forth: there I do disallow ye, as a blasphemer of God, and his most pure
truth. For it is not because our doctrine does allow, much less breed such
evils, that they be among us, but because our doctrine which is the holy word
of God, is of the most men despised, and not known. The Lord by sundry of his
prophets does complain of the Jews, and accuses them to be worse then the
heathen: was therefore the law and doctrine which he had given them, to be
blamed? No, they refused to walk in his ordinances, and so do the people at
this day. The Lord be blessed there are a number (although far the less
number which lie as scattered corns in a great heap of chasse) which have
embraced the holy doctrine of the Lord, and do express it in their lives, and
do every day mourn for the abominations of Jerusalem: and earnestly do
desire that the Lord would purge it. If either our doctrine did allow such
abuses, or those which do sincerely embrace it, walk in them, then your
words which ye utter might have some weight in them: but seeing it is
otherwise, ye remain still with the rest of your companions, a wicked
blasphemer of the holy word of God. As for that which ye utter against our
Clergy, it makes nothing at all against us: unless ye could prove that our
doctrine does allow such. But ye may see the contrary, for our Gospel does
allow none but learned Teachers, and godly Pastors, which express the word
in their conversation: those which Saint Paul allows unto Timothy and Titus,
1. Tim. 3. Titus 1.
those does our religion allow, and none else. If any have preached diligently,
and when they are once come to promotion have given over, it is plain, they
sought themselves, and not the Lord Jesus: will ye lay the fault of such
ungodly men upon the doctrine. Cease therefore, not to be a true Catholic,
which ye never were, but an obstinate blind heretic, without true
understanding.


Pa. Better is a bad scuse then none at all. Forsooth the doctrine must not be
blamed, but the men: but I pray ye for your Clergy, why are those things
maintained? Are they unknown? If not, why are they borne? Answer this, and
then ye say somewhat to the purpose.


Pro. When I have answered it you shall gain little. For as I may most easily
prove that Gods word which is our religion, does allow no such ministry, so
may I as easily show, that all this corruption in the ministry came from you,
we may rue the time that ever your corrupt laws and orders in matters for the
Ministry took place in the world, because the very Relics of them are
deadly wheresoever they remain, and do poison the Church of GOD: the most
filthy and cursed abominations in the lives of the Ministers, and other abuses
began among you. Ye have no cause to boast of the goodness of your Priests,
nor of their learning, look upon those of them which at this day do remain
in our Church, not as standers, but as poor rotten stakes in an hedge: the
people may here and there, (although twenty years and od have greatly wasted
them) see how grave Divines and godly Prelates were among you. As for the
maintenance of such things among us, I say still we defy all such abuses, we
allow none other ministry but such as S. Paul describes. If any man do
defend an unlearned ministry which is not able to guide the flock of Christ,
or to build up the temple of God: or if any do bear with vice in the
ministers, they do follow Antichrist, and not S. Paul: they are then become
enemies of Christ, and fighters together with you against the Gospel,
destroyers and rooters up of the Lords vineyard, which is to be dressed and
kept by expert and skillful laborers. You must learn therefore not to slander
the most glorious Gospel, nor to lay the blame of such things upon it, but for
to find the fault where it is.


Pa. I cannot deny, but that in words ye do seem for to allow such as Saint
Paul wills they should be: but when it comes to the performance, ye do
utterly fail: for having many learned men, ye have none godly: all of them
given over to some foul vice or other: as to be ambitious, covetous
worldlings, idle bellies, gluttons, proud prelates, vain boasters, or such
like.


Pro. I perceive your subtle craft well enough: ye describe our learned men by
these foul vices, when ye mean your popish clergy. For from the top of yours
even to the bottom: even from the triple crown, unto the bare footed friar,
al these vices, and a great number more do abound. The Lord be blessed that in
our Church and other Churches of his Gospel, has raised up a great number
whom he has prepared and sanctified by his spirit: which do give testimony
of their purity, both before GOD and men: that they seek not themselves nor
the world, but only to build up the Church of Christ. As for other which are
defiled with any of those crimes which you do name, I say still, they be not
the workmen by whom God will build his house: they be rather fit to set up the
kingdom of Antichrist, and although they should take upon them with never so
great profession to defend the truth, yet because they profess godliness in
word, Titus 1.
and have denied the power thereof, God does not acknowledge them to be on his
side: neither will any godly man account them true professors.


Pa. Will ye allow none to be of your side, but such as be free from those
forenamed vices or such like. Alas where is your Church become? where shall a
man find a company of those rare birds which you speak of? take the people
and their teachers together. Who are they among ye which are not accused in
some such crime or other?


Pro. I say still, that because God has allowed none to be his redeemed and
chosen, but those whom he does also sanctify: we also do allow none, neither
of the teachers nor of the people, to be the true friends of the Gospel, but
such as do yield and show their obedience thereunto, and express the doctrine
thereof in their conversation. How small soever the number of such seem unto
your bleared eyes for to be, they are the true Church of GOD, and more in
number far, then you could wish. I know if all should be guilty which are
accused, then your saying were true: but when it is most evident that the more
godly a man is the more he is subject to false accusations and slanders: even
as our Savior himself was, and his Apostles, and other most godly which
succeeded them: your reason is very weak, when ye say all are accused: for,
does it by and by follow, that all are guilty?

I confess that our Church if ye understand the whole assembly, is full of
all wicked vices: but shall Gods word be blamed for that? There are a number
among us which are of your brood, whose evil life is seen well enough: there
are a very great number of mere worldlings, which do not greatly esteem any
religion, although they seem now because of laws, to allow and favor our
side, yet in their hearts they rather cleave unto you: which is evident by
this, that they can better away with the friendship and familiarity of a rank
Papist, then of a zealous godly protestant: they will highly commend the one,
and deeply condemn the other. Thus ye shall have them speak: such a man,
indeed I cannot praise him for his religion, I let him alone for that, he
shall answer for himself, I would he were of a better opinion, but for his
behavior there is not a better man. As for such and such, I cannot tell what
to make of them, they are so holy, and so precise, that they have forgotten all
good fellowship. Thus you and your favorers among us, agreeing in a carnal
and evil conversation, and filling all the land full of naughtiness: do
charge the Gospel and holy religion of God, which does most severely condemn
and curse all such abuses. I will not stand in particular reciting of those
vices which you Papists do join in, and allow in our carnal protestants, it
would be over long, a man might make a long book of that matter alone.


Pa. I confess there be many which care not what religion be, so they may live
in wealth and ease: but what are those vices wc we do join with the^? Ye make
a very liberal accusation of great and foul matter, although ye say it would
be too long to recite the particulars, to entreat upon them, yet ye may name
them.


Pro. In few words I may name some, if that will pleasure ye: our carnal
protestants are covetous greedy worldlings, crafty in their dealings to seek
all advantages against those with whom they deal, full of usury and briberie:
and these things are also in you, our carnal Gospellers are very foul mouthed
in slaunderings, railings, ribaldries, and horrible oaths: these things ye make
no conscience of. Our carnal protestants are given over to spend their time in
gluttonies, drinkings, vain pleasures, and unlawful exercises: these are your
venial sins, and whosoever will not run with ye to power out themselves in
the same excess of riot, they are precise fools: more nice then wise: they do
it but of vain glory and singularity.


Pa. Ye may be ashamed to charge us with such things, seeing our Church has
always used so sharp discipline upon such offenders: you may justly be
charged, because ye let loose the raines unto all vices: ye give the flesh the
swinge: ye have no discipline among ye, to make men stand in awe.


Pro. We may be ashamed to speak truth of you: but you must not once blush at
the matter when ye blaspheme the glorious Gospel of Christ: and why? only
because ye are past shame: but let your words go, and come to your matter. You
may not in no case be blamed for such vices, which have always holden men in
awe with sharp discipline, and corrected the offenders. It is well known to
al wise me^ what your discipline was: true it is that ye did hold men
wonderfully in awe, but of whom? not of God, but of the Romish prelate. No man
durst wagge his finger against him: no man might once find fault with any of
his dirtie inventions, under pain of his extreme and heavy curse. But each
man might live as he lust in all vices against God: only he must confess his
sins to the priest, and receive a certain penance, to fast certain days,
or to go on pilgrimage to some Saint: or to have the Popes pardon for a piece
of money, not only for his sins past, but also for those which he should
afterward commit. Others when they had committed some horrible sins, must
whip themselves, and so at it again. Thus your holy pope, did open the gate to
all uncleanness, and therefore in the Scriptures is called the man of sin.


Pa. This seems very strange to me, how penance and correction should open
the gate unto all sin. It seems by your words, that men would love sin the
better, because it should be punished. I would wish ye to be better advised in
your words, for I could take ye in many such absurdities: but I am almost
ashamed to recite them, they be so childish trifles, to come from any one of
your coat, which profess learning. But let me see how you shut up the gate
against sin, which inioyne no penance or correction. It is a world to see the
vanity of men's minds, which persuade themselves, that they can make men believe
the crow is white: alas your poor Sophistry is not able to do this. Yet I
perceive ye have some grace in ye, for I trow ye blush.


Pro. It would make any man blush I trow, to be taken in such a trip, and so to
ouer-shoote himself, as I have done, by affirming that your discipline did
open the gate unto al sin. For can such sharp penance, as to fast three
days together with bread and water: or to go bare footed to our Lady of
Walsingame: or for a man to whip himself until the blood follow: or to give
ten shillings for a pardon, make men love sin the better? This gear I trow
would scarre them, and make them to have little lust to sin. Oh no good sir,
this is nothing so sharp as hell fire: men find such a sweet taste in sin,
that if they may escape so they will not care. The adulterer has such pleasure
in his unclean lust, that he will to it again, if he may be persuaded it be
but a whipping matter. The drunkard will have one pot of ale the more, if he
may heal the matter again by drinking a cup of water. The envious and
hateful man will have one fling at his enemy, if a pair of old angels will
dispatch the matter, and procure his pardon at the hands of the holy father:
and so in each sin. O ye holy hell hounds, here is your sharp discipline,
by which ye give liberty unto men to turn back to uncleanness, even as a dog
to his vomit. But while we reprove your discipline, we have none our selves:
and so we do but play the Sophisters, which would take upon them to prove that
the crow is white. Sir, before I come to our discipline, I say our doctrine is
this, that under pain of Gods curse and eternal damnation, men must return
from their wicked ways, and not return unto them again: they must give up
themselves wholly to serve God in all good works. As for the discipline of our
Church, thus sharp it is, yt the obstinate sinner is to be cut off from the
congregation, and to be delivered up unto satan and not to he received in
again, until such time as he has declared very apparent tokens of deep sorrow
and hearty repentance. Let al men judge whether this be not to shut up the gate
against sin.


Pa. Now you may very well be likened unto a man that will make great brags of
his riches, when he is nothing worth. A marvelous sharp discipline ye speak
of: but I pray ye where shall a man find it? eue^ in your Spiritual courts, for
there a man if the officer cannot get his fee, shall be cursed to the devil,
and thrown out of ye church: yea so severely that he shall not be received in
again, before he come weeping, until the tears drop out of his purse. O ye
dissolute teachers of liberty, and maintainers of iniquity, cease your
bragging of those things which are not among ye.


Pro. Your blasphemous tongue will never cease, unless it be cut out of your
head: do we teach liberty? do we maintain iniquity? Admit your saying be
true, yet I pray you how slenderly do you reason, when ye say, that a man is
excommunicated for money, and received in again for money, although they do
not repent: and therefore your Gospel gives liberty to sin. Oh good sir,
Christ and his Gospel allow no such thing: if men do offend, do not you
therefore blame the truth: for there is no equity nor good dealing in that.
What though we have not the discipline of the Gospel in our Church, here in
this land, so whole and sound as it should be, yet because we allow it, we
pray for it, we thirst after it, we confess the want thereof: we ought not
to be charged as those which defile Gods house, we wait when it shall please
God to put into the hearts of our godly governors to purge the Church by it.


Pa. You give the greater color unto the matter, because a few among you
speak of such a thing: what is that to the purpose? the whole discipline of
your Church, which all those which are your Church do acknowledge, is
established among ye, there is no want confessed.


Pro. No man is to regard what a few or many do speak, but what God does
speak by his word. Whereas ye affirm that our Church does acknowledge no
want, I say our Church does acknowledge a want: for who are the Church, or of
the Church, but such as do embrace the whole word of GOD? But least ye should
still go forward after your former manner, and say that a few do this, and not
the state of our Church: look in the book of our Common Prayer, and there ye
shall find that the grave and godly fathers of our Church, when they did
reform it from Popery, setting down the curses out of Moses, which are to be
denounced at a certain time in the year: they do withal set down and
declare their meaning, namely, that this should be for a time in stead of that
discipline, which they can not only confess to be wanting, but also greatly
to be desired: as they wished for it.


Pa. I cannot tell what the fathers of your Church do set down there, neither
do I mind to look. When ye have said all that ye can, ye shall be driven
to confess that there is all loosenes and liberty unto the flesh among ye. Ye
have feasting and gluttony, in stead of fasting. O our good forefathers, how
much are ye unlike them? they did oftentimes fast and punish their bodies, and
go in sackcloth: these new Gospellers have found a more easy way, they can
do all contrary and yet go to heaven nevertheless. Our fathers lived in
great straightnes, and these walk at liberty: which of these shall we like
best? shall we forsake them and allow of these? No, Christ tells us, The way
is straight which leads unto heaven. If ever any walked in that way, they
were our forefathers, which punished themselves, and lived so devoutly.


Pro. If there be loosenes and liberty among us, it is by them which obey not
the Gospel, which calls them from all sinful lusts of the flesh, unto the
obedience of Gods holy will. The right fast which the Scripture does commend is
in estimation among us: we do not only write and speak of it, but also have
and are ready for to practice it, both publicly and privately. That which you
brag of is not the true fast: for although a man cram his belly never so full
of fish, so that he abstain from flesh, you call it a fast. Sweet wines and
dainty iunkets are allowed in your fast. Moreover ye fast, when ye do it in
the most straight manner, and pine your selves, to a most wicked and abominable
end: for ye do it as a work which is meritorious, ye seek remission of your
sins by it: and so ye deny the redemption by the merits of Christ only:
which is so cursed and blasphemous a thing, that it does turn al your fastings
and prayers into sin. Your fasting is such as God did reprove in the Jews,
by his prophets: and such as the blind Pharisie boasted of, saying: Luke 18.
I fast twice in the week. Doubtless if the abstaining from meat could make a
man holy, the Pharisees should have been exceeding holy men, and the ancient
Jews against whom the Lord complained, should have bin commended: but they
like hypocrites fasted from bodily sustenance, and filled themselves with all
spiritual wickedness: even such are you, O ye detestable hypocrites, although ye
go sometimes with empty bellies, yet your souls are as full of sin as ever
they ca^ hold. We have just cause to cry out against ye for seducing so many of
our forefathers, and making them believe that the very broad way to hell, was
the norrow and straight way which leads unto heaven. You blind Pharisees,
answer, is that the straight way unto life, which the starkest hypocrite of
all, and the most ungodly men can observe and walk in as well as other? Is
that the narrow gate, which the covetous, the malicious, the adulterous and
unjust man, can pass in at as well as other? Tell me this, can there not be a
lecherous heart, and a malicious mind in a body covered with sackcloth?
Cannot a wicked hypocrite punish his body, pine and whip himself, and yet his
sinful soul within never a whit reformed? This then is not the straight way,
but the straight way is that which Christ and his Apostles do teach, which
none can find nor walk in, but the true faithful man: namely, to deny
himself, to kill and crucify all sinful lusts and concupiscences in the
heart: to seek out the will of God, and in all things to obey it. This is the
narrow way which all those are to seek after if they will be saved: all our
godly forefathers have walked in this way, and sought thus to please God: they
knew that the kingdom of heaven could not be purchased by any such outward
trifles as you devised: but that such as will enter in there must be newborn. No man therefore need to fear when he walks in this straight way
which we publish by the doctrine of the Gospel: because he does not forsake
our forefathers, unless it be such as have forsaken the truth, being seduced
by Antichrist.


Pa. What is it which you cannot do, that can so easily prove all the holy
devotion of such as live a straight life to be but hypocrisy: but say what ye
will, ye shall never be able to prove, that such things are trifles, I know
well enough that your sect make small account of all religious observations:
let them believe ye that will, is it possible that God should refuse those men,
which of a good meaning and devotion are so careful to please him? which are
content to take so great pains to serve him, and are so humble minded, as to
refuse nothing by which they may abase themselves, to please him. O that you
heretics did but a little know how devout the mind of the Catholic is: ye
would even be ashamed that ever ye were so foolish to separate your selves
from so holy a company. But alas the world has blinded your eyes, and the
devil has be witched ye so far, that ye care not for any goodness.


Pro. All faithful Christians do know well enough the blind devotion of you
Papists: and are so far from being ashamed to separate themselves from ye,
that they give immortal thanks and praise to God, that he has opened their
eyes to see the light, and to avoid that strong delusion which you are deluded
withal, what good meaning and devotion so ever ye pretend, what pains so
ever ye take, how humble so ever ye seem to be: yet God will refuse to
acknowledge ye for his servants, because ye refuse his ordinances, and devise
toys of your own, which ye thrust upon him, and as it were force him to
accept them. If ye did mean well, ye would do better: your devotion is
devilish obstinacy: your meekenes is haughtiness, in despising God. You have
forgotten what the Lord says: In vain do they worship me, Esaias 29. Matthew. 15.
teaching for doctrines the precepts of men.


Pa. Where learn you to give such railing sentence against the devotion of
holy men, and to judge? Ye boast of the Gospel, ye have nothing else in your
mouth: and yet the Gospel wills ye not for to judge. This does declare what
spirit ye are led with.


Pro. If your Romish rowte were holy devout men, then no doubt we should be
found to give railing sentence: and if the holy scriptures did not warrant us
so to speak of those which are open enemies to GOD, then we might justly be
blamed: or if we should enter so far as to judge of the secrets of men's hearts,
and not where the word of God does pronounce the judgment, then were we to be
condemned: but seeing the word does teach yt which we utter, we neither give
railing sentence, neither do we judge, otherwise then to pronounce out of
Gods truth, what is holy, and what is wicked and abominable.


Pa. Prove those things which you have said out of the word, as that good
intents are not pleasing to God: that when men are devout and take pains to
serve God, it is devilish: and other such like, and I will be your bondsman while
I live.


Pro. Good intents do please God: God does require that men should be devout,
and take pains to serve him: and unless these things be in them they are not
his servants. But yours are no good intents but fantasies of your own brain:
for they proceed not of faith, because they be not ordered by Gods word, Romans
14.
but against the word: and whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Your worship
being not framed after the will of God, but proceeding from your own liking,
is no more but blind devotion, when ye have taken all the pains ye can, and
have wearied your selves, this shall be your reward: Esaias 1.
Who required these things at your hands? Who did set ye a work, and appoint
ye this service? As concerning such kind of worship as yours, the Apostle does
call it will worship: for when he has spoken of commandments and doctrines of
men, he adds thus: Colos. 2.
Which things have a show of wisdom, in voluntary worship, and humbleness
of mind, and not sparing the body: which things are of no estimation, seeing
they pertain to the filling of the flesh. This place of Saint Paul well
observed, does fully and clearly without any exposition quite overthrow all
your Popish religion. For he shows, that before GOD all such trash is of no
estimation. Again, his description does so fitly paynt out Popery, and that
which you brag of, as nothing can be more apt. Mark well every branch and
member of his words, and ye will confess the same. He demands of the
Colossians, how it comes to pass, that if they be dead with Christ from the
rudiments of the world, that they be burdened with traditions? Colos. 1.
as touch not, taste not, etc. Which things perish in their use: and therefore
this conclusion is to be drawn out, that the eternal and spiritual kingdom
of GOD, does not consist in such things. For how should the kingdom of God
consist in those things which perish?


Pa. Ye would make somewhat of nothing: that place of S. Paul is not against
us. If ye have none other, ye cannot overthrow our religion.


Pro. Ye do interrupt me in the midst of my matter, only to cavil, because
ye are loath to have this place of scripture touched, seeing it does so fully
open and display your wards. Because ye say it makes not against ye, and
would feign pass from it, I will lead ye to it by the ears. Does not your
religion stand in outward things which perish in their use? Are not your
traditions the commandments and doctrines of men? Let all the world judge of
that. And Saint Paul does make that a sufficient reason to overthrow any thing
whatsoever, in the service of God. If it be of man, the holy Ghost would have
us make no further inquisition, but to take it for dung, and draugh, how goodly
soever it seem and glister as gold. Esaias 29. Matthew. 15.
Does not the Lord also say: In vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the precepts of men? Well, to go forward, these devises of yours are
marueilously well liked, and the people of the world, are made very devout
toward God by them: indeed the people of the world do like well such
religion, and it carries them to a kind of devotion, and to esteem such
matters to have great wisdom in them. Therefore the Apostle does say, that
those inventions of men have a show of wisdom: and the people use to say, I
warrant ye our fathers which devised these things, were wise men. But mark
well the causes which the Lord does set down, why these things seem to have
such wisdom, and why they be so well liked of. The first cause is, that it is
a voluntary religion: a religion which being framed by the corrupt will and
brain of men, is very well pleasing to the deuisers: and does also fit other
men, whose will and brain is as corrupt as theirs. For as that which proceeds
from the will of God, is contrary to the wisdom of flesh, and therefore
misliked and condemned of folly: so that which comes out of man's will, is
agreeable to man: and therefore approved and commended as the only wisdom.
Thus may we see (when the Apostle says, such things have a show of wisdom in
voluntary religion) how it comes to pass, that the worship which is set by
the policy and invention of men, is better accepted of, then that which
proceeds from the will of God.


Pa. Ye have enough of that place, unless ye would expound it more truly:
there are many scriptures which make for your purpose, if ye may have this
scope, to take them as ye lust. Leave off your vain heap of words, with which
ye go about to bleare men's eyes, and to draw and wrest the Scriptures to your
own sense. It were much better for ye to meddle less.


Pro. All men may easily see, that this place of Scripture does bite ye to the
bone: no marvel therefore though ye have enough of it, for less would better
content ye. There are many Scriptures indeed which make for our purpose,
without any wresting at all. Even as this one place of Saint Paul which we be
in hand with, needs no wresting to make it speak against you, when as every
blind man which cannot see, may yet by groping, feel the weight of it against
ye. But let your foolish words pass which deserve no answer, and come again
to the matter The next cause why such draugh as yours, being but the foolish
and doltish dreams of men, has such a show of wisdom: and that is the
humblenes of mind which appears in such holy hypocrites as worship God after
their own fantasy. They do so abase themselves, and are as meek and lowly as
can be. What can a man devise to be more humble then a devout Papist? he will
do any thing: he is content to bow down and to lick up the dust at the
feet of a stock or a stone: he does so abase himself that he is content to
worship rotten bones: yea whatsoever the holy father of Rome will lay upon him,
he is ready to bear, his mind is so humble. But this is not humility, O ye
blind asses, but pride and haughtiness of spirit even against God, against
whom ye presume, and take upon ye to be wiser then he, because ye refuse the
worship which he has prescribed, and think ye can frame a better of your own.
This is the humility of you Papists, in those good intents, and devotion which
ye brag so much of: ye are like sturdie Rogues, whom a man would take by
their patched cloakes to be gentle and lowly: when as indeed they be exceeding
proud and rebellious against all good laws. The third and last reason which
S. Paul sets down, why there is such a show of wisdom in corrupt
religion, is in this clause when he says, Not sparing the body: for look how
men which are proud men are moved with a show of humility: so also, although
they walk after the flesh, and the flesh reigns in them: yet they like of
mortification, after a sort, a show whereof does appear in the outward
punishing of the flesh, which because they are able to attain unto, they take
it to go for good payment: and when they have pined themselves with hunger for
a while; whipped themselves, or gone barefooted, and barelegged, they suppose
they have mortified the flesh. Alas poor wretches, how humble they be not to
spare their bodies, to take such pains to serve GOD, and yet never the better.
For when their skin is torn, their heart is whole within still, and as full
of all uncleanness as it was before. These are the things which ye boast of,
and ye Apostle says: They be of no price, Colos. 1.
because they pertain but to the filling of the flesh. The Devil has
bewitched men after this sort, to lead them from the sight of the true
mortification of the flesh, through the spirit unto outward things of no value.
Thus we may understand, that all your goodly show which ye make, is nothing
worth: all your religion is but superstition: they do but lose their labor
which travel in it, and are so far off from pleasing God, that he does
accurse and abhor their doings.


Pa. A man may see what trim shifts you heretics can make: but for my part I
am not moved one jot thereby to like of your religion. For it cannot be good,
when there are so many sects among ye, which it does hatch and bring forth.
For your Gospel does come into no place, but by and by up starts one and he
does maintain this heresy; another he does maintain that heresy, and there
is such snatching, as if a man should shake out a bag full of errors, and
every one catches that which does like him best: for such effect does follow
of your preaching in all places. If it were of GOD, would this come to pass?
Can errors arise of true doctrine? No, this were enough to warn all wise men
to take heed of ye, and to fly far from ye, although there were no more. In
our religion we are all of one mind, and agree together: and therefore ours is
the truth. All that will be saved, must come and agree with us.


Pro. Nothing can move you to be of our religion: and why? Because it cannot
be good. Nay, because it cannot have your allowance to be good: for the holy
word of God is so perfectly good, (which is our whole religion) that all the
poison which such venomous beasts as you are able for to vomit up, is not of
force to infect it. But I do ye wrong, for you show a great reason why it
cannot be good. Well, I will answer it. The reason which ye use here against
us, is that bolt which ye have taught every fool to shoot: but a very course
armor will defend a man from it: it gives but a bumpe, and never does pearce,
but rebound back again. Nevertheless, because among you it is esteemed as a
sharp arrow, and principal weapon, I will take somewhat the more pains, not
only to view it my self, but also to let others see the power thereof. Truth
it is, that whatsoever is of God, or whatsoever is good, cannot bring forth
that which is evil: no more then darkness can bring forth light, or heat
can cause cold: for how can any thing breed that which is of a quite contrary
nature to it self. But say you, Wheresoever your Gospel comes, there follow
sundry sects and heresies: one maintains this, and another that, with sundry
divisions. Therefore your Gospel is not of God, it is not the truth. Before ye
make this conclusion strong and sure, ye must prove, that as all sorts of
errors do spring where the Gospel is preached, which is so indeed, that in
like manner the Gospel is the cause of them and does breed them, which ye
shall never be able to do. For as Christ and his Gospel bring peace, and yet
he says he came not to send peace, Matthew. 10.
but a sword, and to set the father against the son, and the mother against
the daughter: and there shall be five in one house, two against three, and
three against two: even so the Gospel is the truth, and sets forth the
doctrine of unity, and yet wheresoever it comes all kind of errors spring
up. Now every wise man will confess that Christ is the author of peace, and
the strife that arises between men is not to be imputed to his doctrine, but
to the devil, and his servants which war and fight against us, because they
hate it, and seek to banish it. The same devil is the cause of heresies, for
to discredit the word of God: wheresoever it is taught he sets up his
school also, and will have his scholars go under the name of the Gospel.
For this is one of the readiest ways that can be to bring the word of God into
contempt, and to make men afraid of it. See, say they, how many heresies these
men fall into, which meddle with the Scriptures: were it not much better that
there were no such preaching?


Pa. Do ye then allow of strife, and errors, that ye will needs have them to
be companions of your Gospel?


Pro. If ye can gather that we allow of the devil and his ministers, ye may
also affirm that we allow of these, for we ascribe all these to them. They be
no companions of our Gospel, unless ye take it in this sense, that they
always accompany the same, as utter enemies to overthrow and destroy it. The
holy Scriptures do testify, 2. Pet. 2.
that there shall be false Prophets, false Teachers, and Antichrists in the
Church to seduce the people. 1. John 2.
And the experience of all times does show the same. Phil. 3. 2. Cor. 10.
For were not the false Apostles in all places set against Saint Paul, and the
other Apostles? Do not the books and writings of ancient fathers shortly
after the Apostles show what foul monsters rose up in the Church, and what
horrible errors did vex the peace thereof? Were not ye right Catholic fathers
within short time after the Apostles of Christ merueilously troubled with
heretics, and had as it were their hands full in confuting them? Do not their
books remain unto this day in which they do confute them? I wonder greatly
how you Papists should be so shameless beasts, as not to deny that the
Gospel in those former days had so many and so foul errors springing up
with it, and yet not to be blamed: and now so wickedly to blaspheme it, when
ye see the same thing come to pass: ye might rather believe that it is the
truth, because ye see the same success now which it had of old, and how the
devil does sweat to quench and overthrow it. Tell me this O ye hounds of
hell: did the Gospel hatch or breed the abominable errors of Ebion, Cerinthus,
Saturninus, Carpocrates, Basilides, and such like? Did the Gospel bring forth
the devilish opinions of Arrius, Manicheus, and of others which sprang up with
it? If ye shame to say it did: why then should ye not now be as much ashamed to
charge it with the errors of the Anabaptists, Libertines, and the Family of
Love, and other, which are the warriors of the devil as well as you, to fight
against the truth? As for this that ye say, You did all agree, and were of one
mind: It is very true in this, to resist God and his Gospel, but otherwise it
is false: for ye have a multitude of sects and sundry orders amongst ye, which
could not one away with the other. Your whole church of Rome is but a schism,
and an Apostasy from the Gospel, and Church of God: and yet among your selves
divided into a great number of sects and schisms. For as among the Corinths, I
hold of Paul says one, I hold of Apollo, 1. Cor. 1.
says another, the third of Cephas: So among you, I am of Benedictus order, I
am of Francis, I am of Augustine, and a rablement besides, both of Monks and
Friars, and other such vermin. These agreed all in this, that they
acknowledged the Pope, and had their confirmation from him, as from the
fountain and maine head, which sent forth rivers and streams every way: for
he was the head, not of unity, but of all schisms. The head indeed of unity,
as they held all of him, but of division, that every one put holiness in his
order, and sought salvation thereby. Ephesians. 4.
There is but one God, one faith, one baptism, one Lord Jesus Christ: and
therefore but one way to life eternal, how many soever you have invented:
which indeed are but crooked paths that lead to hell. I let pass your
dissension in those points which among you should be of the most weighty
things.


Pa. I could show many horrible things against ye, but I see well it is to no
purpose: a man were even as good hold his tongue, he shall have answer at your
hands, with so many flim flammes, and toys. I will leave ye as I found ye,
seeing I can do you no good: it is but a folly for a man to power water upon a
stone, to make it soft.


Pro. I doubt not but that you and your fellows have so well profited in the
school of the father of lies, in which ye have been trained up, that ye are
able to utter many horrible things against us, eue^ as true, as those which ye
have uttered already. Therefore in very deed ye were better a great deal to
hold your tongue, then so shamefully to abuse it in blaspheming the glorious
Gospel of GOD. The answers which I do give, are such flim flammes as the word
of God does express. I thank God he has so opened mine eyes to see his
truth, that even the most crafty iugling of Papists cannot bring me into any
mammering: a man ought to stand fast and to be rooted in the doctrine of the
Lord, that is no hardness, as you esteem it, neither is yours the water of
life, which ye would power upon me, but filthy stinking mud, which ye have
drawn out of the puddle of Popery. Ye offer me drink, but not wholesome
wine, but dregs, which ye bring in the golden cup of the whore of Babylon. Your
cup does entice many a simple soul to drink: for they do not suspect that
such deadly poison should be offered in so goodly a cup. I beseech God to give
men the wisdom to look what is in it before they drink.


Pa. What mean ye by this goodly Allegory? what is that golden cup which ye
speak of, in which ye say we offer ye poison, and deceive the simple souls
with the gains of the cup? Can ye tell your own meaning? Do ye not speak
that which ye do not understand your self in?


Pro. Saint John in the Revelation does use this allegory, which you so like a
dog scoff at. Reave. 17.
He painteth out the whore of Babylon, with a golden cup in her hand full of
abominations: with this she has made drunken those that dwell upon ye earth.
For as I said before, who would suspect that so goodly a cup should be full of
poison? But what is this golden cup say you, in which we offer poison? This is
your golden cup, the name of the Catholic Church, which ye brag of: and the
name of the forefathers: this is a golden cup: how can a simple man once
suspect any evil to be in this cup? Doubtless it is only your cup which
deceives so many, and allureth them to drink, and to suck out even the dregs
of your abominations. For ye cry Catholics, Catholics, the Catholic Church,
the forefathers: and in this ye bring in all your trumperie, and purchase credit
unto it, because the Catholic Church is very honorable, and true, which name
you pretend: the ancient fathers of the Catholic Church are very reverend,
whom you falsely challenge to be of your side. Therefore I say still it is
wisdom to look what is in your cup, and not to be hasty to drink.


Pa. I told ye even now that although I might say much, yet because I see it
is to little purpose, that I will give ye over.


Pro. I must not give you over: for as you have uttered your slanders against
the Gospel of Christ, so you must give me leave to lay open some of those
abominations which you are justly to be charged withal.


Pa. It is no matter what ye say, I doubt not but that I shall be able to
defend our holy Mother from all your spiteful accusations. Say the worst ye
can.


Pro. When I have said the worst that I can, I shall yet come short of the
matter. For what tongue is able to express the full wickedness of Babylon,
the mother of whoredoms and abominations: which did in pride lift up her self
against God, and his truth? and made all nations drunken with the wine of her
fornication.


Pa. I tell ye this is but to rail and slander, unless ye be able to make
proof of that which ye say: but I look for no such thing at your hands: for
your sect is wont to accuse deeply, and to prove slenderly.


Pro. I mind to say nothing but that which I will prove, and that more strongly
then will be to your liking. Your dealing is manifest to all men: and your evil
meaning may soon be espied, unless men will be wilfully blind. Are ye not
like unto whores and thieves, and other malefactors, which put out the light
and seek darkness to cover them, that they may not be seen, when they commit
evil. What is your purpose when ye remove the word of GOD from the sight of
the people, and do as it were bury it in a strange tongue? Is it not the light
to guide our steps? Psalm. 119.
Is it not the food of our souls? What is your intent, that ye would not have
the people know it?


Pa. I see there is nothing so honestly done, but evil men will suspect it, as
you compare our doings with whores and thieves, because we allow not the
people to read the scriptures in a known tongue. But I answer, that ye may
keep your comparison to your self: for our wise ancestors did not take the
scriptures from the lay people, of any evil intent: but because the common
people did abuse them, and gather errors out of them. It is a very dangerous
thing for unlearned men to meddle with or to read the scriptures: they be
dark, and hard to be understood, every man can not gather the true sense of
them. You are fools, and therefore ye are not able to judge of the wisdom of
the fathers in our Church: you take that to be amiss, which is done most
excellently.


Pro. We are over suspicious, for your intent is good: your honesty is such,
that ye may be trusted in the dark: ye are shameful honest men indeed. We
are but fools, and not able to discern with what wisdom such things are
done. Surely we can no skill of that wisdom, when men take upon them to be
wiser then GOD. But let us see the wisdom and good meaning in this thing.
This it is, the common people will abuse the Scriptures, and gather errors out
of them, and therefore a dangerous case for the^ to meddle therewith: the
Scriptures are dark, they be not able to gather the sense. I know this is a
great deep point of wisdom, among those which savor the things of men,
Matthew. 16.
and not the things of God. But try it and it shall appear to be extreme
folly, and those which approve thereof are very doltish asses: although for
worldly wit they have deep heads, and excel a number of other men. For look
how a cunning artificer, when he steppeth out of his own shop, and medleth
with a science beyond his reach, is no body: even so the wisdom of the world
when it will be so busy, as to control the wisdom of God, disgraceth her
self. God is here checked for giving such a word, it is better to remove it
away: errors, errors, do spring by it. It is hard to be understood: God might
have dealth more plainly. O ye blasphemous wretches: what will ye charge God
and his holy word withal: has he in such wise declared his blessed will to
men, that it were better they were without it? Have the sacred Scriptures so
little profit in them, that they be better unknown then known? Moreover see
how ye reason: men do abuse the Scriptures, and gather errors of them,
therefore they are to be removed. This reason is the like, men abuse meat and
drink, and become drunkards and gluttons: therefore it were good to make a law
to debar them those things. The body cannot live without meat and drink:
the soul can not be saved without the word. Some do abuse meat and drink,
shall therefore all be debarred? Some do pervert the word to their
destruction, shall all other therefore be deprived, and want the most
necessary use thereof? No, this is but a craft which ye use to make men
afraid to search the Scriptures, least they should epsy you: for there every
man may easily learn to judge of your dealings. You know well enough, yt when
the people come to know the will of God (which you are loath they should) then
they little esteem your will. Ignorance is the strongest pillar of your
religion, and as you term it, the mother of devotion. For so soon as men have
a little knowledge of God, their zeal toward you is quenched: when they see
once the true treasure, they will no more of your trash. In deed I cannot blame
ye, that ye labor to put out the light, and to hold men still in darkness,
because the light will uncover your shame.


Pa. When should we come to an end, if I should answer all your words? You
confess that some do abuse the word, and gather errors out of it: I suppose
then, that every wise man will grant, it were better for these that the
Scriptures were taken from them. And who can tell which they be, until it be
too late? Were it not better to work the surer way, so that no one may fall
into that danger. You care not as it seems for the loss of a few souls: but
the price of the soul is so great that ye should be careful, if it were but
for one. Moreover, we do not remove the word away, but from those which are
unmeet to deal with it: we do not say it were better unknown the^ known:
but to such as will abuse their knowledge. In good sooth me thinks ye
ouershoote your self greatly, very reason does lead a man to see that it is
not a seemly nor fit thing for Tom carter, when he has laid down his whip,
to take up the bible. Let him meddle with that which he can skill of, and leave
the Scriptures to such as have learning to judge of them.


Pro. I would be very loath to keep ye company, until ye should answer all
my words: the time will be so long that if ye should fast until ye had done,
the Pope need not inioyne ye any further penance. A very clarklike reason ye
make out of that which I grant: some do abuse the Scriptures, if a man could
tell which they were, then it should suffice to take them from those: but
because it cannot be known, until it be too late: it is better to work the
surer way: that is to take them from all, and so ye shall be sure no one shall
gather errors out of them. This reason is amplified, by the price of the soul,
where also ye charge us not to care for the loss of a few souls. This is a
great reason, I pray ye, if a man might ask, what did it cost ye?


Pa. This is a pretty conueiance, when ye are not able to answer, then ye
find a way to make your self merry, ye ask what it cost me, ye should first
ask where I bought it.


Pro. Nay, I know the chief market of such wares is at Louaine, I need not
ask where ye bought it. But I am sure ye bought it too dear, although it cost
ye nothing, because it was not worth the taking up. But ye say I cannot answer
ye: Yes that I can: I say ye are like to a great wise man, who having one
sheep dead of the rot, by feeding in his pasture, does knock all the rest
down and destroys them, casting them away least some one more should be
infected. For because some do pervert the Scriptures to their own destruction:
2. Cor. 3.
and because the Gospel is the savor of death unto death, in some, therefore
you will cast away all the rest with them. For what other thing do ye, when ye
take from them the food of life, and all the armor wherewith they should defend
themselves against the spiritual enemy. Your reason were somewhat worth, if
men could be saved without the knowledge of Gods word: but because they
cannot, therefore ye may put it up again, until it be better grown. For your
other words, God gave the Scriptures for all his people to read and learn,
and therefore ye are murderers of souls, and arrant thieves when ye deprive
the people of God of the waters of life, and in stead thereof give them the
stinking waters of your own inventions. And howsoever it pleases you to
esteem of the common people (whom ye do in disdain set forth by Tom Carter)
and think it no reason to lay down the whip, and to take up the Bible: yet
you must know they are the people of GOD, redeemed by the blood of his son,
unto whom the Gospel does belong, and they have as great interest and full
right in it as any other: GOD has promised to teach it them, and also does
teach it them. You are like the Scribes and Pharisees, which condemned those
which followed Christ, because they were of the common people: Do any of the
Princes (say they) or of the Pharisees believe in him? John 7.
But this multitude which know not the law is accursed. Those proud Prelates
thought the people had no understanding of Gods word, when they understood it
better then they: even so it shall be found, that many a poor plowman has
more right and sincere knowledge of Gods word, then all your horned Bishops and
great Rabbines.


Pa. Truly I cannot but marvel to hear ye: cannot the people be saved
without the Scriptures be in their hands? Can they not do well without the
knowledge of Gods word? Is it not enough for them to believe in Christ, and to
live uprightly? Must they needs meddle with yt which is so far above their
reach? See I pray ye, what case you set the people in: ye shut the^ out from
salvation, when ye teach that they cannot be saved without the knowledge of
Gods word. For they be not able to know the word. Let the best instructed of
your common people come for to defend their faith, will they be able to answer
such reasons, as some can bring against the^? if not, how do they know they
hold the truth? that which they cannot reach unto, to perceive may be the
truth for ought that they know. Therefore I say still, that the holy Mother
has done well and wisely to take the Scriptures out of the hands of lay men.
You must prove that the common people are commanded to read and study the
Scriptures: which ye shall never be able for to do.


Pro. No man can be saved without faith: faith cannot be without the word: for
S. Paul faith, Faith does come by hearing, Romans 10.
and hearing by the word. How should a man believe, before he does know what to
believe? John 3.
God does give testimony of his son, he that believes that testimony, he
does seal yt God is true. He that will believe, must know what and how to
believe: and therefore of necessity, that he have the knowledge of ye word of
God. This does prove how foolish you are, when ye ask if it be not enough for
them to believe in Christ, and to live uprightly? as no wise man does doubt but
that this is enough: so there is no fool almost, but a man may make him see,
yt this can in no wise be without the knowledge of the word. Is it not the word
which conuerteth ye soul? Is it not the word which lightneth the eyes, and
gives wisdom to the simple? Is it not ye word which does purify? Psalm. 19.
John 15. John 8.
Is not ye word the light to guide our steps? do not they which are of God
hear the word of God? Is it not said, Blessed are they which hear ye word of
God, and keep it? Is not the man pronounced blessed, Psalm. 1.
which does meditate in the law of the Lord day and night? O ye miserable
wretches, what whores faces have you put on, that are not ashamed to speak
directly contrary unto God. Is it not above their reach to believe and to obey
God? and yet is it above their reach to know what to believe, and what is the
will and pleasure of God, which they are to obey? dog, that the simple man
cannot answer: yet nevertheless, because he is sure it is a horse, and his
own, and not a dog, the other may make many reasons which he understands not
how to avoid: notwithstanding, they cannot once bring him in doubt, or to go
from that which he knows. Even so all the subtle cauillations of the devil and
his ministers, when they come against the faith and knowledge of a godly
simple man, which is grounded in the word of God, cannot once move him: the
deep fetches and subtilties may make him muse, but yet because he does
certainly know the truth, he does not give over that: he has felt the power
of the word of God in himself, and therefore is out of doubt: it has done that
in him which cannot be wrought but by GOD. Unstable souls may be beguiled: for
they have not felt the power of godliness. Ye would have me prove that God
commands the unlearned men to study and exercise themselves in the
Scriptures: I am ashamed to hear ye doubt of that matter.


Pa. If ye be ashamed to have that doubted of, then I trow ye will be ashamed
not to prove it.


Pro. I would you would be also ashamed of your wilful blindness, and see,
when things are manifestly proved. Did not God utter his word by Moses unto the
Israelites, both men and women? Did he not give it them in their own tongue?
Did he not charge them by Moses, even the lay people, Deuteronomy. 6. and 11.
that they should put his words upon their heart, and upon their soul: and
bind them for a sign upon their hands: and teach them their children: to
talk of the^, as they sat in the house, as they walked by the way, when they
did lie down, and when they did rise up? Hosh. 4.
Are not the people blamed both among the Jews, and also in the time of the
Gospel, for their ignorance and dulnes? Are they not exhorted to grow in
knowledge and understanding every where? Heb. 5.
Did not Christ and all his Apostles travel night and day to bring the people
to understanding? 2. Pet. 3.
Do not the Apostles pray that they might be filled and abound in all
knowledge? Colos. 1.
Did they not give great charge unto other to teach and feed the flock
diligently? Philip. 1.
Acts 20. 2. Tim. 4.
Did they not open all the counsels of God unto the people? Will your holy
mother the whore of Babylon be wiser then all these? Did all these travel in
vain? Did Paul foolishly when he commanded that men should not speak in the
Church in a strange language, 1. Cor. 14.
unless it were interpreted, that so the rest might be edified? For shame
give over, and confess that your great whore has done as foul villainy to
the Church of God as could be, in taking from the^ the word of life, and
putting out the light, to the end that she might play the whore, and commit
all her abominations in the dark, where none should epsy them. The light does
now shine so clear, that she shall never be able to hide her self any more,
nor to cover her shame: unless it be among those Night-birdes, such as you
are, which cannot abide the light.


Pa. Would ye make men believe that it is commanded as a thing so
necessary, and profitable, when we see what follows since the scriptures
have been opened unto the people? What a multitude of sects and divisions, and
quarrels have risen? Whence comes all this, but that holy things are given
to dogs, Matthew. 7.
and precious pearls are cast before swine? The unholy and vnpure, and sinful
men do as it were with filthy unwashed hands, handle the heavenly mysteries,
and each man does gather for his turn that which likes himself: and then
they are puffed up, and prattle they know not what. I wisse, I wisse, they
might be better occupied, then to meddle with the word of God, which should
not be touched but with great reverence: now every one will be prattling of it,
even upon their ale-bench. Wherefore did Christ speak in parables, Luke 8.
Matthew. 23.
and told the Apostles, that to them it did belong to know the mysteries of
the kingdom of God, but to the rest in parables, that they might see and not
see? Doubtless, as I said before, there is great cause why the scriptures
should not be known of the people. When they did not know them, they agreed
and went all one way: now he is of this sect, he is of that sect, he says
this is truth, another says that: a man cannot tell which way to turn him.
Your learned men also themselves are at war, one against another, one
confuting another, in their sermons, in their writings: alas, must it not then
much more follow among the unlearned people. If the learned cannot understand
the Scriptures, how shall they which have no learning? O how well were our
forefathers which knew none of all this. I would the reading of the Scriptures
did make men no worse the^ they were: they had good souls to Godward, now men
are stark naught.


Pro. The great subtlety of the devil, to draw men away from reading the
Scriptures, appears in ye: ye would prove it not only a thing unnecessary to
have them known, but also very evil. This ye prove by the effects which
follow, as divisions and quarrels, and sects: by the same reason ye may prove,
that it had been good never to have heard of Christ, about whom there have been
so many quarrels in the world. Esaias 28. 2. Pet. 1.
Many do stumble at him, he is the rock of offense unto many: but the fault
is in men and not in him. Even so the wicked which abuse the Gospel, although
they be never so many, yet must not cause the small number of Gods elect, to be
deprived of their right, and to be spoiled of their comfort. So soon as the
Gospel appears, the devil labors by his instruments to bring an infamy
upon it, and to make men believe it is naught: for it is he which raises up
sects and errors, Gods word is not the cause. He would by yt means bring men
into a maze, that they should not know which way to turn them. But you say the
cause is that holy things are given to dogs, and precious pearls are cast
before swine. Ye reason even like your forefathers the proud Pharisees, which
took themselves to be so holy, that they were not to be taught: and so wise
and skillful, that they regarded not others. The multitude were accursed: John
9.
the blind man he was altogether borne in sin: you wretches count them dogs
and swine: and your selves holy: whereas your selves have played the notable
vilaines, and have dealt irreverently with the word of God. Matthew. 9.
The Pharisees blamed Christ that he did eat with Publicanes and sinners: he
answered, yt he came not to call the righteous, Luke 5.
but sinners to repentance. You say, sinful me^ are permitted to deal with
the scriptures: we answer, the more sinful, the greater need they have to know
ye scriptures, because they must reform them, and cure them: other means for
the sinners there are none. Psalm. 119.
Wherewithal (says the Prophet) shall a young man cleanse his ways? even by
taking heed thereto according to thy word. Ye reason even as handsomely, as if a
man should count it unmeet for those to come to the water to wash them which
are all myred: or if a man should be out of his way in the dark, let him have
no light, because he is out of his way. Matthew. 12.
O ye wicked Pharisees, ye shut up the kingdom of God before men, ye
neither enter your selves, neither do ye suffer those which would. Let thousand
thousands, and millians of thousands, deal vndiscreetlie and wickedly with the
word, gather all kind of devilish errors out of it, by perverting it, be
puffed up with their knowledge, and make but a prattling thereof: yet this must
not let, but that if God had but ten chosen in the world, his counsels must be
opened unto them. Men abuse the word when they talk irreverently of it,
therefore you say it is to be removed: thieves and quarrellers do fight, rob,
and kill with their weapons, and therefore the true men must cast them away.
Do ye not know that we are commanded for to meditate and talk of the holy
scriptures, night and day: but yet reverently? Is not the word of God called
the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6.
with which we must fight against the devil? Does not Christ our captain
give us example, Matthew. 4.
when he still alleges the scriptures against him? How childish are ye in
alleging this that Christ did speak in parables: and said it was given to
the disciples to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God, but to the rest in
parables: that in seeing they might not see? I pray ye were they the unlearned
only of whom he speaks? Were they not the great clerks, the Scribes and
Pharisees, which did see and not perceive, and hear and not understand? Yea it
is to be understood of all the reprobate, both the learned and unlearned. As on
the other side, the mysteries of the kingdom of GOD are reueiled to simple
ones: Matthew. 11.
I thank thee O father (says Christ) Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have opened them unto babes.
Do ye not see in the Gospel, how our Savior Christ did publish the Gospel,
and instruct the multitude? Is it not testified, that publicanes and sinners
did embrace the same, when the wise ones despised the counsel of God? Does not
Christ tell the^ that publicanes and harlots should go before them into the
kingdom of God? Luke 7. Matthew. 21.
You say they went all one way when they knew not the scriptures. Doubtless the
heathen men went all one way, but it was no good way, for it was to
destruction: even so as many as did not (as S. Paul says) receive the love of
the truth that they might be saved, 2 Thessalonians. ^.
God did send the^ strong delusio^ to believe lies, and so they were damned.
These were not all our forefathers, for God always showed his truth to his
servants. Ye say the people cannot understand the scriptures, when as ye
learned do not, but are set one against an other, and one does confute
another: ye should conclude of this, that because learned men do raise up
errors, as well as the unlearned, therefore the scriptures ought to be taken
away from them also, and so ye should make sure work. Let God speak no more,
unless he can do better: let the Pope only utter his mind, and hear him,
for he will tell a plain tale.


Pa. This is even like all your schismatikes, and heretics, for all of ye do
allow errors, quarrels, and contentions. Ye think it a small matter to have
the world filled and set upon an uproar with them, ye do even glory in them,
as though there could be no truth without them. Oh say you, it is a certain
and infallible proof, that ours is the true Gospel, that so great troubles,
and sundry sects do follow it. Thus ye are not ashamed to confess the evil
fruits of your doctrine: so that others need not to speak thereof. Many other
such like speeches ye utter.


Pro. I am no liker those which embrace the truth, then ye are like your
father, not the father of truth, but of lies: for let a man convict ye a
thousand times in your sayings, yet ye will not stick to lie and slander.
Where can ye ever show, that any true professor of the Gospel does allow
errors, quarrels, and contentions? Because we say that the scriptures must not
be taken from the people, although never so many errors and schisms do
follow: can ye gather thereof that we allow the same? no, we detest and abhor
from the bottom of our hearts such treachery of the devil, and his wicked
instruments. We count it a lamentable thing, to see the malice of the devil
and of the wicked world to be so great, yt so soon as ever Christ and his
Gospel appear, they bend all their might against it, seeking all means to
quench the light thereof: and utterly to banish it. From hence do spring all
vprores and tumults in the Church. We affirm indeed that this is a proof
that it is the Gospel of Christ, that the wicked world cannot abide it: if it
were of ye world, the world would love his own: but because it is not of the
world, therefore the prince of the world with all the power and armies that he
can make, does rise up against it: for Satan will not be dispossessed of his
hold without great stur. The strong man armed which keeps his house, Matthew.
12.
must first be bound before his house ca^ be spoiled. When there shall be no
devil, no wicked ones, no kingdom set up against the kingdom of God, when
Christ shall have none enemies: then the Gospel may come forth in peace,
without troubles, tumults, sects, errors, and such like. But so long as all
those do remain, wherefore should the Gospel lose any glory? because these
things follow it: nay, why should it not be so much the more glorious, that it
does break through all these things, and by it Christ does rule in the midst
of his enemies? When the Prophet foretold, that the stone which the builders
refused, Psalm. 110.
was become the head of the corner: he adds, Psalm. 118.
this is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. So this is the
Lords doing, and it is most marvelous in our eyes, that so many cruel
persecutions do follow the Gospel, and yet cannot banish it: so many heaps,
or rather floods of monstrous errors do even as it were flow over it, to cover
it, to corrupt it, to abolish it: and yet does still break forth, as bright
and pure as before. So soon as Christ was borne, persecution arose, and the
children were cruelly murdered. Paul and the rest of the Apostles do not so
soon go forth to preach, Matthew. 2.
but the false prophets are at their heels. Cease therefore ye wicked wretches,
to blaspheme Christ and his Gospel, because such things follow: they be not
the fruits of the Gospel, nor they do not spring out of it, but they be the
enemies thereof, which do always pursue it. Make a reconciliation between
Christ and the devil, if ye will have the Gospel go quietly. Now let a wise
man way this reason, the word of God, which is ye word of salvation, of life,
of grace, our light, our shield, the food of our souls, can not be set forth,
but there follow troubles, and errors, therefore it is good to keep it
unknown, and not to let the people have any sight thereof. All the world may
see, that ye have conspired with the devil, and are become instruments to
fulfill his desire: for he covers by those evils to banish the truth, and to
hold men in blindness, and all kind of errors which they be by nature full
of, and so to bring all to hell: and you perform his will, in crying out
against the sacred Scriptures, and seeking to bury them.


Pa. Nay, you have consulted with the devil, like unnatural children, to
seek the overthrow of your mother the holy Church, and to dishonor the vicar
of Christ.


Pro. We bring all our consultation out of Gods holy word for the upholding and
maintaining of our holy mother, the true Catholic Church and spouse of Christ,
against the filthy whore of Babylon, and against Antichrist the great vicar of
hell.


Pa. I may say the like against your side, and so we may play at Tenice until
we be both weary, and part as wise as we began.


Pro. I say nothing against yout but that which the word of GOD does plainly
show. You have no color to say the like against us, saving that your shameless
faces have made ye bold to speak all kind of lies.


Pa. Great brags ye make of proving out of the Scriptures. Where do the
Scriptures tell ye, that the Bishop of Rome is Antichrist? You can make the
Scriptures serve for your turn in any matter whatsoever.


Pro. We brag no more of the Scriptures, then that which is manifestly
proved by them: we make them serve none other turn, then the Lord has
appointed them for. The Scriptures do not in flat speeches say that the Pope,
or the Bishop of Rome is Antichrist: yet nevertheless they set a brand upon
his forehead, and describe him in such sort, that every man which has eyes may
easily know him: and as perfectly know him to be Antichrist, as a man may know
an egg to be an egg.


Pa. I have read the Scriptures, and know what they speak concerning
Antichrist, and yet could never find that brand which you speak of, nor such
a description as should paint out the Pope to be Antichrist. You are marvelous
fellows, you can make somewhat of nothing: you are so cunning that ye can draw
water out of a flint.


Pro. You have read the Scriptures, and so have your fellows, even all the
Popish shauelings: and ye know they speak of Antichrist, whom you believe shall
come: you cannot find that brand or mark, or such a description of Antichrist,
as should belong to the Pope: and that causes ye to pronounce, that we make
somewhat of nothing, etc. because it is not like that so many great Cardinals,
Bishops, Abbots, Monks and Friars should read and read again in the
Scriptures, and not see the Pope to be Antichrist, if he be so marked, that he
may easily be known. This may seem strange, but I tell ye it is no
marvel, for ye are all blind as beetles. The Scribes, the Pharisees, the
Sadduces, and all the learned among the Jews did read Moses and the Prophets,
and studied them devoutly: looked for the Messiah which was promised and
described there: and yet when he came, they were so far off from knowing him,
that they did kill him, and fulfilled the voices of the Prophets: even so
fares it with you, ye read what manner of one Antichrist should be, and what
he should do, and yet ye are so blind, that ye fulfill it, in helping him to
murder the Saints. The Jews could not know Christ, because they looked for a
trim Christ, and he came base and poor. You have also devised a popish fable
of Antichrist, which does so stick in your heads, that ye cannot see the notes
and marks of the very Antichrist indeed.


Pa. Go to, go to, let us see your great skill, and what your scriptures will
be whereby ye will show this thing. I fear me we shall have but slender
conclusions.


Pro. When ye have tried them, then give judgment, and so although ye should
judge falsely, yet ye shall not be altogether so rash. Will ye confess that
S. Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. and S. John in the Revelation do describe and set forth
Antichrist?


Pa. That I will: for I suppose no man will deny it: but what are ye the
better? that which S. Paul does speak, and that which Saint John has written,
as concerning Antichrist, may more fitly be applied to you, then to us.


Pro. If it may as fitly be applied to us as to you: nay I will say further, if
it may be applied to any but to you, let us be counted heretics.


Pa. Saint Paul says, that the day of the Lord should not come, except there
came first an apostasy, or falling away. Does not this touch you? Let al men
judge who are fallen away, we, or you? Are we fallen from you, or you from us?
Have we made the departing, or have you? Our Church has always stood fast and
immovable, you have rent your selves from us: by what reason can any man say,
that they have made the apostasy which have always, and do still keep their
standing: and not rather those which are gone out from us: to fulfill that
which S. John says, 1. John 2.
They went out from us, because they were not of us.


Pro. You would shift this thing from your selves, and lay it upon us: but it
cleaves so fast to your hands that it will not off. Ye go about by a subtle
cauillation to bleere the eyes of simple men. We confess we have made the
departure from you, and not you from us, because you had departed from the
truth, and true Church, and had led us out of the way of truth, unto which
we are now again by Gods gracious goodness returned. You say your Church
has always stood steadfast and immovable, and therefore has not made the
departing. It is true, if we respect place, and succession of Bishops: but
what does that help ye, when ye are departed from the faith, which thing ye
might and have done without changing your place and rooms? The high priests,
Scribes and Pharisees among the Jews had their succession and place longer
then you, and yet Christ and his Apostles did depart from them, and were
neither heretics nor schismatikes. And why, because they had first departed
from the truth? Ye must not stand upon one clause, but take that which does
follow with it. This falling away shall be by the man of sin, the son of
perdition, who was to be revealed: which is an adversary, and exalts himself
above all that is called God, or that has imperial majesty, so that he
sits as God in the temple of God, boasting or showing himself to be God.
This is one sentence which does set the brand in the forehead of your Pope: the
scarre whereof will evidently appear, when ye have made as fine work as ye
can.


Pa. Now ye are come unto the matter, I trow ye will make it plain, and out of
all doubt. This is spoken indeed of Antichrist: but where will ye find one
jot of it in the Bishop of Rome? Where will ye find that ever he has exalted
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped? which word you
translate at your pleasure otherwise the^ ever I heard it before, yt which has
imperial majesty. Ye must prove that the Pope has exalted himself above God,
or else ye have slandered and blasphemed him. Such an one shall Antichrist be


Pro. This is all fulfilled by the Pope, as I will show, I am not to prove that
he has exalted himself above God: but that he has exalted himself above
all that is called God. Psalm. 82.
The kings of the earth are that which is called God: for the Scripture says,
they are called Gods. John 10.
And because sebasma, which is translated, that which is worshipped: is in the
New Testament given to the Emperors of Rome, I translate it, that which has
imperial majesty or dignity. Ye may see, that not only among the profane
writers, the epithet sebastos is given to the Emperors, but also in the 27.
of the Acts of the Apostles S. Luke says, that S. Paul was delivered to a
captain, spires sebastes, of the band of Augustus. Also likewise Act. 25.
Festus says that Paul had appealed to Sebaston, that is, to Augustus. Now the
words of S. Paul setting forth the man of sin, are clearly fulfilled in the
Pope, who has bin, as all men know, exalted so high above kings and Emperors,
that they held his stirrops, when he went to horseback. There has been none
Lord over kings and Emperors, but the Roman Bishop. None exalted to that
dignity, but the Italian Priest.


Pa. The Apostle says, all that is called God, and therefore it is to be
understood of God himself: for is not he called God? There is cause why the
Pope should be above all the kings and Emperors, that does not prove him to be
the man of sin. He has that of right, because he is Christ's Vicar.


Pro. The Apostle does use this speech to put difference between in deed, and
that which is called God, and has but that high title, and is not God in
deed: God is more then called God, for he is very God indeed. This thing is
also manifest when the Apostle in the next words rising by degrees, says, that
he sits in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God. In this last
and highest he does but set him forth, to challenge to himself to be equal
with GOD. Where ye say it does belong of right to the Pope to be above all
kings; because he is the Vicar of Christ, I will answer that anon in another
matter.


Pa. I must let ye have your saying, there is no remedy: but does the Bishop
of Rome then sit in the temple of God, boasting himself that he is God? I
marvel what gloss ye can make to persuade the people that the Pope does this.
Who ever can show that the Bishop of Rome does not take himself to be a man?
If he take himself to be a man, does he then boast himself to be God? For
shame leave your slandering, and find some other to ascribe this name
Antichrist unto, for to the holy father it does not belong.


Pro. Ye must needs let me have my saying, when it is so manifest truth that ye
cannot tell which way to cavil against it. The Bishop of Rome does sit in the
temple of God, showing himself that he is God. Ye need not marvel, nor there
needs no glosing to persuade the people in this point. It is rather greatly
to be wondered how men should be so blind as not to know this great monster,
seeing the holy Ghost does so lively paint him forth in his colors. The man
of sin must not be a forenner: for the Apostle shows, that he should have his
seat in the temple of God. This cannot be understood of the material temple
in Jerusalem, for that was utterly destroyed shortly after Christ. But it is
meant of the true temple of God, which is his Church. In this temple sits
not the Turk, nor yet the Jew, or any Pagan, does here reign: but the Pope
has long time had his royal throne set up in this temple. No man can say ye
Turk, or any of the forenamed is Antichrist: for we must not go out of
Christendom to seek him, but find him we must set up in ye very temple of
God. All the Papists in ye world shall never be able to show any other in the
church, besides the Pope unto whom they may apply this description. Where has
there ever been any in the temple of God, (which of necessity is here taken
for the church) exalted above all that is called God, beside the Bishop of
Rome. I pray God open the eyes of the ignorant people whom ye seduce, that they
may see Antichrist and forsake him.


Pa. O how you would triumph, if ye had any great matter of your side: when ye
brag so much of nothing. What if I should tell ye that the Antichrist which S.
Paul does describe, is not yet risen? What can ye say? must the Pope needs be
he, because he has the highest seat in the Church? When ye have proved that
he boasts himself to be God then ye shall say somewhat.


Pro. Where the word of God goes directly against ye, there ye make no account
of it at all, such bold beasts ye are to call it nothing. But what if ye
should tell us that Antichrist is not yet come, alas poor foolish papist? What
if a Jew should tell us that Christ is not yet come, shall we believe him? We
know he is already come, and has fulfilled all things which were written of
him in the Prophets. Shall we be so foolish, with ye Jews, as to wait for
another? Likewise, what if a Papist tell us that great Antichrist, which ye
scripture does speak of, is not yet come? shall we be so mad, when we see that
the Romish Bishop and his clergy, have fulfilled all those things which S. Paul
and S. John in the Revelation have written of him, as to gape after another?
The Pope must needs be be, not simply because he has the highest seat in
the Church, but because he has so high a seat in the Church, as God never
appointed to any. Antichrist should be ye highest of all, where will ye find
any that was above the Pope, or that ever did challenge such authority as he
had for certain hundredth years? But ye say when I have proved that the Pope
does boast himself to be God, then I shall say somewhat. It is indeed such a
somewhat, as may of it self suffice if there were no more, to cause all wise
men to see that he is the man of sin, and utterly to renounce him.


Pa. When ye have done that, I also will recant and forsake him: because I am
sure the spirit of the devil is in that man, which makes himself God: and so
I dare promise for all that be of our side.


Pro. Ye make a double promise, one for your self, and another for your
fellows, that if the Pope can be proved to have boasted or showed himself to
be God, ye will recant and forsake him. But I am sure ye promise much more
then ye can perform: I cannot trust yt which ye make for your self, much
less, when ye promise for all that be on your side. Ye are blinded and
hardened, as the Scribes and Pharisees were: they said, if he be Christ let
him come down from the cross and we will believe in him. Matthew. 27.
Could they, or would they have believed in him if he had come down from the
cross? Why then did they not believe when he was risen from the dead, which
was a thing far greater then to come down from the cross? When I see ye
recant I will believe it, otherwise I will not, because there is a great number
of ye which do wrangle, and cavil, and seek shifts against those things,
which your consciences do tell ye are true: so that ye do willingly and
wilfully blind your selves, and so blind others. And thus while ye go about to
deceive others, ye are deceived. But let us come to the matter. It may be ye
look that I should go about to prove that the Pope has taken upon him to be
called God, or to be taken for God, and not man: I do not mean so.


Pa. No, ye cannot tell what ye mean: I thought this would be the end, now ye
will not go about to prove that the Pope would be called God, or be taken not
to be a man. This is the sleight of ye all, to make great crakes, and when ye
are to come to your proof, then to wind out. I may keep my promise well
enough: you have released me of it: I would like it well if ye would confess
plainly, and shame the devil, that ye have made promise of more then ye are
able to do: and that ye have done great injury unto the holy father, and have
slandered him.


Pro. I have done even as much injury to the holy father, and have slaundered
him even as much, as a man does slander and injury the devil, when he says,
he is the father of lies. I should not shame the devil in retracting that
which I have said, and by saying that I have promised more then I am able to
do: but I should please him very well. For although his own credit is so far
spent, that he should utterly lose his labor in seeking to recover it: yet he
seeks to uphold the credit and estimation of his vicar, and by that means
does maintain his kingdom. I have used no slight, nor am gone from ought yt
I did promise to prove. For does it follow that because the Pope does confess
he is a man, and takes not the name of God, therefore he does not boast himself
to be God. You are a very simple Logitian, which from denial of some part, will
deny the whole.


Pa. What is the whole if this be not, neither to take the name, nor yet to
esteem himself to be the thing. Neither to be called God, nor yet to think
himself to be God. If ye can show any other way whereby he may show himself
to be God, let me hear it.


Pro. He does sit in the temple of God, boasting himself that he is God: when
he challenges to himself the power and authority which does belong only to
God, and to no creature, this power he has usurped many ways. Tell me, is not
this to boast himself to be God?


Pa. I grant indeed that whosoever does challenge the power and authority to
himself which does belong to God only, does make himself God. But what are
ye the nearer for this, so long as ye shall never be able to show any way,
whereby the Pope has usurped any such power, although ye say he has done it
many ways: he has his power given him of God, and yet never the power to be
as God.


Pro. I might with travel make a large discourse with many proves, to show
that he has usurped the highest authority: but I will content my self to show
it in some things, which are known very well even unto the simple. Is not God
only Lord over our faith? and ruler over our consciences to bind the same?
Has not God only power to forgive sins? To shut heaven, and to open hell,
to save and to destroy? Is not God the only lawgiuer? is not Christ our only
Doctor? how then can the Bishop of Rome challenge these things to himself, and
yet not show himself that he is GOD? If this be not much more to make himself
GOD, when he takes upon him Gods power then to take the name, let al men
judge.


Pa. The Pope does take no Lordship over the conscience, nor does not bind
them further then he has authority given him. The laws which he makes are
made by the holy Ghost which is in him, and therefore there is but one
lawgiuer. For ye may even as well say, Moses gave laws, therefore there is
more then one lawgiuer: for look how he gave laws so does the Pope. Hereby
every man may see that ye reason very strongly, when by making laws ye would
prove an equality with God, then all the Apostles and Prophets were equal
with God. And so I may say for the rest.


Pro. God never gave any such authority to any man: If the Pope had it given
him, it was by the Dragon, as S. John says, Revel. 13.
which gave him his seat, and great authority. Ye say I reason strongly, when
I say, the Pope does make laws, to bind men's consciences, therefore the Pope
makes himself God: and likewise makes that there is more then one lawgiuer.
For say you, by this reason Moses, all the Apostles and Prophets should be
equal with God: because they gave laws. But as they did it by the holy Ghost,
so does the Pope: and so God is still the only lawgiver. Thus ye would bleare
the eyes of the ignorant, to make them believe that the Pope does make laws as
Moses did. But I will show a difference: Moses gave no laws nor any of the
Apostles, but such as they received from GOD. They never challenged authority
for to make any law contrary to any part of the word of God: nor to abrogate
any of the laws of God. For S. Paul says, Galath. 1.
yt if he or an Angel from heaven should preach any other Gospel then that he
had preached, let him be accursed. Such was the authority of Gods word, that
if either Paul, or Moses, or any other which brought it, should alter, add to
it, or diminish the same, he should be accursed. And yet the Pope does take
power to make laws contrary to the laws of the word of God: to dispense with
the same, to disanull what he will: and which is most blasphemous of all, to
affirm that the holy Scriptures have no authority without him: but are of
themselves dead and can have no certainty. Is not this to make himself God,
or equal with God? What is there which has authority over Gods word, but
God? Who does not here epsy the very horns of the devil peep up, and speak
these things out of the mouth of his vicar Antichrist? They do al forsake God
and worship the beast, which give him this authority.


Pa. I will not deny but that he which does set up laws contrary to Gods
laws, makes himself God, even as a subject which takes upon him to make
laws, and to refuse the laws of the Prince, makes himself as it were a
king. But I say the Bishop of Rome does not so, for he has the holy Ghost and
cannot err. And so when he does forgive sins, he does no more then is
warranted by the word: and in very deed which ye take upon ye to do.


Pro. What should I stand to answer bare words: we know the Pope is not led
by the holy Ghost, but by the lying spirit of the devil, because he has so
flatly trodden down Gods word, and brought in his own laws in stead of it. I
will not stand to recite particulars, all the world may judge. And whereas ye
say, he does not forgive sins, but as we do take upon us: that is but a shift
which ye have devised: for all that will may see, whether this be all one: to
pronounce remission of sins to the penitent, which we do: and to send forth
pardons, whereby for ten shilling matter, a man might not only have forgiveness
of his sins past, but liberty for a good time after to commit many sins. If
this be not the man of sin, where shall we find him? Who does take upon him
to be God, if he do not, which for money will forgive a man whatsoever he does
commit against God? Shall a rotten stinking carrion thus blaspheme, and men not
epsy that he is the great Antichrist? I have now showed ye how the Pope
boasts himself to be God: but I dare not say you will recant.


Pa. When I see matter which may force me to recant I will do it, but for ought
that I see brought to the purpose, to prove that which you promised, there is
cause rather why you should recant, and renounce your errors, and return
again to the holy mother, which is ready to receive those that return to her,
how unkindly soever they have behaved themselves toward her.


Pro. The devilish strumpet is almost left desolate, and therefore she
labors to draw as many as she can, and to entice them to her love: fair and
foul, tag and mag, all are welcome, none come amiss now: Murderers,
whoremasters, whores, bawdes, drunkards, and all such like: if they will take
her for their mother, she is not ashamed to take them for her children, and to
make them partakers of her holiness. But let us come again to the matter.
Saint Paul in the same chapter says, That Antichrist should come with lying
signs and wonders: and so is it also expressed in the Revelation, that the
beast should that way seduce and deceive the inhabitants of the earth. If this
be not fulfilled in the kingdom of the Pope, how shall it ever be fulfilled,
or where shall we look for it? What has been all your outcries, but
miracles, miracles? Let a man read your Legenda Aurea, and festival, and such
other pure books, what shall he find but miracle upon miracle: and so true,
that if a man would lie for the whetstone, he may there store himself, if he
will have a whole bundle. The people did believe them, for why, the Scripture
says, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
GOD should send them strong delusion to believe lies. I dare say boldly, that
although you Papists, a great number of ye, have put on impudent and shameless
faces, to maintain lies: yet there is not one of ye, but will blush, if he
should take upon him to defend that stinking puddle of lies, and fained
wonders, which ye fed the common people withal. A man may be ashamed to recite
them, least those which know not the matter, should think he does lie.


Pa. What way can you prove that the miracles of the Church were false, and
counterfeit? Will you take upon ye to condemn such things as were done long
since? If there be some things written which might well enough be left out: is
the Church to be charged with that which every particular man does? There were
abuses crept in, which the Bishop himself did not know of. Is it reason he
should be blamed?


Pro. I think no wise man will doubt but that this is a sufficient proof,
that your miracles were but iugling casts in the dark, because ye had such
store then, and have none now: alas there is as great need now as ever there
was. And if there be but one miracle left in your budget, pull it forth and
let us see it, that we may give some credit unto ye. Nay your mother had no
good counsel given her, when she had such plenty to spend it so wastfully as
she did, and to keep none for a dear year. I wisse a few of those great
wonders which she showed in time past, would now stand her in great stead.


Pa. Mock on, take your pleasure, there is none to control ye. What though
there be need at this time, yet the world is unworthy: even as Christ said to
the Pharisees when they required a sign, Matthew. 19.
This evil and adulterous generation seeks a sign, but there shall no sign
be given them but the sign of Jonas the Prophet. Even so what reason is it,
that the holy mother should show any wonders and miracles unto you, which are
worse then the Pharisees?


Pro. Alack good old mother, she has need as much as ever she had to show
her cunning: but the world is not worthy. Although she might win great
credit by it, yet she had rather keep a good conscience. And therefore she
does follow ye example of Christ, which would not do any miracle at the
request of the Pharisees. Yea but why does she not show some of her power to
her own chickens, for fear least they should be drawn from her. Christ wrought
miracles still to his disciples, although ye Pharisees were unworthy. No there
is some other let, the window does stand too wide open, there comes too much
light. Your mother would play one feate, but that she fears she should not
make her conueiance so cleanly, but that one or other would epsy her. She does
use worse means a great deal.


Pa. What can you tell what miracles the Church does, you have not faith to
believe them? She works more then you are made privy of.


Pro. I do certainly persuade my self that I know not all that she does: she
has learned to be more close then to let every man see what she does. And yet
sometime we see more then we can well like of. Your little pretty moulden God
in the box does give her counsel how to deal against her enemies.


Pa. I see well when men are fallen away, they care not what blasphemies they
utter. This is far from the thing which ye offered to prove.


Pro. If a man may utter blasphemy against a piece of dow, then I have
blasphemed. But I do assure ye I will never crave pardon for it. I am still in
the matter which I took in hand, which was to show that the Pope is
Antichrist. I could make plain proves unto ye out of other places of
Scripture, and especially out of the Revelation, where the holy Ghost does of
purpose set forth the kingdom of Antichrist.


Pa. Will ye take upon ye to expound the Revelation, and the things are set
forth in it so darkly by mysteries, that no man can say precisely, this or that
is the sense? but when you have interpreted things one way, another may make as
good and as probable a sense another way. What one thing is there which makes
so plainly against us, as ye would bear men in hand? Does it not make as
plainly against you?


Pro. Although the Lord has spoken darkly in the Revelation, yet not so darkly
but that it may be understood, otherwise to what purpose was it given?
Wherefore are those pronounced blessed which read and hear it, Revel. 1.
if none can expound it? it would have been a great deal more hard to
understand, if the mysteries had been but barely uttered: but because there is
also an exposition of the chief things, which do as it were couple all the
rest together: it is no hard matter to find the sense, especially, when as the
exposition is in so flat and plain terms, that even the very obstinate
Papists of your side are driven to confess them: and not only in word, but
also in writing.


Pa. What can ye show that is confessed by our men, which ye say they are
forced to confess both in word and writing?


Pro. Revel. 11.
Saint John says, in the 11. chapter, that the beast which rises out of the
bottomless pit, should make war against ye two witnesses which the Lord would
send, and overcome them, and slay them. And their bodies should lie in the
streets of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt,
where our Lord was crucified. Jerusalem was destroyed, and Christ although he
was (if we respect the place) crucified there, but yet if we respect the
authority he was crucified at Rome, because he was put to death by Pylate, who
had there the authority under the Roman Emperor.

Moreover, in the 17. chapter, he says plainly, This woman which thou saw,
is the great city which reigns over the kings of the earth. Other things he
sets down, as the seven hills and seven kings, all which do of necessity
describe Rome, for there was, nor is none other city unto which they may in
any color be ascribed. Therefore as I said, it is confessed (because it is so
plain that it cannot be denied) even by your men, that Saint John indeed in
the Revelation does call Rome Babylon. What fools are those which cannot by
and by see that if Rome be Babylon, and then Sodom and Egypt, that the Pope
must needs be Antichrist.


Pa. What fool is it which cannot see the weakness of your argument. I pray
ye does it in good sadness follow, that because the Scripture (as we
confess) does call Rome Babylon: therefore the Bishop of Rome is Antichrist.
What if one should reason thus, London is a wicked city, therefore the Bishop
of London is a wicked man. Were not this a pretty argument? And why is not the
other as good? Rome of old time even when S. John did write, was so full of
wickedness that he called it Babylon: and therefore the Bishop of Rome then
was Antichrist. For ye must as well bring in then, as now. Are ye so poor a
Logitian to frame an argument after that sort? Can ye not distinguish between
a city, and the Bishop of a city? Either you were but a while at Cambridge,
or else ye spent your time evil.


Pro. O great wise man, what a quick and sharp sight have you. And how sound
a Logitian you show your self, if to be blind, be to be a Logitian. Do ye
take it in good sadness, that I would frame my reason thus, Rome is Babylon,
therefore the Pope is Antichrist, without consideration of circumstances thereto
annexed. No sir, although it follow not at all, if we barely consider the city
and the Bishop: yet if ye put on your spectacles, and look well upon other
circumstances, ye shall be forced to confess that if Rome be Babylon, the
Pope is Antichrist.


Pa. If ye can prove such a consequence by circumstances, I suppose ye would be
able for a need to prove Paul's steeple and Charing cross to be cousin
germans. Ye have as many circumstances belonging hereto, as to the other. They
be both made of stone, and dwell both in one city, and peradventure much about
one age. But perhaps yours are nearer matters.


Pro. As for Paul's steeple and Charing cross, I have known them but a while.
I can not testify of any kindred between the^, I leave that to you. Sure I am
of this, that ye shall as soon prove the one of them to be the Father, and the
other the Son: as ye shall be able to disprove this reason, Rome is Babylon,
therefore the Pope is Antichrist. I pray ye tell me this: wherefore does S. John,
describing the kingdom of Antichrist, describe or note out also the City of
Rome? Is it not to let us to understand, that if we will seek for Antichrist,
we shall find him there? Rome is his seat, he that would find him let him go
thither, for there S. John places him. When a man is come thither, where shall
a man look, for this little fellow which is exalted above al, that is called
God, which sits in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God: is
there any other there which bears this likeness? Peradventure ye will say this
was fulfilled in some of the Emperors which would be taken for God. Yea sir,
but there was none of ye wicked Emperors which did sit in the temple of God.
Neither was there any of them which did seduce the world by lying wonders. We
must find such an one at Rome which is exalted above Kings and Emperors, which
sits in the Temple of God and seduceth by miracles. But perhaps he shall
arise at Rome hereafter, and is not yet come. Surely then let us never look
for him: if we think there shall arise one at Rome, which shall be lifted up
higher then the Pope, or do more fained miracles, and lying wonders then he
has.

Moreover, tell me this: is there any man so simple when he reads the 17.
chapter of the Revelation, Revel. 17.
where the Angel does show ye mystery of the woman (which he calls the great
whore) and of the beast which bears her: that will not by and by confess, yt
seeing Rome is that whore, borne up with ye scarlet colored beast with seven
heads: the Pope also must needs be Antichrist: for he is one of ye heads of the
beast. The heads of the beast being seven, are (says the Angel) seven Kings,
where should they reign? At Rome. Five (says he) are fallen, one is, another
is to come. Seven kinds of gouernme^ts in Rome: whereof it is well known, five
were fallen before the time in which John wrote. One was the^ standing, which
was ye Empire. And the seventh or last should shortly follow. Where is he that
has risen at Rome to be the seventh and last of these kings, if it be not ye
Pope? O ye foolish Papists, have ye come thus far as to confess that Rome is
Babylon, which is the great whore, and so tell men where they must seek for
Antichrist: And will ye deny the Pope to be ye beast? Why, they be joined
together. Show us some other, upon who^ we may see the brand which the
scripture has set upon Antichrist? We now, by that which you have granted and
confessed, must not look for him elsewhere, but at Rome: and until ye can show
us some other there, we see none so like him, as the Popes holiness. If ye can
show any other, put men out of doubt.


Pa. Does the Scripture say that Antichrist should be at that place which is
called Babylon. Where find ye any such thing? It was called Babylon for the
great wickedness of the city, not because Antichrist should reign there.
Again, where ye take the interpretation of seven heads to be seven kings in
Rome, as you say, seven kinds of government: five were fallen, one was, which
is the Empire, one was to come: which say you must needs be the Pope, for he
has reigned in the last place. Yea, but ye said five were fallen, to give
place to the sixth: should not then the sixth also fall to give place to the
seventh? How then is your interpretation true, seeing the Empire has stood
ever since?


Pro. Does not S. John in the Revel. set forth the same Antichrist which S.
Paul does describe, which he calls the beast which all the world should
wonder after and worship?

Does he not set forth the whore sitting upon the beast? Is not the whore by
you confessed to be Rome? will ye have the beast to bear her, and not to be at
the same place? the beast that rises out of the bottomless pit, and kills the
saints. Revel. 11.

Where shall their bodies lie, in ye streets? does he not say in the streets of
the great city, which there he calls Sodom and Egypt: and afterward in the
seventeenth chapt. he calls it the great city which rules over the kings of
the earth, is it not all one beast which he speaks of, and al one city? does
it not follow that where he shall kill, there be shall reign? and as for the
other thing which ye take exception against: I confess the Empire did still
retain the name, and was not quite cast down: nevertheless it was not indeed
an empire, when the Emperors themselves were brought down so far in
subjection to the Pope, as to have him tread in their neck, and to hold his
stirrops.


Pa. If the Pope were Antichrist, as you would make men believe, then what
became of ye Church all that while, when men believed in him, and when he
reigned? you confess a thousand years or there about, since the Bishop of Rome
had the sovereignty. Would God forsake his Church a thousand years, or eight
hundredth years? is it like that God which is so gracious and merciful, would
cast off all our forefathers thus many hundredth years, and suffer to perish? O
how hard hearted are you, how irreverently minded against our ancestors, how
unkind children, so to judge of the fathers? let them believe ye that will: ye
be al heretics, I will keep me to the ancient faith.


Pro. Now ye return to your old fortress again: ye suppose that ye have
some of those poor souls in hand which ye may seduce, because they are
ignorant. Ye can lay forth this matter so pitifully among them, yt ye can make
them even weep again. But when ye come among such as have understanding out of
Gods word, and know the state of the Church, they laugh at your folly. This is
a great question, what became of yt Church? we answer as the scripture tells
us: Reave. 17.
the beast and the dragon did persecute and murder the servants of God. The
whore of Babylon was drunken with ye blood of the saints. Revel. 12.
The Church was driven into the wilderness: God did never forsake his Church one
day, much less a thousand, or 8. hundredth years: it does not follow yt
because Antichrist was exalted in the church, therefore the church was utterly
forsaken and destroyed. Although corruptions came into the church apace for the
space of this 8. hundredth, or a thousand years: yet nevertheless the religion
did remain a more tolerable estate, and nothing so corrupted, as within these
5. or 6. hundredth years, which space we may indeed ascribe to the reign of
Antichrist: and yet even in this space he could never utterly destroy the
Church, for the most gracious God did preserve that little remnant which was
his: and none did perish but those which loved not the truth, and therefore God
did send them strong delusion to believe lies.

None but those which worshipped the beast, and wondered after the beast, and
received the mark of the beast: whose names were not written in the book of
life. We reverence our godly fathers, and show no unkindness toward them.


Pa. I will deal with ye then upon your own confession: ye grant that for the
space of five or six hundred years the Pope has reigned, and the truth
suppressed. Where was the Church for this space, this is a long time: will ye
condemn all the world for the space of these five hundred years? It ye can
show any fathers in the Church which were godly and denied the Pope, show them,
Or will ye speak of a church which ye can show no members of? such folly
there is in a number of ye.


Pro. Answer you to a question of mine, and I will give you an answer by and
by to yours: when saint John says Revelation 13. All the world followed the
beast: and power was given him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome
them. And again, when all both small and great, rich and poor, bond and free,
were compelled to receive a mark, and none might buy and sell but those which
had the mark or name of the beast, or the number of his name.

Tell me, where was the true Church then, when this was fulfilled? whether were
al those condemned or not, (if they returned not by repentance) which
worshipped the beast, or had his mark? Saint John says, they were killed with
the sword, not a temporal sword. Where then shall we in these times seek out
the godly fathers, but such as were persecuted by the beast? Of these there be
histories, which show in all times that there were some.


Pa. I may soon answer your question, by showing your great ignorance. He
says, all the world worshipped the beast, and you will needs have it to be
the Church: is there no difference between these two. You must prove such a
general falling away of the whole church and not of the world. God has
promised to be with his Church to the end of the world, and therefore that can
not fall away. Did the beast which S. John speaks of cause all the Church to
worship him? If you can show that, then ye prove somewhat.


Pro. Here is a blind shift brought in to answer the question which I demand.
He says (say you) all the world, and you will have it all the Church. I do not
say yt any part of the Church did fall away, if we understand by the Church
those which are the elect of God, and the true members of Christ's body: for
these can never be seduced to follow the beast, Christ has promised to be with
these to the end of the world. But when by the Church we understand all those
companies which do profess Christ outwardly, those may be seduced and fall
from the truth, being but the outward and visible Church: and these are here by
S. John called the world: which thing is manifestly to be proved thus: those
nations and people where the beast should reign, or which follow the beast,
are called the world: now it is manifest that the beast, being the same
Antichrist which S. Paul sets forth, should reign in the Church: for he
must sit in the Temple of God. It is therefore also as manifest that the
visible Church is called in that place the world. The other nations of the
world did not follow the beast. But if any will be so wilful and perverse as
not to see plainly by this, yt the beast should bear sway over the nations
which were the visible church: let the^ further consider that S. John does
plainly affirm, that ye beast should make war with the saints, and overcome
them. If he shall make war with the saints, and overcome them: where shall he
then reign, but in the visible Church? the true saints of God shall not reign
in ye visible church outwardly, for he shall outwardly overcome them. O wicked
enemies and vpholders of the beast, which because he has for a time gotten the
upper hand in the Church over the saints, would have him continue so still for
ever.


Pa. If a man should grant all that which you say, that there should be a
falling away in ye church yet this is not likely that God would suffer ye
grea-, test part, and almost all to perish. For what a few have those been
which have resisted the Pope, in respect of those that have joined with him.


Pro. This is a very foolish objection, especially to those which consider the
state of Gods Church at all times in the world, what a few were the seed of
Abraham in respect of al other nations of the world, whom God cast off many
hundred years? what a few were they among the seed of Abraham, which
continued good in respect of those which did degenerate? What a few were there
in the Church when Christ came, which were faithful? it appears they were
very few.


Pa. There be sundry things spoken by S. Paul concerning that Antichrist which
should come, and likewise by S. John, which cannot agree to the pope: as for
example, the one does say that the Lord shall destroy him with the breath of
his mouth. Where has that been fulfilled in the pope? the other says, that
Antichrist should continue but a short time, he also sets forth the time to
be three days and a half. How absurdly then is this applied to the Bishop of
Rome, which has continued ever since the Apostles by succession? Who is able
to deny this? I am afraid Antichrist, if he be not yet come among you, will
come shortly, for you are even his forerunners.


Pro. Sundry things there are (say you) spoken by S. Paul and by S. John,
concerning Antichrist which cannot agree to the Pope. And for example ye name
two, the one, that it is said the Lord shall destroy him with ye breath of his
mouth: the other, that he should continue but a little while, as namely three
days and an half. These things agree right well to the Pope: although this
latter might seem to be otherwise: for a thousand years, if we respect it
according to men is a long time, but with the Lord it is but as yesterday. Five
or six hundred years by it self is somewhat, but compared with eternity, it is
but a little: and so although we grant yt it is almost a thousand years since
the Bishop of Rome was exalted so high, yet it is but a while. But say you the
time is limited three days and an half: is it possible that any man should
read the things uttered concerning Antichrist, what he should do, and the
same also set out by sounding of seven Trumpets, Reuela. 16.
in several ages, in which it is apparent he should continue, that can be so
ignorant as to take it of common days and not every day to contain many
years? are the weeks in Daniel to be taken for seven natural days to the
week? Daniel 9.
when it is certain that the seven weeks, did contain almost five hundred
years. Ye are over foolish to make this cauil. Where as ye say the Bishop of
Rome has continued ever since the time of the Apostles, and therefore it could
not be understood of him: it is very true that there has bin a succession of
Bishops there ever since, but yet not of such Bishops, for six hundredth years
after Christ were past, before ye Bishop of Rome was taken to be universal
Bishop and head of the Church: all the Bishops for yt space or at least the
most of them were godly men, and some of them suffered martyrdom. As for the
other matter which is the fall of Antichrist by the breath of the Lords mouth,
it is a marvelous clear testimony which we may use to prove the pope to be
Antichrist. What I pray ye is the breath of the Lords mouth but the gospel
preached? by what other means has this beast bin overthrown? when he had
gotten all the kings in subjection, and sworn unto him, when not one durst
move war against him, but said who is able to war with the beast: how has
the Lord brought him down but by the Gospel? And look in the Reu. 14. Revel.
14.
There he says, he saw an Angel flying in the midst of heaven, having an
everlasting Gospel to preach to them that dwell upon the earth, to every nation,
tribe, tongue, and people, saying with a loud voice: Fear God, and give glory
to him etc. And by and by it follows, that another Angel followed, saying,
She is fallen, she is fallen, Babylon the great city etc. Is it not manifest
by this, that when the preachers should publish the Gospel (for that Angel does
signify the ministers of the Gospel, whom he does call Angels in the 1. chap.)
Babylon should be cast down: his kingdom stood by worshipping of creatures,
therefore when the Gospel does will men to fear God, and to give glory to him,
and not to worship creatures, straightway he comes down. I would wish all men
to consider this.


Pa. Do you make account that the pope is fallen: or can ye say that he is
fallen, because a number are fallen from him? They are fallen and not he. I
hope in God to see him set up again. If ye have no better matter then this, to
show his fall, it is no matter.


Pro. I cannot tell what ye count to be fallen: sure I am of this, his
credit is marueilously cracked. He yt had known him 60. years agone, and
should look upon him now, would say he were nothing ye man he was, for he has
bin in a sore co^sumption, and none of all his physicians can tell which way to
cure him. Then he could shoot out thunderbolts over a great part of the world,
and kings would quake at them: now every man dare come within the noise of the
crack and fear no danger at al. We must not think yt he should be utterly
destroyed at once, for the contrary is plainly to be gathered out of the
Reuelat. Read the 16. Revel. 26.
chap. ye shall find thus: The fifth Angel powered forth his vial upon the throne
of the beast: and his kingdom was darkened, and they did gnaw their tongues
for sorrow. Here ye see a beginning which does fret at the guts: and cause ye
to bite for anger. Then it follows that the sixth Angel powered forth his
vial upon the great river Euphrates, etc. Yet the kingdom of the beast is not
utterly cast down, although his munition be thrown down. For it does by and
by follow: I saw three unclean spirits like unto frogs coming out of the
mouth of the dragon, out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the
false prophet: then he says, they are the spirits of devils, working wonders
which go unto ye kings of ye earth to move the^ to battle. Surely I see no
cause why we may not take your Jesuits to be of these frogs: do not they go
forth into kingdoms to remove rebellions and wars? is it not to hold up ye
beast* and that by all such wicked and devilish means as there can be no worse.


Pa. The Jesuits be holy men, and do no more but that which is their duty,
by the appointment of their great shepherd. They labor to uphold Peter's
chair, and the truth: and therefore they do it not by any unlawful means;
much less by such wicked and devilish means as you do charge them. I will not
stand to reason with ye about those places which ye apply against ye pope, I
doubt not but they may be answered well enough with silence.


Pro. The Jesuits must needs be holy men, or else the Iebusites could not: for
they have almost as many letters in their name as they had, I suppose in deed
that they do all at the appointment of their shepherd: for from whence should
we look for such holy-deeds, but from so holy a father. They labor to uphold
Peter's chair, and to throw down Paul's doctrine. Truth in deed is vpholden
by truth, and needs no falsehoode to help her: which is a most manifest
argument that you have not the truth, because as I said ye do uphold it by all
wicked and devilish means.


Pa. A man would suppose to hear you speak generally that ye had great
matters, but when ye come to make good in particular, then there is nothing.
Ye are to be likened to an empty barrel, which if a man knock, gives a
lusty sound, but pull out the spigot, and there comes not forth one drop.
What are those wicked and devilish means? show them.


Pro. I perceive you will both knock and pull out the tap also: and needs I
must by broching somewhat, let ye see your want of skill, which did not knock
near enough to the bottom. I pray ye tell me, are lies and forgeries devilish?


Pa. No man does deny but they are, can ye charge ye Catholics with any? if
there be any thing which is not in all points true, ye must not by and by
condemn it, when as it is to a good end: as namely to keep the people in
devotion and in awe.


Pro. True it is, when ye say, your forgeries and lies which are out of all
number, were to keep the people in awe, and to terrify them, and so hold them
in a foolish blind devotion. This ye did when your kingdom stood, let any
impudent papist in the world deny the dunghill of gross lies in the legend
and festival, and some other books of yours. Very children may laugh to hear
them: if I should reckon them, or study to reckon them, I need no other
penance enjoined me. But of thousands a few, as these: when the devil came to
tempt S. Dunston, he held the devil by the nose with a hot pair of tongs, and
caused him to rore and cry out: it seems it was some young devil, which had a
tender nose. A rich man which never had done good deed in his life, but only in
anger did throw a loaf at a poor man's head, when he died the devil came for
his soul because he had done never a good deed: on the other side our Lady
she claymed the soul, because he had given a loaf to a poor man: the devil
he replied, that it was no good deed, because he did it not of devotion, for
the^ he must have been saved. In fine, the matter was so hard to judge whose he
was, yt he was sent again into the body. He was not admitted to to go to
heaven nor to hell, nor yet to Purgatory. But it seems our Lady was somewhat
too hasty, for being no better man, she should first have let him bin well
fried in Purgatory, and so peradventure she would but that the devil was so
greedy that he would not tarry. She did not wisely neither, for what a number
of souls might she lose, caught by other devils whiles she was pleading for
this. S. Katherine did vow her self to be married to none but Christ, and
therefore the Virgin Marie did appear to the holy Hermit Adrian, and sent him
to bring Queen Katherine to a place where ye marriage should be sole^nized:
which was a goodly gorgious Abbey erected for that use: where a multitude of
glorious virgins did meet the new bride, and bring her in, where she was married
to Christ, in the presence of the blessed Lady, who^ they salute as Queen of
heaven, Lady of the world, and Empress of hell, she bids her new daughter
welcome, she carried her into ye quier to Christ, who took her by the hand, and
so was married unto her, and put a ring upon her finger, and did charge her to
keep it in remembrance. There was such a glory at that marriage as never the
like: the blessed Virgin also so glad of her new daughter; and Christ of his
new wife, must needs cause exceeding joy. Our blessed Lady came often among ye
in those days: and now she does scarce visit ye once in seven years. What
should be the cause, is she wearied, or has she conceived some displeasure
against ye? I pray ye tell me.


Pa. You are disposed to play and sport your self. What if some did write such
things which were their own devises? Is the Church to be blamed: and if so be
they were allowed by the church, you are not to be taken for an indifferent
Judge: because you do not understand them. If the blessed Virgin did then
appear often, it might be because they were then more worthy, or some other
cause which we know not. Is it not enough now, although she do not appear,
that she hears the prayers of those which call upon her, and helps the^.


Pro. If I play because I recite some part of your divinity: how did your good
ghostly men play which devised them. Yea how did your Antichristian Synagogue
play in setting them forth to be read openly to the people, and that in the
Church. Your blind shifts cannot serve the turn. Your vain speech is not
worth the answering. Ye shall pardon me, if I proceed a little further in the
declaration of your holy lies. Ye have a goodly history (if the book of lies
be true) of Saint Kenelme once king over some part of England: wherein you have
many a fair miracle. The story is very long, and therefore I must tell but the
sum of it. King Kenelme had one sister which was a wicked woman, and hated
him, conspired his death, with Asheberd his governor: who going abroad with
the king, which being heavy and laid down to sleep, the traitor made a pit
and purposed to kill him: but he awoke and told him he did labor in vain:
God would not have him killed there. He gave him a small rod, and told him,
that where he should set it in ye earth, there he should be martyred. Then this
traitor went forth together with him unto a Hawthorne, and there he pight the
rod, and forth with it bare leaves and grew up, and suddenly waxed a great Ash
tree, which does stand there unto this day, and is called Kenelmes Ash. He
smote off his head there, and buried his body in a valley between two high
hills. Then Quendred his wicked sister was glad, and was Queen. Now although
the body did lie in unhallowed burial, yet no man durst take it up, for fear
of Quendred the Queen. But a poor widow had a white cow which was every day
driven into the wood of Cle^t, where she would depart from the rest of the
kine, and go into the valley, and there did rest all the day sitting by the
corpse, and at night returned home, never eat meat, and yet was fatter and
gave more milk then any of the kine. This thing did continue certain years.
Afterward as the Pope was at Mass in Rome, there came a white Dove, and let
fall a scroll upon the Altar, in which was written thus in letters of gold: In
Clent, in Cowbage, Kenelme king borne, lies under a thorn, his head off
shorn. The Pope and all his could not tell the meaning thereof, until an
English man did expound it. The Pope did send to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and willed the body should be taken up. They came to the place which they knew
by the white cow: they dug up the body, and in the place there did spring up
a well, which is called Kenelms well unto this day: where many of the people
have been healed. When they had up the body, it was brought to the Abbey of
Winchcomb. By ye way they were so dry that they fainted: The Abbot of
Winchcombe pitched his cross down, and there sprang up a well. Before they
came at the Abbey all the bells did ring without man's hand. Quendred demanded
wherefore the bells did ring, it was told her that ye body of her brother was
taken up, and that the bells did ring alone. That is even as true said she, as
both mine eyes are fallen out of my head upon this book. And by and by both
her eyes fell upon her Psalter, upon which she was reading, and it is seen to
this day where they fell upon the book. This is all as true, as any lie in the
world may be.


Pa. What of all this, how can you tell whether this were true? Why might it
not be so?


Pro. It might be true as well as the rest of all your lying wonders, which
ye coined to seduce the blind people into Idolatry. Ye had gotten this
advantage to persuade that the Pope could not lie nor err. And therefore
whatsoever ye did invent, although it were never so gross, it would be
credited: not only when they prayed to an Image to make them believe that it
did sweat in taking pains to pray for them, and roll the eyes: but also all
your fained wonders, of which I will yet give a little further taste. For
although they may seem unprofitable to be uttered, yet because they declare
your spirit of lying, whereby Antichrist is known: there is use in them. What
a goodly story is there of your Saint Dominike? When he was at Rome, he saw
in a night Jesus Christ in the air, holding three spears, and brandishing them
against the world: and his mother ran hastily against him, and demanded what
he would do. He said, all the world is full of vices, and therefore I will
destroy them with these spears. Then she fell down at his feet and said:
Dear son have pity, and tarry thy justice by thy mercy. He said, Thou
see what injuries they do me. She said, Son temper thy wrath and tarry a
little: I have a servant a noble fighter against vices, he shall run over al and
vanquish the^ unto thee. And I shall give unto him another servant to help, ye
shall fight as he does. And our Lord said, I am appeased. But I would see who
they be. Then she showed him S. Dominike, and S. Francis, and he praised them.
Here the blessed Lady did help at a pinch, or else all had bin marred. These
her two Apostles which she did send forth, even the two Friars, Saint
Dominike and S. Francis, were worth all the twelve Apostles of Christ. There
were certain Ladies heard S. Dominike preach, which had bin seduced by
heretics: which kneeled down at his feet, and told him their case, prayed him
to help them. He had them tarry a little, and they should see what Lord they
had served. Anon they saw spring out of the middle of them a cat right foul
and horrible, which was bigger then a great dog: which had great flaming eyes,
a broad tongue, and bloody, she had a short tail, out of which issued a
terrible stink. She turned her about among the Ladies a while, and afterward
mounted up by the bell rope into the steeple, and went away, leaving a foul
stink behind her. Thus were these good Ladies delivered by holy S. Dominike.
After S. Dominike was dead he healed many, and raised up sundry from death. The
blessed Virgin S. Mary might do the Pope now a great good turn, to give him
two such as Dominike and Francis: and it may be if he beg hard and call loud
enough, she will hear him.


Pa. Go too, you have these things out of the Legend: who did ever allow it to
be canonical? What should we regard what is spoken there? Ye may be better
occupied.


Pro. If it were not allowed, why did Friar John of Vignay translate it out of
Latin into English? Why had it this price set upon it to excel all other
books as far as gold does excel all other metals? And therefore is called
Legenda Aurea, that is to say, Golden Legends. The festival, which was read
upon Saints days in the church, does fetch as many authorities out of the
Legend, as out of the Scriptures. I perceive you are loath to hear any further:
and therefore I will tell the less. What say ye to that good Lady which was so
devout in the service of the blessed Virgin: and yet at a time upon the
purification her Priest was from home, so that she could not have Mass.
Nevertheless she went into her Chapel and prayed to the blessed Virgin, so
long until she fell on sleep. At the last she saw a great company of goodly
Virgins, and one glorious Virgin above the rest. She saw also one come in with
a bundle of candles. She saw a priest go to Mass with two Deacons, which were
Laurence and Vincent: The priest was Christ. Every one had a candle given them
light, and so had she: two young Angels began the introite of the Mass: the
Angels bare the Tapers, before the priest all the virgins did sing ye Mass.
When the offering came, every one brought their candle, and they stayed for
this woman which did not come with hers, the great Lady sent to her two times,
and yet she would not come. She sent the third time to pray her to offer her
candle, or else to take it from her. She would not: then the messenger laid
hold of the candle, he pulled and she pulled so long, that the candle was
between them pulled in pieces, he had one end, and she another, and withal
she did awake and found the piece of candle in her hand. Then she did know
certainly she had heard Mass, and thanked God and our blessed Lady. Surely
they did her wrong, for they should have awaked her first, and then have bid
her offer her candle. If I had been as this Lady, I would have made much of
that piece of candle. For it is like that some Chaunler in heaven made it. For
Christ and the Angels occupy candles, whenever they say Mass. If I should
tell all the tales of holy S. Anthony, which fought with a number of devils:
of good S. Patrike, which in Ireland did find out Purgatory: of pitiful S.
Francis: of chaste Saint Hagnes, which yet was so gentle to be wooed, that at
diverse times she would hold forth her finger to receive a ring. Indeed I do
not remember that she did receive any but of priests: by which it does appear
she loved them well. If (I say) I should tell all of these and a number more, I
cannot tell whether you Papists might be judged the greater liers for devising,
or I the greater fool for rehearsing. To be short, he that will come to your
dunghill, he can light no where amiss dig where he will, he shall find it
spade deep. Let him come with his dungcart as often as he will, he shall soon
fill it. I suppose the devil has well emptied his bags among ye.


Pa. I told ye, I have nothing to do with those things, if ye can show any
forgeries among us now: the things which are past, we cannot judge of them.


Pro. That which is bred in the bone, will not out of the flesh. Ye have it so
naturally in ye to lie, that ye cannot leave it. Ye are not ashamed to falsify
the Scriptures, the ancient writers, and Councels: ye are not ashamed to devise
and spread abroad foul slanders, against such men as GOD raised up to throw
down Antichrist. Although it be of things impossible, yet tell it and a
number believe it. As for example, a great Bishop of yours did preach in open
assembly, that the Devil came like a trim fellow, fell in love with a man's
daughter, begat her with child, which was Martin Luther. Is it like that the
Devil could beget children now in his old days? and yet I know it goes for
payment among the ignorant blind papists. A number of things ye devise against
Calvin, Beza and others, which are even as true as that.


Pa. These men were so good that a man need not to devise any thing of them: he
may find even enough of that which is true: and too much to be told.


Pro. You are not sure of it, although ye affirm it.


Pa. Yes I am very sure of many things.


Pro. Did ye ever know any of these men: or have ye seen their conversation?


Pa. What though I have never known any of them, nor seen their conversation.
I have heard enough, and that by such as I may believe.


Pro. If that be sufficient, ye might have heard of Christ that he had a
devil, Matthew. 9.
and by as credible men as you have any: likewise that he was a glutton, Matthew.
11.
and an unmeasurable drinker of wine, a friend of Publicanes and sinners. Ye
might have heard many things also against S. Paul. This is the equity which is
among you Papists. Some one of ye do devise a lie, and then ye toss it from
one to another, until at the last it has a passeport given it from such
credible men, that it may go where it will. But I will let this pass, and come
to some other of your wicked means, by which ye labor to stay up the rotten
chair of Antichrist. I will come yet to greater and more shameful villainies,
which truth never needs, because the Lord does support her.


Pa. Can you find such matters against us, and not see your selves? I warrant
ye, that which ye do accuse us of is to be found in you: howsoever ye accuse
us, and excuse your selves.


Pro. Where can ye find that ever ye truth was maintained by periuries, and
breaking covenants? Let a man read and read again, among all Heathen men,
Turks, and Jews, where shall he find that it has bin taken generally to be
allowed, that they might swear and forswear to deceive, and not make
conscience to keep the oath? Among you this is a principle, faith is not to be
kept with heretics. Which also ye do from time to time put in practice. It
is not to be looked for that you should stick to make lies, when ye dare
publish it to the world in writing, that ye may lawfully forswear your selves,
and break the faith which ye have given by oath. By this means ye have
committed very horrible slaughters, and cruel murders: the like whereof have
scarsely been heard of. Are these practices of God, O ye bloody, perjured,
forsworn wretches? Does the holy Ghost lead men into such kind of dealing? no
verily, it is the spirit of the father of lies, of periuries, of murders,
which ye are lead withal. Gods spirit is the spirit of truth, he never
teaches men to lie, and to deal falsely: and therefore those people are
bewitched, which think the Pope and his adhere^ts to be lead by the spirit of
God: when as they be so full of all abominable treacheries.


Pa. What should we meddle with these things: I cannot tell how a man should
persuade you, to see the authority of the Church. You judge of all things
after your own reason. I have no delight to deal in these matters: I will not
say that which I could say.


Pro. I cannot blame ye that ye are loath to meddle in these matters. It were a
great deal better if they were kept close among your selves. For now no man
that is wise will trust ye, neither upon promise nor yet upon oath, which ye
break so often. There be many goodly rules which ye devise now secretly among
your selves. But what should you go about to persuade with me in these matters,
which am not first persuaded how great authority the Church has? For ye have
none other argument but the authority of the Church to allow these things.
Gods word does curse and condemn periuries and murders committed by such
treacheries. To dispute out of that for the maintenance of them, ye know ye
shall have but a cold suite of it. It is a great deal better therefore to lay
the word of God aside, and to set forth what power the new God has for to
change the nature of things. He is of another manner power then men weete. The
GOD which has spoken in the Scriptures, can do nothing nor say nothing but
truth: but the God of Rome has power to do what he will, and to say what he
list, whether it be true or false. This is a mighty God, he can play both
fast and loose at his pleasure. Let a thing be never so much commended by God
in ye Scriptures, if he say it is naught, then is it naught. So on the other
side, whatsoever it be that is condemned to be evil, he has power to make it
good. This is the cause why you say many are deceived, they look but to the
Scriptures, and forget this God, which has power over the Scriptures.


Pa. If you may accuse what ye list, then it were well. But let us see wherein
the Pope has challenged any such power.


Pro. Have not I showed ye already in some part, as in lies, murders and
periuries? Will ye have more? what say ye to treasons and rebellions? Does not
the Pope make it lawful to commit treason? Does he not discharge subjects of
their obedience and subjection to their Prince? Does he not give any of them
leave to kill their Prince? and makes it a work greatly meritorious? What
devil can go further then this? Does not God set up Princes, and has not he
put the sword into their hands? Does not he charge men to be subject and to
obey them? Does not he say, that whosoever does resist them, does resist the
ordinance of God? and that those which do resist, do purchase to themselves
damnation. O ye traitorous wretches, do ye not see that ye draw all those
into damnation, and under Gods curse, whom ye draw from their love and
obedience toward their Prince? Let all men consider this: has a greasy balde
Priest of Italy, power against Gods word, to give leave to subjects and
inferior persons in England, to play the vilaines and traitors against their
sovereign prince, whom God has set over them: for whose defense God does
require at their hands to give their lives? Shall the foul beast of Rome have
power to reward yt deed in heaven, which God has threatened to punish in hell?
Let all the people of this land consider this, and shun such filthy and
abominable men. Some will say, wherefore should we eschew them being honest?
If rank traitors be honest, then are all the Jesuits, Seminaries, and popish
priests, with such as love and harbor them, to be counted honest.


Pa. I see more and more that I cannot prevail by speaking, and therefore I
will give ye over, say even what ye list. I see it is good for a man to take
heed with whom he does talk. I could answer ye to the full, if it might do
good. Thus much I will say, that it is one thing to commit treason against a
prince which is godly: and another thing, to kill an heretic which is no
lawful prince. The subjects indeed may not disobey and rebel: but when the
prince is no right prince, then they are no longer subjects. What say ye to
Ehud in the book of the Judges? did not he slay Eglon king of Moab, and that
under color of a message? What say ye to Iehoiada the priest? did not he
cause them to slay Athaliah, when she had reigned certain years, and set up
Ioash to be king? If the priest of the law had this power, how much more the
priest of the Gospel?


Pro. Ye would give me over now, ye say, but your traitorous heart is so full
that it will not suffer ye. Indeed I know ye like it much better to deal
among the unlearned people, whom ye may draw to your opinion: or with such as
ye know to bear the same mind that you do. Among these ye dare be bold to
reason the matter to the full. But this I say unto ye, let the devil bring his
note book with him: let the Pope and all his prelates utter all the skill they
can: yet the word of God shall still be able to beat them down in this
matter, to prove that subjects incur damnation, when they rebel against
princes, which are the ministers of GOD. As for the examples which ye bring, I
will show how they do not prove that which you allege them for. And then I
will let ye see, how it is to be proved by the law of God, that subjects have
no such power against their princes: but that every private man does very
horribly rebel against the Lord God, which rebelleth against the powers set up
by God.


Pa. Howsoever ye may seem to dally with those examples which I have
alleged, yet sure I am, they prove that which I do allege them for, both yt
it is lawful to kill wicked princes, and also by colorable dealing: for we have
example of the one in Ehud, and of the other also in Iehoiada.


Pro. I will maintain that which I have said, and show that they do not make
for that which ye cite them for. It is set forth in the Judges, that Israel had
done evil in ye sight of the Lord, and he made Eglon king of ye Moabites to
prevail against them, and to bring them into servitude. When the children of
Israel cried unto the Lord, he raised unto them a deliverer, even Ehud.
Afterward it is set forth how he came, went with a present to Eglon, desiring
to speak with him alone, and so slew him. Consider well in this story, first,
how Eglon was an unjust usurper, Judge. 3.
oppressing Israel like a cruel tyrant where he had no right. Secondly, Ehud
is no private man, but raised up by the Lord to be their deliverer. Wherefore
he had authority from God to put down Eglon, eue^ as well as a lawful king
has right to fight against such as invade his land, and to kill the^. Lastly,
where Ehud did it colourably, we may not draw it into an example, because it
was done by an extraordinary spirit: which ye pope cannot give to other,
because he has him not himself. If he could give to a private man, that spirit
which Ehud had to warrant him, the^ were it somewhat. As for the example of
Athaliah the mother of king Achasia, ^. King. 11.
after she saw her son was dead, did arise and murder al ye kings seed, or the
blood royal, and so usurped the kingdom: she was neither lawful Queen, nor
yet to be suffered to live, because she had committed so horrible and cruel
murder. Wherefore Iehoiada, in whose custody the young king was secretly kept,
when he brought him forth to be crowned, did not by his own right set up a
king, who^ it pleased him: but was an help to bring the young king to his
right, and to put down the wicked murderer and usurper. This now makes
nothing at all for the pope, when he takes upon him power to depose kings at
his pleasure, and to set up whom he shall think good.


Pa. I see well a man cannot bring you to see the power which the prince of the
Apostles had, and now his successor has for to depose princes. What should a
man contend with one which does not care what he denies?


Pro. Christ Jesus when he was desired by one that he would command his
brother to divide the land: answered, Luke 12.
Man who made me a judge or a deuider? Whereby he does evidently show that he
had no civil authority, no not in ye least causes: for else he would not have
said, who made me a judge: much less he had authority in the highest matters,
as to depose kings. And for this cause when Pilate did ask him, if he were a
king, he did answer: John 18.
my kingdom is not of this world: and likewise he did testify his subjection
to ye Emperor, Matthew. 17.
when he and Peter did pay tribute. How the^ does it come to pass that the
pope should challenge to have that because he is M. vicar, which neither Christ
nor Peter had? No, he has it not yt way, but because he is the man of sin
which has exalted himself above all that is called God. Moreover, what says
Christ to his Apostles? The kings of the nations rule over them, Matthew. 10.
and they that are great exercise authority over them: but it shall not be so
among you. I pray ye sir, if the Apostles might not be as kings and princes,
how had Peter this power to be king of kings, or how ca^ a priest in Italy,
because (as he says) he is the successor of Peter, have this high dignity, to
be so far above kings? Ye must needs confess, unless ye will be wilful,
that the Pope can have no such power neither from Peter, nor Christ: they do
both renounce him. Then I reason thus, (as I said before) Princes are set up by
God: he has made them his substitutes here on earth, he has not alone given
them ye seat and the sword, but also he has clothed them with glory, and
put upon them as it were of his own robes, when he calls them Gods. We are
commanded to be subject, to honor and obey, not to resist under pain of
damnation. If they command any thing which is disagreeing to Gods will, they
have not that power over our conscience: we must obey God rather then man.
Nevertheless we are still subjects to that power which they have received from
God. And being but private men, we must say with David, God forbid that I
should lay my hand upon my master the king, the Lords anointed. I say
therefore that your Jesuits, or whosoever favor them (which know their
practices) are traitors before God and man: because they dare lift up their
hand against their sovereign prince, placed in the throne by the high God, and
subject to no creature in earth. I say therefore let all men take heed of your
cursed and damnable ways. Let all men see, that your kingdom is not of God,
which ye uphold by treasons, periuries, lies, murders, and all kind of evil
means.


Pa. All is naught of our side, and all good of yours. Ye are so malicious that
whatsoever we do ye condemn it, your charity does show what ye are.


Pro. We must needs say all that is naught, which God says is so. I confess
our charity and yours are not al one, for the charity of you papists, is a
burning love. Ye can both love a man, and cut his throat also. The Lord defend
his people from such Vipers: which sting to death, when they be gentlest of
all. But Idolatry is always cruel, and cannot be maintained, but with
devilish and bloody minds.


Pa. I know ye do account us to be Idolaters, and so ye do call us, but we are
as far from it as you be: we condemn it, and hate it more then you do. And
although ye go about to abuse and wrest the scriptures against us, yet ye
shall never be able to drive any true Catholic from the right pure and devout
worship of God.


Pro. Will ye confess if I prove that you are Idolaters that yours is the
false Church, and that ye are fallen away from the truth, that the Pope is
Antichrist.


Pa. I must needs confess that Idolaters are fallen from the truth: but
where as ye make offer to prove that we commit Idolatry, I say still we be
the furthest from it of all other. And in this I think my self sufficiently
armed to stand against all the heretics in the world, prove what ye can.


Pro. Al those which worship idols, are condemned in the holy Scriptures to be
idolaters. But it seems you Papists do not worship idols: at least ye would
bear men in hand ye do not, when as in very deed ye do it in most shameful
manner. Where has it ever been heard of that men have more doted upon stocks
and stones, then the Papists? Will ye still then be past shame, and say you hate
idolatry, you are furthest from it of all other?


Pa. I say still, and need not be ashamed, that it is the blindness of you
heretics, which either cannot or will not see that ours is no Idolatry. This
sin of Idolatry is where they worship Idols: we have images of the true God,
of the blessed Virgin, of the Apostles, and of other Saints: we have no idols
of feined and false Gods: we worship not the images themselves neither, but
the things which are by them represented. Moreover, we do not give latria to
the images of Saints, but dulia, which God in the scriptures does never
condemn. I say therefore ye help us when ye say we worship stocks and stones,
or that we worship any besides the true God. You are the idolaters your selves.


Pro. You would feign purge and clear your selves from idolatry, and
therefore ye have devised these distinctions: first, ye would make a difference
between Idol and Image, yours are Images but not Idols. Secondly, ye shift
the matter that ye do not worship ye Images themselves, but that which the
Image does put ye in mind of. And last of all, your deep distinction between
latria, which is worship, which ye give only to God, and dulia, which is
service, which ye bestow upon the Saints. I will lay open how vain these
things are: and yet how they be subtle to deceive poor ignorant souls.


Pa. I know your answers well enough, ye take upon ye to defend, that an Idol
and an Image are all one. And so when it is said, God made man after his own
Image, ye may translate it after his own Idol. It may be said of the picture
and image of the prince, this is the princes Idol. Likewise if a painter paint
an image of a dog, ye may say this is an Idol of a dog. Ah Sirs this is over
gross, ye show by this what your skill is in other things.


Pro. Now must ye needs win the spurs, because we say that Image and Idol
is all one: saving that the one is Greek, and the other Latin. Ye say, the^ we
must say God made man after his own Idol: which were very gross. I confess
that in our tongue it were gross indeed, because the word Idol is by common
use of speech taken always in evil part, but in the Greek tongue it was not
so. But I will come nearer unto ye, to show your deceitful dealing in this:
shall we desire a better judge in this matter then the Hebrew tongue, in the
scriptures: in which it is said, that God made man after his own image, and in
which there is much spoken of idols? What if I prove that he uses the same
word where he speaks of idols, which he uses where he says, God made man
after his own image? Will there then be such a difference?


Pa. When I see this, then I will believe it, before I will not: the Scriptures
do speak of images, and it may be there is the same word. But you must prove
it where he does speak it of those which were idols indeed, of the heathen,
and of false gods.


Pro. I will show where he speaks of idols indeed which were worshipped by the
heathen, and prove that he uses the same word. The word in Moses is Tselem,
after which Adam was created: Genesis 1. Now look where he speaks to the
children of Israel by Moses, to command them to break down the idols of the
heathen, and ye shall find the same word. As Numb. 33. He says, ye shall
destroy Tsalme, Massecotham, that is their moulten images. In the 2. book of
Kings, chap. 11. it is said, They went into the house of Baal, and brake down
his images, which he calls by ye same name. By this it does appear, that in
the holy scriptures there is no such difference between idol and image, as the
Papists would bear men in hand. For these were idols by their own confession,
which yet are set forth under that same word, which Moses uses for the likeness
of God, after which man was created.


Pa. All this does prove nothing, for we do grant that which ye have said.
Because idols be also images, although every picture and image be not an idol:
for an idol is an image which is worshipped and taken to be God.


Pro. It does prove this, for which I did allege it, that the same word is in
that tongue used indifferently for the image of GOD, and for the idols of the
heathen. But because ye say it does prove nothing, seeing idols be images,
although every image is not by and by an idol, unless it be worshipped. Let me
demand this: Is not that which is forbidden to be made in the Scriptures an
idol?


Pa. I know no man which does deny, but that is an idol which the Scriptures
do forbid. But you must go further then that: for ye must prove that those
which the Scripture does forbid are but called images: and so images and idols
to be all one.


Pro. Ye say right, for those which the scripture condemns, we must confess
to be idols: then if I prove that the scripture does condemn images, it must
needs follow that they be idols. I require no more, for it is manifest that the
Scripture does forbid all images of God, as in Deuterono. 4. there is forbidden
not only Semel, but also Temnuah and Tabnith. And in Esaias 40. Demuth. Who will
be so mad as to deny but that here are images forbidden: and therefore that
images are idols.


Pa. I see no cause why I should not deny it, for they were also idols, because
they were made to be worshipped.


Pro. I see no cause why I may not esteem you to be obstinatly blinded.
Because in these places which I have cited, he does not only speak of the
true GOD, but also the reasons which are set down to forbid the images, do
disprove not only the worshipping, but also the very making. For why does
Moses tell them, ye heard the voice of words, when God spoke, but ye saw no
similitude? Why does Esaias set forth the incomprehensible greatness of the Lord:
but to conclude as he does, that there can no similitude be made of God? And
therefore this conclusion does stand sure, that images in the Scripture and
idols be all one. And therefore the Papists do but iuggle when they shift
their hands of idolatry in this manner: we do not worship idols, we do but
serve images. Ours be the images of the true God: and we take them not to be
any more then images. If this would have served the turn, the Israelites might
have answered to Moses, and Esaias, well enough.


Pa. Are ye of the mind that every picture or image of God is forbidden to be
made, although a man do not worship it. Does the Scripture say any such thing?


Pro. I must needs be of that mind, when I have the words of the
commandment, Thou shall not make, etc. and not only those places which I did
allege with reasons to forbid the making, but also other reasons: as namely,
that GOD dwells in light which none can come unto, whom never man saw,
neither can see, as S. Paul says. Again, 1. Tim. 6. Acts 17.
the same Apostle tells, that the Godhead is not like silver or gold, etc.
Again, God is incorruptible, man is mortal: which reason is used in the 1.
chap. to the Romans. Sundry things may be spoken to show that an image is a
teacher of lies: and therefore accursed and abominable before God. For it is
wicked to lie of a man: but most abominable to transform God into an heap of
lies: as when a man says, this is the picture of God: then must it be taken to
be like God: or else why is it his image more the^ another thing: these lies
then are in it, God is invisible, this is seen: God is alive, this is dead:
God is incomprehensible, for the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, this is
contained in a small room: God is almighty, this has no power: God is
glorious, and incorruptible, this is subject to rust and corruption: yea to
conclude, it is nothing but lies, because it does neither in shape, because God
is a spirit, and that is a gross substance, neither in any property set forth
that which is in God, but the quite contrary. If any should picture your Pope
like a dog or a toade, ye would not take it well: and yet he is liker to
either of these, then the Lord is to any image: ye do more disgrace him when
ye picture him like any creature, then ye can do to any man to picture him
like a toad.


Pa. What though it be not like him in some points, is it therefore to be
condemned? If men should worship it, that were evil: but we worship that which
it does represent.


Pro. I am out of doubt that ye worship that which the image does represent:
that is not God, for it does not represe^t him in any point, but it is the
devil, who is the father of lies, and therefore the father of images which are
full of abominable lies. But you papists have a pretty conueiance, when ye bear
men in hand, that Idolaters are they, either which worship false gods, or which
worship the images themselves, of the true God. As though either the heathen
men were so gross, or the Idolaters among the Jews, as to take the image it
self to be God. Those are poor men which know not that.


Pa. The Jews did worship the calfe it self, and take it to be God. The
heathen did take their Idols to be Gods: and therefore they did worship them.


Pro. To prove that these did not worship the idols themselves, nor take them
to be gods: a few reasons may serve. For if it be showed that the heathen did
not, then must it needs follow that the Jews did not: unless ye will make
them which had more knowledge of God, to be more brutish then the other. Now
for the heathen, S. Paul says, Romans 1.
that which might be known of God was manifest in them: which he expresses
to be the eternal power and Godhead. If then the sense of the Godhead could
not be rooted out of the hearts of these, much less out of the hearts of ye
Jews. This thing is manifest in the heathen, that believed the gods and
goddesses to be in heaven: and therefore they thought (as their writings do
show) that oftentimes they came down from heaven, and appeared to them in the
likeness of men and women. I need not recite particulars.


Pa. The heathen did believe that the idols were gods: else why should S. Paul
persuade, Acts 19.
that those were not gods which are made with hands. The learned among the
heathen, did think as you say, but not the multitude.


Pro. Although the heathen did know that the idols were not the very gods
themselves, yet this persuasion of S. Paul was not needless, because they did
ascribe a certain divinity unto them: they thought the gods and goddesses
came down into them, and did there receive honor. Even as you papists thought
of your idols, and therefore you would trudge a great way on pilgrimage. As for
the other excuse which ye make it is false: for when Paul and Barnabas came to
Lystra, Acts 14.
and had healed a man that was lame, did not all the multitude cry out, Gods
are come down unto us in the likeness of men? They took Barnabas to be Jupiter,
and Paul to be Mercury. And the^ Jupiters priest came to have offered
sacrifice unto them, as he had done to the idol. The Jews therefore which had
seen the wonders which God wrought in Egypt and in ye red sea, which had heard
him speak out of the fire, with so great terror: could not be so brutish, as
to think the Calfe which they saw Aaron make, to be the God indeed which had
brought them out of Egypt, but the image to represent the same God, whom they
meant to worship in it. Where the foolish papists may see that in this foul
idolatry of the Jews, they neither did worship the idol it self: neither any
false gods. You do worse then they, because ye worship the idols of those
which are no gods: as of the virgin Mary, and other Saints.


Pa. I told ye before that we do not worship any image, but the thing
represented: I said also that we do not worship the Saints: for we give not
latria unto them, but dulia: which you can not prove to be any where forbidden.
But you will have your own saying to charge us with what ye lust.


Pro. We charge ye not with any thing but that which is easy to be proved: I
have showed that the gross idolaters among the heathen did not take the very
image to be God, neither did worship it, but that which it did represent. And
now I tell ye, that as ye play the beasts that way, so now ye play ye part of
subtle fools: which in seducing others, deceive your selves. For this
difference which ye make between latria, and dulia, is not found in the
scriptures. And besides that, the word of God does forbid to give dulian to any
but God.


Pa. You have set down two things which ye will never be able to prove: the
one, that ye say there is no such difference between latria and dulia: the
other that dulia is to be given only to God. If ye ca^ prove these two, let us
see a piece of your cunning.


Pro. Our Savior Christ is a very competent Judge in this matter: and he uses
the one word for the other. For where it is said in Moses Deuteronomy. 6. and also 10.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and him shall thou serve: he does express
it in Matthew. 4. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve: I cite it to this end, to show that where Moses has set down tagnabod,
Christ does translate it by the Evangelist, latreuscis: which is suffcient to
show that he put no difference between them. To prove that dulia is forbidden
to images, we need go no further then to the commandment, where he does
forbid to make them: and then he says, Thou shall not bow to them: neither
shall thou serve the^: for he uses the verb gnabad. I might allege sundry
other places: as Psalm. 97. where he says, They shall be confounded gnobede
pesel, which serve the graven image. You blind Papists would pluck out men's
eyes, by your vain shifts and foolish distinctions: you make a difference
where there is none. If ever there were abominable and foul idolatry
committed in the world, either by Jews or Pagans, or other, it is among you,
ye go, no doubt, as far as ever did any. Now a days the papists, at least a
number of them, do wax more crafty: they will not with their forefathers
allow any thing to the idols themselves: but al to the things which they
represent: whereas in times past the controversy was whether the image was to
be worshipped with the same worship, that the first pattern that it did
represent was? Some of your great clarks did affirm the one way, and some the
other: for one part defends that the images of the Trinity, and of the
Cross were to be worshipped with latria, divine worship: the other part does
reply that latria is proper only to God: and therefore not to be given to the
images: they must adore the^ with some lower worship. But shift how ye can,
agree or disagree among your selves, the holy word of God stands still,
condemning and accursing ye as detestable Idolaters. For say what ye can, ye
ascribe and give worship unto them.


Pa. Have ye by this proved, that dulia is to be given only to God?


Pro. I suppose that it is proved, when the Scripture does make no difference,
but uses latria, and dulia in one sense. For ye all confess now that divine
worship is to be given only to God. Ye take dulia for a divine service or
adoration: does it not then follow that God is robbed of his right, who is our
Lord and we his servants? Now all may see, that are not obstinate, that the
Romish Church is not the true Church of Christ, because ye commit idolatry. I
do therefore conclude, that al which will have salvation, must remove
themselves from ye, and return home to the ancient and true Catholic Church.


Pa. I wonder with what face ye can speak thus: ye would have men depart from
our church, as you say to the ancient and true Catholic church: when as ye
cannot show us that antiquity: for masters it is well known how young your
Church is. To the ancient Church, we would not deny to return, if we were out
of the way: but to you, which are newly sprung up, we may not.


Pro. It is a strange thing that men are so wilful: we do believe all the
doctrine and faith, which the Prophets and Apostles taught and believed: we
cleave only to this, and admit none other, and yet your blind eyes cannot see
what antiquity we call ye unto. We are but men of late years, if the
doctrine which we teach be no elder, I would wish ye not to believe it. But
seeing we bring nothing but that which was from the beginning, we may boldly
say that ours is the ancient Catholic Church: and therefore all those which be
not members of it cannot have salvation. As for you, look how far ye are
gone from the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, so far are ye removed
from the true Catholic Church. Your doctrine is contrary to theirs, your Pope
is nothing like Christ and his Apostles.


Pa. I see that I cannot remove you, nor you shall not remove me. I must even
leave ye as I found you. I am sorry that ye are so far spent: yet I hope one
day to see ye of a better mind. For a day will come when this geere will be
better looked upon.


Pro. I may not be removed from that which I know most certainly to be the
truth: unto that which is most cursed lies. And as for you, I leave ye to the
Lord, no hope I see to win ye: for the day which ye hope for, we see that
the Lord has hitherto miraculously disappoynted ye: and has brought to
light your traitorous purposes. Our hope is that the same Lord will still
protect our gracious Queen and her honorable counselors. Wonderful great
blessings has GOD bestowed upon us by her, and by them. For which as many as
have any drop of grace, cannot but give hearty thanks and praise to the Lord,
and sure I am, that unless our sins do provoke him, he is ready to bestow
greater. Although a great number of ye: even as it were very devils incarnate,
do enterprise and gape for her destruction, and the destruction of those over
whom she does spread her wings to cover them. Al good subjects within this
realm, both to GOD and their prince, are bound in conscience, not only to
curse, hate, and detest, from the bottom of their hearts, your hellish and
cruel practices: but also to lift up their hands and hearts to heaven, and to
power out continual supplications to the Lord, for the preservation of her
Majesty, and her Counsel. Desiring God to guide them with his spirit, to do
nothing but that which is good and pleasing in his sight: also to give them al
gifts of wisdom and courage, and to multiply their days, with true honor
in this life, and eternal blessedness in the life to come. If men did see how
needful this prayer is at this time, that this realm, and the poor Church of
God in this realm may be in safety: it would cause them in stead of a few
ordinary cold prayers in this behalf, to send forth strong cries into the
ears of the Lord, and to power out rivers of tears, to move him to pity and
compassion. For when that greasy priest of Italy does set ye on, to spoil us
of all peace both for body and soul: and to take from us


(...)
