portrait of Francis Bacon Bacon family crest MEDIOCRIA FIRMA

MONITI MELIORA Honmus, Franciscus Baconus, Baro de Verulam Vice-Comes Scti
Albani. mortuus 9o Aprilis, Anno Dn^i. 1626. Annoque Aetat 66.



OF THE ADVANCEMENT AND PROFICIENCE OF LEARNING; OR, THE PARTITIONS OF SCIENCES.

NINE BOOKS.

Written in Latin by the Most Eminent, Illustrious, and Famous Lord FRANCIS
BACON Baron of Verulam, Vicount St. Alban, Councellor of Estate, and Lord
Chancellor of ENGLAND.

Interpreted by Gilbert Watts.

OXFORD, Printed by Leon Lichfield Printer to the University, for Robert Young
and Edward Forest 1640.

SACRATISSIMO DN^O NOSTRO CAROLO DEI GRATIA MAG. BRITANNIAE FRANCIAE ET
HIBERNIAE REGI. TERRAE MARISQ. POTENTISSIMO PRINCIPI. OCEANI BRITANNICI AD
QUATUOR MUNDI PLAGAS DISPARTITI IMPERATORI. DN^O VIRGINIAE ET VASTORUM
TERRITORIORUM ADJACENTIUM ET DISPERSARUM INSULARUM IN OCEANO OCCIDENTALI.

CHRISTIANAE FIDEI DEFENSORI PACIS INSTAURATORI PUB. SECURITATIS AUCTORI PIO
FELL. AUG.

NEC-NON SUB SUI NUMINIS INFLUENTIA AC CLIENTELA DUOBUS MAX. MUNDI LUMINARIBUS
PERPETUIS SAPIENTIAE FLAMMIS CERTISS. SCIENTIARUM CYNOSURIS UTRISQ. ANGLIAE
ACADEMIIS INFIMVS HVMILLIMVS VERULAMII INTERPRES HANC PRIMAM INSTAURATIONIS
MAGNAE PARTEM

D. N. C. Q.

TO THE PRINCE OF GREAT BRITAIN FRANCE AND IRELAND THE GROWING GLORY of a
Future Age.
THE sacrifice of my Devotions in the Dedication of these Labors ( excellent
PRINCE) had gone a more humble way of Ambition, than through the hands of Kings
and Princes, could I afterward have justified such humiliations. But the
Tenure of this work is a Title-Royall, which no laps of time nor alteration of
language can reverse. In the Original entitled to a King; so continued in the
Translation, and so in a direct line descends upon Your Highness, as a part of
a Royal Patrimony, which I durst not alienate by a lower inscription. The
Author is Sir Francis Bacon, a name well known in the European world; a learned
man, happily the learned, that ever lived, since the decay of the Grecian
and Roman Empires; when learning was at a high pitch; and Which rise and fell
with those Monarchies; for Scepters and Sciences have the same revolutions, the
same periods. In the vast spaces of time between those and these last Ages,
Philosophy has bin, as it were in a slumber, for many centuries of years. For
after the Christian faith grew up, the most writers betook themselves to
Theology, and some mistaking the right limits of Faith and Reason, fell foul
upon Aristotle and other Philosophers, as Patriarchs of Eresy, which were the
Patrons of Reason. Somewhat awaked from this slumber she was, by the Arabian
writers, the Schoole-Doctors and Spanish Interpreters; made more active by the
Chimique Philosophers, but never perfectly recovered until the days of this
Author, who is the first that ever joynd Rational and Experimental Philosophy
in a regular correspondence; which before was either a subtlety of words, or a
confusion of matter. He after he had survaied all the Records of Antiquity,
after the volumnes of men, betook himself to the study of the volumne of the
world; and having conquered what ever books possessed (his spacious spirit not
thus bounded) set upon the Kingdom of Nature, and carried that victory very
far; and which was more than those victories, himself being mortal, left
such laws behind him, as may suffice to subdue the rest, if Princes encourage
men, and men be not wanting to themselves. This attempt of his was favored by
the stars of his Nativity. For it was his felicity to live in the times of
two Great Patrons of Learning, K. JAMES Your Highness Grandfather of blessed
memory, and Your Royal Father now Reigning; and it was their glory that he
lived in their times; and will be the eternal honor of this Nation, that the
Greatest Kings and the Greatest Philosopher met together in one age, in one
Island. By the favor of his Prince, who well knew the value of Learning and
Learned men, he was raised to the highest dignities in the Civil state; and by
his own happy Genius, to the highest degree in the state of learning; which
was the greater wonder of the two; being such incompatible perfections, and
divided, enough to fill up the sphere of the greatest abilities alive. Yet with
great applause he acted both these high parts, of the greatest Scholar and the
greatest Statesman of his time: and so quit himself in both, as one and the
same Person, in title and merit, became Lord Keeper of the Great seal of
England, and of the Great Seal of Nature both at once, which is a mystery
beyond the comprehension of his own times, and a miracle requires a great
measure of faith in Posterity, to believe it. This is the Author I here present
unto Your Highness, this his work, which by the powerful influence of Your
favor shall prosper, and, it may be, be quickened to the regeneration of
another Phoenix out of his ashes, to adorn your World: for it is only the
benign aspect and irradiation of Princes, that inspires the Globe of learning,
and makes Arts, and sciences grow up and flourish. Heaven bless Your Highness
with blessings on the right hand and on the left, and make You Heir of all the
virtues of your Royal Progenitors, that the Honor of Princes begun in them,
may be continued in Your person; and that a future age may be so blessed in
You, as the present is in Your Royal Father, the Glory of Kings and their
Admiration.

YOUR HIGHNESS most Humbly devoted GILBERT WATS.

FAVOVRABLE READER.
THE intended Apologetique, for the Instauration of Sciences, and the
justification of this Author, which should have bin prefixed this work, as a
preparation thereto; is not published. Motives to this resolution, were diverse,
whereof some are very concerning. Apologetiques for such Authors and such
enterprises are entertained with jealousies, as if they threatened an innovation
in the state of Learning; by reversing the judgments of Antiquity, and the
Placits of the Modern; and by bringing in, a new Primum Mobile, into the
Jntellectuall Globe of Sciences, to the subversion of the Arts received. But
these are groundless fears, fancied by such, who either understand not the
intention of this attempt; or, engaged in a Professory way, suspect their
profit and reputation to be in danger, if such designs should take effect. Our
Author protests against such dareing vanities, the raising of any new sect,
upon the ruins of Antiquity; and every where endeavors to improve the labors
of Ancient and Modern writers, and so must he do who defends him, if he
understands the business he goes about. The point is not, touching what is
already done; nor of the abilities of the Agents; nor of the capacity of their
instruments; which could not be undertake^ without emulous comparisons, both of
Persons, Actions, and Things: but the point is touching propagation and
Advancement of Knowledges; the improvement, and not the conservation only, of
the Patrimony of our Ancestors: and that by opening to the understanding a
different way, than has bin known to former Ages; and clearing that glass to
the letting in of a more plentiful light. The ways and ends of these two
knowledges (I mean of what we have, and of what we may have) thus different;
and the principles upon which they proceed so diverse; both may consist without
contradictions and confutations; or the invasions upon their distinguished
rights: and so the propagation of Knowledge, by the assistance, of the Father
of Lights, may be pursued, with the reservation of the honor of Ancient and
Modern Authors, and the Arts in use, which respecting the end whereto they
were instituted, Disputation, Redargution and the like, are very conducent, and
in their way of perfection highly exalted. And this is the first motive of
deliberating the publication of my Apologetique, the difficulty of the
business. Another is this. The times into which we are fallen, are learned
Times, as ever were since the Grecian Philosophers, and, their seconds, the
Arabian writers, which also through the great advantages, of the experiments of
later Ages, and the directions of Antiquity, in many particulars have out-gon
their predecessors; so as he that dare adventure, as, some do, to intrude
unstudied thoughts upon so learned an age as this is, neither reverences the
age as he ought, nor wisely consults his own reputation with Posterity. And as
the Times are learned, so (which too frequently falls out) somewhat confident.
Great wits, and which have fortified their conceptions by books and study, are
strongly prepossest with almost impregnable anticipations; and not so easily
induced, as more inconcerned and disengaged natures are; to know or unknow any
thing, that either should be farther inquired into, or should be for gotten.
And much within these two orbs our Apology moves; in discovery of Jgnorance and
of Error; of what we know not, and of what we should not know. For certainly
much knowledge remains yet concealed, and the way to this discovery is by
forgoeing many unprofitable subtleties; and by a learned ignorance falling off
from many aerie speculations, to the solid simplicity of the Ancients. Were we
to compose a Panegyrique in praise of the perfections of the learning of our
days, which indeed merits such a sacrifice, the labor were but half what it
is, for laudatory hymns seldom come out of season; they need no preparations,
and what might be wanting in the weight of speech, would be supplied by an
aptitude to accept and believe. But in the business in hand, the mind of man,
the principal subject to be wrought upon, and her speculations, both which we
so admire, are so immured and blockt up with corrupt notions, either from the
placits of Philosophers, the depraved laws of Demonstration; or from inherent
qualities in the general nature of man, or individuate temperature of
particulars; that nothing can be done until these be convinced; at least,
subjected to examination: which is another motive that stays me upon the Land.
An other Reason, (which is the last I will trouble the Reader withal is this.
Time the measure of all our Actions, without whose assistance our best
conceptions are Abortives, by the intercurrence of other engagements (which I
might have dispensed withal, had I rightly understood the servile tenure of
secular contracts) has surpised me. I conceive, which I pronounce with some
passion, that a Scholar for his studies, had bin the master of his own hours;
but he-that trafiques with the world shall find it otherwise. Time which I
presumed I could command, and stay as I do my watch, has commanded me. And
these diversions were seconded (Humane Reader) by a sad Accident. It pleased
God in the heat of my attendance on this business, to take away, by one of the
terrors of mortality, the Stone, my dear brother Sr RICHARD SCOT, servant to
the most Eminent Lord the Lo. Deputy General of Ireland; beloved of his dear
Lord to the latest minute of life; honored with his presence to the farthest
confines of mortality; and there, by his Noble Piety, delivered up, with as
much solemnity, as a Kingdom could confer, unto the immortality of another
world. This deadly shaft passing through him, so wounded me, that I my self
was arrived within few paces of the land of darkness. Jn his silent Marble,
the best part of that small portion of joy I had in the World; but all my
hopes, are entombed. This pensive casualty so took me off from books and
business, as for some months after, I could relish no thoughts but what were
mingled with the contemplations of mortality. Sic fugit interea fugit
irrevocabile tempus. These were the impediments to my Apologetique; which (if
what is done be accepted) shall be prefixed the NOV. ORG. For of this
Translation this is the first part (Reader) if it please thee, if it please
thee not, the last. But before I take my leave, here are some tacit
objections, which I would meet half way, and so weaken their approaches, lest
they fall too heavy upon me. The first is, touching the Division of the first
book into Chapters, contrary to the mind of the Author, and the intention of
the work. This exception may be thus satisfied, that profit is to be preferred
before artificial contrivance, where both cannot so conveniently be had, and
to this end, discretion to be followed before rule. Were the Author now alive
and his vast Designs going on, this alteration had been somewhat bold: but the
inimitable Architect now dead, having perfected little more then the outward
Courts, as it were, of his magnificent Instauration; and the whole sum of
Sciences, and the stock of Arts in present possession, not able to defray the
charges of finishing this Fabrique; I thought fit, by compartitions and
distributions into several rooms, to improve what we have, to our best
advantage, so it might be done without prejudice to the Authors procedure, and
apt coherence, which J hope it is: Having respect herein rather to
accommodation than decoration; for Houses (as our Author says) are built to
live in and not to look on, and therefore use to be preferred before
uniformity. Another Exception may be made against the draught of the Platform
into Analytique tables, which seems somewhat pedantique and against that common
rule Artis est dissimulare Artem. To this J answer thus. Order and dependence
is as it were, the soul of the World, of the Works of Nature and Art, and that
which keeps them united, without which all would fall asunder and become like
the first Chaos before the production of light. And of all Methods that ever
were, at least that ever came to our hands, our Authors is the most natural
and most dependent. For Truth, as it reflects on us, is a congruent conformity
of the Jntellect to the Object; and of the different faculties thereof, to the
difference of things: wherefore the truest Partition of humane learning, is
that, which has reference to humane faculties; when the Intellectual Globe,
and the Globe of the World, intermixe their beams and irradiations in a direct
line of projection, to the Generation of Sciences. This our Author has
performed to admiration; and in this gone beyond all Antiquity, yet upon their
grounds; wherein he can never be out-gone, unless followed, by Posterity. The
Ancients indeed, were men of most profound speculations, but in the delivery of
themselves, somewhat involved, as appears by Plotinus, Proclus, Trismegistus
and others; and many of Platoes School writ Dialogue-wise, which is no
doctrinal way. As for Aristotle, his precepts touching method (if any such book
was written) they are perished; saving where he scatters such rules here and
there, which should have been silenced, and are not so well followed by
himself. And for the Methods of the Modernes, Ramus and others, by the
improvement of German writers, impaired; they knit the limbs of knowledge to
soon; have bedwarfed Sciences, and are become an Art (as learned Hooker
expresses it) which teaches the way of speedy discourse, and restrains the mind
of man, that it may not wax over-wise. The Excellency therefore of our Authors
Partitions, induced me to these delineations, for their use only, who have not
the leisure, or patience to observe it according to the merit; that by this
Anatomy, the junctures and arteries, as it were, of this great body might more
visibly appear. An other objection is, touching the Allegations in the Margin,
contrary to the solemn custom of Antiquity, and the most of graver Authors.
For this I had these reasons. It pleased our Author, thoe he was himself a
living fountain of knowledge, and had a wealthy stock of his own, yet to taste
of other waters, and to borrow from Antiquity, and to acknowledge such
borrowings, He thus nameing his Authors, I thought fit to note them. And as he
was a man of a most elevated fancy and choice conceptions; so was he in the
selection of his Authors, and the passages he pleased to make use of: and it is
worth the labor to know with whom such great wits use to converse; to point to
the Mines where they dig their Ore; and to the shadows where they repose at
noone. And as his selection of Authors was very choice, so was his application
of their sayings, very curious; and in a strain beyond the vulgar reach. Places
out of Sacred Scriptures are so explicated, so applied, as you may search all
the Commenters that are extant, and not find the like expositions, as you
shall find in him. As for humane Authors he betters his borrowings from them;
teaching the allegations out of them, a sense above the meaning of him that
lent it him; and which he repaies too with double interest for what he
borrowed. These considerations invited me to Marginall Citations. These Reasons
set apart, I cannot approve this weak ambition; and do, not without censure,
read Modern Authors prostitute to humane allegations; as if the Truth they
deliver, were to be tried by voices; or having lost its primitive Innocence,
must be covered with these fig leaves; or as if the Authors themselves were
afraid that it should make an escape out of their text, if it were not beset in
the Margin with Authorities as with a watch. The last exception is, touching
the Prefaces, and other Introductions prefixed this work, that make the Gates
and Entries so wide, as they seem to invite the City to run away. This is thus
answered. It must be remembered that this work in the Design was very
spacious; and is in the performance of what is done so ample, that when the
second and third Parts shall be added, as added they will be, the Porches and
Ingresses, in the judgment of any good Architect, are proportionable enough.
And if our Authors rule hold, that every fair Fabrique should have three
Courts; a green Court; a second Court more garnisht; and a third to make a
square with the Front; then have you here this Epistle as the mean Court;
Judgments upon this Author living and dead, as the middle Court; and the
Authors own excellent Preface to confront with the work it self. Now I should,
say something touching Translation; and as it is mine. The very Action is
somewhat obnoxious to censure; being of the nature of those, the failing
whereof may disgrace more, than the carrying of it through, credit the
undertaker. But, besides the conscience of the deed done; for other ends I
could not have; (the Author now dead, and alive mihi nec injuriis nec
beneficiis notus) and that to be a Translator is more than to be an Author,
some such as there be; and that it is no such mean office, to bear a light
before a Lord Chancellor of England: I should excuse it, were the example mine:
so, writes learned Savil; so, eloquent Sandys; so, Malvezzi's Noble
Interpreter; with whom conferred I am less than a shadow: So, many able and
eminent names of France and Italy, and other Nations; So the Ancients of former
ages and of all Arguments. But if any be so solemn, so severe, and of such
primitive tastes, they can away with no waters, which come not from the
springhead; nor endure to drink of Tiber, that passes through Thames; They may
give over here, if they so please, and proceed no farther. This interpretation
was not meant for such fastidious palates, and yet, it may be, for as
distinguishing as theirs are. Now if this very action be thus liable to
exception, much more must my performance be. Certainly books by Translation
commonly take wind in the effusion; and for strength fall short of their
Originals; as reflexed beams are weaker than direct: but then it must be
understood of Originals, truly so. For if a Writer deliver himself out of his
Native language, J see not why a Translator rendering him in it, may not come
near him: and in this case, the Author himself is the Interpreter, being he
translates his own thoughts, which originally speak his mother tongue. Yet for
all this, Errors I know there are, and some lapses, which require a Connivence;
and a Reader has this advantage, that he may stay upon one period, as long as
an Jnterpreter did on one page; besides his peculiar Genius to some studied
passages. Some Errors (passing but a transient eye upon what is done) J see
already; and could note them; but I would not willingly gratify some kind of
Readers so far. They that are Iuditious and ingenious too (for J would have
no Readers that have not these two ingredients in their compositions, thoe
sometimes I name but one, which I would then, should be predominant) will in
their judgments find them, and in their mercy pardon them. As for Sophists and
Satyrists, a degenerate Race of men, that sit upon the lives and learning of
all that write; who resolved to do nothing themselves, may with more security
censure others: and them too, who, as Learned DON deciphers them, forbid not
books, but men; damning what ever such a name, has, or shall write: they are
things below the merit of my indignation; objects of Scorn; which a little
slighted, and not inflamed by opposition, or countenanced to a reply by
confutation, will within a while, of themselves, extinguish, and vanish: like
some dispersed roving winds, which without encountre are dispirited and die.
And it concerns me, Courteous Reader, to put on such a confidence as this; for
being I am likely to appear in mine own person, as I do now in the Person of
another; to be too tender-fronted were to invite injuries, and to prostitute
such unseasonable modesty to abuse. He that will to sea, must look for some
cloudy days; and to be too scrupulous or Ceremonious touching Times or
Persons, is the bane of business and of all well-meant endeavors: according
to that of Solomon, Qui observat ventum non seminat, and qui considerat Nubes,
nunquam metet.

TESTIMONIES CONSECRATE TO THE MERIT OF THE INCOMPARABLE PHILOSOPHER SR
FRANCIS BACON BY SOME OF THE BEST-LEARN'D OF THIS JNSTANT AGE.
ALthough severe Jnquisitors of truth, and such who, by their learned Labors,
stand upon pub. Record in the approved Archives of Eternity, may, in an humble
distance, lay claim and title to that sacred Prerogative -- Ego autem ab homine
Testimonium non Capto; ipsa enim Opera quae facio testantur de me, -- yet
because such Great Authors, in their high flight, are so lessened in the air
of unfrequented contemplations; and take such unbeaten ways, as they become
the weak wonder of common Capacities, accustomed to populare opinions, and
authorized Errors: and in this admiring Ignorance, the prejudicate objects of
Emulation, Envy, Jealousies, and such like impotent passions: It seems, in a
sort, necessary, that the way be cleared before such writers; and that they
enter the Theater, as well with the suffrage of voice, to gain upon the will;
as with the strength of Reason, to convince the Understanding.

Wherefore, not so much for the honor of this Author, (though that is intended
too) as for the aid of some anticipate Readers, not yet manu-missed from a
servile belief, to the liberty of their own judgments, (such J mean, as are
yet under the minority of an implicit faith) J thought good to deliver this
imperfect list of Deponents, which the precipitancy of this Edition, would not
permit to fill up with some other Great Names, both of this Kingdom, and of
foreign Nations. What is wanting here to the accomplishment of this Catalogue,
Time, the Parent of Truth, shall Consummate.

LE SIEUR MAUGARS Counsilor and secretary to the K. of France, in the Epist. to
his Translation of a Part of this Work, gives our Author this Testimony.

Amongst whom every one knows that Sr FRANCIS BACON, by many degrees off, holds
the first rank, both for the vivacity of his Spirit, eminency of his Learning,
Elegancy of his style. J have studied with diligence all his writings; and
presume I may do a performance of some merit and acceptance, in presenting to
my Country his Books of the ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING, a Work has not bin seen
in our Language. This is the Book which I have caused to pass the Seas; not as
the Gold of the Jndies, to cherish vice, and corrupt our Manners; but as a
sovereign Plant of singular virtue, to cure the wounds, which ignorance and
Pedantisme have given humane sciences.

MR PEIRRE D'AMBOIS SR DE LA MAGDELAINE In his just and elegant discourse upon
the life of our Author, delivers his censure thus.

Judgment and Memory never met in any man in that height and measure they met
in him; so as in short time he became Master of all those Knowledges which are
learnt in Schools.

A page after; But as he ever valewed himself, rather borne for other men,
than himself; now that he could not, for want of employment, any longer endow
the public with his Active perfections; he was desirous at least to become
profitable in a Contemplative way, by his writings and by his books, monuments
certainly meriting, to find entertainment in all the Libraries of the world;
and which deserve to be ranged with the fairest works of Antiquity.

The same noble Frenchman in his Advertisement to our Auctors Not. History
thus expresses him.

For this Natural History, where the quality of Metalls, the Nature of
Elements, the Causes of Generation, and Corruption, the diverse actions of
Bodies one upon another, and such like impressions, are discoursed with such
life and light, that he may seem to have learned his knowledge even in the
School of the First Man. And though herein he may be thought to have passed
upon the breaches of Aristotle, Pliny, and Cardan; yet notwithstanding he
borrowes nothing from them: as if he had a design to make it appear, that
those great men, have not so entirely possessed themselves of this subject, but
that there remains much to be discovered. For my part, thoe it be far from my
intention, to raise the reputation of this Author upon the ruins of Antiquity;
yet J think it may be avouched upon the grounds of reason, that in this present
Argument he has some advantage of them: being that the most of the Ancients
which have written of things Natural, have satisfied themselves in reporting
things, as the information of others have given them intelligence; and not
considering, that oftentimes that which is delivered them for History, is far
esloign'd from all verity; they have chosen rather, by reasons to confirm the
resolutions of another, than to make an exact enquiry and discovery themselves.
But Monr BACON not relying upon the mere word and credit of such as went before
him, will have Experience joined with Reason; and examines the received
principles of the Schools, by the effects of Nature; the speculations of the
Intellectual Globe, by the operations of the Corporale. By this means he has
found out so many rare secrets, whereof he has bequeathed us the invention;
and made many axioms acknowledged for false, which hitherto have gone current
amongst Philosophers, and have bin held inviolable.

TOB. ADAMI, In his Preface to the REALIS PHILOSOPHIA, of that excellent
Philosopher CAMPANELLA (who lives to enjoy that Fame, which many eminent for
their learning, rarely possess after death) speaks his opinion thus.

We erect no sect, establish no Placits of Eresie, but endeavor to transcribe
universale and ever-veritable Philosophy out of the Ancient Original Copy of
the world: not according to variable and disputable speculations, but according
to the Conducture of sense and irrefragable depositions of the Architect
himself, whose hand in works, dissents not from his word in writing. And if
the GREAT INSTAURATION of the deep-mineing Philosopher, FRA. BACON LO. VERULAM
Chancellor of England, a work of high expectation, and most worthy, as of
Consideration, so of assistance, be brought to perfection, it will perchance
appear, that we pursue the same ends, seeing we tread the same footsteps
intraceing, and as it were, hounding nature, by Sense and Experience, etc.

S^ TOB. MATHEWS, In his Epist. to the Duke of Florence prefixed his Italique
Translation of my LO. BACON'S Essaies, amongst other Elogies deciphers him thus.

St AUSTEN, said of his illegitimate son Horrori mihi erat illud ingenium,
and truly I have known a great number whom J much value, many whom J admire,
but none who has so astonished me, and as it were, ravished my senses, to see so
many and so great parts, which in other men were wont to be incompatible,
united, and that in an eminent degree in one sole Person. I know not whether
this truth will find easy belief, that there can be found a man beyond the
Alps, of a most ready wit; most faithful memory; most profound Judgment; of
a most rich and apt expression; universal in all kinds of knowledge, as in
part may be seen by that rare incomparable piece, the ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING,
which future Ages shall render in different languages: But be the faith of
other Nations what it will in this point, the matter J report is so well
understood in England, that every man knows and acknowledges as much, nay has
bin an eye and ear witness thereof; nor if I should expatiate upon this
subject should J be held a flatterer, but rather a suffragan to truth, etc.

Mr GEORGE SANDYS In his excellent Commentaries on his inimitable Translation
of the stately METAMORPHOSIS, rendered, in an equal felicity of expression, to
the Eternal fires of that sweet tongued Roman; often cites the judgment of
our Author, from whose sentence he never appeals, but rather adores as an
Oracle; and in an ingenious acknowledgement of assistance from him, thus
delivers him to posterity.

Of Modern writers J have received the greatest light from Geraldus, Pontanus,
Ficinus, Vives, Comes, Scaliger, Sabinus, and the CROWN of the later the
VICOUNT OF St ALBANS; assisted, thoe less constantly, by other Authors, almost
of all Ages and Arguments. Having bin true to my first purpose, in making
choice, for the most part, of those interpretations, which either bear the
stamp of Antiquity, or receive estimation from the honor of the Author.

MARIN MERSENNE An able man, but a declared adversary to our Authors design
(whose Arguments I shall encountre in my Apologetique for the Instaur. of
Sciences) in his Books of the VERITY OF SCIENCES against the Sceptiques and
Pyrrhonians Lib. 1. Cap. xvi. acknowledges thus much, which coming from an
Adversary is therefore more valid.

VERULAM, seems to have no other intention in his NEW METHOD, then to establish
the VERITY OF SCIENCES; wherefore you must not anticipate, as granted, that he
makes for you, or that he is of your opinion; he confesses we know little, but
he subverts not the Authority of Sense and of Reason, no, he labors to find
out proper and proportionable instruments, whereby to Conduct the understanding
to the knowledge of Nature and her effects.

The Authors Censure upon himself.
For in my judgment, it is a matter which concerns not only the Benefit of
others; but our own Reputation also; that no man imagine that we have projected
in our minds some slight superficial notion of these Designs; and that they
are of the nature of those things, which we could Desire, and which we accept
only as good wishes. For they are such as without question, are within the
power and possibility of men to compass, unless they be wanting to
themselves; and hereof, we for our parts, have certain and evident
demonstration; for we come not hither, as Augures, to measure Countries in our
mind, for Divination; but as Captains, to invade them for a conquest.

His answer to some Tacit Objections.
I do foresee that many of those things which I shall register as DEFICIENTS
will incur diverse censures; as that some parts of this enterprise were done
long ago, and are now extant; others, that they taste of curiosity and promise
no great fruit; others, that they are impossible to be compassed by humane
industries. For the two first, let the particulars speak for themselves. For
the last touching impossibilities, I determine thus. All those things are to be
held possible and performeable which may be accomplished by some person, thoe
not by every one; and which may be done by the united labors of many, thoe not
by any one apart, and which may be effected in a succession of Ages, thoe not
in the same Age; and in brief which may be finished by the care and charge of
the pub., thoe not by the abilities and industry of private persons. Jf for all
this there be any, who would rather take to himself that of Solomon, Dicit
Piger Leo est in via, than that of Virgil Possunt quia posse videntur -- it is
enough for me, if my labors may be estimed as votes yet the better sort of
wishes: for as it asks some knowledge to demand a Question not impertinent; so
it requires some understanding, to make a wish not absurd. Proem. lib. 2.

IN HONOREM ILLVSTRISSIMI DNI FRANCISCI DE VERVLAMIO Vice-Comitis STI ALBANI
POST EDITAM AB EO INSTAUR. MAG.
QVis iste tandem? non enim vultu ambulat
Quotidiano. Nescis Jgnare? audies,
Dux Notionum; veritatis Pontifex;
Jnductionis Dominus; and Verulamii;
Rerum Magister unicus, at non Artium:
Profunditatis Pinus; atque Elegantiae:
Naturae Aruspex intimus: Philosophiae
Aerarium* Sequester Experientiae,
Speculationisque: Aequitatis Signifer:
Scientiarum sub pupillari statu
Degentium olim Emancipator* luminis
Promus: Fugator Jdolum, atque Nubium:
Collega Solis: Quadra Certitudinis:
Sophismatum Mastix: Brutus Literarius,
Authoritatis exuens Tyrannidem:
Rationis and sensus stupendus Arbiter;
Repumicator Mentis: Atlas Physicus,
Alcide succumbente STAGIRITICO:
Columba Noae, quae in vetustis Artibus
Nullum locum, requiemve Cernens, praestitit
Ad se suamque Matris Arcam regredi.
Subtilitatis terebra; Temporis nepos
Ex veritate matre: Mellis Alveus:
Mundique and Animarum, sacerdos unicus:
Securis Errorum: inque Natalibus
Granum sinapis, acre aliis, Crescens sibi.
O me prope Lassum; Juvate Posteri.
GEOR. HERBERT Orat. Pub. in Academ. Cantab.

MANES VERVLAMIANI SIVE IN OBITVM INCOMPARABILIS FRANCISCI DE VERVLAMIO, etc.
EPICEDIA.
INCLYTA Academia CANTABRIGIENSIS, cujus felicitas fuit, viro ad salutem
scientiarum nato, primas sapientiae mammas prebere; ac Philosophum, post
occasum Graeciae, maximum, orbi dare: super funus Alumni sui Lacrymas effudit,
doctas ac duraturas maestitias. Ex hoc integro Musarum font, modica haec sed
facunda fluenta, collegit interpres; ut quod, viventi, seculum dederat decus,
gliscente adhuc invidia; and morienti dedisse constaret, cessante nunc
adulatione. Reliqua sui nominis aeternitati consecranda, continuata seculorum
serie ad ultimas usque mundi favillas, rependet posteritas: Quis supremam suis
laudibus manum imponet, novit tantum, Fundator ille, ac simul eversor Seculorum.

ADhuc superbis insolente purpura
Feretri rapinis Inclytos in tot viros
Sterile Tribunal? cilicio dicas diem,
Saccumque totam facito luxuriem fori.
A Themide libra nec geratur pensilis,
Sed urna, praegravis urna Verulamii.
Expendat. Eheu! Ephorus haud lance^ premit,
Sed Areopagus; nec minor tantus sophos,
Qua^ Porticus bracchata Nam vester, scholae,
Gemiscit axis, tanta dum moles ruit.
Orbis soluta cardo litterarii,
Vbi studio coluit togam and trabeam pari.
Qualis per umbras Ditis Euridice vagans
Palpare gestiit Orpheum, quali Orpheus,
Saliente tandem (vix prius crispa) Styge,
Alite fibras lyrae titillavit manu;
Talis plicata Philologon aenigmatis
Petiit Baconum vindicem, tali manu
Lactata cristas extulit Philosophia:
Humique soccis reptitantem Comicis
Non proprio Ardelionibus molimine
Sarsit, sed Instauravit. Hinc politius
Surgit cothurno celsiore, and Organo
Stagirita virbius reviviscit Novo.
Calpen superbo Abylamque vincit remige
Phoebi Columbus, artibus novis, Novum
Daturus Orbem; promovet conamina
Juvenilis ardor, usque ad invidiam trucem
Fati minacis. Quis Senex vel Hannibal,
Oculi superstitis timens caliginem,
Signis Suburram ventilat victricibus?
Quis Milo inultus quercubus bilem movet,
Senecta tauro gibba cum gravior premit?
Dum noster Heroes traderet scientias
Aeternitati, prorsus expeditior
Sui sepulchri comperitur artifex.
Placida videtur Ecstasis speculatio,
Qua men's tueri volucris Jdaeas boni
Jn lacteos properat Olympi tramites.
His immoratur sedibus Domestica,
Peregrina propriis. Redit. Ioculariter
Fugax; vagatur rursus, and rursus redit.
Furtiva tandem serio, se subtrahit
Totam; gementi, morbido cadaveri
Sic desuescit anima, sic jubet mori.
Agite lugubres Musae, and a Libani jugis
Cumulate thura. Sydus in pyram illius
Scintillet omne; scelus sit accendi rogum
Regum Prometheo culinari foco.
Et si qua forte ludat in cineres sacros
Aura petulantior, fugamque suadeat,
Tunc flete; lachrymis in amplexus ruent
Globuli sequaces. Denuo fundamine
Ergastuli everso radicitus tui
Evehere foelix anima, Iacobum pete,
Ostende, and illuc civicam fidem sequi.
E Tripode juris, dictites oracula
Themidos alumnis. Sic (Beati coelites)
Astraea pristino fruatur vindice,
Vel cum Bacono rursus Astraeam date.
R. P.

AVdax exemplum quo Men's humana feratur,
Et Saecli vindex ingeniose tui;
Dum senio macras recoquis foeliciter arts,
Subtrahis and prisco libera colla jugo;
Quo deflenda modo veniunt tua funera? quales
Exposcunt lacrymas, quid sibi fata volunt?
An timuit Natura parens ne nuda jaceret,
Detraxit vestem dum tua dextra sacram?
Jgnotique oculis rerum patuere Recessus,
Fugit and aspectum Rimula nulla tuum?
An vero, Antiquis olim data Sponsa Maritis,
Conjugis amplexum respuit illa novi?
An tandem damnosa piis atque invida caeptis,
Corripuit vitae fila (trahenda) tuae?
Archim.
Sic ultra vitreum Siculus ne pergeret orbem
Privati cecidit militis ense Senex.
Tuque tuos manes ideo (Francisce) tulisti,
Ne, non tentandum, perficeretur opus.
SVnt qui defuncti vivant in marmore, and aevum
Annosis credant postibus omne suum:
Aere micant alii, aut fulvo spectantur in auro,
Et, dum se ludunt, ludere fata putant.
Altera pars hominum, numeros a prole superstes,
Cum Niobe magnos temnit iniqua Deos.
At tua caelatis haeret nec Fama Columnis,
Nec tumulo legitur, Siste viator iter:
Si qua Patrem proles referat, non corporis illa est,
Sed quasi de cerebro nata Minerva Jovis.
Primatibi virtus monumenta perennia praestat,
Altera, nec citius corruitura, Libri:
Tertia Nobilitas; ducant jam fata triumphos,
Quae (Francisce) tui nil nisi corpus habent.
Vtraque pars melior, Men's and bona Fama supersunt,
Non tanti ut redimas vile cadaver habes.
T. Vincent. T. C.

MUsae fundite nunc aquas perennes
In Threnos, Lacrymasque Apollo fundat
Quas vel Castalium tenet Fluentum:
Nam Letho neque convenire tanto
Possint naenia parva, nec coronent
Immensa haec modicae sepulchra guttae:
Nervus ingenii, Medulla suadae
Dicendique Tagus, reconditarum
Et gemma pretiosa Literarum,
Fatis concidit, (heutrium Sororum
Dura stamina) Nobilis Baconus.
O quam te memorem Bacone sum
Nostro carmine! and illa gloriosa
Cunctorum monumenta seculorum,
Excusa ingenio tuo, and Minerva!
Quam doctis, elegantibus, profundis,
Instauratio Magna, plena rebus!
Quanto luminetineas Sophorum
Dispellit veterum tenebricosas
Ex chao procreans novam (...):
Sic ipse Deus inditum sepulchro
Corpus restituet manu potenti:
Ergo non moreris (Bacone) nam te
A morte, and tenebris, and a sepulchro,
Instauratio Magna vindicabit.
R. C. T. C.

PArcite: Noster amat facunda silentia luctus,
Postquam obiit solus dicere qui potuit:
Dicere, quae stupeat Procerum generosa corona,
Nexaque sollicitis solvere Jurareis.
Vastum opus. At nostras etiam Verulamius arts
INSTAURAT veteres, condit and ille novas.
Non qua majores: Penitos verum ille recessus
NATURAE, audaci provocat ingenio.
Ast Ea, siste gradum, serisque nepotibus, (inquit,)
Linque quod inventum saecla minora juvet.
Sit satis, his sese quod nobilitata Jnventis,
Jactent ingenio tempora nostra tuo.
Est aliquid, quo mox ventura superbiet aetas;
Est, soli notum quod decet esse mihi:
Sit tua laus, pulchros Corpus duxisse per artus,
Integra cui nemo reddere membra queat:
Sic opus artificem in fectum commendat Apellem,
Cum pingit reliquam nulla manus Venerem.
Dixit, and indulgens caeco Natura furori,
Praesecuit vitae Filum Operisque simul.
At Tu, qui pendentem audes detexere telam,
Solus quem condant haec monumentascies.
H. T. Coll. Trin. Socius.

DVm moriens tantam nostris Verulamius Heroes
Tristitiam Musis, luminaque uda facit:
Credimus heu nullum fieri post fata beatum,
Credimus and Samium desipuisse senem.
Scilicet hic miseris, foelix nequit esse, Camaenis,
Nec se quam Musas plus amat iste suas.
At luctantem animam Clotho imperiosa coegit
Ad coelum, invitos traxit in astra pedes.
Ergone Phoebeias jacuisse putabimus arts?
Atque herbas Clarii nil valuisse Dei?
Phoebus idem potuit, nec virtus abfuit herbis,
Hunc artem atque illas vim retinere putes:
At Phoebum (ut metuit ne Rex foret iste Camaenis)
Rivali medicam creed neg ass manum.
Hinc dolor est; quod cum Phoebo Verulamius Heroes
Major erat reliquis, hac foret art minor.
Vos tamen o, tantum Manes atque Vmbra, Camaenae,
Et poene inferni pallida turba Jovis,
Si spiratis adhuc, and non lusistis ocellos,
Sed neque post illum vos superesse putem:
Si vos ergo aliquis de morte reduxerit Orpheus,
Jstaque non aciem fallit imago meam:
Discite nunc gemitus, and lamentabile carmen,
Ex oculis vestris lacryma multa fluat.
En quam multa fluit? veras agnosco Camaenas
Et lacrymas, Helicon vix satis unus erit;
Deucalionaeis: and qui non mersus in undis
Pernassus (mirum est) hisce latebit aquis.
Scilicet hic periit, per quem vos vivitis, and qui
Multa Pierias nutriit art Deas*
Vidit ut hic arts nulta radice retentas,
Languere ut summo semina sparsa solo;
Crescere Pegaseas docuit, velut Hasta Quirim
Crevit, et exiguo tempore Laurus erat.
Ergo Heliconiadas docuit cum crescere divas,
Diminuent hujus secula nulla decus.
Nec far ulterius generosi pectoris aestus
Contemptum potuit, Diva Minerva, tuum.
Restituit calamus solitum divinus honorem,
Dispulit and nubes alter Apollo tuas.
Dispulit and tenebras sed quas obfusca vetustas,
Temporis and prisci lippa senecta tulit;
Atque alias methodos sacrum instauravit acumen,
Gnossiaque eripuit, sed sua fila dedit.
Scilicet antiquo sapientum vulgus in aevo*
Tam claros oculos non habuisse liquet;
Hi velut Eoo surgens de littore Phoebus,
Hic velut in media fulget Apollo die:
Hi veluti Typhis tentarunt aequora primum,
At vix deseruit littora prima ratis,
Pleiadas hic Hyadasque atque omnia sydera noscens,
Syrtes, atque tuos, improba Sylla, canes;
Scit quod vitandum est, quo dirigat aequore navem,
Certius and cursum nautica monstrat acus:
Infantes illi Musas, hic gignit adultas;
Mortales illi, gignit at iste Deas.
Palmam ideo reliquis Magna Instauratio libris
Abstulit, and cedunt squalida turba sophi.
Et vestita novo Pallas modo prodit amictu,
Anguis depositis ut nitet exuviis.
Sic Phoenix cineres spectat modo nata paternos,
Aesonis and rediit prima juventa senis.
Jnstaurata suos and sic Verulamia muros
Jactat, and antiquum sperat ab inde decus.
Sed quanta effulgent plus quam mortalis ocelli
Lumina, dum regni mystica sacra canat?
Dum sic naturae leges, arcanaque Regum,
Tanquam a secretis esset utrisque, canat:
Dum canat Henricum, qui Rex, idemque Sacerdos,
Connubio stabili junxit utramque Rosam.
Atqui haec sunt nostris long majora Camaenis,
Non haec infoelix Granta, sed Aula sciat:
Sed cum Granta labris admoverit ubera tantis
Ius habet in lauds (maxim Alumne) tuas.
Ius habet, ut moestos lacrymis extingueret ignes,
Posset ut e medio diripuisse rogo.
At nostrae tibi nulla ferant encomia Musae,
Ipse canis, lauds and canis inde tuas.
Nos tamen and lauds, qua possumus art, canemus,
Si tamen ars desit, laus erit iste dolor.
Tho. Randolph. T.C.

SIc cadit Aonii rarissima Gloria coetus?
Et placet Aoniis credere semen agris?
Frangantur Calami, disrumpanturque libelli,
Hoc possint tetricae si modo jure Deae.
Heu quae lingua silet, quae jam facundia cessat,
Quo fugit ingenii Nectar and Escatui?
Quomodo Musarum nobis contingit Alumnis
Vt caderet nostri praeses Apollo chori?
Si nil cura, fides, labor, aut vigilantia possint,
Sique feret rapidas, de tribus una, manus;
Cur nos multa brevi nobis proponimus aevo?
Cur putri excutimus scripta sepulta situ?
Scilicet ut dignos aliorum a Morte labores
Dum rapimus, nos Mors in sua jura trahat.
Quid tamen in cassum nil proficientia fundo
Verba? quis optabit te reticente, loqui?
Nemo tuam spargat violis fragrantibus urnam,
Nec tibi Pyramidum mole sepulchra locet;
Nam tua conservant operosa volumina famam,
Hoc satis, haec prohibent te monumenta mori.
Williams.

ORdine sequeretur descriptio Tumuli VERULAMIANI, monumentum Nobiliss. MUTISII,
in honorem domini sui constructum; qua pietate, and dignitatem Patroni sui,
quem (quod rari faciunt, etiam post cineres Coluit) consuluit; Patriae suae
opprobrium diluit; sibi nomen condidit. Busta haec nondum invisit Interpres,
sed invisurus: Interim Lector tua cura Commoda, and abi in rem tuam.

Crescit occulto velut Arbor aevo
Fama BACONI. --

FRANCISCVS BARO DE VERVLAMIO Vice-Comes SANCTI ALBANI.
ALMAE MATRI INCLYTAE ACAD. CANTABRIGIENSI. S.
DEbita Filii qualia possum persolvo; quod vero facio, idem and vos hortor, ut
AUGMENTIS SCIENTIARUM strenue incumbatis: and in Animi modestia libertatem
ingenii retineatis. Neque talentum a veteribus concreditum in sudario
reponatis. Affuerit procul-dubio and affulserit Divini Luminis Gratia, si
humiliata and submissa RELIGIONI PHILOSOPHIA clavibus sensus legitime and
dextre utamini: and amoto omni contradictionis studio, Quisque cum alio, ac si
ipse secum disputet, Valete.

INCLYTAE ACADEMIAE OXONIENSI. S.
CVm ALMAE MATRI meae inclytae ACADEMIAE CANTABRIGIENSI Scripserim, deessem
sane officio, si simile Amoris pignus sorori ejus non deferrem. Sicut autem eos
hortatus sum, ita and vos hortor ut SCIENTIARUM AUOMENTIS strenue incumbatis,
and veterum labores, neque nihil, neque omnia esse putetis; sed vires etiam
proprias modeste perpendentes, subinde tamen experiamini, omnia cedent quam
optime; si Arma non alii in alios vertatis sed junctis copiis in Natural reru^
impressione^ faciatis, sufficit quippe illa Honori and Victoriae, Valete.

FRANCIS LO. VERVLAM CONSVLTED THVS, AND THVS CONCLVDED WITH HIMSELF; THE
PUBLICATION WHEREOF HE CONCEIVED DID CONCERN THE PRESENT AND FVTVRE AGE.
SEEING it was manifestly known unto HIM, that humane understanding creates it
self much trouble; nor makes an apt and sober use of such Aides, as are within
the Command of Man; from whence infinite ignorance of Things; and from the
ignorance of Things, innumerous disadvantages; his opinion was, that with all
our industry we should endeavor, if happily that same COMMERCE OF THE MIND AND
OF THINGS (than which a greater blessing can hardly be found on Earth,
certainly of earthly Felicities,) might by any means be entirely restored; at
least brought to terms of nearer correspondence. But that Errors, which have
prevailed, and prevail would for ever, one after another, (if the mind were
left free to it self) should rectify themselves, either by the imbred power of
the understanding, or by the aides and assistances of Logic, there was no hope
at all; because that the Primitive Notions of Things, which the mind with a too
facile and supine attractive faculty receives in; treasures up and accumulates,
from which all the rest are derived; are unsound, confused, and rashly
abstracted from things. The like luxuriant vanity and inconstancy there is in
the second and sequent Notions; whence it comes to pass, that all that human
Reason which we employ, as touching the Inquisition of Things, is not well
digested and built; but like some magnificent Pile without foundation. For
whilst men admire and celebrate the counterfeit forces of the mind; her true
powers which might be raised (were right directions administered, and she taught
to become obsequious to things, and not impotently to insult over them) they
pass by and loose. This one way remains that the business be wholly
reatempted with better preparations; and that there be throughout, AN
INSTAVRATION OF SCIENCES AND ARTS, and of all Human Learning raised from solid
foundations. And this though it may seem in a sort an infinite enterprise, and
above mortal abilities, yet the same will be found more sound and advised,
than those performances which hitherto have bin achieved: for in this there is
some issue; but in the endeavors now undertaken about Sciences, a perpetual
wheeling, Agitation and Circle. Neither is he ignorant how unfrequented this
Experience is, how difficile and incredible to persuade a belief, yet he
thought not to desert the design, nor himself, but to try and set upon the
way, which alone is pervious and penetrable to the mind of Man. For it is
better to give a beginning to a thing which may once come to an end, than with
an eternal contention and study to be enwrapt in those mazes which are
endless. And the ways of Contemplation for most part resemble those
celebrated ways of Action; the one, at the first entrance hard and difficult,
ends in an open plain; the other at first fight ready and easy, leads into
by-waies and downfalls: And being he was uncertain when such considerations
should hereafter come into any man's mind, induced especially from this
argument, that there has none hitherto appeared, who has applied his mind to
such cogitations, he resolved to publish, seperatly, the First parts as they
could be perfected. Neither is this an ambitious but sollicitous festination;
that if in the mean space he should depart this mortal station; there might
yet remain a designation and destination of the thing he comprehended in his
mind; and withal some Demonstration of his sincere and propense affection to
promote the good of Mankind. Truly he estimed other ambition whatsoever,
inferior to the business he had in hand: For either the matter in
consultation, and thus far prosequuted, is nothing; or so much as the
conscience of the merit it self, ought to give him contentment without seeking
a recompense from abroad.

FRANCIS LO: VERVLAM HIS GREAT INSTAVRATION.
THE PREFACE. Of the STATE OF LEARNING, that it is not PROSPEROUS, nor greatly
ADVANCED; and that a far different way, than has bin known to former Ages,
must be opened, to man's understanding; and other Aides procured; that the Mind
may practice her own power upon the nature of things.
IT seems to me, that men neither understand the Estate they possess, nor
their Abilities to purchase; but of the one to presume more; of the other,
less, than indeed they should. So it comes to pass, that over-prizing the
Arts received, they make no farther Inquiry; or undervaluing themselves, more
than in equity they ought, they expend their Abilities upon matters of slight
consequence, never once making experiment of those things which conduce to the
sum of the business. Wherefore, Sciences also have, as it were, their Fatal
Columns; being men are not excited, either out of Desire, or Hope, to
penetrate farther. And seeing the Opinion of Wealth is one of the chief causes
of want; and that out of a confidence of what we possess in present, true
assistances are despised for the future, it is expedient, nay altogether
necessary, that the excessive Reverence and Admiration conceived of those
Sciences, which hitherto have bin found out, should in the Front and Entrance
of this work, (and that roundly and undissemblingly) by some wholesome
premonition, be taken off, lest their Copy and Vtility be too much Magnified
and Celebrated. For he that survaies with diligence all the variety of Books,
wherein Arts and Sciences triumph, shall every where find infinite repetitions
of the same matter; for manner of Delivery diverse, but for Invention stale and
preoccupate; so as what at first view seemed numerous, after examination taken,
are found much abated. As for Profit J may confidently avouch it, that the
wisdom we have extracted, chiefly from the Grecians, seems to be a Childhood
of Knowledge, and to participate that which is proper to children, namely, that
it is apt for talk; but impotent and immature for propagation: for it is of
Controversies rank and fertile, but of works barren and fruitless. So that the
Fable and fiction of Scylla, seems to be a lively Image of the state of
Learning, as now it is, which for the upper parts had the face and countenance
of a comely Virgin; but was from the womb downward circled, and enwrapt with
barking Monsters, So the Sciences wherein we are trained up, contain in them
certain Generalities specious and plausible, but when you descend unto
particulars, as to the Parts of Generation, expecting solid effects, and
substantial operations, then Contentions and Barking Altercations arise,
wherein they close, and which supply the place of a fruitful womb. Again, if
these kinds of Sciences were not altogether a mere livelesse Thing, me thinks
it should not have fallen out, which now for many Ages has continued, that they
should thus stand at a stay, in a manner immovable in their first Footings,
without any Augmentation worthy the Race of Mankind, in such a dull
Jmproficience, that not only Assertion remains Assertion, but Question rests
still Question, which by Disputes is not determined, but fixed and cherisht: and
all Tradition and Succession of Discipline delivered from hand to hand,
presents and exhibits the Persons of Teacher and Scholar, not of Inventor or
of one should add something of note to what is invented. But in Arts
Mechanical we see the contrary has come to pass, which as if they were
inspired by the vital breath and prolifique influence of a thriving Air, are
daily Propagated and Perfected; and which in their first Autors appeared, for
the most part rude and even burdensome and Formelesse, have afterward acquired
new-refind virtues and a certain apt Propriety and useful Accommodation, so
infinitely fruitful, that sooner may men's studies and desires languish, and
change, than these Sciences arive at their full height and perfection.
Contrariwise Philosophy, and Sciences Intellectual, like Statues are adored
and celebrated, but nothing Advanced; nay commonly of most vigor in their first
Author, and by Time Degenerate and become embased. For since the time men became
devoted and, as Pedary Senators, resigned over to the Placits and Definitions
of one, they do not add any Amplitude to Sciences, but are wholly taken up in
a servile duty of Polishing or Protecting certain Autors. And let no man here
allege, that Sciences growing up by degrees, have at length arrived to a just
period or perfect Stature, and so (as having filled up the just spaces of
Augmentation) have settled and fixed themselves in the works of some few Autors;
and now that nothing more accomplished can be found out, there remains no more
to do, but that the Sciences already extant be improved, and adorned. Jndeed
it could be wished that the state of Learning were thus prosperous; but the very
truth is, these mancipations and servile resignations of Sciences, is nothing
else but a peccant humor, bred out of a dareing lust and confidence in some
few, and a languishing sloth and Pusillanimity in the rest. For when Sciences
(for some parts it may be) have bin tilled and labored with diligence, then
perchance has there risen up some bold-undertaking wit, for Compendious
brevity of Method populare, and plausible, who in show has constituted a
Science, but indeed depraved the Labors of the Ancients: Yet these
Abridgements find acceptance with Posterity, for the expedite use of such a
work, and to avoid the trouble and impatience of a new Inquiry. And if any
stand upon Consent now inveterate, as the Judgment, and test of Time, let him
know he builds upon a very deceivable and infirm Foundation. Nor is it, for
most part, so revealed unto us, what in Arts and Sciences has bin discovered
and brought to light in diverse ages, and different Regions of the world; much
less wbat has bin experimented, and seriously labored by particular Persons
in private; For neither the Birthes, nor the Abortions of Time have bin
Registered. Nor is Consent it self, nor the long continuation thereof, with such
reverence be adored, for however there may be many kinds of States in Civil
Government; yet the State of Sciences is but one, which always was, and so
will continue, Populare; and with the People the Disciplines most in request
are either Pugnacious and Polemicall; or Specious and Frivolous; namely such as
either illaqueate or allure the Assent. Wherefore without question, the
greatest wits in every age have bin over-borne, and in a sort tyrannized over,
whilst men of Capacity and Comprehension about the vulgar, yet consulting
their own Credit and Reputation, have submitted themselves to the over-swaying
Judgment of Time and Multitude. Therefore if in any Time or Place, more
profound Contemplations have perchance emerged and revealed themselves, they
have bin forthwith tossed and extinguished by the Winds and Tempests of Populare
opinions: so that Time like a River carries down to us that which is light and
blown up; but sinks and drownes that which is weighty and solid. Nay the very
same Autors, who bave usurpt a kind of Dictature in Sciences, and with such
confidence past censure upon matters in doubt, have yet (the heat once over) in
the lucide Intervalles, from these peremptory fits of Asseveration, changed
their note and betaken themselves to complaints, upon the subtlety of Nature;
the secret Recesses of Truth; the Obscurity of Things; the Implication of
Causes; the Infirmity of Man's Discerning Power: Yet nothing the more modest for
all this, seeing they choose rather to charge the Fault upon the common
condition of Man and Nature, than to acknowledge any Personal deficience in
themselves. Yea it is a thing usual with them, that what they cannot compass
by Art, their way applied, to conclude the same impossible to be attained by
the same Art: and yet for all this, Art must not be condemned, being she is to
examine and judge; wherefore the aim and intention of such accusations is only
this, That Ignorance may be delivered from Ignominy. So likewise what is
already commended unto us and entertained hitherto, is for most part such a
kind of Knowledge, as is full of Words and Questions, but barren of Works and
real Improvement; for Augmentation backward and heartlesse; pretending
perfection in the whole, but ill-filled up in the Parts; for choice Populare,
and of the Autors themselves suspected, and therefore fortified and
countenanced by artificious evasions. And the Persons who have entertained a
design to make trial themselves and to give some Advancement to Sciences, and
to Propagate their bounds, even these Autors durst not make an open departure
from the Common received opinions; nor visit the Head-springs of Nature, but
take themselves to have done a great matter, and to have gained much upon the
Age, if they may but interlace, or annex any thing of their own; providently
considering with themselves, that by these middle courses, they may both
conserve the modesty of Assenting; and the liberty of Adding. But whilst they
thus cautelously conform themselves to Opinions and Customs, these Plausible
moderations, redound to the great prejudice and detriment of Learning; For at
once to Admire and go beyond Autors, are habits seldom compatible: but it
comes to pass here after the manner of Waters, which will not ascend higher
than the level of the first springhead, from whence they descended; wherefore
such writers amend many things, but promote little or nothing, making a
Proficience in Melioration, not in Augmentation. Neither has there bin wanting
undertaking Spirits, who with a more resolute confidence, presuming nothing yet
done, take themselves to be the men, must rectify All; and employing the
strength of their wits in crying down, and reversing all former judgments,
have made passage to themselves and their own Placits; whose busy Clamor, has
not much advanced Knowledge, since their aim and intention has bin, not to
enlarge the bounds of Philosophy and Arts, by a sincere and solid Enquiry; but
only to change the Placits, and translate the Empire of Opinions, and settle it
upon themselves, with little advantage to Learning, seeing amongst opposite
Errors, the Causes of Erring are commonly the same. And if any inconcerned
natures, not mancipate to others, or their own opinions, but affecting liberty,
have bin so far animated, as to desire that others together with themselves,
would make farther Inquiry; these surely have meant well, but performed little;
for they seem to have proceeded upon probable grounds only, being wheeled about
in a vertiginous maze of Arguments, and by a promiscuous license of Inqury,
have indeed loosened the sinews of severe Inquisition: nor has any of all
these with a just patience, and sufficient expectance attended the Operations
of nature, and the successes of Experience. Some again have embarqu't
themselves in the Sea of Experiments, and become almost Mechanical, but in the
Experience it self, they have practiced a roveing manner of Inquiry, which
they do not in a regular course constantly pursue. Nay many propound to
themselves, certain petty Taskes, taking themselves to have accomplished a great
performance, if they can but extract some one Jnvention by a manage as poor as
impertitent; for none rightly and successefully search the nature of any thing
to the life in the Thing itself; but after a painful and diligent variation
of Experiments, not breaking off there, proceeds on, finding still emergent
matter of farther Discovery. And it is an Error of special note, that the
industry bestowed in Experiments, has presently, upon the first access into
the Business, by a too forward and unseasonable Desire, seized upon some
designed operation; I mean sought after, Fructifera non Lucifera, Experiments
of use and not Experiments of Light and Discovery: not imitating the divine
method which created the first day Light only, and allowed it one entire Day,
produceing no Materiate work the same day, but descended to their Creation the
days following. As for those who have given the preeminence unto Logique, and
are of opinion that the surest Guards for Sciences must be procured from
thence; they have truly and wisely discerned, that the mind of man, and
Intellective Faculty left unto it self, may deservedly be suspected. But the
remedy is too weak for the disease, and is it self not exempt from
Distemperature; for the Logique in force, though it may be rightly accommodated
unto matters Civil and Populare Sciences, which consist in Discourse and
Opinion, yet it comes far short of penetrating the subtlety of Nature; and
undertaking more than it can master, seems rather to stablish and fix Errors
than to open a way to Truth. Wherefore to recollect what has bin said, it
seems that neither Information from others, nor men's own Inquiries touching
Sciences, has hitherto successefully shined forth, especially seeing there is
so little certainty in Demonstration and Infallibility of Experiments thus far
discovered. And the Fabrique of the Universe to the contemplative eye of the
Mind, for the frame thereof is like some Labyrinth or intricate Maze, where so
many doubtful passages; such deceivable resemblances, of Things and Signs;
such oblique and serpentine windings and implicit knots of Nature every where
present themselves, as confounds the understanding. And withal, we must
continually make our way, through the woods of Experiences, and particular
Natures, by the uncertain Light of Sense, sometimes shining sometimes shadowed:
yea and the guides, which (as has bin touched) offer their assistance, they
likewise are entangled, and help to make up the number of Errors and of those
that Err. In matters of such perplexed difficulty, there is no relying upon the
Judgment of men from their own abilities; or upon the Casual Felicity of
Particular events; for neither the capacity of Man, how excellent soever; nor
the chance of Experience, never so often iterated and essayed, is of force to
conquer these mysteries: we must march by line and level, and all the way,
even from the first perception of Senses, must be secured, and fortified by a
certain Rule, and constant Method of proceeding. Yet are not these things so to
be understood, as if, in so many Ages, and so much Industry, nothing at all
has bin performed to purpose; nor is there any cause why it should repent us
of the Discoveries already made; for certainly the Ancients, in those
speculations which consist in strength of wit, and abstract meditation, have
approved themselves men of admirable comprehensions: But as in the Art of
Navigation, the men of former Ages, directing their course by observation of
stars only, could edge along the coast of the known Continent, and it may be,
cross some narrow Seas or the Mediterranean; but before the Ocean could be
thus commanded, and the Regions of the new world discovered, it was requisite
that the use of the Mariners needle, as a more sure and certain guide should be
first found out; even so what discoveries soever have bin hitherto made in Arts
and Sciences, they are of that quality, as might have bin brought to light by
Practice, Meditation, Observation and Discourse, as things nearer the senses,
and for most part, under the command of common Notions; but before we can make
our approaches, to the remote and hidden secrets of Nature, it is necessarily
requisite, that a better and more perfect use, and practique-operation of the
Mind and understanding Faculty be introduc't. As for us, surely we, (vanquished
with an immortal love of Truth) have exposed our selves to doubtful,
difficult, and desert Paths; and by the protection and assistance of the
Divine power, have borne up and encouraged our selves, against the violent
Assaults and prepared Armies, as it were, of Opinions, and against our own
private and inward hesitations and scruples, and against the clouds and
darkness of Nature, and every where flying fancies; that so we might procure
the present and future Age more safe and sound Jndications and Impressions of
Truth. If in this high and arduous attempt, we have made any Proficience,
surely by no other means have we cleared our selves a way, than by a sincere
and just humiliation of the spirit of Man, to the laws and operations of
Nature. For all they that went before us, who applied themselves to the finding
out of Arts, casting a transient eye upon Things, examples, and experience,
have presently (as if Jnvention were nothing else but a mere Agitation of
Brain) invoked in a manner their own spirits, to divine and utter Oracles unto
them: but we being chastely and perpetually conversant with the operations of
Nature, divorce not the Jntellect from the Object farther than that the Images
and beams of things (as in sense) may meet and concentrate; by which manner of
proceeding, there is not much left to the strength and excellency of wit. The
same submission of spirit we have practiced in discovery, we have followed in
Delivery: Nor have we endeavored to set off ourselves with Glory, or draw a
Majesty upon our inventions, either by Triumphs of Confutations; or Depositions
of Antiquity; or an usurpation of Authority; or the veil of Obscurity; which
are Arts he may easily find out, whose study is not so much the Profit of
others, as Applause to himself. I say we neither have practiced, nor go we
about, by force or fraud to circumvent men's Judgments, but conduct them to the
things themselves, and to the league and confederacy of Things, that they may
see what they have, what they reprehend, what they add and contribute to the
Public. And if we have bin too credulous, or too dormant, and not so
intentive upon the matter, or languisht in the way, or broken off the thread of
the Inquiry, yet notwithstanding we present things after such a manner open and
naked, that our Errors may be detected and separated before they can spread
themselves, or insinuate their Contagion into the mass of Sciences; and after
such a Method as the continuation of our labors, is a matter facile and
expedite. By this means we presume we have established for ever, a true and
legitimate Marriage, between the Empiricall and Rational faculty; whose
fastidious and unfortunate Divorce and Separation, has troubled and disordered
the whole Race and Generation of Mankind. And seeing these performances are
not within the compass of our mere natural Power and command, we do here,
in the Access to this work, Power forth humblest and most ardent supplications
to God the Father, God the Word, God the Spirit, that they being mindfulll of
the Miseries of Mankind, and of the Pilgrimage of this life, wherein we wear
out few and evil days, they would vouchsafe to endow mankind, by my hand with
new Donatives. And moreover, we humbly pray, that Humane knowledges, may no way
impeach, or prejudice Divine Truths; nor that from the disclosing of the ways
of sense, and the letting in of a more plentiful Natural Light, any mists of
Incredulity or clouds of Darkness arise in our minds, touching Divine
Mysteries; but rather that from a purified Intellect, purged from Fancies and
Vanity, and yet yielded and absolutely rendered up to Divine oracles; the
tributes of Faith may be rendered to Faith. In the last place, that the venom
of knowledge infused by the Serpent, whereby the mind of man is swelled and
blown up, being voided; we may not be too aspireingly wise, or above sobriety,
but that we may improve and propagate Verity in Charity. Now we have performed
our vows to heaven, converting our selves to men, we admonish them somethings
that are Profitable, and request of them some things that are equal. First we
admonish (which thing we have also prayed for,) that we keep human Reason
within due Limits in matters Divine, and Sense within compass: For sense like
the Sun, Philo. Iud.
opens and reveals the face of the Terrestrial Globe, but shuts up and
conceales the face of the Celestial. Again, that men beware that in flight
from this error, they fall not upon a contrary extreme, of too much abasing
Natural Power; which certainly will come to pass, if they once entertain a
conceit, that there are some secrets of nature separate and exempt, as it were
by iniunction, from Humane Inquisition. For it was not that pure and immaculate
Natural knowledge, by the light whereof Adam gave names unto the Creatures,
according to the propriety of their natures, which gave the first motion and
occasion to the Fall; but it was that proud and Imperative Appetite of Moral
knowledge, defineing the laws and limits of Good and Evil, with an intent in
man to revolt from God, and to give laws unto himself, which was indeed the
project of the Primitive Temptation. For, of the knowledges which contemplate
the works of Nature, the holy Philosopher has said expressly; Prove. 25.
that the glory of God is to conceal a thing, but the glory of the King is to
find it out: as if the Divine Nature, according to the innocent and sweet play
of children, which hide themselves to the end they may be found, took delight
to hide his works, to the end they might be found out; and of his indulgence
and goodness to mankind, had chosen the Soul of man to be his Play-fellow in
this game. In sum, I would advise all in general, that they would take into
serious consideration the true and Genuine ends of knowledge; that they seek it
not either for Pleasure; or Contention; or contempt of others; or for Profit;
or Fame; or for Honor, and Promotion; or such like adulterate or inferior ends:
but for the merit and emolument of Life; and that they regulate and perfect the
same in charity: For the desire of Power, was the Fall of Angels, the desire of
knowledge, the fall of Man; but in charity there is no excess, neither men nor
Angels ever incurred danger by it. The Requests we make are these; (To say
nothing of our selves touching the matter in hand) we Request thus much, That
men would not think of it as an opinion; but as a work, and take it for Truth,
that our aim, and end is not to lay the foundation of a Sect or Placit, but of
Humane Profit and Proficience. Again, that respecting their own Benefit, and
putting off Partialities and Prejudices, they would all contribute in one for
the public Good: and that being freed and fortified by our Preparations and
Aids, against the Errors and Impediments of the ways, they likewise may come
in, and bear a part in the burden, and inherit a portion of the Labors that
yet remain behind. Moreover that they cheer up themselves, and conceive well
of the enterprise; and not figure unto themselves a conceit and fancy, that
this Our Instauration is a matter infinite, and beyond the power and compass
of Mortality; seeing it is in truth the right and legitimate end and period of
Infinite Errors and not unmindfull of Mortality, and Humane Condition, being it
does not promise that the Design may be accomplished within the Revolution of
an Age only, but delivers it over to Posterity to Perfect. Jn a word, it seeks
not Sciences arrogantly in the cells of man's wit, but submissively in the
greater world: And commonly, Empty things are vast and boundless, but Solids
are contracted and determined within a narrow compass. To conclude, we thought
good to make it our last suit, (lest peradventure through the difficulty of the
Attempt, any should become unequal Judges of our Labors) that men see to it,
how they do, from that which we must of necessity lay down as a ground (if we
will be true to our own ends) assume a liberty to censure, and pass sentence
upon our labors; seeing we reject all this premature and Anticipated humane
Reason, rashly and too suddenly departed from Things, (as touching the
Inquisition of Nature) as a thing various, disordered and ill-built: Neither in
equity can it be required of us, to stand to the Judgment of that Reason,
which stands it self, at the bar of Judicature.

THE DISTRIBVTION OF THE WORK INTO SIX PARTS.
P. I. PARTITIONES SCIENTIARVM, OR a summary Survay and partition of Sciences.
P. II. NOVVM ORGANVM, OR True Directions for the Interpretation of Nature. P.
III. PHENOMENON VNIVERSI, OR History Natural and Experimental, for the
building up Philosophy. P. IV. SCALA INTELLECTVS, OR the Intellectual Sphere
rectified to the Globe of the World. P. V. PRODROMI, OR The Anticipations of
second Philosophy emergent upon Practice. P. VI. SECVNDA PHILOSOPHIA, OR Active
Philosophy, from intimate Converse with Nature.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE SEVERAL PARTS.
IT is one point of the Design we have in hand, that every thing be delivered
with all possible Plainness and Perspicuity: for the nakedness of the Mind, as
once of the Body, is the companion of Innocence and Simplicity. First
therefore, the order and Distribution of the work, with the reason thereof,
must be made manifest. The Parts of the work are, by us, assigned Six.

The First Part exhibits the sum or universal description of that Learning
and Knowledges in the possession whereof, men have hitherto bin estated. For we
thought good to make some stay even upon Sciences received, and that, for this
consideration; that we might give more advantage to the Parfection of ancient
knowledges, and to the introduction of new: For we are carried, in some degree,
with an equal temper of Desire, both to improve the labors of the Ancients,
and to make farther progress. And this makes for the faith and sincerity of
our meaning, according to that of the wise, Prove. 18.
The unlearned Man receives not the words of knowledge, unless you first
interpret unto him the conceptions of his heart: Wherefore we will not neglect
to side along (as it were in passage) the Coasts of accepted Sciences and Arts;
and to import thither, somethings useful and profitable. Nevertheless we
adjoyne such Partitions of Sciences, as comprehend, not only such things that
are found out and observed already, but such also as are thereto pertaining and
have bin hitherto pretermiss'd. For there are found in the Intellectual Globe,
as in the Terrestrial, soyles improved and Deserts. Wherefore let it not seem
strange, if now and then we make a departure from the usual Divisions, and
forsake the beaten path of some Partitions: for Addition whilst it varies the
whole, of necessity varies the parts and the Sections thereof: and the accepted
Divisions, are accommodated only to the accepted sum of Sciences, as it is
now cast up. Concerning those Parts, which we shall note as Pretermitted, we
will so regulate our selves, as to set down more than the naked Titles, or
brief Arguments of DEFICIENTS. For where we deliver up any thing as a
DESIDERATE, so it be a matter of merit; and the reason thereof may seem
somewhat obscure; so as, upon good consideration, we may doubt, that we shall
not be so easily conceived what we intend, or what the contemplation is we
comprehend in our mind, and in our meditation; there it shall ever be our
precise care, to annex either precepts, for the performing of such a work; or a
Part of the Work it self, performed by us already, for Example to the whole;
that so we may in every Particular, either by Operation or Information, promote
the business. For in my judgment, it is a matter which concerns not only the
Benefit of others; but our own Reputation also; that no man imagine that we
have projected in our minds some slight superficial notion of these Designs;
and that they are of the nature of those things, which we could Desire, and
which we accept only as good wishes. For they are such as without question, are
within the power and possibility of men to compass, unless they be wanting to
themselves; and hereof, we for our parts, have certain and evident
demonstration; for we come not hither, as Augures, to measure Countries in our
mind, for Divination; but as Captains, to invade them, for a conquest. And
this is the First part of our works.

Wherefore to the Second Part is designed the Doctrine touching a more sound,
and perfect use of Reason, in the inquiry of Things, and the true assistances
of the understanding; that hereby (so far as the condition of humanity and
mortality will suffer) the Jntellect, may be elevated; and amplified with a
faculty, capable to conquer the dark, and deeper secrets of Nature. And the
Art, we here set down, which we are wont to call, The INTERPRETATION OF
NATVRE, is a kind of Logique, though very much, and exceeding different. That
vulgar Logique professes the Preparation and Contrivance of aides and forces
for the understanding, herein they conspire, but it clearly differs from the
Populare, specially in three things, namely, in the end, in the order of
Demonstrating, and, in the first disclosures to Inquiry. For the End propounded
in this our Science is, that there may be found out not Arguments, but Arts;
not things Consentaneous to Principles, but even Principles themselves; not
probable reasons, but designations and indications of works; wherefore from a
different intention follows a different effect: for there, an Adversary is
distressed and vanquished by Disputation, here by nature, the thing done. And
with this End accords the nature and order of their Demonstrations: For in
vulgar Logique, almost all the pains is employed about Syllogism: as for
Induction, the Dialectiques seem scarce ever to have taken it into any serious
consideration, slightly passing it over, and hastening to the forms of
Disputeing But we reject Demonstration by Syllogism, for that it proceeds
confusedly; and lets nature escape our hands. For though no man call into
doubt, but that what are coincident in a middle term, are in themselves
coincident, (which is a kind of Mathematique Certitude) yet here lies the
Fallax, that Syllogism consists of Propositions, Propositions of words, and
words are the tokens and marks of things. Now if these same notions of the the
mind, (which are as it were, the soul of words, and the Basis of this manner
of structure, and fabrique) be rudely and rashly divorced from things, and
roveing; not perfectly defined and limited, and also many other ways vicious;
all falls to ruin. Wherefore we reject Syllogism, not only in regard of
Principles (for which nor do they make use of it) but in respect also of Middle
Propositions, which indeed Syllogism, however, inferres and brings forth; but
barren of operations and remote from practice; and in relation to the Active
Part of Sciences, altogether incompetent. Although therefore we may leave to
Syllogism, and such celebrated and applauded Demonstrations, a jurisdiction
over Arts Populare and Opinable (for in this kind we move nothing) yet for the
nature of Things, we every where as well in Minor, as Mayor Propositions, make
use of Inductions: for we take Induction to be that Form of Demonstration,
which supports sense; presses nature and is instanced in works, and in a sort
mingled therewith. Wherefore the order also of Demonstration is altogether
inverted. For hitherto the business used to be thus managed; from sense, and
some few Particulars, suddenly to fly up to the highest Generals, as to fixed
Poles, about which Disputations may be turned; from which the rest of
intermediate Axioms may be derived. A way compendious indeed, but precipitate;
and to nature impervious; but for Disputations ready, and accommodate. But
according to our method, Axioms are raised by a sequent continuity and graduat
dependancy, so as there is no seizing upon the highest Generals, but in the
last place; and those highest Generals in quality not notionals; but well
terminated, and such as nature acknowledges to be truly near allied unto her;
and which cleave to the individual intrinsiques of things. But touching the
form it self of Induction and Judgment made by it, we undertake a mighty
work. For the Form, whereof Logicians speak, which proceeds by simple
enumeration, is a childish thing, and concludes upon admittance; is exposed to
peril from a contradictory instance; looks only upon commune operations; and
is in the issue endless. But to the knowledges of Induction, such a Form is
required, as may solve and separate experience; and by due exclusion and
rejection necessarily conclude. And if that public and populare Judgment of
Dialectiques, be so laborious and has exercised so many and so great wits; how
much greater pains ought we take in this other; which not only out of the
secret closets of the mind, but out of the very entrails of nature is
extracted? Nor is this all, for we more firmly settle, and solidate the
foundation of Sciences, and take the first rise of our inquiry deeper than
hitherto has bin attempted; submitting to examinations those Principles, which
vulgar Logic takes up on the credit of another. For the Dialectiques borrow,
as it were, from all other Sciences, the Principles of Sciences; again adore
the prime Notions of the mind; lastly rest satisfied with the immediate
informations of sense rightly disposited. But our judgment is this, that true
Logique should visit every particular Province of Sciences, with greater
command than their principles possess; and that those same putative Principles
be enforced to give an account, and be liable to examination, until such time
as their validity and tenure clearly appeared. And as touching the Prime
Notions of the intellect, there is nothing of those, (the understanding left at
liberty to it self) has congested, but matter to be suspected; nor any way
warrantable, unless it be summoned, and submit it self to a new Court of
Judicature; and that sentence pass according thereto. Moreover we many ways
sift and sound the information of sense it self; for the Senses deceive, yet
withal they indicate their Errors: but Errors are at hand, Indications to be
sought for a far off. The guilt of Sense is of two sorts; either it
destitutes us, or else it deceives us. For first, there are many things which
escape the cognizance of sense, even when it is well disposed, and no way
impedire: either by reason of the subtility of the entire body, or the
minutnesse of the parts thereof, or the distance of place, or the slownesse,
and likewise swiftness of motion; or the familiar converse with the object, or
some other causes. Again, nor where sense truly apprehends its object, are her
precepts so very firm: for the testimony and information of sense, is ever
from the Analogy of Man, and not from the Analogy of the World; and it is an
error of dangerous consequence to assert, that sense is the measure of things.
Wherefore to encounter these inconveniences, we have with painful and
faithful service every where sought out, and collected assistances, that
Supplements to Deficients; to Variations, Rectifications, may be ministered. Nor
do we undertake this so much by instruments, as by experiments; for the
subtlety of Experiments, is far greater than of sense it self, though
assisted with exact instruments; we mean such experiments, which to the
intention of the thing inquired, are skilfully according to Art invented and
accommodated. Wherefore we do not attribute much to the immediate and
particular perception of sense; but we bring the matter to this issue, that
sense may judge only of the experiment; the experiment of the thing. We
conceive therefore, that of sense, (from which all knowledge in things natural
must be derived, unless we mean wilfully to go a witless way to work) we
are become the religious Pontifes; and the not inexpert interpreters of her
Oracles; so as others may seem in outward profession; but we in deed and
action, to protect and honor sense. And of this kind are they which we prepare,
for the light of Nature, the accension, and immission thereof; which of
themselves were sufficient, were human Intellect equal, and a smooth
inanticipated Table. But when the minds of men are after such, strange ways
besieged, that for to admit the true beams of things, a sincere and polisht
Area is wanting; it concerns us, of necessity to bethink our selves, of
seeking out some remedy for this distemperature. The IDOLAES, wherewith the
mind is preoccupate are either Attracted, or Innate; Attracted have slid into
men's minds, either by the Placits and Sects of Philosophers; or by depraved
laws of Demonstrations. But the Innate inhere in the nature of the Intellect,
which is found to be far more liable to error, than sense. For however men
may please themselves, and be ravished into admiration, and almost adoration of
the mind of man; this is most certain: as an inequall looking-glass, changes
the rays of objects, according to its own figure, and cutting; even so the
mind, when it suffers impression from things by sense, in encogitating and
discharging her notions, does not so faithfully insinuate and incorporate her
nature, with the nature of things. And those two first kinds of IDOLAES can
very hardly; but those latter, by no means be extirpate. It remains only that
they be disclosed; and that same treacherous faculty of the mind be noted and
convinced; lest from the unsound complexion of the mind, upon the
extermination of ancient, perchance new shootes of Errors spring up in their
place; and the business be brought only to this issue; that errors be not
extinguished, but changed: but that on the contrary, now at last, it be for ever
decreed and ratified, that the intellect cannot make a judgment but by
Induction, and by a legittimate form thereof. Wherefore the Doctrine of
purifying the understanding, that it may become receptive of truth, is
perfected by three Reprehensions: Reprehension of Philosophy; Reprehension of
Demonstrations; and Reprehension of Native humane Reason. These explicated, and
then the case cleared, what the nature of things, what the nature of the mind
is capable off; we presume (the Divine goodness being President at the Rites)
that we have prepared and adorned, the Bride-chamber of the Mind and of the
universe. Now may the vote of the Marriage-song be, that from this conjunction,
Human Aides, and a Race of Inventions may be procreated, as may in some part
vanquish and subdue man's miseries and necessities. And this is the second Part
of the Work.

Wherefore the third Part of the work compriseth, Phenomenon VNIVERSI, as to
say, all kind of Experience, and Natural History, of such kind as may be
fundamental for the building up of Natural Philosophy. For neither can any
exact way of Demonstration or Form of interpreting Nature, both guard and
support the mind from error and lapse; and withal present and minister matter
for knowledge. But they who proposed to themselves not to proceed by
Conjectures and Divinations, but to find out, and to know, whose end and aim
is not to contrive Fictions and Fables, but to search with diligence into the
nature of, and, as it were, anatomize, this true world; must derive all from
the very things themselves. Nor can the substitution and compensation of wit,
or meditation, or Argumentation suffice to this travail, inquisition, and
mundane perambulation; no not if all the wits in the world should meet
together. Wherefore we must either take a right course, or desert the business
for ever: and to this day the matter has bin so managed, that it is no
marvel, if nature has not disclosed her self. For first, defective and
fallacious information of sense; negligent, inequall, and as it were, casual
observation; vain Tradition and from idle report; Practice, intent on the work,
and servile; experimental attempt, ignorant, dull, wild, and broken; lastly
slight and poor Natural History, have toward the raising of Philosophy,
congested most depraved matter for the understanding. After this, preposterous
subtlety of arguing, and ventilation, has essayed a late remedy to things
plainly desperate; which does not any way recover the business, or separate
errors. Wherefore there is no hope of greater advancement and progress, but in
the Restoration of Sciences. And the commencements hereto must, by all means,
be derived from Natural History; and that too, of a new kind and provision:
for to no purpose you polish the Glass, if images be wanting: not only
faithful guards must be procured, but apt matter prepared. And this our
History, as our Logic, differs from that in use, in many particulars: in the
end or office, in the Mass and Congeries, than in the subtilty, also in
choice, and in constitution in reference to those things that follow. For first
we propound such a Natural History, as does not so much either please for the
variety of things, or profit for present improvement of Experiments, as it does
disperse a light to the invention of causes; and gives, as it were, the first
milk to the nourishing up of Philosophy. For though we principally pursue
operation, and the Active part of Sciences; yet we attend the due season of
Harvest; nor go about to reap the green herb or the blade. For we know well
that Axioms rightly invented, draw after them the whole troop of Operations;
and not sparsedly but plentifully exhibit works. But we utterly condemn and
renounce, as Atalantaes Apple which retards the Race, that unseasonable and
childish humor of accelerating erly pledges of new works. And this is the Duty
of our Natural History. As for the Mass, we Compile a History, not only of
Nature at Liberty, and in Course; I mean, when without compulsion she glides
gently along, and accomplishes her own work: (as is the History of the Heavens,
Meteors, Earth and Sea; of Minerals, Plants, Animals:) but much rather of
Nature straightned and vexed; when by the provocations of Art, and the ministry
of Man, she is put out of her commune road; distressed and wrought. Wherefore,
all the experiments of Arts Mechanical; all of the Operative part of Liberal;
all of many Practical, not yet conspired into a peculiar Art (so far as any
discovery may be had, and so far as is conducent to our intention) we will
set down at large. So likewise (not to dissemble the matter) nothing regarding
men's pride and bravades, we bestow more pains, and place more assurance in
this Part than in that other; being the nature of things, more discloses
hirselfe in the vexation of Art; than when it is at its own liberty. Nor do we
present the History of Substances only, but also we have taken it as a part of
our diligence, to prepare a separate history of their virtues; we mean, such as
in nature may be accounted Cardinal, and wherein the Primordials of nature are
expressly constituted; as matter invested with her Primitive qualities and
appetites; as dense, rare, hot, cold, consistent, fluid, ponderous, light, and
others not a few. For indeed, to speak of subtility, we search out with choice
diligence, a kind of Experiments, far more subtle and simple than those
commonly met with. For we educe and extract many out of darkness, which had
never come into any man's mind to investigate, save his who proceeds by a
certain and constant path, to the invention of causes: whereas in themselves
they are of no great use; that it is clearly evident, that they were not
sought after, for themselves, but that they have directly the same reference to
things and works, that the Letters of the Alphabet have to speech and words;
which, though single by themselves, they are unprofitable, yet are they the
Elements of all Language. And in the choice of Reports and Experiments, we
presume that we have given in better security, than they who hitherto have bin
conversant in Natural Philosophy for we admit nothing but by oculate faith, at
least evident proof; and that after most severe enquiry: so as nothing is
reported hightned to the abusive credit of a miracle; but what we relate are
chaste and immaculate from Fables and Vanity. So also all those received and
ventilated current fictions and lies, which by a strange neglect, have for many
ages bin countenanced and are become inveterate; we do by name proscribe, and
precisely note, that they may be no longer prejudicial to Sciences. Plut. de
Ed. P. ex Plat. de Rep.
For what one wisely observes, that Fables, Superstitions, and idle Stories,
which nurses instill into young-children, do in good earnest deprave their
minds: so the same reason moved us, to be so religious and careful, lest at
the entrance, where we handle and take the charge of the Infancy, as it were,
of Philosophy, under natural History; she should be initiated in any vanity.
But in every new and somewhat more subtle experiment, in our opinion, certain
and tried, we yet apertly adjoyne the manner of the experiment we have
practiced; that after it is made apparent what the success of every particular
was with us; men might see the error which might lurk and cleave thereto; and
be awaked to proofs, if any such be, more exact and secure. In brief, we
every where sparsedly insert monitions and scruples and conjectures; ejecting
and interdicting, as it were, by a sacred adjuration and exorcisme, all
Phantasmes. Lastly being it is a thing most liquid unto us, how exceedingly
Experience and History disperse the beams of the sight of humane Intellect; and
how hard a matter it is, specially to minds tender and preoccupate, at first
entrance, to become familiar with nature; we therefore many times add our own
observations, as certain first conversions and inclinations, and as it were,
Aspects of History to Philosophy; to the end that they may be both pledges to
men, that they shall not ever be detained in the waves of History; as also that
when they are once arrived to the operation of the understanding, all may be in
a more preparedness. And by this kind of Natural History, as here we
describe, we suppose that there may be a secure and easy access unto Nature;
and solid and prepared matter presented unto the Understanding.

Now we have both fortified and environed there seems nothing remaining but
that we set upon Philosophy it self. But in so difficile and dubious an
enterprise, there are some particulars, which seem necessarily to be interposed
partly for instruction, partly for present use. Of these the first is, that the
examples of Inquisition and of Invention, be propounded according to our rule
and method represented in particular subjects; chiefly making choice of such
subjects, which amongst other things to be enquired, are the most noble, and in
mutual relation, most Adverse; that there may not want an example in every
kind. Nor do we speak of those examples, which for illustration sake, are
annexed to every particular precept and rule, (for we have sufficiently quit
our selves hereof in the Second Part of the Work,) but we mean directly the
Types and Platformes which may present as it were, to the eye, the whole
Procedure of the mind, and the continued Fabric and order of Invention, in
certain selected subjects; and they various and of remarke. For it came into
our mind, that in Mathematiques, the frame standing, the Demonstration inferred
is facile and perspicuous; on the contrary, without this accommodation and
dependency, all seems involved, and more subtle than indeed they be. Wherefore
to examples of this sort we assign the Fourth Part of our work; which indeed
is nothing else, but a particular, and explicit application of the Second Part.

But the fifth Part is added only for a time, and paid as interest until the
Principal be raised. For we are not so precipitantly bent upon the end, as too
slightly to pass over what we casually meet with by the way. Wherefore the
Fifth Part of the Work, is composed of such things as we have, or found out, or
experimented, or superadded; nor yet do we perform this, by the reasons and
rules of Interpretation, but by the same application of the understanding,
which others in enquiry and invention use to practice. For seeing from our
perpetual converse with nature, we hope greater matters from our meditations,
than we can promise to our selves from the strength of our own wit; these
observations may be as tents pitched in the way, into which the mind, in
pursuit of more certain Collections, may turn in, and for a while repose her
self. Yet in the mean, we promise not to engage our selves upon the credit of
those Observations; because they are not found out, nor tried by the right
form of Interpretation. And there is no cause why any should distaste or
intertain a jealousy, at that suspension of Judgment in knowledge, which
asserts not absolutely, that nothing can be known; but that nothing, without a
certain order and a certain method, can be known; and yet withal, lays down
for use and ease, certain degrees of certitude, until the mind be fixed upon
the explication of causes. Academ. Vet. Nov.
For neither those very Schools of Philosophers, who downright maintained
Acatalepsie or Incomprehensibility, have bin inferior to those, Dogmat.
who usurp a liberty of pronouncing sentence: but they provided not,
assistances to the sense, and understanding, as we have done; but utterly took
away all credit and authority, which is a far different case and almost
opposite.

Now the sixth Part of our Work, whereto But to consummate and perfect this
last Part, is a thing exalted above our strength, and beyound our hopes. We
have given it, as we trust, not contemptible beginnings; the prosperous
success of mankind shall give it issue; and peradventure such, as men, in this
present state of mind and employments, cannot easily conceive and Comprehend.
And the case concerns not contemplative felicity alone, but indeed men's
affairs and fortunes, and all the power of works: For Man, Natures minister
and interpreter, does, and understands so much, as he has by Operation or
Contemplation observed of Natures Order; nor can know or do any more: For
neither can any forces unloose and break asunder the chain of Causes; nor is
nature otherwise, than by obedience unto it, vanquished. Wherefore these two
main Jntentions, Human Sciences, and Human Potencies, are indeed in the same
point coincident: and the frustration of works, for most part, falls out from
the ignorance of Causes. But herein the sum and perfection of all consists,
if a man, never taking off the eye of his mind from the things themselves,
thoroughly imprint their images to the life. For God defend, that we should
publish the ayery dreams of our own Fancy, for the real Ideas of the World!
But rather may he be so graciously propitious unto us, that we may write the
Apocalypse, and true vision of the impressions and signets of the Creator, upon
the Creature!

Wherefore thou, O Father, who have conferred visible Light as the Primitiae on
the Creature; and breathed into the face of Man Intellectual Light, as the
accomplishment of thy works; protect and conduct this Work, which issueing from
thy Goodness, returns to thy Glory! Thou, after thou had survayed the works
thy hands had wrought, saw that all was exceeding Good, and have rested: but
Man survaying the works his hands had wrought, saw that all was vanity and
vexation of Spirit, and found no Rest: Wherefore if we labor with diligence,
and vigilance in Thy works; thou will make us Participants of thy Vision, and
of thy Sabbath. We humbly supplicate, that we may be of this resolution, and
inspired with this mind; and that thou would be pleased to endow human Race,
with new Donatives by our hands; and the hands of others, in whom thou shall
implant the same SPIRIT.

THE GENERAL ARGUMENT OF THE IX. BOOKS.
LIB. I. Is Proemiall to the Instauration of Sciences. Reports the DISCREDITS
of LEARNING. The DIGNITY of LEARNING. LIB. II. Declares the ADVANCEMENT of
LEARNING. Isntrumental. Essential, in the Partition of Sciences, into,
HISTORY. POESY. PHILOS. Partit. of HIST. POESY. LIB. III. Partitions of
PHILOSOPHY, into SUMMARY. SPECIAL, into DIVINE. NATURAL. HUMANE. Partitions
of NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. LIB. IV. Partitions of HUMANE PHILOSOPHY into
PHILOSOPHY of HUMANITY. CIVIL. Partitions of the PHILOSOPHY of HUMANITY. LIB.
V. Partitions of SCIENCES, from the Use and Objects of the MIND, into LOGIC,
ETHICK. Of LOGIC into INVENTION. JUDGMENT. MEMORY. TRADITION. LIB. VI.
Partitions of TRADITION or ELOCUTION into the ORGAN of SPEECH. METHOD of
SPEECH. ILLUSTRATION of SPEECH. LIB. VII. Partitions of ETHICK or MORALE
KNOWLEDGE, into the Doctrine of the PLATFORM of GOOD. Of the CULTVRE of the
MIND. LIB. VIII. Partitions of CIVIL KNOWLEDGE, into the Doctrine of
CONVERSATION. Of NEGOTIATION. Of GOVERNMENT of STATES. LIB. IX. Partitions of
THEOLOGY omitted, DEFICIENTS Three. I. THE RIGHT USE OF HUMAN REASON in
DIVINITY. II. The DEGREES OF UNITY IN THE CITY OF GOD. III. The EMANATIONS OF
SS. SCRIPTURE:
THE ARGUMENT OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE First Book.
CHAP. I. THE Consecration of this Work unto the most Learned of Princes K.
JAMES. Who in high, but just conceptions is here admired. The Distribution into
the Dignity and Proficiency of Learning. I. Discredits of Learning from the
objections of Divines; That the aspiring unto Knowledge was the first Sin.
That Learning is infinite and full of anxiety. That Learning inclines the Mind
to Heresy and Atheism. II. The Solution. Original Guilt was not in the
Quantity, but in the Quality of Knowledge. The Corrective hereof, Charity. III.
Against Jnfinity, Anxiety, and Seducement of Knowledge, Three preservatives.
That it instruct us our Mortality- That it give us content. That it soar not
too high. And so Philosophy leads the Mind by the Linkes of Second Causes unto
the First. CAP. II. I. Discredits cast upon Learning from the objections of
Politiques; That Learning softens Men's natures and makes them unfit for
Exercise of Arms. That Learning perverts men's minds for matter of Government.
Other particular indispositions pretended. II. The solution; Learning makes not
men unapt for Arms. III. Learning inables men for Civil affairs. IV.
Particular seducements imputed to Learning: As curious incertainty.
Pertinacious Regularity. Misleading Book-Presidents. Retired slothfulness.
Relaxation of Discipline; are rather cured than caused by Learning. CAP. III.
I. Discredits of Learning from Learned men's Fortunes; Manners; Nature of
studies. II. Derogations derived from Fortune are these; Scarcity of Means.
Privatenesse of life. Meannesse of employment. III. From their Manners these;
too Regular for the times. Too sensible of the good of others; and too
neglective of their own. A defailance in applying themselves to Persons of
Quality. A Failing in some lesser Ceremonies of demeanure. Gross Flattery
practiced by some Learned men. Instanced, in the Modern Dedication of Books.
Discreet Morigeration allowed. CAP. IV. I. Distempers of Learning from Learned
men's studies, are of three sorts; Fantastical Learning; Contentious Learning;
Delicate Learning. II. Delicate Learning a curiosity in words, through
profuseness of speech. Decent expression commended. Affected brevity censured.
III. Contentious Learning, a curiosity in matter, through Novelty of Terms or
strictness of Positions. A vanity either in Matter; or in Method. IV.
Fantastical Learning has two branches, Imposture; Credulity. Credulity a
Belief of History; or a Belief of Art; or Opinion: and that either Real, in
the Art it self. Or Personal in the Author of such an Art or Science. CAP. V.
Peccant Humors in Learning. I. Extreme affection to two extremes; Antiquity:
Novelty. II. A distrust that any thing New, should now be found out. III. That
of all Sects and Opinions, the best has still prevailed. IV. An over-early
reduction of Knowledge into Arts and Methods. V. A neglect of PRIMITIVE
PHILOSOPHY. VI. A Divorce of the Jntellect from the Object. VII. A contagion of
Knowledge in General, from Particular inclinations and tempers. VIII. An
impatience of suspense; have to positive assertion. IX. A Magistrall manner of
Tradition of Knowledge. X. Aim of Writers, Illustration, not Propagation of
Knowledge. XI. End of studies, Curiosity, Pleasure, Profit, Preferment etc.
CPA. VI. The Dignity of Learning from Divine Arguments and Testimonies. I. From
Gods Wisdom. Angels of Illumination. The first Light. The first Sabbath. Man's
employment in the Garden. Abels contemplation. The Invention of Music.
Confusion of Tongues. II. The excellent Learning of Moses. Job. Solomon.
Christ. St Paul. The Ancient Doctors of the Church. Learning exalts the Mind to
the Celebration of Gods glory; and is a preservative against Error and
unbelief. CAP. VII. The Dignity of Learning from human Arguments and
Testimonies. I. Natural Inventors of new Arts, for the Commodity of Man's life,
consecrated as Gods. II. Political, Civil Estates and Affairs advanced by
Learning. The best and the happiest times under Learned Princes and others.
Exemplified in six continued succeeding Emperors from the death of Domitian.
III. Military: The Concurrence of Arms and Learning. Exemplified in Alexander
the Great. Julius Caesar the Dictator. Xenophon the Philosopher. CAP. VIII. The
Merit of Learning, from the influence it has upon Moral virtues. Learning a
Sovereign remedy for all the diseases of the Mind. The domininion thereof
greater than any Temporal Power, being a Power over Reason and Belief.
Learning gives Fortunes, Honors and Delights, excelling all other as the soul
the sense. Durable monuments of Fame. A prospect of the Immortality of a future
world.
THE SECOND BOOK.
THE PROEM. THe Advancement of Learning commended to the Care of Kings. I. The
Acts thereof in general three, Reward, Direction, Assistance. II In special,
about three Objects, Places, Books, Persons. In Places four Circumstances,
Buildings, Revenues, Privileges, Laws of Discipline. In Books two, Libraries,
good Editions. In Persons two, Readers of Sciences extant, Jnquiries into Parts
non-extant. III. Deficients in the Acts of Advancement, six, want of
Foundations for Arts at large. Meannesse of Salary to Readers. Want of
allowance for experiments. Preposterous Institutions: unadvised practices in
Academicall studies. Want of Intelligence between the Universities of Europe.
Want of Enquirers into the Defects of Arts. The Authors particular design.
Modest defense. CAP. I* I. An Universal Partition of Human Learning into,
History. II. Poesy. III. Philosophy. This Partition is drawn from the three
Intellective Faculties; Memory; Imagination; Reason. The same distribution is
agreeable unto Divine Learning. CAP. II. I. The Partition of History, into
Natural, and Civil. (Ecclesiastical, and Literary comprehended under
Civil.) II. The Partition of Natural History, into the History of
Generations. III. Of Preter-Generations. IV. Of Arts. CAP. III. I. A Second
Partition of Natural History from the Use and End thereof, into Narrative; and
Jnductive. And that the most noble end of Natural History is, that it Minister
and Conduce to the building up of Philosophy; which end, Inductive History
respects. II. The Partition of the History of Generations, into the History
of the Heavens; The History of the Meteors; The History of the Earth, and Sea;
The History of Massive Bodies, or of the greater Collegiats; The History of
Kinds, or of the Lesser Collegiats. CAP. IV. I. The Partition of History
Civil, into Ecclesiastical and Literary; and (which retains the general
name) Civil. II. Literary Deficient. Precepts how to compile it. CAP. V. Of
the Dignity and Difficulty of Civil History. CAP. VI. The first Partition of
Civil History, into Memorials. Antiquities. Perfect History. CAP. VII. The
Partition of Perfect History, into Chronicles of Times; Lives of Persons;
Relation of Acts. The explication of the History of Lives. Of Relations. CAP.
VIII. The Partition of the History of Times; into universal and particular
History. The advantages and disadvantages of both. CAP. IX. The Second
Partition of the History of Times, into Annals; and Iournals. CAP. X. A Second
Partition of Speciall-Civile History in History Simple and Mixed. CAP. XI. I.
The Partition of Ecclesiastical History, into the General History of the
Church. II. History of Prophecy. III. History of Providence. CAP. XII. The
Appendices of History Conversant about the words of Men, as History it self
about Men's Acts. The partition of them into Speeches; Letters; and
Apophthegmes. CAP. XIII. The Second Principal part of Human Learning, Poesy.
I. The Partition of Poesy into Narrative. II. Drammaticall. III. Parabolicall.
Three Examples of Parabolicall Poesy propounded. IV. Natural. V. Political.
VI. Moral.
THE THIRD BOOK.
CAP. I. I. The Partition of Sciences into Theology and Philosophy. II. The
Partition of Philosophy, into three Knowledges; of God; of Nature; of Man, III.
The Constitution of Philosophia Prima, as the Commune Parent of All. CAP. II.
Of Natural Theology. Of the Knowledge of Angels and Spirits, an Appendix
thereof. CAP. III. The Partition of Natural Philosophy into Speculative and
Operative. These two both in the Intention of the Writer, and Body of the
Treatise, ought to be separate. CAP. IV. I. The Partition of speculative
Science concerning Nature, into Physique special; and Metaphysique; whereof
Physique inquires the Efficient Cause and the Matter: Metaphysique the Final
cause of the Form. II. The Partition of Physique into the knowledges of the
Principles of things; of the Fabrique of things or of the World; and of the
variety of things. III. The Partition of Physique respecting the variety of
Things, into the Doctrine of Concretes, and into the Doctrine of Abstracts The
Partition of Concretes, is the same with the Distribution of Natural History.
IV. The Partition of of the Doctrine of Abstracts, into the knowledge of the
Schemes of Matter; and into the knowledge of Motions. V. Two Appendices of
Speculative Physique, Natural Problems; And the Placits of Ancient
Philosophers. VI. The Partition of Metaphysique, into the Doctrine of Forms;
and into the Doctrine of Final Causes. CAP. V. I. The Partition of Operative
Knowledge concerning Nature, into Mechanique; and Magique: respondent to the
Parts of Speculative knowledge; Mechanique to Physique; Magique to
Metaphysique. A purging of the word Magia. II. Two Appendices to Operative
knowledge: An Inventary of the estate of Man. A Catalogue of Polychrests; or
things of multifarious use. CAP. VI. Of the great Appendix of Natural
Philosophy, as well Speculative as Operative; Mathematique knowledge: and that
it ought to be placed rather amongst Appendices; than amongst substantial
Sciences. The Partition of Mathematiques into Pure; and Mixed.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. I. THe Partition of the Knowledge of Man, into the Philosophy of
Humanity; and Civil. The partition of the knowledge of Humanity, into the
knowledge touching the Body of Man; and into the knowledge touching the Soul
of Man. II. The constitution of a general knowledge, touching the Nature and
Estate of Man. The partition of the knowledge concerning the Estate of Man,
into the knowledge touching the Person of Man; and into the knowledge touching
the League of Soul and Body. The partition of the knowledge touching the
Person of Man, into the knowledge of Man's miseries. And of Man's prerogatives.
III. The partition of the knowledge touching the League, into the knowledge of
Jndications, And of Impressions. The assignement of Physiognomy. And of
Interpretation of Natural Dreams: unto the Doctrine of Jndications. CAP. II.
I. The partition of the knowledge respecting the Body of Man, into Art
Medicinal. Cosmetique. Athletique. And Voluptuary. II. The partition of
Medicine, into three duties. Conservation of Health. III. Cure of Diseases. IV.
And Prolongation of life: and that the last Part, Prolongation of life, should
be separate from the other two. CAP. III. I. The partition of Human Philosophy
touching the soul, into the knowledge of the Inspired Essence; and into the
knowledge of the sensible, or traduced soul. The second partition of the same
Philosophy, into the knowledge of the Substance and Faculties of the Soul. And
into the knowledge of the Use, and Objects of the Faculties. II. Two Appendices
of the knowledge, concerning the Faculties of the soul, the knowledge of
Natural Divination. And the knowledge of Fascination. III. The Distribution of
the Faculties of the sensible soul, into Motion; and Sense.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
CAP. I. I. THE partition of the knowledge which respects the use and objects
of the Faculties of the Mind of Man; into Logique; and Ethique. II. The
Division of Logique, into the Arts of Invention, of Judgment; of Memory; and
of Tradition. CAP. II. I. The partition of the Art of Jnvention, into the
Inventive of Arts, and of Arguments. The former of these which is the more
eminent, is Deficient. II. The partition of the Jnventive Art of Arts, into
Literate Experience. And a New Organ. III. A delineation of Literate
Experience. CAP. III. I. The partition of the Inventive Art of Arguments, into
Promptuary, or Places of Preparation: And Topique, or Places of Suggestion. II.
The partition of Topiques, into General, And Particular Topiques. III. An
Example of Particular Topique in the Inquiry, De Gravi and Levi. CAP. IV. I.
The partition of the Art of Judging, into Judgment by Induction, And by
Syllogism. Of the first a Collection is made in the Novum Organum. The first
partition of Judgment by Syllogism into Reduction, Direct; and Inverst. The
second partition thereof, into Analytique Art; and the knowledge of Elenches.
II. The division of the knowledge of Elenches, into Elenches of Sophismes, Into
Elenches of Interpretation of Terms, And into Elenches of Images or Idolaes.
III. The division of Idolaes, Into Impression from the general nature of Man,
or Idola Tribus. Into Impressions from the Jndividuall temper of Particulars,
or Jdola specus. Into Impressions by words and Communicative nature, or Jdola
Fori. IV. An Appendix to the Art of Judging; namely of the Analogy of
Demonstration according to the nature of the subject. CAP. V. I. The Partition
of Art Retentive, or of Memory, into the knowledge of the Helps of Memory. And
the Knowledge of Memory it self. II. The Divivision of the Doctrine of Memory,
into Prenotion; and Emblem.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
CAP. I. I. THE Partition of the Art of Tradition, into the Doctrine of the
Organ of Speech. The Doctrine of the Method of Speech, and the Doctrine of the
Illustration of Speech. The partition of the Doctrine of the Organ of Speech,
into the knowledge of the Notes of things; of Speaking; and of Writing: Of
which the two last constitute Grammar, and the Partitions thereof. The
Partition of the knowledge of the Notes of Things, into Hieroglyphiques; and
into Characters Real. II. A second Partition of Grammar into Literary; and
Philosophical. III. The aggregation of Poesy referring to Measure, to the
knowledge of Speech. An aggregation of the knowledge of Ciphers to the
knowledge of Scripture. CAP. II. I The Doctrine of the Method of speech is
assigned a substantial and Principal Part of Traditive knowledge: it is
styled the Wisdom of Delivery. II The diverse kinds of Methods are enumerated;
their Profits and Disprofits annexed. The Parts of Method. CAP. III. I. The
Grounds and Office of Rhetorique. II. Three Appendices which appertain only to
the preparatory Part. The Colors of Good and Evil, as well simple as
compared. III. The Anti-theta of Things. IV. Lesser styles or usual Forms of
Speech. CAP. IV. I Two general Appendices of Traditive knowledge Art
Critical. II. And Pedagogicall.
THE SEVENTH BOOK.
CAP. I. I. THe Partition of Moral Philosophy, into the knowledge of the
Exemplar, or Platform; and into the Georgiques or Culture of the Mind. The
division of the Exemplar (namely of Good) into Good Simple, and Good Compared.
II. The Partition of Good Simple, into Jndividuall Good; and Good of Communion.
CAP. II. I. The Partition of Individual or Private Good, into Good Active; and
Good Passive. II. The Partition of Passive Good, into Conservative Good; and
Perfective Good. III. The Partition of the Good of Communion, into General.
And into Respective Duties. CAP. III. I. The Partition of the Doctrine of the
Culture of the Mind, into the knowledge of the Characters of the Mind. II. Of
the Affections. III. Of the Remedies and Cures thereof. IV. An Appendix to the
same Doctrine touching the Congruity between the Good of the Mind, and the Good
of the Body.
THE EIGHT BOOK.
CHAP. I. THe Partition of Civil knowledge, Into the knowledge of
Conversation. The knowladge of Negotiation. And the knowledge of Empire or
State-Goverment. CAP. II. I. The Partition of the knowledge of Negotiation into
the knowledge of dispersed Occasions. II. And into the knowledge of the
Advancement of life. Examples of the knowledge of scattered Occasions from some
of Solomon's Parables. Precepts concerning the Advancement of Fortune. CAP. III.
The Partition of the Art of Empiry or Government is omitted, only access is
made to two Deficients. I. The knowledge of enlarging the Bounds of Empire. II.
And the knowledge of universal Justice, or of the Fountains of Law.
THE NINTH BOOK.
CAP. I. The Partitions of inspired Theology are omitted, only way is made unto
three Desiderats. I. The knowledge of the right Use of Human Reason in matters
Divine. II. The knowledge of the degrees of unity in the City of God. III. The
Emanations of SS. Scripture.
FRANCISCI DE VERVLAMIO ARCHITECTVRA SCIENTIARVM.

THE GENERALE IDEA AND PROJECT OF THE LO. VERVLAM'S INSTAVRATIO MAGNA.

Represented in the PLATFORM OF THE DESIGN OF THE I PART thereof, As it was
Conceav'd in the mind of the Author and is expressed in the Model of the Work.

DEUS OMNIA IN MENSVRA, ET NVMERO, ET ORDINE, DISPOSVIT.

THE PLATFORM OF THE DESJGNE
LIB. I. THE DIGNITY OF LEARNING.
Reporting the Dishonors and Derogations of Learning in the Discredites from
Divines Cap. 1. Desire of Knowledge the first sin. Knowledge an Infinite: an
Anxious thing. Learning the cause of Eresy and Atheism. Objected Answered.
Politiques C. 2. Learning makes men unapt for Arms. Disables men for Civil
affairs. Particular indispositions pretended. Objected Answered.
Learned Men's Cap. 3. Fortunes Scarcity of means. Privatenesse of life.
Meannesse of employment.
Ma^ners Too incompatible with the times. Too sensible of the common good. Not
applying to Persons of quality A failing in points of behavior. Gross
flattery practiced by some.
Studies in some impertinents.

Distempers in studies Cap, 4. Fantastical Learning. Contentious Learning.
Delicate Learning.
Peccant Humors Cap. 5. Affection to two extremes Antiquity, Novelty. A
distrust that any thing New should now be found out. A conceit that the best
Opinions still prevail. A too peremptory reduction of Sciences into Methods. A
neglect of Primitive Philosophy. A divorce of the Intellect from the Object. A
contagion of Knowledge from particular inclinations. An impatience of suspense:
have to Positive Assertion. A Magistrall manner of Tradition of Knowledge. Aim
of Writers, Illustration, not Propagation. End of studies, Curiosity, Pleasure,
Profit, Promotio^, etc.

Honors, and Prerogatives of Learning from Arguments Divine Cap. 6. Wisdom of
God. Angels of Illumination. First light. Adams. Abels, Conte^plations etc. The
learning of Moses, Job, Solomon, etc.
Humane cap. 7. 8. Inventors of Arts consecrate as Gods. Civil Estates
advanced by learning. The concurrency of Arms and Letters. The Dominion
Donations of Learning.



LIB. II. THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING.
Personal, in Proem. lib. General by the Amplitude of Reward. Wisdom of
Direction. Conjunction of Labors.
Special Promoted by Places, as Buildings. Revenewes. Privileges. Discipline.
Books, as Libraries. Good Editions.
Persons as Lectures for Arts extant. Inquirers into Arts non-extant.

Prejudiced for Want of foundations for Arts at large. Want of sufficient
Salarie to Lecturers. Want of allowance for Experiments. Want of a right course
of proceeding in studies. Want of Intelligence between Universities. Want of
Inquiries into Arts Deficient.


Real, by a right Partition of Learning Jnto Cap. 1. 1 History referred to
Memory Natural the Subject Cap. 2. Generations Heavens. Meteors. Earth. Sea.
Elements Specifiques.
Preter Gener. Monsters. Marvels. Magique, etc.
Arts mechanique Agriculture. Alchimy, etc.

Use and end Cap. 3. Narrative. Inductive.

Civil into Civil in special. C. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 1 Memorialls.
Antiquities. Perfect History Chronicles. Lives. Relations.

2 Pure. Mixed.
Ecclesiastical Cap. 11. General of the Church. Special Prophesy. Providence.

Literary cap. 4. Ages. Climates. Declinations. Instaurations, etc. of Learning.

Append. to History. Orations. Epistles. Apophthegmes. Cap. 12.
2 Poesy referred to the Imagination Cap. 13. Narrative or Historical.
Drammaticall or Representative. Parabolicall or Allusive.
3 Philosophy, referring to Reason and the will. Lib. seqq.

LIB. III. THE PARTITION OF KNOWLEDGES IN GENERAL INTO
PHILOSOPHY. Cap. 1. Summary or Primitive Axioms of universality. Transcendents
of Entity.
Special respecting three Objects 1 God hence Divine Philosophy or Cap. 1.
Natural Theology. -- Appen. Angels. Spirits.


2 Nature So Natural Philosophy. Cap. 3. Speculative cap. 4. Physique into the
Principles of Things. Fabrique of things or of the world. variety of things
Concrets Generations Heavens. Meteors. Earth. Sea. Elements. Specifiques.
Preter-Generations.
Abstracts of Matter. Hot. Cold. Dense. Grave. Light etc.
Motions Simple motions. Sums of moti. Measurs of mot.


Append. Problems. Placits.

Metaphysiques Forms. Final causes.

Operative Mechanique. subservient to Metaphysique. Metaphysique*

Magique. Apend. Cap. 5. An Inventary of the estate of man. A Catalogue of
Polychrestes.

Append. Mathematiques Cap. 6. Arithmetique. Geometry.

3 Man, Hence the Emanations of Humane Philosophy Lib. seq. Civil Philosophy
Lib. seq.


THEOLOGY inspired Lib. ult.
LIB. IV. THE PARTITION OF HUMANE KNOWLEDGE, OR THE KNOWLEDGE OF HVMANITY.
General of the nature and state of man in respect of Cap. 1. His Person, his
Miseries. Prerogatives Intellectual. And Moral.

The league of soul and Body by Indication of the Mind by the Body. Body by
the mind. Appendices Physiognomy. Interpret. of dreams.

Impression of the Body upon the Mind. Mind upon the Body.


Special divided into Philosophy Humane properly so called, which referr's to
man's Body into Art Cap. 2. Medicinal Conservation of Health. Cure of Diseases.
Prolongation of life.
Cosmeteque, or of Decoration. Athletique, or of Activity. Voluptuary as
Pictures. Music, etc.

Soul the Cap. 3. Substance Rational whether Native or adve^tive Separable or
insep. Mortal or immor. Passible or impassi.
Sensible A corporal, Fiery. Aeriall substance.

Faculties Rational Intellect. Reason. Imagination. Memory Appetite. Will.
Appendices Divination. Fascination.

Sensible Voluntary Motion. Sense. Perception.

Use and Objects of Faculties. Lib. V. Hence the Emanations of Logique. Ethique.



Civil. Lib. VIII.

LIB. V. THE PARTITION OF THE USE AND OBJECTS OF THE FACVLTIES OF THE MIND, INTO
LOGIQUE has four Intellectual Arts. I Inquisitio^ or Jnvention of Cap. 2.
Arts into Literate Experience by Variation. Production. Translation. Inversion.
Application. Copulation. Casualty or Chance.
Interpretation of Nature Nov. Organ.
Arguments into Cap. 3. Preparation or Provision. Suggestion or Topiques
General. Particular.


II Examination or Judgment by Cap. 4. Induction, Whereof a collection is in
the Nov. Org. Syllogism into 1 Reduction Direct. Invert.
2 Analitique Art. Knowledge of Elenchs Sophismes Elenches, handled by Arist.
in precept, by Plato in example. Elenchs of Interpretation of Terms Majority.
Minority. Priority. Posteriority. Power. Act etc.
Idolaes or impressions from the General nature of man. Individual te^per.
Imposition of words and names.



Append: Analogy of Demonstration from the nature of the subject.
III Custody or Memory into Cap. 5. Helps to memory, -- Writing. Memory it
self by Prenotion. Emblem.

Elocution or Tradition. LIB. VI.
ETHIQUES, referred to man's will. LIB. VII.
LIB. VI. THE PARTITION OF THE ART OF ELOCVTION OR OF TRADITION INTO THE
ORGAN OF SPEECH into Notes of things Hieroglyphiques. Real characters.
Speaking Hence the original of Grammar Popular. Philosophical

Writing Append. to Speech-Poetique measure. Writing-Ciphers.


METHOD of SPEECH the Cap. 2. Kinds Magistrall Of Probation or Initiative.
Exoterique. Acroamatique. Delivery By way of Aphorism. By way of Method.
Delivery By Assertions, and Proofs. By Questions and Determinations.
Method Fitted to matter. Upon presupposition.
Method by way of Information Anticipation. Method Analitique. Systutique.
Diaeretique. Cryptique. Homericall.

Parts Disposition of a whole work. Limitation of Propositions, their
Extention. Production.


ILLUSTRATION of SPEECH or RHETORIQUE. The use and office Application Of the
dictates of Reason to Imagination. Of speech respectively to particulars: or
the wisdom of private speech.
Append Colors of Good and Evil, simple, compared. Anti-theta Rerum, or the
cou^terpoint of things Lesser Styles and Forms of Speech.
Two general Appendices touching the Tradition of Knowledge. Critical
Corrected Editions. Interpretation of Authors. A judgment upon Authors.
Paedanticall Collegiate education of youth. A Caveate against Compends.
Application of studies to the quality of wits.



LIB. VII. THE PARTITION OF MORAL KNOWLEDGE, INTO THE
PLATFOKME of GOOD. Cap. 1. Simple or the kinds of Good Cap. 2. Individuals, or
virtues Active from a desire of Perpetuity. Certainty. Variety.
Passive Conservative Good. Perfective Good.

Of Communion, or Duties General. Respective Duties of Professions, etc.
Oeconomicall; Political duties.
Vices Impostures, frauds, cautils etc. Of professions.


Individ. and common Simply and irrespectively taken. Comparatively between Man
and Man. Case and case. Public and private* Time and time.


Compared, or the Degrees of Good of Honesty. Profit. Pleasure. Body. Mind.
Fortune. Contemplative. Active Good.

CULTURE of the MIND in the Cap. 3. Characters or tempers. Impressed by Nature
to Arms. Leters. Contemplative Active course of life.
Imposed by Chance of Sex. Age. Region Health. Beauty etc.
Fortune Nobility. Honors. Riches. Poverty.


Affections or distempers, their. Names Pleasure, pain, fear, hope. Anger,
Patience, Love, Hate.
Nature How stirred. How stilled. How secreted? How disclosed? What operations
they produce. What turns they take? How enwrapt? How they encountre?

Cures, or Remedies Custom, Exercise, Habit, Education. Emulation, Company,
Friends, Fame. Reproof, Exhortation, Laws, Books. Study, Brief precepts
hereof.
Append. The Congruity between the Good of Body and Mind.


LIB. VIII. THE PARTITION OF CIVIL KNOWLEDGE INTO
CONVERSATION Cap. 1 Not Affected; much less despised. But Moderated, that is
either General in Speech in the Conception. Utterance.
Gesture of Speaker. Hearer.

Respective to the Quality of Men. Nature of Matter. Of time. Of Place.


NEGOTIATION. Cap. 2. Scattered occasions, examples thereof out of Solomo^s
Proverbs. The Advanceme^t of Fortune Precepts thereof Summary in the Knowledge
of Others Six ways by Countenance. Works. Actions. Nature. Ends. Reports.
Three ways Acquaintance with men well seen in the world. A wise temper in
liberty of speech and silence. A present dexterity both to observe and act.

Himself How his Nature and abilities sort with The estate of the present
time: Professio^s that are in prize: His competitors in fortune: The Friends he
has chosen: The examples he would follow.

Art of Setting forth his Virtues; Fortunes; Merits Concealing his Defects, and
Disgraces, by Caution. Color. Confidence
Declaring a Man's mind in particulars by a mediocrity of Revealing, Concealing.
Framing the mind to become flexible to occasions; of place; time; and persons,
etc.

Spars'd That he be well skilled what instruments to use and how. That he
overtaske not his own abilities. That he do not always stay for, but
sometimes provoke occasions. That he never undertake great; or long works. That
he never so engage himself but that he leave a posterne door open for retreat.
That he so love, as he may hate upon occasion.


GOVERNMENT of STATES Cap. 3. Partitions omitted Deficients The art of enlarging
an Estate. The fountains of Laws. Certain in the intimation. Just in the
commandment. Fit to be put in execution. Agreeing with the form of the state
Begetting virtue in the Subjects.



LIB. IX. INSPIRED THEOLOGY. The Partition of Inspired Divinity is omitted,
only an entrance is made unto three DEFICIENTS
DEFICIENTS I THE LIMITS AND USE OF HVMAN REASON IN MATTERS DIVINE. The Use it
self Explication of Divine Mysteries. Inferences thence deduced.
Excesses in that Use Mineing into things not revealed by a too Curious
inquiry. Attributing equal Authority to Dirivations, as to Principles
themselves.

II THE DEGREES OF UNITY IN THE CITY OF GOD In Points Fundamental; one Lo.
one Faith; etc. Superstructive or of perfection.
A dissent in Fundamentell Points, discorporates men from the Church of God;
not so in superstructive Points.

III EMANATIONS FROM SCRIPTURE Wherein are observed Errors in Interpretation In
supposing that all Philosophy is derived from Scripture, as the School of
Paracelsus did, and some others now do. In interpreting Scripture as one would
a humane Author; whereas two things were known to God which are not known to
Man The Secrets of the Heart. Succession of Times.

A Desiderate. A Collection of Positive Divinity upon particular Texts in
brief observations. prejudiced by Dilating into common places. Chasing after
Controversies. Reducing to Methods.




The Emanation of SCIENCES, from the Intellectuale Faculties of MEMORY
IMAGINATION REASON.
From these -- I HISTORY Natural. The Subject; the Use. LIB. II. Civil
Civil, properly so called. LIB. II. Ecclesiasticale. LIB. II. Literary. LIB.
II.

II POESY Narrative or Historical. LIB. II. Drammaticall or represent. LIB.
II. Parabolicall or Allusive. LIB. II.
III PHILOSOPHY Primitive Sapience, the receptacle of generale Axioms III.
Derivative Divine, or Nature. Theol. III. Natural Speculative Physics. III.
Metaph. III.
Operative Mechanic. III. Magic. III.

Humane Generale of the nature of man. etc IV. Speciale into Philosophy. A. IV.


A. Humane so called of Body, into Arts Medicinale against diseases. Cosmetick
or of Decoration. IV. Athletick or of Activity. Voluptuary or Sensuale. IV.
Soul, the Substance Spirituale -- Native or Adventive, etc. IV. Sensuale --
Fiery, Aeriall substance, etc. IV.
Foculties Rationale -- Jntellect; reason; Imagination etc. IV. Sensuale. --
Voluntary motion, Sense, etc. IV.
Use of Faculties LOGIC Invnetion or Inquisition V. Judgment or Examination.
V. Memory or Custody. V. Elocution or Tradition Gra^mar. VI. Method. VI.
Rhetoric VI.

ETHICS Platform of good Kinds of Good, VII Degrees of Good. VII
Culture of the Mind Tempers. VII Distempers; Cures. VII



Civil of Conversation. Negotiation. Government of States Art of enlarging a
State VIII. Fountainee of Laws. VIII.

Inspired Divinity is here separat from Philosophy: yet Reason receives the
signet of Faith DEFICIENTS Use of Reason in Divinity. IX Degrees of unity in
Rligion. IX Dirivations from Scripture. IX





The Preparation to these Books, is populare, not Acroamatique: Relates the
Prerogatives and Derrgations of Learning. LIB. I.

FRANCIS LO. VERVLAM VICOVNT St ALBAN, OF THE DIGNITY AND ADVANCEMENT OF
LEARNING. THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. The Consecration of this work unto the most learned of PRINCES, K.
JAMES; who in high, but just conceptions, is here admired. The Distribution,
into the DIGNITY and the PROFICIENCY of LEARNING. I. Discredites of Learning,
from the objections of Divines: That the aspiring unto knowledge was the first
sin. That Learning is a thing infinite, and full of anxiety. That knowledge
inclines the Mind to Heresy and Atheism. II. The solution: Original Guilt was
not in the Quantity, but in the Quality of Knowledge. The Corrective hereof,
Charity. III. Against Infinity, Anxiety, and seducements of Sciences; three
preservatives: That we forget not our Mortality. That Learning give us content.
That it soar not too high. And so Philosophy leads the mind, by the Links of
second Causes, unto the First.
THERE were under the Old Law (Excellent KING) both Free Will Offerings, and
Daily Sacrifices; the one proceeding upon ordinary observance; the other upon a
Devout Cheerfulness. Certainly, in my opinion, some such kind of Homage
belongs to KINGS from their servants, namely, that every one should tender, not
only Tributes of his Duty, but Presents of Affection. In the former of these, I
hope, I shall not be wanting; for the latter I was in suspense what I should
most principally undertake, and in conclusion I thought it more respective to
make choice of some oblation, which might refer, rather to the propriety and
excellency of Your individual person, than to the business of Your Crown and
State.

Representing Your Majesty, as my duty is, many times unto my mind, (leaving
aside the other parts whether of Your Virtue, or of Your Fortune,) I have been
possessed with extreme wonder, when I consider the excellency of those virtues
and faculties in You, which the Philosophers call intellectual; the capacity
of Your mind comprehending so many and so great Notions; the faithfulness of
Your memory; the swiftness of Your apprehension; the penetration of Your
judgment; the order and facility of Your elocution. In truth Plato's opinion
sometimes comes into my mind, which maintains, That knowledge is nothing else
but remembrance; In Phaedo.
and that the mind of man by nature knows all things, once redimed and
restored to her own native light, which the cloudy vault, or gloomy Tabernacle
of the body had or e-spread with darkness. For certainly the best and clearest
instance for this assertion shines in Your Majesty, whose mind is so ready to
take flame from the least occasion presented, or the least spark of another
knowledge delivered. Wherefore as the sacred, Scripture says of the wisest
King, That his heart was as the sands of the sea: 1. Reg. 4.
which though it be one of the largest bodies, yet it consists of the
smallest portions; so has God given Your Majesty a composition of
understanding exceeding admirable, being able to compass and comprehend the
greatest matters, and nevertheless, to apprehend the least, and not to suffer
them to escape Your observation: whereas it should seem very difficult, or
rather an impossibility in nature, for the same instrument to make it self fit
for great and small works. And for Your gift of Speech, I call to mind what
Cornelius Tacitus says of Augustus Caesar, Annal. 13*
Augusto (says he) prompta ac profluens, quae deceret principem, eloquentia
fuit. In truth if we note it well, speech that is Elaborate, or Affectate, or
Jmitating, although otherwise excellent, has somewhat servile in it and
holding of the subject; but Your Majesty's manner of speech is indeed
Prince-like, flowing as from a fountain, and yet streaming and branching it
self into natures order, full of facility and felicity, Imitating none, and
Inimitable of any. And as in Your Civil estate, respecting as well Your
Kingdom as Your Court, there apeareth to be an Emulation and Contention of
Your Majesty's Virtue with Your Fortune, namely excellent Moral endowments
with a fortunate Regiment; a Pious and Patient expectation when time was, of
Your greater fortune, with a prosperous and seasonable possession of what was
expected; a Holy observation of the laws of Marriage, with a blessed and happy
fruit of Marriage in a most fair Progeny; a Godly propension and most
beseeming a Christian Prince to Peace, with a fortunate concurrence of the like
inclination in Your neighbor Princes: so likewise in Your intellectual
abilities, there seems to be no less Contention and Emulation, if we compare
Your Majesty's gifts of Nature with the rich treasury of multiplicious
Erudition and the knowledge of many Arts. Neither is it easy to find any KING
since Christ's time, which may be compared with Your Majesty for variety and
improvement of all kind of learning Divine and Humane; let who will revolve and
peruse the succession of Kings and Emperors, and he shall find this judgment
is truly made. For indeed it seems much in Kings, if by the compendious
extraction of other men's wits and Labors, they can take hold of knowledge, or
attain any superficial ornaments or shows of learning; or if they countenance
and prefer learned men; but for a King and a King borne to drink indeed the
true fountains of Learning, nay to be himself a fountain of Learning, is
almost a Miracle. And this also is an access to Your Majesty, that in the same
closet of your Mind, there are treasured up as well Divine and Sacred
Literature, as Profane and Humane; so that Your Majesty stands invested with
that triplicity of Glory, which was ascribed to that famous Hermes
Trismegistus, The Power of a King; The Jllumination of a Priest; The Learning
of a Philosopher. Wherefore since in these glorious attributes of Learning, so
inherent and individual in Your Person, Your Majesty so far excells all
other Kings, it is very meet that such rare endowments of Nature and Art should
be celebrated, not only in the fame and admiration of the present time, or in
the light of History conveyed over to Posterity, but be engraven in some solid
work, which both may express the power of a great King, and bear a Character
or Signature of so excellent a learned King. Now (to return to our intended
purpose) I concluded with my self that I could not make to Your Majesty a
better oblation, then of some Treatise tending to that end.

The sum and Argument hereof, will consist of two Parts: In the Former, which
is more slight and popular (yet may not be past over) we shall entreat of the
excellency of Knowledge and Learning, through all the parts thereof; and
likewise of the merit of those who have worthily and wisely employed and placed
their bomnties and industries in the Augmentation, and Propagation thereof. In
the latter Part (which is the main and sum of this work) I shall propound
and set down what in this kind has bin embraced, undertaken and accomplished
hitherto, for the Advancement of Learning: and again briefly touch at such
particulars as seem Deficient in this enterprise; to the end that though I dare
not presume positively to separate and select what I would chiefly commend unto
Your Majesty; yet by representing many and different observations, I may excite
Your Princely cogitations to visit the peculiar treasures of Your own mind, and
thence to extract what is most conducent to the amplifying and enlarging of the
bounds of Arts and Knowledges, agreeable to Your Magnanimity and Wisdom.

I In the entrance to the former Part, to clear the way, and as it were, to
make silence, to have the testimonies concerning the Dignity of Learning to be
better heard, without the interruption of tacit objections, I think good first
to deliver Learning from the Discredits and Disgraces which Ignorance has cast
upon it, but Ignorance severally disguised; appearing and discovering it self
sometime in the zeal of Divines; sometimes in the arrogance of Politiques, and
sometimes in the errors of Learned men themselves. I hear the former sort say,
That Knowledge is of the nature and number of those things, which are to be
accepted with great Limitation and Caution; That the aspiring to overmuch
knowledge, was the original temptation and sin, whereupon ensued the Fall of
Man; And that even at this day Knowledge has somewhat of the Serpent in it,
and therefore where it enters into a man, it makes him swell, Scientia inflat;
1 Cor. 8.
That Solomon gives a censure, That there is no end of making Books, and that
much reading is a weariness to the flesh; Eccles. 12.
and again in another place, That in spacious knowledge there is much
contristation, and that he that increases knowledge, increases anxiety;
Eccles. 1.
That S. Paul gives a caveat, That we be not spoild through vain Philosophy;
Colos. 2.
And that experience demonstrates how the Learned men have been Arch
heretics; How Learned times have been inclined to Atheism; and how the
Contemplation of second Causes, does derogate from the Authority of the first.

II To discover then the error and ignorance of this opinion, and the
misunderstanding in the grounds thereof, any man may see plainly that these men
do not observe and consider, That it was not that Pure and Primitive Knowledge
of Nature, by the light whereof man did give names to other Creatures in
Paradise, as they were brought before him, according to their Proprieties,
which gave the occasion to the Fall; but it was that proud knowledge of Good
and Evil, with an intent to shake of God and to give Law unto himself.
Neither is it any Quantity of Knowledge; how great soever, that can make the
mind of man to swel; for nothing can fill, much less extend the soul of man
but God, and the contemplation of God: therefore Solomon speaking of the two
Principal senses of Inquisition, the Eye and the Ear, Eccles. 1.
affirms That the Eye is never satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear with
hearing; and if there be no fullness, then is the Continent greater then the
Content. So of Knowledge it self and the Mind of Man, whereto the Senses are
but Reporters, he defines like wise in the words placed after the Calendar or
Ephemerides which he makes of the diversity of times and seasons for all
Actions and Purposes, Eccles. 3.
concluding thus, God has made all things Beautiful and Decent in the true
return of their seasons; also he has placed the world in man's heart, yet
cannot man find out the work which God works from the beginning unto the
end: By which words he declares, not obscurely, that God has framed the Mind
of Man, as a Mirror or Glass capable of the Image of the universal world, and
as joyful to receive the impressions thereof, as the eye joyeth to receave
light; and not only delighted in the beholding, the variety of things and the
vicisitude of times, but raised also to find out and to discern the
inviolable laws and the infallible decrees of Nature. And although he seem to
insinuate that the supreme or summary law of Nature, which he calls the work
which God works from the beginning to the end, is not possible to be found
out by man, yet that does not derogate from the Capacity of the Mind, but may
be referred to the impediments of knowledge, as the shortness of life, the ill
conjunction of labors depraved, and unfaithful Tradition of knowledge over
from hand to hand; and many other inconveniences wherewith the condition of man
is ensnared and involved. For that no parcel of the world is denied to man's
inquiry, or invention he clearly declares in another place, where he says,
Prove. 20.
The spirit of a man is as the Lamp of God wherewith he searches the inwards
of all secrets. If then such be the capacity and receipt of the mind of man, it
is manifest that there is no danger at all from the Proportion or Quantity of
knowledge how large soever, lest it should make it swell or outcompasse it
self, but merely in the Quality, which being in Quantity more or less, if it
be taken without the true Corrective thereof, has in it some nature of
malignity, or venom full of flatuous symptoms. This Antidote, or Corrective
spice, the mixture whereof tempers knowledge and makes it so sovereign is
Charity, which the Apostle immediately adds in the former clause, saying, 1.
Cor. 8.
Knowledge blows up, but Charity builds up; Not unlike to that which he
delivers in an other place, 1. Cor. 13.
If J spoke (says he) with the tongues of Men and Angels and had not Charity,
it were but as a tinkling Cymball: Not but that it is an excellent thing to
speak with the tongus of Men and Angels, but because if it be severed from
Charity, and not referred to the public good of Mankind, it rather exhibites
a vain and empty glory, then any substantial and solid fruit.

III As for that Censure of Solomon, concerning the excess of writing and
reading Books, and the anxiety of spirit which redoundeth from Knowledge, and
that admonition of S. Paul, that we be not seduced by vain Philosophy; if those
places be rightly understood, they do very excellently set forth the true
bounds and limitations, whereby humane knowledge is confined and circumscribed,
yet so as without any such contracting and coaretation, it may comprehend all
the universal nature of things. These limitations are three. The first that we
do not so place our felicity in knowledge, as we frrget our Mortality. The
second, that we make application of our knowledge, to give our selves repose
and contentment and not distaste or repining. The third, that we do not presume
by the contemplations of nature, to attain the Mysteries of God. For as
touching the first, Solomon does excellently expound himself in the same Book,
I saw well, says he, Eccles. 2.
that knowledge recedes as far from ignorance as light does from darkness,
and that the wise man's eyes keep watch in his head, whereas the fool roundeth
about in darkness, but withal I learned that the same mortality involves them
both.

For the second, certain it is no anxiety, or perturbation of mind resulteth
from knowledge, otherwise then merely by accident: For all knowledge and
wonder (which is the seed of knowledge,) is an impression of pleasure in it
self; but when we fall to framing conclusions out of our knowledge which
obliquely applied to our particular purposes, either minister weak fears or
vast desires, then there grows that vexation and trouble of Mind, whereof we
speak: for then knowledge is no more Lumen siccum, as Heraclitus the Profound
would have it, Lumen siccum optima anima, but it becomes Lumen madidum, or
maceratum, being steeped and infused in the humors of the affections.

The third rule deserves a little to be stood upon, and not to be lightly passed
over: For if any man shall think by view and enquiry into these sensible and
material things, to attain that light whereby he may reveal unto himself the
nature and will of God, then indeed, is he spoiled through vain Philosophy. For
the contemplation of the creatures, having regard to the creatures themselves,
produces Knowledge, but having regard to God, wonder only, which is a broken
Knowledge. And therefore it was most aptly said by one of Plato's school,
Philo. Iud. de Somniis.
That the sense of man carries a resemblance with the sun, which opens and
reveals the terrestrial Globe, but conceales and seals up the stars and
celestial Globe: so does the sense discover natural things, but it darkens
and shuts up divine. And hence it has proceeded, that some of the chosen rank
of the more Learned have fallen into Heresy, whilst they have sought to fly up to
the secrets of the Deity, by the waxen wings of the senses.

As for the conceit of those who are of opinion that too much knowledge should
incline the mind to Atheism, and that the ignorance of the second Causes,
should be, as it were, a Midwife to our Piety toward the first. I would
willingly charge these in the language of Job, Job. 13.
Will you lie for God as one man does for another to gratify him? For certain
it is that God works nothing in nature according to ordinary course but by
second causes, and if they would have it otherwise believed, it is mere
imposture, under color of Piety to God, and nothing else but to offer unto the
Author of Truth the unclean sacrifice of a Lie. But farther, it is an assured
truth and a conclusion of Experience, That a little or superficial taste of
Philosophy, may perchance incline the Mind of Man to Atheism; but a full
draught thereof brings the mind back again to Religion. For in the entrance of
Philosophy, when the second causes, which are next unto the senses, do offer
themselves to the mind of Man, and the mind it self cleaves unto them and
dwells there, an oblivion of the highest cause may creep in, but when a man
passes on farther and beholds the dependency, continuation and confederacy of
causes, and the works of Providence, Homer. Iliad 9.
than according to the allegory of the Poets, he will easily believe that the
highest link of Natures chain must needs be tied to the foot of Jupiters
chair. To close in a word, let no man upon a weak conceit of sobriety or ill
applied moderation, think or maintain that a man can search too far, or be
too well studied in the Book of Gods word, or in the Book of Gods works;
Divinity or Philosophy; but rather let men awake themselves and cheerfully
endeavor, and pursue an endless progress or proficiency in both: only let
them beware lest they apply Knowledge to swelling, not to charity; to
ostentation not to use: and again, that they do not unwisely mingle and
confound these distinct Learnings of Theology and Philosophy, and their
several waters together.

CAP. II. I Discredits of Learning from the objections of Politiques, That
Learning softens men's natures, and makes men unfit for the exercise of Arms.
That it perverts men's dispositions for Matter of Government. Other particular
indispositions pretended. II. The Solution. Learning makes not men unapt for
Arms. III. Learning enables men for Civil affairs. IIII. Particular
seducements imputed to Learning, As, Curious Uncertainty, Pertinacious
Regularity, Misleading Presidents, Retired slothfulness, Relaxation of
Discipline; Are all rather Cured then Caused by Learning.
I NOw let us descend to the Disgraces whereby Politiques defame Learning; They
be these, That Learning does soften men's manners, and makes them more unapt for
the honor and exercise of Arms: That it does mar and pervert men's
dispositions for matter of Government and Policy; which the study of Arts makes
either too Curious by vanity of Reading; Or too peremptory by the strict rigor
of Rules; Or too overweening by reason of the greatness of examples; Or too
incompatible with the times, by reason of the dissimilitude of examples; Or at
least it does divert and alienate men's minds from business and Actions,
instilling into them a love of leisure and privatenesse.

And that it does bring into States a relaxation of Discipline, whilst every
man is more ready to argue then obey. Out of this conceit Cato surnamed the
Censor, one of the wisest men indeed that ever lived, when Carneades the
Philosopher came in Embassage to Rome, and that the young men of Rome began to
flock about him being allured with the sweetness and majesty of his eloquence;
gave counsel in open senate; that they should give him his dispatch with all
speed, Plato in M. Cato.
lest he should infect and inchant the minds of the youth, and at unawares
bring in an alteration of the manners and customs of the State. This same
conceit, or humor moved Virgil, preferring the honor of his country, before
the reputation of his own Profession, to make a kind of separation between the
Arts of Policy, and the Arts of Literature, challenging the one to the Romans,
yielding the other to the Grecians, in the verses so much renowned, Tu regere
imperio populos Roman memento, Virgil. Aen. 6.

Hae tibi erunt Arts --
And we see that Anytus the accuser of Socrates, Plato. Apol. Socratis.
laid it as an article of charge and accusation against him, that he did with
the variety and power of his discourses and disputation, embase in the minds of
young men, the Auctority and Reverence of the Laws and Customs of their
country; and that he did profess a pernicious and dangerous Science, wherein,
who ever was instructed, might make the worse matter seem the better, and to
suppress Truth by force of Eloquence.

II But these and the like imputations have rather a countenance of Gravity,
then any syncerity of truth: For experience does witness that the selfsame
persons, and the selfsame times, have flourisht in the glory of Arms and
Learning. As for men, we may instance in that noble pair of Emperors Alexander
the Great, and Julius Caesar the Dictator; the one was Aristotle's scholar in
Philosophy; the other Cicero's Rival in eloquence. But if any man had rather
call for Scholars that have become great Generals, then Generals that were
great Scholars, let him take Epaminondas the Theban, or Xenophon the Athenian;
whereof, the one was the first that abated the power of Sparta, and the other
was the first that made way to the overthrow of the Monarchy of Persia. And
this conjunction of Arms and Letters, is yet more visible in times then in
persons, by how much an age is a greater object then a man: For the selfsame
times with the Egyptians, Assyrians, Persians, Graecians, and Romans, that
are most renowned for Arms, are likewise most admired for Learning; so that
the gravest Auctors and Philosophers, the greatest Captains and Governors have
lived in the same Ages. Neither indeed can it otherwise be, for as in man the
ripeness of the strength of the body and the mind comes much about one age,
save that the strength of the body comes somewhat the more early; So in states,
the glory of Arms, and Learning (whereof the one correspondeth to the body,
the other to the soul of man) have a concurrence, or a near sequence of Time.

III Now for matter of Policy and Government, that Learning should rather be an
impediment, then an adiument thereunto is a thing very improbable. We all
confess that it is an unadvised Act to commit a natural body, and the cure of
Health, to Emperique Physicians, who commonly have a few receipts which seem to
them to be universal Remedies, whereupon they are confident and adventurous,
when yet they neither know the causes of Diseases, nor the complexions of
Patients, nor the peril of Symptoms, nor the Method of Cures. We see it a
like error in those, who for expedition of their causes, and suites rely upon
petty Advocates and Lawyers, which are only men of Practice, and not grounded
in their books, who are many times easily surpised, when a new case falls out
besides the common Road of their experience: so by like reason it cannot but
be a matter of doubtful consequence, if states be managed by Empirique
Statesmen. On the contrary it is almost without instance, that ever any
Government was disasterous, that was in the hand of Learned Governors. For
howsoever it has bin ordinary with Politic men to extenuate, and disable
Learned men by the name of Pedants, yet History, which is the mistress of
Truth makes it appear in many particulars, that the government of Princes in
minority, has far excelled the Government of Princes of mature age, even for
that reason which Politiques seek to traduce, which is that by that occasion
the State has bin in the hands of Pedants. Who knows not that for the first
five years so much magnified during the minority of Nero, the Burden of the
state was in the hands of Seneca a Pedanti? So likewise Gordianus the younger
owes the ten years applauded government to Misitheus a Pedant. And with the
like happiness Alexander Severus governed the state in his minority, in which
space women ruled all, but by the advice and council of preceptors, and
teachers. Nay let a man look into the Government of the Bishop of Rome, as by
name, into the government of Pius Quinctus, or Sextus Quinctus in our times,
who were both at their entrance estimed but as Pedanticall Friars; and he shall
find, that such Popes do greater things, and proceed upon truer principles,
than those which have ascended to the Papacy from an education, and breeding,
in affairs of estate and Courts of Princes. For though men bred in learning
are perchance, not so quick, and nimble in apprehending occasions, and
accommodating for the present to points of convenience, which the Italians call
RAGIONI DI STATO, the very name whereof Pint Quintus could not hear with
patience, but was wont to say, that they were the inventions of wicked men,
Platon.
and repugnant to religion, and the moral virtues; yet in this there is made
ample recompense, that they are perfect and ready, in the safe and plain way of
Religion, Justice, Honesty, and the Moral virtues; which way, they that
constantly keep and pursue, shall no more need those other Remedies, then a
sound body need Physique. And besides the space of one man's life can not
furnish presidents enough to direct the event of but one man's life. For as it
happens sometimes that the great Grandchild, Nephew, or Pro-nephew resembles
the Grandfather, or great Grandfather more then the Father; so many times it
comes to pass, that the occurrences of present times may sort better with
ancient examples, then with those of later, or immediate times. Lastly the wit
of one man can no more countervaile the latitude of Learning, than one man's
means can hold way with a common purse.

IV And were it granted that those seducements and indispositions imputed to
Learning, by Politics, were of any force and validity, yet it must be
remembered with all, that Learning ministers in every of them, greater strength
of medicin or remedy, then it offers cause of indisposition or infirmity. For
if that Learning by a secret influence, and operation makes the mind irresolute
and perplexed, yet certainly by plain precept it teaches how to unwinde the
thoughts, how far to deliberate, when to resolve; yea it shows how to
protract, and carry things in suspense without prejudice till they resolve.

Be it likewise granted that Learning makes the minds of men more peremptory
and inflexible, yet withal it teaches what things are in their nature
demonstrative, and what are conjecturall; and propounds as well, the use of
distinctions, and exceptions, as the stability of rules and principles.

Be it again, that learning misleades and wresteth men's minds, whether by
disproportion, or dissimilitude of examples, I know not, yet I know well that
it unfoldeth, and lays open as well the force of circumstances, as the errors
of comparisons, and the cautions of applications; so that in all these it does
more rectify men's minds, then pervert them. And these remedies Learning does
every way convay and insinuate by the quick penetration, and forcible variety
of examples. Let a man look into the errors of Clement the VII, so lively
described by Guicciardine, who served under him; or into the errors and
waverings of Cicero, painted to the life by his own pensill, in his Epistles to
Atticus, and he will fly a pace from being inconstant and irresolute in his
designs. Let him look into the errors of Phocion, and he will beware how he be
obstinate or inflexible. Let him read the fable of Jxion, and it will dispell
vaporous hopes and such like fumes and clouds. Let him behold Cato the Second,
and he will never be one of the Antipodes, to tread opposite to the present
world.

Now for the conceit, That learning should be a friend to sloth, and should
orespread the mind with a sweet slumber of repose and retiredness; it were a
strange thing, if that which accustometh the mind to a perpetual agitation,
should be the Patroness to slothfulness: whereas contrariwise it may be truly
affirmed, that no kind of men love business for it self, but those that are
Learned; for other Persons love affairs and business for the Profit, as
hirelings the work, for the wages; others for Honor, for while they are in
Action, they live in the eyes of men and refresh their reputation, which
otherwise would wear; others for Power and the Privileges of Fortune, that
they may pleasure their friends, and displeasure their foes; others that they
may exercise some faculties wherein they take a pride, and in this imagination,
entertain their thoughts in a good humor and pleasing conceit toward
themselves; others to advance other ends: so that as it is said of untrue
valors, that some men's valors are in the eyes of those that look on, so the
industry and courage of these men seems to aim at this, that others may
applaud them, or they hug themselves in the contemplation of their own
designements: only Learned men love business and employment, as actions
agreeable to nature, and no less healthful to the mind than exercise is to
the body; taking pleasure in the Action it self, and not in the purchase: so
that, of all men living, they are the most indefatigable, if it be toward any
business, which can replenish and detain the mind according to the dignity
thereof. And if there be found some laborious in reading and study, and yet
idle in business, and action, this grows not from learning, but from some
weakness or softness of body or mind, such as Seneca speaks of, Controv.
lib. 4. Prove.
Quidam (says he) tam sunt umbratiles ut putent in turbido esse quicquid in
luce est. Well may it be, that such a point of a man's nature may make him give
himself to learning, but it is not learning that breeds, or implants any such
point in his nature. But if any man notwithstanding resolvedly maintains,
that Learning takes up too much time which might otherwise be better employed;
I answer, that no man can be so straightened and oppressed with business, and an
active course of life, but may have many vacant times of leisure, whilst he
expects the returns and tides of business, except he be either of a very dull
temper and of no dispatch; or ambitious (little to his credit and reputation) to
meddle and engage himself in employment of all natures and matters above his
reach. It remains therefore to be enquired, in what matter, and how, those
spaces and times of Leisure, should be filled up and spent; whether in
pleasures or study; sensuality; or contemplation, as was well answered by
Demosthenes to Aeschines, Plut. in Demost.
a man given to pleasure, who when he told him by way of reproach, that his
orations did smell of the Lamp, Indeed (said Demosthenes) there is great
difference between the things that You and I do by lampe-light: Wherefore let
no man fear lest learning should expulse business; nay rather it will keep
and defend the possessions of the mind, against idleness and pleasure, which
otherwise, at unawares, may enter, to the prejudice both of Business and
Learning.

Again, whereas they object, That learning should undermine the reverence of
Laws and Government, it is a mere calumny without all shadow of truth: For to
say that a blind obedience should be a surer obligation then an ocular duty, is
all one as to say, that a blind man may tread surer by a guide, then a seeing
man can with the use of a light and his eyes. Nay it is without all
controversy that Learning does make the mind of man, gentle, ductile, maniable
and pliant to government; whereas ignorance makes them churlish, thwart, and
mutinous; which the Records of time do clearly manifest, considering that the
most unlearned, rude and barbarous times have bin most subject to seditions,
tumults and changes. As for the judgment of Cato the Censor, he was well
punished for his blasphemy against learning: Plut. in M. Cato.
For when he was past threescore years old, he was taken with an extreme desire
to go to the school again, and to learn the greek tongue; which does well
demonstrate that his former censure of the Grecian Learning was rather an
affected gravity, than the inward sense of his own opinion. As for Virgil's
verses, though it pleased him to brave the world in taking to the Romans the
Art of Empire, and leaving to others all other Arts, as popular and servile;
yet so much is manifest, that the Romans never ascended to that hight of
Empire, till the time they had ascended to the hight of Arts. For in the time
of the two first Caesar's, Persons most perfect in the State-principles of
Government, there lived contemporaries, the best Poet, Virgilius Maro; The best
Historiographer, Titus Livius; the best Antiquary, Marcus Varro; the best or
second Orator Marcus Cicero; without question the chiefest, every one in their
several faculty, that to the memory of man are known. Lastly, as for the
accusation of Socrates, only this I say, The time must be remembered when it was
prosecuted, namely under the thirty Tyrants, of all mortals the bloodiest,
basest and most unworthy of Government: which revolution of State and Time was
no sooner over, but Socrates, whom they had made a Person Criminal, was made a
Person Heroical, and his Memory accumulate with all honors divine and humane;
and those Discourses of his, which were than termed Corrupting of Manners, were
after celebrated by all Posterity for most sovereign medicines of Mind and
Manners. And let this serve for answer to Politiques, which in their humorous
severity, or in their feigned gravity, have presumed to throw imputations upon
Learning; which redargution nevertheless, save that we know not whether our
labors may extend to other ages, seems not so needful for the present, seeing
the aspect and favor of two most learned Princes ( Queen ELIZABETH and Your
Majesty, being as Castor and Pollux, Lucida Sidera, stars of a most benign
influence) has wrought in us of Britain, so much love and reverence toward
Learning.

CAP. III. I Discredits of Learning from Learned men's Fortunes, Manners, Nature
of studies. II. In their Fortunes scarcity of Means, Obscurity of life.
Meanness of Employment. III. In their Manners, Too Regular for the times, Too
sensible of the good of others, and neglective of their own. They fail in
applying themselves to Particular Persons. They fail in some points of
Behavior. Gross Flattery practiced by some Learned; Instanced in the Modern
Dedication of Books. Discreet Morigeration allowed.
I NOw come we to the third sort of Discredit or Diminution of Credit, that
redoundes upon Learning from learned men themselves, which commonly cleaves
fastest. It is derived either from their Fortune, or from their Manners, or
from the Nature of their studies; whereof the first is not in their power; the
second is not to the point; so as the third alone seems properly to fall into
enquiry: but because we are not in hand with the true value of things, but with
popular estimation, it will not be amiss to insinuate somewhat also of the two
former.

II The Derogations therefore, or Diminutions of Credit which grow to Learning
from the fortune of Learned men, are taken either from their Poverty and
scarcity of Means; or from their obscure and private course of Life; or from
the meannesse of employment wherein they are conversant.

As concerning Want, and that usually is the case of Learned men, that they are
poor, and commonly begin with little and grow not rich so fast as other men,
which convert their labors chiefly to lucre and increase; it were good to
leave the common Place in Commendation of Poverty to some Friar Mendicant to
handle, (if by their leaves I may be so bold) to whom much was attributed by
Machiavell in this point, Dell. Hist. Fior. lib. 1.
when he said, that the Kingdom of the clergy had bin long before at an end,
if the reputation and reverence toward the Poverty of Friars and Monks, had
not borne out the scandalls of the superfluities and excesses of Bishops and
Praelates: so a man might say that the felicity and magnificence of Princes and
great Persons, had long since turned to Barbarism and Rudeness, if the
Poverty of Learning had not kept up civility and honor of life. But without
such advantages of hunting after the praise thereof, it is worthy observation,
what a sacred and reverend thing Poverty of Fortune was, for some ages in the
Roman State, which yet was a State without Paradoxes: For thus says Titus
Livius in his introduction, Praef. lib. 1.
Either my affection to the work I have undertaken deceaves me, or there was
never State more great, more religious, more richly furnished with good
presidents, nor which avarice and riot conquered so late, nor where so great
reverence to Poverty and Parcimony continued so long. So likewise after the
State of Rome was now degenerate, we read that when Caesar the Dictator took
upon him a Restoration of the collapsed state, one of his confidents gave him
this counsill, That of all Points the most summary to such a designement, as he
went about, was by all means to take away the estimation of wealth, For (says
he) these and all other evils, Orat. ad C. Caesar. Salust. imputata.
together with the reputation of money shall cease, if neither public Offices
nor any other Dignity, which commonly are so coveted, were exposed to sale. To
conclude this point, as it was truly said that Rubor est virtutis Color, though
sometimes it come from vice; Laert. in Diog. Cyn.
so you may truly say, Paupertas est virtutis fortuna, though sometimes it may
proceed from misgovernment and improvidence. Surely this is Solomon's Censure,
Prove. 28.
Qui festinat ad divitias non erit insons, and Precept, Prove. 23.
Buy the truth and sell it not; So wisdom and knowledge judging it right and
equal that means should be employed to get Learning, and not Learning be
applied to gather up means.

To what purpose should we speak of the privatenesse and obscurenesse of life,
which is objected to learned men? It is a Theme so common and so frequently
handled by all, to extol Leisure and retiredness, not taxed with sensuality
and sloth, before a Civil and Active life; for safety, liberty, sweetness,
dignity, or at least freedom from indignities, as no man handles this subject,
but handles it well: such a consonancy it has to men's conceptions in the
expressing; and to men's consent in the allowing. This only I will add, that
Learned men forgotten in States, are like the Images of Cassius and Brutus in
the funerals of Iunia, of which, not to be represented as others were, Tacitus
says, Annal. 3.
Eo ipso praefulgebant quod non visebantur.

For Meannesse of employment assigned to Learned men, that which is most
traduced to contempt is, That the government of childhood and youth is commonly
allotted to them, the contempt of which age is transferred upon the Preceptors
or Tutors. But how unjust this traducement is, if you will reduce things from
popularity of opinion, to measure of reason, may appear, in that we see men
are more careful what they put into new vessels, then into a vessel seasoned;
and more curious what mould they lay about a young plant, then a plant
corroborate: So as it is manifest that the weakest terms and times of all
things, use to have the best applications and helps. Harken, if you please, to
the Hebrew Rabbis, Joel. 2.
Your young men shall see visions, your old men shall dream dreams; from this
Text they collect, that youth is the worthier age, by so much as Revelation is
more clear by visions, then by dreams. And it is worth the noteing that
however Pedants have bin the derision and scorn of Theaters, as the Apes of
Tyranny, and that the modern looseness or negligence has taken no due regard
to the choice of Schoolemasters and Tutors; yet it has bin an ancient
complaint drawn down from the best and wisest times, even to our age, that
States were too busy with their Laws and too negligent in point of Education.
Which excellent part of Ancient Discipline has bin in some sort revived of
late times by the Colleges of the Jesuits, whose pains and diligence when I
consider, as well in the culture of knowledge, as information of manners, the
saying of Agesilaus touching Pharnabazus comes into my mind, Plut. in Agesil.
Talis cum sis utinam noster esses. And thus much concerning the discredits
drawn from the Fortunes and Condition of Learned men.

III As touching the Manners of Learned men, it is a thing belonging rather to
their individual Persons, than their studies and point of learning. No doubt
there is found among them, as in all other Professions, and Conditions of life,
men of all temperatures, as well bad as good, but yet so, as it is not without
truth that is said, abire studia in mores; and that Learning and Studies,
unless they fall upon very depraved dispositions, have an influence and
operation upon the manners of those that are conversant in them, to reform
nature and change it to the better.

But upon an attentive and indifferent review, I for my part, can not find any
disgrace to learning can proceed from the Manners of Learned men, adherent unto
them as they are Learned; unless peradventure it be a fault (which was the
supposed fault of Demosthenes, Cicero, Cato the second, Seneca, and many more)
that because the times they read of, are commonly better, than the times they
live in; and the duties taught, better then the duties practiced; they contend
too far, to reduce the corruption of manners to the honesty of precepts, and
prescripts, of a too great hight, and to impose the Laws of ancient severity
upon dissolute times: and yet they have Caveats enough touching this austerity
out of their own springs: For Solon, when he was asked, Plut. in Solon.
Whether he had given his Citizens the best laws? the best (said he) of such
as they would receive. So Plato, finding that his own heart could not agree
with the corrupt manners of his Country, refused to bear place or office,
saying, In vita. in epist. alibi.
That a man's Country is to be used as his Parents were, that is, with
persuasion and not with violence, by entreating and not by contesting: And
Cesars counselor put in the same caveat, saying, Orat. ad C. Caes. Salust. ad
scripta.
non ad vetera instituta revocans quae jampridem corruptis moribus ludibrio
sunt: And Cicero notes this error directly in Cato the second, writing to his
friend Atticus, Ad Attic. lib. 2. ep. 1.
Cato optime sentit sed nocet interdum Reipub. loquitur enim tanquam in Repub.
Platonis, non tanquam in fae^e Romuli. The same Cicero does excuse and expound
the Philosophers for going too far, and being too exact in their Prescripts,
These same Praeceptors and Teachers, Pro L. Muraena.
(says he) seem to have stretched out the line and limits of Duties somewhat
beyond the natural bounds, that when we had labored to reach the highest
point of Perfection, we might rest where it was meet: and yet himself might
say, Monitis sum minor ipse meis; for he stumbled at the same stone, though in
not so extreme a degree.

Another fault which perchance not undeservedly is objected against Learned
men, is this, that they have preferred the honor and profit of their Country,
and Masters before their own fortunes and safeties. So Demosthenes to his
Athenians, Oration: de Corona.
My Counsels (says he) if you please to note it, are not such whereby J
should grow great amongst you, you become little amongst the Grecians; but they
be of that nature as are sometimes not good for me to give, but are always
good for you to follow. So Seneca after he had consecrated that Quinquennium
Neronis to the eternal glory of Learned Governors, held on his honest and
loyal course of Good and Free Counsel, after his Master grew extremely
corrupt to his great peril and at last to his ruin. Neither can it be
otherwise conceived; for Learning endues men's minds with a true sense of the
frailty of their Persons; the Casualty of fortune; the Dignity of the soul;
and their vocation: which when they think of, they can by no means persuade
themselves that any advancement of their own fortunes, can be set down as a
true and worthy end of their being and ordainement. Wherefore they so live, as
ever ready to give their account to God, and to their Masters under God,
whether they be Kings or States they serve, Matt. 25.
in this style of words, Ecce tibi Lucrifeci, and not in that Ecce mihi
Lucrifeci. But the corrupter sort of Politiques, that have not their minds
instituted and established in the true apprehension of Duties, and the
contemplation of good in the universality, refer all things to themselves, as
if they were the worlds Center, and that the concurrence of all lines should
touch in them and their fortunes; never careing in all tempests, what becomes
of the Ship, so they may retire and save them selves in the Cock-boate of their
own fortune. On the contrary, they that feel the weight of Duty, and
understand the limits of self love; use to make good their places, and duties,
though with peril: and if they chance to stand safe in seditions and
alterations of times and Government, it is rather to be attributed to the
reverence which honesty even wresteth from adversaries, than any versatile or
temporizing advantage in their own carriage. But for this point of tender
sense, and fast obligation of duty, which without doubt Learning does implant
in the mind, however it may be taxed and amerced by Fortune; and be despised
by Politiques in the depth of their corrupt principles, as a weak and
improvident virtue, yet it will receive an open allowance, so as in this matter
there needs the less disproofe or excusation.

Another fault there is incident to Learned men, which may sooner be excused
than denied, namely this; That they do not easily apply and accommodate
themselves to persons with whom they negociate and live: which want of exact
application arises from two causes, The first is, the largeness and
greatness of their minds, which can hardly stoop and be confined within the
observation of the nature and custom of one person. It is the speech of a
Lover, not of a wise man, Seneca.
Satis magnum alter alteri theatrum sumus. Nevertheless I shall yield that he
that cannot contract the light of his mind, as he does the eye of his body, as
well as disperse and dilate it, wants a great faculty for an active course of
Life. The second cause is the honesty and integrity of their nature, which
argues no inhability in them, but a choice upon judgment; for the true and
just limits of observance toward any person, extend no farther, then so to
understand his inclination and disposition, as to converse with him without
offense; or to be able, if occasion be offered, to give him faithful counsill,
and yet to stand upon reasonable guard and caution, in respect of our selves:
but to be speculative into others, and to feel out a man's disposition, to the
end to know how to work him, wind him and govern him at pleasure; is not the
part of an ingenious nature, but rather of a heart double and cloven; which, as
in friendship, it is want of integrity, so toward Princes and Superiors it is
want of Duty. For the Custom of the Levant, whereby it was accounted a heinous
offense, to gaze and fix their eyes upon Princes, is indeed, in the outward
ceremony, barbarous, but good in the moral; for it becomes not Subjects by
bent and inquisitive observations, to penetrate into the hearts of Kings, Prove.
25.
which the Scripture has declared to be, inscrutable.

There is yet another fault with which I will conclude this Part, which is
often noted in Learned men; namely, that in small and outward matters of
behavior and carriage (as in countenance, gesture, march, ordinary discourse,
and the like) they do many times fail to observe decensy and discretion; so
as the vulgar sort of capacities make a judgment of them in greater matters,
by that which they find wanting in small and ordinary points of Action. But
this prejudication does oftentimes deceive them: nay let them know, they have
their answer from Themistocles, who being invited to touch a lute, said,
arrogantly enough, being applied to himself, but pertinently to the purpose in
hand, That he could not, Plut. in Themist.
indeed, fiddle, but he knew how to make a small Town, a great State. And
there are, no doubt, many well seen in the Arts of Government, and Policy,
which are to seek in ordinary conversation and punctual occasions. I refer
such scoffers to the Elogie Alcibiades gave of his Master Socrates, Plato Conv.
whom he compared to the Gallipots of the Apothecaries, which on the outside
were drawn with Apes, Owls, and Antiques, but contained within precious
liquors and sovereign confections; acknowledging that to vulgar capacity and
popular report, he was not without some superficial levities, and deformities,
but was inwardly replenisht with excellent powers and virtues. And so much
touching the Point of Manners of learned men.

In the mean time I thought good to advertise, that I have no purpose to give
allowance to some base and unworthy Conditions of some Professors, whereby
they have discredited both Themselves and Learning: such were those trencher
Philosophers, which in the later age of the Roman state; were usually in the
howses of Great Persons, whom not improperly you may call solemn Parasites: of
which kind Lucian makes a merry description of the Philosopher, that the great
Lady took to ride with her in the Coach, and would needs have him carry her
little Dog Melitaeus; which he doing officiously and yet uncomely, the page
scoffing said, De Merc. conduct.
I doubt our Philosopher of a Stoic will turn Cynique. But above all the
rest, the gross and palpable flattery whereunto many not unlearned have abased
and abused their wits and pens, turning as Du Bartus says Hecuba into Helena,
and Faustina into Lucretia, has diminisht the prize and estimation of Learning.

Neither is the Modern Dedication of Books to Patrons to be Commended; for
that Books, such as are worthy the name of Books, ought to have no Patron but
Truth and Reason. The custom of the Ancients was better, who were wont to
dedicate their writings only to private and equal friends, or to entitle the
Books with the names of such friends; or if they Dedicated their Books to
Kings or Great Persons, it was to some such as the Argument of the Book was fit
and proper for. These and the like Courses may deserve rather reprehension than
defense.

Nor say I this, as if I condemned the Morigeration and application of Learned
men, to men in fortune and place; for the answer was good that Aristippus made
to one that asked him in mockery, Laert. in Aristip.
How it came to pass that Philosophers were followers of Rich men, and not
Rich-men of Philosophers? He answered soberly and yet sharply, That it was
because Philosophers knew well what they had need of, but Rich me^ did not. Of
like nature was the answer which the same Philosopher made when having a
Petition to Dionysius and no ear given to him, he fell down at his feet in
manner of a worshipper, Ibid.
whereupon Dionysius staid and gave him the hearing, and granted it: but a
little after, some person tender of the honor and credit of Philosophy,
reproved Aristippus that he would offer the Profession of Philosophy such an
indignity as for a private suite to fall to a Tyrants feet? to whom he relied;
That was not his fault, but it was the fault of Dionysius that had his ears in
his feet. Neither was it accounted weakness, but a discretion in him that
would not dispute his best with Adrianus Caesar, Spartian. in Hadrian.
excusing the fact, That it was reason to yield to him that commanded thirty
Legions. These and such like applications and stoopeings of Learned men below
the terms of Gravity, at the command of necessity or the advantage of
occasion, cannot be condemned; for though they may seem, at first sight,
somewhat base and servile, yet in a judgment truly made, they are to be
accounted submissions to the Occasion and not to the Person.

CAP. IV. I. Distempers of Learning from Learned men's studies, are of three
sorts. Fantastical Learning, Contentious Learning, Delicate Learning. II.
Delicate Learning, a Curiosity in words through Profuseness of speech. Decent
expression commended. Affected Brevity censured. III. Contentious Learning, a
Curiosity in matter, through the novelty of terms, or strictness of
Positions. A vanity either in Matter or in Method. IV. Fantastical Learning
has two branches, Imposture, Credulity. Credulity is a belief of History. Or
a belief of Art or Opinion; and that either Real in the Art it self. Or
Personal in the Auctor of such an Art, or Science.
LET us now proceed to those Errors, and Vanities, which have intervened
amongst the studies of Learned men, and therewith are intermingled; which is
the principal point and proper to the present Argument; wherein my purpose is
not to patronize errors, but by a Censure and separation of the errors, to sift
out that which is sound and solid, and to deliver the same from aspersion. For
we see it is the manner of men, especially of envious persons, to scandalize,
and deprave that which retains the State and Virtue, by taking advantage upon
that which is corrupt and degenerate; as the Heathens in the Primitive Church
used to blemish and taint the Christians, with the faults and corruptions of
Heretics: Nevertheless I have no meaning to make any exact animadversion of
the Errors, and Jmpediments in matters of Learning, which are more secret and
remote from vulgar opinion, but only to speak of such as do fall under a
common and popular observation, and known, or at least, which recede not far
of therefrom.

I. I find therefore chiefly three vanities, and vacuities in Learning, which
have given occasion to the reproach and disgrace thereof. For those things are
esteemed vain which are either false, or frivolous; namely, wherein there is,
either no truth, or no use: those Persons we esteem vain, which are either
Credulous in things false, or Curious in things of little use. And Curiosity is
either in matter or in words; that is when either labor is spent in vain
matters, or time is wasted in the delicacy of fine words: so that it is
agreeable as well to true reason as approved experience, to set down three
distempers of Learning; The first is Fantastical Learning; The second
Contentious Learning; The third Painted and Delicate Learning: or thus, vain
Jmaginations, vain Altercations, vain Affectations. And with the Last I will
begin.

II. This Distemper seated in the superfluity and profuseness of speech
(though in times past by turns, it was in some price) about Luthers time, got
up mightily into credit, and estimation. The heat and efficacy of Preaching, to
win and draw on the people, began chiefly about that time to flourish; and
this required a popular kind of expression. This was furtherd by the Enmity and
Opposition conceaved in that same age against the Schoolmen; whose writings
were altogether in a differing style and form of expression; taking liberty to
coin and frame new and rude terms of Art, whithout any regard to the
pureness and elegancy of speech, so they might avoid circuit of words, and
deliver their sense and conceptions, in a precise exact expression: and so it
came to pass a little after, that a greater care was taken for Words, than
Matter; and many affected rather Comptnesse of style; a round and clean Period;
the sweet falling of the clauses; and illustrations by Tropes and Figures; than
the weight of Matter, soundness of Argument, life of Invention, or depth of
Judgment. Then sprang up the flowing and watery vein of Osorius, the
Portugal Bishop, to be in price and request: Then did Sturmius spend such
infinite and curious pains upon Cicero the Orator, and Hemogines the
Rhetorician. Then did our Carre and Ascham in their Lectures and Writings
almost Deifie Cicero, and Demosthenes, and allure young Students to that
polisht and flourishing kind of Learning. Then did Erasmus take occasion to
make that scoffing kind of Echo, December annos consumpsi in Legendo Cicerone, to
which the Echo answered, One, Asine. Than grew the Learning of the Schoolmen
to be utterly despised, as rude and barbarous. In sum, the whole inclination
and bent of those times was, rather about Copy than Weight. Here we see the
first Distemper of Learning, when, as we have said, men study Words and not
Matter. Whereof though J have represented examples of late times only, yet such
vanities have bin accepted, in some degree or other, in ancient times, and will
be so hereafter. Now it is not possible but that this should have an operation
to discredit and debase the reputation of Learning, even with vulgar
capacities; when they see Learned men's Works, like the first letter of a
Patent, which though it be limmed and set out with large florishes, yet it is
but a letter. And it seems to me that Pigmalions frenzy is a good Emblem and
Portraicture of this vanity; for what are words but the Images of matter, and
except they be animated with the spirit of reason, to fall in Love with them,
is all one as to fall in love with a Picture.

But yet notwithstanding it is a thing not hastily to be condemned to
illustrate and polish the obscurity and roughness of Philosophy, with the
splendour of words and sensible elocution, For hereof we have great examples in
Xenophon, Cicero, Seneca, Plutarque, and even in Plato himself; and the use
hereof is great: For though to the severe inquisition of Truth, and the deep
progress into Philosophy, it is some hinderance, because it is too early
satisfactory unto the mind, and quenches the thirst and desire of farther
search; yet if a man be to have any use of such knowledge in Civil occasions
(of Conference, Counsill, Persuasion, Discourse, and the like) he shall find
all that he desires prepared and set out to his hand in those Auctors. But the
excess of this is so justly contemptible, that as Hercules, when he saw the
Jmage of Adonis, Venus minion, in the Temple, said, Nil sacries; so there is
none of Hercules followers in Learning, I mean, the more industrious and severe
inquirers into Truth, but will despise those Delicacies and Affectations, as
indeed capable of no Divinenesse.

Little better is that kind of style (yet neither is that altogether exempt from
vanity) which near about the same time succeeded this Copy and superfluity of
speech. The labor here is altogether, That words may be aculeate, sentences
concise, and the whole contexture of the speech and discourse, rather rounding
into it self, than spread and dilated: So that it comes to pass by this
Artifice, that every passage seems more witty and weighty than indeed it is.
Such a style as this we find more excessively in Seneca; more moderately in
Tacitus and Plinius Secundus; and of late it has bin very pleasing unto the
ears of our time. And this kind of expression has found such acceptance with
meaner capacites, as to be a dignity and ornament to Learning; nevertheless,
by the more exact judgments, it has bin deservedly despised, and may be set
down as a distemper of Learning, seeing it is nothing else but a hunting after
words, and fine placing of them. And thus much of the first Disease or
Distemper of Learning.

III Now follows the distemper settled in Matter, which we set down as a second
disease of Learning, and have designed it by the name of Contentious subtletie;
and this is in nature somewhat worse than that whereof we spoke even now. For
as the substance of Matter, is better than the beauty of words; so on the
contrary, vanity of Matter is more odious than vanity of words. Wherein it
seems that the reprehension of S. Paul was not only proper for those times,
but Prophetical for the times following; and not only respective to Divinity,
but extensive to all knowledge, 1. Tim. 6.
Devita prophanas vocum novitates: For in these words he assigns two Marks
and Badges of suspected and falsified science; The first is the Novelty and
Strangeness of Terms; The other, the strictness of Positions; which of
necessity induce opposition and so Alterations and Questions. Certainly like as
many substances in nature, which are solid and entire, do many times putrify
and corrupt into worms; so good and sound Knowledge does often putrify and
dissolve into a number of subtle, idle, unwholesome, and (as I may term them)
vermiculate Questions, which seem indeed to have a kind of Motion and
Quickness in them, and yet they are unsound and hollow, and of no solid use.
This kind of Degenerate Learning corrupting it self, did chiefly reign
amongst the Schoolmen; who having a bundance of Leisure, sharp, and strong
wits, and small variety of reading, (for their wits were shut up within the
writing of a few Auctors, chiefly Aristotle, their Dictator, as their Persons
were shut up in the cells of Monasteries and Colleges) and for most part
ignorant of the History either of Nature, or of Time did out of no great
Quantity of Matter, but infinite agitation of their Wit and Fancy, as of the
spindle, spinne out unto us those laborious webbes of Learning, which are
extant in their Books. For the Wit and Mind of Man, if it work upon Matter,
by contemplating Nature and the Works of God, works according to the stuff,
and is limited thereby; but if it works upon it self, as the spider works
his web, then it is endless, and brings forth Cobwebs of Learning, indeed
admirable for finenesse of thread and work but of no Substance and Profit.

This same unprofitable subtlety or Curiosity, is of two sorts; and it is
discerned either in the subject and Matter it self, such as is fruitless
Speculation or Controversy, whereof there are no small number, both in Divinity
and Philosophy; Or in the Manner and Method of handling, which amongst
Schoolmen was this; Upon every Position or Assertion they framed objections,
then solutions of those objections, which solutions, for the most part, were
only distinctions, whereas indeed, the strength of all sciences, like the Old
man's Faggot, Aesop. Fab Plut. Mor.
consists not in every stick a sunder, but in them all together united in the
bond. For the Harmony of sciences, that is when each part supports the other,
is and ought to be the true and brief way of confutation and suppression of
all the smaller sort of objections: but on the other side, if you draw out
every Axiom, as the sticks of a Faggot, one by one, you may easily quarrel
with them, and bend and break them at your pleasure. So that as it was said of
Seneca, verborum Minutiis rerum frangit pondera, Fabius Qu. Instit. X.
may truly be said of the Schoolmen, Quaestionum Minutiis scientiarum frangunt
pondera. For were it not better for a man, in a fair room to set up one great
light, or branching candlestick of lights, whereby all may be seen at once,
than to go up and down with a small watch candle into every corner? And such
is their Method, that rests not so much upon evidence of Truth proved by
Arguments, Auctorities, Similitudes and Examples; as upon particular
Confutations, and Solutions of every scruple, cavillation, and objection; thus
breeding question upon question; even as in the former resemblance, when you
carry the light into one corner, you darken the rest. So that the fable of
Scylla seems to be a lively image of this kind of Philosophy or knowledge,
which for the upper part had the shape of a comely virgin, but below, Candida
succinctam latrantibus inguina monstris; Virg. Buc. Ecl. 6.
So you shall find some generalties of the Schoolmen, fair and well
proportioned, and invented to some good purpose; but than when you descend to
distinctions and decisions, in steed of a fruitful womb for the use and
benefit of man's life, they end in monstrous and barkeing Questions. Wherefore
it is no marvel, if this quality of Knowledge fall under, even popular
contempt, the people being apt to contemn Truth upon occasion of
Controversies, and altercations; and to think they are all out of their way,
which never meet and agree among themselves; and when they see the
digladiations of Learned men, about matters of no use or moment, they easily
fall upon that judgment of Dionysius of Syracusa, verba ista sunt senum
otiosorum. Laertius in Plato.
Notwithstanding it is most certain, that if the Schoolmen, to their great
thirst of Truth, and unwearied travail of wit, had joynd variety, and
universality of reading, and contemplation, they had certainly proved excellent
lights to the great advancement of all Arts and Sciences. And thus much of the
second Disease of Learning.

IV For the third Disease of Learning which concerns Deceit or Untruth, it is
of all the rest the foulest, as that which does destroy the Nature and
essential form of Knowledge, which is nothing but a representation of Truth.
For the Truth of Being, and the Truth of Knowing are all one, differing no more
than the direct beam, and the beam reflexed. This vice therefore brancheth it
self into two sorts Imposture and Credulity; the one deceives, the other is
deceived, which although they appear to be of a diverse nature; the one seeming
to proceed of Cunning, and the other of Simplicity; yet for the most part they
do concur, for as the verse notes, Horat. Epi.
Per contatorem fugito nam garrulus idem est: Intimating that an Inquisitive man
is a Pratler; so upon the like reason, a Credulous man is a deceaver. As we see
it in Fame and Rumors, that he that will easily believe Rumors, will as easily
augment Rumors; which Tacitus wisely notes in these words, Tacit. Hist. l. 1.
Fingunt simul creduntque; such affinity there is between a propensity to
Deceive and a facility to Believe.

This facility of Crediting and accepting all things, though weakly authorized,
is of two kinds, according to the nature of the Matter handled, for it is
either belief of History, or (as the Lawyers speak) matter of Fact, or matter
of Opinion. In the former kind, we see with what loss and detriment of Credit
and Reputation, this error has distained and embased much of the
Ecclesiastical History, which has too easily received and registered Reports
and Narrations of Miracles wrought by Martyrs, Hermites, or Monks of the
Desert, Anchorites, and other holy men; and of their Relics, Sepulchers,
Chappells, Jmages and Shrines. So in Natural History, we see many things have
bin rashly, and with little choice or judgment received and registered; as may
appear in the writings of Plinius, Cardanus, Albertus, and diverse of the
Arabians, which are every where fraught with forged and fabulous Reports, and
those not only uncertain and untried; but notoriously untrue and manifestly
convicted, to the great derogation of Natural Philosophy with grave and sober
men. Wherein in truth the wisdom and integrity of Aristotle does excellently
appear, that having made so diligent and exquisite a history of living
Creatures, has mingled it so sparingly with any vain or feigned matter; but
has rather cast all Prodigious Reports, De Mirab: Auscult:
which he thought worthy the recording into one commentary; wisely discerning
that matter of manifest Truth (which might be the experimental groundworke
whereupon Philosophy and Sciences were to be built) ought not unadvisedly, to
be mingled with matter of doubtful faith: and yet again things rare and
strange, which to many seem incredible, are not wholly to be suppressed or
denied to be recorded to Posterity.

But that other Facility of Credit, which is yielded, not to History and
Reports, but to Arts and Opinions, is likewise of two sorts; either when too
much belief is attributed to Arts themselves, or to certain Auctors in any
Art. The sciences themselves, which hold more of the fancy and of belief, then
of Reason and Demonstration, are chiefly three Astrology, Natural Magique,
and Alchimie; of which sciences nevertheless the end and pretenses are noble;
For Astrology professes to discover the influence and domination of the
superior Globe, over the inferior: Magique proposes to it self to call and
reduce Natural Philosophy from variety of speculations, to the magnitude of
works: Alchimie undertakes to make a separation and extraction of all
hetrogeneous and unlike parts of bodies, which in mixture of Nature are
Implicate and Incorporate; and to refine and depurate bodies themselves, that
are distained and soiled; to set at liberty such as are bound and imprisoned;
and to bring to perfection such as are unripe. But the derivations and
prosequtions, which are presumed to conduce to these ends, both in the Theorie
and in the Practice of these Arts, are full of Errors and Vanity. Nor is the
Tradition and manner of Delivery for most part ingenious and without suspicion,
but veiled over and munited with devises and impostures. Yet surely to Alchimie
this right is due, that it may truly be compared to the Husbandman whereof
Aesope makes the Fable, that when he died, told his sons he had left unto
them a great mass of Gold buried under ground in his Vineyard, but did not
remember the particular place where it was hidden; who when they had with
spades turned up all the Vineyard; gold indeed they found none; but by reason
of their stirring and diging the Mold about the Roots of their Vines, they had
a great Vintage the year following: so the painful search and stir of
Alchimists to make Gold, has brought to light a great number of good and
fruitful experiments, as well for the disclosing of nature, as the use of man's
life.

As for the overmuch Credit that has bin given to Auctors in Sciences, whom
they have invested with the power of Dictators, that their words should stand,
and not of Consuls to give advice; the damage is infinite that Sciences have
received thereby, as a Principal cause that has kept them low at a stay, and
that they have lien heartlesse, without any notable Growth or Advancement. For
hence it has come to pass, that in Arts Mechanical, the first deviser
comes short, and time supplies and perfects the rest; but in Sciences, the
first Author goes farthest, and time loses and corrupts. So we see
Artillery, Saileing, Printing, were imperfect, formelesse, and grossly managed
at first, but in progress of time accommodated and refined. But contrariwise
the Philosophy and Sciences of Aristotle, Plato, Democritus, Hypocrates,
Euclide, Archimede, were of most vigor in their Auctors, and in process of
time, became rather degenerate and embased, and lost much of their luster;
whereof the reason is no other, but that in Arts Mechanical, many wits and
industries have contributed in one, in liberal Arts and Sciences, many wits
and industries have bin spent about, and yielded to the art of some one; whom
(notwithstanding many times) his sectators have rather depraved than
illustrated. For as water will not ascend higher then the level of the first
springhead, from whence it descends, so knowledge derived from Aristotle,
will never rise higher than the knowledge of Aristotle. Arist. de Rep. Soph.
lib. 1.
And therefore although the position be good, Oportet discentem credere, yet it
must be coupled with this, Oportet jam edoctum judicio suo uti. For Disciples
owe unto Masters, only a temporary belief, and a suspension of their
judgment, until they be fully instructed, and not an absolute resignation of
their liberty, and a perpetual captivity of their judgments. Therefore, to
conclude this point, J will say no more but this, Let great Auctors so have
their due, as we do not derogate from Time, which is the Auctor of Auctors and
Parent of Truth.

CAP. V. Peccant Humors in Learning. I. Extreme affection to two extremes,
Antiquity, Novelty. II. A distrust, that any thing New, should now be found
out. III. That of all Sects and Opinions, the best has still prevailed. IIII.
An over early reduction of Knowledge into Arts and Methods. V. A neglect of
PRIMITIVE PHILOSOPHY. VI. A Divorce of the Intellect from the Object. VII.
Infection of Knowledge in general from individual inclinations. VIII. An
impatience of Doubt, have to Assertion. IX. A Magistrall manner of Tradition of
Knowledge. X. Aim of writers, Illustration, not Propagation of Knowledge. XI.
End of studies, Curiosity, Pleasures, Profit, Preferments, etc.
THus have we at length gone over the three Distempers or Diseases of Learning;
besides the which, there are other, rather peccant Humors, than confirmed
Diseases, which nevertheless are not so secret and intrinsique, but that they
fall under a popular sense and reprehension, and therefore are not to be passed
over.

I The first of these is an extreme affection of two extremities, Antiquity and
Novelty; wherein the daughters of Time, do take after the Father; for as Time
devoureth his children, so these, one of them seeks to depresse the other;
while Antiquity envieth there should be new Additions; and Novelty can not be
content to add things recent, but it must deface and reject the old. Surely
the advice of the Prophet is the true direction in this case, Ierem. 6.
state super vias antiquas and videte quaenam fit via recta and bona and
ambulate in ea: Antiquity deserves that reverence, that men should make a stay
a while, and stand thereupon, and look about to discover which is the best way;
but when the discovery is well taken, than not to rest there, but cheerfully
to make progression. Indeed to speak truly, Antiquitas seculi, Juventus Mundi,
Certainly our times are the Ancient times, when the world is now Ancient, and
not those which we count Ancient, ordine retrogrado, by a computation backward
from our own times.

II An other error induced by the former is, a suspicion and diffidence, that
any thing should be now to be found out, which the world should have mist and
past over so long time: as if the same objection might be made to Time, Sen.
ait Lact. Inst. Lib. 1.
wherewith Lucian reproacheth Jupiter, and other the Heathen Gods, For he
wonders that they begot so many children in old time, and begot none in his
time? and asks in scoffing manner, whether they were now become Septuagenary,
or whether the Law Papia; made against old men's marriages, had restrained them?
So it seems men doubt least time is become past children and generation. Nay
rather the levity and inconstancy of men's judgments, is hence plainly
discovered, which until a matter be done, wonder it can be done. So
Alexander's expedition into Asia was prejudged as a vast and impossible
enterprise; yet afterward it pleased Livie, so to slight it as to say of
Alexander, Hist. lib. 9.
Nil aliud quam been ausus est vana contemnere: The same happened unto Columbus
in the western Navigation. But in intellectual matters it is much more
common, as may be seen in many propositions in Euclide, which till they be
demonstrate, they seem strange to our assent; but being Demonstrate, our mind
accepts of them by a kind of Recognisance or Retractation, (as the Lawyers
speak) as if we had understood and known them before.

III An other error which has some affinity with the former is, a conceit That
all sects and ancient opinions, after they have bin discussed and ventilated;
the best still prevailed and suppressed the rest. Wherefore they think that if a
man should begin the labor of a new search and examination, he must needs
light upon somewhat formerly rejected, and after rejection, lost, and brought
into oblivion: as if the multitude, or the wisest, to gratify the multitude,
were not more ready to give passage to that which is populare and superficial;
than to that which is substantial and profound. For Time seems to be of the
nature of a River, which carries down to us that which is light and blown up,
and sinketh and drowneth that which is weighty and solid.

I Another error of diverse nature from the former is, The overearly and
Peremptory reduction of Knowledge into Arts and Methods; which once done,
commonly sciences receive small or no augmentation. For as young men, when they
knit and shape perfectly, do seldom grow to a farther stature: so knowledge
while it is dispersed into Aphorisms, and Observations, may grow and shoot up;
but once enclosed and comprehended in Methods, it may perchance be farther
polisht and illustrate, and accommodated for use and practice, but it
increases no more in bulk and substance.

V Another error which does succeed that which we last noted, is, That after
distribution of Particular Arts and Sciences into their several places, many
men have presently abandoned the universal notion of things, or Philosophia
Prima, which is a deadly enemy to all Progression. Prospects are made from
Turrets and high places; and it is impossible to discover the more remote and
deeper parts of any science, if you stand but upon the flat and level of the
same science, and ascend not as into a Watchtower to a higher science.

VI Another error has proceeded from too great a reverence and a kind of
Adoration of the mind and understanding of man, by means whereof men have
withdrawn themselves, too much, from the contemplation of Nature, and the
observations of experience; and have tumbled up and down in their own
speculations and conceits; but of these surpassing Opinators, and (if J may so
speak) Jntellectualists, (which are notwithstanding, taken for the most sublime
and divine Philosophers) Heraclitus gave a just censure, saying, Men seek truth
in their own little world, N. L.
and not in the great common world, for they disdain the Alphabet of nature,
and Primer-Book of the Divine works; which if they did not, they might
perchance by degrees and leisure, after the knowledge of simple letters, and
spelling of Syllables, come at last, to read perfectly the Text and Volume of
the Creatures. But they, contrariwise, by continual meditation and agitation
of wit, urge, and as it were invocate their own spirits to divine and give
Oracles unto them, whereby they are deservedly and pleasingly deluded.

VII Another Error that has some connection with this latter, is, That men do
oftentimes imbue and infect their meditations and doctrines with the infusions
of some Opinions, and conceptions of their own, which they have most admired;
or some sciences to which they have most applied and consecrated themselves,
giving all things a Dye and Tincture, though very deceivable, from these
favorite studies. So has Plato intermingled his Philosophy with Theology;
Aristotle with Logique; The second School of Plato, Proclus and the rest, with
the Mathematiques. These Arts had a kind of Primo-geniture with them, which
they would still be kissing and making much of, as their first borne sons.
But the Alchimists have forged a new Philosophy out of the Fire and Furnace;
and Gilbert our Countryman, has extracted another Philosophy out of a
Lodestone. So Cicero, when reciting the several opinions of the nature of the
soul, he found a Musician that held the soul was but a harmony, says
plesantly, Hic ab art sua non recessit: Tusc. lib. 1.
But of these errors Aristotle says aptly and wisely, De Genesis and Cor. lib. 1.
and alibi.
Qui recipient ad pauca de facili pronunciant.

VIII Another error is, An impatience of Doubt, and an unadvised have to
Assertion without due and mature suspension of the judgment: For the two ways
of contemplation are not unlike the two ways of Action, commonly spoken of by
the Ancients; of which the one was a plain and smooth way in the beginning,
but in the end impassible; the other rough and troublesome in the entrance, but
after a while fair and even; so is it in contemplations, if a man will begin
in certainties, he shall end in doubts; but if he can be content to begin with
doubts, and have patience a while, he shall end in certainties.

IX The like error discovers it self in the manner of Tradition and Delivery
of knowledge, which is, for the most part, imperious and magistrall, not
ingenious and faithful; so contrived, as may rather command our assent, than
stand to examination. It is true that in compendious Treatises designed for
Practice, that Form of writing may be retained; but in a just and complete
handling of knowledge, both extremes are to be avoided, Cic. de Not. Dier. lib.
1.
as well the vein of Velleius the Epicurean, who feared nothing so much as to
seem to doubt of any thing; as that of Socrates and the Academie, leaving all
things in doubt and incertainty: Rather men should affect candor and sincerity,
propounding things with more or less asseveration, as they stand in their
judgment proved, more or less.

X Other errors there are in the scope that men propound to themselves
whereunto they bend their endeavors and studies: For whereas the most devout
Leaders and noted Professors of Learning, ought chiefly to propound to
themselves to make some notable addition to the science they profess;
contrariwise, they convert their labors to aspire to certain second prizes, as
to be a profound interpreter, or commentator; a sharp and strong champion or
Defendor; a Methodicall compounder or Abridger: so the Revenewes and Tributes
of Sciences come to be improved, but not the Patrimony and Inheritance.

XI But the greatest error of all the rest is, the mistaking or misplacing the
last and farthest end of knowledge: For many have entered into a desire of
Learning and Knowledge, some upon an imbred and restless Curiosity; others to
entertain their minds with variety and delight; others for ornament and
reputation; others for contradiction and victory in dispute; others for Lucre
and living; few to improve the gift of reason given them from God, to the
benefit and use of men. As if there were sought in knowledge, a couch,
whereupon to rest a restless and searching spirit, or a Tarrasse for a
wandering and variable mind to walk up and down in at liberty unrestrained; or
some high and eminent Tower of State, from which a proud and ambitious mind,
may have a Prospect; or a Fort and commanding ground for strife and contention
or a shop for profit and sale; and not rather a rich storehouse and Armorie for
the glory of the Creator of all things, and the relief of man's estate. For
this is that which indeed would dignify and exalt Learning; if contemplation
and Action were more nearly and straightly, than hitherto they have bin
conjoined and united together: which combination, certainly would be like unto
that conjunction of the two highest Planets, when Saturn which has the
Dominion over rest and contemplations, conspires with Jupiter the Lord of
Civil society and Action. Howbeit J do not mean when I speak of use and
Action, Professory or Lucretive Learning, for I am not ignorant how much that
diverts and interrupteth the Progression and advancement of knowledge; like
indeed the Golden apple, thrown before Atalanta, which while she goes aside and
stoopeth to take up, the race is hindered, Ovid. Met. 10.
Declinat cursus aurumque volubile tollit.

Neither is it my meaning, as was spoken of Socrates, to call Philosophy down
from heaven, to converse upon the earth; that is to lay Natural Philosophy
aside, and to celebrate only Moral Philosophy and Policy. But as Heaven and
Earth do conspire and contribute, to the use and benefit of the life of Man;
so indeed this should be the end of both Philosophies; that vain speculations,
and what ever is empty and barren, being rejected; that which is solid and
fruitful may be preserved and augmented; that so Knowledge, may not be a
Courtezane for Pleasure, or as a bondwoman for gain; but as a spouse for
generation, fruit and honest solace.

Now me thinks I have described and opened, as by a kind of Dissection, those
Peccant Humors; or at least, the Principal of them, which have not only given
impediment to the Proficience of Learning, but have given also occasion to the
traducement thereof. Wherein if I have come too near the quick, Psalm. 141.
it must be remembered, Fidelia vulnera amantis, dolosa oscula malignantis:
however this surely I think I have gained, that I ought to be the better
believed, concerning the Commendations of Learning in that which follows,
because I have proceeded so freely concerning censure, in that which went
before. And yet J have no purpose to enter into a Laudative of Learning, or to
make a Hymn to the Muses; though I am of opinion, that it is long since their
Rites were duly celebrated: but my intent is, without varnish or
amplification, to take the just weight and to balance the Dignity of Knowledge
in the scales with other things; and to search out the true valewes thereof,
from testimonies Divine and Humane.

CAP. VI. The Dignity of Learning from Divine Arguments and Testimonies. I.
From Gods wisdom. Angels of Illumination. The first Light and first Sabbath.
Man's employment in the Garden. Abels contemplative life. The invention of
Music. Confusion of Tongues. II. The excellent Learning of Moses. Job.
Solomon. Christ. S. Paul. The Ancient Doctors of the Church. Learning exalts
the Mind to the Celebration of Gods glory: and is a Preservative against Error
and Unbelief.
I. FIrst therefore let us seek the Dignity of Knowledge, in the Arch-Type or
first Platform, which is in the Attributes, and in the Acts of God, as far
as they are revealed to man, and may be observed with sobriety. Wherein we may
not seek it by the name of Learning; for all Learning is Knowledge acquired,
and no knowledge in God is acquired, but Original: and therefore we must look
for it by another name, that is wisdom or sapience, as the sacred Scriptures
call it. It is so than; In the works of the Creation, we see a double emanation
of Divine virtue from God; whereof the one is referred to Power, Genesis 1.
the other to Wisdom; that is chiefly expressed in making the Mass and
substance of the Matter; this in disposing the beauty of the Form. This being
supposed it is to be observed, that for any thing which appears in the History
of the Creation, the confused Mass and Matter of Heaven and Earth was made in
a moment of Time; yet the Order and Disposition of that Chaos or Mass, was the
work of six days: such a note of difference it pleased God to put upon the
works of Power, and the works of Wisdom; wherewith concurres, that in the
Creation of the Matter; It is not recorded that God said Let there be Heaven
and Earth, as it is said of the works following; but simply and actually, God
made Heaven and Earth: so that the Matter seems to be as a Manufacture, but
the Form carries the style of a Law or Decree.

Let us proceed from God to Angels or Spirits, whose nature in order of Dignity
is next Gods. We see, so far as credit is to be given to the Celestial
Hierarchy, set forth under the name of Dionysius Areopagita, Dion. Areo.
that in the order of Angels, the first place or degree is given to the
Seraphim, that is, Angels of Love: the second to the Cherubim, that is, Angels
of Illumination: the third, and so following, Places to Thrones, Principalities
and the rest, which are Angels of Power and Ministry. So as from this order and
distribution, it appears, that the Angels of Knowledge and Illumination, are
placed before the Angels of Office and Domination.

To descend from Spirits and Intellectual Forms, to Sensible and Material
Forms; we read that the first of Created forms was Light; Genesis 1.
which has a relation and correspondence in nature and Corporal things, to
knowledge in Spirits and Jncorporall things. So in the distribution of Days,
we see the day wherein God did rest and contemplate his own works, was blessed
above all the days wherein the Fabric of the Universe was Created and
Disposed.

Genesis 2.
After the Creation was finished, we read that Man was plact in the Garden to
work therein; which work so appointed to him, could be no other than the work
of Contemplation, that is, the end hereof was not for necessity, but for
delight and exercise without vexation or trouble: For there being than no
reluctation of the Creature, no sweat of the brow; man's employment must of
consequence have bin matter of delight and contemplation, not of Labor and
Work. Again, the first Acts that man performed in Paradise, comprehended the
two summary parts of knowledge; those were the view of Creatures, and the
imposition of names. For the knowledge which introduc't the Fall, it was (as we
have touched before) not the Natural Knowledge concerning the Creatures, but
the Moral Knowledge of Good and Evil, where the supposition was, that Gods
Commandments or Prohibitions were not the Originalls of Good and Evil, but
that they had other beginnings, which man aspired to know, to the end to make a
total defection from God, and to depend wholly upon himself, and his
Free Will.

To pass to the first event or occurrence after the Fall of Man, we see (as
the Scriptures have infinite Mysteries, not violating at all the truth of the
story or letter) an image of the two States, the Contemplative and Active, Genesis
4.
figured in the Persons of Abel and Cain, and in their Professions and
Primitive trades of life; whereof the one was a Sheapheard, who by reason of
his leisure, rest in a place, and free view of Heaven, is a lively image of a
Contemplative life; the other a Husbandman, that is, a man toild and tired with
working; and his countenance fixed upon the earth; where we may see the favor
and Election of God went to the Sheapheard and not to the tiller of Ground.

So in the age before the Flood, Genesis 4.
the holy Records (with in those few Memorialls which are there entered and
registered, touching the occurrences of that age) have vouchsafed to mention and
honor Jnventors of Music and works in Metals.

In the next Age after the flood, Genesis 11.
the great judgments of God upon the ambition of Man was the Confusion of
Tongues, whereby the open trade and intercourse of Learning and Knowledge was
chiefly embraced.

II. Let us descend to Moses the Lawgiver and Gods first Notarie, he is
adorned in Scripture with this commendation, That he was seen in all the
Learning of the Egyptians; Acta 7.
which Nation, we know, was one of the most ancient Schools of the world; for
so Plato brings in the Egyptian Priest saying unto Solon, In Timaeo
You Grecians are ever children, you have no knowledge of Antiquity nor
Antiquity of Knowledge. Let us take a view of the Ceremonial Law of Moses, and
we shall find (besides the prefiguration of Christ, the Badge or Difference of
the people of God, from the profane Race of the world; the exercise and
impression of obedience, and other sacred uses and fruits of the same Law) that
some of the most learned Rabbis, have traveled profitably and profoundly in
the same, intentively to observe and extract, sometimes a Natural, Levit. 13.
sometimes a Moral sense of the Ceremonies and Ordinances: For example, where
it is said of the Leprosy, If the whiteness have overspread the flesh, the
Patient may pass abroad for clean; but if there be any whole flesh remaining,
he is to be sentenced unclean, and to be separated at the discretion of the
Priest. From this Law one of them collects a Principle in Nature; That
Putrefaction is more contagious before maturity then after: Another raises a
Moral instruction; That men ore-spread with vice, do not so much corrupt
public Manners, as those that are half evil and but in part only. So that
from this and other like places in that Law, there is to be found, besides
Theological sense, much aspersion of Philosophy.

So likewise that excellent Book of Job, if it be revolved with diligence, it
will be found full and pregnant with the secrets of Natural Philosophy; Job.
26.
as for example, of Cosmography and the roundnesse of the Earth in that place,
Qui extendit Aquilonem super vacuum, and appendit Terram super nihilum, where
the Pensilenesse of the Earth; the Pole of the North; and the Finitenesse or
convexity of Heaven, are manifestly touched. Again, of Astronomy and
Constellations, in those words, Ibid.
Spiritus ejus ornavit Coelos, and obstetricante manu eius eductus est coluber
tortuosus: Job. 38.
And in another place, Can thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or
loose the bands of Orion? where the settled and immovable configuration of the
first stars, ever standing at equal distance, is with great elegancy
described. Job. 9.
So in another Place, Which makes Arcturus, Orion and Pleiades and the secret
chambers of the South: Where he again points at the depression of the Southern
Pole, designing it by the name of the secrets of the South, because the
Southern stars are not seen upon our Hemisphear. Matter of Generation of
living Creatures, Job. 10.
Have thou not powered me out like milk, and condensed me like Curds? Matter of
Minerals, Surely there is a Mine for Silver, Job. 28.
and a place wherein Gold is fined; Iron is dug up out of compacted dust,
and Brass extracted from stone dissolved in the furnace, and so forward in the
same chapter.

So likewise in the person of Solomon the King, we see the endowments of
wisdom, both in his Petition and Gods assent thereunto, preferred before all
terrene and temporal felicity. By virtue of which Donative and Grant, Solomon
being singularly furnished and enabled, not only writ those excellent Parables
or Aphorisms concerning Divine and Moral Philosophy; but also compiled a
Natural History of all verdure or vegetables From the Cedar upon the Mountain,
1 Reg. 4.
to the Moss upon the Wall; which is but the rudiment of a plant, between
putrefaction and an Herb; and also of all things that breath or move. Nay the
same Solomon the King, although he excelled in treasure and the magnificence of
Building, of Shipping, and Navigation, of Service and Attendance, of Fame and
Renown, and the like train of Glory; yet of this rich harvest and confluence of
Glory, he reaps and makes claim to himself of nothing; but only the Honor of
the Jnquisition, and Invention of Truth; for so he says expressly, Prove. 25.
The Glory of God is to conceal a thing, but the Glory of a King is to find it
out: As if according to that innocent and affectionate play of Children, the
Divine Majesty took delight to hide his works, to the end to have them found
out; and as if Kings could not obtain a greater Honor, then to be Gods
play-fellowes in that game; specially considering the great command they have
of wits and means, whereby the investigation of all things may be perfected.

Neither did the dispensation of God vary in the times after our Savior came
into the world, For our Savior himself did first show his power to subdue
Jgnorance, by his conference with the Doctors of the Law, Luc. 2.
and the Priests in the Temple, before he showed his power to subdue Nature, by
his great and so many Miracles. Act. Apost. 2.
And the coming of the Holy Ghost, was chiefly figured and expressed in the
similitude and gift of Tongues, which are the vehicula scientiae.

So in the election of those instruments which it pleased God to use in the
Plantation of the Faith, at the first he employed persons altogether Unlearned,
otherwise than by inspiration from the holy Spirit; whereby more evidently he
might declare his immediate and divine working, and might abase all humane
Wisdom and Knowledge: Yet nevertheless that counsill of his in this respect
was no sooner performed, but in the next vicissitude and succession of time he
sent his divine Truth into the world, waited on with other Learning, as with
servants and handmaids; therefore we see S. Paul's pen, Act. Apost. 12.
(who was only learned amongst the Apostles) was chiefly employed by God, in
the Scriptures of the new Testament.

So again we know, that many of the Ancient Bishops and Doctors of the Church
were excellently read and studied in all the Learning of the Heathen; in so
much that the Edict of the Emperor Julian, Epist. ad Iambl.
whereby it was interdicted unto Christians to be admitted into Schools, or
exercises of Learning, was estimed and accounted a more pernicious Engine and
Machination against the Christian Faith, than were all the sanguinary
prosequtions of his predecessors. P. Diac. l. 3. Parag. 33.
Neither could the emulation and jealousy of Gregory the First, (otherwise an
excellent man) who designed to extinguish and obliterate Heathen Auctors and
Antiquity, ever obtain the opinion of Piety and Devotion amongst holy men. But
contrariwise it was the Christian Church, which amidst the inundations of the
Scythians from the North-west; and the Saracens from the East, did preserve in
the sacred Lap and Bosom thereof the precious relics of Heathen Learning,
which otherwise had utterly perished and bin extinguished. And of late in our age
we may likewise see the Jesuits, who partly in themselves, and partly by
emulation and provocation of Adversaries, have much quickened and strengthened
the state of Learning; we see, J say, what notable services they have done, and
what helps they have brought in, to the repairing and establishing of the Roman
Sea.

Wherefore to conclude this Part, there are two principal Duties and Services
besides ornament and illustration, which human Learning does perform to Faith
and Religion: The one, because they are effectual incitements to the
exaltation and celebration of the Glory of God: for as the Psalms, Psalm. XIX.
and other Scriptures, do often invite us to the contemplation, and
publication of the magnificent and wonderful works of God; so if we should
rest only in the outward form, as they first offer themselves unto our senses;
we should do the like injury to the Majesty of God, as if we should judge of
the store and wealth of some excellent Jeweller, by that only, which is set out
toward the street in his shop. The other, Mat. 22.
because they minister a singular help and preservative against unbelief, and
errors: You err, not knowing the Scriptures nor the Power of God. Where he
lays before us, two books or volumnes to study, if we will be secured from
errors: First the volumne of Scriptures, which reveal the will of God; than
the volume of Creatures, which express his power; whereof the latter is as a
key to the former, not only opening our understanding to conceive the true
sense of Scriptures, by the general rules of Reason and Laws of speech; but
besides, chiefly opening our belief, in drawing us unto a due meditation of
the omnipotency of God; the characters whereof are chiefly signed and engraven
upon his works. Thus much for Divine Testimonies and Evidences, concerning the
true Dignity and value of Learning.

CAP. VII. The Dignity of Learning from humane Arguments and Testimonies. I.
Natural Inventours of New Arts for the Commodities of Man's life, consecrated
as Gods. II. Political, Civil Estates and affairs advanced by Learning. The
best and happiest times under Learned Princes and others. Exemplified in the
immediate succeeding Emperors, from the death of Domitian. III. Military, The
concurrence of Arms and Learning. Exemplified in Alexander the Great. Julius
Caesar the Dictator. Xenophon the Philosopher.
AS for Humane Testimonies and Arguments, it is so large a field, as in a
discourse of this compendious nature and brevity, it is fit rather to use
choice, than to embrace the variety of them.

I. First therefore in the degrees of Honor amongst the Heathens, it was the
highest, to attain to a Veneration and Adoration as a God; this indeed to the
Christians is as the forbidden fruit; but we speak now separately of Humane
Testimony. Therefore, (as we were saying) with the Heathens, that which the
Grecians call Apotheosis; and the Latins Relatio inter Divos; Herodia. l. 4
Dio. Reliqui.
was the supreme Honor which man could attribute unto Man: specially, when it
was given, not by a formal Decree or Act of Estate, (as it was used amongst
the Roman Emperors,) but freely by the assent of Men and inward belief. Of
which high Honor there was a certain degree and middle term: For there were
reckoned above Humane Honors, Honors Heroical; and Divine; in the
Distribution whereof, Antiquity observed this order. Founders of States;
Lawgivers; Extirpers of Tyrants; Fathers of their Country, and other eminent
Persons in Civil Merit, were honored with the title of Worthies only, or
Demigods; such as were Theseus, Minos, Romulus, and the like: on the other
side such as were Inventors and Authors of new Arts; and such as endowed man's
life with new Commodities, and accessions were ever consecrated among the
Greater and Entire Gods; which happened to Ceres, Bacchus, Mercury, Apollo, and
others, which indeed was done justly and upon sound judgment: For the merits
of the former, are commonly confined within the circle of an Age, or a Nation,
and are not unlike seasonable and favoring showers, which though they be
profitable and desirable, yet serve but for that season only wherein they fall,
and for a Latitude of ground which they water: but the benefices of the latter,
like the influences of the Sun, and the heavenly bodies, are for time,
permanent, for place, universal: those again are commonly mixed with strife and
perturbation; but these have the true character of Divine presence, and come in
Aura leni without noise or agitation.

II. Neither certainly is the Merit of Learning in Civil affairs, and in
repressing the inconveniences which grow from man to man, much inferior to the
other which relieve man's necessities, which arise from Nature. And this kind of
merit was lively set forth in that fained relation of Orpheus Theater, Philost.
in Orph.
where all beasts and birds assembled, which forgetting their proper natural
appetites of Prey, of Game, of Quarrel, stood all sociably and lovingly
together, listening unto the Aires and accords of the harp; the sound whereof
no sooner ceased; or was drowned by some louder noise, but every beast returned
to his own nature. In which Fable is elegantly described, the nature and
condition of men, who are tossed and disordered with sundry savage and
unreclaim'd desires, of Profit, of Lust, of Revenge; which yet as long as they
give ear to precepts, to the persuasion of Religion, Laws, and Magistrates,
eloquently and sweetly coucht in Books, to Sermons and Haranges, so long is
society and peace maintaind; but if these instruments be silent, or that
seditions and tumults make them not audible, all things dissolve and fall back
into Anarchy and Confusion.

But this appears more manifestly, when Kings or Persons of Authority under
them, or other Governors in States, are endowed with Learning: Plato de Rep. 5.
For although he might be thought partial to his own profession that said Than
should People or States be happy when either Kings were Philosophers or
Philosophers Kings; yet so much is verified by experience, that under wise and
Learned Princes and Governors of State, there has bin ever the best and
happiest times. For howsoever Kings may have their errors and imperfections;
that is, be liable to Passions and depraved customs, like other me^, yet if
they be illuminated by Learning, they have certain anticipate notions of
Religion, Policy, and Morality, which preserve and refrain them from all
ruinous and peremptory errors and excesses, whispering evermore in their ears,
when Counselors, and Servants stand mute and silent. So likewise Senators and
Counselors which be Learned, do proceed upon more safe and substantial
principles, than Counselors which are only men of experience: Those seeing
dangers a far off, and repulsing them betimes; whereas these are wise only
near at hand, seeing nothing, but what is imminent and ready to fall upon
them, and than trust to the agility of their wit, in the point of dangers, to
ward and avoid them.

Which felicity of times under Learned Princes (to keep still the law of
brevity by using the most selected and eminent examples) does best appear, in
the Age which passed from the death of Domitianus the Emperor, until the
reign of Commodus, comprehending a succession of six Princes, all Learned, or
singular favorers and advancers of Learning, and of all ages (if we regard
temporal happiness) the most flourishing that ever Rome saw, which was then
the Model and Epitome of the world: A matter revealed and prefigur'd unto
Domitian in a dream, Suet. in Dom parag 23.
the night before he was slain, for he seemed to see grown behind upon his
shoulders a neck and a head of gold; which Divination came indeed accordingly
to pass, in those golden times which succeeded; of which we will make some
particular, but brief commemoration. Nerva was a Learned Prince, an inward
acquaintance, and even a Disciple to Apollonius the Pythagorean; who also
almost expired in a verse of Homers, Nerva tuis Dion. l. 68. Plin. Pan.
Telis Phaebetuis, lachrimas ulciscere nostras. Trajan was for his Person not
Learned, but an admirer of Learning, and a munificent benefactor to the
Learned, a Founder of Libraries, and in whose Court (though a warlike Prince)
as is recorded, Dion. in Adriano.
Professors and Preceptors were of most credit and estimation. Adrian was the
most curious man that lived, and the insatiable inquirer of all variety and
secrets. Antoninus had the patient and subtle wit of a Schoole-man, in so much
as he was called Cymini-Sector, Dion. in Anton. P.
a Carver, or a divider of Cummin-seed: And of the Divi fratres, Lucius
Commodus was delighted with a softer kind of Learning; and Marcus was surnamed
the Philosopher. These Princes as they excelled the rest in Learning, so they
excelled them likewise in virtue and goodness. Nerva was a most mild Emperor,
Plin. Pan. Aur. vict. c. 13.
and who (if he had done nothing else) gave Trajan to the World. Trajan, of all
that reigned, for the Arts, both of Peace and War, was most famous and
renowned: the same Prince enlarged the bounds of the Empire; the same, Xyphil.
ex Dion. Trajan.
temperately confined the Limits and Power thereof; he was also a great Builder
in so much as Constantine the Great, in emulation was wont to call him,
Parietaria, Wall-Flower, because his name was carved upon so many walls. Adrian
was Times rival for the victory of perpetuity, for by his care and munificence
in every kind, he repaired the decaies and ruins of Time. ANTONINUS, as by
name, so nature, Capitol. In Ant. P.
a man exceeding Pious; for his nature and inbred goodness, was beloved and
most acceptable to men of all sorts and degrees; whose reign, though it was
long, In Vero. In M. Ant.
yet was it peaceful and happy. Lucius Commodus (exceeded indeed by his
brother) excelled many of the Emperors for goodness. Marcus formed by nature
to be the pattern and Platform of virtue, against whom that Iester in the
banquet of the Gods had nothing to object, or carpe at, Iuliani Caesares.
save his patience toward the humors of his wife. So in this continued
sequence of six Princes, a man may see the happy fruits of Learning in
Sovereignty, Painted forth in the greatest Table of the world.

III. Neither has Learning an influence or operation upon Civil merit and the
Arts of Peace only, but likewise it has no less Power and Efficacy in
Martial and Military virtue, as may notably be represented in the examples of
Alexander the Great; and Julius Caesar the Dictator, mentioned, by the way
before, but now in fit place to be resumed; of whose Military virtues and Acts
in war, there needs no note or recital, having bin the wonders of the world
in that kind; but, of their affection and propension toward Learning, and
peculiar perfection therein, it will not be impertinent to say some thing.

Alexander was bred and taught under Aristotle, (certainly a great Philosopher)
who dedicated diverse of his Books of Philosophy unto him: he was attended with
Calisthenes, and diverse other Learned persons that followed him in Camp, and
were his perpetual associates, in all his Travailes and Conquests. What Price
and Estimation he had Learning in, does notably appear in many particulars; as
in the envy he expressed toward Achille's great fortune, in this, That he had
so good a Trumpet of his Actions and provesse as Homers verses. Plut. in
Alexand.
In the judgment he gave touching the precious Cabinet of Darius, which was
found amongst the rest of the spoils; whereof, when question was moved, what
thing was worthy to be put into it, and one said one thing, another, another,
Plut. ut supra.
he gave sentence for Homers works. His reprehensorie letter to Aristotle,
after he had set forth his Book of Nature, wherein he expostulates with him,
for publishing the secrets or mysteries of Philosophy, and gave him to
understand, Vt supra.
That himself estimed it more to excel others in Learning and Knowledge, than
in Power and Empire. There are many other particulars to this purpose. But how
excellently his mind was endowed with Learning, does appear, or rather shine in
all his Speeches and answers, full of knowledge and wisdom; whereof though the
Remains be small, yet you shall find deeply impressed in them, the footsteps
of all sciences in Moral knowledge; Let the speech of Alexander be observed
touching Diogenes, and see (if ye please) if it tend not to the true estate of
one of the greatest questions in moral Philosophy? Whether the enjoying of
outward things, or the contemning of them, be the greater happiness. For when
he saw Diogenes contented with so little, turning to those that stood about him,
that mocked at the Cyniques condition, he said, Vt supra.
Jf I were not Alexander, J could wish to be Diogenes. But Seneca, in this
comparison, preferres Diogenes, when he says, De Ben. 5.
Plus erat quod Diogenes nollet accipere, quam quod Alexander posset dare,
There were more things which Diogenes would have refused, than those were which
Alexander could have given. Jn Natural knowledge, observe that speech that was
usual with him, Plut. in Alexand.
That he felt his mortality chiefly in two things, sleep, and Lust: which
speech, in truth, is extracted out of the depth of Natural Philosophy, tasting
rather of the conception of an Aristotle, or a Democritus, than an Alexander;
seeing as well the indigence, as redundance of nature, designed by these two
Acts, are, as it were, the inward witnesses and the earnest of Death. In Peesy,
let that speech be observed, when upon the bleeding of his wounds, he called
unto him one of his Flatterers, that was wont to ascribe unto him divine honor;
Vt supra ex Hom. II.
look (says he) this is the blood of a man, not such liquor as Homer speaks
of, which ran from Venus hand, when it was pierced by Diomedes: with this
speech checking both the Poets, and his flatterers, and himself. Jn Logique
observe that reprehension of Dialectique Fallacies, in repelling and retorting
Arguments, in that saying of his wherein he takes up Cassander, confuteing the
informers against his father Antipater. For when Alexander happened to say, Plut.
in Alexand.
Do you think these men would come so far to complain, except they had just
cause? Cassander answered, Yea, that was it that made them thus bold, because
they hoped the length of the way would dead the discovery of the aspersion; See
(says the King) the subtlety of Aristotle wresting the matter both ways, Pro
and Contra. Yet the same Art which he reprehended in another, he knew well how
to use himself, when occasion required, to serve his own turn. For so it fell
out that Calisthenes, (to whom he bare a secret grudge, because he was against
the new ceremony of his adoration) being moved, at a banquet, by some of those
that sat at table with him, that for entertainment sake (being he was an
eloquent man) he would take upon him some Theme, at his own choice, to
discourse upon, which Calisthenes did, and chuscing the Praises of the
Macedonian Nation, performed the same with the great applause of all that heard
him: whereupon Alexander, nothing pleased, said, Plutarch. ut supra.
That upon a good subject it was easy for any man to be eloquent, but turn,
said he, your style, and let us hear what you can say against us. Calisthenes
undertook the charge, and performed it, with that sting and life, that
Alexander was feign to interrupt him, saying; An ill mind also as well as a
good cause might infuse eloquence. For Rhetorique, whereto Tropes and Ornaments
appertain; see an elegant use of Metaphor, wherewith he taxed Antipater, who
was an Jmperious and Tyrannous Governor. For when one of Antipaters friends
commended him to Alexander for his moderation, and that he did not degenerate,
as other Lief-tenants did, into the Persian Pride, in useing Purple, but kept
the ancient Macedon habit, Plutarch. Dict. Not.
But Antipater (says Alexander) is all Purple within. So likewise that other
Metaphor is excellent; when Parmenio came unto him in the plain of Arbella; and
showed him the innumerable multitude of enemies which viewed in the night,
represented, by the infinite number of lights, a new Firmament of stars; and
thereupon advised him to assail them by night, Plut. in Alexan.
I will not, said Alexander, steal a victory. For matter of Policy, weigh that
grave and wise distinction, which all ages have embraced, whereby he
differenced his two chief friends, Ephestion and Craterus, when he said, Vt
supra.
That the one loved Alexander, and the other loved the King, Describeing a
Difference of great import, amongst even the most faithful servants of Kings,
that some in sincere affection love their Persons, others in duty love their
Crown. Observe how excellently he could tax an error, ordinary with
Counsillors of Princes, who many times give counsill, according to the model
of their own mind and fortune, and not of their Masters. For when Darius had
made great offers to Alexander. Plut. in Alex.
I, said Parmenio, would accept these conditions, if J were as Alexander: said
Alexander, surely so would I, were I as Parmenio. Lastly, weigh that quick and
acute reply, which he made to his friends asking him, Vt supra.
what he would reserve for himself giving away so many and great gifts? Hope,
said he; as one who well knew that when all accounts are cast up aright, Hope
is the true portion and inheritance of all that resolve upon great enterprises.
This was Julius Caesar's portion when he went into Gaull, all his estate being
exhausted by profuse Largesses. This was likewise the portion of that noble
Prince, howsoever transported with Ambition, Henry Duke of Guyse, of whom it
was usually said, S. FRAN. BACON. Apol.
That he was the greatest usurer in all France, because that all his wealth was
in names, and that he had turned his whole estate into obligations. But the
admiration of this Prince whilst I represent him to my self, not as Alexander
the Great, but as Aristotle's Scholar, has perchance carried me too far.

As for Julius Caesar the excellency of his Learning, Cic. de cla. Orat. Cic.
de Orat. l. 3. Suet. in Iul.
needs not to be argued, either from his education, or his company, or his
answers; For this, in a high degree, does declare it self in his own writings,
and works, whereof some are extant, some unfortunately perish't. For first,
there is left unto us that excellent History of his own wars, which he
entitled only a COMMENTARY; Suet. in parag. 56.
wherein all succeeding times have admired the solid weight of matter; and
lively images of Actions and Persons, expressed in the greatest propriety of
words, and perspicuity of Narration, that ever was. Which endowments, that they
were not infused by nature, but acquired by Precepts and instructions of
Learning, is well witnessed by that work of his entitled DE ANALOGIA, Parag. 56.
which was nothing else but a Grammatical Philosophy, wherein he did labor,
to make this, vox ad Placitum, to become vox ad Licitum, and to reduce custom
of speech, to congruity of speech; that words, which are the images of things,
might accord with the things themselves, and not stand to the Arbitrament of
the vulgar. So likewise we have by his edict, a reformed computation of the
year, Suet. in parag. 48.
correspondent to the course of the Sun; which evidently shows, that he
accounted it his equal glory, to find out the laws, of the stars in
heaven; as to give laws to men on earth. So in that Book of his entitled
ANTI-CATO; Plut. in Caesar.
it does easily appear, that he did aspire, as well to victory of wit, as
victory of war; undertaking therein a Conflict against the greatest Champion
with the Pen, that then lived, Cicero the Orator. Again in his Book of
APOPHTHEGMES, which he collected, we see he estimed it more honor, to make
himself but a pair of Tables, or Codicills, wherein to register the wise and
grave sayings of others; then if his own words were hallowed as Oracles, as
many vain Princes by custom of Flattery, delight to do. But if I should
report diverse of his Speeches, as I did in Alexander, they are truly such, as
Solomon notes, Eccles. 12.
Verba Sapientum sunt tanquam aculei, and tanquam clavi in altum defixi:
wherefore I will here only propound three, not so admirable for elegancy, as
for vigor and efficacy: As first, it is reason he be thought a master of
words, that could with one word appease a mutiny in his army: the occasion was
this; The Romans, when their Generals did speak in their Army, did use the
word, Milites, when the Magistrates spoke to the people, they did use the word,
Quirites: Caesar's soldiers were in a tumult, and seditiously prayed to be
cassed, not that they so meant, but by expostulation thereof, to draw Caesar to
other conditions; He, nothing daunted and resolute, after some silence began
thus, Ego, Suet. in Iul. parag. 70.
Quirites, which word did admit them already casseered; wherewith the soldiers
were so surprised, and so amazed; as they would not suffer him to go on in his
speech; and relinquishing their demands of Dismission, made it now their
earnest suit, that the name of Milites, might be again restored them. The
second speech was thus; Caesar did extremely affect the name of King; therefore
some were set on, as he passed by, in popular acclamation to salute him King:
he finding the cry weak and poor, put off the matter with a jest, Suet.
parag. 79.
as if they had mist his sur-name, Non Rex sum, (says he) sed Caesar; indeed
such a speech as if it be exactly searched, the life and fullness of it can
scarce be expressed. For first it pretended a refusal of the name, but yet not
serious: again, it did carry with it an infinite confidence, and magnanimity;
as if the Appellation Caesar. had bin a more eminent Title, than the name of
King; which has come to pass, and remains so till this day. But, that which
most made for him, this speech by an excellent contrivance, advanced his own
purpose; for it did closely insinuate, that the Senate and People of Rome, did
strive with him about a vain shadow, a name only, (for he had the power of a
King already) and for such a name, whereof mean families were invested; for the
Sur-name Rex, was the title of many families; as we also have the like in our
Dialect. The last speech, which I will mention in this place, was this; When
Caesar, after the war was declared, did possess himself of the City of
Rome, and had broke open the inner Treasury, to take the money there stored up,
for the service of the war, Metellus, for that time Tribune, withstood him;
to whom Caesar, Plut. in Caesar.
If thou do persist, (says he) thou art dead; presently taking himself up,
he added, Young man, it is harder for me to speak this, than to do it;
Adolescens, durius est mihi hoc dicere quam facere; A speech compounded of the
greatest terror, and the greatest clemency, that could proceed out of the mouth
of man. But, to pursue Caesar's Abilities in this kind no farther, it is
evident, that he knew well his own perfection in Learning, as appears, when
some spoke, what a strange resolution it was in Lucius Scylla to resign his
Dictature; Suet. in Iul.. 77.
he scoffing at him, answered, That Scylla could not skill of Letters, and
therefore knew not how to Dictate.

Now it were time to leave this point touching the strict concurrence of
Military virtue and Learning, (for what example in this kind, can come with any
grace, after Alexander and Caesar?) were it not that J am transported with the
height and rareness of one other particular instance, as that which did so
suddenly pass from scorn to wonder; and it is of Xenophon the Philosopher,
Xen. Hist. de Exp. Cyri.
who went from Socrates school into Asia with Cyrus the younger, in his
expedition against King Artaxerxes. This Xenophon, at that time was very young,
and never had seen the wars before; neither had than, any command in the
Army, but only followed the war as a voluntary, for the love and conversation
of Proxenus his friend. He was by chance present when Falinus came in message
from the great King, to the Grecians, after that Cyrus was slain in the field,
and the Grecians, a handful of men, having lost their General, left to
themselves in the midst of the Provinces of Persia, cut off from their Country
by the interception of many miles, and of very great and deep rivers. The
Message did import that they should deliver up their Arms, and submit
themselves to the Kings mercy: to which message before public answer was
made, diverse of the Army, conferred familiarly with Falinus, amongst whom
Xenophon happened to say thus, why, (said he) Falinus we have now but these two
things left, Hist. de Cy. Ex. l. 2.
our Arms and our Virtue, if we yield up our Arms, how shall we make use of
our virtue? whereto Falinus smiling said, If I be not deceived Young Gentleman
you are an Athenian, and study Philosophy, and it is pretty that you say, but
you are much abused, if you think your Virtue can withstand the Kings Power;
here was the scorn, the wonder follows. This young Scholar or Philosopher,
after all the Captains and Commanders were murdered by treason, conducted ten
thousand Foot, through the heart of all the Kings high Countries, from Babylon
to Grecia, in despite of all the Kings forces; to the astonishment of the
world, and the encouragement of the Grecians in time succeeding, to make
invasion upon the Persian Monarchy and to subvert it. Which indeed soon after,
Jason the Thessalian conceived and designed; Agesilaus the spartane attempted
and commenced; Alexander the Macedonian at last achieved, all being stirred
up, by this brave leading Act of that young Scholar.

CAP. VIII. The Merit of Learning from the influence it has upon Moral
Virtues. Learning a sovereign remedy for all the diseases of the Mind. The
Dominion thereof greater than any Temporal Power, being a Power over Reason
and Belief. Learning gives Fortunes, Honors, Delights excelling all others,
as the soul the sense: Durable Monuments of Fame. A Prospect of the
immortality of a future world.
TO proceed now, from Jmperiall and Military virtue, to Moral, and that which
is the Virtue of Private men, First that of the Poet is a most certain truth,
Ovid. de Pont.
Scilicet ingenuas didicisse fideliter Arts
Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros.
For Learning does reclaim men's minds from Wildenesse and Barbarism; but
inded, the accent had need be put upon Fideliter; for a superficial confused
knowledge does rather work a contrary effect. I say, Learning takes away
levity, temerity, and insolency, whilst it suggests all dangers and doubts,
together with the thing it self; ballanceth the weight of reasons and
arguments on both sides; turns back the first offers and placits of the mind
as suspect, and teaches it to take a tried and examined way: The same does
extirpate vain and excessive admiration, which is the root of all weak
advisement. For we admire things, either because they are New, or because they
are Great: As for novelty, no man that wades in Learning and the contemplation
of things thoroughly, but has this printed in his heart, Eccles. 1.
Nihil novi sub sole: neither can any man much marvel at the play of Puppets,
that thrusts but his head behind the curtain; and advises well of the organs
and wires that causes the motion. As for Magnitude, as Alexander the Great,
after he was used to great Battles, and conquests in Asia; when at any time he
received Letters out of Greece, of some fights and services there, which were
undertaken commonly for some Bridge, or a Fort, or at most for the besiege of
some City; was wont to say, It seemed to him that he was advertised of the
Battles of Homers Froggs and Mise: So certainly, if a man meditate upon the
world and the Fabric thereof; to him the Globe of the Earth, with men marching
upon it, (the Divinenesse of souls excepted) will not seem much other, Sen.
Not. Q lib. 1. pref.
than a Hillock of Ants whereof some creep, and run up and down with their
Corn, others with their Eggs, others empty; all about a little heap of Dust.

Again, Learning takes away, or, at least, mitigates the fear of death, and
adverse Fortune; which is one of the greatest impediments to Virtue or Manners.
For if a man's mind be seasoned and imbued with the contemplation of Mortality,
and the corruptible nature of things, he will, in his apprehension, concur
with Epictetus, who going forth one day saw a woman weeping for her Pitcher of
Earth; and going forth the next day saw another woman weeping for her son,
Enchir. c. 33. Arr. l. 3. c. 24.
said, Heri vidi fragilem frangi, hodie vidi mortalem mori: Therefore Virgil
did excellently and profoundly couple the knowledge of the cause and the
conquest of Fears together, as concomitants: Geor. 2.
Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.
Quique metus omnes and inexorabile fatum,
Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari.


It were too long to go over the particular Remedies, which Learning does
minister to all the diseases of the Mind; sometimes purging the ill Humors,
sometimes opening the obstructions, sometimes helping digestion, sometimes
exciting ap-appetite, often healing the wounds and exulcerations thereof, and
the like. Therefore I will conclude with that, which seems to be the sum of
all, which is, that Learning so disposes and inclines the mind, as that it
is never wholly settled and fixed in the defects thereof, but ever awakes it
self and breaths after a Growth and Perfection: Plat. Alcib. Porph. in Stob.
Sen. Epist. Plut. Mor.
For the unlearned man knows not what it is to descend into himself, or to
call himself to account, or what a sweet life it is sensibly to feel that he
is every day better. If he chance to have any good parts, he will still be
boasting these; and every where expose them to the full view; and it may be use
them dexterously to his own advantage and reputation; but not much improve or
increase them. Again, what faults soever he has, he will use art and industry
to hide and color them, but not to amend them; like an ill Mower that mowes on
still and never whets his sithe: Contrariwise, a learned man does not only
employ his mind and exercise his good parts, but continually reformes himself,
and makes Progression in virtue: Nay to say all in a word. Certain it is, that
Veritas and Bonitas differ but as the seal and the Prints; for goodness is
Truth's impression; and on the contrary the storms and tempests of Vice and
Passions break from the Clouds of error and falsehood.

II From Morality, let us pass on to matter of power and commandment, and
consider whether there be any sovereignty or empirie comparable to that
wherewith Learning invests and crowns man's nature? We see the Dignity of
commanding, is according to the dignity of the commanded. Commandment over
Beasts and Cattle, such as Heardmen and Shepherds have, is a thing
contemptible; Commandment over children, such as Schoolmasters and Tutors
have, is a matter of small honor; commandment over slaves, is a disparagement,
rather then an honor; neither is the commandment of Tyrants much better, over
a servile People, dismantled of their Spirits and generosity of mind; therefore
it was ever held that honors in free Monarchies and Commonwealths had a
sweetness more than in Tyrannies; because a command over the willing is more
honorable than over the forced and compelled: Wherefore Virgil, when he would
out of the highest strain of his Art express the best of Humane honors, that
he could attribute to Caesar, he does it in these words, -- victorque volentes
-- Per Populos dat jura, viamque affectat Olympo. Georg. 4.



But the Commandment of knowledge is far higher than the Commandment over the
will, though free, and not enslaved and vassal'd: For it is a Dominion over
Reason, Belief, and the Understanding, which is the highest part of man, and
gives Law to the will it self: For without Question there is no power on
earth, which advances and sets up a Throne, and, as it were, a Chair of
estate, in the souls of men and their Cogitations, Assents, and Belief, but
Knowledge and Learning: And therefore we see, the detestable and extreme
pleasure that Arch-Heretiques, false Prophets, and Impostors are ravished, and
transported withal, when once they find that they begin to have a Dominion,
and Superiority over the faith and consciences of men; indeed so great, as he
that has once tasted it, it is seldom seen that any persecution or torture
can make them relinquish this Sovereignty: But as this is that which the Divine
Auctor of the Revelation calls, Apoc. 2.
The depth or profoundnesse of Satan; so on the contrary, the just and lawful
Sovereignty over men's minds, established by the clear evidence, and sweet
commendation of Truth, approaches certainly nearest to the similitude of the
Divine Rule.

As for Fortunes and Honors, the munificence of Learning does not so enrich
and adorn whole Kingdoms and Commonwealths, as it does not likewise amplify
and advance the Fortunes and Estates of particular persons: For it is an
ancient observation, that Homer has given more men their living, than either
Sylla or Caesar, or Augustus ever did, notwithstanding their great Largesses,
such infinite donatives, and distributions of so much land. No doubt, it is
hard to say, whether Arms or Learning have advanced greater numbers: But if
we speak of Sovereignty, we see, that if Arms have carried away the
Kingdom, yet Learning has borne away the Priesthood, which ever has bin in
some competition with Empire.

Again, Jf you contemplate the Pleasure and Delight of Knowledge and Learning,
assuredly it far surpasses all other pleasure: For what? Shall, perchance,
the pleasures of the Affections so far excel the pleasures of the senses, as
a happy obtaining of a desire, does a song or a dinner; and must not by the
same degrees of consequence, the pleasure of the Jntellect transcend those of
the Affections? In all other pleasures there is a finite satiety, and after
they grow a little stale, their flower and verdure vades and departs; whereby we
are instructed, that they were not indeed pure and sincere pleasures, but
shadows and deceits of Pleasures; and that it was the Novelty which pleased,
and not the Quality: therefore voluptuous men often turn Friars, and the
declining age of ambitious Princes is commonly more sad and besieged with
Melancholy; But of Knowledge there is no satiety; but vicissitude, perpetually
and interchangeably, returning of fruition and appetite; so that the good of
this delight must needs be simple, without Accident or Fallacy. Neither is that
Pleasure of small efficacy and contentment in the mind of man, which the Poet
Lucretius describes elegantly, Swave, mari magno turbantibus aequora ventis,
etc. De Rer. Not. lib. 2.
It is a view of delight (says he) to stand or walk upon the shore, and to
see a ship tossed with tempest upon the sea: a pleasure, to stand in the window
of a Castle, and to see two Battles join upon a plain: but it is a pleasure
incomparable, for the mind of man, by Learning to be settled and fortified in
the Tower of Truth, and from thence to behold the errors and wanderings of other
men below.

Lastly leaving the vulgar arguments, that by Learning man excels man: in that
wherein man excels beasts; that by the help of Learning, man ascends in his
understanding, even to the heavens, whether in body he can not come, and the
like; let us conclude this discourse concerning the dignity of knowledge and
Learning, with that good, whereunto man's nature does most aspire, Immortality
and continuance. For to this tends generation, raising of houses and
Families, Buildings, Foundations, Monuments, Fame, and in effect the sum and
height of humane desires. But we see how far the monuments of wit and
Learning, are more durable than the Monuments of materiate Memorialls and
Manu-factures. Have not the verses of Homer continued xxv Centuries of years
and above, without the loss of a syllable, or letter? during which time,
infinite number of Places, Temples, Castles, Cities, have bin decayed or bin
demolish't. The Pictures and Statues of Cyrus, Alexander, Caesar, no nor of the
Kings and Princes of much later years, by no means possible are now
recoverable; for the Originals worn away with age, are perish't; and the
Copies daily loose of the life and Primitive resemblance; But the images of
men's wits, remain unmaimed in books for ever, exempt from the injuries of time,
because capable of perpetual renovation. Neither can they properly be called
Images, because, in their way, they generate still and cast their seeds in the
minds of men; raiseing and procreating infinite Actions and Opinions in
succeeding ages. So that if the invention of a ship, was thought so noble and
wonderful, which transports Riches and Merchandice from Place to Place; and
consociats the most remote regions in participation of their fruits and
commodities; how much more are letters to be magnified, which as ships, passing
through the vast sea of time, counite the remotest ages of Wits and Inventions
in mutual Trafique and Correspondency?

Furthermore, we see some of the Philosophers which were most immersed in the
senses and least divine, and which peremptorily denied the immortality of the
soul, yet convicted by the power of truth came to this point, That whatsoever
Motions and Acts is the spirit of man could perform without the Organ of the
body, it was probable that those remained after death; such as were the motions
of the understanding, but not of the affections; so immortal and incorruptible
a thing did knowledge seem to them to be. But we, illuminated with divine
Revelation, disclaiming these rudiments and delusions of the senses, know that
not only the mind, but the affections purified; not only the soul, but the
body shall be advanced in its time to immortality. But it must be remembered,
both now and at other times, as the nature of the point may require, that in
the proofs, of the dignity of Knowledge and Learning, J did at the beginning
separate Divine Testimonies from Humane; which method I have constantly pursued
and so handled them both apart. Although all this be true, nevertheless I do
not take upon me, neither can I hope to obtain by any Perorations, or
pleadings of this case touching Learning, to reverse the judgment either of
Aesops Cock, that preferred the Barly-corne before the Gemme; Ovid. Met. XI.
or of Midas, that being chosen Judge between Apollo, President of the Muses,
and Pan President of Sheep, judged for plenty; or of Paris, Eurip. in Troad.
that judged for Pleasure and love, against wisdom and power; or of
Agrippina's choice, Occidat matrem modo imperet! Tac. An. XIV.
preferring empire with any condition never so detestable; or of Ulysses, qui
vetulam praetulit immortalitati; being indeed figures of those that prefer
custom before all excellency; and a number of the like popular judgments: for
these things must continue as they have bin, but so will that also continue,
whereupon Learning has ever relied as on a firm foundation which can never be
shaken: Mat. XI.
Justificata est sapientia a Filiis suis.

THE SECOND BOOK OF FRANCIS LO. VERVLAM VICOUNT St ALBAN. OF THE DIGNITY AND
ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING. To the KING.
THE PROEM.
The Advancement of Learning commended unto the care of Kings. I. The Acts
thereof in general, three, Reward, Direction, Assistance. II. In special,
about three objects, Places, Books, Persons. In places four Circumstances;
Buildings, Revenewes, Privileges, Laws of Discipline. In Books two,
Libraries, good Editions. In Persons two, Readers of Sciences Extant; Inquirers
into Parts non-extant. III. Defects in these Acts of Advancement, six; Want of
Foundations for Arts at large. Meannesse of Salary unto Professors. Want of
Allowance for Experiments. Preposterous institutions, and unadvised practices
in Academicall studies. Want of Intelligence between the Universities of
Europe. Want of Inquiries into the Deficients of Arts. The Authors Design.
Ingenuous Defense.

IT might seem to have more convenience, although it come often otherwise to
pass, (Excellent KING,) that those that are fruitful in their Generations,
and have, this way, a foresight of their own immortality in their Descendants,
should above all men living, be careful of the estate of future times, unto
which they can not but know that they must at last transmit their dearest
Pledges. Q. ELIZABETH was a sojourner in the world, in respect of her unmarried
life, rather than an inhabitant: she has indeed adorned her own time, and many
ways enricht it; but in truth, to Your Majesty, whom God has blessed with so
much Royal Issue worthy to perpetuate you for ever; whose youthful and
fruitful Bed, does yet promise more children; it is very proper, not only to
irradiate, as you do, your own times, but also to extend your Cares to those
Acts which succeeding Ages may cherish, and Eternity it self behold: Amongst
which, if my affection to Learning do not transport me, there is none more
worthy, or more noble, than the endowment of the world with sound and fruitful
Advancements of Learning: For why should we erect unto ourselves some few
Authors, to stand like Hercules Columns, beyond which there should be no
discovery of knowledge; seeing we have your Majesty, as a bright and benign
star, to conduct and prosper us in this Navigation.

I. To return therefore unto our purpose, let us now weigh and consider with
our selves, what hitherto has bin performed, what pretermitted by Princes and
others, for the Propagation of Learning: And this we will pursue closely and
distinctly, in an Active and Masculine Expression, no where digressing, nothing
dilateing. Let this ground therefore be laid, which every one may grant, that
the greatest and most difficult works are overcome, either by the Amplitude of
Reward, or by the wisdom and soundness of Direction, or by conjunction of
Labors; whereof the first, encourages our endeavors; the second, takes away
Error and Confusion; the third, supplies the frailty of Man. But the Principal
amongst these three, is the wisdom and soundness of Direction, that is, a
Delincation and Demonstration of a right and easy way to accomplish any
enterprise. Claudus enim, as the saying is, in via antevertit Cursorem extra
viam; and Solomon aptly to the purpose, Eccles. 10.
If the Iron be blunt and he do not whet the edge, then must he put too more
strength; but wisdom is profitable to Direction: By which words he
insinuates, that a wise election of the Mean, does more efficaciously conduce
to the perfecting of any enterprise, than any enforcement or accumulation of
endeavors. This I am pressed to speak, for that (not derogating from the Honor
of those who have any way deserved well of Learning) I see and observe, that
many of their works and Acts, are rather matter of Magnificence and Memory of
their own names, than of Progression and Proficience of Learning; and have
rather increased the number of Learned men, than much promoted the Augmentation
of Learning.

II. The Works or Acts pertaining to the Propagation of Learning, are
conversant about three objects; about the Places of Learning; about the Books;
and about the Persons of Learned men. For as water, whether falling from the
Dew of Heaven, or riseing from the springs of the earth, is easily scattered
and lost in the ground, except it be collected into some receptacles, where it
may by union and Congregation into one body comfort and sustain it self; for
that purpose the industry of man has invented Conduits, Cisternes, and Pooles,
and beautified them with diverse accomplishments, as well of Magnificence and
State, as of Use and Necessity: so this most excellent liquor of Knowledge,
whether it distill from a divine inspiration; or spring from the senses, would
soon perish and vanish, if it were not conserved in Books, Traditions,
Conferences, and in Places purposely designed to that end; as Universities,
Colleges, Schools, where it may have fixed stations and Power and Ability of
uniteing and improveing it self.

And first, the works which concern the Seats of the Muses, are four,
Foundations of Howses; Endowments with Revenewes; Grant of Privileges;
Institutions, and statutes for Government; all which chiefly conduce to
privatenesse and quietness of life, and a discharge from cares and troubles,
much like the stations Virgil describes for the Hiveing of Bees, Principio
Seeds Apibus statioque petenda, Geor. 4.

Quo neque fit ventis aditus, etc.


But the works touching Books are chiefly two: First Libraries, wherein, as
in famous shrines, the Relics of the Ancient Saints, full of virtue, are
reposed. Secondly, new Editions of Auctors, with corrected impressions; more
faithful Translations, more profitable Glosses; more diligent Annotations;
with the like train, furnished and adorned.

Furthermore, the works pertaining to the Persons of Learned men, besides the
Advancing and Countenancing of them in general, are likewise two; the
Remuneration and Designation of Readers, in Arts and Sciences already extant
and known; and the Remuneration and Designation of writers concerning those
parts of Knowledge, which hitherto have not bin sufficiently tilled and
labored. These breefely are the works and Acts, wherein the Merit of many
renowned Princes and other illustrious Persons, has bin famed, toward the
state of Learning. As for particular Commemoration, of any that has well
deserved of Learning, when I think thereof, that of Cicero comes into my mind,
which was a motive unto him after his return from banishment to give general
thanks, Cic. Orat. post redit.
Difficile non aliquem; ingratum, quenquam praeterire: Let us rather, according
to the advice of Scripture, Look unto the part of the race which is before us,
Epist. ad Plil. 3.
then look back unto that which is already attained.

III. First therefore, amongst so many Colleges of Europe, excellently
founded, I find strange, that they are all destinated to certain Professions
and none Dedicated to Free and Universal studies of Arts and Sciences: For he
that judges, that all Learning should be referred to use and Action, judges
well; but yet it is easy this way to fall into the error taxt in the Ancient
Fable, Live. lib. 2. v. c. 260. Aesop. Fab.
in which, the other parts of the Body entered an Action against the stomach,
because it neither performed the office of Motion, as the Limbs do; nor of
sense, as the head does; but yet all this while it is the stomach, that
concocteth, converteth, and distributeth nourishment into the rest of the body:
So if any man think Philosophy and universal contemplations a vain and idle
study, he does not consider that all Professions and Arts from thence derive
their sap and strength. And surely I am persuaded that this has bin a great
cause why the happy progression of Learning hitherto has bin retarded; because
these Fundamentalls have bin studied but only in passage, and deeper draughts
have not bin taken thereof: For if you will have a Tree bear more fruit than it
has used to do, it is not any thing you can do to the boughs, but it is the
stirring of the earth about the root, and the application of new mould, or you
do nothing. Neither is it to be passed over in silence, that this dedicating
of Colleges and Societies, only to the use of Professory Learning, has, not
only, bin an enemy to the growth of Sciences; but has redounded likewise to
the prejudice of States and Governments: For hence it commonly falls out that
Princes, when they would make choice of Ministers fit for the Affairs of
State, find about them such a marveilous solitude of able men; because there
is no education Collegiate designed to this end, where such as are framed and
fitted by nature thereto, might give themselves chiefly to Histories, Modern
Languages, Books and discourses of Policy, that so they might come more able
and better furnished to service of State.

And because Founders of Colleges do Plant, and Founders of Lecturers do
water, it follows now in order to speak of the Defects which are in public
Lectures, the smallness of stipends (especially with us) assigned to Readers
of Arts or of Professions: For it does much import to the Progression and
Proficiency of Sciences, that Readers in every kind be chosen out of the
ablest and most sufficient men; as those that are ordained, not for transitory
use, but for to maintain and propagate the seeds of Sciences for future Ages;
This cannot be, except the Rewards and Conditions be appointed such, as may
sufficiently content the most eminent man in that Art, so as he can be willing
to spend his whole Age in that function and never desire to Practice. Wherefore
that Sciences may flourish, David's Military Law should be observed, 1 Samuel 30.
That those that stayed with the Carriage should have equal parts with those
that were in the Action; else will the Carriages be ill attended. So Readers in
Sciences are, as it were, Protectors and Guardians of the Provision of
Learning, whence the Action and services of Sciences may be furnished.
Wherefore it is reason that the Salaryes of Speculative men, should be equal
to the gains of Active men; otherwise if allowances to Fathers of Sciences be
not in a competent degree ample and condign, it will come to pass, Virg.
Geor. 3.
Vt Patrem invalidi referent jejunia Nati.

Now I will note another Defect, wherein some Alchymist should be called unto
for help; for this Sect of Men advise Students to sell their Books and to
build Fornaces; to quit Minerva and the Muses, as Barren Virgins, and to apply
themselves to Vulcane. Yet certainly it must be confessed, that unto the depth of
Contemplation, and the fruit of Operative studies in many Sciences, especially
Natural Philosophy, and Physique; Books are not the only subsidiary
Jnstruments, wherein the Munificence of men, has not bin altogether wanting;
for we see Spheres, Globes, Astrolabes, Maps, and the like, have bin provided,
and with industry invented, as Helps to Astronomy and Cosmography; as well as
Books. We see likewise some places dedicated to the study of Physique, to have
Gardens for the inspection and observation of simples of all sorts; and to be
auctorized the use of Dead Bodies for Anatomy-Lectures. But those do respect
but a few things; in the generality set it down for Truth, That there can
hardly be made any maine Proficience in the disclosing of the secrets of
Nature, unless there be liberal Allowance for Experiments; whether of Vulcan
or of Daedalus; J mean of Furnace, or of Engine, or any other kind: And
therefore as Secretaries and Spialls of State, are allowed to bring in Bills
for their diligence in the inquiry and discovery of New Occurrences and Secrets
in Foreign Estates; so you must allow Jntelligencers and Spialls of Nature
their Bills of Expenses; else you shall never be advertised of many things most
worthy to be known. For if Alexander made such a liberal Assignation of
Treasure unto Aristotle, for Hunters, Fowlers, Fishers, and the like, that he
might compile a History of living Creatures; certainly much more is their
merit, who wander not in wild forests of Nature, but make themselves a way
through the Labyrinths of Arts.

Another Defect to be observed by us (indeed of great import) is, A neglect, in
those which are Governors in Universities, of Consultation; and in Princes and
superior Persons, of visitation; to this end, that it may with all diligence be
considered and consulted of, whether the Readings, Disputations and other
Scholasticall exercises, anciently instituted, will be good to continue, or
rather to antiquate and substitute others more effectual: For amongst Your
Majesty's most wise maxims, I find this, That in all usages and Praesidents,
IACOBUS R.
the times be considered wherein they first began; which if they were weak or
ignorant, it derogateth from the Authority of the usage and leaves it for
suspect. Therefore in as much as the usages and orders of Universities, were
for most part derived from times more obscure and unlearned than our own, it is
the more reason that they be re-examined. In this kind I will give an instance
or two for examples sake, in things that seem most obvious and familiar. It is
an usual practice (but in my opinion somewhat preposterous) that Scholars in
the Universities, are two early entered in Logique and Rhetorique; Arts indeed
fitter for Graduats than Children and Novices. For these two (if the matter be
well weighed) are in the number of the gravest Sciences, being the Arts of
Arts, the one for Judgment, the other for Ornament. So likewise they contain
Rules and Directions, either for the Disposition or Illustration of any subject
or material Circumstance thereof; and therefore for minds empty and unfraught
with matter, and which have not as yet gathered that which Cicero calls Silva
and Supellex, that is stuff and variety of things; to begin with those Arts,
(as if one would learn to weigh, of measure, or paint the wind) does work but
this effect, that the virtue and strength of these Arts, which are great and
Universal, are almost made contemptible, and have degenerated either into
Childish Sophistry or ridiculous Affectation; or at least have bin embased in
their reputation. And farther, the untimely and unripe accession to these Arts,
has drawn on by necessary consequence; a watery and superficiary delivery and
handling thereof, as is fitted indeed to the capacities of Children. Another
instance which I will set down as an Error now grown inveterate, long ago in
the Universities, and it is this; That in Scholasticall exercises, there uses
to be a divorse, very prejudicious, between Invention and Memory: for there the
most of their speeches are either, altogether premeditate, so as they are
uttered in the very precise form of words they were conceived in, and nothing
left to invention; or merely extemporall, so as very little is left to Memory;
Whereas in Life and Action, there is very little use of either of these apart,
but rather of their intermixture; that is, of notes or memorialls; and of
extemporall speech: So as by this course, exercises are not accommodate to
practice, nor the Jmage answers to the Life. And it is ever a true rule in
exercises, that all, as near as may be, should represent those things which in
common course of life use to be practiced; otherwise they will pervert the
motions and faculties of the mind, and not prepare them. The truth whereof is
plainly discovered, when Scholars come to the Practice of their Professions,
or other Actions of Civil life, which when they set into, this defect, whereof
we speak, is soon found out by themselves, but sooner by others. But this part,
touching the amendment of the Jnstitutions of the Universities, I will
conclude, with the clause of Caesar's letter to Oppius, Cic. Epist. Ad At. lib.
IX.
Hoc que^admodum fieri possit, nonnulla mihi in mentem veniunt and multa
reperiri possunt, de iis rebus, rogo vos, ut cogitationem suscipiatis.

Another Defect which I note, ascendes a little higher than the precedent: For
as the progression of Learning consists much in the wise Government and
Institution of Universities in particular; so it would be more advanced, if the
Universities in general, dispersed through all Europe, were united in a nearer
conjunction and correspondence by mutual Jntelligence. For there are, as we
see, many Orders and Societies, which, though they be divided under several
Soveraignties and spacious Territories, yet they do contract and maintain a
Society and a kind of Fraternity one with another; in so much that they have
their Provincialls and Generals, to whom all the rest yield obedience. And
surely as nature creates Brother-hoods in Families; and Arts Mechanical
contract Brother-hoods in Communalties; the Anointment of God super-induceth a
brotherhood in Kings and Bishops; Vows and Canonical rules unite a
Brotherhood in Orders. in like manner there cannot but intervene a Noble and
Generous Fraternity between men by Learning and Illuminations; reflecting upon
that relation which is attributed to God, who himself is called, The Father of
Illuminations or Lights. Iac. 1.


Lastly, this I find fault with, which I somewhat touched upon before, that
there has not bin, or very rarely bin, any public designation of able men,
who might write or make inquiry of such parts of Learning as have not bin
hitherto sufficiently labored and subdued. Unto which point it will be very
available, if there were erected a kind of visitation of Learning; and a Cense
or Estimate taken, what parts of Learning are rich and well improved; what
poor and destitute: For the opinion of Plenty is amongst the Causes of want;
and the multitude of Books makes a show rather of superfluity than penury.
Which surcharge, nevertheless, if a man would make a right judgment, is not
remedied by suppressing or extinguishing books heretofore written, but by
publishing good new books, which may be of such a right kind, That, Exodus 7.
as the Serpent of Moses may devour the Serpents of the Enchanters.

The Remedies of these defects now enumerate, except the last, and of the last
also, in respect of the Active part thereof, which is the Designation of
writers, are opera Basilica, toward which the endeavors and industry of a
private man, are commonly but as an Image in a cross way, which may point at
the way, but cannot go it: But the speculative part, which pertains to the
examination of knowledges, namely, what is Deficient in every particular
Science, is open to the industry of a private man. Wherefore my Designement is
to attempt a general and faithful perambulation and visitation of Learning,
specially with a diligent and exact enquiry, what parts thereof lie fresh and
wast, and are not yet improved and converted to use by the industry of men; to
the end that such a plot made, and recorded to memory, may minister light both
to public Designations, and the voluntary labors of private endeavors.
Wherein nevertheless my purpose is, at this time, to note only Omissions and
Deficiencies, and not to make redargution of Errors and Oversights: For it is
one thing to set forth what ground lies unmanur'd, and another thing, to
correct ill husbandry in that which is manured.

In the undertaking and handling of which work I am not ignorant what a
business I move, and what a difficult province I sustain, and also, how
unequal my abilities are unto my will: yet I have a good hope, that if my
extreme love to Learning carrry me too far, I may obtain the excuse of
affection, for that, it is not granted to man, To love and to be wise. I know
well that I must leave the same liberty of judgment to others, that I use my
self; and, in truth, I shall be indifferently glad, to accept from others, as
to impart that duty of humanity; Cic. Offic. 1 ex Ennio.
Nam qui erranti comiter monstrant viam, etc. I do foresee likewise that many
of those things which I shall enter and register as Omissions and Deficients,
will incur diverse censures; as, that some parts of this enterprise were done
long-agoe and now are extant; others, that they taste of curiosity, and promise
no great fruit; others, that they are too difficult and impossible to be
compassed by humane industries. For the two first, let the particulars speak
for themselves: For the last, touching impossibility, I determine thus; All
those things are to be held possible and performeable, which may be accomplished
by some person though not by every one; and which may be done by the united
labors of many, though not by any one apart; and which may be effected in a
succession of ages, though not in the same age; and in brief, which may be
finished by the public care and charge, though not by the ability and industry
of particular persons. If, notwithstanding, there be any man who would rather
take to himself that of Solomon, Prove. 22.
Dicit Piger Leo est in via, than that of Virgil

Aen. 5.
Possunt quia posse videntur: It is enough to me, if my labors may be estimed
as votes, and the better sort of wishes: for as it asks some knowledge to
demand a question not impertinent; so it requires some sense to make a wish
not absurd.

CAP. I. I. An universal Partition of Humane Learning, into, History. II.
Poetry. III. Philosophy. This Partition is taken from the triplicity of
Intellective Faculties: Memory: Imagination: Reason. The same Partition is
appropriate to Divine Learning.
I. THat is the truest Partition of humane Learning, which has reference to
the three Faculties of Man's soul, which is the seat of Learning. History is
referred to Memory, Poesy to the Imagination, Philosophy to Reason. By Poesy,
in this place, we understand nothing else, but feigned History, or Fables. As
for Verse, that is only a style of expression, and pertaines to the Art of
Elocution, of which in due place.

History is properly of Individualls circumscribed within time and place: for
although Natural History seem to be conversant about universal Natures; yet
this so falls out because of the promiscuous similitude in things Natural
comprehended under one kind; so that if you know one, you know all of that
species. But if any where there be found Individualls, which in their kind are
either singular, as the Sun, and the Moon; or which do notably digress, from
their kind, as Monsters; these are as aptly handled in Natural History, as
particular men are in Civil History. All these are referred unto Memory.

II. Poesy, in that sense we have expounded it, is likewise of Individualls,
fancied to the similitude of those things which in true History are recorded,
yet so as often it exceeds measure; and those things which in Nature would
never meet, nor come to pass, Poesy composeth and introduces at pleasure,
even as Painting does: which indeed is the work of the Imagination.

III. Philosophy dismisseth Individualls and comprehends, not the first
Impressions, but the abstract Motions thereof, and conversant in compounding
and dividing them according to the law of Nature and of the things themselves:
And this is wholly the office and operation of Reason.

And that this Distribution is truly made, he shall easily conceave that has
recourse to the Originalls of Intellectualls. Jndividualls only strike the
sense, which is the port or entrance of the understanding. The Images or
Impressions of those Individualls accepted from the sense, are fixed in the
Memory, and at first enter into it entire, in the same manner they were met:
afterward the understanding ruminates upon them and refines them, which then
it does either merely review, or in a wanton delight counterfeit and resemble;
or by compounding and dividing digest and endue them. So it is clearly
manifest, that from these three fountains of Memory, of Imagination and of
Reason, there are these three Emanations, of History, of Poesy, and of
Philosophy, and that there can be no other nor no more: for History and
Experience, we take for one and the same, as we do Philosophy and Sciences.

Neither do we think any other Partition than this is requisite to Divine
Learning. Indeed the informations of Oracle and of Sense be diverse, both in
the matter and manner of Conveying, but the spirit of Man is the same, the
Cells and Receptacles thereof the very same. For it comes to pass here, as if
diverse Liquors, and that by diverse Funnells, should be received into one and
the same vessel. Wherefore Theology also consists either of Sacred History; of
Parables, which are a kind of Divine Poesy; or of Precepts and Doctrines, as an
eternal Philosophy. As for that part which seems supernumerary, which is
Prophecy, that is a branch of History: however Divine History has that
prerogative over Humane, that the Narration may be before the Fact as well as
after.

CAP. II. I. The Partition of History into Natural and Civil (Ecclesiastical
and Literary comprehended under Civil.) II. The Partition of Natural History,
into the History of Generations. III. Praeter-Generations. IV. Of Arts.
I. HIstory is either Natural or Civil: in Natural the operations of Nature
are recorded; in Civil the Actions of men. In both these without question, the
Divine workings are translucent, but more conspicuous in Acts Civil; in so
much as they constitute a peculiar kind of History, which we usually style
Sacred or Ecclesiastical: And in truth to us such seems the Dignity of
Learning and of Arts to be, that there ought to be reserved a Particular
History for them apart from the rest; which yet we understand to be
comprehended, as Ecclesiastique History also is, under History Civil.

II. The Partition of Natural History we shall raise out of the state and
condition of Nature hirselfe, which is found subject to a triple state, and
under a threefold regiment: For Nature is either Free and displaying her self
in her ordinary course; as in the Heavens, living Creatures, Plants, and the
Universal furniture of the world; or put out of her usual course and deposed
from her state, by the pravities and insolences of contumacious Matter, and
the violence of Impediments, as in Monsters: or lastly she is Comprest and
fashioned, and as it were new cast, as in Artificial Operations. Let therefore
the partition of Natural History, be made into the History of Generations; of
Praeter-Generations, and of Arts; whereof the last we use to call History
Mechanical, or Experimental. The first of these handles the Liberty of
Nature; the second the Errors; the third the Bands thereof. And we are the
rather induced to assign the History of Arts, as a branch of Natural History,
because an opinion has long time gone current, as if Art were some different
thing from Nature, and Artificial from Natural. From this mistake this
inconvenience arises, that many writers of Natural History think they have
quit themselves sufficiently, if they have compiled a History of Creatures, or
of Plants, or of Mineralls; the experiments of Mechanical Arts past over in
silence. But there is yet a more subtle deceit which secretly steals into the
minds of Men, namely, that Art should be reputed a kind of Additament only to
Nature, whose virtue is this, that it can indeed either perfect Nature
inchoate, or repair it when it is decayed, or set it at liberty from
impediments; but not quite alter, transmute, or shake it in the foundations:
which erroneous conceit has brought in a too hasty despair upon men's
enterprises. But on the contrary, this certain truth should be thoroughly settled
in the minds of men, That Artificialls differ not from Naturalls in Form and
Essence; but in the Efficient only; for man has no power over Nature save only
in her Motion; that is, to mingle or put together Natural bodies, and to
separate or put them asunder; wherefore where there is Apposition and
Separation of Bodies, Natural conjoyning (as they term it) Active with
Passive, man may do all things; this not done, he can do nothing. Nor is it
material so things be managed in a right order, for the production of such an
effect, whether this be done by the Art of Man or without the Art of Man. Gold
is sometimes disgested and purged from crudities and impurities, by fire;
sometimes found pure in small sands, Nature performing her own work. So the
Rainbow is formed of a dewy cloud in the Air above; formed also by
aspersion of water by us below. Therefore Nature commands all, and these
three are her substitute Administrators, The course of Nature; the Expatiation
of Nature and Art; or the Cooperation of Man with Nature in particulars.
Wherefore it is very proportionable that these three be comprised in Natural
History, C. Plin. Not. Hist.
which C. Plinius for most part performed, who alone comprehended Natural
History according to the dignity thereof, but what he thus comprehended he has
not handled as was meet, nay rather foulely abused.

III. The first of these is extant in some good perfection: The two latter are
handled so weakly and so unprofitably, that they may be referred to the list of
DEFICIENTS.
For you shall find no sufficient and competent collection of those works of
Nature which have a Digression and Deflection from the ordinary course of
Generations, Productions and Motions; whether they be the singularities of
certain Countries and Places, or the strange events of times; or the wit of
chance, or the effects of latent proprieties; or Monodicalls of Nature in their
kind. It is true, there are a number of Books more than enough, full fraught
with fabulous Experiments, forged Secrets, and frivolous Impostures, for
pleasure and strangeness; but a substantial and severe Collection of
Heteroclites, and of the wonders of Nature, diligently examined and faithfully
described, this, I say, J find not, especially with due rejection, and, as it
were, public proscription of untruths and fables, which have got up into
credit. For as the matter is now carried, if any untruths touching Nature be
once on foot and celebrated (whether it be the Reverence of Antiquity, that can
thus far countenance them; or that it is a trouble to call them unto a
re-examination; or that they are held to be rare ornaments of speech, for
similitudes and comparisons) they are never after exterminate and called in.
The use of this work honored with a President in Aristotle, De Mirab.
is nothing less than to give contentment to curious and vain wits, as the
manner of Mirabilaries and the spreaders of invented Prodigies is to do; but
for two reasons serious and grave; the one to correct the partiality of Axioms,
which are commonly grounded upon common and popular examples; the other because
from the wonder of Nature, a fair and open passage is made to the wonders of
Art. For the business in this matter is no more than by quick sent to trace out
the footings of nature in her wilful wanderings; that so afterward you may be
able at your pleasure, to lead or force her to the same place and postures
again.

Neither do I give in precept that superstitious Narrations of Sorceries,
Witch-crafts, Enchantments, Dreams, Divinations, and the like, where there is
clear evidence of the fact and deed done, be altogether excluded from this
History of Marvailes. For it is not yet known, in what cases and how far,
effects attributed to superstition, do participate of Natural Causes; and
therefore, howsoever the use and practice of these Arts, in my opinion, is
justly to be condemned; yet from the speculation and consideration of them, (if
they be closely pursued) we may attain a profitable direction; not only for
the right discerning of offenses in this kind of guilty persons; but for the
farther discloseing of the secrets of Nature. Neither surely ought a man to
make scruple of entering and penetrating the vaults and recesses of these Arts,
that proposes to himself only the inquisition of Truth, K. JAMES his
Demonology.
as your Majesty has confirmed in your own example: For you have with the two
clear and quick-sighted eyes of Religion and Natural Philosophy, so wisely and
thoroughly enlightened these shadows, that you have proved your self most like
the Sun which passes through polluted places, yet is not distained. But this
I would admonish, that these Narrations which have mixture with Superstition,
be sorted by themselves, and not be mingled with the Narrations, which are
purely and sincerely Natural. As for the Narrations touching the Prodigies and
Miracles of Religions, they are either not true; or no way Natural, and
therefore pertain not to Natural History.


IV. For History of Nature, wrought and subdued by the hand, which we are wont
to call Mechanical, I find indeed some collections made of Agriculture, and
likewise of many Manual Arts; but commonly (which in this kind of knowledge is
a great detriment) with a neglect and rejection of Experiments familiar and
vulgar; which yet, to the interpretation of Nature, do as much, if not more,
conduce, than Experiments of a higher quality. But it is estimed a kind of
dishonor and aspersion unto Learning, if learned men should, upon occasion
perchance, descend to the Inquiry or Observation of Matters Mechanical, except
they be reputed for Secrets of Art, or Rarities, or Subtleties. Which humor of
vain and supercilious arrogance, Plato justly derideth, where he brings in
Hippias a vaunting Sophist disputing with Socrates a severe and solid
inquisitor of Truth; where the subject being of Beauty, Socrates after his
wandering and loose manner of disputeing, brought in first an example of a fair
Virgin, than of a fair Horse, than of a fair Pot well glazed; In Hipp. Major.
at this last instance Hippias somewhat moved said; Were it not for curtesy
sake I should disdain to dispute with any that alleged such base and sordid
instances; to whom Socrates, You have reason and it becomes you well, being a
man so trim in your vestments, and so neat in your shoes; and so goes on in
an Irony. And certainly this may be averred for truth, that they be not the
highest instances, that give the best and surest information. This is not
unaptly expressed in the Tale, so common, of the Philosopher, Laert. in Thalete.
That while he gazed upward to the stars fell into the water: for if he had
looked down, he might have seen the stars in the water; but looking up to
heaven he could not see the water in the stars. In like manner it often comes
to pass that small and mean things conduce more to the discovery of great
matters, than great things to the discovery of small matters; and therefore
Aristotle notes well, Pol. lib. 1.
that the Nature of everything is best seen in his smallest Portions. For that
cause he inquires the Nature of a Commonwealth, first in a Family and the
simple conjugations of Society, Man and Wife; Parents and Children; Master and
Servant, which are in every cottage. So likewise the Nature of this great City
of the world, and the Policy thereof, must be sought in every first
Concordances and least Portions of things. So we see that secret of Nature
(estimed one of the great mysteries) of the turning of Iron touched with a
Loadstone toward the Poles, was found out in needles of Iron, not in bars of
Iron.

But if my judgment be of any weight, I am wholly of this mind, that the use
of Mechanical History, to the raiseing of Natural Philosophy, is of all other
the most radical and fundamental; such Natural Philosophy, I understand as
does not vanish into the fumes of subtle and sublime speculations; but such as
shall be effectually operative to the support and assistance of the
incommodities of man's life: For it will not only help for the present, by
connecting and transferring the observations of one Art, into the use of
others, which must needs come to pass, when the experiences of diverse Arts
shall fall into the consideration and observation of one man; but farther it
will give a more clear illumination, than hitherto has shined forth, for the
searching out of the causes of things, and the deducing of Axioms. For like as
you can never well know and prove the disposition of another man, unless you
provoke him; nor Proteus ever changed shapes, until he was straightened and held
fast with cords; so nature provoked and vexed by Art, does more clearly
appear, than when she is left free to her self. But before we dismiss this
part of Natural History, which we call Mechanical and Experimental, this
must be added; That the body of such a History, must be built not only upon
Mechanical Arts themselves, but the operative part of Liberal sciences, as
also upon many practices not yet grown up into Art, that nothing profitable may
be omitted, which availes to the information of the understanding. And so this
is the first Partition of Natural History.

CAP. III. I. The Second Partition of Natural History, from the use and end
thereof into Narrative and Inductive. And that the most noble end of Natural
History is, that it minister and conduce to the building up of Philosophy:
which end Inductive History respects. II. The partitio^ of the History of
Generations into the History of the Heavens. The History of the Meteors. The
History of the Earth and Sea. The History of Massive Bodies, or of the greater
Corporations. The History of Kinds, or of the lesser Corporations.
I. Natural History, as in respect of the subject it is of three sorts, as we
observed before; so in respect of the use, of two: for it is applied, either
for the knowledge of things themselves recorded in History; or as the Primitive
matter of Philosophy. The former of these, which either for the pleasure of the
Narrations is delightful; or for the practice of experiments is useful; and
for such pleasure or profits sake is pursued; is of far inferior quality,
compared with that which is the Materials and Provision of a true and just
Induction; and gives the first suck to Philosophy, wherefore let us again
divide Natural History, into History Narrative, and INDUCTIVE; this latter we
report as DEFICIENT. Nor do the great names of Ancient Philosophers, or the
mighty volumes of Modern writers so astonish my sense; for I know very well
that Natural History, is already extant, ample for the mass, for variety
delightful, and often curious for the diligence: but if you take from thence
Fables and Antiquity; and Allegations of Authors; and vain Controversies;
Philology and Ornaments, which are accommodate to Table-talke, or the
night-discourses of Learned men; then will the sequel, for the INSTAURATIONS or
PHILOSOPHY, come to no great matter: And to speak truth this is far short of
the variety which we intend. For first those two parts of Natural History,
whereof we have spoken; The History of Praeter-generations, and of Arts;
matters of great consequence, are there Deficient: than in that third general
Part mentioned before, namely of Generations, of five parts thereof, the
Natural History extant gives satisfaction only to one.

II. For the History of Generations has Five subordinate Parts; The first is
of Celestial Bodies which comprehends the PHENOMENON sincere, and not
dogmatiz'd into any peremptory assertions: The second of Meteors with the
Comets, and of the Regions, as they call them, of the Air; neither is there
extant any History concerning Comets, Fiery Meteors, Winds, Rain, Tempests
and the rest, of any value: The third is of the Earth and of the Water (as they
are integrall parts of the world) of Mountains, of Rivers, of Tides, of Sands,
of Woods, as also of the Figure of the continents, as they are stretched forth:
in all these particulars the Inquiries and Observations are rather Natural,
than Cosmographicall: Fourthly, touching the general Masses of Matter, which
we style the Greater Collegiats, commonly called the Elements: Neither are
there found any narrations touching Fire, Air, Water, and of their Natures,
Motions, Workings, Impressions, which make up any complete Body. The fifth and
the last Part is of the Perfect and exact Collections, which we entitle the
lesser Collegiats, commonly called Kinds or Specifiques. Jn this last part
only the industry of writers has appeared, yet so as was prodigally wasted in
superfluous matter, swelling with the outward descriptions of liveing
Creatures, or of Plants and such like; than enricht with solid and diligent
observations, which in natural History should every where be annexed and
interserted. And to speak in a word, all the natural History we have, as well
in regard of the Inquisition, as of the Collection, is no way proportionable in
reference, to that end whereof we speak, namely the Raiseing and advancing of
Philosophy: Wherefore we pronounce Inductive History Deficient. And thus far
of natural History.

CAP. IV. I. The Partition of Civil History, into Ecclesiastical and
Literary, and, which retains the general name, Civil. II. Literary
Deficient. Precepts how to compile it.
I. Civil History, in our Judgment, is rightly divided into three kinds;
first into Sacred or Ecclesiastical; then into that which retains the
general name Civil; lastly into that of Learning and Arts. We will begin with
that kind we set down last, because the other are extant, but this I thought
good to report as DEFICIENT;
it is the HISTORY OF LEARNING. And surely the History of the world destitute
of this, may be thought not unlike the statue of Polyphemus, with his eye out,
that part of the Image being wanting, which does most show the nature and
spirit of the Person. And though we set down this as Deficient, yet we are not
ignorant, that in diverse particular sciences of Iuris-consults, Mathematicians,
Rhetoricians, Philosophers, there are made some slight Memorialls and small
relations of Sects, Schools, Books, Authors and such like successions of
sciences. There are likewise extant, some weak and barren discourses touching
the Inventors of Arts and Vsages; but a Just and General HISTORY OF LEARNING,
we avouch that none hitherto has bin published. Wherefore we will propound the
Argument; the way how to contrive it, and the use thereof.

II. The Argument is nothing else but a recital from all Times, what
Knowledges and Arts, in what Ages and Climates of the world have florisht. Let
there be made a commemoration of their Antiquities, Progresses and
Peragrations, through diverse parts of the world: (for Sciences shift and
remove, as people do,) Again of their Declensions, Oblivions, and
Instaurations. Let there likewise be observations taken through all Arts, of
the occasion and original of their Jnvention; of their Manner of delivery, and
the discipline of their managings, Course of study and exercises. Let there
also be added the Sects then on foot; and the more famous controversies which
busied and exercised Learned men; the Scandalls and reproaches to which they lay
open; the Lands and Honors wherewith they were graced. Let there be noted the
Chiefest Authors, the best Books, Schools, Successions, Universities,
Societies, Colleges, Orders, and whatsoever else belongs to the State of
Learning. But above all, let this be observed (which is the Grace and Spirit of
Civil History,) that the Causes and Consultations be Connexed, with the
events: namely, that the nature of Countries and People be recorded, the
dispositions apt and able; or inept and enable for diverse disciplines; the
Occurrences of time Adverse, or Propitious to Learning; the zeales and mixtures
of Religions, the Discountenances, and favors of Laws, and lastly, the
eminent virtues and sway of Persons of note, for the promoteing of Learning;
and the like. But our advise is, that all these points be so handled, that time
be not wasted in praise and censure of particulars, after the manner of
Critiques; but that things be plainly and historically related, and our own
judgments very sparingly interposed.

As for the manner of compileing such a History, we do especially admonish
thus much; that the Matter and Provision thereof, be drawn, not only from
Histories and Critiques; but also that through every century of years or lesser
Intervalls, by a continued sequence of time, deduced from the highest
antiquity; the best Books written within those distinguished spaces of time, be
consulted with; that from a taste and observation of the argument, style and
method thereof, and not a through perusal, for that were an infinite work, the
learned spirit of that age, as by a kind of charm, may be awakt and raised up
from the dead.

As touching the use of this Work, it is designed to this end, not, that the
Honor and State of Learning ushered in by so many Images and Ghosts of the
Learned, should be celebrated; or that for the earnest affection we bear to
Learning, we desire, even to a curiosity, to enquire, and know, and to conserve
whatsoever to the state of Learning may any way appertain; but chiefly, for a
more serious and grave purpose. It is, in few words this, For that such a
Narration, as we have described, in our opinion, may much confer to the
wisdom and judgment of Learned men, in the use and administration of
Learning: and that the passions and perturbations; the vices and virtues; as
well about Intellectual matters, as Civil, may be observed; and the best
Presidents for practice may be deduced therefrom. For it is not Saint Austines,
nor Saint Ambrose works, (as we suppose) that will make so wise a Bishop or a
Divine, as Ecclesiastical story thoroughly read and observed: which without
question may befall Learned men from the History of Learning. For whatsoever is
not munited and sustained by Examples and Records, is exposed to imprudency and
ruin. Thus much of the History of Learning.

CAP. V. Of the Dignity. And Difficulty of Civil History.
Civil History properly so called comes now to be handled; The Dignity and
Authority whereof, is very eminent among secular writings: For upon the credit
of this History, the examples of our Ancestors; the vicissitudes of Affairs;
the grounds of Civil Prudence; and the Name and Fame of men depend.

But the Difficulty is as great as the Dignity; for to draw back the mind in
writing, to the contemplation of matters long ago passed; and thus, as it
were, to make it aged; to search out with diligence; and to deliver with faith
and freedom; and with the life and height of expression; to represent unto the
eyes, the changes of times; the characters of Persons; the incertainties of
Counsils; the Conveyances of Actions (as of waters,) the subtileties of
Pretentions, the secrets of State, is a task of great pains and judgment;
especially seeing Ancient reports, are subject to incertainty; Modern liable
to danger. Wherefore the errors are many which attend Civil History; whilst
some write poor and popular Relations, the very reproach of History; others
patch up, in a rash have, and unequal contexture, particular Reports, and
brief Memorialls; others slightly run over the heads of actions done; others
on the contrary pursue every trivial Circumstance, nothing belonging to the
sum and issue of things; some out of a too partial indulgence to their own
wit, take confidence to feign many things; but others add and imprint upon
affairs the Image, not so much of their own wit, as of their affections;
mindful rather of their own parts, than to become Religious deponents for
truth; others every where interlace such Politic observations, as they most
fancy; and seeking occasion of digression for ostentation, too slightly break
off the contexture of the discourse; others for want of moderation and
judgment, over do things, by the prolixity of their speeches, Haranges or
other performances, so as it is sufficiently manifest, that in the writings of
men, there is not any kind more rare than a just History, and in all points
complete and perfect. But our purpose at this present is, to set down a
partition of knowledge, for the observation of parts omitted; and not a censure
of parts erroneous. Now we will proceed to the Partitions of Civil History,
and those of diverse sorts; for the particular kinds will be less entangled,
if diverse partitions be propounded; than if one partition by diverse members,
be curiously drawn out.

CAP. VI. The first Partition of Civil History, into Memorialls. Antiquities.
And Perfect History.
Civil History is of three kinds, not unfitly to be compared to the three
sorts of Pictures or Images: for of Pictures and Images we see, some are
unperfect and unfinisht; others perfect; and others decayed and defaced with
Age. In like manner we will divide Civil History, which is the Image of
Actions and Times, into three kinds, agreeable to those of Pictures; namely,
Memorials; Perfect History; and Antiquities. Memorials are Histories unfinisht,
or the first and rough draughts of History: Antiquities, are Histories defaced,
or the Remains of History, which have casually escaped the shipwreck of Time.

Memorials or Preparations to History, are of two sorts, whereof one may be
termed Commentaries; the other Registers. Commentaries let down a naked
Continuance and Connection of Actions and Events, without the Causes and
Pre-texts of Business; the beginings and Motives thereof; also the Counsels
and Speeches, and other preparations of Actions: For this is the true nature of
Commentaries, though Caesar in modesty mixed with greatness, did for his
pleasure apply the name of Commentaries, to the best History that is extant.
But Registers are of two sorts, for either they comprehend the titles of Matter
and Persons in a continuation of Times, such as are Calendars and Cronologies:
or Solennities of Acts; of which kind are the Edicts of Princes; the Decrees of
Counsils; the Proceedings of Judgments; Public Orations; Letters or Estate
and the like; without the Contexture or Continued thread of the Narration.

Antiquities, or the Remains of Histories, are as we said, tanquam Tabula
Naufragii; when industrious and understanding persons (the memory of Things
being decayed and almost overwhelmed with oblivion) by a constant and
scrupulous diligence, out of Geneologies, Calendars, Inscriptions, Monuments,
Coins, Proper-names, and styles; Etymologies of words, Proverbs, Traditions,
Archives, and Jnstruments, as well public as private; Fragments of stories,
scattered passages of Books that concern not History; out of all these I say,
or some of them, they recover and save somewhat from the Deluge of Time.
Certainly a painful work, but acceptable to all sorts of Men, and attended
with a kind of Reverence, and indeed worthy (all Fabulous Originals of Nations
defaced, and extinguished) to be substituted in the room of such counterfeit
stuff: but yet of the less Authority, because what is prostitute to the
license of private designs, looses the honor of public regard. In these
kinds of Imperfect Histories, I design no Deficience, seeing they are tanquam
imperfecte mista, so as such Defects are but their nature. As for Epitomes the
corruptions, certainly, and the Moathes of Histories, we would have them
banished (where in we concur with many of most sound judgment) as those that
have fretted and corroded the sound bodies of many excellent Histories; and
wrought them into base and unprofitable dreggs.

CAP. VII. The Partition of Perfect History, into Chronicles of Times; Lives of
Persons; Relations of Acts. The Explication of the History of Lives. Of
Relations.
Just or Perfect History, is of three kinds, according to the nature of the
object which it propounds to represent; for it either represents a portion of
Time; or some memorable Person; or some Famous Act: The first we call
Chronicles or Annals; the second Lives; the third Relations. Of these,
Chronicles seem to excel, for Celebrity and Name; Lives, for profit and
examples; Relations, for sincerity and verity. For Chronicles, represent the
magnitude of public Actions, and the externe faces of Men, as they regard the
public, and involue in silence smaller Passages, which pertain either to
Matter or Men. And seeing it is the workmanship of God alone, to hang the
greatest weight upon the smallest wyers; it comes many times to pass, that
such a History pursueing only the greater occurrences, rather sets forth the
Pomp and Solennity; than the true resorts, and the intrinseque contextures of
business. And although it does add and intermixe the Counsils themselves; yet
affecting greatness, it does besprinkle men's actions with more solemnenesse
and wisdom, than indeed is in them; that a Satyr may be a truer table of a
Man's life, than many such Histories. Contrariwise; Lives, if they be well
written with diligence and judgment (for we do not speak of Elogies and such
slight commemorations) although they propound unto themselves some particular
person, in whom Actions, as well commune as solemn; small as great; private as
public, have a composition and commixture; yet, certainly, they exhibit more
lively and faithful Narrations of Matters; and which you may more safely and
successefully transfer into example. But special Relations of Actions, such
as are the wars of Peloponesus; the Expedition of Cyrus; the Conspiracy of
Cataline, and the like, ought to be attired with a more pure and sincere Candor
of Truth than the Perfect Histories of Times; because in them may be chosen an
Argument more particular and comprehensible; and of that quality, as good
notice and certitude, and full information, may be had thereof whereas, on the
contrary, the story of Time (specially more ancient than the age of the writer)
does often fail in the memory of things, and contains blank spaces, which
the wit and conjecture of the writer (confidently enough) uses to seize upon
and fill up. Yet this which we say, touching the syncerity of Relations, must
be understood with reservation, for indeed it must be confessed (since all
mortal good labors of imperfection, and conveniences with disconveniences
are usually connext) that such kind of Relations, specially if they be
published about the times of things done; seeing very often they are written
with passion or partiality, of all other narrations, are deservedly most
suspected. But again, together with this inconvenience, this remedy grows up;
that these same Relations, being they are not set out by one side only, but
through faction and partiary, affections are commonly published by some or
other on both sides; they do by this means open and hedge in a middle way
between extremes to truth: and after the heat of passions is over, they become,
to a good and wise writer of History, not the worst matter and seeds of a
perfect History.

As touching those points which seem deficient in these three kinds of History,
without doubt there are many particular Histories (of such I speak as may be
had) of some dignity or mediocrity, which have bin hitherto passed by, to the
great detriment of the honor and same of such Kingdoms and States, to which
they were due, which would be too tedious here to observe. But leaving the
stories of foreign Nations, to the care of Foreign Persons, lest I should
become Curiosus in aliena Reipub. I cannot fail to represent unto Your Majesty
the indignity and unworthiness of the History of England, as it now is, in the
main continuation thereof, as also the partiality and obliquity of that of
Scotland, in the latest and largest author thereof: supposeing that it would be
honor to Your Majesty, and a work acceptable with Posterity, if this Island of
Great Britany, as it is now joined in a Monarchy for the Ages to come, so were
joined in one History for the times past, after the manner of the sacred
History, which draws down the story of the Ten Tribes, and of the two Tribes
as Twins together. And if it shall seem that the weight of the work; (which
certainly is great and difficult) may make it less exactly, according to the
worthiness thereof, performed; behold an excellent period of much smaller
compass of time, as to the story of England; that is to say, from the uniting
of the Roses to the uniting of the Kingdoms; a space of time, which in my
judgment contains more variety of rare events, than in like number of
successions ever was known in an Hereditary Kingdom. For it begins with the
mixed Title to a Crown, partly by might partly by right: An entry by Arms; an
establishment by marriage; so there followed times answerable to these
beginings; like waves after a great tempest, retaining their swellings and
agitations, but without extremity of storm; HEN. VII.
but well past through by the wisdom of the Pilot, being one of the most
sufficient Kings of all his Predecessors. HEN. VIII
Then followed a King whose Actions conducted rather by rashness, than
counsil, had much intermixture with the affairs of Europe; ballancing and
inclining them according as they swayed; In whose time began that great
Alteration in the Ecclesiastical State; such as very sildome comes upon the
Stage. ED. VI.
Then followed the Reign of a Minor; then an Offer of an Usurpation, though it
was very short, like a Fever for a day: Then the Reign of a woman matched with
a Forraigner: Again, MARIA ELISA.
of a woman that lived solitary and unmarried. And the close of all was this
happy and glorious event; that is, that this Jland divided from all the world,
should be united in it self; by which that ancient Oracle given to Aeneas,
which presaged rest unto him; Virg. Aen. 3
Antiquam exquirite Matrem; should be fulfilled upon the most noble Nations of
England and Scotland, now united in that name of Britannia, their ancient
Mother; as a Pledge and Token of the Period and Conclusion, now found of all
Wanderings and Peregrination. So that as massive bodies once shaken, feel
certain Trepidations before they fix and settle; so it seems probable, that
by the Providence of God, it has come to pass, That this Monarchy, Iacobus R.
Carolus R.
before it should settle and be established in your Majesty and your Royal
Progeny, (in which I hope it is firm fixed for ever) it should undergo so many
changes, and vicissitudes, as prelusions of future Stability.

As for Lives, when I think thereon, I do find strange that these our Times
have so little known, and acknowledged their own virtues; being there is so
sildome any Memorials or Records of the lives af those who have bin eminent in
our Times. For although Kings and such as have absolute sovereignty, may be
few; and Princes in free Commonwealths (so many States being collected into
Monarchies,) are not many; yet however, there has not bin wanting excellent
men (though living under Kings,) that have deserved better, than an uncertain
and wandering Fame of their memories; or some barren and naked Elogie. For
herein the invention of one of the late Poets, whereby he has well enricht the
ancient Fiction, is not inelegant: He faines that at the end of the Thread of
every man's life, there was a Medall or Tablet, whereon the name of the Dead was
stamped; and that time waited upon the sheeres of the fatal Sister, and as
soon as the Thread was cut, caught the Medalls, and carrying them away; a
little after threw them out of his Bosom into the River Lethe And that about
the Bank there were many Birds flying up and down, that would get the Medals;
and after they had carried them in their beakes a little while, soon after,
through negligence suffered them to fall into the River. Amongst these Birds
there were a few swannes found, which if they got a Medall with a name, they
used to carry it to a certain Temple consecrate to Immortality. But such
swannes are rare in our Age. And although many men more mortal in their
vigilancies and studies, than in their bodies, despise the Memory of their
Name, as if it were fume or air, Plin. Iun. alicubi in Epist.
Animae nil magnae laudis egentes: namely whose Philosophy and severity springs
from that root, Non prius lauds contempsimus quam laudandafacere descivimus.
Yet that will not with us, Prove. 10.
prejudicate Salomon's Judgment, The memory of the Just is with Benediction;
but the name of the wicked shall putrify: The one perpetually florishes; the
other either instantly departs into Oblivion; or dissolves into an ill Odor.
And therefore in that style and form of speaking, which is very well brought
in use, attributed to the Dead, of Happy Memory; of Pious Memory; of Blessed
Memory; we seem to acknowledge that which Cicero alleges; borrowing it from
Demosthenes, Bonam Famam propriam esse possessionem defunctorum; which
possession I cannot but note that in our age it lies much wast and neglected.

As concerning Relations it could be in truth; wished, that there were a
greater diligence taken therein: For there is no Action more eminent, that has
not some able Pen to attend it, which may take and transcribe it. And because
it is a Quality not common to all men to write a Perfect History to the Life
and Dignity thereof; (as may well appear by the small number, even of mean
Writers in that kind) yet if particular Actions were but by a tolerable Pen
reported, as they pass, it might be hoped that in some after Age, Writers
might arise, that might compile a Perfect History by the help an assistance of
such Notes: For such Collections might be as a Nursery Garden, whereby to Plant
a fair and stately Garden, when time should serve.

CAP. VIII The Partition of the History of Times, into History Universal; and
Particular. The Advantages and Disadvantages of both.
THE History of Times is either Universal; or Particular: This comprehends the
affairs of some Kingdom; or State; or Nation: That the affairs of the whole
world. Neither have there bin wanting those, who would seem to have composed a
History of the world, even from the Birth thereof; presenting a miscellany of
matter and compends of Reports for History. Others have bin confident that they
might comprize, as in a Perfect History, the Acts of their own times,
memorable throughout the world; which was certainly a generous attempt, and of
singular use. For the actions, and negotiations of men, are not so divorced
through the division of Kingdoms, and Countries; but that they have many
coincident Connexions: wherefore it is of great import to behold the fates, and
affairs destinate to one age or time drawn, as it were and delineate in one
Table. For it falls out that many writings not to be despised (such as are they
whereof we spoke before, Relations) which perchance otherwise would perish; nor
often come to the Press; or at least the chief heads thereof might be
incorporated into the body of such a General History, and by this means be
fixed and preserved. Yet notwithstanding if a man well weigh the matter, he
shall perceive that the Laws of a Just History are so severe and strict, as
they can hardly be observed in such a vastness of Argument; so that the
Majesty of History is rather minisht, than amplified by the greatness of the
Bulk. For it comes to pass that he, who every where pursues such variety of
matter; the precise strictness of Information by degrees slackned; and his
own diligence dispersed in so many things, weakened in all,) takes up popular
Reports and Rumors; and from Relations not so authentic, or some other such
like slight stuff, compiles a History. Moreover he is forced (lest the work
should grow too voluminous) purposely to pass over many occurrences worth the
relating; and many times to fall upon the way of Epitomes and abridgments.
There is yet another danger of no small importance which such a work is liable
unto, which is directly opposed to the profitable use of Universal History;
for as General History preserves some Relations with it may be, otherwise
would be lost; so contrariwise many times it extinguishes other fruitful
Narrations which otherwise would have lived through Breviaries, which are ever
accepted in the world.

CAP. IX. An other Partition of the History of Times into Annals and Iournals.
THE Partition of the History of Time is likewise well made into Annals; and
Iournals. Which Division though it derive the names from the Period of Times,
yet pertaines also to the choice of Business. For Tacitus says well, Annal.
13.
when falling upon the mention of the magnificence of certain structures,
presently he adds; Ex dignitate Populi To. repertum esse, res illustres,
Annalibus; Talia, Diurnis urbis Actis mandare: Applying to Annals, Matters of
State; to Diaries, Acts and Accidents of a meaner nature. And in my judgment a
Discipline of Heraldry would be to purpose in the disposing of the merits of
Books; as of the merits of Persons. For as nothing does more derogate from
Civil Affairs, than the confusion of Orders and Degrees; so it does not a
little embase the authority of a grave History, to intermingle matters of
trivial consequence, with matters of State; such as are Triumphs, and
Ceremonies; Shows, and Pageants, and the like. And surely it could be wished
that this distinction would come into Custom. In our Times Iournals are in use
only in Navigations, and Expeditions of war. Amongst the Ancients it was a
point of Honor to Princes to have the Acts of their Court referred to
Iournals. Lib. Esth. Cap. 6.
Which we see was preserved in the reign of Ahasuerus King of Persia, who when
he could not take rest called for the Chronicles; wherein he reviewed the
Treason of the Evnuches past in his own time. Plutarch Symp. 1.
But in the Diaries of Alexander the Great, such small Particularities were
contained, that if he chanced but to sleep at the Table, it was Registered. For
neither have Annals only comprised grave matters, and Iournals only light; but
all were promiscuously, and cursorily taken in Diaries; whether of greater, or
of lesser Importance.

CAP. X. A Second Partition of History Civil, into Simple, and Mixed.
Cosmographic a mixed History.
THE last Partition of Civil History may be this. History Simple, and Mixed.
The Commune Mixtures are two, the one from Civil Knowledge; the other
specially from Natural. For there is a kind of writing introduced by some, to
set down their Relations, not continued according to the Series of the History;
but picked out, according to the choice of the Author, which he after
re-examines, and ruminates upon; and taking occasion from those selected
pieces, discourses of Civil Matters. Which kind of Ruminated History, we do
exceeding well allow of; so such a Writer do it indeed, and profess himself
so to do. But for a man resolvedly writeing a Just History, every where to
ingest Politic inter-laceings; and so to break off the thread of the story,
is unseasonable and tedious. For although every wise History be full, and as it
were impregnate with Political Precepts and Counsils; yet the Writer himself
should not be his own Midwife at the delivery.

Cosmography likewise is a mixt-History, for it has from Natural History, the
Regions themselves, and their site and commodities; from Civil History,
Habitations, Regiments and Manners; from the Mathematiques, Climates, and the
Configurations of the Heavens, under which the Coasts and Quarters of the World
do lie. In which kind of History or Knowledge, we have cause to Congratulate
our Times; for the world in this our age, has throughlights made in it, after
a wonderful manner. The Ancients certainly had knowledge of the Zones, and of
the Anti-podes. Virg. Geor. 1.
(Nosque ubi Primus Equis Oriens afflavit anhelis,
Jllic sera Rubens accendit Lumina vesper)
and rather by Demonstrations than by Travels. But for some small keele to
emulate Heaven it self; and to Circle the whole Globe of the Earth, with a
more oblique and winding Course, than the Heavens do; this is the glory and
prerogative of our Age. So that these Times may justly bear in their word, not
only Plus ultra, whereas the Ancients used non ultra; and also imitabile
fulmen, for the Ancients non imitabile fulmen.

Demens qui Nimbos and non imitabile Fulmen. Virg. Aen. 6
But likewise that which exceeds all admiration imitabile Coelum, our voyages;
to whom it has bin often granted to wheel and role about the whole compass
of the Earth, after the manner of Heavenly Bodies. And this excellent felicity
in Nauticall Art, and environing the world, may plant also an expectation of
farther, PROFICIENCIES AND AUGMENTATIONS OF SCIENCES; specially seeing it seems
to be decreed by the divine Counsill, that these two should be Coaevals, for so
the Prophet Daniel speaking of the latter times foretells, Plurimi
pertransibunt and augebitur Scientia: Cap. 12.
as if the through Passage, or Perlustration of the World, and the various
propagation of knowledge were appointed to be in the same Ages; as we see it is
already performed in great part; seeing our times do not much give place for
Learning to the former two Periods, or Returns of Learning; the one of the
Graecians; the other of the Romans; and in some kinds far exceed them.

CAP. XI. I. The Partition of Ecclesiastical History, into the General
History of the Church. II. History of Prophesy. III. History of Providence.
HIstory Ecclesiastical falls under the same division commonly with Civil
History; for there are Ecclesiastical Chronicles; there are Lives of Fathers;
there are Relations of Synods, and the like, pertaining to the Church. In
proper expression this kind of History is divided, into the History of the
Church by a general name; History of Prophesy; and History of Providence. The
first records the times and different state of the Church Militant; whether
she flote as the Arc in the Deluge; or sojourne as the Arc in the
Wilderness; or be at rest as the Arc in the Temple; that is, the State of the
Church in Persecution; in Remove; and in Peace. In this Part I find no
Deficience; but rather more things abound therein, than are wanting; only this
I could wish, that the virtue and syncerity of the Narrations were answerable
to the greatness of the Mass.

II The Second Part which is the History of Prophecy, consists of two
Relatives; the Prophesy it self; and the accomplishment thereof. wherefore the
design of this work ought to be, that every Prophesy of Scripture be sorted
with the truth of the event; and that throughout all the ages of the world;
both for Confirmation of Faith; as also to plant a Discipline; and skill in the
Interpretation of Prophesies, which are not yet accomplished. But in this work,
that latitude must be allowed which is proper, and familiar unto Divine
Prophesies; that their accomplishments may be both perpetual and punctual. For
they resemble the nature of their Auctor to whom one day is as a thousand
years, Psalm 90
and a thousand years are but as one day: And though the fullness, and height
of their complement be many times assigned to some certain age, or certain
point of time; yet they have nevertheless many stairs and scales of
Accomplishment throughout diverse Ages of the world. This work I set down as
DEFICIENT;
but it is of that nature as must be handled with great wisdom, sobriety, and
reverence, or not at all.

III The third Part which is the History of Providence has fallen indeed upon
the Pens of many pious Writers, but not without siding of Partiaries; and it is
employed in the observation of that divine Correspondence which often
interveneth between Gods revealed Will, and his secret Will. For though the
Counsils, and Judgments of God be so obscure, that they are inscrutable to the
Natural man; 1 Cor. 2.
yea many times withdraw themselves even from their eyes, that look out of the
Tabernacle: Yet sometimes by turns it pleases the Divine wisdom for the
Confirmation of this; and Confutation of those which are as without God in the
world; Ad Ephesians. 2.
to propose them to be seen written in such Capital Letters, that, as the
Prophet speaks, Every one that runs by, may read them; Habac. 2.
that is, that men merely Sensual, and Carnal; who make have to post over
those divine Judgments; and never fix their cogitations upon them; yet though
they are upon the speed, and intend nothing less; they are urged to
acknowledge them. Such as are late, and unlooked for Judgments; unhoped for
Deliverances suddenly shining forth; the divine Counsils, passing through such
Serpentine windings, and wonderful mazes of things; at length manifestly
disintangling, and clearing themselves. which serve not only for the
Consolation of the minds of the Faithful; but for the Astonishment and
Conviction of the Consciences of the Wicked.

there are feigned Chronicles, feigned Lives, and feigned Relations) is this, that
it is either Narrative; or Representative, or Allusive. Narrative is a mere
imitation of History, that in a manner it deceives us; but that often it
extolls matters above belief. Drammaticall or Representative, is as it were, a
visible History; for it sets out the Image of things, as if they were Present;
and History, as if they were Past. Parabolicall or Allusive is History with the
Type, which brings down the Images of the understanding to the Objects of
Sense.

As for Narrative Poesy, or if you please Heroical (so you understand it of
the Matter, not of the Verse) it seems to be raised altogether from a noble
foundation; which makes much for the Dignity of man's Nature. For seeing this
sensible world, is in dignity inferior to the soul of Man; Poesy seems to
endow Humane Nature with that which History denies; and to give satisfaction to
the Mind, with, at least, the shadow of things, where the substance cannot be
had. For if the matter be thoroughly considered; a strong Argument may be drawn
from Poesy, that a more stately greatness of things; a more Perfect Order; and
a more beautiful variety delights the soul of Man, than any way can be found
in Nature, since the Fall. Wherefore seeing the Acts and events, which are the
subject of true History, are not of that amplitude, as to content the mind of
Man; Poesy is ready at hand to feign Acts more Heroical. Because true History
reports the successes of business, not proportionable to the merit of Virtues
and Vices; Poesy corrects it, and presents events and Fortunes according to
desert, and according to the Law of Providence: because true History, through
the frequent satiety and similitude of Things, works a distaste and misprision
in the mind of Man; Poesy cheereth and refreshes the soul; chanting things
rare, and various, and full of vicissitudes. So as Poesy serves and conferreth
to Delectation, Magnanimity, and Morality; and therefore it may seem deservedly
to have some Participation of Divinenesse; because it does raise the mind, and
exalt the spirit with high raptures, by proportioning the shows of things to
the desires of the mind; and not submitting the mind to things, as Reason and
History do. And by these allurements, and congruities, whereby it cherishes
the soul of man; joined also with consort of Music, whereby it may more
sweetly insinuate it self, it has won such access, that it has bin in
estimation even in rude times, and Barbarous Nations, when other Learning stood
excluded.

II. Drammaticall, or Representative Poesy, which brings the World upon the
stage, is of excellent use, if it were not abused. For the Instructions, and
Corruptions of the Stage, may be-great; but the corruptions in this kind
abound; the Discipline is altogether neglected in our times. For although in
modern Commonwealths, Stage-plaies be but estimed a sport or pastime, unless
it draw from the Satyr, and be mordant; yet the care of the Ancients was, that
it should instruct the minds of men unto virtue. Nay, wise men and great
Philosophers, have accounted it, as the Archet, or musical Bow of the Mind.
And certainly it is most true, and as it were, a secret of nature, that the
minds of men are more patent to affections, and impressions, Congregate, than
solitary.

III. But Poesy Allusive, or Parabolicall, excells the rest, and seems to be
a sacred and venerable thing; especially seeing Religion it self has allowed
it in a work of that nature, and by it, trafiques divine commodities with men.
But even this also has bin contaminate by the levity and indulgence of men's
wits about Allegories. And it is of ambiguous use, and applied to contrary
ends. For it serves for Obscuration; and it serves also for Illustration: in
this it seems there was sought a way how to teach; in that an Art how to
conceal. And this way of teaching which conduces to Jllustration, was much in
use in the Ancient times: for when the Inventions and conclusions of human
reason, (which are now common and vulgar) were in those ages strange and
unusual; the understandings of men were not so capable of that subtilty,
unless such discourses, by resemblances and examples, were brought down to
sense. Wherefore in those first ages all were full of Fables, and of Parables,
and of Aenigmaes, and of Similitudes of all sorts. Hence the Symboles of
Pythagoras; the Aenigmaes of Sphynx; and the Fables of Aesop; and the like. So
the Apophthegmes of the Ancient sages, were likewise expressed by similitudes.
Live. Hist. lib. 2.
So Menenius Agrippa, amongst the Romans, a Nation in that age not learned,
repressed a sedition by a Fable. And as Hieroglyphiques were before letters; so
Parables were before Arguments. So even at this day, and ever, there is, and
has bin much life, and vigor in Parables; because Arguments cannot be so
sensible, nor examples so fit. There is another use of Parabolicall Poesy,
opposite to the former, which tends to the folding up of those things; the
dignity whereof, deserves to be retired, and distinguished, as with a drawn
Curtain: That is when the secrets and mysteries of Religion, Policy, and
Philosophy are veiled, and invested with Fables, and Parables. But whether
there be any mystical sense couched under the ancient Fables of the Poets, may
admit some doubt: and indeed for our part we incline to this opinion, as to
think, that there was an infused mystery in many of the ancient Fables of the
Poets. Neither does it move us that these matters are left commonly to
Schoole-boyes, and Grammarians, and so are imbased, that we should therefore
make a slight judgment upon them: but contrariwise because it is clear that
the writings which recite those Fables of all the writings of men, next to
sacred writ, are the most ancient; and that the Fables themselves, are far
more ancient than they (being they are alleged by those writers, not as
excogitated by them, but as credited and recepted before) they seem to be like
a fine-delicate Air blown up and down by a more Ancient Nation, and by
derivation from them to have chanced into the Pipes of the Grecians; and to
have become their Des-cant; And because that whatsoever has hitherto bin
undertaken for interpretation of these Parables, namely by unskilful men, not
learned beyond common places, give us no satisfaction at all; we thought good
to refer Philosophy according to ancient Parables,
in the number of DEFICIENTS.

And we will annex an example or two of this work: not that the matter perhaps
is of such moment: but to maintain the purpose of our design. That is this;
that if any portion of these works which we report as Deficient, chance to be
more obscure than ordinary; that we alwaise propose, either Precepts, or
Examples, for the perfecting of that work; lest perchance some should imagine,
that our conceit has only comprehended some light notions of them; and that we
like Augures, only measure Countries in our mind, but know not how to set one
foot forward thither. As for any other part defective in Poesy, we find none;
nay rather, Poesy being a plant coming, as it were, from the lust of a rank
soil, without any certain seed, it has sprung up, and spread abroad above all
other kind of Learning. But now we will propound examples, in number only
three, one from things Natural; one from Political; and one from Moral.

The first example of Philosophy, according to Ancient Parables in things
Natural. Of the Universe, according to the Fable of Pan.
IV. The Original of Pan, the Ancients leave doubtful; Hom. Him. Herod. Eut.
for some say that he was the Son of Mercury, others attribute unto him a
far different beginning: For they affirm that all Penelopes suitors had to
do with her, and from this promiscuous Act Pan descended, a common offspring
to them all. There is a third conceit of his birth, not to be passed over: for
some report that he was the son of Jupiter and Hybris, which signifies
contumely. But however begotten, the Parcae, they say, were his sisters, who
dwelt in a cave under ground; but Pan remained in the open Air. The figure and
form, Antiquity represented him by, was this. He had on his head a pair of
Horns, riseing in a sharp, acuminate to heaven; his body shagged, and hairie;
his beard very long, his shape biformed; above like a man, below like a beast;
finished with the feet of a Goat. He bare these ensigns of Jurisdiction; in his
left hand a pipe of seven Reeds; in his right a sheep hoock or a staff, at
the upper end crooked or inflexed: he was clad with a Mantle made of a Leopards
skin. The dignities and offices attributed unto him were these; that he was
the God of Hunters; of Sheepherds; and of all Rural Inhabitants. Lo. President
of Mountains; and next to Mercury, the Ambassador of the Gods. Moreover he was
accounted the leader, and commander of the Nymphs; which were always wont to
dance the Rounds, and frisk about him: his train were the Satyrs, and the old
Sileni: He had power also to strike men with terrors, and those especially
vain, and superstitious, which are termed Panique fears. Cic. Epist. ad Act.
l. 5.
His Acts recorded are not many; the chiefest was, that he challenged Cupid at
wrestling, in which conflict he had the foil; caught Typhon the Giant in a
net, Claud. de R. Proser.
and held him fast. Moreover when Ceres being sad and vexed for the Rape of
Proserpina, had hid her self, and that all the Gods took pains by dispersing
themselves several ways to find her out; it was only Pans good fortune, as he
was hunting, to light on her, and to give the first intelligence where she was.
Ovid. Met. XI,
He presumed also to put it to the trial who was the better Musician he or
Apollo, and by the judgment of Midas was preferred; for which judgment, Midas
had a pair of Asses ears secretly imped to his head. Of the Love-tricks of
Pan, there is nothing reported, or at least not much; a thing to be wondered at,
especially being among a troop of Gods so profusely amorous. This also is said
of him, that he loved the Nymph Echo whom he took to wife; and one pretty
wench more called Syrinx, toward whom Cupid (in an angry revengefull humor
because so audaciously he had challenged him at wrestling) inflamed his desire.
So he is reported once to have solicited the Moon apart into the high Woods.
Moreover he had no issue (which is a marvel also seeing the Gods specially
those of the male-kind were very Generative) only he was the reputed Father of
a litte Girl called Iambe, that with many pretty tales was wont to make
strangers merry; and some thought that she was begotten of his wife Echo. The
Parable seems to be this.

Pan as the very name imports represents, or lays open the world, or the
world of things. Concerning his Original there are only two opinions that go
for Current. For either he came of Mercury, that is the Word of God, which the
holy Scriptures, without all Controversy, affirm; and the Philosophers such as
were the more Divine saw; or else from the confused seeds of things. For some
of the Philosophers held, that the Seeds and Principles of Nature, were even in
the substance infinite, hence the opinion, of Similary Parts primordiall, was
brought in; Laert. in Anaxag.
which Anaxagoras either invented, or celebrated. Some more acutely, and
soberly think it sufficient to salve the variety of Nature, if seeds, the same
in substance, be only diversified in form and figure; certain and definite;
Laerr in vitis eoru^.
and placed the rest in the enclosure, and bosom of the seeds. From this
spring, the opinion of Atoms is derived, which Democritus maintained; and
Leucippus found out. But others though they affirm only one Principle of Nature
( Thales water; Anaximenes Air; Laert. in vitis.
Heraclitus Fire) yet they have defined that Principle, which is one in Act, to
be various and dispensible in power; as that wherein the seeds of all natural
essences lie hidden. They who have introduced the first Matter every way
disarayed, Jn Timaeo
and unformed, and in different to any form (as Plato and Aristotle did) came
to a far nearer, phys. I.
and natural resemblance of the Figure of the Parable. For they conceived the
Matter as a common Courtezan; and the Forms as Suitors. So as all the Opinions
touching the beginnings of things come to this point, and may be reduced to
this distribution; that the world took beginning either from Mercury; or from
Penelope; and all her Suitors. The third conceit of Pans Original is such, as
it seems that the Grecians either by intercourse with the Egyptians; or one
way or other, had heard something of the Hebrew mysteries. For it points to the
state of the World not considered in the absolute production; but as it stood
after the fall of Adam, exposed and made subject to Death and Corruption: For
in that state it was, and remains to this day; the offspring of God, and of
Sin, or Contumely. Genesis 3.
For the like sin of Adam was a kind of Contumely, Genesis 3.
when he would be like God. And therefore all these three Narrations
concerning the manner of of Pans Birth, may seem true; if they be rightly
distinguished according to things and times. For this Pan, as we now behold and
comprehend it, took beginning from the word of God, by the means of confused
matter, which yet was the work of God, and the entrance of Prevarication, and
through it of corruption.

The Destinies may well be thought the sisters of Pan, or Nature: for the
beginings, and continuances, and dissolutions; the Depressions also, and
eminencies, and labors, and felicities of things; and whatsoever conditions of
a particular Nature, are called Fates or Destinies: which yet unless it be in
some noble individuate subject, as a Man, a City, or a Nation, commonly are
not acknowledged. But Pan, that is, the Nature of things, is the cause of these
several states, and qualities in every particular; so as in respect of
Individualls, the Chain of nature, and the thread of the Destinies, is the
same. Moreover the Ancients fained, that Pan ever lived in the open Air; but
the PARCae, or Destinies, in a mighty subterraneous Cave; from whence with an
infinite swiftness they flew to men: because the nature and common face of the
Universe is apert, and visible; but the individual Fates of Particulars are
secret, swift, and sudden. But if Fate be taken in a more general acception,
as to signify the more notable only, and not every common event; yet in that
sense also, the signification is correspondent to the universal state of
things; seeing from the order of Nature, there is nothing so small which comes
to pass without a Cause; and nothing so absolutely great, as to be
independent; so that the very Fabrique of Nature comprehends in the lap and
bosom thereof, every event, small or great; and by a constant rule discloseth
them in due season. Wherefore no marvel if the PARCae be brought in as the
legitimate Sisters of Pan: For Fortune is the daughter of the foolish vulgar;
and found favor only with the more unsound Philosophers. Certainly the words
of Epicurus savor less of Dotage than of profaneness where he says;
Praestare credere fabulam Deorum, Senec. in Epist.
quam Fatum asserere, As if any thing in the frame of nature could be like an
Island, which is separate from the connection of the co^tinent. But Epicurus (as
it is evident from his own words) accommodating, and subjecting his Natural
Philosophy to his Moral; would hear of no opinion which might press and
sting the conscience; or any way disca lme, and trouble that, Euthymia, or
Tranquillity of mind, which he had received from Democritus. Wherefore being
more indulgent to the delusions of his own fancies, than patient of truth; he
has fairly cast off the yoke, and abandoned as well the Necessity of Fate, as
the Fear of the Gods. And thus much concerning the Fraternity of Pan with the
Destinies.

Horns are attributed unto the World, broad at the root, sharp at the top;
the nature of all things being like a Pyramid lessening upwards. For
Individuals in which the Base of nature is spread out; being infinite, are
collected into Species, which are many also; Species again rise up into
Generals; and these ascending are contracted into more Universal
Generalities; so that at length, nature may seem to close in a unity; which is
signified by the Pyramidal Figure of Pans Horns. Neither is it to be wondered
at, that Pan touches heaven with his horns; seeing the transcendentals of
Nature, or Universal Ideas, Iliad. IX.
do in some sort reach things Divine. Wherefore Homers famous Chain of
Natural Causes, tied to the foot of Jupiters Chair, was celebrated. And it is
plain, that no man conversant in Metaphysique; and those things which in Nature
are Eternal, and immovable; and that has never so little withdrawn his mind
from the fluid ruin of sublunary things, which does not at the same instant
fall upon Natural Theology: so direct and compendious a passage it is, from
the top of the Pyramid, to Matters Divine.

The body of Nature is elegantly and lively drawn Hairy, representing the
beams of things; for beams are, as it were, the hairs or bristles of nature;
and every Creature is more or less Beamy; which is most apparent in the
faculty of seeing; and no less in every magnetique virtue, and operation upon
distance; for whatsoever works upon any thing upon Distance, that may rightly
be said to dart forth rays. Moreover Pans beard is said to be exceeding long,
because the beams or influences of the Heavens; and specially of the Sun,
do operate, and pierce farthest of all; so that not only the surface, but the
inward bowels of the earth have bin turned; subduc'd; and impregnate, with the
masculine Spirit of the heavenly influence. And the form of Pans beard is the
more elegant; because the Sun when his higher part, is shadowed with a Cloud,
his beams break out in the lower; and so appears to the eye as if he were
bearded.

Nature also is most expressively set forth with a biformed Body; in reference
to the Differences between superior and inferior bodies. For the one part, by
reason of their beauty; and equability; and constancy of motion; and domiminion
over the earth; and earthly things; is aptly set out by the shape of man: And
the other part in respect of their perturbations; and irregular motions; and
that they are for most part commanded by the Celestial; may be well fitted
with the figure of a bruit beast. Again this same bi-formed description of his
body, pertaines to the participation of the species or kind; for no species of
Nature, seems to be simple; but, as it were participating and compounded of
two, Essential Ingredients. For Man has something of a Beast: a Beast
something of a Plant: a Plant something of an inanimate Body: and all Natural
things are indeed bi-formed; and compounded of a superior and inferior kind.

It is a witty Allegory that same, of the feet of the Goat; by reason of the
upward tending motions of Terrestiall bodies toward the regions of the air;
and of the heaven; where also they become pensile; and from thence are rather
forced down, than fall down. For the Goat is a mounting Animal, that loves to
be hanging upon rocks, and precipices, and steep hills: And this is done also in
a wonderful manner, even by those things which are destinated to this inferior
Globe; as may manifestly appear, in Clouds and Meteors. And it was not without
the grounds of reason, that Gilbert, De Magn.
who has written a painful and an experimental work, touching a Loadstone,
cast in this doubt, Whether or no ponderous bodies, after a great distance, and
long discontinuance from the earth, may not put off their motion toward the
inferior Globe?

The two ensigns which Pan bears in his hands, do point, the one at Harmony,
the other at Empirie: for the Pipe of seven Reeds, does evidently demonstrate
the consent and Harmony; or discordant concord of Nature, which is caused by
the motion of the seven wandering stars: for there are no other Errors, or
manifest Expatiations in heaven, save those of the seven Planets; which being
intermingled, and moderated with the equality of the fixed stars; and their
perpetual and invariable distance one from the other, may maintain and excite
both the constancy in specificall; and the fluency of Individual Natures. If
there be any lesser Planets which are not conspicuous; or any greater Mutation
in heaven (as in many superlunary Comets) they seem but like Pipes, either
altogether mute, or only streperous for a time, because their influence either
does not stream down so low as to us; or does not long interrupt the Harmony of
the seven Pipes of Pan. And that Staff of Empirie, may be excellently applied
to the order of Nature, which is partly right, partly crooked. And this staff
or rod is especially crooked at the upper end; because all the works of
Divine Providence are commonly fetched about by circuits, and windings; so that
one thing may seem to be done, and yet indeed a clean contrary brought to
pass; as the selling of Joseph into Egypt, and the like. Genesis 45.
Besides in all wise humane Government, they that sit at the helm, do more
happily bring their purposes about, and insinuate more easily things fit for
the people, by pretexts, and oblique courses; than by downright dealing. Nay
(which perchance may seem very strange) in things merely natural, you may
sooner deceive nature, than force her; so improper, and selfe-impeaching are
open direct proceedings; whereas on the other side, an oblique and an insinuing
way, gently glides along, and compasses the intended effect.

Pans Cloak or Mantle, is ingeniously feigned to be the Skin of a Leopard,
because it is full of spots: so the Heavens are spotted with stars; the Sea
with Islands; the Land with flowers; and every particular creature also, is for
most part garnished with diverse colors about the superficies; which is, as it
were a Mantle unto it.

The office of Pan could be by nothing so conceived; and expressed to the life,
as by faigning him to be the God of Hunters; for every natural Action, and so
by consequence, motion and progression, is nothing else but a Hunting. Arts and
Sciences have their works; and humane Counsils their ends, which they earnestly
hunt after. All natural things have either their food, as a Prey; or their
pleasure, as a recreation, which they seek for; and that in a quick-discursive,
and discerning way.

Virg. B. 2.
Torva leaena Lupum sequitur, Lupus ipse Capellum,
Florentem Cythisum sequitur lasciva Capella.
Pan is also said to be the God of the Country Swains; because men of this
condition lead lives more agreeable unto Nature, than those that live in the
Cities and Courts of Princes; where Nature by too much Art is corrupted: so as
the saying of the Poet (though in the sense of love) may be here verified:
Mart. Ep.
-- Pars minima est ipsa puella sui.

Pan was held to be Lo. President of the Mountains; because in high Mountains
and Hills, Nature lays her self most open, and is most displaied to the view
and contemplation of men.

Whereas Pan is said to be (next unto Mercury) the Messenger of the Gods; there
is in that a Divine Mystery contained; because, next unto the word of God, the
Image of the world proclaims the Divine power and wisdom; as records the
sacred Poet, Psalm. 19.
The Heavens proclaim the Glory of God, and the vast Expansion reports the
works of his hands.

The Nymphs, that is the Souls of living things, give great delight to Pan:
for the souls of the living are the Minions of the World. The Conduct of these
Nymphs is with great reason attributed to Pan, because these Nymphs, or Souls
of the liveing, do follow their natural disposition, as their guides; and
with infinite variety every one of them after the fashion of his country, does
leap and dance with uncessant motion about her. N. L.
Wherefore one of the Modern very ingeniously has reduced all the power of
the Soul into Motion; noteing the misprision, and precipitancy of some of the
ancients; who fixing their eyes and thoughts with unadvised have, upon Memory;
Imagination, and Reason, have past over the Cogitative faculty untoucht; which
has a chief part in the order of conception. For he that calls a thing into
his mind, whether by impression or recordation, cogitateth and considers; and
he that imployeth the faculty of his fancy also cogitateth; and he that
reasons does in like manner cogitate or advise: and to be brief, the Soul
of man, whether admonisht by sense, or left to her own liberty; whether in
functions of the Intellect, or of the affections and of the will, dances to the
musical aires of the cogitations; which is that tripudiation of the Nymphs.

The Satyrs, and Sileni, are perpetual followers of Pan, that is old age and
youth: for of all natural things, there is a lively, jocund, and (as I may
say) a danceing age; and a dull, flegmatique age: the carriages and
dispositions of both which ages, may peradventure seem, to a man which
seriously observes them, as ridiculous and deformed, as those of the Satyrs,
or of the Sileni.

Touching the Terrors which Pan is said to be the Author of, there may be made
a wise instruction; namely, that Nature has implanted in every living thing, a
kind of care and fear, tending to the preservation of its own life, and being;
and to the repelling and shunning of all hurtful encounters. And yet Nature
knows not how to keep a mean, but always intermixeth vain and empty fears,
with such as are discreet and profitable; so that all things (if their insides
might be seen) would appear full of Panique frights; but specially Men; and
above all other men, the people which are wonderfully travailed and tossed with
superstition; specially in hard, and formidable, and adverse times; which
indeed is nothing else but a Panique terror. Nor does this superstition reign
only in the vulgar; but from popular opinions, breaks out some times upon wise
men; as Divinely Epicurus (if the rest of his discourses touching the Gods, had
bin conformable to this rule) Non Deos vulgi negare prophanum; Laert. in Epicur.
sed vulgi opiniones diis applicare prophanum.

Concerning the audacity of Pan; and his combat upon challenge with Cupid; the
meaning of it is, that matter wants not inclination, and desire, to the
relapsing and dissolution of the World into the old Chaos; if her malice and
violence were not restrained and kept in order, by the prepotent concord of
things; signified by Cupid, or the God of Love. And therefore it fell out well
for man, by the fatal contexture of the world; or rather the great goodness
of the Divine Providence, that Pan was found too weak, and overcome. To the
same effect may be interpreted, his catching of Typhon in a net: for howsoever
there may sometimes happen vast, and unwonted tumors (as the name of Typhon
imports) either in the Sea, or in the Air, or in the Earth; yet nature does
entangle in an intricate toil, and curb and restrain as it were with a
chain of Adamant the excesses and insolences of these kind of Bodies.

As touching the finding out of Ceres, attributed to this God, and that as he
was hunting and thought little of it, which none of the other Gods could do,
though they did nothing else but seek her, and that with diligence; it gives us
this true and grave admonition; that is, that men do not expect the invention
of things necessary for life and manners, from abstract Philosophies, as from
the greater Gods; though they should apply themselves to no other study; but
only from Pan, that is, from discreet experience, and from the universal
observation of the things of the World; where oftentimes by chance (and as it
were going a hunting) such inventions are lighted upon. For the most profitable
inventions, are the offspring, of experience; and, as it were, certain
Donatives distributed to men by chance.

His contestation with Apollo about Music; Addas and inco^par. Sandisij
co^me^t. ad Ovid. Mer. XI.
and the event thereof, contains a wholesome instruction, which may serve to
restrain men's reasons, and judgments, with the reins of sobriety, from
boasting and glorying in their gifts. For there seems to be a twofold Harmony
or Music; the one of Divine Wisdom; the other of Humane Reason; for, to
humane judgment, and as it were, the ear of mortals; the administration, of
the world; and of Creatures therein; and the more secret judgments of God,
sound somewhat hard and harsh: Which rude ignorance, albeit it be well
proclaimed by Asses ears; yet notwitstanding these ears are secret, and do
not openly appear; neither is it perceived, or noted as a Deformity by the
Vulgar.

Lastly it is not to be wondered at, that there is nothing attributed unto Pan
concerning Loves, but only of the marriage with Echo; for the world does enjoy
it self, and in it self all things else. Now he that loves would enjoy
something but where there is enough, there is no place left to desire.
Wherefore there can be no wanton love in Pan, or the World, nor desire to
obtain any thing, (seeing it is contented with it self) but only Speeches;
which (if plain) are pronounced by the Nymph Echo, a thing not substantial,
but only vocal, if more accurate by Syringa; that is, when words and voices
are regulate by certain numbers; Poetical, or Oratoricall, as by musical
measures. It is an excellent invention that amongst speeches, and voices, only
Echo should be taken in marriage by the World; for that alone is true
Philosophy, which does faithfully render the very words of the world; and which
is written, no otherwise, than the world does dictate; and is nothing else than
the image and reflection thereof; and adds nothing of its own, but only
iterates, and resounds.

And whereas Pan is reported to have called the Moon aside into a
high-shadowed wood; seems to appertain to the convention between sense and
heavenly, or divine things. For the case of Endymion, and Pan are different;
the Moon of her own accord came down to Endymion, as he was asleep: For
that Divine illuminations oftentimes gently slide into the understanding, cast
asleep, and retired from the senses; but if they be called, and sent for by
Sense, as by Pan; than they present no other light than that, Quale sub
incertam lunam sub luce maligna
Est iter in sylvis. --
It belongs also to the sufficiency, and perfection of the world, that it
begets no issue: For the world does generate in respect of its parts; but in
respect of the whole, how can it generate, seeing there is no body beyond the
bounds of the Universe? As for that Girl Iambe, fathered upon Pan, certainly
it is a wise adjection to the fable; for by her are represented those vain and
idle Paradoxes concerning the nature of things, which have been frequent in all
ages, and have filled the world with novelties, for the matter, fruitles;
spurious for the Race; by their garrulity, sometimes pleasant; sometimes
tedious and unseasonable.

An other example of Philosophy according to Ancient Parables in Politiques, of
War, according to the Fable of Perseus.
Herod. Polym. Ovid. Met. 4.
V Perseus a Prince of the East is reported to have bin employed by Pallas for
the destroying of Medusa, who was very infestious to the western parts of the
world, about the utmost Coasts of Hiberia. Paus. Strab.
A Monster huge and fierce, of an aspect so dire and horrid, that with her very
looks she turned men into stones. Of all the Gorgons this Medusa alone was
mortal, the rest not subject to death. Perseus therefore preparing himself
for this noble enterprise, had Arms, and gifts bestowed on him by three of
the Gods: Mercury gave him wings fitted for his feet not his arms; Pluto a
helmet; Pallas a shield, and a Looking-glass. Notwithstanding although he was
thus well furnished, he went not directly to Medusa, but turned into the Greae,
which by the Mothers side were sisters to the Gorgons. These Greae from their
birth were hoary-headed, resembling old women. They had but one only eye, and
one tooth among them all; both which as they had occasion to go abroad, they
were wont in course to take with them, and at their return to lay them down
again. This Eye and Tooth they lent to Perseus: so finding himself completely
appointed for the Action designed, with winged speed he marches toward Medusa.
Her he found sleeping; yet durst not venture himself a front to her aspect, if
she should chance to awake; but turning his head aside, beholding her by
reflection in Pallas Mirror, and so directing his blow, cut of her head; from
whose blood gushing out, instantly there emerged Pegasus the flyeing Horse. Her
head thus smitten off, Perseus transferres and inserts into Pallas shield;
which yet retained this virtue, that whosoever looked upon it, as one blasted or
Plannet-struck, he should suddenly become senseless.

This Fable seems to be devised for direction to the preparation, Sandys
Comment. in Ovid. Met. 4. Renovard.
and order that is to be observed in making of war. And first the undertaking
of any war ought to be as a commission from Pallas; certainly not from Venus,
(as the Trojan war was) or some such slight motive; because the Designs of
War, ought to be grounded upon solid Counsils. Than for the choice of war;
for the nature and quality thereof; the Fable propounds three grave and
wholesome Precepts. The first is, that a Prince do not much trouble himself
about the conquest of neighbor Nations: nor is the way of enlarging a
Patrimony, and an Empiry, the same; for in the augmentation of private
possissions, the vicinity of Territories is to be considered; but in the
amplification of public Dominions, the occasion and facility of making
war, and the fruit to be expected, ought to be instead of propinquity.
Therefore Perseus, though an Eastern Prince, makes the expedition of his war
a far off, even in the remotest parts of the Western World. Plut. in Alex.
Id. de Fort. Alex.
There is a notable president of this Case, in the different manner of warring,
practiced by two Kings, the Father and the Son, Philip and Alexander. For
Philip warred upon Borderers only, and added to the Empire some few Cities,
and that not without great contention and danger; who many times, but
especially in a Theban war, was brought into extreme hazard: But Alexander
carried the Actions of his war a far off; and with a prosperous boldness
undertook an expedition against the Persian; conquered infinite Nations; tired,
rather with travile, than war. This point is farther cleared in the
propagation of the Roman Empire, what time their conquests toward the West
scarce reached beyond Liguria, did yet in the East, bring all the provinces as
far as the mountain Taurus, within the compass of their Arms and command.
Hist. Fran. Serres alii.
So Charles the eight, King of France, finding the war of Britain (which
afterward was compounded by marriage) not so feasible, pursued his enterprise
upon Naples, which he accomplished with wonderful facility and felicity.
Certainly wars made upon Nations far off, have this advantage, that they
are to fight with those who are not practiced in the discipline and Arms of
the Aggressor: but in a war made upon Borderers, the case is otherwise.
Besides the preparation for such an expedition is commonly better appointed;
and the terror to the enemy from such a bold and confident enterprise, the
greater. Neither can there usually be made, by the enemy to whom the war is
brought so far off, any retaliation or reciprocal invasion; which in a war
upon borderers often falls out. But the chief point is, that in subdueing a
neighbor state, the election of advantages is brought to a straight; but in a
foreign expedition, a man may turn the race of the war at pleasure,
thither, where military discipline is most weakened; or the strength of the
Nation much wasted and worn; or Civil discords are seasonably on foot; or
such like opportunities present themselves.

Cic. 1. de Off. Bacon de jure Belli cont. Hisp.
The second precept is, that the motives of war be just; and Religious; and
Honorable, and Plausible: for that begets alacrity, as well in the Soldiers
that fight, as in the people that afford pay: it draws on and procures aides;
and has many other advantages besides. Amongst the just grounds of war, that
is most favorable, which is undertaken for the extirpation of Tyrans; under
whom the people loose their courage, and are cast down without heart and
vigor, as in the sight of Medusa: which kind of heroic Acts, Ovid. Met. IX.
Sandisii Comment.
procured Hercules a divinity amongst the Gods* certainly it was a point of
Religion amongst the Romans, with valor and speed, to aid and succor their
confederates and allies, that were any way distressed. So just vindictive
wars have for most part bin prosperous; so the war against Brutus and
Cassius, Tacit.
for the revenge of Caesar's death; Herodian. etc.
of Severus for the death of Pertinax; of Junius Brutus for the revenge of the
death of Lucretia: and in a word, whosoever relieve and revenge the calamities
and injuries of men, bear arms under Perseus.

The third precept is, that in the undertaking of any war, Fra. Bacon ut
supra.
a true estimate of the forces be taken; and that it be rightly waighed whether
the enterprise may be compast and accomplished; lest vast and endless designs
be pursued. For amongst the Gorgons, by which war is represented, Perseus
wisely undertook her only, that was mortal; and did not set his mind upon
impossibilities. Thus far the fable instructs touching those things that fall
in deliberation, about the undertakeing of a war; the rest pertain to the
war it self.

In war those three gifts of the Gods do most avail, so as commonly they
govern, and lead fortune after them: for Perseus received speed, from Mercury;
concealing of his Counsils, from Orcus; and Providence from Pallas. Neither is
it without an Allegory, and that most prudent, that those wings of speed in
dispatch of affairs (for quickness in war is of special importance) were
fastened unto his heels, and not unto his Arme-holes; to his feet, and not to
his shoulders; because celerity is required, not so much in the first
aggressions and preparations; as in the pursuit and the sucours that second the
first assaults: for there is no errors in war more frequent, than that
prosequution, and subsidiary forces, fiale to answer the alacrity cf the first
onsets. Now the Helmet of Pluto, which has power to make men invisible, is
plain in the Moral: for the secreting of Counsils next to Celerity, is of
great moment in war; whereof Celerity it self is a great part; for speed,
prevents the disclosure of Counsils. It pertains to Pluto's Helmet, that there
be one general of the Army in war, invested with absolute authority; for
consultations communicated with many, partake more of the Plumes of Mars, than
of the Helmet of Pluto. To the same purpose are various Pretensions, and
doubtful designations, and emissary reports; which either cast a cloud over
men's eyes, or turn them another way, and place the true aims of Counsils in
the dark: for diligent and diffident Cautions touching letters, Ambassadors,
Rebels, and many such like Provisoes, adorn and begirt the Helmet of Pluto.
But it imports no less, to discover the Counsils of the enemy than to
conceal their own: wherefore to the Helmet of Pluto, we must join the
Looking-glass of Pallas, whereby the strength, the weakness, the secret
abettors, the divisions and factions, the proceedings and Counsils of the enemy
may be discerned and disclosed. And because the casualties of war are such,
as we must not put too much confidence, either in the concealeing our own
designs, or the dissecreting the designs of the enemy; or in celerity it
self; we must especially take the shield of Pallas, that is of Providence;
that so, as little as may be, be left to fortune. Hitherto belong the sending
out of espialls, the fortification of camps, (which in the Military discipline
of this latter age, is almost grown out of use: for the camps of the Romans
were strengthened as if it had bin a City, against all adverse events of
war) a settled and well ordered Army, not trusting too much to the light
Bands, or to the troops of horsemen; and whatsoever appertains to a
substantial and advised Defensive war: seeing in wars the shield of Pallas
prevails more than the sword of Mars.

But Perseus albeit he was sufficiently furnished with forces and courage, yet
was he to do one thing of special importance, before he enterprized the
Action; and that was to have some intelligence with the Greae. These Greae are
treasons, which may be termed the sisters of War; not descended of the same
stock, but far unlike in nobility of Birth: so wars are Generous and
Heroical; but Treasons base and ignoble. Their description is elegant, for
they are said to be gray headed, and like old women from their birth; by reason
that Traitors are continually vexed with cares and trepidations. But all their
strength, before the break out into open Rebellions, consists either in an Eye;
or in a Tooth; for every faction alienated from any state, has an evil eye;
and bites. Besides, this Eye and Tooth is, as it were, common; for whatsoever
they can learn or know, runs from hand to hand amongst them. And as concerning
the Tooth, they do all bite alike, and cast the same scandals; so that hear
one, and you hear all. Perseus therefore was to deal with these Greae, and to
engage their assistance for the loan of their Eye and Tooth: their Eye for
Discoveries; their Tooth for the sowing and spreading of Rumors; and the
stirring up of envy; and the troubling of the minds of men. After all things
are well, and preparedly disposed for war; that is first of all to be taken
into consideration, which Perseus did, that Medusa may be found a sleep: for a
wise Captain ever assaults the enemy unprepared; and when he is most secure.
Lastly in the very action and heat of war, the looking into Pallas Glass, is
to be put in practice: for most men, before it come to the push, can with
diligence and circumspection dive into, and discern the state and designs of
the enemies; but in the very point of danger, either are amazed with fear; or
in a rash mood fronting dangers too directly, precipitate themselves into them;
mindful of victory; but forgetful of evasion, and retrete. Yet neither of
these should be practiced, but they should look with a reversed countenance
into Pallas Mirror; that so the stroke may be rightly directed, without either
terror or fury.

After the War was finished, and the victory won, there followed two
Effects; The procreation and raising of Pegasus; which evidently denotes Fame,
that flying through the world proclaims victory; and makes the remains of
that war easy and feasible. The second is the bearing of Medusa's head in his
shield; because there is no kind of defense for excellency comparable to this:
For one famous and memorable Act prosperously enterpriz'd and achieved;
strikes the Spirit of insurrection in an enemy, into an amazing terror; and
blasts envy her self into an astonishment and wonder.

The third Example of Philosophy according to Ancient Parables in Morality. Of
Passion according to the Fable of Dionysus.
Orph. in Him. Ov. Met. 3. Eurip in Bace. Nonn. in Dion.
VI They say that Semele Jupiters Minion, having bound her Paramour, by an
inviolable oath, to grant her one request which she would ask, desired that he
would accompany her in the same form, wherein he came in to Juno: So she
perished with lightning. But the Infant which she bare in her Womb, Jupiter the
Father took out, and sowed it in his thigh till the months were accomplished,
that it should be borne. This burden made Jupiter somewhat to limpe; wherefore
the child, because it vexed and pinched Jupiter, while it was in his flank, was
called Dionysius. Being borne he was committed to Proserpina for some years
to be nursed; and being grown up, he had such a maiden face, as that a man
could hardly judge whether it were a boy, or a girl. He was dead also, and
buried for a time, but afterward revived. Being but a youth he invented the
planting and dressing of vines; the making and use of wine; for which becoming
famous and renowned, he subjugated the world even to the utmost bounds of
India. He rode in a Chariot drawn with Tigers. There danced about him certain
deformed Hobgoblins called Cobali; Acratus and others; yea, even the Muses also
were some of his followers. He took to wife Ariadne, forsaken and left by
Theseus. The tree sacred unto him was the Ivy. He was held the Inventor and
Institutor of sacrifices and Ceremonies, but such as were frantique and full of
corruptions and cruelties. Paus: in Boeot.
He had likewise power to strike men with madness: For it is reported that at
the Celebration of his Orgyes, two famous Worthies, Pentheus and Orpheus, Eurip
in. Bac.
were torn in pieces by certain mad-enraged women; the one because he got
upon a tree, out of a curiosity to behold their Ceremonies in these Sacrifices;
the other because he played sweetly and cunningly upon the harp. And for the
Gests of this God, they are in a manner the same with Jupiters. V. Comment in
Ovid. Met. 3. G. Sandijs. Renovard.


There is such excellent Morality coucht in this fable, as Moral Philosophy
affords not better. For under the Person of Bacchus is described the nature of
Passion; or of Affections and Perturbations of the mind. First therefore
touching the birth and parentage of Passion; the beginning of all Passion,
though never so hurtful, is nothing else than good Apparent: For as the Mother
of virtue is good-Existent; so the Mother of Passion is good Apparent. The one
of these (under which Person, the soul of man is represented) is Jupiters
lawful wife; the other his Concubine: which yet affects the honor of Juno,
as Semele did. Passion is conceived in an unlawful desire, rashly granted,
before rightly understood, and judged: And after when it begins to grow
fervent, the Mother of it, which is the Nature and Species of Good, by too much
inflammation is destroyed, and perishes. The proceeding of Passion from the
first conception thereof is after this manner: It is nourisht and concealed by
the mind of man (which is the Parent of Passion,) specially in the inferior
part of the mind, as in the thigh; and so vexes, and pulls, and depresseth
the mind; as those good determinations and actions, are much hindered and lamed
thereby: but when it comes to be confirmed by consent and habit; and breaks
out into Act; that it has now, as it were fulfilled the months, and is brought
forth and born; first for a while it is brought up by Proserpina; that is, it
seeks corners and secret places, and lurks as it were, underground; until the
rains of shame and fear laid aside, and boldness coming on; it either assumes
the pretext of some virtue, or becomes altogether impudent and shameless. And
it is most true that every vehement Passion is of a doubtful sex; being
masculine in the first motion; but feminine in proseqution. It is an excellent
fiction, that of dead Bacchus, reviving; for Passions do sometimes seem to be
in a dead sleep, and extinct; but we must not trust them, no though they were
buried: For let there be but matter and opportunity offered, they rise again.

The invention of the Vine is a wise Parable; for every affection is very quick
and witty in finding out that which nourishes, and cherishes it; and of all
things known to men, wine is most powerful and efficacious to excite and
inflame Passions; of what kind soever; as being in a sort a common incentive to
them all.

Again Affection or Passion is elegantly set down to be a subduer of Nations,
and an undertaker tf infinite expeditions: For desire never rests content with
what it possesses; but with an infinite and unsatiable appetite still covets
more; and hearkens after a new purchase.

So Tigers STABLE by Affections; and draw their Chariot: For since the time
that Affection began to ride in a Coach; and to go no more a foot; and to
captivate Reason; and to lead her away in triumph; it grows cruel;
unmanegeable, and fierce, against whatsoever withstands or opposes it.

And it is a pretty devise, that those ridiculous Demons, are brought in
dancing about Bacchus Chariot: For every vehement affection does cause in the
eyes; face; and gesture, undecent and subseeming, apeish, and deformed motions;
so that they who in any kind of Passiion, (as in anger; arrogance; or love)
seem glorious and brave in their own eyes; do appear to others misshapen, and
ridiculous.

The Muses are seen in the Company of Passion: and there is almost no affection
so depraved and vile, which is not soothed by some kind of Learning: And herein
the indulgence and arrogance of Wits does exceedingly derogate from the Majesty
of the Muses; that whereas they should be the Leaders and Ancient-bearers of
life, they are become the foot-pages; and buffoones to lusts and vanity.

Again where Bacchus is said to have engaged his Affections on her that was
abandoned and rejected by another: it is an Allegory of special regard; for it
is most certain, that Passion ever seeks and sues for that which experience
has relinquisht, and they all know, who have paid dear for serving and
obaying their Lusts; that whether it be honor; or riches; or delight; or glory;
or knowledge; or any thing else, which they seek after; they pursue things
cast off, and by diverse men in all ages after experience had utterly rejected
and repudiate.

Neither is it without a Mystery, that the Jvy was sacred to Bacchus, the
application holds two ways: First, in that the Ivy remains green in Winter;
Secondly, in that it creeps along, imbraceth, and advances it self over so
many diverse bodies, as trees, walls, and edifices. Touching the first, every
Passion does through renitence and prohibition, and as it were, by an
Anti-peristasis, (like the Ivy through the cold of winter) grow fresh and
lively. Secondly, every predominant affection in man's soul, like the Ivy, does
compass and confine all human Actions and Consils; neither can you find any
thing so immaculate and inconcern'd, which affections have not tainted and
clinched as it were with their tendrells.

Neither is it a wonder, that superstitious ceremonies were attributed unto
Bacchus, seeing every giddy-headed humor keeps, in a manner, Revell-rout in
false Religions; so that the pollutions and distempers of heretics, exceed
the Bachanalls of the Heathens; and whose superstitions have bin no less
barbarous; than vile and loathsome. Nor is it a wonder that Madness is thought
to be sent by Bacchus, seeing every affection in the Excess thereof, is a kind
of short fury; and if it grow vehement and become habitual; it commonly
concludes in Madness.

Concerning the rending and dismembring of Pentheus and Orpheus, in the
celebration of the Orgies of Bacchus; the Parable is plain. For every prevalent
affection is outrageous against two things; whereof the one is Curious enquiry
into it; the other free and wholesome admonition. Nor will it avail, though
that inquiry was only to contemplate and to behold, as it were going up into a
tree, without any malignity of mind; nor again, though that admonition was
given with much art and sweetness, but howsoever, the Orgies of Bacchus; can
not endure either Pentheus or Orpheus.

Lastly that confusion of the Persons of Jupiter and Bacchus, may be well
transferred to a Parable; seeing noble and famous Acts, and remarkable and
glorious merits, do sometimes proceed from virtue and well ordered reason, and
magnanimity; and sometimes from a secret affection, and a hidden passion;
howsoever both the one and the other, so affect the renown of Fame, and Glory;
that a man can hardly distinguish between the Acts of Bacchus; and the Gests of
Jupiter.

But we stay too long in the Theater; let us now pass on to the Palace of the
Mind; the entrance whereof we are to approach with more veneration, and
attention.

THE THIRD BOOK OF FRANCIS LO. VERVLAM VICOUNT St ALBAN. OF THE DIGNITY AND
ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING. To the KING.
CAP. I. I. The Partition of Sciences, into Theology and Philosophy. II. The
Partition of Philosophy into three Knowledges. Of God; of Nature; of Man. III.
The Constitution of Philosophia Prima, or Summary Philosophy, as the Commune
Parent of all.
ALL History (Excellent KING) treads upon the Earth, and performs the office
of a Guide, rather than of a light; and Poesy is, as it were the Dream of
Knowledge; a sweet pleasing thing, full of variations; and would be thought to
be somewhat inspired with Divine Rapture; which Dreams likewise pretend: but
now it is time for me to awake, and to raise my self from the Earth, cutting
the liquid Air of Philosophy, and Sciences.

I Knowledge is like waters; some waters descend from the Heavens, some spring
from the Earth; so the Primary Partition of Sciences, is to be derived from
their fountains, some are seated above; some are here beneath. For all
knowledge proceeds from a two fold information; either from Divine inspiration,
or from external Sense; As for that knowledge which is infused by instruction;
that is Cumulative, not Original; as it is in waters, which besides the
Head-springs, are increased by the reception of other Rivers that fall into
them. Wherefore we will divide Sciences, into Theology; and Philosophy; by
Theology we understand Jnspired or Sacred Divinity; not Natural, of which we
are to speak anon. But this Inspired Theology, we reserve for the last place,
that we may close up this work with it; seeing it is the Port and Saboath of
all Humane Contemplations.

II. The Object of Philosophy is of three sorts; GOD; NATURE; MAN: so likewise
there is a Triple Beam of Things; for Nature darts upon the understanding with
a direct Beam; God because of the inequality of the medium, which is the
Creature, with a refract beam; and man represented and exhibited to himself,
with a beam reflext. Wherefore Philosophy may fitly be divided into three
knowledges; the knowledge of God; the knowledge of Nature; and the knowledge of
Man.

III. And because the Partition of Sciences are not like several lines that
meet in one angle; but rather like branches of trees that meet in one stem,
which stem for some dimension and space is entire and continued, before it
break, and part it self into arms and boughs; therefore the nature of the
subject requires, before we pursue the parts of the former distribution, to
erect and constitute one universal Science, which may be the mother of the
rest; and that in the progress of Sciences, a Portion, as it were, of the
common highway may be kept, before we come where the ways part and divide
themselves. This Science we style Primitive Philosophy or Sapience, which by
the Ancients was defined to be, The Science of things divine and human. To this
Science none of the rest is opposed, being it is differenced from other
knowledges, rather in the limits of latitude; than in the things and subject;
that is, handleing only the tops of things.
Whether I should report this as DEFICIENT, I stand doubtful, yet I think I
very well may. For I find a certain kind of Rhapsody, and confused mass of
knowledge, namely of Natural Theology; of Logique; of particular parts of
Natural Philosophy (as of the Principles of Nature, and of the soul)
composited and compiled; and by the height of terms (from men who love to
admire themselves) advanced, and exalted, as it were, to the vertical point of
Sciences. But we, without any such stately loftiness, would only have thus
much, That there might be designed a certain Science that should be the
receptacle of all such Axioms, as fall not within the compass of any special
part of Philosophy; but are more common to them all, or most of them.

That there are many of this kind needs not to be doubted. For example, Si
inaequalibus aequalia addas; Euclid. El. lib. 1.
omnia erunt inaequalia; is a rule in the Mathematiques: and the same holds in
the Ethiques concerning Attributive Justice; for in Justice Expletive, the
reason of equity requires, That equal Portion be given to unequal Persons;
but in Attributive, unless unequal be distributed unto unequal, it is a
great injustice. Eclid. El. Arist.
Quae in eodem tertio convenient, and inter se convenient; is likewise a rule
taken from the Mathematiques; but so potent in Logique also, as all Syllogismes
are built upon it. Arist. de Part. Animal 1.
Natura se potissimum prodit in minimis, is a rule in Natural Philosophy so
prevalent, that it has produced Democritus Atoms; yet has Aristotle made
good use of it in his Politiques, Polit. 1.
where he raises his contemplations of a City or State, from the Principles
of a Family. Omnia mutantur nil interit; is also a maxim in Natural
Philosophy thus expressed, that the Quantum of Nature is neither diminisht nor
augmented: The same is applied to Natural Theology thus varied; That they are
the works of the same Omnipotence, to make nothing somewhat; and to make
somewhat nothing; which the Scriptures likewise testify; Eccles 3.
J have found by experience that all the works of God do persevere for ever:
nothing can be put unto them, nor any thing taken from them. Jnteritus rei
arcetur per reductionem eius ad Principia, is a rule in Natural Philosophy;
the same holds also in the Politiques (as Macchiavell has wisely observed)
Disc. sopra la. 1. Dec. di liu. lib. 3.
because the means which must specially preserve States from ruin, are
commonly nothing else than a reformation, and a reduction of them to their
Ancient customs. Putredo serpens magis contagiosa est quam matura; Avicenna
Hippoc. Epid.
is a ground in Natural Philosophy; the same is an excellent Maxim in Moral
Philosophy; because professedly wicked, and desperately impious persons, do not
corrupt public manners so much, as they do, who seem to have some
soundness and goodness in them; Arist. alicubi.
and are diseased but in part. Quod conservativum est formae maioris, id
activitate potentius; is a ground in Natural Philosophy: for it makes for the
conservation of the fabrique of the universe; that the chain and contexture of
nature, be not cut asunder or broken; and that there be not vacuum, as they
call it, or empty discontinuity in the world; and that heavy bodies should be
congregate and assembled to the massy pile of the earth, makes for the
conservation of the Region of gross and compacted natures: wherefore the first
and universal motion commands, and subdues, the latter and more particular.
The same rule holds in the Politiques, for those things which conduce to the
conservation of the whole Body Politic in its entire nature and essence, are
more potent, than those things are, which make only for the welfare and
existence of Particular members, in a State or Civil Government. So the same
rule takes place in Theology; for amongst Theological virtues, Charity, a
virtue most communicative excells all the rest. Augetur vis agentis per
anti-peristasin contrarii: Arist. Meteor. 1. Problem. 11.
is a rule in Natural Philosophy; the same works wonders in Civil states, for
all faction is vehemently moved, and incensed at the riseing of a contrary
faction. Tonus discors in concordem actutum desinens, V. Boet. de Musica. etc.
concentum commendat: To fall suddenly from a Discord upon a Concord commends
the Air: is a rule in Music: the like effect it works in Morality, and the
Affections. That Trope of Music, to fall or slide softly, from the close or
cadence (as they call it) when it seemed even to touch it, is common with the
Trope of Rhetorique, of deceiving expectation. The Quavering upon a stop in
Music, gives the same delight to the ear; that the playing of light upon the
water, or the sparkling of a Diamond gives to the eye. -- Splendet tremulo sub
lumine Pontus. Virg. Aen. 7
Organa sensuum cum Organis reflectionum convenient: Alhaz. Opt. 4. Vitello
Passim.
This has place in Perspective Art; for the eye is like to a Glass, or to
waters: and in Acoustique Art; for the Instrument of hearing is like to the
straits and winding within a Cave. These few instances may suffice for
examples. And indeed the Persian Magique, so much celebrated, consists chiefly
in this; to observe the respondency in the Architectures, and Fabriques of
things Natural; and of things Civil. Neither are all these whereof we have
spoken, and others of like nature mere Similitudes only, as men of narrow
observation perchance may conceive; but one and the very same footsteps, and
seals of Nature, printed upon several subjects or matters. This kind of
Science, has not bin hither too seriously handled: You may peradventure find
in the Writings coming from the pens of the profounder sort of wits, Axioms
of this kind, thinly and sparsedly inserted, for the use and explication of the
Argument which they have in hand; but a complete body of such Maxims, which
have a Primitive and Summary force and efficacy in all Sciences, none yet have
composed; being notwithstanding a matter of such consequence, as does notably
conduce to the unity of Nature; which we conceive to be the office and use of
Philosophia Prima.

There is also an other Part of this, Primitive Ppilosophy, which, if you
respect terms, is Ancient; but, if the matter which we design, is new, and of
an other kind; and it is an Inquiry concerning the Accessory Conditions of
Entities, which we may call Transcendents; as Multitude, Paucity; Similitude;
Diversity; Possible, and Jmpossible; Entity; Nonentity; and the like. For
being Transcendents do not properly fall within the compass of Natural
Philosophy; and that Dialecticall dissertation about them is rather
accommodated to the Forms of Argumentation; than the Nature of things; it is
very convenient that this Contemplation, wherein there is so much dignity and
profit, should not be altogether deserted; but find at least some room in the
Partitions of Sciences: but this we understand to be performed far after an
other manner, than usually it has bin handled. For example no man who has
treated of Paucity or Multitude, has endevour'd to give a reason, Why some
things in Nature are and may be so numerous and large; others so few and little!
For certainly it cannot be, that there should be in nature as great store of
Gold, as of Iron; as great plenty of Roses, as of Grass; as great variety of
determined and specifique Natures, as of imperfects, and non-specificates. So
none in handling Similitude and Diversity, has sufficiently discovered the
Cause, why betwixt diverse species there should, as it were perpetually, be
interposed, Participles of Nature, which are of a doubtful kind and
referrence; as Moss betwixt Putrefaction, and a Plant: Fishes which adhere and
move not, betwixt a Plant and a living Creature: Rats, and Mise, and other
vermin between living Creatures generated of Putrefaction, and of seed: Bats
or Flitter-mise between Birds and Beasts; Flying Fishes, now commonly known,
between Fowls and Fish. Sea-Calfes between Fishes and four-footed Beasts; and
the like. Neither has any made diligent inquiry of the Reason how it should
come to pass, being like delights to unite to like, that Iron draws not Iron,
as the Loadstone does; nor Gold allures and attracts unto it Gold, as it does
Quicksilver. Concerning these and the like adjuncts of things, there is, in the
common Disceptation about Transcendents a deep silence: For men have pursued
Niceties of Terms, and not subtleties of things. Wherefore we would have this
Primitive Philosophy to contain a substantial and solid inquiry of these
Transcendents, or Adventitious Conditions of Entities, according to the Laws
of Nature, and not according to the Laws of Words. So much touching Primitive
Philosophy, or Sapience, which we have justly referred to the Catalogue of
DEFICIENTS.


CAP. II. I Of Natural Theology. Of the Knowledge of Angels, and of Spirits;
which are an Appendix thereof.
THE Commune Parent of Sciences being first placed in its proper throne like
unto Berecynthia which had so much heavenly Issue.

Omnes Coelicolae, omnes supera alta tenentes. Virg. Aen. 6
We may return to the former Division of the three Philosophies, Divine;
Natural; and Humane.

I For Natural Theology, is truly called Divine Philosophy. And this is
defined to be a Knowledge, or rather a spark and rudiment of that Knowledge
concerning God; such as may be had by the light of Nature; and the
Contemplation of the Creature: which Knowledge may be truly termed Divine in
respect of the Object; and Natural in respect of the Light. The Bounds of this
Knowledge are truly set forth, that they may extend to the Confutation and
Conviction of Atheism; the Information of the Law of Nature; but may not be
drawn out to the Confirmation of Religion. Therefore there was never Miracle
wrought by God to convert an Atheist, because the light of Nature might have
led him to confess a God; but Miracles are designed to convert Idolaters, and
the Superstitious, who have acknowledged a Deity, but erred in his Adoration;
because no light of Nature extends to declare the will and true Worship of God.
For as works do show forth the power and skill of the workman, but not his
Image: So the works of God, do show the Omnipotency and Wisdom of the Maker;
but no way express his Jmage. And in this the Heathen opinion differs from the
sacred Truth. For they defined the world to be the Image of God; man the Image
of the World; but Sacred Scriptures never vouchsafed the world that honor, as
any where to be styled the Jmage of God, but only, Psalm. 8. Genesis 1.
the works of his hands: but they substitute man, the immediate Jmage of God.
Wherefore, that there is a God; that he raines and rules the world; that he is
most potent, wise, and provident: that he is a Rewarder, a Revenger; that he is
to be adored; may be demonstrated and evinced even from his works: and many
wonderful secrets touching his attributes, and much more touching his Regiment
and dispensation over the world, may likewise with sobriety be extracted, and
manifested out of the same works; and is an Argument has bin profitably
handled by diverse. But out of the contemplation of Nature, and out of the
Principles of Human Reason, to discourse, or earnestly to urge a point touching
the Mysteries of faith; and again, to be curiously speculative into those
secrets, to ventilate them; and to be-inquisitive into the manner of the
Mystery, is, in my judgment not safe: Da Fidei quae Fidei sunt. For the
Heathens themselves conclude as much, in that excellent and divine Fable of the
golden Chain, Homer Iliad. 9.
That Men and Gods were not able to draw Jupiter down to the Earth; but
contrariwise Jupiter was able to draw them up to Heaven. Wherefore he labors
in vain, who shall attempt to draw down heavenly Mysteries to our reason; it
rather becomes us to raise and advance our reason to the adored Throne of
Divine Truth, And in this part of Natural Theology, I am so far from noteing
any deficience, as I rather find an excess; which to observe I have somewhat
digressed, because of the extreme prejudice, which both Religion and Philosophy
have received thereby; as that which will fashion and forge a heretical
Religion, and an imaginary and fabulous Philosophy.

But as concerning the nature of Angels and Spirits, the matter is otherwise to
be conceived; which neither is inscrutable, nor interdicted; to which
knowledge, from the affinity it has with man's soul, there is a passage
opened. The Scripture indeed commands, Coloss. 2.
let no man deceive you with sublime discourse touching the worship of Angels,
pressing into that he knows not; yet notwithstanding if you observe well that
precept, you shall find there only two things forbidden; namely Adorotion of
Angels, such as is due to God; and Fantastical Opinions of them, either by
extolling them above the degree of a creature; or to extol a man's knowledge of
them farther than he has warrantable ground. But the sober enquiry touching
them, which by the gradations of things corporal, may ascend to the nature of
them; or which may be seen in the Soul of Man, as in a Looking glass, is in
no wise restrained. The same may be concluded of impure and revolted spirits;
the conversing with them, and the employment of them, is prohibited; much more
any veneration toward them; but the Contemplation or Science of their Nature;
their Power; their Illusions; not only from places of sacred Scripture, but
from reason or experience; is a principal part of Spiritual wisdom. For so
the Apostle says, we are not ignorant of his stratagems. 2. Cor. 2.
And it is no more unlawful to enquire, in natural Theology, the nature of
evil Spirits; than to enquire the nature of Poisons in Physique, or of vices
in the Ethiques. But this part of Science touching Angels and degenerate
spirits, I cannot note as Deficient; for many have employed their pens in it.
Rather most of the writers in this kind may be argued either of vanity, or
superstition, or of unprofitable subtlety.

CAP. III. The Partition of Natural Philosophy into Speculative; and
Operative. And that these two, both in the intention of the writer; and in the
body of the Treatise, should be separated.
LEaving therefore Natural Theology (to which we have attributed the enquiry
of Spirits, as an Appendix) we may proceed to the second Part, namely that of
Nature, or Natural Philosophy. Laert. Senec.
Democritus says excellently, That the knowledge concerning Nature, lies hid
in certain deep Mines and Caves. And it is somewhat to the purpose, Paracel. de
Philos. sagaci.
that the Alchimists do so much inculcate, That vulcan is a second Nature, and
perfects that compendiously which Nature uses to effect by ambages and length
of time: why then may we not divide Philosophy into two parts; the Mine, and
the Furnace; and make two professions, or occupations of Natural Philosophers;
Pyoners or workers in the mine; and Smythes; or refiners? Certainly however we
may seem to be conceited, and to speak in jest; yet we do bestallow of a
division in that kind, if it be proposed in more familiar and Scholasticall
terms; namely, that the knowledge of Nature, be divided into the Inquisition
of Causes; and the Production of Effects; Speculative, and Operative; the one
searches the bowels of Nature; the other fashions Nature, as it were, upon the
Anvile.

Now although I know very well with what a strict band, causes and effects are
united; so as the explication of them, must in a sort be coupled and conjoined:
yet because all solid and fruitful Natural knowledge has a double, and that
distinct, scale or ladder; Ascendent and Descendent; From Experiments to
Axioms, and from Axioms to new Experiments. I judge it most requisite, that
these two parts, Speculative and Operative, be separate, both in the intention
of the writer, and the Body of the Treatise.

CAP. IV. I. The Partition of the Speculative knowledge of Nature into Physique
special, and Metaphysique: Whereof Physique enquires the Efficient Cause, and
the Matter: Metaphysique the final Cause and the Form. II. The Partition of
Physique, into the knowledges of the Principles of Things; of the Fabrique of
Things, or of the World; And of the variety of Things. III. The Partion, of
Physique, touching the variety of things, into the Doctrine of Concretes; and
into the Doctrine of Abstracts. The Partition of the knowledge of Concretes, is
referred over to the same Partition which Natural History Comprehends. IV. The
Partition of the knowledge of Abstracts, into the knowledge of the Schemes of
Matter; and into the knowledge of Motions. V. Two Appendices of Speculative
Physique; Natural Problems: And the Placits of Ancient Philosophers. VI. The
Partition of Metaphysique, into the Doctrine of Forms; And into the Doctrine
of Final Causes.
I. THat part of Natural Philosophy which is Speculative and Theoricall, we
think convenient to divide into Physique special; and Metaphysique. And in
this Partition I desire it may be conceived, that we use the word Metaphysique
in a differing sense from that, that is received. And here it seems to fall
out not unfitly to advertise in general of our purpose and meaning touching
the use of words, and Terms of Art. And it is this, that as well in this word
Metaphysique now delivered, as in other terms of Art, wheresoever our
conceptions and notions are new, and differ from the received; yet with much
reverence, we retain the Ancient terms. For being we hope, that the method it
self, and a perspicuous explication of the Matter which we labor to annexe,
may redime us from an incongruous conception of the words we use, we are
otherwise zealous (so far as we can without prejudice of Truth and Sciences)
to depart as little as may be, from the opinions and expressions of Antiquity.
And herein I cannot but marvel at the confidence of Aristotle, who possessed
with a spirit of contradiction; and denouncing war against all Antiquity, not
only usurpt a license to coin new terms of Arts at pleasure; but has
endeavored to deface and extinguish all ancient wisdom. In so much as he
never names any ancient Auctors; or makes any mention of their opinions, but to
reprehend their Persons; or to redargue their Placits, and opinions. Certainly
if he affected glory, and drawing disciples after him, he took the right
course: For the same comes to pass in the asserting and receiving a
Philosophical Truth, that does in a Divine Truth; veni in nomine Patris, Joan.
5.
nec recipitis me; si quis venerit in nomine suo eum recipietis. But from this
divine Aphorism, if we consider whom specially it has designed (namely
Antichrist the greatest Impostor of all times) we may collect, that the coming
in a man's own name, without any regard of Antiquity, or (if I may so speak) of
Paternity, is no good Augurie of Truth, however it be joined with the fortune
and success of an eum recipietis. But for Aristotle, certainly an excellent
man, and of an admirable profound wit, I should easily be induced to believe;
that he learned this ambition of his Scholar, whom perhaps he did aemulate:
that if one conquered all Nations; the other would conquer all Opinions, and
raise to himself a kind of Monarchy in contemplations. Although it may so fall
out, that he may at some men's hands that are of a bitter disposition, and
biteing language, get a like title, as his Scholar did; Lucan l. 10.
Foelix terrarum Praedo, non utile Mundo
Editus exemplum. -- So


Foelix Doctrinae Praedo etc. But to us on the other side that do desire so
much as lies in the power of our pen, to contract a league and commerce
between Ancient and Modern knowledges; our judgment stands firm, to keep way
with Antiquity, usque ad Aras; and to retain the Ancient terms, though
sometimes we alter their Sense, and Definitions: according to the moderate and
approved manner of Innovation, in Civil Government; where the state of things
being changed, yet the solennity of words, and styles is observed which Tacitus
notes; Annal. 1.
Eadem Magistratuum vocabula.

To return therefore to the acception of the word Metaphysique, in our sense.
It appears by that which has bin already said, that we distinguish Primitive
Philosophy, from Metaphysique, which heretofore has bin confounded and taken
for the same thing. The one we have set down as a commune Parent of all
Sciences; the other, as a portion of Natural Philosophy. We have assigned
Common and Promiscuous Axioms of Sciences, to Primitive Philosophy. Likewise
all Relative and Adventive conditions and Characters of Essences, which we have
named Transcendents; as Multitude, Paucity, Jdentity, Diversity, Possible
Jmpossible, and such like; we have attributed to the same, only with this
Proviso, that they be handled as they have efficacy in nature; and not
Logically. But we have referred the inquiry concerning God; Unity, Bonity,
Angels, Spirits, to Natural Theology. Wherefore now it may rightly be
demanded, what after all this is remaining to Metaphysique! certainly beyond
nature, nothing; but of nature it self the most excellent part. And indeed
without prejudice to Truth, we may thus far concur with the opinion and
conceit of Antiquity; that Physique only handles that which is inherent in
matter, and is moveable; Metaphysique things more abstracted and fixed. Again
that Physique supposes existence only and Motion; and natural Necessity: but
Metaphysique the Mind also; the Idea or platform. For to this point perchance
the matter comes, whereof we shall discourse. But we will propound this
difference, (leaving aside the sublimity of speech) perspicuously and
familiarly. We have divided Natural Philosophy into the Inquisition of causes;
and the production of effects. The inquiry of causes we have referred to the
Theoricall part of Philosophy; which we have divided into Physique and
Metaphysique: wherefore by necessary consequence the true difference of these
two Theoryes, must be taken from the nature of the Causes which they enquire;
so without all obscurity or circuit, Physique is that which enquires of the
efficient cause; and of the Matter; Metaphysique, that which enquires of the
Form and end.

II Physique therefore comprehends Causes variable and incertaine, and
according to the nature of the subject moveable and changing, and attaines not
a fixed constancy of Causes.

Virg. Aen. 8.
Limus ut hic durescit, and haec ut caera liquescit
Vno eodemque igni --
Fire is cause of induration, but respective to clay; Fire is cause of
colliquation, but respective to wax. We will divide Phisique into three
Knowledges: For Nature is either united and collected into one; or diffused and
distributed: Nature is collected into one either in respect of the common Seeds
and Principles of all things; or in respect of the entire, total Fabrique of
the universe. This union of Nature has brought forth two Parts of Physique,
one of the Principles of Things; the other of the Fabrique of the Universe, or
of the World; which we use to call the Doctrines of Sums or Totalls. The
third Knowledge which handles Nature diffused, or scattered, exhibites all the
variety of things, and the lesser Sums or Totalls. Wherefore from these
contemplations it is plainly manifest, that there are three Knowledges touching
Natural Philosophy, of the Principles of things; of the world; or of the
Fabrique of thing. Of Nature multiplicious or sparsed; which last Part, (as we
have said) contains all the variety of things; and is, as it were; the first
Gloss, or Paraphase touching the INTERPRETATION OF NATVRE Of these three
Parts, none is wholly DEFICIENT; but in what truth and Perfection they are
handled, I make not now my judgment.

III But we will again divide Physique distinctively sorted, or of the variety
of things, into two Parts; into Physique of concrets; and into Physique of
Abstracts: or into Physique of Creatures; and into Physique of Natures. The one
(to use the terms of Logique) inquires of Substances with all the variety of
their Adjuncts; the other of Accidents, or Adjuncts through all the variety of
substances. For example, if the inquiry be of a Lion, or of an Oak, these are
supported by many and diverse Accidents: Contrariwise if the inquiry be made of
Heat, or Heaviness, these are in many distinct substances. And seeing all
Physique or Natural Philosophy is situate in a middle term, between Natural
History and Metaphysique; the first part (if you observe it well) comes nearer
to Natural History; the later part nearer to Metaphysique; Concret Physique
has the same division which Natural History has; so that it is a knowledge
either concerning the Heavens; or concerning Meteors; or concerning the Globe
of the earth and Sea; or concerning the greater Collegiates, which they call
the Elements; or concerning the lesser Collegiates, or natures specifique; so
likewise concerning Pretergenerations; and concerning Mechaniques. For in all
these Natural History inquires and reports the fact it self; but Physique,
the Causes likewise; but you must conceive this of fluid, not fixed Causes, that
is, of matter and of the efficient.

Amongst these Portions of Physique, that Part is altogether maimed and
imperfect which enquires of Celestial bodies; which notwithstanding, for the
excellency of the Subject, ought to be taken into special consideration: For
Astronomy it is indeed not without some probability and use grounded upon the
Phoenomena, but it is vulgar; base, and no way solid: But Astrology in many
Circumstances has no ground at all. Jn truth Astronomy presents such a
sacrifice to Man's understanding, as once Prometheus did, when he went about to
cozen Jupiter; for instead of a true, substantial Ox, he presented the hide
of a great and fair Ox stuffed, and set out with straw, leaves, and Osier
twigs; so in like manner Astronomy exhibiteth the extrinsique Parts of
Celestial Bodies, (namely the Number, Situation, Motion, and Periods of the
stars) as the Hide of Heaven; fair and artificially contrived into Systemes,
and Schemes: but the Entrals are wanting, that is, Physical reasons, out of
which (adjoining Astronomicall Hypotheses) the Theory should be extracted, not
such grounds and suppositions as should only save the Phenomenon (of which kind
a number may be wittily devised) but such as propound the substance, motion and
influxe of the Heavens, as they they truly are in nature. For those Dogmaes and
Paradoxes are almost vanished, and long ago exploded, Raptus 1. mobilis. So
liditas caeli. Motus re^mitentiae. Poli adversi. Epycli. Excent. Motus Terrae
diurn: etc.
namely, the Rapture of the First Mover: and the Solidity of Heaven (stars
being there fixed as nails in the Arched Roof of a Parlour). And other
opinions, not much better, as, that there are diverse Poles of the Zodiac; and
of the world; that there is a second moveable of Renitency, contrary to the
rapture of the first Moveable; Hypothises imaginariae.
that all parts of the firmament are turned about by perfect circles; that
there are Eccentriques and Epicycles, to save the constancy of Motion by
perfect circles; vide digress.
that the Moon has no force or influence upon a body superior to it, and the
like. And the absurdity of these suppositions, has cast men upon that opinions
of the Diurnall Motion of the Earth; an opinion which we can demonstrate to be
most false. But scarce any man can be found, who has made enquiry of the
Natural Causes of the substance of the heavens, as well Stellare, as
Jnter-stellare; so of the swiftness and slownesse of heavenly bodies, referred
one to another; also of the various incitation of Motion in the same Planet;
likewise of the perpetuated course of Motion from East to West, and the
contrary: Lastly of Progressions, stations and Retrogradations, of the
Elevation and Declination of Motions, by the Apogee, or middle point; and
Perigee or lowest point of heaven; so of the oblique windings of Motions,
either by flexuous Spires, weaving and unweaving themselves, as they make their
approach or recesse from the Tropiques; or by serpentine sinuations, which they
call Dragons, so of the fixed Poles of Rotations or wheeling motions, why they
should be placed in such a point of the heavens, rather than in any other; so
of the alligation of some Planets at a certain distance from the Sun: I say
an inquiry of this kind, has scarce bin attempted, save that some labor has
bin taken therein, only in Mathematical observations and Demonstrations. But
these observations only show how wittily all these motions may be contrived,
and cleared from opposition; not how they may truly subsist in Nature; and
represent only seeming Motions, and their fictitious Fabrique, and framed at
pleasure, not their causes, and the real truth of Things* wherefore
Astronomy, such as now it is made, may well be counted in the number of
Mathematical Arts, not without great diminution of the Dignity thereof; seeing
it ought rather (if it would maintain its own right) be constitute a branch,
and that most principal of Natural Philosophy. For who ever shall reject the
fained Divorces of superlunary and sublunary bodies; and shall intentively
observe the appetencies of Matter, and the most universal Passions, (which in
either Globe are exceeding Potent, and transverberate the universal nature of
things) he shall receive clear information concerning celestial matters from
the things seen here with us: and contrariwise from those motions which are
practiced in heaven; he shall learn many observations which now are latent,
touching the motions of bodies here below: not only so far as these inferior
motions are moderated by superior, but in regard they have a mutual
intercourse by passions common to them both. Wherefore this part of Astronomy
which is natural we set down as DEFICIENT. And this we will call Liveing
Astronomy,
to distinguish it from Prometheus Ox stuffed with straw, which was an Ox in
outward shape only.

But Astrology is corrupted with much superstition, so as there is hardly to
be found any sound part therein. Yet in our judgment it should rather be
purged, than clean cast away. But if any contend that this science is not
grounded upon reason, and Physical contemplations; but in blind experience,
and the observation of many Ages; and therefore reject a trial by natural
Arguments (which the Chaldee Astrologers boasted) he may by the same reason
revoke Auguries, Divination, and Predictions from beasts entralls, and swallow
down all kind of Fables; for all these superstitious vanities were avoucht, as
the Dictates of long experience, and of Discipline delivered over by tradition.
But we do both accept Astrology, as a Portion of Natural Philosophy; and yet
attribute unto it no more credit, than reason and the evidence of Particulars
do evince; setting aside superstitions and fictions. And that we may a little
more seriously consider the matter.

First what a vain fancy is this, that every Planet should reign for certain
hours by turn, so as in the space of twentyfoure hours, they should resume
their Dominions thrice over, three supernumerary hours reserved? Yet this
conceit brought forth unto us the Division of the week; a computation very
ancient, and generally received, as from the interchangeable course of days
most manifestly it appears; when in the beginning of the day immediately
succeeding, the fourth Planet from the Planet of the first day, enters upon his
Government; by reason of the three supernumerary hours, whereof we have spoken.

Again we are confident to reject, as an idle fiction, the doctrine of
Genethliacall Positures of the heavens, to precise points of time; with the
Distribution of the Howses; those same darlings in Astrology, which have made
such mad work in the Heavens; nor can I sufficiently wonder that many
excellent men, and for Astrology of Principal note, should ground themselves
upon so slight reasons, to avouch such opinions. For they say, seeing that
experience it self discovers as much, that Solstices, Aequinoctialls, new
Moon, full Moons, and the like greater revolutions of stars, do manifestly
and notably work upon natural Bodies; it must needs be, that the more exact,
and subtle aspect and posture of the stars, should produce effects more
exquisite and occult. But they should first except the Suns operations by
manifest heat; and likewise, the magnetique influence of the Moon, upon the
increase of Tides every half Moon (for the daily Flux and Refluxe of the
Sea, is another thing.) But these set aside; the other powers of the Planets
upon natural bodies (so far as they are confirmed by experience) is slender
and weak; and, which they shall find, latent in the greater Revolutions.
Wherefore they should rather argue the other way, namely, that seeing those
greater Revolutions, have so small influence, those exact and minute
differences of Positures have no force at all.

Thirdly, Those Fatalities, that the hour of Nativity or conception governs
the Birth; The hour of inception, the fortune of the thing begun; the hour
of Question, the fortune of the thing enquired; and, in a word, the science of
Nativities, Elections, Questions, and such like levities; in our judgment,
have no certainty or solidity in them; and may by natural reasons be plainly
redargued and evinced. The point to be spoken of rather, is, what that is which
we retain and allow of in Astrology; and in that which we do allow, what is
deficient? for, for this end, that is, for the observation of Deficients, we
undertook this work; not intending (as we have often said) matter of censure.
And indeed amongst the received parts of Astrology, the Doctrines of
Revolutions we judge to have more soundness in them, than the rest. But it
may be to good purpose, to set down and prescribe certain Rules, by the scale
and square whereof, Astrologicall Observations may be examined; that what is
fruitful may be retained; what is frivolous rejected.

The first Precept may be that whereof we have admonisht already; let the
greater Revolutions be retained; the lesser Horoscopes and Howses casseer'd.
Those like Great Ordinance may discharge their influences, at a spacious
remoteness; these like small Bows, are for a short distance, and carry not
their forces far. The second rule is; That the operation of the Heavens
works not on all bodies) but only upon the more tender and penetrable; such as
are Humors, Aer, Spirits: but here we except the Operations of the heat of the
Sun, and of the Heavens, which without question pierce even to Metals, and
many subterraneous Bodies. The third rule is, that the Operation of the Heavens
extends rather to the Mass of things and Nature in gross; than unto
individual essences, and particularities; yet obliquely it reaches to many
Individualls, namely, those Individuates which of the same species are most
Passible, and are like soft wax: even as when a Pestilentiall air seizes on
bodies more open and less resistent; and passes by Bodies more compact and
strong. The fourth rule is, somewhat like the precedent; That the Operation of
the Heavens has its influxe and dominion not in points and narrow minutes of
times; but in greater spaces. Therefore Prognostications of the temperatures of
the year may be true; but upon particular days, are worthily accounted vain
and idle. The last rule, (which by the more wise Astrologers has bin ever
embraced) is, That there is no fatal necessity in the stars, but that they
do incline rather, than enforce. We add this moreover (wherein we plainly
take part with Astrology, if it were rectified) and which we know to be most
certain: That Celestial bodies have other influences besides heat and light:
which influences are of force according to the Rules we have prescribed, and no
otherwise: But these lie hid in the profound Parts of Natural Philosophy,
and require a larger dissertation. Wherefore we think good (that which we have
said being rightly conceived) to set down, Astrology agreeable to our
Principles,
amongst DEFICIENTS, and as we have named Astronomy grounded upon natural
reasons, Living Astronomy, so we think fit to call Astrology ascertained upon
the same reasons, Sound Astrology. As for the right way how to frame and make
this Art, although what we have said, does not a little conduce thereto, yet
according to our manner, we will add a few more observations which shall
clearly propound, out of what materials it should be collected, and to what
end it should be referred.

First, let the knowledge touching the Commixtures of Beams be received into
sound Astrology, that is of Conjunctions, and of Opositions, and the rest of
the constellations, or Aspects of Planets, one on an other. Also we assign to
this part concerning the Commixtures of Beams, the passing of the Planets
through the signs of the Zodiaque, and Position under the same signs: For the
location of a Planet under any sign, is a kind of Conjunction of the same
Planet with the Stars of the signs: Moreover as Conjunctions, so likewise
Oppositions and other Constellations of Planets toward the Stars of the
signs, are to be noted, which hitherto has not perfectly bin accomplished. But
the interchangeable Commixtures of the Rays of the sixth stars, are indeed
profitable to the Contemplation of the Fabrique of the world; and of the Nature
of the Regions lying under them; but not unto Predictions, because these
Aspects are ever the same.

Secondly, let there be taken into Astrology the accessions of every
particular Planet nearer to the Perpendicular, and Recessions from it according
to the Climates of Regions. For all the Planets as well as the Sun, have their
summers, their winters; wherein they dart down more forcible, or more feeble
rays, according to their posture in respect of the Perpendicular. For without
question, the Moon in Leo works more forcibly upon natural bodies here below,
than when she is in Pisces: Not because the Moon placed in Leo, has reference
to the Heart, and under Pisces respects the Feet, (as the vulgar Fable goes);
for their Elevation toward the Perpendicular and Approximation toward the
greater stars, just after the same manner as the Sun.

Thirdly, let the Apogaea, and Perigaea of the Planets be received with due
inquiry, to what the vigor of a Planet appertains in respect of himself; and
to what in his vicinity to us. For a Planet in his Apogaea, or exaltation is
more cheerful, and active; but in his Perigaea or declension more
co^municative. So the Sun in his Elevation when he enters the Tropic of
Cancer is in heat more recollected and vigorous; Interpret. additamt.
but when he falls off from the Meridian, as in Capricorn, he is more faint,
yet more dispersed in his influence. For in his Ascension, he is not only
nearer to the fixed stars; but his beams then falling at more equal and
right angles; become more united; and by a direct resultance from the earth
intermixe, and so reduplicate their force; whereas in his declension, they are
oblique, and therefore feeble and errant in reflection. Wherefore with the
Inhabitants under the Equator, the heat is more intense; than it is with
Northern Confiners, where the Sun daily keeps his circuit near about the
Horizon: But yet in this Perigean motion, the Suns beams are more
communicative, though less active; because departing from the point of their
incidence in the rebound, their reflection is oblique and dispersed. This
enquiry touching the projection of beams in a right or oblique line, would be
made with diligence, for it concerns all the influences of the heavens upon
terrene bodies; the general constitution of the year; the diverse
temperatures of the air in the five Zones; the complexion of different
Climates and the like.

Fourthly to be brief, let there be taken in all the remaining Accidents of
the motion of Planets; as what are the Accelerations, Retardations, Progresses,
Stations, Retrogradations, of every one of them in their course, what their
distance from the Sun, their Combustions, Increase, and Diminutions of Light,
Ecclipses, and whatsoever else of this nature? For all these cause, that the
Beams of the Planets do work more strongly, or more weakly, and after diverse
ways and distinct virtues; And these four observations, belong to the
Radiations of stars.

Fifthly, let there be received in, whatsoever may any way, open and disclose
the natures of stars Errant or Fixed, in their proper essence and activity; as
what is their Magnitude; of what color and aspect; what Scintillation and
Vibration of light; what Situation toward the Poles or Aequinoctiall; what
Asterismes; which are more mingled with other stars; which are more
solitary; which are superior, which inferior; which of the fixed stars are
within the lines and course of the Sun and Planets (namely within the
Zodiaque) which without; which of the Planets is more swift; which more slow;
which may move in the Eccliptique line; which may expatiate in latitude from
it; what Planet may be retrograde, which not; what Planet may be at any
distance from the Sun, which is tied to attend the Sun; which moves swifter
in Apogeo, which in Perigeo; to conclude the Irregularities of Mars; the
expatiations of Venus; the wonderful Labors or Passions, which are often
found in the Sun, and in Venus, and the like?

Last of all, let there be taken into Astrology, even from tradition the
Particular Natures, and Inclination of Planets, as also of fixed stars; which
seeing they are delivered over with such an universal consent; they are not
lightly to be rejected; but where they cross the grounds and reasons of
natural Principles. And of such observations as these, sound Astrology is
compiled; and according to these only, should the Schemes and configurations of
Heaven, be composed and interpreted. Sound Astrology is likewise applied and
referred with more confidence to Predictions; to Elections; with more Caution,
within due limits to both, Predictions may be made of future Comets, which as
we conjecture may be foretold; and of all sorts of Meteors; of Deluges,
Draughts; Heates; Conglaciations; Earthquakes; ore flowing of waters; breaking
out of Fires; Winds; great Raines; diverse Tempests; and strange seasons of the
Year; Pestilences, Epidemicall diseases; Plenty, and dearth of Grain; Wars,
Seditions, Sects, Plantations of new Colonies; lastly of all commotions and
greater Innovations, either in Nature, or in State-Goverment: so these
predictions may be drawn down (though not with like certainty) to more
special occurrences, and perchance to singularities; if the general
inclinations of such times and seasons, being first discovered and found out,
these be applied by a sharp piercing judgment Philosophical or Political,
to special or more particular events, which may be most subject to such
Accidents. As for example, a man shall find out from a foresight of the seasons
of the year, such temperatures of weather, as are propitious or pernicious
rather to Olives, than to Vines; rather to Phthisiques, and ulcerations of the
Longues, than to Hepatiques and obstructions of the liver; more to the
inhabitants of high and montainous; than low and champane Countries; more to
Monks, than Courtiers, by reason of their different kind of diet. Or if one
from the knowledge he has of the influence, the Heavens have over the spirits
of men, should find out a man to be of such a complexion and disposition; to
affect or distaste rather the people then Princes; rather learned and curious,
than courageous and warlike dispositions; rather sensual and voluptuous, than
active and politic natures. Such instances as these are infinite, but (as we
have said) they require not only that general knowledge, taken from the
stars, which are Active; but also a particular knowledge of Subjects which
are Passive. Nor are Elections altogether to be rejected but more sparingly to
be credited, than Predictions. For we see in Planting and in Sowing and in
Grafting, that the observation of the age of the Moon is a matter, not
altogether vain and frivolous. But these Elections, are by our rules more
restrained than Predictions: and this must ever be observed, that Elections are
of force, in such cases alone, where both the Jnfluxe of the Heavens is such,
as does not suddenly pass over; and likewise the Action of Jnferiour Bodies
such, as is not presently perfected: for neither the Increases of the Moon,
nor of the Planets are accomplished in an instant: but Punctuality of time, is
by all means to be rejected. There are found many of the like precise
observations (which a man would hardly believe) in Elections about Civil
affairs. But if any man in this case shall except against us, saying, that we
have indeed made some remonstrance out of what this reformed Astrology should
be deduced; and likewise to what it may with profit be referred: but the manner
how it is to be deduced, we have given no precept at all; he should not deal
equally with us, to exact at our hands the Art it self, which we never
promised, nor purposed to handle. Yet notwithstanding touching such a point of
Demand, thus much we will admonish; that there are only four means, which may
prepare the way to this knowledge. First by Experiments future; then by
Experiments past; again by Tradition; last of all by natural Reasons. Now for
future Experiments, to what end should we speak much of them? seeing to make up
a competent number of Jnstances, so many ages are requisite, as it were, but
lost labor, to think to comprehend it? As for Experiments past, they indeed
are within the compass and reach of men, although it is a matter will require
much labor, and much leisure to accomplish. For Astrologians (if they be not
wanting to their Profession) may make a collection from the faithful reports
of History, of all greater contingences; as Inundations, Pestilences, Wars;
Seditions; and (if the state so require) the deaths of Kings: and may
contemplate the situation of the Heavens, not according to the subtletie of
Figures; but according to those general rules which we have already set down;
to know in what postures the Heavens were, at those times, when such effects
came to pass; that so were there is a clear, and evident consent, and
concurrence of events; there a probable rule of Prediction may be inferred. As
for Traditions, they ought to be so examined and sifted, that such as
manifestly oppugn Physical Reasons, should be discarded; but such as well
consent, should be valide even of their own authority. Lastly, as for Physical
or Natural reasons, they are the aptest for this inquiry; which make inquiry
of the Catholic and more universal inclinations and Passions of Matter; and
of the simple and genuine motions of Bodies; for by these wings we safely soar
and mount up to those celestial materiate substances. Thus much concerning
Astrologia sana.

There is another Portion of Astrologicall Frenzy (besides those figme^ts
which we have noted at the beginning) which is wont to be separate from
Astrology, and to be transferred into Celestial Magique, as they call it.
This has purchased a strange Gloss, from the working fancy of man's wit;
namely That a benevolent situation or Aspect of stars, C. Agrip. de Occult.
Ph. 1.
may be taken in seals and signet-rings (be it of Mettalls or of any Gemme,
capable of such impression) which may arrest the felicity of that hour, which
otherwise would swiftly pass away, and as it were, fix it, being volatilous.
As the Poet passionately complains of this so noble Art, among the Ancients,
now long ago buried in oblivion.

Annulus infuso non vivit mirus Olympo, N. L.

Non magis ingentes humili sub lumine Phoebos
Fert Gemma, aut Celso divulsas cardine lunas.
Indeed the Church of Rome has embraced the Relics of Saints, and their
virtues, (for in Divine and immateriate things, the flux of time has no power
to abate the force and efficacy,) but that the Relics of Heaven should be so
lodged, as that the hour which is past, and, as it were, dead, should revive
and be continued; is a mere superstition, and imposture. Wherefore let us let
go these idle fancies unless the Muses be grown doting old wives.

IV. Abstract Physique in our judgment, may very well be divided into two
Parts, into the Doctrine of the Schemes of Matter; and into the doctrine of
Appetites or Motions. We will run them both over briefly, from whence the
delineations of the true Physique of Abstracts may be drawn. The Schemes of
Matter are; Dense, Rare; Grave, Light; Hot, Cold; Tangible, Pneumatique;
Volatile, Fixed; Determinate, Fluid; Humid, Dry; Fat, Crude; Hard, Soft;
Fragile, Tensile; Porous, United; Spirituous, Languid; Simple, Composite;
Absolute, imperfectly Mixed; Fibrous and full of veins, of a simple Positure or
equal; Similare Dissimilare; Specificate Non-specificate; Organicall
Jnorganicall; Animate Jnanimate. Neither do we extend the figurations of
Matter any farther, for Sensible and Insensible; Rational and Irrational, we
refer to the knowledge of Man.

Appetites and Motions, are of two sorts; either motions simple, which contain
in them the Roots of all natural Actions; but yet according to the Schemes and
habitudes of Matter: or Motions composited and Producted; from which last, the
received Philosophy of the Times (which comprehends little of the body of
Nature) takes its beginning. But such Compound Motions (as Generation
Corruption, and the rest) should be taken for the Sums and Products of simple
Motions; rather than for Primitive Motions. Motions simple, are motions of
Antitypie, commonly called Motion opposing Penetration of Dimensions; Motion of
Connection, or Continuity, which they call, Motion to avoid vacuity; Motion of
Liberty, least there should be any compression or extension preternaturall;
Motion into a new sphere, or to Rarefaction and Condensation; Motion of a
second connection, or a motion least there should be a solution of continuity;
Motion of greater Congregation, or to the Mass of their connaturalls, which is
commonly called Natural Motion; Motion of lesser Congregation, usually styled,
Motion of Sympathy and of Antipathy; Motion Disponent, or that parts may be
rightly placed in the whole, Motion of Assimilation, or of Multiplication of
its Nature upon an other; Motion of Excitation, where the more noble and
vigorous agent awaketh, and stirs up Motion latent and dormant in an other;
Motion of the Seal or of Jmpression, that is, Operation without Communication
of Substance; Motion Regal, or a Cohibition of other Motitions from a Motion
Predominant; Motion without Termination, or Spontaneous Rotation; Motion of
Trepidation, or of Contraction and Dilatation of Bodies placed betwixt things
good for them, and obnoxious to them; lastly Motion of Rest or abhorrency of
Motion, which is the Cause of many things. Of this kind are simple Motions
which truly issue forth out of the inward bowels of Nature; which complicate,
continuate, interchang'd repressed, repeated, and many ways aggregated, do
constitute those Composite Motions or Sums of Motions, which are received,
and such other of the same kind. The Sums of Motions are those Celebrated
Motions, Generation; Corruption; Augmentation; Diminution; Alteration, and
Lation; so Mixtion; Separation; Version.

There remains only as Appendices of Physique, the Measures of Motions; of
what efficacy the Quantity, or Dose of Nature is? What distance can do, which
is called, not unproperly, the orb of Virtue or Activity? What incitation, or
Tardity, can effect? What a long or short delay? what the force or rebatement
of a thing? What the instigation of Peristasie or circummambient enclosure? And
these are the natural and genuine Parts of true natural Philosophy, touching
Abstracts For in the figurations, or Schemes of Matter; in Motions simple; In
sums or Agregations of Motions; and in Measure of Motions, the Physique of
Abstracts is accomplished. As for voluntary Motion in Animals; Motion in the
Actions of Senses; Motion of the Imagination; of the Appetite, and of the will;
Motion of the mind; of the discerning faculty, or Practique Judgment; and of
the Intellectuals, we refer over to their proper Knowledges. Yet thus much
again we advertise, that all these Particulars we have delivered, are no
farther to be handled in Physique, than the enquiry of their Matter and
Efficient; for according to their Forms and Ends they are revised and
re-examined in Metaphysique.

V We will here annexe two notable Appendices, which have reference not so much
to the Matter, as to the Manner of Inquiry; Natural Problemes; and Placits of
Ancient Philosophers. The first is the Appendix of multiplied or sparsed
Nature; the second of Nature united or of sums. Both these belong to a grave
and circumspect moving of doubts, which is no mean Part of Knowledge: For
Problemes comprehend Particular Dubitations; Placits, general; about
Principles and the Fabrique. Of Problemes there is an excellent example in the
writing of Aristotle; which kind of work certainly deserved not only to have
bin celebrated by Posterity; Aristot. Probl.
but by their labors to have bin continued; seeing new doubts arise daily. But
in this point Caution is to be taken, and that of great Importance. The
recording and proposing of Doubts has in it a twofold use: One, that it
munites and fortifies Philosophy against errors; when that which is not
altogether so clear and evident is not defined and avouched, (lest error
should beget error) but a judgment upon it is suspended, and is not definitive.
The other that the entry of Doubts, and recording of them, are so many Sponges
which continually suck and draw in unto them an increase and improvement of
Knowledge; whereby it comes to pass that those things, which without the
suggestion of Doubts had bin slightly, and without observation passed over, are
by occasion of such Dubitations, more seriously and attentively considered But
these two utilities scarce recompense one discommodity, which unless it be
carefully looked unto, insinuates it self; namely, That a Doubt once
acknowledged as justly made, and become, as it were authentic; presently
stirs up defendants both ways; who in like manner commend over the same
liberty of doubting to Posterity; so that men bend and apply their wits,
rather to keep a doubt still on foot, than to determine and solve it.
Jnstances of this case we have every where, both in Iurisconsults; and in
Students in the Universities; who if they have once entertained a Doubt, it
goes ever after authorized for a Doubt, assuming unto themselves a Privilege
as well of Dubitation, as of Assertion: Whereas the right use of Reason is, to
make things doubtful certain; and not to call things certain, into doubt.
Wherefore J report as Deficient a Calendar of Dubitations, or Problemes in
Nature, and approve the undertaking of such a work, as a profitable pains; so
care be had, that as knowledge daily grows up, (which certainly will come to
pass if men hearken unto us) such Doubts as be clearly discust, and brought to
resolution, be raced out of the Catalogue of Problemes. To this Calendar, I
would have another annexed no less useful: For seeing that in all Enquiries,
there be found these three sorts of things; things manifestly true; Doubtful;
manifestly false; It wOuld be a very profitable course to adjoyne to the
Calendar of Doubts, and Non-liquets; a Calendar of Falsehoods, and of popular
Errors, now passing unargued in Natural History, and in Opinions; that
Sciences be no longer distemperd and embased by them.

As for the Placits of Ancient philosophers, as were those of Pythagoras,
Philolaus, Xenophon, Anaxagoras, Parmenides,
Leucippus, Democritus, and others, (which men use disdainfully to run over)
it will not be amiss to cast our eyes with more reverence upon them. Aristot.
For although Aristotle after the manner of the race of the Ottomans, thought
he could not safely reign, unless he made away all his Brethren; yet to those
who seriously propound to themselves the inquisition and illustration of Truth,
and not Dominion or Magistrality, it can not but seem a matter of great
profit, to see at once before them, the several opinions of several Auctors
touching the Natures of things. Neither is this for any great hope conceived
that a more exact truth can any way be expected from these or from the like
Theories. For as the same Phoenomena; the same Calculations are satisfied upon
the Astronomicall Principles both of Ptolomy and Copernicus: So the popular
experience we embrace; and the ordinary view and face of things, may apply it
self to many several Theories; whereas a right investigation of truth
requires another manner of severity and speculation. Phys. 1.
For as Aristotle says elegantly, That Children at first indeed call all men
Fathers, and women Mothers, but afterward they distinguish them both. So
certainly experience in Childhood, will call every Philosophy, Mother; but when
it comes to ripeness, it will discern the true Mother. In the mean time it
is good to read over diverse Philosophies, as diverse Glosses upon Nature;
whereof it may be one in one place; another in another; is more corrected.
Therefore I could wish a collection made, but with diligence and judgment, De
Antiquis Philosophiis.
De Antiquis Philosophiis, out of the lives of Ancient Philosophers; out of the
Parcels of Plutarch of their Placits; out of the Citations of Plato; out of the
Confutations of Aristotle; out of a sparsed mention found in other Books as
well of Christians, as of Heathens, (as out of Lactantius, Philo, Philostratus,
and the rest): For J do not yet see extant a work of this Nature. But here I
must give warning that this be done distinctly, so as the Philosophies, every
one severdly, be composed and continued, and not collected by titles and
handfulls, as has bin done by Plutarch. For every Philosophy while it is
entire in the whole piece, supports it self; and the opinions maintained
therein, give light, strength, and credence mutually yone to the other; whereas
if they be simple and broken, Tacit.
it will sound more strange and dissonant. In truth when I read in Tacitus the
Actions of, Nero, or of Claudius invested with Circumstances of Times, Persons,
and Inducements: I find them not so strange, but that they may be true: but
when I read the same Actions in Suetonius Tranquillus, Sueton.
represented by titles and common places, and not in order of Time, they seem
monstrous and altogether incredible: So is Philosophy when it is propounded
entire; and when it is sliced and articled into fragments. Neither do I
exclude out of this Calendar of the Placits, or Sects of Philosophy, the
Theories and opinions of later times, as that of Theophrastus Paracelsus
eloquently reduced into a body and Harmony of Philosophy by Severinus the Dane,
or of Telesius of Cosenze, who reviving the Philosophy of Parmenides has
turned the weapons of the Peripatetiques upon themselves, or of Patricius the
Venetian; who has sublimated the fumes of the Platonists; or of Gilbert our
Countryman, who has restored to light the opinions of Philolaus, or of any
other whatsoever, if he be of merit. And because the volumes of these Auctors
are wholly extant, there may be abridgements made only of them, and so annexed,
by way of reference to the rest. And thus much of Natural Philosophy, and the
Appendices thereof.

VI. As for Methaphysique, we have assigned unto it, the inquiry of Formal and
Final causes; which application, as to Forms, may seem to be nugatory and
void. FORMAE RERVM.
For an opinion has prevailed, and is grown inveterate, that the essential
Forms and true Differences of things, can by no diligence of Man be found out.
Which opinion in the mean, gives and grants us thus much; that the Invention
of Forms, is of all other parts of knowledge the worthiest to be sought; if it
be possible they may be found. And as for Possibility of Invention, there are
some faint-hearted discoverers, who when they see nothing but Air and Water,
think there is no farther Land. But it is manifest that Plato, a man of an
elevated wit, and who beheld all things as from a high cliffe, In Timeo alibi.
in his doctrine of Ideas, did discry, that forms were the true object of
knowledge, however he lost the real fruit of this most true opinion, by
contemplating and apprehending Forms, as absolutely abstract from matters; and
not confined and determined by matter: whereupon it came to pass that he
turned himself to Theological speculations, which infected and distained all
his Natural Philosophy. But if we keep a watchful, and a severe eye upon
Action and Use, it will not be difficult, to trace and find out what are the
Forms; the disclosure whereof would wonderfully enrich and make happy the
estate of man. For the Forms of substances, Genesis 2.
(man only except of whom it is said, Formavit hominem de limo terrae, and
spiravit in faciem ejus spiraculum vitae; not as off all other kinds, Producat
aqua, producat terra) I say the species of creatures, Genesis 1.
as they are now multiplied by compounding and transplanting, are so perplexed
and complicate, as it is either altogether lost labor to make enquiry of them,
or the inquisition thereof, such as may be had, should be suspended for a time,
and when the Forms of nature, in her more simple existence are rightly sought
and found out, then to be determined and set down. For, as it were not a thing
easy, nor any way useful, to seek the Form of that sound, which makes a
word; being that words through composition and transposition of letters are
infinite: but to enquire the Form of sound, which expresses some simple
letter (namely with what collision, with what application of the instruments of
voice it is made) is a thing comprehensible and easy; which form of letters
once known, presently leads us to the form of words. In the same manner to
enquire the Form of a Lion, of an Oak, of Gold, nay of water, of Air is a
vain pursuit; but to enquire the Forms of Dense, Rare; Hot, Cold; Heavy,
Light; Tangible Pneumatique; Volatile, Fixed; and the like, both of Figurations
and of Motions; whereof the most of them we have enumerated when we handled
Physique, and are wont to call them, Forms of the first rank or order; and
which (as the letters of the Alphabet) are not so many in number, and yet build
up and support the essences and Forms of all substances and this is that very
point which we aim at, and endeavor to compass; and which constitutes and
defines that Part of Metaphysique, whereof we now enquire. Nor does this so
prejudicate or hinder, but that Physique may consider the same Natures also (as
has bin said) but only according to the fluid and mutable causes. For example,
if the cause of whiteness in Snow or in Froth be inquired, it is well rendered,
that it is the subtle intermixture of Air with water. But this is far from
being the Form of whiteness; being that air intermixed with the dust, or
powder of Glass, or Crystal, does likewise produce whiteness, as well as if
it were mingled with water; but this is the efficient cause only, which is no
other than vehiculum Formae. But if the inquiry be made in Metaphysique, you
shall find some such rule as this, That two diaphanous bodies being intermixed,
their optique Portions in a simple order, or equally placed, do determine and
constitute whiteness. This part of Metaphysique I find deficient: and no
marvel because by the course of inquiring, which hitherto has bin practiced,
the Forms of things, will never appear while the world endures. The root of
this error, as of all other, is this; that men in their contemplations of
nature are accustomed to make too timely a departure, and too remote a recesse
from experience and particulars; and have yielded and resigned themselves
wholly over to the fumes of their own fancies, and populare Argumentations. But
the use of this part of Metaphysique, which I report as deficient, is of the
rest the most excellent in two respects.

First, because it is the duty and peculiar virtue of all Sciences, to abridge
(as much as the conception of truth will permit) the ambages and long circuits
of Experience, and so to apply a remedy to the ancient complaint of vita
brevis, Hipp. Aphor.
ars longa. And this is excellently performed, by collecting and uniting the
Axioms of Sciences, into more general heads and conceptions; which may be
agreeable to all Individualls. For Sciences, are the Pyramides supported by
History; and experience, as their only and true Basis; and so the Basis of
Natural Philosophy is Natural History; the stage next the Basis is Physique;
the stage next the vertical point is Metaphysique: as for the Cone and
vertical point it self (opus quod operatur Deus a principio usque ad finem;
Eccles. 3.
the summary law of Nature) we do justly doubt whether man's inquiry can
attain unto it. But these three be the true stages of Sciences; and are, to
men swelled up with their own knowledge, and a dareing insolence, to invade
Heaven, like the three hills of the Giants.

Ter sunt Conati imponere Pelio Ossam, Virg. Geor. 1.

Scilicet atque Ossae frondosum involvere Olympum.
But to those that disabling themselves, and discharging their pride, refer
all to the glory of God, they are the three acclamations Sanste, Sancte,
Sancte: Apoc. 4.
for God is holy in the multitude of his works, Holy in the order of them, Holy
in the union. And therefore the speculation was excellent in Parmenides and
Plato; although but a speculation in them, In Parm.
That all things by scales did ascend to unity. So then, that science is the
worthiest, which least charge man's understanding with multiplicity; and it is
evident, that that is Metaphysique, as that which principally speculates those
simple Forms of things; (which we have styled Forms of the first degree or
order) which though they be few in number, yet in their commensurations and
Co-ordinations, they make all kinds of variety.

The Second respect which innobles this part of Metaphysique touching Forms,
is, that of all other sciences, it does most enfranchise, and set at liberty
the Power of Man; and brings it forth into a most ample and open field to
exercise in. For Physique directs man's labor and diligence through narrow and
restrained ways, imitating the flexious courses of ordinary Nature; But latae
undique sapientibus viae, Plat. in Phaed. Cic. de Fin. 2. Tusc. 4.
to sapience (which was anciently defined to be, Rerum divinarum and humanarum
scientia) there is ever copy and variety of means. For Physical causes give
light and occasion to new inventions in simili materia; but whosoever knows
any Form, knows also the utmost possibility of superinducing that nature upon
any variety of matter; and so is less restrained and tied in operation, either
to the Basis of the matter, or to the condition of the Efficient; which kind
of knowledge, though in a more divine sense, Solomon elegantly describes, Non
arctabuntur gressus tui, Prove. IV.
and Currens non habebis offendiculum; his meaning is, that the ways of
sapience, are not liable to streights, nor perplexities.

The second part of Metaphysique, is the inquiry of Final causes; which we
note not as omitted, but as misplaced: for the inquiry of them usually is made
amongst the Physiques, and not in the Metaphysiques. And yet if this were a
fault in order only, I should not much stand upon it; for order is a matter of
Illustration, and pertaines not to the substance of Sciences: but this
inversion of order, has caused a notable deficience, and brought a great decay
upon Philosophy. For the handling of Final Causes in the Physiques, has
intercepted and banished the inquiry of Physical Causes; and has given men
occasion to rest satisfied in such specious, and umbratilous Causes; and not
thoroughly to urge and press the inquiry of Real and truly Physical Causes.
For this I find done not only by Plato, Aristot. Probl.
who ever Ancreth upon that Shore; but also by Aristotle; Galen, and others,
who usually likewise fall upon these Flats. For to say, That the eyelids
furnished with hairs are for a quick-set and fence to fortify the sight: or
that the firmness of skins, and hides of living Creatures, is to repel the
extremities of heat and cold: or that Bones are ordained by Nature for Columes
and Beams whereupon the frame of the Body is to be built: or that Trees
shootforth leaves to shadow and protect the fruit from the Sun and the wind:
or that the Clouds are engendered above, to water the earth below: or that the
earth is close-compact and solid, that it may be a Station and Mansion for
living Creatures, is properly inquired in Metaphysique; but in Physique they
are impertinent. Nay, (to pursue this point) such discoursing Causes as these,
like the Remoraes (as the fiction goes) adhering to ships, stay and slugge
the sailing, and the Progress of Sciences, that they could not hold on their
Course, and advance forward to further Discoveries: And now long ago it is so
brought to pass that the search of Physical Causes, thus neglected, are
decayed and passed over in silence. And therefore the Natural Philosophy of
Democritus, and some others, who removed God and a Mind from the frame of
things; and attributed the structure of the world to infinite Preludiums, and
Essays (which by one name they termed Fate or Fortune; and have assigned the
Causes of Particulars to the necessity of Matter, without intermixture of
Final Causes) seems to us (so far as we can conjecture from the Fragments
and Remains of their Philosophy) in respect of Physical Causes, to have bin
far more solid, and to have penetrated more profoundly into Nature; than that
of Aristotle and Plato: for this reason alone that those Ancient Philosophers
never wassted time in final Causes; but these perpetually press and inculcate
them. And in this point Aristotle is more to blame than Plato, seeing he has
omitted the fountain of all final Causes, God; and in the place of God
substituted Nature; and has embraced final Causes rather as a lover of
Logique, than an adorer of Divinity. Nor do we therefore speak thus much,
because those final Causes are not true and very worthy the enquiry in
Metaphysique Speculations; but because while they sallie out, and break in
upon the Possessions of Physical Causes, they do unhappily depopulate and
wast that Province: For otherwise if they keep themselves within their
precincts and borders, they are extremely deceived who ever think that there is
an enmity or repugnancy between them and Physical Causes. For the cause
rendered, That the hairs about the eyelids are for the safeguard of the sight,
does not indeed impugn that other Cause; That pilositie is incident to
Orifices of Moisture, Virg. Bue.
Muscosi Fontes etc. -- Nor the Cause rendered, that the firmness of Hides in
Beasts is for armor against the injuries of extreme weather, does impugn that
other Cause; That that firmness is caused by the contraction of Pores in the
outward parts of the body through cold, and depredation of Air; and so of the
rest: both causes excellently conspiring, save that, the one declares an
intention, the other a consequence only. Neither does this call in question, or
derogate from divine Providence; but rather wonderfully confirms and exalts
it. For as in Civil Actions that Politic wisdom will be more deep, and
admired, if a man can use the service of other men to his own ends and
desires; and yet never acquaint them with his purpose (so as they shall do
what he would they should do, and yet not understand what they do); then if
he should impart his Counsils to those he imployes: So the wisdom of God
shines more wonderfully, when Nature intends one thing, and Providence draws
forth another; then if the Characters of Divine Providence were impressed upon
every particular habitude and motion of Nature. Surely Aristotle after he had
swelled up Nature with Final Causes; Naturam nihil frustra facere; De Coelo.
lib. 1 and lib. de part. animal.
suique voti semper esse compotem (si impedimenta abessent); and had set down
many such tending to that purpose; had no further need of God: but Democritus
and Epicurus, when they published and celebrated their Atoms; were thus far
by the more subtle wits listened unto with Patience: but when they would
avouch that the Fabrique and Contexture of all things in Nature, knit and
united it self without a Mind, from a fortuitous Concourse of those Atoms,
they were entertained with Laughter by all. So that Physical Causes are so
far from withdrawing men's minds from God and Providence; as rather
contrariwise those Philosophers which were most exercised in contriving those
Atoms, found no end and issue of their travail, until they had resolved all
at last into God, and Providence. Thus much of Metaphysique, a part whereof
touching Final Causes I deny not to have bin handled both in the Physiques,
and Metaphysiques; in these truly, in those improperly; for the inconvenience
has ensued thereupon.

CAP. V. 1 The Partion of the Operative Knowledge of Nature into Mechanique and
Magique: Respondent to the Parts of Speculative Knowledge; Mechanique to
Physique; Magique to Metaphysique. A purging of the word Magia. II. Two
Appendices to Operative Knowledge, An Inventory of the Estate of man. A
Catalogue of Polychrests, or things of multifarious use.
I THE Operative Knowledge of Nature we will likewise divide into two Parts;
and that from a kind of Necessity. For this Division is subordinate to the
former Division of Speculative Knowledge; for Physique, and the Enquiry of
Efficient and Material Causes; produces Mechanique: but Metaphysique, and the
enquiry of Forms produces Magique: As for Final Causes the enquiry is barren,
and as a Virgin consecrate to God brings forth nothing. Nor are we ignorant
that there is a Mechanical Knowledge which is merely empericall, and operarie,
not depending on Physique; but this we have referred to Natural History, and
separate it from Natural Philosophy: Speaking here only of that Mechanical
Knowledge which is connext with Causes Physical. But yet there falls out a
certain Mechanical, or Experimental Knowledge which neither is altogether
Operative, nor yet properly reaches so high as speculative Philosophy. For all
the Inventions of Operations which have come to men's Knowledge, either have
fallen out by casual insidence; and afterward delivered from hand to hand; or
were sought out by a purposed experiment. Those which have bin found out by
intentionall experiment; they have bin disclosed either by the light of Causes,
and Axioms; or found out by extending, or transferring, or compounding former
inventions; which is a matter more sagacious and witty, than Philosophical.
And this part which by no means we despise we shall briefly touch hereafter,
when we shall treat of Literate Experience amongst the Parts of Logique. As
for the Mechanique now in hand, Aristotle has handled it promiscuously; Hero
in spiritalibus; as likewise Georgius Agricola a modern Writer very diligently
in his Mineralls; and many others in particular Treatises on that subject; so
as I have nothing to say of Deficients in this kind; but that the Promiscuous
Mechanicalls of Aristotle, ought to have bin with more diligence continued, by
the pens of recent Writers; especially with choice of such experimentals, of
which either the Causes are more obscure, or the Effects more noble. But they
who insist upon these do as it were only coast along the shore, Premendo
littus iniquum. For in my judgment there can hardly be any radical alteration,
or novation in Nature; either by any fortuitous adventures; or by essays of
Experiments; or from the light of Physical Causes; but only through the
invention of Forms. Therefore if we have set down that part of Metaphysique
as Deficient, which entreats of Forms; it follows that Natural Magique also,
which is a Relative unto it, is likewise Defective.

But it seems requisite in this place that the word Magia, accepted for a long
time in the worse part, be restored to the ancient and honorable sense. Magia,
amongst the Persians, was taken for a sublime sapience, and a Science of the
Harmony and concents of universalls in Nature; so those three Eastern Kings
which came to adore Christ, are styled by the name of Magi: and we understand
it in that sense, as to be, a Science which deduceth the knowledge of hidden
forms to strange and wonderful effects and operations; and as it is commonly
said, by joining Actives with Passives, which discloseth the great wonders of
Nature. As for the Natural Magique, (which flies abroad in many men's books)
containing certain credulous and superstitious traditions, and observations of
Sympathies, and Antipathies, and of hidden and specifique proprieties, with
some experiments commonly frivolous; strange, rather for the art of convayance
and disguisement, than the thing it self; surely he shall not much err, who
shall say, that this kind of magique, is as far differing in truth of Nature,
from such a knowledge as we require; as the Books of the Gests of Arthur of
Britain, or of Hugh of Bordeaux, differs from Caesar's Commentaries, in truth
of story. For it is manifest, that Caesar did greater things de vero, then they
durst feign of their Heroes; but he did them not in that fabulous manner. Of
this kind of Learning, the Fable of Ixion was a figure; who projecting with
himself to enjoy Juno the Goddess of Power, had copulation with a cloud, of
which he begot Centaures and Chimeraes. So whoever are carried away with a
frantique and impotent passion, and vaporous conceit to those things which
only, through the fumes and clouds of Imagination, they fancy to themselves to
see, in stead of substantial operations; they are delivered of nothing but
ayrie hopes, and certain deformed and monstrous apparitions. The operation and
effect of this superficiary, and degenerous Natural Magique upon Men, is like
some soporiferous drugges, which procure sleep; and withal exhale into the
fancy, merry and pleasant dreams in sleep. First it casts man's understanding
into a sleep, still chanting and suggesting specificique proprieties, and
secret virtues; and sent down, as it were, from heaven, to be delivered, and
to be learned only by auricular traditions; whence it comes to pass, that men
are no more stirred up and awaked to search with diligence, and to force out
the true causes; but sit down satisfied with these frivolous and credulous
opinions: and then it instilles an infinite number of pleasing fictions, in the
manner of dreams, and such as one would most wish to be true. And it is worth
the pains to note, that in these sciences which hold so much of imagination
(as are that adulterate Magique, whereof we now speak, Alchymie, Astronomy and
the like) the means and Theorie are ever more monstrous, than the end and
pretenses. The turning of Silver or Quicksilver or any other metal into
Gold, is a hard thing to believe: yet it is a thing far more probable, to a
man well skilled, and experimented in the natures of weight; yellow Color,
malleable and extensible; as also fixed and volatile: and likewise to one who
has exactly searched into the first seeds and menstruous Purgings of Mineralls;
that Gold by an industrious and curious wit, may, at last, be produced; than
that a few grains of Elixir, or of the powder of Production, should be of
force, in a few Minutes, to turn Metalls into Gold, by the activity of the
same Elixir; which is able to perfect nature, and to deliver it from all
impediments. So the retarding of Age, or the restoreing of some degree of
youth, does not easily purchase a belief: yet it is far more likely to a man
that knows perfectly the nature of Arefaction, and the depredations of the
spirits, upon the solid parts of the body; and has thoroughly observed the
nature of Assimilation, and of Alimentation; either more perfect or more
peccant; also the nature of the spirits and of the Flame (as it were) of the
body, assigned sometimes to consume, sometimes to repair; may by diets,
Bathings, Anointings, proper Medicines, and accommodate motions, and the like,
prolong life, or renew some degrees of youth, or vivacity: then that this
should be effected, by a few drops or scruples of some precious Liquor or
Quintescence. Again that Fates may be drawn from the stars, men will not
suddenly, and easily assent unto; but these, that the hour of Nativity (which
oftentimes through many natural accidents, is either accelerated or differed)
should govern the fortune of the whole life; or that the hour of Question is
co-fatall with the thing it self which is sought, you will say are mere
impostures. But such a rash impotency and intemperance, does possess and
infatuate the whole race of man; that they do not only presume upon, and
promise to themselves what is repugnant in nature to be performed; but also,
are confident that they are able to conquer even at their pleasure, and that by
way of recreation, the most difficult passages of nature, without trouble or
travail. And of Magique thus much; the name whereof we have vindicated from
reproach, and separated the true and noble kind from the base and counterfeit.

II. Of this operative part of Nature there are two Appendices, both of much
importance. The first is, INVENTARIVM OPVM HVMANARVM.
that there be made an Jnventary of the estate of Man; in which there should be
taken and compendiously cast up, the sum of all the wealth and fortunes of
men (whether they arise from the fruits and revenewes of nature, or of Art)
which are now extant, and whereof men are already possessed; adding such
inventions, as is manifest have bin in times past celebrated, but are now
perished. To this end and purpose, that he who addresseth himself to the search
of new Inventions, may not be arrested in his inquest; nor wast time and study
in those things which are already invented, and are now extant. And this
Inventary will be more artificial, and more serviceable, if you add those
things which in populare conceit are reputed impossible; and together with them
couple such inventions, as are nearest in degree to impossibles, and yet are
extant; that the one may set an edge on man's enquiry; the other may in a sort
direct it: and that from these Optatives, and Potentialls, man's Actives may be
more readily conducted.

The second is, CATALOGVS POLYCHRESTORVM.
that there be made a Calendare of those experiments, which are Polychrests
things of a multifarious use, and most universal consequence; and which
conduce and direct to the Invention of other experiments. For example; the
artificial experiment of conglaciation of water by Jce with black salt,
pertaines to infinite purposes and essaies; for this discloseth the secret and
abstruse manner of condensation, than which nothing is more commodious for man.
As for Fire, that is a ready and known Agent for Rarefaction; but the mystery
of Condensation, is not yet fully discovered: and it makes much for the
abridgement of invention, if Polychrests of this nature were collected into a
particular Catalogue.

CAP. VI. Of the Great Appendix of Natural Philosophy, Speculative, as
Operative; Mathematique knowledge, and that it ought rather to be Placed
amongst Appendices, than amongst substantial Sciences. The Partition of
Mathematiques into Pure and Mixed.
Metaph. I. and IX.
ARistotle says well, Physique and Mathematique, engender Practical or
Mechanical knowledge: Wherefore now we have handled, both the speculative and
operative part of the knowledge of Nature; order requires that we speak of
Mathematique, which is an auxiliary science to them both. For in the received
Philosophy, Mathematique is annexed, as a third part to Physique and
Metaphysique; but it seems to us, who have undertaken to reexamine, and Till
over again these things, (if we had designed this as a substantive and
principal science) more agreeable both in respect of the nature of the thing,
and the light of order, to place it as a branch of Metaphysique. For Quantity,
which is the subject of Mathematique Science, applied to Matter, is the Dose,
as it were, of Nature, and productive of a number of effects in things
Natural; and therefore is to be reckoned in the number of essential Forms.
Laert. in Them.
For the Power of Figure, and Number, seemed to be of such force amongst the
Ancient Philosophers, that Democritus placed the seeds of the variety of
things, Iambl. de vita Pyth. l. 1.
principally, in the Figures of Atoms; and Pythagoras asserted, the Natures of
things, to be constituted of Numbers. In the mean, this is true, that of
Natural Forms, (as we understand Forms) Quantity is of all most abstracted
and separable from Matter: which was the reason why it has bin more painefully
labored, and more exactly inquired by men, then any other Form whatsoever,
which are all more immersed in Matter. For being it is the nature of Man
(certainly to the great prejudice of knowledge) to delight in the open Fields
of Generals; rather than in the Woods and Jnclosures of Particulars; there was
nothing found more acceptable and delightful, than the Mathematiques; wherein
that appetite of expatiating and meditateing might be satisfied. And though all
this be true, yet to us, who provide not only for truth and order, but likewise
for the use and profit of men; it seemed at last better, to design
Mathematiques; being they are of such efficacy, both in Physiques and in
Metaphysiques, and in Mechaniques, and in Magique; as the Appendices and
auxiliary forces of them all: which in a sort we are compelled to do, for the
wantonness and arrogance of Mathematicians, who could be content that this
science, might even command and overruled Physique. For it is come to pass, by
what fate I know not, that Mathematique and Logique, which should carry
themselves as hand-maides to Physique; boasting their certainty above it, take
upon them a command and Dominion. But we do not so much stand upon the rank,
and dignity of this science; let us consider the thing it self.

Mathematiques are either Pure, or Mixed. to Pure Mathematiques, those sciences
are referred, which handle Quantity altogether abstracted from Matter, and
Physical Axioms. They are two, Geometry, and Arithmetique; the one handling
Quantity continued; the other dissevered. Which two Arts have indeed bin
inquired into, with subtlety and industry; but neither to the labors of
Euclide in Geometry, has there bin any thing of any worth added by Posterity,
in so many centuries of years since he florisht; nor has the Doctrine of
Solides, for the use and excellency of the knowledge, bin labored and advanced
by writers Ancient or Modern. And in Arithmetique there has not bin found out
apt and sufficient variety of compendious ways for supputations, especially
about Progressions; whereof there is great use in the Physiques. Nor is the
Algebra, or Art of Equation well perfected; but that Pythagoricall and
Mystical Arithmetique, which is begun to be revived out of Proclus, and some
Remains of Euclide, is a spacious field of speculation: For such is the nature
of Man, that if it be not able to comprehend solids, it wastes it self in
unprofitable niceties.

Mixed Mathematique, has for subject Axioms, and Portions of Physique; and
considers Quantity, as it is auxiliary to enlighten, demonstrate, and actuate
them. For many Parts of Nature can never be with sufficient subtlety
comprehended, nor demonstrated with sufficient perspicuity; nor accommodated to
use with sufficient dexterity and certainty, without the Aid, and intervening
of the Mathematiques. Of which sort are Perspective, Music, Astronomy,
Cosmographie, Architecture, Jngenarie, and diverse others. But in Mixed
Mathematiques, J can now report no entire portions Deficient; I rather make
this prediction, that there will be more kinds of them invented by Posterity,
if men be not wanting to themselves. For as Physical knowledge daily grows
up, and new Actioms of nature are disclosed; there will be a necessity of new
Mathematique inventions; and so at last more Mixed Mathematiques will be
contrived. And now we have passed through the knowledge of Nature, and have
noted the Deficients therein. Wherein if we have departed from the Ancient and
received opinions, and thereby have moved contradiction; for our part, as we
affect not to dissent, so we purpose not to contend. If it be truth, Virg.
Bucol.
Non Canimus surdis, respondent omnia sylvae; The voice of nature will cry it
up, though the voice of man should cry it down. And as Alexander Borgia was
wont to say, Vid. Hist. Gal.
of the Expedition of the French for Naples, that they came with chaulke in
their hands to mark up their Lodgings, and not with weapons to fight; so we
like better, that entry of truth, which comes peaceably, where the Minds of
men, capable to lodge so great a guest, are signed, as it were, with chalk;
than that which comes with Pugnacity, and forces it self away by contentions
and controversies. Wherefore having finished two parts of Philosophy, concerning
God, and concerning Nature; the third remains concerning Man.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF FRANCIS LO. VERVLAM VICOUNT St ALBAN. OF THE DIGNITY AND
ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING. To the KING.
CAP. I. I The Partition of the Knowledge of Man into the Philosophy of
Humanity; and Civil. The Partition of the Knowledge of Humanity into the
Knowledge touching the Body of Man; and into the Knowledge touching the Soul
of Man. II. The Constitution of a general Knowledge of the Nature or of the
State of man. The Division of the Knowledge of the State of Man into the
Knowledge of the Person of Man; and of the League of the Mind, and the Body.
The Division of the Knowledge of Man's Person, into the Knowledge of Man's
Miseries. And of his Prerogatives. III The Division of the Knowledge of the
League, into the Knowledge of Indications. And of Impressions. The Assignment
of Physiognomy. And of the Interpretation of Natural Dreams, to the Knowledges
of Indications.
IF any Man (Excellent King) shall assault, or wound me for any of those
Precepts I have delivered, or shall hereafter deliver (besides that I should be
safe being under the Protection of Your Majesty) let him know, that he does
that which is against the Custom and Law of Arms: For I am a Trumpeter only,
I do not begin the fight; perchance one of those of whom Homer etc.

Hom. Il. 4.
(...). For these even between Mortal and enraged enemies past to and fro ever
inviolated. Nor does our Trumpet summon, and encourage men to tear and rend
one another with contradictions; and in a Civil rage to bear arms, and wage
war against themselves; but rather, a peace concluded between them, they may
with joint forces direct their strength against Nature her self; and take her
high Towers, and dismantle her fortified Holds; and thus enlarge the Borders of
man's Dominion, so far as Almighty God of his goodness shall permit.

Plat. in Alcib. 1.
I Now let us come to that Knowledge, whereunto the Ancient Oracle directs us,
which is the knowledge of our selves: Cic. de LL. lib. 1.
which deserves the more accurate handling by how much it touches us more
nearly. This knowledge is to man the end and term of Knowledges; but of Nature
her self, a portion only. And generally let this be a rule, that all Divisions
of Knowledges be so accepted and applied, Sen. Epist. 89.
As may rather design forth and distinguish Sciences into Parts; than cut and
pull them asunder into pieces; that so the continuance and entirenesse of
Knowledges may ever be preserved. For the contrary Practice has made
particular Sciences to become barren, shallow, and erroneous; while they have
not bin nourisht, maintained and rectified from the common Fountain, and
Nurcery. So we see Cicero the Orator complained of Socrates, Cicero de Orat.
and his School; That he was the first that separated Philosophy and
Rhetorique; whereupon Rhetorique became a verbal, and an empty Art. And it is
also evident, that the opinion of Copernicus, touching the Rotation of the
Earth (which now is maintained) because it is not repugnant to the Phoenomena,
cannot be revinced by Astronomicall Principles; yet by the Principles of
Natural Philosophy, truly applied, it may. So we see also that the Science of
Medicine, if it be destituted and forsaken of Natural Philosophy, it is not
much better than Empiricall Practice.

This being laid as a ground, let us proceed to the Knowledge of man. This has
two parts: For it either considers man segregate, or distributively; or
congregate, and in society: the one we call Philosophy of Humanity; the other
Philosophy Civil. The Philosophy of Humanity, or Humane, consists of the
same Parts, whereof man himself consists; that is of knowledges which
respect the Body; and of knowledges which respect the Mind.

II But before we pursue particular Distributions, let us constitute; One
general Knowledge of the Nature and state of man: For indeed it is very fit
that this Knowledge be emancipate, and made a knowledge by it self. It is
composed of those Sympathies and Concordances commune between the Body and the
Mind.

Again, this Knowledge of the Nature and State of man may be distributed into
two Parts; attributing to the one the undivided Nature of man; to the other the
Combination between the Mind and the Body: The first of these we will call the
knowledge of the Person of man; the second the knowledge of the League. And it
is plain that all these several Branches of Knowledge, being they are common
and commixt, could not be assigned to that first Division, of Knowledges,
conversant about the Body; and of Knowledges conversant about the Mind.

The Knowledge concerning the Person of man, comprehends specially two things;
namely the Contemplations of the Miseries of Mankind; and of the Prerogatives,
or Excellencies of the same. But the bewailing of man's miseries has bin
elegantly and copiously set forth by many in the writings, as well of
Philosophers, as Divines. TRIVMPHI HOMINIS, SIVE DE SVMMITA. TIBVS NATVRAE
HVMANAE.
And it is both a pleasant and a profitable Contemplation.

As for that other touching Man's Prerogatives, it is a point may well be set
down among DEFICIENTS. Pindar when he would extol Hiero, speaks (as usually
he does) most elegantly, That he cropped off the tops, In Olymp.
or summities of all virtues. For I suppose it would much conduce to the
Magnanimity, and Honor of Man; if a Collection were made of the Vltimities (as
the Schools speak) or Summities (as Pindar) of Humane Nature, principally out
of the faithful reports of History: That as; What is the last and highest
pitch, to which man's Nature of it self has ever reached in all the
Perfections both of Body and Mind. Suet. in Iul.
What a strange ability was that which is reported of Caesar, that he could
dictate at once to five Secretaries? Plat. in Hip in Arist. Quin. Inst. 3 Laert
in vit.
So the Exercitations of the Ancient Rhetoricians, Protagoras; Gorgias;
likewise of Philosophers; Calisthenes; Possidonius; Carneades; who were able to
discourse extempore upon any Subject Pro and Con, with fluency and elegancy of
expression, Philostr. in Ep. alii.
do much enoble the Powers of man's wit and natural endowments. And that which
Cicero reports of his Master Archias is little for use, Pro. Archia Poeta.
but perchance great for Ostentation and Faculties; that he was able upon the
sudden to allege a great number of excellent verses pertinent to the purpose
of such Discourses as were then in hand. It is a singular commendation to that
faculty of the Mind, Xenop. Cyrop. 5. Quintil. Inst. XI.
the Memory; that Cyrus or Scipio could call so many thousands of men by their
Particular Names. But the Trophies of Moral virtues, are no less famous than
those of intellectual virtues. What a great example of patience does that
common story of Anaxarchus present unto our thoughts, Laert.
who put to the Rack and Torture, bit out his own tongue, the hoped Instrument
of some Discovery, and spit it in the Tyran's face? Nor is that inferior for
tolerance though much for the merit and dignity, (which fell out in our time)
of a certain Burgundian, Meteran. Hist. bell. l. XI.
who had committed a Murder upon the Person of the Prince of Orange) this slave
being scourged with iron whips; and his flesh torn with burning Pincers gave
not so much as a groan; howbeit when a broken piece of the Scaffold fell by
chance upon the head of one that stood by the scorcht-stigmatiz'd varlet,
laughed; even in the midst of his torments, who a little before wept at the
cutting off of his curled hair. In like manner the serenity and security of
Mind has appeared wonderful in many even at the instant approaches of Death;
as that of a Centurion recorded by Tacitus; Annal. 15.
who being commanded by the executioner to stretch forth his neck valiantly. I
would (says he) thou would strike as valiantly. But John Duke of Saxony
when the commission was brought him, Hist. Germ.
as he was playing at chests, wherein his death was commanded the next day,
called to one that stood by, and smiling, said; See, whether I have not the
better hand of this game; He (pointing toward him with whom he played) will
boast when J am dead, that he was the fairer of set. And our More, Chancellor
of England, when the day before he was to die, a Barber came unto him (sent for
this end, lest perchance the grave and reverend sight of his long hair might
move compassion in the People, Vita. Mori.
and asked him whether it was his pleasure to have his hair cut) he refused,
and turning to the Barber; The King (said he) is at suit with me for my head,
and until that Controversy be ended I mean to bestow no cost upon it. And
the same Person at the very point of Death, after he had laid his head upon the
fatal Block raises up himself a little again; and having a fair large Beard
gently removed it, saying, Yet I hope this has not offended the King. But not
to insist too long upon this point, it is evident what we mean, namely, that
the wonders of Humane Nature, and the ultimate Powers, and virtues as well of
Mind as of Body, should be collected into a Volume, which might serve as a
Calendar of Humane Triumphs. For a work of this Nature we approve the purpose,
and Design of Valerius Maximus, and C. Plinius; but it could be wished they had
used more choice and Diligence.

III As touching the knowledge of the league, or mutual Alliance between the
body and the Mind; that may be distributed into two Parts. For as all leagues
and Amities consist of mutual intelligence, and mutual offices; so this
league of Mind and Body, is in like manner comprised in these two
circumstances; that is, to describe How these two, namely, the Mind and the
body, disclose one the other; and how one works upon the other, by discovery
or Jndication; and by Jmpression. The former of these (namely a description
what discovery may be made of the Mind, from the habit of the Body, or of the
Body from the Accidents of the Mind) has begotten unto us two Arts, both of
prediction; whereof the one is honored with the Inquiry of Aristotle; Arist.
Hipp.
and the other of Hippocrates. And although the modern times, have polluted
these Arts with superstitious and Fantastical mixtures, yet being purged and
restored to their true state, they have both a solid ground in nature, and a
profitable use in life.

The first is Physiognomy, which discovers the dispositions of the mind, by the
lineaments of the Body. The second is the exposition of Natural dreams, which
discovers the state and Disposition of the Body, from the Passions and
Motions of the mind. In the Former of these, PHYSIOGNOMIA CORPORIS IN MOTV.
I note a DEFICIENCE: for Aristotle has very ingeniously and diligently
handled the Postures of the Body, while it is at Rest; but not the Gestures of
the Body when it is in Motion; which are no less comprehensible by Art, and of
Greater use. For the lineaments of the Body, do disclose the Inclinations and
Proclivities of the Mind in general; but the Motions and Gestures of the face
and Parts, do not only so, but further declare the Accesses, and Seasons, and
Prognostiques of the present disposition, and of the will. For, to use your
Majesty's most apt and elegant expression, The tongue speaks to the ear,
IACOBUS R.
but the gesture speaks to the eye. And therefore a number of old subtle and
crafty Persons, whose eyes do dwell upon the faces and fashions of Men, do
well know this observation; and can turn it to their own advantage, as being
a great part of their ability and wisdom. Neither indeed can it be denied, but
that this is a great discovery of dissimulation in an other, and a great
direction, for the election of seasons, and opportunities of approaching to
persons; which is not the meanest part of Civil Prudence. And let no man think
that such a dexterity, may somewhat avail, in respect of some Particular
persons, but cannot be comprehended under rule: for we all laugh and weep, and
blush, and bend the brow much after the same manner; and so for most part it is
in other more subtle motions. As for Chiromancy, it is a mere imposture.

And as touching the exposition of Dreams; it is a subject handled in some
men's writings, but foild with many idle vanities; only thus much for the
present I do Insinuate, that this knowledge of interpreting Dreams, wants the
support of a solid Base; and that foundation is this, where the same effect is
wrought, by an inward cause, that uses to be wrought by an outward; that
externe Act is transformed into a Dream. The surcharge of the stomach from a
gross vapor, and from the poise of some outward weight, are a like; wherefore
they that labor of the Nightmare do dream, that a weight is put upon them,
with a great preparation of circumstances. The fluctuation or pensility of the
Bowels, from the agitation of the waves in the sea, and from the wind
gathered about the Diaphragma, are a like: therefore such as are troubled with
the Hypocondriaque wind, do often dream of Navigations, and agitations upon
the waters. There are an infinite number of such like instances.

The other branch of the knowledge of the league (which we have called
Impression) has not as yet bin collected into Art, but has sometimes
intervened among other Treatises sparsedly, and as in passage only. It has the
same Antistrophe with the former: for the consideration is double; either how,
and how far the humors and temperament of the body, do alter or work upon
the mind? Or again, How and how far, the Passions and apprehensions of the
mind do alter or work upon the Body. The former of these we see sometimes
handled in the Art of Physique; but the same has by strange ways insinuated
it self into Religion. For the Physician prescribes Remedies to cure the
Maladies of the mind; as in the cures of Frenzies and Melancholy: they do also
administer Physique to exhilerate the Mind; to munite and strengthen the heart,
and so to increase the courage, to sharpen and clarify the wits, to corroborate
the Memory, and the like. But Dietes, and choice of meats, and drinks, and
other observances touching the Body, in the sect of the Pythagoreans; in the
Heresy of the Manichees, and in the law of Mahomet do exceed all measure. So
likewise the ordinances of the Ceremonial Law, interdicting the eating of the
blood; Deuteronomy. 12.
and the Fat; and distinguishing between beasts clean and unclean, so far as
they are for meat, are many and strict. Nay the Christian faith it self,
though clear and sincere from all clouds of ceremonies; yet retains the use
of Fastings; Abstinences; and other observances, which tend to the maceration
and humiliation of the Body; as things not merely Figurative; but also
Fruitful. The root and life of all such prescripts as these, (besides the
Ceremony it self, and the practice of Canonical obedience,) consists in this
whereof we speak, namely, that there may be a mutual sufferance and
humiliation of the soul with the Body. And if any man of weaker judgment do
conceive, that these impressions of the Body upon the Mind, do either question
the immortality, or derogate from the sovereignty of the soul over the Body;
to an easy doubt, an easy answer is sufficient. Let him take these instances;
either from an Jnfant in the Mothers womb, which is compatible with the
Accidents and Symptoms of the mother, and yet separable in its season, from
the Body of the Mother: Or from Monarques, who though they have absolute power,
are some times inclined by the sway of their Servants; yet without subjection
of their Persons or diminution of their Power.

Now as for the reciprocal part, the operations of the soul, and of the
Effects and Passions thereof upon the Body; that also has found a place in
Medicine. For all wise Physicians do ever consider and handle, Accidentia
Animi, as a matter of great moment, for their Cures; and which are of great
force to further or hinder all other Remedies. But there is an other
observation pertinent to this subject, which has bin very sparingly inquired
into; and nothing to the depth and dignity of the thing; that is, (setting
aside the affections) how far the Imagination of the Mind, or a thought
deeply fixed; and exalted as it were, into a belief, is of Power to alter the
Body of the Jmaginant? For though it has a manifest power to hurt, it follows
not that it has the same degree of power to help. No more indeed, than if a
man should conclude that because their be pestilent Aires able suddenly to kill
a man in health; therefore there should be Sovereign Aires, able suddenly to
cure a man in sickness. Laert. in V.
This Inquisition would certainly be of excellent use, but as Socrates said, it
needs a Delian Diver, being covered with darkness and obscurity. Again, of
all these Knowledges, de Foedere; or of the Concordances between the Mind and
the Body, there is no part more necessary than the disquisition of the Seats
and Domiciles, which the several faculties of the mind do take and occupate
in the Body, and the Organes thereof. Which kind of knowledge has not wanted
Sectators, but what is found in many such Writers is either controverted, or
slightly inquired; Plat. in Timaeo. Arist. de Genesis Anim. 4. Gal. de plac. Plat.
and would be searched into with more diligence and perspicacity. For the
opinion introduced by Plato placing the understanding in the brain, as in a
high Tower; Animosity (which he unfitly calls Anger) being it is nearer to
Tumor and Pride) in the Heart; Concupiscence and sensuality in the Liver,
deserves not altogether to be despised; nor yet too hastily embraced. So the
placing of the Jntellectuall Faculties; Jmagination; Reason; Memory; according
to the ventricles of the Brain, is not without error. Thus have we explicated
the Knowledge touching the individed nature of man, as also touching the League
of the Body and the Mind.

CAP. II. I The Partition of the Knowledge respecting the Body of Man, into Art
Medicinal.. Cosmetique.. Athletique.. And Voluptuary. II. The Partition of
Medicine, into three Duties. Conservation of Health. III. Cure of Diseases.
IIII. And Prolongation of Life: And that the last Part, Prolongation of Life,
should be separate from the other two.
I THE Knowledge that concerns Man's Body, is divided, as the Good of Man's Body
is divided, unto which it is referred. The Good of Man's Body, is of four
kinds; Health; Form, or Beauty; strength; Pleasure. Wherefore there are so
many Sciences; Medicine, or the Art of Cure; Cosmetique, or the Art of
Decoration; Athletique, or the Art of Activity; and Art Voluptuary, which
Tacitus calls Eruditus Luxus.

Medicine is a noble Art; and according to the Poets descended of a most
generous race; for they have brought in Apollo, Homer. Him. Pausan. alii.
as the chief God of Medicine, to whom they have assigned Aesculapius for his
son; a God too, and a Professor of Physique: Because in things natural the
Sun is the Auctor, and Fountain of Life; the Physician the Conserver of
Nature; and as it were a second spring of Life. But the greatest glory to
Physique is from the works of our Savior, who was a Physician both of Soul
and Body: And as he made the Soul the peculiar object of his heavenly
Doctrine; so he designed the body the proper subject of his miracles. For we
never read of any miracles done by him respecting Honor, or Wealth, (besides
that one when Tribute was to be given to Caesar), but only respecting the Body
of man; or to preserve, or to sustain, or to cure it.

The Subject of Medicine (namely man's Body) is of all other things which nature
has brought forth most capable of remedy; but then that remedy is most capable
of Error: For the same subtility, and variety of the subject, as it affords
great possibility of Cure, so it gives great facility to error. Wherefore as
that Art (such as now it is) may well be reckoned amongst Arts conjecturall; so
the enquiry thereof may be placed in the number of the most difficult, and
exactest Arts. Neither yet are we so senseless, as to imagine with Paracelsus,
Paramiri. lib. 4. Rob. Flud. passim.
and the Alchymists; That there are to be found in man's Body certain
Correspondences, and Parallels to all the variety of specifique Natures in the
world (as Stars, Minerals, and the rest) as they foolishly fancy and
Mythologize; straining, but very impertinently, that emblem of the Ancients,
That man was Microcosmus, an abstract, or model of the whole world, to
countenance their fabulous, and fictious invention. Yet notwithstanding this is
an evident truth, (which we were about to say) that amongst all Bodies
Natural, there is not found any so multipliciously compounded as the Body of
man. For we see Herbs, and Plants, are nourished by earth and water; Beasts
by Herbs and Fruicts: But man by the flesh of living Creatures; as Beasts,
Birds, Fish; and also of Herbs, Grains, Fruicts, Juice, and diverse Liquors;
not without manifold commixtures, seasoning, and, Preparation of these Bodies
before they come to be man's meat, and aliment. Add hereunto, that Beasts have
a more simple order of life, and less change of affections to work upon their
Bodies, and they commonly working one way; whereas man in his Mansions,
exercises, Passions, sleep, and vigilancies is subject to infinite
vicissitudes of changes. So that it is most evident that of all other natural
substances, the Body of man is the most fermentated, compounded, and
incorporated Mass. The soul, on the other side, is the simplest of
substances, as it is well expressed; -- Purumque relinquit Aethereum sensum,
atque Aurai simplicis ignem. Virg. Aen. 6.
So that it is no marvel though the soul so placed, enjoy no rest; according
to that Principle, Arist. Phys. and de. cael.
Motus rerum extra locum est rapidus, placidus in loco: But to the purpose,
this various and subtle composition and fabrique of man's body, has made it, as
a curious and exquisite instrument, easy to be distempered; therefore the Poets
did well to conjoyne Music, Pansan. in Eliacis. Ov. Met. 1.
and Medicine in Apollo; because the Genius of both these Arts is almost the
same; and the office of a Physician consists merely in this, to know how to
tune, and finger this Lyre of man's body; that the Harmony may not become
discordant and harsh. So then this inconstancy, and variety of the subject,
has made the Art more conjecturall: And the Art being so conjecturall had
given more large scope, not only to error, but even to imposture. For almost
all other Arts and Sciences are judged by their power and operation; and not by
their success and work. The Lawyer is judged by the virtue of his pleading,
and not by the issue of the Cause; the Master in the Ship approves his Art, by
the directing his course aright, and not by the fortune of the voyage. But the
Physician; and perhaps the Politic hardly have any proper particular Acts,
whereby they may make a clear demonstration of their Art and abilities; but
bear away honor or disgrace principally from the event which is ever an
unequal judicature. For who can tell if a Patient dye or recover; or if a
State be preserved or ruined; whether it be by Art or Accident? Therefore it
often falls out, that the impostor bears away the Prize, virtue the Censure.
Nay the weakness and credulity of men is such, As they often prefer a
Montebank, or Witch, before a Learned Physician. Therefore the Poets were clear
and quick-sighted when they made Aesculapius and Circe, Brother and Sister;
both children of the Sun, as in the Verses; of Aesculapius the Suns Son, Virg.
Aen. 7
Jlle repertorem Medicinae talis, and Artis,
Fulmine Phoebigenam Stygias detrusit ad undas;


And likewise of Circe the Suns Daughter, Ibid.
Dives inaccessos ubi solis filia lucos
Assiduo resonat cantu: tectisque superbis
Vrit odoratam nocturna in lumina Cedrum.
For in all times in the reputation and opinion of the Multitude, Witches, and
old Women, and Impostors, have bin rival Competitors with Physicians; and have
even contended with them for the same of Cures. And what I pray ye follows?
Even this, that Physicians say to themselves, as Solomon expresses it upon a
higher occasion, Jf it befalls to me, as it befalls to the fool, Eccles. 2.
why should J labor to be more wise? And therefore I cannot much blame
Physicians, if they use commonly to intend some other Art, or Practice, which
they fancy more than their Profession: For you shall have of them Poets;
Antiquaries; Critiques; Rhetoricians; Politiques; Divines; and in these Arts
better seen, than in their own profession. Agrip. de van. scien.
Nor does this come to pass, as I suppose, because (as a certain Declaimor
against sciences objects against Physicians) they have ever Conversant before
their eyes such loathsome and sad spectacles, that they must needs retire their
minds from these objects, to some other contemplations; for as they are men,
Nihil Humani a se alienum putent; but for this reason, whereof we now speak;
namely, that they find, that Mediocrity, and excellency in their Art, makes no
difference in profit or reputation toward their Persons or Fortunes. For the
vexations of sickness; the sweetness of life; the flattery of hope; the
commendation of friends; makes men to depend upon Physicians with all their
defects: But if a man seriously weigh the matter, these things rather redound
to the imputation of Physicians, than their excusation: who should not for
these prejudices cast away hope; but increase their pains and diligence. For
whosoever pleases to excite and awake his observation, and a little look about
him, shall easily deprehend even from common and familiar examples, what a
command and sovereignty the subtletie and sharpness of the understanding has
over the variety either of matter, or of the form of things. Nothing is more
variable than men's faces and countenances; yet the memory retains the infinite
distinctions of them: Nay a Painter with a few shells of Colors; the benefit
of his eye; the habit of his Imagination; and the steadiness of his hand; can
imitate, and draw with his pencill all faces that are, have bin, or ever shall
be; if they were brought before him: Nothing more variable than man's voice; yet
we can easily discern their differences in every particular person; nay you
shall have a Buffone, or a Pantomimus will render and express to the life, as
many as he pleases. Nothing more variable than articulate sounds of words, yet
men have found away to reduce them to a few letters of the Alphabet. And this
is most certain, that it is not the insufficiency, or incapacity of man's mind;
but rather the remote standing, or placing of the object that breeds these
Mazes, and Incomprehensions. For as the sense afar off is full of mistaking;
but within due distance erres not much; so it is in the understanding. For men
use commonly to take a Prospect of Nature, as from some high Turret, and to
view her afar off; and are too much taken up with generalities, whereas if
they would vouchsafe to descend and approach nearer to Particulars; and more
exactly and considerately look into things themselves; there might be made a
more true and profitable discovery and comprehension. Now the remedy of this
error, is not alone this, to quicken or strengthen the Organ; but withal to
go nearer to the object; And therefore there is no doubt but if Physicians,
letting Generalities go, for a while, and suspending their ascent thereto,
would make their approaches to Nature; they might become Masters of that Art,
whereof the Poet speaks, Ovid. R.A. l. 2.
Et quoniam variant morbi variabimus Arts;
Mill mali species, mill salutis erunt.
Which they ought the rather endeavor because the Philosophies themselves,
upon the which Physicians, whether they be Methodists or Chemists do rely (for
Medicine not grounded upon Philosophy is a weak thing) are indeed very slight
and superficial. Wherefore if too wide Generalities, though true, have this
defect, that they do not well bring men home to Action; certainly there is
greater danger in those Generals, which are in themselves false, and instead
of directing to truth, mislead the mind into the bypath of Error.

Medicine therefore (as we have seen) hitherto has bin such, as has bin more
professed, than labored; and yet more labored than advanced; seeing the
pains bestowed thereon, has bin rather in circle, than in progression. For I
find much Iteration but small Addition in Writers of that Faculty.

II We will divide it into three Parts, which we will call the three Duties
thereof: The first is Conservation of health, the second the Cure of Diseases;
the third Prolongation of Life.

But for this last duty, Physicians seem not to have acknowledged it as any
principal part of their Art; but have (ignorantly enough) mingled and
confounded it as one and the same with the other two. For they suppose, that if
Diseases be repelled before they seize upon the body; or be cured after they
have surpised the body; that Prolongation of Life must naturally follow. Which
though it be so, without all question, yet they do not so exactly consider;
that these two offices of Conservation and Curation, only pertain to diseases;
and to such Prolongation of Life alone, which is abreviated and intercepted by
diseases: But to draw out the thread of Life, and to prorogue Death, for a
season which silently steals upon us, by natural resolution, and the Atrophie
of Age; is an argument that no Physician has handled it according to the Merit
of the subject Neither let that scruple trouble the minds of Men, Fatu^. Stoic.
horr. Dogma.
as if this thing committed to the dispensation of Fate, and the divine
providence, were now by us first repealed and commended, to the charge and
office of Art: For without doubt Providence does dispose and determine all kind
of deaths whatsoever, whether they come of violence, or from diseases, or from
the Course of Age; and yet does not therefore exclude Preventions and Remedies:
For Art and human industry do not command and rule Fate, and nature; but serve
and administer unto them. But of this part we shall speak anon; thus much in
the mean by way of anticipation, least any should unskilfully confound this
third office of Medicine, with the two former, which usually hitherto has bin
done.

As for the duty of preservation of Health, the first duty of the three, many
have written thereof, as in other points very impertinently, so (in our
judgment) in this particular; in attributing too much to the quality of meats,
and too little to the quantity thereof: and in the quantity it self, they have
discoursed like Moral Philosophers, excessively praising Mediocrity; whereas
both fasting changed to custom, and full feeding, to which a man has inured
himself, are better regiments of health, than those Mediocrities which
commonly enervate Nature, and make her slothful, and impatient, if need should
be, of any extremity, excess or indigence. And for the diverse kinds of
Exercise, which much conduce to the conservation of health, none of that
profession has well distinguished or observed; whereas there is hardly found
any disposition to a disease, which may not be corrected by some kind of
exercise proper to such an infirmity. As bowling is good against the weakness
of the Reins; shooteing against the obstruction of the Longes; walking and
upright deport of the body, against the crudities of the stomach; and for other
diseases other exercitations. But seeing this part touching the conservation of
health, has bin in every point after a sort handled, it is not out purpose to
pursue lesser deficiencies.

III. As concerning the cures of Diseases; that is a Part of Medicine, whereon
much labor has bin bestowed, but with small profit. It comprehends in it
the knowledge of Diseases, to which man's body is subject, together with the
Causes, Symptoms, and Cures thereof. In this second Duty of Medicine, many
things are deficient; of these we will propound a few, which are more
remarkable, which to enumerate without precise order or Method, we suppose
sufficient.

NARRATIONES MEDICINALES.
The first is the discontinuance, of that profitable and accurate diligence of
Hippocrates, whose custom was to set down a Narrative of the special cases
of his patients, what the Medicament, what the event. Therefore having so
proper and notable a precident from him, who was accounted the Father of the
Art, we shall not need to allege any example foreign, fetched from other Arts;
as from the wisdom of the lawyers, with whom nothing is more usual, than to
set down and enter more notable cases, and new decisions, whereby they may the
better furnish and direct themselves for the definition of future cases.
Wherefore I find this continuation of Medicinal Reports deficient, specially
digested into one entire Body, with diligence and judgment; which yet I
understand not to be made so ample, as to extend to every common case that
daily falls out (for that were an infinite work and to small purpose) nor yet
so reserved and contracted as to admit none, but Prodigies, and wonders; as
many have done: for many things are new in the manner and circumstances of the
thing; which are not new in the kind; and he that shall give his mind to
observe, shall find many things even in matters vulgar worthy observation.

ANATOMIA COMPARATA.
So in Disquisitions Anatomicall, the manner is, that those parts which
pertain in general to Man's Body, are most diligently enquired and observed
even to a curiosity, and that in every least filet: but as touching the variety
which is found in diverse bodies, there the diligence of Physicians fails. And
therefore I grant that simple Anatomy has bin most clearly handled; but
COMPARATIVE ANATOMY, I define to be deficient. For men have made a good
enquiry into all the parts, and into their consistencies, figures, and
collocations: but the diverse figure, condition, and posture of those parts in
diverse men, they have not so well observed. The reason of this omission I
suppose is no other than this, that the first inquiry may be satisfied in the
view of one or two Anatomies; but the later, being COMPARATIVE and Casual,
must arise from the attentive and exact observation of many Dissections: and
the first is a matter, wherein learned Professors in their Lectures, and the
press of spectators standing about them, may vaunt themselves; but the second
kind of Anatomy, is a severe knowledge, which must be acquired by a retired
speculation, and a long experience. Nevertheless, there is no doubt but that
the Figure and Structure of the inward parts is very little inferior, for
variety and lineaments, to the outward members; and that Hearts and Livers and
Ventricles are as different in men, as are either their Foreheads, or Noses, or
Ears.

And in these differences of inward parts, there are often found the Causes
continent of many diseases; which Physicians not observing, do sometime accuse
the Humors which are not delinquent, the fault being in the very Mechanique
Frame of some part. In the cure of which Diseases, to apply Alterative
Medicines, is to no purpose (because the part peccant is incapable of such
alteration,) but the matter must be mended, and accommodated, or palliated by a
prescript Diet and familiar Medicines. So likewise to COMPARATIVE ANATOMY
appertain accurate observations, as well of all kind of humors, as of the
footsteps and impressions of diseases in diverse bodies dissected: for the
Humors, in Anatomies are commonly past by, as if they were superfluous
Purgaments and Excrements; whereas it is a point very useful and necessary, to
note of what nature and of how various kinds there be of different humors (not
relieing herein too much upon the received divisions,) which sometimes may be
found in the body of Man; and in what Cavities and Receptacles, every humor
uses for most part to lodge and nestle, and with what advantage or prejudice,
and the like. In like manner the footsteps and Jmpressions of Diseases, and
the lesions and devastations of the inward parts by them, are to be observed
with diligence in diverse Anatomies; as imposthumes, ulcerations, solutions of
continuity, putrefactions, corrosions, consumptions, luxations, dislocations,
obstructions, repletions, tumors; together with all preternaturall
excrescencies, found in man's body (as stones, carnosities, wens, worms, and
the like;) I say all these, and such other, should be with great diligence
inquired, and digested by that COMPARATITE ANATOMY, whereof we speak, and the
experiments of many Physicians collected and collated together. But this
variety of Accidents, is by Anatomists, either handled perfunctorily, or else
past over in silence.

Touching that other Defect in Anatomy, (namely, that it has not been used to
be practiced upon living Bodies,) to what end should we speak of it? for this
is an odious and an inhumane experiment, De Re Medica.
and by Celsus justly condemned: yet notwithstanding, that observation of the
Ancients is true, That many Pores, Passages and Pertusions, which are more
subtle than the rest, appear not in Anatomicall dissections, because they are
shut and latent in Dead Bodies; whereas they are open and manifest in LIVE.
Wherefore to consult both for use and humanity, this Anatomia vivorum, is not
altogether to be relinquisht, or referred (as Celsus did) to the casual
inspections of surgions, seeing this may well be performed, being diverted upon
the Dissection of Beasts alive, which, notwithstanding the dissimilitude of
their parts with man's, may sufficiently satisfy this enquiry, being done with
judgment.

DE CVRATIONE MORBORVM HABITORVM PRO INSANABILIBVS.
Likewise in their Jnquiry of Diseases, they find many diseases which they
decerne and judge to be incurable; some, from the first access of the disease,
others, after such a certain period: so that the Proscriptions of L. Scylla,
and the Triumvirs, was nothing to the Proscriptions of Physicians by which, by
their most unjust Edicts; they deliver over so many men to death; whereof
numbers do escape with less difficulty, than they did in the Roman
Proscriptions. Therefore I will not doubt to set down among DEFICIENTS a work
of the cures of Diseases held incurable; that so some excellent and Generous
Professors in that faculty, may be awakt and stirred up, to set this work (so
far as the latent operations of Nature, by man's industry, may be disclosed)
seeing this very sentence of Pronouncing Diseases to be incurable, enacts a
law, as it were, for sloth and negligence, and redeemes ignorance from
Discredit and Infamy.

Nay farther, to insist a little upon this Point, DE EuTHANASIA EXTERIORE.
I estime it the office of a Physician, not only to restore health, but to
mitigate dolors, and torments of Diseases; and not only when such mitigation of
pain, as of a dangerous symptom, may make and conduce to recovery; but even
when all hope of recovery being gone, it may serve to make a fair and easy
passage out of life. For it is no small felicity, Sueton. in Aug.
which Augustus Caesar was wont to wish to himself, that same EUTHANASIA;
which was also noted in the Death of Antonius Pius, who seemed not so much to
dye, as to be cast into a sweet and deep sleep. And it is written of Epicurus,
that he procured this same easy departure unto himself; for after his disease
was judged desperate, he drowned his stomach and senses with a large draught,
and ingurgitation of wine; whereupon the Epigram was made -- hinc Stygias
ebrius hausit aquas, Laert. in Epicuro.
He took away by these draughts of wine, the bitter taste of the Stygian water.
But in our times Physicians make a kind of scruple and nicity of it, to stay
with a patient after the disease is past hope of cure; whereas in my judgment,
if they would not be wanting to their profession, and to humanity it self,
they ought both to enquire the skill, and to give the attendance, for the
facilitating and asswaging of the pains and Agonies of Death at their
departure. And this part, the inquiry de EUTHANASIA EXTERIORI, (which we so
call to distinguish it from that Euthanasia, or sweet-calme Dyeing, procured by
a due preparation of the soul) we refer to the number of DEFICIENTS.

DE MEDICINIs AVTHENTICIS.
So in the Cures of Diseases, I find generally this Deficience; that the
Physicians of the time, though they do not impertinently pursue the general
intentions and scope of Cures; yet for particular Receipts, which by a kind of
propriety respect the cures of specificall diseases; either they do not well
know them, or they do not religiously observe them. For the Physicians have
frustrated and taken away the fruit of Traditions, and approved experience, by
their Magistralities; in adding and taking out, and changing ingredients of
Receipts at their pleasure; and almost after the manner of Apothecaries,
putting in Quid pro Quo; commanding so presumptuously over Medicine, as the
Medicine can no longer command the disease. For except Treacle, and
Mithridatum, and of late Dioscordium; and the confection of Alkermes, and a few
more Medicines; they commonly tie themselves to no receipts severely and
strictly. For the confections of sale, which are in the shoppes, they are in
readiness rather for general purposes, than accommodate and proper for
particular cures; for they do not exactly refer to any disease in special;
but generally to the opening of obstructions, comforting concoction, altering
Distemperatures. And this is the cause why Empyriques and Old women are more
happy many times in their Cures, than Learned Physicians; because they are
faithful, and scrupulous in keeping themselves to the confection and
composition of approved Medicines. I remember that a Physician with us here in
England, famous for practice, in religion half Jew, and almost an Arabian for
his course of study wont to say, your Europaean Physicians are indeed Learned
men, but they know not the Particular Cures of Diseases: And the same person
used to jest, but unreverently, saying, That our Physicians were like Bishops,
they had the Keys of binding and loosing, and nothing else. But to speak the
truth in earnest; in our opinion it would be a matter of good consequence, if
some Physicians of Note for Learning and Practice, would compile a work of
Probations, and experimented Medicines for the cure of Particular Diseases: For
that any man, induced by some specious reason, should be of opinion, that it is
the part of a learned Physician (respecting the complexions of Patients, their
Age; the season of the year, Customs and the like, rather to accommodate his
Medicines as occasions suggest, than to insist upon some certain Prescripts, is
a deceiveable assertion, and which attributes too little to experience, too much
to judgment. Certainly as in the state of Rome they were the men most useful,
and of the best composition, which either being Consuls favored the People, or
being Tribunes inclined to the Senate: So in the matter we now handle, they be
the best Physicians, which either in their great Learning, do much value the
Traditions of Experience; or being famous for Practice, despise not Methods and
Generalities of Art. As for qualifications of Medicines (if at any time that be
expedient) they are rather to be practiced upon the Defferents of Physique,
than incorporated into the Receipt, wherein nothing should be innovated without
apparent necessity. Wherefore this Part which handles Authentic and Positive
Medicines, we report as DEFICIENT:
but it is a matter not to be attempted or undertaken without a sharp and
piercing judgment; and as it were, in a Synod of select Physicians.

Also in the Preparations of Medicines I do find it strange (specially
considering how Mineral Medicines have bin so extolled and celebrated by
Chemists; IMITATIO THERMARVM NATVRALIVM.
and that they are safer for the outward than inward Parts) that no man
hitherto has endeavored by Art to imitate Natural Bathes, and Medicinable
Fountains; and yet it is confessed that those Bathes and Fountains receive
their virtues from mineral veins through which they pass: and for manifest
proof hereof man's industry knows well how to discern and distinguish from
what kind of Mineralls such waters receive their tinctures; as whether from
Sulphur; Vitriol; Steel, or the like: which natural tinctures of waters, if
it may be reduced to compositions of Art, it would be in man's power, both to
make more kinds of them as occasion required; and to command, at pleasure, the
temperament thereof. Therefore this Part of the imitation of Nature in
Artificial Bathes (a thing without question both profitable and easy to be
done we take to be DEFICIENT.


But lest J should pursue Particulars more precisely, than is agreeable to our
intention, or to the proportion of this Treatise; FILVM MEDICINALE.
I will close and conclude this Part with a note of one Deficience more, which
seems to us to be of great consequence; which is, that the Prescripts in use
are too compendious to effect any notable or difficult cure. For in our
judgment it is a more vain and flattering, than true opinion, to think that any
Medicine can be so sovereign, or so happy, as that the simple use thereof
should be of force sufficient for some great cure. It were a strange speech
which spoken, or spoken often, should reclaim a man from a vice deeply rooted and
inveterate. Certainly it is far otherwise: But it is order, Pursuit,
sequence, Artificial interchange, that are potent and mighty in nature: Which
although they require more exact judgment in prescribing; and more precise
obedience in observing, yet this is amply recompensed in the greatness of
effects. And although a man would think, by the daily diligence of Physicians,
their Visitations, Sessions, and Prescriptions, which they perform to the
sick; that they did painfully pursue the Cure; and go on in a certain course:
Yet let a man exactly look into their prescripts, and ministrations, he shall
find many of them full of wavering, inconstancy, and every days devises; and
such as came into their minds without any certain, or advised course of Cure.
For they should even from the beginning, after they have made a full and
perfect discovery of the disease, meditate and resolve upon an orderly sequence
of Cure; and not without important reasons depart therefrom. And let Physicians
know for certain, that (for example) three perchance, or four receipts, are
rightly prescribed for the Cure of some great disease; which taken in due
order, and in due spaces of time perform the Cure; which if they were taken
single, or by themselves alone; or if the Course were inverted, or the
intervalls of time not observed, would be hurtful. Nor is it yet our meaning
that every scrupulous and superstitious way of Cure in estimation should be the
best; no more than that every strait way is the way to Heaven, but that the way
should be right as well as strait and difficult. And this Part which we will
call Filum Medicinale we set down as Deficient. So these are the Parts which
in the Knowledge of Medicine, touching the cure of Diseases, are desiderate,
save that there remains yet one part more of more use than all the other,
which is here wanting, A true and Active natural Philosophy, upon which the
science of Medicine should be built: but that belongs not to this Treatise.

IIII The third part of Medicine we have set down to be that of the
Prolongation of Life, DE PROLONGANDO CVRRICVLO VITAE.
which is a part new and Deficient, and the most noble of all: For if any such
thing may be found out, Medicine shall not be practiced only in the impurities
of Cures, nor shall Physicians be honored only for Necessity, but for a gift,
the greatest of earthly Donations that could be conferred on mortality, whereof
men, next under God, may be the Dispensers and Administrators. For although the
world to a Christian man, travailing to the land of Promise, be as it were a
wilderness, yet that our shoes and vestments (that is our Body, which is as a
converture to the soul,) be less worn away while we sojourne in this
wilderness, is to be estimed a gift coming from the divine goodness. Now
because this is one of the choicest parts of Phisique, and that we have set it
down amongst Deficients, we will after our accustomed manner give some
Admonitions, Indications, and Precepts thereof.

First we advertise, that of Writers in this Argument there is none extant that
has found out any thing of worth, that I may not say, any thing sound touching
this subject. Indeed Aristotle has left unto posterity a small brief
Commentary of this matter; wherein there is some acuteness, which he would
have to be all can be said, as his manner is: De longitud. and Brev. vit.
But the more recent Writers have written so idly, and superstitiously upon
the point, that the Argument it self, through their vanity, is reputed vain
and senseless.

Secondly, we advertise, that the intentions of Physicians touching this
Argument are nothing worth: and that they rather lead men away from the point,
than direct them unto it. For they discourse that Death is a destitution of
Heat and Moisture, and therefore natural heat should be comforted and
radical moisture cherisht; as if it were a matter to be effected by Broaths, or
Lettuces, and Mallows, or Arabian Plums.
Iujubs, or fine Wafercakes or else with hot spices, generous wine, or the
spirits of wine, or chymicall oils; all which do rather hurt, than help.

Thirdly, we admonish men that they cease to trifle, and that they be not so
credulous as to think that such a great work as this is, to retard and turn
back the course of Nature, may be brought to perfection by a morning draught,
or the use of some precious Receipt; no not with Aurum Potabile, or the
substances of Pearls, or such like toys; but that they take it for a grounded
truth, that the Prolongation of Life, is a great work, and which consists in
many kinds of Receipts, and of an orderly course and connection of them: And let
no man be so stupid as to believe, that what never yet was done, can be now
effected, but by means yet never attempted.

Fourthly we admonish men that they rightly observe and distinguish touching
those Receipts which conduce to a healthful life, and those which confer to a
long life. For there are many things which exhilarate the spirits, strengthen
the active powers of nature, repel diseases, which yet subduct from the sum
of life, and without sickness accelerate aged Atrophie. And there are other
receipts which conduce to the Prolongation of life, and the retardation of the
Atrophie of old age; but yet are not used without hazard of health: So that
they who use these remedies for the prorogation of life, must likewise provide
against such inconveniences as upon their usage may unexpectedly fall out. And
thus much by way of Admonition.

As for Indications, the image, or Idea we have conceived in our mind hereof,
is this; Things are conserved and Continued two ways; either in their own
Identitie, or by Reparation. In their proper Jdentitie, as a Fly or an Ant in
Amber; a flower, an apple or wood in Conservatories of Snow; a dead corpse in
Balsame. By Reparation, as in Flame, and Mechanique. He that goes about the
work of Prolongation of Life, must put in practice both these kinds, (for
disunited, their strength is weakened) and Man's body must be conserved after the
same manner inanimate Bodies are conserved; and again, as Flame is conserved;
and lastly, even as Mechaniques are conserved. Wherefore there are three
intentions for the Prolongation of Life; the Retardation of Consumption; the
Integrity of the Reparation; and the Renovation of that which begun to decay
and grow old. Consumption is caused by two Depredations, Depredation of innate
Spirit; and Depredation of ambient Air. The resistance of both is twofold,
either when the Agents (that is, the suc and moistures of the Body) become
less Predatory; or the Patients are made less depredable. The Spirit is made
less Predatory, if either it be condensed in substance, as in the use of
Opiates, and nitrous application, and in contristations; or be diminished in
Quantity, as in spare Pythagoricall or Monastical Diets: or is sweetened and
refresht with motion, as in ease and tranquillity. Ambient Air is made less
Predatory, either when it is less heated with the beams of the Sun, as in
colder countries; in Caves, in Hills, and in the Pillars or Stations of
Anchorites; or when it is repelled from the Body as in dens-close skin; in the
Plumage of birds, and the use of oil and unguents without Aromatique
Ingredients. The juice and succulencies of the Body, are made less depredable,
if either they be made more indurate, or more dewy, and oily: Indurate as in
austere course Diet; in a life accustomed to cold, by strong exercises; by
certain Mineral Bathes. Roscide or dewy, as in the use of sweet meats and
abstinence from meats, salt and acide; but especially in such a mixture of
drinks, as is of parts very tenuious and subtle, and yet without all acrimony
or tartness. Reparation is done by Aliments; and Alimentation is promoted
four ways: By the Concoction of the inward Parts for the sending forth of the
nourishment; as in Confortatives of the Principal Bowels; by excitation of
the outwart parts for the attraction of nourishment, as in due exercises and
frications; and some kind of unctions and appropriate Bathes; by preparation of
the Aliment it self; that it may more easily insinuate it self, and in a sort
anticipate Digestions, as in diverse and artificial kinds of seasoning meat,
mingling drink, leavening bread, and reducing the virtues of all these three
into one; by comforting the last act of Assimilation, as in seasonable sleep,
and outward or Topique Applications: the Renovation of that which began to wax
old, is performed two ways, either by inteneration of the habit of the body it
self, as in the use of suppleing or softning applications by Bathes,
emplasters and unctions, of such quality as may soak or insinuate into the
part, but not extract from it; or by expurgation of the old moisture, and
substitution of new moisture, as in seasonable and often purging; letting of
blood; attenuating Diets, which restore the Flower of the Body, and so much for
Jndications.

As for Precepts, although many of them may be deduced from the Jndications,
yet we thought good to set down three of the most principal. First we give in
Precept that the Prolongation of life, must be expected from a prescript set
Diet, rather than from any familiar regiment of Food, or the excellency of
particular receipts: for whatsoever are of such virtue as they are able to make
nature retrograde, are commonly more strong and Potent to alter, than that they
can be compounded together in any medicine, much less be intermingled in
familiar food. It remains therefore that such receipts be administered
regularly, and successively and at set appointed times, returning in certain
courses.

Our second Precept is, that the Prolongation of life be expected, rather from
working upon spirits, and from a malacissation or inteneration of Parts, than
from any kinds of aliment or order of Diet. For seeing the Body of Man and the
Frame thereof (leaving aside outward accidents) three ways becomes Passive,
namely from the spirits; from the parts; and from aliments; the way of
Prolongation of life by means of aliment is a long way about, and that by many
ambages and circuits; but the ways by working upon the spirits, and upon the
parts, are more compendious and sooner brings us to the end desired; because
the spirits are suddenly moved, both from vapors and passions, which work
strangely upon them: and the Parts, by Bathes, unguents or emplaisters, which
in like manner make way by sudden impressions.

Our third Precept is, that Malacissation or inteneration of Parts by outward
Topiques, must be performed by applications consubstantiall, Penetrating, and
Sringent. Consubstantialls are Willingly entertained with a kindly embrace, and
properly intenerate and supple; Penetrating and insinuating remedies are the
Defferrents, as it were, of Malacissant and mollifying qualities, and convay
more easily and impressedly the virtue thereof; and do themselves somewhat
expand and open the Parts. Restringents keep in the virtue of them both, and
for a time fix it, and also cohibite and repress perspiration; which is a
thing repugnant to malacissation or suppleing, because it sends forth the
moisture; wherefore by these three (but disposed in order, and succeeding, then
intermixed) the matter is effected. Jn the mean we give this caveat, that it is
not the intention of Malacissation by outward topiques to nourish Parts; but
only to render them more capable of nourishment: for whatsoever is more dry,
is less Active to assimilate. And thus much of the Prolongation of life, which
is a third part newly assigned to Medicine.

Come we now to Cosmetique medicaments, or the Art of Decoration; which has
indeed, parts Civil, and parts effeminate. For cleanness, and the civil
beauty of the Body was ever estimed to proceed from a modesty of behavior, and
a due reverence in the first place toward God, whose creatures we are, then
toward society, wherein we live; and then toward our selves, whom we ought no
less, nay much more to revere, than we do any others. But that Adulterate
decoration by Painting and Cerusse, it is well worthy of the imperfections
which attend it; being neither fine enough the knowledge of the Parts of man's
Body, of Functions, of Humors, of Respiration, of Sleep; of Generation; of
the fruit of the Womb, of Gestation in the Womb; of Growth; of the flower of
Age; of whit Hairs; of Impinguation, and the like; although they do not
properly pertain to those three duties of Conservation of Health; Cure of
Diseases; Prolongation of Life. But because man's body is every way the Subject
of Medicine. As for voluntary motion, and sense, we refer them to the
knowledge concerning the Soul; as two principal Parts thereof And so we
conclude the knowledge which concerns man's Body, which is but the Tabernacle
of the Soul.

CAP. III. I The Partition of Humane Philosophy concerning the Mind, into the
knowledge of the inspired Essence; and into the knowledge of the sensible, or
producted Soul.. A second Partition of the same Philosophy, into the
knowledge of the Substance and Faculties of the Soul, and the knowledge of the
use and Objects of the Faculties. II. Two Appendices of the Knowledge
concerning the Faculties of the Soul.. The knowledge of Natural Divination;.
And the knowledge of Fascination. III. The Distribution of the Faculties of the
sensible Soul. Into Motion; and into Sense.
I NOW let us proceed to the Knowledge which concerns the Mind or Soul of man,
out of the treasures whereof all other Knowledges are extracted. It has two
Parts, the one entreats of the Reasonable Soul, which is a thing Divine; the
other of the unreasonable Soul, which is common to us with Beasts. We have
noted a little before (where we speak of Forms,) those two different
Emanations of Souls, which in the first Creation of them both, offer
themselves unto our view, that is, that one has it is original from the Breath
of God; the other from the Matrices of the Elements; for of the Primitive
Emanation of the Rational Soul, Genesis 2.
thus speaks the Scripture, Deus formavit hominem de limo terrae, and spiravit
infaciem eius spiraculum vitae: But the Generation of the unreasonable Soul,
or of Beasts, was accomplished by these words; Producat Aqua, Producat Terra:
Genesis 1.
And this irrational Soul, as it is in man, is the Instrument only to the
Reasonable Soul; and has the same original in us, that it has in Beasts;
namely, from the slime of the earth; for it is not said God formed the Body of
man, of the slime of the Earth, but God formed man, that is the whole man that
Spiraculum excepted. Wherefore we will style that part of the general
knowledge concerning man's soul, the knowledge of the spiracle, or inspired
substance; and the other Part, the knowledge of the Sensible or Product Soul.
And seeing that hitherto we handle Philosophy only (placing sacred Theology
in the close of this work) we would not have borrowed this Partition from
Divinity, if it had not here concurred with the Principles of Philosophy.
There are many and great Precellencies of the soul of man, above the souls of
beasts, evident unto those who philosophize even according to sense: And
wheresoever the concurrent Characters of such great excellencies are found,
there should ever, upon good reason, be made a specifique Difference. Wherefore
we do not altogether so well allow the Philosophers promiscuous, and confuse
Discourses touching the Functions of the Soul; as if the Soul of man was
differenced gradually, rather than specifiquely; from the soul of Beasts; no
otherwise than the Sun amongst the Stars, or Gold amongst Metals.

There remains another partition also to be annexed to the knowledge in
General concerning the soul or mind of man, before we speak at large of the
kinds: For what we shall speak of the species hereafter, comprehends both
the partitions; as well that which we have set down already, as this which we
now shall propound. Wherefore the second Partition may be, into the knowledge
concerning the Substance and Faculties of the Soul; and into the knowledge
concerning the use and objects of the Faculties.

This twofold Partition of the Soul thus premised, let us now come unto the
species or kinds. The knowledge of the Spiraculum, or inspired Essence, as that
concerning the Substance of the Reasonable Soul, comprehends these Inquiries
touching the Naturc thereof; as whether, it be Native, or Adventive; Separable,
or Jnseparable; Mortal, or Jmmortall; how far it is tied to the Laws of
Matter, how far, not, and the like? What other points soever there are of
this kind, although they may be more diligently, and soundly inquired even in
Philosophy, than hitherto they have bin; yet for all this, in our opinion,
they must be bound over at last, unto Religion, there to be determined and
defined; for otherwise they still lie open to many errors and illusions of
sense. Animae Origo Mysteriu^.
For seeing that the substance of the Soul was not deduced and extracted in
her Creation from the Mass of Heaven and Earth, but immediately inspired from
God; and seeing the Laws of of Heaven and Earth are the proper subjects of
Philosophy; how can the knowledge of the substance of the Reasonable Soul be
derived or fetched from Philosophy? But it must be drawn from the same
inspiration from whence the substance thereof first flowed.

DE SVBSTANTIA ANIMAE SENSIBILIS
The Knowledge of the sensible or producted Soul, as touching the substance
thereof is truly enquired into; but this inquiry seems to us to be DEFICIENT:
For what makes these terms of Actus Vltimus; and Forma Corporis; and such like
wild logical Universalities, to the knowledge of the Souls substance? For
the sensible Soul, or the soul of Beasts, must needs be granted, to be a
Corporal substance attenuated by heat and made Jnvisible: J say, a thin
gentle gale of wind swelled and blown up from some flamy and airy Nature,
indeed with the softness of Air to receive impression, and with the vigor of
fire to embrace action; nourished partly by an oily, partly by a watery
substance; spread over the Body; residing (in perfect Creatures) chiefly in the
head; Teles. de Rer. Not. lib. 5. Donius.
running through the nerves; refresht and repaired by the spirituous blood of
the Arteries; as Bernardinus Telesius, and his Scholar, Augustinus Donius in
some points, not altogether unprofitably, have delivered it. Let there be
therefore made a more diligent inquiry touching this knowledge; and the rather
for that this point, not well understood has brought forth superstitious and
very contagious opinions, and most vilely abasing, the Dignity of the soul of
man; of Transmigration of souls out of one Body into another; and Lustrations
of souls by Periods of years; and finally of the too near affinity in every
point of the soul of man, with the souls of beasts. This soul in Beasts is a
principal soul, whereof the body of Beasts is the Organ; but in man this soul
is it self an Organ of the Soul Rational, and may rather be called by the
appellation of a Spirit, than of a Soul. And thus much of the substance of the
Soul.

The Faculties of the Soul are well known, to be, Understanding; Reason;
Imagination; Memory; Appetite; Will, and all those Powers, about which the
Sciences of Logique and Ethique are conversant. But in the knowledge concerning
the soul, the Original of these Faculties ought to be handled, and that
Physically, as they are connaturall with the Soul, and adhere to it: Only
their uses and objects are designed to other Arts. And in this Part (in our
opinion) there has bin no extraordinary performance hitherto; although we do
not report it as Deficient.

II This Part touching the Faculties of the Soul has two Appendices, which as
they have bin handled have rather presented us with smoke, than any lucide
flames of truth; one of these is the Knowledge of Natural Divination; the
other of Fascination.

Divination has bin anciently and fitly divided into two Parts; Artificial
and Natural. Artificial by arguing from the Indication of signs, collectes a
Prediction: Natural from the internal Divination of the mind without the
assistance of signs, makes a Presage. Artificial is of two sorts; one argues
from Causes; the other from Experiments only, by a blind way of Authority;
which later is for the most part superstitious, such as was the Heathen
Discipline upon the inspection of the Intrals of Beasts; the flight of Birds;
and the like: So the solemn Astrology of the Chaldeans was little better. Both
the kinds of Artificial Divination are distributed amongst diverse Sciences.
The Astrologer has his Predictions from the situation of the stars; the
Physician has his Predictions, of the approach of Death; of Recovery; of
ensuing Symptoms of Diseases; from Vrines; Pulses; aspect of Patients, and the
like. The Politic has his Predictions; Salust. in Iugurth.
O urbem vaenalem and cito perituram, si emptorem invenerit, The truth of which
Prophecy staid not long, being first accomplished in Sylla, after in Caesar.
Wherefore Predictions of this Nature are not pertinent to the present purpose,
but are to be referred over to their proper Arts. But the Divination Natural,
which springs from the internal Power of the Soul, is that which we now
speak of. This is of two sorts, the one Native; the other by Influxion. Native
is grounded upon this supposition, that the mind when it is withdrawn and
collected into it self, and not diffused into Organs of the Body, has from
the natural Power of its own Essence, some Prenotion of things future. And
this appears most in sleep; Ecstasies; Propinquity of Death; more rare, in
waking, or when the Body is healthful and strong. And this state of the mind
is commonly procured ano furthered by abstinencies, and those observancies
which do most of all retire the Mind unto it self from the practique
functions of the Body; that thus redim'd from the incombrances of exterior
engagements, it may possess and enjoy its own Nature. But Divination by
Jnfluxion is grounded upon another supposition, That the Mind as a Mirror or
Glass should take a secondary kind of Jllumination from the foreknowledge of
God and Spirits; unto which the same State and Regiment of the Body which was
to the first, does likewise conduce. For the same sequestration of the mind
causes it more severely to employ its own Essence; and makes it more
susceptive of Divine Influxions: save that the soul, in Divinations by
Influxion is rapt with a kind of fervency and impatiency, as it were of the
Deity, wherewith it is possessed (which the Ancients noted by the name of sacred
Fury; but in Native Divination, the mind is enfranchised and nearer to a repose
rather, and an immunity from labor.

Fascination is the Power and intensive Act of the Imagination upon the Body
of another, (for of the Power of the Imagination upon the Body of the
imaginant, we have spoken before). In this kind the school of Paracelsus, and
the Disciples of pretended Natural Magique, Par. In Param.
have bin so intemperate, as they have only not equaled the force and
apprehension of the Imagination, Crollij Praef.
with the power of miracle-working faith. Others, drawing nearer to the
similitude of truth, when they had more intentively considered the secret
energies and impressions of things; the Irradiations of the senses; the
transmissions of cogitations from Body to Body; the conveyances of Magnetique
virtues; came to be of opinion, that much more might such Impressions;
Informations; and Communications be made, from spirit to spirit; being that a
spirit of all other things is more powerful and strong to work, and more soft
and penetrable to suffer: whence the conceits have grown, made almost
populare, of the Mastering spirit; of men ominous and unlucky; of the strokes
of love and envy; and of others of like Nature. Incident unto this, is the
enquiry, How the Imagination may be intended and fortified? For if the
Imagination fortified be of such great power, then it is material to know by
what ways it may be exalted, and made greater than it self? And here comes in
crookedly, and as dangerously, a Palliation and Defense of a great part of
Ceremonial Magique. For it may be a specious pretense that Ceremonies;
Characters; Charms; Gesticulations; Amulets, and the like, do work not by
any tacit or sacramental contract with evil spirits; but serve only to
strengthen and exalt the imagination of him that uses them; even as the use of
Jmages in religion has prevailed for the fixing of men's minds in the
Contemplation of things, and the raising of the devotion of them that Pray. But
for my own judgment, if it be admitted, that the force of Imagination is so
Potent, and that Ceremonies exalt and fortify that Power; and be it granted,
that Ceremonies are used sincerely to that intention, and as a Physical
Remedy, without the least thought of inviting the asistance of Spirits by them;
yet, for all this, I should hold them unlawful, because they impugn and
contradict that divine Edict passed upon man for sin, In sudore vultus
comedes panem tuum. Gen 3.
For this kind of Magique propounds those noble fruits, (which God has set
forth to be bought at the price of Labor) to be purchased by a few easy and
sloathfull observances.

III There remain two knowledges, which refer specially to the Faculties of
the inferior or sensible Soul, as those which do most Communicate with
corporal Organs; the one is of Voluntary Motion, the other of sense and
sensibility.

DE NIXIBVS SPIRITuS IN MOTV VOLVNTARIO.
In the former of these the Inquiry has bin very superficial, and one entire
part almost quite left out. For concerning the office and apt fabrique of the
Nerves and Muscles, and of other parts requisite to this Motion, and which part
of the Body rests whilst another is moved, and that the Governor and
Chariot-driver, as it were, of this Motion, is the Imagination; so as
dismissing the Image to which the Motion was carried, the Motion it self is
presently intercepted and arrested (as when we walk, if an other serious and
fixed thought come into our mind, we presently stand still) and many other such
subtleties not to be slighted, have now long ago come into Observation and
Enquiry. And how Compressions, and Dilatations, and Agitations of the Spirit
(which without question is the spring of Motion) should incline, excite, and
enforce the corporal and ponderous Mass of the Parts, has not yet bin
enquired into, and handled with diligence; and no marvel, seeing the sensible
soul it self has bin hitherto taken for an entelechie, or self moving
Faculty, and some Function, rather than a Substance. But now it is known to
be a corporal and materiate Substance, it is necessary to be enquired, by what
efforts such a pusill and a thin-soft air should put in motion, such solid and
hard bodies. Therefore seeing this part is DEFICIENT let enquiry be made
thereof.

But of sense and sensibility there has bin made a far more plentiful and
diligent enquiry, both in General Treatises about them, and in Particular
Sciences; as in Perspective, and Music; how truly, is not to our purpose to
deliver. Wherefore we cannot set them down as DEFICIENTS: Notwithstanding
there are two noble and remarkable Parts, which in this knowledge we assign to
be DEFICIENT; the one concerning the difference of Perception and Sense; the
other concerning the Form of Light. DE DIFFERENTIA PERCEPTIONIS ET SENSVS


As for the Difference between Perception and Sense, Philosophers should in
their writings de sensu and sensibili have premised a solid and sound discovery
thereof, as a matter Fundamental. For we see that there is a manifest power of
Perception even in all Bodies Natural; and a kind of Election to embrace that
which is any way allied in nature, and favorable to them; and to fly what is
adverse and foreign. Neither do we mean of more subtle Perceptions only, as
when the Loadstone draws unto it Iron; Flame leapes to Bituminous Mould; one
Buble of water near another Buble, closes and incorporates with it; Rays
glance from a white object; the body of a living Creature assimilates that
which is good for it, excerneth what is unprofitable; a piece of sponge even
when it is raised above the surface of the water, sucks in water, expells air;
and the like. For to what end should we enumerate such instances, seeing no
body placed near to an other, changes the other, or is changed of it, unless
a reciprocal Perception precede the operation. Every Body has a Perception of
the Pores and Passages by which it insinuates it self; it feels the invasion
of another Body, to which it yields; it perceives the remove of another Body,
by which it was detained; when it recovers it self, it perceives the divulsion
of its continuance, which for a time resists; and in a word Perception is
diffused through the whole body of Nature. Air does so exactly Sense Hot and
Cold, that the Perception thereof is far more subtle than man's Touch, which
yet is taken for the discerning Rule of Hot and Cold. Two faults therefore are
found concerning this knowledge; that men have for most part past it over
touched, and unhandled; which notwithstanding is a most unble speculation: The
other is that they who perchance have addicted their minds to this
contemplation, Campanella alij,
have in the heat of this Pursuit gone too far, and attributed Sense to all
Bodies, that it is a most a piaculare crime to pull off a bow from a Tree,
Virg. Aen. 3
lest it should groan and complain as Polydore did. But they should explore
with diligence the difference of Perception and Sense, not only in comparing of
Sensibles with Insensibles according to the entire body (as of Plants, and
living Creatures) but also to observe in the sensible Body, what should be the
cause that so many Actions should be discharged, and that without any Sense at
all? Why Aliments are digested, egested: Humors and succulent moystures carried
upwards and downwards; the Heart and Pulse beat; the Guts as so many Shops, or
Worke-houses should every one accomplish his proper work, and yet all these
and many such like are performed without Sense? But men have not with
sufficient enquiry searched or found out of what Nature the Action of Sense is;
and what kind of Body; what delay; what Conduplication of impression are
required to this, that pain or pleasure should follow? To close this point they
do seem to be altogether ignorant of the difference betwixt simple Perception
and sense; how far Perception may be made without sense? Nor is this Enquiry
a Controversy of words, but a matter of great and important moment. Wherefore
let there be made a better inquiry of this knowledge, as of a matter very
profitable, and of manifold use. Considering also that the ignorance of some of
the Ancient Philosophers touching this matter, so far obscured the light of
reason, as that they thought, there was without any difference, a Soul infused
into all Bodies; nor did they conceive how Motion, with a discerning instinct,
could be made without Sense; or Sense exist without a Soul.

RADIX PERSPECTIVAE SIVE DE FORMA LVCIS.
As for the Form of Light, that there has not bin made a due enquiry thereof
(specially seeing men have so painfully employed their Studies in the
Perspectives) may well be censured as a strange oversight. For neither in the
Perspectives, nor elsewhere, is there any thing inquired concerning Light, of
any worth or weight: The Radiations of it are handled, the Originalls not: But
the placing of Perspectives amongst the Mathematiques has begotten this
defect; and others of like nature; because men have made a too early departure
from Physiques. So on the other side the handling of Light and the Causes
thereof, in Physiques is commonly superstitious, as of a thing of a middle
nature betwixt things natural, and Divine; in so much as some of Platoes
School have introduced Light as a thing more ancient than Matter it self:
Ficin. Card de Cusa.
For when the empty space was spread abroad they affirmed, in a vain
imagination that it was first filled with Light, and afterward with a Body;
whereas Holy writ sets down plainly the Mass of Heaven and Earth to be a
dark Chaos before the Creation of Light. Genesis 1.
But what are handled Physically and according to sense of this subject,
presently descends to Radiations; so as there is very little Philosophical
enquiry extant touching this point. And men ought to submit their
Contemplations a while, and to enquire what is common to all Lucid Bodies, as
of the Form of Light: For what an immense difference of Body is there (if they
may be considered according to their dignity) betwixt the Sun and rotten wood,
or the putrid scales of Fish? They should likewise make enquiry, what should be
the Cause why some things take fire, and once thoroughly heated cast forth a
Light; others not? Iron; Metalls; Stones, Glass; Wood, Oil; Tallow by fire,
either cast forth a Flame, or at least grow Red: But Water and Air heated with
the fury of the hottest Flames to the highest degree they are capeable of,
acquire no such light, nor cast forth any Splendour. If any man think, it
therefore thus comes to pass, because it is the property of fire to give
light; but Water and Air are utter enemies to Fire; sure he was never rowed
with Oars in a dark night upon salt waters, and in a hot season; where he
might have seen small drops of water rebounding from the clashing of the Oars,
to sparkle and cast forth a light: Which is likewise seen in the fervent froath
of the Sea which they call the Sea-longs. And what affinity with flame and
fired matter have the Cicindulae, the Luciolae, and the Indian Fly, which cast
a light over a whole arched Room; or the eyes of certain living Creatures in
the dark; and sugar, as it is grated or broken; or the sweat or a horse hard
ridden, in a soultry night; and many more? Nay many have understood so little in
this point, as many have thought the sparks from a flint to be attrited Air.
But when the Air is not fired with heat, and apparently conceives Light, how
comes it to pass, that Owls and Cats, and many other Creatures see in the
night? So that it must needs be (seeing vision cannot be convayed without
light) that there is a native and inbred light in Air, although very feeble
and weak; yet such as may be proportionated to the Opticke Beams of such
Creatures, and may suffice them for sight. But the cause of this evil, as of
many more, that men have not drawn forth the common Forms of things Natural,
from Particular Instances; which is that we have set down as the proper
subject of Metaphysique; which is it self a part of Physique, or of the
knowledge of Nature. Therefore let there be enquiry made of the Form and
Originalls of Light, and in the mean, it may be placed among DEFICIENTS. And
thus much of the Knowledge concerning the substance of the Soul, Rational,
and Sensible, with their Faculties, and of the Appendices of the same Knowledge.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF FRANCIS LO. VERVLAM VICOUNT St ALBAN. OF THE DIGNITY AND
ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING. To the KING.
CAP. I. I The Partition of the Knowledge, which respects the Use, and
Objects of the Faculties of the Mind of Man, into Logique; and Ethique. II. The
Division of Logique into the Arts, of Invention; of Judgment; of Memory; and
of Tradition.
THE Knowledge respecting the understanding of Man (Excellent King) and that
other respecting his Will, are, as it were, Twins by Birth: For the Purity
of Jllumination; and the Liberty of will began together, fell together: Nor is
there in the Universal Nature of things so intimate a Sympathy, as that of
Truth and Goodness. The more shame for Learned Men, if they be for Knowledge
like winged Angels; for base Desires, they be like Serpents which crawle in the
Dust, carrying indeed about them Minds like a Mirror or Glass; but menstruous
and distained.

We come now to the Knowledge which respects the use and objects of the
Faculties of the Mind of Man. This has two Parts, and they well known, and by
general consent received, Logique and Ethique: Save that we have a little
before set at liberty Civil Knowledge, which commonly was taken in as a Part
of Ethique; and have made it an entire Knowledge of man congregate or in
society; handling here only man segregate. Logique entreats of the
understanding and Reason; Ethique of the Will; Appetite; and Affections; the
one produces Decrees; the other Actions. It is true that the Imagination in
both Provinces, Judicial and Ministerial, performs the Office of an Agent or
Nuncius, or common Attorney. For Sense sends over all sorts of Ideas unto the
Jmagination, upon which, Reason afterward sits in Judgment: And Reason
interchangeably sends over selected and approved Ideas to the Imagination,
before the Decree can be acted. For Jmagination ever precedes voluntary motion
and incites it; so that Imagination is a common reciprocal Instrument to both:
Saving that this Ianus is bifronted, and turns faces: For the face toward
Reason has the Print of Truth; but the face toward Action has the Print of
Goodness: which nevertheless are faces -- Quales decet esse sororum. Ovid.
Met.


Neither is the Imagination a mere and simple Messenger, but is invested with,
or at leastwise usurpeth no small Authority besides the duty of the message.
For it is well said by Aristotle, Polit. 1.
That the mind has over the Body that command which the Lord has over a
bondman; but the Reason has over the Imagination that command which a
Magistrate has over a free Citizen, who may come also to rule in his turn.
For we see that in matters of Faith and Religion, the Jmagination mounts, and
is elevated above Reason; not that Divine Jllumination resideth in the
Imagination; (nay rather in the high Tower of the mind, and understanding) but,
as in virtues Divine, grace makes use of the motions of the will; so in
Jlluminations Divine, grace makes use of the Jmagination. Which is the Cause
that Religion sought ever an access, and way to the Mind, by Similitudes;
Types; Parables; Visions; Dreams. Again it is small Dominion the Jmagination
has in persuasions, insinuated by the power of Eloquence: For where the minds
of men are gently entreated inflamed, and any way forcibly won by the smooth
Artifice of speech, all this is done by exalting the Jmagination, which growing
hot and impatient not only triumphs over Reason; but in a sort offers violence
unto it; partly by blinding, partly by extimulating it. Nevertheless I see no
reason why we should depart from the former Division* For the Jmagination
commonly does not produce Sciences; for Poesy which has ever bin attributed to
the Imagination, is to be estimed rather a play of the wit, than a knowledge.
As for the power of the Imagination in things Natural, we have assigned that,
a little before, to the Doctrine de Anima. And for the affinity it has with
Rhetorique, we think it fit to refer it to the Art it self whereof we shall
entreat hereafter.

This Part of humane Philosophy which is Rational or respecting Logique, is to
the taste and Palate of many wits, not so delightful; and seems nothing else
but a net and snare of thorny subtletie. Sen. alicubi
For as it is truly said that knowledge is animi Pabulum; so in the nature of
men's appetites, and election of this food, most men are of the taste and
stomach of the Israelites in the Desert, that would fain have turned ad ollas
Carnium, and were weary of Manna; which thouh it were Celestial, yet seemed it
less nutritive and comfortable. So generally those Knowledges relish best,
that have an infusion somewhat more esculent of flesh in them; such as are
Civil History; Morality; Policy, about the which men's Affections; Praises;
Fortunes do turn, and are conversant: But this same lumen siccum, does parch
and offend most men's watery and soft natures. But if we would measure and value
things according to their proper worth, Rational Sciences are the keys of all
other Arts; and as the Hand is the Jnstrument of Instruments; the Mind, the
Form of Forms; so these knowledges are to be estimed the Art of Arts. Neither
do they direct only; but likewise strengthen and confirm; as the use and
habit of shooting, does not only enable to shoot a nearer shoot; but also to
draw a stronger Bow.

II Arts Logical or intellectual are four in number, divided according to
the ends whereunto they are referred: For man's labor in Rational Knowledges
is; either to invent that which is sought; or to judge what is invented; or to
retain that which is judged; or to deliver over that which is Retained: So as
there must needs be so many Rational Sciences; Art of Inquiry, or Invention;
Art of Examination or judgment; Art of Custody or Memory; and Art of Elocution
or Tradition; whereof we will speak, of every particular apart.

CAP. II. I The Partition of the Art of Invention into the Inventive of Arts:
and of Arguments.. The former of these, which is the more eminent is Deficient.
II. The Division of the Inventive Art of Arts, into literate Experience.. And a
New Organ, III. A Delineation of Experience Literate.
I INvention is of two kinds, much differing; the one of Arts and Sciences;
EXPERIENTIA LITERATA, SIVE VENATIO PANIS.
the other of Arguments and Speeches. The former of these I report to be wholly
DEFICIENT, which seems to me to be such a Deficience, as if in the making of
an Jnventory touching the estate of a Defunct, it should be set down, of ready
money nothing: For as money will fetch all other commodities; so all other Arts
are purchased by this Art. And as the west Jndies had never bin discovered, if
the use of the Mariners Needle had not first bin discovered, though those
Regions be vast, the Versor is a small Motion: So it cannot be found strange,
if in the discovery and advancement of Arts, there has not bin made greater
Progression, seeing the Art of Invention and Perlustration hitherto was unknown.

That this part of knowledge is wanting stands plainly confessed. For first
Logique does not profess, nay not pretend to Invent either Arts Mechanical,
or Arts (as they call them) Liberal; nor to elicite the Operations of the one,
or the Axioms of the other; but speaks to men as it were in Passage, and so
leaves them with this instruction, cuique sua art credendum. Arist Moral. 1.
Celsus a wise man, as well as a Physician (though it be the custom of all men
to be copious in the commendation of their own Profession) acknowledges it
gravely and ingeniously, speaking of the Empyricall and Dogmaticall Sects of
Physicians, That Medicines and Cures were first found out, De Re Medica.
and then after the Reasons and Causes were discovered: not the other way, that
the Causes first extracted from the nature of things gave light to the
invention of Remedies. In Timaeo. Phileb. alibi.
But Plato often notes it; That Particulars are infinite; again that the
highest Generalities give no sufficient Direction; and that the Pyth of all
Sciences, whereby the Arts-man is distinguished from the Inexpert, consists
in middle Propositions, which experience has delivered and taught in every
Particular Science. And therefore we see that they which discourse of the first
Inventors of things, and the Originalls of Sciences, have celebrated rather
Chance than Art; and have brought in Beasts; Birds; Fishes; Serpents, rather
than Men, as the first Doctors of Sciences.

Dictamnum Genetrix Cretaea carpit ab Ida,
Puberibus Caulem folijs and flore comantem
Purpureo, Virg. Aen. 12.
non illa feris incognita Capris
Gramina, cum tergo volucres haesere sagittae.
So that is was no marvel (the manner of Antiquity being for to consecrate
Inventors of things profitable) that the Egyptians, an ancient Nation, to whom
many Arts owe their first Beginnings, had their Temples full of the Idols of
Brutes, but almost empty of the Idols of men, Omnigenumque Deum monstra and
Latrator Anubis, Vir. Aen. 8.

Contra Neptunum, and Venerem, contraque Minervam etc.


And if you like better, from the Tradition of the Grecians, to ascribe the
first invention of Arts to men; yet you can not say that Prometheus applied his
contemplation on set purpose to the invention of Fire; Ovid. Horat. etc.
or that when he first stroke the flint he expected sparks; but that he fell
upon this experiment by chance, and as they say -- furtum Jovi fecisse; so as
for the Jnvention of Arts we are more beholding to a wild Goat for Surgery;
or to a Nightingale for modulations of Music; to the Ibis for Clysteres; to a
Potlid that flew open for Artillery; Pamirollus Rer. Mem. Pa. 2.
and to say in a word to Chance or any thing else more than to Logique. Neither
is the form of Invention which Virgil describes, much other, Virg. G. 1.
Et varias usus meditando extunderet Arts
Paulatim --
For here is no other method of Invention propounded, than that which brute
Beasts are capeable of, and often put in ure; which is a most intentive
solicitude about some one thing and a perpetual practice thereof; which the
necessity of their Conservation imposes upon such Creatures; Oration. pro L:
Cor. Balbo.
for Cicero says very truly, usus uni rei deditus, and naturam and artem saepe
vincit, Therefore if it be said of men Labor omnia vincit
Virg. G. 1.
Improbus, and duris urgens in rebus egestas.
It is likewise said of Beasts, Pers. Prol.
Quis expedivit Psittaco suum (...)? Who taught the Raven in a drougth to throw
Pebbles into a hollow tree where by chance she spied water, that the water
might rise so as she might come to it? Who taught the Be to sail through such
a vast sea of Air, Plin. Not. H
to the Flowers in the Fields; and to find the way so far off to her Hive
again? Who taught the Ant to bite every grain of Corn that she burieth in her
hill, lest it should take root and grow, and so delude her hope? And if you
observe in Virgils verse, the word extundere, which imports the Difficulty, and
the word Paulatim, which imports the slownesse? we are where we were even
amongst the Egyptian Gods, seeing hitherto men have made little use of the
faculty of Reason, none at all of the duty of Art for the discovery of
Inventions.

Secondly if this which we affirm, be well considered, it is demonstrated by
the Form of Induction which Logique propounds, namely by that Form of
inference, whereby the Principles of Sciences are found out and proved; which,
as it is now framed, is utterly vicious and incompetent, and so far from
perfecting nature that it rather perverts and distorts it. For he that shall
exactly observe how this Aethereall Dew of Sciences; like unto that the Poet
speaks of Aerei mellis Caelestia dona is gathered (seeing that even Sciences
themselves are extracted out of particular examples, partly Natural, partly
Artificial; or from the flowers of the field, and Garden) shall find that the
mind of her own nature, and imbred disposition does more ingeniously, and with
better Invention, Act an Induction, than Logicians describe it. For from a nude
enumeration of Particulars (as Logicians use to do) without an Instance
Contradictory, is a vicious Conclusion; nor does such an Induction infer more
than a probable Conjecture. For who will take upon him, when the Particulars
which a man knows, and which he has mentioned, appear only on one side,
there may not lurk some Particular which is altogether repugnant? As if
Samuel should have rested in those sons of Ishay which were brought before him
in the house; and should not have sought David which was absent in the field.
And this Form of Induction (to say plainly the truth) is so gross and
palpable, that it might seem incredible, that such acute and subtle wits as
have exerciz'd their meditations in these things, could have obtruded it upon
the world; but that they hasted to Theories, and Dogmaticalls; and from a kind
of pride and elation of mind despised Particulars, specially any long stay upon
them. For they have used these examples and Particular Instances, but as
Sergeants, and whifflers, ad summovendam turbam, to make way and room for
their opinions; and never advised with them from the beginning, that so a
legitimate and mature deliberation, concerning the truth of things, might be
made. Certainly it is a thing has touched my mind with a pious, and religious
wonder, to see the same steps leading to error, trodden in divine and humane
enquiries. For as in the apprehending of divine truth, men cannot endure to
become as a child; so in the apprehending of humane truth, for men, come to
years, yet to read, and repeat, the first Elements of Inductions, as if they
were still children; is reputed a poor and contemptible employment.

Thirdly if it be granted, that the Principles of Sciences may be rightly
inferred from the Induction, which they use, or from sense and experience; yet
nevertheless, certain it is, that inferior Axioms, cannot rightly and safely
be deduced, by Syllogism from them, in things of nature, which participate of
matter. For in Syllogism there is a reduction of Propositions to Principles by
middle Propositions. And this Form, whether for Invention, or for Proof, in
Sciences Popular, as Ethiques; Politiques; Laws, and the like takes place;
yea, and in Divinity; seeing it has pleased God of his goodness to
accommodate himself to man's capacity* but in Natural Philosophy where nature
should be convinced and vanquished by deeds, and not an Adversary, by Argument;
truth plainly escapes our hands: because that the subtlety of the operations of
Nature, is far greater than the subtlety of words. So that the Syllogism
thus failing, there is every way need of help and service, of true and
rectified Induction, as well for the more general Principles, as inferior
Propositions. For Syllogismes consist of Propositions, Propositions of words,
words are the current tokens or marks of the Notions of things; wherefore if
these Notions (which are the souls of words) be grossly, and variably
abstracted from things, the whole building falls. Neither is it the laborious
examination either of Consequences, Arguments, or the verity of Propositions,
that can ever repair that ruin; being the error is, as the Physicians speak,
in the first Digestion; which is not rectified by the sequent functions of
Nature. And therefore it was not without great and evident Cause, that many of
the Philosophers, and of them, some of singular note, became Academiques; and
Sceptiques; which took away all certainty of knowledge or of Comprehensions;
and denied that the knowledge of man extended further than appearance and
probability. It is true that some are of opinion, that Socrates, when he put
off certainty of science from himself, Cic. in Acad.
did this but by a form of Irony, and scientiam dissimulando simulasse; that
is that by renouncing those things which he manifestly knew, he might be
reputed to know even that which he knew not; neither in the later Academy which
Cicero embraced was this opinion of Acatalepsie held so sincerely: For all
those which excelled for eloquence, In Acad. Q.
commonly made choice of this Sect, as fitter to give glory to their copious
speech, and variable discourse both ways; which was the cause they turned
aside from that straight way by which they should have gone on to truth, to
pleasant walks made for delight and pastime. Notwithstanding it appears that
there were many scattered in both Academies, the old and new (much more among
the Sceptiques) that held this Acatalepsie in simplicity and integrity: But
here was their chief error, that they charged the Perceptions of the Senses,
whereby they did extirpate and pluck up Sciences by the roots. For the senses
although they many times destitute, and deceive men, yet assisted by much
industry they may be sufficient for Sciences; and that not so much by the help
of Instruments (though these are in some sort useful) as of experiments of the
same kind, which may produce more subtle objects, than, for the faculty of
sense, are by sense comprehensible. And they ought rather to have charged the
defects in this kind upon the errors, and contumacie of the mind, which
refuses to be pliant and morigerous to the Nature of things; and to crooked
demonstrations and rules of arguing and concluding, ill set down and
propounded from the Perception of Sense. This we speak not to disable the mind
of man; or that the business should be abandoned; but that apt and proper
assistances may be acquired; and applied to the understanding, whereby men may
subdue the difficulties of things, and the obscurity of Nature. For no man has
such a steadiness of hand by nature or Practice, that he can draw a straight
line or make a perfect circle with his hand at liberty, which yet is easily
done by rule or compass. This is that very business which we go about and
with great pains endeavor that the mind by the help of Art might be able to
equal Nature; and that there might be found out an Art of Discovery, or
Direction, which might disclose, and bring to light other Arts, and their
Axioms and Works. This upon good ground we report DEFICIENT.

EXPERIENTIA LITERATA sive VENATIO PANIS
II This Art of Discovery (for so we will call it) has two parts; for either
the Indication is made from Experiments to Experiments; or from Experiments to
Axioms; which may likewise design new Experiments; whereof the former we will
term, Experientia Literata; the later Interpretatio Naturae, or Novum Organum.
Indeed the former (as we have touched heretofore) is not properly to be taken
for an Art, or a part of Philosophy, but a kind of sagacity; wherefore we
sometimes call it Venatio Panis, borrowing the name from the Fable. But as a
man may go on his way after a threefold manner; either when himself feels
out his way in the dark; or being weak-sighted is led by the hand of another;
or else when he directs his footing by a light: So when a man essays all kind
of Experiments without sequence or method that is a mere palpation; but when
he proceeds by direction and order in Experiments, it is as if he were led by
the hand; and this is it which we understand by Literate Experience: For the
light it self which was the third way is to be derived from the Interpretation
of Nature, or the New Organum.

III. Literate Experience, or the Hunting of Pan shows the diverse ways of
making Experiments: This (seeing we have set it down as DEFICIENT, and that
it is a matter not altogether so plain and perspicuous) we will according to
our manner and design give some light touches and shadows of it. The manner
of making Experiment chiefly proceeds; either by variation of the experiment;
or by Production of the Experiment; or by translation of the Experiment; or by
inversion of the Experiment; or by compulsion of the Experiment; or by
Application of the Experiment; or by Copulation of the Experiment; or else by
the lots and chance of the Experiment. And all these are limited without the
terms of any Axiom of Invention: For that other part of the New Organ takes
up and contains in it all Transition of Experiments into Axioms; or of Axioms
into Experiments.

Variation of Experience is first practiced upon Matter; that is when the
Experiment in things already known commonly adheareth to such a kind of
matter; and now it is tried in other things of like kind; as the making of
Papyr is only tried in linen, and not in silk, (unless perchance amongst the
Chinese; nor yet in stuffes intermixed with hair and bristles, of which is
made that which we call chame-lot; nor yet in woolen, cotton, and skins,
although these three last seem to be more Heterogeneous, and so rather may
become useful mingled, than separate: So insition in Fruit Trees, is
practiced, but rarely tried in Trees-wild; although it is affirmed that an Elm
grafted upon an Elm, will produce wonderful shades of leaves. Insition
likewise in flowers is very rare, though now the Experiment begins to be made
upon musk-Roses, which are successefully inoculate upon common Roses. So we
place the variation in the Part of a thing amongst the variations in Matter.
For we see a scion, or young slip grafted upon the trunck of a tree, to shoot
forth more prosperously, than if it had bin set in earth: And why, in like
manner, should not the seed of an Onion inserted into the head of another Onion
while it is green, germinate more happily than if it had bin sown in the bare
earth? And here the Root is varied for the Trunck, that the thing may seem to
be a kind of insition in the root. Secondly, the variation of an Experiment may
be made in the efficient: The beams of the Sun through burning-Glasses are so
fortified, and intended to such a degree of heat, that they are able to set on
flame any matter, which is apt easily to conceive fire: Now whether may the
beams of the Moon, by the same Glasses be actuated by some weak degrees of
warmth; that we may see whether all heavenly Bodies be hot in power? So bright
and radiant heates are exalted by Glasses: Whether are gloomy and opaque heates
(as of stones and metals, before they be made burning hot by the force of fire)
subject to the same impression; or are they rather in this some portions of
light? So Amber, and Iet, or an Agat, chaffed draw unto them straw; whether
warmed at the fire will they do the like? Thirdly, the variation of an
Experiment may be made in Quantity, concerning which a very diligent care is to
be taken being it is encompassed with many errors. For men are of opinion that
if the Quantity be augmented and multiplied, the virtue is proportionably
augmented and multiplied; and this commonly is with them a Postulatum, and a
supposed truth, as if the matter were a Mathematical certitude; which is
utterly untrue. A globe of Lead, or a pound in weight let fall from a Tower, say
it descends to the earth in the space of ten Pulses; whether will a Globe of
two pound weight (in which that force of Motion, which they call Natural,
should be doubled,) light upon the earth in the space of five Pulses? But that
Globe shall come down almost in an equal space of time with this, and shall
not be accelerated according to the measure of Quantity. So (imagine,) one
dragme of Sulphur mingled with half a pound of Steel, it will make it fluid
and liquid; Will therefore an ounce of Sulphur suffice to the dissolving of
four pounds of Steel? But that follows not; For it is certain that the
obstinacy of the matter in the Patient is more increased by Quantity, than the
Activity of the virtue in the Agent. Besides, too much, as well a too little
frustrates the effect: For in the excoctions and depurations of Metalls it is a
familiar error, that to advance excoction, they augment the heat of the
Furnace, or the Quantity of the Jniection; but if these exceed due proportion,
they hinder the operation; because through their force and acrimony, they turn
much of the pure Metal into fumes, and carry it away; so as there is a loss
in the Metal; and the mass which remains through the emission of the Spitits
becomes more obstinate and indurate. Aesop. Fab.
Men should therefore remember the mockery of Aesopes huswife, who conceited
that by doubling her measure of Barley, her Hen would daily lay her two eggs;
But the Hen grew fat and laid none. It is not altogether safe to rely upon any
Natural experiment, before proof be made both in a lesser, and greater
Quantity.

Production of an Experiment is of two sorts, Repetition and Extension; namely
when the Experiment either is iterated; or driven to a kind of subtlety.
Example of Repetition may be this; the spirit of wine is made of wine once
distilled, and it is much more quick and strong than wine it self; will
likewise the spirit it self of wine distilled, or sublimated, proportionably
exceed it self in strength? But Repetition also is not without deceit; for
neither does the second exaltation equal the excess of the first; and many
times by iteration of the Experiment after a certain state, and height of
operation, Nature is so far from a further progression, as she rather falls
into a relapse. Wherefore the experiment must be made with Caution and
judgment. So Quicksilver in linen, or else in the midst of moulten Lead when
it begins to grow cold the Quicksilver inferted is stupefied, and is no longer
fluid; Will the same Quicksilver if it be often so practiced upon, become so
fixed as to be made malleable? The example of extension may be this, water
placed upwards, and made pensile; and by a long neb of a glass dipped in wine,
mixed with water, will unmingle, the water from the wine, the wine leasurely
ascending, and settling in the top; the water descending, and settling in the
bottom: Now as wine and water which are two diverse bodies are separate by
this devise; may the more subtle parts of wine in like manner, which is an
entire body, be separate from the more gross, that so there may be a
distillation, as it were, by weight; and that there may be found floating in
the top, a substance nearest to the spirit of wine, but perchance more
delicate? So the Lodestone draws Iron solid, and entire, unto it; will a
piece of a Lodestone, plonged into dissolved parcels and fragments of Iron,
allure the Iron unto it, and cover it self with it? So the versor of a
Mariners needle applies it self to the Poles of the world: Does it do this
after the same manner, and upon the same consequence whereby Celestial Bodies
move? Namely if you should place the Needle in a contrary posture, that is, in
the South-point, and there stay it a while, and then cease your forcing it, and
leave it to it self; would this Needle turn it self perchance to the North;
and choose rather to wheel about by the West into its desired-naturall site,
than by the East? So gold imbibeth Quicksilver which is contiguous to it; does
the gold ingulfe, and suck up this Quicksilver into it self without extension
of its substance, that it becomes a Mass more ponderous than gold it self? So
some men subminister helps to their memories by setting up Images and Pictures
of Persons in certain rooms; would they attain the same end, if (setting
aside such Images) they should effigiate to themselves an Idea of their gests
and habits. And thus much of the Poduction of an experiment.

The translation of an experiment is threefold, either from Nature, or chance
into Art; or from Art, or one Practice into another; or from a part of some
Art, into a diverse part of the same Art. Of Translation from Nature, or chance
into Art, there are innumerable examples; for that almost all Mechanical Arts
owe their originalls from slender beginnings presented by Nature or Chance. It
is a received Proverb, That Grapes consorted with Grapes sooner come to
maturity: Which from the Nature of mutual assistance and friendship grew
popular. But our makers of Cider, which is a wine or Apples, do well imitate
this: For they provide that they be not stamped or pressed, before, by being cast
into heaps for a time, they mature by mutual contact; whereby the acidity and
tartness of the liquor is corrected. So the imitation of Artificial Rainbowes
by the spisse aspersion of little drops, is by an easy derivation from natural
Rain-bowes composed of a dewy Cloud. So the manner of distilling might be taken
either from above, as from showers or dew; or from that homely experiment of
Drops adhearing to Covers put upon Pots of boiling water. Pancirollus par. 2.
And a man would have bin affeard to have imitated Thunder and Lightning, if
the Potlid of that chymique Monk had not by being tossed up into the air,
instructed him. But the more plentiful this experiment is of examples, the
fewer we need to produce. And if men would be at leisure to employ their
studies in the inquiry of things profitable; they should view attentively, by
degrees and of set purpose all the workmanship, and the particular workings of
Nature; and perpetually, and thoroughly meditate with themselves, which of
those may be transferred to Arts, For Nature is the Mirror of Art: And the
experiments are as many which may be translated from Art into Art; or from one
Practice into another, though this is not so much in use: For nature every way
is obvious to all men; but Arts appropriate to particular Professors, are only
known to them. Spectacles are invented to help a weak sight; might there be
contrived a instrument which fastened to the ear, might help such as are thick
of hearing? So embalming, and honey conserve dead Corpse; might not some of those
ingredients be transferred into a medicine, which might be useful to bodies
alive? So the practice of Seals upon wax; cements for walls, and upon Lead is
ancient; but this invention showed the way to Impression upon Paper, or the Art
of Printing. So in the Art of Cookerie salt seasons flesh, and that better in
Winter, than in Summer: Might not this be profitably translated to Bathes and
their temperament, as occasion shall require; either to impresse some good
moisture, or extract some peccant humor. So salt in the newfound experiment of
Artificial Conglaciations is found to have great power to condense: Might not
this be transferred to the condensation of Metalls; seeing it is known long
since that strong water being composited of some kinds of salts, have a power
to deject and precipitate small sands of Gold out of certain Metalls, not so
dense and compact as Gold? So painting revives the memory of a thing, by the
Jmage of a Picture: Is not this traduced into an Art, which they call the Art
of Memory? Let this in general serve for admonition; that nothing can so much
conduce to the drawing down, as it were, from heaven, a whole shower of new
and profitable Inventions, as this, that the experiments of many Mechanique
Arts, may come to the knowledge of one man, or some few, who by mutual
conference may whet and sharpen one another; that so by this which we call
Translation of Experiments, Arts may nourish, and, as it were, by a commixture,
and communication of Rays, inflame one the other. For although the rational
way by an artificial Organum, promise far greater matters; yet nevertheless
this sagacitie by literate experience, may in the mean project and scatter to
the benefit of man (as missive Donatives amongst the Ancients) many rudiments
to knowledge, which may be had at hand. There remains the Translation of a
Part of Art into another part diverse from it, which little differs from the
Translation of Art into Art: But because many Arts exercise great spaces, so as
they may very well sustain a Translation within the limits of their own
operations; we thought good to annex this kind of Translation; specially seeing
it is in some Arts of very great import. For it makes much to the advancement
and amplification of the Art of Physique; if the Experiments of that part of
Medicine concerning the Cures of Diseases, be transferred to those Parts
concerning the Regiment of Health, and the Prolongation of Life. For if some
excellent Opiate be of that force and virtue, as to repress and assuage the
raging inflammation of the spirits, in a pestilentiall Fever; let no man
question, but that a like receipt by a due proportioned Dose made familiar, may
in some degree put back and retard inflammation which grows and creepes upon us
by age. Thus much for the Translation of Experiments.

Inversion of Experiment is, when the contrary to that which is by Experiment
manifest, is tried: For example, Heat by Glasses is intended; is cold so too?
So Heat when it diffuseth it self is yet rather carried upwards: Is cold
likewise in diffusing it self carried rather downwards? For instance, take a
small Bar of Iron, and heat it on one end, then set it upright, (that end
which is heated placed downwards) laying your hand upon the end, it will
presently burn your hand; but now inverse the Bar, placeing the hot part
upwards, and your hand upon the part which is downwards, and you shall not
feel the heat so soon by many Pulses: Whether or no if the Bar was heated
all over, and one end should be moistened with snow, or with a sponge dipped in
cold water; if the snow or sponge were applied to the part which is upward,
would (I say) the cold sooner pierce downward, than if the snow or sponge
placed at the lower end, the cold would shoot upward. So the Beams of the Sun
rebound from a white, upon a black are congregate: Whether are shadows also
dispersed upon white, and united upon black? The Experiment we see made in a
dark room, the light being let in through a narrow chinck only, where the Images
of things which are without, are taken upon white Paper, not upon black. So a
vein is opened in the forehead for the Megrim, or Headache. Must also the
Hemicraine be scarified for the Soda; or the pain of the head in general? So
much for the Jnversion of Experiment.

Compulsion of Experiment, is when Experiment is urged, and extended to
annihilation, or privation of the virtue. For in other kinds of hunting, the
game is only taken, but in this killed. Example of Compulsion is this; The
Loadstone draws Iron, in force therefore the Iron, or vex the Loadstone, so,
as the virtue of attraction be stifled or expired: As, suppose the Loadstone
were burnt or macerate in strong water, whether will it forgo, or abate its
virtue? Contrariwise if steel, or Iron be reduced in Crocum Martis, or into
prepared steel, as they call it; or be dissolved in Aquafortis; will the
Loadstone still allure them? Again, the Loadstone draws Iron through all
interposed Bodies that we know, as Gold; Silver; Glass, etc. Fix therefore
some medium upon it (if it may be) that may intercept, and arrest its virtue.
Make a trial of Quicksilver; of Oil; Gummes; a burning coal; and the like,
which yet have not bin experimented. So there have bin brought in of late,
certain Perspectives which multiply after a strange manner the minutest
visibles: Press the use of them, either upon small objects, as they may not be
able to work upon; or upon so vast, as they may be confounded in working: As
whether they can clearly discover those moates in Urin, which otherways could
not be discerned? Whether in Jewels, every way pure and spotless, they can
make the grains and imperceptible clouds to become visible? Whether can they
expose to view the moates in the Sun (which are untruely charged upon
Democritus for his Atoms, Hippoc. Epist. Laert. in vita Plin. Lib. 30.
and the Principles of Nature) as if they were great Bodies? Can they so
distinguish to the sight the grosser dust made of Cerusse, and Vermillion, that
the small grains may appear; here the red, there the white? Again, can they
multiply greater Figures (imagine a face; an eye, or so) to the same bigness
they can a flea, or a little worm? Can they make a piece of Cypres, or
Cobweb-Lawne appear so full of holes, as if it were a Net? But we stay the
less upon the Compulsions of Experiments because commonly they fall not within
the limits of literate experience; but are rather referred to Causes; and
Axioms; and the New Organum. For wheresoever there is a Negative; Privative; or
exclusive faculty; there is already some light given to the Invention of
Forms. Thus far of the Compulsion of Experiment.

Application of Experiment is nothing else than a witty Translation of it to
some other profitable Experiment. Example may be this; All Bodies have their
own dimensions, and their own weights: Gold is of greater weight, of less
dimension, than Silver; Water than Wine. From this is traduced a profitable
Experiment; that from a just weight and measure being taken, you may know how
much Silver has bin mixed with Gold; how much Water with Wine; which was that
celebrated (...) of Archimedes. So flesh sooner putrifies in some Cellers, than
it does in others. It will be of use to make application of this Experiment to
the finding out of Aires, more or less healthful, for habitation; namely,
there where flesh is longest preserved from putrefaction. The same may be
applied to the discovery of healthful, or pestilentiall seasons of the year.
But there are innumerable examples of this Nature: Only let men awake, and
pepetually fix their eyes, one while, on the nature of things; another while,
on the application of them to the use and service of mankind. So much
concerning the Application of Experiment.

Copulation of Experiment is the Linkes and Chain of Application; when as
things, single, and separate had bin to little use, are, (connexed) of force and
efficacy. For example, you desire to have late Roses or fruit, this is effected
if you pull off the more early buds when they are newly knotted; the same is
done, if you lay the roots bare until the spring be well come on, and expose
them unto the open Air; but it will take the better, if you join both these
practices of putting back germination. So Ice and Nitre do much conduce to
refrigeration; but commixt together much more. But this Experiment is clear of
it self, notwithstanding here may covertly a fallacy lie hid, (as there may in
all other effects, and conclusions where Axioms are wanting) if the Copulation
be made of things which work after a different, and as it were, repugnant
manner. And so much for Copulation of Experiment,

There remain the Chances, or Fortunes of Experiment. This is altogether an
irrational, and as it were, a passionate manner of experimenting, when you
have a mind to try a conclusion not for that any reason, or other Experiment
induces you to it; but only because the like was never attempted before. Yet I
do not know whether or no, in this kind, there may not lie hid some secret of
great use, if you try nature every way. For the wonders of Nature commonly lie
out of the high road, and beaten paths; so as the very absurdity of an attempt
may sometimes be prosperous. But if reason go along with this practice; that
is, that it is evident that such an Experiment was never yet tried; and yet
there is great reason why it should be attempted; then it is a choice
Experiment, and searches the very bosom of Nature. For example: In the
operation of fire upon some Natural Body, one or other of these effects
hitherto ever comes to pass; as that either something flies out, (as flame and
fume in ordinary burning fuel) or at least there is made a local separation
of Parts, and that for some distance; as in Distillation where the lees settle,
the vapors, after they have played about, are gathered into receptacles: But
no man ever yet made trial of an Imprisoned Distillation, for so we may call
it: And it seems very probable, that if the force of heat immured within the
Cloisters of a body, do such great matters, and work such alterations; and
yet without loss, or manumission to the Body; that then this Proteus of
matter, fettered as it were, with Manacles, may in time be forced to many
transformations, if so be, that the heat be so tempered; and intermutually
changed, that the vessels be not broken. For this operation is like that of the
womb, where the heat works without emission, or separation of any part of the
Body, save that in the Matrix, there is conjoined Alimentation; but for
version, the thing is the same. These are the fortunes, or adventures of
Experiment. In the mean, we give this advise, touching Experiments of this
Nature; that no man be discouraged, or confounded if the Experiments which he
puts in practice answer not his expectation: For what succeeds pleases more;
but what succeeds not, many times informs no less. And this ought ever to be
remembered (which we often press) that Experimenta Lucifera Experiments of
Light, and discovery, ought for a time to be much more enquired after, than
Experimenta fructifera Experiments of use and practice. And thus much of
Literate Experience, which (as we have said before) is rather a sagacity, and a
hunting sent, than a Science.

Now for the Novum Organum, we say nothing, nor give any fore-tast thereof;
being we have projected in our minds, by the assistance of the Divine favor,
to make a perfect entire work of that subject; seeing it is a matter of higher
consequence, than all the rest.

CAP. III. I The Partition of the Inventive Art of Arguments, into Promptuary,
or Places of Preparation; and Topique, or Places of Suggestion. II. The
Division of Topique Art into General.. And Particular Topiques. III. In
example of Particular Topique in the Inquiry De Gravi and Levi.
INvention of Arguments, is not properly an Invention; for to Invent is to
discover things unknown, and not to recover, or recall that which is known
already. The Use and Office of this kind of Invention seems to be no other,
than out of the Mass of Knowledge, congested, and stored up in the Mind,
readily to produce, that which may be pertinent to the Matter, and Question
propounded. For he that is little or nothing acquainted before hand with the
Subject in question, Topiques of Jnvention will little advantage him: On the
contrary he that has Provision at home which may be applied to the purpose,
even without Art and Places of Invention, will at length, (though not so
readily and aptly) find out and produce Arguments. So that this kind of
Invention (as we have said) is not properly Invention, but only a Reduction
into Memory, or suggestion with Application. But because custom and consent
has authorized the word, it may in some sort be called Inventio^: For it may
be as well accounted a chase, or finding of a Dear, which is made within an
enclosed Park; as that within a Forest at large. But setting aside curiosity
of words it may appear that the scope and end of this kind of Invention, is a
certain promptitude, and expedite use of our Knowledge; rather than any
increase, or Amplification thereof.

I To procure this ready Provision for discourse, there are two ways; either
that it may be designed and pointed out, as it were, by an Jndex, under what
Heads the matter is to be sought; and this is that we call Topique: Or else
that Arguments may be before hand framed, and stored up, about such things as
are frequently incident, and come into disceptation; and this we will call
promptuarie Art, or of Preparation. This later scarcely deserves to be called
a Part of Knowledge, seeing it rather consists in diligence, De Repr. Soph.
lib. 2. c. 9.. ult.
than any artificial erudition. And in this part Aristotle does wittily
indeed, but hurtfully deride the Sophists near his time, saying; They did as
if one that professed the Art of shoo-making, should not teach how to make up a
shoe; but only exhibit in a readiness a number of shoes, of all fashions
and sizes. But yet a man might here reply, that if a Shoemaker should have no
shoes in his shop, but only work as he is bespoken, he would be but a poor
man, and weakly customed. But our Savior speaking of Divine knowledge, says
far otherwise; Mat. 13.
Every Scribe instructed for the Kingdom of heaven, is like a good householder
that brings forth both new and old store. And we see the ancient Writers of
Rhetorique do give it in Precept, That Pleaders should have diverse common
Places prepared long before hand, and handled, and illustrated both ways; for
example, For the sense and equity of Law against the words, Cic. de Orat.
and letter of Law; and on the contrary. And Cicero himself being broken unto
it by great experience, delivers it plainly; That an Orator if he be diligent
and sedulous, Ad Attic. Lib. XVI. EP. VI.
may have in effect premeditate, and handled, whatsoever a man shall have
occasion to speak of; so that in the Pleading of the Cause it self he shall
have no need to insert any new or sudden matter, besides new names, and some
individual Circumstances. But the pains and diligence of Demosthenes went so
far, that in regard of the great force that the entrance and access into a
Cause has to make a good Impression upon the Minds of Auditors, he thought it
worth his labor to frame, Ejus 65 Exordia, si ejus
and to have in readiness a number of Prefaces for Orations and Speeches. And
these Presidents, and Authorities, may deservedly overwaigh Aristotle's Opinion,
that would advise us change a Wardrope for a pair of Sheares. Therefore this
part of knowlede touching Promptuary Preparation, was not to be omitted; where
of for this place this is sufficient. And seeing it is common to both Logique
and Rhetorique, we thought good here aamongst Logiques, only in Passage, to
touch it; referring over a more ample handling of it to Rhetorique.

II The other Part of Invention, which is Topique, we will divide into General
and Particular Topique. General is that which is diligently and copiously
handled in Logique, or rational knowledge; as it were needless to stay upon
the explication thereof. Yet thus much we thought meet to admonish by the way;
that this Topique is of use, not only in argumentations, when we come to
dispute with another; but in meditations also, when we reason and debate
matters within our selves. Neither do these places serve only for suggestion,
or admonition, what we ought to affirm or assert; but also what we ought to
inquire and demand. In Menone.
And a faculty of wise interrogating, is half a knowledge; for Plato says
well, Whosoever seeks, comprehends that he seeks, for, in general notion;
else how shall he know it, when he has found it? And therefore the larger and
more certain our anticipation is, the more direct and compendious is our
search. The same places therefore, which will conduce to search the mind of our
inward conceptions, and understanding; and to draw forth the knowledge there
stored up; will also help us to produce knowledge from without. So as if a man
of Learning, and understanding be in presence, we might be able, aptly and
wisely to propound a Question thereof; and likewise profitably select and
peruse Auctors and Books, or parts of Books, which might teach and inform us
of those points we enquire.

But Particular Topiques do much more conduce to the Purpose we speak of;
TOPICAE PARTICVLARES.
and is to be accounted a thing of far greater use. There has bin indeed
some slight mention made hereof, by some Writers; but it has not yet bin
handled fully, and according to the dignity of the Subject. But to let pass
that humor and pride, which has reigned too long in Schools, which is, to
pursue with infinite subtlety, things that are within their command; but never
to touch at things any whit removed; we do receive and embrace Particular
Topique as a matter of great use, that is, Places of Enquiry, and Jnvention,
appropriate to Particular Subjects and Sciences; and these Places are certain
mixtures of Logique, and the proper matter of Particular Sciences. For he is
but a weak man, and of narrow capacity, who conceives that the Art of finding
out Sciences may be found out, propounded, and perfected, at once, even in
their first conception; and presently be set down, and practiced in some
work. But let men know for certain, That solid and true Arts of Invention do
shoot up, and come to maturity with the Inventions themselves: So as when a
man first enters upon the search of a knowledge, he may have many profitable
Precepts of Invention; but after he has made farther progress in the
knowledge it self, he may, and must excogitate new Precepts of Jnvention,
which may, lead him more prosperously to further Discoveries. For this kind of
Pursuit is like a going upon a Plain and open Champion; for after we have
gone a part of the way; we have not only gained this, that we are now nearer to
our journeyes end; but we gain the better sight of that part of the way, which
remains. So every degree of Proceeding in Sciences, having past over that
which is left behind, gives a better prospect to that which follows. And
because we set down this Part of Topique as DEFICIENT, we will annex an
example thereof.

III A Particular Topique, or the Articles of Enquiry de GRAVI and LEVI.
LEt it be enquired what Bodies those are which are susceptible of the Motion
of Gravity; what of Levity; and whether there be any of a middle and indifferent
Nature?

2 After an absolute Inquiry de Gravi and Levi; proceed to comparative Inquiry;
as of Ponderous Bodies, which does weigh more, which less, in the same
dimension? so of Light Bodies, which are more speedily carried upward, which
more slowly?

3 Let it be inquired, what the Quantum of a Body may contribute, and effect
toward the Motion of Gravitie. But this, at first sight, may seem a
superfluous Inquiry, because the computation of Motion must follow the
Computation of Quantity: But the matter is otherwise; for although the Quantity
in the skales do compensate the weight of the Body it self, (the force of the
Body every way meeting by repercussion, or by resistance, of the Basins, or of
the Beam) yet where there is but small resistance (as in the falling down of
a body through the Air) the Quantity of a body little availes to the incitation
of the descent; seeing two Balls of Lead, one of twenty, the other, of one
pound weight, fall to the earth almost in an equal space of time.

4 Let it be inquired, whether the Quantity of a Body may be so increased, as
that the Motion of Gravitie may be utterly deposed and cast off; as in the
Globe of the earth, which is pensile, and falls not? Whether may there be other
massive substances, so great, as may sustain themselves? V. DIGRES.
For Local Descent to the Center of the Earth, is a mere fiction; and every
great Mass abhorres all Local Motion, unless it be overrul'd by another more
predominant Appetite.

5 Let it be inquired, what the resistance of a Body interposing, or
incountring may do, or actuate toward the managing of the Motion of Gravitie:
For a Body descending, either penetrates and cutteth the Body occurrent; or is
arrested by it: If it Penetrate, then there is Penetration; or with weaker
resistance, as in Air, or with more strong, as in Water: If it be staid, it is
staid either by a resistance unequal, where there is a Pregravation; as if
wood should be put upon wax; or equal, as if water should be put upon water,
or wood upon wood of the same kind: which the Schools, in a vain apprehension
call the non-Ponderation of a body within its own Sphere. All these do vary
the Motion of Gravitie; for heavy substances are otherways moved in skales,
otherwise in falling down; nay otherwise (which may seem strange) in Balances
hanging in the Air, otherwise in Balances immersed in water; otherwise in
falling down through water, otherwise in swimming, or transportation upon water.

6 Let it be inquired, what the Figure of a body descending may, or does work,
to the moderating of the Motion of Gravitie, as a broad Figure with tenuity; a
cubique Figure; long; round; Pyramidale; when they turn; when they remain in
the same Posture, wherein they were delivered.

7 Let inquiry be made, of that which the Continuance and Progression of a Fall
or Descent, may, and does work to this effect, that it may be carried with a
greater incitation and force; and with what proportion, and how far that
Incitation will carry? For the Ancients, upon a slight contemplation, V. DIGRES.
were of opinion, that because that was a natural Motion, it would continually
be augmented, and improved.

8 Let Inquiry be made of that which Distance and Proximitie of a Body
descending from the earth, may, and does work to this end, that it may fall
more speedily, more slowly, or else not at all, (if so be that it be without
the Orb of Activity of the terrene Globe, De Magn.
which was Gilberts opinion): as likewise what the immersion of a Body
descending more in the deep of the earth; or the placing thereof nearer to the
superficies of the earth, may produce? For these kinds of Positures vary the
motion, as they experience that work in Mines.

9 Let there be Enquiry made of that which the difference of Bodies, by which
Motion of Gravitie is diffused, and communicated, can do and does: And whether
it may equally be communicated by Bodies soft, and Porose; as by hard and
solid: As if the Beam of the Balance be on one side of the tongue wood, on
the other side silver, (though they be reduced to the same weight) whether does
it not beget a variation in the Skales? In like manner, whether Metal put upon
Wool, or upon a blown bladder weigh the same, it would do, if laid in the
bottom of the Skale?

10 Let there be Enquiry made what the distance of a Body from the
levell-Poise; that is the quick, or late perception of the incumbent, or of
depression, can do or does: As in a Balance where one part of the beam is
longer (though of the same weight) whether this does sway the Balance? Or in
crooked Pipes, where certainly the longer part will draw the water, although
the shorter part, made more capacious, may contain a greater weight of water.

11 Let there be Enquiry made of that which the intermixtion or Copulation of a
light body with a weighty, may do to the raising of the weight of a Body, as
in the poise of Living Creatures, and Dead?

12 Let Enquiry be made of the secret ascensions, and descensions of the parts
more light and more weighty in one, and the same entire Body. Whereby there may
be made oftentimes exact separations; as in the separation of wine and water;
in the Ascension of the flower of milk, and the like.

13 Let it be Enquired what is the line and direction of the Motion of
Gravitie; and how far it may follow either the center of the earth, that is
the mass of the earth; or the center of the Body it self; that is, the
contention and driving on of the parts thereof; for those Centres are
profitable in demonstration, but of no use in Nature.

14 Let it be inquired touching the Comparison of the Motion of Gravitie, with
other Motions; what Motions it masters; to what it yields? As in the Motion,
which they call, violent, which is represt and bridled for a time; as when a
far greater weight of Iron is drawn up by a small Lodestone, the Motion of
Gravitie gives place to the Motion of Sympathy.

15 Let Enquiry be made of the Motion of Air, whether it be carried upwards, or
be collateral and indifferent? Which is a hard thing to find out, but by some
exquisite Experiments: for the glittering apparition of Air in the bottom of
water, is rather by the percussion of water, than by the Motion of Air; being
the same emication may be made in wood. But Air mingled with Air discovers no
Experiment; because Air in Air exhibites Levity no less, than water in water
does Gravity: But in a bubble drawn over with the enclosure of a thin skin, it
stays for a time.

16 Let it be Jnquired what is the Term of Levitie, for sure their meaning
(who made the Center of the earth, the Center of Gravitie) is not, that the
ultimate convexity of heaven should be the stint and limits of Levitie: Or
rather, that as ponderous Bodies seem to be so far carried, that there they
may cast Anchor as at a fixed Pillar; so light Bodies are so far carried, that
they may begin to wheel about, and come to a motion without termination?

17 Let Enquiry be made, why vapors and exhalations should be carried as high
as the middle Region of the Air (as they call it); seeing they are somewhat a
gross substance; and the beams of the Sun by turns (as in the night) cease
their Operation.

18 Let Enquiry be made of the Conduct of the Motion of Flame upwards; which is
the more abstruse, because Flame expires every moment; save perchance in the
imbracement of greater Flames: For Flames separated and broken off from their
continuation, last not long.

19 Let Enquiry be made of the ascendent Motion of the Activity of Heat, as
when the Heat of red-hot Iron affects rather to mount upwards, than to move
downwards? The example therefore of Particular Topique may be made in this
manner; in the mean, what we have begun to advise, we do again admonish, which
is, that men vary their Particular Topiques so, as after further Progression
made by Jnquiry, they do substitute one, and after that another Topique, if
ever they desire to reach the top of Sciences. As for us, we attribute so much
to Particular Topiques, as we do design to make a Particular Work of them
upon some Subjects in Nature, which are more observeable, and more obscure; For
we are Commanders of Questions, not so of things. And thus much of Invention.

CAP. IV. I The Partition of the Art of Judging, into Judgment by Induction..
And by Syllogism. Of the first a Collection is made in the New Organ.. The
first Partition of Judgment by Syllogism into Reduction, Direct, and Inverst..
The second Partition thereof, into Analytique Art: and the Knowledge of
Elenches. II. The Division of the Knowledge of Elenchs, into Elenchs of
Sophismes.. Into Elenchs of Interpretation of Terms.. And into Elenchs of
Images, or Idolaes. III. The Division of Idolaes.. Into Impressions from the
General Nature of Man, or Idola Tribus.. Into Impressions from the Individual
temper of Particulars, or Idola Specus.. into Impressions by Words, and
Communicative Nature, or Idola Fori. IV. An Appendix of the Art of Judging,
namely of the Analogy of Demonstration according to the Nature of the Subject.
I LET us now pass to Judgment, or the Art of Judging, which handles the
Nature of Proofs, or Demonstrations. And in this Art of Judging (as also
generally it is accepted) a Conclusion is inferred, either by Induction; or
else by Syllogism: For Enthymemes, and Examples are only the abridgements of
these two. As for Judgment that it is by Induction we need nothing doubt. For
by one and the same Operation of the Mind, that which is sought, is both found
and Judged. Neither is the thing perfected by any mean, but immediately after
the same manner, for most part, as it is in Sense: For Sense, in her Primarie
objects, does at once seize upon the species of an object, and consent to the
truth thereof. But it is otherwise in Syllogism, the Proof whereof is not
Jmmediate, but perfected by a Mean; and therefore the Jnvention of the Medium
is one thing; and the Judgment of the consequence of Argument, is another. For
the mind first discourses, afterward rests satisfied. But a vicious form of
Induction we utterly disclaim; a Legitimate Form we refer over to the New
Organ. Therefore enough in this place, of Judgment by Induction.

For that other Judgment by Syllogism, to what purpose is it to speak, seeing
this is by the subtle files off men's wits almost worn away, and reduced into
many minute pieces? And no marvel being it is a thing has such Sympathy with
man's understanding. For the mind of man does wonderfully endeavor, and
extremely covet this, that it may not be pensile; but that it may light upon
something fixed, and immovable, on which as on a firmament it may support it
self, in its swift motions and disquisitions. De Animal. Motione.
Surely, as Aristotle endeavors to prove, That in all motion of Bodies there
is some point quiescent; and very elegantly expounds the Ancient Fable of
Atlas, that stood fixed, and bare up the heavens from falling; to be meant of
the Poles of the World, whereupon the Conversion is accomplished. In like manner
men do earnestly seek to have some Atlas, or Axeltree of their Cogitations
within themselves, which may in some measure moderate the fluctuations, and
wheelings of the understanding, fearing it may be, the falling of their heaven.
Therefore men have hastened too fast to set down Principles of Sciences, about
which all the variety of Disputations might turn without peril of ruin or
Subversion. Jn truth not knowing that he who too early lays hold on
certainties, will conclude in ambiguities; and he that seasonably suspends his
Judgment, shall attain to Certainties.

So then it is manifest, that this Art of Judging by Syllogism is nothing
else, but the reduction of Propositions to Principles, by middle terms; and
Principles are understood to be agreed of by all, and are exempt from Argument.
But the invention of middle terms is permitted to the free sagacity, and
pursuit of men's wits. This Reduction is of two kinds, Direct, and Jnverted.
Direct is, when the Proposition is reduced to the Principle, which is called
Probation Ostensive. Inversed is, when the Contradictorie of the Proposition is
reduced to the Contradictorie of the Principle; which they term a Probation
from incongruitie, or an absurdity. The number also of middle terms, or their
scale is diminished or increased, as they are removed from the Principle of the
Proposition.

These grounds laid, we will divide the Art of Judgment (as for most part
generally it is) into Analytique Art; and the Doctrine of Elenchs; the one
gives Direction; the other Caution. For Analytique sets down the true
forms of Consequences of Arguments; by a variation, and deflection, from
which, the Conclusion is deprehended to be erroneous; and this part contains
in it a kind of Elench, V. Euclid. and Comment.
or Redargution. For, as it is said, Rectum and sui index est, and obliqui.
Notwithstanding it is the safest way to set down Elenchs as Monitors, whereby
Fallacies, which otherwise might ensnare the Judgment, may be more easily
detected. In the Analytique Part we find nothing DEFICIENT, which rather is
loaden'd with superfluities, than any way is wanting in accessions.

II The Knowledge of Elenchs we divide into three Parts: Elenchs of Sophismes;
Elenchs of Jnterpretation; and Elenchs of Jmages or Idolaes. The Doctrine of
Elenchs of Sophismes is very useful; for although the more gross sort of
Fallacies is (as Seneca makes the comparison very well; Epist. 45.
) But as the feats of Iuglers which though we know not how they are done; yet
we know well it is not as it seems to be. Yet the more subtle sort of
Sophismes does not only put a man besides his answer, but does in good earnest
abuse his Judgment.

This Part concerning the Elenchs of Sophismes is excellently handled by
Aristotle in Precept; but more excellently by Plato in example, In Dial. ita
inscript.
not only in the Person of the Ancient Sophists; Gorgias; Hippias; Protagoras,
and Euthidemus, and the rest; but even in the Person of Socrates himself, who
professing to affirm nothing, but to infirm whatsoever others avouch, has
exactly expressed all the forms of Objections, Fallacies, and Redargutions.
Wherefore in this part we have nothing DEFICIENT. But this, in the mean time,
is to be noted, that though we make the ingenuous and principal use of this
Knowledge to consist in this, That Sophismes may be redargued; yet it is
manifest, that the degenerate and corrupt use thereof, is employed to contrive,
and impose, captions and Contradictions, by these Sophismes; which passes for
a great Faculty, and no doubt is of great advantage. Though the difference was
elegantly made by one betwixt an Orator, and a Sophist, That the one is as the
Greyhound, which has his advantage in the race; the other as the Hare which
has her advantage in the turn.

Now follow Elenchi Hermeniae, for so we will call them, borrowing the Word,
rather than the Sense, from Aristotle. And here let us call to men's memory
what we have said before; (when we handled Primitive Philosophy) of
transcendent, and adventitious Conditions, or Adjuncts of Entitie, they be
Majoritie, Minority; Much, Little; Prioritie, Posterioritie; Identitie,
Diversity; Power, Act; Habit, Privation; Totality, Partiality; Activitie,
Passivitie; Motion, Quietude; Entity, Nonentity, and the like. But specially
let men remember, and observe the different Contemplations of these Properties,
which is, that they may be inquired, either Physically, or Logically. The
Physical handling of these adherent Qualities we have assigned to Primitive
Philosophy. The Logical remains, and that is the very thing which we here
style Doctrinam de Elenchis Hermeniae, the Knowledge of the Elenches of
Interpretation. This indeed is a sound and material Portion of Knowledge: For
these Common and general Notions have this Nature, that in all disputations
they every where intervene, so as if they be not by a careful Judgment
accurately distinguished at first; they may wonderfully overcloud the whole
light of Disputations; and even bring the case to that pass, that the
Disputations shall be resolved into a skirmish of words. For Aequivocations,
and erroneous acception of words (specially of this Nature) are the Sophismes
of Sophismes. Wherefore it seems better to constitute a Treatise of them
apart, than to receive them into Prime Philosophy, I mean Metaphysique; or to
annexe them as a part of Analytiques, Arist. Analyt.
which Aristotle very confusedly has done. And we have given it a name from
the nature and Use; for the right use is plainly Redargution, and Caution about
the acception of words. Nay that Part of Predicaments touching Cautions, of not
confounding, and transposing the terms of Definitions and Divisions, if it
were rightly instituted, would be of singular use, in our judgment, and might
fitly be referred hither. And thus much of the Elenchs of Interpretation.

III As for the Elenchs of Jmages or Idolaes; ELENCHI IDOLORVM.
certainly Jdolaes are the profoundest Fallacies of the mind of man. Nor do
they deceive in Particulars, as the rest do; casting a Cloud, and spreading
snares over the Judgment; but apertly from a corrupt, and crookedly-set
predisposition of the mind; which does, as it were, wrest and infect all the
anticipations of the understanding. For the mind of man (drawn over, and
clouded with the sable Pavillion of the Body) is so far from being like a
smooth, equal, and clear Glass, which might sincerely take and reflect the
beams of things, according to their true incidence; that it is rather like an
enchanted Glass, full of Superstitions; Apparitions, and Impostures.

Idolaes are imposed upon the understanding, either by the universal Nature of
man in general. Or from the individual Nature of Particulars; or by words, or
nature Communicative. The first sort of Images we wont to call, Idola Tribus;
the second, Jdola Specus; the third, Idola Fori. NOV. OR. LIB. 1. APH. LXI. ad
LXIX.
There is also a fourth kind, which we call, Jdola Theatri; and is introduced
by depraved Theories or Philosophies, and perverse Laws of Demonstrations; but
this kind may be denied and put off, wherefore we pass it over for the
present. But the other do plainly besiege the mind, nor can they ever be quite
removed, or extirpated. Therefore let none expect any Analytique Art in these;
but the knowledge of Elenchs concerning these Idolaes is a Primarie Knowledge.
Nor (to speak truth) can this Knowledge of Idolaes be reduced into Art; but
only by a contemplative wisdom, we may be instructed to beware of them. As for
a just and more subtle Treatise thereof, we refer that to the Novum Organum,
touching upon them in a generality in this place.

Idola Tribus is thus exemplified, NOV. OR. LIB. 1. Aph. XLV. ad LIII.
exclusive.
The Nature of the mind of man is more affected with Affirmatives and Actives,
than with Negatives and Privatives; whereas in a just and regular course it
should present it self equal to both. But the mind of man, if a thing have
once bin existent, and held good, receives a deeper Impression thereof, than if
the same thing, far more often faild and fell out otherwise; which is the
root, as it were, of all superstition and vain Credulity. So that he answered
well to him that showed him the great number of Pictures of such as had escaped
Shipwreck, and had paid their vows; Cic. de N. D. lib. V.
and being pressed with this Interrogative, Whether he did not now confess the
Divinity of Neptune? returned this counter-question by way of answer; yea, but
where are they painted, that are drowned? And there is the same reason of all
such like Superstitions, as in Astrology; Dreams; Divinations, and the rest.
An other Instance is this; The Spirit of man being it self of an equal and
uniforme Substance, does presuppose, and feign a greater equality, and
uniformitie in Nature, than in truth there is. V. DIGRES.
Hence that fiction of the Mathematicians, that in the heavenly Bodies all is
moved by perfect Circles; rejecting spirall Lines: so it comes to pass that
whereas there are many things in Nature, as it were Monodica, and full of
imparity; yet the conceits of men still feign and frame unto themselves,
Relatives; Parallels, and Conjugates. For upon this ground, Elem. Ignis vide
Digress.
the Element of Fire and its Orb is brought in to keep square with the other
three, Earth; Water; Air. The Chymiques have set out a fanaticall Squadron of
the word, faining by a most vain conceit, in those their four Elements (
Heaven; Air; Water, and Earth) there are found to every one parallel and
conform species. Paracel. Fludde passim.
The third Example has some affinity with the former, That man is, as it
were, the common measure and mirror, or glass of Nature; for it is not
credible (if all Particulars were scanned and noted) what a troop of Fictions
and Idolaes the reduction of the operations of Nature, to the similitude of
humane Actions, has brought into Philosophy; I say this very fancy, that it
should be thought that Nature does the same things that man does. Epiphan. lib.
3. Niceph. Hist. Eccl. lib 11
Neither are these much better than the Heresy of the Anthropomorphites, bred
in the Cells and solitude of gross and ignorant Monks, or the Opinion of
Epicurus answerable to the same in Heathenisme, who supposed God to be of
Humane shape. But Velleius the Epicurean needed not to have asked, why God
should have adorned the heavens with stars and lights, as if he had bin an
Aedilis; one that should have set forth some magnificent shows or plays: for
if that great Workman had conformed himself to the imitation of an Aedilis, he
would have cast the stars into some pleasant and beautiful works, and
orders, like the curious roofs of Palaces, whereas one can scarce find in such
an infinite number of stars a Posture in square, or Triangle, or right-Line.
So different a harmony there is between the Spirit of man, and the Spirit of
the world.

Jdola Specus are derived from the Jndividuall Complexion of every Particular
in respect of Mind, and of Body; as also, NOV. OR. LIB. 1. Aph. LIII ad LIX.
from Education; Custom; and Fortuitous Events, which befall every man. For it
is an excellent emblem that of Plato's Cave; Plat. de Rep. VII.
for certainly (to let go the exquisite subtlety of that Parable) if a man
were continued from his Childhood unto mature Age in a Grot, or a dark and
subterraneous Cave, and then should come suddenly abroad, and should behold
this stately Canopie of heaven, and the Furniture of the World; without doubt
he would have many strange and absurd imaginations come into his mind, and
people his brain. So in like manner we live in the view of heaven; yet our
Spirits are enclosed in the Caves of our Bodies; Complexions, and Customs,
which must needs minister unto us infinite images of errors, and vain Opinions,
if they do so seldom, and for so short a space appear above ground, out of
their holes; and do not continually live under the Contemplation of Nature, as
in the open Air. N. L.
That Parable of Heraclitus does well suite with this emblem of Plato's Cave,
that men seek Sciences in their own proper World, and not in the greater World.

But Idola Fori are most troublesome, NOV. OR. LIB. 1. Aph. LIX. ad LXI.
which out of a tacit stipulation amongst men, touching the imposition of
words, and names, have insinuated themselves into the understanding. Words
commonly are imposed according to the capacity of the People; and distinguish
things by such differences, as the Vulgar are capeable off; and when a more
prescisive conception, and a more diligent observation would discern, and
separate things better; the noise of popular words confounds and interrupts
them. And that which is the remedy to this inconvenience (namely Definitions)
in many points is not a remedy sufficient for the disease; because the
Definitions themselves consist of words, and words beget words. For although we
presume that we are masters of our words, Agell. N. A. alicubi.
and expressions; and it is soon said, loquendum ut vulgus, sentiendum ut
sapientes, and that words of Art, which are of authority only with the Learned,
may seem to give some satisfaction to this defect; and that the Definitions
whereof we have spoken, premised, and presupposed in Arts according to the
wisdom of the Mathematicians, may be of force to correct the depraved
acceptations of words; yet all this secures us not from the cheating slights
and charms of words, which many ways abuse us, and offer violence to the
understanding; and after the manner of the Tartars Bow, do shoot back upon the
judgment from whence they came. Wherefore this disease must have a new kind of
remedy, and of more efficacy. But we do now touch these in passage briefly, in
the mean time reporting this Knowledge which we will call, the Great Elenchs,
or the Doctrine of Jdolaes, Native and adventuall of the mind of man, to be
DEFICIENT. But we refer a just Treatise thereof to the Novum Organum.

DE ANALOGIA DEMONSTRATIONVM.
IV There remains one part of Judgment of great excellency, which likewise we
set down as DEFICIENT. For indeed Aristotle notes the thing, but no where
pursues the manner of acquiring it. The Subject of this Canon is this, The
different kind of Demonstrations, and Proofs, to different kind of Matter and
Subjects; so that this Doctrine contains the Indications of Indications. Eth.
Lib. 1.
For Aristotle advises well, That we may not require Demonstrations from
Orators, or Persuasions from Mathematicians; so that if you mistake in the kind
of Proof, the judicature cannot be upright and perfect. And seeing there are
four kinds of Demonstrations either by immediate Consent, and commune Notions;
or by Induction; or by Syllogism; or by that which Aristotle calls
Demonstration in or be, or in Circle; (that is not from the more known notions,
but down right); every of these Demonstrations has certain Subjects, and
matter of Sciences, wherein respectively they have chiefest use; other Subjects
from which respectively they ought to be excluded. For a rigor and curiosity in
requiring too severe proofs in some things; much more a facility and
remission in resting satisfied in slighter Proofs, are to be numbered amongst
those prejudices, which have bin the greatest Causes of detriment, and
impediment to Sciences. Thus much concerning the Art of Judging.

CAP. V. I The Partition of Art Retentive, or of Memory, into the Knowledge of
the Helps of Memory. and the Knowledge of the Memory it self. II. The
Division of the Doctrine of Memory into Prenotion. and Emblem.
I WE will divide the Art of Retaining, or of Custody, into two Knowledges;
that is, into the Knowledge of the Helps of Memory, and the Knowledge of the
Memory it self. Assistant to Memory is writing; and it must by all means be
noted, that Memory of it self, without this support, would be too weak for
prolixe and acurate matters; wherein it could no way recover, or recall it
self, but by Scripture. And this subsidiary second, is also of most special
use in Inductive Philosophy, and the Interpretation of Nature. For a man may as
well perfect, and sum up the Computations of an Ephemerides by mere Memory;
as comprehend the Interpretation of Nature by meditations, and the nude, and
native strength of Memory; unless the same Memory be assisted by Tables, and
Indices provided for that Purpose. But to let go the Interpretation of Nature,
which is a new Knowledge; there scarcely can be a thing more useful even to
ancient, and popular Sciences, than a solid, and good Aid to Memory; that is,
a substantial and Learned Digest of Common places. Neither am I ignorant, that
the referring of those things we read, or learn, into Common-Places, is
imputed by some as a Prejudice to Learning; as causing a retardation of
Reading, and a slothful relaxation to Memory. But because it is a Counterfeit
thing in Knowledge, to be forward and pregnant, unless you be withal deep
and full; I hold that the diligence, and pains in collecting Common-Places, is
of great use and certainty in studying; as that which Subministers Copy to
Invention; and contracteth the sight of Judgment to a strength. But this is
true, that of the Methods and Syntagmes of Common-Places, which we have seen,
there is none that is of any worth; for that in their Titles, they merely
represent the face, rather of a School, than of the world; exhibiting Vulgar
and Pedanticall Divisions, and not such as any way penetrate the Marrow and
Pith of things.

As for Memory it self; that in my Judgment hitherto has bin loosely, and
weakly inquired into. There is indeed an Art extant of it; but we are certain
that there may be had both better Precepts for the confirming and increasing
Memory, than that Art comprehends; and a better Practice of that Art may be
set down, than that which is received. Neither do we doubt (if any man have a
mind to abuse this Art to ostentation) but that many wonderful and prodigious
matters may be performed by it. But for use (as it is now managed) it is a
barren thing. Yet this in the mean time we do not tax it withal, that it
does supplant, or surcharge Natural Memory (as commonly is objected) but that
it is not dexterously applied to lend assistance to Memory in business, and
serious occasions. And we have learned this (it may be from our practiced
Course in a civil calling) that whatsoever makes ostentation of Art, and gives
no assurance of use, we estime as nothing worth. For to repeat on the sudden
a great number of names or words, upon once hearing, in the same order they
were delivered; or to power forth a number of a verses upon any argument ex
tempore; or to tax every thing that falls out in some satyricall simile; or
the turning of every thing to a jest; or the eluding of every thing by a
contradiction or cavil; and the like; whereof in the faculties of the mind
there is a great store; and such as by wit and practice may be exalted to a
great degree of wonder. All these and the like, we make no more estimation of,
than we do of the agilities, and tricks of Tumblers; Buffones, and Iuglers.
For they are almost all one thing, seeing these abuse the Powers of the Body,
these the Powers of the mind; and perchance they may have some strangeness in
them; but little or no worthiness.

II This Art of Memory is built upon two Intentions, Prenotion and Emblem. we
call Prenotion a Precision of endless investigation; for when a man would
recall any thing to Memory, if he have no Prenotion or Preception of that he
seeks, he searches indeed, and takes pains, rounding this way and that
way, as in a maze of infinity. But if he have any certain Prenotion,
presently that which is infinite is discharged and cut off; and the questing of
the Memory is brought within a more narrow compass; as in the hunting of a
Fallow Dear within the Park. Therefore it is evident, that Method helps the
Memory; for Prenotion suggesteth that it must agree with order. So verses are
sooner gotten by heart than Prose; for if a man make a doubtful stand at a
word, Prenotion prompts him that the word which agrees with the verse, must be
of such a Nature. And this Prenotion is the first part of Artificial Memory.
For in Memory Artificial we have places digested and provided before hand: But
we make Jmages extempore, according as the present shall require. But Prenotion
does admonish that the Image must be such as has some resemblance with the
Place; this is that which awaketh, and in some sort muniteth the Memory in the
chase of what we seek.

Emblem deduceth Conceptions Jntellectuall to Images sensible, and that which
is sensible, more forcibly strikes the Memory, and is more easily imprinted,
than that which is Jntellectuall. So we see that even the Memory of Beasts is
stirred up by a sensible object, not by an Jntellectuall. So you will more
easily remember the Image of a Hunts-man pursuing the Hare, or of an Apothecary
setting in order his Boxes, or of a Pedant making a speech, or of a boy
reciting verses by heart, or of a Iester acting upon a stage, than the Notions
of Invention; Disposition; Elocution; Memory; Action. There are other things
that pertain to the help of Memory (as we said even now) but the Art which
now is in use consists of these two Intentions now set down. To pursue the
Particular Defects of Arts, would be to depart from our intended Purpose.
Wherefore let thus much suffice for the Art of Retaining, or of Custody. Now
we descend in order to the fourth member of Logique, which handles Tradition
and Elocution.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF FRANCIS LO. VERVLAM VICOUNT St ALBAN. OF THE DIGNITY AND
ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING. To the KING.
CAP. I. I The Partition of the Art of Tradition into the Doctrine of the Organ
of Speech. The Doctrine of the Method of Speech; And the Doctrine of the
Illustration of Speech. The Partition of the Doctrine of the Organ of Speech;
into the Knowledge of the Notes of things; of Speaking; and of Writing; of
which the two last constitute Grammar, and the Partitions thereof.. The
Partition of the Knowledge of the Notes of things; into Hieroglyphiques; And
into Characters Real. II. A second Partition of Grammar, into Literarie; and
Philosophical. III. An Aggregation of Poesy, referring to Measure, unto the
Knowledge of Speech. An Aggregation of the Knowledge of Ciphers to the
Knowledge of Writing.
CERTAINLY any man may assume the liberty (Excellent King) if he be so humored,
to jest and laugh at himself, or his own Projects. Who then knows whether
this work of ours be not perchance a Transcript out of an Ancient Book found
amongst the Books of that famous Library of S. Victor, Live. 2. c. 7. des faicts
and dicts du bon Pantag^
a Catalogue whereof M. Fra. Rabelais has collected? For there a Book is found
entitled FORMICARIUM ARTIUM; we have indeed accumulated a little heap of small
Dust; and laid up many Grains of Arts and Sciences therein, whereto Ants may
creep, and there repose a while, and so betake themselves to new labors. Nay
the wisest of Kings sends the slothful, Prove. 6.
of what rank or quality soever, unto the Ants; and those we define to be
slothful, whose only care is to live upon the maine stock, but not to improve
it by sowing the Ground of Sciences over again, and reaping a new Harvest.

I Now let us come unto the Art of Delivery, or of Expressing, and Transferring
those things which are Invented; Judged; and laid up in the Memory; which, by a
general name, we will term Tradition. This comprehends in it all Arts
touching Words, and Speeches; for though Reason be, as it were, the Soul of
Speech, yet in the manner of handling, Reason and Speech should be separate,
even as the Soul and the Body are. We will divide these Traditive Sciences
into three Parts; into the Knowledge concerning the Organ of Speech; into the
Knowledge concerning the Method of Speech; and into the Knowledge concerning
the Illustration or Ornament of Speech.

The Knowledge concerning the Organ of Speech generally received, which is also
called Grammar, has two Parts; De Interpret.
the one of Speech; the other of Writing. For Aristotle says well, Words are
the Images of Cogitations; letters are the Images of words; we will assign
both to Grammar. But to derive the matter somewhat higher before we come to
Grammar, and the parts thereof now set down; we must speak of the Organ of
Tradition in general. For there seems to be other Traditive Emanations
besides Words and Letters. For this is certain whatsoever may be distinguished
into differences, sufficient for number, to express the variety of Notions (so
those differences be perceptible to sense) may be the Convoy of the Cogitations
from man to man. For we see Nations of different Language to trade with one the
other, well enough to serve their turn, by Gestures. Nay in the Practice of
many, that have bin dumb and deaf from their birth, and otherwise were
ingenious, we have seen strange Dialogues held between them, and their friends,
who have learned their Gestures. Moreover it is now generally known that in in
China, and the Provinces of the high Levant, there are at this day in use,
certain Real, and not Nominall Characters; that is, such as express neither
Letters, nor Words; but Things, and Notions: in so much that many Countries
that understand not one an others Language, but consenting in such kind of
Characters (which are more generally received amongst them) can communicate one
with another by such Figures written; so as every Country can read and deliver
in his own native tongue, the meaning of any Book written with these
Characters.

Notes therefore of things, DE NOTIS RERVM.
which without the help and mediation of Words signify Things, are of two
sorts; whereof the first sort is significant of Congruitie; the other ad
placitum. Of the former sort are Hieroglyphiques and Gestures; of the later are
those which we call Characters Real. The use of Hieroglyphiques is very
ancient, and had in a kind of Veneration; especially amongst the Egyptians,
one of the most Ancient Nations: So that Hieroglyphiques seem to have bin a
firstborn writing, and elder than the Elements of Letters; unless, it may
be, the Letters of the Ebrews. As for Gestures they are, as it were, Transitory
Hieroglyphiques. For as words pronounced vanish, writings remain; so
Hieroglyphiques expressed by Gestures, are transient, but Painted, permanent.
As when Periander being consulted with, Herodot. Laert.
how to preserve a Tyranny, bid the Messenger stand still, and he walking in a
Garden, topt all the highest Flowers; signifying the cutting of, and the
keeping low of the Nobility; did as well make use of a Hieroglyphique, as if he
had drawn the same upon Paper. This in the mean is plain, that
Hieroglyphiques and Gestures ever have some similitude with the thing
signified, and are kind of Emblemes; wherefore we have named them the Notes of
things from Congruitie. But Characters Real have nothing of Emblem in them;
but are plainly dumb and dead Figures, as the Elements of Letters are; and
only devised ad Placitum, and confirmed by Custom, as by a tacit agreement.
And it is manifest also that there must needs be a vast number of them for
writing; at lest so many as there are Radical words. Wherefore this portion of
Knowledge concerning the Organ of Speech, which is of the Notes of Things, we
report as DEFICIENT. And though it may seem of no great use, considering that
Words and writings by Letters are the most apt Organs of Tradition; yet we
thought good to make mention of it here, as of a knowledge not to be despised.
For we here handle, as it were, the Coins of things Intellectual; and it will
not be amiss to know, that as Money may be made of other matter besides Gold
and Silver; so there may be stamped other Notes of things besides Words and
Letters.

II Let us proceed to Grammar; this does bear the office as it were, of an
Usher to other Sciences; a place not very honorable, yet very necessary,
especially seeing that in our age Sciences are chiefly drawn from Learned
Languages, and not from Mother-tongues. Nor is the dignity thereof to be
estimed mean, seeing it supplies the place of an Antidote, against that
Malediction of the Confusion of Tongues. Surely the Industry of man striveth to
restore, and redintegrate himself in those Benedictions, which by his guilt he
forfeited; and by all other Arts, arms and strengthens himself against that
first general Curse of the sterility of the earth, Genesis 3.
and the eating of his bread in the sweat of his brows. But against that
second Curse, which was the Confusion of Tongues, he calls in the assistance of
Grammar. The use hereof in some Mother-tongues is indeed very small; in
foreign tongues more large; but most ample in such tongues, as have ceased to
be vulgar, and are perpetuated only in Books.

We will divide Grammar into two sorts, whereof the one is Literary; the other
Philosophical. The one is merely applied to Languages, that they may be more
speedily learned; or more correctedly and purely spoken. The other in a sort
does minister, Suet. in Iul.
and is subservient to Philosophy. In this later part which is Philosophical,
GRAMMATICA PHILOSOPHANS.
we find that Caesar writ Books DE ANALOGIA; and it is a question whether those
Books handled this Philosophical Grammar whereof we speak? Our opinion is
that there was not any high and subtle matter in them, but only that they
delivered Precepts of a pure and perfect speech, not depraved by popular
Custom; nor corrupted and polluted by overcurious affectation; in which kind
Caesar excelled. Notwithstanding, admonish't by such a work, we have conceived
and comprehended in our mind, a kind of Grammar, that may diligently enquire,
not the Analogy of words one with another, but the Analogy between Words and
Things, or Reason; besides that Jnterpretation of Nature, which is subordinate
to Logique. Surely Words are the footsteps of Reason; and footsteps do give
some indications of the Body; wherefore we will give some general description
of this. In Cratyl.
And first we do not allow that curious inquiry which Plato an excellent man
pursued, touching the imposition and original Etymology of names. conceiving
it, as if words had not bin imposed at first, ad Placitum; but were
significantly derived and deduced from a certain reason and intendment.
Certainly an elegant and pliant speculation, which might be aptly feigned and
made square to the purpose; and by reason it seems to search the secrets of
Antiquity, in some kind reverend. But yet sparingly mixed with truth, and
without fruit. But without question that would be a most excellent kind of
Grammar (as we suppose) if some man thoroughly instructed in many Languages, as
well Learned, as Mother-tongues, should write a Treatise of the diverse
Proprieties of Languages; showing in what points every particular Language did
excel; and in what points it was DEFICIENT. For so Tongues might be enricht
and perfected by mutual intertrafique one with another; and a most fair Image
of speech (like the Venus of Apelles); and a goodly pattern for the true
expression of the inward sense of the mind, might be drawn from every part
which is excellent in every Language. And withal no slight Conjectures, but
such as were well worth the observation, might be taken (which a man perchance
would little think) touching the natural dispositions and customs of People,
and Nations, even from their Languages. For I willingly give ear to Cicero
noting that the Grecians have not a word which may express this Latin word,
De Orat. l. 2.
Jneptum; because (says he) this vice was so familiar to the Grecians, that
they did not so much as acknowledge themselves guilty thereof. Certainly a
Censure worthy a Roman gravity. And what may that infer, that the Grecians
used such a Liberty in composition of words, contrariwise the Romans were in
this point severe? Surely a man may plainly collect that the Grecians were more
fit to study Arts; the Romans to manage affairs of state. For distinctions of
Arts, for most part, require composition of words; but matters and business,
simple words. But the Ebrewes so shun Composition, that they make choice
rather to strain a Metaphor too far, than to bring in a Composition. Nay
they use so few words, and so unmingled, that a man may plainly perceive by
their Tongue, that they were a Nazarite People, and separate from other
Nations. And is not that worthy observation (though it may serve to abate our
high conceit of our own times) that Ancient Languages were more full of
Declensions; Cases; Conjugations; Tenses, and the like; the modern commonly
destitute of these, do loosely deliver themselves in many expressions by
Prepositions, and auxiliary verbes. Certainly a man may easily conjecture
(however we may please our selves) that the wits of former times were far
more acute and subtle than ours are. There are an infinite number of
observations of this kind which might make up a just Volume. Wherefore it will
not be amiss to distinguish Grammar Philosophical, from mere and literary
Grammar, and to set it down as DEFICIENT. Unto Grammar also belongs the
consideration of all Accidents of words; such as are Measure; Sound; Accent;
but those first infancies of simple Letters (as, with what Percussion of the
Tongue, with what opening of the mouth; with what drawing of the lips, with
what straining of the throat; the sound of every Particular Letter is to be
made) belongs not unto Grammar; but is a Portion of the knowledge of sounds, to
be handled under sense and sensibility. Grammatical sound, whereof we speak,
belongs only to sweetness and harshnesse of sounds; of which some are common;
for there is no Tongue but in some sort shunnes the too much overture of
concurrent Vowels, and the asperities of concurrent Consonants. There are other
respective sounds which are pleasing, or unpleasing to the ear, according to
the temper of diverse Nations. The Greek Tongue is full of Diphthonges; the
Latin is far more sparing; the Spanish Tongue hates small-sounding Letters,
and presently changes them into Letters of a middle tone; the Tongues derived
from the Goths delight in Aspirates; there are innumerable of this nature, but
perchance these are more than enough.

III But the measure of words has brought us forth an immense body of Art,
namely Poesy; not in respect of the matter (of which we have spoken before)
but in respect of style and the form of words, as Meter or Verse; touching
which the Art is very small and brief, but the access of examples large and
infinite. Neither ought that Art (which the Grammarians call Prosodia) to be
only restrained to the kinds and measures of Verse; for there are Precepts to
be annexed, what kind of Verse best fitteth every matter or subject. The
Ancients applied Heroical Verse to Histories and Laudatories; Elegies to
Lamentations; Jambiques to Invectives; Lyriques to Songs and Hymns. And this
wisdom of the Ancients is not wanting in the Poets of later Ages in
Mother-tongues; only this is to be reprehended, that some of them too studious
of Antiquity have endeavored to draw modern Languages to Ancient Measures (as
Heroique; Elegiaque; Saphique, and the rest) which the fabrique and composition
of those Languages, will not bear; and withal is no less harsh unto the
ear. In matters of this Nature the judgment of sense is to be preferred before
precepts of Art, as he says, -- Coenae Fercula nostrae
Mallem Convivis quam placuisse Cocis. Mart. Ep. 9.

Nor is this Art, but the abuse of Art, seeing it does not perfect, but
perverts Nature. As for Poesy (whether we speak of Fables, or Meter) it is,
as we have said before, as a Luxuriant Herb brought forth without seed, and
springs up from the strength and rankness of the soil. Wherefore it runs
along every where, and is so amply spread, as it were a superfluous labor to
be curious of any DEFICIENTS therein; the care therefore for this is taken
already.

As for Accents of Words, there is no need, that we speak of so small a
matter; unless, perchance, some may think it worth the noting, that there has
bin exact observation made of the Accents of Words, but not of the Accents of
Sentences; yet this, for most part, is the general Custom of all men, that in
the close of a Period they let fall their voice, in a demand they raise it, and
many such like usages.

As for writing, that is performed either by the vulgar Alphabet, which is
every where received; or by a secret and private Alphabet, which men agree upon
between themselves, which they call Ciphers. But the Vulgar Orthography has
brought forth unto us a Controversy, and Question, namely, Whether words
should be written as they are spoken, or rather after the usual manner. But
this kind of writing, which seems to be reformed, which is, that writing
should be consonant to speaking, is a branch of unprofitable subtelties; for
Pronunciation it self every day increases and alters the fashion; and the
derivation of words, especially from foreign Languages, are utterly defaced and
extinguished. In brief, seeing writing, according to the received Custom, does
no way prejudice the manner of speaking, to what end should this innovation be
brought in?

Wherefore let us come to CYPHARS. Their kinds are many, as Cyphars simple;
Cyphars intermixed with Nulloes, or non-significant Characters; Ciphers of
double Letters under one Character; Wheele-Cyphars; Kay-Cyphars; Cyphars of
words; Others. But the virtues of them whereby they are to be preferred are
Three; That they be ready, and not laborious to write; That they be sure, and
lie not open to Deciphering; And lastly, if it be possible, that they may be
managed without suspicion. For if Letters Missive fall into their hands, that
have some command and authority over those that write; or over those to whom
they were written; though the Cipher it self be sure and impossible to be
decypher'd, yet the matter is liable to examination and question; unless the
Cipher be such, as may be void of all suspicion, or may elude all examination.
As for the shifting off examination, there is ready prepared a new and
profitable invention to this purpose; which, seeing it is easily procured, to
what end should we report it, as Deficient. The invention is this: That you
have two sorts of Alphabets, one of true Letters, the other of
Non-significants; and that you likewise fould up two Letters; one which may
carry the secret, another such as is probable the Writer might send, yet
without peril. Now if the Messenger be strictly examined concerning the
Cipher, let him present the Alphabet of Non-significants for true Letters, but
the Alphabet of true Letters for Non-significants: by this Art the examiner
falling upon the exterior Letter, and finding it probable, shall suspect
nothing of the interior Letter. But that jealousies may be taken away, we will
annexe an other invention, which, in truth, we devised in our youth, when we
were at Paris: and is a thing that yet seems to us not worthy to be lost. It
contains the highest degree of Cipher, which is to signify omnia per omnia,
yet so as the writing enfolding, may bear a quintuple proportion to the
writing infolded; no other condition or restriction whatsoever is required. It
shall be performed thus: First let all the Letters of the Alphabet, by
transposition, be resolved into two Letters only; for the transposition of two
Letters by five placeings will be sufficient for 32. Differences, much more for
24. which is the number of the Alphabet. The example of such an Alphabet is on
this wise.

An Example of a Bi-literarie Alphabet.
A Aaaaa B aaaab C aaaba D aaabb E aabaa F aabab G aabba H aabbb I abaaa K
abaab L ababa M ababb N abbaa O abbab P abbba Q abbbb R baaaa S baaab T baaba V
baabb W babaa X babab Y babba Z babbb


Neither is it a small matter these Cypher-Characters have, and may perform:
For by this Art a way is opened, whereby a man may express and signify the
intentions of his mind, at any distance of place, by objects which may be
presented to the eye, and accommodated to the ear: provided those objects be
capable of a twofold difference only; as by Bells, by Trumpets, by Lights and
Torches, by the report of Muskets, and any instruments of like nature. But to
pursue our enterprise, when you address your self to write, resolve your
inward-infolded Letter into this Bi-literarie Alphabet. Say the interior
Letter be

Fuge.

Example of Solution.
F. Aabab V. baabb G. aabba E aabaa
Together with this, you must have ready at hand a Bi-formed Alphabet, which
may represent all the Letters of the Common Alphabet, as well Capital Letters
as the Smaller Characters in a double form, as may fit every man's occasion.

An Example of a Bi-formed Alphabet.
a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a b. a. b. a. b. a. b. AA a. a. B. B. b. b. C. C. c.
c. D. D. d. d. a b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. E. E. e. e. F. F.
f. f. G. G. g. g. H. H. h. h. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b.
J. J. i. i. K. K. k. k. L. L. l. l. M. M. m. m. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b.
a. b. a. b. a. b. a. N. N. n. n. O. O. o. o. P. P. p. p. Q. Q. q. q. R. b. a.
b. a. b. ab. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a b. R. r. r. S. S. s. s. T. T. t. t. V.
V. v. v. u. u. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. a. b. W. W. w. w. X.
X. x. x. Y. Y. y. y. Z. Z. z. z.


Now to the interior letter, which is Biliterate, you shall fit a biformed
exterior letter, which shall answer the other, letter for letter, and
afterward set it down. Let the exterior example be, Manner te volo, donec
venero.

An Example of Accommodation.

F V G E

aabab. baabb. aabba. aabaa.

Manner te volo donec venero

We have annexed likewise a more ample example of the cipher of writing omnia
per omnia: An interior letter, which to express, we have made choice of a
Spartan letter sent once in a Scytale or round cypher'd staff.

Perditae Res. Mindarus cecidit. Milites esuriunt. Neque hinc nos
extricaraeneque hic diutius manner possumus. An exterior letter, taken out of
the first Epistle of Cicero, wherein a Spartan Letter is involved.

Ego omni officio, ac potius pietate ergate. caeteris satisfacio omnibus: Mihi
ipsenunquam satisfacio. Tanta est enim magnitudo tuorum erga me meritorum, vt
quoniam tu, nisi perfectare, de me non conquiesti; ego, quia non idem in tua
causa efficio, vitam mihi esse acerbum putem. In causa haec sunt: Ammonius
Regis Legatus aperte pecunia nos oppugnat. Res agitur per eosdem creditores,
per quos, cum tu aderas, agebatur. Regis causa, si qui sunt, qui velint, qui
pauci sunt, omnes ad Pompeium rem deferri volunt. Senatus Religionis calumniam,
non religione, sed maleuolentia, et illius Regiae Largitionis inuidia
comprobat. etc. The knowledge of Cyphering, has drawn on with it a knowledge
relative unto it, which is the knowledge of Discyphering, or of Discreting
Ciphers, though a man were utterly ignorant of the Alphabet of the Cipher, and
the Capitulations of secrecy past between the Parties. Certainly it is an Art
which requires great pains and a good wit and is (as the other was)
consecrate to the Counsels of Princes: yet notwithstanding by diligent
prevision it may be made unprofitable, though, as things are, it be of great
use. For if good and faithful Ciphers were invented and practiced, many of
them would delude and forestall all the Cunning of the Decypherer, which yet
are very apt and easy to be read or written: but the rawnesse and
unskitfulnesse of Secretaries, and Clarks in the Courts of Princes, is such,
that many times the greatest matters are Committed to futile and weak Ciphers.
But it may be, that in the enumeration, and, as it were, taxation of Arts, some
may think that we go about to make a great Muster-rowle of Sciences, that the
multiplication of them may be more admired; when their number perchance may be
displayed, but their forces in so short a Treatise can hardly be tried. But for
our parts we do faithfully pursue our purpose, and in making this Globe of
Sciences, we would not omit the lesser and remoter Islands. Neither have we (in
our opinion) touched these Arts perfunctorily, though cursorily; but with a
piercing style extracted the marrow and pith of them out of a mass of matter.
The judgment hereof we refer to those who are most able to judge of these
Arts. For seeing it is the fashion of many who would be thought to know much,
that every where making ostentation of words and outward terms of Arts, they
become a wonder to the ignorant, but a derision to those that are Masters of
those Arts: we hope that our Labors shall have a contrary success, which is,
that they may arrest the judgment of every one who is best versed in every
particular Art; and be undervalued by the rest. As for those Arts which may
seem to be of inferior rank and order, if any man think we attribute too
much unto them; Let him look about him and he shall see that there be many
of special note and great account in their own Country, who when they come
to the chief City or seat of the Estate, are but of mean rank and scarcely
regarded: so it is no marvel if these sleighter Arts, placed by the
Principal and supreme Sciences, seem petty things; yet to those that have
chosen to spend their labors and studies in them, they seem great and
excellent matters. And thus much of the Organ of Speech.

CAP. II. 1. The Doctrine touching the Method of Speech is assigned a
substantial and principal part of Traditive knowledge: It is entitled, The
wisdom of Deliverie. 2. The diverse kinds of Methods are enumerated: their
Profits and Disprofits are annexed. 3. The parts of Method two.
I. LEt us now come to the doctrine concerning the Method of Speech: This has
bin handled as a part of Logic, so it has found a place in Rhetoric by the
name of Disposition. But the placeing of it as a part of the Train of other
Arts, has bin the cause that many things which refer unto it, and are
useful to be known, are pretermiss'd: wherefore we thought good, to
constitute a substantial and principal Doctrine touching Method, which by a
general name we call the wisdom of Tradition. The kinds of Method, seeing
they are diverse, we will rather reckon them up, then divide them. But for one
only Method, and continued Dichotomies we need not speak much of them; for
it was a little Cloud of knowledge which was soon dispersed. Certainly a
trivial invention, and an infinite prejudice to Sciences; for these
Dichotomists, when they would wrest all things to the Laws of their Method,
and whatsoever does not aptly fall within those Dichotomies they would either
omit or bow contrary to their natural inclination; they bring it so to
pass, that the Kernels and Grains of Sciences leap out, and they claspe and
enclose only the dry and empty husks: So this kind of Method brings forth
fruitless Compends, destroys the substance of Sciences.

II. Wherefore let the first difference of Method be set down, to be either
Magistrall or Initiative: neither do we so understand the word Initiative, as
if this should lay the groundwork, the other raise the perfect building of
Sciences; but in a far different sense, (borrowing the word from sacred
Ceremonies) we call that Initiative Method, which discloseth and unvailes the
Mysteries of Knowledges: For Magistrall teaches, Initiative insinuates:
Magistrall requires our belief to what is delivered, but Initiative that it
may rather be submitted to examination. TRADITIO LAMPADIS, SIVE METHODUS AD
FILIOS.
The one delivers popular Sciences fit for Learners; the other Sciences as to
the Sons of Science: In sum, the one is referred to the use of Sciences as
they now are; the other to their continuation, and further propagation. The
latter of these, seems to be a deserted and an enclosed path. For Knowledges
are now delivered, as if both Teacher and Scholar sought to lay claim to
error, as upon contract. For he that teaches, teaches in such a manner as
may best be believed, not as may be best examined: and he that learneth,
desires rather present satisfaction, then to expect a just and stayed inquiry;
and rather not to doubt, then not to err: So as both the Master, out of a
desire of glory, is watchful, that he betray not the weakness of his
knowledge; and the Scholar, out of an averse disposition to labor, will not
try his own strength. But Knowledge, which is delivered as a thread to be
spunne on, ought to be intimated (if it were possible) into the mind of
another, in the same method wherein it was at first invented. And surely this
may be done in knowledge acquired by Induction: But in this same anticipated
and prevented knowledge, which we use, a man cannot easily say by what course
of study he came to the knowledge he has obtained. But yet certainly more or
less a man may revisite his own Knowledge, and measure over again the
footsteps of his Knowledge, and of his consent; and by this means so
transplant Science into the mind of another, as it grew in his own. For it is
in Arts, as it is in Plants; if you mean to use the Plant, it is no matter for
the Roots; but if you would remove into another soil, than it te more assured
to rest upon roots than slips. So the Delivery of Knowledge, as it is now used,
does present unto us fair Bodies indeed of Sciences, but without the Roots;
good, doubtless for the Carpenter, but not for the Planter. But if you will
have Sciences grow, you need not be so sollicitous for the Bodies; apply all
your care that the Roots may be taken up sound, and entire, with some little
earth cleaving to them. Of which kind of Delivery, the Method of the
Mathematiques in that subject, has some shadow, but generally I see it neither
put in ure, nor put in Inquisition; and therefore number it amongst DEFICIENTS;
and we will call it Traditionem Lampadis, the Delivery of the Lamp, or the
Method bequeathed to the sons of Sapience.

Another diversity of Method follows, in the intention like the former, but
for most part contrary in the issue. In this both these Methods agree, that
they separate the vulgar Auditors from the select; here they differ, that the
former introduces a more open way of Delivery than is usual; the other (of
which we shall now speak) a more reserved and secret. Let therefore the
distinction of them be this, that the one is an Exotericall or revealed; the
other an Acroamaticall, or concealed Method. For the same difference the
Ancients specially observed in publishing Books, the same we will transfer to
the manner it self of Delivery. So the Acroamatique Method was in use with the
Writers of former Ages, and wisely, and with judgment applied; but that
Acroamatique and Aenigmatique kind of expression is disgraced in these later
times, by many who have made it as a dubious and false light, for the vent of
their counterfeit merchandice. But the pretense thereof seems to be this,
that by the intricate envelopings of Delivery, the Profane Vulgar may be
removed from the secrets of Sciences; and they only admitted, which had either
acquired the interpretation of Parables by Tradition from their Teachers; or by
the sharpness and subtlety of their own wit, could pierce the veil.

Another diversity of Method follows, of great consequence to Sciences, which
is when Sciences are delivered by way of Aphorism; or Methods. For it is a
thing worthy to be precisely noted, that it has bin often taken into Custom,
that men out of a few Axioms and Observations upon any Subject, have made a
complete and solemn Art, filling it with some discourses of wit, illustrating
it with examples, and knitting it together by some Method. But that other way
of Delivery by Aphorisms, brings with it many advantages, whereto Delivery by
Method does not approach. For first it tries the Writer whether he be
superficial or solid in knowledge. For Aphorisms except they should be
altogether ridiculous, cannot be made but out of the pyth and heart of
Sciences: For Illustration and Excussion are cut off; variety of examples is
cut off; Deduction and Connection are cut off; Description of Practice is cut
off; so there remains nothing to fill the Aphorisms, but a good quantity of
observations. And therefore no man can suffice, nor in reason will attempt to
write Aphorisms, who is not copiously furnished, and solidly grounded. But in
Methods, Horat. de Art. P.
-- Tantum series, juncturaque pollet:
Tantum de medio sumptis accedit Honoris.
As oftentimes they make a great show of (I know not what) singular Art, which
if they were disjoynted, separated, and laid open, would come to little or
nothing. Secondly Methodicall Delivery is more fit to win consent or belief;
but less fit to point to Action; for they carry a show of Demonstration in or
be or Circle, one part illuminating another; and therefore do more satisfy
the understanding; but being that Actions in common course of life are
dispersed, and not orderly digested, they do best agree with dispersed
Directions. Lastly Aphorisms representing certain Portions only, and as it
were fragments of Sciences, invite others to contribute, and add something;
whereas Methodicall Delivery carrying show of a total and perfect Knowledge
forthwith secureth men as if they were at the furthest.

An other diversity of Method follows, which is likewise of great weight,
which is when Sciences are delivered either by Assertions with their Proofs
annexed; or by Questions together with their Determinations. The later kind
whereof if it be immoderately followed, is as prejudicious to the progression
of Sciences, as it is to the fortunes and proceedings of an Army, to go about
to besiege every title Fort or Hold. For if the field be kept, and the sum of
the enterprise with diligence pursued, those smaller places will come in of
themselves. Yet this I cannot deny, that it is not always safe to leave any
great, and fortified town at his back. In like manner the use of Confutations
in the Delivery of Sciences ought to be very sparing, and to serve only to
remove and break strong Preoccupations and Prejudgments of men's minds, and not
to excite and provoke smaller Doubts.

Another diversity of Method follows which is that the Method be accommodated
to the purposed matter which is to be handled. For there is a great difference
in Delivery of the Mathematiques, which are of knowledges the most abstracted
and most simple; and the Politiques which are the most immersed and compounded:
Neither can an uniformity of Method (as we have observed already) be fitly
sorted with multi-formity of Matter; and therefore as we have allowed
Particular Topiques for Invention; so we would likewise in some measure have
Particular Methods for Tradition.

Another diversity of Method follows, with judgment to be practiced in the
Delivery of Sciences; and it is directed according to the light of
Informations, and anticipations, of the Knowledge to be delivered, infused, and
impressed in the minds of the Learners. For that Knowledge which is new and
foreign to men's minds, is to be delivered in an other form than that which by
long-receiv'd, and imbibed opinions is naturalized and made familiar: And
therefore Aristotle when he thinks to tax Democritus does in truth commend
him, where he says, If we shall indeed dispute, and not follow after
similitudes etc. Charging it as a defect upon Democritus that he was too
copious in Comparisons. But those whose conceits are seated in popular
opinions, have nothing else to do but to dispute and prove. Whereas on the
contrary those whose conceits are beyond popular opinions, have a double
labor; first, that what they produce may be conceived; then, that they be
proved. So that it is of necessity with them to have recourse to Similitudes
and Translations, whereby they may insinuate themselves into men's capacities.
Therefore we see in the infancy of Learning, in rude times, when those
Comprehensions which are now Vulgar and trivial, were then new and unheard of;
the world was full of Parables and Similitudes; for otherwise men would have
passed over without mark or due attention, or else rejected for Paradoxes, that
which was propounded. For it is a rule of Traditive Art, That whatsoever
Science is not consonant to Anticipations or Presuppositions, must pray in aid
of Similitudes and Comparisons. And thus much of the diverse sorts of Methods,
namely such as have not heretofore bin noted by others. As for those other
Methods, Analytique; Systatique; Dieritique; Cryptique; Homericall, and the
like; they have bin well invented and distributed; nor do we see any cause why
we should dwell upon them.

III But these are the kinds of Method; the Parts are two; the one of the
Disposition of a whole work, or of the Argument of some Book; the other of the
Limitation of Propositions. For there belongs to Architecture not only the
frame of the whole Building; but likewise the form and figure of the Columns;
Beams, and the like; and Method is as it were the Architecture of Sciences.
Ramus.
And herein Ramus merited better a great deal in reviving those excellent
Rules (...); than in obtruding one only Method and Dichotomie. But it falls
out, I know not by what fate, that of humane things (according as the Poets
often faigne) the most precious have the most pernicious Keepers. Certainly
diligent endeavors about the rank and file of Propositions, cast him upon
those Epitomes and shallowes of Sciences; for he had need set out in a lucky
hour, and to go on by the conduct of a happy Genius, that attempts to make
Axioms of Sciences Convertible; and yet withal not make them Circular, or
returning into themselves; notwitstanding we deny not, but that Ramus intention
in this kind was profitable. There remains yet two Limitations of
Propositions; besides that they may be made Convertible; the one touching the
Extension; the other touching the Production of them. Surely Knowledges have,
if a man mark it well two other dimensions besides Profunditie; namely
Latitude and Longitude. For Profunditie is referred to the Truth and Reality of
them; and these make them solid. As for the other two, Latitude may be taken
and reckoned of Science into Science; Longitude may be accepted and understood
from the higest general Proposition, to the lowest particular in the same
science. The one comprehends the bounds and true limits of Sciences, that
Propositions may be properly, not promiscuously handled; and that all
Repetition; Excursion, and Confusion may be avoided: the other gives rule how
far, and to what degree of Particularitie, Propositions of sciences may be
deduced. Certainly there is no doubt but somewhat must be left to use and
Practice; for we ought to avoid the precise error of Antoninus Pius, that we be
not Cumini sectores in Scientijs, Dion. in Anton. P.
Mincers of Commin in sciences; nor that we multiply divisions to the lowest
Particularity. Wherefore how we should moderate our selves in this point, is
well worth the inquiry. For we see too remove Generalities unless they be
drawn down, do little inform, nay rather expose Knowledge to the scorn of
Practical men; and are no more ayding to Practice, than an Ortelius Universal
Map is to direct the way between London and York. Surely the better sort of
Rules have not unfitly bin compared to Glasses of steel, wherein you may see
the Images of things, but first they must be filed and burnisht: so Rules and
Precepts do then help, after they have bin labored and polisht by Practice;
but if those Rules may be made clear and Chrystalline aforehand, it would be
the more excellent, because they would less stand in need of diligence,
labor, and exercise after. And thus much of the Knowledge of Method, which we
have named the Wisdom of Delivery. Nor can we here pretermit that many more
vainglorious, than learned have labored about a Method, which is not worthy
the name of a lawful Method, seeing it is rather a Method of Imposture; which
yet to some vaporous, and vain-boasting natures, without doubt has bin most
acceptible. This Method does so sprinkle drops of any Knowledge, that any
halfe-learned Clark may with a little superficiary Knowledge make a glorious
show. Lullius.
Such was the Art of Lullius; such the Typocosmie drawn by many; which were
nothing else but a heap and mass of words of all Arts, to give men
countenance; that those which have the terms of Art, might be thought to
understand the Arts themselves. Which kind of Collections are like a Frippers
or Brokers shop, that has ends of every thing, but nothing of worth.

CAP. III. I The Grounds and Duty of Rhetorique. II. Three Appendices of
Rhetorique which appertain only to the Preparatorie Part. The Colors of Good
and Evil, as well simple as Compared. III. The Antitheta of things. IV. Lesser
Styles, or usual Forms of Speech.
NOw come we to the Knowledge which concerns the Jllustration of Speech; it
is that which is called Rhetorique, or Art of Eloquence; a Science certainly
both excellent in it self, and by Authors excellently well labored. But
Eloquence, if a man value things truly, is without doubt inferior to Wisdom.
For we see how far this leaves that behind, in those words of God to Moses,
when he disabled himself for that service imposed upon him, for want of this
Faculty; Exodus 7.
There is Aaron, he shall be thy Speaker, thou shall be to him as God. Yet in
profit and popular estime, Wisdom gives place to Eloquence for so Solomon,
Prove. XVI.
Sapiens cord appelatur prudens; sed dulcis eloquio majora reperiet;
signifying not obscurely that profoundnesse of Wisdom will help a man to fame
and admiration; but that it is Eloquence which prevails in business and
active Life. And as to the laboring and culture of this Art, the Aemulation of
Aristotle with the Rhetoricians of his time, and the earnest and vehement
diligence of Cicero, laboring with all might to raise and enoble that Art,
joined with long Experience, has made them in their Books written of this Art
to exceed themselves. Again, the excellent examples of Eloquence in the
Orations of Demosthenes, and Cicero, added to the subtlety and diligence of
Precepts, have doubled the Progression in this Art. Wherefore the DEFICIENTS
which we find in this Art, will be rather in some Collections, which may as
Handmaids attend the Art; than in the Rules and the use of the Art it self.
For even then when we made mention of a Promptuarie Knowledge in Logique, we
engaged our selves by Promise, to exhibit examples at large thereof in
Rhetorique.

I Notwithstanding that we may stir up and subdue the earth a little, about
the Roots of this Science, as our manner is to do in the rest; surely
Rhetorique is sub-servient to the Imagination, as Logique is to the
Understanding. And the office and duty of Rhetorique (if a man well weigh the
matter) is no other, then to apply and commend the Dictates of Reason to the
Jmagination, for the better moveing of the appetite and will. For we see the
government of Reason is disquieted, and assailed three ways; either by
Illaqueation of Sophismes, which pertaines to Logique; or by the deceits of
words, which pertaines to Rhetorique; or by the violence of Passions, which
pertaines to Morality; And as in negotiation with others, a man may be wrought
and overcome either by cunning, or by Importunity, or by vehemence, so in that
inward negotiation which we practice within ourselves, either we are undermined
by the Fallacies of Arguments; or solicited and disquieted by the assiduity of
impressions and observations; or shaken and transported by the assault of
affections and Passions. But yet the state of man's nature is not so
unfortunate, as that those Powers and Arts should have force to disturb
Reason, and not to establish and advance it; nay rather much more do they
conduce to this effect, than to the contrary. For the end of Logique, is to
teach a form of Arguments, to secure Reason and not to entrap it; so the end
of Morality is to compose the Affections, that they may fight for Reason; and
not that they may invade it; the end likewise of Rhetorique, is to fill the
Jmagination with observations and resemblances, which may second Reason; and
not oppress and betray it; for these abuses of Arts come in but ex obliquo for
prevention, not for practice. And therefore it was great injustice in Plato
(though springing out of a just hatred to the Rhetoricians of his time) to
place Rhetorique amongst Arts voluptuary, In Gorg.
resembling it to Cookery, that did mar wholesome meats, and help unwholesome
by the abuse of variety of sawces and seasonings, to the pleasure of the taste.
But be it far away, that speech should not be much more conversant in
adorning that which is fair and honest, than in coloring that which is foul
and evil for this is every where at hand; and there is no man but speaks more
honestly, than he can do or think. Indeed it was excellently noted by
Thucydides, that some such thing as this, used to be objected to Cleon, Lib. 3.
that because he used to hold the bad side in causes he pleaded, therefore he
was ever inveighing against Eloquence, and good speech, for he knew no man
could speak fair of things sordid and base, but in things honest it was an
easy matter to be eloquent. In Menon.
Plato says elegantly (though the saying be now popular) That virtue if she
could be seen, would move great love and affection: but Rhetorique paints out
virtue and goodness to the life, and makes them in a sort conspicuous. For
seeing they can not be showed to sense in corporal shape, the next degree is
by the fair attire of words, to show them to the Imagination, so far as may
be in a lively representation: for the custom of the Stoiques was deservedly
derided by Cicero, Tusc. Q. lib. 2.
who labored to thrust virtue upon men, by concise and sharp sentences and
conclusions, which have no sympathy with the Imagination and will. Again if
the Affections themselves were brought into order, and so reclaimed from
exorbitant courses, as to be pliant and obedient to Reason, it were true, there
should be no great use of Persuasions and insinuations, which might give
access to the mind; but it would be enough if things were nakedly and simply
proposed and proved: but on the contrary, the Affections make such revolts; and
raise up such mutinies and seditions (according to that -- video meliora
Proboque Ovid. Met. 7.

Deteriora sequor) --
That Reason would be forcibly led away into servitude and captivity, if the
persuasion of Eloquence did not practice, and win the Imagination from the
Affections part, and contract a league between Reason and Imagination against
Affections. For it must be noted that the Affections themselves are ever
carried to a good Apparent, and, in this respect, have somewhat common with
Reason: but herein they differ; that the affections behold Principally Good in
Present; Reason beholds a far off even that which is future, and in sum.
And therefore seeing things in present sight do more strongly fill the
Imagination; Reason commonly yields and is vanquished: but after that by
Eloquence and the force of Persuasion, things future and remote are proposed,
and beheld, as if they were actually present; then upon the falling off of the
Jmagination to take part with Reason, Reason prevails Let us conclude
therefore, that Rhetorique, can no more be charged with the coloring and
adorning of the worse part, than Logique, with the setting out and suborning of
Sophismes: for who knows not that the doctrine of contraries are the same,
though they be opposite in use. Again, Logique differs from Rhetorique; not
only in this, that the one (as commonly is said) is like the First, the other
like the Palm; that is, one handles things closely, the other at large: but
much more in this, that Logique considers Reason in its Naturalls;
Rhetorique, as it is planted in vulgar opinion. Therefore Aristotle does wisely
place Rhetorique between Logique on the one side, and Ethique with Civil
Knowledge, on the other: as participating of both. For the Proofs and
Demonstrations of Logique, are to all men indifferent and the same; but the
Proofs and persuasions of Rhetorique, must be varied according to the
Auditors, that a man, like a skillful Musician accommodating himself to
different ears, may become --

PRVDENTIA SERMONIS PRIVATI
Orpheus in sylvis, inter Delphinas Arion. Which Application and variation of
speech (if a man desire indeed the Perfection and height thereof) ought to be
so far extended, that if the same things should be spoken to several
persons, he should speak to them all respectively, and several ways. Though
it is certain that the greatest Orators many times may want this Politic and
Active Part of Eloquence in private speech; whilst by the observing the grace,
and Elegant forms of Expression, they loose that voluble application; and
characters of speech, which in discretion they should have used toward
particular persons. Surely it will not be amiss to recommend this whereof we
now speak, to a new Inquiry, and to call it by name THE WISDOM OF PRIVATE
SPEECH, and to refer it to Deficients; a thing certainly which the more
seriously a man shall think on, the more highly he shall value; and whether
this kind of Prudence should be placed between Rhetorique and the Politiques,
is a matter of no great consequence.

Now let us descend to the Deficients in this Art, which (as we have said
before) are of such nature as may by estimed rather Appendices, than Portions
of the Art it self; and pertain all to the Promptuary part of Rhetorique.

II. First we do not find that any man has well pursued or supplied the
Wisdom and the diligence also of Aristotle: COLORES BONI ET MALI. In Top.
for he began to make a collection of the Popular signs and Colors of Good
and Evil in appearance, both simple and comparative, which are, indeed, the
Sophismes of Rhetorique: they are of excellent use, specially referred to
business, and the wisdom of Private speech. But the labors of Aristotle
concerning these Colors, is three ways Defective; First that there being
many, he recites very few. Secondly because their Elenches or Reprehensions are
not annexed. Thirdly that he conceived but in part the use of them, for their
use is not more for Probation, then for impression and raiseing the affections.
For many Forms of speaking are equal in signification, which are different in
impression: for that which is sharp pierces more forcibly, than that which is
flat, though the strength of the percussion be the same. Surely there is no man
but will be a little more raised by hearing it said, Your enemies will triumph
in this Hoc Jthacus velit and magno mercentur Atridae, Virg. Aen. 2.
Then if it should be merely thus rendered, This will be to your disadvantage;
wherefore the sharpe-edged, quick-pointed speeches are not to be despised. And
being we report this part as DEFICIENT, we will according to our custom
confirm it by examples, for precepts have not sufficiently illustrated the
Point.

EXAMPLES OF THE COLORS OF GOOD AND EVIL, BOTH SIMPLE AND COMPARATIVE.
The COLOR.
1 What men Praise and Celebrate, is Good; what they Dispraise, and Reprehends
is Evil.

THE REPREHENSION.
THis Color deceives four ways; either through Ignorance, or through Fraud,
or out of Partialities and Faction; or out of the natural disposition of such
as Praise or Dispraise. Our of Jgnorance; for what is the judgment of the
common People to the trial and definition of Good and Evil? Phocion discerned
better, Plutar. in vita.
who when the People gave him an unusual applause, demanded whether he had not
perchance some way or other done amiss? Out of Fraud and circumventive
cunning, for Praisers and Dispraisers many times do but aim at their own
ends, and do not think all they say Horat. lib. 2. Epl. Prove. 20.
Laudat venaleis qui vult extrudere merces, So, It is naught, it is naught says
the Buyer, and when he is gone he vaunteth. -- Through Factions; for it is
plain that men are wont to extol their own side, beyond the modest bounds of
desert, but to depresse those of the contrary part below their demerit. Through
an inbred disposition; for some men are by nature made and molded to servile
Flattery; others on the other side are by nature Sower and Censorious; so as in
their commendations, or vituperations they are only indulgent to their own
humors, little or nothing sollicitous of truth.

THE COLOVR. 2 What draws Commendation even from an enemy, is a great Good;
What moves Reprehension even from a Friend, is a Great Evil.
The Color seems to be built upon this foundation; that whatsoever we speak
against our will, and contrary to the affection and propension of our own mind,
it is easily believed, that the force of truth wrested the same from us.

THE REPREHENSION.
THis Color deceives through the Art and Subtilty both of Enemies and Friends:
for Enemies do sometimes ascribe Praises, not unwillingly, nor as urged from
the force of truth: but yet selecting such points of Praise, as may create envy
and danger to their Enemies. wherefore a superstitious conceit went current
amongst the Grecians as they believed, that he who was praised by another
maliciously, and to his hurt, should have a push rise upon his nose. Again it
deceives, because enemies sometimes attribute Praises, as certain brief
prefaces, that so they may more freely and spitefully traduce afterward. On
the other side this Color deceives through the slight and cunning of friends;
for their custom is sometimes to acknowledge and lay open the infirmities of
their Friends, not out of a tender conscience from the impression of truth, but
making choice of such imperfections, as may least prejudice the reputation, or
provoke the indignation of their friends; as if in all other points they were
excellent men. Again it deceives, because friends use their Reprehensions (as
we have observed enemies do their praises) as certain short introductions,
that they may expatiate more amply in their commendations afterward.

THE COLOVR. 3 Whose Privation is Good, that same is Evil; Whose Privation is
Evil, that same is Good.


THE REPREHENSION.
THis Color deceives two ways; either by reason of the Comparison of Good and
Evil; or by reason of the Succession of Good to Good, or of Evil to Evil. By
reason of Comparison; if it were Good for man kind to be deprived of the eating
of Acornes, it follows not that such food was Evil, but that Mast was Good,
Corn Better. Neither if it were Evil for the state of Sicilie to be deprived
of Dionysius the Elder; does it follow that the same Dionysius was a Good
Prince; but that he was less evil than Dionysius the younger. By reason of
Succession; for the Privation of some Good, does not always give place to
Evil, but sometimes to a Greater Good; as when the Flower falls, fruit
succeeds. Nor does the Privation of some Evil always yield place to Good,
but sometimes to a greater Evil; for Clodius an enemy being taken away, Milo
withal forfeited a fair harvest of Glory.

THE COLOVR. 4 That which draws near to Good or Evil, the same is likewise
Good or Evil: But that which is removed from Good is Evil; from Evil, is
Good.
Such commonly is the internal condition of things, that things of like
quality and consenting in nature, consent likewise in place, and are as it were
quartered together, but such things as are contrary and distant in nature, are
also severed and disjoined in place; in regard that all things desire to
approach things symbolizing with them; to exterminate and chase away their
contraries.

THE REPREHENSION.
BUt the Color deceives three ways; First in respect of Destitution; Secondly
in respect of Obscuration; Thirdly in respect of Protection. In regard of
Destitution, it comes to pass that those things, which in their kind are most
ample and do most excel, do (as much as may be) ingrosse all to themselves,
and leave that which is next them destitute and pined; wherefore you shall
never find thriving shootes or under-wood near great spread Trees: so he said
well -- Divitis servi maxim servi; -- and the dirision was pleasant of him
that compared the lower train of Attendants in the Courts of Princes, to
Fasting-daies which were next to Holy Days, but otherways were the leanest
days in all the week. In regard of Obscuration for this is the quality of
things in their nature excellent and predominant, that though they do not
extenuate and impoverish the substance of things adjoining to them, yet they
darken and shadow them: And this the Astronomers observe of the Sun that it
is good by aspect, but evil by conjunction and approximation. In regard of
Protection; for things approach and congregate not only for consort and
similitude of nature; but even that which is evil (especially in Civil
matters) approaches to good for concealment and Protection; so wicked persons
betake themselves to the sanctuary of the Gods, and vice it self assumes the
shape and shadow of virtue. Saepe latet vitium proximitate boni. So on the
other side Good draws near to Evil, not for society but for conversion and
reformation of it into Good; and therefore Physicians are more conversant with
the sick than the sound; Mat. 9.
and it was objected to our Savior that he conversed with Publicans and
sinners.

THE COLOVR. 5 That side to which all other Parties and Sects unanimously
confer second voices after every Particular has asserted a Primacy to it
self, seems to be justly preferred before the rest: for every sect may be
presumed to usurp the first place, out of Passion and Partiality; but to yield
the second Place, out of truth and merit.
So Cicero went about to prove the Sect of Academiques, which suspended all
asseveration for to be the best of all Philosophies; for (says he) ask a
Stoique which sect is better then other, he will prefer his own before the
rest: Cicero. Q. A.
Then ask him which approaches next in dignity, he will confess the
Academique, so deal with an Epicure that will scant endure the Stoique to be
in sight of him, so soon as he has placed himself in the chief room, he
will place the Academique next him. So if a place were void, and a Prince
should examine competitors severally, whom next themselves they would specially
commend, it were like that the most second voices would concur upon the
ablest man.

THE REPREHENSION.
THe fallax of this Color is in respect of Envy: for men are accustomed after
themselves, and their own faction, to incline and bend unto them, which of all
the rest are the softest and weakest, and are least in their way in despite
and derogation of them who have most insulted over them, and have held them
hardest to it.

THE COLOVR. 6 That whose excellency, and supereminency is better, the same is
every way better.
Appertaining to this are the usual forms; Let us not wander in generalities,
Let us compare Particular with Particular.

THE REPREHENSION.
THis Appearance seems to be of strength, and rather Logical, than Rhetorical:
yet is it very often a fallax. First because many things are casual, which if
they escape, prove excellent; so that in kind they are inferior, because they
are so subject to peril, and to perish before they come to perfection; but in
the Jndividuall more noble. Of this sort is the Blossom of March, whereof the
French Proverb goes Burgeon de Mars, Enfans de Paris,
Si un eschappe bien vaut dix.
So that the Blossom of May generally is better than the Blossom of March,
and yet in particular the best Blossom of March is better than the best
Blossom of May. Secondly it deceives, because the nature of things in some
kinds, or species, is to be more equal, in some kinds more inequall: as it
has bin observed that warmer climates produce generally more acute wits; but
in Northern climates the wits of chief surpass the acutest wits of hotter
Regions. So in many Armies if the matter should be tried by duel between
particular champions singled out, perchance the victory should go on the one
side; if it be tried by the gross, it would go on the other side: for
excellencies, and eminencies go, as it were, by chance, but kinds are governed
by nature and Art. So likewise generally metal is more precious than stone;
and yet a Diamond is more precious than Gold.

THE COLOVR. 7 That which keeps the matter entire in our own hands, is Good;
that which leaves no passage open for retrait, is Evil: for not to be able to
come off is a kind of impotency, but the Power of disengaging our selves is
good.
Hereof Aesop framed the Fable of the two Froggs, that consulted together in
the time of Drouth (when many plashes they had repaired to were dry) what was
now at last to be done; Aesop.
the first said let us go down into a deep well, for it is not like the water
would fail there; to whom the other replied, yea, but if it do fail, how
shall we get up again? The ground of this color is, that humane actions are
so uncertain and exposed to perils, as that seems to be the best course,
which has most passages out of it. Appertaining to this persuasion the Forms
are; you shall wholly engage and oblige your self, non tantum quantum voles
sumes ex fortuna, you shall not be your own carver, nor keep the matter in your
own hand, etc.

THE REPREHENSION.
THe Fallax of this Color is first, because in humane Actions fortune urges
us at length to decree, and to resolve upon somewhat: for as he says
elegantly, not to resolve, is to resolve; so that many times a suspension of a
final decision engages and implicates us in more necessities, than if we had
determined of somewhat. And this disease of the mind is like that of covetous
men translated from the desire of retaining wealth, to the desire of retaining
Free will and Power: for the Covetous man will enjoy nothing, least he should
substract from the total; and this kind of Sceptique will execute nothing,
that all things may be entire and indifferent to him. Secondly it deceives
because necessity, and this same jacta est alea, awakens the powers of the
Mind, and puts the spurs to any enterprise; as he says, Caeteris pares,
necessitate certe superiores estis.

THE COLOVR. 8 What a man has contracted through his own Default, is a greater
Evil; what is imposed from without, is a less Evil.
The reason hereof, is, because the sting and remorse of the Mind accusing it
self, doubles all adversity; contrariwise the recording inwardly that a man is
clear and free from fault, and just imputation, does much attemper outward
calamities. Wherefore the Poets do exceedingly aggravate those passionate
Lamentations, as forerunners to desperation; when a man accuses and tortures
himself. Virg. Aen. 12.
Se causam clamat, crimenque caputque malorum. Contrariwise the conscience of
Innocence and good deserving, does mollify and mitigate the calamities of
worthy persons. Besides when the evil comes from without, cast upon us by
others, a man has whereof he may justly and freely complain, whereby his
griefs may evaporate and not stifle the heart: for what comes from the
injuries of men, we are wont to take indignation at, and to meditate revenge;
or else to implore, or expect, that the divine Nemesis, and Retribution, may
take hold on the Authors of our hurt; or if it be inflicted from Fortune, yet
there is left a kind of expostulation against the Divine Powers, Virg. Buc.
Atque Deos atque Astra vocat Crudelia Matter. But on the other side where the
evil is derived from a man's own fault, there the grief strikes inward, and
does more deeply wound and pierce the heart.

THE REPREHENSION.
THe Fallax of this Color is, first in respect of Hope, which is a great
Antidote against Evils: for the reformation of a fault is many times in our
own power, but the amendment of fortune is not. Wherefore in many of his
Orations Demosthenes says thus to the People of Athens: Demost. orat.
That which having regard to the time past, is the worst point and Circumstance
of all the rest; that as to the time to come, is the best: what is that? Even
this, that by your sloth, irresolution, and misgoverment, your affairs are
grown to this declination and Decay; for had you used and ordered your means
and forces to the best, and done your parts every way to the full; and
notwithstanding your matters should have gone backward in this point as they
do, there had bin no hope left of recovery or reputaton for hereafter; but
since it has bin only by your own errors chiefly, you may have good assurance,
that those errors amended, you may again recover the honor of your former
state. Epictet. Cap. 10.
So Epictetus speaking of the Degrees of the Tranquillity of mind, faith the
worst state of man is to accuse externe things; Better then that to accuse a
man's self; and best of all to accuse neither. Secondly this color deceives in
respect of that pride which is implanted in the minds of men, whereby they are
with much ado induced to an acknowledgement of their own personal errors; but
that they may shift off this acknowledgement, they can suffer with far
greater patience such evils, as they have by their own oversights drawn upon
themselves. For as we see it comes to pass that when a fault is committed, and
it is not yet known who is the delinquent, men make much ado; grow hot and
impatient above measure upon the matter: but after, if it appear to be done by
a son, or by a wife, or by a near friend, then it is light made of, and
presently all is quiet: so is it when any thing falls out ill, the blame
whereof must needs light upon our selves. And this is commonly seen to come to
pass in women, who if they have done any thing unfortunately against their
Parents or friends consents, what ill soever betide them upon it, yet you shall
see them seldom complain, but set a good face on it.

THE COLOVR. 9 The Degree of Privation seems greater than the Degree of
Diminution; and again, the Degree of Inception, seems greater than the Degree
of Jncrease.
It is a position in the Mathematiques; that there is no proportion between
somewhat and nothing: therefore the Degrees of Nullity and Quiddity, seem
larger, than the Degrees of Increase and Decrease. As to a Monoculus, it is
more to loose one eye, than to a man that has two eyes: so if one have diverse
children, it is more grief to him to loose the last surviving son, than all
the rest. And therefore Sibylla when she had burnt her two first Books, doubled
the prise of the Third, Agell. lib. 1 No. At.
because the loss of that had bin gradus privationis, and not Diminutionis.

THE REPREHENSION.
THe Fallax of this Color is reprehended; first in those things, the use and
service whereof rests in sufficiency, or competency, that is in a determinate
Quantity. As if a man be bound upon penalty to pay a sum of money at an
appointed day, it would be more to him to want one Noble, than if, (supposing
he could not tell where to be furnished with this one Noble) ten Nobles more
were wanting. So in the decay of a man's estate, the degree of Debt which first
breaks the stock, and casts him behind, seems a greater damage, Hesiod.
then the last Degree, when he proves nothing worth. And hereof the common
Forms are Sera in fundo Parsimonia: and as good never a whit, as never the
better, etc. Secondly this Color deceives in respect of that Principle in
Nature, Corruption unius, Arist. 1. de Genesis and Cor.
Generatio alterius: so that the degree of ultimate Privation, does many times
less disadvantage, because it gives the cause, and sets the wits aworke to
some new course. Which is the cause that Demosthenes often complains before
the people of Athens, Orat. 1. in Philip.
That the conditions imposed by Philip, and accepted by them, being neither
profitable nor honorable, were but aliments of their sloth and weakness, that
it were much better they were taken away; for by this means their industries
might be awaked to find out hetter remedies and stronger resolutions. We knew a
Physician was wont to say pleasantly and yet sharply to delicate Dames, when
they complained they were they could not tell how, but yet they could not
endure to take any Physique; he would tell them, your only way is to be sick
indeed, for then you will be glad to take any medicine. So further, this Degree
of Privation, or of the highest period of want, serves not only to stir up
industry, but also to command patience. As for the Second branch of this
Color, it depends upon the same reason, which is the degrees of Quiddity and
Nullity; hence grew the common Place of extolling the beginning of every thing.
Dimidium facti qui been caepit habet. This made the Astrologers so idle as to
make a judgment upon a man's nature and Destiny, from the moment or point of
constellation in his Nativity, or Conception.

THE REPREHENSION.
THis Color first deceives, because in many things, the first inceptions are
nothing else than what Epicurus terms them in his Philosophy, TENTAMENTA, that
is imperfect Offers, and Essaies, which vanish and come to no substance without
iteration and improvement. Wherefore in this case the second degree seems the
worthier, and more potent than the First: as the Body-horse in the Cart that
draws more than the foremost. And it is a common saying, and not without good
sense, The second blow is that which makes the fray: for the first, it may be,
would have vanished without farther harm: and therefore Prius Malo Principium
dedit, sed posterius modum abstulit. Secondly this color deceives in respect
of the dignity of Perseverance, which consists in the Progression, and not in
the Aggression. For chance, or instinct of Nature, may cause inception; but
settled affection and judgment makes the continuance. Thirdly, this Color
deceives in such things which have a natural course and inclination contrary
to an Inception; so that the first Jnception is perpetually evacuated, unless
the force and faculty be continued. As in those common forms it is said Non
progredi est Regredi; and Qui non proficit deficit, as in running against the
hill; Rowing against the stream; for if it be with the Hill or with the
Stream, then the degree of Inception is more than all the rest. Again this
Color is not only extended to the Degree of Inception, which is from Power to
Act, compared with the Degree, which is from Act to increment; but also is to
be understood of the degree which is from Jmpotency to power, compared with the
Degree which is from power to Act: for the Degree from Impotency to Potency,
seems greater, than from Power to Act.

THE COLOVR. 10 That which is referred to Truth, is more than that which is
referred to opinion. The manner and Proof of that which pertaines to Opinion,
is this; that a man would never have done it, if he thought it should be
sepulchred in secrecy and oblivion.
So the Epicures say to the Stoiques, Felicity placed in virtue, that it is
like the Felicity of a Player, who if he were left of his Auditors, and their
applause, he would straight be out of heart and countenance; therefore they
call virtue out of a spiteful emulation Bonum Theatrale. But it is otherwise
of Riches whereof the Poet says Horat.
-- Populus me sibilat: at mihi plaudo. Likewise of Pleasure, -- Grata sub imo
Gaudia Cord premens, vultu simulante pudorem.


THE REPREHENSION.
THe Fallax of this Color is somewhat subtle; though the answer to the
exemple alleged be ready; for neither is virtue chosen propter Auram
Popularem; seeing that also is given in Precept, That a man should above all
things, and persons, revere himself; so that a Good man is the same in
solitude which he is in the Theater; though perchance virtue will be more
strong by glory and fame, as heat is increased by reflection. But this denies
the supposition, but does not redargue the Fallax. The Reprehension is this. Be
it granted that virtue (especially such as is joined with labor and conflict)
would not be chosen but for her concomitants, Fame and Opinion; yet it follows
not that an Appetite and chief Motive to virtue, should not be real, and for
it self; for Fame may be only causa impulsiva, or sine qua non, and not a
cause Constituent or Efficient. For exemple, if there were two Horses, whereof
the one would perform with good speed, without the spur; but the other with
the spur would far exceed, the performance of the former; this latter (I
suppose) will bear away the prize, and be judged to be the better Horse; and it
will not move any man of sound judgment to say, Tush the life of this Horse,
is but in the spur: for seeing the ordinary instrument of Horsmanship is the
spur, and that it is no matter of impediment or burden; the Horse is not to
be less accounted of, which will not do well without the spur: nor is that
other which without the spur will do great matters, therefore to be reckoned
the better, but the more delicate. So in like manner, Glory and Honor are the
Goades and spurs to virtue; and though virtue would somewhat languish without
them, yet since they be always at hand to attend virtue, even when they are
not invited; there is no impeachment but that virtue may be desired for it
self; and therefore the Position, That the note of a thing chosen for Opinion
and not for Truth, is this; That if a man thought that what he does, should
never come to light, he would never have done it; is reprehended.

The COLOR. 11 What is purchased by our own industry and virtue, is a greater
Good; what is derived upon us, from the benefit of others, or from the
indulgence of Fortune, is a lesser Good.
The reasons are these? First in respect of future Hope; because in the favor
of others, or the good winds of fortune, we have no state or certainty; in our
own endeavors or abilities we have. So when they have procured us one good
fortune, we have the same instruments ready for a new purchase; nay by custom
and success, stronger than before. Secondly because these Properties which we
enjoy by the benefit of others, we are debtors to others for them; whereas
what we derive from our selves, brings no burden with it, nor draws upon us an
obligation to another. Again, if the Divine Providence confer a favor upon
us, it importunes a kind of Retribution toward the goodness of God, which
stings ungracious and wicked men; whereas in that other kind of happiness,
that of the Prophet commonly falls out, They rejoice and triumph; Hab. 1.
they sacrifice unto their net, and burn incence unto their drag. Thirdly
because, that which comes unto us without our own abilities, yields not that
commendation and reputation. For Actions of great Felicity draw wonder, not
praise; as Cicero said to Caesar, Quae miremur habemus, Pro. M. Marcel.
quae laudemus expectamus. Fourthly, because the purchases of our own industry
are joined commonly with labor and strife, which makes the fruition of our
desires more pleasant, as says Solomon, Suavis cibus a venatu.

THE REPREHENSION.
BUt there are four Contre-Colors, which incline the case to the contrary
Part, and may be as Reprehensions to the former Colors. First because Felicity
seems to be a seal and character of Divine favor; and accordingly begets both
confidence and alacrity in our selves; and respect and authority from others:
And this Felicity comprehends many casualties, whereunto the power and
providence of a man can not aspire. As when Caesar encouraging the Sailer, said
Caesarem portas and fortunam ejus; Suet. in Iul.
but if he had said, Caesarem portas and virtutem ejus, it had bin a cold
comfort against a tempest. Secondly because that such things as proceed from
virtue and industry, are imitable, and feasible by others to be practiced;
whereas Felicity is a thing inimitable, and a Prerogative of some few singular
persons. Wherefore we generally see, that things of Nature are preferred before
things of Art, because they be inimitable: for what is imitable is in effect
Prostitute and common. Thirdly the Revenues of Felicity, seem to be no
purchase of our own, but a Donative from others: but what is acquired by our
own proper virtue, is, as it were, bought at a price. whereupon Plutarch says
elegantly of the Arts of Timoleon, a man of all men most fortunate, compared
with the Acts of Agesilaus and Epaminondas who lived in the same Age, In Timol.
That they were like Homers verses, which as they excelled in other points, so
they seemed to have an easy native slide in them, and to be conducted by a
happy Genius. Fourthly because what falls out beyond hope and expectation,
insinuates it self more sweetly, and with greater delight, into the minds of
men; but this can not be incident to those things, which proceed from our own
care and compass.

THE COLOVR. 12 What consists of many and divided parts, is greater than that
which consists of few Parts, and is more entire, for all things considered by
parts seem greater: wherefore both plurality of parts has a show of Magnitude;
and the same Plurality works more strongly, if it be presented unto us without
order; for it induces a resemblance of Infinity, and hinders comprehension.
This Color seems a Fallax, at first sight very palpable: for not the
Plurality of Parts alone, but the Majority, may make the total Greater; yet
nevertheless the Color many times carries the imagination away; yea it
deceives sense. For it seems to the eye, a shorter distance of way, if it be
all dead and continued, so as nothing intercurre which may break the sight;
then in such a coast or quarter, where there are Trees and Buildings, and other
marks, which may measure and Divide the space. So when a great Monied-man has
divided and distributed his chests and baggs into several and distinct rooms,
he seems to himself richer than he was. Therefore a way to Amplify any
thing, is to break it into many Parts, and to handle every part severally by it
self. And this again will more fill the imagination, if it be done
promiscuously and without order; for confusion raises an opinion of multitude;
so what are presented and propounded in order, both seem to be more finite, and
demonstrate, that nothing is left out, but all is there: whereas on the
contrary, whatsoever things are represented confusedly, are not only thought to
be more numerous in themselves; but they leave a suspicion that more might be
said than is expressed.

THE REPREHENSION.
THe Fallax of this Color is. First when a man does over-conceive, or
prejudicate of the greatness of any thing, comprehending it beyond the true
limits of Magnitude; for then the breaking of it will make it seem less, and
rectify that false opinion, and present the object in its native verity, and
not with amplification. Wherefore if a man be in sickness or in pain, the
time will seem longer to him without a Clock or an Hower-glasse, then if it
were measured with them: for if the wearisomenesse, and vexation of a disease,
make the time seem longer then in truth it is; yet the computation of time
reformes that mistake, and makes it shorter than that erroneous opinion
conceived it to be. So in a dead Plain (whereof even now we gave a contrary
instance) it sometimes falls out, for though at first the eye preconceiv'd the
way shorter, because it was undivided, yet if upon this supposition, an opinion
possess the imagination of a far shorter space of ground then it proves to
be, the frustrating of that vain conceit, makes it seem longer than the truth.
Therefore if any man desire to humor and second the false opinion of another,
touching the greatness of any thing, let him beware of distributions, and
breaking it in several considerations, but let him out of hand extol the
matter entire, and in the gross. Secondly this Color deceives when the
Distribution is distracted or scattered, or is not presented entire, or does
not at once object it self to the sight. Therefore if flowers in a Garden be
divided into several bedds, they will show more than if they were all growing
in one bed; so the Beds be within a plot that they be the object of view at
once; otherwise, union is of more force in this case than scattered
distribution. Therefore their Revenues seem greater, whose Lands and Livings
lie together in one shire; for if they were dispersed, they would not fall so
easily within notice and comprehension. Thirdly this Color deceives in respect
of the dignity of unity above multitude; for all composition is a sure mark of
deficiency, in particularities severally considered, which thus pieces out one
thing with the addition of another. Et quae non prosunt singula multa juvant.
And therefore Mary had chosen the better part; Martha, Martha, Luke 10. Aesop.
attendis ad plurima, unum sufficit. Hereupon Aesop, framed the fable of the
Fox and the Cat. The Fox bragged what a number of shifts and devices he had to
get from the Hounds; the Cat said she had but one only way to trust to, which
was this; she had a poor slender faculty in climbing up a Tree. which yet in
proof was a surer guard then all Vulpones policies and stratagems, whereof the
proverb grew, multa novit Vulpes, Aesop.
sed Felis unum magnum, the Fox knows many practices, but the Cat one
special; one that will help at a dead lift. And in the Moral of this Fable it
comes likewise to pass, that a potent and faithful friend, is a surer card at
a pinch, then all the Plots and Policies of a man's own wit.

And these shall suffice for example: we have an infinite number more of
Colors, of this nature, which we collected in our youth; but without their
Jllustrations and Reprehensions, which at this time we have no leisure to
perfect and digest; wherefore we thought it incongruous to expose those Colors
naked, without their Illustrations, seeing these other come abroad attired. Yet
thus much in the mean we admonish, that this branch of knowledge, in our
judgment, whatsoever it may seem, is of no contemptible consequence, but a
matter of high price and use, as that which participates both of Primitive,
Philosophy, of Policy, and of Rhethorique. Thus much of Popular marks, or of
the Colors of Good and Evil in appearance, as well simple as comparative.

III. A second collection which appertains to a ready Provision, or
Preparatory store, ANTITHETA RERVM. Cicero.
is that which Cicero intimates (as we have noted before in Logique) where he
gives it in precept, that we have Common-places in ready preparation argued and
handled Pro and Contra; such as are For the words and letters of Law, for the
sense and mind of Law, and the like. And we extend this Precept to other things
also; as that it may be applied, not only to Judicial Forms; but to
Deliberative and Demonstrative also. Generally this is it we would have done;
namely, that we have all Places, whereof there is more frequent use (whether we
respect Probations and Confutations; or Persuasions and Disswasions; or Praises
and Vituperations;) studied and meditated beforehand, and the same extolled
and depressed by the highest strains of wit and invention; and perversely
wrested, as it were, of purpose utterly beyond Truth. And in our opinion the
manner of this Collection, as well for use as for brevity, would be the best of
such common-places, and seeds of several Arguments were abridg'd and cast up
into some brief and acute sentences, as into skaines or bottomes of Thread to
be drawn out, and unwinded into larger Discourses as occasion should be
presented. Sen. Contro.
A collection of this nature we find in Seneca, but in suppositions only or
Cases. Of this sort (in regard we have many ready prepared) we thought good to
set down some of them for example; These we call Antitheta Rerum.

EXAMPLES OF THE ANTITHETA.
NOBILITY. I.
Pro.
THey whose virtue is altogether derived from the stock; these not only have
not a will, but want a power to be wicked.

Nobility is a Garland of Bays, wherewith time Crowns men.

We reverence Antiquity even in dead Monuments, how much more in living.

If you regard not the honor of an ancient House? Then what difference will
there be between the Race of Men, and the Race of Beasts?

Nobility removes virtue from Envy; recommends it to Grace and Favor.

Contra.
NObility seldom springs from Virtue; Virtue more seldom from Nobility.

Nobles by birth more often use the intercession of their Ancestors for Pardon;
than their suffrage for Honors.

The industry of new riseing men is oftentimes such, as Nobles compared with
them are but Statues.

Nobles by blood, look too often back in the course; which is the quality of an
ill Racer.

BEAUTY. II.
Pro.
Deformed persons commonly have their revenge of Nature.

Virtue is nothing else but inward Beauty; and Beauty nothing else but an
outward virtue.

Deformed Persons seek to rescue themselves from scorn, by malice and
boldness.

Beauty makes virtues shine, vices blush.

Contra
Virtue is like a rich stone, best plain set.

What a fair vestment is to a deformed body, the same is a comely Body to a
deformed Mind.

They usually are of no great parts, whom Beauty commends, or moves.

YOUTH III.
Pro.
Our first cogitations, and the counsils of Youth stream more divinely.

Old men are more wise for themselves, then they are for others and the Repub.

If it could be made visible, Old age does more deforme the mind then the Body.

Old men fear all things save the Gods.

Contra-
Youth is the field of Repentance.

There is in Youth an imbred disestime of the Authority of Age, that every one
may grow wise at his own Peril.

Those counsils to which Time was not called, Time will not ratify.

Jn old men Venus is changed into the Graces.

HEALTH IV.
Pro.
The regard of Health makes the mind humble, and obsequious to the Body.

A sound body is the Souls Host, but a sickly her Jalour.

Nothing so promotes the sum of Business, as a prosperous state of Body; but
on the contrary, a sickly constitution makes too many Holy Days.

Contra.
Often to recover health, is often to grow young again.

Indisposition of Health is a common excuse, hither we fly even when we are
well.

Health unites the Soul and the body in too strict a league.

The Couch has governed mighty Empires; and the Litter mighty Armies.

WIFE AND CHILDREN.
Pro.
Charity to the Commonwealth, begins at a private Family.

Wife and Children are a kind of Discipline of Humanity; but unmarried men are
cruel and hard-hearted.

Single life and a Childlesse state, are good for nothing but for flight.

He that procreates no Children, sacrifices to Death.

They that are happy in all other things, are commonly unfortunate in their
Children: least being men they should approach too near to a condition Divine.

Contra.
He that has Wife and Children, has given Hostages to Fortune.

Generation and issue are Human Acts; Creation and its works are Acts Divine.

Issue is the Eternity of Beasts; Fame, merit, and wholesome Precepts, the
eternity of Men.

Oeconomicall respects many times supplant Political Duties.

To some natures the Fortune of Priamus is acceptable, who survived his whole
Posterity.

RICHES. VI.
Pro.
They despise Riches, that despair of them.

An envy conceived against Riches, has extolled virtue to a Deity.

Whilst Philosophers call in doubt whether all things are to be referred to
virtue, or Pleasure; survay the instruments of them both.

Virtue, by means of Riches, is converted into a common good.

All other kinds of Good have a Provincial Command, only Riches a General.

Contra.
Of great Riches, there is either a Custody, or a dispensation, or a fame; but
no solid Use.

Do you not see what fained Prises are set upon little stones, and such kind of
Rarities, that there may be some use made of great Riches?

Many, whilst they have entertained an opinion that all things might be bought
with their money; have in this conceit, first sold themselves.

J can not call Riches better then the Baggage of virtue; for they are both
necessary to virtue, and yet combersome, hindering the March.

Riches are a good Handmaid, but the worst Maistresse.

HONORS. VII.
Pro.
Honors are not the suffrage of Tyranns, but of Divine Providence.

Honors make both virtues and vices conspicuous; therefore those they excite,
these they repress.

No man can tell what proficience he has made in the Race of virtue, unless
Honors afford him an open field.

The motion of virtue as of other things, is violent to its place, calm in its
place; and the place of virtue is honor.

Contra.
Whilst we seek Honors, we loose liberty.

Honors commonly give men a Power over those things, wherein the best
condition is, not to will; the next not to Can,

The stairs to Honors are steep, the standing slippery, the regresse a
downfall.

They that are in great place had need to borrow other men's opinions, to think
themselves happy.

EMPIRE VIII.
Pro.
It is a great blessing to enjoy Happiness; but to have the power to Confer
it on others, is far greater.

Kings are rather like stars, than men; for they have a powerful influxe
upon all men, and upon times themselves.

To resist Gods-vicegerents, is not only the Guilt of Treason, but a kind of
Theomachie.

Contra.
What a miserable state is it, to have a few things to desire, infinite things
to fear?

Princes are like heavenly bodies, which have much veneration, but no rest.

None of Humane condition is admitted to the Banquet of the Gods, but to his
reproach.

PRAISE, REPUTATION. IX.
Pro.
Praises are the reflexed Beams of virtue.

That Praise is an Honor which comes from voices freely conferred.

Many states confer Honors; but Praises are every where the Attributes of
Liberty.

The voice of the people has some divinenesse in it; else how should so many
men agree to be of one mind?

You need not wonder if the communalty speak more truly than the Nobility; for
they speak more safely.

Contra.
Fame is a better Nuncio, than a Judge.

What has a good man to do with the dull approbation of the vulgar?

Fame like a River bears up things light and swollen; drowns things weighty and
solid.

The lowest virtues draw praise from the common people; the middle virtues work
in the Astonishment, or Admiration; but of the highest virtues they have no
sense or perceiving at all.

Praise proceeds more out of a bravery then out of merit; and happens rather to
vain and windy persons, then to persons substantial and solid.

NATURE X.
Pro.
The Progress of Custom is Arithmeticall; of Nature Geometrical.

As laws are to Custom in Civil states, so is Nature to custom in every
particular Person,

Custom against Nature is a kind of Tyranny, and is quickly and upon light
occasion suppressed.

Contra.
Men's thoughts are according to nature; their words according to precept; but
their deeds according to custom.

Nature is a kind of Pedant; Custom a Magistrate.

FORTUNE XI.
Pro.
Ouvert and apparent virtues bring forth praise; secret and hidden virtues
bring forth fortune.

Virtues of duty bring forth praise; virtues of Ability bring forth fortune.

The way of Fortune is like the milken way in the sky; which is a meeting or
knot of certain small obscure virtues without a name.

Fortune is to be honored and respected, and it be but for her daughters
confidence and Reputation.

Contra.
The folly of one man, is the Fortune of another.

In Fortune this I may chiefly commend, that being she makes no election, she
gives no protection.

Men of place and quality while they decline the Envy of their own virtues;
have bin found among the worshippers of Fortune.

LIFE. XII.
Pro.
It is a foolish and preposterous affection, to love the Accessories of life,
more then life it self.

A full course is better then a short; a fair advantage to all things, yea
even to virtue.

Without a good spacious compass of life, we can neither fully perfect, nor
learn, nor repent.

Contra.
The Philosophers, whilst they raise so great preparations against Death, have
made it but appear more terrible.

Men fear Death because they know it not; as Children fear the Dark.

You can find no Passion in the mind of man so weak, which if it be but a
little pressed, masters not the fear of death.

To be willing to die, not only a valiant man, or a miserable man may, or a
wise; but even a fastidious man, and a coward may do as much.

SUPERSTITION. XIII.
Pro.
They that err out of a well-ment zeal, may not be approved, but yet may be
beloved.

Mediocrities are due to Moral virtues; extremities to divine.

A superstitious man is a religious Formalist.

I should sooner believe all the Fabulous wonders of any Religion, than that
this universal Frame was built without a Deity.

Contra.
As it adds deformity unto an Ape, to be so like a man; so the similitude of
superstition to Religion, makes it more deformed.

Look how odious Affectation is in matters Civil; so hateful is superstition,
in matters Divine.

It were better to have no opinon of God at all, than such an opinion as is
reproachful unto him.

It is not the School of Epicurus, but the Porch of the Stoiques that has
perturbed ancient states.

It cannot come into the mind of man to be a mere Atheist in Opinion; but your
great Hypocrites are the true Atheists, who are ever handling holy things, but
never revere them.

PRIDE. XIV.
Pro.
Pride is even with vices incompatible: And as poison is expelled by poison, so
many vices are by Pride.

A soft nature becomes guilty of the crimes of others; but a proud spirit only
of his own.

Pride if it ascend from contempt of others to a contempt of it self, at last
is changed into Philosophy.

Contra
Pride is the insinuating Ivy to virtues, and all good Qualities.

All other vices are only contrary to virtues, Pride alone is contagious.

Pride wants the best condition of vice, that is, concealment.

A proud man while he despises others, prejudiceth himself.

INGRATITUDE. XV.
Pro.
The guilt of ingratitude is nothing else but a too precise consideration and
inquisition into the cause of a benefit con-ferr'd.

Whilst we endeavor to be grateful to others, we neither persorme justice to
others, nor reserve liberty to our selves.

Where the valuation of a Benefit is uncertain, there the less thank is due.

Contra.
The crime of Ingratitude is not to be repressed by punishments, but to be
referred over to the Furies.

The obligations of benefits are more strict than of Duties, wherefore he that
is unthankful is unjust and any thing

Such is man's condition; no man is borne to so high a fortune, but that he is a
debtor to the retribution both of Private thanks, and personal revenge.

ENVY. XVI.
Pro.
It is natural for a man to hate the reproach of his Fortune.

Envy in a state is a wholesome Ostracisme.

Contra-
Envy never makes Holy Day.

Nothing but death reconciles Envy to virtue.

Envy does put virtue to it, as Juno did Hercules.

INCONTINENCE XVII.
Pro.
Chastity may thank Iealousy that she is become a virtue.

He had need be endewed with much Gravity, that makes the sports of Venus any
matter of Earnest.

Why do you place either a spare diet, or a show of Honesty, or the Daughter
of Pride, amongst the virtues?

Of loves, as of wild-foule, there is no property; but the right is past over
with the possession.

Contra
Incontinence is one of Circes worst transformations.

An unchaste liver has utterly lost a reverence to himself, which is the
bridle of all vice.

They that with Paris, make beauty their wish, loose, as he did, Wisdom and
Honor.

Alexander fell upon no popular truth, when he said, that sleep and lust were
the earnests of Death.

CRUELTY. XVIII.
Pro.
No virtue is so often guilty as clemency.

Cruelty if it proceed from revenge, it is justice; if from Peril it is
wisdom.

He that shows mercy to his enemy, denies it to himself.

Phlebotomy is not more necessary in the Body Natural, than it is in the body
Politic.

Contra.
He that delights in blood, is either a wild beast or a Fury.

Cruelty to a Good man, seems to be but a Fable, and some Tragical fiction.

VAINGLORY. XIX.
Pro.
He that seeks his own praise, withal seeks the profit of others.

He that is so reserved, as to regard nothing that is foreign; it may be
suspected, that he will account public affairs, foreign impertinencies.

Such Dispositions as have a commixture of Levity in them; more easily
undertake a Public charge.

Contra.
Vainglorious persons are always factious, Liars, Inconstant, over-doing.

Thraso is Gnathoes prey.

It is a shame for a Lover to make suit to the handmaid; but Praise is virtues
handmaid.

JUSTICE. XX.
Pro.
Kingdoms and States are only the Appendices of Justice: for if Justice
otherwise could be executed, there would be no need of them.

It is the effect of Justice, that man is to man a God, and not a Wolf.

Though Justice can not extirpate vice; yet it represseth it from doing hurt.

Contra.
If this be to be just, not to do to another what you would not have done to
your self; then is mercy Justice.

Jf we must give every one his due, then surely pardon to Humanity.

What tell you me of equity when to a wise man all things are unequal?

Do but consider what the condition of the guilty was in the Roman state; and
then say justice is not for the Re-publique.

The common Justice of states is as a Philosopher in Court; that is, it makes
only for a reverentiall respect of such as bear Rule.

FORTITUDE. XXI.
Pro.
Nothing but fear is terrible. There is nothing solid in pleasure, nor assured
in virtue, where fear disquiets.

He that confronts dangers with open eyes, that he may receive the charge;
marketh how to avoid the same.

All other virtues, free us from the Dominion of vice; only Fortitude from the
Dominion of Fortune.

Contra.
That Is a goodly virtue to be willing to dye, so you may be sure to kill.

That Is a goodly virtue sure, which even drunkenness may induce.

He that is prodigal of his own life, will not spare the life of an other.

Fortitude is a virtue of the Jron Age.

TEMPERANCE. XXII.
Pro.
To Abstain and to Sustain, are virtues proceeding commonly from the same
habit.

Vniformities, concords, and Measures of motions, are things celestial, and
the characters of Eternity.

Temperance as wholesome coldes, concenterate and strengthen the forces of the
Mind.

Too exquisite and wandering senses, had need of Narcotiques; and so likewise
wandering affections.

Contra.
I like not these negative virtues; for they argue Innocence not Merit.

That mind languisheth which is not sometimes spirited by excess.

I like those virtues which induce the vivacity of Action, and not the dullness
of Passion.

When you set down the equal tempers of the mind, you set down but few; nam
pauperis est numerare pecus.

These Stoicismes (not to use that so you may not desire; not to desire that so
you may not fear) are the resolutions of pusillanimous and distrustful
natures.

CONSTANCY. XXIII.
Pro.
Constancy is the foundation of virtue.

He is a miserable man that has no perception of his future state, what it
shall or may be.

Seeing man's judgment is so weak, as that he cannot be constant to things; let
him at least be true to himself, and to his own designs.

Constancy gives reputation even to vice.

If to the Inconstancy of fortune we add also, the inconstancy of mind, in
what mazes of darkness do we live!

Fortune is like Proteus, if you persist, she returns to her true shape.

Contra.
Constancy like a sullen-selfe-will'd Porteresse, drives away many fruitful
informations.

There is good reason that Constancy should patiently endure crosses, for
commonly she causes them.

The shortest folly is the best.

MAGNANIMITY. XXIV.
Pro.
When once the mind has propounded to it self honorable ends; then not only
virtues, but even the divine powers are ready to second.

Virtues springing from Habit or precept, are vulgar; but from the end
heroical.

Contra.
Magnanimity is a virtue Poetical.

KNOWLEDGE, CONTEMPLATION. XXV.
Pro.
That delight only is according to Nature, whereof there is no satiety.

The sweetest prospect is that, which looks into the errors of others, in the
vale below.

How pleasing and profitable a thing is it, to have the orbs of the mind
concentrique, with the orbs of the World.

All depraved affections are false valuations; but goodness and Truth are ever
the same.

Contra.
A contemplative life is a specious sloth.

To think well is little better, then to dream well.

The divine providence regards the world; thou thy country.

Aright Politic procreates Contemplations.

LEARNING. XXVI.
Pro.
Jf there were Books written of the smallest matters; there would hardly be any
use of experience.

Reading is a converse with the wise; Action for the most part a commerce with
fools.

Those sciences are not to be reputed altogether unprofitable, that are of no
use; if they sharpen the wits, and marshall our conceptions.

Contra-
Jn Schools men learn to believe.

What Art did yet ever teach the seasonable use of Art?

To be wise from Precept and from experience, are two contrary habits; so as he
that is accustomed to the one, is inept for the other.

There is many times a vain use of Art, least there should be no use.

This commonly is the humor of all Scholars, that they are wont to acknowledge
all they know; but not to learn what they know not.

PROMPTITUDE. XXVII.
Pro.
That is not seasonable wisdom, which is not quick and nimble.

He that quickly erres, quickly reformes his error.

He that is wise upon deliberation, and not upon present occasion; performs no
great matter.

Contra
That wisdom is not far fetched, nor deeply grounded, which is ready at hand.

Wisdom, as a vestment, that is lightest, which is readiest.

Age does not ripen their wisdom, whose Counsils deliberation does not ripen.

What is suddenly invented suddenly, vanishes; soon ripe soon rotten.

Silence in matters of Secrecy. XXVIII.
Pro.
From a silent man, nothing is concealed; for all is there safely laid up.

He that easily talks what he knows, will also talk what he knows not.

Mysteries are due to secrecies.

Contra.
Alteration of Customs places the mind in the dark; and makes men go
invisible.

Secrecy is the virtue of a confessor.

From a silent man all things are concealed, because all is repai'd with
silence.

A close man is next to an unknown man.

FACILITY. XXIX.
Pro.
J like the man that is pliant to another inclination, but yet reserves his
judgment from flattery.

He that is flexible comes nearest the nature of Gold.

Contra.
Facility is a weak privation of judgment.

The good offices of facile natures seem debts; their denialls, injuries.

He owes the thanks to himself, that obtaines any thing of a Facile-natur'd
man.

All difficulties press upon a too accessible and yielding nature; for he
ingages himself in all.

Facile natures seldom come off with credit.

POPULARITY. XXX.
Pro.
The same things commonly please wise men, but it is also a point of wisdom;
to humor the changeable disposition of fools.

To honor the people is to be honored.

Men in place usually stand in awe, not of one man, but the multitude.

Contra.
He whose nature rightly sorts with fools, may himself be suspected.

He that has the Art to please the people; commonly has the power to raise
the people.

No terms of moderation takes place with the vulgar.

To fawn on the people, is the lowest degree of Flattery.

LOQUACITY. XXXI.
Pro.
Silence argues a man to be jealous; either of others, or of himself.

Restraint of liberty in what kind soever, is an unhappy case; but the worst of
all is that of silence.

Silence is the virtue of fools; where he said truly to a silent man, If you
be wise you are a Fool; if you be a Fool you are wise.

Silence like night is fit for Treacheries.

Cogitations are like waters, most wholesome in the running stream.

Silence is a kind of solitude.

He that is silent, prostitutes himself to censure.

Silence neither discharges it self of evil thoughts, nor contributes any
good.

Contra.
Silence adds grace, and authority to a man's words.

Silence like a kindly sleep, refreshes wisdom, and settles the judgment.

Silence is the Fermentation of our thoughts.

Silence is the style of wisdom.

Silence is a candidate for Truth.

DISSIMULATION. XXXII.
Pro.
Dissimulation is a compendious wisdom.

We are not tied to say the same, but to intend the same.

Nakedness even in the Mind is uncomely.

Dissimulation is both a Grace and a Guard.

Dissimulation is the fence of counsils.

Some through their too apert fair dealing become a prey.

He that carries all things with an open franknesse, deceives, as he that
somewhat dissembles: for many either do not comprehend him, or do not believe
him.

Open dealing is nothing else, but a weakness of mind.

Contra.
When we cannot think according to the verity of things; yet at least let us
speak according as we think.

Whose shallow capacities comprehend not the Arts of state; in them, a habit of
dissimulation goes for wisdom.

He that Dissembles, deprives himself of one of the most principal
instruments for Action which is belief.

Dissimulation invites Dissimulation.

A dissembler is not exempt from bondage.

BOLDNESS. XXXIII.
Pro.
A shamefaced suitor teaches the way how to be denied.

What Action is to an Orator, the same is boldness to a Politic; the first,
the second, the third virtue.

I love him that confesses his modesty, but I cannot endure him that accuses
it.

A confidence in carriage soonest unites affections.

I like a reserved countenance, and an open speech.

Contra.
Boldness is the verger to folly.

Impudence is good for nothing but for Imposture.

Confidence is the fools Empress, and the wise man's buffone.

Boldness is a kind of Dullness of sense, together with a perverseness of the
will.

Ceremonies, Puntoes, Affectation. XXXIV.
Pro.
A comely moderation of Countenance and Gesture, is the true seasoning of
virtue.

If we observe the vulgar in the use of words, why not in habit and Gesture?

He that keeps not a decorum in smaller matters, and in his daily customs,
though he be a great man, yet set it down for truth; that such a personage is
wise, but at certain seasons.

Virtue and wisdom, without all points of respect and complement, are like
foreign languages, they are not understood by the common people.

He that apprehends not the meaning of the common people, neither by a
congruous application, nor yet by observation, is of all men most senseless.

Puntoes and ceremonies are the translation of virtue into a mother tongue.

Contra.
What can be a more deformed spectacle, than to transfer the sense into our
common course of life?

Fair ingenious behavior winnes grace and favor; but affectation and art
procures hatred.

Better a painted face and crisped hair; then painted and crisped manners.

He cannot comprehend great matters, who breaks his mind to small observations.

Affectation is the shining Putrefaction of ingenuity.

JEASTS. XXXV.
Pro.
A conceit is the altar of an Orator.

He that mingles modest mirth in all his commerce with others, reserves a
freedom of mind.

It is a matter more politic, then a man would think, smoothly to pass from
jest to earnest, and from earnest to jest.

A witty conceit is oftentimes a convoy of a Truth; which otherwise could not
so handsomely have bin feried over,

Contra
What man despises not those that hunt after these deformities and
concinnities.

To put off the importance of business with a jest, is a base slight of wit.

Then judge of a jest, when you have done laughing.

Merrily conceited men, seldom penetrate farther than the superficies of
things; which is the point where the jest lies.

To put a Jest, as a matter of moment upon serious affairs, is a childish
Levity.

LOVE. XXXVI.
Pro.
Do you not see how all men seek themselves; but a lover only finds himself.

There is no better government of the mind, then from the command of some
powerful affection.

He that is wise, let him pursue some desire or other; for he that does not
affect some one thing in chief, unto him all things are distasteful and
tedious.

Why should not that which is one, rest in unity?

Contra.
The stage is much beholding to love; the life of man nothing.

There is nothing has so many names as love; for it is a thing either so
foolish, that it knows not it self, or so base that it must needs disguise it
self under a counterfeit habit.

I like not such natures as are only intent upon one thing.

Love is a poore-narrow contemplation.

FRIENDSHIP. XXXVII.
Pro.
Friendship accomplisheth the same things that Fortitude does; but more sweetly.

Friendship is a pleasant sauce to any temporal happiness.

The worst solitude is to be destitute of sincere friendship.

It is a just punishment for false-hearted dispositions, to be deprived of
friendship.

Contra.
Who contracts strict leagues of Amity, draws upon himself new engagements.

It is a note of a weak spirit, to divide fortune.

FLATTERY. XXXVIII.
Pro.
Flattery proceeds more out of custom then out of Malice.

It was ever a form of civility due to Great Persons, by praising them to
instruct them.

Contra.
Flattery is the style of Servants.

Flattery is the cement of vice.

Flattery is that kind of fowling, which deceives Birds by resemblance of voice.

The deformity of flattery is Comicall, but the damage Tragical.

To give wholesome counsil, is a task most difficult.

REVENGE. XXXIX.
Pro.
Private Revenge is a kind of wild Justice.

He that returns wrong for wrong, violates the Law, not the Person.

The fear of private revenge is a profitable restraint, for laws are too often
asleep.

Contra.
He that does a wrong is the beginner of a quarrel; but he that retaliates,
takes away all means of ending it.

Revenge by how much the more natural, by so much the more to be repressed.

He that is inclinable to retribute a wrong, is behind-hand perchance in time,
but not in will.

INNOVATION. XL.
Pro.
Every medicine is an innovation.

He that will not apply new remedies, must expect new diseases.

Time is the greatest innovator; why then may we not imitate time.

Ancient presidents are inconformable, recent, corrupt, and degenerate.

Let simple and contentious persons, square their actions, according to
examples.

As those that first bring honor into their Family, are commonly more worthy
than most that succeed. So the Innovation of things for the most part excells
those things which are done out of Imitation.

A froward retention of Customs, is as turbulent a thing as Innovation.

Seeing that things of their own course alter to the worse, if they be not by
counsill altered to the better, what shall be the end of Evil.

The servants of custom, are the scorn of Time.

Contra.
New Births are deformed things.

No author is accepted, until time have authorized him.

All novelty is with injury, for it defaceth the present state of things.

Those things which custom has confirmed, if they be not profitable, yet they
are conformable and piece well together.

What Novator follows the example of time, which insinuates innovations so
quietly, as is scarce perceptible to sense.

Whatsoever comes unlooked for, is the less acceptable to him whom it helps;
and the more troublesome to him whom it hurts.

DELAY. XLI.
Pro.
Fortune sells many things to the hasty; which she gives to the slow and
deliberate.

Whilst we make too much have to surprise the beginnings and onsets of things,
we claspe shadows.

Whilst things are at a doubtful stand, we must weigh them; when they incline
we may fall a work.

It is good to commit the beginning of Actions to Argus, with his hundred eyes;
the ends to Briareus, with his hundred hands.

Contra.
Occasion turns the handle of the Bottle first, to be received; and after the
belly.

Occasion, like Sibylla, diminishes the commodity, but enhanseth the Price.

Celerity is the helmet of Pluto.

Those things which are seasonably undertaken, are performed with judgment;
but what are put off too long, are compassed with trouble and by ambages.

PREPARATION. XLII.
Pro.
He that attempts a great matter with small means; fancies to himself the
advantage of opportunity, that he may not despair.

With slender provision we buy wit not fortune.

Contra.
The first occasion of action, is the best point of Preparation.

Let no man think to fetter fortune, with the chains of his preparation.

The alteration of Preparation, and Action, are politic Arts; but the
separation of them is a vaporous conceit, and unprosperous.

Great Preparation is a prodigal both of time and business.

To Encountre first Assaults. XLIII.
Pro.
More dangers deceive us by fraud, then overcome us by force.

It is less trouble to meet danger by early remedies, then to watch and ward
the approaches and progress thereof.

A danger is no more light, if it once seem light.

Contra.
He teaches danger to come on, who over-early addresseth himself against
danger; and fixes it by application of a remedy.

In the redress of dangers, lighter dangers fall off of themselves.

It is better to deal with a few authentic and approved remedies; then to
venture upon a world of unexperienced particular receipts.

VIOLENT CONSILS- XLIV.
Pro.
Those that affect a mild and gentle kind of Prudence; to them the
augmentation of an evil, is a wholesome remedy.

That necessity which resolves upon desperate courses; commonly goes through
with them.

Contra.
Every violent remedy is pregnant of a new evil.

No man gives violent advice, but out of fury or fear.

SUSPICION. XLV.
Pro.
Diffidence is the nerves of wisdom; but suspicion a remedy for the joyncts.

That syncerity is justly suspected, which suspicion weakens or overthrowes.

Suspicion defeats an inconstant integrity; but confirms a strong and resolute.

Contra.
Suspicion breaks the bond of faith.

The distemper of suspicion, is a kind of Civil Madness.

The words of Law. XLVI.
Pro.
It is no exposition, but a divination, which departs from the letter.

When there is made a departure from the letter of Law; the judge, of an
interpreter, becomes a Lawgiver.

Contra.
Out of all the words in the generality, such a sense must be extracted, as may
expound the mind of every particular passage.

The worst tyranny, is Law upon the rack.

For witnesses against Arguments. XLVII.
Pro.
He that relies upon Arguments, defines according to the pleader, not according
to the cause.

He that gives credit rather to Arguments, then witness; must withal trust
more to wit, then sense.

It were a safe way to believe Arguments of Reason, if men were not guilty of
Absurdities against Reason.

Arguments brought against Testimonies accomplish thus much; that the case
seems strange, but not that it seems true.

Contra.
If proofs by witness, are to be preferred before Proofs from Reason, then
there needs no more ado, but that the Judge be not deaf.

Arguments are an Antidote against the poison of Testimonies.

Those kind of Proofs are most safely believed, which do most seldom lie.

Now these Antitheta which we have propounded, are not perchance so much worth;
but being they were prepared and collected by us long ago, we were loath the
diligence of our youth should perish: specially seeing they are (if one exactly
consider them) seeds, and not Flowers. But herein they do plainly breath a
youthly heat, in that they are so plentiful in the moral or Demonstrative
kind, so thin and sparing in the Deliberative and Judiciale.

FORMVLAE MINORES.
IV. A third collection which pertaines to Preparatory store or Provision and is
DEFICIENT is that which we think fit to call FORMULAE MINORES Lesser Forms or
Styles of Speech. And these are (as it were) the Portals Posterne-dores; outer
Room, Back rooms, Passages of speech, and the Like; which indifferently may
serve for all subjects. Such are Prefaces, Conclusions, Digressions,
Transitions, Promises, Excusations, and many of like nature. For as in Building
there is great Pleasure and use in the well-casting of the Frontispieces,
staire-cases, doors, windows, entries, passages, and the like: so in speech
of the accessory conveyances and interposures, be decently and skilfully
contrived and placed, they are of special ornament and effect, to the whole
structure of the speech. Of these Formulae, we will propose an exrmple or two,
and stay no longer upon them. For although they be matters of no small use, yet
because we add nothing here of our own, but describe the naked Forms only,
out of Dcmosthenes or Cicero, or some other select Author, they may seem a more
trivial and common observation, than that we should wast much time therein.

EXAMPLES OF MINOR FORMS.
A Conclusion of a speech Deliberative. So we may both redime the Fault which
is Passed, and with the same diligence provide against future Inconveniences.

The Corollary of an accurate Partition. That every one may understand that J
seek not to balke any thing by silence, or to cloud any thing by words.

A Transition With a Caveat. But let us so pass by these, that reflecting upon
them, and keeping them within view, we may leave them.

A preoccupation against an inveterate opinion. I shall so open the matter as
you may understand in the whole manage of the business, what the case it self
has brought forth; what error has fastened upon it; what envy has raised.

And let these suffice for example, wherewith (annexing two Rhetorical
Appendices) which respect the PROMPTUARY PART we conclude.

CAP. IV. I. Two General Appendices of the Art of Delivery, Art Critical. II.
And Pedanticall.
THere remains two Appendices in general, touching the Tradition of
knowledge; the one Critical; the other Pedanticall. For as the principal part
of Tradition of Knowledge consists in writing of books; so the relative part
thereof consists in reading of Books: but reading is governed and directed,
either by the help of Preceptors and Tutors; or perfited by every man's
particular and proper endeavor and industry: and to this purpose conduce those
two knowledges whereof we have spoken. To the Critical part appertains;
first, an emaculate correction and amended edition of approved Auctors; Whereby
both the honor of Auctors themselves is vindicated, and a light given to the
studious Readers. Wherein nevertheless, the rash diligence of some writers
has done great prejudice to studies. For it is the manner of many Critiques,
when they fall upon a passage which they do not understand, presently to
presume a fault in the copy. As in that place in Tacitus, when a certain Colony
in the open Senate, claimed the privilege of an Asylum, Tacitus reports that
the reasons they preferred were not much favored by the Emperor and the Lords
of the Senate; wherefore the Ambassadors mistrusting the issue of the
business, gave a round sum of money to Titus Vinius, that he would mediate
their cause, and take upon him the protection of their liberties; by this means
their petition was heard and granted; Tum dignitas and antiquitas Coloniae
valuit says Tacitus, as if the arguments that seemed light before, were now
made weighty, through bribes, and corruption. But one of the Critiques, a man
of no obscure note, has expunged the word Tum, and in stead thereof, put in
Tantum. And by this perverse custom of Critiques, it comes to pass (as one
wisely notes) that the most corrected copies, are commonly the least correct.
Nay (to speak truth) unless the Critiques be well skilled in the knowledges,
handled in the Books which they set forth, their diligence is with peril, and
prejudice. Secondly there appertains to the Critique Art, the Exposition; and
Explication of Auctors, by commentaries, Scholies, Notes, Spicilegies, and the
like. In labors of this kind, that worst disease of Critiques has ceased on
many; that they blanch and wave many obscurer passages; and such as are plain
and perspicuous, those they dwell and expatiate upon, even to a fastidious
tediousness; and it is not so much intended, that the Auctor may be
illuminated, as that the Critique may take occasion hereby to glorify himself,
in his multiplicious and various learning. It could be especially wished
(although this point belongs to Tradition in chief, and not to Appendices)
that the writer which handles obscure and noble Arguments, should annexe his
own explications; that neither the text it self may be broken off, by
Digressions and Explications; and that the Annotations may not depart from the
mind and intention of the writer. Some such thing we conceive of Theon upon
Euclid. Thirdly it belongs to Critique Art (from whence it derives the name) to
interpose a brief censure and judgment of the Auctors which they publish, and
to compare and value them with other Auctors upon the same subject: That by
such a censure the Learned and studious, may be both advertised of the choice
of Books; and come better provided to the peruseing of them. This last duty is,
as it were, the Chair of the Critiques, which many great and famous men in our
age have ennobled; greater surely in our judgment, than for the model of
Critiques.

II. For Pedanticall knowledge, it were soon said, consult the Schools of the
Jesuits, for there is nothing for the use and practice better then their
Precepts: but we will according to our manner, as it were, gleaning a few
ears, give some few advertisements. We do by all means approve a Collegiat
education and Institution of Childhood and Youth; not in private houses, nor
only under Schoolemasters. There is in Colleges a greater emulation of Youth
toward their equals; besides, there is the sight and countenance of Grave
men, which seems to command modesty; and fashions and moulds tender minds, even
from their first growth to the same Pattern: in some there are many other
utilities of Collegiat Education.

For the order and manner of Discipline, this I would principally advise; that
Youth beware of compends and abridgements, and too forward maturation of
knowledge, which maks men bold and confident; and rather wants great
proceeding, than causes it.

Further there is an indulgence to be given to the liberty and vent of nature
in particulars; as if there be any which performs such taskes as the
discipline of the place requires; and yet withal steals some hours to bestow
on other studies, to which he has a natural propensity; such a disposition by
no means should be checked or restrained.

Again, it will be worth the pains diligently to observe (which perchance
hitherto has not bin noted) that there are two ways, and they as it were,
reflexively opposite of training up of wits, and of exercising and preparing
them. The one begins with the more easy precepts, and by degrees leads us to
the more difficult; the other at first commands and presses more difficult
practices, which when they are conquered, the other sweetly yield and are won
with ease. For it is one Method to practice swimming by bladders which lift up,
and an other Method to practice dancing with heavy shoes, which press down
the Body; and it is not easy to express, how much a wise intermixtion of these
Methods, conduces to the advanceing of the faculties, both of Mind and of the
Body.

So the Application and Election of studies according to the propriety of wits,
which are instructed, is a matter of singular use and judgment; a true and
perfect discovery whereof, Schoolemasters and Tutors owe to the Parents of
Children, from whom they may expect such informations, that so they may the
better advise upon the particular course of life, unto which they would
design, and dedicate their sons. But this also is to be exactly observed,
that not only exceeding great progression may be made in those studies, to
which a man is swayed by a natural proclivity; but also that there may be
found, in studies properly selected for that purpose, cures and remedies to
promote such kind of knowledge, to the impressions whereof, a man may, by some
imperfection of nature, be most unapt and insufficient. As for example, if a
man be Bird-witted, that is, quickly carried away, and has not the patient
faculty of attention; the Mathematiques gives a remedy thereunto, wherein, if
the wit be caught away but for a moment, the demonstration is new to begin.

So of exercises in course of teaching, there is matter of great consequence:
but there is a point here that has bin noted of few, that there should be of
exercises, not only a wise institution, but also a wise intermission. It has
bin excellently observed by Cicero, That in exercises it often falls out, that
men practice as well their faults, as their faculties; so that an ill habit is
sometimes gotten, and insinuates it self together with a Good; wherefore it is
a safer way to break off exercises, and after to fall to them again, than
incessantly to pursue and press them. But of these enough. Certainly these
things at first view seem no such solemn and grave matters, yet are they in
the issue found efficacious and useful. For as in Plants, the wronging or
cherishing of them while they are Young is that, that is most important to
their thriving or miscarrying* or as the immense greatness of the state of
Rome, is by some deservedly attributed to the virtue and wisdom of those six
Kings, which were as Tutors and Foster-fathers of that state in the Infancy
thereof: so surely the culture and manurance of minds in young and tender
years, has such a forcible operation (though unseen and not obvious to every
man's observation) which neither length of time, or assiduity and contention of
Labor in riper age afterward, can any way countervaile. And it is not amiss
to observe how small and mean faculties, if they fall into Great men, or upon
Great matters, do sometimes work Great and important effects. Hereof we will
set down a memorable example, which we the rather note, because the Jesuits
themselves seem not to despise this kind of Discipline; in our opinion upon
sound judgment, and it is a matter, which if it be made professory, is
ignominious, if disciplinary, one of the best qualities: We mean Action upon
the stage; as that which strengthens memory, moderates the tone and emphasis of
voice, and Pronunciation; composes the countenance and gesture to a Decorum,
procures good assurance, and likewise inureth Youth to the faces of Men. The
example shall be taken out of Tacitus, of one Vibulenus, who had bin sometimes
an Actor upon the stage, but at that time a common soldier in the Pannonian
Garrisons. This fellow upon the death of Augustus had raised a mutiny, so that
Blaesus the Livetenant, committed some of the mutiners to Prison; but the
soldiers by violent impression brake open the Prisons, and set them at
liberty; and Vibulenus about to make a Tribunitiall speech before the
Soldiers, began in this manner, Annal. 1.
You have given light and life, to these poor innocent wretches; but who
restores my brother to me, or life unto my brother, that was sent hither in
message from the Legions of Germany, to treat of the common cause, and he has
murdered him this last night by some of his Fencers, that he has about him
for his executioners upon soldiers. Answer Blaesus, where have thou thrown his
body? the most mortal enemies, do not deny burial: when I have performed my
last duties unto the corpse with kisses, with tears, command me to be slain
besides him; so that these my fellows for our good meaning, and our true
hearts to the Legions, may have leave to bury us. With which speech, he put the
Army into such an infinite fury and amaze, that if it had not incontinently
appeard, that there was no such matter, and that he never had any brother; the
Soldiers would hardly have spared the Lievetenants life; for he played it
merely, as if it had bin some interlude upon the Stage.

Now we are come to a period of our Treatise concerning Rational knowledges;
wherein if we have sometimes departed from the received partitions, yet let no
man think that we disallow all those Partitions which we have not used: for
there is a double necessity imposed upon us, of altering the Divisions; The one
because these two, namely to sort together those things which are next in
nature, and to cast into one Pile those things which are next in use; are in
their end and purpose altogiter differing. For example; A Secretary of a Prince
or of Estate, so digests his Papers, without doubt, in his study, as he may
sort together things of like nature, as Treaties apart, Instructions apart,
Foreign letters, Domestique letters, all apart by themselves; on the contrary
in some particular Cabinet, he sorts together those that he were like to use
together, though of several nature: so in this general Cabinet of knowledge,
we were to set down Partitions according to the nature of things themselves;
whereas if any particular science were to be handled, we should have respected
the divisions fittest for use and practice. The other reason of changing the
Division is, because the adjection of Deficients to Sciences; and the reduction
of them into an entire Body, did by consequence, alter the Partition of the
Sciences themselves. For say the Arts which are extant (for demonstration sake)
be in number 15. and the Deficients superadded make up the number 20. I say
that the Parts of 15. are not the parts of 20, for the parts of 15. are 3. and
5. but the parts of 20. are 2. 4. 5. and 10. so is it plain these could not
otherwise be. And so much of Logical Sciences.

THE SEVENTH BOOK OF FRANCIS LO. VERVLAM VICOUNT St ALBAN. OF THE DIGNITY AND
ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING. To the KING.
CAP. I. I The Partition of Morale knowledge, into the Doctrine of Exemplar, or
Platform; and into the Georgiques or Culture of the Mind. The Division of the
Platform of Good, into Good Simple, and Good Compared. II. The Division of
Good simple, into Individual Good, and Good of Communion.
WE are now come (Excellent KING) unto Morale knowledge, which respects and
handles the will of Man: Right Reason governes the will, Good Apparent
seduceth it; the Incentives of the will are the Affections, the Organs and
voluntary Motions, are her Ministers; of this faculty Solomon says, Above all
keepings, keep thy Heart; for out of it issue, the actions of life. Prove. IV.
In handling of this Science, those which have written thereof, seem to me to
have done, as if a man that professed the Art of writing* should only exhibit
fair copies of Alphabets and letters joined, without giving any precepts for
the carriage of the hand and framing of the Characters: so have they propounded
unto us good and fair examples and draughts, or accurate portraitures of Good,
Virtue, Duties, Felicity, as the true objects and scopes of man's Will and
Desires: but how to take a just level at these marks (excellent indeed and by
them well set down) that is, by what precepts and directions, the Mind may be
subdued and framed, to pursue and attain them; either they pass it over
altogether, or perform it slightly and unprofitably* It is not the disputeing
that Moral virtues are in the mind of Man by habit, and not by Nature; or
formally distinguishing between Generous spirits and the obscure vulgar; that
those are won by the weight of Reasons; these by reward and Punishment; or
the witty precept, that to rectify the mind of man, Aristoteles Et. lib. 2.
it must like a staff, be bowed the contrary way to its inclination; and the
like glances scattered here and there. These and the like are far short of
being a just excuse of the deficience of that thing, which now we seek. The
reason of this neglect I suppose to be, that hidden Rock, whereupon so many
Barks of Knowledges have run and bin cast away; which is, that writers
despise to be conversant in ordinary and common matters; which are neither
subtle enough for Disputation, nor flourishing enough for Ornament. Verily it
cannot easily be expressed, what calamity this thing we now speak of has
brought upon Sciences; that out of an imbred Pride and vainglory, men have
made choice of such subjects of Discourse, and of such a manner and method of
handling, as may commend rather their own wit, than consult the Readers profit.
In Epist.
Seneca says excellently, Nocet illis eloquentia, quibus non rerum facit
cupiditatem* sed sui, For writings should be such, as should make men in love
with the Lessons, and not with the Teachers. Therefore they take a right
course, which can openly avouch the same of their Counsills, which Demosthenes
once did, Demost.
and can conclude with this clause, which if you put in execution, you shall
not only commend the Orator for the instant, but your selves likewise, not long
after, in a more prosperous state of your affairs. As for my self (Excellent
KING) to speak the truth of my self, I have often wittingly and willingly
neglected the glory of mine own Name, and Learning (if any such thing be) both
in the works I now publish, and in those J contrive for hereafter; whilst I
study to advance the good and profit of mankind. And I, that have deserved,
perchance* to be an Architect in Philosophy and Sciences, am made a Workman
and a Labourer, and at length any thing else whatsoever; seeing I sustain and
work out my self, many things that must needs be done; and others out of a
natural disdain shift off and refuse to do. But, (to return to the matter)
which we were about to say, Philosophers in Moral Science, have chosen to
themselves a resplendent and lustrous mass of matter; wherein they may most
glorify themselves, for sharpness of wit, or strength of Eloquence but such
precepts as specially conduce to practice, because they cannot be so set out,
and invested with the ornaments of speech; they have in a manner passed over in
silence. Neither needed men of so excellent parts, to have despaired of a
fortune like that, which the Poet Virgil, had the confidence to promise to
himself, and indeed obtaind; who got as much glory of Eloquence, Wit, and
Learning, in the expressing of the observations of husbandry; as in describeing
the Heroical Acts of Aeneas. Nec sum animi dubious, verbis ea vincere, magnum,
Geor. 3.

Quam fit, and angustis his addere rebus honorem.
And surely if the purpose be in good earnest, not to write at leisure, that
which men may read at leisure; but really to instruct and be a subsidiary to
Active life, these GEORGIQUES OF MAN'S MIND, ought to be had in as great estime
with men, as those heroical portraitures of Virtue, Goodness, and Felicity,
wherein so much labor and cost has bin bestowed.

I. We will therefore divide Moral Philosophy, into two maine and Principal
Knowledges; the one concerning the Exemplar or Image of Good* the other
concerning, the Regiment and Culture of the Mind, which we are wont to call,
the GEORGIQUES OF THE MIND: that describes the Nature of Good; this prescribes
rules, how to subdue and accommodate the mind of Man thereunto.

The Doctrine touching the Platform, which respects and describes the Nature
of Good, considers Good either Simple or Compared, I say either the kinds of
Good, or the Degrees of Good. In the latter of these, those infinite
Disputations and speculations touching the supreme degree of Good, which they
term Felicity, Beatitude, the highest good, (the Doctrines of which were the
Heathens Divinity) are by the Christian Faith, taken away and discharged. For
as Aristotle says, Rhet. lib. 2.
That Young men may be happy, but not otherwise, but by hope; so must we all,
being so taught by Christian Faith, acknowledge our selves to be but children
and in our Minority; and think of no other felicity, than that which is in hope
of the future world. Freed therefore by happy fate from this doctrine, which
was the Heathens Heaven (wherein without doubt, they attributed a higher
elevation of man's Nature, than it was capeable of; for we see in what a height
of style Seneca writes, In Epist.
vere Magnum habere fragilitatem hominis, securitatem Dei) we may certainly
with less loss of sobriety and Truth, receive for most part, the rest of
their inquiries concerning the doctrine of the Platform. As concerning the
Nature of Good Positive and Simple, surely they have set it out in beautiful
colors and drawn it to the life, upon excellent Tables; representing with
exact diligence to the eye, the Forms, Postures, Kinds, Affinities, Parts,
Subjects, Provinces, Actions, Administrations of virtues and Duties. Nor do
they so leave the pursuit; for they have commended and insinuated all these
into the spirit of man, with great quickness and vivacity of Arguments, and
sweetness, and beauty of Persuasions; yea and fortified and entrenched the
same (as much as discourse can do) against corrupt and populare opinions and
invasions. As touching the nature of comparative good, they have also well
handled that, in setting down that triplicite Order of Good, in comparing
contemplative life with Active; in distinguishing between virtue with
reluctation, and virtue settled by security and confirmed: in the conflict and
encounter; between honesty and profit; in the ballancing of virtue with virtue,
to see which preponderates other; and the like. So as this part touching the
Platform; I find excellently labored, and that the ancients herein have
showed themselves admirable men: yet so as the pious and painful diligence of
Divines, being practiced in Duties, Moral virtues, Cases of Conscience, and
circumscriptions of sin, have far outgone the Philosophers. Notwithstanding
(to return to the Philosophers) if before they had addressed themselves to the
popular and reciv'd notions of Virtue, Vice, Pain, Pleasure, and the rest;
they had stayed a little longer and had searched the Roots of Good and Evil,
and the strings of those Roots; they had given in my judgment a great light
unto all which might fall into inquiry afterward: especially if they had
consulted as well with the Nature of things, as with the Axioms of Morality,
they had made their Doctrines less prolixe, and more profounde: which being by
them either altogether omitted, or very confusedly handled, we will briefly
reexamine and endeavor to open and clear the springs of Moral habits, before
we come unto the doctrine of the Culture or Manurance of the Mind, which we
set down as DEFICIENT.

II. There is imbred and imprinted in every thing an appetite to a duple Nature
of Good: the One as everything is a Total or Substantive in it self; the
other as it is a part or membre of some greater Total: and this latter is more
excellent and potent than the other, because it tends to the conservation of
a more ample form. The first may be called Jndividuall or selfe-Good; the
latter the Good of Communion. Jron in a particular Sympathy moves to the
Loadstone, but yet if it exceed a certain Quantity, it forsakes those
affections, and like a good Citizen and a true Patriot moves to the Earth,
which is the Region and Country of its connaturalls. To proceed a little
further; Dense and Massy Bodies move to the earth, to the great Congregation
of close-compacted Bodies; yet rather than to suffer a divulsion in the
continuance of nature, and that there should be, as they call it, a Vacuum,
these Bodies will move upwards, forsaking their duty to the Earth, that they
may perform the general duty they owe unto the World. So it is ever seen that
the Conservation of the more general and public form, commands and governs
the lesser and more particular Appetites and Inclinations. But this Prerogative
of the Good of Communion, is especially engraven upon Man, if he degenerate not
according to that memorable speech of Pompeius Magnus, who being in Commission
for purveyance for a Famine at Rome, and being dissuaded with great vehemence
and instance by his friends that he would not hazard himself to Sea in an
extremity of weather, he answered only this, Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam.
So as the love of life which in every Individual Creature is so predominant an
affection, could not out-ballance his love and loyalty to the state. But why
do we dwell upon this Point? There was never extant in any age of the world,
either Philosophy, or Sect, or Religion, or Law, or Discipline which has so
highly exalted the Good of Communion and depressed Good private and particular,
as the Holy Christian Faith, whereby it clearly appears, that it was one and
the same God that gave the Christian Law to Men, who gave those Laws of Nature
to Creatures of inferior order. Wherefore we read that many of the elect Saints
of God have rather wished themselves anathematized and razed out of the Book of
Life than that their brethren should not attain salvation; Romans IX.
provoked through an ecstasy of Charity and an infinite feeling of the Good of
Communion. This being set down and strongly planted, does judge and determine
many of the profoundest Controversies in Moral Philosophy. For first, it
decideth the Question touching the preferment of the Contemplative or Active
life; and that against the opinion of Aristotle: for all the reasons which he
brings for the Contemplative, respect a private Good, and the pleasure and
dignity of an Individual only; in which respects (no question) a
Contemplatixe life has the pre-eminence. For the Contemplative life is not
much unlike to that comparison to which Pythagoras made for the gracing and
magnifying of Philosophy and Contemplation; who being asked by Hiero what he
was, answered; That if Hiero were ever at the Olympian Games, Iamb. in vita.
he knew the manner that some came to try their fortunes for the prizes; and
some came as Merchants to utter their commodities; and some came to make good
cheer, to be merry, and to meet with their friends; and some came to look, on
and that he was one of them that came to look on. But men must know that in
this Theater of Man's life, it is reserved onley for God and Angels, to be
Lookers on. Neither surely could it have bin that any doubt, touching this
point, should ever have bin raised in the Church (notwithstanding that saying
was frequent in many men's Mouths, Psalm. CXVI.
Pretiosa in oculis Domini mors sanctorum ejus: by which place they use to
exalt their Civil Death and the Laws of a Monastique and Regulare course of
life;) but upon this defense, that the Monastical life is not simply
Contemplative; but is altogether conversant in Ecclesiastique Duties, such as
are incessant Prayer; Sacrifices of Vows performed to God; the writing also,
in such great leisure, Theological Books for the propagation of the knowledge
of the Divine Law, Exodus XXIII.
as Moses did when he abode so many days in the retired secrecy of the Mount.
And so we see Enoch the seventh from Adam, who seems to be the first founder
of a Contemplative life, Genesis V.
(for he is said to have walked with God) yet endowed the Church with a Book of
Prophecy, which is also cited by St Jude. In Epist.
But as for a mere Contemplative life, and terminated in it self, which
casts no Beams of heat or light upon humane society; assuredly Divinity
knows it not. It decides also the Question controverted with such heat between
the Schools of Zeno and Socrates, on the one side, who placed Felicity in
Virtue simple or attended, which has a great share in the Duties of life: and
on the other side other Sects and Professions, as the Schools of the
Cirenaiques and Epicureans, who placed it in pleasure; and made Virtue, (as it
is used in some Comoedies, where the Mistress and the Maid change habits) to
be but as a handmaid, without which Pleasure cannot be well waited and
attended upon; as also that other, as it were, reformed School of Epicurus,
Laert. in vita.
which asserted Felicity to be nothing else than a Tranquillity and Serenitie
of Mind free and void of all Perturbations; as if they would have deposed
Jupiter from his Throne and restored Saturn with the Golden Age, when there
was no Summer nor Winter, nor Spring nor Autumn, but all after one Air and
Season. Lastly, the exploded School of Pyrrho and Herillus, which placed
Felicity in the utter extinction and extirpation of all the scruples and
disputes of the mind, making no fixed and constant nature of Good, and Evil,
but estiming Actions Good or Evil, as they proceed from the Mind in a clear
and resolute motion; or contrariwise with aversation and reluctance. Which
opinion notwithstanding has revived in the Eresy of the Anabaptists, who
measured all things according to the Motions and Instincts of the spirit, and
the constancy, or wavering of Belief. But it is manifest that all this we have
recited, tends to private repose and complacency of Mind, and no way to the
Point of Society, and the Good of Communion. Again, it censures also the
Philosophy of Epictetus, Epict. Enchir. Arrian. Lib. 1.
who lays down this presupposition; That felicity must be placed in those
things which are in our power, lest we be liable to fortune and disturbance; as
if it were not a thing much more happy, to be distributed and frustrated of a
good success in worthy and generous intentions and ends, which concern the
Public Good, than to obtain all that we can wish to our selves, in those
things which refer to our Private Fortune. As Consalvo showing his Soldiers
Naples, bravely protested, That he had rather run himself upon certain
ruin with one foot forward, than to have his life secured for long, by one
foot of reretrait. Whereunto the wisdom of that heavenly leader and commander
has signed, Prove. XV.
who has affirmed, That a good conscience is a continual feast; by which
words is plainly signified, that a Mind Conscious of good Intentions, however
succeeding, affords more solid and sincere joy, and to nature more agreeable,
than all that provision wherewith man may be furnished either for the fruition
of his desires, or the repose of his Mind. It censureth likewise that abuse of
Philosophy, which grew general about the time of Epictetus, which was, that
Philosophy was converted into a professory kind of life, and as it were into an
Occupation or Art; as if the purpose of Philosophy, was not to repress and
extinguish perturbations, but to fly and avoid the causes and occasions of
them; and therefore to shape a particular kind and course of life to that end;
introducing indeed such a kind of health of mind, as was that of Herodicus in
body, whereof Aristotle makes mention, which was, that he did nothing all his
life long but intend his health, and therefore abstaind from infinite number of
things, being amerc'd by the fruition of his body: whereas if men refer
themselves to duties of society, that health of Body is principally to be
desired, which may best endure and overcome all alterations and extremities: so
likewise that mind is properly sound and strong, which can break through the
most and greatest temptations and perturbations. So as Diogenes seems to have
spoken well, who commends those powers of the Mind, (...). Summa Stoic. Philos.
which were able not warily to abstain but valiantly to sustain, and which
could refrain the violent encounter of the Mind, even in the steepest
Precipices, and which could give unto the Mind (which is commended in
well-broken horses) the shortest stop and turn. Lastly, it censures the
tenderness and the want of Morigerous application, noted in some of the most
ancient and reverend Philosophers, that did retire too easily from Civil
business, that they might discharge themselves of all indignities and
perturbations, and so might live, in their opinion, more unstained, and as it
were, sanctified persons; whereas the resolution of a man truly moral, ought
to be such, as the same Consalvo required in a soldier, which is that his
Honor should be woven e Tela Crassiore, and not so fine as that every thing
should catch in it, and tear it.

CAP. II. I The Partition of Particular or private Good, into Good Active, and
Good Passive. II. The Division of Good Passive, into Conservative Good, and
Perfective Good. III. The Division of the Good of Communion into General and
Respective Duties.
I. WHerefore let us now resume and prosecute first Private or Particulare
Good: we will divide it into Good Active and Good Passive, for this difference
of Good (not unlike surely to those Appellations, which amongst the Romans,
were familiar in their Household Terms of Promus and Condus) is found
impressed in the whole course of Nature: but chiefly discloseth it self in the
two several Appetites of Creatures; the one of Conserving and fortifying
themselves; the other of multiplying and dilating themselves; and this latter
which is Active, and as it were, the Promus seems to be the more powerful and
the more worthy; but the former which is Passive, and, as it were, the Condus,
may be taken as inferior and less worthy. For in the universal frame of
Nature, the Heavenly nature is chiefly the Agent; the Terrestrial nature the
Patient: so in the Pleasures of living Creatures, the pleasure of Generation is
greater, then that of Nutrition: and in the divine Oracles it is pronounced,
Act. 20.
Beatius esse dare quam accipere. Nay farther, in the common course of life,
there is no man's spirit so soft and effeminate, but estimes the effecting, and
bringing to some issue that which he has fixed in his desire; more than any
sensuality or pleasure. And certainly this pre-eminence of Active Good, is
infinitely exalted from the consideration of our humane condition, that it is
mortal, and also exposed to the stroke of Fortune: for if there could be
obtained, a license of perpetuity and certainty in humane Pleasures, their
price would be advanced, for their security and continuance. And in as much as
we see, that the sum of all comes to this, Magni aestimamus mori tardius; Et
ne glorieris de crastino, nescis partum Diei; it is no wonder if with all
contention of spirit, we pursue those things, which are secured and exempt from
the injuries and affronts of time: and these things can be nothing else but
only our deeds, as it is said, opera eorum sequuntur eos. Apoc. XIV.


There is likewise another pre-eminence of Good Active, of import implanted in,
and supported by that affection, which cleaves close to man's nature, as an
individuate companion; which is the love of Novelty and Variety: and this
Affection in the pleasures of the senses (which are the very principal part of
Passive Good) is exceeding narrow and has no great latitude: Do but think
(says Seneca) how often you have acted over the same things, Meat, Sleep,
Mirth, Sen. de brevit. vitae.
we run round in this circle, to be willing to dye; not only a valiant, or a
wretched, or a wise man may, but even a fastidious and nice nature may. But in
the Enterprises, Purposes and Pursuits of our life, there is much variety,
whereof we are sensible in our inceptions, progressions, rests, recoiles, to
redintegrate our forces, approaches, attainings and the like; so as it was very
well said, vita sine Proposito languida and vaga est: which indifferently
befalls both to the wise and unwise, as says Solomon, A light-brain'd man,
seeks to satisfy his fancy, and intermixeth himself in all things. Nay we see
likewise, that many great Princes, who may have at command whatsoever may
delight the Senses, notwithstanding many times, have procured to themselves
poor desires, and set their hearts upon toies; (as Nero, in playing upon the
Harp; Commodus in playing at Fence; Antoninus in driving Chariots, and others
taken up with other delights) which to them were more acceptable than all the
affluence of sensual Pleasures: so much great refreshing and contentment it
is, to go forward in Action, than to stand at a stay in fruition. This in the
mean is to be somewhat more diligently noted, that this Active individual
Good, altogether differs from the good of Society, though oftentimes they are
coincident; for although that Particular Active Good, does many times breed,
and bring forth Acts of Beneficence, which is a virtue of Communion; yet here is
the difference, that those Acts are by most men performed, not with intention
to benefit and make happy others, but merely in a private respect to
themselves, and their own power and amplification. This best appears when Good
Active lights upon a subject which is contrary to the Good of Communion: for
that Gigantive state of mind which possesses the troublers of the world (such
as was L. Sylla, and infinite others, thoe in a far smaller Model) who seem
to endeavor this, to have all men happy or unhappy as they were their Friends
or Enemies, and that the world might bear their stamp and be formd to their
humors (which is the true Theomachie,) this I say, aspires to Active
Particulare Good, at least in appearance, although it does most of all recede from
the Good of Society.

II. But we will divide Passive Good into Good Conservative and Good
Perfective. For there is implanted in every thing a triple Appetite in respect
of Private or Particular Good; the first of preserving or continuing it self;
the second of advancing and perfecting it self; the third of multiplying and
extending it self: but this last Appetite is referred to Active Good, whereof
we spoke even now. There remain therefore the two other kinds of Good, of
which the Perfective excells; for it is less to conserve a thing in its
natural state, but greater to advance the same thing to a higher nature; for
there are found through all Essences some nobler natures, to the dignity and
excellency whereof inferior natures do aspire, as to their originals and
springs. So concerning Men, the Poet does not impertinently describe, Virg.
Aen. 6
Igneus est Ollis vigor and Coelestis Origo; Man's assumption or approach to a
divine or Angelical Nature is the perfection of his Form; a depraved and
preposterous imitation of which Perfective Good, is the destruction of humane
life and a violent Tempest which bears down and ruins all, that is, while
men instead of a formal and essential advancement are carried in a blind
Ambition to an Advancement only Local. For as those which are sick and find
no Remedy, do tumble up and down and change place, as if by a remove Local,
they could obtain a remove internal, and shift of their disease: so it is in
Ambition that men being possessed, and led away with a false resemblance of
exalting their nature, purchase nothing else but an eminence and celsitude of
Place.

But Good Conservative is no other then the reception and fruition of things
agreeable to our Nature; and this Good tho it be most simple and Native; yet
seems it to be of all other kinds of Good the softest and lowest. And this
Good also admits a difference, which has neither bin well judged of* nor well
inquired; for the Good of Fruition, or (as it is commonly called) the dignity
and commendation of delightful Good, is placed either in the Syncerity of the
Fruition, or in the quickness and vigor of it; whereof the one is superinduced
by Equality; the other by Variety and Viciscitude: the one having a less
mixture of Evil; the other a more strong and lively impression of Good. But of
these, whether is the greater Good, is a question controverted; But whether a
man's nature may be capable of both at once, is a question not inquired.

As touching that whereof a Question is raised: a Controversy began to be
debated between Socrates and a Sophist; Socrates affirmed; Plato in Gorg.
That Felicity was placed in a constant Peace and Tranquillity of mind; but
the Sophist in this, That a man desire much, and enjoy much. And so they fell
from Arguments to ill words; the Sophists saying that Socrates Felicity was the
Felicity of a block or stone; Socrates on the other side, That the Sophists
Felicity was the Felicity of one that had the Jtch, who did nothing but itch
and scratch. And both these opinions do not want their supports; for to
Socrates opinion assents even the School of Epicurus which deemes not but that
Virtue bears a great part in Felicity; and if so, Certain it is, that
Virtue has more use in clearing Perturbations, then in compassing desires. The
Sophists opinion is much favored by the assertion we last spoke of; namely
that Good Perfective is greater than Good Preservative, because the obtaining
of things desired, seems by degrees to perfect nature; which though it do not
do it indeed, yet the very motion it self in circle has a show of
Progressive Motion.

But the second Question, (whether humane nature may not at once retain, both
the tranquillity of Mind and the active vigor of fruition) decided the true
way makes the former idle and superfluous. For do we not often see that some
men are so framed and composed by nature, as they are extremely affected with
pleasures while they are present; and yet are not greatly troubled at the
leaving or loss of them. So as the Philosophical consequence, Non uti, ut non
appetas, non appetere ut non metuas, seems to be the resolution of a poor and
diffident spirit,. Surely most of the Doctrines of Philosophers seem to be
somewhat more fearful and cautionary, then the nature of things requires; as
when they increase the fear of death by curing it: for when they would have a
man's whole life to be but a discipline or preparation to die; how can it be
that that enemy should not seeeme wonderful terrible, against whom there is
no end of preparing? better says the Poet thoe a Heathen, Iuven. Satir. 10.
Qui spacium vitae extremum, inter munera ponat Naturae. -- So have the
Philosophers sought to make the Mind in all things uniforme and Harmonicall;
by not breaking them to contrary Motions and extremes. The reason whereof I
suppose to have bin, because they dedicated themselves to a private course of
life; exempt and free from active imploiments and observances to others. But
let men rather imitate the wisdom of Iewellers, who, if perchance, there be in
the Gemme a Cloud or an Ice, which may so be ground forth, as it abate not the
stone too much, they help it, otherwise they will not meddle with it: so ought
men so to procure Serenitie of mind as they destroy not Magnanimity. Thus
much of Particulare Good.

III. Now therefore after we have spoken of Selfe-good (which also we use to
call Good Particular, Private, Individual, let us resume the Good of
Communion, which respects Society, This is commonly termed by the name of
Duty, because the term of Duty, is more proper to a mind well framed and
disposed toward others; the term of Virtue, to a mind well formed and
composed in it self. But this part at first sight may seem to pertain to
Science Civil, or Politic, but not if it be well observed; for it concerns
the Regiment and Government of every man over himself, and not over others.
And as in Architecture, it is one thing, to frame the Posts, Beams, and other
parts of an Edifice, and to prepare them for the use of building; and another
thing, to fit and join the same parts together: and as in Mechanicalls, the
direction how to frame, and make an instrument or engine, is not the same with
the manner of erecting, moving, and setting it on work: So the doctrine of the
conjugation of men, in a City or Society, differs from that which makes them
conformed, and well affected to the weal of such a Society.

This Part of Duties is likewise distributed into two portions, whereof the one
respects the common duty of every man; the other the special and respective
Duties, of every man in his profession, vocation, state, person, and place. The
first of these, has bin well labored, and diligently explicated by the
Ancients and others, as has bin said* the other we find to have bin sparsedly
handled, althoe not digested into an entire body of a Science; which manner of
dispersed kind of writing, we do not dislike; howbeit in our judgment, to
have written of this Argument by parts, were far better. For who is endewed
with so much perspicacity and confidence, as that he can take upon him to
discourse, and make a judgment skilfully, and to the life, of the peculiar and
respective duties, of every particular order, condition and profession? And the
treatises which are not seasond with experience, but are drawn only from a
general and Scholasticall notion of things, are touching such matters, for
most part, idle and fruitless discourses. For althoe sometimes a looker on may
see more then a gamester; and there be a common proverb, more arrogant than
sound, proceeding from the censure of the vulgar, touching the actions of
Princes, That the vale best discovers the Hills; yet it could be especially
wished, that none would intermeddle or engage themselves in subjects of this
nature, but only such as are well experienced and practiced in the particular
customs of men. For the labors and vigilancies of speculative men, Cic. Lib.
2. de Oratore.
in Active Matters, do seem to men of experience, little better than the
discourses of Phormio of the wars, seemed to Hanniball, which estimed them
but dreams and dotage. Only there is one vice which accompanies them, which
write books of matters pertaining to their own profession, and Art, which is,
that they magnify and extol them in excess.

K. JAMES. DORON. BASIL.
In which kind of Books, it were a crime Piacular, not to mention, Honoris
causa, Your Majesty's excellent work touching the duty of a King: for this
writing has accumulated and congested within it many treasures as well open as
secret of Divinity, Morality, and Policy, with great aspersion of all other
Arts; and it is in my opinion one of the most sound and healthful writings
that J have read. It does not float with the heat of Invention; nor freez and
sleep with the coldness of negligence: it is not now and than taken with a
wheeling dizzines, so to confound and loose it self in its order; nor is it
distracted and discontinued by digressions, as those discourses are; which by a
winding expatiation, fetch in and enclose matter that speaks nothing to the
purpose; nor is it corrupted, with the cheating Arts of Rhetorical perfumes
and paintings, who choose rather to please the Reader, than to satisfy the
nature of the Argument. But chiefly that work has life and spirit, as Body and
Bulk, as excellently agreeing with truth, and most apt for use and action: and
likewise clearly exempt from that vice noted even now, (which if it were
tolerable in any, certainly, it were so in KINGS, and in a writing concerning
Regal Majesty) namely, that it does not excessively and invidiously exalt the
Crown and Dignity of Kings. For Your Majesty has not described a King of
Persia or Assyria, radiant, and shining in extreme Pomp and Glory; but really,
a Moses or a David, Pastors of the People. Neither can I ever loose out of my
remembrance, a Speech, which Your Majesty, in the sacred Spirit, wherewith you
are endowed to govern Your people, delivered in a great cause of Judicature,
which was, JACOB. R. dictum memorab.
That Kings ruled by the Laws of their Kingdoms, as God did by the Laws of
Nature; and ought as rarely to put in use that their prerogative, which
transcends Laws, as we see God put in use his power of working Miracles. And
yet notwithstanding in that other book, written by Your Majesty, DE LIB MONAR.
of a free Monarchy, You give all men to understand, that Your Majesty, knows
and comprehends the Plenitude of the Power of Kings, and the Vltimities (as the
Schools speak) of Regal Rights; as well as the circle and bounds of their
Office, and Royal Duty. Wherefore I have presumed, to allege that book
written by Your Majesty, as a prime and most eminent example of Tractates,
concerning special and Respective Duties. Of which Book, what I have now said,
I should in truth have said as much, if it had bin written by any King a
thousand years since. Neither does that kind of nice Decency move me, whereby
commonly it is prescribed not to praise in presence, so those Praises exceed
not measure; or be attributed unseasonably or upon no occasion presented.
Surely Cicero in that excellent oration Pro M. Marcello studies nothing else,
Cicero.
but to exhibit a fair Table drawn by singular Art, of Caesar's virtues, thoe
that Oration was made to his face; which likewise Plinius secundus did to
Trajan. Plin. Iun.
Now let us resume our intended purpose.

There belongs farther to this part, touching the Respective Duties of
vocations and particular Professions, SATYRA SERIA, sive de Interioribus rerum.
and other knowledge, as it were, Relative and Opposite unto the former,
concerning the Frauds, Cautels, Impostures, and vices of every Profession: For
Corruptions and Vices, are opposed to Duties and Virtues. Nor are these
Depravations altogether silenced in many writings and Tractates; but for most
part, these are noted only upon the By, and that by way of Digression: but how?
rather in a Satyr and Cynically after Lucians manner, than seriously and
gravely, for men have rather sought by wit to traduce, and to expose to scorn
that which is useful and sound, in Arts and Professions; than to sever that
which is good and wholesome, from that which is corrupt and vicious. But Solomon
says excellently; Prove. XIV.
A scorner seeks wisdom and finds it not; but knowledge is easy unto him that
understands: for he that comes to seek after knowledge, with a mind to scorn,
and censure; shall be sure to find matter for his humor, but no matter for his
instruction. And certainly a grave and wise Treatise of this argument, whereof
we now speak, and that with sincerity and integrity, seems worthy to be
reckoned one of the best fortifications of virtue and honesty, that can be
planted. For as the Fable goes of the Basiliske, that if he see a man first,
the man dies; but if a man see him first, the Basiliske dies; so it is with
Frauds, Impostures, and evil Arts; if a man discover them first, they loose
their power of doing hurt; but if they prevent, then, and not otherwise, they
endanger. So that we are much beholding to Machiavill, and such writers, who
discover apertly and plainly, what men use to do, not what men ought to do:
for it is not possible to join the wisdom of the Serpent, with the Innocence
of the Dove, except a man know exactly the nature of evil it self; for
without this skill, virtue lies open and unfencd; nay a sincere and honest man,
can do no good upon those that are wicked, to reclaim them, unless he know
all the coverts and profundities of Malice. For men of corrupt minds and
depraved judgments, presuppose, that honesty grows out of the weakness of
Nature, and simplicity of Manners, and only out of a belief given to Preachers
and Schoolmasters; as likewise to Books; Moral Precepts; and popular
opinions* so that unless you can make them plainly to perceive, that their
depraved and corrupt Principles, and crooked Rules, are as deeply sounded, and
as plainly discovered, by those who exhort and admonish them, as they are to
themselves, they despise all the integrity of Moral Practices or Precepts;
according to that admirable Oracle of Solomon, Prove. 18.
Non recipit stultus verba prudentiae, nisi ea dixeris, quae versantur in cord
ejus. But this part concerning Respective Cautels and vices, we place in the
number of DEFICIENTS, and will call it by the name of SATYRA SERIA, or of a
Treatise De Interioribus Rerum.

So to this kind of knowledge, touching Respective Duties, do also appertain
the Natural Duties between Husband and wife; Parents and Children, Master and
Servant: so likewise the laws of Friendship and Gratitude; as also the Civil
bonds of Corporations, Companies, Colleges, Neighborhood and the like. But
it must ever be presupposed, that they are here handled, not as parts of Civil
society (for that is referred to the Politiques) but as to the framing and
predisposing of the Minds of Particular persons, to the maintaining of those
Bonds of Society.

But the Knowledge concerning the Good of Communion or of Society, even as that
of Good Individual, does handle Good not simple alone, but also comparatively;
whereunto belongs the waighing of Duties between Person and Person; Case and
Case; Private and Public; between time Present and Future: as we may see in
the severe and cruel proceeding of L. Brutus against his own Sons, Live.
Hist. lib. 2. Florus Hist. lib. 1. Plutar. in M. Bruto.
which by the most was extolled to the heavens; yet another said Infelix
utcunque ferent ea fata Minores. The same we may see in that supper unto which
M. Brutus, and C. Cassius were invited, for there when there was a question
shrewdly cast forth, Whether it was lawful to kill a Tyranne? on purpose to
feel the minds of the company, touching a conspiracy intended against Caesar's
life; the guests were divided in opinion; some said it was directly lawful,
for that servitude was the extreme of Evils; Others were of a contrary mind,
for that Tyranny was not so great a misery as Civil war; a third sort, as if
they had issued out of the School of Epicurus, avouched; That it was an
unworthy thing, that wise men should hazard their lives and states for Fools.
But there are many Cases touching comparative Duties, amongst which, that of
all other is the most frequent; Whether a man ought to swerve from the rule of
Justice, for the safety of his Country, or some such notable Good, to ensue
afterward? Touching which case Jason of Thessalie was wont to say, Plut. Moral.
Praec. gerend. Reip.
Aliqua sunt injuste facienda ut multa just fieri possint, but the Reply is
ready, Auctorem praesentis justitiae habes, sponsorem futurae non habes: Men
must pursue things which are just in present, and leave the future to the
Divine Providence. And thus touching the Exemplar, or of the description of
Good.

CAP. III. I. The Partition of the Doctrine of the Culture of the Mind, into
the Knowledge of the Characters of the Mind. II. Of the Affections or Passions.
III. And of the Remedies or Cures. IIII. An Appendix of the same Dostrine,
touching the Congruity between the Good of the Mind, and the Good of the Body.
NOw that we have spoken in a Philosophical sense of the fruit of Life, it
remains that we speak of the Culture of the Mind, which is due unto it,
without which the former part seems nothing else, than an Image or Statue,
beautiful to contemplate, but destitute of Life and Motion; Mag. Moral. lib. 1.
to which opinion, Aristotle himself subscribes in these plain words,
Wherefore it is necessary to speak of virtue, both what it is, and from what it
proceeds: for it would be to little purpose, to know virtue, and to be ignorant
of the manner and means how to compass it. Concerning virtue therefore inquiry
must be made, not only of what kind it is, but by what ways it may be
acquired: for we desire both these, the knowledge of the thing it self, and
the fruition thereof; but this cannot be effected, unless we know of what
materials it is compounded, and how to procure the same: In such full words,
and with such iteration does he inculcate this Part; which yet notwithstanding
himself pursues not. This likewise is the very same which Cicero attributes to
Cato the Younger, as a great commendation, which was, that he had applied
himself to Philosophy, Pro. L. Muraen.
Non disputandi causa, ut magna pars, sed ita vivendi. And althoe through the
negligence of the times wherein we live, few hold any consultation diligently,
to manure and till the Mind, and frame their course of life (according to some
Rule; according to that of Seneca, De Brev. vitae.
De partibus vitae quisque deliberat, de summa nemo; so as this part may seem
superfluous,) yet this moves us not, so as to leave it untouched, but rather we
conclude with that Aphorism of Hippocrates, They who are sick of a dangerous
disease, Aphor. l. 2.
and feel no pain, are distempered in their understanding: Such men need
medicine, not only to assuage the disease, but to awake the sense. And if it be
said that the Cure of men's minds, belongs to sacred Divinity, it is most truly
said; but yet why may not Moral Philosophy be accepted into the train of
Theology, as a wise servant and a faithful handmaid, ready at all commands to
do her service? For as it is in the Psalm, That the eyes of the Handmaid,
Psalm. 123.
look perpetually toward the Mistress; and yet no doubt many things are left
to the discretion and care of the Handmaid; so ought Moral Philosophy to give
all due observance to Divinity, and to be obsequious to her Precepts; yet so,
as it may yield of it self, within its own limits, many sound and profitable
directions. This Part therefore, when I seriously consider the excellency
thereof, I can not but find exceeding strange, that it is not yet reduced into
a Body of Knowledge. Wherefore seeing we have reported it as DEFICIENT, we will
after our manner give some Adumbrations thereof.

I. First therefore, in this as in all things which are Practical, we ought to
cast up our account, what is in our power, GEORGICA ANIMI, five de cultura
Morum.
and what not: for the one may be dealt with by way of Alteration; the other by
way of Application only. The Husbandman cannot command either the nature of
the Earth, or the seasons of the weather; no more can the Physician the natural
temper or constitution of the Patient or the variety of Accidents. Now in the
Culture of the mind of man, and the cure of the Diseases thereof; three things
fall into consideration: The diverse Characters of Dispositions; the
Affections; and the Remedies. As in curing the Body three things are
propounded, the Complexion or Constitution of the Patient; the Disease; and the
Cure; and of these three, the last only is in our power, the two former are
not. Yet even in those things which are not in our power, no less diligent
inquiry is to be made thereof, then in those which are subject to our power;
for a distinct and exact knowledge of them, is to be laid as a groundwork to
the knowledge of the Remedies; that they may be more aptly and successefully
applied; for neither can a garment be well fitted to the Body, unless you
first take the measure of the Body.

Wherefore the first article of this knowledge of the Culture of the Mind,
shall be conversant about the diverse Characters of men's natures or
dispositions. Neither do we here speak of those common Proclivities to virtues
and vices; or Perturbations and passions: but of those which are more
intrinsique and radical. Surely for this part of knowledge, I do much wonder
that it should be, for most part, so neglected or slightly past over, by
writers Moral and Political; considering it casts such resplendent beams upon
both those kinds of knowledges. In the Traditions of Astrology, the natures and
dispositions of men, are not without some color of truth, distinguished from
the Praedominancies of Planets; as that some are by nature made and
proportioned for contemplation; others for matters Civil; others for War;
others for Advancement; others for Pleasure; others for Arts; others for
changeable course of life. So among the Poets, Heroical, Satyricall,
Tragedians, Comedians, you shall find every where, the Images of wits, althoe
commonly with excess and beyound the bounds of Truth. Nay this same Argument
of the diverse Characters of Nature, is one of those subjects, wherein the
common discourses of men, (which very seldom, yet sometimes falls out) are
more wise then Books. But the best provision and collection for such a
treatise, ought to be fetched from the observations of the wisest sort of
Historians; not only from Elogies and Panegyriques, which commonly follow the
death of a Person; but much more from the entire body of a History, so often as
such a personage does, as it were, enter upon the stage. For this inter-woven
Image, seems to be a more lively description, than the censure of an Elogy;
such as is that in T. Livius, of Africanus, and of Cato the Elder; in Tacitus
of Tiberius, Claudius and Nero; in Herodian, of Septimius Severus; in Philip de
Commines, of Lewis the XI. K. of France; in Fra. Guicciardine, of Ferdinand
King of Spain; Maximilian the Emperor; Leo and Clemens, Bishops of Rome. For
those writers fixing their eyes continually on the Images of these Persons,
whom they made choice of to decipher, and purtrait, seldom mention their Acts
and Achievements, but withal, insert something touching their nature and
dispositions; so likewise many Relations, touching the Conclaves of Popes,
which we have met withal, represent good Characters, and lively impressions,
of the natural dispositions of Cardinals; as the letters of Ambassadors, set
forth the nature and manners of Counsilors to Princes. Wherefore let there be a
full, and perfect collection made of this argument, whereof we have spoken,
which certainly is fertile and copious. Neither would we, that those Characters
in the Ethiques (as it is with Historians, Poets, and in common speech,) should
be accepted as perfect politic Images; but rather as the first draughts and
rude lineaments of those Images, which compounded and commixt, constitute any
resemblances whatsoever; how many and of what sort they may be; and how they
are connext and subordinate one with another: that there may be made, as it
were, an artificial and accurate dissection of natures and dispositions; and a
discovery of the secret inclinations of Individual tempers; and that from a
knowledge thereof, precepts of cure may be more pertinently prescribed.

And not only the Characters of dispositions, impressed by nature, should be
received into this Tractate, but those also which are imposed upon the mind,
from Sex, Age, Region, Health, Beauty, and the like: as also those from externe
fortune, as of Princes, Nobles, obscure Persons; Rich, Poor, Private persons,
Prosperous, Miserable, and the like. For we see Plautus makes it a wonder to
see an old man Beneficent, Benignitas quidem huius, oppido ut adolescentuli
est: Mil. Glo.
and S. Paul, commanding that the severity of discipline, should be used to
the Cretans, (rebuke them sharply) accuses the nature of that Nation from a
Poet; Cretenses semper mendaces, Ad Tit. c. 1 ex Epimen
malae bestiae, ventres pigri. Salust notes this in the nature of Kings, that
it is usual with them to desire contradictories; In Iugurth.
Plerunque Regiae voluntates ut vehementes sunt; sic mobiles, saepeque ipsae
sibi adversae. Tacitus observes that Honors and advancements, oftener change
men's natures to the worse, Hist. lib. 1.
than to the better, Solus Vespasianus mutatus in melius. Pindarus makes an
observation, that great and Sodoms fortune for most part, loosens and dissinues
men's minds; sunt, Pindar.
qui magnam felicitatem concoquere non possunt: so the Psalm shows, that it
is more easy to keep a measure and temperament, in a modest consistency; than
in the increase of Fortune, Psalm. 62.
If Riches increase set not your heart upon them. These observations and the
like, I deny not, but are touched a little by Aristotle, as in passage, in his
Rhetoriques; as likewise in the writings of others dispersedly by the way; but
they were never yet incorporated into Moral Philosophy, to which they do
principally appertain; no less certainly, than the handling of the diversity
of grounds and moulds, does to Agriculture; or the handling of the diversity of
complexions and constitutions of the body, does to Medicine. The same must be
observed here, except we mean to follow the indiscretion of Empiriques, which
minister the same medicines to all Patients, of what constitution soever.

II. After the knowledge of Characters follows the knowledge of Affections and
Passions, which are as the Diseases of the Mind, as has bin said. For as the
Ancient Politiques in Populare States were wont to say, That the people were
like the Sea, and the Orators like the winds; because as the Sea would of it
self be calm and quiet, if the winds did not move and trouble it; so the
People of their nature would be peaceable and tractable, if the seditious
Orators did not set them in working and agitation. So it may be truly affirmed,
that man's mind in the nature thereof, would be temperate and staid, if the
affections as winds, did not put it into tumult and perturbation. And here
again I find it strange, that Aristotle, who writ so many books of Ethiques,
should never in them, handle the Affections, as an essential member of
Ethiques; and yet in the Rhetoriques where they are considered but
Collaterally, and in a second degree (that is so far as they may be raised
and moved by speech) he finds place for them, (in which place notwithstanding,
for such an abridgement, he discourses acutely and well,) for his disputations
about pleasure and pain, no way satisfy this inquiry; no more than he that
should write only of light and lightening, could be said, to have written of
the nature of particular Colors; for Pleasure and Pain, are to the particular
affections, as light is to Colors. Better travailes the Stoiques have taken in
this argument, as far as may be conjectured from such Remains as are extant;
but yet such as consisted rather in curiosity of Definitions, than any full and
ample descriptions. So likewise I find some elegant Books of some affections,
as of Anger, of tenderness, of countenance, and some few other. But to speak
the truth, the best Doctors of this knowledge are the Poets, and writers of
Histories, where we may find painted and dissected to the life, how affections
are to be stirred up and kindled; how stilled and laid a sleep; how again
containd and refrained, that they break not forth into Act? likewise how they
disclose themselves thoe repressed and secreted? what operations they produce?
what turns they take? how they are enwrapt one within another? how they fight
and encounter one with another? and other the like Particularities. Amongst the
which, this last is of special use in Morale and Civil matters, How I say, to
set Affection against Affection; and by the help of one to master and reclaim
another? After the manner of Hunters and Fowlers, who hunt Beast with Beast;
and fly Bird with Bird; which percase of themselves without the assistance of
Bruit Creatures, a man could not so easily recover. Nay farther, upon this
foundation, is erected that excellent and universal use in matters Civil of
Praemium and Poena, which are the Pillars of Civil States; seeing those
predominant Affections of Fear and Hope do bridle and suppress all other
exorbitant Affections. Again, as in government of States, it is sometimes
necessary to confront and bridle one Faction with another; so it is in the
inward Government of the Mind.

III Now come we to those Points which are within our own command, and have
force and operation upon the mind, and also affect, dispose, and manage the
Will and Appetite; and therefore are of great force to alter the manners. In
which part the Philosophers ought to have made a painful and diligent
Inquiry touching the Power and Energie of Custom, Exercise, Habit, Education,
Conversation, Friendship, Praise, Reprehension, Exhortation, Fame, Laws, Books,
Studies, and other points of like nature. These are they which have the sway
and dominion in Morality; from these Agents the mind suffers and is
disposed; of these, as of Ingredients, receipts are compounded, which conduce to
the conservation and recovery of the Health and good estate of the Mind as far
as may be performed by Humane Remedies. Of which number we will select one or
two whereupon we will a little insist as an example to the rest. We will
therefore insinuate a few points touching Custom and Habit.

Moral. Nicom. lib. 2.
That opinion of Aristotle seems to me to savor of negligence and a narrow
Contemplation, where he asserts -- that those Actions which are natural can
not be changd by custom; using for example -- that if a stone be thrown a
thousand times up, it will not learn to ascend of its own accord: Moreover,
that by often seeing or hearing, we do not learn to hear or see the better:
for though this principle be true in some things wherein Nature is Peremptotory
(the reasons whereof we cannot now stand to discuss) yet it is otherwise in
things wherein Nature according to a Latitude admits intention and remission.
He might see that a straight glove by often drawing on, is made wider; and that
a wand by use and continuance is bowed contrary to its natural bent in the
growth, and soon after stays in the same posture; that the voice by
exercizing it becomes louder and stronger; that heat and cold are better
endured by custom; and many instances of like kind. Which two latter examples
have a nearer resemblance and come nearer to the point, than those he there
alleges. But however this case be determined, by how much the more true it
is; that both Virtues and Vices consist in habit; he ought, by so much the
more, to have endeavored, to have so prescribed rules how such habits might be
acquired, or removed: for there may be many Precepts made of the wise ordering
of the Exercises of the Mind, no less then of the Exercises of the Body;
whereof we will recite a few.

The first shall be; that we beware even at first of higher or smaller taskes,
than the nature of the business requires, or our leisure or abilities permit:
For if too great a task be imposed, in a mean diffident nature, you blunt the
edge of cheerfulness and blast their hopes; in a nature full of Confidence,
you breed an opinion whereby a man promises to himself more than he is able
to perform; which draws on sloth and security; and in both those
temperatures, it will come to pass that the experiment does not satisfy the
expectation; which ever discourageth and confounds the mind: but if the Tasks
be too weak and easy, in the sum of proceeding there is a loss and
prejudice.

A second shall be; that to the practicing of any faculty, whereby a habit may
be superinduced, two Seasons are chiefly to be observed, the one when the mind
is best disposed to a business; the other when it is worst: that by the one,
we may be well forwards on our way; by the latter, we may by a strenuous
contention work out the knots and stonds of the mind; which makes middle times
to pass with more ease and pleasure.

A third Precept shall be that which Aristotle mentions by the way, Moral.
Nicom. lib. 2.
which is to bear ever toward the contrary extreme of that whereunto we are
by nature inclined, so it be without vice. Like as when we row against the
stream; or when we make a crooked wand straight by bending it the contrary
way.

The Fourth Precept is grounded upon that Axiom which is most true. That the
mind is brought to any thing with more sweetness and happiness if that
whereunto we pretend, be not principal in the intention of the Doer; but be
overcome, as it were, doing somewhat else; because the instinct of nature is
such a freedom as hates necessity and compulsive commands. Many other rules
there are which might profitably be prescribed touching the Direction of
Custom: for Custom, if it be wisely and skilfully induced, proves (as it is
commonly said) an other nature; but being conducted absurdly and by chance, it
is only the Ape of Nature; which imitates nothing to the life, but in a foolish
deformity only.

So if we should speak of Books and Studies, and of their power and influence
upon Manners; are there not diverse Precepts and fruitful Directions
appertaining thereunto? Has not one of the Fathers in great indignation called
Poesy vinum Daemonum; being indeed it begets many Temptations, Lusts, and
vain Opinions? It is not a wise opinion of Aristotle and worthy to be
regarded: That young men are no fit auditors of Moral Philosophy, Moral.
Nicom. Lib. 1.
because the boiling heat of their affections, is not yet settled, nor attemperd
with Time and Experience. And to speak truth, does it not hereof come that
those excellent Books and Discourses of ancient Writers, (whereby they have
persuaded unto virtue most effectually; representing as well her stately
Majesty to the eyes of the world, as exposing to Scorn, popular Opinions in
disgrace of Virtue, attired as it were, in their Parasite Coats) are of so
little effect toward honesty of life and the reformation of corrupt Manners;
because they use not to be read and revolved by men mature in years and
judgment; but are left and confined only to Boys and Beginners. But is it
not true also that young men are much less fit Auditors of Policy than
Morality, till they have bin thoroughly seasoned with Religion and the
knowledge of Manners and Duties; lest their judgments be corrupted and made
apt to think that there are no Moral differences true and solid of things; but
that all is to be valued according to a utilitie and fortune. As the Poet
says, Prosperum and felixscelus virtus vocatur. Iuvenal. Sat. 13.
And again, Ille crucem pretium sceleris tulit, hic Diadema. But the Poets
seem to speak this Satyrically, and in indignation; be it so, yet many Books
of Policy do suppose the same seriously and positively: for so it pleased
Machiavell to say, That if Caesar had bin overthrown he would have bin more
odious than ever was Catiline; as if there had bin no difference but in fortune
only, between a very fury composed of Lust and Blood, and the most excellent
spirit (his ambition reserved) in the world. By this we see how necessary it
is, for men to drink deeply Pious and Moral knowledges, before they taste
Politic; for that they who are bred up in the Courts of Princes from tender
years, and in affairs of state, commonly never attain an inward and sincere
Probitie of Manners; how much further of from honesty, if to this fire of
corrupt education there be administered the fuel of corrupt Books? Again,
even in Moral instructions themselves, or at least in some of them is there
not a Caution likewise to be given, lest they make men too Precise, Arrogant,
and Incompatible; according to that of Cicero touching M. Cato, These Divine
and excellent qualities which we see are his own proper endowments, but such as
are sometimes deficient in him, Pro L. Muraena.
are all derived from Teachers and not from Nature. There are many other Axioms
touching those properties and effects which Studies and Books do instill into
the minds of men: for it is true that he says, abeunt studia in mores; which
may likewise be affirmed of those other points touching Company; Fame, the
Laws of our Country, and the rest which a little before we recited. But there
is a kind of Culture of the Mind which seems yet more acurate and elaborate
than the rest, and is built upon this ground, That the minds of all Mortals
are at some certain times in a more perfect state; at other times in a more
depraved state. The purpose therefore and direction of this Culture is, that
those good seasons may be cherisht, and the evil crossed, and expunged out of
the Calendar. The fixation of good Times is procured by two means, by vows or
at Least most constant Resolutions of the Mind; and by Observances and
exercises, which are not to be regarded so much in themselves, as because they
keep the mind in her devoir and continual obedience. The obliteration of evil
Times may be in like manner perfected two ways; by some kind of Redemption or
expiation of that which is past; and by a new course of life, as it were,
turning over a clean leaf. But this part seems wholly to appertain to
Religion, and Justly, considering that true and genuine Morale Philosophy, as
was said, supplies the place of a Handmaid only to Divinity* wherefore we will
conclude this part of the Culture of the Mind, with that remedy which of all
other means is the most compendious and summary; and again the most noble and
effectual, to the reducing of the mind to virtue, and the placing of it in a
state next to perfection: and this is, That we make choice of, and propound to
our selves, right ends of life and Actions, and agreeing to virtue; which yet
must be such as may be in a reasonable sort within our compass to attain. For
if these two things be supposed, that the ends of Actions be Honest and Good;
and that the Resolution of the mind, for the pursuing and obtaining them, be
fixed, constant, and true unto such ends; it will follow that the mind shall
forthwith transform and mould it self into all virtues at once. And this
indeed is an operation, which resembles the work of nature, whereas other
courses whereof we have spoken, are like the work of the hand. For as when a
Carver cuts and graves an Image, he shapes only that part whereupon he works,
and not the rest; as if he be fashioning the Face, the rest of the Body is a
rude and formelesse stone still, till such time as he come to it: but
contrariwise, when Nature makes a Flower or Living Creature, she ingenders and
brings forth rudiments of all the parts at one time. So in obtaining virtues by
habit, while a man practices Temperance, he does not profit much to Fortitude
and the like; but when we wholly dedicate and devote our selves to good and
honest ends; look what virtue soever such ends commends and commands, our mind
unto, we shall find our selves already invested and predisposited with a kind
of hability and propension to pursue and express the same. And this may be
that State of Mind which is excellently described by Aristotle, Moral. Nicom.
lib. 7.
and expressed with the character, not of virtue, but a kind of Divinity, his
words are these; And with IMMANITY, we may not unaptly countre-ballance, that
ability which is above humanity; HEROIC OR DIVINE VIRTUE: and a little after,
for as Savage Creatures are incapable of Vice or Virtue; so is the Deity: but
this state is a thing higher than virtue; that, somewhat else than vice. Indeed
Plinius Secundus, from the license of Heathen magniloquence, set forth the
virtue of Trajane, not as an imitation, but as a pattern too divine, when he
says, That men need to make no other praires to the Gods, but that they would
continue as good and as gracious Lords to them, Paneg.
as Trajane had bin. But these are the profane and unhallowed Aires of
Heathens, who apprehend shadows greater then the Body: but true Religion, and
the Holy Christian Faith, lays hold on the substance it self, imprinting upon
men's Minds Charity, which is most properly called, Colos. 3.
The bond of perfection; because it comprehends and fastens all virtues
together. Surely it is elegantly said by Menander of vain Love, which is but a
counterfeit imitation of Divine Love, Amor melior sophista laevo, ad humanam
vitam; by which words he insinuates, that good and decent carriage, is better
learned from Love, then from a Sophist, or an innept Tutor; whom he calls
Left Handed, because with all his tedious Rules and Precepts, he cannot form a
man so dexterously, and with that facility to value himself, and govern
himself, as Love can do. So certainly, if a man's mind be truly inflamed with
the heat of Charity, he shall be exalted to a greater degree of Perfection,
then by all the Doctrine of Morality, which, indeed, is but a Sophist in
comparison of the other. Nay farther as Xenophon observed truly, De Inst. Cyri.
That all other affections thoe they raise the Mind, yet they distort and
disorder it by their ecstasies and excesses; but only love does at the same
instant, dilate and compose the mind. So all other humane excellencies, which
we admire; thoe they advance nature, yet they are subject to excess; only
Charity admits no excess. So we see the Angels while they aspired to be like
God in power, prevaricated and fell, Esa. 14.
I will ascend above the altitude of the clouds, I will be like the most high.
So man, while he aspired to be like God in Knowledge, Genesis 3.
digressed and fell. ye shall be like Gods knowing Good and Evil: but by
aspiring to a similitude of Gods Goodness or Love, neither Man nor Angel ever
was endangered, nor shall be endangered. Nay we are invited to this imitation
Bless them that curse you, Mat. 5.
and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you; that you may be
the sons of your father which is in Heaven: for he makes his Sun to rise on
the Evil and on the Good; and sends Rain upon the just, and upon the unjust.
So in the first Platform of the Divine Nature, the Heathen Religion places
Gods attributes thus, Optimus Maximus; Psalm. 145.
and sacred Scripture speaks thus, Misericordia ejus, supra omnia opera ejus.

Wherefore we have now concluded this part of Moral knowledge concerning the
Culture and Regiment of the Mind; wherein if any from a contemplation of the
Portions thereof, which we have strictly enumerated, does judge that our labor
is only this, to Collect and Digest, into an Art or Science, that which has
bin pretermitted by other writers, as matter of common sense and experience,
and of themselves clear and perspicuous; let him freely enjoy his judgment:
yet in the mean let him be pleased to remember what we premonisht at first;
that our purpose was not to pursue the flourish and beauty of things; but their
use and verity. Likewise let him a while ponder in his mind that invention of
the Ancient Parable, touching the two gates of sleep.

Virg. Aen. 6.
Sunt geminae somni Portae, quarum altera fertur
Cornea, qua veris facilis datur exitus umbris;
Altera candenti perfecta nitens Elephanto
Sed falsa ad Coelum mittunt insomnia Manes.
A gate of Ivory is indeed very stately, but true Dreams pass through the Gate
of Horn.

IV. By way of supplement that observation about Moral Knowledge, may be set
down, which is, that there is a kind of relation and Conformity between the
Good of the mind, and the Good of the Body. For as the Good of the Body
consists as has bin said, of Health, Beauty, Strength, and Pleasure; So the
Good of the Mind, if we consider it according to the Axioms and Precepts of
Morale Knowledge, we shall perceive tend to this point, to make the mind sound,
and discharged from Perturbation; Beautiful and graced with the ornaments of
true Decency; strong to all duties of life; Lastly not stupid, but retaining an
active and lively sense of Pleasure and honest Recreation. But these four, as
in the Body, so in the mind, seldom meet altogether. For it is easy to
observe, that many have strength of wit and courage; who yet notwithstanding
are infested with perturbations, and whose manners are little seasoned with
elegancy and Beauty of Behavior, in their doings: some again, have an
Elegancy and finenesse of carriage, which have neither soundness of honesty,
nor substance of sufficiency in their doings: some have honest Minds, purified
from the stain of Guilt, which yet can neither become themselves, nor manage
business: others which perchance are capable of all these three Qualities; but
possessed with a sullen humor of Stoical sadness, and stupidity, they practice
virtuous Actions, but enjoy neither themselves, nor the fruit of their good
Parts: and if it chance that of these four two or three sometimes meet, yet a
concurrence of all four very seldom falls out. And now we have concluded that
Principal member of Humane Philosophy, which considers Man, as he consists of
Body and Soul; but yet, as he is segregate and separate from society.

THE EIGHTH BOOK OF FRANCIS LO. VERVLAM VICOUNT St ALBAN. OF THE DIGNITY AND
ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING. To the KING.
CAP. I. I. The Partition of Civil knowledge into the Knowledge of
Conversation; the Knowledge of Negotiation; and the Knowledge of Empire, or of
State Government.
THere is an ancient Relation (Excellent KING) of a solemn Convention of many
Philosophers before the Ambassador of a foreign Prince, and how that every one
according to their several abilities made demonstration of their wisdom; that
so the Ambassador might have matter of report touching the admired wisdom of
the Grecians: But amongst these, one there was, as the story goes, that stood
still and uttered nothing in the assembly, insomuch as the Ambassador turning
to him should say: And what is your gift, Plutar. in Moral.
that I may reportit? To whom the Philosopher, Report (says he) unto your
King, that you found one amongst the Grecians that knew how to hold his peace:
and indeed J had forgotten in this compend of Arts to intersert the Art of
Silence; which notwithstanding (because it is DEFICIENT) I will teach by mine
own example. For seeing the order and contexture of matter has brought me at
length to this point, that I must now a little after handle the Art of Empire;
and being I write to so Great a King, which is so perfect a Master in this
science, wherein he has bin trained up even from his infancy; nor can I be
altogether unmindfull, what place I hold under your Majesty; I thought it
would best become me in this point to approve my self unto your Majesty, by
Silence, rather than by Writing. Cicero makes mention not only of an Art, but
of a kind of Eloquence found in Silence: for after he had commemorated in an
Epistle to Atticus many conferences which had interchangeably past between him
and another, Ad Atticu^.
he writes thus, In this place I have borrowed somewhat from your Eloquence,
for J have held my peace. And Pindar to whom it is peculiar suddenly to strike,
as it were, with a divine Scepter, the minds of men, by rare short sentence,
Pindar.
darts forth some such saying as this, Interdum magis afficiunt non dicta quam
dicta: wherefore I have resolved in this part to be Silent or which is next to
Silence, to be very brief. But before I come to the Arts of Empire, some
things by way of Preoccupation are to be set down concerning other Portions of
Civil Doctrine.

Civil Science is conversant about a subject which of all other is most
immersed in matter, and therefore very difficultly reduced unto Axioms: yet
there' are many circumstances which help this difficulty: Plutar. in M. Catone.
for first, as Cato the Censor was wont to say of his Romans: That they were
like Sheep, a man were better drive a flock of them, then one of them; for in
a Flock, if you could get but some few to go right, you shall have all the
rest follow of their own accord: So in this respect indeed, the Duty of
Morality is somewhat more difficult then that of Policy. Secondly Morality
propounds to it self that the Mind be imbued and furnished with Internal
Goodness; but Civil Knowledge requires no more, but Goodness external
only, for this as respecting society, suffices. Wherefore it often comes to
pass that the Government is Good, the Times Bad: for in sacred story the saying
is often repeated, speaking of Good and Godly Kings, And yet the People
directed not their hearts to the Lord God of their Fathers; wherefore in this
respect also the parts of Ethique are more austere and difficult. Thirdly,
states have this nature, that like great Engines they are slowly moved, and not
without great pains; whence it comes that they are not so easily put out of
frame; For as in Aegipt the seven good years upheld the seven bad; so in
States, the good government and Laws of Precedent times cause that the errors
of succeeding times, do not so quickly supplant and ruin: but the Decrees and
Customs of particular persons, are more suddenly subverted. And this likewise
does charge Morality, but eases Policy.

I. Civil Knowledge has three parts, according to the three summarie Actions
of Society; The Doctrine of Conversation; the Doctrine of Negotiation; and the
Doctrine of Empire or Republiques. For there are three sorts or Good, which men
seek to procure to themselves from civil Society; comfort against solitude,
Assistance in buisnesse; and Protection against Injuries: and these be three
wisdoms distinct one from the other, and often times disjoined; Wisdom in
Conversation; Wisdom in Negotiation, and Wisdom in Gubernation.

As for Conversation, certainly it ought not to be affected, but much less
despised; seeing a wise moderation thereof, has both an honor, and grace of
Manners in it self; and a powerful influence for the apt manage of Business;
as well Public, as Private. For as Action in an Orator, is so much respected,
(thoe it be but an outward quality) that it is preferred before those other
Parts which seem more grave and intrinseque; so Conversation and the
government thereof, in a man or a Civil Practique life (however it consists
in outward ceremonies) finds, if not the chiefest, yet certainly a very eminent
place. Of what special importment the very Countenance is, and the composure
thereof, the Poet insinuats where he says, Nec vultu destrue verba tuo.

A man may cancel and utterly betray the force of his words, with his
Countenance. Nay the Deeds as well as Words may likewise be destroyed by the
Countenance, if we may believe Cicero, who when he would commend to his Brother
Affability toward the Provincials said, that it did not chiefly consist in
this to give easy access unto his Person, unless likewise he received them
courteously even with his Countenance; De Petit. Consulatus
Nil interest habere ostium, apertum, vultum clausum: It is nothing won, to
admit men with an open door, and to receive them with a shut and reserved
countenance. So we see Atticus before the first interview between Caesar and
Cicero, Lib. XII. Epist. ad At.
the war depending did diligently and seriously advise Cicero by a letter
touching the composing and ordering of his countenance and gesture. And if the
government of the Face and Countenance alone be of such effect, how much more
is that of familiar speech and other earriage appertaining to Conversation. And
indeed the sum and abridgement of the Grace and Elegancy of Behavior, is for
most part comprised in this, that we measure in a just balance and maintain
both our own Honour' and the Reputation of others. The true Module whereof T.
Livius has well expressed (thoe intended to an other purpose) in the Character
of a Person, Livius.
Least (says he) I should seem either arrogant or obnoxious; whereof the one
is the humor of a man that forgets the liberty of another; the other of a man
that forgets the liberty of himself. But on the other side if Vrbanity and
outward Elegancy of Behavior be intended too much, they pass into a deformed
and counterfeit Affectation. Quid enim deformius quam scenam in vitam
transfer. To Act a man's life. But though they fall not by insensible degrees
into that vicious extreme; yet too much time is consumed in these small
matters; and the mind by studying them is too much depressed and broken. And
therefore as Tutors and Preceptors use to advise young Students in
Universities, too much addicted to keep company; by saying, Amicos esse fures
temporis: so certainly this same continual intention of the mind upon the
comeliness of Behavior, is a great thief to more solemn Meditations.
Again, such as are so exactly accomplished in Vrbanitie, and seem, as it were,
formed by nature for this quality alone, are commonly of such a disposition, as
please themselves in this one habit only, and seldom aspire to higher and
more solid virtues: whereas on the contrary, those that are conscious to
themselves of a Defect this way, seek Comeliness by Reputation; for where
Reputation is, almost every thing becomes; but where that is not, it must be
supplied by Puntoes and Complement. Again, there is no greater or more
frequent impediment of Action than an overcurious observance of Decency and of
that other ceremony attending on it, which is a too scrupulous Election of time
and opportunities: for Solomon says excellently, Eccles. 11.
qui observat ventu^ non seminat, and qui considerat nubes nunqua^ metet: We
must make opportunity oftener then find it. To conclude, this comely grace of
Behavior is, as it were, the Garment of the Mind, and therefore must have the
conditions of a Garment: for first it ought to be such as is in fashion;
again, it ought not to be too curious or costly; than it ought to be so shaped
as to set forth any good making of the mind, and to supply and hide any
deformity; lastly and above all, it ought not to be too strait, or so to
restrain the spirit, as to repress and hinder the motion thereof in
business. But this part of Civil knowledge touching Conversation, has bin
indeed elegantly handled, nor can it any way be reported as Deficient.

CAP. II. I. The Partition of the Doctrine of Negotiation into the knowledge of
dispersed Occasions. II. And into the Knowledge of the Advancement of life.
Examples of the knowledge of Scattered Occasions from some of Solomon's
Parables. Precepts touching the Advancement of fortune.
THe knowledge touching Negotiation, we will divide into a knowledge concerning
Scattered Occasions; and the Knowledge concerning the Advancement of Life;
whereof the one comprehends all the variety of Business, and is, as it were,
the Secretary of a Practique course of life; the other only selects and
suggests such observations as appertain to the advancing of a Man's proper
fortune, which may be to every man as intimate and reserved Table-Books, and
Memorials of their Affairs.

But before we descend to the Particular kinds, we will speak something by way
of Preface, in general, touching the The knowledge of Negotiation. The
knowledge of Negotiation no man has handled hitherto according to the dignity
of the Subject; to the great derogation of Learning, and the Professors of
Learning: for from this root springs that note of Dullness which has
defamed the Learned, which is; That there is no great concurrence between
Learning and Practique wisdom. For, if a man observe it well, of the three
wisdoms which we have set down to pertain to Civil life, that of
Conversation is by learned men for the most part despised as a servile thing
and an enemy to Meditation. As for that wisdom concerning Government, Learned
men acquit themselves well, when they are called to the manage of Civil
Affairs in state; but that is a Promotion which happens to few. Concerning
the WISDOM OF BUSINESS (whereof we now speak) wherein man's life is most
conversant; there be no Books at all written of it except a handful of two of
some few Civil Advertisements, that have no proportion to the magnitude of
this Subject. For if there were Books extant of this Argument, as of other, I
doubt not, but Learned men with mean experience would far excel men of long
experience without Learning; and out-shoot them (as they say) in their own
Bow. Neither is there any cause why we should fear least the Matter of this
Knowledge should be so various, that it could not fall under Precepts, for it
is much narrower than the Science of Government, which notwithstanding we see
is exactly labored, and subdued. Of this kind of Wisdom, it seems there
have bin some Professors amongst the Romans in their best and wisest times.
Cicero.
For Cicero reports that it was in use a little before his time for Senators,
that had the the name and opinion for wise and experienced men (the Coruncanii,
Curii, Laelii, and others) to walk at certain hours in the Forum, where they
might give access and audience to the Citizens, and might be consulted
withal; not only touching point of Law, but of al sorts of Business; as of
the Marriage of a Daughter; or of the bringing up of a Son; or of a Purchase,
of a Bargain, of an Accusation, Defense; and every other occasion incident to
man's life. By this it plainly appears, that there is a Wisdom of giving
Counsil and Advise even in Private Business; arising out of an universal in
sight into the Affairs of the World; which is used indeed upon particular
Causes, but is gathered by general observation of Causes of like nature. For
so we see in the Book which Q. Cicero writes unto his Brother, De Petitione
Consulatus (being the only Book of Particular Business, Q. Cicero de
Petitione Consul.
that I know written by the Ancients) althoe it concerned specially an Action
then on foot, yet it contains in it many Politic Axioms, which prescribe
not only temporary use, but a perpetual direction in the case of Popular
Elections. And in this kind nothing is extant which may any way be compared
with those Aphorisms which Solomon the King set forth, of whom the Scriptures
testify, That his Heart was as the Sands of the Sea: 1. Reg. IV.
For as the Sands of the Sea do incompasse all the utmost bounds of the world;
so his wisdom comprehended all matters, as well humane, as divine. In these
Aphorisms you shall clearly discover, beside those precepts which are more
divine, many most excellent Civil precepts and advertisements, springing out
of the profound secrets of wisdom, and flowing over into a large field of
variety. Now because we report as DEFICIENT, the Doctrine touching dispersed
occasions, (which is a first portion of the knowledge of Business) we will,
after our manner, stay a while upon it, and propound an example thereof, taken
out of those Aphorisms, or Parables of Solomon. Neither is there in our
judgment, any cause of just reprehension, for that we draw from writers of
sacred Scripture, something to a political sense; for I am verily of opinion,
that if those Commentaries of the same Solomon were now extant concerning
Nature (wherein he has written of all Vegetables, 1. Reg. IV.
From the Moss upon the wall, to the Cedar of Libanus; and of living
creatures) it were not unlawful to expound them according to a natural sense;
the same liberty we may take in the Politiques.

AMANVENSIS VITAE, sive de occasionibus Sparsis.
AN EXAMPLE OF A PORTION OF the Doctrine concerning DISPERSED OCCASIONS, from
some Parables of Solomon.
THE PARABLE. 1. A soft Answer appeaseth Wrath. Prove. XV.

THE EXPLICATION.
If the wrath of a Prince or of a great Person be kindled against thee, and it
be now thy turn to speak, Solomon gives in precept two points; one is, that an
answer be made; the other, that the same be soft. The First contains three
precepts; First that you beware of a sad, and sullen silence: for that either
charges the fault wholly upon your self, as if you had nothing to say for your
self; or closely appeacheth your Master of some injustice, as if his ears
were not open to a just Defense. Secondly that you beware of delaying and
putting off a Business, and that you crave not a longer day to give in your
defense: for this procrastination, either insinuates the same prejudice the
former did, (which is that your Lord and Master is led away with too much
passion and partiality) and plainly betraies, that you are divising some
cunning and counterfeit Apology, seeing you have no present answer ready.
Wherefore it is ever the best course to say something instantly in your own
defense, according as the occasion of the present business shall administer.
Thirdly that by all means, an answer be made; an answer (I say) not a mere
confession or a mere submission, but yet not without some sprinklings of an
Apology and excuse let fall here and there; nor is it safe to bear your self
otherwise, unless you have to deal with very generous and noble dispositions;
which are very rare. It follows in the second place, that the answer made, be
soft and temperate; and not harsh and peremptory.

THE PARABLE. II. A wise Servant shall have command over a reproachful Son,
Prove. XVII.
and shall divide the Inheritance among the brethren.
THE EXPLICATION.
IN all troubled and disagreeing Families, there ever arises up some servant
or gentle friend, powerful with both sides; which may moderate, and compound
the differences of the Family; to whom, in that respect, the whole house and
the master himself are engaged and beholding. This Servant, if he aim only,
at his own ends, cherishes and aggravates the Divisions of a Family, but if he
be sincerely faithful, and upright, certainly he deserves much; so, as to be
reckoned as one of the brethren, or at least, to receive a Fiduciary
Administration of the inheritance.

THE PARABLE. III If a wise man contests with a Fool, Prove. XXIX.
whether he be in anger, or injest, there is no quiet.
THE EXPLICATION.
WE are often admonisht to avoid unequal commerce; in this sense, not to
contend with our Betters: but it is a no less profitable instruction, which
Solomon here sets down, Not to undertake a worthless person; for such a
business is usually concluded upon terms of disadvantage; for to overcome is
no victory, but to be conquered a foul disgrace: and it is all one in the heat
of this engagement, whether we deal by way of jesting, or by way of disdain
and scorn; for howsoever we change Copy, we are embased and made the lighter
thereby; nor shall we handsomely come off with credit. But the worst
inconvenience of all is, when the Person with whom we contend (as Solomon
speaks) has somewhat of the Fool in him; that is, if he be witless and
wilful; have some heart, no brain.

THE PARABLE. IV. Eccles. VII
Lend not an Ear to all words that are spoken, lest perchance thou hearst thy
servant curse thee.
THE EXPLICATION.
IT is a matter almost beyond belief, what disturbance is created by
unprofitable curiosity, about those things which concern our personal
interest: that is, when we make a too scrupulous enquiry after such secrets;
which once disclosed and found out, do but cause molestation of mind, and
nothing conduce to the advanceing of our designs. For first there follows
vexation and disquietnesse of Mind; being that all humane affairs are full of
faithlesnesse and ingratitude; so as if there could be procured some enchanted
glas-wherein we might behold the hatred, and whatsoever malice is any way
raised up against us; it were better for us that such a glass, were forthwith
thrown away and broken. For slanders of this nature, are like the impotent
murmures of Leaves on Trees, and in short time vanish. Secondly, this Curiosity
fills the mind with ungrounded jealousies, which is a capital enemy to
Counsils, and renders them inconstant and involved. Thirdly, the same curiosity
does oftentimes fix evils, which of themselves would fly away. For it is a
dangerous matter for to provoke men's consciences, who if they think themselves
undiscovered, are easily changed to the better; but if once they perceive
themselves dismaskt, they drive out one mischief with an other. Wherefore it
was deservedly judged, Plutar. in Pomp.
a point of great wisdom in Pompeius Magnus, that he instantly burnt all
Sertorius papers unperus'd by himself; or permitted to be so by others.

THE PARABLE. V. Thy Poverty shall come as a Travellour, Prove. VI.
and thy Want as an armed Man.
THE EXPLICATION.
IN this Parable, it is elegantly described how the shipwreck of Fortunes falls
upon Prodigalls, and on such as are careless of their Estates; for Debt and
Diminution of stock, comes upon them at first by insensible degrees, with
soft-silent paces, like a Traveller, and is hardly perceived; but soon after
necessity invades him like an armed man, that is, with so strong and potent an
arm, as there is no more resistance to be made; so it was said by the
Ancients, that of all things necessity was the strongest. Wherefore we must
prevent the Travellour; and be well provided against the armed Man.

THE PARABLE. VI. He that instructs a scorner, Prove. IX.
procures to himself a reproach; and he that reprehends a wicked man, procures
to himself a stain.
THE EXPLICATION.
Mat. 7.
THis Parable agrees with our Saviors precept, That we cast not our Pearls
before swine. In this Parable the Actions of Instruction, and of Reprehension
are distinguished; as also the Actions of a scorner, and of a wicked person.
Lastly that which is retaliated, is differenced. For in the former part, lost
labor is returned; in the latter, a stain and dishonor is repaid. For when a
man teaches and instructs a scorner, first the time thus employed is cast
away; and then others also deride his pains, as a fruitless design, and a
labor ill placed; Last of all, the scorner himself despises the knowledge
which he has learned. But the matter is transacted with greater danger in the
reprehension of the wicked; because a wicked nature, not only gives no ear to
advise, but turns head against his Reprehender, now made odious unto him; whom
he either wounds presently with contumelies; or traduces afterward to others.

THE PARABLE. VII. Prove. X.
A wise Son is the gladness of his Father; but a foolish Son is the
sadness of his Mother.
THE EXPLICATION.
THe joys and griefs domestical of Father and Mother touching their
Children, are here distinguished: for a wise and well-governed Son, is chiefly
a comfort, to the Father, who knows the value of virtue, better than the
Mother, and therefore more rejoices at the towardliness of his Son
inclinable to goodness: yea and it may be his education of him, that he has
brought him up so well; and implanted in his tender years, the Civility of
manners, by precepts and example, is a joy unto him. On the other side, the
Mother is more grieved, and discomforted at the calamity of a Son, both
because the affection of a Mother is more soft and tender; as also perchance,
being conscious of her too much indulgence, she has tainted and corrupted his
tender years.

THE PARABLE. VIII. The memory of the lust is blessed, Prove. X.
but the name of the wicked shall putrify.
THE EXPLICATION.
Here is distinguished the Fame of good men and of evil; such as commonly falls
out after Death: for the Name of good men, after envy is extinguished, (which
cropped the blossom of their Fame, while they were alive) presently shootes up
and flourishes; and their Praises daily increase in strength and vigor: but
for wicked men (though their Fame through the partial favor of Friends, and
of men of their own faction last for a short time) a detestation of their Name
springs up, and at last their transient glory exhales in infamy, and expires in
a filthy and noisome odor.

THE PARABLE. IX. He that troubles his own house shall inherit the wind. Prove.
XI.

THE EXPLICATION.
A Very profitable admonition touching Discord and Domestique Breaches. Many
promise to themselves great matters, by the dissentions of Wives; or the
Disinheriting of Sons; or the often changing of Servants; as if the
Tranquillity of mind; or the administration of their Affairs were by this
means advanced, and should become more prosperous unto them. But commonly their
hopes turn to wind; for those alterations, for most part, succeed ill, and
those Perturbers of their own house, often times meet with many vexations, and
ingratitudes from them, whom (passing by others) they adopted and loved: Nay by
this means they draw upon their Persons ill Reports, and doubtful rumors. De
Pet. Consul.
For it is well noted of Cicero, Omnem famam a Domesticis emanare. Both these
evils, Solomon excellently expresses by the inheritance of winds: for the
Frustrating of Expectation; and the raising of Rumors, are rightly compared to
Winds.

THE PARABLE. X. Better is the end of a speech, Eccles. VII
than the Beginning thereof.
THE EXPLICATION.
THis Parable taxes, and reformes a frequent error committed, not only by them
which chiefly, study words; but even by the more wise and grave. The error is
this, that men are more solicitous of the ingresse and entrance of their
speech; than of the close and issue: and more exactly meditate the Exordiums
and Prefaces; than the conclusions of speeches. But they should neither neglect
those, and yet have these about them, as the more material parts, ready
prepared and digested; considering with themselves, and so far, as may be,
fore-casting in their minds, what may be the issue of speech and conference at
last; and businesses thereby may be promoted and matured. Yet this is not all;
for you must not only study Epilogues, and conclusions of speeches, which may
be pertinent to business, but also regard must be taken of such speeches, as
may aptly and pleasantly be cast in, at the very instant of your departure,
althoe they have no reference at all to the business in hand. I knew two
Counsilors, Personages of high rank, and wise men; and on whom the charge of
State-affaires did then principally depend; whose common, and, to them,
peculiar custom it was, that so often as they were to negociate with their
Princes about their own affairs; never to close their conference with any
matter referring to that business; but ever seek diversions, either by way of
jest; or by somewhat, that was delightful to hear; and so, as the Adage
renders it, wash over at the conclusion of all, their Seawater discourses,
with fresh fountain water. And this usage was one of their chief Arts.

THE PARABLE. XI. As dead Flies cause the best ointment, Eccles. X.
to send forth an ill Odor; so does a little folly him that is in reputation for
wisdom and honor.
THE EXPLICATION.
THe case of Men remarkable for eminent gifts, is very unhappy and miserable
(as the Parable excellently notes,) because their errors, be they never so
small find no remission. But as in a pure Diamond every least grain, or little
cloud, strikes the eye, and affects it with a kind of trouble; which upon a
more gross Diamond would hardly be discerned: even so in men of eminent parts,
the least infirmities are presently spied, talked of, and more deeply censured;
which in men of more mean and obscure gifts, and rank, would either
altogether pass without notice, or easily procure pardon. Therefore a little
Folly in a very wise man; and a small offense in a very honest man; and a
slight indecency of manners, in a man of Courtly and Elegant behavior; much
derogates from their fame and reputation. So that it is not the worst course
for eminent persons, to mingle some absurdities (so it may be done without
guilt) in their Actions; that they may retain a kind of liberty to themselves,
and confound the characters of smaller defects.

THE PARABLE. XII. Scornful men ensnare a City, Prove. XXIX.
but Wise men divert wrath.
THE EXPLICATION.
IT may seem strange, that Solomon in the description of men, made, as it were,
and by nature framed to the ruin and destruction of a state, has chosen the
character; not of a proud and insolent man; not of a tyrannical and cruel
nature; not of a rash and violent man; not of an impious and wicked person; not
of a seditious and turbulent spirit; not of an in continent and sensual
inclination; not of a foolish and unable Person; but of a Scorner. But this is
a judgment, worthy the wisdom of that King, who best knew the grounds of the
conservation, or eversion of a state. For there is not commonly a like Plague
to Kingdoms and Commonwealths, than if Counsilors of Princes, or Senators, and
such as sit at the helm of Government, are by nature Scorners. For such
persons, that they may win the reputation of undanted statesmen, do ever
extenuate the greatness of dangers; and insult over those that value dangers,
according to the true weight; as timorous and faint-hearted natures. They
scoff at all mature delays, and meditated debateings of matters by
consultation, and deliberation; as a thing too much tasting of an
oratory-veine; and full of tediousness; and nothing conduceing to the sum
and issues of Business. As for Fame, at which the counsils of Princes should
especially level, they contemn it, as the spittle of the vulgar, and a thing
will quickly be blown over. The power and Authority of Laws, they respect no
more, than as cobwebbs, which should not ensnare matters of greater
consequence: Counsils and Precautions, foreseeing events a far off, they
reject, as mere dreams and Melancholy apprehensions: men seriously wise, and
well seen in the world, and of great resolution and Counsil, they defame with
gibes and jeasts: in a word, they do at once prejudice, and weaken the whole
foundation of Civil government; which is the more to be looked into, because
the Action is performed by secret fraud, and not open force; and is a practice
not so suspected, as it demerites.

THE PARABLE. XIII. A Prince that lends a willing ear to lies, Prove. XXIX.
his servants are all wicked.
THE EXPLICATION.
WHen a Prince, is of such a temper as to lend an easy and credulous ear,
without due examination, to Detractors and Sycophants, there breaths a
pestilentiall air from the Kings side; which corrupts and infects all his
servants. Some feel out the fears and jealousies of a Prince; and aggravate
the same with feigned reports: Others awake the furies of envy, especially
against the best deserving in the state: Others seek to wash away their own
guilt, and the stains of a foul conscience, by defaming others: Others give
sail to the Honors and wishes of their friends, by traduceing, and debaseing
the merit of their competitors. Others compose Fabulous enterludes against
their enemies, and concurrents, as if they were upon the stage; and infinite
such like. And these are the Arts of such servants to Princes, as are of a vile
and base nature. But they that are of a more honest disposition, and better
civilz'd; when they perceive their innocence to be no safe sanctuary (in that
their Prince knows not how to distinguish between truth and falsehood) they
put off moral honesty, and gather in the Court-windes; and are therewith,
carried about in a servile manner. For as Tacitus says of Claudius. Aliud
sona^t Annal. XII.
There is no safety with that Prince, into whose head all things are convayed,
as it were, by infusion and direction from others. Histoire de Commines.
And Commines very well, It is better to be servant to a Prince, whose
jealousies have no end, then to a Prince, whose Credulity has no mean.

THE PARABLE. XIV. A lust man is merciful to the life of his Beast; Prove. XII.
but the mercies of the wicked are cruel.
THE EXPLICATION.
THere is implanted in man by nature, a noble and excellent Affection of Piety
and compassion, which extends it self even to bruit creatures, that are by
divine ordination subject to his command: and this Compassion has some Analogy
with that of a Prince toward his subjects. Nay farther, it is most certain,
that the more noble the mind is, the more compassionate it is; for contracted
and degenerate minds, think these things nothing to pertain to them; but the
Mind, which is a nobler portion of the world, is affected in the gross out of
community. Wherefore we see that there were under the old Law, many precepts,
not so merely Ceremonial, as Institutions of Mercy; such as was that of not
eating flesh with the blood thereof, and the like: even in the sect of the
Esseans and Pythagoreans, they altogether abstained from eating Flesh; which to
this day is observed by an inviolate superstition, by many of the Eastern
people under the Mogol. Nay the Turks, (both by Descent and Discipline a
cruel and bloody Nation) yet bestow alms upon Bruit Creatures; and cannot
endure to see the venation and torture of any live thing. But least, what we
have said, should perchance seem to maintain all kinds of Mercy; Solomon upon
sound advice annexeth, That the Mercies of the wicked are cruel: These
mercies, are, when lewd and wicked persons, are spared from being cut off by
the sword of justice; this kind of Mercy is more Cruel, than Cruelty it self:
for Cruelty is extended in practice on particulars; but this kind of Mercy, by
a grant of impunity, arms and subornes the whole band of impious men against
the innocent.

THE PARABLE. XV. A Fool utters all his mind; Prove. XXIX.
but a wiseman reserves somewhat for hereafter.
THE EXPLICATION.
THe Parable (it seems) especially corrects; not the Futility of vain
Persons, which easily utter, as well what may be spoken, as what should be
secreted: not the bold roveing language of such as without all discretion and
judgment fly upon all men and matters: Not Garrulity, whereby they fill
others even to a surfeit: but another vice, more close and retired; namely the
Government of speech, of all adventures the least prudent and politic, which
is, when a man so manages his speech in private conference, as whatsoever is in
his mind, which he conceives any way pertinent to the purpose and matter in
hand, out it must, at once, as it were, in one breath, and in a set continued
discourse: this is that which does much prejudice Business. For first, a
discontinued speech, broken off by interlocutions, and instilled by parts,
penetrates deeper, than a settled continued speech; because that in a continued
Discourse, the weight of Matters is not precisely and distinctly taken, nor by
some convenient rests sufferd to fix; but Reason drives out Reason before it
be fully settled in the Comprehension of the Hearers. Secondly there is no man
of so powerful and happy a Delivery of himself, as at the first onset and
encountre of his speech, he is able so to strike him dumb and speechless,
with whom he discourses; but that the other will make some interchangeable
reply, and peradventure object something: and then it may fall out, that what
should have been reserved for refutation and replication, by this unadvised
anticipation being disclosed and tasted beforehand, loses its strength and
grace. Thirdly if a man discharge not all at once what might be said, but
deliver himself by Parcells, now one thing, anon casting in an other, he shall
gather from the looks and answers of him with whom he discourses, how every
particular Passage affectes him, and in what sort they find acceptance; so as
what is yet remaining to be spoken, he may with greater Caution either select,
or silence.

THE PARABLE. XVI. If the Displeasure of a Great Man rise up against thee,
Eccles. X.
forsake not thy Place; for pliant demeanure pacifies great Offenses.
THE EXPLICATION.
THe Parable gives in Precept, how a man ought to demean himself, having
incurred the wrath and displeasure of his Prince. The Precept has two
branches. First that he relinquish not his place; Secondly, that with caution
and diligence he attend the Cure, as in case of some dangerous disease. For men
are wont after they perceive their Princes displeasure against them, to retire
themselves from the execution of their charge and office; partly put of an
impatience of disgrace; partly lest they should revive the wound by being in
the Presence; partly that Princes may see their sorrow and humility; nay
sometimes to resign up the Places and Dignities they held, into the hands of
the Prince. But Solomon censures this way of Cure, as prejudicious and
hurtful; and that upon a very good ground. For first this course does too much
noise abroad the disgrace it self; so as enemies and enviers become more
confident to hurt, and friends more fearful to help him. Secondly it comes to
pass that the wrath of the Prince, which perchance if it had not bin published,
would have died of it self, is now become more fixed; and having once made way
to his ruin, is carried on to his utter subversion. Lastly, this retiring
tastes somewhat of a malignant humor, and of one fallen out with the times;
which cumulates the evil of Jndignation, to the evil of suspicion. Now the
precepts for cure are these. First, above all things let him take heed that he
seem not insensible, or not so affected, as in duty he ought to be, for the
Princes displeasure, thorough a stupidity or stubbornness of mind: that is,
that he compose his countenance, not to a sullen and contumacious sadness; but
to a grave and modest pensiveness; and in all matters of employment, that he
show himself less pleasant, and cheerful then he was wont to be; and it
will promote his case to use the assistance and mediation of some friend, unto
the Prince, which may seasonably insinuate, with what feeling grief he is
inwardly afflicted. Secondly let him carefully avoid all, even the least
occasions whereby the matter that gave the first cause to the indignation,
might be revived; or the Prince take occasion to be again displeased with him,
or to rebuke him for any thing, before others. Thirdly, let him with all
diligence seek out all occasions wherein his service may be acceptable to his
Prince; that he may show both a prompt affection to redime his fore-past
offense; and that his Prince may understand what a good servant he may chance
to be deprived of, if he thus cast him off. Fourthly, that by a wise art of
Policy, he either lay the fault it self upon others; or insinuate, that it was
committed with no ill intention; or make remonstrance of their Malice, who
accused him to the King, and aggravated the matter above demerit. Last of all,
let him be every way circumspect and intent upon the Cure.

THE PARABLE. XVII. The First in his own cause is Just; Prove. XVIII.
than comes the other Party and inquires into him.
THE EXPLICATION.
THe first information in any cause, if it a little fix it self in the mind of
the Judge, takes deep root, and wholly seasons and prepossesseth it; so as it
can hardly be taken out, unless some manifest falsehood be found in the matter
of Information; or some cunning dealing, in exhibiting and laying open the
same. For a bare and simple defense, thoe it be just and more weighty, hardly
compensates the prejudice of the first information; or is of force of it self
to reduce the scales of Justice, once swayd down, to an equal wait.
Wherefore it is the safest course both for the Judge, that nothing touching the
proofs and merit, of the cause, be intimated beforehand until both parties
be heard together; and the best for the Defendant, if he perceive the Judge
preoccupated; to labor principally in this (so far as the quality of the
cause will admit) to discover some cunning shift and fraudulent dealing
practiced by the adverse party to the abuse of the Judge.

THE PARABLE. XVIII. He that delicately brings up his servant from a child,
Prove. XXIX.
shall find him contumacious in the end.
THE EXPLICATION.
PRinces and Masters, from the Counsil of Solomon, must keep a mean in the
dispensation of their Grace and Favor toward Servants. The mean is
threefold; First, that Servants be promoted by degrees and not by saults.
Secondly, that they be now and then accustomed to repulses: Thirdly (which
Machiavell well advises) that they have ever in sight before them something
whetherto they may farther aspire. Machia. Discorso sopra Live.
For unless these courses be taken in the raising of servants, Princes shall
bear away from their servants, instead of a thankful acknowledgement and
dutiful observances, nothing but disrespect and contumacy: for from sudden
promotion arises insolency; from a continued achievement of their desires, an
impatience of Repulse: if the accomplishment of wishes be wanting; alacrity and
industry will likewise be wanting.

THE PARABLE. XIX. See thou a man of Dispatch in his Business; Prove. XXII.
he shall stand before Kings, he shall not be ranked amongst mean men.
THE EXPICATION.
AMongst the qualities which Princes do chiefly respect and require in the
choice of their servants, celerity and alacrity in the Dispatch of Business,
is above all the rest, most acceptable. Men of profound Wisdom are suspected
by Kings, as men too speculative and penetrating, and such as are able by the
strength of wit, as with an engine, to turn and wind their Masters, beyond
their comprehension and against their inclination. Popular natures are spighted
as those that stand in the light of Kings, and draw the eyes of the people upon
themselves. Men of courage, are commonly taken for turbulent spirits, and
dareing, more than is meet. Honest men and of an impartial upright
conversation, are estimed too stiff and stoicall; nor so pliable as they
should be to the whole pleasure of those on whom they depend. To conclude,
there is not any other good quality, which presents not some shadow, wherewith
the minds of Kings may not be offended; only quickness of Dispatch in the
execution of commands, has nothing in it which may not please. Again, the
motions of the minds of Kings are swift and impatient of delay; for they think
they can do all things; only this is wanting, that it be done out of hand;
wherefore above all other qualities, celerity is to them most acceptable.

THE PARABLE. XX. I saw all the living which walk under the sun, Eccles. IV.
with the succeeding young Prince, that shall rise up in his stead.
THE EXPLICATION.
THe parable notes the vanity of men who are wont to press and flock about
the designed successors of Princes: The root of this vanity is that Frenzy,
implanted by nature in the minds of men, which is, that they too extremely
affect their own projected hopes. For the man is rarely found that is not more
delighted with the contemplation of his future Hopes, then with the fruition of
what he possessetb. So further, Noveltie is pleasing to man's nature, and
earnestly desired. Now in a successor to a Prince these two concur, Hope and
Novitie. The Parable expresses the same which was long ago uttered, Tacit.
Annal. 6. Plutar. in Pomp.
first by Pompeius to Sylla, after by Tiberius touching Macro; Plures adorare
solemn Orientem quam Occidentem. Yet notwithstanding Princes in present
possession, are not much moved with this fond humor; nor make any great matter
of it, as neither Sylla nor Tiberius did; but rather smile at the levity of
men, and do not stand to fight with Dreams; for Hope (as he said) is but the
Dream of a man awake.

THE PARABLE. XXI. There was a little City, Eccles. IX.
and manned but by a few; and there was a mighty King that drew his army to it,
and erected Bulwarks against it, and intrench't it round. Now there was found
within the walls a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom raised the siege, but
none remembered that same poore-man.
THE EXPLICATION.
THe Parable describes the depraved and malignant nature of Men. In extremity
and straits they commonly fly for sanctuary to men of wisdom and power, whom
before they dispis'd; but so soon as the storm is gone, they become
unthankful creatures to their conservers. Machiavell not without reason
propounds a Question, Discorso sopra Live. Lib. 1.
whether should be more ungrateful to well deserving Persons, the Prince or
the People? But in the mean he taxes them both of Ingratitude.
Notwithstanding, this vile dealing arises not from the ingratitude of the
Prince or People alone; but oft-times there is added to these the envy of the
Nabilitie, whom in secret repine at the event, though happy and prosperous;
because it proceeded not from themselves: wherefore they extenuate the merit of
the Act and depresse the Author.

THE PARABLE. XXII. The way of the slothful is a Hedge of Thorns. Prove. 15.

THE EXPLICATION.
THe Parable expresses most elegantly, that sleth proves laborious in the end:
For a diligent and sedulous preparation effects this, that the foot does not
strike it self against any impediment, but that the way is levelled before it
be gone. But he that is slothful and puts off all to the last point of
Execution, it must needs follow, that continually, and at every step he passes
as it were through Briars and Brambles, which ever and anon entangle and
detain him. The same observation may be made upon the governing of a Family,
wherein if there be a care and providence taken, all goes on cheerfully and
with a willing alacrity, without noise or tumult: but if these fore-casts be
wanting when some greater occasions unexpectedly fall out, all matters throng
in to be dispatched at once; the servants brawle; the whole house rings.

THE PARABLE. XXIII. He that respects Persons in judgment does not well; Prove.
28.
for that man will forsake the truth even for a piece of Bread.
THE EXPLICATION.
THe Parable most wisely notes that in a Judge, Facility of Deportment is more
pernicious then the corruption of Bribes: for all persons do not give Bribes;
but there is hardly any cause wherein somewhat may not be found, that may
incline the mind of the Judge, if Respect of Persons lead him. For one shall
be respected as a Countryman; another as an ill-tongu'd man; another as a
rich man; another as a Favorite; another as commended by a Friend; and to
conclude, all is full of iniquity where respect of Persons bears rule; and for
a very slight matter, as it were, for a piece of Bread, Judgment is perverted.

THE PARABLE. XXIV. A poor man that by extortion oppresses the poor, Prove.
XXVIII.
is like a land-floud that causes famine.
THE EXPLICATION.
THis Parable was by the Ancients expressed and shadowed forth, under the Fable
of the two Horse-leeches, the full and the hungry: for Oppression coming from
the Poor and necessitous persons, is far more heavy than the oppression
caused by the full and Rich; because it is such, as seeks out all Arts of
Exaction, and all angles for money. This kind of Oppression was wont also to
be resembled to sponges, which being dry suck in strongly; not so, being moist.
The Parable comprehends in it a fruitful Instruction, both to Princes, that
they commit not the government of Provinces, or offices of charge to indigent
and indebted persons; as also to the people that they suffer not their Kings to
be distressed with too much want.

THE PARABLE. XXV. A just man falling before the wicked, Prove. XXV.
is a troubled Fountain and a corrupted spring.
THE EXPLICATION.
THe Parable gives it in Precept, that States and Republiques must above all
things beware of an unjust and infamous sentence, in any cause of grave
importance, and exemplar in the face of the world; specially where the guilty
is not quitted, but the Jnnocent is condemned. For Injuries ravageing among
private persons do indeed trouble, and pollute the waters of Justice, yet as
in the smaller streams; but unjust Judgments, such as we have spoken of, from
which exemples are derived, infect and distaine the very Fountannes of Justice:
for whn the Courts of Justice side with Injustice, the state of things is
turned, as into a public Robbery, and it manifestly comes to pass, ut Homo
Homini sit Lupus.

THE PARABLE. XXVI. Make no friendship with an angry man; Prove. XXII
nor walk thou with a Furious Man.
THE EXPLICATION.
BY how much the more devoutly the Laws of Friendship amongst good men, are to
be kept and observed, by so much the more it stands us upon to use all Caution,
even at first in a prudent election of Friends. In like manner the disposition
and humors of Friends, so far as concerns our personal interest, should by
all means be dispensed withal: but when they impose a necessity upon us, what
quality of Persons we must put on, and sustain; it is a very hard case and an
unreasonable condition of Friendship. Wherefore according to Salomons Precept,
it principally conduces to Peace, and Safety in the course of this world, that
we intermingle not our affairs with Cholerique natures, and such as easily
provoke and undertake Quarrels and Debates; for such kind of Friends will
daily espouse us to Factions and Contentions; that we must of necessity be
forced to break off all terms of Friendship; or else be wanting to our own
personal safety.

THE PARABLE. XXVII. He that conceales a fault seeks Friendship; but he that
repeats a matter, Prove. XVII
separates united Friends.
THE EXPLICATION.
THe way to arbitrate differences, and to reconcile affections is of two sorts.
The one begins by an Amnesty and passing over that which is past. The other,
from a Repetition of wrongs, interlaceing Apologies and Excusations. For I
remember the speech of a very wise Person, and a great Statesman which was to
this effect. He that deals about a Treaty of Peace, without any
recapitulation of the terms of Difference, and falling out; he rather deludes
men's minds with the sweetness of an Agreement, than compounds the
differences, by equity and moderation of Right. But Solomon, a wiser man than
he, is of a contrary opinion, approves Amnesty, and prohibites Repetition: for
in Repetition, there are these inconveniences, for that it is, as it were,
unguis in ulcere, the nail in the ulcer; as also there is a danger of breeding
a new Quarrel, for the Parties at difference will never accord upon the terms
of their falling out. And lastly, for that in the issue, it brings the matter
to Apologies: but both the one and the other Party, would seem rather to
remit an offense, thah to admit of an excusation.

THE PARABLE. XXVIII Jn every good work there shall be abundance; Prove. XIV.
but where words do abound, there commonly is want.
THE EXPLICATION.
IN this Parable Solomon separates the fruit of the Labor of the Toungue, and
of the labor of the Hands; as if wealth were the Revenues of the one, want the
Revenues of the other. For it commonly comes to pass, that they that talk
much, boast many things, and promise great matters; receive no emolument from
the things whereof they discourse: nay rather such natures for most part are no
way industrious, and diligent at work; but only feed and fill themselves with
words, as with wind. Certainly as says the Poet -- Qui silet est firmus --
for he that is conscious to himself of Proficiency in his endeavors,
applaudes himself inwardly, and holds his peace; but on the contrary, he that
is guilty to himself of hunting after vain glory, talks many things, and
reports wonders to others.

THE PARABLE. XXIX. Open Reprehension is better than secret Affection. Prove.
XXVII.

THE EXPLICATION.
THe Parable reprehends the soft nature of Friends, which will not use the
Privilege of friendship, in admonishing their Friends with freedom and
confidence, as well of their errors as of their dangers. For what shall I do?
(will such a tenderhearted friend say) or which way shall I turn my self? I
love him as dearly as any man can do; and if any misfortune should befall him,
I could willingly impawne my own person for his redemption; but I know his
disposition, if J deal freely with him, I shall offend him, at least make him
sad, and yet do no good; and I shall sooner estrange him from my friendship,
than reclaim him, or withdraw him from those courses, which he has fixed and
resolved upon in his mind. Such a friend as this, Solomon here reprehends, as
weak and worthless; and that a man may reap more profit from a manifest Enemy,
than from such an effeminate Friend: for he may perchance hear that by way of
reproach from an Enemy, which through too much indulgence was but faintly
whispered by a friend.

THE PARABLE. XXX. A wise man is wary of his ways; a cunning Fool seeks
evasions.
THE EXPLICATION.
THere be two sorts of wisdom; the one true and sound, the other counterfeit
and false, which Solomon doubts not to entitle by the name of Folly. He that
applies himself to the former, takes heed to his way and footing, foreseeing
dangers, and studying remedies; useing the assistance of Good men, muniteing
himself against the invasions of the wicked; wary in his entrance and
engagement upon a business, not unprepared of a retraite and how to come off;
attent upon advantages, courageous against encounters; with infinite other
circumstances, which respect the government of his ways and Actions. But that
other kind of wisdom, is altogether made up of fallacies and cunning devices,
and wholly relies upon circumventing of others, and casting them according to
the form of their own mould. This wisdom the Parable deservedly rejects, not
only as Wicked, but also as Foolish. For first it is not in the number of those
things which are in our own power; nor is it directed by any constant Rule; but
new stratagems must every day be contrived, the old failing and growing out of
use. Secondly, he that is once attainted with the fame and opinion of a cunning
crafty Companion, has deprived himself of a principal Instrument for the
manage of his affairs, and a practical life, that is, Trust; and so he shall
find by experience all things to go CROSS to his desires. To conclude, these
Arts and Shifts, howsoever they promise fair, and much please such as practice
them; yet are they many times frustrated. Which Tacitus has well observed,
Tacit.
Consilia Callida and audacia, expectatione laeta; tractatu dura; eventu
tristia.

THE PARABLE. XXXI. Be not too precisely Righteous; Eccl. VII.
nor make thy self too excessively wise; why should thou unseasonably
sacrifice thy safety?
THE EXPLICATION.
THere are Times (says Tacitus) wherein too great virtues are exposed to
certain ruin. Tacit. Hist. 1.
And this fate befalls men eminent for virtue or Justice, sometime suddenly,
sometimes foreseen a far off: and if these excellent parts be seconded by
the access of wisdom, that is, that they are wary and watchful over their
own safety, than they gain thus much, that their ruin comes suddenly,
altogether by secret and obscure Counsils; whereby both envy may be avoided,
and Destruction assail them unprovided. As for that Nimium, which is set down
in the Parable, (in as much as they are not the words of some Periander but of
Solomon, who now and then notes the evils in man's life, but never commands
them) it must be understood, not of virtue it self, in which there is no
Nimium or excessive extremity, but of a vain and invidious Affectation and
ostentation thereof. A point somewhat resembling this, Tacitus insinuates in a
passage touching Lepidus, setting it down as a Miracle, that he had never bin
the Author of any servile sentence, and yet had stood safe in so cruel, and
bloody times. Annal. IV.
This thought (says he) many times comes into my mind, whether these things
are governed by Fate; or it lies also in our own Power to steer an even course
void of Danger and Indignity, between servile Flattery and sullen Contumacy.

THE PARABLE. XXXII. Give occasion to a wiseman and his wisdom will be
increased. Prove. IX.

THE EXPICATION.
THe Parable distinguishes between that wisdom which is grown, and ripened
into true Habit; and that which swimmes only in the Brain and conceit, or is
boasted in speech, but has not taken deep root. For the one upon occasion
presented, wherein it may be exercised, is instantly quickened, prepared, and
dilated, so as it seems greater than it self: but the other which before
occasion was quick and active, now occasion is given, becomes amazed and
confused, that even he who presumed the possession thereof, begins to call into
doubt whether the preconceptions of such wisdom were not mere Dreams, and
empty speculations.

THE PARABLE. XXXIII. He that praises his friend alowd, rising early, Prove.
XXVII.
it shall be to him no better than a curse.
THE EXPLICATION.
MOderate and seasonable Praises, and uttered upon occasion, much conduce both
to men's Fame and Fortunes; but immoderate, streporous, and unseasonably powered
out, profit nothing; nay rather from the sense of this Parable they do much
prejudice. For first, they manifestly betray themselves to proceed either from
too extreme Affection, or from a too studied Affectation, to the end that him
whom they have thus praised, they may by false acclamations demerit rather to
themselves; than by just attributes adorn his person. Secondly, sparing and
modest Praises, commonly invite such as are present to add something of their
own to the commendations; Contrariwise profuse and immodest Praises, invite the
hearers to detract and take away something. Thirdly, (which is the principal
point) too much magnifying a man stirs up envy toward him; seeing all
immoderate Praises seem to be a Reproach to others, who merit no less.

THE PARABLE. XXXIV. As Faces shine in waters, Prove. XXVI.
so men's hearts are manifest to the wise.
THE EXPLICATION.
THe Parable distinguishes between the Hearts of wisemen and of other Men;
compareing those to waters or Glasses, which receive and represent the forms
and Images of things; whereas the other are like to Earth, or rude stone,
wherein nothing is reflected. And the more aptly is the mind of a wiseman
compared to a Glass or Mirror; because in a Glass his own Image may be seen
together with the Images of others; which the eyes cannot do of themselves
without a Glass. Now if the mind of a wise man be so capable, as to observe
and comprehend, such an infinite diversity of Natures and Customs, it remains
to be endeavored, that it may become no less various in the Application, than
it is in the Representation,

Qui sapit, in numeris Moribus aptus erit. Ovid. de A. A.
THus have we staid perchance somewhat longer upon these Parables of Solomno,
tha^ is agreeable to the proportion of an example, being carried away thus
far for the Dignity both of the matter it self, and of the Auctor. Neither
was this in use only with the Hebrews, but it is generally to be found in the
wisemen of ancient times; that if any man's observation light upon any thing
that was good and beneficial to the common practique course of life, he would
reduce and contract it into some short sentence or Parable, or else some Fable.
Lib. 2. cap. 13.
But for Fables (as we have noted elsewhere) they were in times past
Vicegerents, and supplements of Exemples; now that the times abound with
History, the aim is more right and Active, when the Mark is alive. But the
form of writing which best agrees with so variable and universal an Argument
(as is the handling of negociations and scattered Occasions) that would be of
all other the fittest which Machiavell made choice of, Discoso in Live.
for the handling of matters of Policy and Government; namely by Observations
or Discourses, as they term them, upon History and Examples. For knowledge
drawn freshly, and, as it were in our view, out of Particulars, knows the way
best to Particulars again; and it has much greater life for Practice, when
the Discourse or Disceptation attends upon the Example, than when the Example
attends upon the Disceptation: for here not only Order but substance is
respected. For when the Example is set down as the Ground of the Disputation,
it uses to be propounded with the preparation of circumstances, which may
sometimes control the discourse thereupon made; sometimes supply it; so it
may be in place of a pattern for imitation and practice: whereas on the
contrary, examples alleged for the Disputations sake, are cited succinctly and
simply; and as bondmen wait, in a servile aspect, upon the commands of the
Discourse. But this difference is not amiss to be observed, that as Histories
of Times afford the best matter for Discourses upon Politiques, such as are
those of Machiavell; So the Histories of lives, are the best Jnstructions for
discourse of Business; because they comprise all variety of Occasions and
Negociations, as well great as small.

Nay there is a ground of Discourse for Precepts touching Business, more
acco^modate than both those sorts of History; which is, when Discourses are
made upon Letters, but such as are wise and serious, as those of Cicero ad
Atticum, and others. For letters usually represent Business more particularly,
and more to the life, than either Chronicles or Lives. Thus have we spoken both
of the Matter and Form of the first portion of the Knowledge touching
Negotiation, which handles dispersed Occasions, which we deliver up upon the
accounts of DEFICIENTS.

FABER FORTVNAE, sive de Ambitu vitae.
II. There is also another portion of the same Knowledge, which differs as
much from that other, whereof we have spoken as sapere, and sibi sapere: for
the one seems to move as it were from the center to the circumference; the
other as it were, from the circumference to the center. For there is a wisdom
of giving Counsil unto others; and there is a wisdom of forecasting for his
own fortunes; and these do sometimes meet, but more often sever. For many are
exceeding wise in their own ways, which yet are weak for administration of
civil affairs, or giving of Counsil, like the Ant, which is a wise creature
for it self, but very hurtful for the Garden. This wisdom the Romans, thoe
excellent Patriots, did take much knowledge of; whereupon the Comicall Poet
says, Plaut. in Trin. Cic. in Par. Salust. ad Caes. Lib. 1. Dec. IV.
Certainly the Mould of a wise man's Fortune is in his own hands; yea it grew
into an Adage among them -- Faber quisque Fortunae propriae --; And Livy
attributes the same virtue to Cato Major. In this man there were such great
abilities of wit and understanding, that into what climate soever his nativity
had cast him, he seemd to be able to command a fortune. This kind of wisdom,
if it be professed and openly declared, has ever bin thought not only
impolitique, but an unlucky and ominous thing: as it was observed in Timotheus
the Athenian, who after he had done many excellent services to the honor and
utility of the state, and was to give an account of his government to the
people, as the manner was, concluded every particular with this clause, and in
this, Plutar. in Sylla.
Fortune had no part: but it fell out that he never prosper'd in any thing he
took in hand afterward. This is in truth too high and savouring of extreme
arrogance, aspiring to the same point of Pride which Ezechiel records of
Pharaoh, Ezech. 29.
Dicis fluvius est meus, and egofeci meipsum; or of that which another Prophet
speaks, They exult and offer sacrifices to their net, Habac. 1.
and burn incense to their snare. or of that which the Poet expreseth of
Mezentius a Despiser of the Gods.

Dextra mihi Deus, and telum quod missile libro, Virg. Aen. 10.

Nunc adsint. --
Finally Julius Caesar, never, to my remembrance, betrayed the impotency of his
hidden thoughts, so much as in a speech of like nature; Suet. in Iulto.
for when the Augur gave him information that the entrails were not
prosperous, he closely murmured to himself Erunt laetioracum volo, which
saying of his preceded not long before the misfortune of his death. But this
extremity of Confidence, (as we have said) as it is an unhallowed thing, so was
it ever unblest. And therefore they that were great Politiques indeed, and
truly wise, thought it their safest course, ever to ascribe their successes to
their Felicity; and not to their skill and virtue. So Sylla surnamed himself
Felix, not Magnus; and Caesar (more advisedly than before) says to the Pilot,
Plut. in I. Caes.
Caesarem vehis, and fortunam ejus. But yet nevertheless these Positions;
Faber Quisque Fortunae suae. Sapiens dominabitur Astris. Jnvia virtuti nulla
est via, and the like; if they be understood and applied rather as spurs to
industry, than as stirrops to insolency; and rather to beget in men courage and
constancy of Resolutions, than Arrogance and ostentation; are deservedly
accounted sound and healthful; and (no question) have bin ever imprinted in
the greatest Minds, so sensibly, as sometimes they can scarce dissemble such
cogitations. For we see Augustus Caesar (who compared with his uncle, was
rather diverse, than inferior, but certainly a person more staid and solemn)
when he died, Suet. in August.
desired of his friends that stood about his Bed, that when he expired they
would give him a Plaudite; as if he were conscient to himself, that he had
played his part well upon the stage. This portion also of knowledge is to be
summed up amongst DEFICIENTS; not but that it has bin usurped and frequented
in Practice, far more excessively than is fitting; but because books
concerning this Argument are silent. Wherefore according to our custom, as we
did in the former; we will set down some heads or passages of it; and we will
call it Fabrum Fortunae, or as we have said, -- Doctrinam de Ambitu vitae. --
Wherein, at the first view, I may seem to handle a new and strange Argument, in
teaching men how they may be raisers and makers of their own fortune; a
doctrine certainly to which every man will willingly yield himself a Disciple,
till he thoroughly conceives the difficulty thereof. For the conditions are
neither lighter, or fewer, or less difficult to the Purchase of Fortune, than
to the purchase of virtue; and it is as hard and severe a Thing to be a true
Politic, as to be truly Moral. But the handling hereof concerns learning
greatly, both in Honor and in Substance. For it is a principal point which
nearly concerns the Honor of Learning, that Pragmatique men may know, that
Learning is not like some small Bird, as the Lark, that can mount and sing,
and please her self, and nothing else; but that she holds as well of the
Hawk, that can soar aloft, and after that when she sees her time, can stoop
and ceyze upon her Prey. Again this kind of wisdom much respects the
Perfection of Learning; because it is the right rule of a perfect enquiry, that
nothing be found in the Globe of Matter, that has not a Parallel in the
Christalline Globe, or the Intellect. That is, that there be not any thing in
Being and Action, that should not be drawn and collected into contemplation
and Doctrine. Neither does learning otherwise admire or estime this
Architecture of Fortune, than as a work of an inferior kind: for no man's
proper fortune, can be a retribution any way worthy the donation of his Essence
and Being granted him from God; nay it often comes to pass, that men of
excellent gifts abandon their Fortunes willingly, that their minds may be
vacant for more sublime respects: yet nevertheless Fortune, as an Organ of
virtue and merit, deserves likewise her speculation and Doctrine.

Unto this knowledge appertain precepts, some summary and Principal; some
spars'd and various. Precepts Summary are conversant about the true knowledge
both of others; and of himself. The first Precept, wherein the principal
point of the knowledge of Others does consist, may be determined this; that we
procure to our selves, so far as may be, that window which Momus once
required. He, Plato de Rep.
when he saw in the frame of Man's heart, so many Angles and Recesses, found
fault that there was not a window, through which a man might look into those
obscure and crooked windings. This window we shall obtain, if with all
diligent circumspection we purchase and procure unto our selves good
information touching particular Persons, with whom we negociate and have to
deal; as also of their natures, their desires, their ends, their customs,
their Helps and Advantages, whereby they are chiefly supported and are
powerful; and again, of their weaknesses and disadvantages, and where they
lie most open and are obnoxious; of their Friends, Factions, Patrons and
Dependancies; and again of their Opposites, Enviers, Competitors; as also
their Moodes, Times, and Critical seasons of easy Access.

Sola viri molles Additus, Virg. Aen. IV.
and tempora noris. Lastly the Principles and Rules which they have set down
to themselves; and the like. And this information must be taken not only of
Persons, but of Particular Actions also which are on Foot, from time to time,
and as it were hott upon the Anvile; how they are conducted and succeed; by
whose futherances they are favored, by whom opposed, of what weight and moment
they are, and what consequence they infer; and the like. For the knowledge of
present Actions is not only material in it self, but has this advantage
also, as without it the knowledge of Persons will be very deceitful and
erroneous: for Men change with the Actions; and while they are implicated in
Actions, engaged and environed with business, they are one; when they return to
their Nature, they are another. These Informations touching Particulars,
respecting as well Persons as Actions are, as the Minor Propositions in every
Active Syllogism for no verity or excellency of Observations or Axioms
(whereof the Major Propositions Politic are made) can suffice to ground a
conclusion, if there be error and mistakeing in the Minor Proposition. And that
such knowledge may be compassed, Solomon is our surety, who says -- Counsil in
the Heart of a Man is like a deep water, Prove. XX.
but a wise man will draw it out. -- And although the knowledge it self fall
not under Precept, because it is of Individuals, yet instuctions for the
deduceing of it may with profit be set down.

The knowledge of Men six ways may be disclosed and drawn out; by their Faces
and Countenances, by Words, by Deeds, by their Nature, by their Ends, and by
the Relations of others. As for the Visage and Countenance, let not the ancient
Adage move us -- Fronti nulla Fides; Iuv. Sat. II.
-- for though this saying may not amiss be meant of the outward and generale
composure of the Countenance and Gesture, yet there are certain subtle
motions and labors of the Eyes, Face, Looks, and Gesture, whereby as Q.
Cicero elegantly says, is unlockt and opened, De Pet. Cons.
-- Ianua quaedam animi -- the gate of the mind. Who more close then Tiberius
Caesar? But Tacitus, noteing the Character and different manner of speaking,
which Tiberius used in commending in the Senate the great services done by
Germanicus and Drusus; of the commendations given of Germanicus he says thus
-- Magis in speciem verbis adornata, quam ut penitus sentire crederetur, Annal.
I.
of the commendations given of Drusus thus, -- Paucioribus; sed intentior, and
fida oratione. Again Tacitus noteing the same Tiberius at other times somewhat
more clear and legible Says -- Quin ipse compositus alias and velut Orl. and
velut elector anxius.
eluctantium verborum; Annal. IV.
solutius promptiusque loquebatur quoties subveniret. -- Certainly there can
hardly be found any Artificer of Dissimulation so cunning and excellent, or a
Countenance so forced, or as he says -- vultus jussus -- so commanded, that
can sever from an artificious and fained speech, these Notes; but that the
speech is either more slight and careless, or more set and Formal; or more
Tedious and Wandering; or more Dry and Reluctant, than usual.

As for Men's words they are (as Physicians say of waters) full of flattery and
uncertainty; yet these counterfeit Colors are two ways excellently
discovered; namely when words are uttered either upon the sudden, or else in
Passion. So Tiberius being suddenly moved, and somewhat incensed upon a
stinging speech of Agrippina, Annal. IV.
came a step forth of his imbred dissimulation. -- These words, says Tacitus,
heard by Tiberius drew from his dark couvert Breast -- such words as he used
seldom to let fall; and taking her up sharply, told her her own in a Greek
verse. That she was therefore hurt because she did not reign. Therefore the
Poet does not improperly call such Passions -- Tortures -- because they urge
men to confess and betray their secrets, Hor. Epist. I.
Vino tortus and Ira. -- Experience indeed shows that there are few men so
true to themselves, and so settled in their Resolves, but that sometimes upon
heat, sometimes upon bravery, sometimes upon intimate good will to a Friend,
sometimes upon weakness and trouble of mind, that can no longer hold out under
the weight of griefs; some times from some other Affection or Passion, they
reveal and communicate their inward Thoughts: but above all it sounds the mind
to the bottom, and searches it to the quick, when Simulation is put to it by
a counter-Dissimulation according to the proverb of Spain Di Mentira, y
sacaras verdad, Tell a lie and find a Truth.

Neither are Deeds thoe they be the surest pledges of men's minds, altogether to
be trusted without a diligent and judicious consideration of their Magnitude
and Nature: For the saying is most true, That fraud erects it self a
countremure of credit in smaller matters, that it may cheat with better
Advantage afterward. The Italian thinks himself upon the Cross with the
Crier, and upon the point to be bought and sold, when he is better used than
he was wont to be, without manifest cause: for small favors, they do but lull
men a sleep, both as to Caution, and as to Industry, and are rightly called by
Demosthenes Alimenta socordiae. Demost.
Again we may plainly see the false and inconstant propriety and nature of
some Deeds, even of such as are accounted Benefits, from that particular which
Mutianus practiced upon Antonius primus, who upon that hollow and unfaithful
reconcilement made between them, advanced many of the Friends of Antonius and
bestowed upon them Tribuneships, and Captaineships liberally: Tacitus Hist. IV.
by this subtle pretense of Demerit, he did not strengthen, but altogether
disarme and desolate Antonius, and win from him his Dependances, and made
them his own creatures.

But the surest kay, to unlock the minds of Men, consists in searching and
discloseing either their Natures and dispositions, or their ends and
intentions. And certainly the weakest and simplest sort of men are best
interpreted by their Natures; but the wisest and more reserved are best
expounded by their Ends. For it was wisely and pleasantly said (thoe in my
judgment very untruly) by a Nuncio of the Popes, returning from a certain
Nation, where he served as Leidger, whose opinion being asked, touching the
appointment of one to go in his place, gave Counsil, that in any case his Ho:
would not send one too wise, because, says he, no wise man would ever imagine,
what they in that country were like to do. Certainly it is a frequent error,
and very familiar with wise men, to measure other men, by the Module of their
own abilities; and therefore often shoot over the mark, supposing men to
project and design to themselves deeper ends, and to practice more subtle
Arts, and compast reahces, than indeed ever came into their heads, which the
Italian Proverb elegantly notes, saying Di Denari, di Senno, e di Feed
C'n'e Manco che non Creed.


There is commonly less Money, less Wisdom, and less good Faith than men do
account upon. Wherefore if we be to deal with men of a mean and shallow
capacity, because they do many things absurdly, the conjecture must be taken
rather from the proclivity of their Natures, than the designs of their ends.
Furthermore Princes (but upon a far other reason) are best interpreted by
their Natures; and private persons by their ends. For Princes being at the
top of humane Desires, they have, for the most part, no particular ends
propounded to themselves whereto they aspire, specially with vehemence and
perseverance; by the site and distance of which ends, a man might take measure
and scale of the rest of their Actions, and Desires; which is one of the chief
causes that their Hearts (as the Scripture pronounces) are inscrutable. Prove.
25.
But private persons are like Travelers which intentively go on aiming at
some end in their journey, where they may stay and rest; so that a man may make
a probable conjecture and presage upon them, what they would, or would not Do:
for if any thing conduce unto their ends, it is probable they will put the same
in execution; but if it cross their designs, they will not. Neither is the
information touching the diversity of men's ends and natures, to be taken only
simply, but comparatively also; as namely what affection and humor have the
predominancy and command of the rest? So we see, when Tigellinus saw himself
outstript by Petronius Turpilianus in administering and suggesting pleasures to
Neroes humor, -- Metus ejus rimatur -- says Tacitus, Annal. XIV
he wrought upon Neroes Fears, and by this means brake the neck of his
Concurrent.

As for the knowing of men's minds at second hand from Reports of other, it
shall suffice to touch it briefly. Weaknesses and faults you shall best learn
from Enemies; virtues and abilities, from friends; Customs and times, from
servants; cogitations and opinions, from intimate confidents, with whom you
frequently and familiarly discourse. Popular fame is light, and the judgment
of superiors uncertain; for before such, men are more maskt; Q. Cic. de Pet.
Con.
-- Verior Fama e Domesticis emanat --

But to all this part of enquiry, the most compendious way rests in three
things. First, to have general acquaintance and inwardnesse with those which
have most looked into the world, and are well verst both in men and matters; but
especially to endeavor to have privacy and conversation with some particular
friends, who according to the diversity of Business and Persons, are able to
give us solid information, and good intelligence of all passages. Secondly, to
keep a discreet temper and mediocrity, both in liberty of speech and
Taciturnity; more frequently useing liberty, but secrecy where it imports. For
liberty of speech invites and provokes others to use the same liberty to us
again; and so brings much to a man's knowledge; but silence induces trust and
inwardnesse, so as men love to lay up their secrets with us as in a closet.
Thirdly, We must by degrees acquire the Habit of a watchful and present wit,
so as in every conference and Action we may both promote the maine matter in
hand, and yet observe other circumstances that may be incident upon the Bye.
For as Epictetus gives it in precept, a Philosopher in every particular Action,
should say thus to himself, Epict. Enchir.
I will do this also and yet go on in my course. So a Politic in every
particular occurrence should make this account, and resolution with himself;
And J will do this likewise and yet learn something that may be of use
hereafter. And therefore they who are of such a heavy wit and narrow
comprehension, as to overdoe one particular, and are wholly taken up with the
business in hand; Essays.
and do not so much as think of any matters which intervene (a weakness that
Montaigne confesses in himself) such indeed are the best instruments of
Princes and of state; but fail in point of their own Fortune. But in the
mean, above all things caution must be taken, that we have a good stay and
hold of our selves, by repressing a too active forwardness of disposition;
least that this knowing much, do not draw us on to much meddling; for nothing
is more unfortunate, than light and rash intermedling in many matters. So that
this variety of knowledge of Persons and Actions, which we give in precept to
be procured, tends in conclusion to this; to make a judicious choice both of
those Actions we undertake, and of those Persons whose advice and assistance we
use, that so we may know how to conduct our affairs with more dexterity and
safety.

After the knowledge of others follows the knowledge of our selves; for no
less diligence, rather more is to be taken in a true and exact understanding
of our own Persons; than of the Persons of others; for the Oracle, Nosce
Teipsum, is not only a rule of universal Prudence, Jacob. I.
but has a special place in Politiques; for as St James excellently puts us
in mind, that he that viewes his Face in a Glass, yet instantly forgets what
a one he was; so that there is need of a very frequent inspection. The same
holds also in Civil Affairs; but there are indeed diverse Glasses; for the
Divine Glass in which we must look our selves, is the word of God; but the
Politic Glass is nothing else but the state of the world and times wherein
we live. Wherefore a man ought to take an exact examination, and an impartial
view (not such as uses to be taken by one too much in love with himself) of
his own abilities, virtues and suports; as likewise of his own defects,
Inhabilities, and Impediments; so making his accounts, that he ever estimate
these with the most, those rather with the least; and from this view and
examination these points following come into consideration.

The first Consideration should be, how a man's individual constitution and
moral temper sorts with the general state of the times; which if they be
found agreeable, then he may give himself more scope and liberty and use his
own nature; but if there be any antipathy and dissonancy then in the whole
course of his life he should carry himself more close retired, and reserved.
So did Tiberius who being conscient of his own temper not well sorting with his
times was never seen at public Plays, and came not into the Senate in
twelve of his last years: whereas on the contrary Augustus lived ever in men's
eyes, which also Tacitus observes: Annal. I.
Alia Tiberio Morum via; the same reason too was to secure his person from
danger.

The second Consideration should be how a man's nature sorts with the
Professions and courses of life which are in use and estime, and whereof he is
to make his choice, that so if he have not yet determined what race to run, or
what course of life to take, he may choose that which is most fit and agreeable
to his natural disposition; but if he be engaged already in a condition of
life, to which by nature he is not so fitted, let him make a departure at the
first opportunity and take another Profession. This we see was done by
Valentine Borgia that was designed by his father to a Sacerdotall profession,
which, obeying the bent of his own nature, he quitted soon after, and applied
himself to a Military course of life; tho as equally unworthy the dignity of a
Prince as of a Priest, seeing the pestilent Man has dishonored both.

The third Consideration should be how a man may be valued, and may deport
himself as he is compared with his equals and Rivals, whom it is likely he may
have competitors and Concurrents in his Fortune, and that he take that course
of life wherein there is the greatest solitude of able men; and himself like
to be most eminent. Thus Julius Caesar did, who at first was an Orator or
Pleader, and was chief conversant in the gowne-Arts of Peace; but when he saw
Cicero, Hortensius, and Catulus to excel in the glory of Eloquence, and no man
eminent for the wars but Pompeius, he forsook his course and bidding a long
farewell to a Civil and Popular Greatness, transferd his designs to the
wars and to a Martial Greatness; by which mean he ascended to the top of
sovereignty.

The fourth Consideration may be, that in the choice of friends and inward
dependances, a man consult his own nature and disposition, and proceed
according to the composition of his own temper; for different constitutions
require different kinds of friends to complie withal; to some men, solemn and
silent natures, to others bold and boasting humors are acceptable; and many of
like sort. Certainly it is worth the observation, to see of what disposition
the friends and followers of Julius Caesar were, (as Antonius, Hirtius, Pansa,
Oppius, Balbus, Dolabella, Pollio, the rest,) these were wont to swear ita
vivente Caesare moriar; bearing an infinite affection to Caesar, but toward
all others disdainefull and arrogant, and they were men in public Business
active and effectual; in fame and reputation not so solemn and celebrated.

The fifth Consideration may be that a man take heed how he guide himself by
Examples, and that he do not fondly affect the Imitation of others; as if that
which is pervious to others, must needs be as patent to him, never considering
with himself what difference perhaps there is betwixt his and their natures
and carriages, whom he has chosen for his pattern and example. This was
manifestly Pompeius error, who, as Cicero reports it, was wont often to say
Sylla potuit, Ego non potero? wherein he was much abused, the nature and
proceedings of himself, and Sylla being the unlikeliest in the world; the one
being fierce, violent, and pressing the fact; the other solemn, reverencing
Laws, directing all to Majesty and Fame; and therefore the less effectual
and powerful to go thorough with his designs. There are more Precepts of
this nature, but these shall suffice for example to the rest.

Nor is the well understanding, and discerning of a man's self sufficient, but
he must consult with himself upon a way how he may aptly and wisely open and
reveal himself, and in sum become flexible and molded to the several
forms and impressions of occasions. As for the Revealing of a man's self, we
see nothing more usual, than for the less able man to make the greater show.
Wherefore it is a great advantage to good parts, if a man can by a kind of Art
and Grace set forth himself to others, by aptly revealing (so it be done
without distaste or arrogance) his virtues, Merits, and Fortune; and on the
contrary by covering artificially his weaknesses, defects, misfortunes and
disgraces; staying upon those, and as it were, turning them to the light;
sliding from these and lessening them by an apt exposition, and the like.
Wherefore Tacitus says of Mucianus, who was the wisest man and the greatest
Politic of his time, Hist. alicubi.
Omnia quae dixerat feceratque Art quada^ ostentator. This setting forth of a
man's self requires indeed some Art, least it turn tedious and arrogant; but
yet so, as some kind of Ostentation, tho it be to the first degree of vanity
seems rather a vice in the Ethiques, than in the Politiques. For as it is
usually said of Slander, Audacter calumniare, semper aliquid haeret. So it may
be said of Ostentation (unless it be in a gross manner deformed and
ridiculous) Audacter te vendita, semper aliquid haeret; it will stick certainly
with the more ignorant and inferior sort of men, tho the more wise and solemn
smile at it, and despise it. Wherefore the Estimation won with many, shall
countervaile the Disdain of a few. But if this Ostentation of a man's self,
whereof we speak be carried with decency and discretion; for example, if it
make show of a native candor and imbred ingenuity; or if it be assumed at
times, when other Perils approach (as in Military persons in time of war;) or
at times when others are most envied; or if words which respect a man's own
Praise, seem to fall from him in a careless passage, as intending something
else, without dwelling too long upon them, or being too serious; or if a man so
grace himself, as with equal freedom, he forbeares not to tax and jest at
himself; or in sum, if he do this not of his own accord, but as urged and
provokt by the insolences and contumelies of others; it does greatly add to a
man's Reputation. And surely not a few more solid than windy natures, (and
therefore want the Art of bearing up sail in the height of the winds;) suffer
for their moderation, not without some prejudice, and disadvantage to their
reputation and merit. But for these Flourishes and enhancements of virtue,
however some of weak judgment, and perchance too severely Moral, may
disallow, no man will deny this, but that we should endeavor at least, that
virtue through careless negligence be not disvalewed, and imbased under the
just price. This diminution of the value, and abating the price in estimating
Virtue, is wont to fall out three ways. First when a man offers and obtrudes
himself and service in matters of employment not called nor sent for; such
prompt offices as these are reputed well rewarded, if they be not refused.
Secondly when a man in the beginning and first onset of an employment, too
much abuses his own forces and abilities, when that which should have bin
performed by degrees, he lavisheth out all at once; which in matters well
managed, winnes early grace and commendation, but in the end induces satietie.
Thirdly when a man is too suddenly sensible, and too inconsiderately
transported with the fruit of his virtue, in commendation, applause, honor,
favor conferred upon him; and is too much affected and delighted therewith: of
this point there is a wise Aviso: Beware least you seem unacquainted with
great matters, that are thus pleased with small, as if they were great.

But the covering of Defects is of no less importance, than a wise and
dexterous ostentation of virtues. Defects are concealed and secreted by a
threefold industry, and as it were under three coverts, Caution, Color, and
Confidence. Caution is that, when we do wisely avoid to be put upon those
things for which we are not proper; whereas contrariwise bold and undertaking
spirits will easily engage themselves without judgment, in matters wherein
they are not seen, and so publish and proclaim all their imperfections. Color
is when we do warily and wisely prepare and make way, to have a favorable and
commodious construction made of our faults and wants; as proceeding from a
better cause, or intended for some other purpose than is generally conceived:
for of the Coverts of Faults the Poet says well, Ovid.
Saepe latet vitium proximitate Boni. Wherefore if we perceive a Defect in our
selves, our endeavor must be to borrow and put on the Person and Color of the
next bordering Virtue wherewith it may be shadowed and secreted. For instance,
he that is Dull, must pretend Gravity; he that is a Coward, mildness, and so
the rest. And it will advantage, to frame some probable cause, and to give it
out and spread it abroad, that induced us to dissemble our abilities and not
do our best; that so making a Virtue of Necessity, what was not in our power,
may seem not to have bin in our will to do. As for Confidence, it is indeed an
impudent, but the surest and most effectual remedy; namely that a man profess
himself to despise and set at naught, what in truth he cannot attain;
according to the Principle of wise Merchants, with whom it is familiar to raise
the price of their own Commodities, and to beat down the price of others. But
there is another kind of Confidence far more impudent than this, which is to
face out a man's own Defects, -- to boast them and obtrude them upon Opinion; as
if he conceived that he was best in those things, wherein he most fayles; and
to help that again, that the Deception put upon others may come off more
roundly, he may feign, that he has least opinion of himself in those things,
wherein he is best. Like as we see it commonly in Poets; for a Poet reciting
his verses, if you except against any verse, you shall presently hear him
reply, And for this verse it cost me more labor than the rest; and than he
will bring you some other verse, and seem to disable and suspect that rather,
and ask your judgment of it, which yet he knows to be the best in the number,
and not liable to exception. But above all, in this Helping a man's self in his
carriage, namely, that a man may set the fairest gloss upon himself before
others, and right himself in all points, nothing, in my opinion, availes more,
than that a man do not dismantle himself and expose his person to scorn and
injury by his too much Goodness and Facility of Nature; but rather in all
things show some sparkles and edge of a free and generous spirit, that carries
with it as well a sting, as Honey. Which kind of fortified carriage together
with a prompt and prepared resolution to vindicate a man's self from scorn, is
imposed upon some by accident and a kind of an inevitable necessity, for
somewhat inherent in their person or fortune; as we see it in Deformed Persons
and Bastards, and in Persons any way disgraced; so that such natures, if they
have any good parts commonly they succeed with good felicity.

As for the declaring of a Man's self, that is a far different thing from
Ostentation or the Revealing of a Mans-selfe, whereof we spoke even now; for it
referres not to Men's Virtues or weaknesses, but to the Particular Actions of
life; in which point, nothing is more Politic, than to observe a wise and
discreet mediocrity in the disclosing or secreting the inward intentions and
meanings of the Mind touching particular Actions. For although depth of
secrecy and concealing of Counsils, and that manner of managing Business when
men set things a work by dark, and as the French styles it, Sourdes Meneers
sourd Arts, and close Carriages, be a thing both prosperous and admirable; yet
many times it comes to pass, as the saying is, That Dissimulation begets
errors, and illaqueates the Dissembler himself. For we see the ablest men, and
greatest Politiques that ever were have made no scruple of it, openly to
profess, freely and without dissimulation, Plutar. in Sylla.
the ends they aim at: so L. Sylla made a kind of profession, That he wished
all men happy or unhappy as they stood his friends or enemies: So Caesar when
he went first into Gaul confidently professed, Plutar. in I. Caes.
That he had rather be first in an obscure village, than second at Rome: the
same Caesar when the war was now begun did not play the dissembler, if we
observe what Cicero reports of him; the other (meaning of Caesar) refuses not,
Ad At. Lib. X. E. 4.
nay in a sort desires, what, as matters stand, he may so be called Tyrant. So
we may see in a letter of Cicero's to Atticus, how far from a Dissembler
Augustus Caesar was, who in his very entrance into Affairs, while he was a
darling to the senate, yet in his Haranges and speeches to the People was wont
to swear after this manner, Cic. ad Attic.
Ita parentis honores consequi liceat, which was no-lesse than the Tyranny;
save that to help the matter a little, he would withal stretch forth his hand
to a statua of Julius Caesar's, which was erected in the Rostra: and men laughed
and applauded, and wondered and discoursed thus amongst themselves, what means
this? What a young man have we here? and yet thought he meant no hurt, he did
so candidely and ingenuously speak what he meant. And all these, we have
named, Hist. 2.
were prosperous: Whereas on the other side, Pompeius who tended to the same
ends, but by more umbragious and obscure ways (as Tacitus says of him
Occultor non melior; Sal. apud Sueton. lib. de cl. Gram
a censure wherein Salust concurres, Ore probo, Animo inverecundo,) made it his
design, and endeavored by infinite engines, that deeply hideing his
boundless desires and ambition, he might in the mean space cast the state
into an Anarchy and confusion, whereby the state must necessarily cast it self
into his arms for protection, and so the sovereign Power be put upon him, and
he never seen in it: and when he had brought it, (as he thought,) to that
point, when he was chosen Consul alone, as never any was; yet he could make no
great matter of it; because those, that without question would have cooperated
with him understood him not; so that he was feign in the end, to go the beaten
and common track of getting Arms into his hands, by color of opposing
himself against Caesar: so tedious, casual, and unfortunate are those
Counsils which are covered with deep Dissimulation; whereof it seems Tacitus
made the same judgment, when he makes the Arts of Simulation, a prudence of an
inferior form, Annal. libris.
in regard of true Policy, attributing the one to Augustus, the other to
Tiberius; for speaking of Livia he says thus, That she sorted well with the
Arts of her husband, and Dissimulation of her son.

As touching the bending and moulding of the Mind; it must indeed by all
possible means be endeavored, that the mind he made pliant and obedient to
occasions and opportunities, and that it be not any way stiff and renitent to
them: for nothing hinders the effecting of Business, and the making of men's
fortunes so much as this: Idem manebat neque idem decebat, that is, when men
are where they were, and follow their own bent when occasions are turned.
Therefore Livy, Lib. XXXIX. v. c. 566.
when he brings in Cato Major, as the expertest Architect of his fortune, very
well annexes this, that he had, versatile ingenium, and thereof it comes, that
these grave solemn wits, which must be like themselves, and cannot make
departure, have for most part more dignity then felicity. But in some it is
nature to be viscous and in wrapped and not easy to turn: in others it is
custom, that is almost a nature and a conceit, which easily steals into men's
minds, which is, that men can hardly make themselves believe, that they ought
to change such courses, as they have found good and prosperous by farther
experience. For Machiavell notes wisely in Fabius Maximus; How he would have
bin temporizing still according to his old biasse, Discors supra Live.
when the nature of the war was altered and required holt pursuit. In some
others the same weakness proceeds for want of penetration in their judgment,
when men do not in time discern the Periods of things and Actions, but come
in too late after the occasion is escaped. Such an oversight as this, Orat. in
Philip. I.
Demosthenes reprehends in the People of Athens, saying they were like country
fellows playing in a Fenceschoole, that if they have a blow, than they remove
their weapons to that ward and not before. Again in others this comes to
pass, because they are loath to loose the labor, in that way, they have
entered into, nor do they know how to make a retrait; but rather intertaine a
conceit, that by perseverance they shall bring about occasions to their own
plie. But from what root or cause soever this viscosity and restivenesse of
mind proceeds, it is a thing most prejudicial both to a man's affairs and
fortunes; and nothing is more politic, than to make the wheel of our mind
concentrique and voluble with the wheels of Fortune. Thus much of the two
summary precepts touching the Architecture of Fortune. Precepts Scatterd are
many, but we will only select a few to serve as examples to the rest.

The first Precept is, that this Architect of his own fortune rightly use his
Rule, that is, that he inure his mind to judge of the Proportion and valor of
things, as they conduce more or less to his own fortune and ends; and that he
intend the same substantially, and not superficially. For it is strange but
most true, that there are many, whose Logical part of Mind (if I may so term
it) is good, but the Mathematical part nothing worth; that is, who can well and
soundly judge of the consequences, but very unskilfully of the prizes of
things. Hence it comes to pass, that some fall in love and into admiration
with the private and secret access to Princes; others with popular fame and
applause, supposing they are things of great purchase, when in many cases they
are but matters of envy, peril, and impediment: others measure things,
according to the labor and difficulty spent about them, thinking that if they
be ever moveing, they must needs advance and proceed; as Caesar said in a
despiseing manner of Cato Vticensis, when he describes how laborious, assiduous
and indefatigable he was to no great purpose, Omnia (says he) magno studio
agebat. Hence likewise it comes to pass, that men often abuse themselves, who
if they use the favor and furtherance of some great and honorable Person,
they promise themselves all prosperous success; whereas the truth is, that,
not the greatest, but the aptest instruments, soonest, and more happily
accomplish a work. And for the true direction of the Mathematical square of
the Mind; it is worth the pains especially to know, and have it set down,
what ought first to be resolved upon for the building and advanceing of a man's
fortune? what next, and so forward?

In the first place I set down, the Amendment of the mind; for by taking away
and smoothing the impediments, and rubbes of the Mind, you shall sooner open a
way to fortune, than by the assistance of Fortune, take away the impediments of
the Mind. In the second place I set down wealth and Means, which perchance
most men would have placed first, because of the general use it bears toward
all variety of occasions; Discorssi in T. Livio lib. 2.
but that opinion I may condemn with like reason, as Machiavell in another
case not much unlike; for whereas the old saying was, that Moneys were the
sinews of war, he on the contrary affirmed, that there were no other sinews
of wars, save the sinews of valiant men's arms. In like manner it may be
truly affirmed, that it is not Moneys that is the sinews of Fortune, but the
sinews rather and abilities of the Mind, Wit, Courage, Audacity, Resolution,
Moderation, Industry, and the like. In the third place, I set down Fame and
Reputation, and the rather because they have certain tides and times, which if
you do not take in their due season, are seldom recovered, it being a very
hard matter to play an after game of Reputation. Jn the last place I set down
Honors, to which certainly there is a more easy access made by any of the
other three, much more by all united; than if you begin with Honors and so
proceed to the rest. But as it is of special consequence, to observe the order
and priority of things; so is it of little less import, to observe the order
and priority of Time; the preposterous placing whereof, is one of the communest
errors; while men fly unto their ends, when they should intend their
beginings; and whilst we suddenly ceize upon the highest matters, we rashly
pass over what lies in the midst; but it is a good precept, Quod nunc instat
agamus.

The second Precept is, that upon a greatness and Confidence of Mind, we do
not engage our forces in too arduous matters, which we cannot so well conquer;
nor that we row against the stream. For as touching men's Fortune, the counsil
is excellent, -- Fatis accede Deisque. Let us look about us on every side, and
observe where things are open, where shut and obstructed; where easy, where
difficile, to be compassed; and that we do not overstraine and misemploy our
strength where the way is not passable, for this will preserve us from foil;
not occupy us too much about one matter; we shall win an opinion of Moderation;
offend few; and lastly, make a show of a perpetual felicity in all we
undertake; whilst those things which peradventure would of their own accord
have come to pass, shall be attributed to their providence and industry.

The third Precept may seem to have some repugnancy with that former
immediately going before; though it be well understood, there is none at all.
The Precept is this; that we do not always expect occasions, but sometimes
provoke them, and lead the way unto them; Orat. in Phil. I.
which is that which Demosthenes intimates in high terms. For as it is a
received principle that a General should lead the Army; so wise and
understanding men should conduct and command matters, and such things should
be done as they saw fit to be done; and that they should not be forced to
pursue and build only upon events. For if we diligently consider it we shall
observe two differing kinds of sufficiency in managing affairs and handling
business; for some can make use of occasions aptly and dexterously, but plot
and excogitate nothing; some are all for Plots, which they can well urge and
pursue, but cannot accommodate and take in: Either of which abilities is
maimed, and imperfect without the other.

A fourth Precept is, not to embrace any matters which do occupy too great a
quantity of time; but to have that verse ever sounding in our ears.

Sed fugit interea fugit irreparabile tempus.

And the cause why those who addict themselves to professions of burden and the
like, as Lawyers, Orators, painful Divines, writers of Books, and the like,
are not commonly so politic in contriving and promoting their own fortunes,
is no other then this; that they want time which is otherwise employed, to
inform themselves of Particulars; and to wait upon occasions, and to devise
and project designs which may conduce to the making of their fortune. Nay
further, in the Courts of Princes and in states, you shall have those that are
exceeding powerful and expert how to advance their own Fortune, and to invade
the Fortune of others, which undergo no public charge, but are continually
practiced in that whereof we speak, The Advancement of Life.

A Fifth Precept is, to imitate nature which does nothing in vain. Which
certainly we may do, if we discreetly mingle and interlace our businesses of
all sorts. For the mind should in every particular action be so disposed and
prepared; and our intentions so subdued, and subordinated one under another; as
if we can not have that we seek in the best degree, yet we may have it in a
second, or at least in a third: but if we can get no footing nor any
consistency at all in any part of a thing we desire; than we may turn the
pains we have taken upon some other end, then that whereto it was designed:
but if we cannot make any thing of it for the present, at least we may extract
something out of it that may stand us instead for the time to come; but if we
can derive no solid effect or substance from it, neither for the present nor
for the future; let us yet endeavor to win some good opinion and reputation
by it; and the like: ever exacting accoumpts of our selves, whereby it may
appear that we have reapt somewhat more or less from every particular Action
and Counsil; never suffering our selves to be cast down and dispirited, like
men amazed and confused, if perchance we fail in the principal scope of our
intentions. For nothing is more prejudicious to a Politic, than to be wholly
and solely taken up with one thing; for he that does so, loses infinite
occasions which do intervene upon the by; and which perhaps are more proper
and propitious for somewhat that may be of use hereafter; than for those things
we urge for the present: and therefore we must be perfect in that Rule, Haec
oportet facere and illa non omittere. Epict. Ench.


A sixth Precept is, that we engage not our selves too peremptorily in any
thing though it seem not at first sight, liable to accident; but that we ever
have either an open window to fly out at, or a secret posterne way to retire
by.

A seventh Precept is, that ancient Rule of Bias; so it be construed not to
any point of Perfidiousnesse; but to caution and moderation. So love a man as
yet thou may become an enemy, so hate a man as yet thou may become his
Friend; for it utterly betrays and frustrates all utility, for a man to
embarque himself too far in unfortunate friendships; unquiet and troublesome
spleenes, or childish and humorous Aemulations.

Plura velis? V. Cardani Proxen sive Arcana Pol: and quam Arcana!
These shall suffice for examples touching the knowledge of the Advancement of
Life: yet I would have it remembered, that these adumbrations which we have
drawn and set down as Deficients, are far from complete Tractates of them,
but only that they are as little pieces and edgings for patterns, whereby a
judgment may be made of the whole web. Again we are not so weak and foolish
as to avouch that Fortunes are not to be obtained without all this ado; for we
know well they come tumbling into some men's laps, and a number obtain good
fortunes only with diligence and assiduity (with some little caution
intermingled) in a plain way, without any great or painful Art. But as Cicero
when he sets down the Idea of a perfect Orator, does not mean that every
Pleader should be or can be such: and again as in the description of a Prince
or a Courtier, by such as have handled those subjects; the Mould is made
according to the perfection of the Art, and not according to common practice:
the same we have performed in the instruction of a Politic man; J mean
Politic for his own Fortune. And likewise take this advertisement along
with you. That the Precepts which we have chosen and set down, are all of
that kind which may be counted and called Bonae Arts. Libro del Pren.
As for Evil Arts, if a man would yield himself a disciple to Machiavell
who gives it in precept, That a man needs not much care for virtue it self,
but for the appearance only thereof in the eyes of the world, because the fame
and credit of virtue is a help, but the use of it a cumber; who in another
place gives this rule: That a Politic man lay this as a foundation of his
Practique wisdom, that he presuppose, that men are not rightly and safely to
be wrought upon and bowed to the bent of our wills, otherwise than by fear; and
therefore let him endeavor by all means possible to have every man obnoxious,
low and in streights. So as Machiavells Politician seems to be what the
Italians call jl seminatore delle spine; or if any would embrace that
Principle which Cicero cites, Cadant amici, dummodo inimici intercidant; as
the Trium viri sold the lives of their friends, for the deaths of their
enemies. Or if a man would be an imitator of L. Catilina to become an
incendiarie and a perturber of states to the end he may better fish in droumy
waters, Cic. pro L. Muraena.
and unwrap his fortunes; I (says he) if once a fire ceize upon my Fortune,
will extinguish it not with water but with ruin; or if any one would convert
to his use that of Lysander, Plutar. in Lysand.
who was wont to say, That children are to be deceived with Comfits, and men
with Oaths. With other such corrupt and pernicious Positions of the same
impression, whereof (as in all other things, there are more in number, than of
the good and sound. If any (J say) be delighted with such contagious and
polluted wisdom, I deny not but with these dispensations from all the laws of
charity and integrity, wholly eslaved to the pressing of his own Fortunes, he
may be more speedy and compendious in the promoting of his Fortune: but it is
in life, as it is in ways, the shortest way is commonly the fowlest; and
surely the fairer way is not much about. But it is so far from the mind and
purpose of this Discourse that men should apply themselves to these corrupt and
crooked Arts, that rather indeed (if they be in their own power and are able to
bear and sustain themselves; and be not carried away with the whirlewinde and
tempest of Ambition) they ought in the pursuit of Fortune to set before their
eyes, not only that general Map of the world, That all things are vanity and
vexation of spirit; but also that more particular card and direction, That
Being, without well-Being, is a curse; and the greater Being, the greater
curse; and that all virtue is most rewarded, and all wickedness most punished
in it self: according as the Poet says excellently, Quae vobis, quae digna,
viri, Virg. Aen. 9.
pro talibus ausis
Praemia posse reor solvi? Pulcherrima primum
Dii Moresque dabunt vestri. --
And so on the contrary he speaks as truly of the wicked -- atque eum
ulciscentur mores sui. -- Nay further the race of Mortality, whilst their
working heads every way toss and diffuse their thoughts how they may best
forecast and consult their advancement in the world, ought, in the midst of
these heats, and eager pursuits, to look up to the divine judgment, and the
eternal providence, which oftentimes subverts and brings to nothing the plots
of the wicked, and their evil counsils, thoe never so profound; according to
that of sacred scripture, Psalm. VII.
He conceived wicked thoughts, traveled great with mischief, and shall bring
forth delusive vanity. Nay though men should refrain themselves from injuries
and evil Arts; yet this incessant and Saboathlesse aspiring to the steep
height of Fortune, paies not the tribute of our time due unto God, who (as we
may see) demands and sets apart for himself a Tenth of our substance and a
Seventh of our time. For it is to small purpose to have an erected face
toward heaven, and a grovelling spirit upon earth, eating dust as does the
serpent; an opposition which even Heathens could see and censure. Horat. ser. 2.
Atque affigit humo divinae particulam Aurae. And if any man should herein
flatter himself, that he resolves to employ his Fortune well though he should
obtain it ill; as was wont to be said of Augustus Caesar and Septimius
Severus, That either they should never have bin borne, or else they should
never have died, they did so much mischief in the pursuit and ascent of their
greatness; and so much good when they were established; let him take this with
him, that such compensation of evil by good, may be allowed after the Fact,
but is deservedly condemned in the purpose. Lastly, it will not be amiss for
us, in that swift and hot race toward our fortune, to cool our selves a
little, with that elegant conceit of the Emperor Charles the V. in his
instructions to his son, Script. Germ. A.C. 1519.
That Fortune has somewhat of the nature of a woman, that if she be too much
whoed she is the farther off, but this last remedy is for those whose taste,
from some distemper of the mind, is corrupted: let men rather build upon that
foundation, which is as a cornerstone of Divinity and Philosophy, wherein they
almost join close by the same assertion of what should be first sought; Mat.
VI.
for Divinity commands, First seek the Kingdom of God and all these things
shall be superadded unto you; and Philosophy commands somewhat like this; Seek
first the goods of the mind, and the rest shall be supplied, or no way
prejudiced by their absence. And although this foundation laid by man is
sometimes placed upon the sands, as we may see in M. Brutus, DION Lib. XLVII.
ex Poeta vet.
who in the last scene of his life, brake forth into that speech, Te Colui
virtus ut Rem, ast Tu Nomen inane es. Yet the same foundation laid by the hand
of heaven, is firmly settled upon a Rock. And here we conclude the knowledge of
the Advancement of Life; and withal the general knowledge of Negociations.

CAP. III. The Partitions of the Art of Empire or Goverement are omitted; only
access is made to two DEFICIENTS. I The knowledge of enlarging the Bounds of
Empire. II. And the knowledge of universal Justice; or of the Fountains of
Law.
I. I Come now to the Art of Empire, or the knowledge of Civil Government;
under which Household Government is comprehended, as a Family is under a City.
In this part, as I said before, I have commanded my self silence: yet
notwithstanding I may not so disable my self; but that I could discourse of
this part also, perchance not impertinently, nor unprofitably; as one practiced
by long experience; and by your Majesty's most indulgent favors, and no merit
of mine own, raised by the degrees of office and honors, to the highest
Dignity in the state; and have borne that office for four years; and which is
more, have bin accustomed to Your Majesty's commands and conferences, for the
continued space of eighteen years together, (which even of the dullest mould
might fashion and produce a Statesman) who have spent much time amongst other
knowledges, in Histories and laws. All which I report to posterity, not out of
any arrogant ostentation; but because I presume it makes something to the
honor and Dignity of learning; that a man borne for letters more than any
thing else, and forcibly carried away, I know not by what fate, against the
bent of his own Genius, to a Civil active course of life, should yet be
advanced to so high and honorable charges in the state, and that under so wise
a King. But if my times of leisure shall bring forth hereafter any thing
touching the wisdom of Government, and state matters, it will be perchance an
Abortive, or an Afterbirth. In the mean space now that all sciences are
distributed and ranged, as it were, into their true Forms; least such an
eminent place as this should remain empty, I have judged it fit to note as
DEFICIENTS two Portions only of Civil knowledge, which pertain, not to the
Secrets of Empire, but are of a more open and public nature; and, according
to our custom, to propound examples thereof. Seeing the Arts of Government,
comprehend three sorts of Politic Duties; First that a Kingdom or State be
conserved; Secondly that it may become happy and flourishing, Thirdly that it
may be amplified and the bounds thereof propagated and extended. Of these
duties the two first are for most part by many, excellently well handled; but
the third is past over in silence; wherefore we will set this down in the
number of Deficients, and according to our manner propose examples thereof;
calling this part of Civil knowledge Consulem Paludatum, or a knowledge of the
enlarging the Bounds of Empire.

EXAMPLE OF A SUMMARY TREATISE touching the enlarging of the Bounds of EMPIRE.
CONSVL PALVDATVS, sive de proferendis Imperii finibus.

THe speech of Themistocles, taken to himself, was indeed somewhat uncivile
and haughty; but if it had been applied to others and at large, certainly it
may seem to comprehend in it a wise observation and a grave censure. Desired at
a Feast to touch a lute, Plutar. in Them.
he said He could not Fidle, but yet he could make a small Town a great City:
These words drawn to a Politic sense do excellently express and
distinguish two differing Abilities, in those that deal in business of
Estate. For if a true survey be taken of all Counsilors and Statesmen that
ever were, and others promoted to public charge, there will be found (though
very rarely) those which can make a small State great, and yet cannot fidle, as
on the other side there will be found a great many, that are very cunning upon
the Citterne or Lute, (that is in Court-Trifles) but yet are so far from
being able to make a small State, Great; as their gift lies another way, to
bring a Great and Flourishing Estate to ruin and decay. And certainly those
degenerate Arts and shifts, whereby many Counsilors and Governors gain both
favor with their Masters, and estimation with the vulgar, deserve no better
name than Fidling; being things rather pleasing for the time, and graceful to
the professors themselves; than tending to the weal and advancement of the
State, which they serve. There are also (no doubt) Counsilors and Governors,
not to be despised, which may be held sufficient men, and equal to their
charge; able to manage Affairs, and to keep them from precipicies and
manifest inconveniences, which nevertheless are far from the Ability to
raise and amplify an Estate. But be the workmen what they may be, let us cast
our eyes upon the work, that is, what is the true greatness of Kingdoms and
Estates, and by what means it may be obtained? An argument fit for great
Princes to have perpetually in their hand, and diligently to meditate; to the
end that neither by overmeasuring their Forces, they loose themselves in vain
and too difficile enterprises; nor on the other side undervaluing them, they
descend to fearful and pusillanimous Counsils. The Greatness of an Estate in
Bulk and Territory, does fall under measure; the Greatness of Financies and
Revenue does fall under computation. The number of Citizens and the Pole may
be taken by Musters; and the multitude and greatness of Cities and Towns, by
Cards and Mapps. But yet there is not any thing amongst Civil Affairs, more
subject to error, than a true and intrinseque valuation, concerning the Power
and Forces of an Estate. The Kingdom of Heaven is compared not to an Acorne or
Nut; but to a Grain of Mustard Seed, which is one of the least Grains, but
has in it a property and spirit hastily to get up and spread. So are there
Kingdoms and States in compass and territory very great, and yet not so apt
to enlarge their Bounds or Command; and some on the other side that have but a
small dimension of stem, and yet apt to be the Foundations of of great
Monarchies.

1 Walled Towns; stored Arcenalls and Armories, goodly Races of Horse,
Chariots of war, Elephants, Ordinance, Artillery, and the like; all this is
but a sheep in a Lions skin, except the Breed and Disposition of the people be
stout and warlike. Nay number it self in Armies imports not much, where the
people is of a faint and weak courage: for, as Virgil says, It never troubles
a Wolf, B. Ecl 7.
how many the sheep be. The Army of the Persians in the Plains of Arbela, was
such a vast sea of people, as it did somewhat astonish the Commanders in
Alexanders Army; who came to him therefore, and wished him to set upon them by
Night, Plutar. in Alex.
but he answered, I will not Pilfer the victory; and the Defeat by that
courageous assurance was the more easy. When Tigranes the Armenian, being
encamped upon a hill with an Army of 400000 Men, Plut. in Lucul.
discovered the Army of the Romans being not above 14000 marching toward him,
he made himself merry with it and said; yonder men are too many for an
Embassage, and too few for a Fight: but before the sun set he found them enough
to give him the chase with infinite slaughter. Many are the examples of the
great odds between number and courage. First then a man may rightly make a
judgment and set it down for a sure and certain truth, that the principal
point of all other which respects the Greatness of any Kingdom or State, is to
have a RACE of Military men. Macch. Discors. sopra Livio lib. 2.
And that is a more trite than true saying, That Money is the Sinews of War;
where the sinews of men's arms in base and effeminate people are failing: for
Solon said well to Croesus (when in ostentation he showed him his gold) Sir,
Plut. in Solone.
if any other come that has any better Jron than you, he will be master of all
this Gold. Therefore let any Prince or State think soberly of their Forces,
except their Militia of Natives be of Good and Valiant Soldiers: and let
Princes on the other side that have Subjects of stout and Martial disposition,
know their own strength, unless they be otherwise wanting to themselves. As
for Mercenary Forces (which is the help in this case where native forces fail)
all times are full of examples whereby it manifestly appears; that whatsoever
State or Prince does rest upon them, he may spread his Feathers for a time
beyond the compass of his nest; but he will mew them soon after.

2 The blessing of Judah and Issachar will never meet. Genesis XLIX.
That the same Tribe or Nation should be both the Lions whelp, and the Ass
between Bardens; neither will it be that a people overlaid with Taxes, should
ever become Valiant, and Martial. It is true that Taxes levied by public
consent of the estate do depresse and abate men's courage less; as a man may
plainly see in the Tributes of the Low-cou^tries, which they call Excizes; and
in some degree in those contributions which they call Subsidies in England. For
you must note that we speak now of the Heart and not of the Purse; so that
although the same Tribute conferred by consent or imposed by command, be all one
to the purse, yet it works diversely upon the courage: Therefore set down this
too as a Principle, That no People overcharged with Tribute is fit for Empire.

3 Let states and kingdoms that aim at Greatness by all means take heed how
the Nobility, and Grandies, and those which we call Gentlemen, multiply too
fast; for that makes the common subject grow to be a Peasant and Base swain
driven out of heart, and in effect nothing else but the Noblemans Bondslaves
and Laborers. Even as you may see in Coppice wood, Jf you leave your studdles
too thick, you shall never have clean underwood, but shrubs and bushes: So in
a country if the Nobility be too many the Commons will be base and
heartlesse, and you will bring it to that, that not the hundredth Pole will be
fit for an Helmet; especially as to the Infantery, which is the nerve of an
Army; and so there will be great Population and little strength. This which I
speak off has been in no Nation more clearly confirmed than in the examples
of England and France, whereof England, thoe far inferior in Territory and
Population, has bin nevertheless always an overmatch in Arms; in regard the
middle-people of England make good Soldiers, which the Peasants of France do
not. Histor. HEN. VII.
And herein the devise of HENRY THE VII KING OF ENGLAND (whereof I have spoken
largely in the History of his life) was profound and admirable, in making
Farms and Houses of Husbandry of a standard; that is maintained with such a
Proportion of land unto them, as may breed a subject to live in convenient
plenty, and to keep the Plough in the hands of the Owners, or at least
usu-fructuary, and not hirelings and Mercenaries; and thus a Country shall
merit that Character whereby Virgil expresses ancient Jtaly, Aen. I.
Terra potens Armis atque ubere Gleba. Neither is that state which is almost
peculiar to England, (and for any thing I know, hardly to be found any where
else, except it be perhaps in Poland) to be passed over; J mean the state of
Free-servants and Attendants upon Noblemen and Gentlemen; of which sort, even
they of inferior condition, do no ways yield unto the Yeomanry, for
Jnfantery. And therefore out of all question the Magnificence and that
Hospitable splendour, the Household servants, and great Retinues of Noblemen
and Gentlemen received into custom in England, does much conduce unto
Martial Greatness: whereas on the other side, the close, reserved and
contracted living of Noblemen, causes a Penury of Military Forces.

4 By all means it is to be procured, that the Trunck of Nebuchadnezzars Tree
of Monarchy, be great enough to bear the Branches and the Boughs; that is,
that the number of Natural Subjects to the Crown or State, bear a sufficient
proportion for the over-topping the stronger subjects. Therefore all States
that are liberal of Naturalization toward strangers, are fit for the
Greatness of Empire. For it is a vain opinion to think that a handful of
people, can with the greatest courage and Policy in the world, keep and
repress under the laws of Empire, too large and spacious extent of Dominion;
this may hold for a time, but it will fail suddenly. The Spartans were a
spareing and nice People in point of Naturalization, whereby while they kept
their compass, they stood firm and assured; but when they began to spread and
to enlarge their Dominion, and that their boughs, multiplied by strangers, were
becomen too great for the stem of the Spartans, they became a wind-fall upon
the sudden. Never any State was in this point so open to receive strangers
into their Body, as were the Romans; therefore their Fortune seconded their
wise institution, for they grew to the greatest Monarchy in the world. Their
manner was to grant Naturalization (which they called Ius Civitatis) and to
grant it in the highest degree; that is, Exempla apud Cic. pro L. C. Bal.
not only Ius Commercii, Ius Connubii, Ius Haereditatis; but also Ius
Suffragii, and Ius Petitionis sive Honorum; and this not to singular persons
alone, but likewise to whole families, yea to Cities, and sometimes to whole
Nations. Add to this, their custom of Plantation of Colonies, whereby the
Roman Plants were removed into the soil of other Nations: and putting both
constitutions together, you will say, that it was not the Romans that spread
upon the world; but it was the world that spread upon the Romans; which was
the securest way of Enlarging the Bounds of Empire. I have marvailed sometimes
at Spain, how they claspe and govern so large Dominions, with so few natural
Spaniards: but surely the whole compass of Spain, is a very great body of a
Tree; being it contains far more ample Territories, than Rome or Sparta at
their first riseings. And besides, thoe the Spaniards have not had that useage
to Naturalize liberaly; yet they have that which is next to it, that is, To
employ, almost indifferently, all Nations in their Militia of Ordinary
soldiers, yea and sometimes they confer their highest commands of war,
upon Captains that are no natural Spaniards: nay it seems, not long ago,
they have begun to grow sensible of this want of Natives, and to seek a Remedy,
as appears by the Pragmaticall Sanction published this year.

5 It is most Certain that sedentary and within-doore Mechanical Arts; and
Delicate Manufactures (that require rather the Finger, than the Arm,) have in
their nature a contrariety to a Military Disposition. And generally all warlike
People are a little idle; and love danger better than travail: neither must
they be too much broken of it, if we will have their spirits preserved in
vigor. Therefore it was great advantage in the ancient states of Sparta,
Athens, Rome, and others, that they had the use, not of Freemen, but of
Slaves, which commonly did rid those Manufactures: but the use of Slaves since
the receiving of the Christian Law, is, in greatest part abolisht. That which
comes nearest to this custom, is to leave those Arts chiefly to strangers,
which for that purpose are to be allured, or at least the more easily to be
received. The vulgar Natives should consist of three sorts of men; that is, of
Tillers of Ground; Free-servants; and Handy-craftsmen of strong and Manly Arts,
as Smithes, Masons, Carpenters, etc. not reckoning professed Soldiers.

6 But above all, for the Greatness of Empire, it imports most; that a Nation
do profess Arms as their glory, Principal study, and chiefest Honor. For
the things which we formerly have spoken of, are but Habilitations toward
Arms; and to what purpose is Habilitation without endeavor to produce it into
Act? Live. lib. I. v.c. 37.
Romulus, after his death, (as they report or faigne) sent a present to the
Romans, that above all they should intend Arms, and than they should prove the
greatest Empire of the World. The whole Fabrique of the State of Sparta, was,
industriously (thoe not so wisely) composed and built to that scope and end.
The Persians and Macedonians had the same useage, but not so constant and
lasting. The Britans, Galls, Germans, Goths, Saxons, Normans, for a flash of
time gave themselves chiefly to Arms. The Turks not a little instigated
thereto by their Law, retain the same discipline at this day, (thoe as it is
now practiced) with great declination of their Militia. Of Christian Europe
they that retain and profess it, are in effect only the Spaniards. But it is
so liquid and manifest, that every man profits most, in that he most
intends, that it needs not to be stood upon. It is enough to point at it;
That no Nation which does not profess Arms, and practice Military Arts,
making it their principal study and occupation, may ever hope to have any
notable greatness of Empire, fall into their mouths: and on the other side,
it is a most certain Oracle of time, That those Nations that have continued
long in the profession and study of Arms (as the Romans and Turks
principally have done, for the propagation of Empire, work wonders. Nay those
that have flourisht for the glory of Arms, but for the space only of one age;
have commonly attained that Greatness of Dominion, in that one age, which
maintained them long after, when their profession and exercise of Arms has
grown to decay.

7 Incident to this Precept is; for a state to have such laws and Customs
which may readily reach forth unto them just occasions, or at least pretenses
of taking Arms. For there is that apprehension of Justice imprinted in the
nature of men, that they enter not upon wars (whereof so many calamities do
ensue) but upon some, at the least specious grounds and Quarrels. The Turk
has at hand for cause of war the Propagation of his law and sect; a quarrel
that he may always command. The Romans thoe they estimed the extending of the
Limits of their Empire, to be great honor to their Generals, when it was done;
yet for that cause alone, to Propagate their bounds, they never undertook a
war. Therefore let a nation that pretends to Greatness, and aspires to
Empire, have this condition, that they have a quick and lively sense of any
wrongs either upon Borderers, Merchants or public Ministers; and that they
sit not too long upon the first provocation. Again let them be pressed, and
Active to send Aides and Succors to their Allies and confederates; as it ever
was with the Romans: in so much, as if a hostile invasion were made upon a
confederate, which also had leagues Defensive with other states, and the same
implored their aides severally; the Romans would ever be the foremost; and
leave it to no other to have the Honor of the Assistance. As for the wars
which were anciently made for a kind of conformity, or tacit correspondency
of Estates, I do not see upon what law they are grounded. Such were the wars
undertaken by the Romans, for the liberty of Grecia: such were those of the
Lacedaemonians and Athenians, to set up or pull down Democracies and
Oligarchies: such are the wars made sometimes by States and Princes, under
pretense of protecting Foreign subjects, and freeing them from Tyranny and
oppression, and the like. Let it suffice for the present point that it be
concluded, That no Estate expect to be Great, that is not instantly awake, upon
any just occasion of Arming.

8 No body can be healthful without exercise, neither Natural Body nor
Politic: and certainly to a Kingdom or Estate a just and honorable war is
in place of a wholesome exercise. A Civil war indeed, is like the heat of a
Fever; but a Foreign is like the heat of Exercise, and serves to keep the body
in health: for in a slothful and drowsy Peace, both courages will effeminate,
and Manners corrupt. But howsoever it be for the Happiness of any Estate,
without all question, for Greatness, it makes, to be still for the most part
in Arms: and a veterane Army (thoe it be a chargeable Business) always on
foot, is that which commonly gives the Law, or at least the Reputation amongst
all neighbor states. This is notably to be seen in Spain, which had in one
part or other a veterane Army almost continually, now by the space of
sixe-score years.

9 To be Master of the Sea, is an Abridgement of a Monarchy, Vide sis Cl.
Seldeni Mare claus.
Cicero writing to Atticus of Pompeius his preparation against Caesar says;
Consilium Pompeii, plane Themistocleumest; putat enim, qui Mari potitur, eum
Rerum potiri. And without doubt Pompey had tired out and broken Caesar, if upon
a vain confidence he had not left that way. We see from many examples the
great effects of Battles by Sea. The Battle of Actium decided the Empire of
the world: the Battle of Lepanto put a ring in the nose of the Turk:
Certainly it has often fallen out that Sea Fights have bin final to the
war; but this is when Princes or States have set up their Rest upon those
Battails. Thus much is without all doubt, that he that commands the Sea, is at
great liberty; and may take as much and as little of the war as he will:
whereas on the Contrary, those that be strongest by Land, are many times
nevertheless in great straights. But at this day and with us of Europe, the
vantage of strength at Sea (which is indeed one of the principal Dowries of
this Kingdom of Great Britain) is in the sum of Affairs of great import:
both because most of the Kingdoms of Europe, are not merely Inland, but girt
with the Sea most part of their compass, and because the Treasures and wealth
of both Indies, seems in great part but an Accessarie to the command of the
Seas.

10 The wars of latter Ages seem to be made in the dark, in respect of the
Glory and Honor which reflected upon Military men from the wars in ancient
times. We have now perchance, for Martial encouragement some degrees and
Orders of Chivalry, which nevertheless are conferred promiscuously upon
Soldiers, and no Soldiers; and some Pedegrees of Families perhaps upon
Scutchions; and some public Hospitals for emerited and maimed Soldiers, and
such like things. But in Ancient times, the Trophy erected upon the place of
the victory; the Funeral Laudatives and stately Monuments for those that died
in the wars; Civique Crowns and military Garlands awarded to particular
persons, the style of Emperor, which the Greatest Kings of the world after,
borrowed from commanders in war; the solemn Triumphs of the Generals upon
their return, after the wars were prosperously ended; the great Donatives
and Largesses upon the disbanding of the Armies: these I say were matters so
many and great, and of such glorious luster and blaze in the eyes of the world,
as were able to create a Fire in the most frozen breasts, and to inflame them
to war. But above all, that of the Triumph amongst the Romans, was not a
matter of mere Pomp, or some vain spectacle or pageants; but one of the
wisest and noblest institutions that ever was: for it contained in it three
things, Honor and Glory to the Generals; Riches to the Treasury out of the
spoils; and Donatives to the Army. But the Honors of Triumph perhaps were not
fit for Monarchies, except it be in the person of the King himself, or of the
Kings sons; as it came to pass in the times of the Roman Emperors, who did
impropriate the Honor of Triumph to themselves, and their sons; for such
wars as they did atchieve in Person, and left only by way of indulgence,
Garments and Triumphall Ensigns to the Generals.

But to conclude these discourses, There is no man (as sacred Scripture
testifies) that by care taking can add a cubite to his stature, Mat. VI.
in his little Modul of a Man's body; but in the great Frame of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, it is in the Power of Princes and estates, to add Amplitude
and Greatness to their Kingdoms. For by introducing such ordinances,
constitutions and customs, as we have now propounded, and others of like
nature with these, they may sow Greatness to posterity and future Ages. But
these Counsils are seldom taken into consideration by Princes; but the Matter
is commonly left to fortune to take its chance.

And thus much for the points that for the present, have offered themselves to
our consideration touching the Enlarging of the Limits of a State or Kingdom.
But to what end is this contemplation, seeing of all Imperial Soveraignties in
this world, the Roman Monarchy (as it is believed) was to be the last? but
that, being true to our own Design, nor any where declining out of the way (in
as much as, the Amplification of a Kingdom was, amongst the three Politic
Duties, the third) we could not altogether pass it over untoucht. There
remains now another DEFICIENT of the two we have set down, that is, of
Universal Justice, or the Fountains of Law.

11 All they which have written of Laws have handled that Argument either as
Philosophers, or as Lawyers, and none as statesmen. As for Philosophers they
propound many things goodly for discourse, but remote from use. For the Lawyers
they are mancipated and wholly devoted every one to the laws of the state where
they live, or to the Placits of the Emperial or Pontificial Laws, and cannot
use impartial and sincere judgment; but discourse as out of Gyves and Fetters.
Certainly this kind of knowledge pertaines properly to Statesmen; who can best
discern what humane society is capeable of; what make for the weal of the
public; what natural equity is; what the law of Nations, the custom of
Countries, the diverse and different forms of states and Republiques; and
therefore are able to decerne and judge of Laws, from the Principles, both of
natural Equity and Policy. Wherefore the business in hand is, to have recourse
unto, and make enquiry of the Fountains of Justice, and of Public utility,
and in every part of Law to represent a kind of character and Jdea of that
which is just; by which general mark and direction he that shall intend his
mind and studies that way, may try and examine the several laws of
particular kingdoms and estates; and from thence endeavor an emendation.
Wherefore after our accustomed manner we will, in one Title propound an example
thereof.

EXAMPLE OF A TREATISE TOUCHING Universal Justice, or the Fountains of Law,
IDEA IVSTITIAE VNIVERSALIS sive de Fontibus Iuris.
in one Title, by way of APHORISM.
THE PROEM.
APHORISM. I.
In Civil society either Law or Power prevails; for there is a Power which
pretends Law, and some Law tast's rather of Might, then Right. Wherefore there
is a threefold Fountain of Injustice; Mere Power; Cunning Illaqueation under
color of Law; and the Harshnesse of Law it self.

APHORISM II.
The force and efficacy of Private Right is this. He that does a wrong, by the
Fact, receives Profit or Pleasure; by the Example, incurres Prejudice and
Peril: others are not Partners with him in his Profit or Pleasure; but they
take themselves interressed in the Example; and therefore easily combine and
accord together to secure themselves by Laws, least Injuries by turns ceize
upon every particular. But if thorough the corrupt humor of the times, and the
generality of guilt, it fall out, that to the greater number and the more
Patent, danger is rather created then avoided, by such a Law; Faction disanuls
that Law, which often comes to pass.

APHORISM III.
Private Right is under the Protection of Public Law: for Laws are for the
People; Magistrates for Laws; and the authority of Magistrates depends upon the
Majesty of Empire, and the form of Policy, and upon Laws Fundamental:
wherefore if this Part be sound and healthful, Laws will be to good purpose;
if otherwise, there will be little security in them.

APHORISM IV.
Yet notwithstanding, the end of Public Law is not only to be a Guardian to
Private Right, least that should any way be violated, or to repress Injuries:
but it is extended also unto Religion, and Arms and Discipline, and Ornaments,
and Wealth, and finally to all things which any way conduce unto the prosperous
estate of a Common wealth.

APHORISM V.
For the End and Aim at which Laws should level, and whereto they should
direct their Decrees and Sanctions, is no other then this, That the People may
live happily: This will be brought to pass, if they be rightly trained up in
Piety and Religion; if they be Honest for Moral conversation; secured by Arms
against foreign enemies; Munited by Laws, against seditions, and private
wrongs; Obedient to Government and Magistrates; Rich and Flourishing in Forces
and wealth: but the Jnstruments and sinews of all Blessings are Laws.

APHORISM. VI.
And this end the best Laws attain; but many Laws miss this mark: for
there is a great difference, and a wide distance in the comparative valor and
virtue of Laws; for some Laws are excellent; some of a middle temper; others
altogether corrupt. We will exhibit according to the measure of our judgment,
some certain Laws (as it were) of Laws, whereby information may be taken,
what in all Laws is well or ill set down, and Established.

APHORISM. VII.
But before we descend to the Body of Laws in Particular; we will briefly
touch the merit and Dignities of Laws in general. A Law may be held good, that
is Certain in the intimation; Just in the Precept; Profitable in the
Execution; Agreeing with the Form of Government in the present state; and
begetting virtue in those that live under them.

TITLE. I. OF THE FIRST DIGNITY OF Laws, that they be CERTAIN.
APHORISM. VIII.
CERTAINTY is so Essential to a Law, as without it a Law cannot be Just; Si
enim incertam vocem det Tuba, quis se parabit ad Bellum? So if the Law give an
uncertain found, who shall prepare himself to obey? A Law than ought to give
warning before it strike: and it is a good Rule, That is the best Law which
gives least liberty to the Arbitrage of the Judge, which is that, the CERTAINTY
thereof effects.

APHORISM. IX.
INCERTAINTY of Laws is of two sorts; one where no Law is prescribed; the
other, when a Law is difficile and dark: we must therefore first speak of
Causes omitted in the Law; that in these likewise there may be found some Rule
of CERTAINTY.

OF CASES OMITTED IN LAW.
APHORISM. X.
THe narrow compass of man's wisdom, cannot comprehend all cases which time
has found out; and therefore Cases omitted, and new do often present
themselves. Jn these cases there is applied a threefold remedy, or supplement;
either by a proceeding upon like Cases, or by the use of Examples thoe they be
not grown up into Law; or by Jurisdictions, which award according to the
Arbitrament of some Good Man, and according to sound judgment; whether they be
Courts Praetorian or of Equity, or Courts Censorian or of Penalty.

OF PROCEEDING UPON LIKE Presidents; and of the Extensions of LAWS.
APHORISM. XI.
IN Cases omitted, the Rule of Law is to be deduced from Cases of like nature;
but with Caution and Judgment. Touching which these Rules following are to be
observed. Let Reason be fruitful; Custom be Barren, and not breed Cases.
Wherefore whatsoever is accepted against the Sense and Reason of a Law; or else
where the Reason thereof is not apparent, the same must not be drawn into
consequence.

APHORISM. XII.
A singular Public Good does necessarily introduce Cases Pretermitted.
Wherefore when a Law does notably and extraordinarily respect and procure the
Profit and advantage of a State, Let the interpretation be ample and extensive.

APHORISM. XIII.
It is a hard Case to torture Laws, that they may torture Men. We would not
therefore that Laws Penal, much less Capital, should be extended to new
Offenses: yet if it be an old Crime, and known to the Laws, but the
Prosequution thereof falls upon a new Case, not foreseen by the Laws; we must
by all means depart from the Placits of Law, rather than that offenses pass
unpunisht.

APHORISM. XIV.
In those statutes, which the Common Law (specially concerning cases frequently
incident, and are of long continuance) does absolutely repeal; We like not the
proceeding by similitude, unto cases omitted: for when a State has for a long
time wanted a whole Law, and that, in Cases expressed; there is no great danger
if the cases omitted expect a remedy by a new statute.

APHORISM. XV.
Such Constitutions as were manifestly, the Laws of Time, and sprung up from
emergent Occasion, then prevailing in the Commonwealth; the state of times
once changed, they are reverenced enough if they may conserve their authority,
within the limits of their own proper cases: and it were preposterous any way
to extend and apply them to Cases omitted.

APHORISM. XVI.
There can be no Sequel of a Sequel, but the extention must be arrested
within the limits of immediate Cases: otherwise we fall by degrees upon
unresembling Cases; and the subtlety of wit will be of more force, than the
Authority of Law.

APHORISM. XVII.
In Laws and Statutes of a compendious style, extention may be made more
freely; but in those Laws which are punctual in the enumeration of Cases
Particular, more warily: for as exception strengthens the force of a Law, in
Cases not excepted; so enumeration weakens it, in Cases not enumerated.

APHORISM. XVIII.
An Explanatory statute dammes up the streams of a Former statute; neither is
the extention received afterward, in the one or the other: for there is no
super-extension can be made by a Judge, where once an extention has begun to
be made by a Law.

APHORISM. XIX.
The Form of words and Acts of Court, does not admit an Extention upon like
Cases; for that loses the nature of Formality, which departs from Custom to
Arbitrament: and the introduction of new Cases imbaseth the Majesty of the old.

APHORISM. XX.
Extention of Law is aptly applied unto Cases Post-nate, which were not
existent in nature, when the Law was enacted: for where the case could not be
expressed, because there were none such extant; a Case omitted is accepted for a
Case expressed, if the reason be the same.

So for Extention of Laws in Cases omist let these Rules suffice. Now we must
speak of the use of Examples.

OF PRESIDENTS AND the use thereof.
APHORISM. XXI.
NOw it follows we speak of Examples, from which Right is inferred, where Law
is deficient: as for Custom, which is a kind of Law; and for Presidents which
by frequent Practice are grown into Custom, as into a Tacit Law; we will
speak in due place. But now we speak of Examples or Presidents, which rarely
and sparsedly fall out; and are not yet grown up to the strength of a Law;
namely when, and with what caution a Rule of Law is to be derived from them,
where Law is Deficient.

APHORISM. XXII.
Presidents must be derived from Good and Moderate; and not from Bloody,
Factious, or Dissolute Times: for Examples fetched from such times, are a
Bastard issue, and do rather Corrupt, than Instruct.

APHORISM. XXIII.
Jn Examples the more Modern, are to be reputed the more safe: for that which
was but lately done, and no inconvenience ensued thereon, why may it not be
done again? Yet nevertheless Recent Examples are of less Authority: and if
perchance it so fall out, that a Reformation must be made, Modern Presidents
fast more of their own Times, than of right Reason.

APHORISM. XXXVI.
But more Ancient Presidents must be received with caution, and choice: for the
Revolution of an Age alters many things; so as what might seem Ancient for
Time, the same through perturbation, and Inconformity to the present Age, may
be altogether New. wherefore the examples of a middle time are best; or of such
an Age, as best sorts with the Present times; which now and than the Time
further off better represents, than the Time close at hand:

APHORISM. XXV.
Keep year self within, or rather on this side the limits of an Example, and
by no means surpass those bounds: for where there is no Rule of Law, all ought
to be intertain'd with jealousy: wherefore here, as in obscure cases, follow
that which is least doubtful.

APHORISM. XXVI.
Beware of Fragments and Compends of Examples; and view the Example entire and
every particular passage thereof: for if it be inequal and unreasonable before
a perfect comprehension of the whole Law, to make a judgment upon a Part, or
Paragraph thereof; much more should this rule hold in Examples which unless
they be very square and proper, are of doubtful use and application.

APHORISM. XXVII.
In Examples it imports very much thorough what hands they have past, and have
bin transacted; for if they have gone current with Clerks only and Ministers,
of Justice from the course of some Courts, without any notice taken thereof by
superior Counsilors; or with the Master of Errors, the People; they are to be
rejected and little estimed of: but if they have bin such precise Presidents to
Counsilors of Estate, Judges or Principal Courts, as that it must needs be,
that they have bin strengthened by the tacit approbation, at least, of Judges;
they carry the more Reverence with them.

APHORISM XXVIII.
Presidents that have bin published, however less practiced, which being
debated and ventilated by men's discourses and disceptations have yet stood out
unargued; are of greater Authority; but such as have remaind, buried, as it
were, in Closets and Archives, are of less: for Examples like waters are most
wholesome in the running stream.

APHORISM. XXIX.
Examples that refer to Laws, we would not have them drawn from writers of
History, but from public Acts, and more diligent Traditions: for it is an
infelicity familiar even with the best Historians, that they pass over Laws
and Judicial proceedings too slightly: and if perhaps they have used some
diligence therein, yet they vary much from Authentic Constitutions.

APHORISM XXX.
An Example, which a contemperary Age, or a time nearest unto it has repealed,
should not easily be taken up again, thoe the like case should afterward
ensue: nor makes it so much for an Example, that men have sometimes used it, as
it make against an example, that upon experience, they have now reliquisht it.

APHORISM. XXXI.
Examples are admitted into Counsils; but do in like manner prescribe or
command; therefore let them be so moderated, that the Authority of the time
past, may be bowed and plied to the practice of the Time present. And thus much
concerning information from Presidents where Law is Deficient. Now follows
that we speak of Courts Praetorian and Censorian; Courts of Equity, and of
Penalty.

OF COURTS PRAETORIAN AND CENSORIAN.
APHORISM. XXXII.
LEt there be Courts and Jurisdictions, which may define according to the
Arbitrament of some Good man, and according to sound judgment for the Law (as
is observed before) cannot provide for all Cases; but is fitted to such
occurrences as commonly fall out; and Time (as was said by the Ancients) is a
most wise Thing, and daily the Auctor and Inventor of new Cases.

APHORISM. XXXIII.
New cales fall out both in Matters Criminal, which have need of Penalty, and
in Matters Civil, which have need of Relief: the Courts which respect the
Former, we call Censorian; which respect the latter, Praetorian.

APHORISM. XXXIV.
Let the Censorian Courts of Justice, have jurisdiction and Power not only of
punishing new offenses; but also of increasing Penalties assigned by the Laws
for old crimes, if the cases beheynous, and enormous, so, they be not Capital:
for a Notorious guilt, as it were, a New Case.

APHORISM. XXXV.
Jn like manner, let Praetorian Courts of Equity, have power to qualify the
Rigor of Law; as also of supplying the Defects of Law: for if a Remedy ought to
be extended to him whom the Law has past by; much more to him whom it has
wounded.

APHORISM. XXXVI.
Let these Censorian and Praetorian Courts be by all means limited within Cases
Heinous and extraordinary; and not invade ordinary Jurisdictions; least
peradventure the matter extend to the supplantation, rather than the supplement
of Law.

APHORISM. XXXVII.
Let these Jurisdictions recide only in the Highest Courts of Judicature, and
not be communicated to Courts inferior. For the Power of extending, or
supplying, or Moderating Laws, little differs from the Power of Making them.

APHORISM. XXXVIII.
But let not these Courts be assigned over to one man, but consist of Many: Nor
let the Decrees thereof issue forth with silence, but let the Judges allege
Reasons of their sentence, and that openly in the Audience of the Court; that
what is free in the Power, may yet in the fame and reputation be confined.

APHORISM XXXIX.
Let there be no Rubriques of blood; neither Define of Capital crimes in what
Court soever, but from a known and certain Law; for God himself first
denounced Death, afterward inflicted it. Nor is any man to be put to death,
but he that knew before hand, that he sinned against his own life.

APHORISM XXXX.
In Courts of Censure, give way to a third Trial, that a necessity be not
imposed upon Judges of absolveing or of condemneing, but that they may
pronounce a Non liquet, so in like manner, let Laws Censorian, not only be a
Penalty, but an Infamy, that is, which may not inflict a punishment, but either
end in admonition; or else chastise the delinquent with some light touch of
Ignominy, and as it were, a blushing shame.

APHORISM. XLI.
Jn Censorian Courts let the first aggressions, and the middle Acts of Great
offenses, and wicked attempts be punished; yea although they were never
perfectly accomplished: and let that be the chiefest use of those Courts; seeing
it appertains to severity, to punish the first approaches of wicked
enterprises; and to Mercy to intercept the perpetration of them by correcting
middle Acts.

APHORISM. XLII.
Special regard must be taken, that in Pretorian Courts, such Cases be not
countenanced, which the Law has not so much pretermitted, as slighted as
Frivolous; or, as odious, judged unworthy redress.

APHORISM XLIII.
Above all it most imports the Certainty of Laws, that Courts of Equity do
not so swell and overflow their banks, as under pretense of mitigating the
Rigor of Laws, they do dissect or relaxe the strength and sinews thereof, by
drawing all to Arbitrament.

APHORISM. XLIV.
Let not Pretorian Courts have Power to Decree against express statute, under
any pretense of equity: for if this should be permitted, a Law-interpreter
would become a Lawmakers; and all matters should depend upon Arbitrament.

APHORISM. XLV.
Some are of opinion, that the Jurisdiction of Defining according to Equity and
Conscience; and that other, which proceeds according to strickt Law; should be
deputed to the same Courts; but others say to several: by all means let there
be a separation of Courts; for there will be no Distinction of Cases, where
there is commixtion or jurisdictions; but you shall have Arbitrament incroach
upon, and at last, swallow up Law.

APHORISM. XLVI.
The Tables of the Pretors amongst the Romans came in use upon good ground: in
these the Praetor set diwne and published before hand, by what form of Law he
would execute Judicature. After the same example, Judges in Pretorian Courts,
should propound certain Rules to themselves (so far as may be) and openly
publish them: for that is the best Law, which gives least liberty to the Judge;
he the best Judge that takes least liberty to himself. But of these Courts we
shall speak more at large, when we come to the Title De Judiciis; we now speak
of them in passage only, so far as they clear and supply that which is
omitted by the Law.

OF THE REFLECTIVE ASPECT OR REFERENCE of Laws one to another.
APHORISM. XLVII.
THere is likewise another kind of supplement of Cases omitted; when one Law
falls upon another, and withal draws with it Cases pretermitted. This comes
to pass in Laws or Statutes, which (as the usual expression is) look back
or reflect one upon another. Laws of this nature, are rarely and with great
Caution to be alleag'd: for we like it not, to see a too Faced Ianus in Laws.

APHORISM. XLVIII.
He that goes about to elude and circumvent the words and sentence of Law by
Fraud and captious fallacies, deserves in like manner to be himself ensnared
by a succeeding Law wherefore in case of subtle shifts and sinister devises,
it is very meet that laws should look back upon and mutually support one
another, that he who studies evasions, and eversion of Laws Present, may yet
stand in awe of future Laws.

APHORISM. XLIX.
Laws which strengthen and establish the true intentions of Records and
Instruments, against the Defects of Forms and Solennities, do rightly
comprehend matters Past: for the greatest inconvenience in a law that referres
back, is, that it disturbeth: But these confirmatory Laws, respect the peace
and settling of those cases, which are transacted and determined; yet we must
take heed that cases already adjudg'd, be not reverst or violated.

APHORISM. L.
We must be very careful that, not those Laws alone, be thought to respect
things past, which invalide cases already decided; but those also which
prohibit and restrain future cases necessarily connext with matters past. As
for example, if a Law should interdict some kind of Tradesmen the vent of
their commodities for hereafter: the letter of this Law is for the future; but
the sense and meaning takes hold of the time past; for now it is not
warrantable for such persons to get their liveing this way.

APHORISM. LI.
Every Declaratory Law althoe there be no mention of time past, yet by the
force of the Declaration, it is by all means to be extended to matters past:
for the Interpretation does not then begin to be in force, when it is declared;
but is made contemporary with the Law it self. Wherefore never enact
declaratory Laws, but in case where Laws may in equity refer and look back
one upon another. And here we have done with that part which handles the
INCERTITUDE OF LAWS, where no Law is found. It remains, we now speak of that
other part, namely where there is a Law extant, but such a one as is PERPLEXED
and OBSCURE.

OF THE OBSCURITY OF LAWS.
APHORISM. LII.
OBscurity of Laws springs from four causes: either from the excessive
accumulation of Laws, specially where there is a mixture of Obsolete Laws: Or
from an ambiguous, or not so perspicuous and dilucide description of Laws: or
from the manner of expounding Law, either altogether neglected, or not rightly
pursued: or lastly from contradiction and incertainty of judgments.

OF THE EXCESSIVE ACCUMULATION OF LAWS.
APHORISM. LIII.
THe Prophet says, Pluet super eos Laqueos; now there are no worse snares than
the snares of Laws, specially Penal; if they be immense for number; and
through the alterations of times unprofitable; they do not present a torch,
but spread a net to our Feet.

APHORISM. LIVE.
There are two ways in use of making a new statute; the one establishes and
strengthens the Former statute about the same ject; and then adds and changes
some things: the other abrogates and cancels what was Decreed before, and
substitutes de integro, a new and uniforme Law. The latter way we approve: for
by the former way Decrees become complicate and perplexed; yet what is
undertaken is indeed pursued, but the Body of Law is in the mean time
corrupted. But certainly the more diligence is required in the latter, where
the Deliberation is of the Law it self; that is, the Decrees heretofore made,
are to be searched into and duly waighed and examined, before the Law be
published: but the chief point is, that by this means the Harmony of Laws is
notably advanced for the future.

APHORISM. LV.
It was a custom in the state of Athens, to delegate fix persons, for to
revise and examine every year the Contrary-Titles of Law, which they called
Anti-nomies; and such as could not be reconciled, were propounded to the
People, that some certainty might be defined touching them. After this example,
let such in every state, as have the Power of making Laws, review Anti-nomies
every third or fifth year, or as they see cause. And these may be first
searched into, and prepared by committees assigned thereto, and after that
exhibited to Assemblies; that so what shall be approved, may by suffrages be
established and settled.

APHORISM. LVI.
And let there not be too scrupulous and anxious pains taken in reconcileing
Contrary-Titles of Law, and of Salving (as they term it) all points by subtle
and studied Distinctions. For this is the web of wit; and however it may
carry a show of Modesty and Reverence, yet it is to be reckoned in the number
of things Prejudicial; as being that which makes the whole body of Law
illsorted and incoherent. It were far better that the worst Titles were
canceled, and the rest stand in force.

APHORISM. LVII.
Obsolete Laws and such as are grown out of use, as well as Anti-nomies,
should be propounded by delegates, as a part of their charge to be repealed:
for seeing express statute cannot regularly be voided by Disuse; it falls out
that through a Disestimation of Obsolete Laws, the authority of the rest is
somewhat embased; and Mezentius Torture ensues; that Laws alive are killed
with the embracements of Laws dead: but above all beware of a Gangrene in
Laws.

APHORISM LVIII.
So likewise for Obsolete Laws and statutes, and such as are not lately
published; let the Pretorian Courts have power, in the mean space, to define
contrary to them: for although it has been said not impertinently, no man
ought to make himself wiser than the Laws; yet this may be understood of
Laws, when they are awake, not when they are asleep. On the other side, let
not the more recent statutes, which are found prejudicial to the Law-Publique,
be in the Power of the Judges; but in the Power of Kings and Counsilors of
Estate, and supreme autorities for Redress, by suspending their execution
through edicts and Acts; until Parliamentary Courts, and such High Assemblies
meet again, which have Power to abrogate them; Lest the safety of the
Commonwealth should in the meanwhile, be endangerd.

OF NEW DIGESTS OF LAWS.
APHORISM. LIX.
But if Laws accumulated upon Laws, swell into such vast volumes, or be
obnoxious to such confusion, that it is expedient to revise them a new, and to
reduce them into a sound and solid body; intend it by all means; and let such
a work be reputed an Heroical noble work; and let the Auctors of such a work,
be rightly and deservedly ranckt, in the number of the Founders and Restorers
of Law.

APHORISM. LX.
This Purging of Laws, and the contriveing of a new Digest is five ways
accomplished. First let Obsolete Laws, which Justinian terms, old Fables be
left out. Secondly let the most approved of Anti-nomies be received, the
contrary abolisht. Thirdly, let all Coincident Laws, or Laws which import the
same, and are nothing else but repetitions of the same thing, be expunged; and
some one, the most perfect among them, retained instead of all the rest:
Fourthly if there be any Laws which determine nothing, but only propound
Questions, and so leave them undecided, let these likewise be casse er'd.
Lastly let Laws too wordy and too prolixe be abridged into a more narrow
Compass.

APHORISM. LXI.
And it will import very much for use, to compose and sort apart in a new
Digest of Laws, Law recepted for Common Law, which in regard of their
beginning are time out of mind; and on the other side statutes super added from
time to time: seeing in the delivery of a Juridicall sentence, the
interpretation of Common Law, and Statute-Lawes in many points is not the same.
This Trebonianus did in the Digests and Code.

APHORISM LXII.
But in this Regeneration and new structure of Laws, retain precisely the
words and the Text of the Ancient Laws and of the Books of Law; thoe it must
needs fall out that such, a collection must be made by centoes and smaller
Portions: then sort them in order: For althoe this might have bin performed
more aptly, and (if you respect right reason) more truly, by a New Text, than
by such a consarcination; yet in Laws, not so much the style and description;
as Authority, and the Patron thereof, Antiquity, are to be regarded: otherwise
such a work, might seem a scholastique business, and method, rather than a
body of commanding Laws.

APHORISM. LXIII.
In this New Digest of Laws, upon good advisement a caveat has bin put in;
that the Ancient volumes of Law should not be utterly extinguished, and perish
in oblivion; but should at least remain in Libraries; thoe the common and
promiscuous use thereof might be retained. For in Cases of weighty consequence,
it will not be amiss to consult and look into the mutations and continuations
of Laws past: and indeed it is usual to sprinkle Modern matters with
Antiquity. And this new corpse of Law, must be confirmed only by such, who in
every state have the power of making Laws; lest perchance under color of
Digesting Ancient Laws, new Laws, under hand be convayed in.

APHORISM. LXIV.
It could be wished that this Instauration of Laws, might fall out, and be
undertaken in such times, as, for learning and experience, excel those more
Ancient times, whose Acts and Deeds they recognize: which fell out otherwise in
the works of Justinian. For it is a great unhappiness, when the works of the
Ancient, are maimed, and recompiled by the judgment and choice of a less wise
and Learned Age: but often times that is necessary which is not the best.

They much be spoken of the OBSCVRITY of LAWS, arising from the excessive and
confused accumulation thereof. Now let us speak of the dark and DOVBTFVLL
DESCRIPTION of them.

OF THE PERPLEXED AND OBSCURE DESCRIPTION OF LAWS.
APHORISM LXV.
OBscure Description of Laws arises either from the Loquacity or Verbosity of
them; or again from extreme Brevity; or from the Preamble of a Law repugnant
with the Body of a Law.

APHORISM. LXVI.
It follows that we now speak of the Obscurity of Law, ariseing from a corrupt
and crooked description thereof. The Loquacity and Prolixity, which has bin
used in setting down Laws we dislike: neither does such a writer any way
compass what he desires, and labors for; but rather the quite contrary. For
while a man endeavors to pursue and express every Particular case in apt and
proper terms, hopeing to gain more Certitude thereby; contrariwise it falls
out that through many words, multitude of Questions are engendered; so as a more
sound and solid interpretation of Law, according to the genuine sense and mind
thereof, is much intercepted through the noise of words.

APHORISM. LXVII.
And yet notwithwanding a too Concise and affected Brevity for Majesty's sake,
or as more Imperial, is not therefore to be approved, specially in these
times; least Law become perchance, a Lesbian Rule. Wherefore a middle temperd
style is to be embraced; and a generality of words well stated to be sought
out; which though it do not so thoroughly pursue cases comprehended, yet it
excludes cases not comprehended clearly enough.

APHORISM. LXVIII.
Yet in ordinary and Politic Laws and Edicts, wherein for most part no man
advises with his Counsil, but trusts to his own judgment, all should be
more amply explicated and pointed out, as it were, with the finger, even to the
meanest capacity.

APHORISM. LXIX.
So neither should we allow of Preambles to Laws, which amongst the ancients
were held impertinencies, and which introduce Disputeing and not commanding
Laws, if we could well away with ancient custom. But these Prefaces commonly
(as the times are now) are necessarily prefixed, not so much for explication of
Law, as for persuasion that such a Law may pass in the solemn meeting of a
State; and again to give satisfaction to the communalty. Yet so far is
possible may be, let Prologues, be avoided and the Law begin with a command.

APHORISM. LXX.
The Mind and Meaning of a Law, though sometimes it may be drawn not improperly
from Prefaces and Preambles (as they term them;) yet the latitude and
extention thereof, must not be fetched from thence. For a Preamble by way of
example, sometimes fetches in lays hold upon some of the most plausible and
most specious passages; when yet the Law compriseth many more: or on the
contrary, the Law restraines and limits many Cases, the reason of which
limitations to insert in the Preface were superfluous. Wherefore the dimension
and latitude of a Law must be taken from the Body of a Law: for a Preamble
often falls either short, or over.

APHORISM. LXXI.
And there is a very vicious manner of Recording of Laws, that is, when the
case at which the Law aims, is expressed at large in the preamble, afterward
from the force of the word (The like) or some such term of relation, the Body
of a Law is reverst into the Preamble; so as the Preamble is inserted and
incorporated into the Law it self; which is an obscure and not so safe a
course; because the same diligence uses not to be taken in Pondering and
examining the words of a Preamble, as there uses to be done in the Body of a
Law it self. This part touching the Incertainty of Laws proceeding from an
ill Description of them we shall handle more at large hereafter, when we come
to treat of the Interpretation of Laws. Thus much of the obscure Description
of Laws. Now let us speak of the ways of expounding Laws.

OF THE DIVERSE WAYS OF expounding Law and solveing Doubts.
APHORISM. LXXII.
The ways of Expounding Law and solveing Doubts, are five. For this is done
either by Court Rolls and Records; or by Authentic writs; or by subsidiary
books; or by Prelections; or by Responses and Resolutions of wise men. All
these if they be well instituted and set down, will be singular helps at hand
against the obscurity of Laws.

OF THE REPORTING OF JVDGEMENTS.
APHORISM. LXXIII.
ABove all, let the Judgments delivered in higher, and Principal Courts of
Judicature, and in matters of grave importance; specially Dubious, and which
have some Difficulty and Newness in them, be taken with faith and diligence.
For Decrees are the Anchors of Law, as Laws are of the Republique.

APHORISM. LXXIV.
The manner of collecting such Judgments and Reporting them, let be this.
Register the case precisely; the Judgments exactly; annexe the Reasons of the
Judgments alleged by the Judges, mingle not Authorities of Cases brought for
example with Cases Principal. As for Perorations of Pleaders, unless there be
something in them very remarkable, pass them over with silence.

APHORISM. LXXV.
The Persons which should Collect these Judgments, Let them be of the order
and rank of the Learned Advocates, and let them receive a liberal
Remuneration from the State. Let not the Judges themselves meddle; at all, with
these Reports; least perchance, devoted to their own opinions, and supported
by their own Authority, they transcend the limits of a Reporter.

APHORISM. LXXVI.
Digest these Judgments according to the order and continuation of time, not
according to Method and Titles: for writings of this nature are, as it were,
the Histories and Reports of Laws; nor do the Decrees alone, but their times
also, give light to a wise Judge.

OF AUTHENTIC WRITERS.
APHORISM. LXXVII.
LEt the Body of Law be built only upon the Laws themselves, which constitute
the common Law; next of Decrees or Statutes; in the third place of Judgments
enrolled; besides these, either let there be no other Authentiques at all, or
spareing entertained.

APHORISM. LXXVIII.
Nothing so much imports Certainty of Laws (of which we now discourse) as that
Authentic writings, be confined within moderate bounds; and that the
excessive multitude of Authors and Doctors of the Laws; whereby the mind and
sentence of Laws are distracted; the Judge confounded; proceedings are made
immortal; and the Advocate himself, despairing to read over and conquer so
many Books, betakes himself to Abridgements; be discarded. It may be some good
gloss, and some few of Classique writers, or rather some small parcel of few
writers, may be received for Authentiques. Yet of the rest, some use may be
made in Libraries, where Judges or Advocates, may as occasion is offered read
their Discourses: but in causes to be pleaded, let them not be permitted to be
brought, and alleged in the Court, nor grow up into authority.

OF AUXILIARY BOOKS.
APHORISM. LXXIX.
LEt not the knowledge and practice of Law be destituted, but rather well
provided of Auxiliary Books. They are in general six sorts, Institutes; of
the signification of words; of the Rules of Law; Ancient Records; Abridgements;
Forms of Pleading.

APHORISM LXXX
Young Students, and Novices are to be enterd by Institutes; that they may the
more profoundly and orderly draw and take in the knowledge and Difficulties of
the Laws. Compose these Institutes after a clear and perspicuous manner. Jn
these elementary books run over the whole Private Law; not passing by some
Titles, and dwelling too long upon others; but briefly touching something in
all; that so coming to read through the whole body of Laws, nothing may be
presented altogether strange; but what has bin tasted, and preconceiv'd by
some slight notion. Touch not the Public Law in Institutes, but let that be
deduced from the Fountains of themselves.

APHORISM. LXXXI.
Compile a Commentary upon the Terms of Law: Be not too curious and tedious in
the explication thereof; and of rendering their sense; for the scope here, is
not exactly to seek out the Definition of words; but such explications only,
as may clear the passage to the reading of the Books of Law. Digest not this
Treatise by the letters of the Alphabet: leave that to some Index; but let such
words as import the same thing be sorted together; that in the comprehension of
the sense, one may administer help unto the other.

APHORISM. LXXXII.
A sound and well-labour'd Treatise of the Diverse Rules of Law, conduces (if
anything does) to the Certainty of Laws. A work worthy the Pen of the
greatest wits, and wisest Jurists. Nor do we approve what is extant in this
kind. And not only noted and common Rules, are to be collected, but also others
more subtle, and abstruse, which may be abstracted out of the Harmony of
Laws, and Judged Cases; such as are sometimes found in the best Rubriques; and
these are the general Dictates of Reason, and the Ballast, as it were of Law.

APHORISM. LXXXIII.
But all Decrees and Placits of Law, must not be taken for Rules, as is wont to
be, absurdly enough: for if this should be admitted, then so many Laws, so
many Rules; for a Law is nothing else, then a commanding Rule. But accept those
for Rules which cleave to the very Form of Justice, from whence for most part
the same Rules are commonly found through the Civil Laws of Different States;
unless perhaps they vary for the reference to the Forms of Public
Goverments.

APHORISM. LXXXIV.
After the Rule is delivered in a brief and substantial comprehension of
words; let there be, for explication, annexed examples, and most clear and
luculent Decisions of Cases; Distinctions and exceptions for limitations;
Points concurrent in sense, for Amplification, of the same Rule.

APHORISM. LXXXV.
It is well given in Precept, that a Law should not be drawn from Rules; but
the Rule from the Law in force. Neither is a Proof to be taken from the words
of a Rule; as if it were a Text of Law: for a Rule (as the sea-mans needle does
the Poles) indicates only, not Determines Law.

APHORISM. LXXXVI.
Besides the Body of Law, it will avail also, to survay the Antiquities or
ancient Records of Laws, whose Authority thoe it be vanished, yet their
Reverence remains, still. And let the writings and Judgments concerning
Laws, be received for the Antiquities of Laws, which in time preceded the Body
of Laws; whether they were published or not: for these must not be Lost.
Therefore out of these Records select what ever is most useful (for there will
be found much vain and frivolous matter in them) and digest them into one
volume; Lest old fables (as Trebonianus calls them) be mixed with the Laws
themselves.

APHORISM. LXXXVII.
And it much imports the Practique part of Laws, that the whole Law be
Digested into Places and Titles; whereto a man may have (as occasion shall be
given) a sudden recourse, as to a furnished Promptuary for present practice.
These Books of Abridgements, both reduce into Order what was dispersed, and
abreviate what was diffused and Prolixe in Law. But caution must be taken that
these Breviaries, make not men prompt for the Practique part: and slothful for
the knowledge it self: for their proper use and office is this, that by them
the Law may be tilled over again, and not thoroughly learned. And these
Summaries must by all means be collected with great diligence, faith, and
judgment, lest they commit Felony against the Law.

APHORISM. LXXXVIII.
Make a Collection of the diverse Forms of Pleading in evekinde: for this
conduces much to the Practique Part: and Certainly these Forms do discover
the Oracles, and secret Mysteries of Laws: for there are many things which lie
hidden in Laws; But in Forms of Pleading, they are better and more largely
displayed; -- like the Fist to the Palm.

OF RESPONSES AND RESOLVTIONS OF DOVBTS.
APHORISM. LXXXIX.
SOme Course must be taken for the Cutting off and satisfying Particular Doubts
which emerge from time to time: for it is a hard case that they which desire to
secure themselves from error, should find no guide to the way: but that
present Businesses should be hazarded; and there should be no means to know
the Law before the matter be dispatched.

APHORISM. XC.
That the Resolutions of the Wise, given to Clients touching point of Law,
whether by Advocates or Professors should be of such authority, that it may not
be lawful for the Judge to depart from their opinion, we cannot approve. Let
Law be derived from sworn Judges.

APHORISM. XCI.
To Feel and sound Judgments by fained Causes and Persons, that by this
means, men might find out what the Course and proceeding of Law will be, we
approve not: for it dishonors the Majesty of Laws, and is to be accounted a
kind of prevarication or double dealing; and it is a foul sight to see places
of Judicature to borrow any thing from the stage.

APHORISM. XCII.
Wherefore let, as well the Decrees, as the answers and Counsils proceed from
the Judges alone: those of suits depending; these of difficult points of Law,
in the general. Require not these Decisions, whether in causes private or
public, from the Judges themselves, (for this were to make the Judge an
Advocate) but of the Prince, or of the State. From these let the order be
directed unto the Judges: and let the Judges thus authorized, hear the reasons
on both sides; both of the Advocates or of the Committees, deputed by the
parties to whom the matter appertains; or of them assigned by the Judges
themselves; if necessity so require: and waighing the Cause, let them deliver
the Law upon the case and declare it. Let these verdicts and counsils, be
recorded and notified amongst Cases adjudged, and be of equal authority.

OF PRELECTIONS.
APHORISM. XCIII.
LEt the Lectures of Law, and the exercises of those that address themselves
to the studies of Law, be so instituted and ordered, that all may tend rather
to the laying asleep, than the awakeing of Questions and Controversies in Law.
For (as the matter is now carried) a School is set up, and open amongst all,
to the multiplying of Altercations and Questions in Law; as if their aim was
only to make ostentation of wit. And this is an old disease, for even amongst
the Ancients, it was, as it were, a glory, by Sects and Factions, to cherish
rather than extinguish many questions concerning Law. Provide against this
inconvenience.

OF THE INSTABILITY OF IVDGEMENTS.
APHORISM. XCIV.
IVdgements become incertaine, either through immature and too precipitate
proceeding to sentence; or through Emulation of Courts; or through ill and
unsckilfull registring of Judgments; or because there is a too easy and
expedite way open of Reversing and Rescinding them. Wherefore it must be
provided, that Judgments issue forth not without a staid deliberation had
aforehand; and that Courts bear a Reverent respect to one another; and that
Decrees be drawn up faithfully and wisely; and that the way to repeal
Judgments be narrow, rockie and strewed, as it were, with sharp stones.

APHORISM. XCV.
If a Judgment have been awarded upon a Case in any Principal Court; and the
like case, intervene in another Court; proceed not to sentence before the
matter be advised upon in some solemn Assemble of Judges: for if Judgments
awarded must needs be repealed, yet let them be interred with Honor.

APHORISM. XCVI.
For Courts to be at debate and variance about Jurisdictions is a humane
frailty; and the more because this intemperance, through a misprision and vain
conceit (that it is the part of a stout resolute Judge to enlarge the
privileges of the Court) is openly countenanced and spurred on, whereas it
has need of the Bridle. But that out of this heat of stomach, Courts should so
easily reverse on both sides Judgments awarded, which nothing pertain to
Jurisdiction, is an insufferable evil, which by all means should be repres'd
and punished; by Kings or Counsils of State, or the form of Government. For it
is a President of the worst example, That Courts, that should distribute Peace,
should themselves practice Duells.

APHORISM. XCVII.
Let there not be a too easy and free passage made to the Repealing of
Judgments by Appellations and writs of Error, or Reexamination, and the like.
It is maintained by some, that a Suit may be brought into a Higher Court, as
entire and untried, the Judgment past upon it, set aside and absolutely
suspended: others are of opinion that the Judgment it self may stand in
force, but the execution thereof may be staid: neither of these is to be
allowed, unless the Courts wherein the Judgment was awarded, were of a base
and inferior order: but rather that both the Judgment stand, and that the
execution thereof go on; so a Caveat be put in by the Defendant for Damages
and charges if the Judgment should be reverst.

BUt this Title touching the Certainty of Laws shall suffice for a president
to the rest of a DIGESTUM juris Anglicani; SACRVM IUSTITIAE TEMPLUM; Opus sane
Regium; sed nondum conditum; quod Tuo seculo, EXCELLENTISSIME PRINCIPUM,
INSTAURANDUM: TVI NOMINIS Aeternitati, consecrandum reservatur.
DIGEST, which we with care and diligence endeavor to contrive. And now have
we concluded Civil Knowledge (so far as we thought fit to entreat thereof)
and together with it Humane Philosophy, as also with Humane Philosophy;
Philosophy in General. Wherefore being now at length at some pause, and
lookeing back into that we have past through; this our writeing seems to us not
much unlike those sounds and Preludes, which Musicians make while they are
tuneing their Jnstruments; which is harsh and unpleasing to hear, but yet is a
cause why the Music is sweeter afterward. So have we bin content to employ
our pains in tuneing the Jnstrument of the Muses, and to set it unto a true
Harmony, that afterward they may play who have better hands. Surely, when I
set before me the condition of these times, in which Learning seems to have
made her third Circuit to Men; and withal diligently behold, with what various
supplies and supports being furnished, she has made her visitation; as are, the
height and vivacity of many wits in this our Age; the excellent monuments of
Ancient writers, which as so many great lights shine before us; the Art of
Printing, which communicates Books with a liberal hand to men of all fortunes;
the traveled bosom of the Ocean and of the world, opened on all parts, whereby
multitudes of experiments unknown to the Ancients have bin disclosed; and
Natural History, by the access of an infinite Mass advanced: the leisure
wherewith the Kingdoms and States of Europe every where abound, not employing
men so generally in Civil Businesses, as the States of Graecia did in respect
of their Popularity; or as the state of the Romans did in respect of their
Monarchy: the Peace which at this present Brittanny, Spain, Italy, as also at
this instant France and many other Countries enjoy: The Consumption and
Exinanition of all that can be imagined or said in controversies of Religion,
which now so long time have taken up so many wits, and diverted them from the
studies of other Sciences: the Elevation and Perfection of Your Majesty's
Learning; about whom (as the Birds about the Phoenix) whole vollies of wits
flock and assemble: Lastly the inseparable property which attends time it
self, which is, ever more and more to disclose Truth: when we think I say, on
these advantages; we cannot but be raised to this Persuasion, that this third
period of Learning, will far surpass those two former of the Grecian and
Roman Learning. Only if men will but well and wisely know their own strength
and their own weakness both; and take, one from the other, light of
Inventions, and not Firebrarnds of contradiction; and estime of the Inquisition
of Truth, as a noble entreprise, and not as a delight or ornament; and employ
wealth and magnificence to things of worth and excellency, and not to things
vulgar and of popular estimation.

As for my Labors, if any man shall please himself or others in the
reprehension of them, certainly they shall cause me put up that ancient
request, but of great patience, verbera sed Audi; let men reprehend as they
please, so they observe and weigh what is spoken. Verily the Appeal is lawful
(though, it may be, for this matter, not so needful) if it be made from the
first cogitations of men unto the second; and from the nearer times, to the
times farther off.

Now let us come unto the Learning, which those two ancient Periods of time
were not so blessed as to know, I mean SACRED AND DIVINELY INSPIRED THEOLOGY, the
Noblest Saboath and Port of all men's Labors and Peregrinations.

THE NINTH BOOK OF FRANCIS LO. VERVLAM VICOUNT St ALBAN. OF THE DIGNITY AND
ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING. To the KING.
CAP. I. The Partitions of Inspired Divinity are omitted, only access is made
to three DEFICIENTS. I. The Doctrine of the right use of Humane Reason in
matters Divine. II The Doctrine of the Degrees of Unity in the City of God,
III And the Emanations of SS. Scriptures.
ANd now (most excellent King) we have with a small Barque, such as we were able
to set out, sailed about the universal circumference, as well of the old as the
new, WORLD OF SCIENCES, with how prosperous winds and course, we leave to
Posterity to Judge. What remains, but that, having accomplished our Designs,
we should pay our vows? But there rests yet behind SACRED-INSPIRED-DIVINITY;
whereof if we should proceed to entreat, we should depart out of the Pinnace of
Human Reason, and go into the ship of the Church, which must alone be governed
by a Divine sea-needle to direct her course aright: for the stars of
Philosophy which hitherto shined forth unto us, and were our chief guide, here
fail us: it were then meet, we kept silence in this sacred subject. Wherefore
we shall omit the just Partitions of this knowledge; yet notwithstanding
somewhat we will cast into this treasury, by way of good wishes according to
the proportion of our slender hability. This we do the rather because we find
no coast or space of ground in the whole Body of Divinity lying vacant and
untilled; so diligent have men been, either in sowing of Good seed, or sowing
of Tares.

Wherefore we will propound three Appendices of Theology treating, not of the
matter informed of by Divinity, or to be informed off; but only of the manner
of information: neither will we annexe examples, or set down precepts
concerning these Tractates, as our manner was to do in the rest; that we
refer to Divines; for these are (as has been said) like mere vows only.

SOPHRON sive de legitimo usu RATIONIS humanae in DIVINIS.
I. The Prerogative of God Comprehends the whole man; and is extended as well to
the Reason, as to the will of Man; that is, that man renounce himself wholly,
and draw near unto God: wherefore as we are to obey his law, thoe we find a
reluctation in our will; so we are to believe his word thoe we find a
reluctation in our Reason: for if we believe only that which is agreeable unto
our Reason, we give assent to the Matter, not to the Auctor; which is no more
than we would do toward a suspected and discredited witness: Genesis 18.
but that Faith which was accounted unto Abraham for Righteousness, was of
such a point, as whereat Sarah laughed, who therein was an Image of Natural
Reason. By how much therefore any Divine Mystery is more discondant, and
incredible; by so much the more Honor is given to God in Believing, and the
victory of our Faith is made more noble: Nay even sinners by how much the more
they are surcharged in conscience, and yet repose a trust in the mercies of God
for their salvation, by this do more honor God; for all desperation is a
reproach of the Deity. Nay farther (if we truly consider the point) it is an
Act more great and high to believe, than to know, as we now know: for in
knowledge man's mind suffers from sense, which results from things materiate;
but in Belief the spirit suffers from spirit, which is the worthier Agent: the
case is otherwise in the state of Glory, for then Faith shall cease, 1. Cor.
XIII.
and we shall know as we are known. Wherefore we may conclude, that Sacred
Theology is grounded on, and must be deduced from the Oracles of God; and not
from the light of Nature, or the Dictates of Reason: for it is written, Psalm.
XIX.
The Heavens declare the Glory of God, but we never find it written The
Heavens declare the will of God: of the will of God, it is said, Ad legem and
Testimonia; si non fecerint secundum illud, etc. This holds not only in those
Great Mysteries concerning the Deity, the Creation, the Redemption, but
appertains also to a more perfect interpretation of the Law Moral, Love your
Enemies; Mat. V.
do good to them that hate you etc. that you may be the children of your
heavenly Father, who commands the rain to fall upon the just and unjust, which
words certainly deserve that applause, Nec vox hominem sonat: For it is a voice
beyond the light of Nature. So likewise we see the Heathen Poets especially,
when they fall upon a passion, do still expostulate with Laws and Moralities
(which yet are far more free and indulgent than divine Laws) as if in a kind
of malignity, they were repugnant to the liberty of nature, -- Et quod natura
remittit Plutar. in Alex. M.

Invida jura negant --
So said Dendamis the Indian, unto Alexanders Messengers, That he had heard
somewhat of the name of Pythagoras, and some other of the wisemen of Graecia,
and that he held them for excellent men; but they had one fault, which was,
that they had in too great Reverence and veneration, an imaginary thing they
called LAW AND MANNERS. So it must be confessed, that a great part of the Law
Moral is of that perfection, whereunto the light of nature cannot aspire: yet
notwithstanding, that men are said to have, even from the Light and Law of
Nature, some notions and conceits of virtue, vice, justice, injury, good and
evil, is most true and certain. Yet we must understand that this light of
Nature is used in two several senses; first, as it springs from sense,
Induction, Reason, Arguments, according to the Laws of Heaven and Earth;
Secondly, as it is imprinted and shines upon the spirit of Man by an inward
instinct according to the Law of Conscience, which is a spark, and, as it
were, the Remains of a Pristine and Primitive Purity: in which latter sense
principally, the soul is participant of some light to behold and discern the
perfection of the Moral Law; which light is not altogether so clear, but such
as in some measure rather reprehends vices, than fully informs us concerning
Duties: So then the Religion as well Moral as Mystical depends upon Divine
Revelation.

V. Doctis Hookerum de LL. Eccl Politiae l. 3. VIII. IX. l. I. VIII IX. Romans
xii.
The use, notwithstanding, of Humane Reason in matters spiritual, is, without
question; manifold, very spacious, and general; and it is not for nothing that
the Apostle calls Religion, our reasonable service of God, Let it be remembered
that the shadows and Figures of the old Law, were full of Reason and
signification, much differing from the ceremonies of Idolatry and magique,
which were surde and mute; oftentimes instructing nothing, no not so much as
insinuating any thing. The Christian Faith especially, as in all things, so in
this is eminent, and deserves highly to be magnified, that it holds a golden
Mediocrity touching the use of Reason and Disputation, which is the offspring of
Reason; between the Law of the Heathen and the Law of Mahomet, which have
embraced the two extremes; for the Religion of the Heathen, had no constant
belief or confession; on the contrary in the Religion of Mahomet, all
Disputation was interdicted: so as one has the very face of wandering and
multifarious error; the other of cunning and cautelous imposture; whereas the
Holy Christian Faith does both admit and reject Disputation, but according to
due bounds.

The use of humane Reason in matter pertaining to Religion is of two sorts; the
one in the explication and conception of the Mystery; the other in Illations
and Jnferences derived from thence. As touching the Explication of Mysteries,
we see that God vouchsafes to descend to the weakness of our capacity, so
expressing and unfolding his Mysteries as they may best be comprehended by us;
and inoculating as it were, his Revelations, upon the Conceptions and Notions
of our Reason; and so applying his inspirations to open our understanding, as
the form of the kay is fitted to the ward of the lock. In which respect
notwithstanding, we ought not to be wanting to our selves; for seeing God
himself makes use of the faculty and function of Reason in his Illuminations;
we ought also every way to employ and improve the same, whereby we may become
more capeable to receive and draw in such holy Mysteries: with this caution,
that the mind for its Module be dilated to the amplitude of the Mysteries; and
not the mysteries be straightened and girt into the narrow compass of the Mind.

As for Illations we ought to know that there is allowed us a use of Reason and
Argument, in regard of Mysteries, secondary and Respective; not Primitive and
Absolute: for after the Articles and Principles of Religion, are placed in
their seats, so as they stand altogether exempt from the examination of Reason,
it is then indeed permitted unto us to make derivations and inferences from
them, according to the Analogy of them. Jn things Natural this holds not; for
both the Principles are liable to examination, by Jnduction I mean, thoe not by
Syllogism; and the same Principles have no repugnancy with Reason, but that
the first and middle Propositions, may be derived from the same fountain. But
it is otherwise in the Doctrine of Religion, where the first propositions are
their own supporters and subsistent by themselves; and again, they are not
regulate by that Reason, which infers consequent propositions. Nor holds
this in Religion alone, but also in other Sciences both of greater and smaller
nature; namely Where the Primarie Propositions are Placita not Posita; because
in these also the use of Reason cannot be absolute. For instance we see in
Games, as Chesse, or the like, that the first Draughts and Laws of the Play
are merely positive and ad placitum, which must absolutely be accepted and not
disputed; but that thereupon you may win the Game, and with the best advantage
manage your play, is a thing artificial and Rational. So it is likewise in
Humane Laws, wherein there be many Maxims (as they style them) that is, mere
Placita Juris, grounded more upon Authority than Reason; neither come they into
disceptation: but what is most just, not absolutely but relatively, (that is
from the Analogy of these maxims) that indeed is Rational, and affords a
large field of Disputation. Such therefore is that secondary Reason, which has
place in sacred Theology that is, which is grounded upon the Placits of God.

And as there is a double use of humane Reason in matters Divine; so in the
same use there is a double excess; the one where there is made a more curious
enquiry into the manner of the Mystery, than is beseeming; the other when
equal Authority is attributed to Derivations, which is to Principles. For both
he, may seem to be Nicodemus Disciple, who pertinaciously enquires How can a
man be borne when he is old? Joan. III.
and he in no wise can be accounted Paul's Disciple, which may not sometimes
interlace his instructions with Ego non Dominus, I. Cor. VII.
or that, According to my Judgment; for to many Illations that style is well
applied: wherefore to my understanding it would be a wholesome and very
profitable course, if there were a sober and diligent Tractate compiled, which
as a kind of Divine Dialectique might give directions, concerning the true
limits and use of Reason in matters Divine; which would be a kind of Opiate
Medicine, not only to quiet and lay asleep the vanity of Aerie speculations,
wherewith the Schools sometime labor; but likewise not a little calm and
mitigate the furies and rage of Controversies, which raise sideings and
factions in the Church. A Treatise of this nature we set down as Deficient,
and term it SOPHRON or the right use of Humane Reason in matters Divine.
IRENAEVS, sive de Gradibus unitatis in Civitate Dei. Luc. c. IX.


II It imports exceedingly the Peace of the Church, that the League of
Christians, prescribed by our Savior in those two clauses which seem to cross
one the other, were well and clearly expounded; whereof the one defines thus,
He that is not with us is against us, the other thus, He that is not against us
is with us. Luc. XI.
From those two several assertions it plainly appears, that there are some
Articles wherein whosoever dissenteth, is to be held as not comprehended in the
league: and there are other Articles, wherein a man may dissent, and yet the
league be kept entire. For the bounds of Christian community are set down, One
Faith, Ephesians. IV.
one Baptism; and not, one Rite, one Opinion. We see likewise the Coat of our
Savior was entire without seame; Joan. XIX.
but the garment of the Church was of diverse Colors. Ps. XIV.
The Chafe must be severed from the corn in the ear; but the Tares may not
presently be pulled up from the Corn in the Field. When Moses saw an Egyptian
fighting with an Israelite, he did not say, why strive you? but drew his sword
and slew the Egyptian; but when he saw two Israelites fight, though it could
not possible be that both parties had a just cause; yet he thus bespeaks them
both, Exodus II.
You are Brethren, why strive you? Wherefore if these things be well observed,
it will be found a matter of great moment and use to define what, and of what
latitude those points are, which discorporate men from the body of the Church,
and cast them out and quite casseere them from the communion and fellowship of
the faithful. And if any think that this has bin done now long ago, let him
seriously consider with what syncerity, and moderation the same has bin
performed. In the mean space it is very likely, that he that makes mention of
Peace, shall bear away that answer Jehu gave to the Messengers, Is it PEACE
Iehu? I Reg. IX.
What have thou to do with PEACE? turn and follow me. Peace is not the matter
that many seek after, but Parties and sideing: Notwithstanding we thought good
to set down amongst DEFICIENTS, as a wholesome and profitable work a Treatise
touching THE DEGREES OF UNITY IN THE CITY OF GOD. VTRES COELESTES, sive
Emanationes Scripturarum.


III Seeing the Parts of sacred Scripture touching the Information of Theology,
are such and so great; let us specially consider the Interpretation thereof;
nor do we here speak of the Authority of interpretateing them, which is
established by the consent of the Church, but of the manner of Interpreting.
This is of two sorts, Methodicall; and Solute, or at large: for this divine
water, which infinitely excells that of Jacobs well, is drawn forth and
delivered much after the same manner as Natural waters use to be out of wells;
for these at the first draught are either received into Cisternes, and so may
be convayed and diriv'd by many Pipes for public and private use; or is
powered forth immediately in Buckets and vessels, to be used out of hand, as
occasion requires.

Now this former Methodicall manner has at length brought forth unto us
Scholasticall Theology, whereby Divinity has bin collected into an Art, as
into a Cisterne; and the streams of Axioms and Positions, distributed from
thence into all parts.

But in solute Manner of Interpreting, two extremes intervene; the one
presupposes such a perfection in Scriptures, as that all Philosophy ought to
be fetched and diriv'd from those sacred fountains; as if all other Philosophy
were an unhallowed and Heathenish thing. This distemperature has prevaild
especially in the School of Paracelsus, and some others; the source and spring
whereof flowed from the Rabbis and Cabalists. But these men have not attained
their purpose; nor do they give honor (as they pretend) to Scriptures, but
rather embase and distaine them. For to seek a materiate Heaven, and Earth in
the word of God, whereof it is said Heaven and Earth shall pass, Mat. XXIV.
but my word shall not pass, is indeed to pursue Temporary things amongst
eternal: for as to seek Divinity in Philosophy, is as if you would seek the
living amongst the Dead; so on the other side to seek Philosophy in Divinity,
is all one as to seek the Dead amongst the living.

The other manner of Jnterpreting, which we set down as an excess, seems at
first sight sober and chaste; yet notwithstanding it both dishonors
Scriptures, and is a great prejudice and detriment to the Church; and it is, to
speak in a word, when Divinely inspired Scriptures are expounded after the same
manner that humane writings are: For it must be remembered, that there are two
points known to God the Author of Scripture, which man's nature cannot
comprehend; that is, The secrets of the Heart; and the succession of times.
Wherefore seeing the Precepts and Dictates of Scriptures were written and
directed to the Heart and Thoughts of men, and comprehend the vicissitudes of
all Ages, with an eternal and certain foresight of all Heresies,
Contradictions, differing and mutable estates of the Church, as well in
general, as of the Elect in special; they are to be interpreted according to
the Latitude and the proper sense of the place, and respectively toward that
present occasion whereupon the words were uttered; or in precise congruity from
the Context of the precedent and subsequent words; or in contemplation of the
principal scope of the place; but so as we conceive them to comprehend, not
only totally or collectively, but distributively, even in clauses and in every
word, infinite springs and streams of Doctrine to water every part of the
Church and the spirits of the Faithful. For it has bin excellently observed
that the Answers of our Savior, to many of the questions which were propounded
to him, seem not to the purpose, but as it were, impertinent to the state of
the question demanded. The Reasons hereof are two: the one, that being he knew
the thoughts of those that propounded the Questions, not from their words, as
we men use to do, but immediately and of himself, he made answer to their
thoughts not to their words. The other Reason is, that he spak not only to them
that were then present, but to us also who now live, and to men of every Age
and place to whom the Gospel should be preached: which sense in many places of
Scripture must take place.

These thus briefly touched and fore-tasted, come we now to that Treatise which
we report as Deficient. There are found indeed amongst Theological writings
too many books of Controversies, an infinite mass of that Divinity which we
call Positive, as Common-places; Particular Treatises; Cases of Conscience;
Sermons; Homilies, and many Prolix Commentaries upon the Books of Scripture:
but the Form of writing Deficient is this, namely a succinct and sound
Collection, and that with judgment, of Annotations and observations upon
particular Texts of Scripture; not dilateing into common-places; or chaseing
after Controversies; or reduceing them into method of Art: but which be
altogether scatterd and Natural; a thing indeed now and then expressed in more
learned Sermons, which for most part vanish; but which as yet, is not collected
into Books that should be transmitted to Posterity* Certainly as wines which at
first pressing run gently, yield a more pleasant taste, than those where the
wine press is hard wrought; because those somewhat relish of the stone and
skin of the Grape; so those observations are most wholesome and sweet, which
flow from Scriptures gently expressed, and naturally expounded, and are not
wrested or drawn aside to common-places or Controversies; such a Treatise we
will name The Emanations of Scripture.

Thus have we made as it were, a small Globe of the Jntellectuall world, as
faithfully as we could, together with a designation and description of those
parts which I find not constantly occupate, or not well converted by the
Industry and labors of men. In which work if I have any where receded from the
opinion of the Ancients, I desire that Posterity would so judge of my
intentions, as that this was done with a mind of further Progression, and
Proficience in melius; and not out of a humor of Jnnovation, or Transmigration
in aliud: for I could not be true and constant to my self, or the Argument
which I have in hand, if I had not resolvedly determined, To add to the
inventions of others, so far as I was able. And I am as willing, and as
syncerely wish that later ages may go beyond me hereafter, as I have
endeavored to go beyond others now. And how faithfully I have dealt in this
Business may appear eve^ by this, that I have propounded my opinions every
where naked and unarmed, not seeking to prejudicate the Liberty of others by
the pugnacity of confutations. For in any thing which I have well set down, I
am in good hope that it will come so to pass, that if in the first reading a
scruple or objection be moved, in the second reading an answer will be ready
made; and in those things wherein I have chanced to err, I am sure I have not
prejudiced the right by litigious arguments, which commonly are of this nature,
that they procure Authority to error, and derogate from Good inventions; for
from Dubitation Error acquires Honor, Truth suffers repulse. And now I call to
mind an Answer Themistocles made, who, when an Ambassador in a set speech had
boasted great matters of a small Village, takes him up thus, Friend your words
would require a City. Plut. in vita.
Surely I suppose it may be justly objected to me, that my words require an
Age, a whole Age perchance to prove them, and many Ages to perfect them.
Notwithstanding seeing the greatest matters are owing unto their Principles, it
is enough to me that I have Sown unto Posterity and the immortal God, whose
divine Majesty I humbly implore through his son and our Savior, that he
would vouchsafe graciously to accept these and such like sacrifices of Humane
understanding seasond with Religion as with salt, and incensed to his Glory.

THE END.
A NEW WORLD OF SCIENCES, OR THE DEFICINTS.
LIB. II.
ERRORES NATURAE Or the History of Preter -- Generations. Cap. 2. Sect. 3.
VINCULA NATURAE, Experimental or Mechanical History. Cap. 2. Sect. 4.
HISTORIA INDUCTIVA, Natural History for the building up of Philosophy. Cap. 3.
Sect. 1. OCULUS POLYPHEMI, Or the History of Learning from age to age. C. 4.
Sect. 1. HISTORIA AD PROPHETIAS, The History of Prophesy. C. 11. Sect. 2.
SAPIENTIA VETERUM Philosophy according to ancient parables. C. 13. S. 3.
LIB. III.
PHILOSOPHIA PRIMA Or the Common and General Axioms of Sciences. Cap 1. Sect.
3. ASTRONOMIA VIVA, Living Astronomy Cap. 4. Sect. 3. 1. ASTROLOGIA SANA, Sound
Astrology. Cap. 4. Sect. 3. 2. PROBLEMES Natural, a continuation thereof,
Cap. 4. Sect. 5. PLACITES Of ancient Philosophers. Cap. 4. Sect. 5. 1. FORMAE
RERUM: A part of Metaphysique of the Forms of things. Cap. 4. Sect. 6. MAGIA
NATURALIS Or the setting of FORMS on work Cap. 5. S. 1.. 1. INVENTARIUM OPUM
HUMANARUM, An Inventary of the Estate of Man. Cap. 5. Sect. 2. CATALOGUS
POLYCHRESTORUM, a Catalogue of Things of multifarious use and Application. Cap.
5. Sect. 2.. 1.
LIB. IV.
TRIUMPHI HOMINIS, or of the SUMMITIES and highest pitch of Humane Nature. Cap.
1. Sect. 2.. 2. PHYSIOGNOMIA CORPORIS IN MOTU, a Physical discovery of the
Body upon Motion. Cap. 1. Sect. 3.. 1. NARRATIONES MEDICINALES, Medicinal
Reports, or Historical observations in Physique. Cap. 2. Sect. 3.. 1. ANATOMIA
COMPARATA, Comparative Anatomy. Cap. 2. Sect. 3.. 2. MORBI INSANABILES, Of the
curing of Diseases counted incurable. Cap. 2. Sect. 2.. 5. DE EUTHANASIA
exteriore, Of a fair and easy outward passage out of life. Cap. 2. Sect. 3..
6. Of AUTHENTIC and approved Medicines. Cap. 2. Sect. 3.. 7. ARTIFICIAL
Imitation of Natural Bathes. C. 2. Sect. 3.. 8. FILUM MEDICINALE, An orderly
course and sequel in Physique. Cap. 2. S. 3.. 9. PROLONGATION of the space or
course of life. C. 2. Sect. 4. Of the substance of the Sensible, or merely
producted Soul. Cap. 3. Sect. 1. Of the impulsion of the Spirit in voluntary
Motion. Cap. 3. Sect. 3.. 1. Of the Difference between Perception and Sense.
Cap. 3. Sect. 3.. 3. RADIX PERSPECTIVAE, The original of the Perspectives, or
of the Form of light. Cap. 3. Sect. 3.. 4.
LIB. V.
VENATIO PANIS, Or Literate experience. Cap. 2. Sect. 1.. 1. 2. ORGANUM NOVUM,
Or true Directions for the Interpretation of Nature. Cap. 2. Sect. 3. ult.
TOPICAE PARTICULARES, Or Places of Invention, appropriate to Particular
subjects and sciences. Cap. 3. Sect. 2. 1. ELENCHUS IDOLORUM, Sophisme-Images,
imposed upon the understanding from the nature of Man, General, Particular, or
Communicative. Cap. 4. Sect. 3. ANALOGY OF DEMONSTRATIONS according to the
nature of the subject. Cap. 4. Sect. 4.
LIB. VI.
NOTES OR IMPRESSIONS OF THINGS, from Congruity, or from ad Placitum. Cap. 1.
Sect. 1.. 2. A PHILOSOPHICAL GRAMMAR, Or the Analogy between words and Things.
Cap. 1. Sect. 2.. 1. TRADITIO LAMPADIS Or the Method delivered unto the sons
of Wisdom. Cap. 2. Sect. 1.. 1. OF THE WISDOM OF PRIVATE SPEECH; Or respective
Deliveries of a man's self. Cap. 3. Sect. 1.. 1. THE COLORS of Good and Evil
in appearance, simple and compared. Cap. 3. Sect. 2.. 1. ANTITHETA RERUM, the
Contre-positio^ of things. Cap. 3. Sect. 3. FORMULAE MINORES, lesser forms or
styles of speech. Cap. 3. Sect. 4.
LIB. VII.
SATYRA SERIA, or of the subtle Reaches, Cautels, and impostures in
professions. Cap. 2. Sect. 3.. 3. GEORGICA ANIMI, the culture of the mind. Cap.
3. Sect. 1.
LIB. VIII.
AMANUENSIS VITAE, or of Sparsed Occasions. Cap. 2. Sect. 1. 1. FABER FORTUNAE,
the Contriver of Fortune; or the course of life for advancement. Cap. 2. Sect.
1. CONSUL PALUDATUS; Or the Art of enlarging the bounds of a Kingdom or State.
Cap. 3. Sect. 1. IDEA JUSTITIAE UNIVERSALIS; or the Fountains of Law. Cap. 3.
Sect. 2.
LIB. IX.
SOPHRON; Or of the right use of Humane Reason in matters Divine. Cap. 1. S. 1.
IRENAEUS, Or of the degrees of Unity in the City of God. Cap. 1. Sect. 1.
UTRES COELESTES; or the Emanations of SS. Scriptures. Cap. 1. Sect. 3.
THE INDEX OF SACRED SCRIPTURES ILLUSTRATED OR ALLEGED.
GENESIS
Cap. Verse. Page 1 1 etc 41 1 2 215 1 3 42 1 9 etc. 161 1 9 207 1 27 137 2 7
161 2 7 206 2 8 42 3 5 362 3 19 211 3 19 260 3 22 112 4 2 43 4 21 43 5 24 339
11 9 43 18 10 468 45 3 15 49 9 427

EXODUS
7 1 278 7 12 75 24 18 339

LEVIT.
13 12. 13. 44

DEUTERONOMY.
12 16 183

I. REG.
20 34 71

III. REG.
4 29 2 4 29 371 4 33 45 4 33 372

IV. REG.
9 30 204

ESTH.
6 1 99

JOB.
9 9 44 10 10 45 13 9 8 26 7 44 26 13 44 28 1 etc. 45 38 31 44

PSALM.
7 4 422 8 3 137 19 1. etc. 47 19 1 116 19 1 469 62 10 354 90 4 102 116 15 339
123 2 353 145 9 362

PROVE.
4 12 164 4 23 333 6 6 258 6 9 397 6 11 375 9 7 376 9 9 395 10 1 376 10 7 96 10
7 377 11 29 377 12 10 382 14 6 350 14 23 392 15 1 372 15 15 340 15 19 389 17 2
375 17 9 392 18 2 22 18 2 350 18 17 385 20 5 402 20 14 284 20 27 6 22 13 76 22
24 391 22 29 387 23 23 19 25 1 45 25 2 18 25 3 23 25 3 405 25 26 391 27 5 393
27 6 40 27 12 394 27 14 396 27 19 397 28 3 390 28 20 19 28 21 389 29 8 380 29 9
374 29 11 383 29 12 381 29 21 386

ECCLES.
1 8 6 1 10 59 1 18 5 2 15 188 3 11 6 3 11 163 3 14 133 4 15 387 9 14 388 10 1
379 10 4 384 10 10 68 11 4 369 12 11 56 12 12 5

ISAIAS.
14 14 362

IEREM.
6 6 35

EZECH.
29 3 399

DAN.
12 4 101

JOEL.
2 28 20

HABAC.
1 16 295 1 16 399 2 2 103

MATH.
5 44 362 5 44 469 6 27 434 6 33 422 7 6 376 9 11 286 11 19 65 13 52 238 22 29
47 24 35 474 25 20 22

LVK.
2 46 45 10 41 298

JOAN.
5 43 142

ACT.
2 2 45 7 22 43

ROMANS
9 3 338 12 1 470

I. COR.
2 14 103 8 1 5 8 1 7 13 12 471

II. COR.
2 11 139

EPHESIANS.
2 12 103

COLOS.
2 8 5 2 18 138 3 14 361

I. TIM.
6 5 29

IAC.
1 17 75 1 24 407

APOC.
2 24 62 4 8 163 14 13 343

THE INDEX OF HUMANE AUTHORS CENSVRED PRAISED CITED.
A
AESop. Fab. P. 30. 33. 70. 228. 288. 298. 299. Agel. N. A. 252. 291. Agrippa.
p. 188. Alcoran. Azoara. 5. p. 470. Alhazen. p. 135. Aristoteles. p. 33. 34.
38. 81. 133. 159. 160. 165. 166. 172. 182. 185. 187. 199. 218. 221. 238. 246.
248. 252. 258. 292. 334. 336. 352. 357. 358. 361. Avicen. p. 134.
B
BACON. p. 55. 122. 123. 249. 251. 428. Boethius. p. 134.
C
Campanella. p. 213. I. Capitol. p. 57. Cardan. P. 215. 420. Celsus Med. p.
194. 221. Cicero. p. 21. 39. 55. 70. 104. 164. 178. 180. 222. 224. 225. 238.
250. 262. 280. 287. 295. 348. 349. 352. 359. 368. 371. ib. 399, 403. 406. 413.
414. 429. 432. Claud. p. 110. De Comines. p. 381. Crollius. p. 211.
D
Demost. p. 21. 238. 290. 292. 334. 404. 415. 418. P. Diaconus. P. 46. Dion. p.
48. 50. 51. 277. 423. Dion. Areop. P. 42. Donius. p. 208.
E
Epict. p. 60. 290. 340. 407. 419. Epiphan. p. 250. Euclid. p. 133. 247. Eurip.
p. 126.
F
Florus. p. 351. Flud. p. 186.
G
Gilbert. p. 115. 242.
H
Herodian. p. 48. 123. Herodot. p. 120. 259. Hesiod. p. 292. Hipp. p. 134. 182.
233. 351. Hist. Ger. p. 180. Hist. Hen. 7th, p. 428. Homer. p. 9. 109. 113.
138. 186. Hooker. p. 470. Horat. p. 32. 221. 274. 284. 294. 404. 422.
I
Iac. R. p. 73. 82. 95. 182. 348. 349. ib. Iambl. p. 338. P. Iud. p. 18. Iul.
p. 46. Iuven. p. 346. 361. 403.
L
Laert. p. 25. 83. Livius. p. 18. 36. 70. 251. 257. 368. 430. Lucan. p. 142.
Lucian. p. 24. Lucret. p. 63. 105. 195. 239. Lullius. p. 278.
M
Match. discors sopra Live. lib. 1. cap. 10. Machia. p. 18. 133. 359. 359. 386
389. 398. 415. 417. 420. 426. Mart. Ep. p. 95. 116. 263. Meteran. p. 180. Mori
vit. p. 181. Mount. p. 407.
N
Nonn. p. 126.
O
Orpheus. p. 126. Ovid. p. 40. 59. 64. 110. 123. 126. 187. 190. 218. 221. 281.
397. 412.
P
Pancirol. p. 222. 230. Paracel. p. 140. 186. 211. 250. Pausan. p. 120. Pers.
p. 222. Philost. p. 49, 180. Pind. p. 179. 354. 366. Platin. p. 13. Plato. p.
2, 43. 49. 111. 163. 164. 178. 180. 185. 221. 239. 247. 251. 261, 280. 345.
401. Plaut. p. 353. 399. Plin. sen. 50. 80. 96. 222. Plin, jun. p. 349, 361.
Plaut, p. 24. 34. 53. 54. 56. 99. 283. 296. 338. 351. 351. 365. 366. 375. 389.
400. 413. ib. 421. 425. 426. ib. 427. 469.
Q
Quint. p. 31. 180.
R
Ramus. p. 276. Renovard. p. 121, 127.
S
Salust. p. 19. 41. 210. 256. Sands. p. 119. 121. 127. Seldom. p. 432. Senec.
p. 15. 23. 36. 53. 113. 178. 219. 247. 300. 334. 336. 343. 351. Socrat. p. 83.
Spart. p. 25. Strab. p. 120. Sueton. p. 50. 56. 180. 195. 260. 290. 399. 400.
414.
T
Tacit. p. 2. 65. 123. 180. 329. 354 381. 388. 394. 395. ib. 403. ib. ib. 404.
406. 408. 410. 414. ib Teles. p. 208.
V
A. Vict. p. 51. Virg. p. 11. 60. 76. 95. 116. 166. 174. 187. 188. ib. 244.
221. ib. 222. ib. 283. 290. ib. 335. 344. 362. 399. 402. 421. 426. 428.
Z
Zenoph. p. 57. 180. 361. Zephil. p. 61.
ERRATA.
THe correction of Textual Errors (Courteous Reader) is a work of time, and
that has taken wing. The more faults thou find, the larger field is
presented to thy humanity to practice in. Be indulgent in thy censure, and
remember that Error, whether Manual or Mental, is an inheritance, descending
upon us, from the first of our Race. What he said of men, may be laid of Books,
-- Vitiis nullus fine nascitur, optimus ille est
Qui minimis urgetur, --


MARGINAL CORRECTIONS.
Page 18. for Del. Hist. Fiot. read. Discors Iopra Live. page 40. for Psalm. 141.
read Prove. 27. p. 81. * Errores Naturae, etc. p. 82. * Vincula Naturae, etc. p.
85. * Historia Induct. p. 87. Oculus Polyph. p. 109. * Sapientia veterum. p.
132. * Philosophia prima. p. 150. * Astrologia viva. * Astrologia sana. p. 185.
* Problemata Naturalia. p. 159. * Placita Philos. The star in the margent
points to the laps and to the recovery. Where thou meetest with Vid. Digress.
page 146. 241, etc. deleatur, for the Interpreters Digressions are not
published. p. 470. read Alcoran Azoara. 5.

LECTORI ACADEMICO S.
CErte Philosophia Naturalis omnium Scientiarum nobilissima est, Certissima ac
amplissima; utpote suo ambitu Complectens volumen illud magnum and admirandum
Operum Dei ac Creaturarum; eorumque varietatem, Constantiam ac ornatum.
CATALOGUS vero iste, qui Capita and summa Rerum Continet, omnium qui unquam
prodiere, perfectissimus est, maxim ordinatus ac definitus: ad imaginem mundi
compositus ac Rerum; non intellectus and speculationum, quarum non est ordo,
numerus, neque finis. CATALOGUS revera ad mensuram universi and experimentorum
ita accommodatus, ut naturam in natura quaerat, eamque in omnes ejus formas
mutatam constringat, omnesque ejus status comprehendat; libertatem, errores,
vincula; in speciebus suis, in monstris, in mechanicis. Denique INDEX est
incompabilis, ac summo judicio elaboratus. Ad sylvam and suppellectilem
Historiarum Naturalium Colligendam, nullus uberior; ad, sic collectam, in locos
Com. and proprias classes digerendam, nullus Concinnior, ad, sic digestam,
memoriter retinendam, nullus efficacior unquam extitit; vel humano ingenio ac
industria excogitari potest. Interpres sic cogitavit? quod Juventuti Academicae
ac veritatis amantibus notum fieri, ipsorum interesse putavit. Erunt fortassis
Pedarii Senatores, qui, modernis methodis adsueti, aliam sententiam ferent;
atque ferant aliam; Sed justificata est sapientia a filiis suis.

CATALOGVS HISTORIARUM PARTICVLARVM.
secundum Capita.
1. HIstoria Coelestium, sive Astronomica. 2 Historia configurationis Coeli and
partium ejus, versus Terram and parts ejus; sive Cosmographica. 3 Historia
Comerarum. 4 Historia Meteororum ignitorum. 5 Historia Fulgurum, Fluminum,
Tonitruum, and Co^uscationum. 6 Historia Ventorum, and Flatuum repentinorum,
and Vndulationum Aeris. 7 Historia Iridum. 8 Historia Nubium, prout superne
conspiciuntur. 9 Historia Expansionis Coeruleae, Crepusculi, plurium Solium,
plurium Lunarum, Halonum, Colorum variorum Solis and Lunae; atque omnis
varietatis Coelestium ad aspectum, quae fit ratione Medii. 10 Historia
Pluviarum Ordinariarum, Procellosarum, and Prodiglosarum; etiam Cataractarum
(quas vocant) Coeli, and similium. 11 Historia Grandinis, Nivis, Gelu, Pruinae,
Nebulae, Roris, and similium. 12 Historia omnium aliorum Cadentium sive
Descendentium ex alto, and superne generatorum. 13 Historia Sonituum in alto
(si modo snt aliqui) praeter Tonitrua. 14 Historia Aeris, in Toto, sive in
Configuratione Mundi 15 Historia Tempestatum, sive Temperamentorum Anni, tam
secundum variationes Regionum, quam secundum accidentia Temporum, and periodos
Annorum; Diluviorum, Fervorum, Siccitatum, and similium. 16 Historia Terrae and
Maris; Figurae and Ambitus ipsorum, and Configurationis ipsorum inter se, atque
Exportectionis ipsorum in latum aut angustum; Insularum Terrae in Mari, Sinuum
Maris, and Lacuum ^^lsorum in Terra, Isthmorum, Promontoriorum. 17 Historia
Motuum (si qui sint) globi Terrae and Maris; and ex quibus Experimentis illi
colligi possint. 18 Historia Motuum majorum and Penturbationum in Terra and
Mari, nempe Terrae Mot^im and Tremorum and Hiatuum, Insularum de novo
enascentium, Insularum fluctuantium, Abruptionum Terrarum per ingressum Maris,
Invasionum and Illuvionum, and contra Desertionum Maris; Eruptionum ignium e
terra, Eruptionum subitanearum Aquarum e Terra, and similium. 19 Historia
Geographica Naturalis, Montium, Vallium, Sylvarum, Planitierum, Arenarum,
Paludum, Lacuum, Fluviorum, Torrentium, Fontium, and omnis diversitatis
scaturiginis ipsorum, and similium: missis Gentibus, Provinciis, Vrbibus, and
hujusmodi Civilibus. 20 Historia Fluxuum and Reflaxuum Maris, Euriporum,
Vndulationum and Motuum Maris aliorum. 21. Historia caeterorum Accidentium
Maris; Salsuginis ejus, Colorum diversorum, Profunditatis: and Rupium, Montium,
and Vallium submarinarum, and similium.
Sequuntur Historiae Massarum majorum.
22. HIstoria Flammae, and Ignitorum. 23. Historia Aeris, in substantia, non in
configuratione. 24. Historia Aquae, in Substantia, non in Configuratione. 25.
Historia Terrae and diversitatis ejus, in Substantia, non in Configuratione.
Sequuntur Historiae Specierum.
26. HIstoria Metallorum perfectorum, Auri, Argenti; and Minerarum, Venarum,
Marcasitaru^ eorundem: Operaria quoque in Mineris ipsorum. 27. Historia Argenti
Vivi. 28. Historia Fossilium; veluti Vitrioli, and Sulphuris, etc. 29. Historia
Gemmarum; veluti Adamantis, Rubini, etc. 30. Historia Lapidum; ut Marmoris,
Lapidis Lydii, Silicis, etc. 31. Historia Magnetis. 32. Historia Corporum
Miscellaneorum, quae nec sunt Fossilia prorsus, nec Vegetabilia; ut Salium,
Succini, Ambrae-griseae, etc. 33. Historia Chymica circa Metalla and Mineralia.
34. Historia Plantarum, Arborum, Fruticum, Herbarum: and Partium eorum,
Radicum, Caulium, Ligni, Foliorum, Florum, Fructuum, Seminum, Lachrymarum, etc.
35. Historia Chymica circa Vegetabilia. 36. Historia Piscium, and partium ac
Generationis ipsorum. 37. Historia Volatilium, and Partium ac Generationis
ipsorum. 38. Historia Quadrupedum, and Partium ac Generationis ipsorum. 39.
Historia Serpentum, Vermium, Muscarum, and caeterorum Infectorum; and partium
ac generationis ipsorum. 40. Historia Chymica circa ea quae sumuntur ab
Animalibus.
Sequuntur Historia Hominis.
41. HIstoria Figurae, and Membrorum externorum Hominis, Staturae, Compagis,
Vul^us, and Lineamentorum: eorumque varietatis secundum Gentes and Climata, aut
alias minores Differentias. 42. Historia Physiognomica super ipsa. 43. Historia
Anatomica, sive Membrorum internorum Hominis; and varietatis ipsorum, quatenus
invenitur in ipsa naturali Compage and Structura, and non tantum quoad Morbos
and Accidentia praeternaturalia. 44. Historia partium similarium Hominis; ut
Carnis, Ossium, Membranarum, etc. 45. Historia Humorum in Homine; Sanguinis,
Bilis, Spermatis, etc. 46. Historia Excrementorum; Sputi, Vrinarum, Sudorum,
Sedimentorum, Capillorum, Pilorum, Rediviarum, Vnguium, and similium. 47.
Historia Facultatum; Attractionis, Digestionis, Retentionis, Expulsionis,
Sanguificationis, Assimilationis alimentorum in membra, Versionis Sanguinis and
Floris ejus in Spiritum, etc. 48. Historia Motuum Naturalium and
Involuntariorum; ut Motus Cordis, Motus Pulsuum, Sternutationis, Motus
Pulmonum, Motus Erectionis Virgae, etc. 49. Historia Motuum mixtorum ex
Naturalibus and voluntariis; veluti Respirationis, Tussis, Vrinationis, Sedis,
etc. 50. Historia Motuum Voluntariorum; ut Instrumentorum ad voces articulatas;
ut Moruum Oculorum, Linguae, Faucium, Manuum, Digitorum; Deglutitionis, etc.
51. Historia Somni and Insomniorum. 52. Historia diversorum Habituum Corporis;
Pinguis, Macilenti; Complexionum, (quas vocant,) etc. 53. Historia Generationis
Hominum. 54. Historia Conceptionis, Vivificationis, Gestationis in utero,
Partus, etc. 55. Historia Alimentationis Hominis, atque omnis Edulii and
Potabilis, atque omnis Diaetae; and Varietatis ipsorum secundum Gentes aut
minores differentias. 56. Historia Augmentationis and Incrementi Corporis in
Toto and Partibus ipsius. 57. Historia Decursus Aetatis; Infantiae, Pueritiae,
Iuventutis, Senectutis, Longaevitatis, Brevitatis Vitae, and similium, secundum
Gentes and minores differentias. 58. Historia Vitae and Mortis. 59. Historia
Medicinalis Morborum, and Symptomatum and Signorum eorundem. 60. Historia
Medicinalis, Curae, and Remediorum, and Liberationum a Morbis. 61. Historia
Medicinalis eorum quae conservant Corpus and Sanitatem. 62. Historia
Medicinalis eorum quae pertinent ad Formam and Decus Corporis, etc. 63.
Historia Medicinalis eorum quae corpus alterant, and pertinent ad Regimen
Alterativum. 64. Historia Pharmaco polaris. 65. Historia Chirurgica. 66.
Historia Chymica circa Medicinas. 67. Historia Visus and visibilium, sive
Optica. 68. Historia Picturae, Sculptoria, Plastica, etc. 69. Historia Auditus
and Sonorum. 70. Historia Musica. 71. Historia Olfactus, and Odorum. 72.
Historia Oustus and Saporum. 73. Historia Tactus, and ejus Objectorum. 74.
Historia Veneris, ut speciei Tactus. 75. Historia Dolorum corporeorum, ut
speciei Tactus. 76. Historia Voluptatis and Doloris in genere. 77. Historia
Affectuum; ut Irae, Amoris, Verecundiae, etc. 78. Historia Facultatum
Intellectualium; Cogitativae, Phantasiae, Discursus, Memoriae etc. 79. Historia
Divinationum Naturalium. 80. Historia Dignotionum, sive Diacrisium occultarum
Naturalium. 81. Historia Coquinaria; and Artium subservientium, veluti
Macellaria, Aviaria etc. 82. Historia Pistoria, and Panificiorum; and Artium
subservientium, ut Molendinaria, etc. 83. Historia Vinaria. 84. Historia
Cellaria, and diversorum generum Potus. 85. Historia Bellariorum and
Confecturarum. 86. Historia Mellis. 87. Historia Sacchari. 88. Historia
Lacticiniorum. 89. Historia B^eatoria, and Vnguentaria. 90. Historia
Mi^^ellanea circa curam corporis; Tonsorum, Odorariorum, etc. 91. Historia
Auri^ ^llis, and Artium subservientium. 92. Historia Lanificiorum, and Artium
subservientium. 93. Historia Opificiorum e Serico and Bombyce, and Artium
subservientium. 94. Historia Opificiorum ex Lino, Cannabio, Gossipio, Setis,
and aliis Filaceis; and Artium subservientium. 95 Historia Plumificiorum. 96.
Historia Textoria, and Artium subservientium. 97. Historia Tinctoria. 98.
Historia Curiaria, Alutaria; and Artium subservientium. 99. Historia
Culcitraria and Plumaria. 100. Historia Ferri-Fabrilis. 101. Historia Latomiae
sive Lapicidarum. 102. Historia Lateraria, and Tegularia. 103. Historia
Figularis. 104. Historia Caementaria, and Crustaria. 105. Historia
Ligni-fabrilis. 106. Historia Plumbaria. 107. Historia Vitri and omnium
Vitreorum, and Vitriaria. 108. Historia Architecturae in genere. 109. Historia
Plaustraria, Rhedaria, Lecticaria, etc. 110. Historia Typographica, Libraria,
Scriptoria, Sigillatoria; Atramenti, Calami, Papyri, Membranae, etc. 111.
Historia Cerae. 112. Historia Viminaria. 113. Historia Storearia, and
Opificiorum ex Stramine, Scirpis, and similibus. 114. Historia Lotricaria,
Scoparia, etc. 115. Historia Agriculturae, Pascuariae, Cultus Sylvarum, etc.
116. Historia Hortulana. 117. Historia Piscatoria. 118. Historia Venationis and
Aucupii. 119. Historia Rei Bellicae, and Artium subservientium; ut
Armamentaria, Arcuaria, Sagittaria, Sclopetaria, Tormentaria, Balistaria,
Machinaria, etc. 120. Historia Rei Nauticae, and Practicarum, and Artium
subservientium. 121. Historia Athletica, and omnis generis Exercitationum
Hominis. 122. Historia Rei Equestris. 123. Historia Ludorum omnis generis. 124.
Historia Praestigiatorum and Circulatorum. 125. Historia Miscellanea diversarum
Materiarum Artificialium; ut Esmaltae, Porcellanae, complurium Caementorum,
etc. 126. Historia Salium. 127. Historia Miscellanea diversarum Machinarum, and
Motuum. 128. Historia Miscellanea Experimentorum Vulgarium, quae non coaluerunt
in Artem.
Etiam Mathematicarum purarum Historiae conscribendae sunt, licet sint potius
Observationes quam Experimenta.
129. Historia naturarum and potestatum Numerorum. 130. Historia naturarum and
potestatum Figurarum.
NOn abs re fuerit admonere, quod, cum necesse sit multa ex Experimentis sub
duobus Titulis vel pluribus cadere, (veluti Historia Plantarum, and Historia
Artis Hortulanae multa habebunt fere communia) commodior sit inquisitio per
Arts, Dispositio vero per Corpora. Parum enim nobis curae est de Artibus ipsio
Mechanicis, sed tantum de iis quae afferunt ad instruendam Philosophiam. Verum
haec e re nata melius regentur.

FINIS.
Typographus Lectori.
VNA aut altera Pagina vacant in damnum Bibliopolae, ad implendam areolam
inanem, Nobiliss. Authoris Litteras, suo Collegio missas ac propria manu
munitas, subjungere visum est. Quod vivit Chartula haec peritura, id nostrum
munus est; Tuum Lector, si vigeat. Succincta pagina est, sed solida: and
excellentium virorum, etiam Reliquiae conservandae. Vale.

FRA. DE VERVLAMIO Vice-Comes SANCTI ALBANI. PERCELEBRI COLLEGIO SANCTAE ET
INDIVIDVAE TRINITATIS JN CANTABRIGIA S.
REs omnes earumque progressus initiis suis debentur: Itaque cum initia
Scientiarum e Fontibus vestris hauserim, incrementa ipsarum vobis rependenda
existimavi. Spero itidem fore, ut haec nostra apud vos tanquam in Solo nativo
Felicius succrescant. Quamobrem and vos hortor, ut salva animi modestia, and
erga veteres reverentia, ipsi quoque Scientiarum Augmentis non desitis: verum
ut post volumina sacra verbi Dei and Scripturarum, secundo loco volumen illud
magnum operum Dei and Creaturarum, strenue, and prae omnibus libris, qui pro
Commentariis tantum haberi debent, evolvatis. Valete.

Excudebat OXONII LEONARDVS LICHFIELD Primarius ACADEMIAE Typographus.

Impensis ROBERTI YOUNG, and EDVARDI FOREST.

Anno Salutis, M.DC.XXXX.

