: Here begins the Book of knowledge of things unknown a parteynynge to
Astronomye with certain necessary Rules, and certain speres contaynyng
herein Compyled by Godfridus super Palladum de agricultura Anglicatum.



Ptholomeus

This is unknown to many men, though they be known to some men.

Here begins the Book of. Knowledge.
Sunday.
IF the Nativity of our Lord come on a Sunday, winter shall be good. Ver shall
be windy, sweet and hot, vintage shall be good Oxen waxes, Sheep shall be
multyplyed, Honny and Milk, and all goods shall be plenteous Old men and women
shall dye, peace and accord shall be in the land. Also the Sondayes of each
year suynge, in the hour of the day, or of night, to do all things that
thou will begin it is profitable. Who that been borne shall be strong, great and
shynynge, Who that flies shall be found.

Mondaye.
IF it come on the Monday winter shall be meddled. Ver shall be wyndye and
good-So^mer all dry, or even the contrary, if it be rayny full of tempest,
vyntage shall be in mydle assyse. In each mondaye of the same year in the hour
of day, or of night, to do all things that thou will begin it is good,
dremes perteyneth to effect. Who that been borne shall be strong. Who that
flies shall soon be found, theft done shall be proved, he that falls in to
his bed soon shall rekeuer.

Tuesdaye.
IF it come on the Tuesdaye, winter shall be good. Ver shall be wyndye, so^mer
shall be good, bintage shall be traue^louse, women shall dye, shyps shall perisshe
of sees In each tuesday of the same year in the hour of day, or of night, to
do all things that thou will begin it is good. Who that been borne shall be
strong and coueytous, dreams perteyneth to age. Who that flies shall soon
be found, theft than done shall be proved.

Wednesdaye.
IF it come on the Wednesdaye, winter shall be sharp and hard. Ver shall be wyndy
and evil, so^mer shall be good, vyntage shall be good and traue^lous, good wit y^
shalt find, young men shall dye, Honnye shall not be earnde, Berers shall
travail, Shypmen shall travail in each year. In each wednesdaye of each year
to do althynges that thou wyl^ begin it is good.

Thursdaye.
IF it come on the Thursdaye, winter shall be good. Ver shall be wyndy, so^mer
good, vyntage good and plentye shall be, Kings and Princes perameter shall
dye. And in each Thursdaye of each year to do all things that thou will
begin it is good. Who that ^en borne shall be of fair speech and worshypful.
Who flies shall soon be found theft done by awenche shall be proved. Who that
falls in his bed rather other latter often was wont to rekeuer.

Frydaye.
IF it come on the Friday winter shall be maruaylouse Ver wyndy and good,
summer good and dry, byntage plenteous, there shall be doloure of the Air,
Sheep and been shall perysshe. Otes shall be dear. In each Frydaye of each year
to do all things that thou wylt begin it is good. Who that benborne shall be
profitable and Lecherous. Who that flies shall soon be found, theft done by
a Child shall be proved.

Saturdaye.
IF it come on ye saturdaye winter shall be dyrke, snow shall be great, fruit
shall be plenteous Ver shall be wyndy, so^mer evil, byntage evil by places Otes
shall be dear, men shall wax sick, and been shall dye. In no Saturdaye of that
same year, whether it be in the hour of day, or night to begin every thing
uneath it shall be good, but if the course of the Moon bring it thereto, theft
done shall be found, he that flies shall turn again to his own they that is
sick shall long wayle, and uneath they shall escape, that theyne should dye.

Finis the vii. days.
Here follows of the birth of Children.
ON the Sunday, who that is borne he shall be great, and shynyng. Who that is
borne on the Mondaye, to begin all things he shall be good. Who that is borne on
the Tuesdaye, he shall be coueytous, and he shall peryishe with iron, and uneath
he shall come to the last age, to begyne all things he shall be good. He that
is borne on the Wednesdaye, he shall lightly learn words. He that is borne on
the Thursdaye, he shall be stable and worship full, and to begin all things is
good. He that is borne on the Friday he shall be of long life and lecherous,
(...) to begin all things is good, He that is borne on the Saturdaye, he shall
seldom be profitable, but if the course of the Moon byrngeit thereto.

Here begins the nature and dysposycyon of the days of the Moon with the
^yrth of Children.
The First day.


IN the first Day of the Moon Adam was made, to do all things it is
profitable, and what ever thou wylt to do good, and that thou see in thy
sleep, shall be well, and shall be turned into joy. If thou semest to be
ouercomen, never the latter, thou shalt overcome. A child that is borne shall
soon wax, and be of long life, and rich. He that falls sick shall long
wayle, and he shall suffer a long syckenesse, it is good ^o let a little blood.

The second day.
IN the second Day of the Moon, Eve was made, to do an ernde it is good, and
to do all things it is profitable, to bye and to sell, to stye into a ship,,
to make away, to sow seeds, theft done shalsoone be found. Whatso ever
thou shalt se in sleep, soon effect it shall have, whycher it be good or
evil: to let blood it is good. A child that is borne, soon shall wax, and
he shall be a lechour, or a strompe^.

The.iii. day.
IN the.iij. day of the moon Kay^ was borne, of all things that should be
done, it behooves to abstain, but only that thou will not that it wax
again, it is good to draw up roots in the yerde and in the field, thefted
one shall be soon be found, whatso ever thou see in sleep, it is naught. Who
that is borne, mently the shall wax, but he shall bye young. A sick man that
falls in his bed, shall travail, and he shall not escape, to let blood it is
good.

The.iiii. day.
IN the.iiij. day of the moon Abell was borne. Whatso ever thou do is good
in each travail, the dreams that thou see has effect. Hope in god and
counsel good. A child that is borne, he shall be a good Treatoure, and much
he shall be praised. A man that falls sick, either soon shall be healed, or
soon shall dye, it is good to let blod.

The.v. day.
IN the.v. day of the moon, do nothing of erndene of work, to make sacrament,
it is not good. Who that flees, bound or dead, he shall be showed / the
dreams that thou shalt se, shall be well. After that thou haste seen: it
shall be. Beware that thou leese no counsel. A child that is borne shaldye
young. He that falls in his bed, soon shalldye, to let blood it is good.

The.vi. day.
IN the.vi. day of the moon, to send children to schole, it is good, and to
use hunting, the dreams that thou sha^te se, nyghe shall hap in good, but
beware yt thou say naught to any man. Thy counsel do not dyscouer. A child
borne, shall be of long life and sely. A sick man uneath shall escape, to let
blood it is good.

The.vii. day.
IN the.vij. day of the moon Abell was slain. He that falls sick, shaldye,
he that is borne shall be of long life, and good to let blood, and to take
drink it is good A dream that thou see, long after shall be. Who that flees
shall soon be found, and theft also. To bye swyne, to tame beasts, to clyp
heeres, and to take all manner of norysshynge, it is good. A sick man if he be
medyeyned, shall be healed.

The.viii. day.
ANd in the.viij. day of the Moon, whatsoever thou will do is good, all
things that thou will treat, to go in counsel to bye Mancyples and
beasts: foldes of sheep into another place to change, it is good, to set
fundamentes, to sow Seeds, to go into a way. A child that is borne, shall be
sick but in all days, he shall be a purchasoure, and he shall dye young. A
dream shall be certain, and soon shall be. If thou see sorry things, turn
then to the east, he that waxes sick shall live: theft shall be found, to let
blod it behooves in the myddest of the day.

The.ix day.
ANd in the.ix. day of the Moon, Lameth was borne, to do all things it is
profitable, what thing thou will enter to make, it is good, and shall profit.
A dream that thou see, shall come in the day following, or in the second
day, and thou shalt se a sign in the East, and that shall appear in sleep
openly within.xi. days shall come. A child borne in all things shall be a
purchasoure and good, and long of life. A sick man shall wayl^ much and arise.
Who shall be chased, shall not be found, and who that is oppressed, shall be
conforted, presume thou not to let blood.

The.x. day.
AND in the.x. day of the Moon, was borne the Patriarch Noe. What so ever
thou wylt do shall perteyne to light. Dreams be vain, and within.iiij. days
shall come without peril. A child that is borne, shall enuyron many
countries, and he shall dye old what soever be lost, shall be hyd, who that is
bound, shall be unbound. Who that flees, after shall be found: who that falls
in travail, without peril shall be delivered. Who that falls in his bed, he
shall long abide, to let blood, it is good.

The.xi. day.
AND in the.xi. day of the Moon, Sem was borne, it is good to begin works, to
go out, to sow, to make wedding. A dream within.iiij. days shall be fulfilled
without perils, and soon it shall appear after that thou see. A child
that is borne shall be of long life and relygyous, and loueable, he shall have a
sign in ye forhed, or in ye mouth or in the eye, and in latter age he shall be
made better. A wenche shall have a sign that she shall be learned with wisdom,
to go into a way, it is good, and to change fooldes of sheep, fro place to
place, he that is sick and he be long sick, he shall be heled each day to let
blood it is good.

The.xii. day.
ANd in the.xij. day of the Moon, was borne Canaan the son of Cham,
nothing thou shalt begin, for it is a grievous days, a dream shall be
certain, to joy to the after that thou see, within.ix. days, it shall be
fulfilled to wed and to do erndes it is profitable, that is lost shall be
found. A child that is borne shall be of long life angry and honest, a sick
man shall be grened and arise. Who that is taken shall be left, theft soon shall be
found, to let blood at even it is good. ^ ^

The.xiii. day.
ANd in the.xiij. Day of the Moon. Noe planted Vynes, and in each day Vynes
ben made to plant Vynes it is good. After that thou see, thy dream shall be,
and within four dates it shall come to gladness, but take heed to Psalms and
to Orysons. A child borne in aduersyte shall be let, he shall be angrye, and he
shall not be long of life. Who that is bound shall be losed, that is lost
shall be found. Who that waxes sick, long time shall travail, and uneath
shall be saved but dye: Towed a wife, it is good, it is good each day to let
blood.

The.xiiii. day.
IN the.xiiij. day of ye Moon it is a good day and a glad. Noc blyssed all
things that shall be done what ever thou will do, and shall come to the to
hele. A dreme within six days shall be, to make wedding it is good, and to go
in the way. Axe of thy friend, or thine enemy, and it shall be done to the. A
child that is borne, shall be a tretoure, the sick man shall be changed and
rise, and shall be heled by medycyne to let blood it is good.

The.xv. day.
ANd in the.xv. day of the Moon. Tongges were divided, do no work, begin no
ernde, for it is a grievous day. A sick man shall long travail, but he shall
escape. A dreme that thou see nothing shall no^ but soon shall come. A
child borne shall dye young, that is lost shall be found, to let blood it is
good. ^ ^

The.xvi. day.
IN the.xvi. day of ye Moon, Pytagoras was borne, the Auc^oure of
Philosophers, to bye and to sell it is good, to tame Oxen and other Beasts. A
dreme is not good after long time it shall come, and it shall be harmefull, to
take a wife to make wedding it is good, foldes o^ Sheep from place to place to
change it is good. A child that is borne shall be of long life but he shall
be poor forsworn, and a cursed. A sick man if he change his pla^e he shall
live, to let blood it is good.

The.xvii. day.
IN the.xvij. day of ye Moon it is evil to do an (...). A dreme that thou
see after long time shall be, or withi.xxx. days. A child that is borne
shall be sely, he that is sick shall be much ground, and a rise, that is lost
shall ^^ found, to send children to scole, to be wedd^^ and to make (...) and
take it is good, but not to (...) blood.

The.xviii. day^.
ANd in the.xviij. day of the Moon, is good for althinges to be done, namely
to begin houses. And to set children to scole dreams are good and shall be
done within.xx. days. Who that syckenes has shall lsoone rise, or long be
sick, and than cover. Theft than done shall be found. A knave child than
borne shall be vnouercome and eloquent, proud vnpesable, and not long life. A
maid child than borne, shall be chas^e laborous, senyaunt and b^^ter in her
hinder age, they shall both be marked about the knees, not so hardy thou let the
blood this day.

The* xix. day.
IN the.xix. day of ye Moon is not (...) good ne full evil, dremes shall ^o
(...) within.xx. days. Who that (...) has shalsoone rise if he ta^^ medicyn^,
theft than done shall not be found. A knave child than borne, shall be true,
benynge, sleyghte, wise, ever wax better and better in great worship, and have
a mark in the browe. A maiden child than borne, shall be eight sick: save not
paid of one man, that day is good to blede.

The.xx. day.
AND in the.xx. day of the Moon, Isaac blessed his son^e what ever thou will
do is good, a dreme that thou see shall appear, but say it to no man, to
make wedding it is good, to by a mancyple, it is good, to buyld houses it is
good foldes of sheep, from place to place to change it is good, and to tame
beestes and to sow seeds. A child that is borne shall be a fyghter and he
shall have many aryuynges, that is los^e shall be found, to change been it is
good. A sick man shall long wayle or son (...), to let blood on even it is
good.

The.xxi. day.
IN the.xxi. day of yt Moon Saull was borne, first king of the Jews, a
dreme is true, and to joy shall pertayne within.iiii. days. A child that is
borne shall find much evil, he shall be a th^f^, and wy^ty, he shall be a treat
our, and trauaylous. Fsa^ roke the resydue blyssynges of his father, it is good
to hele swyne, and other Beestes: it behooves to abstain fro gamyng things,
to go in the way it is good. A sick man shall vesycke and arise, theft shall be
found, let no blood neither dayene night.

The.xxii. day.
IN the.xxij. day of ye Moon Joseph was borne, it is a day of holiness, if
thou doste any earnde thou shall find it grenous, dremes shall be certain,
and shall come to io^e. A child borne, in aldayes shall be a purchesoure,
merye, fair, relygyous, and lyperous. A sick man both late is confyrmed and
healed. Been to change from place to place it is good. A sy^ke man shall be
sick, and be healed, to let blood all day it is good.

The.xxiii. day.
IN the.xiij. day of ye Moon Benyamyn was borne, son of the right side, the
last son of the Patriatke Noe. What ever thou wylt do is good. A dreme that
thou see shall turn to joy, and nothing shall noy, and other while it was
wont to fall within eyghte days, To take a wife it is good, to make
weddynges, to set foundamentes to open new earth, to ^ame beasts it is good.
A child borne, shall be out ^aste, and many letrynges, he shall make and in
sins he shall dye. A sick man shall be sick, and arise, it is good to let
blood.

The.xxiiii. day
IN the.xxiiij. Day of the Moon Golyas was borne, a dreme that thou see,
sygnifyeth thine hele, and nothing shall noy. A child borne shall be
compendyous, and shall do wounderful things. A sick man shall lange wysshe and
be heled to let blood before the third hour it is good.

The.xxv. day.
AND in the.xxv. day of the Moon, Our Lord send signs into Egypt by
Moses, and in each day he passed the red sea, he that makes sacrament, shall
dye in a peryllous death, beware dred to come, the dream sygnyfyeth hard
things, and within.x. days it was wont to come, Erly the^ bow thine head
into the East. A child borne shall be an evil man, many perils he shall
suffer. A sick man shall sustain iniurye and uneath shall escape, it is good
to let blood.

The.xxxvi. day.
IN the.xxvi. day of ye Moon Moses dried the red Sea. In each day Ionathas,
the son of Saul, was borne, and deed is Saul with his sons, thou shalt
begin nothing, the dreme shall be certain and shall be turned in to joy, to
men Pilgrims it pertayneth to beware of aspyes, of thine enemies A child
borne shall be full louable, but another rich ne poor. A sick man shall
travail and arise, if he have the dropsye he shall dye, to let blood a little,
it is needful.

The.xxvii. day.
IN the.xxvii. Day of the Moon. Our Lord reyned Manna, to the children of
Israel, what ever thou wylt do is good, be buysy for a dreme that thou seeste
was wont to come, either to good or to evil. A child borne, shall be of long
life and most loved, and menlyche strange neither rich ne poor. A sick man
shall rise to life, he shall be holden in much langonre, but he shall be
heled, foldes of sheep from place to place to change it is good, to let blood
on even, it is good.

The.xxviii. day.
ANd in the.xxviij. day of the Moon, ye da^es ben fighting ^abe^nacles den
fyxed in desert, what ever thou wylt do is good A dreme that thou see shall
turn in to Joy, and shall come Welfullyche. A child borne, shall be much
loved, he shall be holden in syckenes. ^ syck^ man that falls in fyrm^c^ soon
shall be saved, to let blood in the evening it accords. ^ ^

The.xxix. day.
AND in the.xxix. day of the Moon, the Jews went in to the Land of Byheste,
Herod the king, cut of the chyldrens hedes, begin nothing the dream shall be
certain, and good gladness, and Joy it sygnyfyeth, an (...) begynit is good to
fulfill, to take a wife it is good, but uylte thou not make dowers, ne write
testamentes. A child borne shall be of long life, wise, and holy, and meke,
to fysshe, and hunt and it is good. A sick man shall not greuouslye be sick,
but a escape, it is good to let blood.

The.xxx. day.
IN the.xxx. Day of the Moon* Samuel the Prophet, was borne, what ever thou
wylt do is good. A dreme that appears to the certain, and within.ii. days
thou shalt se, and thou shall find a red Sign in the East, within.ix. days.
A child borne shall be of long life and profitable, and well mesured in each
thing. A sick man shall nyghe come to death, in no manner let no blood. These
and many other ^^tayneth to men after as ye course of the Moon follows.

Of Saturn, and what Saturn is.
Saturn, what is Saturn, he is the first Planet, and the wyckedest, and he
vnbegynneth the zodiake but once in.xxx. year, tha^ follows it forth in the
zodiake by.xij. signs, that Saturn reygneth in ^che* signs.ij. years and ^
half, in.vi. Signs he reyneth.xv. ^^res. And in all the.xij. Signs he (...)
even.xxx. years, and right as there ar^.xij. signs in the zodiake, so are
there.xij. months in the year, ^che sign to his month. Wherefore beware
before, and make puruayaunce therefore, and soke when Saturn reyneth in
the.iij. winter signs, that is to say, Capricorn, Aquarie, and Pisces, and
so long those vij. years and half a year, shall be scarsenes and derth of
corn, fruit Beestes, and all other things, for in the.iij. years Signs* he
has might and mo^ste power to fulfill his malice, if he be naught le^^ed by
neyghbourhed of any good Pla^et*

This next Chapter following declares, what sygnyfyeth the thondre in every
year.
THondre in Ianuarye* signifies the same year, great wyndes plea^ye of corn,
and bat^ay^e. Pera^u^nture also thondre in February year, sygnyfyth that same
(...) many men, namely rich men, shall dye in great syckenesse. Thondre in
M^rche, sygnyfyeth that same ye^r great wyndes, plentye of corns, and debate
among people. Thondre in Apryll, sygnyfyeth that same year to be fruytefull,
and merry, and also death of wicked men. Thondre in May sygnyfyeth that year
need scarse^es and berth o^ corns and great hunger. Thondre in June,
sygnyfyeth that same years, that wooddes shall be ouereasten with wyndes. And
great ragynge shall be of Lions, and Wo^kes, and so like of other harmefull
Beasts. Thondre in July, sygnyfyeth that same year shall be good corn, and
fruytes of Beasts, that is to say, their strength shall peryssh^* Thondre in
August, sygnyfyeth the same year sorrow welyng of many, and o^ most
hotethynges, and also many shall be syeke. Thondre i^ Septembre, sygnyfyeth that
same year great wind copye of corn, that is to say, plenteous, and occasyon
of folk, that is to say, much falling. Thondre in Octobre sygnyfyth yt same
year, great w^nde and scantnes of Corns, and fruits of trees, Thondre in
Nouembre sygnyfyeth that same year to be fruytfull, and merry, and chepe corn.
Thondre in Decembre sygnyfyeth that same year chepe corn, and of wheere, peace
and accord among the people.

This Chapter following, declares what are the evil days, and forboden in the
year. And also which be the best bledynge days in the year.
WIt thou well that in every monethe, be.ij. evil days, one in waxynge of the
month, and another in the wanynge. The Kalenders shows them and their hours
openly enough, in the which days, if any folk take syckenes, or begin any
new thing, it is great grace, if it ever fare well, or come to good end.
Also there are L. Caniculer days, that is to say, from the.xv. Kalefi. of
August, to the N^nas of Septembre, in the which Days it is forboden, by
Astronomye to all manner of folks: That they let them no blood, ne take no
Drynkes, and also good it is to abstain than from women, and they should
greatleches know and keep, and teach to other men. For why all that time
reygneth a Statre, that is called Caniculacanis, in Latin, a hounde in
English, now of this foresaid star Canicula, the foresaid.L. days, are
called Canicular days, that is to say, hoar days and bytynge as a Bytche,
for the kind of the star Canicula, is boylynge and beennyng as fire, and
bi^ynge as a bytche whelpe, that time the heat of the son, and of the star
is so dowlcet and vyolent, that men's bodies at mydnyght, swetes as at mydday,
and swells lightly: blows and brenneth, and if they tha^ be hurt, than ben
they more sick than at any other time, and right nere^ deed. In those days
all venemouse Serpents, crepeth and flies, and gendreth, and so they ouerset
hugelye the Air, in sedynge of theyrkynde, so yt many a man ar deed thereby,
there again all the so^mer: namely those days, a fire is good night and day,
and wholesome. And sees such meats and take keep of great vyolent m^ates.

Also from the.xviij. Kalen^. of Octobre, to the.xvij. Kalen^. of Nouembre,
look thou take no cold, for than the poores of man, and of earth, and of all
things else setten. And they may not open again till the.xvij. Kalen^. of
Apryll, wherefore such things as thou take, within the poores thaffection
thou shall hold till they open trewlye it should less harm the'to take cold
at Christenmas than then.

Td Know how a man shall keep himself in health.
IF thou will keep the long in health, than hold this rule, that is to say,
fly anger, wrath, and euur, give the to mirth in measure, travail sadly, so
that thou sweet not to much in the so^mer and namely in the Canyculer days,
fle all manner of strong drinks and hot spyces, brennynge meats namely to
have them v^andly. Fast not to long at morn. Suppe not to late at night, eat
not hastelye: ne eat but little at ones: and that, that thou eatest, chewe it
well every time that thou eats, rest a little rather after, sleep not ye
under meal, namely out of these.iiij. mouths. That is tosaye, May, June,
July, and August. And yet the l^sse that thou slepest than the better it is:
sleep well in the waxynge, of the night, and be early up in the morning,
tymelyer the better. And every day beware of wicked mystes that none enter in
the fasting, for thereof comes great pestylences ^ great hete. And in great
cold and in pestylences eat much garlycke every day.ix. Saffron chyues, it
will do the much good. Eat Inoughe in wyn^er, eat Inoughe in Ver, but eat
but little in so^mer, look thy meat be well seasoned in harvest, beware of
fruyres, for they are not good, if it be given the for medycyne, of all manners
of meats soden is the best, eat not to many hot spyces, ne eat but little
at ones, for better it were.vii. times on the day, than ones thy fill, flesh
is more norysshynge than fysshe. Eat not to much sour meats nor salt for
they will make thy bones sore, Look thy drink be not to new, ne to old: Sweet
powdered meats be most wholesome. Of all things take me sure and no more, for
in measure restes virtue. And that seyntes did hold them to

To know what peryllous days: come in the change of every Moon.
IN each change of every Moon be.ij. days in the which, what thing so is
begone, late or never it shall come to end, and the days be full peryllous,
for many things ^

In January, when the Moon is.iij. or.iiij.

In February, when the Moon is.v. or.vij.

In March.vi. or.vij.

In Apryll.v. or.viii.

In Mayt.viii. or.ix.

In June.v. or.xv.

In July.iii. or.xiii.

In August.viii. or.xiii.

In Septembre.viii. or.xiii.

In Octobre.v. or.xii.

In Nouembre.v. or ix.

In Decembre.iij. or.xiij.

Astronomyers says, that.vi. days in the year are peryllous of death. And
therefore they forbed men to blede on them, or take any drynkes, that is to
say.

The third day of the Month of January.

The first day of the Monthe of Iulye.

The second day of the Monthe of Octobre.

The last day of the Monthe of Apryll.

The first day of August.

The last day going out of Decembre.

These vi days with great dylygence ought to be kept, but namely the
latter.iij. for all the veins are than full. For then whyther man or Beast he
^^yt in than, within. vii days, or c^rtaynly within.xiiij. days they shall
dye. And if they take any drynkes, within xv. days they shall dye. And if they
eat of any goose in these.ij days within xl. days they shall dye. And if any
child be borne, in these.iij. latter days they shall dye a wicked death,
Astronomiers and Astrologiers, says that in the beginning of March,
the.vij. night or the.xviij. day, let the blood of the right arm. And in the
beginning of Apryll.xi. day on the left arm. And in the end of Ma^e.iij.
or.v. day, on whyther arm thou wylt. And thus of all that year thou shalt
syke^ly^ bewaresshe fro the Fevers, and fro the falling gowte, and fro the
fyste^ gowte. And fro loss of thy syghte, Bia^magest, insent^^o qui of
Ptholomei^ Each man's body is rewled by a certain sign of the zodiake.
Wherefore as says Ptholome^s in the place of Bone. If thou be sick in any
lymbe, do no medycyne unto that lymbe, when the Moon is in sign of that
lymbe, for it shall rather hinder, than fourther. And namely flee blood
lettynge, it that time of those lymbes. Thus shalt thou know which signs
reygneth in which lymbes.

The Bulle reyneth in the neck and in the throat over all.

The Gemuse reyneth in the shulder, arms, and hands, and those.iij. be the
signs of Ver.

The Creues or Lobster, Reygneth in the breast, stomach and lymbes, arteries,
the mylte, heart, liver, and gall.

The Lion reygneth in ye back sides, bones, synewe, and grystles.

The Maid reygneth in the womb, mydry^e and gu^tes. And also (...)

Here follows the dyscryption of the.iiij. Elements: and of the.iiij.
Com^lection^.
I Do the to Wit that in each man and woman, reygneth each planet, and every
sign of the zodiak, and every pryme qualytes, and every Element, and every
Complexion, but not in every like, for in some men reygneth one more and in
some men reygneth another, and therefore me^be of diverse manners, wherefore good
is that we se shortly the kind of those prymes qualytes. And so forth on the
other.

Of the four pryme qualytes, and what they are.
Four Pryme Qualytes, there be. That is to say, moystenes, hotenes, drynes be
two contrary^s. And therefore they may no neyghe together without a mean, for
the hotenesse on the one side byndeth them together, and coldenes on the other
side. Also hotenes and coldenes are two contraryes, and therefore they may not
nyghe together, without a mean, for the moystnes on the one side, byndeth them
together. And drynes, on the other. Moystenes is cause of every thycke
Substance, and of every sweet taste. And there again drynes is cause of
every thyn substance, and of every sour stynkynge ^ast. And also hotenes is
cause of every red color, and large quantyte. There again coldenes is cause
of every white color and little quantyte.

Combyne, That is ^o say, knyt these.iiij. pryme qualytes alter these.iiij.
co^binations. That is to say, knyttynges, and than they will hold.iiij.
Elements, that is to say. The Air moist and hot. The fire hot and dry.
The Earth dry and cold. The Water cold and moist. The Air and the Earth
are two contraryes, and therefore they may not neyghe together, but as fire
byndes the^ on the one side, between them. And the water on the other side
between them. Also Fire and water, are two contraryes and therefore they may
not neyghe together, but as the Air between them byndes on the one side. And
the Earth between byndeth them together, on the other side. The Fire is sharp,
subtle, and monable. The Air is subtle, monable, and corpulent, and dull.
The Earth is corpulent and thycke. The Water is mouable, corpulent and dull.
The Earth is corpulent, dulle, and immovable, right as an egg shell, Vyngose a
thyn skyn. And ye sign Vyngose the white, and in the mids of the yolke, is a
little tender hoole, right so the Fire Vyngose the Air ten times more, and ten
times. Than the Air Vyngose the Water.x. times more, and.x. times tymer than
the water. The water Vyngose the Earth.x. times more, and.x. times tymer than
the Earth. In the heart of the Earth is the senter of the world. That is to
say, the mids point. And in every Sente^ is hell. And there again is above
ye fire are the stars, and above them is heaven christalline, that is to
say, waters of all bliss, departed in nine orders of Aungelles, than is
heaven in the highest, rowmest, and largest. And the re again, is Hell in the
lowest, narowest, and straytest.

Right as there be.iiij. Elements, so there be.iiij. Complections according
in all manner qualytes to these.iiij. Elements,

The First is sanguyne, that is to say, blood gendreth in the lyuers lymbe,
and like to the Air.

The Second is Cooler gendred in the galle, And like thereto. And it is
according to the fire.

The third is Melancolye, gendred in the mylt, and like to the dregs of
blood, and it accords to the Earth.

The Fourth is Flumes gendred in the lunges like to glat, and it accords to
the water. A sanguyne man much may, and much coueyteth, for he is moist and
hot.

A Cooloryke man, much coueyteth and little may, for he is hot and dry.

A Melancolyus man, little may, and little coueyte^h, for he is dry and cold.

A Flumatyke man, little couerteth, and little may for is cold and moist.

A Sanguyne manis large loving, glade of chere, laughing and ^oddy, of
Color, steadfast, tlesshely, right hardy, manerly, gentle, and well noryrshed.

A Cooleryke man is gylefull, false, and wrathful, tretours, and right hardy,
quynt, small, dry, and black of color.

A Melancolyus man, is enuyous, sorry, coueytous, hard, and false holdynynge,
gylefull, dredefull, slothful, and clear of color.

A Flumettyke man is slomery slepy, slow, sleyghtfull, and much spyttynge,
dul^e, and hard of wit, fat vysage, and white of color.

Of the.iiij. quarters of the year: and of the.iiij. complections: and what
they are.
IN the year be four quarters rewled by these.iiij. co^plections, that is to
say, Ver, Summer, Harvest, and winter. Ver has.iij. months. That is to say.
March, Apryll, and May. And is sanguyne complexion. So^mer has also.iij.
months. That is to say. June, Iulye, and August. And this quarteris coleryke
complexion. Harvest has also three mo^thes. That is to say Septembre,
Octobre, Nouembre, and this quarter is melancolyus complexion. Winter has
also.iij months. That is to say, Decembre, January, and February, and this
quarteris flumatyke complexion.

Each day also these.iiij. complectio^s reigns, yt is to say. Fro.iij after
mydnyght, unto.ix. reygneth sanguyne, and fro.ix. after mydnyght to.iij. after
mydday, reygneth Coloryke, and from.iij. after mydday to.ix. after myddaye
reygneth melancoly, and fro.ix. after mydday to.iij. after mydnyght reygneth
flume.

Also in the.iiij. Quarters of the world reygneth these.iiij. complections.
That is to say. Sanguyne in the East, Cooloryke in the South, Melancoly in the
West. And Fleume in the North.

Also the.iiij. Complections, reygneth in.iiij. ages of man. That is to say,
Cooler in chyldehoode. Sanguyne in ma^hoode, Fleume in age. And M^lancolyus in
old chyldhod. If fro the birth, to.xiiij. year full done, Manhood is from
thens to.xxx. year age. Fro thens to l. year. And old from thens to.lxxx.
year, and so forth to death.

Also these.iiij. co^plectio^s reygneth in.iiij. parts of man's body.

Cooler reyneth in all the coule^ lymbes from the breast upward.

Sanguyne reygneth, in all small lymbes. Also from the mydryfe to the wesande.

And Fleume reygneth in all noryssheande lymbes, also fro the raygnes to the
mydryfe.

And Melancolye reygneth in all the lymbes, from the reygnes downewarde.

Wherefore every man's ^rine is ^as^^.iiij. that is to say, Corltyl, Superfyce,
Mids, and ground, every party of the ^ryne to his part, of man's body. And
therefore to.iiij. things in every vryne, we must take heed. That is to say,
Substance, quantyte, Cooler, and content.iii. Substaunces there are. That is
to say, thycke, thyn, and mydle.

Thycke Substance betokens much moystenes.

Thyn Substance, betokens much drynes.

And mydle Substance betokens temporaunce.

Also.iij. Qua^tytes be in urine. That is to say. Much, Little, and Mean.

Much quantyte, betokens great cold.

And little quantyte betokens great heat.

And Mean quantyte betokens temporaunce.

Also take heed to the cast, whyther it be sweet or not.

Sweet cast betokens health.

And other taste betokens syckenes.

Also in brynes be.xx. Colors, of the which the first.x. betokens cold.
And the other.x. betokens heat.

The.x. colors that betokens cold, are these.

The first is black a derke cole and comes of lived going before.

The second like to leede, and those.ii. betokens mortyficacion.

The third is white as clear water.

The fourth is laktyke, like to whaye.

The fyfte is caropose, like to graye russet: or to Camels beer.

The.vi. is yelow like to falow leaves falling of trees. And those.iiij.
colors betokens indygestion.

The seventh is subpale, that is to say, not fullpale.

The right is pale, like to some sodenflesshe.

The nynthe is Subsytryn^, That is to say, fulsycryne.

The.x. is sytryne like to a ponisiter, or to right yalowe flowers.

And these.iiii. colors, betokens beginning of degestyon.

Now we have seen the colors, which betokens cold. So we se the other
ten which betokens heat.

The first is Subryfe. That is to say, not full ruff.

The second is ruff like to fy^^ gold.

And those two colors betokens per^yte dygestyon. So the ^^ryne be myddle of
substance, myddle of quantyte, sweet of taste, and without contents.

The third is subryfe, that is to ^a^e full red.

The fourth is red like to Saffron durte.

The fyft is subrugunde, that is to say, not full rubygunde

The syxte is rubygunde like a strong flaume of fire. And these iiij. colors
betokens passing of dygestyon. (???)

The seventh Ynopose like to whytewyne.

The right is kynanos like to ^oten blood. And these two betokens adustyon.

The nynche is grene as the ^ole stock.

The tenth is black, as a clear black horn. And this black comes of grene
going to fore. And these two betokens adustyon and death. ^ ^ ^

In Vry^e be.xviii. contents. That is to say. Serkell, Ampull, ^raynes,
Clouds, Scumme, Atterer, Fatnes, Humer, Blood, Gravel, Here Is, Scalos, Bran,
Crinodose, Sperme, Dust, Eskes, Sedimen, or Ypostas.

The Serkle, shows all the qualytes of the head.

Ampull, that is to say, creme, shows also the brain dysturbed.

Graynes betokens of remne, and glutte.

Clouds shows vice, of the small lymbes.

Scu^me, that is to say, foam, shows ventosyte, and often the Iandyes.

Atterer, that is to say, quiter shows vice of the reygnes. The bladder, or
of the liver.

Fatnes as oil drops, shows wasting, and dyssolucion of all the body,
namely of the loins.

Humer like gl^t, or like dre^es of blood, or rotten gall, it shows vice of
the mydryfe, or above or beneth

Blood shows vice of the liver or of ye raygnes, or of ye bladder.

Gravel shows the stone.

Heeres shows dyssolucyon, of the fatnes of all the body, of the raygnes
namely

Scalos and bran, shows the third spyce of Fever etyke incurable.

Sperme, that is to say, mankind shows to much lechery.

Duste shows the gowte, or a woman conceyned.

Eskes the preuye harneys to be grieved.

Sedymen, that is ^o say, clo^des in the ground of the Vryne, or brekynge up
toward.

The cyrcle is called Ypostas. That is to say, the ground, and it hathemooste
Sygnyfycacyon of all, and namely of the lowerpartyes.

Of every man's body be.iiii. princypall lymbes, that is to say, soulet lymbes,
small lymbes, and norysshande lymbes, and genderynge lymbes.

Sowlet lymbes, be the draynes, and all that are there about, down to the
wesande.

Small lymbes be the heart, and the lunges, and all that be about them
betwyxte the wesande and the mydryfe.

Norysshynge lymbes, be the liver, mile, gall, and guts, and all that be
about them, between the wesande, and the mydryfe, and the Raygnes.

Gendrynge lymbes, be the reygnes, bladder, preuy harneys, and the lymbes
about fro the reygnes downewarde.

Also here follows an A. B. C. Whereby thou (...) know of what Planer every
man is
A. E 1 I. S. 1. B. K. 2. Q. R 2. G.. L. D. M. 4. C. O. ^. V. ^. T. ^. F. 8. P.
^. X. 9.

Depart this by.ix. unto a hundredth. And if one or 8. be over, than the Son
is his Planet. If. 2. or ^. be over, than Venus is his planet. If.. be over,
than he is of Mercury. If. 4. be over, than he is of the Moon. If. 5. be
over, than he is of Saturnus. If. 6. be over, than be is of Jupiter. If. 7. be
over, than he is of Mars.

Adam. 31. Andren. 1^. Aldon. ^2. Nufos. 12. Benastri^is. 92, Becus. 9. David.
9.

Also here follows another. A B. C. To know by of what sign in the zodiake,
every manis, that is to say under which sign he is borne, and to which
sign, he is most like. Also hereby thou may know his fortune and the moment
in the which he shall dye. Also here by thou may know the fortune, and
infortune of many things, to bones, cities, and Castelles.

A. 2. B. 2. C. 20. D. 41. E. 5. F. 24. G. 3. H. 20. I. 10. K. 13. L. 42. M.
12. N. 22. O. 12. P. 21. Q. 24. R. 27. S. 22. T. ^1. V. 13 X. 20. Y. 20. T. 7.

If thou will know by this. A. B. C. any man as it is said before take his
name and his mothers name. And also if thou wylt know of any town, by this. A.
B. C. as it is said before, than take that towns name, and the name of the
City of Jerusalem, for that is ye mother of all towns, and than a count the
letters of the names, by the no^bre of this. A. B. C. and when thou haste all
done, depart it by.xxviij. and if one or two be over, than that that thou
sekest longs to the wether. And if.iij. or.iii^. or.v. be over, than that
that thou sekest, longs to the Bull. And if.vi. or.vii. be over, than longs
it to the Iemu^e, And if.viii. or.ix. be over, than longs it to the Crabbe.
And if.x. xi. or.xii. than longs it to the Lion. And if.xiij. or.xiiij. than
longs it to the Virgyn And if.xv. or.xvi. be over, than longs it to the
Lyba^de And if.xvij.xviij. or.xix. than longs it to the Scorpion. And if xx.
or.xxi. than longs it to the Segittarie. And if.xxij. or.xxiij than longs
it to the Capricorn. And if.xxiiii. or.xxv. than longs it to the Aquarie.
And if.xxvii. or.xxviii. than longs it to the Fysshe.

Another Alphebet.
Depart any thing in vi^. by the proper name of these letters: A. will tell,
which of the.vi^. it is by the over no^bre divided by.ix.

A. 3 I. 3. R. ^. B. 4. K 5. S. 13 C. 2, L ^. T. ^^. D 2. M. 25. V. 1^. E. ^. N
25 X. ^^. F. 4. O 1^ Y. 5^. G. 2. P. 13. ^ 34. H 5. Q. 15.

To know the wether yt shall be all the year / after the change of every Moon,
by the Pryme days.
Sunday Pryme / dry W^ther /
Mondaye Pryme / moist Wether /
Tuesdaye Pryme / cold and Wind /
Wednesdaye Pryme / metu^y^ous /
Thursdaye Pryme / fair and clear /
Frydaye Pryme / fair and sow^^ /
Saturdaye Pryme / ^ayne.
A Rule to know upon what Letter, what Hour, and what mynute as toloweth.
Pryme upon hor^ mym^.
A. ^9. 9. B. 4. 5. C. 13. 1. D. 20. 18. E. 18. 12. F. 21. 4. G. 15. 20.

EVermore thus reygueth these.vij. planettes. First reygneth Saturn. Than
Jupiter, Than Mars, Than Sol, Than Venus, Than Mercury, and than Luna. Saturn
is Lord on saturdaye, Iupit is lord on thursdaye, Mars is lord of tuesday,
Sol on sunday, Venus on frydaye, and Mercury of wednesdaye, and Luna on
mondaye. Saturn. Jupiter, Mars, Sol, and Mercury, is masculyne. That is to
say mankind, Venus and Luna, are femynyne, that is to say womankynde.
Saturn, Mars, and Luna, are evil planettes. Jupiter, Sol, and Venus, be good
planettes, and Mercury is chaungeable.

On saturdaye the first hour after mydnyght, reygneth Saturn, the second
hour Jupiter, the third hour Mars, the.iiij. hour Sol, the.v. hour Venus,
the.vi. hour Mercury, the.vij. hour, Luna. And then again Saturn,
the.viij. hour, and Jupiter the.ix. hour, Mars the.x. hour, Sol, the.xi.
hour, Ve^us the.xij. hour, Mercury the.xiii. hour, and Lun^ the.xiiij
hour. Than again the third of day time. Saturn the.xv. hour. Jupiter
the.xvi. hour, Mars the.xvij. hour, Sol the.xviij. hour, Venus the.xix.
hour, Mercury the.xx. hour, and Luna the.xxi. hour. And than again
the.iiij. time. Saturn the.xxii. hour. Jupiter the.xxiij. hour* Mars
the.xxiiij. hour. And (...) begins Sol in the (...) mydnyght on the
Sunday, Venus the.ij. hour, Mercury the third hour, Luna the.iiij. hour,
Saturn the.v. hour. And so forth hour by hour, and planet by planet, in
order as they stand. Each planet in his own day, teygneth ever more
certaynelye the first hour, the.viii. hour, the.xv. hour, and the.xxii.
hour. And so forth evermore one after another. And next after that reygneth
the Planette that is next in order as thus Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus
Mercurius and Luna.

Of the most best and profytablest days that be in the year to let blood.
IN the beginning of March. That is to say, the.vi. and the.x. day, thou
shalt draw out blood of the right arm. In the beginning of Apryll of the
left arm, and that in the.xi. day for the sight In the end of May, of which
arm thou will, and that again the Fevers, and if thou so do, neither thou
shalt lose thy sight, ne thou shalt have no Fevers how long thou lyuest.

Quot reti^t vita et no^ morti^ Imago Si se^per fuerint viuent morietur ^t
infra.



Collge pro numeros a^iquid cupis esse pro (...)
Iunge simul nome^ ^utu^ fetiaq die^.
A.iij. K.xv. V.iiij. B.vi. L.xxi. X.vi. C.xij. M.xxv. y.vi. D.xx. N.xxij.
z.iij. E.xxvi. O.xx. F.xxv. P.xiiij. G.iij. Q.xvi. R.xiii^. S.xxix. T.xxvii^.
Sunday. xii^. Mondaye. xviij. Tuesdaye. xv. Wednesdaye. xxv. Thursdaye. xi.
Frydaye. xv. Saturdaye. xxvi.

Thus ends the Sper^ of Platon.

SE^nt Beede says, that if any man be let blood, or take any medycyne in the
last day of Apryll or the first day of Harvest, or the last day of the
monthe of Decembre, within.xlvi. days, he shall be deed, and if any man in
those days eat of a goose, within.xl. days he shall be dead.

Who ever in the.vii. day of March lets him blood in the right arm in
the.xi. day of Apryll in the left arm, he shall not lose the sight of his
eyes. And in the.iiii. or.v. last day of May, in the both arms be let no
blood he shall have no Fevers

Who so ever in the first day of each monthe, falls into any infyrmyte, the
third day suynge is to dread, which if he pass he shall ascape till xxx.
days.

Who so falls in the.ii. day is to dread, which if he pass though he long
be sy^ke he shall be delivered.

He that falls in the.iii. day, at (...) shall be delivered.

He that falls in the.iiii. day sick he shall be grievously to the.xxviii. day,
which if he pass shall escape.

He that falls ye.v. day, though^ he suffer griuously he shall escape.

He that falls in the.vi. day, though he seem to be healed never the latter
in the.v. day of the other Moon he shall be dead.

He that falls the.vii. day without grefe he shall be delivered.

He that falls the.viii. day, if he be not hoole at the.xii. day, he shall
be dead.

He that falls in the.ix. Day, though it be with great great, he shall
escape.

He that falls in the.x. day without doubt he shall be dead.

He that falls the xi. day he shall be delivered at the next.

He that falls in the.xij. day but if he be delivered within.ij. days
within.xv. he shall be dead.

He that falls in the.xiij. day, till to.xviij. days, he shall be sick,
which if he pass, he shall escape.

He that falls in the.xiiij. day, he shall dwell till to.xv. and so he shall
escape.

He that waxes sick the.xv. day but if he recover within xviij. days he
shall be dead.

He that falls in the.xvi. day, though he be grieved till xxiiij. days, til
to.xxviij. days, he shall escape

He that falls the.xvii. day, he shall dye the.x. day.

He that falls in the.xviij. day soon shall be heled.

He that falls in the.xix. day, also shall escape.

He that falls in the.xx. day, sick in the.v. day he shall escape, but
never the less, in the month following he shall be deed.

He that waxes sick in the.xxi. day, but he run into peril of death
within.x. days of that other monthe, he shall be delivered.

He that waxes sick in the.xxij. day, but he run into peril of death
within.x. days of that other monthe he shall be delivered.

He ye falls in ye.xxii^ day, though it be with greuousnesse of pain in the
other month he shall be delivered

He that falls in the.xxiiii. day, in the xxii. day, he shall be delivered, but
nevertheless in the month fold wynge, he shall be dead.

He that falls sick the.xxv. day though he suffer a little, nevertheless he
shall escape.

He that falls in the.xxvi. day, though he suffer to the ou^ passing
nevertheless in that other month he shall be delivered.

He that falls in the xxvii. day, it manaseth death.

He that falls in the.xxviij. day it manasseth death.

He that falls the. rxix. day, little and little in that other monthe he
shall be delivered.

He that falls sy^ke in the.xxx. day, it is doubt whether he pass any of
th^se.

Also he that waxes sick in the.xxxi. day, whether he shall escape, it is
unknown.

Explicit.
Imprinted by me Robert Wyer: Dw^llynge at the Sign of S. John^ Euangelyst, in
S. Martyns Parysshe, beside Charynge Cross.

Cum priuilegio (...) imprim^^dum. o. um.


