THE RACE CELESTIAL, OR a direct path to heaven. By HENRY GREENVVOOD master
of Arts, and Preacher of the word of God.

1. COR. 9.24. So run, that ye may obtain. Printed at London by N. O. for
Henry Pell, dwelling in holborne near to the Cross Keys. 1609.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



TO THE MOST high and mighty, most gracious and religious Prince, James, by
the grace of God, of great Britain, France and Ireland king, defender of the
faith Apostolical, etc. All blessed hap in this life, and eternal bliss in
life to come.
THE picture of Purity, and pattern of Piety (most gracious and dread
sovereign Lord) holy Bernard by name, deciphereth out at large, the gross
enormity of that ugly vice Ingratitude, saying: that it is Inimica animae,
exinanitio meritorum, dispersio virtutum etc. An enemy to the Christians
soul, an exile of merits, a ruin of virtues, and a consuming fire, that
scorcheth up the fountain of all godliness. Lest therefore I should condemn my
self of this sensual sin, and challenged be of gross ingratitude: I have
presumed (craving pardon for my arrogant audacitie herein) in token of my
loyal duty, to your sacred majesty, to transport these lines Laconicall, and
letters impolite, to the happy haven of your Princely heart, wishing to your
royal grace, the silver of all earthly prosperity, and the gold of all
celestial felicity. If your highness respect the matter, it is celestial,
if your supremacy the manner, it is too too terrestiall: Yet pardon (most
religious Prince) this my bold attempt, partly weighing the compulsion of
entire affection, and partly considering the necessity of your simplest
subjects erudition. Thus ceassing further troubling your majesty's sacred
ears, prosterning my self upon the knees of submission, at your highness
footstool, for pardon for my presumption herein; I beg without intermission
before the throne of grace, that it would please the almighty to bless,
protect and defend your royal majesty, your blessed bedfellow, and all your
royal issue, in this life present, and in the life to come, crown you all with
the Crown of immortal glory: and that for Jesus Christ's sake our only Lord,
and everliving Savior, Amen.

From Sampford Magna in Essex, this 16. of October. 1608. Your majesty's most
humble servant, and most loyal subject. H. Greenewood.

The Race Celestial, or a direct path to heaven.
1. COR. 9.24. So run, that ye may obtain.
Boethius in his book De consolatione philosophia, says: Boethius.
Quod vnicuique viro bono inserta est quaedam cupiditas boni: i. That in every
good man there is inserted a fervent desire of that which is good. Now the true
and chiefest good thing that may possibly be desired of mortal man (in which
only the soul of man is fully satisfied) is the Lord God: according to that
of S. Augustine: August. in libro confess.
Fecisti nos Domine, ad te, and inquietum est cor nostrum, donec quiescat in
te: i. Thou have created us (O Lord) for thine own self, and our hearts are
disquieted, until they find a firm rest in thy self. And (as well says S.
Bernard. Bernard.
) Illud est verum, and summum gaudium, quod non de creatura, sed de Creatore
concipitur: i. that is, the true and chiefest joy, which is conceived not of
the creature but the Creator.

Now the Lord (that is Omnium summum bonorum, Of all good things the chiefest)
can by no means be obtained but by a true and lively faith in Jesus Christ his
well-beloved son, proving it self by good fruits of amendment, by whom we are
reconciled again to the Lord, and brought into the favor of the most High, of
which by our sins we have justly been deprived: as well says Leo: Non
dormientibus peruenit regnum caelorum, Leo.
nec otio nec desidia torpentibus praemium aeternitatis promittitur: sed
vigilantibus and been viuentibus: i. The kingdom of heaven falls not to the
sluggards share, neither is eternal bliss promised to idle and evil persons:
but only to those that live by faith, and are vigilant in the works of
godliness.

The holy Apostle therefore, having in the former chapters of this his first
Epistle to the Corinthians, earnestly and industriously taught them the true
path that leads to life: having also perceived that they had embraced his
doctrine willingly, and run in the same in some measure cheerfully: he does
here in this golden simile (that they might have their portion in the Lord)
exhort them to perseverance, holding out to the end of their lives, knowing
that of our Savior in the Gospel to be true, Math. 10.22.
He that endures to the end, the same and none but the same shall be saved.

In which words the Apostle borrows a similitude, A certamine cursorio: from
a terrestrial race for a temporary price: for as in that race many run, but
one receives the prize, namely, he that all the rest out-strippeth, and
comes first at the end: even so in the race of Christianity no man shall be
crowned, but he that holds out to the end of his life: yet notwithstanding
there is this difference in this similitude, that in the race terrestrial, he
is only guerdened with reward that touches first the but, and in this race
celestial, not only one but all may be crowned with everlasting bliss.

In which excellent Simile the Apostle compares Cursui vitam: stadio pretatem:
praemio salutem, i. our life to a race or running: piety and godliness to a
race wherein we must run: and everlasting bliss to a promised reward.

Text.
So run that ye may obtain. That is, so live in this life under the Gospel
of Christ Jesus, that ye may obtain everlasting life in the life to come. In
which heavenly exhortation of Paul, we may generally observe these three things.

Quid sit currere: what is meant by this word Run.

Qualiter quid currendum, how must we run to obtain. So Run.

Praemium promissum: the reward promised to all those that run lawfully.

Run, By this race or running, is understood this present life of man.

The life of man is compared to many things: Some of the Philosophers have
compared it to a bubble: some to a sleep: some to a dream: some to one thing,
some to another.

Job compares it to a wind: Job. 7.7. Psalm. 109.23. Iam. 4.24. 1. Pet. 1.24
Esaias 40.6
the Prophet David compares it to a shadow: James to a vapor: Peter to a
flower: Esaias to grass: and the Apostle Paul in respect of the celerity and
swiftness thereof, compares it here to a Race or running. Quid aliud (says
S. Augustine) est vita nostra, Augustine
nisi quidam cursus ad mortem: vita dum crescit, decrescit, vita mortalis, and
mors vitalis, i. what is our life, but a certain running to death: our life
while it increases, decreaseth: our life is dying, our death is living.

The traveler, the longer he goes on his journey, the nigher he is his
iourneys end: the children of Israel, the longer they wandered from Egypt, the
nigher they were the promised land: so every mortal man, the longer he lives,
the nigher he is his iourneys end, death: for Time and Tide stay for no man:
young hairs do soon turn gray, and active youth is soon metamorphosed into
crooked age: Poet.
Cito pede labitur aetas: i. the days of man do swiftly pass away: Ovid.
Tempora labuntur, tacitisque senescimus annis, and fugiunt fraeno non
remorante dies: i. Time swiftly passes, and old age soon comes on, no
bridle so strong, as can keep in our galloping days.

He that runs in a race, never stays till he comes at the end thereof:
so every mortal wight ( volens nolens, willing nilling) never stays till
death the end of his race stays him. The picture of patience (Job by name)
considering the swift passage of the days of man, compares them to the swift
race of a post: saying, Job 9.25.
Dies mei velociores sunt cursore: i. My days are swifter than a post: yea
swifter are they then a weauers shuttle, Job 7.6.
Job 9.26.
they are as the motion of the swiftest ship in the sea, and as the Eagle that
flies fast to her pray. Psalm. 90.9.
Our years are spent (says the Psalmist) as a tale that is told: Ps. 90.10.
yea our life is quickly cut off, and we are soon gone: Therefore fitly is our
life compared here of S. Paul (in regard of the velocity thereof) to a race or
running.

From hence every Christian is to learn this lesson, that (seeing our life is
nothing else but a running to death) he redeem the time, make much of it,
whiles he has it: for the hour spent cannot be recovered, time passed cannot
be recalled.

Ecce nunc tempus acceptum: 2. Cor. 6.2
(says the Apostle, i. Behold now the accepted time, behold now the day of
salvation. This life is the time, wherein our election must be made sure, and
sealed up unto our spirits by the infallible testimony of the good spirit of
God: This life is the time, wherein every man in his calling must work out his
salvation with fear and trembling: This life is the time, wherein we must be
admitted into ye kingdom of grace, if ever we will look to be admitted into
the kingdom of glory: In this life must we be matriculated into the mystical
body of the Church, if ever we will look to fit at the bride-groomes table in
heaven: In this life must we have heaven in inchoation, if after this life we
will have it in perfection.

The husbandman will in no wise slack his opportunity, and omit his time in
tilling and sowing his ground, that in summer he may have the better croppe:
The tradesman will not miss his faires and markets, that he may increase his
stock the more in those his painful affairs: Ier. 8.7.
The Storke in the air, the Turtle, the Crane and the Swallow, observe their
times, as says the Prophet: Prou. 6.8.
the little silly creature (the Ant by name) gathers in summer, whereby she
may live in winter: Even so should every Christian take his time, and treasure
up (with the painful Be) the honey of good works in the hiue of his heart in
this life, that he may with the faithful servant, be welcomed into his masters
joy, in the life to come. But alas, alas, men are so assotted with blindness
and ignorance, that they may be sent to ye very senseles creatures for wisdom
in this point. Ask the beasts, and they shall teach thee: and the fowls of
heaven, and they shall tell thee: (says the just man Job) or speak to the
earth, and it shall show thee, Job. 12.7.8
or the fishes of the sea, and they shall declare unto thee. Esays ox knows
his masters stall, and his Ass his masters cribbe: Esaias 1.3.
but miserable man has not known his maker.

O let us not be worse than horse, Ass and Mule that have no understanding,
but let us (in the fear of God) know our times and seasons, let us seek the
Lord while he may be found, Esaias 55.6.
and call upon him while he is near. Let us in no wise post off our amendment
from day to day: Let us live no longer in careless security like sensual,
brutish and hellish Epicures that neither believe nor yet respect the judgment
to come: that sing that cursed Epitaphe of Sardanapalus: Ede, Poet.
bibe, lude, charum praesentibus exple delitijs animumi: post mortem nulla
volupta^, i. Eat, drink, play, and be merry: live in all kind of pleasure:
for after death there is no pleasure: that say with the old man in the Poet:
Because my days are short, which I have here to live: to women, wine, and
pleasant sport, I mean my self to give.

Let us not be like those foolish virgins that knocked at the gates of heaven
too late, when the doors were shut against them: for after this life there
shall be no place for pardon, nor time for repentance: therefore in time look
to the welfare of thy dear soul, that thy soul may fare well, not for a time
but for ever.

Psalm. 42.7.
One depth (says the Psalmist) calls for another: The depth of our misery
cries for the depth of Gods mercy: let us therefore be as swift in running in
the race of Christianity, as our lives are swift to leave us: let us be as
swift to kill sin in us, as sin is to kill us: O (beloved) let us be as
swift to pull out the sting of the Scorpion (which is sin) as he is with his
sting swift and ready to stabbe us at the heart, and wound our souls
incureably: that when death, the end of our race shall come (which is most
certain, and yet his time most uncertain) it may be unto us, as it is to all
the saints of God, Ianua vitae, finis miseriarum, initium refrigerij, scala
ascensionis in coelum. i. The gate to life, the end of miseries, the beginning
of everlasting refreshing, and the ladder of ascension to the highest and
happiest heavens.

Text.
So run that ye may obtain.

Qualiter currendum, i. How must we run to obtain. So run.

If we will run to obtain, we must run these three ways:

Direct, recta via: the right way.

Celeriter s^u festinanter: Swiftly or speedily.

Perseueranter: Perseuerantly, holding out to the end.



Those that run in a race will not make the furthest way about ye nighest way
home (as we say) but they will take the shortest cut that may be, and run the
directest way that can be, that they may the rather obtain: So should we run
in the right way that leads to life, if we will obtain life everlasting.
Lactant.
Lactantius speaking of man's creation, says that Homo incedit erectus in
coelum, i. Man goes right up, lifting his eyes toward heaven, Ovid.
Os homini sublime dedit, coel^mque ^ueri ^ussit: i. God gave man a lofty face,
a face to behold the heavens: whereas other creatures fasten their eyes upon
the center of the world, from whence they came, hanging down their heads to
the earth like bulrushes. As man therefore was created pure and upright in
soul, and straight and right in body, carrying his head toward heaven: so must
he run (if ever he will obtain heaven) in the straight way, and right path
that leads to heaven.

Many there are that seek the Lord and find him not, because they seek
amiss: so many there are that run (yea all men living are runners) yet are
they far from obteining, because they run amiss.

There are four sorts of ground, yet but one fructiferous: there are four
ways in the world, yet but one (and that a narrow one) that leads to life.
Generally there are but these two: the way of Godliness, and the way of
iniquity: whereof the one in the Gospel of Matthew, is called the broad way,
and the other, the strait and narrow gate: yet S. John (considering the
multiplicity of this dangerous Labyrinth) does cut out this broad way into
three maine heads: into Luxury, Covetousness and Pride: saying: 1. Ioh. 2.16.
Whatsoever is in the world, is either the concupiscence of the flesh, the
concupiscence of the eye, or the pride of life: Poet.
Haec tria pro trino numine mundus habet: i. This is the Trinity which the
world does worship. These ways are wide and large, and whole multitudes walk
in the same: Magna plenitudo hominum, sed magna solitudo bonorum, i. There is a
great plenty of men, but there is as great a scarcity of good men.

These ways seem pleasant to be walked in, yet Nouissima illaerum mors est:
The end of these ways is death: for the devil like a subtle fisher shows
the bait, but hides the hook: shows the unprofitable profit, and the
unpleasant pleasure of sin, but hides the hook from men's eyes, which is
death: according to that of S. Paul, Stipendium peccati mors est: the wages of
sin is death here, hell and damnation hereafter. Sin seems at the first to
fawn upon a man, Genesis 4.
but yet in the end, it will (with Cains dog) pluck out the very throats of
our souls.

In these maine roades (the more is the pity) does the greatest part of mankind
run headlong to perdition, without any check of conscience, remorse for
their sins, or any reclamation in the world. Sin never more than in these
our days of the Gospel abounded: the Devil has more followers than Christ:
the whole multitude cried, Math. 27.19.
Crucify him, Crucify him: But there was but one (and that a silly woman)
that labored to set him free.

The saying of Paul to the Romans is verified in these our days of sin:
There is none righteous, no not one: There is none that understands: there is
none that seeks God: all have gone out of the way, Romans 3.10.11.12.
all are altogether unprofitable: there is none that does good, no not one.
Pride, whoredom, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, Gal. 5.19.20.21.
debate, emulation, wrath, contention, sedition, heresy, covetousness,
drunkenness, swearing, forswearing, blasphemy, prophanenes, contempt of the
word, despising of Gods messengers, and the like abominations are reigning in
every angle of this our Island: yea our land is become a sink of sin, a pit
of pollution, and a place of abomination: defiled with iniquity, A vertice
capitis, vsque ad plantam pedes, 1. From top to toe, having no sound part
throughout it: yea our whole land is out of course: Lam. 3.22
and it is the great mercy of God that we are not consumed.

Yea these last days of the world are like to the days of Isreal's provocation
of the Lord in the wilderness: wherein we prefer the slavery of Egypt above
the sweet Manna of heavenly bliss.

Yea that saying of the Prophet is verified of the most part of mankind: That
the children gather sticks, the fathers made the fire, Ier. 7.8.
and the women bake cakes for the queen of heaven: That is, they offered
sacrifice to the Sun and Moon and planets, which they called the Queen of
heaven. So the Beast of Rome with his Antichristian crew, does sacrifice to
Mary, making her an Idol, and calling her (as in their Salve regina: and Regina
coel^ laetare: does appear) the Queen of heaven. They make ignorance the
mother of their devotion: Sir John Lacklatine and Sir Anthony Ignorance are
their chiefest clerks, and best Massemongers.

Yea, the world is grown to this height of reprobation, that that which is
written in Job is verified of many: They say to God, Depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways: Job. 21.14.15.
who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? Full little thinking that the
Lord shall answer them with the like, Mat. 7.23.
Discedite, Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity.

Thus we see, how the worldlings run in the race of iniquity, the broad way
to the lake unquenchable: some in the race of Atheism, some in Papisme, some
in Mahumetisme, some in Paganism, but few there are yt run in ye race
Christianisme. But thou that would be saved, thou that would so run, that
thou may obtain, run not in any of these ways, but fly from sin as from
a stinging serpent, and a a biting Cocatrice: Gal. 5.21.
For they that do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

The right way therefore wherein we must run, Hac via itur ad ^^peros.
is the way of godliness, the way of Christianity, the way of the word of God,
framing all our thoughts, words and operations, according to the precise and
strict rule of the same: for Factores legis iustificabuntur: i. the doers of
the law shall be justified, saved, and glorified.

This way of godliness is a blessed way to walk in: Psalm. 19. Math. 11.30.
It is sweeter than honey or the honey comb: Iugum Christi suaue est, and onus
suum leave. i. The yoke of Christ is easy, and his burden light. Mandata eius
grauia non sunt: i. 1. Ioh. 5.^
His Commandments are not grievous: and his commandments are exceeding
large: Psalm. 119.
her ways are ways of pleasure and all her paths prosperity: It is a lantern
to our feet and a light unto our paths: Pro. 3.17. Psalm. 119.105.
It is a pillar of fire to carry us through the wilderness of this world to the
Celestial Chanaan: it is the power of God to salvation to every believer, Romans
1.16 Iam. 1.21.
both Jew and Grecian: it is able to save our souls: it is able to make us
wise to salvation: it is profitable to teach, 2. Tim. 3.15.16.17.
to improve, to correct, to instruct in righteousness, and to make us perfect
in all good works: It is comfortable in all cases and parts of our life, both
in prosperity and adversity, both in life and death: If we fight, it is a
sword: if we hunger it is meat: if we thirst, it is drink: if we be naked it
is a garment: if we be in darkness it is a light: yea (in a word) the word of
God is the high way to heaven Enter therefore in at the straight gate of
amendment: Mat. 7.13
and run in the same from faith to faith, from grace to grace, from virtue to
virtue, from strength to strength, till thou be a perfect man in Christ
Jesus.

Cast away the works of darkness, Romans 13.12.13.14.
and put on the armor of light: walk honestly, as in the day: not in gluttony
and drunkenness, neither in chambering and wantonness, nor in strife and envying,
but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill
the lusts of it. Be wise as the serpent, be innocent as the dove: Math. 10.16.
Amongst diverse points of wisdom to be found in the serpent, this is one:
namely, She casts her coat, and so renouareth her age, as Aristotle says:
Arist. de not Animal. lib. 8, cap. 17.
These three beasts Tum vere, tum Autumno, both in the spring as also in
Autumn, do cast their skins: viz. the beast like a Lizzard, called in Latin
Stellio: Stellio.
Quia habet maculas quasi stellas collo infixas: because he has spots in his
neck like stars: Lacertus: the Lizard: and the Serpent. Lacertus. Serpens.
And to do this, they go through some or other narrow cranny to loosen their
skins, and cast them within four and twenty hours. So should thou put off
the old man with all his works: Col. 3.9.
and to do this, thou must go Per strictam rimam poenitentiae: i. Through the
narrow cranny, and strait gate of amendment. Psalm. 1.2.
Meditate therefore (with the just man) in the law of God day and night. Let
the candle of faith burn clear in the lamp of thy heart, and nourish it with
the oil of love and good works: Walk not in the counsel of the wicked:
Stand not in the way of sinners: Psalm. 1.1.
sit not in the seat of the scornful: but run in the race of Line well,
that living well thou may dye well, and after death eternally speed well,
obteining that blessedness, Apoc. 14.13.
Blessed are they that dye in the Lord.

Text.
So run, that ye may obtain.

And that we may run in the race of godliness, one Caveat is exceeding
necessary: namely, that we avoid wicked company, which will draw away our
hearts from this race Celestial. Eccles. 13
Qui tangit picem, coinquinabitur ab ca: i. He that touches pitch, shall be
defiled therewith. Cum sancto sanctus eris, and cum peruerso peruerteris: i.
with the holy thou shall be holy, and with the froward thou shall learn
frowardness: for birds of a feather will fly together.

It was not lawful for a Jew to converse with a Samaritane: if an Hebrew did
eat with an Egyptian, it was counted abomination: so must we count it
abomination, and hold it a point of reprobation, to frequent the company of
damned helhounds, and hellish miscreants. Let us therefore flee all occasion
and every apparition of evil: Let us delight in the company of those that
fear the Lord, and excel in virtue. Well therefore says Seneca: Seneca.
Cum illis versare, qui te meliorem sunt facturi, vel quos meliores efficere
possis: i. keep company with those that may make thee better, or whom thou
may make better.

I command you therefore brethren (as says S. Paul) in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 2. These. 3.6.
that ye withdraw your selves from every brother that walks inordinately,
and not after the instruction which ye received of me.

And (to conclude this point) I give every Christian this good counsel, with
good king Solomon: My son, if sinners do entice thee, consent thou not: Pro.
1.10.11.12 etc.
If they say, Come with us, we will lay wait for blood, we will swallow up the
innocent whole, like a grave, we shall find all precious riches, and fill our
houses with spoil: Cast in thy lot among us, we will have all one purse: My
son walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path,
for their feet run to evil, and make have to shed blood. O that these my
words were written, o that they were written in a book, Job. 19.2^.24.
o that they were written with an iron pen, in lead or in stone for ever: O
that they were engraven in the brass table of every young man's heart, that so
bad company may not be his destruction.

Text.
So run, that ye may obtain.

we must run, Celeriter, seu festinanter, Swiftly and speedily.

Vita breuts, via longa (says S. Bernard) sivis ad metam peruenire, Bernard.
incipe celeriter currere: i. The life of man is very short, the way to heaven
is very long, if therefore thou will obtain, thou must run exceeding
swiftly. We see that those that run in an earthly race (and that but for a
mean reward) how swiftly do they streine themselves to run? according to
that of the Poet, Qui cupit optatam cursu contingere metam, multa tulit, Poet.
fecitque miser, sudauit and alsit, i. He that desires first to touch the
mark, takes much pains, sweateth abundantly, and runs exceeding swiftly.
Even so should we (that we may obtain an everlasting reward in heaven) run
in the path of Gods commandments, being shod with the shoes of the Gospel of
peace, like Roes exceeding swiftly.

The senseles creatures are a looking glass to all Christians in this respect.

Psalm. 19.
The Sun (as says the Psalmist) like a Giant rejoices to run his race:
that is, valiantly and swiftly: swift is his motion and speedy is his race, for
in the space of 24 hours he compasses the earth round about, that nothing is
hidden from him, and passes from the one end of heaven to the other, that
nothing is wanting in him: So the Lord our God has set every man his task
upon earth, which is to work out his salvation with fear and trembling. A
great work, a short time, along way from Egypt to Canaan, from the gates of
hell to the door of heaven: therefore like Giants, we had need to run
swiftly, lest we come too late, and be shut out of heaven, like the five
foolish aforesaid virgins.

As the Sun in the heavens is a looking glass unto us in this regard: so is
also the Son of God Christ Jesus above the heavens, to be imitated of us all
in this point. Omnis Christi actio nostra debet esse instructio: Greg.
i. Every action of Christ, ought to be a matter of imitation to us Christians.

As he was Immensus maiestate, incomparabilis fortitudine, so was he
incomprehensibilis celeritate i. As he was great in Majesty, incomparable in
fortitude, so was he also incomprehensible in celerity and swiftness. Ioh 9.
He wrought the works of him that sent him whiles it was day, without any
delay in the world.

This bridegroom Christ Jesus (even as the Sun) went forth out of the
Chamber of the highest heavens, from the bosom of the Father, and from the
inuisibility of the Divinity: and descended down to the earth, and became
man, and was like unto man in all things, sin only excepted: and valiantly in
the wilderness pitched a field against Satan, that old serpent and roaring
Lion, and overthrew him in the desert, breaking his wily head, and ouercomming
his chiefest power: fulfilled the law in every point and tittle: satisfied Gods
justice for us: appeased his wrath against us: purchased celestial mansions to
us: by offering himself in sacrifice to the Lord of hosts upon the cross at
Golgotha for the sins of the whole world, by his death and passion, by
vanquishing hell, by conquering death, by his glorious resurrection and
ascension, and by sending of the holy Ghost. Ioh. 16.28.
He went from the father, and came into the world: And in short time (yea in
the space of 33. years) wrought the redemption of all believers: Ioh. 16.28.
And left this world and went again to his father,

The spouse of Christ considering her husbands great velocity, celerity and
swiftness, says: Behold he comes leaping by the mountains, and skipping by
the hills: Cant. 2.8.9.
my well-beloved is like a Roe or a young Heart, etc. Venit, vidit, vicit, He came
from heaven, he saw the earth, and overcame the dragon.

Thus after Christ's example, should we that profess our selves Christians,
run swiftly in the race of godliness, holiness, purity, and obedience to
the commandments of our heavenly father: thus should we run, Investigijs Jesus,
In the footesteps of Christ Jesus, who is Via, Ioh. 14.6.
veritas and vita, i. The way, the truth, and the life: and the true way to
life everlasting. To the performance of which duty the Lord grant to us his
grace (for of our selves we are not able to set one foot forward to heaven)
that so we may be able (to his glory and our souls everlasting good) to do his
will in earth as willingly, swiftly and as speedily, as the Angels do it in
heaven.

Now (dear brethren) that we may run thus swiftly in the race of godliness,
and in the course of Christianity, two things are necessary.

Vt simus intus vacus, That we be empty within.

Vt simus extra exonerati, i. That we be unladen without.



Now what is that, which cloggeth us so sore within, and hinders us from
running in this godly race? Surely that is sin.

Luke 10.
So weighty a thing is sin, As it sunk down Satan from heaven.

So weighty a thing is sin, as it caused the earth to open her mouth, and
swallow up cursed Core, Number. 16.32.
devilish Dathan, and that abject Abiram, with all their treacherous crew. The
Prophet in respect of the weight thereof compares it to Lead, and that
worthily: for as lead in the clock causes by the weight thereof, the cogs,
wheels, and gimmers successively to move one after the other: even so the
weight of sin does draw the cogs of our carnal concupiscence, the wheels of
our lewd desires, and the gimmers of our untamed affections, from one sin to
another: according to that of S. Gregory, Peccatum quod per poenitentiam non
deletur, Greg.
mox suo pondere ad aliud trahit: i. If sin by repentance presently be not
done away, by the weight thereof, it will draw a man to more sin: ^^ we find
it exemplified in the Prophet David* who fell from idleness to concupiscence,
from concupiscence to adultery, from adultery to murder.

Of the weight of sin the Prophet David speaks: Mine iniquities are gone
over mine head, Psalm. 38.4.
and as a weighty burden, they are too heavy for me.

The Prophet Esaias calls the bands of wickedness heavy burdens, Esaias 58.6
intolerable to be borne. The sins of the world being laid upon the
shoulders of Jesus upon the cross, were so weighty and heavy, as they forced
him (having the weight of Gods wrath for them also upon him) to cry out on this
manner to his God: Eli, Eli, Lamasabac^thani? My God, Math. 27^46. Math. 11.
my God, why have thou forsaken me? If the yoke of Christ be easy and his
burden light: then of necessity on the contrary, must the yoke of Satan
(which is sin) be uneasy, heavy and intolerable to be borne.

By which it may appear, that sin is an intolerable burden, and a great
impediment to this Christ^^^ race. Heb. 12.1.


Let us therefore (as the chosen vessel does exhort us) cast away every thing
that presses us down, and the sin that hangs so fast on: Let us run
with patience the race that is set before us. Where it is evident, that we
cannot run with patience the race that is set before us, unless we do cast
away our sins from us, which do hang so fast on us.

Moses was not permitted to come nigh the Lord, before he did discalciate
himself: Put off thy shoes, for the place where thou stand is holy ground:
So must we put off the durty shoes of iniquity, and abandon sin from the castle
of our hearts, before we can be able to stand in the pathway to joys, which is
an holy ground: therefore much less are we able to run in the same, and most
unapt to run swiftly.

Let us therefore (in the name of God) purge our souls and bodies from sin,
with the hysope of Gods grace: Let us separate them from us, and our selves
from them, as far as the East is from the West, and North the South: Let us
loath, detest, and abhor them, because the Lord does loath, detest, and abhor
us for them: as we have given our members as weapons of unrighteousness to the
service of Satan in ungodliness of this life, even so let us give them as
weapons of righteousness to the service of the Lord in godliness of life: as
we have run in the race of the first Adam by commission of sin, so let us
run in the race of the second Adam Jesus Christ the righteous, by performance
of righteousness: let us cease from sin, and do that which is good, let us
seek peace and ensue it: Let us Plangere plangenda, bewail our sins that
ought to be lamented: Grauia peccata grauia desiderant lamenta (says Isodore)
great sins require great lamentation: sweet meat must have sower sauce:
rejoicing in sin must have mourning for sin: let us therefore be Tam proni
ad lamenta, sicut fuimus ad peccata: As prone to lamentation, as we have been
to transgression: as ready to lament them, as we have been to commit them: let
us sweep every corner of our hearts clean with the broomes of penance, and
let us water them with the salt tears of earnest contrition: so that we may be
sit receptories for the Lord to dwell in: and (being anointed with the oil of
grace) we may run swiftly in the race that is set before us, and obtain the
reward prepared for us.

Text.
So run, that ye may obtain.

Extra exonerati: i. unladen without.

Those that run in a race will lay aside their cloakes, doublets, and such
like outward vestiments, that they may run the more speedily, and obtain the
more assuredly.

And so in like manner, we must be unburdened of all outward matters
whatsoever, especially of the excessive care and affection that naturally we
bear to this wicked world, or else hell and damnation will be our best reward.
We must forsake all, if we will be followers of Christ: as Peter said to his
master: Math. 19.
Ecce nos reliquimus amnia, and secuti sumus te, i. Behold we have forsaken all
and followed thee: Well and wisely said Peter, (as says S. Bernard) we have
forsaken all and followed thee: for he could not follow Christ laden, as we
have an example in the same Chapter of the young man, Math. 19^
that at the Vende omnia, and da pauperibus, i. sell all and give to the poor,
chose rather to leave Christ, than forsake his riches for Christ.

Yea it is a thing impossible for such covetous churles to run swiftly in the
way to life: Math. 19.24.
It is easier for a Cammell to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich
covetous carle to enter into the kingdom of heaven: Poet.
Nemo potest dominis recte seruire du obus, i. No man can serve two masters:
no man can serve God and Mammon: God and riches. He that has his treasure in
earth, cannot have his conversation in heaven: For where the treasure is there
will the heart be also. Math. 6.21


If therefore riches increase, let us not set our hearts upon them: Let us use
this world as though we used it not: let us hold all as doung for the gaining
of Jesus. As Christ said in the Gospel of John: Ioh. 18.
That his kingdom was not of this world: So should we say, that our delight is
not in this world, but our hearts are altogether in the world to come. Let us
take no care what we shall eat, Mat. 6.31.
or what we shall drink, or wherewith we shall be arrayed: After all these
things the muck-wormes of this world, the pagans, infidels and heathen people
seek, that have neither knowledge of God, nor fear of God before their eyes:
but let us cast our care on the Lord, 1. Pet. 5.7. Math. 4.
for the Lord only cares for us: Therefore as Peter and Andrew left their nets
to follow Christ: 1. King. 19.20.
and as Elisha left his oxen and his plough to follow Eliah the man of God: So
should we leave whatsoever is in the world to follow the Son of God to
heaven.

Crates.
We read of Crates Thebanus, that (because he could not apply himself to the
study of philosophy in regard of his riches) he took his money, and cast it
into the sea, saying, Ego perdam te, ne tu perdac me, i. I will destroy thee,
least thou destroyest me. So (if we find that our wealth or any other thing in
this world is an impediment to our Christian race) let us cast them from us,
not (as Crates did) into the sea, Eccles. 11.1.
that were a fond and foolish thing: but let us cast our bread upon the waters:
that is, bestow them on ye poor, as Christ did wish ye young man in the
Gospel of Matthew.

Thus therefore should we empty our selves of sin within, and unburden our
selves of the cares of this wicked world without, if we will run swiftly in the
High way to heaven.

Text.
So run that ye may obtain.

perseueranter, perseuerantly, and continually, holding out to the end of our
race.

Those that run in a race, though they run never so directly, though never
so swiftly, yet if they give out, before they come at the end, they loose
their reward. Even so if we persevere not in the race of godliness to the end
of our lives, shall we fail of the kingdom of heaven.

He that diggeth in a golden mine, till he comes within five or six faddomes
of the gold, and then give over: is not all his labor lost, and all his cost
in vain?

A traveler, that having taken upon him a long journey and in the end gives
over within two or three miles of his iourneys end: is not all his labor lost,
and are not all his pains likewise in vain?

Even so, Nihil prod est cursus bonae vitae, nisi consummetur bono fine: i. The
race of a godly life profits nothing, unless it be finished with a godly
end.

If a man had lived in the profession of the glorious Gospel of Jesus, for the
space of 20.30. or 40. years, and then prove an Apostata, backsliding from
the same: he is so far from obteining salvation, as the end of him is worser
then the beginning.

So that there is no hope of happiness without perseverance: for as the tree
falls so it lies: whether it falls toward the South or North: and as a
man dies, so shall he be adjudged: if in the Lord, then shall he have his
portion with Saints: if in impenitency, then shall he have his portion with
Devils.

The soldier is not guerdened with spoils before he has obtained victory: no
more shall we be crowned before we have been more then conquerours in Jesus
Christ. Well therefore says one: Si nullus esset hostis, nulla esset pugna: si
nulla pugna, nulla victoria, si nulla victoria, nulla denique corona, i. If
there were no enemy, there were no fight: if there were no fight, there were no
victory, if there were no victory, there were no crown: Nam nemo coronabitur
nisi qui legitime certauerit, i. for no man shall be crowned, 2. Tim. 2.
but he that fights lawfully. Ideo homines tentaentur, vt tentati resistant,
resistentes vincant, vincentes coronentur: i. Men are for this cause tempted,
that being tempted, they may resist, resisting, they may overcome, and
ouerconuning they may be crowned.

So that the perseverance is all in all.

The woman of Canaan by perseuerant crying after Christ, got her daughter to
be dispossessed of the Devil. Math. 15.


The man that had guests come late to his house, by his perseuerant knocking,
got bread for them of his neighbor at midnight.

So by perseverance in the race of godliness we shall obtain the bread of
life, Christ Jesus, that reigns at the right hand of his father in glory for
evermore.

Chrysostom.
Chrysostom speaking of this spiritual race, says thus: Incipere multorum,
finire paeucorum: i. Many will begin to run in this godly race, but few there
are that will hold out to the end.

Rome began well, and embraced the Gospel of Christ willingly: Pro. 26.11.
but with the dog they returned to their former vomit of idolatry, and with
the Sow that was washed, they wallowed again in the mire of iniquity: So that
friar Mantuan reports thus much in commendation of their City: Heu Romae nunc
sola pecunia regnat: Mantuan
exilium virtus patitur: vrbs est iam tota lupanar: i. Alas, alas,
covetousness is Queen of Rome: all godliness is banished from thence: the
whole city is become a stews. And hereupon he gives this Caveat to all
Christians: Viuere qui sancte cupitis, discedite Roma: Poet.
omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum, i. All you that will live a godly
life, depart from Rome: for all things are there suffered save godliness.

Oh it had been better for this whorish city, never to have known the way of
righteousness, 2. Pet. 2.21.
then after they have known it, to turn from the holy doctrine given unto
them. For the latter end is worse with them, 2. Pet. 2.20.
then the beginning: according to that in the Gospel: Mat. 12.45.
If Satan be cast out, and enter in again with seven devils worser then
himself, the end of that man is worse then the beginning.

So Julian Emperor of Rome began well, and for a while embraced the Gospel of
Christ: but he proved an Apostata in the end, dying, cursing, banning and
blaspheming, and casting his blood into the air.

2. Tim. 4.10. Ioh. 6.66.
Demas followed Christ a while, but afterward forsook him: Demas has
forsaken me, loving this present world. Many of Christ's disciples went back,
2. Tim. 1.15.
and walked no more with him: Thou know (says S. Paul) that all they which
are in Asia are turned from me: of which sort, are Phygellus and Hermogenes.

So we see, that many have begun well, but few have perseuered: but it were
better that a millstone were hanged about the necks of such reuolters, and cast
into the midst of the sea: for the Lord will tread down reuolters under his
feet, Psalm. 18.22
as clay in the streets.

Luke 9.62.
He that puts his hand to the plough and looks back, is not fit for the
kingdom of heaven. He that looks back to his house and home, having his
mind busied in other matters, cannot possibly make good work: even so he that
intangleth himself with the things of this present world, is not able to work
out his salvation with fear and trembling* for where the dead carkeise is,
thither will the Eagles resort: and where our treasures are, there will our
hearts be also.

He therefore that will obtain the land that flows with milk and honey, must
forget the flesh pots of Egypt: and he that will obtain heaven, must not cast
his eyes to the earth: he that is on the house top, Math. 24.17.18.
must not come down to fetch any thing out of his house: and he that is in the
fields must not return back again to his house: He that is in the way to
heaven, let him not turn back again to this world, least he be atached of
the Lion and cast into hell.

Lots wife for back-looking was turned into a pillar of salt: And so every man
that turns back from the way of godliness, shall be turned into a firebrand,
and burned with vnquanchable fire: for whosoever shall deny Jesus Christ in
this world, shall be denied the kingdom of heaven, of Christ Jesus in the
world to come.

Back-looking and backsliding must not be in Christians: let us therefore
(with S. Paul) not look behind us, Phil. 3.13.
but to that which is before us, namely to the reward: Let us fasten our eyes
upon heaven gates, and never leave running, till we come at them.

The bride of Jesus would not turn back from her holy race: saying: I have
washed my feet, Cant. 5.3.
how shall I defile them? So should every member of the mystical body of
Christ, say: I have washed my self from my sins, and by Gods assistant grace,
will I never defile my self any more. For he that washes himself (says the
son of Syrach) because of a dead body, and touches it again: Eccles. 34.26.
what avails his washing? So it is with a man that fasteth for his sins,
and commits them again. Who will hear his prayer? or what does his fasting
help him? Even so beginning well does nothing avail a man, unless
perseverance be resolved.

Thou therefore that would obtain, pull not thy neck out of Christ's yoke:
give not in any case: but at the very first step thou set into this godly
race, resolve to persevere to the end of thy life, come what can come.

Manus igitur remissas, Heb. 12.12.
and genua soluta erig^te: i. Lift up your hands that hang down, and your
weak knees: take heed that ye fall not away from the grace of God. 2. These.
3.13. 1. Cor. 16.13. 2. Chron. 25.7.
Be not weary of well-doing: Stand fast in the faith, and play the men, be
strong: take courage to you: and persevere to the end: for he that indureth to
the end, the same shall be blessed.

Esto fidelis (says S. John) vsque ad mortem, and dabo tibi coronam vitae:
Apoc. 2.10.
i. be faithful to thy death, and I will give thee a crown of life.

Qui vicerit, dabo ei sedere in throno, Apocal. 3.12.
etc. to him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne.

Hieron.
Non enim incepisse, sed perfecisse virtutis est: i. It is not the nature of
godliness to begin well, but to perfect the work begun: Remigius.
Nec inchoantibus, sed perseuerantibus praemium tribuitur: says Remigius, i.
Neither is the reward given to enterers, but to enders, not to beginners but to
perseuerers. Whereupon S. Gregory says: Incaessum curritur si ceptum iter,
ante terminum deseratur* i. He is a mad traveler that will not see the end of
his journey: and he is a fond professor, that will not labor to die in the
Lord.

We read in the Gospel of John, that our Savior in the end of his life said
in this manner: Ioh. 17.4.
Opus consummaui, quod dederas mihi vt facerem: i. I have finished the work
which thou gave me to do. And in the hour of his death, Ioh. 19.30.
he said in like manner: Consummatum est: it is finished. So should every
Christian after the example of his Savior, labor to finish the work, which
the Lord called him to do: that so he may (with great peace of conscience, and
with unspeakable solace of heart) say upon his deathbed with the chosen
vessel, in his second Epistle to Timothy: 2. Tim. 4.7.8.
Certamen bonum decertaui, cursum consummaui, fidem seruaui, etc. I have fought
a good fight, and have finished my course: I have kept the faith: therefore
henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all
them that love his appearing.

Such was the resolute zeal, and zealous resolution of all holy Martyrs in
former ages: The resolution of Martyrs.
that nothing could make them forsake the profession of the glorious Gospel of
Jesus: Yea this was their constant answer to their bloody butcherers: Vere,
tunde, di^elle, lama, seca: idola tua non adorabimus potes corpora ista (O
Caesar) cruciatibus absumere, facere vero vt aliud sentiamus, aut loquamur, non
potes: tua saeuia nostra est gloria: cum nos interficere credas, de carcere
corporis liberas: citius saxa, scopulosque and montes de loco suo monebis, quam
nobis fidem Christo datam cripies, i. Burn, buffet, slay, devour, hew in
pieces: thy abominable idols will we never worship: thou may (O cruel
tyrant) consume with torments these our mortal bodies, but to make us thinks
or speak otherwise then we do, can thou never do: thy cruelty is our glory:
killing us, thou do but deliver us from the prison of our bodies: thou shall
sooner remove the rocks and mountains from their places, then make us recant
from the profession of the Gospel of Jesus.

Such was ye resolution of Sydrach, Myshach and Abednego, that rather than they
would croutch to Nabucadnezzars golden image, which was 60. cubits high: Dan.
3.1.23.
they would be cast into the hot fiery furnace, which was made seven times more
hot, then usually it was for necessary uses.

Such was the resolution of Blessed Paul, that nothing could separate him from
his Lord and master Christ: whose courageous vow we may find in his Epistle
to the Romans on this manner: Romans 8.35.38.39.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? No verily: for I
am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord, neither the love which we have to God from us, who are
made his sons through Christ Jesus.

And indeed that which Paul promised, he performed: for he was beheaded at
Rome for the Gospels defense: although ye sword did separate his head from his
shoulders, yet it could not separate him from his head, Christ Jesus.

Such was the resolution of the pattern of patience: that though the Lord
should kill him, Job. 13.15.
yet would he put his trust in him.

Such was the resolution of Ignatius Bishop of Antioch after Peter, Ignatius.
that the ravening beasts could not make him flinch from his redeemer: yea
being commanded by the king of Syria to be torn in pieces of wild beasts, and
being led to the place of execution, he uttered this golden sentence: Nihil
moror visibilium, nec inuisibilium, modo Iesum Christum: i. I care neither for
things visible, nor yet for things invisible, neither for things seen, nor yet
for things not seen: Only this is my care, that I may obtain Christ Jesus,
and with him everlasting salvation: and when the beasts were let loose upon
him, these were his last words (as says S. Jerome. Jerome.
) I am Gods corn, and the teeth of these wild beasts must grind me in pieces,
that I may be pure bread and fine manchet for Christ Jesus his table in heaven.

Such was the constant resolution of that godly old woman Apollonia: Apollonia
that she chose rather to have her teeth dashed out of her head willingly, and
to be burnt to ashes, then to worship any other gods beside the true and
everliving God.

Yea this was the constancy of all holy Martyrs, that they would rather endure
a thousand deaths, then shrink back from the word of life: Peter.
Peter was beheaded for the Gospels defense: James thrown down from an high
pinnacle, and his head cleft in sunder: James.
yea almost all of the Apostles were put to grievous deaths, some were stoned,
some broyled, some put to one death, some to another.

Old Simeon, Simeon.
that was cousin german to Christ, son to Cleophas and Mary, Bishop of
Jerusalem after James: was nailed to the cross, being six score years old and
more. Cyprian.
S. Cyprian beheaded at Sexti nigh the city Carthage.

Polycarpe Bishop of Smyrna, Polycarp.
disciple to John, was most pitifully tortured to death by fire: yea for the
space of 300. years after Christ and more, the Lord sent persecution
ordinarily to his Church.

Willingly did these saints suffer, and joyfully did undergo all these
afflictions for the kingdom of heaven sake.

August.
Hic ure, hic seca, vt in aeternum parcas domine, says Saint Augustine: i.
Here burn me (Lord) here slay me, to spare me hereafter: do what thou will
(Lord) with my body, so that thou will spare my soul.

Jerome.
Vtinam (says S. Jerome) ob Domini mei nomen, atque iustitiam, cuncta
gentiliam turba me persequatur and tribulet: vtinam in opprobrium meum stolidus
hic mundus exurgat: tantum vt ego mercedem Jesus consequar: i I would to God
that the whole nation of the Gentiles, Pagans and Infidels would for the name
of my God, and for the glory of his Gospel, persecute me and trouble me: I
would to God, this mad and foolish world rise up against me for the profession
of Gods blessed truth: only that I may obtain Christ Jesus for my reward.

Ammonarion.
Ammonarion, Mercuria, Dyonisia, with diverse other godly women, would run to
the fire with their children, as to a joyful feast or banquet, thinking no
greater glory on earth, then to suffer for the Gospel of Christ.

And thus should every man and woman (as they tender the welfare of their dear
souls) resolve to suffer willingly, and bear patiently, whatsoever calamity
may befall them in this heavenly race: considering the torments of hell which
by reuolting they shall undergo: considering the joys of heaven, which they
shall have by patience: and considering what others have done before them, as
the Martyrs, and what Christ has suffered for them: that so with perseverance
holding out to the end they may obtain everlasting bliss.

The merchant will through fire and water, suffering no repulse, that he may
have his pinnace fraught with plenty of pure gold at the Indian haven:
according to that of the Poet: Poet.
Impiger extremos currit mercator ad Indos: per mare pauperiem fugiens: per
saxa, per ignes: i The painful merchant aduentureth to the foreign Indians,
beyond the seas, through fire and water, fearing nothing, that he may eschew
poverty, and obtain much treasure: Even so, he that will have the pinnace both
of soul and body fraught with the silver of all earthly prosperity, and with
the gold of all celestial felicity, must run the race that is set before him
with patience, leaping over the wall of all obuious afflictions, perseuering
till he comes at the happy haven of heaven: that then he (being more than
conqueror in Christ Jesus) may triumph over death, hell, and damnation, saying
with the Prophet: Ero mors tua O mors: Hose. 13.14.
i. O death, I will be thy death: O grave, I will be thy destruction: 1. Cor.
15.
and with valiant Paul: Death, where is thy sting? hell, where is thy victory?
Of necessity afflictions must meet with us that run in the high way to
heaven: Yea no man living can be freed from them. All that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution: 2. Tim. 3.^2. Act. 14.22.
we must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God.

Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and he scourges every son, Heb. 12.6.7.
whom he receives: we are bastards and not sons, if we be free from
afflictions. Apoc. 3.19


Ego quos amo, arguo and castigo: i. as many as I love, I rebuke and chasten.

Qui diligitur, corripitur: i. He that is loved is reproved.

The oxen that are appointed for the slaughter, are let run in fat pastures:
but those that are not appointed for so terrible an end, are daily wrought, and
subject to much travel.

The barren tree is not beaten: but the tree that is planted by the rivers
side, and brings forth his fruit in due season, is sorely shaken, and yearly
beaten.

The stones that were for Salomons temple, 1. King. 7.
were squared and heiuen before they were laid in the building.

So every Christian ( who is a lively stone in this spiritual building, 1.
Pet. 2.5.
as says S. Peter) must be hewn with the are of affliction, and squared with
the saw of correction, before he can be received into the triumphant Church,
whereof Christ Jesus is the head corner stone.

Greg.
Ideo Dominus quibusdam hic parcit non feriendo, vt in aeternum feriat: ideo
hic ferit non parcendo, vt in aeternum parcat: i. The Lord spares some for a
time, that he may punish them for ever: and he chasteneth some for a time, that
he may spare them for ever. Luke 16.
Dives that was spared on earth, was tormented in hell: and Lazarus that was
corrected on earth, was spared in heaven.

For qui vult cum Christo conregnare in regno coelorum: i. He that will reign
with Christ in the kingdom of heaven: must cum Christo compati in valle
lachrimarum: i. must suffer with Christ in the vale of tears: qui vult
consequi, must sequi: i. he that will obtain Christ, must follow Christ: and
he that will follow Christ must take up his cross and follow him.

Christ suffered before he entered into glory: Luke 24.
so must every Christian first suffer, before he can be glorified: The servant
must not be above his master: Ioh. 15.20. 2. Tim. 2.12
Si ergo compatimur, conregnabimus: i, If we suffer with him, we shall reign
with him.

Dulcia non meruit, Poet.
qui non gustauit amara: i. He deserves not to taste of the sweet, that will
not taste of the sower.

Iouinian a king, Iouinian.
having two vessels of wine in his palace, the one sweet wine, and the other
sower: decreed that whosoever would taste of the sweet wine should first taste
of the sower: So whosoever will taste of the sweet joys that run through
the celestial paradise, must first with Christ, sup of the cup of salt tears
of affliction.

No marvel therefore if the Prophet in general says: Psa. 3^.
that many are the troubles of the righteous. No marvel if he compares
afflictions to waves of the sea: for as one wave dasheth over the neck of
another: so one affliction continually follows another, for God is not like a
waspe, that having stung once can sting no more: but there is a plurality of
crosses with God, he can sting again and again: as one sorrowful messenger
came to Job after another: even so one affliction visits the Christian after
another: as the viper leapt upon Paul, Act. 27.
and leapt off again: even so afflictions leap upon Gods servants, and leap
off again.

Those therefore that run in the race of godliness, must not think this
strange, neither must they think themselves free from afflictions: for they
are hedged in on every side with sundry kinds of troubles: and have three
deadly enemies continually warring against them.

Whereupon Job calls the life of man a warfare upon earth: and that worthily:
for we fight against three mighty enemies: the Devil, the World, and the
flesh: The first enemy that withstandeth us in the way to heaven, is the
devil: who in respect of his cruelty and might is compared to a roaring Lion:
1. Pet. 5.
The Devil like a roaring Lion, goes up and down, seeking whom he may
devour: The second enemy is the world, which is as subtle as the devil is
powerful: for by the profits and pleasures therein, it draws many to the
service of Satan. The third enemy, which is the flesh, is no whit inferior to
either of them: for Caesar being asked what was the greatest thing in the world
to overcome, said, Scipsum vincere, to overcome a man's own self, and his
untamed affections. It does always rebel against the good motions of the
spirit: it is a Judas to betray our souls into the hands of old Leuiathan.

The prophecy must be fulfilled: Genesis 3.15.
I will put enmity between thee and the woman, between thy seed and her
seed: Therefore the Church of God in this respect is called Ecclesia militans:
a warring Church: a Church ye fights manfully under the banner of Christ
against ye adversaries abousaid.

No marvel therefore (our life being a warfare) if this world be called vullis
lachrimarum: a vale of tears: for afflictions are so common, that we have
always cause to shed forth a whole Ocean of tears, with the Prophet David,
who (although he were a man according to Gods own heart) was a Pellicane in
the wilderness of this world, whose nature is always to have tears trickling
down her bill: his tears were his meat and drink: Psalm. 6.
he watered his bed with salt tears, and washed his couch with continual
weeping.

1. Pet. 5.9.
This is the state and condition of all Gods children in this life, that will
run in the race of Christianity: so that we may conclude with Job, and say:
Job. 14.1.
Man that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance, and is full of trouble.

Seeing then, that we are borne to travel, as the bird to flying: let us arm
our selves with patience: let us possess our souls with patience, and let us
run the race that is set before us with patience: knowing that Non sunt
condignae passiones, etc. that the passions that we can suffer in this world
are not worthy of the joys in the world to come.

And seeing we are withstood in this way by three mighty enemies, let us like
wise soldiers, put on the whole armor of God: the helmet of hope, Ephesians. 6.
the breast plate of righteousness, the shield of faith, the girdle of
sincerity, the shoes of peace, and let us always have ready drawn the sword of
the spirit, which is the word of God, which is able to quench all the fiery
darts of Satan, and slay the dragon in the deep.

Moreover let every Christian (that runs in the race of godliness) know,
that as afflictions are by no means to be avoided, so are they necessary for
the good of Gods children. Romans 8.28
All things work for the best to them that love God. And it is good for me
(says ye Prophet) that I have been in trouble, Psalm. 119.71.
for thereby have I learned thy law: For affliction to ye godly Medicina est non
poena: castigatio non da^natio: i. is a curing medicine, not a destroying
punishment: a profitable chastisement, not a devouring condemnation.

For diverse causes therefore does the Lord suffer his dear children to be
afflicted.

Gregory: Aurem cordis tribulatio aperit, Greg.
quam saepe prosperitas huius mundi claudit: i. Tribulation does open the ear
of the heart, which worldly prosperity does many times shut.

As Antiochus in his prosperity, thought himself equal with God, yea above
God, but having a fall out of his Chariot, and being in adversity, he sung a
new song,: saying, Iustum est hominem mortalem subditum esse Deo. 2. Mack. 9.
i. O, it is meet and requisite for mortal man to be subject to the immortal
God. So Alexander being hurt with an arrow, said: Homines dicunt me esse filium
Iouis; sed sagitta haec probat me esse mortalem. i. Men say that I am the son
of Jupiter, but this arrow proves me to be but a mortal man.

So Nabuchadnezzar proudly vaunted himself against the Lord of hosts in his
prosperity: But when the Lord took him to task, metamorphosing this proud
King into a base beast, then he could say: Dan 4.34
That the Lord was able to abase all those that walk in pride.

Thus therefore does the Lord chasten us in this world, that we may neither be
entangled with the love of this world: 1. Cor. 21.32.
Nor be condemned with this world.

For as the Nurse to weane her child from thirsting after her milk, does
anoint her teat with Aloes, or some such bitter thing: Even so our heavenly
Father, to weane us from the pleasures of this wicked world, does send us many
sharp afflictions in this world.

Before I was troubled, I went wrong: Psalm. 119.67. Pro. 29.^
but now have I learned to keep thy Law. The rod (says Solomon) brings
wisdom.

As the rod of Moses, striking the stony rocks caused whole rivers of water to
flow therefrom. Deuteronomy. 8.
So the Lord striking upon our stony hearts, with the rod of affliction,
causes us to shed forth buckets of tears for our sins committed.

Isod.
Aduersa corporis, animae remedio sunt: agritudo carnem vulnerat, sed mentem
curat: i. The affliction of the body is wholesome physic for the soul: it
kills the flesh, but cures the spirit: it wounds the outward man: but
reuiueth the inward. Cum infirmor: tunc fortior sum: i. when I am weak, 2.
Cor. 12.10.
then am I strong.

Affliction therefore may be fitly compared to a Goldsmiths Forge, which
tries the pure gold from the impure dross.

It is like a purgation which expels corrupt humors from the body.

It is like a Shepherds crook, whereby the Lord does bring again his
wandering sheep to the fold.

It is called of the Prophet, Ierem. 1.
Virga vigilans: i. a wathfull rod: a rod that keeps men in continual
watchfulness.

The Prodigal child, that wandered far in the by-waies of sin, by this
sheep-crooke, Luke 15.
was brought back again to his fathers house: so the Lord by this means,
does bring home many that have erred from the way of truth, and wearied
themselves in the way of wickedness: For as the careful mother cannot. see a
mote amiss in her beloved child, but will immediately wash the same away: So
our heavenly father cannot endure ye blemish of sin upon ye face of his dear
children, but he will wash it presently away with the water of affliction: if
thou sinnest to day, he afflicts to morrow.

Greg.
Mala quae nos hic premunt, citius ad Deum ire compellunt: i. adversity that
oppresses us here in this world, does make us swiftly and speedily run to
the Lord.

Esaias. 26.16. Dan. 13.42. Jonas. 2.1.
Lord in their streights they sought thee: Susanna being ready to be put to
death, cried out to the Lord: the Prophet Jonas being in the Whales belly,
powered out his prayers to the Lord. David in many of his Psalms, being in
trouble, called upon the name of the Lord, especially in the 130. Psalm. De
profundis clamaui ad te Domine, Psalm. 130.1.2.
Domine exaudi vocem meam: i. Out of the have I cried unto thee, O Lord: O Lord
hear my voice, etc.

So the prodigal child being in a straight, sought to his father, Luk 15.19
desiring him to make him but as one of his hired servants.

So the Disciples, when the ship was ready to suffer naufrage by reason of the
tempest, awaked their Master, saying: Lord save us, we perish.

So Peter being ready to sink, Mat 14.30
cried out to Christ saying: Master, save me. Therefore that men may be
compelled to seek the Lord, he sends afflictions upon them: according to
that of good S. Augustine: A deo premuntur iusti, vt pressiclament, August.
clamantes exaudiantur, exauditi glorificent eum: i. Men are therefore
oppressed of God, that being oppressed, they may cry unto him: crying unto him,
he may hear them: and hearing them, he may deliver them: and delivering them,
may be glorified of them.



And thus was Job tried of the Lord: For though the Lord had permitted Satan to
tempt him, his enemies to undo him, his children by sudden death to be taken
from him, his body to be afflicted from top to toe with biles, botches and
sores, having no sound part throughout, his wife to be an occasion of offense
unto him, who in these his distresses should have been a comfort to him: yet
notwithstanding all this, Job sinned not against his maker: yea he was so far
from mistrusting in God, as he said, though the Lord killed him, yet would he
put his trust in him: and so far from murmuring against him, or cursing him,
as with admirable patience in them, he blessed the Lord for them, saying, on
this heavenly manner: The Lord gives, Job. 1.
and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord.

Thus were the Apostles and holy Martyrs tried, who were so far from
recantation, as they willingly chose to loose their lives in tribulation.

And thus were the three children tried in the furnace.

By affliction are the children of the Lord and the sons of Belial discerned:
even as crased vessels will break in pieces when they come to the fire, Eccles.
27.
and the sound only hold out: So the wicked (like counterfeits) will bewray
themselves, when they come to the faggot, and the godly only stand to it: as we
read in the Gospel of S. Luke: They depart from God in the time of
tribulation. Luke 8.13.
Many will (with Peter) vow to follow Christ Jesus, and to stick close to him:
but when they come to Pilars hall, a silly maid will make them forswear him.

The Lord therefore afflicts us to try our faith, our patience, our hope and
other virtues.

Faith is exercised in affliction, Faith.
by considering the causes of Gods permission, and by believing most assuredly
his promises concerning our deliverance.

Hope is exercised in affliction, Hope.
by assuring our selves of the rewards promised to all those that suffer
patiently.

Love.
Love is exercised in affliction, by considering the love of Christ in suffering
for us: and thereby we are provoked to suffer for him again.

Obedience.
Obedience is exercised in affliction, by conforming our wills to the will of
Christ, saying with Christ: Not as we will, but as thou will, o Lord God of
hosts.

Patience
Patience is exercised in affliction, by suffering quietly, willingly and
cheerfully, and by welcomming them sent of God for our good.

Humility.
Humility is exercised in affliction, by abasing our selves in the sight of God,
acknowledging that they are but as flea-bitings in respect of the torments of
hell, which by our lewd lives for evermore we have deserved.



We read in the Gospel of John, that the Apostles having asked our Savior
the reason why the man was borne blind: he answers them, Not for his fathers,
nor for his own sin, Ioh. 9.2.3.
but that the works of God should be shown on him: From which we may truly
gather thus much, namely, that the man was borne blind, especially to this end,
that our Savior might have occasion to show the greatness of his power in
curing him.

Again in the same gospel, we read that Lazarus died, to this end, John 11.
that God might be glorified in raising him from death. The wonderful power of
the Lord was shown in the delivery of the three children from fire: of Jonas
from drowning, by the Whale: of Susanna from death, by Daniel: of Daniel from
the Lions, by his own immediate power: of Eliah from staruing, by the ravens:
and of our most gracious sovereign Lord King James from the sword in Scotland,
and from the powder treason in England, by his extraordinary favor and
wonderful love, which he had to this his gracious servant: which the Lord in
mercy vouchsafe unto him, and his royal progeny for evermore.

Thus the Lord brings men into deep afflictions, that his power might be
shown in bringing them out again: 1. Sam. 2.6.
Dominus deducit ad inferos, and reducit: i. The Lord brings to hell and
brings back again: to great afflictions, and out of them again: Vna
eademque manus, vulnus, opemque tulit: Poet.
The same hand that wounds, the same hand cures: Vulnerat, and medetur, Job.
5.18.
percutit, and sanum reddit: i. He makes the wound and binds it up: he
smites and his hand makes whole. So that howsoever many are the troubles of
the righteous, in their journey to heaven, yet the Lord powerfully in his good
time delivers them out of all, if he sees it best for their good: otherwise
suffering for the testimony of the truth, and the glory of his name, they shall
change this life for a better.

Thus have I somewhat largely spoken of afflictions, both in regard of their
necessity, as they cannot be shifted of any that run in the way of
godliness, as also in regard of their conueniency, being more help then
hinderance in this spiritual journey: that so we may make good use of them,
when it shall please the Lord to send them.

And thus much shall suffice, for this third point: namely, for perseverance in
this course of godliness: beseeching the Lord of his goodness, to give us
grace, that we may not shrink back for fear of afflictions, but wade through
with patience, holding out in this race to the end of our race.

Text.
So run that ye may obtain.

The third thing in order to be spoken of, is praemium promissum: i. the
promised reward: but before I enter into the handling thereof, one thing
necessarily must be observed, and that worthy of annotation.

The Apostle says not here: Seem so to run that ye may obtain: or make an
outward show of running: but. So run that ye may obtain.

In which speech he excludes all hypocrisy, and banisheth all counterfeit
godliness from this Christian race. For in this visible Church there are many
that outwardly profess Christ, but inwardly serve Belial: Christians in name,
but reprobates in deed: Saints in show, but devils in conversation. Many
hypocrites there are, like painted sepulchers: dissembling pharisees: fair
without, but foul within: lambs in apparition, but wolves in condition: Ones
habitu (as says S. Bernard) vulpe^ actu, Bernard.
and crudeli^ate lupi: i. Sheep in show, foxes in deed, Poet.
and wolves in cruelty. Mente sub agnina latitat men's saepe lupina: i They have
lambs skins, but wolves hearts. Yea howsoever they seem to be members of
Christ's body, courteous and kind to the stock of Jesus, zealous lovers and
earnest embracers of the sincere milk of the word, running in the path of true
godliness: yet nevertheless they are a generation of vipers, Math. 3.7.
of whom the Evangelist speaks, ready to suck out the very heartblood of the
saints of God, and rend them in pieces like ravening wolves: they have mel in
ore, fell in cord: i. Honey in their mouths, but gall in their hearts: sugared
words to entrap, but poisoned hearts to torment: carrying themselves like Judas
who saluted his master with a kiss, having the poison of Aspes lying under
his lips: For Quando bonum ore faris, Poet.
mala cord tamen meditaris, oscula quae Domino Judas dedit, haec mihi tu das:
i. When men speak well, and think ill, their kindness is treason, as was the
kiss of Judas. And of all other enmities in the world, this is the greatest,
as says Cassiodorus: Grauissimum inimicitiae est genus, cord aduersarios,
Cassiod. in Psalm.
and linguae simulare deuotos: i. This is a most grievous kind of enmity, when
men pretend much love in tongue, and bear much more malice in heart.

These cursed hypocrites, these dissembling helhounds, and these venomous
vipers, are the very pictures of the devil, and lively representations of the
old serpent: for as the devil, lies, coggeth, counterfeiteth and dissembleth,
so do these.

The subtle serpent pretended great kindness to our first parents, counselling
them to eat of the forbidden fruit, that so they might see and be as gods, but
he intended their everlasting destruction: so these crafty foxes seem to be
charitable Christians, and to give good counsel wheresoever they become: but
yet they denoure widows houses, Mat. 23.14
and that under color of long prayers.

The subtle serpent seems to be an Angel of light: but yet he is a devil
of darkness, fettered with the chains of everlasting darkness. Apoc. 20.1.
So these apes of the devil, do bear an outward show of holiness and purity:
yet they are wels without water, and clouds carried about with every tempest,
2. Pet. 2.17.
to whom the black darkness is reserved for ever.

These hypocritical mocke-gods may fitly be compared to Idols: Holgot. in Sap.
for as an Idol has an outward shape of a living man, but yet has no life at
all within it: so hypocrites seem to live by the life of grace: yet are they
dead in sin, and rotted in corruption. They are new vpstart Giants having two
faces under one hood: Esaias. 29.13.
they come near unto God with their mouths, and honor the Lord with their
lips, but their hearts are far removed from him. Deum laudant in tympano, sed
non in choro: i. They praise the Lord in the Tabor, but not in the dance: they
serve God in show, but not in truth: they bear (with the fig tree) great
store of leaves, but no fruit at all.

But alas, alas, these hypocrites (that thus deceive themselves, having their
reward on earth, which they through vaineglory greedily look for at the hands
of men) shall never obtain a crown of righteousness being altogether
unrighteous, but they shall have their portion with hypocrites, Math. 24.54.
where shall be weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth. For the Lord abhors
all hollow hearts and double tongues, all outward oblations and burnt
sacrifices, all outward show and hypocritical worship: he is a Spirit, and he
will spue all such out of his mouth, as worship him not in spirit and truth.
Simulata sanctitas, duplex iniquitas: i. Counterfeit godliness is so far
from holiness, as it is double ungodliness. I say therefore unto thee with S.
Chrysostom: Chrysostom.
Aut esto quod appares, aut appare quodes: i. Either be as thou seem, or
seem as thou art.

It is not seeming but being that shall go for pay: Non auditores, sed factores
legis iustificabuntur: i. Not the hearers, but the doers of the Law shall be
justified: Nec candem profitentes, sed eidem obedientes glorificabuntur: i. Not
professors but performers shall be glorified.

Woe therefore to all hypocritical mock-gods, that run not in the race of
Christianity, as they boast themselves by profession: they shall roar at the
gates of heaven, and say: Lord, Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied? and
by thy name cast out devils? and by thy name done many great works? have we
not professed thy Gospel, and borne the name of thine? But because they did
not the will of our heavenly father, Mat. 7.22.23.
our Savior shall send them packing to hell with a Nescio vos: professing on
this manner unto them. I never knew you, depart from me ye workers of
iniquity. O ye viperous serpents, Math. 23.33.
o ye generation of vipers, how shall ye escape the damnation of hell?

Let every Christian therefore beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy. Math. 7.16.17.
Beware of false Prophets, which come unto you in sheep clothing, but
inwardly are ravening wolves: ye shall know them by their fruits: do men gather
grapes of thorns, of figs of thistles?

Walk wisely toward them that are without, redeeming the time, Col. 4.5.
for the days are very evil.

That you may therefore prevent the damned traditions of this devilish brood,
I say unto you as our Savior said unto his Apostles, a little before his
passion: Math. 24.25.
Behold I have told you before.

Let every Christian therefore (avoiding all counterfeit and hypocritical
profession) run in the race of godliness, serving the Lord with all his
heart, with all his soul, with all his strength, in holiness and
righteousness all the days of his life.

Prou. 23.26. August.
God calls for our hearts: My son give me thy heart: The Lord (as says S.
Augustine) Quia totum fecit, totum exigit: i. Because he made all, he will have
all: not a piece of the heart, nor a room in thy heart, but the whole heart:
for the Lord is a jealous God: and as a jealous husband cannot endure that his
wife should give her heart, or any part thereof, to any other man: so the Lord
cannot abide that we should give any part of our heart from him: He calls not
for a stony heart, nor for a double heart, but for a fleshly heart, a heart
purged by faith in Christ Jesus, bathed in the blood of the Lamb, and
thoroughly cleansed by the fire of the spirit: not an old heart, neither a
corrupted heart, but a new heart, and a new spirit: for which the Prophet David
begged: create in me a new heart, o god, Psalm. 51.10.
and renew a right spirit within me.

Let us therefore (I beseech you brethren, by the mercies of God) give up our
bodies, a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, which is our
reasonable serving of God: Romans 12.1.2.
and let us not fashion our selves like to this world: but let us be changed by
the renewing of our mind: In stead of dead beasts, let us give up our bodies,
which are lively sacrifices: and in stead of the blood of beasts, which was but
a shadow, and pleased not God of it self, let us give up the acceptable
sacrifice of the spiritual man, framed by faith to godliness of life: Let us
sanctify the Lord God in our hearts. 1. Pet. 3.23.
who daily calls for our hearts: let us say with David: Psa. 103.1
My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name:
Let us praise him in his sanctuary and in the firmament of his power: let us
praise him in his mighty acts, and according to his excellent greatness: let
us praise him in the sound of a trumpet, upon the viole and harp: yea let
every thing that has breath praise the Lord: And that not only in word and in
tongue, but in deed and in truth: not in outward show and profession only, but
in our pure lives and holy conuersations: that so running in the race of
godliness to the end of our lives, we may be blessed for ever: and glorifying
the Lord God by our holy conuersations in this world, we may be eternally
glorified of the Lord our God in the world to come.

Text.
So run, that ye may obtain.

praemium promissum: The promised reward, to all those that run lawfully. So
great a reward it is, as should stir up every Christian to run in the race
of godliness.

If the king of his princely bounty, would offer a 100000. pounds to him that
should first come at a miles end: would not thousands hazard their lives, and
adventure a surfeit willingly, that they may obtain the same? But the Lord
has offered us a kingdom: Luke 12. Heb. 13.14. 1. Pet. 1.10.
yea it is the pleasure of our heavenly father to give us a kingdom an
habitation not made with hands: nor purchased with gold and silver, but with
the blood of the immaculate Lamb: And shall not we labor and streine our
selves with might and maine, to run the race that is appointed for us? How
will men toil and moyle for a little worldly trash? how will men use all their
wits, and bend all their studies to be worldly rich? Alas, these are as doung
in respect of this reward: shall we not therefore much more labor for the meat
yt shall never perish, and for this glorious reward yt shall never be taken
from us?

The greatness of this reward is painted out unto us in the holy scriptures,
by the diversity, and greatness of the names thereof.

For first, it is called by the name of Regnum caelorum: i. The kingdom of
heaven: because the saints of God, do there enjoy great liberty, dignity,
honor, power, pleasure, glory, and all good things whatsoever.

Regnum Dei and Christi: Ephesians. 5.21.
i. The kingdom of God and of Christ: because that Jesus Christ (having
overcome death, hell and damnation, together with all the enemies that did
oppose us in the way to heaven) does there rule and govern his Church
triumphant with heavenly peace, and everlasting tranquillity.

Paradisus: Luke 23.
1. Paradise: in respect of the abundant plenty of all good and pleasant
things, which the saints can either wish or possibly desire.

2. Cor. 12.
Fourthly, it is called by the name of Caelum tertium: ye third heaven: which is
called Caelum Empyraeum, i. igneum: not in respect of fire, but in respect of
ye glorious light ye shines therein: for it is Situ altissimum, quantitate
maximum, natura purissimum, luce plenissimum, capacitate amplissimum: i. High
in situation, great in quantity, pure in nature, full of light, and exceeding
large, able to receive ten thousand times more persons, then there are drops of
water in the sea, or sands lying by he shore.

Sancta ciuitas: an holy city, Apoc. 21.10.
built with most precious pearls: because the company that dwell therein, are
holy and pure, shining in holiness and glistring in purity, as the portals of
the burnish Sun.

Summa beatitudo: inestimable blessedness: because the saints enjoy the full
presence of the blessed trinity, wherein true bliss consists.

Vita aeterna: life everlasting: because there shall be no more death, nor
lamentation, no more crying nor sorrow, but the saints shall enjoy these
blessed joys so long, as God shall be God, which is for everlasting. This is
the reward promised to all those that will run in the race of godliness,
holding out to the end. A large reward, and no man knows it, but he that
inioyeth it. Adeo magna est, quod nequit numerari, adio pretiosa, quod nequit
comparari, adeo diutina, quod nequit terminari: i. So great is their reward, as
it cannot be numbered: so precious, as it cannot be valued: so lasting, as it is
everlasting: it is great without quantity, sweet without quality, infinite
without number, everlasting without end.

1. Cor. 2.
So great is this reward, as neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard of the
like, neither can it be expressed of the heart of man. Quod praeparauit (says
S. Augustine) diligentibus se Deus, August.
fide non capitur, spe non attingitur, charitate non comprehenditur, desideria
and vot a transgreditur, adquiri potest, aestimari non potest: i. That which ye
Lord has prepared for those that love and fear his name, is not fully
attained to by faith, neither fully retained by hope, neither fully contained
by charity: it far surpasses the desires of men and angels: it may in some
measure be obtained, but valued it can never be. Deus (says S. Bernard) Est
mel in ore melos in aure, and inbilus in cord: Bernard.
i. God is honey in the mouth, melody in the ear, and joy in the heart. Ibi
nihil intus quod fastidiatur, nihil foris quod appetatur: ibi rex veritas, lex
charitas, poss^ssia aeternitas: i. In heaven there is nothing that may seem
fulsome or loathsome, out of heaven there is nothing that may be wished or
desired (for then were there no perfection in heaven, for Perfectum est, cui
nihil addi potest: i. There is perfection, where can be no addition:) there the
king is verity, the law charity, and possession eternity.

S. Augustine speaking of the joys of heaven, says thus: August.
Ibi laetitia sine tristitia, locus sine dolor, vita sine labor, lux sine
tenebris: ibi iuuentus semper vigescit, and nunqua^ senescit: ibi dolor nunqua^
sentitur, nec gemitus vnquam auditur: ibi tristitia nunqua^ videtur, sed
aeternum gaudium possidetur: i. There is mirth without inone, place without
pain, life without labor, light without darkness: there youth always
flourishes, and never decays: there is no torment felt, no howling heard, no
sorrow seen, but possession of everlasting joys.

Ibi est summa, and certa tranquillitas, tranquilla faeticitas, faelix
aeternitas, August.
aeterna beatitudo, and beata Trinitas: i. There is great tranquillity,
tranquil felicity, happy eternity, everlasting blessedness and the blessed
trinity. O gaudium, super gaudium, August.
vincens omne gaudium, extra quod non est gaudium, quando intrabo in te, vt
Deum meum videam, qui habitat in te? i O joy above all joys, far surpassing
all joys, without which there is no joy, when shall I enter into thee, that I
may see my God that dwells in thee?

This holy man Augustine, considering the greatness of the joys of heaven,
August.
says on this manner: facilius expont petest quid non sit in coelo, quam quid
fit in coelo: i. A man may sooner tell what is not in heaven, then what is in
heaven, for the joys which are there are innumerable.

Even as a learned Geometrician, finding Hercules his footes length upon the
high hill Olympus, drew out his whole picture by the proportion of the same,
though far unequal to it: so we may guess at the greatness of the joys of
heaven, though far unequal to them.

As the Queen of Sheba, having heard the wisdom of Solomon, which before she
believed not, said to Solomon, Lo the one half was not told me: So the saints
of God, inioying ye unspeakable joys of heaven, may say: It is true which we
have heard concerning the joys of heaven, by the mouth of preching ministers,
but lo the thousand part of the^ was not told unto us.

The greatness of these joys, do appear in ye entertainment of the faithful
servant into joys by our Lord Jesus: saying: Enter into thy masters joy: Our
Savior says not, Let thy masters joy enter into thee: but Enter thou into
it: showing unto us, that the joys of heaven are so many, as the thousand part
of them cannot be contained in the soul of man.

Thus at large have I spoken of this reward the more to allure al men to run in
ye race of Christianity, which is ye highway to this glorious reward.

Four things there are, that being well considered, are excellent motives to
cause men to leave the broad way of iniquity, and to betake themselves to run
in this race Celestial: The day of death: The day of doom: The joys of
heaven, and the torments of hell.

Let every Christian therefore (as he tendreth his everlasting salvation) cast
his eyes upon this reward, and run in the race of godliness, so long as life
shall last, that whenever it shall please the Lord to call him out of this
vale of tears, he may (having his name written in the book of life) be
welcomed into his masters joy with this blessed harvest song, Come thou blessed
of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for thee from the beginning of the
world: To the which thrice blessed kingdom* he bring us that has so dearly
bought us, even Jesus Christ the righteous, who has taken away the sins of the
world: To whom with God ye Father, and God the holy Ghost, three per^^^s, but
one eternal and everliving God, we ascribe both now and ever (as is most due)
all power, glory, dominion and thanksgiving, Amen.

FINIS.

