THE GRAMMAR WAR. OR The eight Parts of SPEECH, Noune, Pronoune. Verb,
Participle, Aduerbe, Conjunction, Preposition, Interiection,
altogether by the ears. Together with the lamentable burning of a Petty
School.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Raworth, for Thomas Spencer. 1635.

THE TRANSLATOR, To all Tyro's, or first admitted into the Grammar Squadron.
COme hopeful young ones, and with fea^elesse fight,
View the blyth turmoyle, of a Grammar Fight.
It was a Roman field; and higher strain:
But now brought low, fought on an English plain:
That every tender head, and Infant eye,
May judge and see, who gets the Victory.
And though the parts of speech in conflict are,
Through wild combustion of Gramma^ick War;
Yet one thing Jolly Readers grant, that we
Like Subst^ntiues and Adictiues agree.
The Preface upon the Historical discourse of the Grammar War.
THe first and ancient Philosophers that wrote their Poesies covertly hidden
under subtle and wily matter, did constitute Pallas the daughter of Jupiter,
to be goddess of Wisdom, called Mi^arua, and of War, called Enyo or
Bellona. Giving hereby to understand, that of one and the same beginning, in
one time altogether and in one substance are two principal things inseparately
joined together: which two properties are so knit, that the one without the
other is of no force, and the other without his fellow, of small or no account:
Yea, they are the principles whereby men attain to the height of Honor,
advancing mean men to Honor in their lifetime, and immortal fame after
death. They are Learning and Martial discipline. Of these two together Noble
Greece made separation in her two metropolitanes; when the City of Athens
flourished in learning, and the City of Sparta or Lacedemonia glorious in
feats of Arms. The noble fame of the Romans grew by the one, and by the
other they did always defend them, so that they did successively greatly set
store by them. The worthy, valiant, and mighty Eloquent Caesar was decored
with them both, and by them did eternise his renown. These two which did so
much ennoble Greece, so greatly honor the Romans, and eternise the fame of
the great Caesar, are in this present small volume comprised under an angry
Argument, and Historical narration of the Grammar War: Lucian an eloquent
Greek Author made the first d^aughts in the battle of the Alphabet letters:
But this Author has waded further, even unto Verbes and Nounes, being
principal heads of Oration, and to the adherents of speech, as well to the
congruate word, (being the opener and the declaratiue of the sense) as
otherwise, wherein rests all Art and Knowledge, wherein also all the
wisdom of man is comprised: shaping and forming these two heads, and the
auxiliary ayding parties with such fained personages and pretty properties, so
apt and to them so quick in quality, that he gives life, body, weapon and
armor to dead words, yea, and sounding voice, to substances inanimate and
without soul: so that the Reader in the lecture of this (though fained)
narration and dreadful discovery, shall deem them no mo^^ to be vocal
words, but by a strong judgment shall thin^e them dapperlie disguised, being
transformed into lively persons, going, speaking, and sharply reasoning with
continual terrors of martial expedition and exploits, with allegorical
conflicts of bloody battle, not only in hostile contention abroad, but also
in civil, yea, and intestine Wars at home: so that in the discovery hereof
he is nothing obliuious of any thing that appertains to the deduction and
safe guiding of so great affairs, even from the first causes and intermixed
medlies of their adventures, unto the last end of their attemptes and
endeauours, with all their circumstances, all their tumults and vproares, with
their doubtfulnesse of victory among many martialists, how of bloody battle
diverse losses and dangers do follow, and how in the end final peace ensues.
All which matters be so properly penned, and so cunningly compact in this
tragedy, that the wars of the Poloponenses, and the civil wars of the
Affricanes in Thucide, in Salust, and Lucan, are peradueuture more high and
diffusedly described: But with more a^te, or more compendiously, I am sure they
are not. Here are placed the mighty, huge, and fearful factes of arms under
the figure of so small a thing as of the congruitie or discordance of words in
Oration, joining letters with weapons, teaching the art Military with the art
Litterarie, so well, and so exactly, that the Reader (beside the delight and
pleasure that he shall have in the reading of so pleasant an Allegory) shall
receive further benefit: For herein is represented in one conceit, two
understandings knit together, the one proper and natural, the other tropique
and figured. Beside this, he shall comprehend in this same very substance, and
by the only labor of one reading, those two so worthy things above mentioned,
that do eternise the fame of their fellows, that is lovers of learning, and
prudent Martiallistes. The science litterarie, and military, that is to say,
the art of G^amm^^, yea, the Grand mother of all arts and sciences, and the art
military (of deduced Wars, under pleasant Metaphorical figure^, transported
and turned, bereauin, the mind of the literal understanding of small things
Verbal, to the consideration of greater, more royal and real) does
manifestly show by example the ambitious mouings, the imperious desire of
Princes to have government, the tumults and partiallities of peoples, the
profitable and perverse counsel of sundry Counselors, the seemly sentences,
and modest messages of the artificial erands on both Partees, their
enterprised attempts, and martial orders, the summonning of Soldiers, the
charts of defiance, the denouncing of Heraldes, the high and sta^tely stomachs
of the adverse parties to join battle, the seeking of aliance in extremity,
the compact confederated of contrymen, the flights, treasons, espies,
ambushments, their sudden entraps and skirmishes, the ordinances of arms,
the placing of the camp, the pitching of the arrayes, the noble cheering of
the Captains to their Soldiers, the taking of Towns, the marching of their
men, the cruel conflicts, and worthy feats of arms on all sides, the
lammentable loss of Captains, the cruel combat of the fighters, the great
slaughters on both Partees, the fearful flying on all sides, the doubtful
meetings of many, the indifferency of their victory, and the final pernicious
accidents that ensue through the wars to both sides, the robbing, the
reauing, the rapine and disorder that is then in ure, the depopulating of
inhabitate countries, the desolate destruction that diverse are damnified by:
the commodities and advantages that one realm enjoys through the detriment
of another: and contrarily, the infinite vtillities that ensue through peace
and con^ord, to all realms and Republikes. It was first written in Latin, but
now translated, whereby the simple and unlearned English readers, as well as
the learned Latinists, might enjoy part of the pleasure that is had in the
reaping of this so delectable discourse of the figured war, and blood-lesse
battle, without mortal shot, sweat, or noise of Canon. For the utility of
our English Children, but especially beginning to study the Latin tongue, who
reading this pleasant fight in their own tongue, might learn by way of mirth
and m^rrie pastime, the principal points of the Grammar. Not to hold thee
longer in that to which all this but introduces; If the Book please thee, it
will be obuious in Paul's Church-vard and else where; the Stationers may have
thy money, but thou shall have the profit, an I in the int^im ^est,

Thine I. S.

THE GRAMMAR WAR.
THere is none so simple (as I think,) that doubts the soil of Grammar to
be the fairest and happiest of all the renowned parts and Provinces of the
World, as well for the pleasantness of the place wherein it is situate, being
in good and wholsesome air, and abundant in all fruits and other good things,
without which this mortal life cannot easily be sustained: As also for that
she has always, and ever, been the Nurse and bringer up of all people of
renown. For even as in this age, even so long time heretofore, the custom and
manner was in this land and country (except among the rude and barbarous
Nations) where any were espied of prompt and ready nature, or hopefully
inclined, they were sent thither to be taught and instructed, whereby they
might attain the most holy and learned Sciences: For by this only way and
passage is the entry and access to the highest Countries, and Noble houses of
Dialectica, that is Logike, Philosophy, that is learned Wisdom, and
Theology, that is the most high and excellent knowledge in Divinity. Insomuch
that unless they enter through the Province of Grammar, no soul were able to
attain to the worthy secrets of the other Provinces. And albeit that the same
regions abound in all pleasure, yet notwithstanding they are so environed about
with high Mountains, and such sharp Rocks, right dificult and hard to be got
up upon, that hardly without a good-guide, any may ever attain to the plain
and pleasant path of them. And therefore because mankind should not be
restrained from so necessary a benefit, the good and laudable custom ever was,
and yet rests to the Kings of the said land, to send abroad through every
part of the universal world, some of their expert Knights and worthy Captains
of old bands properly called Pcdagoges, Schoolmasters, that they might aid
others, and surely conduct them of tender age to the Princely palaces of the
said Kings, (for the mighty, and such as now draw toward age, hardly suffer to
be taught of any,) to the end that the youth there being taught in the
Sciences of the Greek and Latin tongue, might the easier, and more lightly
ascend and go over the foresaid countries. There have all learned Greeks and
Latins made their apprentishippe, who by their worthy writings, or by the act
of others, are immortallized with renowned fame. Being there thus well taught
and learned, they have afterward so florishingly lived through the high praise
of their illustrious and splendant acts, that living, they were unto all men
in their time setters forth of virtuous examples, and after they were dead (yet
as alive) showed to those that suruiued them, as it were by pointing with the
finger, the right path and ready way to attain honorable life, and immortal
fame. But although that this land of Grammar be none other but indivisible and
without partition, yet nevertheless there are two mighty Kings, that there
reign and govern, that is to say, the Verb and the Noune. The Verb has to
name Amo, and the Noune Poeta, who a very long time reigned together in such
concord and quietness, that to form Oration perfect (wherein the beauty of
them both, the highest place of the one, and the chiefest seat of the other
depends) no dissension, displeasure or contention was ever heard between
them: For in all their territory there grew nothing more esteemed, more
worthy, or more sound, then Oration, which being beautified with the most
colors of sundry flowers, and decked with the most fair and fine figures, and
most sweet and perfumed Buds of set Roses, was of such singular comeliness and
authority, that she not only drew unto her m^nkind, (when the same is right
and aptly applied) but may also withdraw any of the Gods which way she will
wind them. By reason whereof Euripides says*

That which force could not gain,
That fair speech did soon attain.
Pyrrhus also used sometime to say that Cyneas did win more Towns with his
tongue and comely speech, then he with his Wars. These two Kings then being
in such concord, as all the affairs of Grammar were in good appearance and
better estate, it happened that for a small thing, dissension sprang between
them, whereby upon a very sudaine, all was bewrapped in uproar and martial
displeasures: For what harm is that, that Wine and insaeiate eating cause not?
Thus that so great amity and union between these two Princes was so
overthrown at one only banquet, wherein they were both drunken; and ebrietie
set them in so great enmities one against another, that either of them, pricked
forward with ambitious desire of regiment (as wild Bulls stung of gadde flies)
almost utterly ouerturned their own realms, and the noble Empire of Grammar.

But now let us show how their debate happened, to the end that every one may
know, that there is no band or knot of amity so strong that desire of
superiority may not break, every man loving rather to be served, then to
serve other.

As these two Kings on a time were at a banquet, in the midest of the hot
Summer, near to a pleasant and clear spring, having the water bancke on the
one side, and the other side most pleasant, and singulatly shaddowed with the
branches of green Willowes, and high Plane trees, after they had sufficiently
banquetted, being warmed with Wine, and lightened with drinking, a question
arose between them, whether of them two were greatest in authority, and of
most importance to perform Oration? Then the Verb minding to hold the
worthiest place, was sharply withstood of the Noune, affirming, that without
him, Oration and speech might not be, and that through him altogether, the
same is understood and of better grace: And what do thou (said he) without
me in Oration? If I withhould me a part never so little, the hearers
understand thee no more then one were dumb and spoke not. Gather a while a
small part of speech without me, and do that the hearers may understand that
which thou speak. Doubtless, if I be not there for an Interpreter, none
may so much as guess the least thing of thy meaning. Moreover thou should
note, that in so much as I am elder then thou, so much more am I approved
worthiest. Who is he that knows not the Noune, before the Verb? Or who is
he that is ignorant, how the beginning of the Noune is more ancient then the
Verb? It is infallible, that God made all things, who if he made all, then
he made also the Verb. Now God is a Noune and not a Verb, wherefore now of
consequence, by the Noune were all things made, yea, Oration it self was made
of God, and so of the Noune. As for thee, O thou Verb (that art so proud) thou
have thy calling of me: Have thou never read, that among the Sons of Women,
is not a greater then John Baptist? This is Gods sentence, it is not lawful to
go against it. Wherefore if none be greater then John, and John being a Noune;
it is apparent to be seen, that there is not, neither may any thing else be
greater then the Noune. I could allege to this matter six hundred places,
whereby it is proved clearer then the day, that as in worthiness and
antiquity, even so in authority and chief place the Noune is preferred
before the Verb. All which things I set and leave apart, to the end that men
think me not to proceed of the Verb, more through much babbling, then of just
cause. O Poeta (answered the Verb) I maruailed before now, why that Divine
Plato had expulsed thee out of his common Weal: But now knowing how shameless
and light thou art so to intermixe the holy Scripture among thy follies: I know
well that the learned and wise Plato judged rightly of thee. For had not he
exiled thee with many other, forth of the Republike that he ordained, thou
had by thy false coremonies, fearful Gods, and other things, corrupted the
civil manners of his citizens. For what pernicious thing durst not thy great
pride and arrogancy, enterprise and attempt? Yea seeing that by the devised
deceipts, and false writhed witnesses wrested by force from holy Scripture,
thou labourest to cast me down from the dignity of the chiefest place, which I
have long time in this land possessed. But certainly, for that it shall not
seem to thee, that thou alone art learned, I will easily allege more manifest
and plain testimonies of the same holy Scripture, that maintain mine
authority. I will set here foremost the very beginning of that Evangelical
Scripture, where it is thus said: In the beginning was the word, and the word
was with God, and God was the word. Open thine ears now, wherefore hidest thou
thy face so? God (said he) was the Word, and moreover, all things are made by
him: And without him nothing was made. It is not therefore the Noune that made
all things, but the Verb. Again, God was a Verb, and not a Noune. Moreover,
by the Word the Heavens were made firm and sure, and all their powers.

What will thou now say? There is no mean to defend thee by holy allegations,
but thou may perceive them to make for me, and not for thee. But let us bend
to those points that aptliest tend to our cause: Tell me I pray thee, whence
comes to thee this folly and madness? And whence have thou so sudainely taken
such stomach and heart of grace, that thou dare usurp upon thee the
worthiest place in Oration* Know thou not that all comeliness, beauty and
sweetness comes of me alone? And that the Noune is always ruled of the
Verb, and not that the Verb is ruled of the Noune. The comely featnesse of
the Verb is that, that beautifieth and enricheth Oration: And if I govern
thee not therein, thou shall be half handed, and of no force. Know thou
how to make a construction, wherein forthwith the chief place is not given
me? Behold all men know, that I only that hold the seigniorie over the
Verbes, can without the aid of any other make perfect Oration. Wherefore then
speak thou so impudently? And (as Horace says) why throwest thou so thy
proud and disdainefull six cornered words? Who art thou? What art thou? Of
what force? Or how great? Not of such authority as thou boastest of, I am
sure, that so go puffed and swollen, that it is marvel thou burstest not in
the midst, I am (thou will say the King of the Nounes: But what is thy name?
Thou will answer Poeta. And what is Poeta other then a pratler, a seller of
gaudes, a deviser of fables, a master of mischief, a brabler, a Liar, a
Drunkard, and a foolish dolte, that colors that which is truth, and puts
forth falsehood, and such a one as by prattling fillest and perturbest all the
World?

Which also by thy chat vsurpest so much authority among the common and simple
sort, that thou dare strive for the dignity against the renowned stock of
the Verbes. Foolishly do those fathers that give thee their children to be
taught of for what is in thee whereby that youth may be encited to grace and
virtuous encouragement, but the Stews of the adulterous Jupiter, the jealousy
of Juno, and the Whooredome of Venus, and of the Ruffian Mars, and such goodly
devices imrgined of thine own brain, that having drunk a little more then
well, thou, as filled with a divine ghost, and ouerladen with wine, mad like or
deuilishly, dare in a Poetical fury mix heaven with earth, and earth with
heaven.

At these words, Poeta the King, all fired in ire, not able to suffer the shame
nor the injury that was said to him, answered thus: O thou most mischievous
head of man, dare thou speak so boldly such contentious things of us? And
there withal caught a Cupp in his hand, which had, violently hit him on the
face, had not one of the standers by (holding him by the arm) turned the
stroke aside. It is not to be doubted now, that in the rage wherein both
parties were then, but that words were no blows: But certainly of the elder
sort and wisest came upon the same and they bear away the said Kings all
drunken into their Palaces: And on the morrow after that the friends of the
parties were assembled, there was great inquiry and disputation of the
contention happened the day before. Then of the part of the Nounes was sharply
blamed, the open throat and unseemly talk of the King of Verbes, and the most
part of the Nounes, especially the younger of them maruellously muttered,
saying that the tongue of King Amo ought to be tamed, and to give him to
understand, that the mighty majesty of the Nounes was never subject to such
reproach and contumely.

But although the elders that were then there present, especially Terence,
admonished them that nothing might be unadvisedly done, but that it was
requisite rather first to take counsel then weapon, in that point following
the wiser sort: yet notwithstanding all the Nounes with their King, were so
fleshed to fight, that it was forthwith fully determined and accorded to offer
battle to the Verbes: And thereupon was sent forth a Trumpet to the King Amo,
assuredly to proclaim War against him. On the Verbes part was no wiser
counsels held, for when all their Nobility were come together, there was
nothing else treated of among them, then to defend the dignity of the Verb^s,
in the land of Grammar, and to depresse and throw down the pride of the Nounes.
And behold, hereupon came the Herald of the King Poeta, who diligently declared
the charge of his errand. They answered, that with good will they received the
defiance, and from thence forward all their minds were bent wholely toward
martial affairs. Afterward the King of Verbes, sent Trumpets and messengers
to all Nations and lands that were under his seigniorie, commanding that all
such as were able to bear weapon, should be found ready in good order at the
day assigned.

First before all other, came Quando, the Duke of Aduerbes, with six of his
Captains, Vbi Quo, Vnde? Qua? Quorsum? and Quosque? Quorsum and Quosque were
companied with their bands, and under the first Ensign were these renowned
Champions. Hic, Illic Isthic, Intus, Foris, Ibi, Ibidem, Sicubi, Alicubi,
Alias, Alibi vsquam, and Nusquam. Under the second, Huc, Illuc, Istue, Intro,
For As, Alio, Nequo, Aliquo, Siquo, Illo, Eo, and Eo^^^. Under the third, Hac,
Illac, Istac, Alia, Nequa, Illa, and Eadem. Under the fourth, Horsum, Illorsum,
Istorsum, Introrsum, Extorsum, Dextrorsum, Sinistrorsum, Aliorsum, Aliquorsum,
and Deorsum.

Under the fifth, Hactenus, Hucusque, Eousque, Vsquemodo, and Vsque nunc. To the
sixth band the Captain himself bear the Ensign, marching in the midst of his
men, so that two of the said bands were in the Van, and the other three in the
Reere.

Many other Aduerbes served for forerunners, and these discovered the ways and
served for Partisans, the rest covered the wings and kept that the bands
marched not out of array. The names of them are, Peregre, Pone, Super, Supra,
Inter, Infra, Extra, Citra, and Vltra, with many other. After them came other
Aduerbes, great of quallity, quantity, and number, among whom were those
hideous swearing Aduerbs, as Aedipol, Enimuero, Ecastor, Medius fidius, and
profecto. Also the calling Aduerbs, as Heus, etc. The answerers, as Hem. The
laughers, as Ha, Ha, He. The denying Aduerbs, Minime and Nequaquam: which
Nequaquam albeit he were valliant, and greatly trained up in the wars, was
yet withstandinge the most untrue and deceitfullest of them all, and would
never say truth, but through constraint of danger.

Now these Adverbs were armed with three kinds of Armor; for they had kind for
a Buckler, Signification for an Headpice, and Figure for a Sword. Many other
Adverbs came to the aid of their King: as Indicatives, Frequentatives,
Meditatives, Deminutives and Denominatives, with their bands, which were not to
be contemned. Anomales (being Verbes out of rule, that bear great sway and
lordshippe in the borders of Grammar) were not last and hind most: doubtless
worthy men of War, but yet not able to hold their array, they are called,
Sum, Volo, Fero, and Edo, By reason whereof it was permitted them to pitch their
Tents in any part of the Camp where they would, least they might raise uproar
among the Soldiers.

The nation of the Verbes Defectives came also thither very brave, and in
goodly order, Memi^i, Novi, Caepi and Odi: Also Vale, Salve, Aio, Inquit, Faxo,
and Cedo, being all armed point device ready to join battle. After them
followed all the Verbes Actiues, clothed in bone and bravery, and also the
Neuters, with the Deponents, Commons, and Impersonals: All of them in sundry
fourms and strange languages, and were armed with Gende^^, Tences, Moodes,
Kinds, Persons, and Numbers.

The King Amo, after he had thus assembled his host, pitched his camp in the
wild plains of Conjunctions, in a place called Copula, and encamped his host
there, near the river of Disiunctiues called Siuer, and divided his Host into
four coniugations, giving to every of them a meet place (except to certain
familiar Verbes, who were encharged to bear the Baggage of the Infinitiues)
Their names are, Incipit, Desinit, Debet, Vult, Rotest, Iubet, Audet, Nititur,
Tentat, and Dignatur, with such like: This office was assigned them, for that
they were willing thereto, and had sturdy strength and ability. Last of all
came certain Verbes extract from high place, and of great dignity, as Pluit,
Ningit, Fulgurat, Tonat, Eulminat, and Aduesperacit; bringing with them
certain bands of their most worthy Champions: But the Gerundes, with the
Supines, forsaking the Nounes, came and yielded to the Verbes.

When Poeta King of Nounes heard the great preparation of his adversary,
fearing to be suprised with some sudaine alarm, if he abode the fury and
force of his enemies without preparation to defend him, commanded all the
subjects of his Realm that in the speediest manner they might, they should
make themselves ready to be in the field armed, and so aptly equipped, as in
best wise were possible for them. Then to the aid of the King of Nnunes, First
came the Dukes of the Pronounes, as the nearest kinsmen, who for the most part
were oftentimes Princes, Ego, Tu, Tui, being of the Blood royal, and of the
stock of the Arsacides, with whom were, Meus, Tuus, Noster, and Vester,
Nostras and Vestras, Ille, Ipse, Iste, Hic, and Hac. All the Pronounes were
parted in many fourmes, and under sundry Ensigns.

Some were Primatiues, other Deriuatiues, some Possessiues, and some Gentiles.
After them came the right worthy Articles, who had a long time haunted the
Wars, of which the first was, Hic, Haec, Hoc, The second, Hic, and Haec: The
third, Hic and Haec and Hoc, armed with Genders, Numbers, Figures, Persons, and
Cases. After them came the grand Captains of Interrogatiues, Infinitiues, and
Relatiues, Quia, qui, quae, quod vel quid: and these joined to the host. These
were the general referenders of all the land of the King of Nounes, with whom
were all the Relatiues, and Demonstratiues divided into two bands; that is to
wit, in Idendity, and Diversity: In the first were Is, Suus, Ipse, Ille,
Idem. In the second, Caeter, Alius, Reliquus and Alter. The Prince of the
accidental relatiues was Qualis, under whom fought Quartus, quot, quotuplex,
quatenus, quotenus, quotifarium, cuias and euigena; the queen of the
Prepositions called Ad, came thither also with Ab, and In, the husbands of
Nounes Casuals, and they brought with them three Ensigns of worthy Amazones;
Under the first were A, abs, cum, coram, clam, de, e ex, pro, prae, palam,
sine, absque, tenus, which served to the Ablative Cases, Under the second were
Ad, apud, ante, aduersum, aduersus, cis, citra, circum, circa, contra, erga,
extra, inter, intra, infra, iuxta, ob, pone, per, propter, prope, secundum,
post, trans, vltra, praeter, supra, circiter, vsque secus, and penes, all
serving to the Acusatiue cases: But In, sub, supra, and subter, served to both
Cases, to the Ablatiues, as well as to the Accusatiues. Under the third were,
Di, dis, re, se an, con, whose office was to puruey potation for the Soldiers,
for it was then Lent. Who albeit they were by composition inseparable, least
they should at any time be void of that was enjoined them, were yet
inconstant, that sundry times they claue to the Nounes, and somewhile to the
Verbes, and therefore they were accounted by the common rogues of the camp.

Now the Nounes thus divided by bands, marched in goodly array, that is to
weete, the Substantives, likewise the Adjectives, Nounes proper, Appellatiues,
and Participles: After whom were the brave and rich Comparatiues, Superlatiues,
Possessiues, Patronymiques, Gentiles, (which were noble) Numerals, and
Multiplying, which governed the outward borders. Every of them were divided by
five Declinations, to weete, by the first, the second, the third, the fourth
and fifth, and they were all armed with Kinds, Genders, Numbers, Figures, and
Cases. All the said bands reduced in one, Poeta the King of the Nounes carried
his host into the same plain of Conjunctions, and pitched his camp on the
other side of the said river Sieve: So that between both the hosts was nothing
but the River: By reason whereof, sundry times there happened sharp
skirmishes, between those that went there to the water, notwithstanding yet
without open battle, for that had both the Kings forbidden, because all
needful necessaries for the Wars, were not yet very ready.

Now either of these Kings conveyed to ^nduce to his part the Participle; a man
doubtless of very great authority tho^ow all the land of Grammar, yea, in
^uissance and dignity, altogether next and nearest the King: Who without doubt
was able also to cause victory to whether side he would wind him. By reason of
this, as well the Verb as the Noune, left nothing unassayed, either of them,
hoping to have him on their side: Poeta the King of Nounes putting forth
foremest, wrote to him in this manner: I doubt not (O my brother) but that thou
know with what pride and puffed stomach Amo the King of the Verbes is risen
against me, and against the dignity of Nounes, and by what law I mind to
occupy the chiefest seats to construe Oration: for which thing, seeing that
the fame does so much move and displease me; I am forced to take arms, and
set Soldiers in the field, that his pride being beaten down, we may keep
our seigniorie in his right, uncorrupted. And s^hens thou know how much thou
art bounden to the nation of the Nounes, and what great benefit thou have
received of us, as Genders and Cases, Numbers, and Figures: Thou shall
therefore do a work worthy of thy faithfulness and friendship, if with thy
men of war and thy Soldiers, thou come to join with us to defend our common
Titles, our common riches, and common hope. For if the dignity and lordship of
Nounes be destroyed, think not thou to find any sure place in all the land of
Grammar, And so farewell: Beseeching thee to set forward thy coming in the
speediest wise thou may.

On the other side, Amo the King of Verbes, wrote to the said Participle in
this wise: I know very well (O dear brother) how thou art by our enemies very
instantly solicited to be on their part, to war against us: And albeit that
we have hope, that by thy singular wisdom thou will not do any thing so
rash or unadvisedly, yet nevertheless it seemtth good unto us, to admonish and
advertise thee, that thou consider in thy self what commodities thou have
received of us, and what increase of dignity the Verbes have made thee, in
making thee partaker of their Tenses and Significations, Numbers, and Figures.
And if thou have any small benefit of the Nounes, those that thou receiuest of
us are much more, yea, and also greater. Thou shall therefore do best if thou
repair ^^ our happy fold, not alone to keep and defend us, and the lordship
of the Verbes, but also thou thy self, and thine. For thus think with thy
self, that if I have the worst, mine enemies will not withhold them from
running (...) thy lordship, and turn thy victorious arms against thee: That
they all alone may with their mad will run in and spoil all the land of
Grammar. Farewell.

The Participle after that he had read the said letters of the two Kings,
thought now of the one, then of the other, and had sundry thoughts in his head,
considering with himself that he could not part with neither of them, without
great and evident loss of his own goods. Contra^ily if he should seem to
minister, he might not only enjoy the favor of them both, but also that he
rather wished to see them low brought thorough the hazard of the wars, that
they being destroyed, he might afterward alone without resistance possess the
said land of Grammar: and therefore thought good to dissemble, ^eeding them with
fair words, until he knew who should have the better: therefore he wrote to
them in this manner.

I have most puissant Kings, received you^ letters, and I have read them with
great sorrow and trouble of mind, knowing that between two such Princes so
knit, is fall^^ such discord, that you cannot withold yo^ from overthrowing
thorough cruel warre^ your own lordships, and that renowned Empire. But
wherewith are you vexed? O^ what harm holds you? And whence comes this
madness? I beseech you consider ^ little whither you go. How will our common
enemies (those beast-like citizens of Ignorance, and that slouen-like people of
Barbary) rejoice, understanding the strength o^ two such Princes to be so
wasted through their own contentious quarrelling? I adiur^ you by the high
Gods above and beneath, tha^ ye would withhold you, and forbear such deadly,
mortal, and abominable battles, lea^ that through damnable desire of
superiority you bewrap in vproares and slanders the good lie Province of all
the world. But if destim^ will have it so, and that you be so fully purpose^ to
debate your quarrel by the sword, I purpose to take part with neither of you,
seein^ my lordship depends in part of the Verb^ and in part of the Noune.

And for that I am greatly bound to you both, with what I can I will aid you
both with Victuals, Munitions, and other necessary things: But as touching
facts of arms, I will withholde me, and I will cause my Soldiers to be
assembled in arms, to keep in at home, that through incourses no injury be
done by any, on the frontiers of mine own^ land: Fare ye well.

And albeit that he had thus written to them, this subtle and wily Fox
nevertheless, through all possible means he might, maintained the quarrel,
and by his privy letters incited the minds of both nations eagerly to itch
against other, hoping thereby (as I have said) that he should attain to the
seigniorie of the whole Grammar after their total destruction. Then having
assigned a day for his subjects to be assembled in, was in a most trim and
brave Company. First the Terminats in Ans, ens, dus, rus, tus, sus, ^us, were
therewith the Nounes verbal in Tox, trix, and such like, which were neighbors
of the Verbes and Nounes, and joined with the Participles. Likewise the
Gerundes and Supines, to avoid these civil wars, withdrew them also from the
Verbes, and fled to the Participles. These things thus appointed, the
Participle sent great gifts to both sides, to be always and still in their
favor: and first he sent to the Verb these vndernamed Neuter Passiues, to
weere, Gaudeo, soleo, audeo, fio, prandeo, Coeno, iuro, titubo, placeo, nubo,
careo, moereo, poto, taceo, and quiesco. To the King of Nounes he gave the
ending in Tor and trix. He sent also for wages to the host of Verbes an
hundredth Wagons of Preter Tences, of Present and Future Tences. Item, a
thousand Camels laden with Figures, Simples, Composites, and Decomposites: And
to the Noune, he sent by the river Sieve, ten ships laden with Nominative and
Genitive Cases, with as many Singular and Plural Numbers, and a great number
of other, Masculine Genders, Feminines, Neuters, Commons and all. This done,
he held him in his country with his men of war, awayting to whether side
forture would turn her. In the mean while, these two warre-like Kings having
very well made provision of all things necessary to give battle, awaited
nothingelse then some fit occasion to co^mence the War. But it chanced that
two of the worthiest towns of Grammar, (to weete) A, and V, were taken
vnappointed by the King of Verbes, albeit that then all towns were
indiffe^ently subject, and paid equal tribute ^o both the said kings, as much
to the one, as to the other, being moreover, in no thing more in service to the
one King, then to the other.

When Poeta the king heard this, he took by the like policy three other
Towns, E, I, O: The other hearing this, kept them to their strongest watch, and
keeping their liberty, were common to both parts, whose names are, B, C, D, E,
G, L, M, N, P, Q, R, S, T, X, Z, and of them doubtless comes all the force
of Grammar. To either of the Kings were given two Dipthongs to be their
trum^ets, for they were taught by sound of ^rump, to move the spirit of all the
Soul^iers for to fight, ae, and oe, served* to the ^ing of Nounes: Au, and Eu,
to the Verbes. Beside this, certain ieasting or ^ibing Women followed both the
hosts, that moved the minds of the Soldiers ^^ sundry affections: For some
wept and ^ewailed the slaughter that should be among them of Grammar, yea, and
that they felt the same near them already, ^ Oh, ah, he, heu, and hei: Other
were displeased, and reproved the contention ^ these Kings, as Vah, va, and
atat. Other wondered at such dissension fallen between so great friends, as
Papae, vah^ and vah: Other as fools incited and encouraged the Soldiers to
fight, as Ei^ and Euax. Moreover all the men of W^ and Soldiers being well
appointed, an^ ready to enter into the battle, in seem^ good to the King of
Verbes that on hi^ part gladly with all his heart, he would withdraw to
commence civil Wars And to cloak his doing in, or with some honest manner,
wrote a letter to the ki^ of Nounes, in this tenor:

O Poeta, thou have well understood ^ what appointment and ready strength I ^
come down to show my self in the field give the battle: And again thou may
know that there are not in thee sufficient f^ces able to abide, and withstand
the viol^ rushing in of the legions of my men of War^ Therefore thou shall do
wisely, if in leau^ me in my estate, thou withdraw unto t^ territories.

But if thou be so senseless, that it must be had by the edge of the sword,
then know thou that three days hence, I will beeready with mine host in the
plain field to fight, there to receive thee.

When the Trumpets Au and Eu had given their letters to the king of Nounes; He
answered them according to his Council, in this wise:

O Amo, thou ever have too many words, but it is now no time to amase the ears
of the hearers with thy much babbling: Thou boastest thy valiant host, and thy
fearful prepared ordinance, as if on our side we had none but Dwarfes and
Grasshoppers. Thy possession has ever been very little in Oration: But yet thy
folly leads thee thither, from whenc thou may not fly, until with that
part of Lordship (by thee wrongfully won, worse governed, and naughtily
retained) thou be by just war chased out. And for that thou shall know how
little, not I only, but mine, do waeye thee, and how smally we fear thy
threatenings; our Heraldes ae and oe shall show thee, their bare buttockes if
thou will, Farewell, such as I wish thee: Adieu to the devil for ever and aye.

By these letters the hearts of them poisoned one against another, did all
awai^ with fiery stomachs the last assigned day of battle. In the mean while,
by occasion of such troubleous time, there arose (as commonly does in such
business) ^ license of most mischievous deeds, and there went forth a company
of privy pilferers through the whole Province ^^ Grammar, seeking their prey,
and especially in Wooddie places, and from the hills espied the passengers, and
spoiled the Victuallers that went to the Camps Whereby great dearth and
scarcity ^^ Victuals daily increased in both the hosts. By reason whereof,
certain wo^thy Captains, with sufficient number o^ Soldiers were by the
consent and decree of both Kings, sent out to slay the^ robbers, or else to
drive them far out ^^ the land of Grammar. They being com^ thither, the
Soldiers did enclose a ver^ thick wood, where they had vnderstoo^ that there
were a great number hidden: S^ they beset them, that one escaped not un taken.
Among whom was a certain fello^ called Catholicon that drove a great A^^laden
with Greek and Latin words boun^ up together, and carried them into Italie^

Item, an old Dunse called Ignoramits, with a young yonker surnamed Dulman
which also with a great one-eyed Mule, drove a Wagon laden with false and
broaken Rules, and foul Fourmes, not only of old Phrases, but also of Latin
terms, wherewith he hoped to be enriched in the burroughes and towns,
selling them as precious things set in glass, to make latin of glass, which
might have day seen through it. Moreover this yonker Dulman was found puffed
full of false pieces of money, and counterfeit coin, being base bullion, which
he caused to be taken for good, being of an untrue stamp which he had,
forged, and of the said money he had filled all the land of Grammar. Likewise
there was taken a great and greasy lasie lordane, that made himself be
called Grecismus, that had made lean all the Victuallers that went to the
camp, to stuff a great, foul, rank, stinking, and rotten calves panch
with. There was also taken one Pylades, that had robbed all the ways he went
in, and bodily punished as they had merrited, some quartered and cut in pieces,
some burnt in the fire, other cast into the dongeons of perpetual and stinking
prisons. He that took and punished Grecismus, was a right worthy Captain
called Toussan or Tusan: The robberrie of Pylades was discovered and debarred
by a noble captain, very well acquainted in the Wars, which was called John
of Cuvella, that so swelled that he was in peril of the dropsy, but one gave
him a short glister, that did bring him in slender form, and more lean and
easy to be borne then he was. All the rest of his robberous rabble were
destroyed, slain and buried in a great and dark dungeon. Catholicon that
among them was called the great, was brought to the camp with his Ass, who
confessed on the rack (albeit it were a thing manifest) that he had stolen all
these words in the land of Grammar: Then when he was asked ought in Greek,
he answered that he understood not the Greek, and of the Latin but a very
little. Then said the Judges, wherefore carriest thou with thee Greek words,
seeing that thou understand not? Then he answered: there is so great
ignorance of learning with us (says he) that albeit I speak grossly, yet can
I easily make them believe that I am through lined in every corner with all the
eloquence of Attica. All they which were there, hearing this, fell in a great
laughter, and said: By Saint George, seeing that thou have such hearers as thou
have, that which we know not the due owners of, thou shall carry with safe
conduct to thy people and nation: But that which we shall know to belong to
any, that we think good to be rendered to the due owners. Then after they
had made diligent search, all the Greek words almost were given Isydore, whose
they were, and the remnant of the Latins; to which business was appointed the
master of the Trench-men, called Calapine, with the courteous Captain,
Anthony of Nebrisse. The intermixed, rotten, and secret hidden words were
given him, and so they permitted him to go his way with his Ass lighter laden
then before: Nevertheless they forbade him at any time ever after, to be so
hardy as to call himself a Grammarian, except among the rude and barbarous
people. In these business, one Priscian, a very renowned man, and of great
honor in the land of Grammar, for that he could not suffer the said land to
run into total ruin through civil war and contention, hasted toward the
camp in post to make an agreement, and being taken, was spoiled and sore
beaten of the felonish fellowship of Catholicon, and was so wounded on the
head, that there was no salve able to heal him. Shortly after, among these
fellows was taken one, who falsely and shameful said that he was an
Historiographer, and had gathered together a great bundell of Ieasting foolish
gaudes in a great volume, called Supplementum Chronicharum, who forced through
question, confessed that all they were stolen things: And so he was exiled
for ever into the land of Ignorance. As these things were doing, certain of
the Verbes anomales, as Sum, voto, fero, with three companies of their
hand-maides, made an assault and took away a prisoner of the captains of the
Nounes named Caeter, which was of the race of Relatiues, and they took him
hidden with his fellows in an ambush, in what cave I know not, near to the
by-pathway of the Coniu^ctions, Quod and Quam, and him they slew, with all his
Singulars. His Plurals seeing the danger they were in, made a vow to Jupiter,
to sacrifice him the remnant of their goods, and so they escaped whole and
sound miraculously. When tidings hereof were told to King Poeta, he was
maruailously moved, and it greatly grieved him to loose such a Captain: For
this Caeter was very stout and full of stomach even to the uttermost, and in
feats of war he had no peer.

The king of Nounes therefore feeling himself greatly endamaged with the
loss of Caeter and his Singulars, diligently awaited occasion, whereby he
might render double the like to his enemies. But fortune, who can in all things
do very much, and chiefly in war, gave him shortly after the way to revenge
him of the wrong. For in those days many legions of Verbes of no small
authority were taken prisoners by certain light horsemen of the Nounes. Among
whom was Dice, face, fore, and duce of the band of the Imperatiues and
commanders. From whom through great ignomie was cut aaway by the Kings
commandment, the hinder skirts of their garments, so that they showed their
buttocks, and so sent them away again, so that ever since they were called
only Dic, duc, fac and fer. Afterward he commanded that the prisoners should
be slain, namely Fuo, specio, leo and pleo, whose goods were by the king of
Verbes given to their lawful children, descending of them in line, as Fui,
fueram, fuissem, fuisse, and futurus: And the children of specio, who were a
great number, as Aspicio, conspicio, and such like: And also to them of Leo,
and pleo, as Doleo, impleo, compleo, suppleo, repleo, expleo, opleo. At the
very same season was bewrayed a great treason to the host of the Verbes, how
certain horrible hooresons of the stock of Preterperfectes, being soldiers,
to cloak their treason, and not to be known, were disguised after the manner
of the Greeks, though they were of the Latin tongue, and being taken, had
two heads. These had conspired and laid wait for the king of Verbes: but being
taken and convict of the fact, were declared traitors, and condemned of
trespass against the King: They were called Momordi, cecidi, cucurri, pependi,
spospondi, pepigi, didici, poposci, tetuli, cecini, peperi, tutudi, pepuli,
fefelli, memini, pugugi, and tetigi, from whom was cut off one head at that
present: So that whereas they were before time called, Momordeo, cecido,
cucurro, they be now called, Mordeo, cedo, curro, and so of the rest. From
Tetuli were cut off both heads, as well of the Preter, as of the Present-tence:
Albeit that Terrence through pity thought to simon the same again of the
Preter tence with Baulme, but it held not. Now as the time of fighting drew
near, the said kings set up in the highest place of their host, a red cloak,
to advertise the Soldiers that they should shortly join together in fight,
that they might prepare and propose themselves thereto, taking their repast,
and whetting their weapons, might make their munitions ready, with all other
things pertaining to such affairs. In the morning, after the Soldiers had
dined on both sides without any noise making, the whole host assembled to the
said place. Then when they had all ranged in battle array with displayed
ancients, the said Kings besought and required their soldiers earnestly to
behave themselves well and worthily: But it was no need, seeing that they of
themselves were already fired enough. For all as madmen shook their Pikes
with so great and stout a stomach, that they cared for nothing but to strike,
and awaighted naught but the sign of the onset and alarm: And hereupon
hehold, the Trumpets blew the onset, on both sides. On the other part the earth
resounded and rang again, and in both hosts were made great shoutes and
cries, the heads of both hosts made great vows, and every of them stomacked
and cheered up their soldiers: Then every one did what he could and knew to
be done, they stroke together with great handy strokes of Swords, brake
their Pikes, that the air rang again of the cry of the fighters. In the air
was nothing seen but clouds of smoke and brimstone: On both sides were great
stoare wounded, and of dead corpeses plenty. O there was a goodly sight to see
the Verbes Defectiues (among the rest) fighting against the Nounes
Heteroclites. These Nounes accompanied with their Nominative Cases, with their
Genders, also with their Genitiues, and Plural Numbers, did fie^cely lay upon
their enemies. The Verbes Defectiues did stoutly and courageously withstand and
put apart these Nounes Heteroclites, with their Indicatiues accompanied with
their preter-perfect-tenses, so that by their Coniugations they break through
force, the Numbers and Genders of the other.

Ofthese Verbes, there was one called Aio, who using singular hardiness, did
for a long space resist two Nounes Heteroclites so long, that in the end being
no more able to withstand their furious forces, lost diverse of his Persons,
Modes, Tenses, and Numbers, and then rested only unto him, Ais, ait, aiunt,
aiebam, aiebas, aiebat, and aiebant: The rest passed through the sword.

The air was obscured and made dark with the arrows that the Numbers
Singulars and Pluralls shot. The shot of the Figures Composite and Decomposite,
flew whistling so round, and rightly into the ears of every one, that they
were all as deaf. A great number were hurt by the darts of the kinds of
Primatiues, and Deriuatiues. The Trumpets likewise that went on every side,
sounded a fearful Taratantara; so that the sound thereof encouraged the
fighters maruailous full of stomach and hardy, to bear the blows and
sturdie stripes of their enemies. And in the midest of these, troublous railing
Women, the Interiections that went about the arayes, vexed and sore troubled
them all, through their moving and fickle affections: Among whom for the most
part were often heard these pitiful and dolorous cries, Heu, and hei: oh, ah,
eh. Notwithstanding this war was more fierce and cruel then long in
fighting, and had it not been for great abundance of rain, that through a
sudden storm and tempest which fell from the clouds, even at that present
made the medly to depart and break off, then doubtless had there been an end
of all the forces of Grammar. Such and so great was the furious rage that they
had every one of them, one against another, yea until that point, that albeit
the Trumpets sounded the retreat on both sides, and they al greatly encombred
with the water, nevertheless could they be unmingled and separate asunder one
from another, to return again to their colors: The victory abroad doubtful
and uncertain, neither was it known of any, whether had the better or the
worse, for on both sides there was a maruailous many, as well of sore wounded
as of slain, not only of common Soldiers, but also of high and chief
Captains. It is not possible for any to tell the great losses that were there
on both sides: Notwithstanding I will endeavor to show plainly and
manifestly, and in the onliest manner I can, that which some did win or lose
there (though I cannot say of every one in particular) this will I do, to this
end, that they that come after may be better advised. First the part of the
Verbes Defectiues, Infit, lost all them that were descendent from him, all his
Genders, Tenses, Moodes, Persons and Numbers, that were of the fourth
Conjugation, of Figure Composite, and of the Singular number. He himself
escaped safe, for seeling himself in peril, he made a vow, that of no kind
of religion, godly, or otherwise, he would after any more bear the liuerie:
And therefore he was at that brunt so sore affrighted, that since he has
been very seldom seen publicly in the land of Grammar. Fore was berest and
robbed of all his goods, except Fores, foret, and fore, which are of the third
Conjugation, Vale, aue, salve, of the kindred and stock of the Imparatiues
(lost a great many of their fellows) which are yet living, the rest were lost.
Faxo, of the same stock of Actiues, escaped only with three of his, all the
rest of his band after him were slain, except faxis, faxit, and faxint, who
saved themselves with him by flight. Inquio, of the stock of the Neuters, kept
Inquis, inquit, inquiunt, inquam, inquies, inquiet, inquient, inque, and
inquam: The rest perished in the Wars. Inquiens at that time was with the
Participles, and so escaped. Apage, and apagite, when they had lost all their
fellows, escaped alone. Diet, lost also all his fellows, except diescit.
Facio was put from his son factor, who notwithstanding before he died, did
constitute by knightly testament an heir, Fio: posco, disco, metuo, timeo,
renuo, respuo, compesco, vrgeo, linquo, and all they of the race of the
Actiues, lost their Supines. Some Verbes lost their Preter-tenses of the third
Conjugation, and in place of them they after recovered the Preter-tenses of the
fourth Conjugation; among whom was Cupio, peto, quaero, arcesso, facesso, and
fero. Some Verbes, having lost their Future in am, to the end that they would
not hence forth wholly lose the hope that was to come, bought other Futures in
Bo, at the Fayers of Recanetum, as Eo, queo, and vaeneo: But Horace by his
authority gave to Lenio, lenibo. All Verbes belonging to beauty lost all
their Supines, among whom was Luceo, fulgeo, splendeo, polleo, and such like.
Fulcio using a singular hardiness escaped out of peril, and held his fultum:
But seeing we have recounted and told of them that received loss, it is not
meet to hold of no account these Verbes, that behauing themselves well and
worthily, had both spoils and dignities, which they received of their King,
beside these others that they first had and enjoyed, among other were eleuate
and set up in great honor, Cano, curo, careo, moereo, nubo, and prandeo, for
beside their own Preter-tenses, they received also the Preter-tenses of the
Passive voice. Redimo was enriched in his Five Tenses of nature, and at that
present obtained four Significations, as to deliver, to lead and govern, to
deck and ornate, and to take to ferme. Solor won three significations, as to
be alone, and to comfort and exhort. Explicat, beside his own sense, which
is, to explicat and show forth plainly, received, that he might declare, show,
that he might draw, that he might represent and deliver. Valco, beside his own
sense, which is to be in health and whole, wan so much, that when he said
vale, that he might salute also and sometime curse too. Presto had four
significations, as, to lend, and to be aloft, to do good, and hold promise,
with diverse other significations. Haurio was as much enriched, for he had four
significations, as to draw out, to wound, to hear, and see, and diverse other
such like: and all they when need is, are reduced into one. Pasco received two
understandings, to feed and bring up. Vaco, albeit he meddled not much among the
fighters (for as Socia says in Plautus, the fiercer they fought, the faster he
fled) nevertheless, fortune that oftentimes gives reward to the slothful,
would enrich his cowardice with the best of the spoils: for as he espied
certain of his enemies that were fled and gone away, he crept out of his Cabin
and cloaked them in his fist: who after bought them again with a great sum
of silver, and he wan beside his own former sense, seven other, to weete, to
understand, to leave of, to serve, to be superfluous, to be lawful, not to
have, and to be empty. Studeo wan three significations, as to solicit, to
desire earnestly and to be very painefully busied. Pango received three
senses, as to sing, and has given him panxi in his preter-tense to make
truces, and has given to pepigi to fasten and join together. Sapio from that
day had two senses, to weete, to give knowledge, and to be wise. Fero, one of
the four annomales gained three senses, as to uphold, to desire, and to bear.
Confiteor had three senses, to praise, to purge, and to make manifest. Supero
received seven senses, by reason of the great authority that he had among the
Verbes: as to remain in part, to overcome, to be near, to go further, to
escape, to ouerliue and exceed. Some Verbes there were, which having lost their
own preter-tenses, had of their king the goods of other Verbes Passiues which
were slain at the battle: as Audeo, Fido, Gaudeo, Soleo, and Fio. These
pestiferous and perilous perilous lying Verbes, which always have in their
heart and mind, other then in the mouth, albeit they had no part of the prey,
yet ought not they and their names to be left in oblivion, but spoken of, to
the end that every one might know them, and so beware: Seeing that always
under the color of a cloak of the active, they bear the passive voice: They
are called exulo, veneo, nubo, liceo, and vapulo, This last of all is the most
wily and subtillest: and therefore so much wiser as the boy is, so much the
more heed will he have to decline his wily ambushes, If he have good care
to keep his posteriors. Now seeing we have already showed as well as we are
able, that which happened to the Verbes, it seems good in our account that
we speak also of Nounes. Oversight was made in and through the host of the
Nounes, and it was found how fortune had been as much diverse to one part as
to another, and to the end that we begin by the positiues, there was certain
of them, that being hurt in their Comparatiues, received dressing and cure
through the diligence of certain expert Physicians, as melior, minor,
dexterior, sinisterior, plus, magnificentior, and muneficentior, all Irregular,
and descending of the second Declension. But Pius, arduus, egregius, tenuis,
and suchlike, lost their own Comparatiues. The Nounes ending in er, lost
imus, in their Suparlatiues: And for the same they had rimus, as tener and
saluber. To others for that they had lost simus was given limus, as Humilis,
facilis, gra^dis, similis, agilis, and to vetus, was given veterrimus.

Among Trees were certain Nounes, that quitting themselves manfully, by a
sudden miracle changed altogether at once their kinds, becoming of females,
males, every one astonished at the sudden case, demanded whence came such
transformation to them: Of them were rubus and oleaster, which Liuius says
were evil and unlucky tokens, and therefore affirmed he that they ought to
be cast into the botome of the Sea, or else to be exiled out of the land of
Grammar. But the King Poeta ieasting at the fond superstition that they had in
the miracles, did pro^ibite all and every of them, to harm, or any way to hurt
them, saying that it was not an evil sign or unhappy accident to be changed
from women into men: saying that out of a naughty and crooked kind* they were
turned into a good and better. From certain Nounes Hetroclites, fighting
against the Verbes Defectiues, were cut away both cods and cullion in the
Plural number, so that afterward there was in that Number neither man nor
woman but chaste Neuters: which doubtless is a thing greatly to be pitied.
Their names were Sibilus, Auernus, Infernus, Menalus, Supparus, Baltheus,
Tartarus, Dindymus: Other had better chance, for when in the same Number they
were Neuters, were glad forthwith to see them become males: as Porrum, rastrum,
frenum, and coelum. But the said porrum and rastrum, as they went through Rome,
found in the markets of Agon^ their Neuter Pluralls, and there the^ bought them
again with a great summ^ of money, and giving leave to the males, loved better
to hold them to them there, Balsamum among all Nounes and trees abode only a
Neuter: By reason whereof seeing that he could not beget nor bring forth
young, is in so great scarcity, th^^ he is no where seen, but in the land o^
Judah, which is the cause (as sorrowful) he yields his fruit all in tears:
As for other Nounes that were bereft of their Plural Neuter, received the
Feminine for amends, as Epulum, ostreum, vesper, and cepe. But truth is, of
all creatures, the Oysters only were Neuters: But above all authors, Pliny,
and the Poets hold them for Neuters: Wherefore Ouia says thus: Ostreaque in
co^chis tuta fuere suis, so that afterward they gaired so, that they became as
much Feminine as Nenters: others that were of the Doubtful gender, received
the Masculine in their Plural number, as Cardo, bubo, and such like: Other
that were spoiled of all their Cases Plural, abode ever since dismembered and
maimed; among whom were Fumus, imus, fimus, puluis, sanguis, mundus, pontus,
sol, sal, and vnus, all of the Masculine gender. Hardly is seen any time more
then one Sun in the firmament, but when it happens so, it is not natural,
but rather wonderful: likewise also certain Femi^ines lost their Plural
Cases, as Lux, sitis, ^^bes, mors. vita, fames, tabes, gloria, fama, ^alus,
pax, humus, lues, tellus, senecta, sobo^es, inventa, indolis, and proles.

These fought so feebly in the host,
That all their Pluralls there they lost.
Other Feminines lost at the said conflict their Singular Number, as Argutiae,
habenae, bigae, blanditiae, cimae, delitiae, exequiae, excubiae, exuviae,
phalerae, facetiae, g^nae, gades, insidiae, induciae, calendae, lachrymae,
latebrae, minae, and many other. Other Neuters were spoiled of all their
Pluralls, as Coenum, foenum, aeuvm, solum, pus, and virus: Furthermore, other
were put from all their Singular numbers; as Arma, castra, exta, cunabula,
crepundia, pascua, moenia, mapalia, magnalia, ilia, seriaprae, coma, precordia,
and sponsalia, yea and also all the names of Feasts, as Saturnalia, Dionisia,
Aphrodysia, Bacchanalia, Floralia, and Neptunalia. These vain Nounes, which
always do say many, and signify one only, having lost all their Singulars,
saved themselves by flight, as Venetiae, Pisae, Cuinae, Athenae, and Thebae.
All the names of Mettalls, especially Aurum, and Argentum, which every one
labors to take Prisoner, Auricalcum, plumbum, ferrum, and stannum lost their
Pluralls. A^ hadly retained hibaera. In like mann^^ for the great heat and
alteration of the combat, the measures were spoiled of the Plurallitie of their
liquors, except of Wines and Honies, which in the Plural Cases were spared, to
the end that they might do king Poeta service with new Wines, for that he
loved them well. Oleum, and frumentum, by like misfortune were so gluttonous,
that through the great scarcity that was in the host, they were not found in
Plurallitie. Other abroad, shortened in the end of their Genitiues, and Datiues
plural, as Iura, thura, era, maria, and fora. Yet nevertheless all Nounes
had not the worse part; for di^ers of them had of the spoil of their enemies:
by reason whereof they were of greater authority then before: so that some
received other Nominative cases beside their former: As Arber, which also ^ath
arbos: Honor, which has honos: O^^^, which has odos: Cucumer which has
^^eumis: Ciner which has cinis; and Pul^er, which has puluis. Notwithstanding
^^ey occupy not the^e always, but keep ^is share for high Feasts, as for
trim and ^^ce dressing for honors sake. Plaga, al^^it through hurting he
bled, yet won ^^e four other senses without account of the first (that
signifies a Wound or hurt) as when you would say, the Arming coard of a nett,
also a great space of the Heaven and earth (called Clima) also a great kind of
Linen, such as the old matrons of Rome wear when they go in the City, and
also for a bed, or any part of a bed; Opus the same day won other three
senses: for Opus signifies earth: Under Open he gives Aid, under Opibus,
Riches. The The Gerundes and Supines, because they were so often fled to the
enemy, were amerced to fine, after peace was made between both the said
Kings, through the earnest complaint and supplication of Demosthenes, who
alleged the laws of Solon, by which it was commanded, that such were to be
put apart from all honor, and Offices, that in any sedition had not held that
part of the one nor the other: For that such a one thinks altogether of his
own business, and reckons not of the Common wealth: The greatest part of
them in the land of Grammar lived after the laws of Athens. Afterward
therefore the King of the Nounes left to the Gerunds no more but only three
cases, taking away from them for the trespass of their default all their other
Cases. To the Supines, only were reserved but two: which greatly grieved all
the inhabitants of Grammar, sharply blaming such a sort of foolish precepts of
Solons laws, as much as the fond reasons of Demostenes, whom they ieasted at,
saying, that he had left his cunning at home, his distaffes, bands and wool,
and that he had not fained the disease of the throat in vain, to have yearly
reueneues and preferrement: because he hoped not to have so much money of the
Gerundes and Supines, as be sometime had of Harpalus. Surely if I would
describe forth all the losses and misfortunes orderly as they ought to be, and
also all the conquests of the worthiness of every one that changed in that
day, my matter would be too long: and therefore I will here make an end: And
this may suffice, that whatsoever is found lost, wasted, or joined to, and
grown up through all the land of Grammar and his borders and utter limmits, is
wholly proceeded through the same hard, hideous, and mortal sight among them.
In the same time of the Wars, sprang up many new words, and sundry old were
put apart and rejected. And had not three honest persons been chosen for
arbitrators (of whom we shall speak by and by) which by their power and
abillitie withstood the naughtiness of certain Grammatistes, or slender
Grammarians, so great Barberousnesse had then been so mixed through the Latin
tongue, and the same then bin so mingled with foolish words, that all hope had
been lost ever to restore the same again to his honor, and comely beauty.
Therefore after that the Retreat was sounded of both the hosts, and that they
had numbered as well the wounded as the slain, and known the great loss that
was of both the hosts, they all began to fall on sighing: and the sight of
such a slaughter of their people greatly grieved them, through desire of
superiority. Wherefore every of them repenting, sought now nothing else then
to make peace.

And first of all Poeta King of Nounes, after he had called his Soldiers
together (but not without tears) said these words: I think well that you know
(O my fellow Soldiers) how dolefully, and against my will, I have taken arms
to defend and uphold the honor (as I thought then) and the authority of the
Nounes, against our brethren the Soldiers of the Verbes, and by how many ways
I have assayed to defer and put off long between us the wars, that they
might leave us quiet in our estate. But when I think not only of our own
loss, but also of theirs: Again when I behold the dead corpses on both sides,
I have greater desire to lament then to speak. Therefore it behooves us to
remember that, which some of our good old Citizens and Burgeses wrote of the
discord and civil Wars, as well of the Romans as the Greeks, and how with
great reproaches they blame and detest the ambition of them. In truth if we
had thought of this at the first, we never had gone to so great folly, neither
had we also (as blinded with anger and rage, frantickely and as void of
reason) torn our propper flesh so with our own hands as we have: That which
is done and past, is easier to be reproved then amended: Nevertheless it is
better to stay thus, then to follow on a naughty beginning: For if we will be
so mad as to continue fighting amongst our selves, doubtless then is the
principality of Grammar utterly come to confusion, and then shall be made so
great an excess and entry into the same, to the Barbarous and ignorant
people, that they only will rule all, there being none to resist them, or
prevent them. By reason whereof (O my fellow soldiers) for the commodity of
both Realms, I am willingly determined to make peace with the King of Verbes,
and of mine own free will, will go toward him, and give him mine hand.
Notwithstanding, think not that I speak thus because I have lost stomach, or
that I am timorous; but because there is nothing more sure, that the affairs
of the Nounes and Verbes can continue, unless they be friends tigether, knit
and quiet in one: Of my self I do mine office, not doubting but that I teach
you that; which serves to the continuing benefit and commodity of every one
in general, being ready willingly to do what your will is.

This profitable Oration, and no less necessary saying of the King, greatly
pleased all the assembly, and all the crew of the Soldiers cried aloud,
desiring that that which the King had so wisely spoken, might be as diligently
done. So there was sent into the camp of the Verbes for Ambassadors certain
of the wisest and chiefest of the Nounes: who having first made without much
difficulty a truce, finally came in such agreement with the king of Verbes, and
his greatest Lords, that three personages should be chosen, which should be
exactly seen, and have understanding in all customs, rules and terms of
Grammar: and that to their award and arbitrament (by solemn oath being sworn
thereto) both parties should hold them, and their rest; without any
contradiction. Great was the difficulty, and much more was the disputation, to
whom the charge should be given to make the treaty of the peace. Many
procured means to have the same office on them, and to diverse was the voice
given, and other again took it from them: In the end it was agreed by
Priscian, Linacrus, and Despauterius, that Lilius should have the charge and
authority to knit and make sure the Articles of the peace: who being sent for,
came to the camp, and having there heard the reasons on both sides, and
diligently waighed all the business; In the end pronounced this sentence.

To the Kings of Grammar, to their Gentlemen, to their Citizens, and all
Students good hap and commodity be that which now is discussed. Whereas we
were deputed to take away the contentious disorders, to put apart all the
slanders, wrongs and domages that heretofore have come upon the Kings of
Grammar, and their soldiers, all which we revoke, take away, and blot out:
which if they may not be forgotten, at the least our decree is, that they be
never hereafter more spoken of.

Item, That henceforth when a solemn Oration comes to be made, that both
the Kings of Grammar in good agreement with their subjects come together, as
Verb, Noune, Pronoune, Participle, Aduerbe, Conjunction, Preposition,
Interiection.

Item, We appoint that in common and familiar speech, the Noune and the Verb
only do bear the burden, taking for their help whether of them they will,
but to leave the other by, to the end that being put too often in work, they
be not molested.

Item, We ordain that the Noune serve to the Verb, and when he goes
formest as touching the case, ought also to be governed of the Verb, but in
speech that the Noune be before the Verb, and the same being after, ought
therefore to govern the Noune touching his Case: but concerning his Persons
and Numbers, the Verb ought to given place to the Noune, Pronoune, or
Participle.

Item, We appoint the Participle bear remembrance of the Nounes and the
Verb, and have the government of the Verb before him first, and that of the
Noune after him last.

Furthermore we permit the Verb, where need is to make an O^ation himself
alone, in the first and second Person, and also in the third Person in certain
Verbes of action always notwithstanding under the authority of the Noune, but
not expressing the sa^e.

This sentence was given and published in the presence of both parties, and it
pleased very well all the assembly, and has since ever been observed of all
the inhabitants of Grammar. Also the Universities have approved it: The
University of Paris observing the rest, craved then for her Students, that
they might pronounce Nounes and Verbes at their pleasure, and that without any
regard of the quantity of sillables. But because between the Relatiues and
Antecedents, between the Adjectives and the Substantives, between the word
governing, and governed, between the determined, and also between perfect
speech and imperfect was an old quarrel, striving whether of them were chiese
and greatest: It was also concluded to join them in unity, that the Relative
of substance identitiall, should agree in Gender, Number, and Person, with his
Antecedent.

Item, That the Adjective should obey to his Substantive in Case, Gender, and
Number: and that the governed word should follow the governing: and that the
Relative of the accident should only represent the Antecedent in such accident
or property, in what manner the referred, and the referrent agreed by rule of
diversity with the Anticedent: and that the speech imperfect should depend
upon the perfect; and the specifying, of the specified, and between two
Adjectives, two substantives, two Verbes of the Infinitive mode, two perfect
speeches, and between two imperfects to be no bond of service. Furthermore
the said William Lilly would, that between sayings and doings might be made
a peace and agreement: but the advice was, that if that discord were once taken
away, the Barbor-surgeons and Tauerne-keepers would have little to do:
wherefore they left that thing even as they found it. All students of
Ignorance, with these bussards of Barbary, Ignoramus and Dulman his Clearke,
were by commandment exiled for ever out of all Grammar; and all false Latin
was ever after confiscated to their use. The Barbarous were chased bayond the
Alps into their Cities and Borrough-townes: But the Ignorant through the
favor of some Princes, are bred not only in and through Italy, but also in
Rome, the mother of good letters: and there whether she will or no, do they
continue, among whom there are some being purueied of fatt Prebends are
observed so dull-headed and doltish, that if ye ask them Amo quae pars? They
will say, parlate Italiano chio vt intenda, so much in assery they surpass in
ignorance the great Mules whereon they are so highly got up. Moreover there was
given irrecouerable power to the deputed by the strong and firm counsel of
them all to search out, to punnish, and exile (as monsters of nature) all
euill-fauoured corrupters of Grammar, as half Latins, half Greeks, and they
to do all things that they thought to be profitable to the honor and
advancement of all good letters. And to the end that they might the easier and
more lightly execute their charge, there were commanded forthwith certain Rules
to be drawn up, which were accordingly done; and now there is peace on both
sides, every one knows his place, as you may more at large perceive by the
Orders established; where I leave you: FAREWELL.

A Lamentation upon the Con^lagration of the Muses Habitation: Or a Description
of the burning of a Petty School.
What heat of learning kindled your desire,
You Muses sons to set your house on fire?
What love of Honor in your breast did turn,
Those sparks of Virtue into flames to burn?
Or wa'st some higher cause, were the hot God's
^hoebus and Vulcan, (old friends) now at ods?
What ere the cause was, sure ill was the intent:
Which all the Muses justly may lament.
^ut above all ^or name sake Polaehimney,
^ewayles the downfall, of this learned Chimney.
Where you might see, without or speech or sense:
^ay the sad ashes, of an Accedence.
What Numbers here of Nounes to wrack did go?
^s Domus Liber, and a many more.
^woefull Case, no Sex the flames did spare,
^ach Gender, in this loss had Common share,
^^ere might you see the rufull Declinations,
^fifteene Pronounes and four Coniugations.
Some Gerunds, Di, but some Do over come,
And some with heat and smoke, are quite struck Dum.
Supines, lay gasping upward, void of senses.
The Moodes were mad to see Imperfect Tences.
Aduerbes of Place, threw down their lofty stories:
As Vbi, Ibi, Illic, Intus, Foris.
Conjunctions, so disioyn'd, as you would wonder:
Noe cupling scarce, but it was burnt asunder.
The Praepositi^ns, knew not where to be.
Each Interiection, cried Heu woe is me.
FOr the Due joining of the things again,
A Neighbor called Qui mihi, came amain.
Else sure the Fire, had into flames so turned:
Gods, Men, Months, Rivers, Winds, and all had burned
Now began the flames the Hetroclites to cumber:
And poor Supellex, lost his Plural number.
Of Verbs, scarce had escaped one of twenty:
Had there not bin by chance As in presenti.
FINIS.

