THE SPEECH WHICH THE FRENCH KING made to the Lords of the Parliament on the
fifth of January. 1599.

Faithfully translated out of French, by H.W.



Imprinted at London by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes
head Alley, near unto the Exchange. 1599.

The speech which the King made to the Lords of the Parliament, on the 5. of
January 1599.
BEfore I speak of that, for which I caused you to be here assembled, I will
tell you a history, which even now I put the Marshall De la Chastre in mind
of.

Presently after S. Bartholmeus, four of us playing at Dice, saw some drops
of blood appearing on the Table, the which being wiped twice out, they still
returned again. And for the third time, I said I would play no longer, and
that it was an Augure against them which had spilt it: The Lord Guise being one
of the company.

This talk ended, his Majesty said as follows.

YOu see me in my closet, where I come to speak with you, not in Royal
habitements, with my Rapier and Helmet, as my predecessors, norlike a Prince
who intends to speak to foreign. Ambassadors: but apparrelled like a
father of a family, in a doublet, to speak familiarlie to his children. That
which I have to say, is to pray you, to verify the Edict which I have granted
unto those of the Religion. That which I have done, is for the good of the
peace, which I have concluded without, and I will now have it within my Realm.
You ought to obey me, although there were no other consideration, but my
quality, and the obligation of all my subjects, and especially you of my
Parliament. Some I have replaced in their houses, from which they were banished:
and other some in the faith which otherwise they would not have had. If the
obedience was done to my predecessors: as much or more is dew to me, because
that I have reestablished the estate: God having chosen me, to set me in the
kingdom which is dew to me by inheritance and purchase. The Lords of my
Parliament should not be in their seats without me. I will not vaunt nor
boast, but thus much I will say, that I have no other example to imitate, but
my self: I know full well, that there has been great briberie: and that
seditious preachings have been raised up. But I will set good order for those
men, and will not refer the same to you: It is even the way which was taken,
to make the Barricadoes, and to come by degrees to the murder of the late
King. Nay I will look to all that, I will cut the root of all those
factions, and of all factious Sermons, and will shorten all those which shall
raise them. I have leaped upon the walls of Cities, I shall also be able to
leap upon your Barricadoes, which are not so high. Allege not unto me, the
Catholic religion: I love it better then you: I am more Catholic then you:
I am the eldest son to the church, which none of you is, nor cannot be: you
deceive your selves greatly, in supposing your selves in the Popes favor: I am
in it better then you. (If in case that I will undertake it, I will cause all
you to be declared heretics for not obeying me. I have more intelligence at
Rome then you: you may do enough, I shall know what every one of you say: I
know all what is in your houses: I know all what you do and say: I have a
little Demon, who reuealeth it all unto me. Those which will not have my Edict
to pass, seek wars. I will declare them to morrow to those of the
Religion: but I will not make the wars. You your selves shall go thither,
with your gowns, and gather again the procession of the Cappuchins, which
shall carry their Muskets upon their garments: It will be a goodly sight to
see you. If you will not pass my Edict, you will make me go to the
Parliament: You shall be unkind, when you shall have engendered me this envy:
Witness those of my counsel which have found the Edict good and needful,
for the estate of my affairs: my Lord the Constable, my Lord Chauncelor, my
Lords of Belliure, of Sancy, de Sillery and Villeron, I have done it by their
advice, and of the Dukes and Peers. There was not one of them, that durst name
himself Protector of the Catholic Religion, or that durst deny to have
given me his advice therein. I am the only conseruator of the Religion. I
will, well enough dissipate the commotions which will be ^owed. They have
complained at Paris, that I would make some leuying of Switzers, or other
gathering of troops. Well, I have done it: It ought to be well thought of,
and it should be to a good end, by reason of all my forepassed demeanors.
Witness what I have done for the reconquest of Amiens: where I have employed
the moneys of the Edicts, which you would not have passed, had I not gone to
the Parliament. Necessity constraind me to make this Edict: through the same
necessity I have at other times playde the Soldier. It is spoken of, and yet
I have not made any semblance thereof. I am King now, and speak like a King. I
will be obeyed.

In deed I confess, that the Justice is my right arm. But if now the right
arm be infected, the left ought to cut it off. When my regiments do not serve
me, I casheere them. What shall you gain by not verifying the Edict? for
as well will I pass it. The Preachers may preach their fill, and brawle: as
the brother to my Lord of Silery has done, to whom I will speak in this
company. And having called the said Lord of Sillery, he said.

I have before advertised you of some complaints done against your brother, as
also I had commanded you to admonish him to restrain himself, and to be
wise. At the first, I believed that there was no such matter, that he had
preached against the Edict: because there were no proofs, yet was it true: And
at last, he got to S. Andrew, where my General Attorney has heard him preach
seditiously, against the Edict, but it was not taken up as it ought, they will
accuse him to be moved by an inconsiderate zeal. But be it of purpose or
otherwise, it is always evil, and this inconsiderate zeal deserves a
punishment. This complaint done, his Majesty returning to the Lords of his
Parliament, said: There is not one of you but finds me good, when he needs
me, there being not one amongst you but need me once a year: And yet
notwithstanding to me which am so good, you are bad. If the other Parlements,
for having resisted my will, have been causes that those of the Religion, have
demanded new things: I will not that you also be causes of other nouilties,
by your refusal. Anno. 94. and 95. when I sent you a declaration upon the
Edict of Anno 77. for the provision of the Officers. I had promised not to
provide any of the religion, with the Estates of the court of Parliament: Since
that, the time has changed the affairs: yet nevertheless I will have good
assurance of those unto whom I commit charges, that they shall behave
themselves as they ought. Speak not so much of the Catholic Religion. All
those great Catholic and Ecclesiastical cryers, if I give but to the one, a
benefice of 2000. crowns, and to another 4000. pounds of rent, they will play
mum, they will not speak a word more. I judge of this sort of all the rest
which speak against the Edict. There are fomelewde, which seem to hate sin,
but it is, for fear of the pains: and the good hate it for the love of
virtue. I remember once I learned two Lattin verses.

Oderunt peccare male formidine pene,
Oderunt peccare boni virturis Amore.
I have not repeated these verses these twenty years, but at this present,
because I know that some of you which hate sin, do bear the hate for love of
the virtue: and I wish punishment to those which shall hate it for fear of the
pain. And afterward (as does a son to his Father) they will thank me for
the punishment. I had not thought to have sent for you but yester night late.
Seeing the Edict whereof I tell you, is the Edict of the late King: Also it is
mine: for it has this day been done by me, and I do yet confirm it. I find
not good to have one thing in my mind and to write another. And although some
others have done so, yet will I not do it. The last words which you shall have
of me is. That you follow the example of Monsieur du meyne: who, when some
desiring him to make some enterprises against my will: answered that he was too
much bound unto me, as also all my subjects, amongst the which he would
always be one, who should expose his life to pleasure me: Because that I have
reestablished France, in dispight of those which sought the ruin thereof:
Although that in times past, he would have assayed all ways and means to
overthrow the Estate. If then the head of the league, has spoken so: how much
more ought you which I have reestablished? Those which always have been
faithful unto me: Those which I have replaced in their houses: In fine what
ought they to do? Finally, grant unto my requests: what you will not grant to
threats, yet shall you not have any of me: do what I command you, and what I
pray you. Ye shall not only do it for me, but also for your selves, and to
the good of the peace.

FINIS.

