Three Sermons upon some portions of the former lessons appointed for certain
Sabbaths.

The first containing, A displaying of the wilful devises of wicked and vain
worldlings.

Preached at Tanridge in Surrey the first of February 1597.

The two latter describing the dangers of coffeehouse and disobedience.

Preached the one at Tanridge and the other at Crowhurst in July then next
following.

By Simon Harwarde.

LONDON, Imprinted by RICHARD BRADOCKE for RICHARD JOHN'S. 1599.

TO THE RIGHT honorable and most Reverend Father in Christ, my singular good
Lord John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, primate of all England, and
Metropolitaine, and one of the Lords of her Majesty's most Honorable privy
Council, many healthful and happy years, in all joy and continuance of all
honorable felicity.
IT has often fallen out (most Reverend my very good Lord) that small things
have been offered informer ages to mighty and noble Potentates. But then
though small in quantity, yet have they either been such matters as like
Pearls have in a little room contained great worth, or else they have been
such as in case of necessity have supplied a want, or stood in some good
stead to those great Personages to whom they have been delivered and
presented. The treatise of Isocrates (...) sent to king Nicocles was short and
compendious. The water, which Plutarch does report to have been taken up with
the palm of a poor man's hand and with a cheerful countenance exhibited to
King Artaxerxes, was but of very small quantity, yet was the one very
precious, eloquent and full of well compacted instructions, and the other very
needful and commodious to remove or ease some present distress and
extremity. But this my discourse being penned as it was uttered in rude and
homely manner, and containing also nothing but that which is so far and so
many degrees better known to your Grace than I am any way able to express and
make manifest: I should in no case adventure to present it unto your Grace, but
that I have had heretofore so often and so plentiful experience of your Graces
exceeding clemency, that not only it has often accepted great and exquisite
volumes written by them who have had a calmer quietness for their studies, and
have been that way of far more fit sufficiency, but also has sometimes
favorably received such poor tokens of my humble and deutifull affections as
my troublesome estate of sustena^ce and slender talent of knowledge have been
able to address and afford.

In the Preface of my Sermon next following, which was first printed (because
indeed I meant not at this time to have set forth any more) I have signified
that when I consented to the publishing thereof, my purpose was, before it and
in the same volume to have prefixed one other Sermon made some eight years
since upon the beginning of the first psalm. But seeing that both there are
now no more copies of that Sermon to be had amongst the Stationers and that
also I perceive there have been a convenient and sufficient number of them
already printed and dispersed, I have thought it not amiss in lieu and steed
thereof to add this short speech had at Tanridge the first of Feb. last past
upon a portion of the first lesson appointed for the Sabbath. In which as
certain learned Justices of Surrey (who in heart honor your Grace) M. Bostock
and M. Sander my very good friends with other virtuous and religious gentilmen
the^ assembled, had bin worthy to have had more exact matter the^ my voice
either did or could at that time deliver: so much more now your Grace should
have had, if any way my pen had bin of power to prepaire it. This Sermon
describing (as it does) the original cause of both those enormities which are
condemned in the treatises following, and having been (as it was) in time first
made and uttered, does therefore now justly challenge to possess here in order
the first and principal place.

And being by the Printer united with the rest into one little discourse as to
frame thereby some sle^der gift to begin the new year withal, I do here
most humbly present it unto your Grace, hoping that the greatness of my
sincere and deutifull desires shall not be measured by the smalnesse of my
gift, and praying that J may remain still continued in the good favor of your
Grace, to whom god the disposer of all times grant, that this and many other
good years may be most healthful and prosperous to the joy of us all, who do
heartily desire the long peace of the Church and to your eternal and most
Honorable renown. From Tanridge this second of January. 1598.

Your Graces most humble in all deutie, Simon Harward,

A DISPLAYING of the wilful devises of wicked and vain worldlings.
The text. Esaias. cap. 59. ver. 5. They hatch the eggs of the Cockatrice [or
dropbloud] and weaue the Spiders web, he that eats of their eggs shall dye,
even he which is sprinkled (shall be) as though a Viper did burst out (upon him.)


THE Prophet Esaias (beloved in the Lord) Esaias. 37.9.
having a little before described the great misery of the Jews who together with
their King Achas were compelled by their enemies to seek help of a deadly foe,
to wit, of Tiglah Pilleser King of the Assyrians, and that in such base manner
that their King besides the humble sending of presents was enforced to bend and
crouch with these servile speeches, seruus tuus and filius tuus sim, 2 Reg. 16.7
let me be thy servant and thy son, only save me this time from the hands of
Retzin king of Syria: which abject abasing ye Prophet does notably name to be
even a throwing down into hell. He does afterward express the causes of that
and all other their calamities, Esaias. 57.9.
which were indeed their wickedness in their lives and their damnable
hypocrisy in their fastings and service of GOD. Which their iniquities
although he have in the chapter last going before very liuelily deciphered them
and very effectually condemned them, Esaias. 58.
yet in this chapter he houldeth on still ye same argument declaring unto
them, that God is of as great power to assist them as ever he was to deliver
their forefathers, Esaias. 56.1.
his hand is not shortened, but that he can save, neither is his ear made
heavy but that he can hear. Only their iniquities made a separation betwixt
God and them, as afterward was likewise said unto them by the Prophet
Ezechiel, Eze. 8.9.
that by their ^prophaning of divine sacrifices and by their wicked
abominations they had set up posts and pillars against God and made a wall
betwixt God and them. The enormities which at this time did make a division
betwixt God and this people and cause the Lord even to hide his face from them,
are expressed here in the verses last going before to be of three several
sorts. First the bloody oppressions of their hands and outward dealings, your
hands (says Esaias) are full of blood, Ver. 3.
and your fingers defiled with wrong. Secondly the abuses of their tongues,
your lips spoke falsehood, your tongue utters ungodliness. No man cries out
for justice, no man contendeth for faithful dealing, ver. 4.
every one does trust unto vanity and utter forth deceit. Thirdly the
malicious counsels and cogitations of the heart, which he notes by the word
Conceiving, every one conceiueth mischief and brings forth iniquity: which
speech though it seem hear to be uttered only to ye Jews, yet the Apostle
Paul in the third to the Romans does apply it generally to all that are
destitute of the grace of God, Romans 3.15.
and it does paint out indeed all such malicious purposes of heart, out of
which as out of a bad root do spring all rotten and unsavory fruits as well in
Jew as in Gentile. This conceiueing of mischief is by the Prophet Esaias in this
first verse more at large laid open unto us by a threefolde Allegory pointing
out three especial things unto us, first the malice of the mind, compared to
the hatching of the eggs of the serpent Haemorhous. Secondly the vanity and
unprofitableness of all such wicked conceiptes resembled here by the weauing
of the Spiders web: And thirdly, the dangers that do thereby issue out as
well to others as to themselves, If but a drop thereof be sprinkled it is
even as if a Viper should break out upon them. The malicious counsels of the
heart which he has called in the verse going before the conceiuings of
mischief, Psalm. 7.15.
according to the phraise of the Psalmist, he trauaileth with vanity and
conceiueth sorrow and brings forth ungodliness are likened here first to the
hatching of the drop blood his egg, whereby the Prophet signifies that they
are no sudden motions, but premeditate purposes, not resisted and withstoode,
but cherished and brooded not such as are easily cured, but such as are
venomous, poysonfull and altogether deadly and desperate.

Saint Hierom does follow the septuaginta in translating this place, oua
aspidum ruperunt, they have broken the eggs of Aspes, which interpreting though
it do not altogether rightly answer the Hebrew text, yet does it import the
very same meaning, to wit that the devises of the wicked are most dangerous and
incurable. As in Deuteronomy there is as it were a reason rendered when it is
said, Deuteronomy. 32.33.
venenum aspidu^ saeuum and immedicabile (speaking of ye diseignements of ye
malicious) they are as the poison of Asps evil and such as can no way be cured.

They which are strong with an Aspe are said to fall by and by into a dead
sleep, and in that sleep to be presently deprived of the life and light of
this world. And therefore Cleopatra Queen of Egypt when her husband Antonius
was dead because she would not be led in triumph by Augustus the Emperor,
chose especially to shorten her own days by the stinging of an Aspe, hoping
thereby to depart with some ease, and to die without feeling any pangs or
torments of death, as witnesses the Poet Propertius.

Prop. lib. 3.
Brachia spectaui sacris admota colubris
Et trahere occultum membra soporis iter.
Such a dead sleep is in the wicked when being past feeling they do give
themselves over to wantonness, to work all uncleanness even with
greediness, Ephesians. 4.19.
Such is in those who are utterly destitute of all godly remorse of conscience
of, whom S. Bernard. Quis magis mortuus eo qui portat ignem in sinu, peccatum
in conscientia nec sentit, Ber^ lib. 1. de consider.
nec excutit, nec expauescit? who is more dead than he which carries fire in
his bosom or sin in his conscience, and does neither feel it, nor shake it
out, nor once stand in any fear of it? Such a dead sleep is in all them
which lie still securely in sin and do never rise up to amendment of life,
Ephesians. 5.14.
to whom the Apostle Paul cries out, awake thou that sleep and stand up
from the dead, and Christ shall give the light. And such is in those obstinate
and wilful hearts which will in no wise hearken to ye voice of wholesome
admonition, of whom the Prophet David speaks, that they are like the deaf
Aspe which stops her ears, and will not hear the voice of the charmer,
Psalm. 58.5.
charm he never so wisely: for so do the best late writers expound there the
word Pethen to signify an Aspe, as likewise do the ancient fathers,
Augustine, Hierom, and Cassiodor: who do yield also the reason, because the
Aspe alteram aurem terrae pressius infigit, alteram cauda obturat: she
fasteneth one ear close to the ground and with her tail does stop the
other. Such wilful obstinacy does Job affirm to be in those wicked which say
unto God, depart from us, Job. 21.14.
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: who is the Almighty that we should
serve him, or what profit have we if we pray unto him? And such was in those
malicious Jews whom Stephen calls stifnecked and of uncircumcised hearts and
ears, Act. 7.51.
always ready to resist the holy Prophets of God. As that man in whom an
evil tongue is (as Saint James says) (...) full of deadly poison may be said
by a phrase of scripture, to have the poison of Aspes under his lips, because
thereby his whole body and soul is empoysoned and putrified, Romans 3.13
as ye Apostle calls evil speeches (...) rotten talk such as does consume
and wear away all good gifts and graces in man: so wilful and malicious
purposes of heart, may well be resembled to the poison of Aspes, Ephesians. 4 29.
who have not only the stingings and bitings, but even the whole flesh and
substance, Gal. de the^i ac. cap. 8
full of most deadly venom, as Galen moving the question, why the flesh of
Aspes may not go into the Theriaca as well as the flesh of Vipers, yeldeth
this for the reason, because the one may by are be rectified, but the other can
receive no alteration or correction.

Sundry late and learned interpreters because the Prophet Esaias does not use in
this the Hebrew word Pethen which does properly signify, the Aspe, but an
other word tsiphgnoni. have therefore departed from the translation of Saint
Hierom, and in steed of Aspe have set the word Cockatrice. These also though
they have not (in the judgment of some) duly expressed ye Hebrew word, yet
have they carried a sense nothing dissonant from the meaning of the Prophet. The
Cockatrice called Basiliscus and Regulus is named as it were the prince of
Serpents not only because of his exceeding force in that he is reported to
have power to kill even with the sight of the eye, but also in respect of that
mark and badge or rather Diadem which nature has given unto him having a
little crownet growing upon his head. To this Serpent may very well be
compared that envious and malicious heart which here the Prophet Esaias does
principally condemn, Math 20.15.
for that both the venom thereof is by the eye often disclosed as our Savior
says, is thy eye evil because I am good? Pro. 22.6.
and Solomon does pronounce that he which has a good eye shall be blessed of
God Saint Hierom does interpret yt place, qui pronus est admisericordia^
benedicetur ei: but the Hebrew which is, a good eye, and Saint Hieroms word
which is, a prone disposition of heart, are so perpecually united together that
the one may very well be signified by the other) As also because all such
malice of heart does proceed from Satan whom Saint Hierom upon Esaias does call
regul^m volantem the flying basiliske and principem serpentum and prince of
Serpents, Hiero. in Esa. 30 etc. in 59.
and who is named by our Savior Christ to be (...) the envious or malicious
man, because as first by envy of the Devil death came into the world, so he is
still the father and author of al deadly malice in the hearts of the wicked.
Math. 13.28.
Howsoever the malicious may think sometimes that their envious affections are
but the ordinary course of flesh and blood, Sap. 2. v. vlt.
and so be like the fond dog which when a stone is flung, will bite the stone
and not regard the hand that threw it, Ephesians. 4.26.
yet the Apostle does teach us plainly that he which does lodge and harbor
malice in his heart has yielded a room and given place to the Devil. In the
breaking of the Serpents egg, Saint Hierom does note further the
deceiptfulnesse as well of sin as of Satan: oua putaverit gallinaru^, Hiero.
in Esa. 59.
aut volucrum; sed si fregerit, antequam comedat statim teterrimum foetorem
agnoscit, and principem serpentum Diabolum: A man would think the eggs of
Serpents to be the eggs of some hens or birds, but if he once break them,
yt is if he do sound the bottom of malicious (though glorious) pretenses, then
shall he straightwaies perceive a most odious sent and deadly savor, then
shall he plainly acknowledge the Devil the prince of Serpents. 2. Cor. 11.1
Apoc. 12.9
Satan is called in the Scriptures the Serpent, and the old Serpent, first
because he appeared to Eve in the shape of a serpent, and chose it to be the
instrument of his voice unto her. Where by the way I cannot but marvel at
and abhor the forwardnes of ye captious Atheists which think that they have
gotten some advantage against the Scriptures when they can allege the
impossibility of the speech of a Serpent, not considering that the speech
through an instrument yt has breath may far better be granted then their
oracles through senseless instruments which were given either by Jupiter Ammon
out of a navel of Brass, or by Apollo at Delphos out of an oak, or by any
other Idol in their heathenish writers, the strange impossibilities whereof
they can readily swallow and easily digest. Secondly because of his subtlety
(for the Serpent was the subtilest beast in all the field) which appeared most
evidently when in the assault upon our first parent he could use all the
sleights and advantages which possibly could be devised. Genesis 3.1.
He could first deal with ye weaker vessel, he could first pluck from her the
weapon of her defense, to wit the word of God: Has God said thus? it shall
not be so. 2. Cor. 4.4.
As ye Ra^en setting upon her spoil, does first pluck out the eyes, so still ye
God of this world does first blind the eyes of men that the glorious light of
the Gospel of Christ should not shine upon them. He could choose a fit time
when Eve was given to curious beholding of the fruits, and when Adam her
counselor was away: As likewise he could tempt David with Bethsaba in a fit
time when he was so slothful that he would lie upon his bed at noone
days: 2. Sa. 11.2.
and when the goodman of the house is asleep, then in a fit time he is said
to sow tares: Math. 13.25.
he could also come with fair pretenses as though he would teach our first
parents how they should become Gods, when his purpose is nothing but to throw
them headlong into hell. His entisments are like the Serpents eggs whereof
Aristotle reports, (...) the egg is of one color and soft skinned, as
simply pretending good, Lib, 1. de hist. animal. Ca. 6
but the whole substance is venomous and full of deadly poison. The intemperat
man is persuaded by his delicacies to lengthen his days. The couerous man has
an Imagination that by his wealth he shall make his house continue for ever:
but their conceits do then prove like the deceiptfull eggs of Serpents,
Psalm 49.1.
when not only the one does by surfeiting hasten his own end, Eccle. 37.30.
Zach. 5.4.
and the other procure a curse toroote out his house even with the stones and
timber, Gal. 5.21.
but also both together by following and cherishing their carnal desires do
deprive themselves of the immortal joys of heaven. The eating of a fruit
might seame a small thing in the eyes of Eve, but the intemperancie,
disobedience, and unthankfulness of the heart, did drive our first parents out
of Paradise, Lib. 2^ de hist. animal. cap. 33.
and bring the poison of death upon their posterity. Aristotle writes that
the Crocodile does grow out some times into such a huge bigness that he
attaineth to the length of thirtene cubits, yet is he nothing so venomous nor
dangerous as is the Cockatrice, who is reported to grow not past the length of
three spans. David his spilling of blood, may seame a greater offense than
Saul his sparing of blood: 2. Sam. 11. 1. Sam. 15.
Peter's denying may seame a greater trespass, than Magus his desire of buying.

But it is the poisoned malice of the heart which especially makes the sin
to be most deadly, and then is it a venom incurable when it offends neither
of ignorance nor of infirmity, but of set purpose and even in despite of ye
spirit of grace, as did ye malice of the Libertines and Cyrenians, Act. 6.10.
who withstoode Stephen though they could not resist the wisdom which spoke in
Stephen, 1. Ioh. 3.12
And as did the envy of Cain who hated not his brother, but the virtue of his
brother, and would have no peace with him, because he would not be as ungodly
a man as himself.

The best approved interpreters do in this place by the word tsiphgnoni
understand neither the Cockatrice nor the Aspe, but another serpent named
Haemorrhous: the french men expressing the meaning of the Greek word do
term it Coule sang, and we may by a like compounded word fitly name it
drop-bloud. Auicen, (who very well knew the nature of the original word) does
describe it to be a serpent of about a cubit long, gray and glistering breeding
much by the river Nilus, whose venom has such a strange and bloody operation,
that whosoever is stong therewith does presently fall on bleeding at ye corners
of the eyes, at the nails ends, and almost at every joint and part of the
body. Which Serpent as it does most directly answer the Hebrew word, so does
it most liuelilie express the drift and meaning of the Prophet in this place:
for both before and after this text he begins with their bloody cruelty as
their chiefest offense now reigning amongst them, your hands (says he) are
defiled with blood: Ver. 3.
and again a little after he tells them that their feet did run to evil
and make have to shed innocent blood, and even their thoughts were altogether
wicked and malicious. ver. 7.
All cruelty has the name of ye latin word cruor which signifies blood,
because cruel hearts are murdering hearts, 1. John. 3.15.
he that hates his brother is such a manslayer as has no eternal life abiding
in him. Esau when with a bloody intent he gaped for Isaacks death and said the
days will come that I shall morn for my father, Genesis 27.41
and then will I surely kill my brother Jacob, was in the sight of God guilty
of parricide. The Jews which with cruel hearts cried crucify him, Act. 7.52.
and 5.30.
cucifie him, are named murderers of Christ, as well as the Romans which put
him to death. The Jews were commanded of God in sundry Laws by types and
figures to abhor and detest all beastly crueltye. For as by abstaining from
swines flesh they were taught to fly all filthy pleasures, So by not eating
the kite, vulture, Deuteronomy. 14, 13.
gripe, hawke, and such ravening spoylers, they were admonished to reject all
cruel affections. Deuteronomy. 22.6 Leuit. 19.14.
When thou take any birds thou shall not (says God) kill the young with the
damme: thou shall not revile the deaf, nor lay a stumbling block before the
blind. Seldom do we read of any cruelty, but that the Lord by his just
judgment, as it were lege talionis, does heap the like measure upon it
again. Adonibezeg had taken Seauenty Kings, Iud. 1.
and being prisoners, he cruelly cut off their thumbs and great toes, and made
them as dogs to gather bread under his table, but at the last he was taken
by Jude, and having his own thumbs and toes cut off, Iud. 9.5.
was compelled in the same manner to receive his food as he himself before
had prescribed to others.

Abimelech to usurp, Iud. 9. v. 53
a kingdom did upon a stone cruelly put to death Seauentie of his brethren:
but afterward by a stone being thrown upon him by a woman, his braine-panne
was crushed in pieces. As by the cruelty of Achab, dogs did lick the blood
of Naboth, so dogs did lick his blood, 1. Reg. 21.19.
and the blood of her that gave the counsel, insomuch that when Iehu said of
Iezabell being dead, seek out that cursed woman and bury her because she is
a kings daughter, she was found in a manner all devoured by dogs, 2. Reg. 9.
nothing was to be had but the skull and the feet and some part of her hands.
Haman with an envious heart most cruelly sought to hang Mardocheus: but on the
gybbet which he had caused to be erected for others, Hest. 9.14.
he and his own ten sons did first take hansell and possession.

The manifold curses which David does rehearse in the sixty and ninth Psalm,
Psalm. 69.27
as to have the table to be made a snarre, the eyes to be darkened, the howses
to be left desolate, and to be wiped out of the book of life, are all
denounced against such as with cruel hearts add affliction upon affliction:
they persecute (says David) the^ whom thou have stricken and vex them whom
thou have wounded.

This cruelty of heart may very well be compared to the poison of the
Haemorrhous or Dropbloode mentioned in this place. For no sooner has any
received the venom thereof, but presently the hands, the tongue, the devises
of ye head, and the whole actions of the life do yield forth bloody fruits
in sundry deadly kinds of murder. Chrisost. in Mat. 15. Basilia ps. 14.
The hands do break out in blood either by cut throat usury, which by
Chrysostom is compared to the stinging of an Aspe, and by Basil to the biting
of a Viper, because as the one does cast asleep, and the other cause to swell,
so does usury cast ye poor borrower for a time into a pleasant sleep but such
a sleep as brings death; it makes him for a time to swell with abundance,
but it causes a bursting and utter ruin to him and his whole family: Or else
they become murdering by witholding sustenance from the needy: Eccle. 34.22.
Ambr. vt si Gratian did, 86.
the bread of the poor (says the son of Syrach) is the life of the poor
and he that defraudeth him is a murderer. Pasce fame morientem (says Ambose)
si non pascis occidisti feed him that is ready to die with famine, if thou
feed him not, thou have murdered him: or else, if they do bring forth their
food, they do suck out the blood of the poor, Amos, 8, 5
and (as Amos speaks) swallow up the poor by making the Epha small, and the
shekell great. The Epha is an Hebrew measure, the shekell their coin and
price. Many think that if they make just measure, they may advance ye price of
their wairs to what extremity they can. But the Prophet does place a kind of
murder as well in excess of price as in the deceiptfulnesse of measure. The
Apostle forbideth as well the oppression of the one as the fraud and subtlety
of the other. Let no man oppress nor defraud his brother, 1. These. 4, 6
for the Lord is the auenger of all such things. Iehoiakim his hands were an
otherway defiled with blood, when as ye Prophet Jeremy says he used his
neighbors in his work without wages and gave them no recompense for their
toil. Ier. 12, 13. and 17.
The sweat of the laboring man is as it were the wearing and wasting and
consuming of his strength and life: to use that toil without recompense is to
be guilty of a kind of murder. As the blood of Abel did cry out of the
earth for vengeance, Genesis 4.10.
so Job does make the ground to be as it were an old mother crying out, Job,
31, 38,
and the forrowes thereof complaining together against those which by detaining
the reward do vex and grieve the souls of the laborers and tillers thereof,
Effundit sanguinem qui fraudat mercede, he that defraudeth men of their hyre
is a blood sucker. Further, Ecc. 34, 26
the venom of this Serpent, to wit, the malice of the heart, does cause as
the hands, so the tongue also to commit many deadly sorts of bloodshedde. In
some, by slaunderings and railings, whereby as the Psalmist shows their
tongues are become sharp raisors, and their smooth words nothing but very
swords. In others, Psalm. 52, 2. and 55, 22.
by flatteries, whereby as Antisthenes said, men do often become worse than
Ravens: Laer lib, 6 Cap. 1.
for thee Ravens feed upon carkases being dead, but the flatterers do eat
up and devour their neighbors being alive. Laertius who ascribes that
speech to Antisthenes, does likewise record that Bion, when one asked the
question of him, of all beasts what was most noisome, made this answer: Si de
feris percontaris, tyrannus; si de mitibus, adulator. If your demand be of
wild beasts, a tyrant; if of tame beasts, Greg. super Ezech.
a flatterer. Saint Gregory, says very well, tot occidimus quot ad morte^ ire
trepidi and tacentes videmus, we murder so many men as we see to run headlong
unto death, and by a fearful silence do refuse to admonish them of the
truth: as likewise Saint Augustine: Aug. super Ioh. tract, 42.
homicida dicitur Diabolus non gladio armatus, non ferro accinctus, verbu^
seminauit and occidit. Noli ergo putare te non homicidam cum fratri tuo mala
persuades. The Devil is called a murderer from the beginning, not as one armed
with sword and weapon, but he sowed ill counsel and so did kill. Do not
therefore imagine that thou art free from murder, if thou do persuade or
entise thy brother to any kind of wickedness.

The poisoned malice which lucketh in the hearts of the Romish Catholics does
another dangerous way break out into murder, to wit, by treasons and
rebellions, which are called of David bloodshedde, in the fifty and fifth
Psalm, Psalm. 55. ver. vlt,
made (as Beza and Tremellius do judge) in the time of the conspiracy of
Absolon and Achitophell. The bloodthirstie and deceiptfull men, says he,
shall not live out half their days. For although lawful wars be called
the wars, 2. Chr. 20.15.
not of men but, of God himself, (provided always that they be taken in
hand withan advised care, not to thrust men into wilful dangers, and so to
make as it were a pastime of the blood of man: David because his men were so
few which brought him water through the great army of the Philistines,
would not drink of it, 2. Sam. 23.16.
because it was (as he said) the blood of them which did fetch it with so
desperately endangering their lives): Yet traitorous rebellions do most
evidently proceed of a very poysonfull and devilish malice of heart, and are
so detestable in the sight of God, that whatsoever is done by them against the
anointed Sovereign, the Lord does revenge and punish it even as done against
his own person. 2, Sam, 16,
As may manifestly appear in the before named conspiracy, where though
Absolon were most noble in birth as being the kings own son, though he were
most comely and beautiful in person, 2, Sam. 16,
though he were highly in favor with the people (whose hearts he had stolen
away) and though he were most dearly and entirely beloved of his father
David, insomuch as the King gave most earnest commandment to his Generals and
captains that notwithstanding his traitorous sedition, yet they should for his
sake entreat Absolon kindly, and no man to be so hardy as to lay hands upon
Absolon: Yet the Lord of heaven (who in treasons and rebellions does account
his own majesty most of all contemned, and his own authority impugned, did
as it were take the matter into his own hands, when he caused an oak
stretching out her bough to trusse up Absolon by the locks of his gallant
heir, to testify unto all posterity, that no nobility of blood, no
comeliness or gifts of body, no love nor favor either of prince or people
shall save a rebel from due punishment, but that howsoever the judgments of
man be sometimes wanting, yet GOD himself, who is thereby chiefly dishonored,
will undoubtedly follow by some extraordinary means with a heavy and sharp
revenge. Howsoever GOD did for a time suffer that rebellion to grow to head
and wax strong: Yet at the last the words which David did pronounce of them,
that the bloodthirstie men should not live forth half their days, Psa 55.
ver. vlt. 2. Sam. 18, 7.
were verified to the full when as the head of that conspiracy was plucked up
by the head, so the baiser sort received a fit reward for a rascal crewe,
being slain in one day twenty thousand, besides that the Counselor
Achitophell, who gave the advice to the rebellion, Sam. 17, 23
had his wisdom so confounded, that for want of a hangman he became a
hangman to himself. That the treasons and rebellions, which for these many
years have been and are stirred up in Christendom, do especially proceed
from the Romish Catholics, there needs no other proof, but their own
confession. For the writer of the Popish Chronicle called Gallo-Belgicus, in
that part of his third Come which he calls supplementum, Tom 3. lib 15, page
439.
calls the commotious in Ireland, Comitis Tyronij and Hibernorum rebellionem,
the rebellion of the Earl of Tyronne and of the Irish men, but the same man in
other places of the same book does say Catholicos plurimos ad comite^ Tyronium
vndique confluxisse, that many Catholics out of all quarters did join
themselves to the Earl of Tyronne, Page 421.
whom he also calls Catholicorum antesignanum and ducem the captain and
General of the Catholics. Whereby it appears that he accounts rebellion
and his own profession of the Catholic faith to have such near affinity
amongst themselves, that very easily they do knit and join the one to the
other. So heretofore by the dealings of pope Innocentius the third against John
king of England, and by Pope Adrian the fourth his absoluing the subjects of
the King of Sicily from all loyalty and allegiance, as also by daily
experience in these days (for we hear of no insurrection, but there is a
popish Priest at the one end of it, nay the Popes privy Factors are the
chiefest Authors, and their Friars hands the very instruments to murder
Princes) we see it plainly confirmed unto us that Rome is the fountain and
spring, out of which, poisons, bloodshedde, witchcrafts, treasons and
rebellions do ouerflow the whole earth. Of all the eggs of the drop-bloode,
that is, the malicious purposes of the heart, here condemned by the Prophet
Esaias, these of ye Catholic rebels are most devilish and dangerous. He yt
names other sins, names most commonly simple and single transgressions, but
he ye names rebellion names in a manner a heap of all sins that can be
named, murders, rapes, thefts, blasphemies, oppressions, whordomes and (in a
manner) all sins whatsoever, they are all together united in this crime of
rebellion. It is as it were a hell in this world, the feendes and furies
whereof are the traitorous cutthroats, the General and Captain is Lucifer the
prince of rebels, the torments and punishments are greefes, walings and woes of
children fatherless, of fathers childlesse, of women husbandlesse, of poor
friendles, of all comfortless.

They may cloak and cover their pretenses and purposes with a show of the
Catholic faith, but they must needs be counted devilish intents, which
seek to draw any such mischeefes and calamities upon their native soil and
country: Mart. fox. Tom. 2.
for infinite are the miseries which then needs must follow, when (as one has
written) treason is above reason, and might ouerrunneth right, and it is had
for lawful whatsoever is lustful, and common woe is accounted common wealth.
The very heathen Poet by the light of natural reason could perceive the
filthiness of such seditious affections. Homer.


(...)
(...).
Most ungodly is he, lawles, unnatural, unkind
Which desires wars by civil bloody rebelling.
The kingly Prophet when he had the election of three plagues offered unto him
of which one must of necessity be taken he made choice of pestilence rather
tha^ war: Lord (said he) let us fall into thy hands, ^. Sa. 24.14
for with thee there is mercie^ let us never fall into the hands of men.

To prevent all these several kinds of bloodshed, our way is to labor
(especially) for the reforming of the affections of our hearts: Pro. 4.23.
keep thy heart (says Solomon) with all diligence, for from thence do
proceed the actions of this life. If sin do once make a breach into the
heart, it is planely of the nature of the Serpent which if once into any place
it can get in the head, it will soon into the same place wind in ye body. 1.
Reg. 21.
When Achab did in heart covet the vineyard of Naboth, how soon was he brought
to yield his consent to shede innocent blood? Genesis 4.5.
When Cain suffered wrath to cast down his countenance, how sone did his hands
follow to ye achieuing of his villainy and parricide? When Herod in heart had
conceived wrath against ye wisemen, Mat. 2.16.
how sone did ye venom burst out into a lamentable bloodshed, when he caused
so many young infants to be slain and so cruelly butchered? The wrath of man
says S. James, works not that which is righteous before God. Solomon
advises thee not to keep company with an angry man, ne assumas tibi
tendiculam, Pro, 22.24
least thou procure a snarre unto thy self. For as he which is slow to wrath
does abound in understanding, Pro, 14.29.
so the hasty and furious do stir up folly. And not only wrath, but
sometimes a sinister favor may cause bloody effects when either by bribery or
partiality, justice is perverted, as the Prophet Esaias here cries out in the
verse last going before, no man calls for justice, no man co^tendeth for the
truth: and in ye first chapter when he has showed them yt their hands were
full of blood, to redress that fault he bids them, seek judgment, Isa.
1.17.
relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, and defend the widow. Saint
Hierom discoursing upon these words here they weaue the spiders web, does
make an application of them to condemn corruption in judgments: Hier. in Is.
59.
telas arancae texunt quibus muscas and culices and paru^ capiunt animalia, ad
quas cum forte quid ve nerit quasiper aerem vanum transuolat. Laws are made
like unto the webbes which spiders do weaue, they take flies and gnats and such
other little creatures, but if any strong thing do come, it breaks through
even as through the thin air. But I take the spiders web in this place to
signify rather, the vanity and unprofitableness of the malicious purposes of
the heart, because as great labor and curious art is used of the spider in
framing the web, but when it is made a small puff of wind does blow it away,
even so much cunning is practiced of wicked worldlings to entrap their
neighbors, and to enrich their own howses with the spoil of others: but when
they have brought it to the hight of their desires, then do they suddenly
consume, Psalm. 73.19
perish, and come to a fearful end, even as a dream when a man awaketh*
Job. 8.13.
So does Job apply the like phraise of speech, when he says, The hope of the
hypocrite shall perish, his confidence is as the house of the spider, which
leans upon that dwelling that has no foundation. The Psalmist does as it
were weigh the delights and vanities of men, he puts man in the one end of
the balance, and vanity in the other, and makes his conclusion that man is
more light than vanity. Psalm. 62.9.
And as men with all their worldly devises are light, so are they soon blown
away: Psalm. 103, 14. and 15. Ecc. 14.18. 2. Sam, 14.14. Psalm. 39.5.6.
in which respect they are compared sometimes, to dust, sometimes to a blossom,
sometime to green leaves and thick trees, sometime to water sincking into the
ground, sometime to a spanne long, as of a small and short continuance,
sometimes to a shadow, as soon vanishing. 2. Cor. 5, 4.
The Apostle Paul compares our estate here to tents or pauillions which are
sone pitched and soon removed. Gregory Nazianzene in that Sermon which he
made upon the death of his brother, Greg in Epitaph. super frat,
says very well: (...). We are here as a dream that makes no tariance, as a
ghost or fantasy which cannot be taken hold on, as the flying of a bird in
the air, or of a ship upon ye seas which pass and leave no step behind
them, as dust, as a vapor, as a morning dew or as a flower which in a short
time is sprung and in a short time does fade away. What a curious web had
Solomon wouen when he could not only in wisdom discourse of the nature of
all trees, plants, beasts, fowls, and creeping things, but also for his
pleasure in dwelling here, had built himself gorgeous howses, 1 Reg, 4, 33
planted vineyeards, framed goodly gardens and orchardes abroad, and within
his palace erected a goodly throne of estate made of Iuory, and ouerlayed with
pure gold, Eccle. 2.4.
mounted to such height that it had six steps going up into it, on each side
of which steps were set six Lions, and Lions also upon the knoppes and
pummells of the throne, the very footestoole whereof was made of gold: 2.
Chron. 9 18.
yet he says that when he had duly considered all the works which his
hands had wrought, and all the toil and travail which here he had taken,
he found all to be but vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccl, 2, 11
and nothing (as he says) to be of any profit under the sun. Vanity he
calls them, because like spiders webbes, they were soon puffed away, the use
of them was very short and transitory: vexation of spirit, because they were
wrought with those busy troubles and cares, which like the flies of Egypt did
deprive him of quiet rest. Nothing he found to be of any sound profit,
because in the infirmities and greefes either of body or mind he found no
perfect comfort in them. The only sound comfort is in the testimony of a good
conscience. David says, Psalm. 112.4.
that unto the righteous there arises up light in darkness. In the midst
of all the miseries and calamities of this life, the light, that is, the sweet
feeling of the mercy of God, does never depart from them. Blessed (says he)
is the man that considers the poor and needy, psa. 42, 1, 3
the Lord will deliver him in the time of troble, the Lord will strengthen him
upon the bed of sorrow, pro. 28.27.
the Lord will turn his bed in all his sickness. It is a most comfortable
promise of ye wisdom of God, qu^ dat pauperi non indigebit, he that is
bountiful to the needy shall never himself stand in necessity. As virtue
and mercy do bring two most singular blessings in this life, to wit, the
testimony of a good conscience, bringing a continual comfort (according to
that of the wise man, prou. 15.15
A good conscience is a continual feast) and the providence of God so
graciously protecting them, that even the generation of the righteous shall be
blessed, and they themselves, Psalm. 112.6
as the Psalmist speaks, shall be had in an everlasting remembrance, So on
the other side, malicious practices and subtle deceipts, used as nets one to
ensnare another, do draw upon the wicked two fearful curses; the one is, the
stinge of a corrupt conscience, when they are here deprived of hope and
confidence, Job. 8.13.
as Job affirms like the house of the spider that has no foundation, Pro.
20, 17
The bread of deceit (says the wiseman) may for a time be sweet in the
mouth, but in the end the mouth is filled with gravel: The other is that
those things which they take in hand shall neither prosper in themselves, Psalm.
1.4. Zach. 5, 4.
but they shall be as the chafe which the wind does scatter away, neither
shall they benefit their posterity, but as Zachary shows the curse of God
shall enter in and destroy even the stones and timber of their cruel
habitations. Hag. 1.4
The Prophet Haggei tells us that in the bags of the wicked there is a hole
or breach,, by which hole he means the curse of GOD, when that which is
evil gotten is evil also wasted and consumed, that as it never came from God,
so does it run all to the Devil. Hesiod.
The very heathen Poet could give this warninge, (...)
Ne malalucreris, mala lucra aegualia da^ni^
Seek not wrongful gains, bad gaine^ and loss are all one.


The third Allegory here used by the Prophet, is drawn from the viper called
here Ephgue, of whose nature Aristotle writes, Lib. 1. de hist. animal. cap. 6.
(...), among serpents the viper brings forth (not eggs as the rest do but)
living creatures (though bad) and her eggs are first bred and hatched within
herself. And therefore the viper may very fitly signify and point out them
which do cherish and nourish bad purposes in their hearts and with a
premeditate hatching of their devises do work mischief against their
neighbors

The Prophet Esaias in this place would have us to mortify these first
beginnings of sin, wherewith if ye heart be but once sprinkled, it will be
as if a viper did presently burst out. The beginnings of sin, do seame at the
first small, but they are dangerous and harmefull, they are like those lesser
wedges which open the entrance to ye greater, like little thieves entering in
at some hole or window to open ye doors to the greater, like a small drop
of poison or a slender venomous stinge, whereof the one does infect a whole
vessel, and the other destroy the whole body. If we would be free from
injurious dealings, we must first not let the sun go down upon wrath, if
we would abstain from bloody oppressions, Ephesians. 4.26
Heb. 13.11
we must first let our conversation be without covetousness. If we would be
(as we ought to be) obedient and deutifull subjects, we must first cast away
all malcontented affections and all envying ye blessings of God bestowed upon
our brethren.

The viper who by the bearing of his own fruits is burst a sunder, does very
well represent all sin: for ye sting of death is sin, and ye reward of sin is
death: 1 Cor. 15.56. To. 6.23.
but especially it does most lively paint out ye malicious envy of ye heart,
as Augustine does show, Augu. ser. 83. de te^p.
ficut aerugoferrum ita inuidia illam ipsam animam in qua est interimit and
consumit, sicut aiunt viperas dilacerato and dirupto illo ipso materno vtero in
quo conceptae era^t nasci, ita and inuidiae natura illam ipsam animam a qua
concepta est and consumit and perdit. As the rust (which does grow of the Iron)
does consume the Iron, so envy which breadeth in the heart does consume the
heart: and as they say that Vipers do come out, breaking the bellies of their
dammes in which they were conceived, so the nature of envy is to destroy that
soul, in which it is fostered. Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 45.
In which respect Chrysostom does compaire envy to the wood worm which though
it do breed in the timber, yet it does consume and waste the timber, as envy
springing of the heart does putrify and utterly eat up the heart. As Solomon
says well, A sound heart is the life of the body, Pro. 14.30,
but envy is a rottenness to the bones. The prophaine Poet could say. Hor.


Inuidia Siculi non inuenere tyranni
Tormentum maius, And another,
Iustius inuidia nihil est, quae portinus ipsum
Auctorem rodens extruciat misere.
The biting of this viperous Envy, as they are dangerous, Genesis 26.15.
unto others (which Isaac felt when the Philistians envying his riches did stop
up all his wels which his fathers servants had dug in his father Abraham's
time: and David when Saul envying the songs of the women, 1. Sam. 18.8
that Saul had killed one thousand, and David ten thousand, did therefore seek
the death of him, who by all means sought his good: And Daniel when by the
envy of the malicious Judges, Dan. 6.4.
he was thrown into the den of Lions: and all the saints of God have and do
still from time to time to their sundry losses very often feel and suffer)
So especially the wounds thereof are most deadly to the envious persons
themselves, when their hearts are thereby made altogether carnal and altogether
unfit for any spiritual exercise. 1. Cor. 3.3
If there be envying amongst you (says Paul) are ye not carnal? and Saint
James says, where there is in men bitter envying their wisdom is not from
above, Iam. 3.14.
but is earthly devilish and sensual. Gregory.
They cannot withstand and subdue the enemies in the field, that is, the
outward temptations of sin and wickedness, when they harbor within the walls
the malicious traitor of an envious heart. Beda.
They cannot receive any help or comfort by the plaster or medicine of prayer,
so long as the arrow head remains within the wound, so long as the cankered
Iron of envy does fester and empoyson their affections. They cannot be true
and lively members of the mystical body of Christ when they do not with
thankful hearts rejoice at the weldoing and benefit of others, 1. Cor.
12.26.26.
as he Apostle does teach us, that If one member be had in honor all the rest
should rejoice with it. Rejoice with them that rejoice and weep with them that
weep. Romans 12.15
Finally they can never in this life feel any perfect solace and comfort, when
as the heathen Poet could see and say: Virg.
Liuor tabificum malis venenum
Intactis vorat ossibus medullas.
Close consumptio^ envy brings to badme^,
Not touching any bone it eats the marow.


Neither can they receive any hope to be delivered from the eternal tyranny of
Satan, Wisd. 2.^4
when they find in themselves that sin which is equal or rather worse (...)

THE DANGER OF Coffeehouse, Entreated of in a Sermon preached at Crowhurst
in Surrey the ninth of July 1598.

By Simon Harward.

Imprinted at London by William White. 1599.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful M. Edmunde Bowyer Esquire, and M. John Bowyer his
brother, mercy and peace be multiplied in Christ Jesus.
FOr as much as some years since (Right Worshipful) it pleased you so
courteously to accept that Sermon, which at your request I then published, as
concerning The fruits of our repentance toward God; wherein David Psalm. 1.
does place The chiefest blessedness and felicity of man: I have thought good
to add thereunto this Sermon, which I made at the same Church (where you, and
others, Justices and Gentlemen were assembled on the ninth of July last past)
upon a part of the first Lesson, by the order of our Church appointed for that
Sabbath, as concerning that duetifull contentment of mind which (as good
subjects) we owe all to our Prince and Country; that as in the first we are
put in remembrance of our duty toward the Lord of Lords, and Prince of
Princes: so in this other, as well we which uttered and heard it, as others
into whose hands it shall come to be read, may be admonished of those loyal
affections which we ought continually to bear to our mo^ gracious Sovereign,
and our established Commonwealth. As I am well assure^ that these affections
are, and have alway^ bin thoroughly settled in your faithful hearts; so I doubt
not, but ye are also a fully desirous, that by this slender labor and by all
means possible, others may be allured and drawn to the like disposition* Thus
hoping that you will as louing^ accept the reading and publishyng, as you have
already done the hearing, I commit this my short Discourse to your Worshippes,
and you and it to the blessing of the Almighty. From Tondridge this.xij. of
July. 1598.

Your Worships assured in the Lord, Simon Harward.

1. Sam. 12.19. We have added a wickedness to all our other sins, in
asking us a King.


WHen Nachash the King of the Ammonites (Right Worshipful and beloved in
Christ) had now brought the inhabitants of Iabesh Gilead into so great
distress, that only upon seven days respite they were to yield up their
City into the enemies hands upon a very hard condition (which was, that every
one of the Citizens should have his right eye plucked out.) The people of
Israel, partly because they saw Samuel their Judge to be old and feeble, and
partly, because they percei^ed the sons of Samuel, Joel and Abiah, though
ruling in the place and stead of their Father; yet not walking in the ways and
^teps of their Father, as dispayring to have any aid or deliverance by their
Judges (in which state of government, God had for many years so happily
preserved them They come (with one consent) to the^ Judge, and desire that
they may have King. 1. Sam. 11.12
Samuel when he had used man means, and many forcible arguments (...)
dissuade them from this their malcontent^ and dispayring mind, and seeing
evidently that no persuasions could take any pla^n their wilful hearts, does
now at the la^ call upon the Lord in the time of Wheat harvest, for a sudden
and miraculous thu^der and storm of rain, that thereby, as were by an other
voice of God, the peo^ might be further certified, both how grievously they had
offended, and how for the offense the Lord was highly, displeas^ with them.
When the Israelites saw ^parantly that Samuel had no sooner call unto the Lord
for that thunder and rain^ but that presently his request was hea^ and that in
terrible manner, in the sight a^ hearing of the whole people, they were
a^nished: and being wonderfully stricken w^ sudden fear, They desire Samuel to
p^ to the Lord for them, that they die n^ adding these words (which now I have
read) as a reason of their petition, and a confession of their desert: For (say
they) we have sinned, besides all our other sins, in asking us a King. What
this offense was which the Prophet does seek so many ways to lay open unto
them, it shall the better appear if we consider these two especial
observations.

First, the mighty providence, and infinite goodness of God extended toward
that people, so many years together, during the time of the government of the
Judges. And secondly how small and weak the occasions were for the which they
desire to shake off that blessed government: as also on the other side, what
great and weighty causes they had to have bin contented with that estate
wherein God had so long and so miraculously protected them.

How long the people had lived, delivered, defended, and governed by Judges, S.
Augustine does record it in his. 18. book de Ciuitate Dei, where he affirms,
Aug. de Ciuitate dei, lib 18. Cap. 22:
that at that time wherein Rome was buylt (which was by Romulus, in the time of
Josias king of Judah) the Hebrews had bin seven hundred and eighteen years
in the land of Canaan; whereof (says he) seven and twenty appertain to
Joshua, three hundred twenty and nine to the Judges, and three hundred sixty
and two to the Kings: where he makes three several estates of Government,
under which it pleased God that his people Israel should live. The first was
under Dukes, as in the days of Moses and Joshua. The second was by Judges,
which differed from Joshua, for he was appointed a governor in the time of
prosperity, when Sehon the King of the Amorits and Ogge the King of Basan were
overthrown and vanquished: but the Judges were first inaugurated and invested
into their callinges in some great distresses, by the affecting of some notable
deliverance. Neither were they like the Dictators, advanced amongst the
Heathen; for they were chosen by the voices of men, but these by the voice of
God him self. They were chosen out of men of greatest account, and best
furnished for the undergoing of such a charge: but these were raised up
miraculously out of the inferior sort, and lowest degrees of people, and
enabled extraordinarily by the gifts and presence of the Almighty, as it is
said in the second Chapter of the Judges: The Lord raised up Judges, Judge.
2.16.18.
which delivered them out of the hands of their oppressors: And when the Lord
did raise up any Judges, the Lord (as it is said there) was with that Judge,
and did deliver the people out of the hands of the enemies all the days of
that Judges life.

There were also many differences betwixt them and the Kings which followed. In
the Kings, succession of blood took ^lace: in the Judges it took no place.
The Kings, had a greater authority in ru^ing and commanding then the Judges
would challenge. The affairs having good success against the Madianites, Judge.
8.22.
the people offered to Gedeon, that he should Reign ^s king over them: But
Gedeon answe^ed, Neither will I reign over you, ney^her shall my child reign
over you; but ^he Lord shall still reign over you. The Kings were some of
them holy, and some picked: Heb. 11.32. Judge. 2.18.
the Judges were all the faithful ^eruantes of God, though some times er^ng,
yet always rising again by repen^nce. The Kings did some of them save the
people from invasions, and some no^ but the Judges did ever deliver them from
the hands of their oppressors: And the^fore they have the Hebrewe name Mos^
grim, Saviors, given unto them, as in (...) third Chapter of the Judges it is
said Othoniel, Iud 3.9.
that the Lord did stir vp^ Savior unto the children of Israel. A^ in the
ninth of Nehemias, Nehe 9.27.
where there mention made of the former mercies (...) God during the time of
the Judges: i^ added, that God of his mercy gave (...) people Saviors, who
saved them out the hands of their adversaries. Some add hereunto, that the
Judges more t^ any other, were the most evident types (...) figures of that
deliverance which we h^ by Christ, from the tyranie of sin, de^ and Satan.

A. fourth kind of government, v^ which the people afterward lived, is
mentioned by Josephus in the.xx. chapter of Antiquities, Joseph Antiq. lib. 20.
Cap. penult
(...) After the death of these (to wit) Herod Archelaus their government was
Ar^cratie, wherein the chief authority of the ^on was committed to the
High-priestes. Joseph Antiq. lib. 14. cap. 10.
Of that government he makes mention before, when he declares how Gabinius
^ad divided the Kingdom into five parts; ^d ordained five Counsayles, called
^ynedri^: he shows what ensued of it, (...) They altering the government,
lived in Aristocratie. They had then, and long before, three several orders of
their coun^yles: one was an authority given to ^ree chosen Men, who should
decide all ^auses in money matters. The second was (...) council of twenty
three Judges: they ^ere to hear the causes of life and death. The third was a
council of seauentie ^e: their office was to determine of most ^aightie
matters, of the high Priesthood, ^r of a whole Tribe, or of a false Prophet.
Concerning the excellency of every one of ^ese four gouernmentes, and which
of ^em ought to have the pre-eminence to be most to be desired amongst
Christians, I ^olde with Calvin, Valde otiosum est, Calvin institut. lib. 4
cap. 20. sect. 8.
quis ^tissimus sit politiae status a priuatis hominibus ^isputari, quibus de
constituenda aliqua re^ublica deliberare non licet. It is a very idle thing,
that about the best estate of government, a disputation should be had among
private men, who have no authority to co^sult of ye ordering of any
Common-weal^ It is a most singular token of the might power and providence of
God, that so ^nie several Nations over the face of (...) whole world, are
vpholden and maynt^ned by so many several sorts of gouernmentes, That
Quemadmodum non nisi (...) aequali temperatura elementa inter se cohaere ita
hae regiones sua quadam inaequalitate (...) time continentur: As in bodily
essences, t^ four elements do cleave together by v^ equal temperaturs, so as
it were by ac^taine inequality, all these several co^tries are holden
together: But for eu^ particular Nation, he very well require^ that Voluntas
Domini satisfaciat: The w^ of God ought to suffice every man. Si^ Visum est
reges, regnis praeficere, liberis ciui^ tibus senatus aut decuriones,
quoscunque lo^ praefecerit in quibus degimus, nostru^ est ijs (...) morigeros
ac obedientes praestare: Wheth^ it please God to place Kings over kin^domes;
or to set Senators, Counsailou^ and Aldermen, over free Cities, whom (...)
ever the Lord shall establish in those places wherein we live, we ought to
yield submission and obedience to them.

Some do highly advance the government of many, because many are not so ^oone
corrupted as one may be; even as a great quantity of water will not so soon
^utrifie, as will a small portion: But these must on the other side consider,
that it is a great deal more hard to find many good, ^hen one: and it is most
likely, that such a ^ne will prove best, whom the Nobility ^f Royal blood,
and Princely ensamples of ^redecessours, do inuit unto virtue. They ^est much
upon the liberty which ought to ^e in man, and whereunto (they say) man is
^orne: But we see, that (by nature) as some^re framed fit to command, so
others are made fit to obey. It is an excellent kind ^f liberty, when men
being set free from ^he thraldom of their own lusts, do under the rule of
superiors, obey godly and ^olsome laws. Tul. parad. penult.
As the Orator does well ^escribe a Freeman, Qui legibus non prop^r metum
paret, sed eas sequitur atque colit quia ^d salutare maxim esse iudicat, Which
does ^ot obey the Laws for fear, but does follow them and embrace them,
because he does judge it a thing wholesome and necessary for the safegarde of
man. For better it is to dwell where nothing is lawful, then to dwell where
all things are lawful. Judge. 2.16.
The Judges which were approved in a kind of Aristocratie, Psalm. 21.3.
are said to be raised up of God. So also the same is said in other places of
Kings. Prou. 8.15.
The wisdom of God does pronounce it: By me Kings do reign: Dan. 2 21.
and Princes decree justice Daniel says, that the Lord does change times and
seasons: Iere. 27.6.
he takes away Kings and sets up Kings. Nabuchadnezzar in respect of his
kingdom, is called The Servant of God: and a judgment i^ threatened against
all people which will no^ submit their neck under his yoke. Romans 13.1.
The^ is no power, but of God: and whosoever does resist power, does resist the
ord^nance of God. Of all powers, the authority of the King (who is named by
the Apostle Peter such a chief or supreme power as for the Lords sake, 1.
Pet. 2.13.
is to (...) obeyed) does seem first to be most agreeable to nature, Hieron.
epist. 4. ad Rusticum.
as S. Jerome does witnesse^ his.4. Epistle: In apibus principes sunt, gru^
vnam sequuntur ordine literato, Imperator vnus, Iudex vnus prouinciae, in naui
vnus gubernator, in domo vnus dominus, in quamuis grandi exercitu vnius signum
expectatur. Bees have their chief governor. The Cranes do follow one in
exquisite order. There is one chief commander, one chief Judge of a
Province, one governor of all in the Ship, one Master in a house: In an
army be it never so great, the ensign of one is especially regarded and
attended on. In the body of man, though the limbs and parts be many, yet they
all obey one head.

Secondly, most fit for the cutting off of seditions and rebellions: and
therefore the Romans in all their extremest dangers had recourse unto this
Tanquam ad anchoram sacram, as to their shoot anchor, as to their last and
best refuge, as Liuy witnesses, Liu. lib. 6.
Trepidi patres ad summum auxilium decurrunt, dictatorem dici placet, The
fearful Senators did fly to their chiefest succor, (which was, to choose
out one to have supreme authority) whom it pleased them to call a Dictator.
Liu. lib. 22.
And when Hannibal pressed the Romans Ad dictatorem dicendum remedium iamdiu
desideratu^ ciuitas confugit, The City went to the choosing and pronouncing of
the Dictator, Liu. lib. 6.
which was the remedy they long expected: Because, as in an other place he
writes, Dictatoris edictum pro numine semper obseruatum est, The commandment
and proclamation of the Dictator, was esteemed to be as the voice of God: there
was no appealing from him. Liu lib. 2.
Agedum dictatorem a quo prou^catio non est creemus: Come (said the Consul
Appius) let us make a Dictator, Liu. lib. 6.
from whom it shall not be lawful for any man to appeal. Tantus erat
Dictatoris terror apud hosts vt eo creato statim a moenibus discesserint. So
great was the terror of the Dictator, even amongst the enemies, that as soon as he was created, they raised their siege and departed. Whereby appears
plainly, that the ancient Romans as well in war as in peace, found this as
a sure anchor hold against all seditions and dangers, to enjoy one, such a
Magistrate, as from whom there should be no appeal, and whose authority
should possess, as it were, the room of God upon the earth. The Carians were
once a wealthy and flourishing people: but by seditions, which came by the
having of many heads and governors, they were brought to ruin and utter
desolation: whereupon there arose a proverb, (...).
Multi duces disperdidere Cariam, Homer. ^.

Too many Guydes undid the countey Caria.


When many Soldiers were mutinous, prudent Ulysses did repress them with
these words, (...).
Multos imperitare malum est, rex vnicus esto.
It Is not good too many to rule,
let only be one King.
Which verse (as Aemilius Probus does testify) Dion did also use when
Heraclides began his faction.

Thirdly, the government of one Monarch does seem to resemble most lively the
image of Gods power and majesty: For as in the firmament, the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, do as it were represent some image of the glory of the Eternal:
So the rule of Monarchs, in their several kingdoms upon earth, does call to
our considerations the government and high majesty of the omnipotent God. And
most certainly ac this time of the alteration of the estate of the Jewish
commonwealth, the will and purpose of God is in his servant king David, Psalm.
22, 3. Psalm. 2, 6.
to erect an Image and type of the kingdom of Christ. But here (may some say)
If the will of God were now in David and his posterity, to set forth a figure
of the kingdom of Christ, how can the Israelites be said to sin so great a
sin, in asking a king, when they asked only that, which was determined in
the purpose of God: Why does the Lord so punish their request, in sending
them so wicked a king as was Saul, 1. Sam. 13 11 1. Sam. 15, 9.
who besides his often and wilful disobedience against the commandment of
God, did most cruelly murder the priests of God, 1 Samuel 22, 18.
causing to be slain at one time fourscore and five, which ware the linen
Ephod, if in desiring a king, their will did concur with the will of God? Ye
are here to observe, that the Israelites had no respect to the purpose of God,
but only they showed forth the fruits of despairing and malcontented
affections. In the spoil of the goods of Job, Job. 1 15, 17, 21.
the Caldeans and Sabeans had no regard to the will and purpose of God, which
was most just and holy to examine sharply one of his servants, and to make him
a schoolmaster of patience to all posterity: their desire was only
injuriously to enrich themselves with the spoil of Job. In the death of our
savior Christ, the high Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees had no respect to the
will of God, Act. 2.23.
which was most merciful and just, by that all sufficient ransom for sin,
to save all believers: their intent was only to be revenged of him, whom they
hated with deadly malice. Even so, these Israelites have no desire here to obey
the secret decree of God, in the kingdom of David and of his offspring, to set
out a resemblance of the kingdom of Christ, but only their purpose is, with a
desperate coffeehouse to shake off the government of their good judge Samuel,
contrary to the revealed will of God, which had before decreed, Iud. 2.18.
that Whosoever was approved to be raised up of God for their deliverer, he
should afterward judge Israel all the days of his life. And therefore they
worthily receive a punishment of their obstinate disobedience against the
express commandment of God. And yet notwithstanding this history does show
us that the appointment of God was performed in Samuel, (...) 7.14.
who is said, To have judged Israel all the days of his life. Seven and
twenty years and seven months he had judged, (...) 2.
when Saul began to reign. Two years was Saul king: for although he lived
above twelve years after that he was elected king, yet forasmuch as in the
second year he was denounced to be rejected of God, (...) 1, 7.
his kingdom is named to be but of two years in continuance. And during that
time also, ye authority of Samuel is not abolished, for even in these affairs
against Nachash the Ammonite, a punishment was in a public Proclamation
threatened against every one which would not follow Saul and Samuel, Act.
13.21.
although in the Acts of the Apostles, because the kingdom is the more
excellent state of government, the whole forty years be attributed to Saul,
as the greater power and majesty, swallowing up the less. As concerning the
miraculous providence of God extended toward the Israelites during the time
that Samuel was their Judge, there need no further testimonies, but that only
place in the seventh chapter of this book, 1. Sam. 7, 13.
where it is said, That the hand of the Lord was against the Philistines all the
days of Samuel. The Philistines were the deadliest and fiercest enemies that
ever molested the Israelits. Seeing then that God overthrew their cruellest and
mightiest enemies, and that not once or twice, but even all the days of Samuel:
what a wretched ingratitude was this, that because a few adversaries had gotten
advantage against one of their Cities, they should therefore unthankfully shake
off that happy government, under which God had granted them so many
triumphant victories? But what were the causes of this their unkind and froward
desire of alteration? First they would be like to other nations round about
them, as they say: 1. Sam. 8, 5.20.
Make us a King to govern us, like all other nations. And afterward again: We
will be like all other Countries, a King shall judge us, and go out before us,
and fight our battayles. Foreign gouernementes, although they be in them
selves most excellent (as no doubt those were which were established under
kings) are not to be drawn as ensamples to other nations wherein another
estate of government has already taken place. We cannot affirm that because
this or that is now done in the common wealth of Geneua, Ioh. 12, 42.
or because this or that was once done in the Elderships and Councels of the
Jews, therefore the same ought to be done in other seniories and assemblies
where there is not that Ius gladij, that civil authority and power, which we
see plainly was in them. Their Synagogues had the ordering of civil
punishments, Math. 10, 17.
to condemn to be scourged, those whom they judged to offend: Math. 26, 47,
57.
they could send out officers with swords and staves to apprehend Christ, they
could examine witnesses against him, and bind him and deliver him to Pilate.
And whereas when Pilate bade them take him and judge him after their own law:
Ioh. 18, 31.
they answered, That it was not lawful for them to put any man to death.
Chrysostom does one way expound it, that it may well be meant of that kind
of death, which (to aggrauate the shame) they sought especially to have
executed on Christ. For otherwise they had authority to stone to death, as it
may seem that Steven was condemned by them, because as the law was, that the
witnesses should cast the first stone, Deuteronomy. 17, 7.
so the witnesses in the stoning of Stephen, Act. 7, 58.
do orderly lay down their clothes at the feet of Saul. In the Chapter
following, their power does extend to draw out men, Act. 8, 3.
women and children, and to thrust them into prison: which authority Saul
could put in execution at Damascus, Act. 9, 1.
much more at the city Jerusalem.

Tertullus their Orator does acknowledge this before the governor Faelix when
he says of Paul, We took him, Act. 24.6.
and would have judged him according to our law, but that the chief captain
Lysias came upon us, and with great violence took him out of our hands.

The ensamples of those which are chief governors in Aristocratie, ought not
to be drawn unto them which are subjects under a Monarchy. There is in every
dominion a supreme power, which the Greeks do call call (...) and (...) the
Latins Maiestatem, the Italians Signoria, and we in England do name it by the
French word Soueraintie. Wheresoever that chief authority does remain,
whether it be in one or in many, from thence must be derived the ordering of
all things, both in Church and Commonwealth.

1. Sam. 8.20
These Israelites here desire that they might have a King to go before them,
and to fight their battayles. Their request had not displeased God, had there
not been before an other form of government established amongst them: for
otherwise of a Monarchy, Aug. contra Fastum Manichaeum lib. 22 cap. 75.
that may well be said which S. Augustine does write against Faustus the
Manichee, Ordo ille naturalis mortalium paci accommodatus hoc poscit vt
suscipiendi belli auctoritas atque consilium sit penes principem, exequondi
autem iussa bellica ministerium milites debeant paci salutique communi. The
natural order most fit for the peace of mankind, does require this; that the
authority and counsel of taking War in hand, be in the power of the Prince:
and the duty of executing the commandments of War, is a thing that the
Soldiers do owe, for the maynteinance of the peace of the Commonwealth. And
a little after, Vir iustus si forte sub rege etiam sacrilego militet, recte
possit illo iubente bellare, ciuicae pacis ordinem seruans, oui quod iubetur
vel non esse contra dei praeceptum certum est, vel vtrum sit certum non est,
ita vt fortasse reum regem faciat iniquitas imperandi, innocentem autem militem
ostendat ordo seruiendi. A just man, if he be a Soldier under his King being
wicked, may at his commandment fight, keeping the order of civil peace with
his fellow subjects, when that which is commanded is not directly against the
word of God: or whether it be or no, it is not certainly known; so that
perhaps a sin in commanding may make the king guyltie, and yet the order
of obeying may declare the Soldier innocent. Number. 13, 3. Iosu. 11. Iosu. 6, 6.
When God ruled his people by Moses and Joshua, they as Dukes and Magistrates,
disposed all things both in war and peace, in ordering both Church and
Commonwealth, in causing the people to be circumcised, in buylding Aulters,
and every way governing the charge committed to them. When afterward he raised
up Judges, he endued them not only with warlike virtue, but that they might
better also reform abuses in the Church, Judge. 4, 4.
he gave sometimes to the Women, as unto Debora: 1. Sam. 3, 20
sometimes to Men, as unto Samuel, the spirit of prophesying. When after, he
established Kings, the Scriptures do plentifully declare unto us what
supremacy was granted to them over all persons, 1. Chro. 13. 1. Chro. 23, 4.
and in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as civil. David armed his people
with the authority of the sword, against all their public enemies: he caused
the Arc to be removed from a private man's house: he placed the orders of the
Priests and Levites, Psalm. 132.5.
and had a principal care to find out a seat for the Lords service, an
habitation for the mighty God of Jacob. Solomon deposed the wicked Priest
Abiathar, and placed Sadoc a better in his room. 1. Reg. 2.35. 2. Chro. 8, 14.
He established the orders of the Levites and other officers: and (least any
man should think that Solomon did herein more then he might) it is said by
express words that this his charge of the Church was the commandment of
David the man of God. Asia armed his people against the enemies of Gods Church,
2. Chro 14. 2. Chro 15.13, 16. 2. Chro. 20.3.
he made a decree, that they should be slain which would not seek and worship
the Lord God of Israel, he deposed Maacha from her regencie, because of her
idolatry. Iehosaphat ordered the wars of the house of Judah: he sent forth
Elisham and Iehoram Priests to instruct the people: 2. Chro. 17, 8. 2. Chro.
19.8. 2. Chro. 29.1. 2. Chro. 31.4.
he placed in authority the Priests and chief nobles for the judgment of the
cause of the Lord. Ezechias by lawful war withstood Sennacheribs unlawful
oppressions. He repaired the temple, rooted out idolatry, and appointed the
courses of the Priests and Levites. Josias took order for the pulling down of
idolatry, 2. Reg. 23.4
and the execution of the priests of Baal. Afterward when the Romans had
conquered Jury, for as much as there is no power but of God, S. Peter does
also to them attribute this supremacy, 1. Pet. 2 13. Romans 13, 4.
calling the king a chief and supreme governor: and showing also what manner
of supremacy he has: to wit, such a chief power as does extend it self
generally to the punishment of evil doers, and to the praise of them that do
well. As largely then as goes good or evil, that is, through the observation
and breach of every commandment of either of the two tables, and throughout
all nations that can be either in the Church or common wealth: so far goes
the supremacy of Princes in their dominions, to show forth their justice in
punishing, their mercy in favoring, and the^ love in rewarding. Saint Paul
speake^ as well of the Roman Emperors of h^ time, Romans 3, 4.
as also of all other higher power which are to ensue in any other age (...)
place, that they bear not the sword f^ naught, but are the ministers of God,
take vengeance of evil doers.

1. Sam. 8, 3,
The second cause why these people desire to shake off the government of Samuel
was, 1. Sam. 2, 3, 4.
because his sons ruling in his stee^ did receive bribes, and pervert
judgment Samuel does in this twelfth Chapter e^ postulate this matter at
large with them and is cleared sufficiently in the conscience, testimony of
them all. The iniquiti^ which his sons committed, 1. Sam. 8, 2.
were not because he did not prescribe good ways vn^ them, but because they
did not walk in t^ ways and steps of their father. If a m^ have but a small
family, he shall yet be ab^sed by some: What then must we think of those
higher powers, who have so man under officers in so infinite places, de^uing
their authority from them: 1. Reg 2, 22
Salom^ when he commanded Ioab to be put death for those wilful murders
which h^ had before committed, says, that he did the^ Patre suo Dauide inscio,
His father David not knowing of it. So herein Samuel his children, and in all
ages under Christian Princes, many things are done by inferior Magistrates,
which come not to the knowledge of superior powers, and whereof no fault is to
be imputed to them, seeing the offenses proceed not of want of good and
wholesome laws: but, for that there is not due obedience yielded unto them.

The third cause, 1. Sam. 8, 1.
why they so greedily gape for alteration, was, because they distrusted in the
power and providence of God. They thought that the weakness of aged Samuel,
was not sufficient to deliver them from the oppression of Nachash the Ammonite.
The punishment which God laid upon their distrustful forefathers, might have
been a sufficient warning to them, Number. 13, 3.
to have showed them the greeuousnesse and horror of this sin. When Moses had
sent of every Tribe one, to view the land of Canaan (amongst whom, were Joshua,
of the tribe of Ephraim; and Caleb, of the tribe of Judah:) at their return,
many of them gave great reports of the power and strength of the Canaanites,
Nu^. 13, 34.
that they were mighty men, Number. 14.2, 9.
like Giants, and the sons of Enachim: and that the Israelites were but as
Grasshoppers in respect of them. The people began by and by to murmr and
despair, and to prepare a return into Egypt. Joshua and Caleb did what they
could to encourage the people, bidding them not to fear, Psalm. 78, 18.
for (say they) they are but bread for us: the Shield is departed from them:
the Lord is on our side: But the Israelites were so far from receiving
comfort, that they cried out one to an other, to fling stones against their
comforters. This distrusting mind did so highly displease God, Number. 26.64.
that they were cut off and destroyed with many fearful plagues, so that of
above six hundred thousand of them, there came but two into the land of
Promise. The Lord had let that people see by sundry ensamples, that there is no
power so small, but that he is able sufficiently to strengthen it against the
enemies of his truth. Abraham having but three hundred and eighteen men, Genesis
14, 14
ouerthrewe the power of five Kings. Samson with a law bone slew a thousand.
Sisera the captain of the host of Iabin king of Canaan, Judge. 15, 15.
was of great strength, he had.900. charets of iron, Judge 4, 13. and 22.
yet was he slain at the last by the hands of a silly woman. And to Samuel, 1.
Sam. 7, 13.
though he were old, yet ye Lord gave him power to his dying day, to subdue and
keep under the haughty Philistines. By this continual experience of ye power
of God, they might have evidently seen, that there is no strength so feeble,
but God can plentifully enable it, for the fighting of the Lords battayles:
and thereupon they should have gathered courage and comfort, and not with such
wretchlesse unthankfulness, started back from the living God. What a most
ungrateful part was this, 1. Sam. 3, 20
when Samuel had so long time propounded unto them the heavenly truth of God,
and for the space of above.xxvii. years, as a most careful Magistrate
defended them from all invasions and oppressions, now in old age to forsake
him, and as weery of his government, to desire a King to be placed over them?
These Israelites do deal with Samuel, as afterward the subjects of David did
with their king, at the time of the rebellion of Absalom. David had then
reigned.xxx. years, and therefore was about lx. years of age (for he was
about.xxx. years old at the death of Saul. Psalm. 3.1.
) How his people did carry them selves in Absoloms conspiracy, he declares him
self in his.3. Psalm, wherein he complains that in that his time of need,
he found many so to become his enemies, that in most despitefull manner they
objected unto him, that there was no help for him in his God. But these
unfaithful Subjects, were like unto the Swallows which carry with us in the
Spring and Summer, but in the cold of Winter do wholly forsake us: they were
like the Doves, which sit upon the house in fair weather: but if once a storm
do come, they are presently gone: or rather they were like that currish kind of
lazy Dogs, that will fawn upon their masters by the fires side, but if they
see him go abroad in foul weather, they are content to let him go a sone: or
like unto cursed Vipers, seeing that as much as in them lied, they sought to
rent the bowels of him of whom next under God they had their being, their
strength, and wealth, and whatsoever they possessed. The sin of many in these
our days, is by many degrees more heinous and detestable, then was the
offense of the Israelites in the days either of David or of Samuel. They
desired an exchange of their governor: but yet they desired to have a King
erected out of the midst of their brethren, according to the law in
Deutronomie. Deuteronomy. 17.15.
Out of thy brethren shall thou appoint thy self a King: thou may not set
over thee a stranger, which is not thy brother. How grievously then do they
offend, which desire to have brought in upon their Prince a foreign power, ye
power of a Priest of Rome? How horrible is their sin (if there be any such
monster in nature) that do gape for the invasion of a foreign Prince, to
weaken or abrogate that authority, which right, and blood, and the law, has
placed over them? What measure we should look for of Strangers, the dealinges
of the Spaniards in the Low Countries may be a sufficient warning unto us.
Their Nobles have been murdered, their ancient inhabitants spoiled, or driven
to fly their native soil. Their famous and flourishyng Cities so oppressed
and dispeopled, that the grass does grow in those streets, which have bin
heretofore by wealthy Citizens and Merchants so notably frequented and
replenished. Naples may likewise serve for instruction herein: where, when the
Spaniards prevailed, they were presently most miserably plagued with many new
taxes and tributes, whereof before, they never had mention. No man could have a
sire, but he must first pay six shyllinges for the chimney: none permitted to
eat sundry kinds of meats, but first he must fine for them: none to kill a
Foul, but first stick up a fether to give warning for the Impost: so that the
farmer of the Butcherie and Poultrie, received daily the sum of three hundred
Ducats. None fared the better because he bare the name of a Catholic.
Religion was not the thing which the hungry Soldiers respected: Protestant or
Papist, if he were rich, and had a sleece, all was one.

1. Sa^. 8, 3.11.
The Israelites found them selves grieved, that Samuels, children received some
things of them: But by Samuels answer it may appear, that the receiptes of
his sons, were nothing to those infinite taxes and oppressions which a Tyrant
should bring upon them. It was well said of the Poet, Temporibus diris igitur
iussuque Neronis
Longinu^, and magnos Senecae praediuitis hor^s, Iuuenal. satyr. 10.

clausit et egregias Lateranorum obsidet aedes tota cohors. etc.
In bloody times, and in rage of Nero the tyrant
Longinus great substance, gardens of Seneca, buildinges
of Laterans serve for fit spoylinges for the men armed.


Quintus Aurilius, when he (having a fair house in Alba) was drawn to
execution in the tyranny of Sylla, cried out, O house at Alba, thou wast the
cause of my death! In civil vprores, and in invasions of strangers, no man can
challenge any privilege for his integrity or profession. Be they Catholics
in name (as are now the Romanistes) or Catholics in deed (as are true
faithful Christians) be they Ministers, be they Merchants, be they Recusants,
be they Reformers, if they be wealthy, and have any thing to loose, all is one.
The most fearful punishment of all, is that which Samuel does warn them off,
that when the Lord shall lay oppression and bondage upon them, as a plague for
their coffeehouse, they shall cry unto the Lord for help, and not be heard:
1. Sam. 8.18.
Ye shall cry out (says he) at that day, because of the King which you have
chosen to your selves, and the Lord at that day will not hearken unto you.
There are three especial duties required in all good Subjects in any
established Commonwealth, whereof every one is wanting in these inconstant
Israelites. The first is in heart to be loyal to the supreme Governor. Eccl.
10.20.
Curse not the King (says the Wise man) no not in thy heart, least the birds
of the air do carry the voice, and the fethered fowls bewray thee. Whatsoever
is amiss in superior powers, seeing that (as Solomon witnesses) The heart of
the King is in the hand of the Lord: Pro. 21.1.
it is the part of us that are inferiors, to pray to God to renew and guide
their hearts with his principal spirit: but in the mean time, in no case,
either to take up or move against them, or once in heart to wish for the
subuertion of their estate. When Nero, Caligula, or such Heathen tyrants
possessed the Scepter and Empire, yet did the Apostles of Christ Exhort every
soul to be subject to them: Romans 3.1. 2. Tim. 2.2.
and all prayers and supplications to be made to God for them. Baruch. 1.11
Pray for the life of Nabuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and for Baltasar his
son, that their days upon earth may be as the days of heaven, that ye may
long do them service, and find favor in their sight.

The second duty of a faithful Subject, is in the ordering of his life, to
abandon sin and iniquity: for (as Solomon declares) For the iniquity of
the people, Pro. 28, 2.
the Prince is often changed. These Israelites say, That they have added this,
desiring of a King, to all their other wickedness, as their own conscience
accusing them of many other enormities. Look how odious the name traitor is to
the ears; and so grievous in deed should sin be to the soul and spirit:
for whosoever do by heaping sin upon sin, draw down a vengeance upon the
place where they inhabit, are by the sentence of the Wise man, found guyltie
of high treason against Prince and Country. Hose. 41.
There is (says the Prophet) no truth, no mercy, no knowledge of God in the
land: but by swearing, lying, murdering stealing, and whooring, they break
out; and blood touches blood: therefore shall the land mourn, and the
inhabitants thereof shall utterly be destroyed.

The third duty is in tongue also to carry him self loyal and duetifull.
The Law of God is, Exodus 22 28
Thou shall not rail upon the Judges, neither speak evil of the Ruler of the
people. Number. 12.2. Number. 21.6.
The old Israelites were some stricken with Leprosies, some destroyed with
Pestilence, with fiery Serpents, and many fearful kinds of death, because
they murmured against the Lords anointed. These Israelites here, 1. Sam. 12.2
do tread in their steps, when because Iabesh Gilead their city was in great
distress, do therefore impute the fault to the government under Samuel. Such
is the wickedness of many in our age, which because some troubles, dearth, and
scarcity, are for a time befallen unto, do therefore murmr either against
the Word now preached, or the Government now established: whereas in deed the
occasion ought chiefly to be ascribed to their own ungodly lives, and to their
wilful disobedience against the laws both of God and Sovereign. Psalm. 81.13.
O (says God by the psalmist) that my people would have harkened unto my
voice: For if Israel would have walked in my ways, I should soon have humbled
their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries: I should have fed
them with the flower of Wheat, and with Honey, out of the stony Rock would I
have satisfied them. Ier. 44.1
When the Jews (as it is in Jeremy) cried out that things were not so cheap
and plentiful amongst them since they gave over baking cakes to the Queen of
heaven, as they were before, when they worshypped the host of the Skies:
where, I pray you, was then ye fault? Not in the word taught by Jeremy, but
in the want of due obedience in the people to the voice of God uttered by the
Prophet. Even so in these our days, the cause of the dearth and scarcity
which does remain amongst us, is not in the word now preached, or the laws
now confirmed, but in the disobedience of the people both to the one and to the
other. As (not to use many instances) the Word of God, and the Statutes of our
most gracious Sovereign, do condemn pride and excess, as well in apparel
as diet, with all unthrifty gaming, and prodigality of life. Now where there
is no regard to avoid these sins, but that so many run wilfully headlong
to exceed their calling, and to live at a greater rate then their maynteinance
does extend unto, How is it possible, but that thereby many must needs be
brought to great distress, want, and penury. A late writer speaking of a
dearth in Germany, did yield this as the cause thereof, Hulric. Hutten in aula.
Omnes fere per Germaniam principes egent propter luxum et vanitate^, quibus
dediti plurima inutiliter absumunt. Videsne enim vt multa scurris, ludionibus,
mimis, parasitis ac musicis largiuntur? Videsne vt in aulis noctu diuque edatur
et bibatur? vt pauimenta vino madeant? vt plus ebrij isti profundant quam
ingurgitent, plus ingurgitent quam far possint? Tum ad aemulationem quoque
dantur vestes, atque is est principum tumor vt quanto magis egent tanto minus
egere videri velint, et idcirco nihil de pompa, nihil de apparatibus remitta^t.
What want we have, must be imputed to our own abuse of Gods blessings, when
for the prodigal wasting of them, God does shorten them, and make the heaven
as iron, Leuit. 26.19.
and the earth as brass. It must be laid upon oux haughty disobedience of
the Law, and not upon such decrees, statutes, and proclamations whereby the
said abuses have bin so often and so justly prohibited. And yet if we would
duly call to mind how wonderfully people are now multiplied in every part of
this our realm of England (by reason that although by war we have sometime
lost some men, and by plagues also the Lord has eftsoons corrected us gently,
and as it were shaken the rod at us, and beaten us with a soft hand: yet we
have had no such civil wars, and universal plagues of Pestilence, Sweates,
or other consuming diseases, which heretofore have made waste over our whole
land) if I say, we would duly consider the great increase of people now, in
respect of that they have bin in times past; and how notwithstanding, the Lord
of his bountiful goodness has from year to year, either mercifully
provided for us within the land, granting us sufficient not only to sustain
our selves, but also to be helpful and comfortable unto others; or else
plentifully supplied our necessities out of other countries, sending us, though
peradventure not so much as we have desired, yet infinite times more then we
have deserved: we should rather be enforced to admire and reverence the great
mercies of God, then with unthankful minds to repine and grudge against him.
Genesis 12, 10. Genesis 26.2.
Abraham was compelled by famine to fly out of Canaan into Egypt. Isaak driven
to fly to Abimilec king of the Philistines, and to dwell in Gerar. Genesis 45.2,
Jacob forced to send his Family and Asses again and again to buy Corn of
Pharaoes servants. And although now through want of grain, we have in many
places endured some punishment, yet has it been nothing so heavily laid on,
as heretofore it has been upon many of our forefathers. In the year of our
Lord God a thousand sixty and nine, men were constrained to eat Cattes,
Dogs; yea, and men's flesh, in sundry parts of this land. In the year one
thousand three hundred and fifteen, some did eat Horseflesh, some their own
children: and in diverse places, when Prisoners came to be committed which had
any flesh upon them, they were welcomed with plucking in pieces, and devoured
half alive. Of late time, in the days of Queen Marie, many yet can remember
how many thousands in this land, for want of their accustomed corn, were glad
that they could feed upon their bread of Ackornes. But we (although our people
be now in a manner doubled or trebled above the number that were then) yet the
Lord of his everlasting mercy, does still vouchsafe to continue his goodness
toward us: Whose providence in thus susteining us is as mighty and
powerful, and in a manner the very same that was in the time of the Flood in
the Arc of Noah: which though it were but a small vessel, Genesis 6.15.
the length but three hundred Cubits, the breadth but fifty, the deapth but
thirty; Genesis 7.11.
yet did the Lord in the same for the space of about a whole year together
(for so long were they tossed upon the waters) provide not for Noah only and
his family, but also for all beasts, birds, Genesis 8.13.
and creeping things, two and two of every kind. How was it possible to any
judgment of man, that so small a vessel should contain room, relief and
succor, for so many, and that for the space of so large a time? And how could
it be that those beasts and birds which do commonly one live of the spoil of
an other, should yet be all both wild and tame together, so long a time in the
Arc, and not one devour an other. Here the omnipotent power of God did
wonderfully show forth it self. God multiplied their food. God held his
holy hand over them. God preserved them one from praying upon another, and one
from hurting an other. And so miraculous in a manner has been, and is the
providence of God to this our Realm of England. It is but a small Arc, but a
handful in respect of other nations: it is with inhabiters mightily
replenished: yet the Lord not one year (as in the Arc) but from year to
year, and many years has favorably preserved us. And though there be many
wild beasts, amongst which with malcontented minds do gape for an
alteration, that they may wreake their malice on the Saints of God, which
have their wills inwardly prone, and as it were the knives in their hands
ready drawn, to cut the throats of Gods children: yet the Lord does so with
his power put a snaffie in their mouth, and a hook in their nostrelles, that
they have not their purpose: The Lords name be blessed therefore, and the Lord
so bridle them ever hereafter, even for his mercies sake, in his son Christ
Jesus.

If these brutish natures had eyes to behold, and hearts to remember, what
singular blessings the Lord has bestowed on this small Island, that they
could (as Samuel speaks here to the Israelites) consider what great things
the Lord has done for them, 1. Sam. 12.24.
they could not but be touched with remorse and grief for this their viperous
and heinous unkindness: whereas many other Countries about us, either have not
the word of God truly taught, 1. Cro. 14.15.
or if they have it, they have it either with war or bloddshed, or (which is
as ill) with joining together Christ and Belial. We may in all peace and
quietness freely resort to the Temple to hear the word of God and public
prayer in a known language, whereby both heart and tongue may go together; in
which respect every little Village in this realm of England has a greater
blessing, then all that large and ample region of Spain. And whereas other
Nations about us have continual broils and troubles within the land, we stand
as it were in a gallarie, as the Greek proverb is (...), Extra telorum
iactum, Lucian. in votis.
where we may behold them (though to our grief) bayting and renting one an
others bowels: but we are free our selves from those outrageous mischiefs. We
feel those (...), Aristoph. in auibus. Plin. lib. 10 cap. 32. Plant. in
paenulo.
Halcyonios dies, as the ancient Writers have observed, that when the little
bird Halcyon, otherwise called Alcedo, does build her nest in the Sea banks,
be the Sea never so rigorous and stormy before, yet there follows then a
great calm and quietness, which continues till she have hatched her young:
duering all which time, the Shipmen in the Sicilian Seas, do fear no dangers
of tempest.

This calm time, this mild, quiet, and peaceable time, the Lord has granted
to us, not for a few days, but for many happy years together. We enjoy that
sweet blessing which was in Jury and Israel in the time of Solomon, 1. Reg
4.25
To dwell safely every man under his own Vine, and under his own Figtree,
from Dan to Beersheba: from one end of the land to the other, even all the
days of Solomon. O that we were not become so drunke^ with this our
prosperity as to forget that good Lord, Deuteronomy. 8.14.
which has given this good Land unto us! Deuteronomy. 32.15.
O that we were not like Ieshurun, spoken of in Deutronomie, like the Horse,
which being fat and well fed, fed, does spurn and flinge against his
keeper, and nourisher! O that we were not like the untamed Heyfar, Ier. 31.18.
by reason of our long running in plentiful pastures, to forget to carry the
sweet yoke of obedience! O that we could make true use of all the benefits
and blessings of our heavenly Father! that the loving kindness of God might
lead us to repentance: Romans 2.4.
that we could (as Samuel speaks here to the Israelites) Fear the Lord, and
serve him ^n truth with all our hearts, 1. Sam. 12.24.
and consider what great things he has done for us: Psalm. 107.8.
that we could Praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the woonders
which he daily does for this realm of England: 2. Sam. 12.14.
Then should the blessing of God still remain upon us, both upon Prince and
people. Pro. 16.7.
Then should the Lord continue his mercies in going in and out with our Armies.
Psalm. 8.13.
Then should the Lord either make our enemies become our ^riendes, or thoroughly
turn his hand against our adversaries. Romans 13.1.
Then should there ^e amongst us every soul duetifully subject to the higher
powers. Then should we (...) all distresses, with contented minds, cast all
our care on God, 1. Pet. 5.7.
for he cares for us. Then should we in heart conceive that assured confidence
and trust in the goodness of God, that we should faithfully say with David,
Psalm. 118.6.
If the Lord be on our side, we need not care what man can do unto us. Then
should the Lord long prosper, Psam. 21.4.
and even for ever preserve that happy Monarchy under which we are here so
peaceably governed, and grant us a Kingdom of everlasting peace in the world
to come* Which gifts and graces, the Lord of Lords, and King of all Kings,
vouchsafe to give unto us, for the merits of our savior Christ Jesus. To whom
with the Father and the holy Ghost, one true and everliving God, for all his
inestimable benefits bestowed upon us, be all honor, glory, thanksegeuing,
and praise, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON DESCRIBING THE NATVRE AND HORROVR OF STVBBERNE DISOBEDIENCE.

Preached at Tanridge in Surrey the xvi day of July Anno domini 1598.

And at the same time written to be added as a second part, to the Danger of
coffeehouse. *

By Simon Harwarde.

LONDON, Imprinted by RICHARD BRADOCKE for RICHARD JOHN'S. 1599.

TO MY VERY good friend M. Michaell Murgatrod Steward in household to the most
reverend Father in God the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his grace many joyful
and happy years. *
SIR, the great kindness and courtesy heretofore by me received at your hands
whenever I came either to Lambeth or Croydon to do my humble duty unto your
most honorable Lord and master my L. his grace of Canterbury, has many times
and often justly occasioned me to remember you, and to bethink my poor self
how happily I might anyway, if not requite you, yet yeald at the least some
acknow. ledgement and plain testimony of my thankfulness in that behalf
unto you. Hereof it comes that being now to publishe this little treatise of
horror of disobedience, I have presumed (in hope of pardon) to direct the same
to you as to a special friend meriting a far greater matter from me. But
until such time as I may perform some thing of greater moment for you, my
trust is you will accept in good part this small ^oken of my great love
toward ^ou; And withal still continew^our former well-wishing affection
^owards me. The which I do ^ore desire than any ways I am ^ble to deserve,
and yet purpose^ by Gods grace) further to re^mpence, if ever either occasion
^all serve, or power shall better ^able me thereunto. Even so with^anie thanks
for your manifold ^auours, I cease to be further troublesome at this time unto
^ou, beseeching almighty God ^ll to bless you with the honou^able countenance
of him whom ^u serve, and whom for his great ^ertues sake all good and honest
men do love, reverence, and entirely honor. From Tanridge this second of
January 1599.

Yours ever assured to his power, Simon Harward.

The preface of the Author to the Christian Reader.
AS in the former Sermon (beloved in Christ) there is laid open unto thee the
offense of the Israelites in desiring a king: So in this (the argument whereof
was likewise taken out of the first chapter by the order of our church
appointed for the Sabbath then next ensuing) there does follow some part of the
punishment, wherewith it pleased God to scourge the malcontented desires of
that rebellious people. In asking a king, they did wilfully cast off the
ordinance of God, who had established anotherforme of government amongst them:
therefore (as this history does evidently declare) the Lord has now given them
a King in his wrath, and as commonly he does punish every transgression in and
by it self, so to a rebellious and wilful people he has sent a stubborn and
obstinate governor. The matter then of this latter Sermon depending so
necessarily on the other going before; I have thought it not amiss here to
join them both together with equal labor of pe^ning, as before they required
not much unequal time in their uttering and delivering: And being so united I
do offer them here jointly to thy godly consideration, praying thee in the same
manner to accept them, as they are now presented to thee, that is with a single
sincere and wel-willing affection. Farewell in Christ, From Tanridge this
xviii. of July. Anno 1598.

1. Sam. 15. Ver. 23. But rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft and stubborn
resisting is as superstition and Idolatry: because thou have cast away the
word of the Lord, the Lord has likewise cast away thee from being King.


THE Amalechits (of whom Agag is now King, and whom GOD does here in this
Chapter command to be utterly destroyed by Saul) were as the Proverb is
(...), mali corui mala oua, of a wicked race a cursed generation, as descended
of one Amalec, Genesis 36. v. 12.
who was a base son of Eliphas the son of Esau, by a concubine named Timna.
Exodus 17.14.
They did with such bloody hearts afflicte and assault the Israel ^s in
Rephidim when they were coming out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 25. v. 17.
especially in following them and beating down the hinmost of them, killing
such as they saw were faint and weary and not able to march with the rest, that
God did both assure his servant Moses that he would destroy the remembrance of
Amalec from under heaven, and also by Moses command the Israelites, that as
soon as they had gotten victory of their enemies about them, they should put
in execution that decree of Gods vengeance denounced against those Amalekites.
For although the Lord do suffer for a time the wicked to rage and make havoc
of his servants, yet he does also determine and appoint a time when their
outrage and cruelty shall be punished and revenged. He permitted for a time
Pharaoh to oppress the Israelits Senacherib to triumph against, Ezechias with
blasphemous speches: Exodus 14, 28. 2. Reg. 18.13.
but he appointed also the time when the one should be overwhelmed in the sea,
and the other murdered by his own children. He suffered for a time Herod,
Nero, Maxentius, Dioclesian, Maximinus and others to persecute the faithful
Christians in the primitive Church: but he determined also a time when Herod
should be eaten up with worms, Act. 12.23.
Maxentius fall off a bridge and together with horse and harnes be overwhelmed
in ye waters, Dioclesian poison himself, Nero cut his own throat, and
Maximinus so be plagued with vermin yt no Physician could abide to come near
unto him. A time the Lord gave to the Amalekites to embrew their hands in the
blood of the Israelits, Deuteronomy. 25.17.
and a time also did the Lord prescribe when their cruelty should be remembered
to their utter confusion. Ps. 56. v. 8.
For if God (as the Psalmist speaks) do put the tears of his Saints in his
bottell, much more shall God remember the blood of his Saints. The Amalekites
showed themselves to have cruel and very unmerciful hearts when they
murdered such as were faint and weary and by reason of their weakness no way
able to encounter with them: But now lege talionis, by the law of like
recompense God does command an utter destruction of them, their wives, their
children, their sucklings their cattle, Iam. 2. v. 13
and whatsoever appertains to them, that judgment may be without mercy to
them which showed no mercy. Achab and Iezabell for Naboths vineyard caused
Naboths blood to be shed: 1 King. 21.19.
but as dogs did lick the blood of Naboth, so of dogs also was their blood
afterward devoured. Judge. 1.
Adonibezeg cut off the thumbs and toes of seventy Kings and made them gather
bread under his table: the same despightfull reproach which he had measured to
others was at the last in like manner measured to himself. A most cruel envy
it was in Haman that could no way be satisfied, but with the hanging of
harmless Mardocheus: Hest. 7.9. Hest. 9. v. 14.
but by the just judgment of God Haman and his ten sons were hanged on the same
gallows which he had prepared for Mardocheus. Seneca writes that Xerxes the
King of Persia when one Pithius came unto him and desired him, that of his five
sons which were pressed out of all to be soldiers in Xerxes his army, Seneca
li. 3. de ira. cap. 17.
it would please him to grant him one of them to go home with him to be a
comfort to his old age. The King took that son whom the father had made
choice of, and causing him to be plucked in pieces he cast the limbs of the
dead carkase on either side the way, commanding his army to pass through
them, and saying that he would in this manner purge and purify his army. But
what did ensue thereupon? Xerxes himself not long after being vanquished by
the Grecians was compelled to run over the dead carkases of his army to save
his own life. Deuteronomy 15 v 11.
God in his law did command the Jews mercifully to make provision for their
poor and needy. Ezech. 16. v. 49. Amos. 8.6.
But they (as the Prophets do every where convince them) had no care to
strengthen the hand of the poor: nay most unmercifully they bought and sold
the poor for old shoes, they utterly made no account of them. But at the
last they themselves were ouerrunne by strangers, and being exiled out of their
native soil were made a swarm of beggars to all posterity. Iam. 2, 13.
Even so to these merciless Amalekites by the same tenor of Gods justice,
though many hundred years after, yet now at the last there is judgment
denounced without mercy against them which showed no mercy. For as when a man
falls timber, the longer he draws his blow the deeper the Axe does enter:
and as the Archer the longer he draws his arrowe the more violently it does
strike and pearce: eauen so the longer the Lord does withholde his hand from
punishing unrepentant transgressors, the more severely at the last is the
vengeance brought against them. But here it may seem strange to some that
these Amalekites so long after should receive the punishment of their
predecessors transgression. Does it stand with the justice of God, for the
fault of the forefathers so many hundred years after to destroy the
posterity? Here some do make answer that God does lay temporal punishments
upon the son for the fathers offense, because temporal punishments do
oftentimes turn to the good and benefit of them which are afflicted. Esai. 39.
v. 7.
So it is threatened against Ezechias that because of an ambitious mind he
showed the Babilonians his treasures, therefore his children should be deprived
of their kingdom and carried away captive. Hebr, 7. v. 10.
But further seeing that as Leui though he were four generations after Abraham,
is yet said to be shut up in the loins of Abraham, so every posterity ought
to be accounted as included in the person of the predecessor; it may well be
reputed just in human laws when any are found guilty of treason to account
the blood attainted, and it must needs be acknowledged most just in God to
lay the punishment of the trespass of the parents upon the children continuing
in their parents wickedness. Otherwise if the children, though by nature being
children of wrath, Romans 1^ 24.
being yet by faith graffed into the true vine Christ Jesus, do see what their
fathers have done, and fear, and not commit the like, then, says the Prophet,
the son shall not bear the fathers offense, neither shall the father bear
the sons offense, but that soul that sins that shall die. ver. 3.
You shall no more use that proverb, The fathers have eaten sower grapes, and
the childrens teeth are set on edge, as I live says the Lord, ye shall use this
byword no more in Israel. When Saul was about to put in execution the
commandment of God concerning the destruction of these Amalekites (who
continuing in the steps of their forefathers were still professed enemies of
the people of God) the Lord does so order the matter, 1. Sam. 15. v. 6.
ye first the Kenits who dwelled in the mountains amongst the Amalekites
should be called out, and set free from that calamity and bloodshed. Judge.
1.16.
These Kenits were descended of Iethro, Exodus 18.21.
who by comfort and good counsel had showed mercy upon the Israelits as they
came from Egypt, therefore does the Lord now show mercy upon thousands unto
such as feared him and regarded his commandments. The best treasure therefore
which parents can lay up in store for purposes of God do seem to vary, Romans
10.29.
which notwithstanding do abide steadfast and grounded fast for ever, only by
the unstable mutabilitie of man they appear to become variable. The decrees of
Gods judgments, as that of Jonas against the Niniuits, Ion. 3. v. 4.
yet forty days and Niniuy shall be destroyed, and that of Esaias against
Ezechias: put thy house in an order, Esai. 38.1.
for thou shall die and not live, have included in them a secret condition, to
wit, unless they should truly repent. For so in Genesis God said to Abimelech
for his keeping of Abraham's wife, behold thou art as a dead man, thou shall
surely die: Genesis 20. ver. 3.
yet there follows afterward, restore the wife to her husband, for he is the
Prophet of the Lord, he will pray for thee and thou shall live. As the
threatenings of GOD do contain in them a hidden condition of repentance, so
the promises of advancement in his temporal elections do comprehend in them a
secret condition of continuance in such duties as their function requires. In
which because now Saul does not abide, but falls to manifest rebellion
against the word of God, he is therefore most justly cast off and rejected.

1. Sam. 15.11.
Samuel before he did denounce this judgment of God in rejecting Saul, did
first as it is said in the xi. verse of this Chapter cry all night unto the
Lord Where a doubt may arise how Samuel could pray in faith seeing that his
prayer may seem to be against the decree of GOD. Genesis 18.22
The like may be said of Abraham praying for the Sodomits and of Jeremy
praying against the captivity of Jerusalem. Ier. 32.16.
Saint Augustine does very well answer this question, Quomodo side orant
sancti vt petant a Deo contra quam decreuit? Aug, deciuitate dei. lib. 22, cap.
2.
nempe quia secundum voluntatem eius orant, non illa^ abscondita^ and
inco^mutabi lem, sed qua^ illis inspirat vt eos exaudiat alio modo. How do the
Saints pray in faith when they require a thing of GOD against that which he
has decreed? Truly because they pray according to his will, not his secret
and unchangeable purpose, but according to that will which he does so inspire
into them, that he hears them some other way: he hears them, if not that
way which they desire, yet undoubtedly that way which he knows to be most
expedient for them. And in the mean time their charitable affection, Anno dom.
558.
obeying the general commandment of GOD cannot but be agreeable to the
ground of faith. We read of Narses that noble Captain of Italy who subdued
the Goths, vanquished the Bactrians, and received by dedition all the Cities of
Tuscia, that he never gave his enemies the battle, but he wept in the Temple
the night before. Such was the human and loving affection here in Samuel,
who before he comes to be a minister of the judgments of GOD against Saul,
does first mourn and lament all the night before and earnestly solicit the
Lord by humble prayer: Afterward he does faithfully discharge that which the
Lord had given him in commission concerning Saul of his wilful rebellion
against GOD in reserving the fattest of the Cattle of the Amalekites (whereas
GOD had commanded their whole substance to be utterly destroyed,) And also
of his wretched ingratitude in contemning that good God by whom he was, of in a
manner nothing, anointed to be the king and head of the Tribes of Israel.
Saul being reproved and manifestly found guilty, does (as is the part of
notable hypocrites) first give glorious words to the Prophet and stand upon
justifying of himself: Blessed art thou of the Lord, Ver. 13.
I have fulfilled the commandment of the Lord. Secondly he posteth off the
fault to others, Ver. 15.
accusing ye people that they had spared the best and fattest of the cattle to
offer them in sacrifice unto God. And last of all he continues obstinate in
defending of himself, thinking that the accusing of others might be for him a
sufficient excuse, and alleging the fear of the people as a cloak to cover
his casting away of their fear of God. I feared (said he) the people, and
therefore I obeyed their voice. Ver. 24.
But Samuel shows him what were indeed the true causes of his sparing of Agag
and of his carrying away the fattest of ye sheep and Oxen of the Amalekites, to
wit, first his setting his heart upon the prey, thou have (says he) turned thy
self to the prey and done wickedly in the sight of God: and secondly a
stubberne disobedience against the word of God, Ver. 19.
which he does at large describe in this verse which now especially is offered
to our considerations. Wherein we have two especial things to observe. First
the nature and effects of rebellion, which are here set out by comparing it
with witchcraft and Idolatry. Secondly the judgment of God against Saul being
found guilty of this detestable offense: Because thou have cast away the
word of the Lord, therefore the Lord has cast away thee from being King.
Rebellion may well be resembled to witchcraft and Idolatry in four especial
respects: Ephesians. 2. v. 2 Gal. 5.20.
first in regard of the original, in that they all proceed of one fountain,
all fruits of infidelity, all manifest works of the flesh, all proceed of
yielding to the suggestions of Satan, and renouncing to be governed by the
spirit of God. Gregory Nazianzene says very well of witchcraft, (...) there
can be no good use of witcheries and sorceries, by which the Devil does enter
and take possession of man. So of Idolatry the Apostle speaks that those
things which the Gentiles sacrificed to Idols, 1. Cor. 10.20.
they sacrificed unto devils and not to God. The like may be said of wilful
disobedience. For as faith is notably approved and declared by obeying the will
of God, Genesis 22.10.
so a stubberne rebelling against ye commandment of GOD is an evident token
of an unfaithful renouncing of God. If any of us being sieke should have two
several persons come unto us, whereif the one should bring a sovereign medecin
to cure our malady, and the other should bring a box of most deadly poison,
how shall it appear in which of these two we place our greatest confidence?
Surely the embracing of the parties counsel and the taking of his receipt
will manifestly declare, of whether of them we have conceived the better
thoughts, and whether we do more rely upon: though we speak well of the one
and never so much commend his excellent knowledge, yet if we follow the advice
of the other, he is the man whom our heart does most prefer. Even so it
falls out in matters which do concern our feeble and diseased souls.
Whosoever they are that do refuse the sovereign salve of repentance offered
unto them by the heavenly Physician Jesus Christ, and do receive the deadly
poison of rebellion ministered unto them by Satan, their own deeds do bear
apparent witness against them, that howsoever in word they call Christ their
Lord and Savior, yet in the heart the suggestions of Satan have found the
chiefest harbor. Secondly rebellion may well be compared to these sins of
witchcraft, superstition and Idolatry in regard of ye nature and quality of ye
offense, because they are all most odious and detestable in ye sight of God.
How abominable these tra^sgressio^s are, is sufficiently made manifest unto us
by those punishments which God in his word has denounced against the^. Exodus
22.18, Leuit. 20.27. and 19.31 and 20.6.
The law is in Exodus that witches should not be suffered to live, and in Leuit.
that if any have a spirit of diuinatio^ and southsaying, they shall die the
death: yea it is denou^ced against such as seek any help of them, that they
shall be cut off from amongst the people. For Idolaters there needs no mention
of any other law, but only yt which is contained in the thirteenth of
Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 13. v. 6.8.9.
where the Lord does command us that, if any do entise us to go after any
strange God, our eye must not pity him, neither must we show any mercy upon
him, though it be thy brother the son of thine own mother, or she that
sleeps in thine own bosom, or thy friend that is as dear unto thee as
thine own soul, yet (says the law) thou shall kill him, thy hand shall be
first upon him. Some to prove that Idolaters are not now to be punished by
death, Math. 13. ver. 25.
do allege that parable in S. Mathews gospel, where the servants are commanded
not to pluck up the tares from amongst ye wheat, Ver. 41.
but to let the^ both grow together until ye harvest. But our Savior does
there himself expound it, that by the servants are not me^t the Magistrates,
but the Angels of God* and by the tares are signified not Idolaters only, Ver.
38.
but generally all the children of the wicked. The purpose then of the Parable
is, not to abridge the authority of the Magistrate, but to show how in this
world the Lord with long patience does permit the hypocrites to be mingled with
the faithful, Ver. 39.
until in the harvest (which is there interpreted to be the end of the world)
he shall by the ministry of his Angels separate the sheep from ye goats and
the good wheat from the darnell. For so I do rather translate it tha^ tares,
for that Tares are called Aphacae or viciae syluestres wild firches: but
Zizanium the word here used is according to Dioscorides, Lolium, Darnell or
Ray: and S. Hierom does yield this cause why he does interpret it by Lolium,
because that Darnell so long as it is in the blade can hardly be descerned from
good corn, and so hypocrites in the Church for a long time can hardly be
distinguished from true Christians. They say further that to punish Idolatours
with death is nothing else but to throw them headlong to utter condemnation. The
like may be said in delivering from the punishment of death any other
mischief whatsoever, because that if the malefactors be executed in ye time
of their unrepentance, they are deprived of all hope of salvation. But their
execution is no occasion of their unrepentance, yea rather it is an ordinary
means to draw such desperate minds to some considerations of themselves, when
seeing their end to be most certainly at hand, they begin then or never to
think of their own estate, to renounde the world, and to call the Lord to
remembrance. They seek also to strenghthen their opinion by that saying of
Solomon, the throne of a King is established by mercy. Prou. 20. v. 28.
But mercy and justice cannot be said to be things contrary, seeing they are
both commanded by one God who is never contrary to himself. Iam. 1.17. Psalm.
101. ver. 1.
David in his meditations does give the first and principal place to mercy,
my song shall be of mercy and judgment, ver. vlt.
yet he affirms afterward in the same Psalm that betimes he will destroy
all the wicked of the land that he may cut off all the works of iniquity from
the City of GOD. Numb. 12. v. 3.


Moses is said to be the mildest man in all the earth, Exodus 32, ver. 82.
yet he proceeded zealously against Idolaters when at one time were slain
about three thousand Samuel was of an humble spirit, 1. Sam. 12, 3.
as may appear by his submitting himself to be accountable to the common
people (over whom he was governor) and offering them to recompense whatsoever
injury had been done unto them, 1. Sam. 15.33.
yet we see with what courage and zeal he did afterward hew in pieces
Idolatrous Agag.

To spare the Wolves is no mercy to the flock, but extreme cruelty. Joshua.
23. ver. 13. Iud. 2. v. 3.
The Israelites showing too much favor to Idolaters, are threatened to receive
then a just reward, when they should find those whom they had spared, to be at
the last whipps to their sides, and thorns in their eyes. As by the punishment
of death the Lord has declared how grievous and horrible the sins are of
witchcraft and Idolatry, so by the same means he has laid open to us how
odious rebellion is, and how heinous is the offense stubbornly to disobey the
commandment of GOD. There needs no further proof of it, but only to call
to mind how not the death of a few particular men, but death it self and the
death of all men came first into the world by the disobedience of man. Romans
5.19. Genesis 3.19
If riotous persons which will not harken to the voice of their parents, Deuteronomy
21. v. 20.
be condemned by the law to be storied to death, then what death do they
deserve which wilfully resist the commandment of the eternal God? If they
escaped not which despised him ye speaks in earth, Heb. 12.25
how shall they escape ye despise him which speaks from heaven? As by temporal
plagues the greeuousnes of these sins are equally made manifest, so in
eternal punishments Saint John in the Revelation does signify that they
equally have their portion. Reave. 21. ver. 8.
The fearful (says he, that is, they which fear men more than God) and the
unbelievers, and the abominable (that is, the stubberne and wilful contemners
of God) and witches, and Idolaters, and Liars, they shall have their part in
the lake burning with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.

A third resemblance wherein rebellion may well be compared with witchcraft and
Idolatry is, in that (as it appears here plainly by the ensample of Saul)
it is full of many glorious pretenses and excuses. The witches have a goodly
pretense for their charms and sorceries, when they defend that to heal the
sick, to relieve grief and pain, to recover things lost, must needs be a
good and charitable deed. Math. 27. Ver. 6.
But they consider not that good is to be done by good and lawful means: we
may not cast the price of blood into Corban, we may not rob the poor to
build a Temple, we may not do evil that good may come of it. Esaias. 8.19.
Mich. 3.7.
Sorceries (as ye have heard) are in the Law every where condemned, the
Prophets do threaten sharp judgments against them. The very heathen men
which knew not the word of God, yet by the law of nature they saw them to be
most wicked and abominable. Lib 2. de Repub.
Plato does condemn all (...) Iuglars, and Wisards and all those which can
(...), bring damage to their enemies by sacrifices and enchantments. If they
plead that they do good and no harm, Galen does well call (...) (...)
witcheries and sorceries not only superfluous things, and besides all the
grounds of Physic, but wholly deceiptfull and full of illusions. A glorious
pretense they have when they use devout prayers and call upon all the holy and
sacred names of GOD: but this is only a cloak to cover their villainies, 2.
Cor, 11, ver, 4,
when to deceive the simple the devil does transform himself to an Angel of
light. They will seame to imitate the Apostles of Christ, who wrought sundry
miracles and cured many infirmites by the name of Jesus of Nazareth. But they
did it ex mandato, by commandment and by the virtue and power of Christ, but
sorcerers do it ex pacto, by some secret covenant and agreement with Satan. As
Witches have many goodly pretenses, so likewise Idolaters. The Romanists think
their excuse sufficient that they worship not the Idol, but GOD in and
through the Idol. Surely the Israelits were not so blockishe as to think that
the golden Calfe which they had caused to be made of their Jewels, was truly
GOD, only they would have a visible representment of God, Exodus 22. ver. 4.
and yt not in memory of any heathen God, but in remembrance of that God which
brought them out of the Land of Egypt, yet was their deed most wicked
Idolatry. They say that if they put no holiness in the Idol, they may lawfully
erect Images in memory of Christ and his Apostles with other blessed Saints of
GOD. Wherefore then do the Spaniards now take greater pains to visit the
Idol of Saint James in Compostella, than they do to any other Images of
Saint James, whereof they have abundance in many other their Temples? And
wherefore did they in time past in England go greater iourneyes on pilgrimage
to the Image of the Virgin Marie in Walsingham, to Saint Anne at Buckstons, to
Saint Chad at Lichfield, and to the holy Roode at Chester, than they did to
any other the like Images set up in other Churches, but only that they did
most certainly place some holiness and virtue even in the Idols themselves? If
only men do seek a remembrance of Christ and his Saints, let them hear what
ancient Clemens Alexandrinus has written, Clemens de imag. lib. 5. ad Iacobu^
fratre domini.
Si velitis Dei imaginem colere, homini vtique benefacientes, veram in eo Dei
imaginem coletis, If ye have a desire to worship the Image of God, do good then
to man, and so ye shall in him worship the true Image of God. Christ took
the shape of a poor servant upon the earth. What need they to seek any dead
Image, Phil. 2. ver. 7.
when they have so many lively Images daily before their eyes, of whom our
Savior does so manifestly affirm, that whatsoever is done to them, he will
accept as done to his own person? Math. 25. Ver. 40.
Let them hear also what Saint Augustine says honorandi sunt sancti propter
imitationem non adorad^ propter Religionem, Aug. de ver a relig. cap. 6.
the Saints are to be honored for imitation, and not to be adored for
Religion. The best Image which we can erect of the Saints of God, is by
following the steps of their godly life, to propound our selves unto the world
an Image of their virtue. Exodus 25, Ver. 18. Numb. 21.9.
Another pretense they have of following the ordinances of God in the old
Testament, in the which were Cherubins and the brazen Serpent, Images allowed
of the Lord. But those which were expressly commanded cannot be drawn as a fit
defense and a warrant for these which are not only not commanded, but are on
the other side expressly forbidden. They were Types and figures of Christ, Heb
10. v. 1. Numb. 21.9. 2. King. 18.4.
but the time is now come that such ceremonial shadows are vanished away. If
the brazen Serpent which was set up by the commandment of God himself, was
yet afterward worthily broken in pieces by ye godly King Ezechias and called
Nehushtan but a piece of brass when it was come to give occasion of Idolatry,
then what ought to be done with the works and devises of men, which being
erected against the divine law of God, have been so long adored with Idolatrous
worship? As these damnable sins as well of witchcraft as of Idolatry have many
glorious shows of colored pretenses, so the like may be here affirmed of
Saul his disobedience and wilful rebellion. He pretends first that the
people did reserve the best and fattest of the sheep and Oxen to offer them in
sacrifice. To this Samuel answers, V. 22.
has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offering and sacrifice, as he has
when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? behold to obey is better than Sacrifice,
Heb. 9.23.
and to harken is better than the fat of Rams. The sacrifices had these two
especial ends and uses: first to be Types and figures of the death and
passion of Christ. Secondly to be seals unto the children of GOD of the
slaying and mortifying of their own iusts and affections. Unto him (says GOD)
will I look that is poor and of a contrite spirit and that trembles at my
words: Esaias. 66. ver. 2.
otherwise he that kills a Bullock is as he that slays a man, and he that
sacrifices a sheep is as he that cutteth off dogs necks, he that offers
an oblation is as he that offers swines blood, and he that remembers
Incense is as he that blesses an Idol: and why? they have chosen their own
ways and their Soul does delight in their own abominations. Seeing then that
Saul has not the inward grace to be of a contrite spirit and to tremble at
the word of GOD, seeing that he has not his will and affections mortified
and made subject to the will, and commandment of GOD, but does choose and
follow his own way and does perform what seameth good in his own fancy, his
pretense of sacrificing howsoever it might seame holiness in the judgment of
carnal man, yet was it indeed a damnable hypocrisy most odious in the sight
of GOD. Intents of the mind be they never so godly in outward appearance,
yet are they wicked when they are without some ground of Gods word, but most
wicked when they are directly against the word, Deuteronomy. 12.8
The Law is in Deuteronomie that the people must in no wise perform that
which seameth good in their own eyes. 2. Sam Ver. ^
When the Ark of GOD was carried from the house of Aminadab, Vzza when he
saw the Oxen going awry, and the Arc ready to fall, put to his helping hand
to save the Arc from falling. Numb. 4. Ver. 15.
This his intent might seame to be good and godly, but for as much as it was a
breach of the law of God, wherein laymen were forbidden once to touch those
holy things, he was therefore overtaken with vengeance, Pro. 14.12.
and stricken with sudden death, There is a way (says Solomon) that seameth
good to man, Romans 10.2.
but the issues thereof are the issues of death. Paul says of the Jews that
they had a zeal, but not according to knowledge: Math. 15.9
and therefore in vain they worshipped God while they taught for Doctrines, men's
precepts.

The Apostle says of himself that before he was called, concerning zeal, he
had persecuted the congregation of God. Phil. 3. v. 6
1. Tim. 1, 13.
Yet he affirms that in that his blind zeal he was a blasphemer and a
persecuter until he had obtained mercy for that which he committed
ignorantly. If the intent of the heart might serve for a sufficient warrant,
then any Turk or heathen should be holden excused: for they think they
worship a true God, yea the bloody tormenters of Christians might then
challenge a full discharge and freedom for their tyranny, John. v. 2.
because (as our Savior does witness) when they kill the Saints of GOD they
think they do God good service. But thoughts and intents can no longer
awarrant us, than they themselves be awarranted by the word of God. Colos.
2.23.
(...) (as the Apostle does call it) will-worshippe be it never so devout and
zealous in outward show, yet if it be against the will and word of God, it
is nothing but a blind zeal of a devilish superstition. The second pretense
which Saul does use to cloak and cover his rebellion is, the fear of man. I
feared (says he) the people and therefore I obeyed their voice. Ver. 24.
This fear of man to permit or to commit wickedness for fear of displeasing
man, is a crime to be condemned even in the private persons of the inferior
people, because all are commanded one to exhort another, 1. These. 5.11.
and one to edyfie another, and our Savior says generally to all, Luc. 12, 4.
fear not them that can only kill the body and have no more that that they
can do, but fear him which has power to kill both body and soul and to
cast both into hell fire. But it is much more to be condemned, if it be found
in them which have any charge of a public function. For of Ministers may be
said that which the Apostle Paul speaks of himself, Gal. 1.10.
If I should please men I were not the servant of Christ. And all magistrates
ought to approve themselves to be such as Iethro does describe them, to wit,
men of courage, fearing God, Exodus 18.21.
dealing truly and hating covetousness. But especially this crime of fearing
man is most intolerable in them whom it pleases GOD to call (as he did
here Saul) to the dignity and Majesty of supreeme governors and to possess
as it were the room of GOD upon earth. When GOD had placed Joshua chief
governor over his people he gave him in charge two especial deuties: Ios. 1.
v, 8
First that he should never let the book of the Law depart out of his mouth,
but so meditate in the same day and night, Ver. 9.
that he should observe and do according to the things contained therein:
and secondly that he should be strong, and of a good courage, not to fear,
neither to be faint hearted, for (says God) I will be with thee at hand
which way soever thou go. Whatsoever Saul does pretend of the intent of
Sacrifice, and of his fearing the people, yet Samuel shows him what was
indeed the true cause of his wilful rebellion in sparing the cattle of the
Amalekites. Ver. 19.
Thou have (says he) turned thy self to the prey and done wickedly in the
sight of GOD. To receive the spoils of enemies is a thing of it self not
unlawful in those which are authorized and armed with the sword of Justice:
for sundry times did David carry away spoils even from the Amalekites, 2.
Sam. 3.12. 1. Sam. 30.26.
and sent part thereof for presents to the elders of Judah, Ramath and Bethel.
But the pray which Saul does turn unto, was commanded by the voice of GOD
utterly to be destroyed, and no portion thereof to be saved or reserved.
Again though it be permitted in lawful war to carry away the spoils of such
enemies as the Lord shall deliver into our hands, yet is it not lawful to set
our heart upon the spoil, and to make that as it were the principal drift of
our labors and endeavors, as here it is said of Saul that he turned himself
to the prey, as setting his heart especially upon it: Ephesians. 5. v. 5. Phil. 3. v.
19.
Which if he did of a covetous affection, then did he make Mammon his Idol:
If he did it for his own feeding and refreshing, then did he make his belly
his God and his glory to his shame: If he did it to please man, then was it
also spiritual whordome and Idolatry, As Saint James says: Iam. 4. v. 4.
O ye adulterers and adulteresses know ye not the friendship of the world is
enmity against God? If any man will be a friend of the world, he makes
himself the enemy of God. So that every way this rebellion of Saul against
the commandment of God may be fitly compared with the sin of Idolatry.
The fourth thing wherein rebellion may well be compared with witchcraft and
Idolatry, is in sundry effects which they do equally work in the hearts and
estates of men: as first they do harden and make obstinate the heart of man. In
witches what one amongst a thousand has in many years been seen to return to
the Lord by unfeigned repentance? Of Idolatours that may well be spoken which
Jeremy says of the Idolatrous people, Ier. 3.3.
thou have had a whorish face and would not be ashamed, Psa. 135.18
and that which David says of the Idols themselves, they have eyes and see
not, ears and hear not, they that make them are like unto them, and so are
all such as put their trust in them. The custom of rebellion in Saul (for he
had wilfully broken another commandment of God before, 1. Sam. 13.8
in refusing to tarry for Samuel, for which disobedience he was first denounced
to be rejected of God) This custom, I say, of opposing himself against the
will of GOD, Ier. 3, 3.
does so harden the heart of Saul, that with a whorish countenance (as Jeremy
speaks of Idolatours) he does now impudently defend that he has done
nothing amiss, but perfectly fulfilled the will of God: and afterward as
having eyes and not seeing, and ears and not hearing does run headelong in the
race of wilfulness even unto the end of his miserable days. Samuel when he
exhorts the people to avoid all Idolatry and all setting their own wills
against the will of GOD, does use this reason, because (says he) they cannot
profit nor deliver you, 1. Sam. 12.21.
for they are but vanity. So that in this also these sins are resembled one
to another, for that they are utterly unprofitable for the estate of man's life.
That may well be spoken of all the contemners of God which Osea says of
Idolaters, Osea. 8.7.
they sow in the air and reap the wind, their bud brings forth no meal,
their fruit is like blasted grain. We see it most evident in the common
course of man's life, 1. Tim. 6. ver. 6.
that as godliness is a great gain, and virtue is profitable to all things,
so the service of sin is utterly unprofitable: Romans 6.21.
what fruit (says the Apostle) had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? What fruit have contentious men by their suites and debaits, Gal. 5.
v. 15
but as one does bite another, so one in the end to devour another? What
fruit receive they which live a dissolute life in whordome and drunkenness,
Pro. 23.21 Pro. 29.3. Pro. 23.17. 2. Sa. 12.11. Pro. 6.23. Hos. 4, 11, 1. Cor
6, 10 Apoc. 22.15,
but only the consuming of their substance, the wasting of their health,
trouble and unquietness in their own house, shame and confusion abroad, the
loss of spiritual graces in this life, and the loss of life eternal in the
world to come? What fruit does the covetous miser reap by his abundance of
wealth, Eccl. 4, 8 Pro. 10. ver. 2,
when he does not possess his goods, but is possessed of them, when he has
them and cannot find in his heart to use them, when he has no hope to have
them blessed to the third generation, and especially what will it profit him if
he should win all the world, Mat. 16.26
and in the mean time loose his own soul? As living in the obedience of Gods
word in goodness of life is called by the Apostle (...) a great gain and
profit: 1. Tim, 6, 6
so disobeying the Lord by riotousnes of life does heap upon man all plagues
and miseries.

The people which here under Saul do against the commandment of GOD keep
some cattle to make a will worship of their own, do reserve the best and
fattest of the sheep and Oxen: wherein we may further observe how forward
and zealous men are to set forth and maintain those things which they have
hatched in their own brain against the direct rule of Gods word. For I can
account no better of their sacrifices when they will make them as seals of
their disobedience against God.

Exodus 32.3
The people of Israel to erect a golden Calfe would part with their Earings,
even the best Jewels they had: but in the true worship of God every thing
went hard with them, they were continually murmuring and grudging against Moses
and Aaron. When Elias could find little succor amongst the Israelits their
successors, Iezabel to maintain the Idolatry of Baal kept four hundred
Chaplains, as it is said in the Scriptures, 1. Reg. 18.19.
there were four hundred Priests of the groves that did eat at Iezabels
table. We see in our days many monuments and remnants of superstition which
do sufficiently lay open to us, how forward they were in times past to
maintain their wilworshippe, and we see also on the other side (more is the
pity,) by too lamentable experience, how cold and backwarde we are to
uphold and resort unto the true service of God framed according to his word.
Many now are like unto children, who if they be commanded any thing by their
parents, they are either by and by hungry and weary, or straight way oppressed
with heat or cold: but if they run headlong upon any devise of their own
brain, they continue in their travel a long time without feeling hunger or
cold, a whole day will scarce suffice for their vain inventions. Even so it
is with many men, which though they be grown in stature, 1. Col. 14.20.
yet are children in understanding and knowledge: what pleases their own
humors and affections, yt they are forward with great charges to sustain.
But if any thing be commanded by godly laws of Christian Princes, agreeable
to the word of God, of that they make little or small account. So likewise it
falls out in the performance of the duetyes of the second Table.

If there be any thing that shall disobey the commandment of GOD, any
riotousnes of life, any pride, any unclean lusts, any excess and surfeting,
how forward are we, nay how prodigal to compass and accomplish such dissolute
affections? But if any thing be to be done in obedience of the word, any poor
to be relieved, any virtuous act to be performed, alas how cold are we then,
how sparing? yea rather how froward? how obstinate? Rebellion is as the sin
of witchcraft, and stubborn resisting as superstition and Idolatry. Of the
second part of this text, to wit, of the judgment of God denou^ced against
Saul for this his rebellion, I shall (godwilling) entreat at some other
convenient time. In ye mean while, as the Lacedaemonians by showing to their
children the loathsome sight of dronkards, would thereby withdraw their youth
from that lewd and beastly vice, So let this view and beholding of the
horror of rebellion, effect and work in our hearts a perfect hatred of all
disobedience. Let us earnestly endeavor to be that flock of Christ which hear
his voice and follow him, that so we may be certainly assured, Ioh. 10.27.
that he will give unto us eternal life, and that nothing shall be able to
pluck us out of his hands. Let us show forth the fruit of our faith by
humble obedience, Genesis 22, 10
as did faithful Abraham, yt walking after ye spirit, we may be fully
certified that we live by the spirit. Gal. 5.25.
Let us order our conversation duetifully in the fear of God, as becomes
obedient children, in sacrificing and mortifying our own wills and affections
yt so being sons and daughters, 1. Pet, 1, 14 Col, 3, 5. 1. Cor. 6, 18 Apoc.
1, 6,
yea kings and priests to God the father in this life we may reign with him
for ever in his eternal kingdom in the world to come, Apo, 22, 5,
whereunto he speedily bring us all, that mercifully dyed for us all, our Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus, To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, three
persons and one true and everliving God, be all honor, glory, thanksgiving
and praise now and for ever. Amen.

Errata.
In the first Sermon, for strong, r. stong, for portinus, r. protinus. In the
second sermon, fol. 3. b. r. moshegnim, fol. 5. b.r. effecting of some, fol.
18. a. r. Longins. fol. 14. a. actions that can be. In the third, for honoradi.
r. honorandi.

The often sudden changing of the Character, was the Printers conceit, in the
absence of the Author.


