The Familiar Epistles of Sir Anthony of Gueuara, Preacher, Chronicler, and
Counceller to the Emperor Charles the fifth.

Translated out of the Spanish tongue, by Edward Hellowes, Groom of the Leashe,
and now newly imprinted, corrected, and enlarged with other Epistles of the
same Author.

Wherein are contained very notable letters, excellent discourses, curious
sayings, and most natural reasons.

Wherein are contained expositions of certain figures, authorities of holy
Scripture, very good to be preached, and better to be followed.

VVherin are contained declarations of ancient stamps of writings upon stones,
Epitaphes of Sepulchers, Laws and customs of Gentiles.

Wherein are contained Doctrines, Examples, and counselles for Princes, for
noble men, for Lawyers, and Church men: very profitable to be followed, and
pleasant to be readde.

Printed at London by Henry Bynneman, for Raufe Nevvbery, dwelling in
Fleetstreete, a little above the Conduit.

To the Right worshipful Sir Henry Lee Knight, Master of the Leasshe.
RIGht worshipful, being combred with doubt too be noted of rash
presumption, and no less afflicted with that uncouth and detestable vice of
dull despair: I was constrained with two much odds, to endure combat with
both these furious sprites: and after long conflicte, as it were by the way
of taking breath, they began to argue: and first despair (being more fierce,
with thin face and holovve eyes) grimmely began to say, Oh beastly Swine
without providence, and enraged Bear, to perform thy own disposition,
without all grace or learning, and void of all consideration of the issue of
judgment of others, which greedily despise, hate and bear envy, and at all
times cease not to persecute the feeble attemptes which thou and others
take in hand, every of which evils with many others might be avoided, if
by the nature and manner of my disposition thou could keep thy self coy and
mute. But with great impatie^ce presumption did breath forth these or such
like words: ah miserable Cockatrice, and caytife most cruel to mankind, which
by thy ougly shape declarest the loathsome fruit of thy vvretched nature,
which in all times and places do practice the overthrow of al honest,
lavvdable and noble enterprises, vvherin they would have used many tedious
arguments, if I had not cut off by suit for divine assistance. Presently
obtaining two such ancient and famous Champions, of no common singularity,
by whose presidents, directions, and conductions, I was forth with
delivered of all perplexities, namely Lucifer and Judas: but therevvithall not
omitting to succor my self with the wisdom and policy of the Be, vvhi^h
gathers honey out of nettles, which both and jointly made such discourses of
the horrible evils, desperate mischiefs, and cruel mishaps, that has ensued
the hateful company of both these companions aforesaid, in such sensible
manner, as such feeling vvitnesses possibly might report. Leaving all their
particular reasons which vvoulde grow ouerlong, they concluded, that every
extremity engenders vice, and only virtue is that which is equal in balance:
and so departed. Thereby giving to understand, that the virtue of a noble mind,
is neither dau^ted with froward fortune, either exalted or puffed up with
gifts or prosperity. And presently being brought to a certain examination, I
was driven flatly to confess that al strength is weakness, al knowledge
ignorance, actiuitie impotencie, vvisdome foolishness, justice vvrong,
tempera^ce rashness, fortitude covvardnesse, and all perfection but
corruption: of all which, and no other notable deeds, man whatsoever, may
presume and boast himself, but when God alone unto diligence does add his
grace. And thus presumption with his sequel being removed, and despair with
his drovvsie troop being vanished, depending only of divine providence, I
began to call to mind my God, my Prince, my country, and also your worship, of
whom I had received many good things, being very loath to show my self
utterly idle, either ingrate, receiving aduertiseme^t of Gueuara which gives
us to understand, that since the beginning of the world, there has not bin
any Prince that has excelled, or to whom Julius Caesar, either Alexander the
great ought to give place: obtaining soueraintie in their several virtues,
namely the one in pardoni^g of injuries the other in giving large and bountiful
rewards: affirming therevvithall, that to the ingrate or unthankful man,
neither would Alexander give any revvard, either Julius Caesar pardon injury:
giving us thereby to understand, that they held it much better to darken their
own singular and renowned virtues, tha^ to yield benefit unto so detestable
vice. Forthwith being urged thereby to confess my debt, and constrained to
shake off all drovvsie forgetfulness, and awake my dull spirits to yield my
self as abandoned to do your worship either service or pleasure: but my
treasure and storehouse being searched and ransackt, I find it furnished with
no other implements, but empty ability, and barren faculty to perform the
same: forced in the place of works to furnish the satisfaction with words.
Yet frankly confessing that although opportunity shall deny to yield her self
to stretch to the merit of your great goodness used with me: notvvithstanding
at all times and places, words of confession and disposition to perform,
shall never cease to do their endeavor to escape the unkind disgrace of
ingratitude. Adding thereby hardines unto my self once more to attempt your
patience with this present of Gueuara being finished, and also out of the
French Book somevvhat augmented, with matter both horoicall and divine: the
praise and commendation whereof, I rather remitte unto the glorious fame of
the Auctor himself, than tediously without skill to paint or polish the same
with colors of imperfect hevv. Right humbly beseeching your Worship to
accept the same with the mildness of your wonted favor: and (as it
apperteyneth) I shall not cease to pray that the protection of the living God
may conduct and follow you with perfect felicity in all nobleness both of
body and mind, as may yield your worship before god and man immortal renown.

Your worshippes most humble to command Edward Hellowes.

To the Reader.
RIght gentle Reader, in all nations, cuntries, and Common wealths, although
barbarous, yet in respect of the office of Harold, Pursiuant, Messenger, or
Interpreter, they always bear with patience and take in good part, all
actions both of word and deed, appertayning unto his office: And sometimes of
their own nobleness, do bountifully reward the same, although he utter unto
them matter both opprobrious and spiteful. And also Gueuara makes report,
that it was a law among the Romans, that no man whatsoever, should adventure
to approach the Emperors tent in the night and time of war upon pain of
death. The Emperor Aurelius as then making war with Zenobia Queen of
Palmiris, it chanced, that a certain Greek soldier was apprehended within
the compass of the same, being committed to be executed for his offense, the
Emperor himself from within his Pauilion with a loud voice cried out and
said, If his approach were for himself, let him dye for it, but if it be for
another, let him live. The matter being searched and examined, it was found,
that he came to sue for his two fellows that were taken sleeping in the
watch, which after whipping should have bin delivered unto the enemies. And
so it came to pass, that the soldier escaped death, his fellows delivered
from punishment, and the Emperor of clemency obtained immortal renoune. Of
all which premises, me thinks I gather unto my self, a safety and
protection from all injury, both of word and deed of all manner of men, not
unreasonable, which in this matter have used but the office of messenger,
interpreter, and soliciter: but to my own pain, and thy profit, being
utterly without doubt to be requited with thy ingratitude. And whereas but with
such time as was rather stretched unto the liking of him that might command
them mete for the matter, I have not only corrected, but also performed the
translation of the first book of the familiar Epistles of Gueuara, that were
not translated, and further finding certain Epistles and disputations of the
said auctor, by no man as yet translated, wa^dring and as it might seem
taking leave: I thought it more convenient to entertain the same with my
simple English speech, tha^ to hazard the loss of so rare, singular, divine,
and most necessary doctrine therein contained, although but with my poor
ability: flatly confessing that I want both gloss and hew of rare eloquence,
used in the polishing of the rest of his works: nevertheless most certaynely
affirming, that it goes agreeable unto the author thereof. For due
commendations whereof, for want of time I shall yield no other words, than be
contained in my former Preface, as follows: Being furnished so fully with
sincere doctrine, so unused eloquence, so high a style, so apt similitudes, so
excellent discourses, so convenient examples, so profounde sentences, so old
antiquities, so ancient histories, such variety of matter, so pleasant
recreations, so strange things alleged, and certain parcelles of Scripture
with such dexterity handled, that it may hardly be discerned, whether shall be
greater, either thy pleasure by reding, or profit by following the same. Like
as in a most curious shop furnished with incomparable drugs, and most precious
spices, both to preserve health, as also to expel most pestilent diseases:
even so herein is plentifully to be found, things not only precious to
conserve, but also to remedy the contagion of any estate both in peace and
war. As rules for Kings to rule, counselors to counsel, magistrates to
govern, prelates to practice, captains to execute, soldiers to perform, the
married to follow, the prosperous to prosecute, and the poor in adversity to
be comforted, wherein he delicately touches with most curious sayings, and no
less philosophy, how to write or talk with all men, in all matters at large,
with matter so apt, so learned, so merry, and also so grave, with instruction
of behavior, with thy better, with thy equal, with thy friend, with thy foe,
with thy wife, servant, and children: That for praise and advancement
thereof, words most certainly, and also time may want, but not matter and just
occasion to commend the same. Commending the rest unto thy good consideration,
and yielding my self unto thy mildness, grace, and favor, I commit thee to
the living God, to whom be praise for evermore.

The familiar Epistles of Sir Antony of Gueuara, Bishop of Mondonedo, Preacher
and Chronicler to Charles the fifth.
An Oration made unto the Emperors Majesty in a Sermon, at the triumphs when
the French King was taken. VVherin the Author does persuade to use his
clemency, in recompense of so great a victory.

S.C.C.R.M.
SOlon Solonio commanded in his laws to the Athenians, that on the day they
had overcome any battle, they should offer unto the Gods great Sacrifices,
and give unto men large rewards: to the end that against other wars, they
might find the Gods favorable, and men of willing minds. Plutarch says,
that when the Greeks remained Conquerours in that renowned battle of
Marathon, they sent unto the temple of Diana in Ephesus, What they gave in old
tune in reward for good news.
to offer so much Silver, that it was to be doubted, whether there remained so
much more in all Greece. When Camilius overcame the Etrurians and Volsians,
mortal enemies to the Romans, all the women of Rome did not forget to send
to the Oracle of Apollo, which stood in Asia, as much Gold and Silver as they
had in possession, without reserving any one jewel. When the Consul Silla was
Conqueror of the valiant King Mithridates, he conceived so great pleasure in
his heart, that not contented to offer to the God Mars all the spoil gotten of
the enemies, he offered also a vial of his own blood. The famous and glorious
Iephthah Duke of the Hebrews made a solemn vow, that if God gave him
victorious return from the wars he then had in hand, he would offer in the
temple both the blood and life of his only daughter: the which vow as he
promised, so he accomplished. Of these examples it may be gathered, what and
how many thanks Princes ought too give unto God, for the triumphs, victories,
and bounties he gives them: for though it be in the hands of kings to begin
war, it is in the hands of God only to give victory. There is nothing that
moves god to be less careful for us, than the ingratitude of a good turn
received. For the good things we receive of men, God will not but that we
gratify the good thing we receive.
they will we recompense or deserve them: but God will that we gratify and
not forget them. Princes most chiefly have cause to beware they forgette not
benefits received of GOD, because the ingratitude of a benefit received
makes them incapable and unworthy of divine favor in time to come. The
forgetful, ingrate or unkind Prince, neither God does delight too help, or
men so serve. All this have I said unto your imperial Majesty, by occasion of
this great victory ye have obtained at Pauia, where your army has taken
Fraunces the French King, who in his own galleys was brought prisoner into
Spain. A case so grave, In the wars more than in other things fortune uses
doubleness.
a news so new, a victory so seldom heard of, a fortune so accomplished is
both terrible to the world, and brings your Majesty in debt, which debt is, to
give God thanks for the victory, and to recompense the conquerours of the
battle. By this it may be apparent to your Majesty, that there is nothing
wherein fortune is less constant, than in martial affairs, since the French
king being present (and also taken in his own person) with all the potentates
of Italy, did lose the battle, where dyed all the nobles of France. Much
should your Majesty err, once to think the victory to be gotten by your
policy, or obtained by your power, or else to have happened by chance. For a
deed so famous, an act so glorious, and a case so heroical, as this is, does
not fall out under fortune, but is only given by divine providence. Quid
retribuam Domino pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? If David being a King, a
Prophet, a Saint, and with God so private, understood not what to present
unto God, for the good things he had received: what shall we do that are
miserable, that understand not what to say, nor have not what to give? of our
selves we are so weak, and our ability so small, our valor so little, and
have so few things, that if God do not give wherewith to give, of our selves we
have not what to give. And what we have to crave, or else that he should give:
is his grace to serve him, and not license to offend him. There is no sacrifice
more accepted, than to pardon an enemy.
In remuneration of so great victory, I would not counsel your Majesty too
offer jewels as the women of Rome, either Silver or Gold as the Greeks, either
your own blud as Silla, neither your children as Iephtha: but that ye offer
the inobedience and rebellion against your Majesty, by the commons of Castile.
For before GOD there is no Sacrifice more accepted, than the pardoning of
enemies. The jewels that we might offer unto God, proceed from our Cofers: the
Gold from our Chests: the blood from our Veins: but the pardoning of injuries,
from our hearts and entrayles, where envy lies grinding, and persuading
reason to dissemble, and the heart to be revenged. Much more sure is it for
Princes, to be beloved for their clemency, than to be feared for their
chastisements. For as Plato says, The man that is feared, has need to fear.
the man that is feared of many, has cause also too fear many. Those that
offended your Majesty in those alterations paste, some of them be dead, some
be banished, some hidden, and some be fled. Most excellent Prince, it is
great reason, that in reward of so great victory, they may boast themselves of
your piety, and not complain of your rigor. The wives of these unfortunate
men be poor, their daughters upon the point to be lost, their Sons are
Orphans, their kinsfolks blushe and are ashamed: In so much as the pity that
ye shall use toward a few, redoundeth to the remedy of many. There is no
estate in this world, which in case of injury, is not more sure in pardoning
than in revenging: for that many times it does happen, that a man seeking
occasion too be revenged, does utterly destroy him self. It is more sure to
forget an injury, than to revenge it.
The enemies of Julius Caesar, did more envy the pardoning of the Pompeyans,
than the killing of Pompeyus himself. For excellency, it was written of him,
that he never forgot service, or ever did remember injury. Two Emperors have
been in Rome, unlike in name, and much more in manners: the one was named Nero
the Cruel, the other Antony the Meek. The which ouernames the Romans gave
them, the one of Meek, because he could not but pardon, the other of Cruel,
because he never ceased to kill. A Prince although he be prodigal in play,
scarce in giving, uncertain of his word, negligent in government, absolute
in commanding, dissolute in living, disordinate in eating, and not sober in
drinking, is termed but vicious: but if he be cruel and given to revenge, he is
named a tyrant. As it is said by Plutarch: He is not a tyrant for the goods he
takes, but for the cruelties he uses. Four Emperors have been of this name.
The first was called Charles the great: the second, Charles the Bohemian: the
third, Charles the Balde: the fourth, Charles the gross, the fifth, which is
your majesty, we wish to be called Charles the Meke, in following the
Emperor Antony the Meek, Few and good words are to be used with Princes.
which was ye Prince of all the Roman Empire best beloved. And because
Calistines would that Princes should be persuaded by few things, and those very
good, and words well spoken: I conclude and say, that Princes with their
piety and clemency, be of God pardoned, and of their subjects beloved.

An Oration made unto the Emperors Majesty, in a sermon on the day of Kings,
wherein is declared, how the name of Kings was invented, and how the title of
Emperors was first found out. A matter very pleasant.

S. C. C. R. M.
THis present day being the day of Kings, in the house of Kings, and in the
presence of Kings, it is not unfit that we speak of Kings: though Princes
had rather be obeyed than counseled. And seeing we preach this day before him
that is the Emperor of the Romans, and King of the Spaniards, it shall be a
thing very seemly and also very necessary, to relate here what this word King
does mean, and from whence this name Emperor does come: to the end we may al
understand how they ought to govern us, and we to obey them. As concerning
this name of King, it is to be understood, that according to the variety of
nations, so did they diversely name their Princes, that is to say: How in the
old time they called their Kings.
Amongst the Egyptians they were called Pharaones: the Bythinians Ptolomaei:
the Persians, Arsicides: the Latins, Murrani: the Albans, Syluij: Sicilians,
Tyrants: the Argiues, Kings. The first king of this world the Argiues do say
was Foroneus: and the Greeks do report, to be Codor Laomor: Which of these
opinions is most true, he only knows that is most high and only true.
Although we know not who was the first King, neither who shall be the last king
of the world, at the least we know one thing, and that is, that all the Kings
past are dead, and al those that now live shall die: because death does as well
call the King in his throne, as the laborer at his plow. Also it is to be
understood, that in old time, In the old time to be a king was no dignity,
but an office.
to be a King was no dignity, but only an office, as Mayor or Ruler of a
common wealth: After this manner, that every year they did provide for the
office of King to rule, as now they do provide a Viceroy to govern. Plutarke
in his book of Common wealth does report, that in the beginning of the
world all Governors were called tyrants, He that knows not to govern,
deserves not to reign.
and after the people did perceive what difference was between the one and the
other, they did ordeyn amongst themselves, to name the evil governors tyra^ts,
and the good, they entitled Kings. By this it may be gathered (most excellent
Prince) that this name King, is consecrated unto persons of good deserning, and
that be profitable unto the common wealth: for otherwise he does not deserve to
be called King, that does not know to govern. When God did establish an
household, and for himself did constitute a Common Wealth in the land of the
Egyptians, he would not give the^ kings to govern, but Dukes to defend them,
that is to say, Moses, Gedeon, Iephtha, and Sampson. This God did to deliver
them from paying of tributes, and that they might be used as brethren, and not
as vassals. This manner of government among the Hebrews did continue unto the
time of Helie the high priest, under whose governance the Israelites required a
King to govern their common wealth, and to lead them in their wars. Then God
gave them Saul to be their King, much against his will: so that the last Duke
of Israel was Helie, and the first king was Saul. In the beginning when Rome
was founded, and the Romans began to be Lords of the world, forthwith they
did create kings to rule them, and Captains to defend them. They found
themselves so grieved with that manner of government, that they suffered but
seven kings, not withstanding they thought them seven hundred. And because the
soothsayers had said, yt this name King was consecrate unto the Gods, Amongst
the Romans a Priest was called a king.
the Romans commanded that he should be called King, that was no king: And
this was the high priest of the god Jupiter, in such manner that he held only
the name of king, and the office of priest. Having spoken of the name of king,
now let us speak of the name of Emperor, that is to say, how it was
invented, where it was invented, and to what end it was invented, since it is
the name in all this world most reuere^ced, and also most desired. And although
amongst the Syrians, the Assyrians, Medes, Persians, Greeks, Troyans,
Parthians, Palestines, and Egyptians, their have bin princes glorious in
arms, and in great estimation in their common wealths, yet they never obtained
the name of Emperor, In old times they did not boast themselves with vain
titles.
either entitled themselves therewith. In those ancient times and in those
golden worlds, the good men and the noble personages did not lay up their honor
in vain titles, but in noble, valiant and glorious acts. This name Emperor
the Romans first brought into this world, which they invented not for their
Princes, but for their Captains general. In such wise, that in Rome he was
not entitled Emperor, that was Lord of the Common wealth, but that was
chosen general of the war. The Romans every year in the Month of Ianuarye,
did choose all their officers of the Senate, and in their such election, they
did first ordeyne the high Priest, which they named King: then the Dictator,
then the Consul, then the Tribune of the people, then the Emperor, then the
Censor, and then the Edill. By this election it may be gathered, The office of
the Edil was the master of ceremonies in triumphs and theaters.
that the same which is now an Imperial dignity was in those days but an
office given in the month of January, and ended in the month of December,
Quintus Cincinatus, Fabius Camillus, Marcus Marcellus, Quintus Fabius, Annius
Fabricius, Dorcas, Metellus, Gracchus, Sempronius, Scipio the African, and the
great Julius Caesar: when they did govern the Roman hosts, were called
Emperors, but afterward when in the Senate the office was taken away, they
were named by their proper names. But after the great battle of Pharsalie, in
which Pompey was overcome and the field remaining to Caesar, it happened that
the common wealth came into the hands of Caesar. The Romans made request he
should not take unto himself the Title of king, because it was odious unto
them, but that he would use some other at his liking, under which they would
obey and serve him. Being at that time Captain general of the Romans, and
therefore then called Emperor, he chose his name, How the name of Emperor was
first found out.
and not the name of King, to do the Romans pleasure, in such wise, that
this great Prince was the first of the world, that left this name annexed
unto the Emperor. Julius Caesar being dead, Octauius his cousin did succeed
him in the Empire, then Tyberius, then Caligula, then Claudius, then Nero, and
Vitellius, and so of all the other Princes to this day: The which in memory of
the first Emperor be entitled Augustus, Caesar's, and Emperors.

Of the seven conditions that a good king ought to have, with an exposition of
a text of holy Scripture.
THis name of King being declared, and the invention of the title Emperor
being spoken of (most Noble Emperor) it shall be meet that we declare how
a good king ought to govern his kingdom, and how the good Emperor ought to
rule his Empire, The best office is to be holden by the best man.
for, being as they are, the two greatest offices in this world, it is
necessary that the two best men in this world do use them. It were great
infamy to the person, and no small offense to the common wealth, to behold a
man earing at the plough, It is more worthy to deserve honor than to hold it
that deserves to reign, and to see him reign that deserves to go to plough.
Wherefore (most sovereign Prince) it is convenient you understand, that to be
in honor is a thing of small effect, but to deserve the same is of most great
worthiness. If he which is only a King, be bound to be good, he that is king
and Emperor, is he not bound to be good and very good? The ingrate Prince is
unfortunate.
The evil Princes be ingrate, and forgetful of benefits be they great or
little: but the good Princes and the Christian Emperors, recompense every
service bountifullye. The Prince that is to God ingrate, and of the service
they do him unthankful, in his person it will be seen: and in his kingdom it
will appear: because all his attempts do fall out confused or with shame. And
for that it shall seem we speak not of favor or at large, we will expound
upon the same a certain authority of holy Scripture, wherein is showed what
a one the King ought to be in his own person, and how he ought to govern his
common wealth, for it is not sufficient that the Prince be a good man, but that
his common wealth be good: neither is it sufficient that the common wealth be
good, but the Prince also be good. In Deutero. 18. Chapter, What conditions a
good king should have.
God said unto Moses, If the people shall ask thee a King, thou shall give
them one, but beware that the King which thou shall give them, be natural of
the kingdom, that he have not many horses, that he turn not the people into
Egipte, that he hold not many wives, that he gather not much treasure, that
he be not proud, and that he read in Deuteron. Upon every one of these
commandments, to speak what might be said, should be, never to make an
end, only we will briefly speak of every of them.

Before all things God commanded that the Kings should be natural of the
kingdom, that is to understand, that he should be an Hebrew circumcised, and
no Gentile, for that god would not they should be governed that honored one
God, by those that did believe in many Gods. The Prince to whom it aperteyneth
to govern Christians, it is convenient he be a good Christian: and the signs
of a good Christian are these, The good king does forget his own injuries, and
does chastise the offenses to God.
when the offenses to God he does chastise, and his own he does forget. Then
is the Prince natural of the kingdom, when he does observe and defend the
Gospel of Christ. For to speak according to truth, and also with liberty, he
does not deserve to be king, which is not zealous of Gods law. God also
commaundes the Prince not to have many horses, that is to say, that he wast not
the treasure of the common wealth in superfluous cost, in maynteyning a great
house, and in sustayning a great sumptuous train of horses, for unto the
Christian Prince it is more sound counsel, rather to seed a few men, than to
have many horses.

Notwithstanding I will not say but that in the houses of Kings and of high
Princes, many must enter, In palace more is spoiled than spent.
many must serve; many must live, and many must eat: but that which is to be
reprehe^ded is this: that many times more is spoiled than is spent. If in the
Courts of Princes there were not so many horses in the stable, so many hawks
in the mewe, so many gibers in chambers, so many vagabondes in palace, and so
great disorder in expenses, I am sure, The disordinate expenses of the mighty
is to bring necessity.
that neither should they so go ouercharged, either their Subjects so much
grieved. God in commanding the Prince not to have many horses, is to forbid
him that he use not excessive expenses: because in deed and in conclusion,
they shall give an accoumpt unto God of the goods of the common wealth, not as
Lords but as tutors. Also God does command that he which shall be King, do
not consent to turn the people intoo Egypt, that is to say, that he do not
permit them to commit Idolatry, ne yet to serve King Pharao, for our good God
will that we adore him alone for Lord, and that we hold him for our creator.
To come out of Egypt is to come out of sin, to turn into Egypt, is to turn
into sin, and for this cause the office of a good Prince is, not only to
remunerate the virtuous, and such as live well: but also to chastise the wicked
and such as live evil. The secret is to be remitted to God, but the publik
offense to be chastised.
It is no other thing to return into Egypt, but boldly, openly, and manifestly
to sin, the which the good Prince ought not to consent unto, either with any
in like case to dispense, because the secret sins to God, are to be
remitted, but those which are manifest the good king ought to chastise. Then
does the Prince suffer any to return into Egypt, when openly he suffers him to
live in sin: that is to say, to pass his life in envious revenging, to hold
by force yt which is due to an other, to be given to follow the lusts of the
flesh, and to dare to renew his old age into wanton affections, in which the
Prince does so much offend God, that although he be no companion in the fault,
yet in the world to come, he shall not escape to be partaker of the pain.
For a king to govern well in his kingdom, ought to be as much feared of the
evil, The good king ought to impart his goods, but not his conscience.
as beloved of the good. And if by chance any be in his house that is in
favor that is a quareller, or any servant that is vicious, I deny not, but
unto such a one, he may impart of his goods, but not with his conscience. Also
God commands him which shall be king, that he hold not in his company many
women, that is to understand, he shall content himself with his Queen, with
whom he is married, without ungodly acquayntance with any other, for ye great
Princes and mighty potentates do more offend God, with ill example they give,
than with the faults they commit. Of David, of Achab, of Assa, and of
Jeroboam, the scriptures do not so much complain of their sins, as of the
occasion they gave unto others to sin: Princes are more viewed and more
accused than the rest.
because very seldom we see the people in awe of correction when their lord
is vicious. As Princes be more high and also mightyer than the rest, even so
are they more beheld and also more viewed tha^ others. And for this cause
according to my judgment, if they be not chaste yet at the least they should be
more secret. Among the heap of sins this may be one wherewith God is not a
little offended. And on the other part, it is wherewith ye common wealth
receives most sclander: for in cases of honor, none will yt they haunt his
house, request his wife or defloure his daughter. The writers of histories do
much praise Alexander ye great, Scipio the Affrican, Marcus Aurelius, the
great Augustus, and the good Traian, which only used not to force women in
liberty, but did not so much as touch such as were their captives and taken
in battle: and truly they were justly praised for virtuous me^. For it
proceeds of a more noble courage to resist a prepared vice, tha^ to give an
onset upon a ca^p of great power.

Also God does command him, which shall be king, that he hoord not up much
treasure, that he be not scarce, or a nigard, for the office of the merchant is
to keep, but of a King to give and to be liberal. In Alexander the great is
much more praised the largeness be used in giving, than his potencie in
fighting: the which does clearly appear, when we will praise any man, we do not
say, he is mighty as Alexander, but frank as Alexander. To the contrary of
this, Suetonius writes of the Emperor Vespasian, the which of pure misery,
nigardship, and covetousness, commanded in Rome to be made public places to
receive urine, not to keep the City more sweet, but to the end that they
should give him more rent.

The divine Plato did counsel the Atheniens in his books of a good common
wealth, The conditions of a good king.
that the governor which they had to choose, should be just in his
judgments, true of his word, constant in that he takes in hand, secret in
that he understands, large and bountiful in giving. Princes and great
potentates for their power they be feared, and for their magnifice^t
liberality they are beloved. But in deed and in the end, few follow the king,
not only for that his conditions be good, but because they think his giving is
much and very noble.

Gods commanding in his law, that the Prince shall not hourde up treasures, is
no other thing to say, but that all shall serve him of good will, and that be
use toward all men of his liberalite: for that many times it does happen,
that the Prince in being vnchearefull in giuyng, it comes to pass in process
that very few have any mind to gratify or serve him. Also God commanded the
king that should govern his people, that he should not be proud, tha^ he
should always read in Deuteronomie, which is the Book of the Law. And because
we have already made a large discourse, we will leave the exposition of these
two words for an other day. There rests, that we pray unto the Lord, to
give your Majesty his grace, and unto you and us his glory, to the which
Jesus Christ bring us. Amen.

A discourse or conference with the Emperor, upon certain most aunciente
stampes in Mettalles, the which he commanded the Author to read and to
expound, wherein are touched many antiquities.

S. C. C. R. M.
Princes ought so to recreate themselves, that thereof rise none offense.
SO great be the affairs of Princes, and so much laden with studious cares,
that hardlye remains time to sleep, or eat, much less to recreate or joy
themselves with gladsome pastyme. Our forces are so small, our judgment so
weak, our appetite so variable, and our desires so disordinate, that
sometime it is necessary, and also profitable, to give place to the humanity
to be recreated: upon condition, that the truth be not put to flyghte or
weakened. The sensuality makes us war with his vices. Reason fyghteth with
our wickedness. Our body contendeth with his appetites. The heart strives
with his desires. For which cause it is necessary to give place to the one,
that they bring us not to our end, and to dissemble with the other, that they
lead us not to despair. Princes ought to limite their recreations.
This I say to your imperial Majesty, for the magnificent means which your
excellency used to pass the time, when it pleased you to command that I should
be called to your chamber and presence. And for a troth, ye recreatio^ of
princes ought so to be measured and limited, that they may recreate without
offense to ye world. Arsacidas king of the Bactria^s, his pastime was to knit
fishing nets: of king Artaxerxes, to spin: And of Arthabanus king of Hircans,
to arm for Rats. And of Viantus King of Lidians, to fish Frogs. And of the
Emperor Domitianus, to chase Flies. Princes (having their times so limited,
and also of all men so beholden and considered,) that employ themselves in such
pastimes and vanities, we cannot well say that therein they pass their times,
but loose their times. The case is this, that your Majesty presently after you
felt your self delivered of your quartaine, commanded to be set before you a
certain little table, all full of stamped metals, as well of gold, as silver,
of brass, as also of Iron. A thing surely worth the beholding, and much to be
praised. I did not a little delight, in seeing your Majesty take pleasure in
beholding the faces of those metalles, in reading the letters they held, and in
examining the devises they did contain. All which things might not easily be
read, and much less understood. There were amongst those stamped metalles,
certain that were Greek, some Latin, some Caldee, some Arabic, some Gothic,
and other some high Dutch: your Majesty commanded me to view them, read
them, and the most notable to expound: assuredly the commandment was directed
very justly, and in me more than another most aptly employed. For being (as I
am) your imperial Chronicler, it is my part to render account of the things
you shall doubt, and to declare ye meaning of that which you read. I have
vewed the^, read them, and studied them: and although some of them be very hard
to be read, and very difficult to be understood, I will travail with such
playnesse to declare them, and every parcel so diligently to examine and
distinguish, that not only your Majesty may understand to read the stamp,
but also comprehend the blason and original thereof.

It is to be understood, that the Romans more than all other nations were
covetous of riches, and ambitious of honors: whereby it came to pass, that
to have to spend, and to magnify their names, they hild wars six hundredth
and forty years, with all nations and kingdoms. In two things the Romans
did travel to leave and perpetuate their memory, that is to wit, in buildings
they made, and in their Coins they did grave or stamp: neither did they
allow the grauing or stamping of any money, but unto him that had overcome
some famous battle, or done some notable thing in the common wealth. The
buildings they most used to make, were walls for Cities, cawsies in high ways,
Bridges over Rivers, fountains artificially made, statues or great pictures
over gates, Bathes for the people, arches for their triumphs, and Temples for
their Gods. Much time passed in the Empire of Rome, wherein the Romans had
no money but of brass or of yro^. In the ancient times iron was used in coin.
Whereof it proceeds that the true and most ancient metalls be not of gold
but of Iron. For the first coin that was made to be melted in Rome of gold,
was in the time of Scipio the Africane. The ancient Romans used to stamp or
grave on the one side of their money, their faces drawn most natural, and on
the other, the kingdoms they had overcome, the offices they had held, and the
laws they had made.

And for that it shall not seem that I speak at large or of favor, it is
reason I give account of all I have said. The letters of one of these stamped
metals does say, Pboro. dact. Leg. Your Majesty has to understand, that this
stamp is the most ancient that ever I saw or read, which appears very well
by the metal it is made of, and by the letter it is written in: for
declaration whereof, it is to be understood, there have bin seven which
invented to give laws to the world, that is to wit, Moses, that gave laws to
the Hebrews, Solon to the Athenians, Licurgus to the Lacedaemonians, Asclepius
to the Rhodians, Numa Pompilius to the Romans, and Phoroneus to the
Aegiptians. This Phoroneus was King of Aegipt before that Joseph the son of
Jacob was borne. And as Diodorus Siculus does say, he was a King very just,
virtuous, honest, and wise. This was he that first gave laws in Egypt, and
also (as it is thought) in all the world, whereof it does proceed, that all
Cou^sellours and Lawyers of Rome did call the laws that were just, and most
just, Forum, in memory of king Phoroneus. And so the letters of this metal
would thus much say: This is King Phoroneus, which gave laws to the
Egyptians. The letters of the other stamp, Genuci. D. vi. Leg. For the
understanding of this stamp, it is to be considered, that the Romans
conceived so great shame and disdain of the filthiness of king Tarquine
committed with chaste Lucrece, that only they would not, that in Rome there
should be any more kings, but also that the name of king, and the laws of
kings, should for evermore be banished, and in the common wealth forgotten.

So the Romans not meaning to obey the laws they had received of their good
King Numa Pompilius, sent a most solemn imbassage to Grecia, to bring them
the laws that the Philosopher Solon had given to the Athenians. Which being
brought to Rome accepted, and observed, were afterward entitled the laws of
the twelve tables. The Ambassadors that were sent to bring these laws from
Greece, were ten most sapient Romans, whose names are Apius, Genutius,
Sextus, Veturius, Julius, Mannilius, Sulpicius, Curious, Romulus, Postumus: and
because Genutius was one of those ten notable men, and for that great act so
famous, he sta^ped those words on the one side of his money. The which would
say: this is the Consul Genutius, one of the ten men of Rome, that was sent
for the laws of Greece. The words of the other stamp following are Con, Quir,
Ius, Mos, Le, Obs. To explane these words which are very dark, it is to be
understood, that all the laws of this world, are reduced from three manner of
laws, which is to wit, It is to be noted that all laws are reduced from three
laws.
Ius natural, lex condita, and mos antiquus. That which in the old time was
called the Law of Nature, is, That thou wish not for another, which thou will
not for thy self: and also to shun evil, and approach to do well, which is not
to be learned by lesson, but by reason. Lex condita are the laws that kings
have made in their Kingdoms, and Emperors in their Empires: Some of the which
consiste in Reason, and other some in opinion. Mos antiquus is, when a Custom
by little and little is brought in amongst the people: the force whereof
depends upon the well or evil observing thereof. Of the above said it is to
be gathered, we call Ius natural the law which reason does direct: we name
Lex Condita, which is ordained and written: and we term Mos antiquus, the
custom of long time used, and presently observed: this presupposed the letters
of this stamp do signify, Seven manner of ancient laws.
This is the Consul Quirinus, the which in the time of his Consulship, did
observe, and caused to be observed, that which right requires, law
commands, and custom has brought in.

The words of the other stamp are these: Popil. Con. Iu. Mill. fecc. for the
understanding of these words is to be understood, that the ancient Lawyers
did ordain seven manner of Laws, which is to wit, Ius gentium, Ius civil,
Ius consularis, Ius publicum, Ius quiritum, Ius militare, and Ius magistratum.

In the old time, they did call Ius Gentium, to occupy that which had no
owner, to defend the Country, to die for the liberty, to endeuer to possess
more than others, and to be of more ability than the rest. This was named ius
Gentium, because in all Kingdoms and Nations, Greeks, Latins, and
Barbarians, this manner of living was used and observed.

Ius Civil was the order and manner in old days, to form their plees in
law, that is to wit, to cite, answer, accuse, prove, deny, allege, relate,
to give sentence, and to execute: to the end each one might obtain by justice,
that which was taken by force.

Ius Consulare, was, such orders, as the Consuls of Rome did use amongst
themselves, for themselves: which is to say, of what number they should be,
what garments they should wear, Laws only for Roman Senators.
what company they should keep, where they should congregate, and how many
hours they should assemble, of what things they should confer, how they
should live, and to how much goods they should attain.

This Ius Consulare did serve but for the Roman Consuls that were resident in
Rome, for notwithstanding there were Consuls in Capua, they would not consent
they should live as those of the Senate of Rome.

Ius Quiritum, was the laws and privileges that the Roman Gentlemen did use
or enjoy, that did live within the compass of Rome, or had the privilege of a
Roman Gentleman: which is to say, that the Gentlemen and knights of Rome had
four names: that is to understand, Patricios, Veteranos, Milites, and
Quirites. The which four names, according to the variety of the time was
given them.

The privilege or law Quiritum, that the Knights of Rome enjoyed, was, that
they might sit in the temples, they might not be arested for debt, or pay for
lodging, or proue^der where they went, to be maintained by the common treasure
if they became poor, to make a testament without witness, not to be accused
but in Rome, to pay no impost in time of tribut, and also that they might be
buried in an high Tomb. All these preheminences no gentleman did enjoy, but
only such as were Citizens of Rome.

Ius Publicum, was the ordinances and constitutious, that every people in
particular did use amongst themselves and for themselves: that is to say, how
they should repair their walls, conserve their waters, measure their
streates, build their houses, provide necessary things, to have store houses,
to gather money, to make their fifes, to watch their cities. They called these
ordinances Ius Publicum, because they were made by all, and observed by all.

Ius Militare, was the laws that the ancient Romans made, The laws for
war, they used in Rome.
for the times that kingdoms did break peace, and entered into wars one with
the other, because they esteemed much to be wise in government, and to fight as
men determined in order. The laws of Ius militare were how to proclaim
wars, to confirm peace, to take truce, to levy their soldiers, too pay
their Camp, to give order for their watches, too make their trenches, to give
battle, to retire their host, to redeem prisoners, and how the Conquerours
should triumph.

They called these laws Ius militare, which is to say, the order of Knights,
because they served no further, but too give order unto those that did follow
the wars, and with arms did defend the common wealth.

Coming now to the exposition of the stamp, it is too be understood, yt in
the days of the first Roman Dictator Quintus Cincinatus, there was also in
Rome a certain Romain Consul named Popilius Vastus, a man very well learned,
and no less expert in arms. This Consul Popilius made laws to be observed in
wars, and gave it in stamp in his money: that which is contained in the
stamp before rehearsed in the letters, The first that made laws for wars.
has this signification: This is the Consul Popilius, which made laws for
the captains, that should go to the wars for defense of the common wealth.

Also it may please your Majesty to understand, that if any Prince or Roman
Consul, did chance to make any law either necessary or very profitable for
the people, they did use for custom, to entitle that law by the name of him
that did invent and ordain the same: for that in the worlds to come it might
be known who was the author thereof, and also when it was made. After this
manner, the law that they made to eat with doors open, was called Caesaria.
The law that Pompey made too give tutors to Orphans, was named Pompeia. The
law that Cornelius made for parting of fields, was entitled Cornelia. The law
that Augustus made to take no tribute but for the profit of the common wealth,
was written Augusta. The law that the Co^sul Falcidias made, that none might
buy the dowry of any other man's wife, was nominated Falcidia. The law that the
Dictator Aquilius made, that no Roma^e should be put to death within Rome, was
cleped Aquilia. The law that the Censor Sempronius made, that none might
disinherit his son, but if he were a traitor to the Empire of Rome, was termed
Sempronia.

The words do follow of the other stamp Rusti, pry, tris, ple. For the
understanding of these words, it is to be noted, that ye order which the
Romans did use in creating dignities and offices, was as follows: First they
had Kings, afterward Decemuiri, then Triumuiri, after that Consulles, and the^
Censores, then Dictators, afterward Tribunes, and lastely Emperoures. Of
their Kings there were but seven, their Decemuiri endured ten years, their
Triumuri continued forty years, their Consulls four hundredth thirty and
four years, their Censor one year, their Dictator half a year: their Tribune
three years. That which we call the procurer of the people, the ancient
Romans did name the Tribune of the people, whose office was, every day to
enter into the Senate, and to procure the causes of the people: and in such
business as did not like him, he had authority to stand for the poor, and to
resist the Senators. And for that the office of Tribune was always against the
Senate, and thereby passed his life in peril, it was a law made and capitulate
by the Lawyers and Senators, that what soever man or woman did violently prease
to his person or unto his garment to offend him, publicly they cut off his
head.

And be it known to your Majesty, The procurer of the people was most
privileged in Rome.
that many Roman Princes did procure to be chosen Tribune of the people, not
for the interest they received by that dignity, but for the security they had
with the same: because not only they might not kill them, either in their
clothes so much as touch them. The first Tribune that was in Rome was a
certain Roman named Rusticius, a man of a very sincere life, and merueilous
zealous of his common wealth. This Rusticuis was, and this dignity created,
betwixt the first and the second Punick battails, in the time that Silla and
Marius did lead great bands in Rome, and did spoil the common wealth. Thus
much the letters of the stamp would say, This is the good Consul Rusticius
the which was the first Tribune that was in the Empire of Rome. Your Majesty
amongst these has many other sta^pes, the which being easy and facile to
read, and clear to understand, I shall not need to spend the time too
expound them.

A certain relation unto Queen Germana, declaring the life and laws of the
Philosopher Licurgus.

MOst high and serene Lady, this Sunday past, after I had preached before your
highness the Sermon of the destruction of Jerusalem, ye commanded I should
recite, and also give in writing, who was that great Philosopher Licurgus,
whose life I praised, and whose laws I alleged. In repayment of my travel,
and to bind me the more unto your service, you commanded I should dine at
your table, and also gave me a rich clock for my study. For so small a matter
as your highness does command, neither it needed ye should feast me, either
give me so great rewards: for that I attain more honor and bounty in that ye
command, than your highness does receive service in the thing I shall
accomplish. We receive liberality from the Prince, when he commands to
serve.
To say the truth, I had thought rather ye had slept in the sermon (the
curtains drawn) but since ye command, I shall recite that which I said of
the Philosopher Licurgus, it is a sign ye heard the whole Sermon, and also
noted the same. And since it pleases your highness, that the Ladies and dames
that serve you, and the gallants and Courtiers that attend upon you be present
at this communicatio^, that ye command them that they be not gibing, either
making of signs: for they have sworn to trouble me, or to put me from my
matter. But coming to the purpose, it is to wit, yt in the first reigns of
this world, when Sardanapalus reigned in Assiria, Osias in Jury, Tesplus in
Macedonia, Phocas amongst the Greeks, Alchimus amongst the Latins, Arthabanes
amongst the Egyptians, Licurgus was borne amongst the Lacedemonia^s.

This good Licurgus was jointly Philosopher and King: and King and Philosopher:
because in those Golden times, either Philosophers did govern, either else
Governors did use Philosophy. Note the great virtues of the Philosopher
Licurgus.
Plutarche does say of this Licurgus, that he was low of stature, pale of
color, a friend of silence, an enemy of vain talk: a man of small health,
and of great virtue. He was never noted of dishonestie, he never troubled the
commonwealth, he did never revenge injury, he did never thing against justice,
either against any man did use malicious words. He was in feeding te^perate,
in drinking sober, in giving liberal, in receiving of consideration, in
sleeping short, in his speech reposed, in business affable, in hearing
patient, prompt in expedition, gentle in chastisement, and benign in
pardoning. Being a child was brought up in Thebes, being a young man he did
study in Athens, and in the time of more years he passed into the great
India, and afterward being old was king of ye Lacedaemonians, which also were
called Spartans, which of nation were Greeks, and of condition very barbarous.
For excellency, it is recounted of him, that they never saw him idle, he never
drank wine, never travailed on horseback, never chid with any man, never did
hurt to his enemies, neither at any time was ingrate to his friends. He himself
went to the temples, he himself did offer the Sacrifices, he himself did read
in schools, he himself did hear complaints, he himself gave sentence in
causes of the law, he himself did cause to give chastisement to offenders. This
Licurgus was of a valiant mind in wars, of great devise in time of peril,
certain in things determined, severe with rebels, in sudden assaults of great
readiness, affable with offenders, and a mortal enemy of vagabonds. They say
that this Philosopher did invent the Olimpiades, which were certain plays
used every fourth year in the mountain Olimpus, to the end that all should
give themselves to study, or to learn some Art, because in that assembly
which there they used, every man made a proof of his knowledge, and the sprite
that was given him. Licurgus was the first that gave laws to the Spartans,
which afterward were called Lacedaemonians: which is to understand, before
Solon, and Numa Pompilius.

And also it is written of him, that he was the first that invented in Greece,
to have public or common houses founded at the charges of the common wealth,
and also endewed, where the sick might be cured, and the poor refreshed.
Before the days of Licurgus, the Lacedaemonians were a people very absolute, and
also dissolute: for which cause ye good Philosopher did pass immesurable
travels, and no less perils amongst the^, before they would be governed by a
King, or live under a law. On a certain day before all the people, he took two
little dogs new whelped, the one of the which he fed in his own house very
fair and fat: the other he commanded to be brought up in a country house, Of
him that brought up one dog fat in idleness and in the house, and the other in
the field.
with hunger, and to use the fields. These dogs being thus brought up, he
commanded the^ to be brought to the market place, in the presence of the whole
multitude, and throwing before them a live Hare, and a great piece of flesh:
presently the country dog ran after the Hare, and the pampered dog to the
flesh. Then said Licurgus, you are witnesses that these two dogs were whelpt
in one day and in one hour, in one place, of one Sire and Dam. And for that
the one was brought up in the field, he ran after the Hare: and the other that
was brought up in idleness, ran to his meat. Believe me ye Lacedemonia^s, To
be good, it does much profit to be well brought up.
and be out of doubt, that to prove good and virtuous, it imports much, from
the infancy to be well governed and brought up: for we retain much more of
ye customs wherewith we be bred, the^ of ye inclinatio^s wherewith we be borne.

Licurgus coming to his old age, commanded to call all the Noble and most
principal of his kingdom, and being gathered together at the doors of his
Temple, said these words: I have known many years since, how ye go
complaining and blaming me and my laws, affirming and swearing that they are
very sharp to be observed, and intolerable to be accomplished, and that
jointly by my death there may end both the law and the law giver, I will go to
the I Will of Delphos, to consulte with the God Apollo, if these my laws be just
or unjust, and by the same God I do swear, to stand to that which he shall say,
and to perform what he shall command. Therefore, oh ye Lacedaemonians, it is
convenient, that all you jointly do swear in this holy temple, that until I
return either alive or dead from the God Apollo, you shall not break the
laws that you have sworn, the good God Apollo being witness. This good King
and Philosopher departed, minding never to return from the I Will of Delphos, and
provided before he should die, a great chest of lead, wherein they should
enclose him, and cast him into the depth of the Sea, at the instant that his
life should depart.

Very worthy is Licurgus to be praised, in that he would banish himself from
his own Country, unto the end his common wealth should remain bound unto
good Laws.

And the Lacedaemonians are much to be commended, that have so kept their oath,
as if Licurgus were alive. Behold most serene Lady, the life that the
philosopher led. Now we shall recite the laws he did ordain, the which
although they were many and very good, yet we shall here repete but some.

The laws that Licurgus gave to the Lacedaemonians.
LIcurgus did ordain and command, that all the hills, pastures and meedes,
houses and inheritances should be parted, and equally divided, to avoid
tyrauntes for being to rich, and the poor from complaints. He did ordain and
command, that if any were vicious or idle in tilling his land, or in using his
inheritance, that he should not sell his land to another, without selling
himself to be slave therewith. All the Gold, the Silver, the Copper, the Tin,
and the Lead, he did give to the Temples where his Gods were worshipped, only
he did reserve the metal of iron, wherewith the people of his kingdom might
ear their fields, and resist their enemies. The children that were borne
fools, dumb, blind, deaf, counterfeit or lame, he commanded their fathers
to commend them to be sacrifised, saying, that in their creation, either the
Gods were negligent, or else nature erred. Also amongst them he did forbid
ba^queting, affirming, that men lost there their judgment with drinking, their
gravity with babbling, and their health with eating. He did permit, that nine
persons should feast together, in the reverence of the nine Muses: but upon
this condition, that if they would talk, they should drink no wine, and if
they used silence, they gave them wine to drink.

Their Vines were not planted to drink in time of health, but to cure in time
of sickness: in such wise, that they sold not wine in Tauernes, but in
Apotecaries shoppes. They held schools for children to learn, but no studies
to learn Philosophy: for he held opinion, that such as govern the common
wealth, ought not too be of those that read Philosophy, but such as did
perform it in manner of life, neither did they consent that any Coin should
be current amongst them, but did make exchange, wheat for bread, wine for
cloth, cloth for oil, and so of all other things, in such wise they changed,
but bought not. From the return of the battle Marathon, certain Lacedemonian
soldiers brought home money coined, wherefore the Magistrates of the common
wealth determined to drown the money, and to hang the men. Alcamenus and
Theopontus, two famous Kings that were before Licurgus received answer from
the Oracle of Apollo, that only for the vice of covetousness their common
wealth should be destroyed. Also amongst them, the use of navigations was
forbidden, as well for the wars as for their traffike, because they held
opinion, that mariners did never serve GOD, neither were subject too laws.
Also to no woman did they give anything in marriage: wherefore, commonly the
women did seek the men of most wealth: and the men did choose the women of
most virtue. In such sort, that amongst the Lacedaemonians, none were left
unmarried for their poverty, but for their lewdness and want of virtue.

As concerning any crafts man that did live in their common wealth, he must
exercise his Art according to the ancient fashion of the country. And if it
chanced any to attempt any novelty, or new invention, they did banishe the
Master and abolishe the devise. Five things they were commanded to observe,
the which were publikly cried with a loud voice every day, after this manner.

A notable proclamation daily made.
It is commanded by the Senate of Licaonia, yt thou shall bear honor and
reverence to the Gods, that thou be pacient in adversities, that thou give
obedience unto the Judges, that thou accustom thy self to travail, that thou
return from the wars victorious, either else dead. In one whole year they
might not wear but one new garment, and if any man neded any other garment, he
must not only have leave, but also show wherewith he must buy the same. A right
worthy search.
In certain prefixed times the Judges did search the houses, and if they by
chance found spyld bread, rotten wheat, garments mothe eaten, flesh corrupted,
and such other things spoiled, they were not only reprehended, but publicly
whipped: aduertising the employment thereof much more convenient to the relief
of the poor, than utterly to be lost. Being demanded why he had forbidden
hot houses, bathes, and ointments, answered: Bathes and oyntme^ts forbidden.
that bathes did infeeble the vigor and strength of the members, and ointments
did revive vices. Ambre greece, Musk, Storax, Siuet, Beniamim, and all kind of
perfumes amongst them were forbidden: affirming it to be no less infamy for a
man to be perfumed, than for a woman to be manifestly wicked.

And until ye time that men were married, or of thirty years of age, they did
never feed or take repast but standing, neither sleep but upon the leaves of
Canes: giving therein to understand, to avoid both delay and excess of sleep,
and of meat. The authority of old men.
The ancient men had liberty to enquire of young men that passed by, whither
go thou? and what to do? And if they answered to do any good thing, they
let them pass, but if otherwise, the old me^ might both reprehend, and also
detain the^.

If any young man committed any dishonesty in the presence of an old man,
without let or reprehension, he himself was chastised, and the young man
absolved. And if it fortuned any man to be taken for an offender, in the market
place he was set aloft upon a Pillar, where he ended his miserable days:
holding opinion, to be inhumaine to kill a man with Iron, but to permit him to
languish that is wicked, to be a thing most just. The disobedient son was
chastised, and afterward disenherited. When any young man did encounter with
an old man, if he were set, he did rise and salute him: and if he were alone,
The disobedient son both chastised and disinherited.
he did accompany him, and if he were negligent herein, the Judges did chasten
him, and the people did reprehend him. Their communaltie and fraternity was so
great, that the nature of their children, the order of their servants, and the
commandment of their slaves were indifferent. A friend by fraternity.
It was permitted amongst them to use theftes, not that they had estimation
thereof, but to yield unto men skill, advise, and policy. For if by chance he
were taken with the manner, he was openly punished: also the cause of the
permission thereof was, to move men to be careful of their goods. In their
feeding and diet they were very sober and temperate, taking refection only to
live, and to sustain life. For it was Liourgus opinion, that the fat and
gluttonous man, was of gross judgment, and of unable and unhealthy body.
They used to sing with great delight, and no small friends of musical
instruments, for they held opinion, that the sweetness of music did recreat
the spirits, and the heart did undertake to love. They used no other songs
but such as were invented to the praise of glorious personages, that finished
their days in great nobleness: or else to the disprayse of the wicked. They
might not permit or endure in their music, more than in the rest, any new
invention. New invention, and the inuentors banished.
Therpandar, in those days the most famous musician, for that he invented to
add an other string to a certain Instrument, was banished, and his instrument
broken too shiuers. To avoid the great superstitions that in ancient time were
used in building of Sepulchers, An honor used to the dead that valiantly died
in the wars.
it was forbidden to bury any more in the fields, but near unto the Church.
It was not permitted unto any person too raise up any sumptuous Sepulcher, but
unto such, as in time of peace did govern the common wealth, or valiantly had
died in the wars. The Lacedaemonians were so great enemies to admit novelties
in their common wealth, that they neither permitted strangers to enter, or
their people to wander into strange countries: doubting to be entangled with
new fashions and customs. The father that gave no learning unto his child in
his youth, did lose that succor that in his old age was due unto him. Three
things were in great estimation among them, which is to wit: slaves too
travel, Hounds to hunt, and horse for the wars. As touching things to be
eaten, I mean fruit, herbs, and roots, was common to all men to eat at
full, but not to carry to their houses. Their apparel, which they used too
wear in the wars, was died with the juice of Grapes, to the end the blood of
the maimed, should be no dismay to the rest. The prayers they made unto their
Gods, was to entreat them, to dissemble their injuries, and to remunerate
their service they did unto them.

When they went to the wars, they did sacrifice a For unto the God Mars, and
at the instant to give battle, they did sacrifice an Ox: To give the
Captain to understand, that they ought not only to be strong as a Bull, but
also subtle, wise, and provident as a Fox. They painted their Gods, some with
a blunt lance, and other some with a naked sword: to give aduertisment, that
the Gods did chastise some, and but threaten others. Their usage was not to
crave any thing of their Gods, that was not of importance: affirming that al
other small matters, were to be obtained by ma^s industry. Justice was so much
observed amongst them, that they used no locks to their Coffers, neither
boltes to their doors. It was not permitted amongst them, that one man should
use many faculties or occupations: And for that the Philosopher Chrisiphont,
reported in his Oration, that in every Art he knew somewhat, they banished him,
affirming that he could not prove a perfect Philosopher, that studied Sciences
general.

A letter unto Sir Alonso Manrique, Archbishop of Civil, and to Sir Antonio
Manrique, Duke of Naiara, for that they did choose the Author, for Judge in a
contention. A matter very notable.

MOst high and mighty Princes, sir John Ma^rique gave me ij-letters from your
honors, signed and sealed wherein you gave me to understand how you had chose^
me for your ce^sor and judge upon a certain doubt wherein both have doubted, and
sufficiently contended. I my Lords, do accept the same, and do declare my
self for your Judge in this behalf, upon such condition, that neither of you
appeal from the sentence, and further, that ye pay the costs of the
process, and the penalty ye shall be condemned in. But first I do note and
blame your Honors, and in a manner reprehend, that such contention should
rise betwixt you, for that between so high personages, conference is admitted,
but contention utterly condemned. Nobleness and conte^tion did never
accompany in one generous personage, which is not so in the ignorant and
contendor, having between themselves so great parentage. Gentlemen may commen,
but not contend
It is convenient to the Philosophers, to prove, to prosecute, and to maintain
all that which they shall speak: but to the good Knight it does not
appertain to contend, but to defend. The Knight that is of a noble mind, For
what causes a Gentleman may be inflamed with choler.
valiant, and of courage, his choler is never inflamed, but in drawing of his
sword. For he proves very seldom valiant, that is given to be a brabler.

But coming to the purpose, your Honors do write, that all your contention
has risen for the verifying, and the understanding, which of these two Cities
has been Numantia: that is to wit, Ciquentia, or else Monviedro. Likewise you
write, you have not only contended, but also have waged a good Mule for him in
whose favor the sentence shall be given. Speaking with such consideration as
is due to so high personages, if the one do no better understand to pray, and
the other to give battle, than ye understand in Chronicles and ancient
histories, in vain is the one Archbishop of Civil, and the other Duke of
Naiara.

Helia is now Jerusalem, and Byzantio is Constantinople.
How much distance is betwixt Helia and Thiro, from Bizantio to Mephis, from
Rome to Carthage, from Agripina to Gades: so much is betwixt the city of
Numantia and Sagunto: because the most ancient Numantia: was founded in
Castile: and the generouse city of Sagunto, was situate near to Valentia.
Numantia and Sagunto were two most ancient and famous Cities, and very much
renoumed and celebrate in Spain: in opinions contrary, in kingdoms diverse, in
situations different, in names discordant, and also in conditions variable: for
Sagunto was founded of the Greeks, and Numantia of the Romans. The City of
Sagunto was always friend and allied with the Romans, and mortal enemy to
the Carthagians. But the City of Numantia, neither was friend to the one, or
confederate with the other: for they never gave obedience to any, but always
made a Seigniory of it self.

The seat of the City of Sagunto, was four leagues from Valentia, where is
now Monviedro: and he that shall say, that, which we call now in Castile
Ciguenca, was in time paste the City Sagunto: it shall be because he dreamed
it, and not to have read it. Being Inquisitor of Valentia, I was many times at
Monviedro, as well to visit the Christians, as to baptize the Moors. And
considering the sharpness of the place, the antiquity of the walls, the
greatness of the college, the distance from the Sea, the stateliness of the
buildings, and the monstrousenesse of the sepulchers, there is none, but he may
understand that to be Monviedro, which was Sagunto, and that which was Sagunto
is now Monviedro. In the fields of Monviedro and in the ruinous buildings that
be there at these days, there are found many stones ingraue^, and many
ancient Epitaphes of the Hannibals, and of the Asdrubals that died there in
the siege of Sagunto: the which were two linages of Carthage, very notable of
blood, and also famous in arms. Near to Monviedro there is a certain place,
that in those days was called Turditanos, and is now named Torres torres: and
for that they were mortal enemies of the Saguntines, Hanniball put himself in
with them, and from thence did make his battery, and did throw down and burn
the city of Sagunto: not succored then of the Romans, or ever after
reedified.

Behold here my Lords, how your contention was, which was Sagunto, and not
which was Numantia: So that Soria and Samorra does rather give doubt, which
was Numantia, and Monviedro and Sigentia, which was Sagunto. But the resolution
and conclusion of all the aforesaid, considering the merits of the process,
and what either party has alleged for him self, I do say and declare by my
definitive sentence, that the Archbishop of Civil, did fail, and the Duke of
Naiara did err: in the thing that both did contend, and lay their wager. And I
condemn either of them in a good Mule, to be employed upon him that shall
declare which was the great Numantia.

I my Lords will now recount and declare which was that City Numantia, and
also say, who was the founder thereof, where it was fo^nded, how it was founded,
and what time it lasted, and also how it was destroyed, for that it is an
history very delectable to read, worthy to be understood, pleasant to recount,
and lamentable to hear.

Which was the great City Numantia in Spain.
THe City of Numantia, was founded by Numa Pompilius, Numantia was named of
Numa Pompilius.
the second king of Romans, in the fifty and eight year after the foundation
of Rome, and in the eightenth year of his reign, in such sort, for that the
founder thereof was called Numa, it was named Numantia. In the old time they
did much use to name their Cities they builded by their own proper names, as
Jerusalem of Salem, Antioche of Antiochus, Constantinople of Constantine:
Alexandria of Alexander, Rome of Romulus, and Numantia of Numa. Only seven
Kings there were of Romans: The first of the which, was Romulus, and the
seventh was Tarquine, of these seven the most excellent of them all was this
Numa Pompilius, for he was the first that brought the Gods into Rome, he did
enclose the vestall Virgins, builded the temples, and gave laws to the
Romans. The situation of this City was near the river of Dwero, and not
far from the head of the same, and it was set upon the height of an hill, and
this height was not of a Rock, but upon a certain plain. Neither was it
towred within, nor walled without, onel^ it was compassed about with a broad
deep disch^ was inhabited with more than five, and less than six thousand
households, two parts of the which did follow the wars, and the third part
their tillage and labor. Amongst them exercise was much praised, and idleness
greatly condemn, and which is more, not covetous of goods, and yet very
ambitious of honor. The Numantins of their natural condition, were more
flegmatike than colericke, suffering, dissembling, subtle, and of great
actiuitie: in such wise that that which they did at one time dissemble, at
another they did revenge. In their City there was but one crafts man, and that
was the Smith: Goldsmiths, Silkworkers, Drapers, Fruters, Tauerners,
Fishmongers, Butchers, and such like, they would not consent to live amongst
them: For all such things every man ought to have in his own house, and not to
seek them in the common wealth.

They were so valiant, and so doubtie, in the affairs of war, that they
never saw any Numantine turn his bark, The Numantins in the wars did rather
die than flee.
or receive any wound in the same, in such wise that they did rather determine
to die than to flee. They could not go a warfare without license of their
common wealth, and those also must go altogether and follow one quarrel, for
otherwise if one Numantine did kill another Numantine, the murderer afterward
was put to death by the common wealth. Four kind of people the Romans had
very fierce to tame, and very warlike to fight, that is to wit, the Mirmidones
which were those of Merida, the Gauditanes, which were those of Calis, the
Saguntines, which were those of Monviedro, and the Numantines, which were
those of Soria. The difference amongst these was, that the Mirmidons were
strong, they of Calis valiant, the Saguntines fortunate, but the Numantines
were strong, valiant, and fortunate. Fabatus, Metellus, Sertorius, Pompeius,
Caesar, Sextus Patroclus, and all the other Roman Captains, that by the space
of one hundred and four score years held wars in Spain, did never conquer
the Numantins, neither at any time had to do with them.

Amongst all the Cities of this world, only Numantia did never acknowledge her
better, or kiss the hands of any other for lord. This Numantia was somewhat
Rockie, half compassed, with out-towers, not very well inhabited, and less
rich. With all this, none durst hold her for enemy, but for confederate: and
this was the cause, for that the Fortune of the Numantins was much more than
the power of the Romans. In the wars between Rome and Carthage, Caesar and
Pompey, Silla and Marius, there was no King, or kingdom in the world, that did
not follow one of those parts and against the other did not fight, except the
proud Numantia: which always made answer to those that did persuade her to
follow their opinion, that, not she of others, but others of her, ought to
make a head. In the first Punick wars, never would the Numantines follow the
Carthaginia^s, or favor the Romans: for which occasion (or too say better)
without any occasion, the Romans determined to make war upon the Numantins,
not for any fear they had of their power, but for envy of their great
fortune. Fouretene years continually, the Romans besieged the Numantins, Rome
was envious of the fortune of Numantia.
in which great was the hurt the Numantins received, but much more marvelous of
the Roman Captains that there died. There were slain in that Numantine war
Caius Crispus, Trebellius, Pindarus, Rufus, Venustus, Eskaurus, Paulus Pilos,
Cincinatus, and Drusius, nine Consuls that were very famous, and Captains of
much experience. These nine Consuls being slain, Nine Consulles were, slain
at the siege of Numantia.
with an infinite number of Romans, it happened in the twelfth year of the
siege of Numantia, that a Roman Captain named Cneius Fabricius, did ordain
and capitulate with the Numantins, that they and the Romans for evermore
should be friends, The good Captain ought rather loose his life than make an
infamous truce.
and in perpetual confederation. And in the mean time, while they sent
advertisement thereof to Rome, they confirmed a long truce. But the Romans
understanding the whole order, to be greatly to the honor of the Numantins,
and to the perpetual infamy of the Romans, they commanded the Consulles
throat to be cut, and to prosecute the wars. Then in the year following,
which was the thirtenth of the siege, the Romans did send the Consul Scipio
with a new army to Numantia, the which being come, the first thing he did,
was to deliver the Camp from all manner men that were unprofitable, and women
that were leude of disposition: saying that in great armies more hurt is done
with prepared vices, than with determined enemies. A year and seven months
was Scipio at the siege of Numantia, In the wars vice does more hurt tha^ the
enemies.
all which time he never gave battle or skirmish, but only gave order that no
succor might come at them, or vitayles might enter to them. When a certain
Captain demanded of Scipio, why he did not skirmish with those that came
forth, neither fight with them within? He made answer: Numantia is so
fortunate, and the Numantins so luckie, that we must rather think their fortune
to come to an end, than hope to overcome them. Many times the Numantins did
sallie to fight with the new Romans, and it happened one day, that there
passed betwixt them so bloody a skirmishe, that in an other place, it might be
counted for a battle. And in the end, the Romans received such foil, that
if the fortune of Scipio had not helped, that day the name of Rome had ended in
Spain. Scipio considering the Numantins to increase in pride, and the Romans
to discourage, advised to retire his camp more than a mile from the city:
because they should give no attempt upon the sudden, and to avoid by the
neernesse of the place, the hurts that might happen. But in the end the
Numantins wanting vitayles, and having lost many of their men, did ordeyn
amongst themselves, and did make a vow unto their gods, no day to break their
fast, but with the flesh of Romans, The Numa^tines did eat the flesh of
the Romans
neither to drink water or wine, before they had tasted and dronken the blood
of some enemy they had slain. A monstrous thing then to see, as it is now to
hear, that even so the Numantins every day went in chase of Romans, as
hunters do in hunting Coneys: and with as great apetite they did eat and
drink the flesh and blood of enemies, as if it had bin shoulders and loins of
mutton.

Very great were the hurtes that every day the Consul Scipio received in ye
stege, because the Numantins like most fierce beasts, To fight with a
desparate man is no small peril.
with Romans blood imbrued, did not fight as enemies, but as men desperate.
Among the Numantines he was holden excused that took any Roman alive, and
much less to give him a burial. For at the hour that any were slain, they
did take him, slay him, quarter him, and in the shambles did weigh him. In
such wise, that a Roman was more (being dead) than alive and raunsomed. Very
many times Scipio was persuaded, prayed, and importunated of his captains to
raise his siege and to ^urue to Rome: but he would never do it, neither could
in any wise abide to hear of it: for at his coming out of Rome, a Nigromantik
priest, did advertise him, that he should not dismay, neither retire from that
conquest, although in the same he should pass immeasurable perilles, because
the gods had determined that end of the fortunate Numantia, should be the
beginning of all his glory.

How Scipio did take Numantia.
SCipio perceiuyng the Numantins not to be overcome by prayers, neither by
arms, he caused to be made (in compass of the city) a stately ditche, the
which was in depth seven fadoms, and in breadth five: in such sort, that to the
discomfortable Numantins) neither might there any vitayles enter, that they
might eat, neither they come out with the enemies to fight. Many times did
the Consul Scipio request the Numantines to commend themselves to the
clemency of Rome, and that they should credit and give faith unto his words,
The noble minded had rather die free than live a slave.
to which things they made answer: that since they had lived three hundred and
thirty eight years free, they would not now die slaves. Great cries did the
women give within the city, great clamoures did the Priests make unto their
Gods, with great and loud voices did the men exclame upon Scipio, that he
should let them out to fight as men of worthynesse, and not to kill them with
hunger like wretches. And said more, thou (oh Scpio) being a young man of Rome,
valiant and bold, considerest not what thou do, neither do they counsel thee
what thou ought to do. For to keep us in as thou do, is but a policy
of war, but if thou should overcome us in battle, it should be for thee an
immorall glory. But in the end the Numantins seeing them selves so infamously
and miserably enclosed, and that now their vitayles failed them, the most
strongest did join themselves together, and killed all the old men, The
Numantines did kill their wives and children.
children and women, and did take all the riches of the City and of the
temples, and heaped them up in the market place, and gave fire to all parts of
the City, and poisoned themselves, in such wise, that the Temples, the
houses, the riches, and the persons of Numa^tia ended all in one day. A
monstrous thing it was to see that which the Numantins did while they were
alive, and a thing no less fearful which they did when they were a dying:
No Numantine taken prisoner.
Because they left to Scipio neither goods to spoil, neither man or woman of
whom to triumph. During the time that Numantia was besieged, no Numantin entered
into prison, or to any Roman was prisoner, but suffered death before he
consented to yield. When the Consul Scipio did see the City burn, and entered
the same, and found all the Citizens dead and burned, there came over his
heart great heaviness, and out of his eyes he poured out many tears, and said:
O right happy Numantia, which the gods willed to have an end, but not to
be overcome. The continuance of the prosperity of Numantia.
Four hundredth threescore and six years endured the prosperity of the City
of Nmantia: For so many years had passed, since the foundation thereof by
Numa Pompilius, until it was destroyed by Scipio the Affricane.

In those old times there were three Cities very enemies and rebels to Rome,
that is to wit, Helia in Asia, Carthage in Africa, and Numantia in Europa, the
which three were utterly destroyed, but by the Romans never possessed or
inhabited. The Prince Iugurth of the age of.xxij. years came from Africa to
the wars of Numantia, in favor of Scipio, and did there such and so notable
feats in arms, that he deserved with Scipio to be very private, and in Rome
to be esteemed. All the Historiographers that write of the wars of Numantia,
say that the Romans did never receive so much hurt or lose so many people,
or were at so great charges, neither received so great shame, as they did in
that conqueste of Numantia. And the reason they give for this, is, for that all
the other wars had their beginning upon some injury, except that of
Numantia, which was of mere malice or envy. To say, that the City of
Samorra, was in time past Numantia, is a thing very fabulous, and worthy to
be laughed at: because (if stories do not deceive us) from the time that
Numa^tia was in the world, until the time that Samorra began to be, there did
pass seven hundredth thirty and three years. If Pliny, Pomponius,
Ptholomaeus, and Strabo, had said that Numantia was near to Dwero, there had
bin a doubt whether it had bin Soria or Samorra. But these Historiographers do
say, that the foundation thereof was near to the head of Dwero: whereof it may
be gathered, that seeing Samorra is more than thirty leagues from the head of
Dwero, and Soria is but five, that it is Soria and not Samorra.

There be three opinions where the situation of the city of Numantia should
be, in which some do say, that it was, where now is Soria: others affirm
that it was on the other side of the bridge upon an hill: some do auouche that
it was a league from thence, on a certain place named Garray: and in my
judgment as I consider of the three situations, this opinion is most true,
because there is found great antiquities, and there does appear ancient
great buyldings. Those that wrote of Numantia, were Plinius, Strabo,
Ptholomaeus, Trogus Pompeius, Pullio, Trebellius, Vulpicius, Isodorus,
Instinus, and Marcus Ancus.

A letter unto the Constable Sir Ynigo Valasco, in the which the Author does
persuade, that in the taking of Founterabie he first make proof to profit his
wisdom, before he do, experiment his Fortune.

MOst renoumed Lord and Captain to Caesar, about the dead of this night,
Peter Herro delivered me a Letter from your Lordship, the which although it
had not come firmed or with superscription, by the letter I should have known
it to be written with your own hand: because it contained few lines and many
blots. While you are in the wars, it is tolerable to write on gross paper,
In the wars it imports dot to write with an evil pen.
with crooked lines, evil ynke, and blotted letters: For good warriers do
more esteem to sharpen their lances, than to make pens. Sir, you write unto
me, that I should pray for your health and victory, for that at the
commandment of Caesar, you go to besiege Founterabie, which was taken by
the Admiral of France, the same being of the Crown of Castile. This your
servant preaceth with such diligence for this letter, that I shall be forced to
answer more at large than I can, and much less than I would. As touching
Founterabie, I do certainly believe, that within these two years, the taking
and susteynyng of it, has cost the French King more than it would have cost
to have bought, or else to have buylt it. More is spent to maynteyne opinion,
than to defend reason.
Whereof there is no cause to have marvel, for that great Lords and Princes do
spend much more in susteyning the opinion they hold, than the reason that they
use. In all christendom (at this present) I find not an enterprise more
dangerous than this of Founterabie. For either you must overcome the French
king, or else displease the Emperor. I would say, that ye take in hand to deal
with the might of the one, and with the favor or disgrace of the other. To be
a Captain general is an estate very honorable and profitable, although right
delicate. For notwithstanding he do all that he can; and all that is meet to
be done, it by the mishap of his sins he give any battle, and carry not
away the victory, it is not sufficient that the sorrowful man do lose his
life, but also they seek some fault, by the which they say he lost that
battle. Be it that every man be what he can, and fight what he may, yet never
to this day have we seen a conquered Captain called wise, neither him that
overcame, termed rash. It is very good, that the Captains which fight, No
excuse may excuse ye loss of a battle.
and the Physicians that cure, be wise: but it is much better, that they be
fortunate: For these be two things wherein many times wisdom fails, and
fortune preuayleth. Sir you do take in hand an enterprise just, and very
just: because from time out of mind to this day, we have never heard or
seen, the town of Founterabie possessed by any king of France, neither any
king of Castile to have given it them: In such wise, that it is a conscience
for them to hold it, and a shame for us not to take it.

Sir consider well for your own part, that a war so just, be not lost
through some secret offense: A just war is lost by an unjust captain.
because the disgraces and overthrows that do happen in such like enterprises,
do not chance because the war is not just, but for that the conductours
thereof be unjust. The war the Hebrews made with the Philistines in the
mount of Gilboa, was a war very just, but king Saul that had the conduction
thereof, was a King very unjust, for whose cause the Lord did permit that
noble battle to be lost, to the end the king should be slain in the same.

But as the judgments of God are in them selves so high, and of us so
unknown, many times it does happen, that a king or prince does chose out one
of his servants, to make him general of an army, to the end he be honored,
and his state more amended than the rest: And on the other side, God does
permit, that there where he thought to obtayn most honor and good hap, from
thence he does escape most shamed and confounded. Let it not be thought of
Princes and of great men, that seeing they would not abstain from sin, they
shall more than others avoid the pain. An evil life does come to make
repayment in one day.
For God does compass them in such wise, that they come to make paymente in
one hour, of that which they committed in all their life. In the house of God
there has not, is not, neither shall be, merit without reward, or fault
without punishment. And if it hap that presentely we see not the good
rewarded, either the evil chastised, it is not for that God does forget it,
but until an other time to defer it.

The Marshall of Navarre with his band of Agramontenses, we understand is in
the defense of Founteraby: it seems not to be ill counsel, to make your
siege openly, and to practice with them secretly. For although they be now
servants to the French King: they shall remember they were subjects to our
Caesar: for so much as I find in old Histories, that this lineage of Marshalls
of Navarre is ancient, generous, and valyant. And for my part I do firmly
believe, that the Marshall had rather serve Caesar his lord, than follow the
French king his master. The good Scipio the Affricane, did use to say, that al
things in the wars ought to be assayed before the sword be drawn: And surely
he did speak most truly: Because there is not in all this world so great a
victory as that which is obtained without blood. The more noble victory is
that which is obtained by counsel tha^ by the sword.
Cicero to writing to Atticus, does say and affirm, that the devise that
vanquisheth the enimyes with counsel, is of no less worthynesse, than he that
overcomes by the sword. Sylla, Tyberius, Caligula, and Nero, never could but
command and kill, and on the other side, the good Augustus, Titus, and
Traianus, could not but pray and pardon, in such manner, that they overcame
praying, as the other fighting. The good Surgion ought to cure with sweet
ointments, and the good Captain with discrete persuasions. For as for iron,
Iron was made to ear fields, and not to kill men.
God rather made it to ear fields, than to kill men. Plutarch does say,
that Scipio being at the siege of Numantia when they were importunate that he
should besiege the City and destroy the Numantins, answered: I had rather
conserve the life of one Roman, than kill all those in Numantia. If these words
of Scipio were well considered of the Captains of war, peradventure they
would leave to be so rash in hazardyng their armies in so great and many
perils. Whereof does follow oftentimes that thinking to be revenged of their
enemies, they execute vengeance of their own proper blood.

All this have I said (noble Constable) to the end that since Caesar has
justified the war of Founterabie, your nobleness of your part should also
justify the same: And the justification which you have to make, is: First
persuade the^, before you come to besiege them, We ought rather to make trial
by persuasion, than by sword.
because it does many times happen, that the prayers of a friend may do more,
than the sword of the enemy. Of the good Emperor Theodosius the history
writers recount, that until ten days were past after he had besieged any
City, he did not permit his soldiers to make war, neither to misuse the
neighbors thereof: Saying and proclayming every day, that those ten days
space he gave them, to the end they should profit themselves by his
clemency, before they should make proof of his power. When the great Alexander
did see the dead body of Darius, and Julius Caesar: the head of Pompeius:
and Marcus Marcellus, Syracusa burn: and the good Scipio, Numantia destroyed:
They could not detain their eyes from weeping, although they were mortal
enemies. For if the tender hearted and noble minded, rejoice of the victory,
they are grieved with others spoil. Believe me (noble Constable) that pity
and clemency do never blunt the lance in time of war: The bloody Captain
does finishe his days with an evil end. Julius Caesar pardoned more enemies
than he kilde.
And on the other side, the Captain that is blouddie and revenging, either the
enemies do kill him, or else his own do sell him. Julius Caesar, not
undeserved, shall hold the supremacy amongst the Princes of the world: and not
because he was more fair, stronger, valyanter, or more fortunate than the
rest: but for that, without comparison, much more were the enemies he
pardoned, than those he overcame or killed. We do read of that famous
Captain Narsetes, that he did subdue the French, overcame the Bactrians, and
did conquer and govern the Germains: and with all this, did never give
battle to the enemies: but he wept in the Temples the night before. It is
more loved that is obtained by request than by the sword.
The kingdom wherein the Emperor Augustus most delighted and ioyed, was that
of the Mauritanes, which is now called the kingdom of Marrewcos. And the
reason that he gave for this, was: because all other kingdoms he got by the
sword, and this kingdom he obtained by entreatance.

If unto my words it please you to give credit, travail that Founterabye
may be yielded, rather by composition than by force: For that in grave and
doubtefull cases: first men ought to profit themselves with their policy,
before they make proof of Fortune. All the rest that your Lordship does
command me, I will perform with great good will: Which is to wit, that
I pray unto our God, for your Lordships victory. And that he give unto me
of his glory.

From the town of Victoria, the.xiij. of January.1522.
A letter for Sir Antonie of Cuniga, Priour of Saint John, in the which is
said, that although there be in a Gentleman to be reprehended, there ought not
to be cause of reproach.

FAmous and most valiant Captain, yesterday being Saint Luces day, Lopes
Osorius gave me a letter from your woorship, made at the siege of Toledo: And
of a truth, In time of war it besemeth not a knighte to write from his house.
I did much rejoice therein: and no less esteem the same, to be written
of such a hand, and sent from such a place. For in the time of rebellion,
as now, the Knight ought not to write from his house resting, but from the
Camp fightyng. The Priest ought to boaste himself of his study: the
husbandman of his plough: and the Knight of his lance. In such wise, that in
a good common wealth, the priest prays, the husbandman ploweth, and the
Knight fights. He is not to be accounted a knight, yt is extract of noble
blud, in power great, in jewels rich, in servants mighty: for all these things
in merchants is many times found, and also of a Jew many times obtained.
Note ye right conditions of a right ge^tleman.
But that which makes the Knight to be a perfect gentleman, is to be measured
in his words, liberal in giving, sober in diet, honest in living, tender in
pardoning, and valiant in fightyng. Notwithstanding any one be noble in blood,
and mighty in possessions, yet if he be in his talk a babbler, in eating a
glutton, in condition ambicious, in conversation malicious, in getting
covetous, in trauells impatient, and in fightyng a coward: of such we shall
rather say, to have more ability for a carle, than for a Knight: vileness,
sluggishnesse, nigardship, maliciousness, lying, and cowardnesse, Is a
gentleman a fault is tolerable, if it be not vile.
did never take repast with knighthoode. For in the good knight, although there
may be found wherewith to be reprehended, there ought not to be contained
wherefore to be reproved.

In our age there has bin no time, wherein the good knight might better show
his ableness, or to what end he is, than at this instant: because the King
is out of his kingdom, the Queen is sick, the royal Counsel is fled, the
people rebel, the gouerners are in Camp, and all the kingdom out of quiet:
now or never, they ought to travail, and die, to appease the kingdom, and
every man to serve his King. The good Knight does now turn his gloves into
gantlets: Mules into horses, his buskins into greues, his hattes into Helmets,
his doublets into Harness, his sylke into mayle, his gold into iron, The good
knight has in possession more armor than books.
his hunting into fighting: In such wise that the valiant knight ought not to
boaste himself of his great Library, but of his good armorie. For the weal
of the common wealth, it is as necessary that the knight do arm, as the
priest reuest himself: for as prayers do remove sins, even so does armor
defend from enemies.

Sir, I have said all this, to the end you shall understand there, that we
know here all that you do in your camp: and also, all that you do say:
Wherewith you ought not to be grieved, since every man does praise your
wisdom, and magnify your Fortune. In the register of fame marvelous is the
great Judas Machabeus: the which when he was counseled by his soldiers by
flying to save their lives, Judas Machabeus had rather lose his his life, than
his fame.
even at the instant to give battle, said: God never permit, that we put our
fame in suspision, but that this day we die all here, to keep our laws, to
succor our brethren, and not to live de famed. Great account do the Greek
writers make of their king Agiges, the which upon the point to give battle to
the Licaonians: when his soldiers began to say, that the enemies were very
many, he made answer: The Prince that will subdue many, of necessity must
fight with many. To command many will cost much.
Anaxandridas Captain of the Spartans, being demanded why those of his army
did rather endure themselves to be slain than taken, answered: That it was a
law amongst them much used, rather to dye free, than live captives. The great
Prince Bias, holding wars with Iphicrates King of the Athenians, when he
happened to fall into the stale of his enemies, and his Soldiers began to
cry, what shall we do? he made answer: That you make report to those that
are alive, that I dye fyghtyng: and I will say there to the dead, that you
scapte flying. Leonidas the son of Anaxandridas, Note the words of a valiant
captain.
and brother to Cleomenides, fighting in a certain battle, when his
soldiers said, the enemies did shoot arrows so thick that the Sun was
covered. He answered: Then let us fight in the shade. Charrillus the fifte
King after Licurgus, being in war with the Athenians, when one of his
Captains did ask an other if he did know what number the enemies were:
Charrillus answered: The valiant and noble minded Captains ought never to
inquire of their enemies, how many they are, but where they be. To demand
how many, and not where the enemies be, is a sign of fear.
The one is a sign of flying, the other of fyghting. Alcibiades a famous
Captain of the Athenians, in the wars he held with the Lacedaemonians, when
they of his camp suddenly made alarm with great cries, that they were fallen
into their enemies hands: ^e valiant and fear not (quod he) we are not fallen
into their hands, but they into ours.

I thought good to recounte these few antiquities, that it may be known to
all that be present, and also notified to those that are absent, that amongst
these so glorious personages, your noble worthiness might be recounted: for
that they neither did exceed you in their words they spoke, neither in their
acts they did.

We have here understood in what manner the army of Toledo did make their
salye, to take away a great booty that you were driving to your Camp: and
many of your soldiers did not only begin to flee, but also gave you counsel
to save your self by running away: but you of your part, as a man of much
courage, and a Captain of no less experience, gave onset amongst the enemies,
crying: Here Gentlemen here, shame, shame, victory, victory, if this day we
overcome, we obtain that we desire, and if we die, we perform our duty. Words
wordthy to be engraued on his tomb.
Oh words worthy to be noted, and right worthy upon your tomb to be
engraven: Since it is certain that you slew that day more tha^.vij. with your
sword, and with your noblenes of mind overcame more than seven thousand.

Trogus Pompeius does say many times and in many places, Of more value is the
noble minded and expert captain than a great army.
that the innumerable victories which the Romans did obtain, were not so
much for that their armies were of such power, but because their Captains were
of experience.

And this may we very well believe, for we every day see that the happy
success of a battle, is not so much attributed to the army that fights, as
to the captain that overcomes. The Assyrians do much glory themselves of
their captain Belus: The Persians of Syrus: The Thebans of Hercules: The Jews
of Machabeus: The Greeks of Alcibyades: The Troyans of Hector: The Egyptians
of Osiges: The Epirothians of Pyrhus: The Romans of Scipio: The Carthagians of
Hanniball: The Spaniardes of Viriato.

Who was the valiant Viriato captain of Spain.
This noble man Viriato was natural of the province of Lusitania, the which is
now called Portingale. In his youth he was first a shepeherd, afterward a
ploughman, and then a robber, and in fine made Emperor, and of his country
only defendour. Viriato was invincible in the wars.
The writers of Rome themselves do recount of this valiant Captain Viriato,
that in fifteen years that the Romans held war with him, they could
never kill, take, either foil him. When they found him invincible, and not to
be overcome in battle, they ordained treason to kill him with poison.

Sir, I thought good to bring this History in remembrance, to the end that in
this civil war, that we the Gentlemen hold with the Communers, that you show
your self an other new Machabeus amongst the Hebrews: and an other new Viriato
amongst the Spaniards: To the end that our enemies may have what to say, and
your friends what to praise.

But to let the conclusion be, that you cease not to travel (as you have a
noble mind) to give adventure upon your enemies, that you may also resist al
vices: Few vices are sufficient to darken many victories.
for men of valiantness, as your worship is, few vices are sufficient to
darken many victories. As concerning the rest, that M. Hernando of Vega did
commend unto me of your part, which is to wit, that since you have done
notably in the wars, it may be remembered in the Chronicles. Sir, hold your
self for happy, that if your lance shall be such as was Achilles, my pen
shall be such as that of Homere.

From Medina of Ruisseca, the.18. of February. 1522.
A Letter to the Earl of Myranda, wherein is expounded that text of Christ,
which says: My yoke is sweet. etc.

Most famous and right noble Lord and Master of the house to Caesar, your
honor requires by your Letter, that I should send unto you the exposition
of that text of Christ, which says, My yoke is sweet, and my burden is
light, the which you heard me preach the other day before his majesty in the
sermon of all saints, and that you delighted not a little to hear it, and no
less desire to have the same in writing. Also you write, it shall not be much
for me to take the pain to send the exposition thereof, for that you came to
visit me when I was Warden of Soria: in such wise, that if I would not
perform your request of courtesy: you would demand it by justice.

I will not deny, but that visitation was to me no small pleasure and
consolation: for that the Monastery is moist and ye soil cold, the air
subtle, scarce of bread, evil wines, crude waters, and the people no fools:
for in very deed, if in other parts they judge what they see, there they
speak what they think. That which I most wanted, was not lack of vitayles,
but the company of friends, without which, there is neither country does like,
or conversation that does content. You have great reason to demand the
visitation you used with me, Note what is due betwixt friends.
and the consolation you gave me: for the good friend does owe no more unto his
friend then to remedy his necessities, and to comfort him in his adversities.

For so great courtesy, if I would use liberality, I am not of power: if I
would serve you, I have not wherewith: if I would visit you, I have no
liberty: if I would requite or recompense you, I am poor: if I would give
any thing, you have no need. That which I am able to perform, is to confess
the courtesy ye then used with me, and to accomplish that, which you now
command me, although if be not very great, it is not to be esteemed as little,
that I hold you as my good Lord, and choose you for my friend. For it is much
more to gratify a good turn received, than to recompense it.

Vice for vice, and evil for evil: there is none in this world so evil as
the ingrate man. Ingratitude seldom or never pardoned.
And of this it comes that the humayne and tender heart does pardon all
injuries, except ingratitude: which he never forgets. Alexander in using
liberality, and Julius Caesar in pardoning of injuries, to this day there
have not bin born two Princes that exceeded, or else to be compared unto them.
And with this, it is readde of them, that if they had known a man ingrate,
Alexander would not give him, neither Julius Caesar would pardon him.

The exposition of the text, My yoke is sweet. etc.
SIr, as concerning that your lordship does say that I should send you the text
which I preached unto his Majesty as I did then pronounce it, is a thing that
I never use to do, neither ought to do: for if it be in our hands to send you
what we say, we cannot send you the grace wherewith we do preach: The grace that
is given in preaching is seldom given in writing.
for ye grace, disposition and vain that God gives in ye hour unto the tongue,
he does give afterward, very seldom unto the pen. Asclepius amongst the
Argiues, Demosthenes amongst the Athenians, Aeschine amongst the Rodians,
Cicero amongst the Romans, were not only skillful in orations, but Princes of
all other Orators. And jointly with this, never any Oration that they made,
would they give afterward unto the people in writing, saying, they would not
commend unto the pen, the glory their tongue had given them. The heart is
more moved hearing the word of God than by reading.
For how much difference is betwixt the drawn plat and the builded house,
the figure and the thing figured, the natural and the thing represented: so
much is betwixt the hearing of a sermon in a Pulpit, and the reading thereof
afterward in writing. For in the writing chiefly the eyes do use their
office, but with the word the heart is moved. It is the property of Divine
letters, that being read, they be understood, and being heard, they be tasted
or favored. And so it comes to pass, that many mo persons be turned to God
by hearing of Sermons, than by reading of Books.

Sir, I will do that you command me, and will send you that you require of
me, with a testimony which I crave and with a protestation which I make: that
if it shall not seem so good when you read it, as it did when you heard
it, impute not the fault to my good will, but to your importunity.

But now to the point, Christ says: Come unto me all you that be ouerladen and
weary, and I will unload you and refreshe you. Esaias says in his visions, the
burden of Babylon, the burden of Moab, the burden of Arabia, the burden of
Egypt, the burden of Damascus, the burden of the Desert of the sea, the burden
of Tyrus: which is to be understood, that he did see Babylon burdened, Moab
burdened, Arabia burdened, Egypt burdened, Damascus burdened, and Tyrus
burdened. The prophet David does say: As with a grievous burden I am
ouerladen: as if he should say, A mighty great burden they have laid upon me.
Of the premises it may be well gathered, ye before Christ, The old law gave
punishment to the evil, but no glory to the good.
all the old law was tedious and painful: and held us laden and wearied,
because it was rigorous unto those that did break it, and held no glory for
such as did observe it. In repayment of the Moral precepts they observed, the
laws they accomplished, the ceremonies they used, and the sacrifices they
offered, only God gave them victory of their enimyes, peace in their common
wealths, health to their persons, and goods wherewith to sustain their
families.

What greater burden might there be in this world, than that he which did break
the law, went presently to hell: And to him that did observe the same, they did
not incontinently give Paradyse. From the beginning to the end of the old
law, ever they laid on precept upon precept, ceremony upon ceremony, law upon
law, burden upon burden, pain upon pain, in such wise, that all were in
burdening, but none in discharging. Until Christ none proclaimed rest.
The first in this world that gave commandment to be proclaimed, that all the
laden should come unto him, and he would unload them, all the wearied, and he
would refresh them, was Christ our God. And this was when in the molde of love,
he did melt that law of fear.

It is here to be understood, every yoke naturally to be heavy, sharp,
hard and painful: and the beast that draws the same, goes bound and
travailed. And on the other part Christ to say, that his yoke is sweet,
and his burden light, surely is a thing worthy to be noted, and most highly to
be considered: Christ did not say simply every yoke is sweet: because
otherwise we had not known of what yoke he had spoken, neither what law he
did approve.

In that Christ said, his yoke is sweet, he did give us too understand, that
other yokes be bitter. For what cause Christ said, my yoke is sweet, and my
burden is light.
In saying that his burden is light: he gave us to conceive that others were
heavy, in such wise, that he does lighten us, when he does burden us: and
gives us liberty when he does yoke us: neither did Christ say, my yokes be
sweet, and my burdens be light, because our God does neither command us to
plough with many yokes, either to be laden with many burdens. It is the devil
that does persuade us to many vices: It is the world that does ingulfe us in
great troubles: It is the flesh that craves of us much excess and
superfluities. But the good Christ our God, does ask us no more but that we
love him, and not to abhor our brethren. The law of the Hebrews was the law of
fear: but the law of Christians is the law of love. And as they served god of
force and by fear, so we of love and good will: their law is called hard, and
that of the christians sweet.

The property of love is to turn the rough into plain, the cruel to gentle,
the bitter to sweet, the unsavory to pleasant, The property of a faithful
lover.
the angry to quiet, the malicious to simple, that gross to advised, and also
the heavy, to light. He that loves, neither can he murmur of him that does
anger him: neither deny that they ask him: neither resist when they take
from him: neither answer when they reprove him: neither revenge if they shame
him: neither yet will be gone when they send him away. What does he forget that
does love with all his heart? what leaves he undone, that knows not but to
love? whereof does he complain, that always does love? If he that does love
has any cause of complainte, it is not of him that he loves, but of him
self, that has made some fault in love: the conclusion is: The heart that
loves entierly without comparison, Perfect love endures all travel.
much more is the pleasure that he takes in love, than the travel he passes
in serving.

Oh, to how great effect should it come too pass, if being Christians, we
should therewith be enamored of the law of Christ: for then surely, neither
should we be pensive, nor live in pain: for the heart that is occupied in
love, does neither fly dangers, nor is dismayed in trauelles. The yoke that
cattle do bear, when he is new, is of him self very heavy: but after, when
he is dry, and somewhat worn, he is more soft to be suffered, and more light
to be carried. Oh good Jesus, Oh high mystery of thee my God: Since thou
would not incontinent after thy birth burden us with the yoke of thy law:
but that thou thy self, upon thy self did bear the burden: and thirty
years first did carry the same, that it should dry, Christ did not command
us to do, that which he did not first experime^t himself.
and grow light, and be seasoned. What has Christ commanded us to do, that
he first has not done? what yoke has he cast upon our backs, that he first
has not borne upon his shoulders? If he commanded to fast, he fasted: if he
commanded to pray, he prayed: if he commanded we should forgive, he
pardoned: if he commanded to die, he died: if he commanded us to love, he
loved: In such wise, that if he commanded us to take any medicine, first in
him self he made experence.

Christ does not compare his blessed law, unto Timber, Stone, Plants, or Iron:
but only to the yoke, because al these things may be carried by one alone: but
to draw ye yoke of necessity, there must be twain. High and also most
profou^d is this mystery, by the which is given us to understand, yt even at
the present hour that the good Christian shall put down his head under the
yoke to carry the same: forthwith on the other part, Christ puts himself to
help him. None calls Christ, that he does not answer. None does commend
himself unto him, The world does more chastise than pardon, but in the house
of God more pardoned than chastised.
that he does not succor. None does ask him, that he gives not some what.
None does serve him, that he pays not. Likewise none does travel, that he
does not help. The yoke of the law of Christ, does more cure, then wound:
does more pardon, than chastise, does more cover than accuse: does more fear,
than weary, and also does more lighten, than burden. For Christ him self, that
commanded to bear, he himself and no other does help us to carry. Oh good
Jesus, O love of my soul, with such a guide as thou, who can lose the way? with
such a patron as thou, who fears drowning? with such a captain as thou, who
dispaireth victory? with such a companion as thou, what yoke may be painful?
Oh sweet law, oh blessed yoke, oh travel well employed, by the which we
pass unto Christ: for, not only thou do make account too be with us in
all our travels, but also do promise, not to leave us to our selves.

He that in the garden of Gethsemany came forth, to receive those that were
come too take him: It is firmly to be believed, that he fails not to come
forth to embrace them that come to serve him. If any worldly and mighty rich
man do contend at any time with a poor Christian, truly we shall find, that
the help is much more that Christ gives unto his poor servant, than all the
cost that the world gives to those that do follow the same. Those that the
world does lead under his yoke, to them he gives al things variable,
dismesured, and by false weight: but in the house of god, all things are given
whole, entier, without counterpeyse, and most perfect. We may well say with
great reason, that the yoke of Christ is sweet, and his burden light: for
that the world does not so much, as pay for the service we do him, but Christ
does pay us, even for the good thoughts we hold of him.

Christ does well see that of our own nature we be humane, weak, miserable,
foul, and remiss: for which cause he does not behold what we are, but what we
desire to be. Moses gave the law to the Hebrews: Solon to the Greeks:
Phoroneus, to the Egyptians: Numa Pompilius, to the Romans: but as me^ made
the^, and even as men died, so they ended: but the yoke of the law of God shall
endure, as long as God does endure. In all the laws of the world vices be
permitted, Christ's laws excepted.


What may Moses law be worth in which was permitted diuorcements, and usury?
What may the law of Phoroneus be esteemed, in which was granted, to the
Egyptians, to be thieves? Of what value may the law of Licurgus be accounted,
in which man slaughter was not chastised? of what account may the law of
Solon Solonius be reputed, in which adultery was dissimuled? Of what reputation
may the law of Numa Pompilius be weighed, in which it was allowed, that as
much as you could take, was lawful to conquer? Of what consideration may we
judge the law of the Lidians, in which the mayde^s used no other marriage, but
unto him that did win them by adultery? Of what judgment, may we think the
law of the Baleares, wherein it was commanded that the bride should not be
given unto the bridegroom, before the next kinsman had used her? These and
such like laws, we cannot say otherwise but that they were beasily, brutish,
and dishonest: since they did contain vices, and by vicious men were permitted.

He that is entered into the religion of Christ, to be in deed a Christian:
has no license to be proud, a thief, a murderer, an adulterer, a glutton,
malicious, neither blasphemous. And if we shall happen to see any to do the
contrary, he shall have only the name of a Christian, but for the rest, he
shall be of the parish of Hell.

The holy, and sacred Law of Christ, is so right in the things it does
admit, and so pure and sincere in the things it does permit: that it does
neither suffer vice, nor consent to the vicious man, Quia lex Domini
immaculata. The Hebrews, the Arabians, the Pagans, and Gentiles, that defame
our law, and complain of the hardness thereof: Surely they have no reason,
The Law of christ is sharp unto the wicked, but easy and light to the
virtuous.
much less occasion so to do. For the defecte is not in that she is evil,
but in that of us she is evil observed. Those that would be virtuous, of the
precepts of Christ never conceive hardness, because the yoke of God, is not
for their purpose that follow their opinion, but for those, that live
conformable to reason. Finally: I do say, that all that we do in respect of
Christians, we are bound to do, in consideration that we are men: and to this
end Christ says, that his yoke is sweet, and his burden light. For he is so
good, and so magnificent, that he pays us as well, for that we do for him, as
though we were not bound to do it. This is it, that I understand of this text.
And this is it, that I said unto his majesty, when I preached thereof. No
more, but that our Lord have you in his keeping, and give me grace, to serve him.

From Madrid the.x. of June. 1526.
A letter unto Sir Peter Gyron, wherein the author does touch the manner of
ancient writing.

VIlloria your Solicitor and servant gave me a letter of yours here in Borgos,
written in Ossuna the.xxiiij. of August, the which, (although he departed from
thence in the same month) came hither the.xv. of November. Your letters be so
wise and so well provided for, that before they come out of their Country they
will have August and the grape gathering past. If it had been powdered flesh as
it is a letter, it had good time to come hither very well seasoned, for by this
time it had taken salt. Sir, the letters that you have to send, and the
daughters that you have to marry, care ye not to leave them far over yeared:
Daughters are to be married before they grow old
for in our country they do not over year other things than their bacon,
which they will eat, and their store wine which they will drink.

There is much less distance betwixt Ossuna and Borgos, than is betwixt Rome
and Constantinople. And the Emperor Augustus gave commandment unto al his
Viceroys that were resident in the East, that if they did not receive his
letters within xx. days after they were written, they should not take the^ as
received, although in process they did receive them, saying, that afterward
there might happen some thing in Rome which were to be otherwise provided than
according to the first letters. The Emperor Tiberius Caesar, if the letters
that came from Asia were not of.xx. days writing, and those that came from
Europa of.xv. and those that came from Africa of x. and those that came from
Yllirica of.v. and those that came out of all Italy of.iij. days, he would
neither read them, and much less provide for them.

Sir, it seems to me that you ought from henceforth to talk, indent and also
covenant with your letters, that if they come to Caesar's Court, they make more
haste upon the way: for (in deed) speaking the truth, and that with liberty,
if your letters were wood of the Pines of Soria, as they be letters of Ossuna,
by the faith of a Christian, they might come so dry, yt thereof might be made
both doors and windows. Although they give me many Letters together, presently
I know yours among the rest: the which come wrinkled like linne^, rusty like
bacon, besweat like a doublet: and beside all this, to open and read them, there
needs no force or necessity to tear the^, for that the foldes come all
broken, and the seals all to pieces.

Philistratus in the life of Apolonius Thioneus says, that it was a custom
amongst the Ipimeans, The Ipinea^s did write the date of their letters with ye
superscriptio^.
to put the date of their letters with the superscriptio^, to the end, if they
were but few days written, to read the^, and if they were over yeared, to
tear them. If (as you be a Christian) you had bin a Ipimean, be sure and out
of doubt, that of a.100. letters written with your hand.98. should be torn. And
also I doubt, whether the other two should be read. But since it is true that
the Date of the letter is old, yet that the letters be good and legible, I
swear by the holy things of God, that it seems rather the caracters wherewith
they write music, than the letter of a Gentleman.

If your Tutor you had in your youth did not instruct you better to live, than
your scholemaister to write, your life should be no less disgraced in the
sight of God, than your evil letter to my disconte^tation. For I give you to
wit, that I had rather take in hand to conster cifers, tha^ to read your
letters.

With what paper they were wont to write.
According to the variety of time, so was the discovering of the manner of
writing amongst men. For (according to the saying of Strabo) in the beginning
of the world, first they did write in ashes, afterward in Kinds of trees,
then in Stones, afterward in leaves of Laurel, afterward in sheets of
lead, after that in parchement, and at last they came to write in Paper. It is
also to be noted, that in stones they did write with iron, in leaves with
pensils, in ashes with fingers, in rinds with knives, in parchment with canes,
and in paper with pens.

The Incke that our old forefathers did write withal, Note the inck of old
time.
was first of a fish called Zibia, after that they made it of soote of smoke,
afterward of vermilion, after that of Cardenillio: in the end they invented it
of gum, galls, coperas and wine.

Sir, I thought good to recite these antiquities, to gather thereof (of this
your letter) whether it were written with knives, with iron, with pensilles, or
with the finger. For, (as I think) it is not possible (at the least) but that
you did write it with a cane or with a canon. You have to understand, that the
form of your letter was, gross paper, whitish incke, crooked lines, letters
turned vpside down, and the reasons blotted: so that either you did write it
by Moon light, or else it was some child that began to learn at school.
Although the letter came old, open, slubbred, rent, and all be blotted, is it
true, that it was short in reasons, and few in lines: no surely, but to have
little or nothing to write, it held two sheets and a half of paper. In such
wise, that when I did open it and did see it, I thought it rather to be some
citation wherewith they cited me, than a letter which any should write to me.
The letters written with your own hand, I cannot tell why they should be
closed, and much less sealed: for speaking the truth, for more safe I hold
your letter being open, than your plate being locked in your chest. For unto ye
one a gardeniance is not sufficient: and to the other, a seal is superfluous.

I gave your letter to be read to Peter Coronell, to see if it were in Hebrew:
I delivered it to master Prexamo to tell me if it were in Chaldee, I showed it
unto Hameth Abducarin, Famous eloquence of the Auctor in a base matter.
to see if it came in Arabian: I did present it also to Siculo, that he might
see the style if it were in Greek: I sent it unto master Alaia, to
understand, if it were a thing of Astrology. Finally, I showed it unto
Flemings, Almans, Italians, Englishmen, Scotts and Frenchmen, the which all
did affirm, that either it was a letter in jest, or else a writing enchanted.
And when many said that it was not possible, but that it was a letter
enchanted, or else infected with a spirit, I determined with my self to send
it to the great Nigromancer John de Barbota, instantly desiring him to read it,
or else to conjure it: who answered by writing, and also certefied me, that he
had coniured it, and also put it in circle, and that he could gather of the
matter, is, that the letter (without doubt) had no spirit in him: but he
advised me, that he which wrote it should be besprited.

Sir, for that I wish you well, and am also beholding unto you: I advertise,
and also beseech you, from henceforth to use some ame^dment in your letters, if
not, ye may commend them to John de Barbota. That your letters shall escape my
hands, as good a virgin as Putifars wife did escape the hands of Joseph,
Notable examples of co^tine^cie in Princes
or the fair Sara the hands of Abimelech, or the Hebrews Sunamite the hands
of David, or the Dame of Carthage the hands of Scipio, or Phocions wife the
hands of Dionisius, or the daughter of King Darius the hands of Alexander, or
Queen Cleopatra the hands of Augustus: finally, I do say that I cannot read,
or else you know not to write.

If the letter, sent by David unto his Captain Ioab, upon the death of the
unhappy Vrias, and the conception of the fair Bersabe, had been of this cursed
letter, David had not sinned, neither the innocent Vrias been slain. If the
consederacie made by Escaurus, Catiline a tyrant of Rome.
and his companions, in the comuration of Catiline, had bin of such miserable
letter as youres, neither had they received so cruel death, or in the City of
Rome had they raised so infamous war? that it had pleased the divine
providence that you had been secretary to Manicheus, to Arrius, Nestorius,
Sipontinus, Marius, Ebion, and all the other heretics that have been in the
world: for though they had constrained you to write their excommunicate and
cursed heresies: we should never, or any other have found mean to read them.

It ought not to be written that cannot be written.
Of Pliny in his natural History, of Clebius in his Astrology, of Pitus in
his Philosophy, of Clea^der in his Arithmetike, of Estilphon in his Ethiks, and
of Codrus in his Politikes, all the ancient writers do most sharply
complain, because in their doctrines they did write some things the which are
easy to be read, but difficill to understand. In the Captaineship of these
so excellent men: you may well set down your lance, and also give three
pounds of wax to enter their fraternity. For if their writings will not be
understood, no more may your lines be read.

Many times I do muse, how with the antiquity of times, and with the variety
of wits, all things have bin renewed, and many made better, except the letters
of the A.B.C. in which, from the time they were first invented, there has
been nothing added, and much less mended.

The A.B.C. holds xxj. letters, eightene of the which. The inue^tion of the
A.B.C.
Nestor found, and the other three, the captain Diomedes invented, being at ye
siege of Troy. And surely it is a thing to be noted, that neither the eloquence
of the Greeks, either the curiosity of the Romans, or the gravity of the
Egyptians, ne yet the excellency of the Philosophers, both found, or could
find, another letter to the A.B.C. to be added, or to be taken away, or to be
changed. And although the human nations are in some part diverse, at the
least, the letters of the A.B.C. thoroughout the world do sound one.

As Solon, Harman Cortes, Pedrarias, and Pisarro, have discovered in the Indies
a new world to live in: it may be, that you have found out a new A.B.C. to
write withal: but I fear me much, that none will go to learn at your
schole, if the matter thereof be like your letters. I say for my own opinion,
that you shall never come to any good market, to sell your land by such a list.

I will say no more, of the matter of your letter, but that you accept this of
mine, as a warning, and therewith of your courtesy I do crave, from henceforth
you keep your letter vnmoth eaten: And that it may stand with your pleasure,
to amend the imperfection of the same: for I have learned too read, and not to
divine.

I did imagine with my self, that of purpose you had sent me this letter in
jest, to give me occasion to answer you in jest: and of very ouerthwartnes you
did write to me so, because I should answer to the same purpose: if happily
it were your intent, Sir you must think, that out of such pilgrimage, you can
obtain but like pardons.

Sir from this Court of Caesar, very few things are to be written: although
many to be murmured, the news now are, that many titles of Dukes, Marqueses,
Earls, and Vicountes the Emperor our Lord and Master has given to many of
his kingdom, the^ which do deserve them very well, for the authority of their
persons, and for the antiquity of their houses.

The rentes of great Lords, ought to be agreeable to their titles.
If ye demand of the rents they receive, and of the lands and Seigniories they
possess, in these things I do not entermedle or dare not put to my hand,
although it be true that some of these Noble men's estates be so narow and
strait, that if it appertained to the Friars Hieronimites, (as it does to the^)
they would shortly choose it within a wall.

Rodrigo Giron, to you beholding, and my special friend, desired me of his
own part, and commanded me of yours, that I should speak to the gentleman
Antony of Fonseca, upon I cannot tell what, unbarge, or stay, that you had
upon a license. Sir I have dispatchte it, as your authority and my fidelity
did require. Since that time I have not understood, what has been done therein:
but that which I can certify you of and affirm, is: If he do persevere with
such diligence too take order for your license, as he has with great
earnestnes played away his goods: your worship shall as well be delivered of
auditors and of an account, as he was this other night of gamsters at dice. For
as one of them advertised me, he lost no more but the cap he did wear: and the
spurs upon his heels.

There are, that do well resemble their own, and do follow the steps of their
forefathers: for if I be not forgetful, I have seen his father the Justice or
Mayor of Montanches, Gamsters at dice play them selves to nothing.
many times keep his chamber, not because he was sick, but for that in Merida
he had played and lost all that ever he had. The lord have you in his keeping,
and give me grace to serve him.

From Burgos the 15. of September in the year 1523.
A letter unto Sir Ynnigo of Velasco, Constable of Castile, wherein the author
does teach the briefness of writing in old time

THe fourth of October, here in Valiodolid I received a letter from your
honor, written in Villorado the thirtith of September: and considering the
distance from hence thither, and the small tarying of your letter from thence
hither, too my judgment, if it had bin a troute, it had come hither very
fresh. Pirrhus the King of the Epirotes was the first that invented currers or
posts: and in this case, he was a Prince so vigilant, that having three armies
spread in diverse parts, his seat or palace being in the City of Tarento: in
one day he understood from Rome: in two days out of France: in three out of
Germany: Posts in old time made great speed.
and in five out of Asia. In such sort, that his messengers did rather seem
to fly, than otherwise.

The heart of man is such an inuentor of new things, and so far in love with
novelties, that the more strange the thing is they say or wright unto us, so
much the more we do rejoice and delight therein: for that old things do give
lothsomenesse, and new things do awaken the spirits. This va^tage you have
(that can do much) of them that have but little, that in short time you write
whether you will, Evil news never comes to late.
and understand from whence you think good: although also it is most true, that
sometime you understand some news within three days, which you would not have
known in three years.

There is no pleasure, joy, or delight, in this world, that with it brings
not some inconvenience: in such wise, that that wherein long time we have had
delight, in one day we pay and yield again.

Sir I have said thus much, to the end to continue your good opinion toward
Mosen Ruben, your Steward: which by the date of your letter, does seem to
have made great speed, and to have slept very little, for he brought the
letter so fresh, that it seemed the ink to be scarce dry.

You write unto me, that I should certefie you, what is the cause, that I being
descended of a lineage so ancient, of body so high, in the momentes of my
prayers so long, and in preaching so large, how I am in writing so brief:
especially in my last letter, that I sent from the monastery of Fres Dell
Vall, when I was there preaching unto Caesar: Which you say, did contain but
four reasons, and eight lines.

Sir in these things, that you have written, you have given me matter, not to
answer very short. And if by chance I shall so do from henceforth, I say
and protest, it shall be more for your pleasure than for mine own contentation.

As concerning that you say my lineage is ancient, your lordship does well
know, that my graundfather was called sir Beltran of Gueuara: The auctor
reports of his lineage of Gueuara.
my father also was named sir Beltran of Gueuara: and my Cousin was called sir
Ladron of Gueuara, and that I am now named sir Antony of Gueuara: yea and also
your Lordship does know, that first there were Earls in Gueuara, before there
were Kings in Castile.

This lineage of Gueuara, brings his antiquity out of Britain: and does
contain six houses of honor, in Castile: which is to wete, the Earl of
Onate, in Alaua: sir Ladron of Gueuara, in Valldalega: sir Peter Velez of
Gueuara in Salinas: sir Diego of Gueuara in Paradilla: sir Charles of Gueuara
in Murcia: sir Beltran of Gueuara in Morata. All which be valiant of persons,
although poor in estates and rentes: in such sort, that those of this lineage
of Gueuara, do more advance themselves of their antiquity, from whence they
are descended, than of the goods which they possess.

To descend of a noble blood, provoke to be virtuous.
A man to descend, of a delicate blood, and to have noble or Generous parents:
does much profit to honor us, and does not blunte the lance to defend us:
for that infamy does tempt us to be desperate: and the honor, to mende our
estate. Christ and his Mother would not descend of the tribe of Benjamin,
which was the least, but of the tribe of Judah, which was the greater and the
better.

They had a law in Rome, named Prosapia, which is to say, the law of linages,
by which it was ordained and commanded in Rome, that when contention did arise
in the senate for the consulship, that those which descended of the lineage of
the Siluians, of the Torquatians, and of the Fabritians, should obtain chief
place before all others: and this was done after this manner, for that these
three linages in Rome were most ancient, and did descend of right valiant
Romans.

They which descended of Cato in Athenes: of Licurgus in Lacedemonia: of Cato
in Vtica: of Agesilaus in Licaonia: The ancient and noble Linages in Rome were
much esteemed.
and of Tussides in Galacia: were not only privileged in their provinces, but
also amongst all nations much honored. And this was not so much for the desert
of those that were living, as for the merit of the ancient personages that
were dead.

Also it was a law in Rome, that all those that descended of the Tarquines, of
the Escaurians, Catelines, Fabatians, and Bithinians, had no offices in the
common wealth: In Rome they bare no office that descended of traitors.
neither yet might dwell within the compass of Rome. And this was done for the
hate they bare to King Tarquin, the Consul Escaurus, the tyrant Catiline, the
Censor Fabatus, and the traitor Bithinius: all which were in their lives very
dishonest, and in their government very offensive.

Sir, I say this, because a man to be evil, descending from the good, surely
it is a great infamy: but to descend of the good, and to be good, is no small
glory. But in fine, it is with men as it is with wines: sometime he sauors of
the good soil, sometime of the caske, and others of the goodness of the
grapes. A mind not to fly, a nobleness in giving, sweet and courteous in
speech, an heart for to adventure, The properties of a man born of a good
lineage.
and clemency to pardon: graces and virtues be these, that are rarely found
in a man of base soil. And many times such one is extract of an ancient and
Noble lineage. As the world now goes, upon who art thou, and what art thou,
it does not seem to me, a man may have better blason in his house, than to be,
and also descended of a blood unspotted. For that such a man shall have whereof
to commend himself: and not wherefore to be despised or taunted.

Sir also you say in your letter, that I am in body large, high, dry, and very
straight: of which properties I have not whereof to complain, but wherefore to
praise my self. Because the wood that is large, dry, and straight, is more
esteemed, and bought at a greater price. If the greatness of body displeased
God, he had never created Paulus the Numidian, Hercules the Grecian, Amilon
the wild woodman, Sampson the Hebrewe, A note of the Giants of the old time.
Pindarus the Thebane, Hermonius the Corinth, nor Hena the Ethicke: which were
in the greatness of their bodies, so monstrous, and so fearful, that other
men seemed in their presence, as Crikets or Grasshoppers do seem before men.

The first King of Israel, which was Saul, how much difference is betwixt the
shoulders and the crown of the head, so much was he higher than all the men of
his kingdom.

The great Julius Caesar, was of body high and lean, although of face, not
very fair. It is said of Augustus the Emperor, that he was so high of
stature, that of the high trees, with his own hands he did gather fruit.

Also it is written of the Consul Silla, that his greatness was so excessive,
as he always stouped to enter at every door.

Titus Liuius says, that Scipio the Affrican was of so great a stature, that
none was equal to him in mind, neither did pass him in height of body.

The difference betwixt the great and little men.
Plutarch says of Alexander the Great, that according unto such a mind as he
possessed, unto the world it did seem they had more than enough of Alexander:
and to Alexander it did seem, that for himself the whole world was not
sufficient.

Sir this do I say in the end, hereby to consider how the heart of man may be
contained in a little body: Since unto it, the whole world seems very
straight: A man, to be very great or very little: of these two inconveniences,
the less is to be great, because the large garment easily is made less, but
that which is too little without blemish or deformity, cannot be made greater.

Allonso Henricus, Aluergomes, Salaia, Valderrauano, and Figueroa, which be
little of body, although not of mind, ever as I see them go in Court, seem
to me to be proud, furious, troubled, and angry. And of this I do not much
marvel: because little chimneys always be somewhat fumishe or smokie.

In the Monastery of Toros, of Guisando, Of a little Friar of the Abbay of
Guysando.
I found there a very little Friar, which for that I knocked thrice arowe, he
did braule with me very frowardly, and when I said unto him, that he had
little patience, he made me answer, that I had less good manner: I entreated
him to give me some drink, and that we might cease chiding, where unto he
answered: Brother, although you see me, you know me not: I give you to
understand, that I am, as you see but little, but there withal I am a piece of
steel, and such great men and unwieldy as you are, if they speak to me by
day, by night they dream of me: for this other day I caused my self to be
measured, and found the heart to have advantage of the body five yardes in
measure, whereunto I replied: father, thereof is great necessity, that the
heart have five yardes of measure in height, since in all your body there is
not two Cubits and a half: but after the father heard this, he ceased to
chide, and also left me without drink.

Sir believe me, the short haquebuts soonest break, the smalest fortes be
soonest besieged: the shalowest Seas do soonest drown: in ye narowest ways is
greatest peril: the straytest garments be soonest rent: and little men be
soonest angry.

In little beasts, Little things give more offense than profit.
there is not such strength neither such grace as in the great: because the
Elephant, the Dromedary, the Ox, the Bull, and the Horse, which be great beasts
do profit for service. But the Fly, the Rat, the Flea, the Grasshopper, and
the Criket serve not but only to offend.

And also you note me, that in saying of service I am very long, and in
contemplation not short, and likewise as tedious therein as M. Prexmus in
telling his tale. But I promise your Lordship, that if I be long in prayer,
your Lordshippe is not short in communication: for many times I have seen you
begin a long tale that I never durst tarry the end thereof: for if I had so done,
either I should come to the court at none, or go to bed at midnight.

Sir I do confer the moments of my contemplations, with the sins of my
life, and I do find by my rekoning, that it is not a just thing to be large in
sinning, and short in praying. The maker and redeemer of the world, did use
great measure in all things, except in praying: wherein he was always long,
which he showed most clearly in the garden of Gethsemany, where, how much the
more the agony did oppress him, so much the more did he enlarge his prayer.

Also your Lordship does say, that in preaching I am long and tedious, whereto I
answer: that in the whole world there is no long sermon, if the hearer do give
ear as a Christian, and not as to curious. I remember the lent past being with
your Lordship, they presented unto your honor, certain Samons of Penia
Melera, which you praised for very good, and yet complained that they were
very little. In such sort that your Samons are never sufficiently large, or
sermons short enough.

A sise is observed in nothing but in sermons.
It is thirty eight years since I was brought to Caesar's Court, during which
time, I have seen all things increasing, except sermons, which always do
stand at one stay. This seems to be true, for that in our eating we add
more time, in our sleeping we consume more hours, all our garments hold more
cloth, our houses are more large, our expenses more excessive, our apparel
more costly, and the men more vicious. Finally, I say that in our talk, or in
any other thing no syse is suffered, but in sermons which must not pass above
an hour.

Whereas your Lordship says, I am so short in writing: to this I answer, that
if I be not deceived, More gravity is required in writing, tha^ in talking.
to talk there needs but a certain liveliness, but to write, it is
necessary to have much wisdom: because, to prove if a man be wise or
foolish, there is no other need, than to put a pair of spurs to his heels,
or a pen in his hand.

In all things I confess my self to be large, except in writing, which I
repent nothing: for an inconsidered word, I may incontinent revoke: but the
firm of my hand I can not deny. To speak something with too much simplicity
or inconsidered, is a sheepishnesse, but to firm it with the hand, is mere
folly.

Salust says, that if the tyrant Catilene and other his fellows had not firmed
the letter of their coniuration (although they were accused) they had not been
condemned: in such wise, that as well kills the pen as the lance. If
Laertius, Plutarch, Pliny, Vegetius, Sulpitius, and Eutropius do not deceive
us by their histories: many Poets, Orators, Philosophers, Kings, and Princes,
have bin in the world past, of whom it is read, that in their talk they were
very large, but in their writings very considerate.

Caesar in a letter that he did write from the Persicke wars of Rome, said no
more but these words, Veni, vidi, and vici, Note the brevity of ancient
writing.
I came, I have seen, and I overcame.

Octauius the Emperor, writing unto his Cousin Caius Drusius, said thus: For
that thou art in Illiria, remember thou art of the Caesar's, that the Senate has
sent thee, and that thou art a young man, my nephew, and a Citizen of Rome.

The Emperor Tiberius writing unto his brother germain, said thus: The Temples
be reverenced, the Gods be served, the Senate in peace, the common wealth in
prosperity, Rome in health, Fortune gentle, and the year fertile: this is
here in Italy, the same we desire unto thee in Asia.

Cicero writing unto Cornelius says thus: Be thou merry since I am not
evil, for likewise I shall rejoice, if thou be well.

The divine Plato, writing from Athens unto Dionysius the tirant, says thus:
To kill thy brother, to demand more tribute, to force thy people, to forget me
thy friend, and to take Photion as an enemy, be works of a tyrant.

The great Pompeius writing from the East unto the Senate, says thus:
Conscript Fathers, Damascus is taken, Pentapolis is subject, Syria, Colonia,
and Arabia is confederate, and Palestina is overcome.

The Consul Cneius Siluius, writing news of the battle of Pharsalia unto
Rome, says thus: Caesar did overcome, Pompeius is dead, Rufus is fled, Cato
killed himself, the government of Dictator is ended and the liberty lost.

Behold Sir, the manner that the ancients used in writing to their peculiar
friends, which with their brevity gave unto all men wherefore to be noted, but
we in never making an end, give large occasion to be corrected. No more, but
that I pray the Lord to be your protector, and give me grace to serve him.

From Valiodolid, the eight of October, in the year. 1525.
A letter unto the Marquis of Pescara, wherein the Author does touch, what a
Captain ought to be in the wars.

BEing with Caesar in Madrid the.xxij. of March, I received a letter from your
Lordship, written the.xxx. of January: and God be my witness, that when I saw
and read it, I would rather the date thereof had bin, not from the siege of
Marcellus, but from the conquest of Jerusalem. For, if it were from Asia, and
not from France, your journey should be more famous and magnified, and of God
much more accepted.

Titus Liuius reports of no small variance betwixt Mar. Marcellus, and
Quintus Fabius, which did arise upon the Cenfulships of the wars, for that
the good Mar. Marcellus would not be Captain of the war, which was not very
well justified? And Quintus Fabius did not accept to go to the wars, were it
not very dangerous. Two Roman Captains would two manner of wars.
The Romans were in a marvelous vain glory in that world, when these two
noble Princes were borne: but in the end, much more was the estimation of
Marcus Marcellus (for being just) than of Quint. Fab. for being valiant.

The Romans were never so foiled, or ever did incur so much dishonor in the
wars of Asia, either in Africa, as they received at the siege of Numantia.
And this was not for defaulte of battery, either because the City was very
strong, The wars against Numantia was vmust.
but for that the Romans had no reason to make them war. And the Numantines
had just cause to defend themselves.

Helie the Spartan does say, that only the Emperor Traian was he, that never
was overcome in battle. And the reason thereof was this, that he did never
take any war in hand, wherein he did not justify his cause.

The King of Pontus which was called Mithridates, did write a certain Letter
unto the Consul Silla, being bente in wars most cruelly the one against the
other, wherein was thus written: I do much wonder of thee Consul Silla, to
take war in hand in so strange a land as this of mine: and that thou
dare adventure to deal with my great fortune, since thou know she never
deceived me, neither had acquaintance with thee. To these words the Consul
did answer: Oh Mithridates, I weighe it very little to hold war far from
Romae since the Romans have fortune always by them. And if thou say, that she
did never fail thee, nor ever know me, thou shall now see, how (in using her
office) she shall pass to me, and take her leave of thee. And although it be
not so, I do neither fear thee, or doubt her, for that I hope that the Gods
will do more for my justice, than for thee thy great fortune.

Many times the Emperor Augustus used to say: that wars to be good, must be
incommended unto the Gods, The nature of wars that is to be holden just.
accepted of Princes, justified of Philosophers, and executed of Captains.

Thus much I have said unto your Lordship, to this end, that if your war had
bin upon Jerusalem: it were to be holden for just, but for that it is upon
Marsellius, always we hold it for scrupulous. The kings heart is in the hand of
God, says the divine scripture. If it be so, who may attain unto this so
great a secret? which is to weete, that the Kings heart, being in Gods hand, he
dare offend God: which does appear most clear, in that we see no other thing
but wars amongst the Christians: and leave the Moors to prosper and live in
rest. This business to me is so difficulte, that although I ca^ speak thereof:
I know not, how to understand it: since all day we see no other thing, but
that God does permit by his secret judgments, Wars betwixt christians
depends of the secrets God.
that the Churches where they praise him be destroyed and thrown down: and
the cursed remain sound and free, where they do offend him.

Your Lordship is a Christian, a good man at arms, my near kinseman, and my
special friend, any of which things does much bind me to feel your travail,
and to be grieved with your peril: I speak of travel to the body, because
the Captain that holds much of his honor, ought to esteem little of his
life: I say peril unto the soul, because amongst Christians there is no war
so justified, that in the same remains not some scruple.

Herein your Lordship shall see that I desire to save you, in that I will not
delight you with lies: Eight conditions meet to be performed, by a captain
general of the wars.
But only to say unto you that which I do conceive, to the end that afterward
you may do what is meet. If you know not whereunto you are bound, I wish your
Lordship to understand, it is, that the Captain general do avoid unjust
wrongs, correct blasphemers, succor innocents, chastise quarellers, pay his
army, defend the people, avoid all sackings, and observe faith with the
enemies.

Assure your self my Lord, that there shall come a time, in which, you shall
give an account to God, and also to the king: not only of what you have done,
but likewise of that whereunto you have consented.

Sir John of Gueuara was your Gra^dfather and my cousin, and he was one of the
Gentlemen at arms, The good knight ought to imitate his good predecessors.
that passed out of Spain, into Italy with the King Sir Alonso, and there did
help to get this kingdom of Naples, and in recompense of his service, he
made him Lord great Seneshall of the kingdom. Of which you may gather, how
much your Lordship ought to travel, to leave such another renoume unto your
successors, as has been left unto you by your predecessors.

As Cicero says, writing unto Articus, this name Knight or Gentleman, the
Romans did never admit, either consent to entitle those that could gather
much riches, but such as had been at the victory of many battles.

That Knight or Gentleman that does not imitate the valiant acts of his
predecessors, ought not boast himself, He is not to be entitled a knight
that is rich, but virtuous.
to descend of them. For, how much the more renoumed the life of the fathers
is, so much the more are the children to be accused, for their negligence. To
presume much of no more but to descend of Noble parents, I say is a thing most
vain. To blason a man's own proper deeds is foolishness: but in the end of
these two extremities, he is more tolerable that prayseth his own virtues,
than he that boasts himself of other deeds.

When amongst Knights or Gentlemen talk is of arms, In the talk of wars,
not that I have heard, but that I have scene is most commendable for a
gentleman.
a Gentleman ought to have great shame to say, that he read it, but rather that
he saw it. For it is very convenient for the Philosopher to recount what he
has read, but the Knight or Gentleman it becommes to speak of things that he
has done. The Consul Marius, when he was resident in Rome, and also in the
wars, many times would say: I confess that I am extract of lineage obscure,
and also I acknowledge that I have no arms of my predecessors, for that they
were not flourishing Captains. But jointly with this, they that are now alive
can not deny, that in the temples I have erected pictures or counterfets, I
have received in my body many wounds, and in my house many enseignes: none of
which I do enherite of my predecessors, but have won the^ of mine enemies.
And Marius said more: Your predecessors left you riches to enjoy, houses
wherein to dwell, slaves to serve you, gardens to delight in, fame whereof to
boaste, and armor wherewith to venture: but they have not left you virtue,
whereof you might presume. Of which deed, Oh you Romans, ye may infer, that
it is very little that he does enherite, which does not enherite the virtues of
his predecessors.

I thought good to advertise you of these things, to the end that in remembering
the fame and nobleness of such men as were your predecessors, you should
much more esteem to imitate their virtuous acts, than too have their arms
set forth and drawn at large. I am deceived, if I did not see in Caesar's
court, a certain gentleman of more than a Quent of rent, which I did never
see have a horse in his stable, either lance in his house, neither yet
commonly did wear his sword, but only a Dagger that was very little. But on
the other part, when he began to recount the doubty deeds of his forefathers,
it seemed that he daunted Lions.

The arms of a knight are given him to fight, and not to behold.
Men do now esteem to paint their arms in their houses, to grave them in their
seals, to place them in their portals, and to weaue them in their sumpter
clothes, but none adue^tureth to win them in the field: in such wise, that they
hold arms, for others to behold: and not for themselves to fight.

One thing I will counsel your lordship: which for such as are of your estate
in the wars, is very necessary: And that is, above al things to be vigilant,
and to have great regard, that amongst the captains of your army, there be
used great secrecy: for in great affairs there is never good success, when
they be discovered before they take effect. If Suetonius Tranquillus do not
deceive us: Julius Caesar never said, to morrow this shall be done, and to day
let this be done: but only to day this shall be done, and to morrow we shall
see what we have too do. Plutarche says in his politiques, that Lucius
Metellus, being demanded of one of his Captains, when the battle should be
given, made answer: if I thought my shirt did know the least thought that
is in my heart, I would presently burn it, and never wear another. It were
very well the affairs of wars, should be commoned of many, but the
resolution of them, to be used with few. For otherwise, they are like to be
discovered before they be concluded.

Also I think very well, Age and ability be mothers of good counsel.
that you take counsel with men that be grave and of experience but not
without consideration, that they be wise, without rashness. For sometimes,
more sound counsel does proceed from men of few years, and of much
ability, than from men that be opinatiue and of old years.

Your Lordship has great cause to consider how to take advise of men, that in
their counsayles be headstrong, The generous and noble mind does more fear to
fly, than to abide.
and in their deeds very rash: for in dangerous cases that happen in the
wars, it is less evil to retire, than to be lost. Alcibiades a Captain
amongst the Greeks, did use to say, that men of bold and valiant hearts have
more need of fortitude, to move them to retire, than to abide their enemies.
For not to fly, their honor does move them: but to retire, their wisdom does
constrain them.

In great hazardes it is much better that men submit themselves to reason,
than to hurl themselves into fortune: In all things your Lordshippe has to
embrace counsel, In soden perils it needs not to use long and delayed
counsels.
except it be when you shall see your self in some sudden danger: for in the
war, we have seen many Captains lost, for no other cause, but for that
when they should have done a thing at the sudden, they have sit down with
great leisure to take counsel.

Also your lordship ought to admonish your armies, that in their forcible and
necessary perilles, they show not themselves to be menns dismayed: for the
wars be of such qualities that the fear of some dismayeth the rest. Your
Lordship may hold it for certain: that the heart which is full of fear, must
of necessity be void of hope. Those that go always to the wars, neither
ought to hold victory for certain, either despair to obtain it. For there
is nothing wherein fortune is less correspondent, than in the affairs of
war.

Brasidas the Greek, in the wars that he held with the Thracians, when they
did take by force of arms a certain fort which he defended marvelous
valiantly, being demanded by one of his enemies, A fort ought to be the
sepulcher of the defendant.
why he had put him self within the same for his defense, answered: I do
swear by the immortal Gods, that she did rather commend her self unto me to
be kept, than I unto her to be defended: Because in the end, I have more
certentie of her to serve me for a sepulcher, than for a sauegard.

I will say no more in this case, but crave of especial favor: that in such
wise ye behave your self in these wars of Prouance, that it may seem, and
also be to all men notorious, that you do more for the obedience of your Lord
the Emperor, than to be revenged of the French king. For otherwise God would
take vengeance of your reuengement.

The pen of gold that you sent me I have received, and so I believe your
Lordship shall receive Marcus Aurelius, which I do send you: the difference
betwixt the one and the other is, that in the Book your Lordship may
understand my simplicity, and in the pen there does appear your great bounty.
No more, but that our Lord be your protector, and give me grace to serve him.

From Valiodolid, the xix. of August, 1524.
A letter unto sir Allonso of Albornaz, wherein is touched, that it is a point
of evil manner, not too answer too the letter that is written unto him.

IF the Lady Marina your wife be as well affected to your person, as my pen
is offended at your slothfulness: you may safely marry without after
repentance. And I think not that I bind my self unto a small matter in saying,
that in your marriage you shall find no repentance, for surely, I wish too have
no more contrition of my sins, than many men have too think themselves
married. If many be married, they are not few that be repentant.
To contract matrimony with a woman, is a thing very easy: but to sustain it
unto the end, I hold it for very difficult. Whereby it comes to pass, that
those which mary without respect, but only for love, live afterward with
sorrow. Considering all the displeasures that proceed of the family, then
tediousness of the wife, the care for the children, the necessity of the
house, the provision for the servants, the importunity of the cousins, and the
suits of the sons in law: Although of all these things the married does not
repent him, at the least it does tire him.

The Philosoper Mirtho, being demanded why he did not marry, answered: No
married man may live without travel.
because if the woman (whom I take in marriage) be good, I shall spill her, if
she be evil I must supporte her, if she be poor I must maintain her, if
she be rich, I must suffer her, if she be foul I shall abhor her, it she
be fair, I must watch her, and that which is worst of al, for evermore I give
my liberty to her that shall never gratify me. Riches breeds care, poverty
sorrow, sailing fear, eating heaviness, going weariness: all which trauelles
we se divided amongst many, except amongst the married where they join
altogether. For we seldom see the married man go without care, sorrow, wearied,
heavy, yea and also sometime astonished, I say astonished, of that which may
happen unto him, and of that his wife may dare to do.

The man that does encounter with a woman that is a dizard, foolish, a babbler,
light, a glutton, a chider, That man is miserable that is married unto a foolish
woman.
slothful, a goer at large, intractable, iealouse, absolute or dissolute: it
were better for that man too be a slave to some honest man, than a husband
too such a wife. It is a terrible thing too suffer a man: but there is very
much too be known in a woman. And for no other cause more, than for that they
know not too use a measure in loving, or give no end in abhorring: I will
not, or perchance, I dare not, say more in this case. For if in the same I
should occupy my self and give liberty to my pen, I should want time to
write, but not matter to speak.

Not without cause I said, my pen was angry with your slothfulness, since
half a year past I did write unto you, and you have not as yet answered me.
And afterward came John de Occanio, and also with him you did not write: in
such wise, that on the one part I call you sluggish, and of the other part
note you of negligence.

Worship is not blemished by answering of a letter.
Sir, you may take it for a rule, never to leave him unanswered that has taken
pain to write unto you: For that the master of the henchmen, which is Harnan
Sanz de Minchasa, said unto me, that none lost his worship for answering unto
a letter. To write to our better, is of necessity: to answer our equal, is
of will: but to write unto our inferior, is of pure virtue. Alexander the
great did write unto Pulion his bit maker: A Prince did write unto a bitmaker.
Julius Caesar to Rufus his gardener: Augustus to Pa^philo his smith: Tiberius
to Escaurus his miller: Tullius too Mirto his tailer: and Seneca to Gipho his
rent gatherer: whereof it may very well be inferred, that baseness does not
consist in writing or answering base persons, but to will or to do vile things.

A noble Roman did write unto a plough man.
Paulus Aemilius writing unto his plough man, said: I have understood what word
thou did send me by Argeus, and the answer of the same is, that I send thee
another ox, to yoke with that firce ox, and also I se^d thee a cart ready
dressed: therefore ear that ground well, dress the vines, purge the trees, and
always have memory of the Goddess Ceres. Curious Dentatus being in war with
Pyrrhus King of the Epirotes, did write a letter unto a carpenter, which said
thus: Cneius Patroclus certified me, that thou do work in my house: take
heed that the timber be dry, and that thou make the lights toward the south,
that it be not high, that it be clear, ye chimney without smoke, with two
windows, and no more but one door. Alexander the great, writing unto his
smith, said: I send thee a horse, which the Athenians sent me: he and I did
escape wounded from the battle: breath him well every day, cure well his
wounds, pare his forefeete, let him be unshod, slit his nose, wash his neck,
let him not grow fat, for that no fat horse may well endure with me in the
field. Of the famous Phalaris the tirant, it is read, No man is so evil in
whom there is not somewhat to be praised.
that never man did him service, that he did not gratifye: either write him a
letter, that he did not answer.

So high and so great Princes, as bear we have named too have written to men so
base and so vile occupations, is not written by historiographers too blemish
them, but by the same to magnify them. Of which we may gather, that: baseness
does not consist, in writing or aunswering base persons. but in doing things
scandolous or dishonest. In this matter as in all other things, you may use
that boldness with me as with your self: but if universally you use to do the
same with all men, it may be, if your friends do note you of negligence, there
shall not want that will accuse you of presumption.

To be noted angry, envious, covetous, slothful, wanton gluttonous,
auaricious, certainly is a grief: Negligence and presumption be two things
that loses friends.
but to be noted of foolishnes, is an infamy, which gives me occasion to say
unto you, that to call a man presumptuouse by a cunning manner of speech, is to
call him fool.

In Caius Caesar there wanted no fortitude, for that he overcame many people:
either clemency, for he pardoned his enemies: either liberaliitie, for that he
gave kingdoms: either science, for that he wrote many Books: either fortune,
for he was Lord of all men: But he wanted good manner, which is the foundation
of a quiet life.

Amongst the Romans it was a custom, Evil nurture is hurtful in all estates.
that when the Senate entered the Emperors house, they did unto him a certain
great obeisance, and he did use unto them a certain courtesy: in doing
whereof, as he grew negligent, either for that he would not, or not
remembering: the case was thus, that within few days after, they gave him
three and twenty stabs with a dagger: in such wise, that, ye most Noble Prince
lost his life for no greater matter, than for not having a little good manner.
The contrary of this Suetonius Tranquillus does write of Augustus ye Emperor,
which being in ye Senate, or in the College, did never sit down until they
were all set, and rendered the same reverence that they gave him, and if by
chance his children entered the Senate house, neither did he consent that the
Senators should rise, either that his children should sit down.

Sir, if you will not that men call you presumptuous: or to speak plainly, do
call you fool, have a care to be well manered: for with good manner, more than
with any other thing, we withdraw our enemies, and do sustain our friends.

Sir, I have spoken with the Popes messenger, upon the dispensations that you
sent to have, to marry with the Gentlewoman the Lady Marina. Which we have
agreed for three score ducates, Where is money, there is dispatch.
and as he is a Venetian, and would not be counted a fool, he will first be
paid, before you shall be dispatched.

I have spoken with Perianes as concerning the expedition of the privilege of
the Jury, and as he was deaffe and most dunch, I cried out more in speaking
unto him, than I do use in preaching.

The news of the Court is, that the Empress wishes the Emperors coming,
the Dames would marry, the suitors would be dispatched, the Duke of Veiar
would live: Antony de Fonseca would grow young: Sir Rodrigo of Voria would
enherit, and also Friar Denise would be a Bishop. Of my self I give you to
understand, that I am in possession of all the conditions of a good suter, that
is to wit: occupied, soliciting, careful, spent, suspicious, importunate, out
of temper, and also abhorred: for that my Lord the Archbishop of Toledo, and I
go to the law for the Abbay of Baza, upon which I have for my part a famous
sentence. No more, but that our Lord be your protector, and give me grace to
serve him.

From Medina del Campo, the twelfth of March.1523.
A lerter unto sir Gonsalis Fernandes of Cordoua, great Captain: in which is
touched, that the knight escaping the wars, ought not from thence forth to
depart his house.

MOst renoumed and valiant Prince, my weakness to write unto your
mightiness, my simplicity unto your prudencie, if it shall seem unto those
that shall hear thereof to be a thing over proud, and to such as shall see it,
to be over presumptuous, let them lay the fault upon your honor, which did
first write unto me, and not on me, that do answer with shamefastness.

Sir, I will travel to satisfy your excellency in all things that ye
command me by your letter, upon this condition: most humbly beseeching, that
you do not so much consider what I do say, as that which I would say. And for
that (to a person of so great an estate) it is reason to write with gravity:
I will travel to be measured in the words I shall speak, and to be
remeasured in the reasons I shall write. The divine Plato in his Books of
common wealth did say: That less greatness is not to be imputed to the
honorable, to deal and be conversant with the weak, than it is to stand and
to countenance with the mighty: and the reason that he gave for the same, is,
that the Generouse and magnificent man, uses more force in taming his heart to
stoop unto low things, than to take in hand grave, weighty, and high
attempts. A man of an high stature, receives more pain in stouping to the
ground for a straw, than to stretch out his arm to reach a branch. By this
that I have said, I would say, that this our heart is so puffed up and so
proud, that to rise unto more than he may, it is life, and to descend to less
than he is worth, it is death.

There are many things which God would not bring to pass by himself alone,
to the end they shall not say, that he is a Lord absolute: either will he bring
them to pass by the hands of the mighty, for that it shall not be said, that
he takes help of human favor: and afterward he performs the same by the
hand and industry of some man beaten down of fortune and forgotten amongst
men: God does many times bring things to pass rather by the weak, tha^ by the
strong.
wherein GOD shows his greatness, and fills the same with his might.

The great Judas Machabeus was less in body and much less in years, than his
three other brethren, but in the end the good old Mathathias his father, to him
only did commend the defense of the Hebrews: and into his hands did also
resign the armies against the Assyrians.

The least of the children of the great Patriarch Abraham was Isaac, but in him
was established ye right line of Christ, and on him al ye Jewish people did
fix their eyes. The inheritance of the house of Isaac came too Esau and not to
Jacob: but after the days of the Father, Jacob did not only buy the
inheritance of his brother Esau, but also did steal the blessing.

Joseph the son of Jacob was the least of his brethren and the last of the
eleven Tribes, Amongst.xij. sons, the youngest was most excellent.
but in the end it was he alone that found grace with ye kings of Egypt, and
did deserve to interpret their dreams. Of seven sons that Iesse had, David
was the least, but in the end, King Saul was of God reproved, and David King
of Hebrews elected. Amongst the meaner Prophets Heliseus was the least, but
in the end, unto him and unto none other was given a dubled spirit. Of the
meaner sort of the Apostles of Christ was S. Philip, and the meanest Disciple
of Paul, was Philemon: but in the end, with them more than with others they
did take counsel, and in great affairs would take advise.

Sir, it seems to me that agreeing with that which I have said, your
Lordship would not take counsel with other men, that be learned and wise, but
with me that am the simplest of your friends. As your Lordship has been so long
time in the wars of Italy, it is very seldom that I have seen you, but
much less, that I have either spoken or bin conversant with you, for which
cause my friendship is to be holden for more sure and less suspicious, for
that I love you, not for the rewards you have given me, but for the
magnificence that I have seen in you. When one co^mes to seek to be our
friend, makes much to the matter, to consider the cause that moves him to
seek the same: for if he be poor we must give him: if he be rich, we must
serve him: if he be favored, we must worship him: if he be wilful, we must
faune on him: if he be impatient, we must support him: if he be vicious, we
must disse^ble with him: and if he be malicious, we must beware of him.

One of the great trauelles that unprofitable friends bring with them is, that
they come not to seek us, To lack friends is perilous. And some friends be
tedious.
to the end to do what we will, but to persuade us to do what they will. It is
great peril to have enemies, and also it is great travel to suffer some kind
of friends: for to give the whole heart to one is not much, but how much less,
when amongst many it is reparted? neither my condition may bear it, either
within the greatness of your estate may it be contained, that we should love
after such sort, neither in such manner to behave ourselves: for that there is
no love in this world so perfect, as that which holds no scruple of
intereste.

Your Lordship says in your letter, that you write not unto me, for that I am
rich or mighty, but because I am learned and virtuous. And you instantly desire
me, that I write unto you with mine own hand some thing that maybe worthy to
be understood, and plesaunt to be read.

To that which you say, that you hold me to be wise, to this I answer, as
Socrates did, which is too wit, that he knew not any thing more certain, but
in perceiving that he did know nothing.

Very great was the Philosophy that Socrates did enclose in ye answer: for
(as the divine Plato does say) the lesser part that we understand not, is much
more, than all that we know. In all this world there is not ye like infamy, as
a man to be imputed ignorant, either the like kind of praise, as to be called
wise: because in the wise, death is very evil employed, and in the fool life
is much worse bestowed.

The tirant Epimethes, seeing the Philosoher Demosthenes weep immeasurable
tears for the death of a Philosopher, demanded for what cause he wept so
much, since it was a strange thing for Philosophers to weep. To this
Demosthenes answered: We ought rather to bewail the life of the wicked, than
the death of the just.
O Epimethes, I do not weep because the Philosopher died, but for that thou
live: and if thou know not, I will give thee to understand, which is: that
in the schools of Athens we do more weep, because the evil do live, than for
the death of the good.

Also your honor does say, that you do judge me, to be a man solitary and
virtuous: might it please the divine clemency, that in all this, and much more,
you speak the truth: because, in case for one to be or not to be virtuous, I
dare venture to speak, that how much sure it is, to be, and not too seem to
be, so dangerous it is to seem to be, and not to be in deed.

A man is to be known, but not to be understood.
Man is naturally variable in his appetites, profou^d in heart, mutable in his
thoughts, inco^stant in his purposes, and indeterminable in his conclusions:
whereof we may well gather, that man is easy to know, and very difficile to
understand. Your excellency gives me more honor, in calling me wise and
virtuous: than I give to entitle you Duke of Sesa, Marquis of Bitonto, Prince
of Guilache, and above all, great captain. For to my virtue and wisdom,
wars can give no impeachment, but your potencie and greatness is subject unto
fortune.

Your honor writes unto me, that I certify you of my opinion, in that the
king our master does command now of new, that you pass once more into Italy,
by occasion of the battle, The battle of Rauenna for evermore shall be
renoumed.
that the Frenchmen of late have overcome at Rauenna, which in the worlds to
come shall be so famous, as it was now bloody. Unto this answering your
honor, I say that you have great reason to doubt: and upon the same too use
counsel: for if you do not accomplish what you be commanded, the King takes
displeasure, and if you do what they entreat you, you contend with fortune.

Two times your honor has passed into Italy, and twice won the kingdom of
Naples, in which two iorneyes, you overcame the battle of Garrellano, and the
battle of Chirinola, and slew the best people of the house of France. And
that which is most of all, you brought to pass, that the Spanish nation of all
the world were feared, and obtained unto your self renoume of immortal memory.

This being true as it is, it were no wisdom, Less in the wars, than many
other thing we have to believe fortune.
either surety, once more to return thither to tempt fortune, which with none
does show her self so malicious and double, as with such as spend long time in
the wars.

Hanniball, a Prince of the Carthaginians, not contented too have overcome the
Romans, in those great and famous battles of Trene, Trasmene, and Canna, but
as he would always force and wrestle with fortune, he came to be overcome of
those, which he many times had overcome. Those that have to deal with fortune,
must entreat her, With great eloquence the aucthor declares the nature of
fortune.
but not force her, they must hear her, but not believe her, they must hope in
her, but have no confidence in her, they must serve her, but not anger her,
they must be conversant with her, but not tempt her. For that fortune is of
so evil a condition, that when she fauneth, she biteth, and when she is
angered, she wounds.

In this journey that they command your honor, neither do I persuade you that
you go, either diswade you to tarry: Only I say and affirm, with this third
passage into Italy, you return to put your life in peril, and your fame in
balance. In the two first conquests, you obtain honor with them that be
present, fame for the worlds to come, riches for your children, an estate for
your successors, reputation amongst strangers, credit amongst your own,
gladness for your friends, and grief unto your enemies. Finally, you have gotten
for excellency, this renoume of great Captain, not only for these our times,
but also for the world to come.

Consider well what you leave, and what you take in hand: for that it may
rather be imputed for rashness, than for wisdom, yt in keeping your house where
al does envy, you should depart where al men should be revenged. The words of
a very friend, without dissimulation.
You overcame the Turks in Paflonia, the Mores in Granada, the Frenchmen in
Chirinola, the Picardes in Italy, the Lombardes in Garellano, I hold it to be
doubted, that as fortune has not more nations to give you to overcome, she
will now lead you, where you shall be overcome.

The Dukes, the Princes, the Captains, and under Captains, against whom you
have fought, either they be dead, or else gone: In such sort, that now
against an other kind of people you must deal and fight. I said it, for that
it may chance, that fortune which then did favor you, now may favor them.

Men do order wars, but God only gives victory.
To accept wars, to gather people, to order them, and to give battle, it
belongs unto men: but to give victory appertains only to God. Titus Liuius
says, that many times with great ignomie the Romans were overcome at Furcas
Caudinas, in the end, by the counsel of the Consul Aemilius they changed
that Co^sul which had the charge of that army: and where they were before that
time overcome, were from thence forward conquerours of their enemies. Of which
we may gather for our purpose, that changing the Captains of the wars,
jointly therewith fortune does alter.

To one person and one matter, fortune very seldom shows fidelity.
In one self kingdom, with one self people, under one king, in one ground, and
upon one self quarrel or demand, hope you not, that Fortune will always be
faithful? For in the place where she has used to be most favorable, it is
her devise, by the same means, to show her cruelty.

Rodrigo of Viuero did say unto me, that your honor was not a little grieved
to see that your departure was prolonged: and that the King for this present
held it in suspense. And further he said unto me, that you held it for so
great displeasure, that if it were with an other that were your equal, you
would demand it at his hand as an injury. To hear this I do marvel, and am
not a little, but much offended: for I hold him not for a good beast, that
when they lade him will stand stock still, and when they unlade him, will yerke
out behind. Since the soul goes charged with sins, the heart with
thoughts, the spirit with temptations, and the body with travels: it is much
convenient for us, that if may not altogether discharge our selves of this
burden at the least, that in some part we lighten the same.

Your honor is not so young a man, but that the more part of your life is past:
and since the life goes consuming, What he ought to do that has continued
long in the wars.
and death approaching: in my judgment it should be better counsel for you to
occupy your self in bewayling your old sins, than of new to shed the blood
of enemies.

It is now time, rather to weep than to fight: to withdraw your self, than
to use liberty: to make a reckoning with God, more than with the king: to
accomplish with the soul, and not with honor: to call upon God, and not to
provoke with enemies: to distribute your own, and not to take from others: to
conserve peace, and not to invent wars. And if in this case, your lordship
will not believe me: from hence forward I divine, that then you shall begin to
feel it, when you may not remedy the same.

Your honor deceyueth your self, or else I know not what to say, for that I
see you flee that you should procure, which is quietness: and you procure that
which you should flee, There is no greater travel than to be ignorant of
quietness.
which is disquietnesse. For there is no man in this world more unfortunate,
than he that did never experiment what thing it is to be reposed.

Those that have travailed throughout diverse lands, and have had exprience of
diverse fortunes, the thing yt they most desire in this life is, with honor to
see themselves returned to their country. Of which it may be inferred, that it
is great temeritie, that you alone will rather go to die amongst strangers, than
to live with honor amongst your own. Until men have gotten necessary to eat,
yea until they have obtained also some surplusage also to give, in my
judgment, they ought not much to be blamed, although they wander through out
diverse kingdoms, and put themselves in great perilles. Men ought to travel
until they have wherewith to defend necessity.
For he is as much worthy reprehension, that does not procure that which is
necessary, as he that ceasseth not to provide that which is superfluous.

After a man has found that which he has sought for, and also perchance it
has happened him better than he thought of: He is in some hatred with fortune,
that is not suffered to repose in his own house.
if after he be retired unto his house in great quietness, will return to
rub again with the world, I dare be bold to speak it, that such a one
either lacks wit, or else fortune will be to him unhappy. The divine Plato
does say in his books of common wealth, that Fortune is more contrary unto
that man, that he does not suffer to enjoy that which he has, than unto him,
to whom he denies what he craves.

I do beseech, and also advise your honor, that after you have red this
sentence, that you turn again and again too read the same: for in my
judgment, this sentence of Plato is very true, and very profound, and also
used of many. For almost we see it by daily experience, that many men can
obtain fame, honor, quietness, riches: and have not the mean afterward to
enjoy them.

It is more to know how to enjoy a victory than to overcome a battle.
Julius Caesar was he that nature endued with most grace^, and to whom Fortune
did give most victories: and with all this, great Pompey did say of him: that
he had great hardiness to overcome any battle, but that afterward he did
not understand how to enjoy the victory. If in the great renoumed battle of
Canas: Hanniball had known how to enjoy the conquest, he never afterward in
the fields of Carthage, by Scipio the Aphrican had bin overcome.

Your Honor may take it as it pleases you, and understand thereof as it may
like you to command: but in my judgment, he is not so cruel an enemy yt
hurles his darte at me in the wars, as he that comes to drive me from my
house. Comfortable to that which I have said, I do say: that since we can not
flee from cares and trauelles, yet at the least, that we procure to avoid some
displeasures thereof. For without comparison, much more be the offenses that
we seek unto our selves, than be brought unto us by our enemies.

Our greatest travels be of our own seeking.
I will say no more in this letter, but that the Gentleman Rodrigo of Viuero and
I, have talked some things worthy the understanding, and perilous to be
written. I commend them with trust unto his noblenes here, and he shall relate
them unto your excellency there. No more, but our Lord be your protector, and
unto me give grace to serve him.

From Medina del Campo, the.viij. of January.1512.
A letter to sir Enrique Enriques, wherein the Author does answer to many
gracious demaundes.

RIght magnificent and my old friend Valdiuia, your solicitour, gave me a
Letter, the which seems very well to be written with your own hand, for
that it held few lines, and many blottes. As God made you a Knight, if he had
made you a Scriuener, you would have been more handsome to color Cordouan
skins, than to have written process. Sir, always frame, if you shall write
any Letter to be sent, that the lines be right, the Letters close, the
reasons divided, the letter legible, the paper clean, the folding equal, the
closyng smoothe, and the seal clear: Both wisdom and eloquence in writing
of a letter be discovered.
for it a law of Court, in that which is written, the wisdom is uttered:
and in the manner of writing, good manner is known.

In the letter that was given me, were contained many demaundes under very
few words. And for that with one Turquois we both will make but one show.
The case shall be thus: to every demand, I will answer only one word. First
you ask me, wherefore I came to the Court: to this I answer, that I came not
willingly, but constrained of necessity, for the contention betwixt me and
the Church of Toledo: my coming was expedient to clear my self, and to
withdraw the law.

Also you demand of me, what I do in the Court: In the court men do not,
but undo.
whereunto I answer, that as my adversaries do follow me, and my business
enlarging: I do nothing but undo my self.

Likewise you will that I write unto you in what thing I do employ the time: to
this I answer, that according to the fashion of us Courtiers, bear evil will,
blaspheme, loyter, lie, trafike, and curse: with more truth we may say of
time, that we lose it, than employe it. Also you demand, with who^ I am most
conversant in this Court: to this I answer, that the Court and the people
thereof, be grapes of so evil a soil, that we that go in the same, and from
our childhode be brought up therein, study not with whom to be conversant,
but in discovering of whom to beware: with much pain we have time to defend
us from our enemies: and will you that we occupy our selves in seeking new
friends? In the Courts of Princes I do confess there is a conversation of
persons, but no confederation of will: for here enimitie is holden for
natural, and amity a stranger. The Court is of such nature, that they that
do most visit them, the worse they do entreat them: and such as speak best
unto them, the more evil they do wish them. In the court there are things to
be wondered, as also to be shunned
They which haunt the Courts of Princes, if they will be curious and no fools,
shall find many things whereat to wonder: and much more whereof to beware.

Also you demand how the difference betwixt the Admiral and the Earl of
Myranda stands: to this I answer, that the Admiral, as one of much power,
and the Earl, as one in much favor, gives to each other wherewith to be
occupied, and to us sufficient whereat to murmr.

Sir, you demand what news we have of the Emperors coming: to this I answer,
that which we presently understand, News of those days from Italy.
is, that the Turk is retired, Florence is alyed, ye Duke of Milane is
reduced, the Venetians did amain, the Pope and Caesar did consecrate, the
Estates of Naples be reparted, the Coluna is dead, the Marquis of Villa Franca
is made Viceroy of Naples, the Prince of Orange is slain, and unto the
Chanceler and to the Confessor, to either of them is given a Cardinals hat.
Other secret news they write from thence, which be lamentable to such as be
therewith touched, and gracious to those that hear thereof, which is: many of
those that went into Italy with Caesar, are became amorous, and in the arts
of love have raunged too far. But sir, in this case I swear unto you, as it
foundeth in mine ears, In Italy they win not so much money as they learn
vice.
their wives be here sufficientely revenged of them, for if they leave there
any women great with child, also they shall find here their wives brought a
bed.

You will also that I write unto you, how it goes with us for vittailes this
Lent: to this I answer, that by divine grace we have not wanted this lent
fish to eat, and also fins ynowe to confess. For the case is come to such
dissolution and vnshamfastnesse, that the Gentlemen hold it for an estate and
advancement of honor to eat flesh in Lent.

Also you demand if the Court be dear or good cheap, to this I answer, that
my steward tells me, that from October unto April, it has cost me in wood
and cole, an hundredth and forty Ducates. The cause of this is, that this same
town of Medina as it is rich in faires, so is it poor in mountains or woods,
in such sort that the count being well cast, the wood costs as dear as the
dressing of the pot. Other things are in this Court at a good price, or to say
it better, Eight conditions of the court, and all very perilous.
very good cheap: that is to wit, cruel lies, false news, dishonest women,
feigned friendship, continual enimities, doubled malice, vain words, and false
hopes, of which eight things we have such abundance in this Court, that they
may set out bouthes, and proclayme faires.

Sir you demand of me, if there be good expedition of causes, for that you
have some to be dispatched: In the court more despited than dispatched.
to this I do answer, as the things of the court be tedious, displeasant,
long deferred, costely, intricate, unfortunate, desired, besieged, lamented,
and bescratched, I conceive of mine own part, that if ten be dispatched, nintie
be despited.

Also you will me that I write unto you if the fair be good this year at
Medina. To this I answer, that as I am a courtyer and a suter, and have neither
marchaundise to sell, and much less money wherewith to buy: I know not
whereof to praise it, nor do I find why to mislyke it. But in passing thorough
the fair, I see in the bouthes of these Burgaleses, so many rich and
pleasant things, that in beholding them, I took great pleasure, and being not
able to buy them, I was much tormented. The Empress came forth to see the
fair, and as a Princess most wise, would not be accompanied with her maids of
honor, because the Gentlewomen that did serve her, being so poor and so few,
it could be no less, but that they would use their liberty in asking
fairings, and the gentlemen should think it their parts to give them.

Sir, you demand if the Court be in health, or if the pestilence be
thereaboutes: to this I answer, that of agues, tertians, and quartaines,
plague sores, and such other infirmities of the body, we are al in health and
very well, except the licenciate Alarcon, that being relating a process before
the counsel, suddenly fell down dead. And of a troth, his death was to many
in this Court very terrible, Death gives fear, but not amendment.
although I see none to amend his life by the same. Other infirmities be in
this Court, that be not corporal, but spiritual, as angers, hatred,
quarrels, rancours, wrath, and slaughters: the which maladies do consist, not
that they go with bodies infected, but in the swelling of the spleen, and
corruption of the gall.

I have turned many times to read your letter: and have not found any more to
answer. For of a surety, it did rather seen an Interrogatorie to take
witnesses, than a letter to a friend: I will say no more, but that I have escaped
in writing unto you, very weary, and also angry not for the answering to the
matter, but in construing your ill favored letter. Our Lord be your protector,
and give me grace to serve him.

From Medina del Campo, the fifth of June, in the year.1532.
A letter to sir Antonie of Cneua, wherein is expounded an authority of holy
Scripture, very notable, which is to wit why God did not hear the Apostle, and
did hear the devil against Job.

MAgnificent sir, and particular beloved, Alonso Espinell gave me a letter from
your worship here in Toledo, the date whereof was the.12. of May, and it is
now the.16. of June: in such sort, yt your letter neither may by condemned for
stale, either for fresh. Many from many parts do write unto me: sometime their
letters be such, that to read them, it is very tedious, and to answer them,
no less displeasant. To see a letter ill written, and worse noted, neither is
it to be taken in good part, either may we leave to murmur thereat. The
ploughman reuewing the straightnes of his forough, gives note to the wise to
examine their writings
The ploughman in plowing, does reuew his forough that it be straight: and
shall not a man have regard to note and write his letter very well? There be
many who will as lightly take the pen in hand to write, as the glass to drink:
and that which is worst of all, they think much of themselves to be talking
and writing. The which does well appear in their letters, because the letter is
illegible, the paper blotted, the lines crooked, and the reasons doltish. To
know a man whether he be wise or foolish, is a great part to consider, whether
he write upon aduisement, and speak with judgment, for a man must not write
what comes to his memory, but what reason does direct.

Plutarch does say of Phalaris the tyrant, that he did never write but being
alone, withdrawn, and with his own hand: whereof it does follow, that
although, al do blaspheme him for his tyranny, his letters were praised
throughout the world.

Of a troth, a Gentleman and a kinseman of mine, did write unto me a letter
of two sheets of paper, and as he wrote so large, and not returning to read
what he had written, the very same reasons, and the very same words that he
had put in the beginning, he did return to write in the end, whereat I was so
much offended, that I burnt the letter, A letter ought to be pleasant to read,
and discret to be noted.
and made him no answer. Doubtless your letters are not of such quality, the
which to me be very pleasant to read, and not tedious to answer, because in
iestes they are very pleasant, and in earnest, very wise.

Sir you say, that in reading the moralles of saint Gregory, you did note, and
also did marvel to see, that the devil did ask license of God to do hurt
unto holy Job, and it was granted him: and the Apostle S. Paul did pray unto
God to take away the temptation of the flesh, and it was denied him. In such
wise, that God heard the Devil, and did not condescend unto the prayer of
saint Paul. Marvel ye not sir of this: for the things that the divine
providence do bring to pass be so just, and done for so just causes: that
although we may not reach them: they want not therefore reason, why they
should not be done. If we deeply consider what God did with the Apostle, we
shall find, that it was more that God gave him, than the Apostle did crave.
God does more for us in giui^g us grace than to take away temptations.
Because, he desired that the temptation of the flesh might be taken away: and
God gave him grace to overcome it. What injury does the Prince to the
Captain, that sendes him a warfare, if he makes him sure to have the victory?
If absolutely God should have taken away the temptation of the flesh, from the
Apostle saint Paul: neither should there have remained occasion to deserve,
either should have been given grace to overcome. For he is more supported of
God, to whom he gives help to conquer, than to him, that he excuses to
fight. Let us not despair, afflict our selves, or be over thoughtfull, and
much less complain and murmur of God: if forthwith he give not that which
we desire. For he does it not, with disfavor in that he will not hear us,
God does know what he gives us, but we know not what to crave.
but because he will change it into a better cause. He knows what he does,
and we understand it not: he knows what he does deny, but we not what
we ask: he measures all things with reason, and we but with apetite: he
does deny that is hurtful unto us, and grants that which is profitable.
Finally I do say, that he does know: how he are to be handled: and therefore,
we ought of him only to depend. The Apostle had seen the invisible and divine
secrets, which of his forefathers had been much desired but never seen: and
because, of that so high revelation, he should not boast or grow proud, To
have the occasion of sin taken away, is no small benefit of God.
the Lord would not take away the concupiscence of the flesh. In such wise,
that in recompense of not condescending to his desire, he did take away the
occasion to sin, and gave him grace to overcome. God used more pity with
saint Paul, in that he would not hear him: than if he had heard him. For if
he should have taken away the concupiscence of the flesh, it might have come
to pass that as much as he had diminished in temptation, To be without
temptation is no good sign.
he might have increased in pride. When the Lord does permit that one is
tempted, it does not follow therefore, that he is of God abhorred: for my
part, I hold it rather a sign, that of God, he is elect. For as saint
Gregory says, there is not a greater temptation, than not to be tempted.
Christ has left the way to heaven marked: and the marks of this voyage be
tribulations, adversities, mishappes, and infirmities. In such wise, that it is
no other thing to be remembered of God: but that in this world he be permitted
to be tempted. Let it be holden for certain, that they of him are lost, which
in this world, from adversities be privileged. For the enemy of mankind,
(which is the devil) unto all those that he has registered for his own, he
does travel, that they may live in great welfare and ease. Sir, also you say,
The devil procures great welfare unto his dearlings.
that you do much maruail to see the boldness that the Devil had in asking
license of God, to hurt holy Job: and to see the liberality that God used in
giving it. In such sort, that he denied S. Paul, that he desired, and granted
the Devil, that which he craved. Sir, although you have no reason, yet have
you some occasion to demand that which you ask: for of a surety, it as an
hard thing to consent that our enemy do hurt unto our friend. That which I
dare speak in this case, is that it is less, pernicious, and of more
worthiness to suffer ill, than to have authority to do evil. And after this
manner we have more envy of holy Job, in that he suffered, than unto the
devil, for that which he did. It ought to be far distant from the divine
will, that he that has to give grace to serve him, should give license to
offend. It is a great evil for a man to be evil: but it is much worse to make
him evil, which is good. Because, our own proper sins God does well see,
they proceed of weakness: but the persecuting of the good, always grows
of malice. If men do ask of God upon their knees, that he give grace to
serve him, they ought to ask with tears that he do not give them place, to
offend him. For in the end, Notable examples against such as do persecute.
if I do not good works I shall have no reward: but if I do evil, for the
same I shall have pains. By Caine, Abell was slain: by Esau, Jacob was
persecuted: by Saul, David was banished: by Nabugodonoser, Jerusalem was
burned: by Achab, Micheas was imprisoned: by Zedechias, Esaias was sawen: and
by the Devil, holy Job was afflicted. Man by the multitude of his sins, does
deserve to be an offense, and a scourge of the good. Much did the Devil offend
Job, in tempting him: but much more did holy Job deserve in suffering that
temptation. Because in the persecutions of the just, God does more behold the
patience of him that suffers, than he does the malice of him that does
persecute.

Also you will, that I write unto you, what it was I preached this other day
unto the Emperor, which is to wit, that the Princes which tyra^nously govern
their common wealths, have more cause to fear good men, than those that be
evil. Sir, that which I said in this case was, that the tyrants which in
the common wealths have offices of most pre-eminence, have much more respect
to the bounty of the good, Very great be the privileges of the virtuous.
than to the conspiracies of the evil. For that amongst many other things,
this privilege is contained in virtue: that is to understand: amongst the least
inferiors it gives dismay: with the equal, it moves envy: and to the great
and mighty, it yeldeth fear. The Siracusan Dionisius, had more fear of the
divine Plato which was in Grecia, than of all the enemies he had near him in
Cicilia. King Saul had more respect to the deseruings of David, than to the
armies of the Philistines. The proud Aman, He incurreth great perils that
co^tendeth with the virtuous.
that was so private with King Assuerus, was more grieved with the good
Mardocheus, that he held him in no reverence, than with all the rest of the
kingdom. Herod Escalonite, did hold in more reverence, and also did more fear
only John Baptist, than all the kingdom of Judea. Finally, I do say and
affirm, that none may with a troth say or affirm that he has an enemy, but
when he has some good man to his enemy. Because the evil man does hurt with
his knife, but the good, does hurt with his credit. Sir, always have regard,
not to strive or contend with a man that naturally is good, and has credit in
the common wealth with all men. For, he shall do you more hurt with his word,
than you shall offend him with a blow of a lance.

Sir as touching the Commendathor, John of Towers, that would not the
government this year, The certain before the doubtful is to be preferted.
which the governors had given him, saying: that he deserved better, and that
the king when he shall come from Flaunders will give him more: to this I
answer, that it seems to me lack of wit, and also a surplusage of
foolishness, to leave a reward certain, for a hope doubtful.

Sir, also you conjure me that I write unto you, what I thought of the Lord
President, Sir Antony de Roias, when I talked with him in your business: to
this I answer, that he seems to me sharp in his aunsweres, and wise in
his dealings. I do not like well with many of this Court, A Kintall is a
hundredth weight.
that deprave him for his speech, and do not afterward consider of his
doings, as it is true, so likewise many of our friends give us words by
Kintals, but works by the ounce.

Also you will me that I write unto you what I judge of the Ambassador of
Venize, for that I am conversant with him, and he confesses himself with me.
Sir, I can tell you, that he is in science learned, in his life reformed, and
in conscience much considerate. And it may be said by him, thatwhich Plato
said by Phocion his friend: he did more love to be, than seem to be
virtuous. In the other secret and particular business, that Alonso Espinell
commoned with me off, in your behalf, It is better to be, than to seem to be
virtuous.
with the same faith that your worship sent me the message: receive ye also
the answer.

From Toledo the.xxx. of June, in the year of our Lord. 1525.
A letter unto Master Friar John Beneuiades: wherein is expounded, that which
is said in the scripture, that the evil spirit sent of God, came upon Saul.

Reverend and well-beloved Father, the letter that your fatherhod made in
Salamanca, I have received here in Soria: the which forthwith I read, and
afterward many times did turn to read: For that I received very great
consolation in remembering my self from whom it came, The conditions of a
friends letter.
and in noting what it contained. In the letter of a very friend, the spirits
do rejoice, the eyes delight, the heart is recreated, friendeship confirmed, and
the understanding is comforted. For Plutarch says in the book of the fortune
of Alexander: that the great Alexander did never read the letters which
tyrants did send him, either did tear the letters that Philosophers did write
unto him. All the letters, that Marcus Antonius did write unto Cleopatra, and
all the letters that Cleopatra did write unto Marcus Antonius, were found by
the Emperor Augustus very well laid up, after the death of Marcus Antonius.
The letters that Cicero did write to Publius Lentulus, to Atticus, to Rufus, to
Fabarius, and to Drusius, which were his familiar friends, were all found in
their keeping, and not in his original.

As concerning that your fatherhode writes, and by this letter comaund me to
write: it may be very well answered: as saint Agneda did answer the virgin
Lucie, which is to wete, Quid a me petis Lucia Virgo? nam ipsa poteris
praestare continuo matri tuae. In this case, and in this demand, I can not
tell whether of us deserves more pain, your fatherhode, for tempting my
patience, or I, in aduenturning my self to publishe my ignorance. For he is
not worthy less fault that sins, than he that is the cause of sin. Si
nequeo ascendere in montem cum Loath: ad minus saluabor in Segor. I would say,
that if your fatherhode, be not satisfied with that which I shall answer,
it may please you to be satisfied with that I would answer. For as Plato
said, he that does travel not to err, misseth very narowly.

You will that I write unto you, what I judge, and how I understand that text,
which is written in holy scripture, 1. Regum cap. xvj. where it is said,
speaking of King Saul and of his infirmity: Spiritus Domini malus arripiebat
Saulem. A text of scripture expounded.
The first King of Israel was named Saul, he was chosen of the Tribe of
Benjamin, which was the last Tribe of all ye Tribes: and in the second year of
his reign, an evil spirit sent of God did vex him, which would not come out
of him, neither leave to torment him, until the good King David came before
him, to play and to sing. But now the dout is, how it may be understood, and
agree withal, that the scripture should say, the evil spirit of the Lord did
take Saul: if the spirit were of the Lord, how was he evil? and if he were
evil, how was he of the Lord? it seems an hard thing, and not intelligible,
to say of the one part, that that spirit which held Saul, was of the Lord: and
of the other part, to say that the spirit was evil. But if the spirit were of
the Lord how was he then evil? and if he were evil, how was he of the Lord?
For the understanding hereof, it is to be noted, how it is written in the 1.
Regum cap. xxvj. that David being compassed with the army of King Saul, who
sleeping on a night in his tent, David did pass thorough the mids of his
camp, and took from the Kings beds head, the lance that he fought withal,
and a cruse of water, wherein he used to drink: and in this passage, he was
neither seen of the watch, nor perceived of the scout. And why? Quia sopor
Domini irruit super eos: to say, as the Scripture says, that the sleep of
the Lord fell upon them, is most true: but to say, that God does sleep, and
has need of sleep, is a great mockery. For, as the Psalmist does say, Ecce
non dormitabit neque dormiet qui custodit Israel. When the scripture does say:
Quod sopor Domini irruit super eos: that God had sent a dead sleep upon them:
it is to be understood: non quod ipse dominus dormiret: Sed quia eius nutu
infusus esset: ne quisquam presentiam David sentiret. The divine providence
would cast a sleep upon King Saul, and upon his watch, and upon those of his
Camp: not for their recreation, but for the safe keeping of David: in such
wise, that in God, his sleep and his providence is one self thing: the Lord is
so zelouse of his elect, and so vigilant to preserve them, that he does not
only give them grace to perform good purposes, but also does direct them
always by good means: in such wise, that although he does permit them to
travail, he does not consent that they perish.

But coming to the purpose, that after the manner, that the Scripture is to be
understood, Sopor Domini irruit super eos: after the same manner, is
understand, Spiritus Domini malus arripiebat Saulem. And for farther
declaration of this I say: Quod si Diabolus tentationem justice semper infer
cupiat: tamen si a Domino potestatem, non accepit: nullatenus adipisci potest,
quod appetit. The spirit that did tempt and torment King Saul: for this cause
he is called an evil spirit: for that the will of the Devil in tempting us,
is evil. And for this purpose, he is named the spirit of the Lord: for that
the power which the Lord does give him to tempt us, is good. When God does
give license to any Devil, that he go to vex and disquiet any just man: it is
not Gods intention, that he tempt him, but to exercise him: because virtue is
of such quality, that it grows mortified, when it is not exercised with
travails. The wheat which is not turned, is eaten with wiuels. The garment
that is not worn, Virtue and the virtues by exercise be conserved.
is eaten with mothes: the timber that is not seasoned, is spoiled with chest
locks: the from that is not wrought, does consume with ruste: bread long kept
grows finnowed. God has more regard unto us than we our selves.
By this that I have said, I would say, that there is not any thing that
turns us to more weakness and negligence: than to be a certain time
without temptations. Much more care has God of us, than we of our selves: for
in the end, as our worthiness is little, and but to small purpose, if we do
quail, he does comfort us: if we lie down to sleep, he waketh us: if we be
wearied, he helps us: if we grow fearful, he does encorage us: if we grow
negligent, he does entice us. Finally I say, that leaving our selves unto our
own power, we permit our selves to fall, and he alone gives the hand to lift
us up.

Also holy Job was tempted of the evil spirit of the Lord, not because there
was any notable fault in the man: but for that there reigned in the Devil envy
and malice. For cursed satan had not envy of the great goods that Job had,
but of the excellent life that he led. At the instant that one is evil, he
does desire that all be evil: if he be sclaundered, that all be defamed: in
such wise, that there is not so perilous an envy, as that which evil men
have of those which be good and virtuous: If one be good and rich, and live
by one that is evil and malicious. First, he that is evil, does travel to
take away the credit the good man has, before he uses force to spoil him of
his goods.

Abrabam was tempted when it was commanded that his only son should be
sacrifized. Tobie was tempted when he lost his sight. The holy Job was tempted,
when they killed his children, took his goods, and filled him with the mangie:
in which temptations those holy men suffered much; Not the suffering but the
patience wherewith we suffer, God regards.
and also lost much: but at the time of repayment he did not give them reward
according to the goods they lost, but according to the patience they used.
Since it is certain that all passions or troubles, either God does send them,
or else do come by the hand of God, it is reason that we take them as sent by
the hand of God, who is so just in that he commands, and so limited, in that
he permits, The temptation of the Devil is limited.
that he does never suffer us to be tempted above our strength. With men that
be of a good life, and do keep rekening with their conscience: the license
which God gives to the Diuill to tempte them, is surely limited, and the
patience that he gives them, is very bountiful, and de hoc bactenus sufficit.

The Controler Hinestrosa came from the Court this way to see me, which came
in such distress, for that he had gone thither, he him repented, and for that
he had stayed, he was despited, and for that which had happened, he was
abhorred: in such sort, that to hear him report his great trauelles, moved
me to weigh my own as light. Men in sadness ought not to seek comfort of those
that be merry, but of others that are sorrowful and more confounded than them
selves. For if they so do, of a troth, they shall find that it is very little
they suffer, in respect of that which others endure. No more, but that our
Lord be your protector, and give me grace to serve him.

From Sotia the 4. of March. 1518.
A letter unto the Marquis of Velez, wherein he writes unto him certain
news of the Court.

RIght magnificent and my singular good Lord, Garcy Rodrygues servant and
solicitor unto your Lordshippe, gave me a letter of yours made the seventh of
this present in Velez el Rubio, which came with more swiftnes, and also more
fresh tha^ the Samons they bring from Bayon. Your honor writes unto me, that
I should certify you what news, and what world runs: unto which, I dare
answer your Lordship, that in this Court, none runs, but they go all
bechafed. It is an ancient pestilence in the courts of Princes: that they
call such men as do not answer them: they love where they be hated: they
follow such as know them not: they seek those that fly them: they serve
those that pay them not: they hope for that which is not given them: and they
procure that which they can not obtain. Such and so great trauelles as these
are, although we perform with our body that suffers, we can not bring to
pass with the heart to dissemble them: if the body suffer pains, and the
heart be compassed with anguish, sooner does the body cease to complain, than
the heart to sighe. Plutarche says of Aeschines the Philosopher, that being as
he was always sick, did never complain of the Spleen that did grieve him: and
on the other part, he did much lament of any sorrow that happened unto him. As
a wise man it seemethe your Honor to be advised in keeping your house,
ouerseeing your lands, enjoying your goods, understanding how to live, and
how to discharge your conscience. In such wise, that of affairs in court, ye
delight to hear, and fly to see them. For of a troth, as all things that do
pass here are feigned, vain, void, inconstant, and dangerous: it is a
pastime to understand them, and a great despite to behold them.

Your Lordship will that I write unto you, whether I be present at any time
when the Emperesse does eat, and what things she does most use to feed on. Now
in winter (as at this present) few Prelates being at Court, I (my Lord) am
present every day at dinner and supper, not to see, but to bless the table.
And I can tell your Lordship, that if I bless her, I curse my self: because
at the hour that I depart the Court to go to dinner, it is then time (very
near) to go to bed. There is much less travel in serving of God, than the
king. It is less travel to serve God, than the world.
For the king does not accept service, but when it likes him: but our God,
does not only accept when he will, but also when we think good. To that you
demand, what and how the Empress does eat: I can show your Lordship, that
she eats that which she eats cold, and in the cold, alone, with silence,
and that all stand beholding. If I be not deceived, these be five such
conditions, that only one were suffcient to give me a very evil repast. Sir
it is now winter, the which naturally is a time very heavy, cold,
melancholic, and all men delight to eat their meat by the fire, warm,
accompanied, and talking, and that none stand to behold, for that in time of
rejoicing, when a man neither eats or serves, but stands with silence
musing with him self: I dare say, of such a one, yt he does not behold us,
but rather watch us. To eat in ye winter any cold meat, is no small want of good
diet, for meats that are cold, do hurt the stomach, and give no apetite. A man
to eat alone is likewise great solitarnesse, and in ye end, Good company is
more pleasant then great fare.
the gentleman does not so much delight in the meat he eats, as in ye mirth
he makes with ye company he has at his table. For a man to eat without
communication and warmthe: I would say, the one proceeded of filthiness, the
other of wretchedness. Princes be not bound to be subject to these rules:
because they are forced to use great severity in their life, and great
authority at their meat. My Lord, be it as be may: and let her Majesty eat,
as shall please her to command: for in the end I do more repine at her
patience, than envy the meat she eats. The meats yt are served at her table
are many: and those that she feeds on, be very few, (for if her
Phisiognomie do not deceive me,) the Empress is of a very good condition, and
of a weak complexion. The most that she eats of, is winter Mellons, poudred
Beef, fed Pigions, minst Bacon, great Geese, and Capons roasted: in such wise,
that she eats that others do loath: and she abhors that, for which men
of the country do sighe. They set before her, Pecocke, Partridge, Capo^s,
franked Fesant, Manger bla^ck, Pasties, Tarts, and other variable kind of
gluttonies: of all which, she not only pretends a contempt to eat, but
also, shows a lothsomnesse to behold. In such wise, that the conte^tation
does not consist in the much or little that we have, but only in that, whereunto
we be inclined. In all her dinner, she drinks but once, and that is not pure
wine, but water mixed with wine: in such wise, that with her sippets none may
satisfy his apetite, and much less kill his thirst. She is served after the
manner of Portingall, which is to wit: there is placed at the table three Dames
upon their knees, the one to carue, the other twain to serve, in such sort,
that the meat is braught by gentlemen, and served with Ladies. All the other
Dames be there present, standing upright, not in silence, but talking, not
alone, but accompanies: so that the three Ladies give the Empress to eat, and
the others yield their servant sufficient matter both to speak and think.
Authorized and pleasant is the manner of Portingall, yet truly, notwithstanding
that sometimes the Dames do laugh so loud, and the gallants do speak so high,
that they lose their gravity, and also are yrksome to her Majesty.

To that which your Lordship does demand, that whether be more, the Dames
that be sued unto, or the gallants that do serve them? to this I answer: that
Esayas did say, Apprehendent septem malieres virum vnum. Many sons of
Knights and Gentlemen, do travel to see the Dames, to talk with them, and to
serve them: but at the time of marriage, none does marry with them. In such
manner that Justice justice, but not at home.

To that which you demand, who gave the Hat to the Lord Cardinal: it was
Sir Frauncis of Mendoza, Bishop of Samora. And if my divination deceives me
not, the Lord Bishop, had rather have been upon his knees to receive the same,
than sitting to give it. They presented the Hat in saint Antonies Church: and
at the instant it was given him, there fell so great tempest of wind and rain,
The old Romans were superstitious.
that if as he was a Christian, he had been a Roman, either he would not have
received it, or else have defered it until another day. My Lord it is not to
be holden for a jest, that at the very present, the wind and the rain was so
cruel and vehement, and the water so great, that when the Cardinal went
thence made Cardinal, he did more profit him self of the Hat he brought,
than of the Hat which he received. The banquet made by the Cardinal, was
magnificent in expenses and of long continuance, for that we began to eat at
one, and made an end at four. As concerning drinking, there were found so good
wines, and also so good drinkers, that Toro, S. Martin, Places where the good
wine of Spain does grow.
Madrigall, and Arenas, did cause that some did stauke with vnstedy steps.

As concerning my lodging, your Lordshippe ought not to ask me, if I have good
lodging, but if I have any lodging. For I say many times unto John de Aiala
the harbenger, that of God we obtain that we desire with prayers: and of him
we can not get a lodging, no not with tears. On a sunday in Aduent, preaching
in the Chapel unto her Majesty, I said, that saint John Baptist went to
dwell in the desert, not only to avoid sin, but also for that he would not
have to do with herbingers: and your Lordship do demand if there be much
people at the Court: to my judgment there are few men and many women: for that
from Auila there came inowe to the Court, and here in Medina was very many, and
beside these, Toro, Zamora, Salamanca, and Olmedo, have sent hither other
adventures, in such fort, that if in Palace there be for every galant seven
dames, there is in Court for every courtyer seven Courtizanes. For that Caesar
is in Flanders, ye winter hard, and the year dear also, there is none at the
court that willingly would be there, but for necessity.

Further, your Lordship will that I write unto you what I think of the duke of
Veiar, which gathered so great treasure in his life, that at his death he left
four hundredth thousand Ducates. This is a matter perilous to write, and
odious to hear: but in the end (my judgment is) that he went to seek care
for himself, envy for his neighbors, spurs for his enemies, Terrible
notes for the rich nigard.
a pray for thieves, travail for his person, anguishe for his spirit,
scruple for his conscience, peril for his soul, law for his children, and
cursses for his heirs. Great contention and debate goes betwixt the old
duchess and the young Duke, and the Earl of Miranda, and others his kinsfolk
and heirs, upon the inheritance of his good, and the succession of his house:
in such wise, that there be many that eft procure to inherit his money, and
none that takes the charge of his discharge. In the year. 1523. I being sick
in Burgos, The deed do here leave their money, and carry away their sins,
the Duke came to see me, and demanded who might properly be called covetous,
for ye he had asked many, and none had answered unto his mind: and that which
I answered at the sodeyn, were these words: The man ye sits in ye smoke when
he may warm himself by a fair fire: that may drink good wine, and drinks
evil: that may have a good garment and goes hard and ragged: and that will
live poorly to die rich: Horrible to live poorly, to die in great wealth.
he alone and no other we may name covetous and wretched. And said further:
Believe me (my Lord Duke) that I hold him a more worthy man that does
venture to part his riches, than him that gathers them together: because, for
a man to be rich it is sufficient that he be diligent, but to employ his
great riches, he must be a Gentleman, and noble minded. To that your Lordship
does demand my opinion of this town of Medina, I can say unto your honor
(to my judgment) that it has neither ground nor heaven, for the heavens are
always covered with Clouds, and the ground with dirt: in such wise, that if
the neighbourhed do call it Medina of the field, we Courtiers do term it
Medina of the dirt. It has a river that is called Sapardiell, which is so
deep and dangerous, that geese in summer go over dry footed: and as it is a
river narrow and muddy: it does provide us many eeles: and does cover us with
many Clouds. No more, but that our Lord be your protector, and give me grace
to serve him.

From Medina del campo, the xviij. of July in the year. 1532.
A letter unto the Bishop of Tui, new president of Granado, in which is said,
what is the office of Presidents.

MAgnificent and most reverend Lord and regal judge, I wish the new provision
that his majesty has bestowed upon your honor for the Presidentship of this
royal audience of Granado, may be fortunate. I can show your lordship, that
in this country you are more known by your fame, than by your person.
Wherefore (as you know) you have to travail that your life may be conformable
unto your fame, also you have to consider that if you come to judge, you shall
also: be judged, not of few, but of many: not of learning but of custom: not
of goods, but of fame: not only in public, but also in secret: not of
weighty causes, but also of very small matters. One of the greatest trauayls
that Presidents have, and such as govern common wealths, is, that they do
not only judge what they do, but also what they think: not only the things
that they do in earnest, but also what they commit in jest: in such sort that
all things which they do not with severity, they judge it for lightness.
Plutarke says in his politikes, that the Athenians did note in Simonides, that
he spoke loud. The Thebanes accused Parniculus that he spet much. The
Lacedaemonians said, that Licurgus went stouping The Romans blamed Scipio, that
he slepte snorting. The Vticenses defamed the good Cato, that he did eat with
both his cheeks. The enemies of Pompey murmured that he scratched with one
finger. The Carthaginia^s reproved their Hanniball, for that he went lose with
his garments: and the Sillanos charged Julius Caesar, that he went evil girt.
Behold sir, how far the malice of man does extend, and in what things the idle
(in the common wealth) do occupy themselves: to wit, that they praise not,
what the noble minded do take in hand as valiant men, but condemn that
which they do of negligence.

With reason they might have praised Simonides: that overcame the battle of
Marathone: Parniculus that reskued Thebes: Licurgus, that reformed his kingdom:
Scipio that subdued Carthage: Cato, that sustained Rome: Pompeius, that
augmented the Empire. Hanniball: that was of a mind immortal: and Julius
Caesar, that thought it little to be Lord of the world. Whereof we may gather,
that the people of a base soil do not speak of their betters and of the
mighty: according as reason directs, but agreeable to that which envy
does persuade them. Pliny says that the Romans, only in the province of
Vetica, held five jurisdictions conuented: which is, that of Gades, Hispalis,
Emeritans, Astaginensis, Cordubensis: they called Andelozia, the Province of
Vetica: they named the Chauncellorships, jurisdictions conuented: Gades, was
Calis: Hispalis, was Seuill: Cordubensis, Corduua: Meritensis, Merida:
Astaginensis, Ecija. Of these five Chauncelorships, the first and the greatest
was that of Calis: for there was resident the Counsel of the Province: and in
Merida were the men of war. I have brought all these antiquities unto your
Lordships memory, thereby to be advertised and also to consider: as there were
then many presidents appointed to govern, there were many of whom also to
murmur: but now you being alone, ye charge of murmuration will light upon you
only. The people of this country, are not like the people of your country:
for here they be sharp, subtle, and great dissemblers: therefore I advise and
forewarne you, that in hearing them you use leisure: and in your answers
resolution. As you shall perceive more hereafter, Strange customs in a common
wealth are perilous.
they will apply more understandings to one word, than there be gloses upon the
Bible. Conserve the^ in their ancient customs: care not to attempt or bring in
any new things: for novelties do always bring displeasures to those that deal
therein: and amongst the people, does enge^der vprores or offenses. Stand always
upon good aduisement: and walk always upon consideration: for in the houses of
judges, as many enter to view, as to dispatch matters. The house of Audience is
very moist, old, narowe, little, displeasant and dark; in such sort, that it
is rather to be pulled down than to dwell in: it will grieve your honor to see it,
and offend you to inhabit the same, but in the end, you have to comfort your
self, that your coming thither is not to dwell, but to amend your estate. My
Lord president your predecessor, entered the same, Bishop of Malorca, and came
from thence, made bishop of Auila. And so may it please the Lord, as ye now
come Bishop of Tui, ye shall return Archbishop of Ceuill: for it is now an
ancient custom, that the presidentes be never removed, until their estate be
amended. Your Lordship may bold it for most certain, that the office of
president is not a little honorable, but jointly therewith, very tedious and
burdensome. For that no man has compassion of his travel, and all (if he take
ease,) blaspheme him. In this presidentship there is other travel, which is,
your friends have license to see you, and to speak unto you, but your Lordship
has not liberty, to use conference with them: for if you talk with any in
particular, and admit him to your secret affairs: forthwith they will
report through the audience, and also will talk in place, that you have more
ability to be commanded, than capacity to command. In hard, grave, and
weighty matters, it is not repugnant to wisdom, neither yet to conscience,
for a Judge to confer with his friends, upon this condition, that they be
neither affected or furious, for there does wit most bend, where will has most
force. In such wise, ye ought to be conversant, confer, talk, and also co^sult
with your familiar friends, that all men may think of you, that they do
counsel, but not command you. Such as come to be suitors unto you, are not to
be answered sharply or with rigor, a mild answer never offends: for if
they go not with hope to be despatched, it were not just they should depart
complaining of their answer. In the words, in the courtesies, and in the
aunsweres, that you shall use, deal with every one according as your Lordship
shall perceive the condition of his estate to require: for otherwise, some will
praise you for just, and other some note you of evil nurture. Your Lordship
also has to travel in the common wealth, to appear mild, pitiful, loving,
and well wishing: in such sort, that you rather seek to be praised for the
bounty ye use, than for the authority you have. Consent not to be furious,
angry, cruel, and absolute, for that Judges be bound to suffer infinite
injuries, and have no license to revenge only one. When at any time you shall
feel occasion to be angry, troubled, and also iniuried, break not forth into
ire, nor speak any evil word. For if the man that does injury us, be discrete,
we take no small revenge, Notable co^dicio^s of a good President.
if to his words we give no answer. The good President, ought to have
rectitude in judgment, purity of life, quickness in dispatch, patience in
his affairs, and prudence in his governance. The which five virtues, he in
them selves so connexed, and in him so necessary, that he shall not be so much
profited by the four that he has, as he shall receive offense by the one
that he lacks. Of my self I give your Lordship to understand, that two years
since I have ^in at the law in this audience, against the Church of Toledo, for
the Abbay of Basa, in which, I have sentence in my favor, Per omnia
benedictus Deus. My Lord, at this present, we be in degree of a reuew, and for
that the matter depends in such estate, and may not farther proceed without
the President, Nil iam superest, nisi quod descendas, and ponas manum super
eam. In that your Lordship is President and I a suter, this letter suffers not
offers in words, nor permits much less service in works. Ne imponamus
crimen gloriae vestrae. Come your Lordship when you will with gladness, and
enter this audience in an happy hour, that as you know, positus es in ruinam,
and in resurrectionem multorium. Of lawiers and officers old and new, you
shall find a sacred College, dignum profecto tali viro. No more, but our Lord
be your protector, and give me grace to serve him.

From Granado the 12. of May. 1531.
A letter unto the warden of Alcala, in which is expounded that of the Psalm,
which says, Let the living descend into hell.

MOst reverend and sufficient religious father, Frater Antonius de Gueuara,
predicator and Chronista Caesaris: suo precordiali patri guardiano, cumplu:
sal. plu. mittit. Quamuis hactenus non scripsi paternitati tuae, non tunc minus
tibi deditus and affectus fui. Causam autem meae taciturnitatis, tua
singularis, prudentia per sese optime nouit. Literas tuas accepimus: quae nobis
incunditati, and volup^ati: fuerunt. Nec enim est alius quisquam bomimum, cuius
scripta libentius quam tua legamus: est enim in eis, and dicendi ornatus, and
debiti salis condimentum. Gaudemus te been valere: vtina^ and semper tibi sit.
Et de bis hactenus: In the general chapter I preached, all our order being
present, and amongst other authorities of holy Scripture, I expounded that text
of the Psalmist, which says, desce^dant in infernu^ viue^tes. The exposition
whereof your reverence desires me to send written as it was preached, for that
as then you heard it not. The preacher that gives in writing what he has fayd
in the pulpit, binds him self to lose his credit. For in the mouth of a great
preacher, it is more to see the spirit which he gives to the words he
speaks, than to all that he can write unto us. Aeschines the Philosopher,
being banished by the Athenians to the Rodes, when upon a certain day he
related the Oration that Demosthenes had made and written against him, he said
unto them: if ye had seen that beast Demosthenes blason his words, and the
spirit he had in speaking of them. Amongst the thirty most famous tyrants
that did destroy the common wealth of Athenes, Pifistrato was one, in whose
time the Philosopher Damonidas did flourish: A man out of doubt of a reformed
life, and must eloquent in his speech. Of this Philosopher Damonidas,
Pifistraro the tyrant, on a day said unto the Senate of Athens: All manner of
men of Athe^s, and of Greece, may freely come and speak with me in their
affairs, and say what appertains, except the Philosopher Damonidas, which
may write unto me, but not come and talk with me, The words of the eloque^t
contain great efficacy.
for he holds such efficacy in his words, that he persuades to what he
will. King Philip (Father to Alexander the great, besieging a certain city in
Grecia,) came to parlee with those in the City, that if they would suffer the
Philosopher Theomastes to enter, and to speak with them certain words, he
would depart and raise his siege: the Philosopher Theomastes had great
eloquence in the words he did speak, and very great persuasion in things he
would bring to pass, and so it chanced there, A strange example of an Orator.
that he entering alone into the City, making his Oration in the Senate: they
did not only render them selves and open their gates, but also did kiss King
Phillips hands for king. In such wise, that the Philosopher had more power with
his words, tha^ the King with his armies. I say this reverend Father, for that
betwixt the bearing and reading of a sermon there goes no small difference.
For as the Apostle says, the letter kills, but the spirit quickneth. The
authority of the Prophets be assured, the sermon goes written as it was
preached, but I give you to understand, it goes despirited and unsavory.

But coming to the purpose of that the Prophet says: which is to wete:
descendant in infernum viuentes. The doubt is, how it may agree, that they may
go down to hell, A text of the Psalmist expounded.
being alive, and being alive, how they may be in hell. Saying, as the Prophet
does say, in an other Psalm: Non mortui lnudabunt te Domine, nes omnes qui
descendant in infernum. If those that go down into hell, shall not there
praise God, but blaspheme him: to what end does the prophet command us to
desce^d? To say that Orestes entered into hell after the Nymphs, and that
Aeneas descended thither to seek his father: and that the musicion Orpheus did
fetch from thence his wife, and the valiant Hercules did break the gates and
bind the Giant Aethna, and the dog Cerberus: These may be termed poetical
fixions, and no truths: for the unfortunate that is once overtaken with night
in hell, for evermore there remains buried: and he that can once tymely rise
up into Paradise, shall never more see night: for the elect shall there find
day without night, and the dampened shall find night without day. Being such as
we ought to be, we may excuse our going to hell: but after that we shall be
entered thither, it is not in us to return again. For there is nothing more
consonant to reason, tha^ that he which willingly came to the fault, against
his will do suffer pain. For the prophet to say, descendant in infernum
viuentes, in my judgment I durst say, that his meaning was to persuade us, and
to warn us, that we descend into hell being alive: that we descend not after
we be dead. Now let us descend into hell by contemplation, so that afterward
we descend not to eternal dampnation. Let us descend thither by fear, that
they carry us not thither by rigor. Let us descend thither with good will,
that they carry us not by force. Let us descend by day, that they carry us not
at night. Let us descend alone, because they shall not compel us to go with
company. Let us descend in time, that we may return, because that
afterward they shall not carry us to leave us there. Finally, I do say, that
it is an holy thing to descend into hell, while we are alive, to the end we
descend not when we be dead. They daily descend into hell that think upon
the grievous pains and formentes that be given there for sin. For there is
no better salve to part us from our sins, than always to carry the pain in
memory. For out of doubt, the pain of the dampened does withdraw us from
vices. Go who will on pilgrimage to Mo^serate, let them wander to get the
Iubile of S. James: let him vow himself to our Lady of Gadaliape: let him
travail to S. Lazarus of Civil: let him send alms to the holy house: and let
him offer his goods to S. Antony de Castro. But for my part I will no other
station, but that unto hell. He vnderstendeth not a little, nor occupies
himself in little, nor goes not a little, nor takes in hand that is little,
neither goes on pilgrimage a little, that every day gives a hoylt or a turn
into hell. Once a year did the Hebrews visit their temple. From five years
to five, the Samnites did celebrate their Lustros: from four to four years
the Greeks did feast at their Olimpiades: from seven years to seven years,
the Egyptians did renew the Temple of Iris: from ten to ten years, the
Romans did send presents to the Oracle of Apollo: but he that is a faithful
and a true Christian, not from a time to so long a time, but every hour and
every moment shall go and come to hell. For of a perpetual pain, perpetual
ought to be the memory thereof. In the pilgrimage to the holy House, there is
cost, travel, and also peril: but those that every day do visit hell by
contemplation: neither have cost, or pass travel, neither run in any kind
of danger: For it is a pilgrimage that you go on dry foot, and is visited
with standing still. Oh blessed is the Soul that every day by the stations of
hell gives a turn, in which he does behold, how the proud be there brought
down: the envious chastized: the gluttons pine with hunger: the furious grow
mild: and the fleshly consumed. Therefore, let the living descend into hell. To
go this holy journey, neither weakness may excuse us, either poverty let us:
for it does neither command us to weary our persons, or that we employe our
goods, but that we keep our money and there to bestow our thoughts.
Therefore let the living descend into hell. It does not seem to me, ye
(...)ath an unmeet painted story, yt has hell painted in his oratorie: for
they are much more that abstain from sin for fear of the pain, than for love of
ye glory.

This is that I judge of that text of the Psalmist, about the which (may it
please the king of heaven) that even as my pen has written, my soul may
always ruminate: for as the Apostle says, not the hearers, but the doers
shall be justified.

Vale. Iterumque vale. From Madrid the.viij. of January.1524.
A Letter unto sir Diego of Caminia, wherein is treated, how envy reigns in
all men.

MAgnificent and good Christian gentleman, you write unto me, that you are
much offended by many slaunderers that deprave your doings, and vnframe your
attemptes: I say, to marvel thereat, you have some occasion, but to be
offended, you have no reason. For in the end, It is less evil to envy us,
tha^ to pity us
it is less evil that your neybors envy you, tha^ that your friends should
pity you The most ancient vice of this world is envy, and that which shall
not end until the world be finished, is envy. Adam, and the serpent: Abell
and Cain* Jacob and Esau: Joseph and his brethren: Saul and David: Job and
Satan: Achitophell, and Hewsey: Haman and Mardocheus: did not persecute each
other for the goods they did possess: but for the envy they had. Much more
is the enimitie that is sown upon envy: than that which is founded upon
injury. For the injured man, does many times forget: but the envious does
never cease to persecute. More cruel and also more long were the wars
betwixt the Romans and the Carthaginians: than betwixt the Greeks and the
Trojans: For the Greeks did fight for the injury done unto Helene: and the
others, who should obtain the seygnorie of Europe. The mortal hatreds that
fell betwixt those two great Romain Princes, The causes of hatred of Julius
Caesar, and Pompeius.
Julius Caesar and Pompeius, was not for that the one had injured or evil
dealt with the other: but for that Pompeius had envy at the great fortune
Julius Caesar had in fyghting, and Caesar had envy at the great grace Pompeius
had in government. Two kind of people were amongst the Romans: much famous
and very glorious, which is to wit: the Dictators, that were very wise in
government, unto whom they erected pictures lively counterfeit: and the
Consulles, which were skillful in ordering of their batailles. And to these
were given triumphs. In such wise, that when Rome was in her great
prosperity, no service was left unrewarded, nor crime unpunished. There be few
men in whom all vices (...) concorre, and much less be those that want all
faults: and if there be any man that is good, he is envied, and if he be
evil, he is envious. In such wise, that with the vice of envy, either we must
persecute, or of some be persecuted. We may save our selves from the liar, by
not speaking with him: From the proud, by not comparing with him: From the
slothful, by not troubling him: from the lecherous, in not being conversant
with him: from the glutton, by not eating with him: From the furious, by not
chiding with him: from the nigard, by asking him nothing. But from the envious,
it is not sufficient to fly from him, much less to flatter him. The vice of
envy is of such effect, that there is no tower, which he does not scale: nor
wall, that he does not ouerthowe: nor mine, that the does not countermine: nor
power, that he does not resist: neither man, against whom he does not bend. If
in one man alone might be found the beauty of Absolon, the strength of
Sampson, the wisdom of Solomon, the swiftnes of Azaell, the riches of
Croessus, the liberality of Alexander, the valiantnes of Hector, the eloquence
of Homer, the fortune of Julius, the life of Augustus, the Justice of Traianus,
and the zeal of Cicero, let him hold it for certain, that he shall not be so
endued with graces, as he shall be persecuted of the envious: the wolf
follows the flock, the Ravens the carrion, the Bee^ the flower, the Flies, the
Honey, men, the riches, and the envious prosperity: I would say, that
naturally as we have compassion upon the wretched, so have we envy at tthe
prosperous. At the venim of Socrates, at the exile of Aeschines, Envy bends
his artillery against prosperity.
at the hangyng of Cressus, at the destruction of Darius, at the mischaunce of
Pyrrhus, at the end of Cyrus, at the infamy of Cateline, at the misfortune of
Sophonisa, none ever bare envy, but pity. One of the things by the which I
know how far the malice of man does extend, is: in that to the miserable and
overthrown, there is none that will give his hand to help them up: and to the
rich and those that are in favor, there wantes not that armeth stumblyng
blocks to make them fall. Let them persuade themselves which be rich of
power, and private or in favor, that their power and riches is not so great,
as the malice and envy of their neighbors is cruel. Sir I thought good to
bring unto your memory these old things, to the end you shall not refuse to
pay your pound of wax, to be admitted into the brotherhode of envy. I give
you to understand, if you know not, that the brothers of the fraternity of
envy, Behold the fraternity of envy.
observe it as a principal office, to bury men quick, and to raise up dead
men. This brotherhode of envy is generous, for of them have bin Christians and
infidels, absent and present, rich and poor, and all those that be dead, and
such as be now alive. They have in that fraternity, great liberties and
privileges, that is to say, they repair not to Chapels, but to houses: they
speak not evil of the poor, but of the rich: they do not help, but
hinder: they give not, but they take: they pray not, but they curse: they
abstain not from man's flesh, but from beasts: they be not in doubt of their
enemies, but of their friends: Finally they have license to murmur one of an
other, and never to common of the truth. Although this brotherhood be painful
and tedious, yet is it a sign of great misery not to be registered in the
same: for the man that has not in this world some enemies, it is a note that
of fortune he is much forgot. Plutarch in his Apophthegmes, speaking of
Themistocles, the renoumed Captain of the Greeks says, that one demanding
why he was so sad? made answer: The sorrow that I have is, for that in.xxij.
year since I was borne, I think not that I have have done any thing worthy
memory, because I see no man in all Athens bears me envy. The first tyrant
that was in Sicile, the ancients do affirm, was Herion, the second Celon,
the third Dionysius the Syracusan, the fourth Dionysius the young man, the
fifth Taxillo, the sixte Brudanus, the seventh Hermocrates: of the which seven,
to this day the Scicilians do as much complain, as the Greeks do boast
themselves of their seven sages. The last tyrant Hermocrates, approaching near
to death is reported to have said unto his son: Son, the last words I say
unto thee, is, be not envious in condition, but do such deeds as therefore
thou must be envied. Surely, these words were not words of a Tyrant, but of a
very wise man. For he commanded by the same, that he should be virtuous, and
forbad him to be malicious. Sir I said unto you in the beginning of this
letter, that although you had some occasion, yet had you no just reason too
vex your self, neither to desist in weldoing. For of two evils the less
evil is, to consent that they murmur of well doing, then to leave to do well.

Sir from hence there are few things to write of, but that, if you have there
too many evil tongues, here we have no want of blasphemies, which do neither
make exception of God, or pardon the King. Two times I have moved the Cardinal
Tortosa in your business: and if I be not deceived, as great is his
forgetfulness, as my diligence. We that be in this Court, advise our selves to
seek that which we may, when we cannot what we desire. No more, but our Lord
be your protector, and give me grace to serve him.

From Valiodolid, the xxvj. of October.1520.
A letter unto sir John of Moncada, in which is declared what thing is Ire,
and how good is patience.

EXpectable Gentleman and magnificent Knight, if it shall seem unto you that I
answer your Letters with slacknesse, impute the fault to Palome your servant
which halteth, and the horse whereon he rides is lame, the way long, the
winter hard: and I also am always in business, although from the same I have
gathered small profit: and as I suspect, if this your servant have made any
tarriance upon the way in coming hither, or has made small have in returning
thither, it has proceeded of a certain combat with love that he happened to
encounter by the way. Wherein, you may then well think how much rather he
would accomplish the love that he bears in his breast, than with your letters
that he carries in his bosom. If you will credit me, to men inamored you shall
never commend your business: For his office is not to be occupied in other
affairs, but in writing letters, watching at corners, playing on gitterns,
climing of walls, and vewing of windows. As concerning that which you write
unto me in your letter, I shall answer you more briefly than your desire, and
more largely than I may. Considering how I go to the Inquisition to reform,
and to the Court too preach: and every day in Caesar's Chronicles to write. My
business is overmuch, and my time too little. By the holy God I do swear, that
as many courtiers which be idle in this court, I do more envy the time they
loose, than the money they possess. But coming to the purpose, Courtiers
loose time.
I do swear by the law of a friend, I have been as much grieved for your
great mischance and misfortune, as if it had bin mine own cause. For as Chilo
the Philosopher said: the mischances of a friend we must not only remedy them,
but also bewail them. Agesisaus the Greek being demanded for what cause he did
more lament the heaviness of his friends, than the death of his children, made
answer: I do not bewail the want of my wife, the loss of my goods, or the
death of my children: for all these are parts of my self: but I bewail the
death of my friend, which is an other my self. Sir, I say thus much, since I
may not be there present to lamente with you, neither do I here find my self
of power sufficient to remedy your case, I will write some letter to comfort
you. For sometimes the pen uses no less pity with the friend, than the
lance does cruelty with the enemy, to persuade that you should not feel,
that which reason would you should so much feel: it should be just occasion
for me to be worthily noted with want of due consideration, and you accused to
be insensible. That which I dare speak in this matter is, that you conceive
thereof as a man, and dissemble the same as advised and discrete. The injuries
that touch our honor, done by such of whom we may not be revenged, the most
sound counsel is, to let it fall, since with due vengeance it may not be
quited. If in these present greeues you will take the order of a Christian, and
leave the way of a worldly knight, you shall fix your eyes (not on him that
does persecute you) but in God that does permit the same: before who^ you shall
find your self so faulty, that that is little which you suffer, in respect of
that ye deserve to suffer. Moreover, Injuries don by the almighty are to be
dissembled.
ye ought to think, that tribulations which God permits, be not to lose
us, but to prove us. For in the books of God they set down no man as quited,
but he that is apt for travel: and amongst those of the world, they give
wages to none but unto him that is given to wantonness.

Sir you write unto me that I certify you what thing is anger, and the
definition thereof. To see if you may forget the dispite of him that has done
you so cruel an outrage to know what thing is Ire, and to cut of the furious
curse of his rage. Sir, it semes to me no evil counsel (the very troth being
known) many times it is more security for him that is iniuried to dissemble
the injury, than to revenge it.

Aristides says, that ire is no other thing, but an inflaming of the blood:
and an alteration of the heart. Possidonius says, that ire is no other thing,
but a short foolishnes. Cicero says, that which the Latins do call ire, the
Greeks do name desire of vengeance. Aeschines says, that ire was caused of the
fume of the gall, and of the heat of the heart. The trefull of al men and at
all times abhorred.
Macrobius says there is much difference betwixt ire and testiness: because
ire grows of an occasion, and testiness of evil condition. The divine Plato
says, that the fault is not in anger, but in him that gives occasion.
Laertius says, when the chastisement exceedes the fault, then is it vengeance,
and not zeal: But when the fault does exceed the chastisemente, it is zeal
and no vengeance. Plutarche says, that the privileges of ire, are not to
believe our friends, to be rash in attempts, to have the cheeks inflamed, to
use quickness with ye hands, to have an unbridled tongue, at every word to use
ouerthwartnesse, to be fumish for small causes, and to admit no reason. Solon
Solonio being demanded whom we call properly irous, answered, he that little
esteems to lose his friends, and makes no account to recover enemies. After
so many and so grave Philosophers, that which I dare say is, that the vice of
ire is lightly written, easy to persuade, pleasant to preach, ready to
counsel, and very difficile to refrain. Of any vice we may speak evil, but
of the vice of anger we may say much, and very much evil. For ire does not only
transform us into fools, but also makes us of al men to be abhorred. To
temper ire is sufficientely virtuous: but utterly to expel it, is a thing more
tha^ sure. For all things that are evil of themselves, and of condition
hurtful, are more easily resisted than thrown away. In the beginnings, many
things be in our own hands, to admit or to send them away: but after they
have taken power over us (if by chance reason rise against them) they say they
will not depart, since they be in possession. Ire has so evil a condition,
that of one only time that we yield him our will, he afterward makes our
will unto all the he likes.

In the Magistrates that govern the common wealth, In him that governs, ire
is perilious.
we condemn not the good or evil correction they use: but the great fury
they show in the same. For if they be bound to chastise the offenses, they
have not license to show themselves passioned. Those that offend, it is a thing
very just yt they remain not unpunished: but this punishment must not be
such, that it appear that they take some great vengeance: for be a man never
so brute, without comparison he does more feel the hate that they show, than
the chastisements which they give. The whip, the staff, the sword, and the
punishment that is given to the flesh, although it be grievous, yet it soon
passes: but the injurious word the heart never forgets. For a man to be in
power and authority, and to refrain his anger, it is not an human virtue,
but heroical and divine. For in this world, there is not a more high or
excellent kind of triumph, than a man to triumph over his own heart. Socrates
the Philosopher, A notable example to re^traine ire.
holding his dagger in his hand to strike one of his servants (the same
already lifted up) said: remembering my self that I am a philosopher, and that
at this present I am angry, I will not give thee thy deserved chastisemente. O
example for certain worthy to be noted, and much more to be embraced and
followed. Of which we may gather, that during the time that ire has us in
possession, we ought not to dare to speak, and much less any man to
chastise.

Licurgus the Philosopher, commanded those that governed his common wealth: An
example of the heathen to be noted and learned.
that all evil and dishonest things they should condemn and chastise, but
yet by no means, abhor the malefactor, saying that there could not be amongst
the people, a more grievous plague than a judge that would make himself
drunk with fury. There be few that follow this counsel, and very many that
do the contrary: for now a days there is none that is angered with the offense,
but with the offender. For my part (and also for those that shall) it is a
great travail to trafike or deal with furious, impacient, and men of evil
suffering: For that they are importable to serve, and of conversation very
perilous. Since I have said what thing is ire, and the hurtes that are done
by ire: now let us say, what remedies may be given against ire. For my meaning
is not to teach you to be angrye, but to be paciente. I dare auouche, that it
is a great remedy against ire, when a man is angered to refrain the tongue,
and to defer vengeance until an other time. For that many times a man does
say and promise being in choler, things the which afterward he would not
should have once passed his thoughts. With the yrefull we must not be
importunate to entreat a pardon, no not from the foot to the hand, but only
to desire that vengeance be deferred. For during fury, there is no account to
be made that the iniuried will pardon, except he be quieted with the man
that is furious and in choler: for any one to seek to bring him to agreement,
or to justice, either it is lack of wit, or diligence more than needs. For
the ire that is much inflamed, and the heart that is kindled with furye,
neither does admit consolation, or is overcome with reason. I do advise and
readuise the man that presumes to be wise, that he take not in hand to contend
with him that is inflamed with ire. For if he fail to follow counsel herein,
when he scapeth best, he shall either have his honor reviled, or his head
broken. Although a man be a fre^d unto him that is offended, he does him more
profit to let him alone, than to speak unto him, or help him. For at ye
instant he has more need of a bit to bridle him, than a spur to quicken him.
With the man that is in a rage, it is more need to use skill than to deal by
force. For although he were angered at the sudden, the pacifying of him must be
at leisure. Plutarch in the books of his common wealth does counsel the
Emperor Traiane that he be paciente in his trauayles, mylde in his
affairs, and of much suffering amongst the furious: affirming and swearing,
that many mo things be cured by time, than framed and agreed by reason.
Betwixt noble personages we have seen great quarelles, which passions and
furies might not be stayed by entreataunce of friends, threatening of enemies,
gifts of money, neither yet with weariness of trauayles: And after that time
has had his course (and calling them to remembrance) have agreed amongst
themselves, without the request of any friend to talk therein. Finally, I say,
that when a friend does see the choler of his friend inflamed, if he will
do him good, let him cast on water with temperaunce to cool him, and not
wood with fury to burn him. I (sir John) have enlarged this Letter much more
than I thought, and also more than I desired, but that your exceedyng pain
and sorrows have made my pen discourteous, to suffer, use silence, and
dissemble, and let the time pass, and somewhat forget the matter. For if I be
not deceived, you shall see, the fire that they made at your gates, burn in
their entrayles. Solomon the Hebrew said, that the wise man has his tongue
in his heart: and he that is a fool and furious, has his heart in his
tongue. Agis the Greek said, that the foolish man is grieved with that which
he does suffer, and boastes himself of that which he has spoken. And the
wise is grieved with that which he has spoken, and boasts himself of that
he does suffer. Now or never it is needful, that you profit your self of
your science and wisdom: For it is a spice of no small foolishness, to know
to cure others, and not to remedy your self. I am not forgetful, that when my
sister the Lady Francis died in Mexia her tower, you did write me so many and
so good things, that they were sufficient to lyghten me of the pain,
although not altogether of the sorrow. And sir, I say it for this cause,
that it shall be greatly to your own purpose, to take some grapes of the
same vine.

As concerning the rest, I have no more to write unto you, but that the
credit which your servant brought with your letter, in that he should
say unto me, the self same credit, my letter does give him, in that which
he shall answer.

From Toledo the.vj. of April. 1523.
A letter unto Sir Jerome Vique, in which is treated, how great liberty is
much hurtful.

RIght magnificent and Caesar's Ambassador, I being in Granado the xx. of July,
received a letter from your worship. And considering it came so far as it is
from Valentia to Granado, he has made good speed upon the way, since he
departed from thence the Saturday and came hither the Monday. Coming as you
come from so strange a country as is Rome, and having passed so dangerous a
Sea as is the gulf of Narbona, I will not demand if you came safe: But give
God thanks for that you are come alive. I wish (if it please the Lord) that
you come from Italy so sound in body and so perfect in soul, as when you
parted from Spain: for in new countries always there is learned new fashions.

The good Licurgus did command the Lacedaemonians, that neither out of the
kingdom they should go to traffike, or suffer strangers to enter their
country, saying: That if kingdoms grow rich by trading with strangers, they
turn poor of their proper virtues. Speaking the truth and also with
liberty, I have seen few come from Italy; that came not absolute and also
dissolute: and this, not because the land is not consecrat with saints, but for
that it is now inhabited with sinners. The properties of the belles, are to
call men to come to service, and never enter into the church them selves: and
in my judgment, such is the condition of Italy, where there be great
Sanctuaries that provoke unto prayer, and the people thereof has no devotion.
Many do say that all the weal of Italy consists in liberty. I say that
all their hurt rises by want of subjection: because, for men to do all that
they will, they come to do that, which they ought not. If Trogus Pompeius do
not deceive us, the Romans giving liberty to the Bactrians for that they had
succored the Consul Rufus in the Spartian wars, For the doubt of vice,
liberty refused.
they refused it, saying, that, that day they should be made free, they should
commit whereby deservedly to be slaves. Speaking the truth, there be no common
wealths more lost than those where the people be most at liberty? For the
condition of liberty is, to be of many desired and of few well employed:
where there is no subjection, there is no King: where there is no King, there is
no law: where there is no law, there is no Justice: where is no Justice, there
is no peace: where there is no peace, there is continual war: and where
there is war, it is impossible that the common wealth may long endure.
Never might the mighty Rome be brought under by the Greeks, the Carthaginians,
the French, the Hunnes, the Epirotes, the Sabines, the Samnites, and
Hetrurians: but finally it came to ruin and was lost, by the pride they had in
commanding, and the much liberty in sinning. The divine Plato did say many
times to the Athenians when he saw them go so at large: take heed you
Athenians to your selves, and loose not by your viciousnes, that which you have
won by your valiauntnes. For I give you to understand, that liberty asks
no less wisdom to conserve it, than valiauntnes to obtain it. Experience
teaches daily, how in a free common wealth, they do more hurtes, they speak
more blasphemies, they commit more offenses, they raise more scandales, more
good be defamed, and more theft attempted, only of two yongmen at liberty,
than of two hundred that be subject. If curiously we do behold, of a troth we
find that they do not drown in wells, whip, banishe, cut the throtes, hang,
cut of ears, nor put in prison, but lost men that spends their time in
vanities, and employ their liberty in vices.

In the life of man there is not the like riches to liberty, but jointly
therewith, there is nothing more perilous than she is, if they know not to
measure her and use her according to reason: liberty ought to be won,
procured, bought, succored and defended: Liberty craves wisdom.
but jointly with this, I do warn, give counsel, and also advise him that
shall have her, that he use her (not when the appetite shall require) but when
reason shall give license. For otherwise, thinking that he had liberty for all
his life, he shall not enjoy hier a month. The liberty of Phalaris did trouble
the Greeks: that of Roboam lost the Hebrews: that of Cateline did offend the
Romans: that of Iugurtha defamed the Carthaginians: that of Dionysius decayed
the Scicilians: and in the end, the common wealths had an end of their
travails, and they of their lives and tyra^nies. Many men there be that leave
to do evil, because they will not: but much more are they that cease, because
they cannot. Many there be that do abstain for conscience, and many more for
shame: many do refrain for love, but many more for fear: many live with a
desire to be good, and many more for fear to be dishonored. But yet for fear,
or for love, or for conscience, or else for shame: always we must stay our
selves by the truth, and cut of the sway of liberty. For if we give the bridle
to sensuality, and do not shut the door to liberty, we shall have what to
think upon by day, and also wherefore to weep by night.

Sir, I thought good to bring this to your memory, to the end, that since you
come from Rome, you be not over careful to boast your self of the customs
thereof. For you shall understand (if ye know not) that the fashions of Italy
are more pleasant to be recounted, than sure to be followed. If you call to
remembrance the generositie of Rome, the liberty of the neighbors, the
variety of the people, the galantnes of the women, the plenty of victualles,
the goodness of the wines, the mirth and joy at their feasts, and the
magnifice^cy of their Palaces: you have therewith to remember, yt there where
goods be spent, the conscience is charged, and also many times yt soul is
lost. The Romish people in Rome many of them be good, but the strange people
yt are stayed in Italy, for ye more part are evil, for they be but very few
that go thither with devotion, but they be infinite that be lost in wandering
after their fleshly lusts. Rome is not now in ye power of the Christians, as
it was in the time of the heathen, for then being the mother of all virtues,
she is now turned to ye schole of al vices.

Leaving this aparte, what shall we say of a poor priest that goes to Rome
through Spain, France, and Lumbardy, and before he can get sentence of his
benefice, he co^mittes a thousand vices, spendes his money, and does a thousand
wicked deeds? I say for mine own part, that I was at Rome, I saw Rome, I
visited Rome, and did behold Rome: in which I saw many things that gave
devotion, and other things that brought me to admiration. Oh how much, and how
much is betwixt the customs of Italy, and the law of a pure christian?

Twelve co^dicio^s of Rome, variyng from Christ's law.
1 For in the one they say, that ye may do all that you will, and in the
other, nothing but what you ought to do.

2 In the one, that you be a comfort to all men, and in the other, that you
shall deny to procure to be saved.

3 In the one, that you have much conscience, and in the other, that you make
no account of shame.

4 In the one, that you travel to be a good Christian, and in the other, that
you care to be very rich.

5 In the one, that you live comfortable unto virtue, in the other, that you
care not but to enjoy liberty.

6 In the one, that for any thing you shall not speak a lie, in ye other, yt in
case of interest, you make no acco^pte of truth.

7 In the one, that you live only with your own, and in the other, that also
you take profit of other men's.

8 In the one, that always you remember to dye, and in the other, that for
nothing you leave to lead an ill life.

9 In the one, that always you occupy your self in knowledge, and in the
other, yt you give your self to be of much power.

10 In the one, that you impart of that you have with the poor and friends,
and in the other, that always you keep for dear years.

11 In the one, that you use much silence, and in the other, that you presume
to be very eloquent.

12 In the one, that you believe only in Christ, and in the other, that you
procure to have money. If you my Lord Ambassador, with these xy. conditions
will be a Roman, much good may it do you. For upon the day of accoumpt, you
would rather have bin a laborer in Spain, than an Ambassador at Rome. No
more, but that our Lord be your protector, and to you and to me he give good
endings.

From Granado, in the year 1525. the day and month aforesaid.
A letter unto the said Sir Jerome Vique, in which is declared an Epitaph of
Rome.

RIght magnificent Ambassador to Caesar: by your letter that I have received,
I was certified yt to you was delivered an other of mine, A condition at be in
braced.
wherein I have used no curious care: For under your good condition, there is
no place for any thing to be dispraysed, much less to be condemned. Mosen
Rubine advertised me, that by sleeping in an ayry place, you have bin very
reumatike, which I certainly beeleue has proceeded of the great heat of the
month of August, but by my advise you shall not use it, neither others so give
counsel: for that it is less evil in summer to sweat than to cough.

You write, and also send unto me certain Gothicke letters, that you have
found written in an ancient place in Rome, which you can neither read, or
they in Italy can declare.

Sir I have very well seen, considered, and also reconsidered them: and to him
that is not acquainted with this Romish cyphringes they seem illegible, and
not intelligible, and that to understand and read them well, it were necessary
that the men that be a live should divine, or those that wrote them should
rise from death to life. But to expound these letters, no dead man shall be
raised, either am I a soothsayer or divine. I have tired my wits, and called
to remembrance, I have ouerturned my Books, and also have ouerloked marvelous
and many histories, to see and to know who it was that did write them, and
wherefore they were written: and in the end, as there is nothing that one man
does, that another can not do, or that one man knows, and an other knows
not, your good luck would, and my great diligence, that I met with that which
you desired, and I sought for. And for that it shall not seem that I speak
without Book, in few words I will recite the history.

In the times of Octauius Augustus the Emperor, there was in Rome a Roman
Knight named Titus Annius (verily a man) of great experience in causes of
war, and right wise in the government of the common wealth. There was in
Rome an office that was called Tribunus Scelerum, and this had the charge of
all criminal causes, which is to wit, to hang, to whip, to banish, to cut
throats, and to drown in wels: in such manner, that the Censor did judge the
Civil, and the Tribune the Criminal. This office amongst the Romans was of
great pre-eminence, and of no less confidence, they never incommended the same
but to a man of noble blood, ancient in years, learned in the laws, in life
honest, and in justice very moderate: for that all these conditions did
concur in Titus Annius, he was by the Emperor Augustus in the office of
Tribune named, by the Senate confirmed, and of the people allowed. Titus Annius
lived and was resident in this office xxv. years, in all which time he never
spoke to man any injurious word, either did any injustice. In remuneration of
his travel, A reward after death.
and in reward of his bounty, they gave him for privilege that he should be
buried within the walls of Rome, and that he should bury by him self some
money, and that in that sepulcher there should not any other be buried. For a
man to be buried in Rome, was amongst the Romans a great pre-eminence, the
one was because the priests did consecrate the sepulcher, and the other for
that malefactors to fly unto sepulchers, were more worth than the temples. But
now these letters would say, that Titus Annius (Judge of the faulty) by him
in his sacred sepulcher did hide certain money, which is to wit, ten foot
off, and that in the same sepulcher the Senate does command, that none of his
heirs be buried. This Titus Annius when he died left his wife alive that was
named Cornelia, which in the sepulcher of her husband did set this Epitaphe.
The aucthors of this history are Vulpicius, Valerius, Trebellius. And because
the declaration of the history shall appear more clear, let us set the
exposition over every letter, and these be the letters.

Titus. Annius. Tribunus. Scelerum. Sacro. A dark Epitaph expounded.


T. A. T. Sce. S.

Suo. Sepulcro. Pecuniam. Condidit. Non.

S. S. P. Con. N.

Long. Pedes. December. Hoc. Monumentum.

Lon. P. X. H. M.

Here Is. Non. Sequitur. Iure. Senatus.

H. N. S. I. S.

Cornelia. Dulcissima. Eius. Coniux. Posuit.

Cor. D. E. Con. P.

Behold here my Lord Ambassador your letters expounded, and not dreamed, and in
my judgment this that we have said they would say, and if you be not satisfied
with this interpretation, let the dead expound them that did write them, or
those be which aline that gave them. No more but that our Lord be your
protector, and give us grace that we end in his service.

From Toledo the third of April, 1526.
A letter unto the Bishop of Badaios, in which there is declared the ancient
laws of Badaios.

RIght magnificent and Caesar's Precor, I received a letter from your
Lordshippe, with the which I did much rejoice my self before I did read it,
and after that I had read it, I remained no less offended: not for that
which you had written unto me, but for that you commanded me, and also
demanded of me. (If Plutarch do not deceive us,) into the chamber of Dionisius
the Siracusan none did enter: in the librarye of Lucullus no man sat down:
Marcus Aurelius with the key of his study, (no not with his Faustine) did use
any trust: and of a troth they had great reason: because there be things of
such quality, that not only they ought not to be dealt withal, neither yet to
be looked upon. Aeschines the Philosopher said, that for very great friendship
that might be betwixt one and other, he ought not to show him all things in
his house, He is deprived of liberty, that discovers a secret.
nor to communicate with him all that he thinks in his heart: saying that a man
is no more himself, than that he holds secret in himself. It is long since
I commended unto my memory, that sentence of the divine Plato, where it is
said: that unto whom we discover our secret, we give our liberty. I say this
unto your Lordship, for that if I had not consented that your Secretary
should enter my study, neither had he bin a babbler, or your Lordship
importunate. Your honor says that he said, he had seen in my library a bank
of old books, whereof some were Gothike, Latin, Greek, Calde, and Arabic,
and that he forgot not to steal one, which made much for your purpose. In that
he said unto you, he said very troth: and in that he did, he did me much
displeasure, for that amongst the learned, iestes do extend even to the
speaking of words: but not to the stealing of books.

As I my Lord have no other goods to lay up, nor other pastimes wherewith to
recreat me, but books that I have procured, and also sought in diverse
kingdoms: beeleue me one thing, which is, that to take my books, is as much
as to pull out my eyes. Of my natural condiciou, I was ever an enemy to new
opinions, and a great friend of old books: for if Solomon say, Quod in
antiquis est sapientia, for my part I do not believe, that the wisedonie lies
in horeheades, but in old books. The good king sir Alonso that took Naples,
did use to say that all was but trash, except dry wood to burn, an old horse
to ride, old wine to drink, old friends to be conversant, and old books
to read in. Old books have great advantage of the new, which is to wit,
that they speak the truth, they have gravity, and do show authority: of
which it follows, that we may read them without scruple, and allege them
without shame.

The case is this, that in the year 1523. I passing thorough the Town of
Safra, came to a Book binders shop, which was tearing out leaves of an old
parchement book to cover another new book, and knowing that the book was
better to read in, than to make couerings, I gave him for the same viij.
Rialles of plate, and also would have given him viij. Ducates. Now Sir, you
shall understand, that the book was of the laws of Badaios, that king Allonso
the xj. made, a Prince that was very valiant, and not a little wise. This is
the book that your Secretary did steal from me, which he carried unto you,
and it has pleased me much that you have seen it, and have not understood
it: in such wise, that if you render it, it is not because ye have desire to
make restitution, but for that you will I make exposition thereof.

The rest of this letter is the exposition of certain old laws, wherein
there arises this marvel, that the Castilian speech (but in a few hundredth
years) is so altered, and the prices of their things so changed, that not
only the common people, but also a Bishop of the same country; craved an
interpretor of the said laws.

A letter unto Sir John Palamos, wherein is declared which was Saians horse,
and the Gold of Tholose.

RIght noble Knight, I have received your letter and your complaint therein,
whereunto answering, I say, that I have bin much busied in certain affairs
which Caesar has commanded, (during the expedition whereof) I have had no
time to pray my hours, much less to answer your letters missiue. It came
unto Caesar's understanding, that the Duke of Sogorbe, and the Monks of the
vale of Paradise did bear each other ill will, and did use evil neighborhood:
for which cause he commanded, that I should visit them, and travail to
bring them agreed: which I did of very good will, although not without great
difficulty. In forty days that I was there, I neither went to walk,
either did occupy my self in preaching, either give my self to study: but
all my exercise was to see privileges, to visit bounds, to hear quarelles,
and to appease injuries. And for that these affairs were of importance, and
betwixt personages of so great authority: I passed immeasurable travel before
I could make them friends, and remove their griefs. I have said all this, to
the end you should hold me the rather excused, for not aunswering so soon
unto your letter: and for not accomplishing that which I promised you in the
grades of Valentia: but the case was this. The Prince of Borbon passing by
Valentia, we saw in a certain cloth of his tapistrie a horse, which had at
his feet Knights thrown down and dead. And in the breast of the horse was a
writing in which was said, Equus Seianus: as one would say, this is Saians
horse. Marueylouslye did they of the City behold this cloth, and no man
understood what the blason of that horse might signify: some said it was the
history of Iosue, some of Judas Machabeus, some of Hector, some of Alexander,
othersome of Cirrudias. After that manner every man did speak as he did guess,
but no man as he did know for troth. There was in that troop a gentleman
which said, that that was king Don Martin his horse which won Valentia of the
Mores, and that they were five Kings of the Mores that he killed in one day:
and his horse was named Seian, for that he was of Sogorbe. It staineth a
Gentleman to tell a lie.
And because there was no man that did know the secret of that history but I
(that held my peace) he did so swear and forswear, and also affirm it so
true, as if he had recompted a story of the Bible. Considering he was a
Knight, in blood. Generouse, of goods rich, and of years ancient, (although
in his words very lying) I would not there declare presently the misterye of
that horse, because others should not have wherewith to deride him, or the
poor gentleman wherefore to be displeased. Mimus Publianus, the Philosopher
said, that with old me^ that be vain bablers and ianglers, we ought to have
more respect to their hoar hears that they possess, than to the words they
speak.

The history of Saians horse is written by very grave authors, which is to
wit: Cayus Bassianus, Julius Modestus, and Aulus Gelius in the third Book that
he made de noctibus Atticis. And I do aledge these authors, for that no man
shall think it is a compound fable, but that of a troth it did pass, as here
we shall recount the history, resiting it from the foundation.

The great Hercules the Thebane, after that he had slain Diomedes in Thracia,
brought with him to Greece, a certain race of horses yt Diomedes had bred,
which of their own proper nature were in color fair, of stature large, in
conditions gentle, and in battle courageous. Of the race of these there was
bred an horse in the province of Argose, whose proportion was, a high crest,
hear to the ground, slit nostrelles, sure houed, well membred, broad buttocks,
a long tail, great eyes, a soft skin, color baye, and above all, of courage
marvelous fierce. This horse being yet but a colt, they came from Asia, from
Palestina, from Thebes, from Pentapolis, and from all Greece, by the mean of
his fame: some to see him, others to buy him, and other some to praise him and
set him a sale to the people: for there was no person that desired not to see
him, and much more to have him. And in this world, as there is not a thing so
perfect, in which there is not some imperfection, the destiny of this horse was
so accursed: for all they that bred him, bought him, and did ride him, died
miserable and infamed. And for that it shall not seem that we speak at
large, and do recounte an history very suspicious: briefly we will touch who
were they that bought this horse and did possess him, and also the great
misfortunes that came unto them by the same.

In the year CCCCxiij. from the foundation of Rome, Quintus Cincinatus the
Dictator being dead, the Romans did send a Roman Consul into Grecia that
was named Cneius Saianus, a man in blood holden famous, and for government in
the common wealth very wise. When the Consul Cneius Saianus went into Greece,
that horse was a Colt of thirty months, the which he cheapened, bought, and
brake, and was the first that did ride him. And for that this Cneius Saianus
being in Rome, did follow the partiality of Octauius Augustus: a year after
he went into Greece, and not six months after he had bought that horse,
Marcus Antonius commanded his head to be cut off, and also his body to be
unburied. This may it appear, that Cneius Saianus was the first that bought
and brake this horse, and also did experiment by death his un happy destenie.
They named him then, (and from thence forward,) Saianus horse. Cneius Saianus
being beheadded, there succeeded him in the office of Consulship, a certain
Roman named Dolabella: which immediately being Consul, did buy that horse
for an hundredth thousand Sestercios: and surely if he had known the evil
that he bought unto his house (I think) he would have given an other hundredth
thousand not to have bought him. Within a year after the Consul Dolabella had
bought that horse, there arose in the City of Epirus (were he was resident) a
popular sedition, in which the sorrowful Dolabella was slain, and also drawn
through the streates. The Consul Dolabella being dead, another Consul was
desirous to buy that horse, whose name was Caius Cassius, a man whom
Plutarch writes to have borne great office in Rome, and to have done great
deeds in Africa. Not two years after, the Co^sul Cassius had bought that
unhappy horse, they gave him such herbs at his dinner, that within an hour,
he, his wife and children lost their lives, not having time to speak one
word. The Consul Caius Cassius being dead, the famous Roman Marcus Antonius
desired to buy that horse: and he was so pleased with the form and shape
thereof (when they brought him) that he gave as great reward to the bringer,
as he paid unto him that sold the same: not two months after that Marcus
Antonius had bought this horse, a batell was fought at Sea betwixt him and his
enemy Octauius Augustus: In which bataill his only beloved Cleopatra would be
present, to her great infamy, and greater loss of him self. What
unfortunate end Marcus Antonius had, and what an hastye death his Cleopatra
did suffer, is notorious to all men that have read Plutarch. Marcus Antonius
being dead, yet still that unfortunate horse remained alive, which came to the
hands of a Knight of Asia, who was named Nigidius, and for that the horse (as
now) was somewhat old, at that present he bought him good cheap, although
afterward he cost him very dear: for within one year after he bought him, at
the passage of the River Marathon, the horse stumbled and fell in such wise,
that both master and horse were drowned, and were never more seen.

These are the five Knights that are thrown down at the foot of Sayans
horse, to wit, Saian, Dolabella, Cassius, Five Knights thrown down.
Marcus Antonius, and Nigidius. The which history, although it be delectable
to read, on the other part it is lamentable to hear. Afterward, when in
Asia they fell in reckoning and to remember the evil fortune that the horse
had always with him, there arose amongst them a common proverb, to say unto
the man that was unhappy or unfortunate, That he had ridden upon Sayans horse.

The like chance happened when Scipio did rob the Temples of Tolosa in
France, in that of all those which carried away any gold and riches to their
houses, none did escape, but within one year died, and all his family and
house destroyed. To this day it is a custom in France, to say unto the man
that is unfortunate, That he has Tolouze gold in his house.

Laertius says, that in Athenes there was an house where all were borne
fools: and there was another house where they were all borne doltish: and as
by discourse of time, the Senators fell into the reckoning thereof, they
commanded that those houses shoud not be inhabited, but pulled down.
Herodianus says, that in the Marcian field in Rome, there was a Gentleman's
house, Sometimes some things unfortunate.
in which all the owners died suddenly: And as the neighborhood made relation
thereof unto the Emperor Aurelianus, he did not only command it to be
threwen down, but also that all the timber should be burned. Solon Solonius
forbids in his Laws to the Egyptians, that nothing of the dead should be
sold, but that all should be parted amongst his heirs, saying: If the dead
had any unfortunate or unlucky thing, it should remain in his family and
kindred, and should not pass unto the common wealth. Incontinent upon the death
of the infamouse Roman Princes Caligula and Nero, the Senate provided that all
the riches and household stuff should be burned and buried in wells, fearing
that in their tyra^nicall goods, there might be hid some evil fortune, by the
covetousness whereof, Rome might be lost, and the common wealth impoysoned.

Sir, I thought good to write all these examples and strange chances, not
that you should beeleue in Augureis, but to the end you should think that
there be in this world some things so unfortunate as they seem to draw or
bring with them the self same or other mishaps. No more but that our Lord be
your protector. etc.

A letter unto the Duke of Alba, Sir Frederique of Toledo, in the which is
entreated of infirmities, and the profits of the same.

REnoumed and most magnifice^t Lord, at the time that Palome your servant
came to visit me on your behalf, and gave me your letters, I was in a furious
fever, in such wise, that I could neither read your letter, or speak a word
unto the bearer thereof. After that ye fever began to cease, and that I had
read your letter, I understood the desire you had of my health, and the grief
you seemed to have of my infirmity. Believe me Sir, and be out of doubt, that
at that present I had more ability to drink, than to read, for I would have
given all my Library for one only ewer of water. Your Lordship writes unto
me, that you also have been ill, and that you think all your sickness to be
well employed, as well for that you feel your self recovered, as also that
you find your self affected with a holy purpose to depart from sin, and to
abstain from excess in eating.

My Lord, I am sorry with all my heart that you have been sick, and it pleases
me very much that you stand upon so good a purpose, although it be very true,
that I would more rejoice to see you perform, than to hear you promise: for
hell is full of good desires, and heaven is full of good works. But be it as
be may, to my judgment there is not any thing wherein we may sooner discern a
man to be wise or foolish, than to see in what manner he behaueth him self in
adversity, and how he reapeth profit by sickness. To profit by sickness
declares great wisdom.
There is no such foolishnes as to employe our health to evil purpose, either
is there any such wisdom, as to draw fruit or commodity out of sickness.
Cum infirmor iuncfortior sum: the Apostle said, that when he was sick, then
was he most strong: and this he said, Privileges and profits obtained by
sickness
because the sick man does neither swel by pride, or fornication does make him
co^bat, or avarice does overthrow, or envy does molest, or ire does alter, or
gluttony does bring under, or slothfulness does make negligent, either
ouerwatch him self with ambition.

My Lord Duke, pleases it the Lord that we were such being whole, as we
promise to be when we be sick. All the care of the evil Christian when he is
sick, is, to desire to be whole, only to live and enjoy more of this world:
but the desire of the good Christian when he is diseased, is to be whole, not
so much to live as to reform his life. In the time of sickness, there is none
that does remember himself of affection or passion, of friends or enemies, of
riches or poverty, of honor or dishonor, of solace or travel, of laying up
treasure or growing poor, commanding or obeying: but to be delivered of one
grief of the dead, would give all that he had gotten all the days of his life.
In sickness there is no true pleasure, and in health all travel is tolerable:
what wants he that lackes not health? What is it worth that he possesses that
enjoys not his health? What does it profit to have a very good bed if he
cannot sleep? What benefit has he that has old wine of fragrant favor, if
the physician do command that he drink sod water? What avails to have good
meat, when only the fight thereof moves belkes, and makes the stomach wamble?
What commodity arises unto him that has much money, if the more part he
spend upon Physicians and Poticaries? Health is so great a thing, that to keep
it and to conserve it, we ought not only to watch but ouerwatche: The which
surely seems not so, since we never have regard thereof, until we have lost it.

Plutarch, Plini, Nigidius, Aristicus, Dioscorus, Plotinus, Necephalus, and
with them many others, have written great Books and treatises, how infirmities
are to be cured, and how health is to be conserved. And (so God save me) if
they affirmed a troth in some things, in many other things they did but guess,
and other things not a few they dreamed. Beeleue me my Lord Duke, and be out
of doubt, for my part I do fully beeleue, and also I have experimented, that
to cure diseases and to conserve healths, there is no better thing, than to
avoid anger, Angers and excess be no small enemies to health.
and to eat of few meats. How great weal should it be for the body, and also
for the souls, if we might pass our life without eating, and without anger?
For meats do corrupt the humors, and anger does cont^^ne the bones. If men did
not eat and would not be angry, there should be no cause to be sick, and
much less of whom to complain. For the whips that do most scourge our
miserable life, are ordinary excess, and profound sadness. Experience
teaches us every day, that the men that be doltishe and ignorant, for the
more part are always strong, lusty, and in good health, and this is the
reason: for that such as they are, neither do weary them selves to obtain
honor, either do feel what is shame, reproach, or dispite: the contrary of
all this does happen to men that be wise, discrete, quick witted, and of
sharp devise: every one of which be not only grieved of that which is spoken
unto them, but also they grow sorrowful, for that they imagine what others do
think. There be men that be so sharp, and so ouersharpe or refined, that it
seems little unto them to interpret words, but also they hold it for an
office to divine thoughts: and their repaiment is, that by them selves always
they go discomforted, and with others evil lyked. I durst affirm, and in a
manner swear, that to breed a sickness, and to danger a man's life, there
is no poison of so dangerous infection, as is a profounde and deep sorrow:
for ye miserable heart when he is sad, does rejoice in weping, and takes ease in
sighing. Let every man speak what he thinks good, for amongst such as be
discrete (and no fools) without comparison they be more that grow sick by
anger they receive, than of the meats they feed on. All day long we see no
other thing, but that those men which be merry and glad, be always fat, whole
and well colored, and those that be sad and melancholic always go heavy,
sorrowful, swollen, and of an evil color. In these writings I confess unto
you (my Lord Duke, that the Ague that now I have, was not of any meat that I
had eaten, but of a certain anger I had taken.

Your Lordship does write that by sleeping upon the ground you have taken a
pestilente reume, I verily think, the greafe heat of this month of Auguste,
has bin the cause thereof, which in mine opinion you ought not to use, or
counsel any other thereunto: For it is less evil to sweat with heat, than
to cough with cold. To the rest which I understand by your letter, in desiring
I should write some news, it is sufficient for this time, that of this our
Court there be few things to be trusted in paper, To manifest the secrets of
Princes, is perilous.
and much to be said in a ma^s ear. The things that appertain unto Princes
and lords of high estate, we have permission to conceive them, and no license
to speak them: In the Court and out of Court, I have seen many advanced by
secrecy, and many shamed by want of silence. Your Lordship pardon for this
time my pen, and when we shall meet together, my tongue shall supply this
present want. No more but that our Lord be your protector.

From Borgos the.15. of October, Anno.1523.
A letter unto sir Peter of Acunia Earl of Buendia, wherein is declared a
prophecy of a certain Sibill.

RIght magnificent and Christian knight, does your honor think in your
judgment, that the answer I shall send you, shall be as large as the letter
you have written unto me? of a troth it may not be so: for I am now come to
that age, that nothing lyketh me, that I take in hand, either can I perform
any thing that I would do. The many years, the continual studies, and the
great travels yt I have passed, have made in me such impression, yt now the
eyes be tired with reading, the pulses with writing, the memory with
retaining, and also the judgment with noting and compounding. God knows I
would not boast my self thereof, but in ye end I can not but confess it, which
is, every day I feel my self much more in age, and much less in ability: the
more I would dissemble, the more I would enable my self, the more I would grow
young, the more tenderly I would deal with my self, I can not leave to
acknowledge, but that my sight decreaseth, my memory fails, my body goes
wearied, and the strength decays, and also my hears grow hoare. Oh my soul,
what be all these things, but certain cruel summoners, that cite my life to
inhabit the sorrowful sepulture?

Epaminondas the Greek said, that until the age of thirty years they ought
to say unto men, you are welcome, or you come in a good hour: because at that
time they seem to be coming into ye world: from thirty until fifty, they
ought to say, God keep you, or stand in a good hour, because at that time
they begin to have some judgment of the world: from fifty years forward
they ought to say unto them, God speed you, or go in a good hour, for from
thence they go taking their their leave of the world. In these repartments of
Epaminondas, it appertains not unto your honor and me, that we come in a
good hour, nor that we stand in a good hour: for we are now come to be of
the number that go in a good hour, I beseech the redeemer of the world, that
when we shall pass out of this world, we may depart in a good hour, take our
leave in a good hour, and that we go in a good hour. For if it be much
requisite for us to live well, much more it stands us upon to finish well. I
thought good to write unto your Lordship all this, to the end, that if I shall
answer you somewhat short, ye have me excused, and to hold me blameless.

But coming to the purpose, I say that I much delighte to read your letters,
and on the other part, I am ouercharged with your importunities: for always
you come to me with unknown demands, and right strange questions: you now
send me a most ancient Epitaph, An old Epitaph.
that a certain friend of yours has brought from Rome, which has waged
with your honor a certain wager, that in all Spayn there should not be a man
which should have skill to read it, much less to understand it: the letters of
the Epitaph be these. R.R.R.T. S.D.D.R.R.R.F.F.F.F. Neither did that Roman
speak according to knowledge, either shall he win his wager. For that
notwithstanding they be most obscure, and every letter importe one word, I
will send them so declared and so aptly distinguished, that he shall remayn
confounded, and you win the wager. The case is thus.

Romulus reigning in Rome, and Ezechias in Judea, there was a woman borne in
Tarento, named Delphica, which was famous in her life, and singular in the art
of divining. Amongst the Hebrews, such women were named Prophetesses, and
amongste the Gentiles, called Sibilles. This Sibill Delphica prophesied the
destruction of Carthage, the prosperity of Rome, the ruin of Capua, the
glory of Graecia, and the great pestilence of Italy: And for that the fame of
this Sibill was spread thoroughoute the world: King Romulus sent her great
presents, made her great promises, and wrote to her many letters, to remove
her out of her countreye, to live at Rome. Neither for any intreatance they
used with her, or for any gifts they could send her, this Sibill at any time
would leave her country, or come to dwell at Rome. The which Romulus
perceiving, determined in his own person to go see her, and with her in
certain causes to communicate.

The secret that Romulus desired, was to understand what Fortune was reserved
for him, and what destenie the City of Rome should have (which at that time
king Romulus began to build.) Answer better nor worse might the king receive
of that Sibille Delphica, but that she gave him fourteen letters written in
certain barks of trees, (for that in those so ancient times they had not as
then found out the manner to write in parchement, and much less in paper)
the secret and mystery of which letters neither could King Romulus
understand, either would the woman declare the same. But so much she did
certify him, that there was one to be borne, which should understand and
interpret those letters. King Romulus being returned unto his City of Rome,
commanded those letters to be set in one of his Temples, under great and safe
keeping, until the time should come, that the Gods should reveal them, or
some other be borne that should understand them. Four hundredth thirty
seven years those letters stood hydden that no man could read them, much
less understand them, until there came to Rome an other Sibill, named Erithra,
the which so clearly did declare, interpret, and expound them, as if she her
self and none other had composed them. The letters are but fourteen, the
which declared in English, says:

Romulus reygning, Rome triumphing, Sibill Delphica said, the kingdom of Rome
shall perish by Sword, Fire, Hunger, and Cold. Let us put the self same
caracters of the letters, and the exposition in Latin upon every one of them,
in the form that the Sibill expounded them, which was as follows.

R. Romulo R. Regnante, R. Roma T. Triumphante, S. Sibilla

D. Delphica D. Dixit, R. Regnum R. Romae R. Ruet

F. Ferro, F. Flamma,F. Fame, F. Frigore.

Sir, behold here your letters expounded, your prophesies deuined, your Roman
confounded, and also your wager gotten. And the reward shall be, that (I over
watching my self to seek this history) your honor shall bear away the
praise of the answer. If he will more thoroughly know of this history, let him
come to seek and read Liuius, Vulpitius, Trebellius, Who did write the
history of the, Sibils.
and Pogius, which have written of the antiquities of the Romans, and the
sayings of the Sibilles. No more, but that our Lord be your protector, and that
he give us both his grace. Amen. Amen.

From Madrid the.xiij. of March. 1535.
A letter unto Sir Ynigo Marrique, in which is re counted what happened in Rome
betwixt a slave and a Lion: an history very pleasant.

MAgnificent and discrete Gentleman, your servant Trusillo gave me a letter of
yours at the breaking up of the counsel of the Inquisition: and to speak the
troth, neither did he advertise me from whom he came, neither did I demand
him any question. To my judgment the one did well, and the other did not err:
for he came wearied with travel, and I came from the Counsel angered. The
philosopher Mimus said, qui cu^ lasso fameli^o loquitur, rixam quaerit: as if
he should have said: to talk with a man that is hungry, and to have business
with him that is weary, be great occasions to move debate. For if at the time
the hungry would eat, or when the wearied would repose himself, and would
seek occasion of business, he would give the business to Barrabas, and the
Author to Satan. Experience does teach us, that at the present when a man is
refreshed, forthwith he begins to talk: at the instant that a man does eat or
drink, forthwith he begins to debate. And therefore we say, that then, (and
not before) it is an apt time to dispatch affairs. For other wise, it should be
rather to importune, tha^ to dispatch. Sir, I say thus much for yt you shall see
and also understand, that it is very conueniente for him that goes in
affairs, not only to flee importunity, but also that he know to seek
opportunity.

Sir, leaving this aparte, I give you to understand, that your importunities,
and my much business, have bin together (by the ears:) the one procuring
that I should condescende to your desire: the other resisting, that I could not
do what you required: in such wise, that the cause why I have not answered, is
I can not, and also I will not: why I cannot answer, did proceed at that time,
for yt we took order in the inquisition for the business of witches in Nauerne:
and that I would not, did rise, that you sent to demand of me a thing so
strange, with the which (if you did take pleasure in reding) I received much
offense, and also tired my self in seeking.

The declaration of which history, that you sent to demand, I did well
remember I had seen it, but I could not call to mind in what book I had red
it, and thereof we do not marvel, that do not deal with humain and divine
scriptures. For the divine Plato says, we should leave to be men, and become
Gods, if the memory were able to retain so much as ye eyes were able to
read and see. Although on the one part I had great business, and on the
other part was somewhat offended, yet always I left my affairs, and began to
turn over my book, to see if I could find out that history, and remember ye
counterfeit. And I thought good to take this travel in hand, not only to
accomplish your demand, but also to prove my ability. The history of the
man and the Lion.
Sir, you write unto me, that in the Wardrobe of the great captain you saw a
rich cloth, which (they say) the Venetians had given him for a present, wherein
was figured a man leading a Lion, and a Lion that went led and laden after a
man. Also you say, that in the breast of the Lion were written these words:
Hic Leo est bospes huius hominis. In like manner was written in the breast of
the man other words, which were: Hic homo est Medicus huius Leonis. The one
and the other letters thus much did signify: This Lion is the host of this
man: and This man is Physician or Chirurgian to this Lion. Sir, you may well
think somewhat at the strangeness of the history, since the manner of the
paintyng seems so monstrous: therefore I marvel not though you desire to
understand the same: notwithstanding, to find it, was not a little painful
to me. It shall happen to this my letter, which I consent very seldom unto
an other: that is, that it shall be somewhat long, and yet not tedious: for the
history is so pleasant to hear, yt the reader shall be grieved, for that it is
no longer.

Coming to the purpose, The good Titus Emperor of Rome, (which was son to
Vespasian, and brother to that evil Emperor Domitianus) coming from the
wars of Germany, determined to celebrate in Rome the day of his nativity
in Campania. Amongste the Roman Princes, three feasts of all other were
most celebrated, to wit, the day wherein they were borne, the day wherein
their Fathers dyed, and the day wherein they were created Emperors. The day
of this Titus birth being come, he ordained to make great feasts to the
Senate, and to distribute gifts among the people. For in great disportes and
feasts, always the Roman Princes did feast the mighty, and gave reward
to the poor. A thing worthy to be noted, and also unto memory to be
commended, that in the great feasts and triumphs of Ianus, of Mars, of
Mercury, of Jupiter, of Venus, and of Berecinthia, they did not boaste,
neither esteem such feasts to be solemn, great, or duly solemnised, by the
costs that were spent, either by the shows and triumphs that therein were
represented: but by the number of rewards and liberal gifts that there were
given. Great liberality used in feasts.
The Emperor Titus commanded to be brought for that feast many Lions,
Bears, great Hearts, Onchas, Unicorns, Griffins, Bulls, Bores, Wolves,
Camelles, Elephants, and either many marvelous cruel beasts, which for the more
part be bred in the deserts of Egypt, and in the edge of the mountain
Caucasus. Many days before, the Emperor had commanded that they should
reserve all thieves, and robbers by highwayes, murderers, perjured persons,
traitors, quarellers, and rebels: to the end that on that day they should
enter into listes, to chase and fight with the beasts, in such wise, that the
chastisements of malefactors should be performed by the same beasts. The
order that he used herein was, that the wretched men should be put within the
great College, and those cruel beasts should come forth to fight against
the^, all the people standing to behold, and none to help. And if it happened the
beasts to tear the man in pieces, there he paid his det: but if the man killed
the beast, by justice they could not put him to death. Amongst other beasts
that they brought unto that feast, there was a Lion which they had taken in
the deserts of Egypt, which was mighty of body, of great age, of aspect
terrible, in fighting cruel, and in his yelles and cries very horrible. This
most cruel Lion walking in the chase all imbrued (for at that time he had
slain and torn to pieces xv. men) they determined to cast unto him a fugitive
slave, to the intent he should kill and eat him, and thereupon to quiet his
ravenous fury. A marvelous thing it was to hear, and fearful to see, Did
acquaintance renewed between a man and a Lion.
that at the very instant they cast the slave in the chase to the Lion, he did
not only refuse to devour him, but also hasted not to touch him, but rather
went unto him and lickt his hands, fauned with his tail, held down his
head, and couched down upon the ground, showing signs of old acquaintance,
and that he was in his det and beholding unto him. The slave, seeing the
fawnings and the courtesies that the Lion used with him, cast himself down
upon the ground, and creeping to the Lion, and the Lion coming to the slave,
they began one to embrace the other, and to faune as me^ that had bin of old
acquaintance, that had not seen in many years. To see a thing so monstrous
and strange at the sudden, (which the eyes of man had never seen, neither in
old Books had ever bin read) the good Emperor Titus was amassed, and all the
Roman people grew astonished: and did not presently imagine that the man and
the Lion had bin of old acquaintance, and there knew each other: but that the
slave should be a nigromantike, and had inchaunted the Lion. And after the
Lion and the slave had played together, renewed their old acquaintance, and the
people of Rome beholding a great space, the Emperor Titus commanded the
slave to be called before him, the which coming to accomplish his commandment,
the cruel Lion came after him, so quiet and so gentle, as if it had bin a
house lamb brought up by hand. The Emperor Titus said unto him these words:
tell me man what art thou, of whence art thou, what is thy name, The Emperor
Titus talks with a slave.
to whom did thou belong, what have thou done, what offense have thou
committed, wherefore wast thou brought hither and cast unto the beasts? may
it happen that thou have bred this most cruel Lion, or have thou known him by
chance in times past? wast thou present when he was taken, or have thou
delivered him from any mortal peril? (perchance thou art a Nigromantike, and
have enchaunted him.) I command thee that thou say unto us the truth, what
has passed, and deliver us of this dout, for I swear unto thee by the
immortal gods, this matter is so monstrous, and so strange, that it seems
rather that we dream it, than behold it. With a good courage, and with a high
clear voice, the slave made answer to the Emperor Titus as follows, the
Lion being laid at his foot, and all the people in admiration.

Andronico recompteth by discourse, all his life.
IT may please thee to understand most victorious Caesar, that I am of the
country of Slauonia, of a certain place that is called Mantuca, the which
when they did rise and rebel against the service of Rome, we were there al
taken and condemned to servitude and bondage. My name is Andronico, and my
father was named Andronicus, A slave and also noble was Andronicus.
and also my grandfather. This lineage of Andronicos were in our Country so
noble and generous, as Quintus Fabius, and Marcus Marcellus be now in Rome.
But what shall I wretch do unto fortune, which do see the sons of servants
there, to be knights, and my self that was there a Gentleman, in Rome become
a slave? It is twenty six years since I was taken in my Country, and so long
ago since I was brought unto this City, and also other twenty six since I
was sold in the field of Mars and bought of a sawyer, which when he perceived
that my arms were better given to handle a lance, than to pull at a saw, he
sold me to the Consul Dacus, father to the Censor Rufus, that is now alive.
This Consul Dacus was sent by thy father Vespasian, to a certain province in
Africa, which is called Numidia, as Proconsull to minister Justice, and as
Captain of the horsemen to understand in causes of war, for that in very
troth in the wars he had great experience, and in government much wisdom.
Also (great Caesar) it may please thee to understand, that my master (the
Consul Dacus) ioyntely with the experience and wisdom that he had, was on the
other side proud in commandment, and covetous in gathering together. And
these two things be brought to pass, Avarice is cause of great infamy.
that he was ill served in his house, and abhorred in the common wealth: and
his principal entente was to gather money to make him self rich, so that
although he had many offices, and much business, he had no more in his house,
but my self and an other to do all the same: in so much, I gathered and cast
abroad, did grynde, fifth, and bake the bread: And besides all this, I dressed
the meat, I washed the clothes, I swepte the house, I dressed the cattle, and
also made beds. What will thou that I shall say more, (O most victorious
Caesar?) but that his covetousness was so great, and his pity so little, that
he gave me neither coat, shoes, or shirt: and moreover, beside all this, every
night he made me to weaue two baskettes of Palms, which he made me to sell
for eight Sextertios, Four sextertios amounte to.iiij. d.
toward his dispences. And that night that I had not performed the same, he
gave me nether to eat, either left me vnwhipt. But in the end, seeing my
master so continually to chide me, so often to whippe me, to keep me so naked,
so to over work me, and so cruelly to deal with me, I will confess the troth
unto thee (oh invincible Caesar) which is, that seeing my self in so desperate
a state, and in a life so miserable, I desired him oftentimes that it might
please him to sell me, or else to give order to kill me. Eleven years
continually I passed this wretched life with him, without receiving at his
hands any reward, or at his mouth any mild word. And farther seeing in the
Proconsul (my master) that every day his anger increased, and unto me there was
no travel diminished, and jointly with this, feeling age coming upon me, and
my head to be hoar, mine eyes blind, my strength weak, my health wanting, and
my heart desperate: I determined with my selfs to run away unto the cruel
deserts of Aegipt, to the intent that some ravenous beast might eat me, or
that by pure hunger I might die. And for that my master did not eat but what I
dressed him, or drink but what I brought him, with great suertie I might have
killed him and revenged my self: but that having more respect to the
nobleness of blood from whence I was descended, Where nobleness dwells, no
treason haunteth.
than to the servitude that I suffered, I thought it better to put my life in
peril, than to do treason to my nobleness. In the end, my master (the
proconsull) going to visit a certain Country named Tamatha which is in the
confines of Aegipt and Africa, when on a night he had supped and I saw him a
bed, I departed without knowing any high way: but that I took care that the
night might be very dark, and did behold (the day before) which mountain
was most sharp, where I might be most hidden and least sought for. I carried
with me but a pair of sandalles to wear, a canuas shirt to put on, a bottell
of water to drink, and a little bunch of grapes to eat, with which provision
I might have bin sustained for six days: which being past, either I must
die, or be eaten with beasts, or return to my master, or else put my self
in safety. Having past three days and three nights, forsaking all high ways,
thicked my self in the great desert. And being utterly tired with great and
extreme beat, and no less in fear of them that should seek me, I conveyed
my self into a great Cave, somewhat dark, the entrance narrow, but more large
within.

Not six hours after I had conveyed my self into that den, I saw at the
entering thereof a Lion most terrible to behold, whose feet and mouth was all
bloody, and my judgment was that he had eaten some beast, or torn some man
in pieces: (which was like enough) for that notwithstanding the country is
inhabitable, and the heat intolerable, yet there resort into those deserts
some that go to hunt the Lion, and other unfortunate (as I) that flee from
their Masters, which choose for less evil to be eaten with Lions, An
extreme distress.
than all their lives to be slaves. Perceiving that monstrous Lion sitting at
the entrance of the cave, and seeing in my self that I had no place to escape
or flee unto, nor strength to resist: the tears presently fell from mine
eyes. Remembering my self, with fear I became senseless, and fell dismayed to
the ground, holding for certain, that now the hour was come, in which (by the
rage of that beast) my miserable life should take an end. Oh what difference
there is to blason death with the tongue, and to see it with the sight of the
eyes. I say this (puissant Caesar,) for that in seeing him at the door that
should eat me, and that the sepulcher of my flesh should be those bestiall
entrayles, I would have chosen an other life much worse at that present to
have escaped with life. But after the Lion had a little viewed and also rested
at the entrance of the cave, he came forward halting on one of his feet,
grievously groaning, and coming unto me (that was fallen to the ground) laid
his lame foot upon my hands, after the manner of a wise man that discovers
his hurt to an other, and craves remedy for the same. A passing toye.
My tongue can not sufficiently say unto thee (Oh magnificent Caesar) the
strength I recovered, and the joy I conceived to see that most cruel beast
stand so myld, come sick, go so lame, and to ask to be cured. And you may
well believe it, for at that hour I was in such estate, that if it were in the
power of that Lion to take away my life, I had not at that instant any sense
to feel my death. Beasts do feel benefits.
The grief of this poor lion was, that from the head to the point he had
thrust a thorn into his foot, and his foot was full of of matter,
maruellously swollen, and the worst of all was, that the wound was so black
and so festred, that hardly the thorn might be then seen. When I had with the
point of a knyfe opened the wound, presently issued the matter, and
forthwith I pulled out the thorn, incontinente I washed it with urine, and
then anointed it with salve, and speedyly I bound it up with a piece of my
shirt: in such manner, that if I did not as I ought to do, at the least, I did
that I thought best to be done. Noble Caesar, thou would have delighted to
have seen how at the time I brake up the swelling, pulled out the thorn,
thrust out the matter, and bound up the wound, he stretched his feet, clitched
his fist, turned his head, gnashed with his teeth, and secretly gave certain
sighs, in such sort, that if he felt ye grief as a beast, yet he dissembled it
as a man. After I had dressed him and bound it up, all that evening and night the
Lion remained still and lay close by me, and like one that had reason, he would
lament one while, and rest an other: in such wise we passed all the night, he
in bewayling, and I in pitying. Now when day appeared, and light came into the
cave, I began again to squise out the matter, and to anoint it with a little
salve which I had, both little and very dry, because there had two days
passed wherein I had not eaten, and as much more that I had not drunk. The
Lion feeds his Chirurgian.
Two hours after that I had dressed him, and that the sun was risen, the poor
Lion departed by little and little out of his cave unto the desert, to seek
something where upon we might feed, and wherewith we might be sustained. And
when I thought not thereof, behold, he brings me overthwart in his mouth a
piece of a beast of what nature or kind of beast it was, I swear (O mighty
Caesar, I am not able to say unto thee: for at that time I was not able to
understand. Hunger oppressing me, having too much flesh, and wanting fire, and
having no mean to boil nor rest, I gat me out of ye cave, laying my flesh in
ye sun upon a fair stone, where with the most fervent sun in those deserts
which does not warm, but burn, although not sufficient to roast: I did eat
it so dried and parched, not withstanding with no small appetite. Four whole
days and nights I was with the Lion in his cave, in which I took charge to
cure him, and he, to maintain and feed me. Now six days being past, that I
had ended my bottell of water, he went out of the cave very early before the
sun was up, and did take of those herbs most full of dew, which I tasted with
my mouth, more to refreshe, than to kill the thirst which I had. After I saw
my host the Lions foot somewhat amended, and also that I likewise grew weary,
loathsome, and full of that beastiall life: at the instant that he went out of
the cave to hunt, presently I came forth to hyde me, constrained thereto by
necessity, and not of will. Absence extremely lamented.
The night being come, when the Lion returned to his cave, and found me
absent (of a troth I swear unto thee O magnifice^t Caesar, that) I heard him
from thence where I was hidden, give so many and so sorrowful brayes, that they
filled my eyes full of tears. The poor Lion did show that he was grieved
with solitariness, which he felt by the want of my company, and the lack
he had of me to perform his cure: of my part (being wearyed to travel in
those cruel deserts, and to eat such raw flesh) I determined to do that
which I should not so much as once have thought: which was, to seek a place
inhabited, where I might find people to speak and be conversant withal, to
the end that I might kill hunger with bread, and the intolerable thirste with
water. But as my master had taken all the passages, and above all, that yet my
heavy and sorrowful destinies were not ended, I was scarsly come unto the
first place, but that I fell into their hands, that had sought and followed me.
Being taken, bound, whipped, and drawn, they brought me to my cruel master:
and I may say to thee (O good Caesar) that I would rather have remained dead at
the Lions feet, than alive to appear before my master. Incontinent after I
was brought into his presence, he began to take advice of them that brought me,
if I should be drawn to pieces, have my throat cut, be hanged, flayne quick,
or else be drowned. In such wise, that thou may well conceive (O noble
Caesar) in what case my heart stood, and how afflicted in spirit I was, when
in my own hearing they entreated, not how they should chastise me, but what
cruel death they might give me. After they had spoken many cruel words, and
had threatened me with diverse cruel deaths, he commanded that I should be
thrown into the dungeon amongst the condemned men, for that with them I should
be brought hither to Rome, to be meat for beasts: and surely he did not
err in thinkyng to be thus most cruelly revenged of me: for there is not so
cruel a kind of death, as to tarry and think every hour to die. This lion
that you see here lying by me, is the same that I cured of the thorn, and he
that kept me so many days in his cave: and since the immortal Gods have
willed yt he and I, and I and he, should come to be acquainted in the place
where they have brought us to be slain, upon my knees I beseech thee (most
victorious Caesar, The slave craves mercy.
that since my fault has condemned me to the beasts, that it may please thy
great clemency to quite us, and to make us free. This was that which
Andronicus said unto the Emperor Titus, and that he related before all the
Roman people. If the myldnesse of the Lion had put them in great marvel, the
words and the great travails of Andronicus moved them to great compassion, to
hear the immeasurable pains the poor man had passed, The people of Rome make
humble supplication for the slave.
and to see how many times death had swallowed him: with loud voices all the
people began to beseech and pray the Emperor Titus, that it might please him
to provide and command, that Andronicus might not be slain, neither cast unto
the Lion: for the best part of the feast had bin to see the mildness of the
Lio^, and to hear the life of Andronicus. The Emperor Titus condescended with
a very good will, to that which the people required, and Andronicus desired.
And thus it was, that from thence forward, he and the Lion went together
throughout all the streets and Tauernes of Rome, making merry, and all the
people rejoicing with them: After the manner of a little ass, Andronicus with a
small line did lead the Lion girded with a pair of bougets, wherein he carried
certain provision of bread, and other things that they gave him at their
houses and tauernes. And sometime he consented that boys should ride upon the
Lion for money: and to the strangers that came to Rome from far countries,
and had not heard the story thereof, demandyng what that so strange and
monstrous sight should signifye, answer was made, that that man was the
Lions surgion, and that the Lion was that man's host. This history is
recounted by Aulus Gellius the Latin, Note the authors of the history.
and Apius the Greek much more at large. Behold sir, your paynting here
declared, behold here your strange story found out, behold here your desire
accomplished, and behold me here that remain tired: that for any thing
would not again take such pain, neither put my self in such care. No more
but that our Lord be your protector, and give us good ending. Amen.

From Toledo the.25. of August. 1529.
A letter unto Sir Peter of Acuna, Earl of Buedia, wherein is touched how
Lords should govern their estates. A notable letter for such as come newly
to their inheritance.

REnoumed Lord and Christian knight Gonsalus of Vrena, your servant and my
friend, gave me a letter from your lordship, by ye which you maintain against
me a certain great co^playnt, saying that it is a year past since I have not
seen you, and six months wherein I have not written unto you. Sir, I am so
busyed and of my natural condition so solitary, that it is painful unto me
to visit, and no less tedious to be visited: not because they do visit me,
but for that they let and hinder me. The divine Plato said, quod amici sunt
fures temporis, which is to say, that friends are stealers of time, wherein
he said troth. For there be friends so importune in visiting, and so tedious
in communication, that the time is more evil employed that is lost with them,
than the goods that thieves steal from us.

We Courtiers be much combred with tediousnes which in the court our friends
do use with us, that sit down by great leisure, and do settle them selves in
a chair, not to ask any case of conscience, or to talk any thing of holy
scripture, but to murmur, saying, that the King does not firm, Of what things
they murmur in the Court.
the Counsel does not dispatch, the Paymasters do delay, the private do
command, the Bishops be not resident, the Secretaries rob, the Justices
dissemble, the Officers compou^d, the Gentlemen play, and the women go at
large. Think you Sir, that a man learned, given to reading, solitary and
busied, does not more loose time in hearing these news, than to cure an
infirmity with evil diet: to have delight in murmuring, he must be ill
tongued that talks: of lend disposition, and of evil condition, that
delights therein. They say that the good Marquis of Santillana used to say,
that evil tongs and evil ears did frame pleasant murmurings. There be so
many men in this Court loytering, superfluous, idle, Who be great murmurers.
vagarant and evil tonged, that if Laurence Temporal be so great workman in
refining clothes, as they be in shearing their neighbors lives, we may
boldly give more for the refining of cloth of Segeuia, than for the cloth in
Grain of Florencia.

My Lord, I say all this to the end you have me excused for my want of
diligence, and also to give you to understand of my condition, the which
stretched no farther with his friends, than to make them answer to their
letters, and that sometime I write unto them. Before all things I am right glad
of the sentence given on your Lordships behalf, wherein they have entitled you
with Town of Duennas, and the Earldome of Buendia, in which I beseech God
give you many years of fruition, and children to inherit. For it is no small
sorrow to see strange children inherit our proper sweat.

Your Lordship does write unto me in your letter, that I pray unto God to give
you grace, as well to save you, as also to govern this estate: whereunto I
answer, as also unto them of the Town of Duennas: great is the mischance, if
they should not be better entreated than my sacrifice of God aceepted. Do you
not think that I being a sinful man, a religious sinner, and a Courtlike
sinner, shall not have enough to pray for mine own sins, but that I must
burden my self with you? Much is God pleased with the prayer of the just, but
much more he does delight in the amendment of the sinner: for it does little
profit for the one to augment his prayers, if the other do not diminishe his
sins. If you will govern this Earldom very well, begin the gubernation in
your self: for it is impossible for him to understand to govern the common
wealth, that does not know to rule his own house, or order his own person:
when the Lord is mild, honest, chaste, The order of the noble or gentleman's
house.
sober, silent, patient, and devout: all his household and common wealth be
likewise affected: and if by chance there be any servant absolute or
dissolute, they must be hidden and withdrawn, which to the Lord is no small
glory: for he does not little, yt takes holdnesse from any man in his house
to be evil. In the houses where Lords are ambitious, rash, quarelling,
liars, gluttons, gamsters, infamous, and lecherous: what steward may bring to
pass that the servants be honest, seeing they do not, but what their masters
do allow, and likewise do. The words of Lords be fearful, but their good
works do animate: and I say it to this end: for their servant and vassalles
do rather imitate the works they see the^ do, than the words they hear them
speak.

The charge that a Bishop has of his household and Diocese, the same has a
Gentleman of his servants. For, it is not sufficient that a master or Lord pay
his servants what is dew, but that they make them also do their duty: it is a
lamentable thing to see; that a mother shall send her son to the house of
Gentleman clad, shod, shamefast, honest, solitary, well mannered, and devout,
and at the years end, the poor young man shall return ragged bare legged,
dissolute, a glutton, a dice player, a liar, and a quarreller, in such wise,
that it had bin less evil to have had him dead, than sent to such palace or
Court. Let the conclusion of this case be, that in such manner you order your
life and govern your house, that your own may have to follow, and strangers
to praise.

That the Knight ought to be to God grateful and to men pitiful.
ALso it is right necessary that always you have in remembrance the bounties
and good things ye have received of God. In special to give you this Earldom
(be deprived the Earl your Brother of his life, the Lady countess died,
disherited your Cousin, and gave a sentence against the Admiral,) in such wise
that you owe unto God not only for the gift thereof, but also for the
deliverance of the incumber thereof. My Lord be ye certain that although
before God all sins be grievous, yet the sin of ingratitude is holden for
most intolerable: for God will not any thing that we have but only for that
which he gives us; The sin of Ingratitude before God is detestable.
we be thankful. Give thanks unto God for that he created redeemed, and
relieved you, and also provided for you. And surely with this estate and
Earldom (if you keep rekoning with your rent, and measure in expenses) you
may serve God, and live honorably. Although this Earldom has cost much
travel, perilles, suits, anger, and money: contend not with God, thinking that
you have obtained it by your own diligence, but confess his great mercy to
have given it: for the victories and good gifts that God does give us, we may
desire the^ and also crave the^, but not deserve the^. Remember (my Lord) that
god has removed you from anger to ease, from poor to rich, from asking to
giving, from serving to commanding, from misery to plenty, and from sir Peter
to be entitled the Earl of Buendia, in such wise that you owe unto God not
only the state that he has given you, but also the misery that he has taken
from you. Oh how great mercy does God use with that man, that gives him
wherewith to give, and puts him not in estate to crave of any man. For to
shamefast faces, and to generous hearts, there is no travel that so does perce
their intralles, as to enter to crave at other men's doors. Plutarch reported of
the great Pompeius, that being sick in Pusoll, when the Physicians said, that
to be hole and recover strength, it were convenient he should eat of certain
Zorzales that the Consul Luculus did breed: Zorzales blackbirds.
he answered I will rather die, than send to crave them, for the Gods have
not created Pompeius to ask, but to give.

My Lord I say thus much, to the end ye consider, since God has given you
liberally, that you need not crave of any man, that you be not rechlesse to
give as they gave you, to succor as they succored you, and to part as they
parted with you. For of the temporal goods that God gives us, we be not lords
but reparters. Although the Earledom of Buendia be of no great rentes, yet may
you do with it many good works. For (as I have said) the gentleman that
knows to rule his house, and to order his goods: he shall have to spend,
to keep, and to give. For Princes and Lords of power ought not to be called
great or mighty for the proud estates that they hold, but for the great
rewards they give. The office and dewtie of the laboring man, is to dig,
the religious to be contemplative, the priest to pray, the crafts man to
work, the Merchant to be guilefull, He is not to be holden for noble that
has much, but that gives much.
the vserer to keep, the poor to crave, and of the gentleman to give: for
upon that day, that the gentleman does begin to hourde up money: from thence
forth, he puts his fame in proclamation.

In Lordly houses and of inheritours, there ought to be the haunts of brothers,
cosines, nephews, uncles, and all others of his kin, bearing good will to
their affairs, and supporting their necessities. In such wise, that to them
there is no hour forbidden, or any door shut: nevertheless there are some
Brothers, Cosins and Nephews, tedious in their speech, so importunate in
visiting, and so without measure in their craving: that they make a man angry,
and also abhor them: and the remedy for such, is to succor their
necessities and to appart their conuersations.

You shall now find in your Earldom retaynours of your Fathers, Servants of
your Brothers, allies of your house, and friends of all your dealings, unto
whom you ought in general to use good countenance, speak sweet words, give
good hope, and deal some rewards: for if you should be ingrate unto them, you
should run into great indignation of the people. Also my Lord you shall find
some old Servants and some poor widows, unto whom your predecessors
commanded to be given some pension or some refreshing for trauelles past, or
for service they did them: beware in no wise to take it away, neither yet to
diminish it: For besides that unto you it were a great wretchedness, and unto
them a great want: In the place to pray unto God for your life, they would
crave of God vengeance upon you. Without comparison you ought to have more
fear to do injury unto the poor, The poor do revenge with tears.
than to the rich: for the rich does revenge himself with arms, but the
poor with tears.

Also you shall find in your Earldom some young men and maidens, that were
children of old servants, and the sorrowful orphans, neither have father to
help them, neither good to sustain them: your Lordship ought in such cases to
bring up the sons, and to mary the daughters: for there is not in this world
an alms of God more accepted, tha^ to give marriage unto a damsel upon the
point to be cast away.

As it is a great offense to cause another to sin, so does he deserve much
glory, that takes away the offense for another to fall: for certainly we are
more beholding to him that keeps us from stumbling, than unto him that helps us
up. Also you shall find some men and women, of whom they shall say unto you,
that they were affectioned to one partiality, and offended at the other, To
forget an injury, proceeds of singular wisdom.
and in such cases take no care to make search, and much less to take
vengeance: for the noble hearts ought never to think themselves injured, but of
such as be mighti^ like themselves. If any want of duty or offense has bin
done unto you by any of your estate, I hold it for more surety to dissemble
it, than to revenge it: for it may so happen, that thinking all law were
ended, there might arise unto you other new more indigested angers. It is
tolerable that the Lords do chastise his vassal, but not that he revenge: for
it is sure that he will not only defend him self, but also attempt to offend,
and the offense shall be, raising his country, and defaming his person. If you
will be revenged of such as have given some occasion, be grateful unto those
that did follow and serve you: for after this manner they shall remain
recompensed, and the other confounded. And let it be in this case for
conclusion, that in my judgment and conceit, your Lordship ought not to care
to remember the injuries they have done you, but the service that now they do
you: and make no account to make quarells with your vassals, for in things of
common liberty, he that shall seem most to serve you, the same is he that
most will sell you.

That a Knight do minister Justice in his Country.
ALso it is necessary to the good government of your vassalles, that you leave
them to be governed of virtuous men and of experience: for there is no man in
this world so wise, that needs not the counsel of another. We said not
without grave consideration: that you should use men of experience, and said
not that you should take men of learning: For matters in law must be commended
unto the learned, but government of the common wealth unto men of wisdom. For
we see every day by experience, what difference or advantage there is, betwixt
him that has a good will, and him that knows no more but out of Bartlet.
Things that many desire but few obtain
If you find any that jointly is both learned and wise: leave not to lay hand
upon him, nor let him slip for any price: for learning to give sentence, and
prudence to govern, be two things that many desire and few do obtain.

My Lord you have to be advised to commend your countries to mouthy or
brutishe bachelors, that come from Salamanca, which bringing their science in
their lips, and their wit in their sachelles, before they can chance to do
Justice, they shall escandelise the common wealth, and also rob the whole
country. Those that do proceed from Colleges, and from the Universities, as
they tie themselves to that their Books do say, and not to that which their
eyes do see: and to that their science does speak, and not to that which
experience does find: such are good to be advocates, but not to govern.

Sir believe me and be out of doubt, that the art of government, neither is
sold at Paris, either is found at Bolloigne, neither yet learned at Salamanca,
but is found out by prudence, is defended by Science, and conserved by
experience. Plato in his book of common wealth said these words: Consilium
peritorum ex apertis obscura, ex paruulis magna, ex proximis remota, ex
partibus tota aestimat. As if he should have said: the man that is wise and of
experience: the clear he holds for dark, the little for great, the near to
be far off, the gathered together to be cast abroad, the certain for doubtful.

Out of these words of Plato there may be gathered, the difference betwixt
science and experience: for that we see inexpert men hold all things for
easy, and he that is expert judges all things difficult. God deals
mercifully with such men, as he leaves not into ye hands of proud captains,
rash Pilots, unlearned Lawyers, foolish Physicians, and inexpert Judges:
because the proud Captain fights out of time, the rash Pilots sendes you to
the bottom, the unlearned Lawyer loses your matter, the foolish Physician
spoils your life, Conditions of a good justice.
and the inexpert judge robs your goods. The Judges to whom you shall put
your conscience in trust, and commend your common wealth, ought to be honest
in their lives, upright in justice, pacient in injuries, measured in their
speech, justified in that they command, righteous in judgment, and pitiful
in their executions. Beware of Judges that be childish, foolish, ouerbold,
rash, and bloody: which to the end their fame shall sound at Court, that from
thence they may receive commission of Justice: they will commit a thousand
cruelties in your countries, and will give a thousand displeasures to your
person, in such wise, that many times there needs more reformation for their
disorders, than for the offenses your vassals shall commit. I do lie if it did
not happen on a time to me in Arreuallo, being warden with a new inexpert
Judge: which because I did somewhat advertise him that he was over furious and
cruel, said: Father Warden, you get your meat by preaching, and I get it by
hanging: and by your Lady of Gadilupe, I do more esteem to put a foot or a
hand to the Pillery, than to be Lord of Ventosilla. When I heard him mention
Ventosilla, I replied this word, of my troth master Justice, justly apertayneth
unto you the Lordship of Ventosa, for you may not be contained in Ve^tosilla.
But prosecuting our intent, it is to wit: that those that the Romans did call
Censors or judges, we do call Corregidores or Correctors, and it was amongst
them a law inviolable, that they made no man a Judge, that was not at the
least above forty years old: he should be married, holden for honest, meanly
rich, nor infamed with covetousness, and that in other offices of the common
wealth he had experience.

Julius Caesar, Octauius Augustus, Titus Vespatianus, Neruus Coceyus, The
conditions of Judges used to be chose^ in Rome
Traian the just, Antony the meek, and the good Marcus Aurelius: All these so
glorious Princes from the office of Judges, did rise to be Emperors, in such
wise, that in those days, they did not provide offices for men, but men for
offices: for the office of Governor, Justice, and corrector, many will be
suitors: and for many they will make suit, but in any wise you ought to be
advised how ye make promise thereof to any man, either for prayers or
intreataunce to give the same. For your good, you may give to whom you shall
think good, but the rod of justice to him who shall best deserve it. The
office of Justice is to be given for merit, and not for affection.
Also some of your servants (in recompense of service) will crave the office of
justice: and in my judgment, you ought less to give it unto those than unto
any other: for in saying they be your servants, and that you shall believe them
more tha^ the rest: The people shall not dare to complayn, and they shall have
liberty the more to rob and steal.

If any man or woman shall come to complain before your Lordship of your
Justice, give him ear at leisure, and with good will, and if you shall find
his complaynte to be true, remove his grief, and reprehende your Iusticer: but
if it be not so, declare how just it is that he commands, and how unjust
that he demands: for the base country people do hold the words of their
Lord for gospel, and of the officer as a passioned. If it be not convenient
for the Judge you shall choose, that he be skilful to steal or bribe, much
less does it beseem your Lordeship to be a nigarde or covetous, neither with
the price of justice to profit your chamber. Advise your Justices, that
heinous, bloody, desperate, and scandalous offenses (in no wise) be redeemed
with money: for it is impossible that any may live in surety, either go safe
by the high way, if there be not in the common wealth the whip, the halter,
and the sword. There are so many quarellers, vagabonds and thieves,
murderers, rebels, and sedicious, that if they had hope for money to escape
Justice, they would never cease to commit offenses. And therefore it is
convenient, that the Judge be wise and skillful, to the end he chastise not
all offenses with extremity: neither that he leave sometime with the voice of
the king to honor the people. Also your Lordship has to provide, that the
officers of your audience, which is to wit, Counselors, Atturneys, and
Scriueners, be faithful in the process they make, and no tyrants in the
Laws they have in hand: Evil judges do execute the purse, and not the person.
for many times it does happen, that one coming to complayn of an other, they
do not justice upon the person that gave the quarrel, but they execute justice
upon the pouche that he wears. Also advise your Justices, that they dispatche
their affairs with brevity and with troth: with troth, because they shall
judge justly: with brevity, that it be done with expedition: for it happens to
many Clients, that without obteyning that they crave, they consume all that
which they have. Also your Lordship ought to provide and command the
ministers of your justice, that they do not dishonor, misuse, shame, or
despise such as come to your audience, but that they be mylde, modest, and
manerly. For sometimes the sorrowful suter does more feel a rough word they
speak, than the Justice they delate. I assure you, there be officers so
absolute, without temperance, and so ill manered, that they presume to do more
cruelties with their pen, than Roulande with his sword.

Judges ought to dispatche with speed, and answer with patience.
Also your lordship has to provide, that your Judges do not suffer themselves
to be much visited, accompanied, and much less served. For the judge can not
hold narrow friendship with any man, that is not in the prejudice of justice:
for very few resort unto the Judge for that he deserves, but for the power
he holds.

In the common wealth dissentions, angers, quarelles of ambition amongst your
officers of Justice, neither ought you to dissemble, or in any wise consent
unto: for at the instant that they shall grow into quarrels, the people shall be
divided into partialities: whereof may rise great offenses in the common wealth,
and great want of reverence to your person. Concluding in this case (I say)
that if you will hold your Country in justice, give your Officers occasion to
conceive opinion that you love Equity: And that for no request or interest,
you will be removed from the same: for if the Lord be just, his officers never
dare to be unjust.

That a Knight or Gentleman be mylde, and of good governance.
ALso it is necessary to the good government of your house and common wealth,
Humanity to all men of the mighty is to be used.
yt your behauior toward your subjects be such, that with the meaner sort ye
deal as with sons, with the equal as with brothers, with the ancient as
with fathers, and with the strangers as with felows: for you ought much more to
esteem your self in holding them for friends, than to command them as vassals.
The difference betwixt the tirant and the Lord is, that the tyrant (so he may
be served) makes small account to be beloved: but he that is a Lord wise, and
will rather choose to be beloved than served, and I assure you he has great
reason, for ye person that gives me his heart, will never deny me his goods.
The great Philosopher Licurgus in the laws he gave to the Lacedaemonians, did
command and counsel: That the ancient men of his common wealth should not
talk standing, neither be suffered to stand bareheaded: and I say it to this
end: For that it shall diminishe nothing your authority or gravity, in that
you shall say unto the one, be covered Gossip, and unto the other, sit down
friend. The good Emperor Titus was worthily beloved, for that the old men he
called fathers, the young men fellows, Strangers Cousins, the private friends,
and all in general brothers.

The gentleman that is humble, courteous, and of a good bringing up, strangers
love him, and his own do serve him, for courtesy and friendly behavior is
more honor to him that uses it, than to whom it is done. I am not far in in
love with many Gentlemen, unto whom there goes to talk and to dispatche
affairs, old honorable and wise men (although poor) and they never offer
unto the^ so much courtesy, as to say, arise, neither be covered, and much
less to sit down, conceiving all their greatness to consiste, in not
commaundyng to give them a stool, either to put of their cap to any man: note
and consider well this which I say unto your Lordship, that the authority,
greatenesse, and gravity of Lords and Gentlemen, does not consist to have
their vassals kneeling, and bare headed, but in gracious and good governing
them.

When I heard a certain knight valiant and of noble blood (yet disdainful and
very proud) that used always to say to all men (although of worship he talked
withal) thou, thou, and he he, and never added words of favor, worship, or
curtesy: I said unto him: By my life sir I assure you, and do judge many times
with my self, yt for this cause God or the king show you any favor, because
you never talk with any man with words of favor, worship or courtesy. He did so
much feel this word, that from thence forward, he left to say thou, and said
unto all men: My masters, or by your favors. All men that shall come to talk
and have business with your Lordship, you ought to use with mildness, honor,
and also fawn on them, as every man shall deserve, and according to their
degrees, commanding the old men to cover, the young men to rise, and some to
sit down. For if they delight to serve as vassalles, they will not that you
entreat them as slaves: many vassals we do see every day rise against their
Lords, not so much for the tributes they raise on them, as for the evil
dealings they use toward them: Of all men to be noted.
always your Lordship has to remember, that you and they have one God to
honor, one King to serve, one law to keep, one land to inhabit, and one
death to fear: and if you hold this before your eyes, you shall speak unto them
as unto brothers, and deal with them as with Christians.

Above all things take great heed, to say at the sudden to any of your
subjects any word that shall stain his kindred, or injury his person, for
there is no villain of Saigo so insensible that does not more feel an
injurious word that is spoken, than the chastisement which is given: and there
is a greater evil therein than this, that amongst the common and
countrey-people, all the kindred does answer for the injury, and the shame to
one, redoundeth to the despite of the whole: whereof it happens many times,
that to be revenged of a word, the whole people do rise against their Lord. So
in this case take my counsel, that if any your subjects shall do a thing
which he ought not to do, that you determine to chastise him, and not to
upbraid or defame him: for the chastisement he shall think to proceed of
justice, but your vpraiding of malice. For any distemperance that may grieve
you, or may happen to anger you: Avoid in any wise to call any man knave,
Jew, filth, or villain: for besides that these words be rather of tiplers,
than of Knights or Gentlemen: The Gentleman is bound to be as chaste of his
speech, as a virgin of her virginity: for a gentleman to be of a distempred
speech, foul mouthed, evil manered, loud and foul spoken, this may not
proceed of any other occasion, but that he is melancholic, The woman's armor
is her tongue.
a coward and fearful. For it is notorious unto all men, that unto the woman
it appertains to be revenged with the tongue: but the knight or Gentleman with
his lance.

The king Demetrius had a certain love named Lamia, which when she demanded
Demetrius why he did not speak and was not merry, he made answer: Hold
thy peace Lamia, and let me alone, for I do as well my office, as thou do
thine: for the office of the woman is to spin and prattle, and the office of
the man is to hold his peace and fight. To buffet the boys of the chamber, to
pull them by the hear, to ioll them against the portall, and to spurn with
the feet: Your Lordship ought not to do it, neither consent that it be done
in your presence. For in palaces of authority and gravity, True gentilitie
pitieth the distressed.
to the Lord it appertains to manifest his mind, and to the stuarde to
chastise. If your lordship shall command to chastise or to whip any page or
servant: provide that it be done in a place privy and secret: for it ought
to be very strange unto the Lord or Gentleman that is noble and valiant, to see
any man weep, either to hear any complain. The writers of histories do much
praise the Emperor Octauius Augustus, which did never consent that any
execution should be done whilst he was within the walls of Rome, but for
the taking away of any man's life, he always went to hunting: By the contrary,
the Historiographers do much reprehend the Emperor Aurelius, who before his
own eyes, commanded his servants to be whipped and chastised, which certainly
he should not have done: for the clemency of the Prince ought to be such,
that not only they should not see the execution, neither yet so much as the
person that is executed.

Brothers children.
Your Lordship also has to beware to adventure to recou^t news, to compound
lies, to relate fables, and to tell tales: For the foolish man, and the
tatling tedious Gentleman, be brothers children. The officers and servants of
your house, you have to keep them corrected, warned, and also in fear: that
they raise no quarrels, rob no orchardes, spoil no gardens, neither dishonor
married women: In such sort that the servants presume not to do that which
their Masters dare not command: the young men and pages that shall attend on
you, cause them to learn the commandments, to pray and fast, and to keep
the Sabbath days: For God will never deal mercifully with you, if you make
not greatter account that they serve God, than your self. Such as shall play
at cards or dice (for dry money) not only chastise them, but also dispatch
them away, for the vice of play may not be sustained but by stealing or
disceyt. The pages and young me^ that you shall take into your chamber, you have
to make choice of such as be wise, honest clenly and secret: for babbling and
foulemouthed boys, they will imbesill your apparel, and stain your fame.
Command the Controller of your house, that the pages be taught to go clenly,
to brushe, and lay up their apparel, serve at the table, put of their cap, use
reverence, and to speak with good manner, because it may not be named a
palace, where there wants in the Lord shamefastness, and in the servants good
bringing up.

To the servant that shall be virtuous, and agreeable to your condition, trust
him with your person, let him command in your house, incommend him with your
honor, and give him of your goods, upon such condition that he presume not
to be absolute lord of the common weal: for that day that they hold such one
in reverence, they shall esteem you but little. If you will enjoy service, and
be free from displeasures, you shall give no man such rule in your estate,
that your servant shall thwart you, or your vassal disobey you. Also your
Lordship is to be aduertized (in that as now ye enter of new) you attempt not
to do many new things: for every novelty does not more please him that
does institute the same, than the accomplishement thereof displeases him to
whom it is commanded.

Lactantius Firmianus does say, that the common wealth of the Sicienians
endured longer, than that of the Greeks, A special adventure.
Egyptians, Lacedaemonians, and the Romans, because in seven hundredth and
forty years they never made new laws, neither brake their old. Such as
shall counsel you to renew your Judges, change your Justices, make
proclamations, The pretense of private profit, is void of all good counsel.
and to remove your service to other persons unknown. Consider very well, if
they attempt the same, to the end that you shall not err, or else to amend
their own estate. For it was a law amongst the Athenians, that he should
have no voice in the common wealth, that pretended to have interest in that
which he counseled.

Now at the beginning you have much cause to consider in whom to trust, and
with whom to take counsel: for if the counselor be such as hops thereby to
gather any gain: to that end he will direct his counsel, where his affection
is inclined. In such sort that if he be covetous, he will seek to rob, and
if he be malicious or matched with enemies, how to be revenged. And also such
things as you shall find in your house to be reformed, and your commonwealth
to be chastised. It is not my opinion that you amend or reform all things in
have that is amiss: For it is not just, neither yet sure, that ancient
customs of the common people be taken away suddenly, being brought in by
little and little. The customs that touch not the faith, neither offend the
Church, either offend the Common wealth, take them not away, neither alter
the^: the which if you will not for their cause, yet for your own cause
disfauor the same (for if I be not deceived) in the house where dwells
novelties, there lodges want of judgment.

A notable measure.
Also my Lord I counsel you, yt you in such wise measure your goods, that they
live not with you, but that your lordship live with them. I say it because
there be many noble men of your estate, that keep a great house with other
men's goods: he that has much, and spendes little, they call him a nigarde:
and he that has little and spendes much, they hold him for a fool: for which
cause men ought to live in such sort, yt they be not noted mizers for their
keeping either prodigal for their spe^ding.

A quent of Meruedis, which be.6. a penie, amou^t 2500. Ducates.
My Lord Earl, be none of those that have two quentes of rent, and four of
follies, which always go taking by lone, dealing by excha^ge, taking rent
aforehand, and selling their patrimony: In such manner, as all their travel
does consist not in mainteyning house, but in sustayning follies. Many other
things I might say unto your Lordship in this matter, the which my pen does
leave to write, to remit them unto your prudencie. No more but the Lord be
your protector.

From Valiodolid the third of November.
A letter unto the Admiral Sir Fadrique Enriques, wherein is declared, that
old men have to beware of the year three score and three.

Most renoumed Lord and great Admiral, I assure you, I may firmly aduouche
unto your honor, that at the instant, there was not any thing farther out of
my mind, than was your letter when I saw it enter into my Cell: and
incontinente I imagined with my self, that you wrote unto me some jest, or
sent unto me to declare some doubt.

The heart of man is most excellent in his kind.
To the very like purpose the divine Plato did say, that such is the excellency
of the heart, above all the other members of man, that many times the eyes be
deceived in the things they see: and the heart does not err in that it does
imagine. The Consul Silla, when he saw Julius Caesar being a young man evil
trussed, and worse girt: (for which cause many did judge him to be negligent,
and also doltish) said unto all those of his band, beware of that il girt
youth: that although he appears to be such, yet this is he that shall
tirannise the City of Rome, and be the ruin of my house. Plutarch in the life
of Marcus Antonius recounteth of a certain Greek named Ptolomeus: which being
demanded wherefore he did not talk, or was conversant with any man in all
Athens, but with the young man Alcibiades? answered, because my heart gives me,
that this young man shall set Greece on fire, and defame all Asia. The good
Emperor Traiane said, that he was never deceived in choosing friends, and in
knowing of enemies: for presently his heart did advertise him, to whom he
should repair, and of whom he should beware. And if we well consider the
foresaid: neither the heart of Silla was deceived in that he propbesied of
Julius Caesar, neither the Art of Ptolomeus did err in that he diuined of
Alcibiades: because the one deprived Rome of her liberty, and the other
darkened the glory of Greece. Thus much I thought to say unto your Lordship,
to the end you might see, how my heart was not deceived in divining what you
had written, and also what you craved.

I may very well say, that sometimes your Lordship writes me some jests that
makes me merry: and sometimes you demand questions, that makes me watch: for
your Lordship has your judgment so clear, your memory so ready,
Comme^dable qualities.
the Scripture so prompt, the time so disposed, and above all great swiftness
in writing, and much use in reading: that you do me great grief to
importunate me so often to declare that which you understand not, and to seek
out that which you may not find, to expound as I did the verses of Homer, too
declare the life of Antigonus, to search you the history of Methiados the
Thebane, to relate you the Ceruatica of Sertorius, you have judged to be don in
manner without travel: but I swear by the law of an honest man, I was over
watched in seeking, spent in disposing, and tried in writing it. Many other
Lords of this kingdom, and also out of the same do write unto me, and crave
that I declare them some doutes, and send the^ some histories: which doutes and
demaundes be all plain and easy, and at three turns, I find them amongst my
writings: but your Lordship is such a friend of novelties as always you ask me
histories so strange and peregrine, that my wits may not in any wise but
needs go on pilgrimage. My Lord coming, to the purpose, you say that the
Earl of Miranda did write unto you, that eleven days before the good
Constable Sir Ynnigo of Velasco died, he hard me say and certify that he
should die, the which as I then spoke, so afterward it came to pass, but I
would not declare unto him, by what mean I understood it.

Your Lordships pleasure is, that I should write unto you, whether I did
speak it in earnest or in jest: or if I saw in the sickeman any
prognostication, or if I knew in this matter any great secret: the which I
will discover unto you, if you promise me to keep it secret, and that unto me
thereof you be not ingrate. The truth is, I said it to the Earl of Miranda,
and also to the Doctor Carthagna: neither did I know it by revelation as a
Prophet, either did I obtain it in Circle as a Nigromanticke, either did I
find it in Ptolomeus as an Astronomer, nor understand by the pulse as a
Physician, but I found it as a Philosopher: for that the good Constable did
then go in the year Climatike. A notable secret in the year climatik.
At the present I understood the Constable to be sick, I demanded how old he
was, and when they answered that he was three score and three, I said his life
was in great peril, for that he was then in the most dangerous year to die.

For the understanding hereof it is to wit, that all the life of man is like a
long and a perilous sickness, wherein the seventh and the ninth day is much to
be noted, for that in those cretick days, the sick do mend or grow worse. That
which the Physician does call Term in the sick man, is called in the whole
by the Philosopher Climate: and from thence it is, that from seven to seven
years, and from nine to nine years, me^ do change their complexions, and
also many times their conditions. That this is true, it clearly appears, in
that the man which is now flegmaticke, we see him turn cholerike, the furious
to be mild, the prosperous to be unfortunate, and also he that is wise remove
to be foolish. All which comes to pass, that after seven or nine years,
they have changed as we have said their conditions, and also their
complexions. Also it is to be understood, that in all the discourse of our
life, we only live under one only climat, the which is seven, or nine years:
except in the year of threescore and three, in the which two terms of two
climats do join, which is to wit, nine seuens, or seven nines: because nine
times seven, and seven times nine, be threescore and three years, and
therefore in that year many old men dye. Those that come to the year of
three score and three, A perilous time for old men.
ought to live in very good order, and to walk very warely: because that year
is so perilous, that none passes the same without suffering some danger.
Many and very notable men (in time past, and also present) died in that year
of threescore and three. More and jointly with this I say, that the son that
shall see his Father pass this term, let him not hope so soon to see him
die: neither as yet to inherit.

The Roman and Greek Princes, after they saw themselves escaped the year,
theescore and three, they gave great gifts unto their people, and also offered
no small offerings in their Temples: as it is read of the Emperor Octauius,
the Emperor Antonie the meek, and the good Alexander Seuerus.

I thought good to give a reckoning unto your honor of this history: or to say
better, of this philosophy: because you may understand how I did divine the
death of the good Constable of Castile: which all we his friends and lovers did
see, within the year sixty three to begin to be sick: and also to make and
to dye. Of all the great-states of this kingdom, I hold some for kinsmen,
others my good Lords, some for neighbors, and others for aquainted: but
amongst them all, I held him for my singular good Lord and friend, for that I
found him of a very good conversation, and of a sound condition. The good
Constable was mild in commanding, just in governing, Notable conditions of a
noble man.
wise in speech, large in expense, valiant in battle, meek in pardoning, and
a very good Christian in living. For that your Lordship and he were captains
in the war, and Viceroys in time of peace: you will not deny that which I
say to be very true, although I leave of him much more to be said. When you
gave and also overcame the battle of Reniega near unto Pampalona, I do
remember, that I coming unto your honor to confirm two bills, the one as
concerning Justice, the other for goods: your Lordship said unto me these
words: with me (father master) you have framed and brought to pass, that I
will do what you will, and confirm what you demand: but it is necessary, that
first you inform the Constable of the case, and make relation unto him of
the quality of the matter, for that he is very much advised in the
distribution of goods, and very scrupulous in matters of Justice. The good
Constable had with me very great familiarity, and I with him inviolable
friendship, and upon this foundation he did always communicate with me matters
of conscience, and discharges of his goods, wherein always I did know of him,
that he did procure to do well, and did shun and avoid to offend, I know
not what to write more in this matter unto your Lordship, but that the good
Constable (if he finished his life here in Madrid) at the least in my chronicle
his memory shall remain immortal.

From Madrid the xv. of October.1529.
A letter unto the Admiral, Sir Frederique Enriques, in which is expounded,
wherefore Abraham and Ezechiell did fall forward, and Hely and the Jews
backwardes.

RIght renowned Lord and Archmariner, great be the complaints that your Honor
sends me in this your last letter: the one for that I have not answered this
year unto your writing: and the other, because I have not sent your doubt
absolved. The truth known and the certainty understood, neither shall I be
blamed, or you remain offended. The very truth that has passed in this matter
is, that as they have stolen from Mansilla your servant his horse, and he
played away al his money that he brought by the way (in seeking to borow, to
pay at his lodging) he forgot with me to take order for his answer. Since I
read your letters with a very good will, and presently forthwith did put my
self in study for your doubts, it is not just that fault to be imputed unto
me, if your servants be forgetful to take their answer. Oftentimes I was
both ashamed and also offended, to see your letters come so bitter and so
cholerike: that of a troth to show so much anger, and to write so heavy or
leadenlike, your Lordship had no occasion, and much less any reason. But as
your body is little, and your heart exceeding the same, by a third or fifth: if
you give him place to speak what he will, and that he complain what he
feels, believe me my Lord and be out of doubt, you shall live in your self
payned and discontented, and of others not well-beloved.

The great and mighty Lords, A lesson for Lords.
ought of nothing more too presume or boast themselves, than to have great
hearts, which they ought to enjoy, (if they will employ them well,) in
moderating themselves in great prosperities, and not to be dismayed in their
great adversities. My judgment is, since your Lordship is naturally cholerike,
and of small patience, that you give not your self to write when you be
distempered: for men do write many times in their choler, which afterward
they would not should have passed (so much as) their thoughts. To the argument
which you allege that I esteemed you but little because I would not answer
presently: this I answer, I deny the premises, and defye the consequence:
because your Lordship has much, may do much, deserves much, and therefore we
all esteem you very much. For me to be ignorant of the great estate of your
person, of blood so unspotted, of judgment so delicate, in letters of so
great exercise, and of so great dexterity in arms: the cause were to great
foolishness, or to much lack of wit. But let the case rest, let us divide all
this unkindness amongst us, which is to wit, that your Lordship from hence
forward defer or put off your choler, pardon Mansilla for forgetting his
letter: and also kind me to expound your doubts: and after this manner we will
give amends to that which is past, and use silence for the time to come.

Your honor demands, that I declare, wherefore the Patriarch Abraham in the
vale of Mambre, The exposition of the text.
and the Prophet Ezechiel near unto the river Cobar, as holy scripture says
of them, fell to the ground upon their faces: and contrariwise, Heli the
Prophet, and the Jews that took Christ, fell backwards Your Lordship has to
consider, that it is not so light or easy which you doubt of, for if I be not
deceived, it is a question that few men do move, and in a manner none does
expound. For notwithstanding I have seen much, and read much, I can not
remember me to have considered or doubted, neither at anytime to have preached
thereof: I dare be bold to say, that by these two manners of fallings, the one
back wards, and the other forwards, do signify two kinds of sinning. For even
as to fall after the one manner or the other, in the end all is falling: so in
like manner, to sin after the one sort or the other, all is sinning. Those
that do fall upon the back, and backwards, we see them have their faces
discovered, To be ashamed of sin, is hope of ame^dment.
and looking up to heaven: by these are to be understood: those which do sin
without the fear of God, and afterward have no shame to have sinned. We see
by experience that he that falls forwards, may help him self to rise with
his hands, with his elbowes, with his knees, and with his feet: by this I
would say, that then we have hope to come out of sin, when we shall be
ashamed to have sinned. The contrary happens in him that falls backwards,
yt which can never help him self with his hands, or lift him self, or stay
with his feet. By this I would say, that the man that is not ashamed to be a
sinner, late or never shall we see him come out of sin.

Plutarch and Aulus Gellius do say, that no young man of Rome might enter
amongst the common women, but with their faces very well covered. If there happened
any so vnshame-fast that durst enter or come forth discovered: so openly was
he chastised, as if he had committed some forcible adultery. It is to be noted,
that all those that fell forward were saints: as Abraham and Ezechiel: and on
the contrary, those that fell backwardes, as Hely the priest of the temple, and
the Jews that sold Christ were sinners. Out of all this there may be
gathered, how much, and how greatly we have to regard, not only that we fall,
either so much as to stumble: for we know not whether we shall fall forward as
Abraham, or backward as the unfortunate Hely. Considering we descend of
sinners, live amongst sinners, be conversant amongst sinners, and this world
being in so great want of just men, we cannot deliver our selves from all
sins: jointly therefore with this let us pray unto the Lord, that if he take
away his grace, that we do fall, that he take not away shamefastness wherewith
to arise. Much is God offended with us to see how little we esteem to sin,
but he is much more offended to see how slowly we remember to repent: for
they be very few that do leave to sin, but at the time when they cannot more
sin. Oh how many more be they that fall backward with Hely, tha^ forward with
Abraham: for if there be one that is ashamed of sin, there is an hundredth
that account sin but pastime. Let every man esteem himself as he list, and
let every man say what he supposes: No greter sinner than he that presumes to
be good.
but for my part I hold none for a greater sinner, than he that accounts
himself for very just: neither do I conceive for very just, but he that
acknowledges himself to be a great sinner. God does well know what we can
do, and he understands very well the strength that we have: and thereof it
is, that he is not offended for that we be not just, but because we do not
confess to be sinners. I return to say, that God does not marvel that we be
humane in sinning, but yt which does offend him is, for that being as we are so
great sinners, we would well make the world believe that we be very just. Let
the conclusion be in this matter, that they only fall backwards with Hely, and
with the Hebrews, that so without remorse sit down to sin, as they would
sit down to eat, and lie down to sleep. Of that which I do most marvel
in this matter is, that being as we are fallen into most grievous sins, we do
so live, and go so contented, as though we had received of God a safeconduit to
be saved. Behold here my Lord your letter answered. Behold your doubt
absolved. Behold here my fault excused. And also behold here your choler
removed. No more but that our Lord give you his grace, and unto me his glory.

From Madrid the xj. of November. 1528.
A letter unto the Abbot of Monserrate, wherein is touched the oratories that
the Gentiles used, and that it is a better life to live in Monserrate, than at
the Court.

MOst reverend, and blessed Abbot, in the eleventh Calends of May, your Monk
brother Roger gave me a letter of yours, which I received with gladness, and
read with pleasure, for that it was from your fatherhoode, and brought by the
hands of that grave Father. Of Aurelianus the Emperor it is read, that the
letters which Domitius sent unto him were so tedious, that he heard them, but
did not answer them: and the letters that the Censor Turinus sent him, he
himself did read them, and with his own hand answered them. Of a troth there
be men so tedious in their speech, and so without grace in writing, that a man
would rather be sick of a fever, than hear their talk, either read their
letters.

No man, of any man ought to marvel, since men be so diverse in complexion, and
so variable in condition, that many times against our will the heart does love
which were much better to be abhorred, and does abhor that which were better
to be beloved. I say this father Abbot, to the end you shall understand, that
as often as they say, here is one of Monseratte, my heart rejoices to hear some
news from thence, and the eyes he quickened in readyng your letters.

Father you write unto me, that I advertise you, if in the old time amongst
the Gentiles were used holy Oratories: as now is used amongst the Christians:
to which demand I will say what I have read, Oracles of old time.
and that which presently I do remember. The oracle of the Scicilians was
Libeus, the Oracle of ye Rodes was Ceres, the oracle of the Ephesians was the
great Diana, the Oracle of the Palestines was Belus, the Oracle of the Argiues
was Delphos, the oracle of the Numidians was Juno, the Oracle of the Romans
was Berecinthia, the oracle of the Thebans was Venus, the oracle of the
Spaniards was Proserpina, (whose temple stood in Cantabria, which is now called
Nauara.) That which the Christians do now call Hermitage, the Gentiles did name
Oracle. This Oracle stood always distant from the Cities, and holden in very
great veneration. There was always in the Temple one priest alone, it was well
repaired, well lockte, and well endued, and those that went thither on
stations, they might only kiss the walls, and also from the doors behold, but
within they might not enter, except ordinary priests, and strange Ambassadors.
Nere vn^^ the Oracle, they planted trees, within alwais oil did burn: the
covering was all of lead to defend the rain: at the door there stood an
Idol the which they did kiss: they had there a certain hollow trunk where
they did offer, and an house builded where they lodged.

Plutarch does much praise the Emperor Alexander the great for that in all the
kingdoms he conquered, and in all the provinces that he subdued, he commanded
solemn Temples to be made to pray in, and Oracles far distant to visit.
Antigonus to be noted.
The king Antigonus that was page to the Emperor Alexander, and father of king
Demetrius, (although they reprehend him to be absolute in government, and
dissolute in manners, the Historiographers do much praise him, because every
week he went once into the Temple, and every month did sleep one night to
the Oracle. The Senate of Athens did much more honor unto the dinure Plato
after his death, than they did when he was living: and the cause thereof was,
for that the good Plato, when he was weary of reading and studying, did
withdraw himself to live, and also to dye near unto a certain devout Oracle,
wherein he was afterward buried, and as God adorned. Archidamas the Greek,
that was son to Agesilaus, after he had governed the common wealth of
Athens.22. years, and had overcome by sea and by land ten battles, he
commanded to he made in the most sharp mountains of Argos a most solemn
oracle, wherein Archidamas did end his life, and also for himself did choose
a sepulcher. Amongst all the oratories that of old they had in Asia, the most
famous was the Oracle of Delphos: for to that place from all parts of the
world they did concur, and thither did carye most presents, and there made
most vows, and also from thence of their Gods received most answers.

When Camillus overcame the Samnits, the Romans made a vow, to make an image of
gold to send to ye Oracle, for which purpose the matrons of Rome, gave their
cholers, their rings, their bracelets, and their ear rings from their persons,
for which liberality they were greatly honored and largely privileged. I have
said all this Father Abbotte, to the end y^ shall understand, that it is no new
thing in this world to have amongst the people temples and hermitages. The
difference betwixt ours and theirs, is: that those Oracles men have appointed,
but our sanctuaries God does choose, whereof there follows great utility,
and no small security: for that in the place that of God is chosen, we may
pray without any scruple. I do remember I have been at our Ladies of
Lorito, of Gadalupe, del a penia de Francie, del a Hoz de Segouia, y de
Balunera, the which house and sanctuaries be all of much prayer and admiration:
but for my content and my condition, our Lady of the craggy Rock, I find it
to be a buildyng of admiration, a temple of prayer, and a house of devotion.
Father Abbot I assure you of a troth, I did never see my self amongst those
sharp crags, amongst those high mountains, amongst those cruel rocks, and
amongst those thick woods, that I did not purpose to be an other, that I did
not sorrow for time past, and that I did not abhor liberty, and did love to
be alone. I did never pass by craggie moon that forthwith I was not contrite,
that I was not repentant at great leisure, that I did not celebrate with
tears, that I did not watch one night, that I gave not to the poor: and
above all, that I did not fill my self with sighing, and purpose to amend. Or
that it pleased the God of heaven that I were such here, and in my whole life,
as I have purposed to be when I was there. The more I go laden with days,
the more dull I feel my self in virtues, and which is worst of al, that in
good desires I am a saint, and in doing good works I am a sinner, preaching as
I do preach, that heaven is full of good works, and hell is full of good
thoughts. I know not whether they be my friends that do counsel me, parents
that does importune me, enemies that do direct me, business that does hinder
me, Caesar that without ceasing commaundes me, or the devil that temptes me.
The more I do purpose to part from the world, more and more I find my self
sinkyng to the bottom thereof. The troth is, that the life of the Court, is
very pleasant for such as have an appetite thereto: for there we suffer
hunger, cold, thirste, weariness, poverty, sorrow, angers, disfavors and
persecutions: all which be tolerable and very easy to be suffered: for there
is none that does hinder our liberty, neither takes reckening of our
idleness. Believe me father Abbotte, and be out of doubt, for the soul and
also for the body, your life is much better there at Craggye Mount, than
this that we lead here at Court: for the Court serves better to hear
news thereof, than to experimente the things that passes therein. In the
Court he that may do little is soon forgotten, and he that has somewhat,
is pursued. In the court the poor has not to care, and the rich can not help
himself. In the Court they be few that live contented, and many that be
abhorred. In the Court all procure to be in favor and authority, and in the
end one only does command. In the Court none has desire there to die,
notwithstanding we see not any that will depart from thence. In the Court we
see many do what they (...)t, but very few what is meet, In the Court all
do blaspheme the court, notwithstanding all follow the court. Finally, I say
and affirm that which I have said and preached, which is, that the Court is
not but for men that be private and in favor, that can gather the fruit
thereof: and for young men that have no feeling thereof. It with these conditions
(Father Abbot) you will come and dwell at Court, from henceforth I make
exchange for your craggy mount, and also do promise you by the faith of a
Christian, you shall more repent you to have bin converted a courtier, than I
to be admitted of the religion of S. Benet. For the much good will I bear you,
for the much devotion I hold of that place, you are bound to pray unto God,
Gods grace does only save us.
that he will draw me from this infamous life, and fight me with his grace,
without the which we cannot serve him, and much less be saved. By the hands
of Friar Roger I have received the spoones you sent me, and to him I delivered
the book that he desired me: in such wise, that I shall have spoones to eat
with, and your fatherhod a book to pray in. In the rest that you write, as
concerning your Monastery, the case shall be, that you deal with God for me,
as one that is devout, and I shall do with Caesar the work of a friend. No
more, but that our Lord be your protector.

From Valiodolid the vij. of Ian. 1535.
A letter unto the Admiral Sir Frederique Enriques, in the which there is
declared a certain authority of the holy scripture.

GLorious and right famous Archmarriner, I am determined before ye Judge
Ronquillo to adiorne your Lordship, to the end that the parties called and
heard, he he judge and give sentence betwixt us, whether I, being as I am a
Gentleman, and a Courtier, be bound to answer Extempore, unto all your
Letters: and to expound all doubts, which your honor so continually writes
unto me. Your solicitor is so importunate for answer (I confess) that many
times I give the servant to the Devil, and also at sometime, I pray not unto
God for the master.

Complaining yesterdaye unto your solicitour, for that he was so tedious, and
because so continually he did move me, he made me answer with a very good
grace. Consider sir master I give you to understand, that the Admiral (my
Lord) craves of your reverence, that you write unto him as a friend, that you
send him news as a Chronicler, declare his doubts as a Divine, and counsel
his conscience as a Religious. Whereunto I replied, if your master the Admiral
will be well served, also I will be well paid. The payment shall be, for the
office of Chronicler, of a divine, of a friend, and of a Counselor: that since
I cannot get my meat with the lau^ce, I must obtayn it with the pen. I made all this threatening, not to the intent your Lordship shall give me to eat, but
for that you should cease to be importune: for I thank God, A benefit due to
such as serve princes.
the Emperor (that is my lord and master) has not only given me that
which is necessary, but also wherewith to reliene others. The benefit that we
have (that attend upon Princes) is, that if we be bound to serve them, we have
alwais license to crave of them, but let the conclusion be, that with the same
intention that I did speak those words here, it may please your Lordship to
receive them there: that in fine and in the end, chide we never so much, or be
we never so angry, you must needs do what I desire you: and I must of
necessity do what you command me.

Your Lordships pleasure is, that I write unto you, how that text is to be
understood of Esaias, where he says, Vae tibi Jerusalem, quia bibisti
calicem irae Dei vsque ad feces: Which words are to be understood: woe be
unto thee Jerusalem, because thou have drunk the cup of the Lords wrath,
even to the dregs. Your lordship asks a matter so high, and a thing so
profound, that I had rather understand than speak it, taste it than write it:
for they know more thereof that be given to contemplation, than such as be
occupied in reading: but this is the doubt. Since God the father did send to
Christ his son, a cup to drink of bitterness: whereof is Jerusalem
reprehended, for the cup that she drank of wrath? the one was the cup, the
other was the cup: the one of bitterness, the other of wrath: the Synagogue
did receive the one, and the Church the other: Christ did drink the one,
Jerusalem did drink the other: God sent the one, and God sent the other. But
since it is so, why do they so much praise the cup that Christ tasted of,
and condemn the sorrowful cup that Jerusalem did drink?

To understand the profunditie of this scripture, we must presuppose, that
there be two manners of cups, which is to wit, the cup that is said simply
only of God, and the cup that is said with an addition, that is, of the ire of
God. There is so great difference betwixt these two cups, that in the one we
drink heaven, in the other we swalow hell: the holy cup of God is no other
thing but temptations, hunger, cold, thirste, persecutions, exile, poverty,
and martirdom: of which things, God gives to drink and to taste, to such as he
has chosen to serve him, and has predestinate to be saved. Unto whom God
gives this cup to drink, it is a sign that he is registered amongst them
that shall be saved: in such sort that we can not escape Hell, but at the
cost of very great travel. Profoundly it is to be considered what Christ
said: that the cup should not only be given to his own person, but that it
should also pass unto his Church, in such wise that he drank thereof, but he
made not an end: for if Christ had drunk all the cup, only Christ should
have entered the glory. And for this cause he prayed unto his father that the
cup should pass unto those of his Church, for that we should all enter with
him into the glory. Oh high mystery never heard of, yt Christ being in the
Garden, in the dark alone, flat upon his knees, sweating, praying, and
weeping, he did not crave of his Father, that the elect of his Church should be
cherished or worldly pampred, but of that cup he would give them a draught to
drink. Of that cup of bitterness and travel, only Christ did drink his
fill: because he only was sufficient to redeem us. All we that came after
Christ. If we cannot drink our fill, I would to God we might drink sufficient
for our Salvation: the sword of saint Peter, the Cross of saint Andrew, the
knife of saint Bartelmew, the girdierne of S. Laurence, and the sheares of
saint Steven, what other things are they, but certain badges they have
received of Christ, Badges of Christ.
and certain gulpes they have drunk of his cup. So many more degrees we shall
receive in Heaven of Glory, as we have drunk of the cup of Christ in this
life, and therefore we ought to pray unto God every day with tears, that if we
cannot drink all his cup, at the least that he will suffer us to taste thereof.
The cup of Christ (although it be bitter in drinking) after the drinking
thereof, it does great profit: I would say, that the trauells which we suffer
to be good, they give not so much pain when we endure them, as they afterward
give pleasure, having passed them. Provide who will of the wines of Illana, of
the buttes of Candia, and of the pipes of Rebedew: but for my consolation and
salvation, I ask not of God, but that all the days that remain of my life, he
give me leave to drink if he please but one drop of his cup.

There is another Cup which is called the cup of ye wrath of God: whereof to
speak, the entrails do open, the heart does fail, the flesh does tremble, and
the eyes do weep: with this God does threaten us, this is that which the
Prophet speaks of: Of this the sorrowful Jerusalem did drink: of this the
unfortunate Sinagogue did make her self drunk. And the drunkenness of this,
was the cause that Israel was banished from Judea, and translated into Babylon.

He drinks of the cup of wrath, that falls from the state of grace wherein
he stood, whereof it follows that the soul is much more dead without grace,
than a body without a soul. Then it is said that God is an angered, Without
grace a soul is like a body without life.
when he is careless of us, and that day that we be forgetful to fear him,
and he not delighted to love us, and stumbling at every step, in the end of
the journey we shall be condemned. Oh what difference there is in the wrath that
men do show, and in that wrath and ire, which is said to proceed from God:
for when men be angry they revenge, but God when he is angry, he cease to
chastise. In such wise that God does more chasten an evil man, when he
deferreth and does dissemble with him, than when he does presently torment him.
There is not a greater temptation, than not to be tempted: there is no greater
trouble, than not to be troubled: there is not greater chastisement, than not
to be chastised: neither is there a greater whip, than not to be scourged of
God. The sick man of whose health the physician dispaireth is in small hope of
his life, I would say, that his sin which God does not chastise: I have great
suspicion of his salvation.

It is much to be noted, that the Prophet does not only threaten Jerusalem
for that she did drink the cup of wrath: but also because she did drink the
grounds and dregs thereof, until nothing was left: in such wise, that if there
had bin more, she would have drunk more. To drink of the cup unto the
dregs, is: that having offended God grievously committing all manner of
sins wickedly, forsaken some articles of the faith peruersely, and having
sinned with all the members damnably: As if the commandments being ten, had
bin ten thousand, we had rather die than leave any one of them disobeyed.

To drink the Cup unto the dregs, is when we be not contented with breaking
of one commandment or two or three, but that of force they must be broken al
ten: to drink ye cup unto the dregs, is: if we leave to commit any sins, it
is not for want of will, but for want of power, or for want of occasion: to
drink the cup unto the dregs is, that we do not only content our selves
with sinning, but that we do presume and boaste ourselves of our sinning: to
drink the cup unto the dregs is, committing as we do all manner of
sins, we can not suffer that they call us sinners: to drink the cup unto the
dregs is, to have so great unshamefastness in sinning, that we dare not
entire and urge others to sin: to drink the cup unto the dregs is, to have
our desires like a saint, and our deserts like a devil.

Behold here my Lord Admiral, what I conceive of that text of the Prophet,
behold here what I do think of your doubt, and I beseech God our Lord that
he being pleased, we may deserve to drink of the cup that Christ did drink
of, and not of the cup that Jeremy does write of. I write not unto your
lordship news of the court as I was wont to write, To drink of the one or of
the other, great choice is to be used.
because it seems to commit treason unto the holy Scripture, if we should
place any profane things at the foot of so holy a matter. No more but that our
Lord give us his grace.

From Madrid the xxv. of March.
Another letter unto the same Commendathor, Sir Jews Brave, wherein is written
the conditions that the honorable old men ought to have: and that love sildome
or never departs the heart where it is entered.

VEry noble and reformed knight, by ye words of your letter, I understood
how quickly the medicine of my writing came to your heart, and I do much
rejoice to have shot at you with an arrow so inuenomed, that was sufficient
to make you stagger: but not to strike you down. Although in the other letter
which I did write unto you, it repented me to call you noble: now I hold it
for very well employed, in this letter to entitle you very noble, because you
have amended the abuse of your life, and answered according to your nobleness.

Sir you write unto me, that the words of my letter did penetrate your heart,
and touch you to the quick, and to say you the troth, I was right glad
thereof: for I did not write it that you should only read it, but to the end
you should cordially feel it. Jointly with this I promise you as a Gentleman,
and swear unto you as a Christian, that it was not my meaning when I did write
unto you to offend you, but to the intent to amend you. Also you say, that at
the instant you read my letter you burned the tokens of your enamored, did
tear the letters of love, dispatch the page of messages, removed all talk of
your love, and gave a quittance to the Pandor. I cannot but praise what you
have done, and much more will praise it when I shall see you continue and
persevere in the same. For vices be so evil to be vnrooted where they once take
place: that when we think they be all gone, in the house they remain hidden.
Sir I give you great thanks for that you have done, and also do crave pardon
for that I have said, although it be true, to see you amended I do little
esteem that you be offended. For an unkindness is sooner lost, than vice
removed.

Also you crave of me in your letter, that since I have written you the
conditions of an old man enamored, that I write also unto you the conditions
that a wise old man ought too have: because by the one may be known the
shelfe that is to be shunned, and by the other the channel obtained that is
nauigable, wherein I delight to accomplish your request, and to write your
desire: although it be true, that I know not, if my judgment shall have so
delicate a vain, and my pen so good a grace, in giving counsel, as in
reprehending. For there be many that in giving counsel be very cold, but in
speaking malicious taunts very skillful. Sir, I will do my endeavor to do and
say the best I can, with an admonition that I give before all things unto him
that shall hear or read the same, that he prepare, not to take so great a
taste in reading these counsels, as profit by using them.

The old men of your age, they ought to be so advised in that they speak,
and such examplers of that they do, that not only they are not to be seen to
do evil works, either so much as to speak dishonest words. For the old man
that is absolute and dissolute: is sufficient to corrupt or cast away a whole
Town or common wealth. The old men of your age: Rules for old men.
ought to give, not only good examples, but also good counsel: for the
inclination of the young man is to err and to vary, and the condition of the
old man, ought to be to correct by discretion, and give good counsel to
amend. The old men of your age: ought to be gentle, modest, and patie^t: for
if in times past they were breeders of discord, now they ought to be makers of
peace. The old men of your age ought to be masters of such as know little,
and defenders of such as can do little, and if they may not give them remedy,
they leave not to give them comfort. For the heart that is tormented, despited,
and in great distress, sometimes receives more comfort with the words which
they speak, than with that which they give them. The old men of your age,
now have no time to be occupied, but in visiting of hospitalles, and releeuing
the poor: for there may not be a thing more just, than that, so many paces as
have bin spent to brothel houses, should now be spent to visit Temples. The old
men of your age, ought not to be busied, but in making their discharges when
they be in ye house, and to bewail their sins when they go to Church: for
he stands in great suertie of salvation, that in his life does that he ought
to do, and in his death what he can do.

The old men of your age ought to use great measure in the words they speak,
and pleasant brevity in that they recount, and also they ought to beware to
tell news, and much less to use to relate fables: for in such a case, if they
call young men light and foolish, they will say that old men dote and babble. The
old men of your age ought to be removed from contentions, and from troubles in
law, and if it be possible, to redeem them by the weight of money, to the end
to be free from infinite trauells: for young men only do feel the travel, but
the old men do feel vexation, and bewail the displeasure.

The old men of your age, ought to have their communicatio^ with persons well
complexioned, and not evil conditioned, with whom they may repose and
pleasantly be conversant: for there is not in this mortal life a thing that
does so recreate the heart: as is sweet conversation. The old men of your age
ought to seek men, and choose honest friends, and much to consider that the
friends which they shall choose, and the men with whom they shall be
conversant, be not tedious in their speech, Conversation for old men.
and importunate in craving: ^or friendship and importunity never feed at one
dish, either name themselves to be of one band.

The old men of your age, ought not as now to use vain and light pastimes,
but to have regard to the bestowing of their goods, and to consider for their
houses: for the old man that looks not to his substance, shall want to eat,
and he that watches not his house, shall not lack wherefore to weep. The
old men of your age be bound to go cleanly, and well clad, but they have not
license to be curious, either with niceness to wear their garments: for in
young men to be neat, is a good curiosity, but in old men, it is great vanity.

The old men of your age ought much to flee brawling with your adversaries,
either trauerse in words with your neighbors: for if they reply any
overthwart words, or speak any bitter injury, the hurt is, that you have a
heart to feel it, and not strength to revenge it. The old men of your age,
ought to be charitable, pitiful, and alms giuers: for young men without
experience, walk so bedolted of the things of this world, that it seems unto
them sufficient to be termed Christians: but the old men that time has
advised, and age delivered from disceit, let them hold it for certain that God
of the^ will never have pity, The exercise of good old men.
if they have not charity. The old men of your age, ought to have some good
Books to profit, and other histories to pass away the time: for as now
their age does not suffer to walk, much less to travel, and as they are
forced all day to be idle and pensive, so is it of more deserving that they
fill themselves with reading in books: than too be tired in thinking of times
past. The old men of your age ought to avoid entering into conuocations,
sessions, and Sises: for in such places they entreat not but causes of the
common wealth, and interest for goods: and that by the judgment of froward
young men, and men passioned, where they never believe the wise, either hear
the old of experience. The old men of your age, when you shall be in
counsel, or called to counsel, ought not to be rash, ianglers, or
contentious: for it apertayneth to young men to follow their opinion, and the old
men but only reason. The old men of your age, The notes of good old men.
ought to be sober, pacient, and chaste, and to presume more to be named
virtuous than old: for in these times, and also in time past, they have more
respect to the life he leads, than to the hoare hears he wears. The old
men of your age, ought to hold for their chief exercise, to go every day to
Church, and to hear service on the holyday: and if this shall seem painful
or tedious, I give him license to go no ofter to Church being old, than he went
to visit his innamored when he was young. The old men of your age, ought to
have all things well provided for their souls, to understand also for the
health of their persons: for as Galene says, old age is so monstrous in
condition, that it is neither a sickness finished, or a perfect health. The
old men of your age, before all things ought to procure their houses good and
healthy, situate in a gladsome and sound air: for I am of opinion, that there
is no goods better employed, than that which old men bestow upon a good
house. The old men of your age, ought to procure, not only to dwell in a good
house, but also to sleep in a good chamber, Necessary provision for old men.
in a bed very clenly, and the chamber very close: for as the old man is
delicate and of small strength, so be is more offended by a little air that
co^mes in at a chinke, tha^ the cold of one whole winter night did grieve him
when he was young. The old men of your age, ought very much to procure to eat
good bread, and to drink good wine, and the bread that is well baked, and the
wine that is a year old: for as old age is compassed with infirmities, and
laden with sadness, the good vituals shall hold them in health, and the good
wine shall lead them in mirth. A diet for old men.
The old men of your age, ought much to consider that their meals be small,
their meat young and well seasoned: and if they eat much, and of many meats,
they ever go sick: for notwithstanding they have money to buy them, they have
not heat to digest them. The old men of your age, ought too procure their bed
curteyned, their Chamber hanged, a mean fire, the chimney without smoke: for
the life of old men consists in going clenly, warm, contented, and without
anger. The old men of your age, ought utterly to avoid to dwell upon any
river, either to do their business in moist grounds, either to sleep in ayry
places, for old men being delicate as they are, be like children, and
naturally accraised: the air shall penetrate their powers, and moystnesse
shall enter their bones. The old me^ of your age, upon pain of their life
ought to be temperate in their diet, refusing to eat late: for old me^, as
they have their stomachs weak and grown cold, they may not digest two
meals in a day: Temperance in old men provoke sleep and auoydeth belke.
for the old man that is insatiable and a glutton, using the contrary, shall
belke much and sleep little. The old men of your age, to the end that they
be not sick, or grow heavy, neither turn to be gross, ought a little to
refreshe them selves, walk into the field, use some exercise, or be occupied
in some faculty: for otherwise, it might happen them to get a tisick, or a
lamenesse in their limbs: in such wise, that it will be hard to fetch breath,
and by puffing and blowing give warning where you walk. The old men of your age
ought to have great care to avoid all contentious brabbling amongst their
servants, and sometime to bear with their negligences, to pay their wages, too
the end they go contented: for otherwise they will be negligent in service,
and very subtle in stealing. For conclusion, the old men of your age ought much
to procure to wear their apparel sweet and cleanly: A conclusion with rules,
convenient for old men.
their shirts very well washed: their house neat and well swept, and their
chamber very close, warm, and well smelling. For the old man which presumes
to be wise, if he will live in health, and go contented, ought to have his
body without life, and his heart without strife. In the end of your letter you
write, that having left to love, sorrow leaves not to vere you, which uses to
follow the enamored: and instantly you desire me to give you some remedy, or to
send you some comfort: for notwithstanding you have thrown it out of the
house, it leaves not now and then too knock at the gate.

Sir in this case I remit you to Hermogenes, to Tesiphontes, to Doreatius, to
Plutarch, and to Ovid, which spent much time, and wrote many books, to give
order in what manner the enamored should love, and the remedies that for their
love they should use. Let Ovid write what him pleases, and Dorcas say what he
thinks good, but in fine, there is no better remedy for love, than is, never
to begin to love: A most certain remedy for love.
for love is so evil a beast, that with a thread he suffers to be taken, but
he will not depart with thrusts of a lance. Let every man consider what he
attempteth, mark what he does, behold what he takes in hand, note whither he
does enter, and have regard where he may be taken: for if it were in his
hands to set the tables, he is not certain to win the game. There is in love
after it is begone, infinite shelues, immesurable sloughes, dangerous rocks,
and unknown whirelpooles, in which some remain defaced, others blinded, some
besoilde, and also some others utterly drowned, in such wise, that he that is
best delivered, I accoumpt to be evil delivered.

Oh how many times did Hercules desire to be delivered from his love Mithrida,
Menelaus from Dortha, Pyrrhus from Helena, Alcibiades from Dorobella, Demophon
from Phillis, Ha^niball from Sabina, and Marcus Antonius from Cleopatra, from
whom they could never, not only depart, but also in the end for them, and with
them, they were cast away.

In case of love, let no man trust any man, and much less him self: for love
is so natural to man or woman, and the desire to be beloved, that where love
amongst them does once cleave, it is a sore that never opens, and a bond
that never vnknitteth. Love is a metal so delicat, and a canker so secret, yt
he planteth not in ye face where he may be seen, nor in ye pulse where he may
be felt, but in the sorrowful heart where (although he be sensible) they dare
not discover it. After all this, I say, that the remedy that I give for love,
is, that they give him no place to enter amongst the entrayles, nor give their
eyes liberty to behold windows, or give ear to bawdes, either suffer any
trade of Dames to come or go, and if any come to house, to shut the doors, and
not to walk abroad after evening: if with these conditions love may not
altogether be remedied, at the least it may be eased and amended.

Sir (and my gossip) if you will in all these things profit your self and
well consider thereof, you shall be excused of many angers, and also save much
money. For to your age and my gravity it is more convenient to understand of
the best wines, than to view the windows of the enamored. Take for example and
chastisement the Licentiat Burgos, your acquainted, A sudden and strange
spectacle.
and my great friend, which being old (and enamored as you) died this saturday,
a death so strange and fuddayne, as was fearful to al men, and sorrowful to
his friends. No more, but our Lord be your guide, and give me grace too serve
him.

From Burgos the.24. of Febr. 1523.
A letter unto Sir James of Gueuara, uncle to the Author, wherein he does
comfort him, for that he has bin sick.

MAgnificent and right honorable Uncle, it pleases your Honor to complain of
me in your letter, that I neither serve you as my good Lord, either do sue
as unto a father, or visit as an uncle, neither write as unto a friend. I
may not deny, but as concerning kindred your are my Fathers brother, Note the
eloquence of the Author.
in merit my good Lord, my father in courtesy, and my Progenitor in giving of
liberal rewards, which I have received at your hands: not as a nephew, but as
a son much beloved.

Since I have confessed the affinity that I hold, and affirm the debt that I
do owe, no more will I deny the fault that I have committed in neglecting my
duty in visiting and writing unto you: The perfect condition of a friend.
for with our friends we ought to accomplish until we may do no more, and
spend until we have no more: let it avail what it may avail, and my excuse
serve, what it may serve. The very troth is, that I go in this court with mine
offices so occupied, and so bewandred in my business, that scarsely I know any
man, neither yet remember my self: and this which (I say) is not so much to
excuse my fault, as it is to accuse my living. For in the time when I was
alive, and abode in my monastery, I did rise early to go to Church, I studied
my books, preached my sermons, fasted the aduents, performed my disciplines,
bewailed my sins, and prayed for sinners: in such sort, that every night I
made a reckening of my life, and every day did renew my conscience. But
afterward, I died: afterward they buried me: Buried, being alive.
and afterward they brought me unto the Court: I grew negligent in fasting, I
brake holy days, I forgot my disciplines, I did no alms, I prayed with
negligence, I preached sildome, I spoke at large, I suffered little, I
celebrated with dullness, I presumed much, and over much: and the worst of all
is, that I gave my self to unprofitable conuersations, the which lead me unto
some tedious passions, and also affections to be avoided. Behold here my Lord
and Uncle, after what manner we go in Court, neither know we kindred, or
speak to friends, neither be sensible of the mischief, or profit us of the
time, neither do we seek rest, or have any wit: but wandering here and there,
we go as certain men bedolted and charged with a thousand thoughts.

But setting this apart, since in time to come there shall be amends, and for
that which is past I may obtain pardon, I shall promise you by the faith of an
honest nephew, that the court having passed these ports, I shall come to visit
you, and will write by every messe^ger. Sir Ladron your son and my cousin
willed me (here in Madrid) that I should write unto you, the sorrow which I
conceived of the sickness your Lordship has had, and the long diseases you
have passed. The excess you used, is grief unto me: the ague that held you,
sorroweth me: the sorrows you have paste, displeases me: the syropes you
received, irketh me: the purgations you used, lothed me: the oyntmentes you
experimented, despiteth me: the bathes you proved, are tedious, and tormenteth
me: the lauatories you tasted, payneth me: the money you wasted, vexes me:
because the sick man, considering the goods he expended, and the little that
medicines have profited, many times it does more grieve him, that he gives to
the Physician and Apoticarye, than the malady which he suffered.

Behold here my Lord, how I am not a man that gives one sorrow, but an
hundredth if need be: although it be true, that a thousand times it soroweth
me, is not so much worth as one it pleases me. Licurgus in the laws that he
gave to the Lacedaemonians, did command, that no man should bring evil news
to any man, but that the pacient should divine it, or by discourse of time, he
should understand it. The divine Plato in the books of his common wealth,
did counsel the Athenians that they should not visit any of their neighbors
in time of adversity, except they could by some means remedy them. For (he
said) and said well, that cold and unsavory is that comfort, when it comes
not be wrapped in some remedy. Of a troth, to remedy and give counsel be two
distinct offices, and very seldom contained in one person: for counsel is to
be given by the wife, and the remedy by him that possesses the same. My Lord
and uncle, I would God, that your remedy were in my hands (as it is to desire
it) that I might rather say, It pleases me of your health, than that it
soroweth me of your sickness. Sir, you have to understand, I bear you much
envy: not of Paradilla, where you dwell, not to the new planted vineyard which
you possess, or to the mil yt you make, either to the nintie years that you
possess, but of the order that you use in your house: for that in nurtour it
is a palace, and in honest civility, A good praise to a Gentleman.
a College.

Cato the judge, in his old age did withdraw himself to a country house,
which stood betwixt Nola, and Caieta, and all the Romans that past thereby
did say, iste solus scit viuere: which is to understand, this man knows to
live by himself, wherefore they reported that he had withdrawn himself thither
in time, and sequestered himself from the hurly burly of the world. The
greatest mercy that God uses to an old man is to give him to understand, that
he is become old: for if he know this of himself, of a troth he shall find that
the old man has not of any thing more certainty, than every day to look for
death. Plato said: Iuuenes cito moriuntur, senes aute^ diu viuere no^ possunt,
yt is to say, it is true that young men die quickly, but the old men can not
live long. The steel being spente, the knife may not cut: the talow consumed,
the candle goes out: the Sun being set, the day can not tarry: the flower
being fallen, there is no hope of fruit. By that which is said, I would say, yt
after an old man is past four score years, he ought to make more readiness
to die, tha^ prouisio^s to live. Diodorus Siculus says, that it was a law
amongst the Egyptians, that no king, after he had children, either any old man
having passed threescore years, should presume to build an house, without
first for himself he had made a sepulcher. My Lord, thus much I say, that not
as an Egyptian, but as a good Christian, you have in the Monastery of Cuenca,
made a sepulture, and endued a chapel, where your bones shall rest, and
whereof your kynred may boaste.

Peter of Reynosa (your neighbor, and my great friend) has advertised me,
that in the pleasant Peradilla, the storm has spoiled your wheat, and that
in low places the vines be blasted, with which lamentable and strange chance
(although you feel much grief) your lordship must show good courage, and have
great patience: for that you now stand in such an age, as you shall rather
want years to live, than corn to eat. Those that ingrosse wynes to make it
dear, and keep their corn against the month of May, upon such men,
heaviness ought to fall, and upon such loss is well employed: for there is
nothing so meet, either more just, than the man that wishes an evil year to
the common wealth, should never see a good year enter his own house.

It is a property of such as be much covetous, and little virtuous to murmr
at that which nature does perform, and God does permit, in such sort that they
will rather amend God, than correct themselves. Let houses fall, the vines be
blasted, the storms spoil corn, the flocks die, and rent gatherers run away:
if we give thanks to God for that he leaves us, if we do not murmur for that
he takes away, if we grow not dull to serve him, he will never grow negligent
to give us provision. They say unto me that your Lordship is vexed, sorrowful,
and also intractable: these are privileges of old men, but not of wise old
men: for it should be a much greater loss to have the wit blasted, tha^ the
Corn destroyed. Uncle you know very well, that in all the the markets of
Vilada, and Palencia we shall find bread to be sold, but in none of the faires
of Medina, shall we find wisdom to be bought: For which cause men ought to give
more thanks unto God, for that he did create them wise, than for that he made
them rich. It is a more sound welthinesse for a man to esteem himself wise,
than to presume to be of great wealth: for with wisdom they obtain to have,
but with having they come to lose themselves. The office of humanity is to
feel trauells, and the office of reason is, to dissemble them. For when
sudden assaults come upon us, and infortunes knock at our gates, if the heart
should receive them all and of every one complain and bewail: he should ever
have whereof to recount, and never want wherefore to lament.

The wise man weepeth not but for the loss of a friend
Prometheus that gave laws to the Aegiptians, said, that the Philosopher should
not weep for any thing, but for the loss of his friend: for all other things
are contained in our chestes, only the friend dwells in the heart. If
Prometheus did not permit to show any grief but for a friend, it is not
credible that he would weep for the corn in the field, wherein he had great
reason: for notwithstanding that the loss of temporal good is, wherewith we
be most grieved: yet on the other part, it is that wherein our loss is least.
Seeing the incertayntie of this life, and the continual chaunges that be in
the same, as little surety men have thereof, that be in their houses, as the
corn that is in the field. I dare say that we have very little wherein to
trust, and many things whereof to be afraid. It is not unknown to your
Lordship, that in this life there is nothing sure, since we see the corn
blasted, trees stricken down, flowers fall, woodde wormeaten, cloth devoured
with moathes, cattle do end, and men do dye: and that all things well
marked, in the end all things have an end. Men that have passed three score
years, have for their privilege, to see in their houses great misfortunes,
which is to wit, absence of friends, death of children, loss of goods,
infirmities in their persons, pestilences in the common wealth, and many
novelties in Fortune: and for this cause Pliny durst say, that men ought not
to be borne, if that he being borne forthwith should die. The honest care,
not to live long, but well.
Oh how well said the divine Plato, that men ought not to be careful to
live long, but to live well. I thought good thus much to write unto you, to
the end you should understand to profit your self by old age, since you
had skill to enjoy the days of youth: for in the age of fourscore years, it
is a time to make small accounte of life, and to use great skill and no small
reckening of death.

All these things I have written unto your Lordshippe, and my good uncle, not
for that you have need, but because you shall have wherein to read, and also
to the end you shall understand, that (although I go bescattered and wandering
in this Court,) I do not leave to reknowledge the good. No more, but that our
Lord be your protector.

From Madrid the eleventh of March. 1533.
A letter unto Master Gonsalis Gil, in which is expounded that which is said in
the Psalmist, Inclinaui cor meum ad faciendas iustificationes tuas in aeternum.

RIght reverend and eloquent Doctor, ad ea quae mihi scripsisti quid tibi sim
respo^surus ignoro: although I say that to so many things I know not to
answer, I should have said better, that I dare not to wright. For the affairs
of our common wealth, are come to that estate, that though we be bound to feel
them, we have no license to report them. It is too grievous in our humanity
to suffer injuries, but it is much more greeuouse unto the heart to keep them
secret, Who is worthy of praise.
and not to utter them: for the remedy of the sorrowful heart is, to discover
his poison, and to unburden where he loves. He deserves much, and can do very
much, that has a heart to feel things as a man, and dissembleth them as
discret. For he is of a greater courage that forgettes the sorrow that once
enters into the heart, than he which reuengeth it. If my memory should reveal
what it does retain, my tongue speak what it does know, and my pen write what
me lists, I am sure those that be present would marvel, and such as be
absent, would grow offended: for now burns the pearcher without tallow, and
at randon all goes to the bottom. The army of gentlemen be here in Medina del
ryo secco, and they of the communaltie in Villa Braxima, in such wise, that
too the one we desire victory, and of the other we have compassion. For the one
be our good Lords, and the others our good friends: I desire that the part of
the gentlemen may overcome: and it grieueth me to see the death and fall of
the poor: chiefly for that they know not what they ask, either understand
what they do. If the travel of the war, and the peril of the battle might
light upon their shoulders, that were inuenters thereof, and that have altered
the people, it should be tolerable too see, and just to suffer: but alas the
sorrow, they fight in safety, and chase the bull in great surety: we have the
monastery full of soldiers, and the Celles occupied with knights: wherein,
there is no place for a man to withdraw, either a quiet hour to study: In
such wise, that if my Books be scattred, also my wits be wandering. What
quietness or contentation will you that I have, seeing the king is out of his
kingdom, the commons rebel, the counsel fled, the Gentlemen persecuted, the
towns men altered, the governors astonished, and the people sacked, every hour
enters men of war, every hour they make alarums, every hour they sound to
battle, every hour they ordeine ambushes, every hour there is skirmishes,
every hour they intend repayres, and also every hour I see them bring men
wounded. The Cardinal and the governors command me to preach and instruct
them in the affairs of peace, that which I can say, is every third day I go
from one camp to an other, and they of the co^monaltie will not believe me,
neither will be converted: in such wise that they have the voice of Jacob, and
the hands of Esau. In this civil war, I hear them say from thence so many
things, that it displeases me, and I see here so many things that
discontenteth me, Quod posui custodiam ori meo, vt no^ delinquam in lingua mea.
If they meet there with my letters, or yours should be seen here, either for
not understanding, or by evil interpreting, it might be, I should incur some
danger, and you discredit. Ignosce mi domine, tum breuitate literarum, tum
etiam quod non liceat hic nostra tempestate apertius loqui.

The Author does expound an authority of the Prophet.
THis other day (which was the feast of Saint Thomas) when I preached unto
the Gouernoures, you do say in your letter that you heard me expound that
Text of the Prophet, which says: Inclinaui cor meum ad faciendas
Iustificationes tuas in aelernum proptet tribulationem: and you desire me to
send it you in writing, in such form and manner as I did pronounce it in the
pulpet. Sir I will perform it (although I use it not) for that I wish you
well, and am also beholding unto you. For the friend unto his friend, should
neither hyde secret that he knows, The friend unto the fre^d, neither
hides secret, nor denies money.
or deny any thing that he possesses. But coming to the purpose, it is a
thing to be noted, and no less to be marvelled, that the Prophet would bind
himself to serve God for evermore without end, knowing that she should die, and
have an end. For the understanding of this text of David, it is necessary to
expound that of Christ, which says, Ibunt in supplicium, boni autem in vitam
aeternam: because the one authority being expounded, the other is easyly
understood. Christ being as he is, the whole truth and the sum of Justice,
it seems a thing disproporcioned to give unto the good, infinite glory for
temporal merits, and to give unto the evil eternal pain, for temporal
faults: Since he commands in the Apocalips, that by the weight of their
demerites the wicked should be tormented. If it were not divine judgment, it
would seem in the opinion of man, to be a just thing they should give unto
the just that served God an hundredth years in this world, so much more of
glory in the other world: and to the wicked that offended fifty years,
being alive here in this world, they should torment him as many more in hell: In
such sort that there the pain should be given by weight, and the glory by
measure. In that God gives not temporal reward, for temporal service, neither
does give temporal pain for temporal offenses: there seems and ought to be
in this case some high mystery, which if it be facile to demand, is very
difficile to absolve. For the understanding hereof, it is to wit, that the
pain they have to give us in the other world, and the reward we shall receive
in the glory, is not answerable to the many or few works which we do, but
unto the much or little charity wherewith we work them: for God does not
behold what we do presently, but what we would do. It may be that a man may
deserve much with little works: and another merit little passing many
travels, for our deserts consist not in the travels we do pass, but in the
patience we use therein.

Not without a high and very notable mystery Christ said (in your patience,)
and said not (in your labor) you shall possess your souls. For as Austine
says, Not in your labor but in patience.

Not the pain but the cause makes the martyr.


the pain makes not the Martyr, but the cause wherefore he suffers. Answering
to your demand and to my dout, I do say and affirm: that for this cause, in
the other world they shall give eternal reward unto the good: for if God
should let them live for ever and ever, they would never cease to serve God. In
like manner they shall give unto the wicked infinite pain, their sins being
infinite, for if God for evermore should give them life here in this world,
they would never cease to offend him. The Prophet to say, inclinaui cor meum in
aeternum, is as if he should say, I Lord do bind my self to serve thee, so
much as shall please thee to be served of me. In that if it shall please thee
to perpetuat my life, it shall be always employed in thy service, what will thou that I say more, (oh my God,) but if it shall please thee, and may be to
thy service, that my days be temporal, that at the least my good desires may
be infinite, quia in aeternum inclinaui cor meum. Oh with how great desire
ought we to serve God, and how great hope ought we to have of our salvation,
for that we have a Lord of so good condition, and a God of such power, that
without any scruple we may set down in his account, not only what we do, but
also what we desire to do. No more but that our Lord be your protector.

From Medina del rio secco the xxij. of January. 1523.
A letter unto the Abbot of saint Peter of Cardenia, in which he much prayseth
the mountain country.

Reverent Abbot and monastical Religious, Regi seculorum immortali sit gloria,
quia te ex litteris tuis been valere audio, and ipse been habeo. The health of
the body at all times ought to be much esteemed, and much more in this present
year: for we have war within the house, and pestilence is calling at door. I
have not said much in saying that the pestilence calls at the door, since
Auila is infected, Madrigal depopulate, Medina escandalized, Valiodolid in
great fear, and Duennas mourning.

As touching the rest I give your fatherhood many thanks for Ochams Dialogues
that you lent me. And I give you no less for your poudred meat you sent me;
and as I was borne in the Astuaries of Sintillana, and not in the costs of
Cordoua, you could have sent me nothing more acceptable than that salt flesh:
in such sort, quod cognouisti cogitationes meas de long. From Asia unto
Rome, the fair Cleopatra sent unto her good friend Marcus Antonius a poudred
Crane, A poudred crane sent from Asia to Rome
which he so esteemed, that he eat every day only one morsel of that poudred
meat. From Illiria (in the Confines of Panonia) they brought presented unto
the Emperor Augustus six salted Lampreys, which meat was so new a thing in
Rome, that he only eat but one, and divided the other five amongst the
Senators and Ambassadors. Macrobius in his Saturnals recounting, or to say
better, reprehending Lucullus the Roman of a solemn and costly supper that he
made to certain Ambassadors of Asia, he says amongst other things they did
eat, a Gripe in potage, and a Goose in pickle. In a certain inuectiue that
Crispus Salust makes against his adversary Cicero, amongst the most grave
things that he does accuse him, is, that he caused to be brought to
satisfy his wanton excess, poudred meats from Sardinia, Plato offended with
Dionisius for eating twice on the day.
and wines from Spain. The divine Plato when he went to see Dionisius the
tyrant, was not of any thing in him so much offended, as he was to see him eat
two times a day, and to drink the better he did eat salt flesh. There past
much time in Rome, in which although they did eat flesh newly poudred, they
not yet know to make a brine. But as times gosh every day discovering more
things, and the industry of man goes more sharpened, it is come to pass yt the
pickle, brine, and poudred meats yt was found out most delicate for kings: at
this present the rustical be glutted withal. For better seasoned and also more
sweet and delectable I hold the poudred meats of the mountain, than those of
Castile for in ye mountains herbs be more delicate, ye waters more pure, the
country more cold, the beasts more sound, and the air more subtle. That the
mountain is a better country than Castile, it appears most clear, in that
the wines that goes from hence thither be more fine, and the men that comes
from thence hither be converted more malicious, in such wise, that wines be
there made better, and here men made worse.

I like very well of that James Lopes of Haro was wont too say, that for one to
prove a perfect man, he ought to be borne in the mountain, and transferred
into Castile: but I am sorry that unto my country men there cleaves few
courtesies and less good manners that we have there, and very much malice that
we use here. When we demand of a neighbor of the confines of Cordoua, of
Zocodouer, of Toledo, of Valiodolid, or of Segouia, in what country he was
borne, incontinent he assures (it is true) that he was borne in that country,
but his grandfather came from the mountain, in such wise that at ye instant
they will be Castilians, and in lineage they will be Biscains.

If Roger of Toledo do not deceive us, seven Nations had the dominion of nine
provinces of Spain, which is to wit, the Greeks of Carpentania, the Vandales
of Andolosia, the Zuitsers of Carthagene, the Alaians of Galisia, the Hunes of
Arragonia, Seven nations inhabited Spain.
the Goths of Lucitania, and the Romans of Pirenea. But of all the nine
Nations we read of none that did pass the rock of Ordunia, neither durst
approach the rock of Horadaida. To us that be Montanezes the Castilians cannot
deny, that when Spain was surprised by the Moors, the greatest and chiefest
men were not saved only in the mountains, and that afterward all the nobles
have not descended from thence. The good Inigo Lopos of Santillana did use to
say, that in this our Spain that lineage was a stranger or very new, yt in ye
mountains was not possessed of some notable Manor. Father Abbot I thought
good to say all this, to the end you shall see how much I do esteem that
which you sent me: the one, for that it was poudred, and the other for that it
was seasoned in my country. It is no novelty that the poudred meats of my
country do like me well, since the Emperor Seuerus did never wear shirt but
of the flax of Africa which was his natural country.

Of Aurelius the Emperor, his chroniclers do recount that he said many times,
that all meats that we eat of other countries, we eat them with appetite,
but those that be of our own country we eat them with love and also with
appetite. As concerning the rest that your Fatherhood did write and incommend
unto me, friar Benet your subject and my friend, may say what I did speak
therein unto his Majesty, and what he answered me, which presently was
dispatched. No more, but that the grace Dei nostri Jesus Christi sit tecum and
mecum.

From Madrid, the twelfth day of March, Anno Domini.1522.
A letter unto Doctor Manso, present of Valiodolid, in which is declared, that
in the affairs of an other, a man may be importunate.

RIght magnificent and most reverent Imperial Judge, quanto timore ad vos
scribam, nouit ipse quem timemus in vobis, with much fear and no small shame, I
write this letter unto your Lordship, because every day I have been with my
letters so importunate, that I deserve to be holden importune and tedious.
Believe me sir, that it is a strange thing unto me to go to importune, or yet
to be importuned: The importunat and the fool are brothers children
for the man that is importune, I hold him for the brother of a fool. The
suter that is patient, silent, and manerly, we take pleasure to hear him,
answer him, and dispatche him: on the other side, to him that is troublesome,
ouersharp, entermedling, and importunate, we shut the doors against him, we
cut off his tail, we turn away our face, and also we give him betwixt the
teeth (you are come in an evil hour.)

Cicero in his book of Friendship, says, that in the affairs that touches
but our selves, we ought only to make suit, but for such as concern our near
friends, we ought to entreat, and may be importune. In following suits, there
is much to be considered: what the suter is, to whom he makes suit, and
wherefore he makes suit, and also in what time he sueth: because to dispatch a
thing out of time, is to cut the pecocke by the knees. There are affairs of
such quality, that only to speak in them were shameful, and yet if they be
procured for others, it is great charity. The thing that Alexander the great
most praised in the great philosopher Calistenes, was, that for others he
craved many things, and for himself nothing. Julius Caesar and Cicero were
mortal enemies, but in the end, on a certain day in the Senate, Julius
Caesar said unto Cicero, I cannot deny this (Oh Cicero) but that in the
things that touch thy self, thou art remiss, and in matters that concern
the common wealth, very importune.

There was a Law amongst the Romans much used and also observed, that upon
pain of death none should presume to approach the tent, where the Emperor did
eat and sleep, except such as did serve him by day and guard him by night,
but the case was thus. The Emperor Aurelius being in wars in Asia against
Cenobia, in the night a certain Greek seruitor entered the Emperors tent, A
notable example of a pitiful Prince.
which being taken and presently condemned to die, the Emperor Aurelius from
his bed where he lay spoke with a loud voice, if this man did come to sue for
any thing for himself, let him die: and if he came to sue for another, let
him live, and for certain it was found, that the poor man came to make suit
for his three companions that had slepte being of the watch, which the
Captain commanded to be whipped and to be delivered to the enemies. Oh example
to be noted, and to memory to be incommended, for that out of one self
chance and misfortune, the soldiour obtained life, the companions escaped
distress and shame, and the good Prince enjoyed the renoume of clemency. I
thought good to allege these old examples, to advise such as you that be
supreme Judges, and constituted in high estates, to the end that if you will
not do all that we crave, at the least you will not chide us when we be
suitors unto you: because, that bond that holds the Judge to be just in that
he judges, the very same does bind the good to be importune when he sueth for
another. The office of the good man is to pray and be importunate, not only for
the good, but also for the evil: it is to wit, for the good that they may be
made better, and for the evil that they pardon them. Since there is no law in
this world so rigorous, that in good or in evil part may not be interpreted,
the Judges have to presuppose we do not desire them to break their laws, but
that they do but moderate them: for many times the suter does complain, not of
the sentence of condemnation, but of the desire that the judge did show to
condemn him In the judge it is not only a vice intolerable to condescend to
all that which they crave, but also a great extremity to do nothing of that
they desire: the good Judge ought to be always just in that he gives
sentence, and in that they desire him sometime human. When the Consul
Ascanius did boast himself that in the office of Censor or judge, he had never
admittted, either so much as heard the requests of his friends. An answer of
Cato to Ascanius.
The good Censor Cato said unto him on a certain day in the Senate, the offense
stands not (oh Ascanius) in that the Judge suffers himself to be sued unto,
but to consent himself of any man to be commanded. Not of few, but of many
Judges we may justly say, that which they do not at the intreatance of a
gentleman, they do afterward by the Counsel of their private friend. I do lie
if I did not entreat a Judges wife to cause him to consider of a plee of a
friend of mine, which answered me, Entreat? what think not Master Gueuara,
that my husband has a wife that must entreat, but command: And so it came to
pass (as she said) for that which could not be obtained in half a year, she
dispatched in one night. In the books of common wealth, Plutarch does advise
Traiane, that since in humane laws there be more things arbitrable than
forceable, he should advise his Judges, to approach more unto reason than
opinion. The unbridled Judges that naturally be severe and intractable, it is
impossible but that they must be odious unto all men, and for this cause I
think it very meet, that one by one they should hear all men with courtesy,
and afterward determine what they shall find by Justice. Many Justices do
hold it for advancement of honor to hear their suitors with an evil will,
and not to do any thing wherein they be entreated: which they do not,
because they be just in their offices, but for that of their nature they be
evil condicioned.

The good Judge ought not to wrest the laws to his condition, but wrest his
condition conformable unto the laws: The good Judge wresteth his condition
agreeable to good laws.
for otherwise it should not be expedient to seek just Judges, but men well
co^dicioned: but in somuche as God was entreated of those of Niniuie that were
condemned, of Ezechias that was anointed, of David that offended in adultery,
of Achab that committed Idolatry, of Joshua that did not overcome, of Anna that
was barraine, An example for men to be entreated of other men.
and of Susan that falsely was accused: surely it is not much that men do
suffer them selves to be entreated of other men. I thought good my Lord
president too write all these things, not to teach you them, but to remember
you of them. The Abbot of saint Isidro is of my acquaintance and great friend,
for we were brought up in palace together, and were fellows of one College,
in such wise that we be brethren, not in arms, but in letters: and now of
late there has bin process against him to appear in this your audience, for
which he would present him self before your presence, and in his way take a
letter of mine, by which I do much desire your Lordship that the Father Abbot
and his Monks: Sentiant si placet, quod non sit amor ociosus, sieve vester ad
nos, sieve nostrum ad illos, salua tamen in omnibus iusticia, contra quam noque
patrem respicere fas est.

From Toledo the xx of August. 1532.
A letter unto the Earl of Beneuent sir Alonso Pimentell, wherein is entreated
the order and rule holden by the ancient Knights of the band.

RIght renowned, and greatest Earl of Spain, most acceptable to my heart was
the letter you did write unto me (by the Commendathor Aquilera) because there
was not in these Kingdoms, Lord nor Prelate, that had not written unto me,
and to whom I had not written again, (except your honor, and my Lord the
Earl of Cabra,) but since we have passed the port, and that the gulf is
nauigable, the way tracked, and I come to your acquaintance: knowing the
sincerity of your blood, the generositie of your person, the authority of
your house, and the fame of your renown: I will not leave from hence forward
to request you, neither will I be negligent to write unto you. With some Lords
and gentlemen I hold aquaintance, A sugared speech.
with others kindred and affinity, with other friendship, with others
couersation: but to other some I refuse communication, and fly their
condition: for in wit they be doltishe, and in their communication very
tedious. It is more painful to suffer a tedious Lord or Gentleman, than a
foolish ploughman: for the inconsiderate Gentleman will make you rave, and the
doltish ploughman prouokes you to laugh: and farther (and besides this) the one
you may command to hold his peace, and the other you must suffer until he
have made an end: but your Lordship is of so good stuff, and come of so right
a Turquois, and so delicate of judgment, that there may be no place in my
conceit, but that from hence forward I will boast my self of your conversation,
and joy my self of your condition. Your Lordship does command me to write
unto you (if I have read in any ancient writing) who were the knights of the
Band in Spain. Also you would understand, in the time of what prince this
order was established, who was the inuentour thereof, why he devised the same,
what rules he gave them to live with, how long it lasted and wherefore it was
lost: although I were some suspicious witness, and your Lordship were judge
Ronquillo, you could not take my deposition by interrogatories more delicatly.
A commendable eloquence.
I swear by the law of a good man, that if mine answer be so accomplished, as
your demand is exquisit, your honor shall be satisfied, and I not a little
tired. After I did see the stately buildings that you have made at Valiodolid I
did more boast you for a good builder tha^ for a curious reader, and therefore
I do much delight in that you demand and write unto me, for that to the good
Knight it is as pertinent to have a book under his pillow, as a sword at his
beds head.

The great Julius Caesar, in the mids of his camps, had his Commentaries in
his bosom, his lance in his left hand, Notes of Julius Caesar, and of
Alexander the great.
and his pen in the right hand: in such wise, that all the time that was free
from fighting, he spent in reading and writing. The great Alexander, that only
with fear did subdue the West, and with arms did conquer the East, he was
always girt with Achilles sword, and with the Iliades of Homer did always
sleep in his Chamber. It is not my opinion that you should take writing and
reading for your principal office (as I that am bound to study) but the tenth
hour you spend in talk and loose in play, you should employ and spend in
reading. But coming to the purpose, it is to wit, that in the year
M.CCC.lxviij. the King Sir Alonso being in the City of Burgos, that was the
son of King Sir Hernando, and of the Queen the Lady Constance: This good
King made a certain new order of Knighthood, which he entitled the Order of
the band, wherein he himself with his children, his brethren, and the sons
of the most rich and noble Knights of the realm did enter. Four years after
he had ordained this order of the band, the king Sir Alonso being in Palentia,
reformed the rules which he had made, and also added punishments for the
transgressors of the same: in such wise, that agreeable to the last rule, which
was the better and more Knightlike, I will write this letter unto your Honor:
They were named Knights of the band, The order of the knights of the band in
Spain in time past.
because they did wear upon them a certain read skarffe three fingers
broad, after the manner of a stoale, cast upon the left shoulder, and knit
under the right arm. None could give the band but only the King, either any
might receive the same, except he were the son of a Knight, or the son of
some notable Gentleman, and that at the least had been resident at the Court
ten years or in the wars against the Moors had served the King.

In this order of the band, the eldest sons of knights that were
inheritours could not enter, but such as were second or third sons, and
that had no patrimony, for the intention of the good King (Sir Alonso) was, to
honor the sons of the worshipful of his Court, that could do and had
but little. That day which they received the band, they did present into the
Kings hand faith and homage to observe the rule, and I say they made not any
strayt vow, or rigorous oath, because if afterward any should transgress
some part of the rule, they should be subject to the chastisement, but not
bound to the sin.

HIs first rule commanded, that the Knight of the band was bound to speak
unto the King (being required) for the aduauncemente of his Country, A right
notable rule.
and for the defense of the Common wealth, upon pain that being noted thereof,
he should be deprived of his patrimony, and banished out of his country.

2 His rule commanded, that the knight of the band above all things should
speak troth unto the king, unto his Crown and person should observe
fidelity: And if any in his presence should murmr of the king, and he
should not disco uer it, and being approved with infamy, he should be
turned out of Court, and for evermore depryued of the band.

3 His rule commanded, that all those of that order should use much silence,
and that which they spoke, should be of great troth: and if by chance any
knight of the band should tell any notable lie, he should go one month without
his sword.

4 His rule commanded, that they should accompany themselves with wise men,
of whom they might learn to live well, and with men of war that might
teach them to fight, upon pain that the knight of the band which should suffer
himself to be accompanied, or be seen to walk with merchants, men of
occupations, Lawyers, or with men of the country, should be grievously
reprehended of the master: and one whole month in his chamber imprisoned.

5 His rule commanded, A necessary rule for these our days.
that all the knights of this order should maynteyne their words, and keep
fidelity unto their friends, and in case it were proved against any knighte
of the band, that he had not accomplished his word (although it were given
unto a base person, and upon a small matter, yet) such a one should go alone
in court and unaccompanied, not presuming to speak, or to approach or keep
company with any knight.

6 His rule commanded, that the knight of the band should be bound to have
good armor in his chamber, good horses in his stable, a good lance at his
gate, and a good sword at his girdle: upon pain that if in any of these
things he were defective, they should call him (in Court) by the space of a
month, servant, and should lose the name of knight.

7 His rule did command, that no knight of the band should presume to ride to
the Court on a mule, but on horseback, either openly should dare to go
without his band, either should take upon him to go to Court without his
sword, or venture at his lodging to eat alone: upon pain to pay a mark of
Silver toward the iustes.

8 His rule commanded, that no knight of the band should be served with a
liar, either boast himself like a babbler, upon pain yt if any of the^ should put
himself in palace to tell news or tales, or to make to the king any false
report, he should go to court one month on foot, and arested an other into his
chamber.

9 His rule commanded that no knight of the band should complain of any wound
that he had received, either should boast himself of any deed he had don, upon
pain if he so reported of his sore, or should relate many times of his
prowes, he should of the master be grievously reprehended, and of the other
knights of the band not visited.

10 His rule commanded, that no knight of the band should presume to play at
any play, (in especial at the dice) upon pain, that if any did play, either
in his lodging did consent to play, they should take away his months wages,
and for six weeks banished him the Court.

11 His rule commanded, that no knight of the band should presume to lay his
armor to guage, either to play the apparel perteyning to his person at any
play that might be devised, upon pain that he that should play them away, or
lay them to guage, should go two months without the band, and an other month
remain prisoner in his lodging.

A rule for modesty of apparel.
12 His rule commanded, that the knight of the band in the week days should
be apparelled in fine cloth, and on the holy days he should wear some kind of
silk, and at Easter some little of gold, and he that should have nether
stocks, and wear buskins, the master should be bound to take them away, and
to make an alms of them to the poor.

13 His rule commanded that if the knight of the band would to the Palace, or
walk to the Court on foot, that he should not go in great haste, either
speak with loud voice, but that he should talk with low voice, and walk at
great leisure, upon pain that of the other knights he should be
reprehended, and of the master chastised.

14 His rule commanded, that no knight of the band should presume either in
ieste or in earneste, to speak to an other knight any malicious or suspicious
words, whereof the other knight might remain shamed or dispited, upon pain he
should ask pardon of the iniuried, which should give the offender banishement
from the court for three months.

15 His rule commanded, that no knight of the band should take any quarrel
with any damsel unmarried, either should raise any Law to a woman that were
the daughter of a a Gentleman, upon pain that any such knighte might not
accompany any Gentlewoman in town, either dare to serve any dame in palace.

16 His rule commanded, that if any knighte of the band should encounter in
the street with any Lady or Gentlewoman that should be generous and of valor,
he should be bound to bring himself on foot, and to accompany her, A rule
for erection of courtesy and good manner.
upon pain to lose a months wages, and should be of the dames not beloved.

17 His rule commanded, that if any noble woman or damsel in her hair,
should desire any knight of the band to do any thing for her which he could
do, and should refuse to do it, that such a one in Palace the Dames should
call: The evil commanded knight, and void of courtesy.

18 His rule commanded, that no knight of the band should dare to eat any vile
or gross meats: which is to wit, Onions, Garlike, Chibols, nor such like,
upon pain that he that were such a one, should not that week enter into the
Court, either sit at the table of a gentleman.

19 His rule commanded, that no knight of the band should presume to stand at
his meat, eat alone, either to eat without napkins: but that they should
eat sitting, accompanied, and the cloth spread, upon pain that the knight
which should not do so, should eat one month without his sword, and pay a
mark of silver for the tilt.

20 His rule commanded, that no knight of the band should drink wine in a
vessel of earth, either should drink water in a pitcher, and at the time of
drinking he should bless himself with his hand, and not with the pot,
upon pain, that the knight which should do the contrary should be a month
banished from the Court, and an other month drink no wine.

21 His rule commanded, that if two knights of the band should quarrel, and
defy each other, the other knights should travel to bring them agreed, and if
they would not be friends, that no man should help them upon pain, that if
any did contrary, he should go one month without his band, and pay^ a mark
of silver to the Iustes.

22 His rule commanded, that if any did wear the band without gift from the
king, two Knights of the band should defy him, and if they did overcome him,
he might not wear the band, but if he overcame them, he might from thence
forward wear the band, and name himself knight of the band.

Rules for the obseruyng of peace.
23 His rule commanded, that when in court they should exercise Iustes and
Turneys, the knights that should win the prise at the iustes and turneys,
should also win the band (although before he were none of the knights of the
band) which the king presently there would give, and all the knights of the
order into their company should receive.

Rules for the observing of peace.
24 His rule commanded, that if any knighte of the band should lay hand upon
his sword against any other knight of his company, that in such a case he
should not appear before the king in two months, and that he should wear but
half his band other two months.

25 His rule commanded, that if any knight of the band should give a word to
an other knight of the band upon any anger or quarrel, that he should not
enter in court one whole year, the half of which time he should be prisoner.

26 His rule commanded, that if any knighte of the band were made a Justice
by the king, either in the court, or out of the same, that he might not do
Justice upon any of ye knights of the band, but that in taking him in any
thing not well done, he might only take him, and afterward remit ye same unto
the king.

27 His rule commanded, that the king going on warfare, that all the knights
of the band should attend upon him, and being in camp, they should all join
under one standerd, and jointly should fight together: upon pain, that that
knight which in the wars should sight without his standard, and join to an
other strange knight, should lose his years wages, and an other year should
go with half his band.

28 His rule commanded, that no knight of the band should presume to go to the
wars (except it be against the Moors) and that if in any other war he
should be found with the King, that for the present he take away the band, and
that if he should fight in the favor of any other than the king, he should
lose the band.

29 His rule commanded, Rules for the exercise of arms.
that all the knights of the band should assemble three times in the year where
the king should command: and these assemblies should be to make muster of
their armor and horses, and to talk in things of their order: and these were
in April, September, and Christmasse.

30 His rule commanded, that all the knights of the band should at least
turney two times in the year, and just four, and to practice the play at the
canes six times, and use the carrere every week: upon pain, that that knight
which was found negligent to live in these warlyke exercises, and should be
unready in exercising of them, he should go one month without his band, and
an other without his sword.

31 His rule commanded, that all the knights of the band should be bound within
eight days after the king should come to any place, to set up a tilt to just,
and letter for turney, and more than this, they should have a Master, where
to school and skirmishe, and to play at rapier and dagger: upon pain that he
that should be negligent herein, should be arrested in his lodging, and they
should take away half his band.

32 His rule commanded, that no knight of the band should be in the Court
without serving some dame, not to dishonor her, but to feast her, or else to
marry with her, and when she shall walk abroad to accompany her, as she shall
like, on foot, or on horseback, vsyng reverence with his cappe, and curtesye
with the knee.

33 His rule commanded, that if any knight of the band did understand, that
within the compass of thyrtie miles of the Court there should be made any
Iustes or Turneys, he was bound to go thither to just and turneye: upon pain
to go one Month without his sword, and as much without his band.

34 His rule commanded, that if any knight of the band should be married
within three score miles compass of the Court, all the other Knights of the
band should go with him to the King, to crave for him some reward, and that
afterward they should accompany him to the place of his marriage, to the end
that there they should do some honorable exercise of chivalry and knighthood,
and to the end they should offer some jewel unto his spouse.

35 His rule commanded, that on the first sunday of every month, the knights
of the band should go to Court together, very well appointed and armed, and
that there in the Court, or in the great hall in the presence of the king and
al his Court, they should play at all weapons two and two, in such wise that no
hurt were done: for ye end that this order was made, was because they should
rather boast themselves of deeds, than of the names of knights, and were of
the king therefore much honored.

They should assail each other.
36 His rule commanded, that they should not torney more than thirty with
thirty, and with swords rebated, and at the sound of a trumpet they should
assail each other, and also at the sound of the Clarion they should all
retire, upon pain not to enter more in torney, and in one month not to go to
the Court.

37 His rule commanded, that at the iustes none should run more than every
man his four courses, and should have for Judges, four Knights, and he that
in four courses brake not a staff, should pay all the costs of the tilt.

38 His rule commanded, that at the time that any Knight of the band did fail
or die, they should all go to help him to die well, and after they should go
to his burial, and for that he had bin brother and companion of the band, they
should for one month be cladde with black, and after for three months
forbear to Just.

The nobleminde of the maker of this rule is to be noted.
39 His rule commanded, that two days after the knight of the band should be
buried, all the other knights of the order should assemble and go to the king,
on the one part to deliver the king the band that the dead had left, and on the
other part to make supplication (to have remembrance) to raise in his place
some of his able sons, if he left any, and to use his bounty toward his
wife, to sustain and marry her children and daughters.

Behold here my Lord the rule and order of the knights of the band, that was
made by the king Alfonso: Jointly whereunto I will add all the knights that did
first enter into this order, the title of whom said thus.

These are the most Courteouse, the most esteemed, the most renoumed, the
most chosen Knights and Infants of the Knightlike order of the Band, that our
Lord and king Don Alphonso commanded to be made, whom God maintain. The King
Don Alfonso that made this order.
The infant Don Pedro. Don Enrique. Don Fernando. Don Tello. Don Iuan el bueno.
Don Iuan Nunez. Enrique Enriquez. Alfonso Fernandez Coronel. Lope Diaz de
Almacan. Fernan perez puerco carrero. Fernan Perez ponce. Carlos de Gueuara.
Fernan Enriquez. Aluer Garcia Dalbornoz. Pero Fernandez. Garci Ioffre tenorio.
Iuan Esteuanez. Diego Garcia de Toledo. Martin Alfonso de Cordoua. Goncalo ruys
dela Vega. Iuan Alfonso de Benauides. Garci Laso dela Vega. Fernan Garcia
Duque. Garci Fernandez tello. Pero Goncales de Aguero. Iuan Alfonso de
Carriello. Ynigo Lopez de Horozco. Garci Gutierez de Graialba. Gutierre
Fernandez de Toledo. Diego Fernandez de Castriello. Pero ruyz de Villegas.
Alfonso Fernandez Alcayde. Ruy Goncales de Castaneda. Ruy ramirez de Guzman.
Sancho Martiuez de Leyua. Iuan Goncales de Bacan. Pero Trillo. Suero Perez de
Quinones. Goncalo Meria. Fernan Carriello. Iuan de Roias. Ptralbarez Osorio.
Pero Lobez de Padilla. Don Gil de Quintana. Iuan Rodrigez de Villegas. Diego
Peers Sarmiento. Mendorodrigues de Viezma. Iuan Fernandez Coronel. Iuan de
Cereiuela. Iuan Rodrigez de Cisneros. Oreion de Liebana. Iuan Fernandez del
Gadillo. Gomez Capiello. Beltran de Gueuara vnico. Iuan Tenorio. Ombrete de
Torrellas. Iuan Fernandez de Bahamon. Alfonso Tenorio.
THat which is to be noted in all this letter is, how in order the Gentlemen
and Knights went in those days, and how they did exercise them selves in arms,
and auaunced themselves by deeds of prowes, and that the children of good men
were in the kings house very well brought up, and were not suffered to be
vicious and go lost. It is also to be noted in this letter, Things to be noted.
in how little time the world has made so many changes, it is to wit, undoing
some, and aduauncing others out of the dust, because fortune never discharges
her shot but against such as be set aloft. My Lord I say this, for that there is
to be found in this order of the band, some ancient linages which in those
days were noble and famous: all which be not only ended, but (also) altogether
forgotten. What houses or Manors be there now in Spain of the Albornozes, of
the Tenorios, of the Villegas, of the Trillos, of the Quintanas, of the
Biesmas, of the Cereiuelas, of the Bahamondas, of the Coronels, of the
Cisneros, of the Graialbas, and of the Horozcos: of all these linages there
were Gentlemen and Knights very honorable. In those days, as in the list it
does appear amongst those that first entered into the order of the band, of al
which, at this present there is not found any notable Manor, neither so much as
the name. There are now in Spain other Linages, the which be Velascos,
Manriques, Enriques, Pimenteles, Mendozas, Cordouas, Pachecos, Cunigas,
Faiardos, Aguilares, Manueles, Arellanos, Tendillas, Cueuas, Andradas,
Fonsecas, Lunas, Villandrandos, Carauaiales, Soto maiores, and Benauides.

It is a thing surely to be noted, and no less to be maruailed, that none of
the lineage of all above said, is named amongst the Knights of the band. All
which in these our days be illustre, generouse, rich, and much renoumed. It is
well to be believed that some of these glorious linages were risen in those
days, and if they were not put amongst the knights of the band, it was not
because they wanted gravity, but for that they had not at that time such
authority, and also because (though they had sufficient nobleness) they
wanted riches. Also it is to be thought that of those aunciente and forgotten
linages there are enough at this instant descending and decayed, that he noble
and virtuous: which for that we see they have little and may do little, we
hold it for better too keep silence, than so name them. The sons of
Gentlemen and Knights, be they never so glorious in blood, if they have little,
and may do little, (let them hold it for certain) they will esteem them but
little: and therefore it were very good counsel, that they should rather
remain rich servants in their countries, than to come to the Courts of
Kings to be poor Gentlemen. For after this manner they should in their
countries be honored, that now go in Court discountenaunced.

According to this purpose it came to pass in Rome, that Cicero being so
valiant of person, and having so great commandment and power in the common
wealth, they did bear him great envy on all sides, and beheld him with
overmuch malice. Wherefore a certain Roman magistrate said (as if we should
say unto a frankling of Spain) tell me Cicero, A gracious confession of Cicero.
wherefore will thou compare with me in the Senate, since thou know and al
others do know, that I am descended of glorious Romans, and thou of rusticall
ploughmen? where unto Cicero made answer with very good grace, I will confess
it, that thou art descended of noble Roman magistrates, and I proceed from
poor ploughmen, but jointly with this thou can not deny me, but that all
thy lineage is ended in thee, and all mine begins in me. Of this example your
Lordship may gather what difference there is betwixt times, betwixt linages,
and also betwixt persons. Since we know, that in Caius began the Augustus, and
in Nero ended the Caesar's. I would say by that which is said, that the want of
nobleness in many gave an end to the linages of the Knights of the band, and
the valiantness of others, gave a beginning to other glorious linages that be
now in Spain: because the houses of great Lords be never lost for want of
riches, but for want of persons.

I have enlarged this letter much more than I promised, and also more than I
presupposed, but I give it all for well employed, since I am sure, that if I
remain wearied in writing thereof, it will not be tedious unto your Honor too
read it, because therein are so many and so good things, that of old Gentlemen
they are worthy to be known, and of young gentlemen necessary to be followed.

From Toledo, the xij. of December. 1516.
A letter unto the Constable of Castile sir Ynigo of Valesco, in which is
touched that the wise man ought not to trust his wife with any secret.

REnoumed and good Constable, Sir James of Mendoza gave me a letter from your
honor written with your hand, and sealed with your seal, I would to God
there were as good order taken with my letters that I answer you, as is here
used with such as you send me. For I cannot say, whether it be my hap, or my
mishap, that scarcely I can write you a letter whereof al in your house
understand not. As much as it does please me that al men know me to be your
friend: so much does it grieve me, when you discover of me any secret,
chiefly in grave and most weighty affairs: for coming to the intelligence of
your wife and children that you communicate with me your delicat affairs, they
will make great complaint if to the profit of their substance I direct not your
conscience. My Lady the Duchess did write unto me, aduertising to have some
scruple in me, saying: that I was against her as concerning the house of
Touare, which I did never speak or think: for the office that I do most boast
myself of, is to direct men that they be noble and virtuous, and not to
understand in making or marring of heirs or Manor houses.

My Lord Constable you do know, that at all times when you discover your
self, and take counsel of me, I have always said, and do say, that the
Gentleman of necessity must pay that he owes, and what he has, divide at his
will: and that to make restitution there needs a conscience, and too give or
divide, judgment and wisdom: if there pass either more or less betwixt us
two, it is without need that your nobleness should speak it, or of my
authority be confessed. For the things that naturally be grave, and do require
secrecy, if we may not avoid that they judge or presume of them, at the least
we may cut off, that they know them not. In that your Lordship has let fly
some words, or lost some letter of mine, my Lady the Duchess is not a little
offended with me, and I do not marvel thereof, in that she not understanding
the mystery of your speech, or the ciphers of my letters, did kindle her
choler, and raised a quarrel against me: Believe me my Lord Constable, that
neither in jest or earnest, you ought to put secret things in confidence of
women: for to the end that others shall esteem them more, they will discover
any secret. I hold the husbands for very doltish that hide their money from
their wives, and trust them with their secrets: for in the money there is no
greater loss than the goods, but in discovering their secrets sometime he
loses his honor. The Consul Quintus Furius discovered all the conspiracy of
the tirant Cateline to a Roman woman named Fuluia Torquata, the which
manifesting the matter to another friend of hirs, and so from hand to hand it
was deuulgate thorough all Rome, whereby it happened that Quintus Furius lost
his life, and Cateline his life and honor. Of this example your Lordship may
gather, that the things that be grave and effectual, ought not to be committed
to the confidence of women, much less spoken in their presence: for to them
it imports nothing the knowledge of them, and their husbands it touches
much, if they be discovered. There is no reason to think, either is it just to
presume and say, that all women are like, for that we see there are many of
them honorable, honest, wise, discrete, and also secret: whereof some have
husbands so foolish and such buzardes, that it should be more sure to trust
them than their husbands. Not offending the gentlewomen that be discrete and
secret, but speaking commonly of all, I say, that they have more ability to
breed children, than to keep secrets. As concerning this let it be for
conclusion, that it happen you not another day to talk before any man, much
less before any woman. That which we have co^muned and agreed betwixt our
selves, there might rise thereof that your Lordship might remain offended, and
I disgraced. At this present there is nothing more new in Court, to write,
tha^ that I am not a little offended, of that your Lordship dare discover, and
troubled with the words yt my Lady the Duchess has sent me, for which cause
I beseech you as my good Lord, and command you as my godsonne, that you
reconcile me with my Lady the Duchess, or command me to be forbidden your
house.

From Valiodolid the eight of August.1522.
A letter unto the Constable Sir Ynigo of Velasco, wherein is touched that in
the heart of the good Knight, there ought not to reign passion or anger.

REnoumed Lord, and pitiful Constaple, I may say by your honor, that which
God said by the Sinagog, which is to wit: Curauimus Babilonian, and no^ est
curata, relinquamus illam, which is to say: we have cured Babylon, and it
would not be cured, let us abandon it. Sir I say thus much, for that it has
happened not a little gracious unto me, that whereas I craved in my letter that
my Lady the Duchess should not see any one part thereof, notwithstanding you
have not only showed it, and conferred thereon with her, but also had great game
thereat. Whereupon in the way of revenge, I showed your letter unto the Earl
of Nassaro, who with Flemings, Portingalles, Almaines, and Spaniards, did also
take some pastime therewith, yet was it my very good luck that all the evil
that I said of women in your letter, my Lady the Duchess converted into jest,
in such wise that with great reason I may praise her for her wisdom, and
complain me of your temeritie.

My Lord Constable, I shall most heartily desire you not to have such care to
make proves of triacle with my letters, but to read them, and to tear or else
burn them: for it may happen that some day you might read them before some
not very wise, either yet of good condition, that might divine to my hurt, that
which they understand not, to their own profit.

Leaving this a part, your Lordship says, yt for my sake you have remitted
the displeasure you did bear against ye Gentleman, the which I accept for so
great courtesy, and grace, as if unto my self ye injury had bin pardoned:
for I am so tender over him that is my dear friend, that al which I see to be
done in the behalf of his person, and to the amendment of his estate, I set it
down in mine own account. Besides the accomplishment of my desire, your
Lordship has performed that which you were bound to do: for Princes and great
Lords have no license to do injuries, either so much as to revenge them. For
as you know, that which is in the meaner called wrath, in the mighty is named
pride: and that which amongst the smaller sort is chastisement, in the mighty
is termed vengeance. As often as you shall make conjugation with your nobleness
and conscience, and shall call to remembrance that you be a Christian and a
Knight, it shall not mislike you of the offenses you have dissimuled, and it
shall grieve you of the injuries you have revenged. The pardoning of injuries
gives great contentation to the heart, and the desire of reuengement is no
small torment thereof. By that which is said, I would say, that sometimes
for some man to revenge some little injury, he escapes from thence much more
iniuried. There be some injuries, that only are not to be revenged, neither as
much as to be confessed: for things of honor are so delicate, that the same
day that any confesses to have received an injury, from that day he binds
himself to take reuengement.

The Consul Mamilius demanded at a certain time of Julius Caesar, wherein it
was that he had in this world most vain glory, and in the remembering thereof
did take most pleasure: to this the good Caesar made answer, by the Gods
immortal I swear unto thee (Oh Consul Mamilius) that of nothing in all this
life I do think that I deserve so much glory, or any other thing does give
me so great joy and contentation, A notable example to be embraced.
as pardoning of those that do offend me, and gratifying such as do serve me.
Oh words worthy praise, and pleasant to hear, notable to read, and necessary
to follow: for if Julius Caesar did believe as a Pagane, he did work as a
Christian, but we all believe as Christians, and work like Paganes.

I speak it not without a cause that we live as (Paganes, although we believe
as Christians,) since in this case the malice of man is grown so great, that
many would pardon their enemies, and dare not for fear of their friends: for
if they once perceive them to speak of pardoning any man, presently they will
say, they do it more of cowardice, than of conscience. Be it as be may, and
let every man speak as he thinks good in this case of pardon, your lordship
has done with that Gentleman like a faithful Christian, and with me like a
very friend: and beside fidelity to God, and friendship to a friend. There is
no more to be craved of any man in this world.

The memorial that your Lordship sends me of yt things that touches your
goods and conscience, I (my Lord) will consider thereof at leisure, and will
answer upon aduisement, because in your charges or discharges, in such wise I
will give you counsel as in my breast no scruple shall remain. In him yt asks
counsel there ought to be diligence and no slackenes, for that many times
business lies so in corners and so far from hand, that it shall be more
sure counsel to trust to our weapon, than to stay for that books shall say:
the contrary whereof is to be used of him ye shall give counsel unto another,
which is to wit, that he have much wisdom and little diligence: for counsel
that is given, if it be not upon aduisement, most times brings some
repentance.

The divine Plato writing of Orgias the Greek said, Hasty counsel breeds
repentance.
My friend Orgias, thou writest unto me, that I should counsel thee how thou
should behave thy self in Licaonia, and on the other part, thou make
great haste to have an answer: which thing although thou do rashly crave,
I dare not perform, for that I do much more study to counsel my friends, than
to read in schools to Philosophers: the counsel that is given or taken, ought
to be given by a man that is wise, for ye good judgment he has, a learned man
for the much that he has read, an ancient man for that he has seen, Worthy
to be admitted a counselor.
a patient man for that of him self he has suffered, a man without passion
because malice shall not blind him, a man without interest, for that
covetousness shall not let him: Finally, I say, that the shamefast man and of
a noble mind, ought to give unto his friends money with liberality, and
counsel with great gravity.

If it be true (as it is most certain) that he ought to have all these
conditions that should give counsel unto an other, we dare well say, that to
give counsel is an office so common, that many use it, and very few can
perform it. There comes a careful man to ask counsel of his friend (in
giuyng which counsel the one way or the other, there goes life, honor,
goods, and also conscience) and then his friend whose counsel he has craved,
without removing or further thinking thereof, void of all scruple or doubt,
says what is to be done in that case (as though he had found it written in
the holy Scripture.)

All this I say unto your Lordship, because sometime you be offended and grow
angry, if I answer not presently unto your letters, and send you not your
doubts declared. As concerning that which you write of Marcus Aurelius, the
case stands thus: that I translated and presented it unto Caesar not all
finished, the which Laxao did steal from the Emperor, and the Queen from
Laxao, and Tumbas from the Queen, and the Lady Aldonsa from Tumbas, and your
lordshippe from the Lady Aldonsa: in such wise that my sweates ended in your
theftes. The news of this Court is, that the Secretary Cobos grows
private: the governor of Brefa does keep silence: Laxao does murmr and
groan: the Admiral does write: the Duke of Veiar does hoorde and keep:
Short news from the court
the Marquise of Pliego does plays: the Marquise of Villa Franca follows his
business: the Earl of Osorno does serve: the Earl of Siruela does pray:
the Earl of Buendia does sigh: Gutiere quixada does just: and the Judge
Ronquillo does whippe.

From Madrid the sixthe of January 1524.
A letter unto the Constable Sir Ynigo of Velasco, in which is said, that which
the Marquis of Piskara reported of Italy.

Renowned Lord, and co^playning Constable, it has chanced me with very good
grace, that you never writ me letter wherein there comes not some murmuring
complaints, saying: that I have not answered to all that you have written, or
that I am very short in writing, or that I write but now and then, or that I
detayne the messenger, or that I write as one offended: in such wise that
neither in me is any end of faults, nor in your Lordship any lack of
complaints: but if your Lordship will note, and accuse all the wants of
considerations, negligences, slacknesse, simplicities, and doltishnesse that I
have: I can tell you, that you shall be wearied, and also tired, for there is
in me many things to be reprehended, and very few wherefore to be praised. That
which is in me to be praised is that I esteem my self to be a Christian,
keep my self from doing hurt to any man, and boast my self to be your
friend. And that which is in me to be reprehe^ded is, that I never leave to
sin, neither ever begin to amend: this it is my Lord that does vex me, this
it is that settes me aground, and this is the cause why that there never
remains in me gladness: for as your Lordship knows, matters of honor and
of conscience, give great cause to be felt or considered, but not to be
discovered. To write short or at large, to write late or in time, to write
polished or without order, neither is it in the judgment of him that does
indite it, either in the pen that writes ye same: but in the matter that he
has in hand, or in the aptness of time he uses: for if a man be disgraced,
he writes that he ought not, and if in disposition, he writes what he
lists. Homer, Plato, Aeschines, and Cicero, in their writings never cease to
complain, that when their common wealths were in quiet and pacifyed, they
studied, read, and writ: but when they were altered and unruly, they could
not study, and much less wrought. That which passed by those glorious
personages in those days, every day passes now in my self, for if I be well
disposed and in temper, it is offered me by heaps, as much as I would write,
and if by chance I be disgraced or distempred, I would not so much as to
take pen in hand. There be times that I have my judgment so kindled and so
delicate, that (as me thinks) I could sweep one grain of wheat, and
cleave a hair in sunder. At another time I have it so dull and so far
removed, that I can hardly hit a nail with a stedge. I know not what to write
of this Court, but that the Marquis of Peskara, is come hither from Italy,
which does recount from thence such and so many things, that if they be worthy
to be put in Chronicle, they be not to be written in a letter. He that knows
the condicione of Italy, will not marvel of the things thereof: for in Italy no
man may live under the defense of justice, but that to have and too be able, he
must be of power or else very private. Let him not desire to live in Italy,
that has not favor of the king to defend, or power in the field to fight:
for in Italy they never care to demand by Justice, that which they may win
by the lance. The conditions of Italy.
In Italy they have not to ask of him that has an estate or goods, of whom
he did inherit them, but how be did win them. In Italy to give or take away
estates or goods, they seek not right in the laws, but in arms. In Italy
he that leaves to take any thing, it is for want of power, and not for want
of will. Italy is very pleasant to live in, and very perilous to be saved.
Italy is an enterprise whether many do go, and from whence few do return.
These and many other such like things the Marquis of Peskara recounted unto us
at the table of the Earl of Nassao, (many Lords being present, and some
Prelates.) Give thanks unto God our Lord that has bred you in Spain, and of
Spain, in Castile, and of Castile in Castile the old, and of Castile the old
in Burgos, where you are beloved and served, for that in the other places or
towns of Spain, although they be noble and of power, they have always some
controversies. The memorial ye your Lordship sent me this year to consider
of, and upon the same to give you counsel, now I send it you corrected with
my conscience, and consulted with my science. No more. etc.

A letter unto the Constable Sir Ynigo of Velasco, in which is declared, the
prises of things as in old time they were wont to be sold in Castile.

REnoumed and curious Constable, I have received a letter from your Lordshippe,
as it appears by the same: although you be chief or head of the Valascos,
and I of the Ladrons of Gueuara, there you have the deed, and here I have the
name. For entering into my cell, you have stolen my Pictures, and ouerturned my
Books. If there be a privilege of the Constables of Castile, (the religious
being at his prayers, that they shall enter and sack his Cel, it were very just
to show wherefore they did it, or else to restore unto the owner the thing
stolen. Your Lordship writes unto me, yt you will not restore the pictures that
you have taken away, except I send you written the ancient ordinances that
were made by the king Don Iuan in Toro, in such wise, that you do not content
your self with stealing, but that you will also extort and do violence. I
know not which was greater that day, your fortune or my mischance, in that my
Cell was open: for I swear by the faith of a christian, that my lance in the
sight of God were much more worth, if I should use as great circu^spection in
refraining my thoughts, as I use in the keeping of my books. Your Lordeship
says, that the book you happened upon in my library was old, of an old
letter, of old time, and of old things, and did entreat of the prices how
all things was sold in Castile, in the time that King John the first did first
reign. I will not only write unto you that which the good king did ordeyn in
Toro, but also the rude and gross speech wherewith that ordinance was
written, whereof may be gathered how there has been changed in Spayn, not
only the manner of selling, but the manner of speaking. That which has passed
in this case is, that the king Sir John the first kept Court in the City of
Toro, in the year. M.CCCC. and.vi. in which he did ordein very particularly,
not only how victuals should be sold, but also for what prices the labourer
should work. The title of that ordinance says these words which follows,
in so old a kind of speech, that the Spaniards themselves crave an
interpreter, and is much to be marvelled at, but most of all for the prices of
things, is almost incredible. Which I leave unwritten, partly to be
considered by these words that follow, wherewith the Author concludes his
Letter as follows.

This Letter being read, I believe your Lordshippe will marvel of the good
cheap that was in those days, and of the dearth that is now of victuals. And
I believe that you will laugh at the rusticall speech that was then, and of
the polyshed speech that now is used, although it be true, that the vantage
that we have now in the speech, they had then of us in their living.

A Letter unto sir Alonso of Fonseca, bishop of Burgos, president of the
Indians, wherein is declared, wherefore the kings of Spain be entitled
Catholic.

RIght magnificent and Indian Proconsull, about twenty days past they gave me
a letter from your honor: and above fifteen days since I did write an
answer of the same, the which no man to this day has come to ask, neither do
I know by whom to send it. Your lordship does write that I should advertise
your honor what it is that they say here of your Lordship: to speak with
liberty, and to say you the truth, they say al in this Court, that you are a
very good christian, A plain advertisement.
and a very intractable Bishop: also they say, that you are long, prolix,
negligent, and indetermined in the affairs that you have in hand, and with the
futers that follow you, and which is worste of all, that many of them do
return to their houses, spente and not dispatched: they say that your
Lordship is fierce, proud, impacient, and suspicious, and that many do leave
their business undetermined, to see themselves by your Lordship so
ouershadowed. Others say, that you are a man that deals in troth, you speak
truth, and that you are a friend of truth, and that a man given to lying was
never seen to be your friend: also they say that you are right in that you
command, just in your judgments, and moderate in your executions, and that
which is more than all: that in matters of justice, and in the determination
thereof, you have neither passion or affection: Notable conditions in a Judge.
they say that you are of much compassion, pitiful, and an alms giver: and
that (which can not be spoken but to your great praise) to many poor and in
necessity, from whom you take goods by Justice, on the other part you give it
them out of your chamber. Your Lordeship has not to marvel of that which I
say, neither do I mislike of that which you do, because out of the one and
the other, there may be gathered, that no man in this world is so perfect, but
there is in him to be amended, either any man so evil, that has not in him
to be praised. The history writers do note Homere of vain speech, Alexander
for furious, Julius Caesar for ambicious, Pompeius for proud, Demetrius for
vicious, Haniball for perjured, Vespasian for covetous, Traiane for a wine
bibber, and Marcus Aurelius for amorous: Amongst men so illustre, glorious, and
heroical as all these were, it is not much that your Lordship do pay for a
pound of wax to be of their fraternity: And this pound is not because you
are an evil Christian, but for that you were of weak patience. There is no
virtue more necessary in him that governs a common wealth than is patience:
for the Judge that is measured in that he speaks, and dissembleth the
injuries that they do unto him, May descend but not fall.
he may descend, but not fall. The Prelates and Presidentes that have charge
to govern people, and determyne causes, much more than other men ought to
live circumspectly, and be of more suffering: for if we of you be judged,
believe me that of us also you are beholden, vewed and considered. There is
nothing in this world more sure, than he which is feared of many, ought also
to fear many: for if I will be a Judge of your goods, for the same you will
be a vewer of my life: and thereof it comes to pass that many times the
Judge is more damnified in his fame, than the surer in his goods.

My Lord all this is to be understood of Judges that be proud, of evil
complexion and melancholic: Such as be mild, gentle, and suffering, they do
not examine the lives they lead, but also they dissemble the weakness they
commit. He that has charge of the common wealth, it is necessary that he have
a mild condition, in such wise that when he shall see weakness, Excellent
graces in a judge.
that he make strong: and where he sees courage, that he praise it: and where
he sees want of foresight, that he provide: and where he sees dissolution,
that he chastise: and where he sees necessity, to succor: and where he sees
sedition, to appease it: and where he sees conformity, to conserve it: and
where he sees suspicion, to clear it: and where he sees heaviness to
remedy it: and where he sees gladness, to temper it: for after extreme
pleasure and gladness, many times do follow no small distresses. If in your
virtuous attempts ye take in hand, there shall happen some success not
conformable to your good desires, and if it shall also chance that you be
grieved therewith, impute not all the fault upon your self: for the man that
does all that he can do, we cannot say to him, that he does not that he ought
to do, since in blood I hold you for kinsman, in conversation for friend, in
authority for my good Lord, A frie^dly persuasion.
and in deserving for father, I shall not leave to pray you as a father: and
beseech you as my good Lord, that you be mild in conversation, and measured in
your words: because of Judges and Lords as you are, at sometimes they do more
feel a word, than of another the push of a lau^ce. But since in all this
kingdom it is notorious that your Lordship is honest of your life, and just
in your tribunal or judgments: I would not gladly hear that those that do
praise that which you do, should complain of that which you say: with a Lord
of so high estate, Skilful eloquence.
and with a judge of so preheminent an office, my pen should not have presumed
to write what it has written, if your Lordship had not commanded. My Lord I
said it, because if this that I have here written unto you shall not like you,
that it may please you to send too revoke the license that you have given.

Also you will that I shall write unto your Lordship, Why ye kings of Castile
be called Catholics.
if I have found in any ancient Chronicle, what is the cause wherefore the
Princes of Castile do call themselves not only Kings, but also Catholic
Kings. And that also I write unto you, who was the first that called himself
Catholic King, and what was the reason and the occasion to take this so
generous and Catholic title. There were ynowe in this Court of whom you
might have demanded, and of whom you might have understood, in years more
ancient, in knowledge more learned, in books more rich, and in writing more
curious than I am. But in the end my Lord be sure of this one thing, that that
which I shall write, if it be not written in a polished style, at the least it
shall be all very true: Coming to the purpose, it is to be understood, that
the Princes in old time did always take proud ouer-names: The ouer-names of
renoumed kings
as Nabugodonozer that did entitle him self King of Kings, Alexander the
great the king of the world, the king Demetrius the conqueror of Cities, the
great Haniball the tamer of kingdoms, Julius Caesar the Duke of the City, the
king Mithridates the restorer of the world, the king Athila the whip of
nations, the king Dionisius the host of all men, the king Cirus the last of the
Gods, ye king of England defender of the Church, the king of France ye most
Christian king, and the king of Spain the Catholic king. To give your
Lordship a reckoning who were these kings, and the cause why they did take
these so proud titles, to me it should be painful to write, and to your
Lordship tedious to read, it is sufficient that I declare what you command
me, without sending what you crave not.

The year, the day, ye month and hour that Spain was lost.
It is to wit, that in the year seven hundredth fifty two, the fifth day of the
month of July upon a sunday, joining to the river Bedalake, about Xeres on the
frontiers, even at the break of day was given the last and most unfortunate
battle betwixt ye Goths that were in Spain, and the Alarues that had come
from Africa, in which the sorrowful king Sir Rodrigo was slain, and all the
kingdom of Spain lost. The Moore that was Captain, and that overcame this
famous battle was named Musa, which did know so well to follow his victory,
that in the space of eight months he did win and had dominion from Xeres in
the frontieres, unto the rock Horadada, which is near to ye town of Onnia.
And that which seems to us most terrible is, that the Moors did win in
eighte months, Spain lost in eight months, and hardly recovered in eight
hundred years.
which in recovering was almost eight hundred years, for so many years did
pass from the time that Spain was lost, until Granado was won. The few
Christians that escaped out of Spain, came retiring unto the mountains of
Onnia, near unto the rock Horadada, unto which the Moors did come: but from
thence forward they passed not, either did conquer it, for there they found
great resistance, and the land very sharp. And when they of Spain did see that
the king Sir Rodrigo was dead, and all the Goths with him, and that without
Lord or head they could not resist the Moors, they raised for king a Spanish
Captain that was named Sir Pelaius, a man venturous in arms, and of all the
people very well beloved. The fame being spread thoroughout all Spain, that
the mountain men of Onia had raised for king the good Sir Pelaius, all men
generouse and warlike did repair unto him, with whom he did unto the Moors
great hurt: and had of them glorious triumphs. Three years after they had
raised the good sir Pelaius for King, he married one of his daughters with one
of the sons of the Earl of Nauarn, who was named Sir Peter, and his son
was called Sir Alonso. This Earl Sir Peter descended by right line of the
lineage of the blessed King Richardos, in whose time the Goths did leave the
sect of the curled Arrius, by the means of the glorious and learned Archbishop
Leonard. The good king Pelaius being dead, in the eighteen year of his
reign, the Castilians exalted for king a son of his, that was named Fauila,
the which two years after he began to reign, going on a certain day to the
mountain, meaning to flea the Bear, the Bear killed him.

And for that the king Fauila died without children, the Castilians elected for
king, the husband of his sister, which is to wit, the son of the Earl of
Nauarne, who was named Alonso, the which began his reign in the
year.vii.C.lxxij. his reign endured eightene years, which was as much time
as his father in law the good King Sir Pelaius had reigned.

This good King was the first that was named Alonso, which took his name in
so good an hour, that since that day amongst all the kings of Castile that
have bin named Alonso, we read not of one that has bin evil, but very good.
Of this good king Alonso the historiographers do recite many landable things to
recompt, worthy to be known, and exemplars to be followed. The King sir Alonso
was the first that out of Nauarne entered Galizia, to make war upon the
Moors, with whom be had many encounters and battles: in the end he overcame
and drove them out of Astorga, Ponferada, Villa franca, Tuy and Lugo, with all
their Countries and Castelles.

This good king Alonso was he that did win of the Moors the City of Leon, and
builded there a royal place, to the end all the Kings of Castile (his
successors) should there be reside^t, and so it came to pass, that in long
time after, many Kings of Castile did live and die in Leon. This good King
Alonso was the first that after the destruction of Spain began to build
Churches and to make Monasteries and Hospitalles, in especially (from the
beginning) the Cathedral churches of Lugo, T^y, Astorga, and Ribe^ew, the
which afterward did pass to Mondonedo. This good king Alonso did bui^d many
and very solemn Monasteries of the order of saint Benet and many hospitalles
in the way of saint James, and many particular Churches in Nauarne, and in the
Country of Ebro, which he endewed all with great riches, and gave them
opulent possessions. This good King Alonso was the first that did seek, and
commanded to be sought with very great diligence, the holy books that had
escaped the hands of the Moors, and as a zealous Prince commanded that they
should be carried to the Church of Oiendo to be kept, and gave great rewards
unto such as had hid them. This good King Alonso was the firsts that commanded
that all the great writers and singers should resort to Leon, to the end they
should write great singing books, and little breuiaries to pray on, the which
he gave and divided amongst all the Monasteries and Churches that he had
founded: for the cursed Moors had not left a Church in Spain that they did
not overthrow, either book that they did not burn. This good king Alonso was
the first, that did begin to make all the Bishops houses joining to the
Cathedral Churches, To the end cold in winter neither heat in somer should
hinder residents.
because the heat in the So^mer, either the cold in Winter, should not let
them to be resident in the Quier, and to see how they worshipped God.

This good king Alonso the first died in ye age of.lxiiij. years, in the City
of Leon, in the year of our Lord. 793. And his death, of the Castilians and
Nauarrois was as much bewailed, as of all men his life was desired. How
acceptable his life was unto God, it appeared most clear, in that the Lord
showed by him at his death: which is to wit, that at the point of his last
breath, they heard over his chamber Angelike voices sing and say: Behold how
the just dies and no man makes account thereof, his days be ended and his
soul shall be in rest. The lamentation was so great that was made through out
Spain for the death of this good King Alonso, that from thence forward every
time that any named his name, if he were a man he put off his cap, and if a
woman she made a reverence. Not three months after the death of the good King
Alonso, all the mighty of the Kingdom joined in parliament, wherein they did
ordeyne and command by a public Edict, that from thence forward and for
evermore none should presume to say coldly or driely, the king Alonso, but for
his excellency they should call him the king Alonso the Catholic, for that he
had bin a prince so glorious, and of the divine service so zelouse. This good
king was son in law of sir Pelaius, The first inue^tio^ of the title
Catholic.
he was the third King of Castile, after the destruction thereof: he was the
first king of this name Alonso: he was ye first that founded Churches in
Spain: he was the first King at whose death such Angelike voices were heard:
he was the first king that was entitled Catholic: by whose deseruings and
virtues all the kings of Spain (his successors) be called to this day
Catholic Kings.

My Lord, it seems to me, that since the kings of Spain presume to inherit
the name, they should also presume to follow his life, which is to wit, to make
war upon the Moors, and to be fathers and defendours of the Church: And for
that in the beginning of this letter, I did use the speech of a friend, and in
this I have accomplished what you craved as a servant. I say no more, but that
our Lord be your protector, and give us all his grace.

From Segouia the xij. of May. 1523.
A letter unto Mosen Rubin of Valentia, being enamoured, wherein is touched
the displeasures that the amorous dames give unto their lovers.

MAgnificent and old enamored, Contrary salutations in respect of his birth and
manners.
being in Madrid the fourth of August, where I received a letter of youres, and
for that it was torn, and the firm somewhat blotted, I swear unto you by the
law of an honest man, I could not find means to read it, or imagine or call to
remembrance who should write it. For notwithstanding we were acquainted when I
was Inquisitor in Valencia, it is almost a thousand years since we saw each
other: after I awakened and called my self to remembrance, and did read, A
sufficient cause to forget old acquaintance.
and read again your letter, I fell in the reckoning that it was of Mosen
Rubin my neighbor (I say Mosen Rubin the enamored) I remember that sometimes
we were wont to play at the chesse in my lodging, and cannot advise me that you
gave me the dame, but I do certainly remember, that you did not suffer me to
see your enamored. I remember that at the rock of Espadon, Assured notes of old
acquaintance.
at the encounter we had with the Moors, I escaped wounded, and you with a
broken head, where we could neither find Surgeon to cure us, or as much
as a clout to bind us. I remember that in reward for that I caused your bill to
be firmed by the Queen, you sent me a Mule which I did gratify and not
receive. I remember that when we went to accompany the French King to Requena,
when we came to the seven waters, I complained for want of meat, and you for
lack of lodging: and in the end, I received you into my lodging, and you went
forth to provide victualles. I remember when Caesar commanded me to repair
unto Toledo, you gave me a letter to be delivered unto the Secretary Vrias,
upon a certain business of yours, to whom I did not only speak but also
obtained your suit. I remember that chiding with a Chaplayne of your wives in
my presence, when he said unto you, that it were not convenient you should deal
fowly with him, for that he had charge of souls, and was a Curat, you made
answer, that he was not a Curat of souls but of fools. I remember that I
counseled you and also persuaded you, being in Xatina, that you should give
to the Devil the love that you wot of: and I also do know, because they were
tedious, perilous, and costly. I remember that after in Algezira you reported
(weeping and sighing) that you had no power to chase them from your mind,
either root them from your heart: and there I returned to say and swear, that
it was no love, either pleasant to your person, or too your estate convenient.
I remember that after we met at Torres, where I demanded to what conclusion
you had framed your love, you answered in a thousand sorrows and trauelles,
for that you had escaped from thence wounded, abhorred, beflouted, infamed, and
also be pilled. Of many other things, (I remember) I have both seen and hard
you speak and do, in that time that we were neighbors and couersant in
Valentia: The issue of dishonest love.
whereof (although we may talk) they are not too be written.

In this present letter you advertise me that now you are enamored and taken
with other new loves, and that since I said the troth in the first, you pray me
to write my opinion in the second, (holding it for certain, that my skill
serves to let blood in the right vain, and also to bind up the wound.) Sir
Mosen Rubin, I would you had written or demanded some other matter: for
speaking the very troth in this matter of love, you are not in the age to
follow it, either may it be contained with my ingrauitie to write it: of my
habit, of my profession, and of my authority and gravity, you should have
demanded cases of counsel, and not remedies of love: for I have red more in
Hostiensis that instructs to give counsel, tha^ in Ovid that teaches to be
enamored. Of a troth master Mosen Rubin I say, that it is neither you or I,
that love does like, and with whom she does delight. For you are now old,
and I am religious, in such sort, that in you age does abound, and in me
wants liberty. Believe me sir and be out of doubt, it is not love but sorrow,
not mirth but displeasure, not taste but torment, not recreation but confusion:
when in the enamored there is not youth, liberty, and liberality. The man
that is now entered into age, and will be young again and enamored, they never
term him an old lover, but a filthy old fool, and (as God save me) they have
great reason that so do call them: for old rotten strawes are more fit to make
dung, than to be kept. The God Cupid, and the Goddess Venus, The conditions
of men apt for love.
will not have in household but young men that can serve, liberal that know to
spend, and free that can enjoy and delight, pacient that can suffer, discreet
that have skill to talk, secret that know too keep silence, faithful to
gratify, and valiant that can persevere: he that is not endued and priuileged
with these conditions, it should be more sound counsel for him to delue in
the field, than to be enamored in palace. For there are not in this world men
more miserable than the enamored that be foolish. The doltish lover besides
that his dame scorneth him, his neighbors jest at him: his servants beguile
him, Pandar bepeeleth him, he is blinded with gilefull speech, evil imployeth
his iuels, goes without foresight, he is light of belief, and in the end
finds himself beflouted. All the offices, crafts, and sciences in this world
may be learned, except it be the skill and occupation to know to love: the
which, neither Salamon had skill to write, Asclepius to paint, Ovid to teach,
Helen to report, either yet Cleopatra to learn, but that from the school of
the heart it must proceed, and pure discretion must give instruction. There is
not any thing wherein is more necessity to be discreet, than in being a lover:
for if a man have hunger, cold, thirst, and werinesse, the only body feels
it, but the follies that is committed in love, the heart chiefly bewayleth the^.
To the end that love be fixed, sure, perpetual, and true, there must be
equalities betwixt the enamored: for if the lover be young, and she old, or he
old and she young, or he wise and she a fool, or he a fool and she wise, or he
love her, and she abhors him, or she love him, and he abhors her: believe
me sir and be out of doubt that of fained lovers, they shall end assured and
unfeigned enemies. Master Mosen Rubin, I thought good to say thus much unto
you, to the end that if the lover that you have now chosen be in possession of
three score and three years as you are, A lover in possession of threescore and
three years.
there is no great peril that you love and know her. For most of the time you
shall spend, shall be in recounting unto her the lovers that you have holden,
and she in reckoning up unto you, all such as has served her.

Speaking more in particular, I would know to what purpose a man as you that
has passed threescore years, that is full spent, and laden with the gout,
will now take a Curtisan young and fair, which will rather occupy her self in
robbing, than delighting of you? To what end will you have a love of whom you
may not be served, but to bind up grieves, and to drive away flies? Wherefore
will you have a dainty Dame, since betwixt you and her there may rise no
either conversation or communication, but to relate and count reckonings and
tales, and how little you have eaten all the day, and how many times you
have told the clock that night? For what cause would you have a love since you
want strength to follow her, goods to serve her, patience to suffer her, and
youth to enjoy her? Why will you have an amorous dame unto whom you can not
represente how much you have suffered and endured for her sake, but report
how the gout is risen from the hand to the shoulders? To what conclusion
will you love an infamous woman, which will not enter in at your doors that
day which you cease to give her, or shall grow negligent to serve her? To
what consideration do you delight to have a wanton love, unto whom you shall
not dare to deny any thing that she craves, either chide for any displeasure
she gives? To what service will you have a lawless love, who may not be
served conformably to your good, but agreeable to her foolishness? For what
skill will you have alemman, which must be gratified for the favor she bears
you, and dare not complain of the ielosies she shall demand of you? For what
conceyt will you have a second Lais, which when she shall flatter you, it
shall not only be to content you, A chief cause of courtizans love.
but something to crave of you? For what intent will you have a love, before
whom you must needs laugh, although the gout make you rave? For what
meaning will you have a dissolute dame, with whom you shall spend all your
goods, before you shall have acquaintance with her conditions? And why desire
you a lusty Less, with whom you are joined for money, and also susteyn her
with delights, and yet in the end must depart from her with displeasures? If
you M. Mosen Rubin with these conditions will needs be enamoured, be it so in
a good hour, for I am sure it will rain into your house.

To your age and infirmity, it were more convenient to have a friend to
recreate, than a Lamia, with whom to putrify. Samocratius, Nigidius, and Ouide
did write many books, The authors of remedies for love, and the fruit they
reaped thereof
and made great treatyses of the remedies of love, and the reward of them,
is, they sought remedies for others, and used none for themselves, all three
dyed, persecuted and banished, not for those offenses they committed in Rome,
but for the loves they attempted in Capua. Let Ouide say what he dreameth,
Nigidius what him pleases, Samocratius what he thinks good, but in fine,
the greatest and best remedy against love, is to flee the conversation and to
avoid the occasion: for in causes of love we see many escape that do flee
it, and very few that abide it. Sir take you heed, that the Dinel deceive
you not in your reckenyng (a fresh to be enamoured) since it is not convenient
for the health of your person, either aunswerable to the authority of your
house: For I assure you of my faith, that sooner you shall be delivered of the
displeasures of your Courtizan, than of the pains of the gout. My pen has
stretched out farther than I thought, The beginners of quarrels do sometime
catch a wipe.
and also farther than you would: but since you were the first that laid hand
to weapon, the fault is not mine, if I have happened to give you a wype. To the
Father Prior of Corta caeli, I send a rich palia, for my sake I pray you to
command that it be given him, and in my behalf to visit him, because I
lodged long time with him, and am much bound and affectioned unto him. No more
but that our Lord be your protector, and keep you from an evil lemman, and
heal you of your gout.

From Madrid the third of March.1527.
A letter unto the Bishop of Zamora Sir Anthony of Acuna, wherein he is sharply
reprehended, for that he was captain of the commons that rebelled in Spain.

Contrary congratulations in respect of his function and manners.
Reverent and seditious Prelate, Zalobrena the sergeant of your band gave me a
Letter of yours, which presently I could not understand, but after I had
read, and returned again to read the same, I did see it was no letter, but a
bill that the Bishop of Zamora had sent: wherein he did desie and threaten
that he would kill me, or command me to be chastized. The cause of this
defiaunce your Lordshippe declares to proceed, for that in Villa Braxima I
withdrew Sir Peter Giron from your parcialitie, and counseled him to cease to
follow you, and retire to serve the king. I my Lord do accept your defiance,
The lykelyhode of a notable combat.
and hold my self defied, not that we kill our selves, but that we examine our
selves, not to the end we go unto the field, but to incommende our selves
to reason. Which reason as a viewer of our factes shall declare whether of us
is most culpable, I in followyng and obeying the King, or you in altering and
reuolting the kingdom. I remember me being as the^ but young in Trecenon, a
manor house of Gueuara, I did see my uncle Sir Ladron, and sir Beltram my
father, mourn in black for your father, and (in very troth my lord Bishop)
seeing you as I did see you in Villa Braxima compassed with artillery,
accompanied with soldiers, and armed at al points: with more reason we might
wear green, because you live, than black for yt your father died. The divine
Plato of two things did not discern which first to bewail, that is to wit:
the death of good men, or the life of the wicked: for it is a most great grief
unto the heart to see the good so soon to die, and the wicked so long time to
live. A certain Greek being demanded for what cause he showed so great sorrow
in ye death of Agesilaus? He answered: I weep not because Agesilaus died, but
for that Alcibiades remains living, whose life offends the Gods, and
escandalizeth the world. A certain Gentleman of Medina (who is named John
Cnaso) reported that being appointed to have the oversight of your bringing up,
he was driven to change four Nursses in six months: for that in nursing you
were fierce wayware, and importune in suckyng. It seems unto me my Lord
Bishop, that since in your childhoode you were so paynfull, and in your life so
sedicious, it were great reason, that in your old years as you should be
quiet: if not for your deserving, yet to repose you should seek quietness:
holding as you have in your possession three score year completed* and
shortly may boaste your self of three score and ten accomplyshed, it
seems to me no evil counsel that you offer (if it like you) the flower to
God, for that you bestowed so much branne in the world. Since your gardein is
blasted, your vinedage ended, your flower fallen, your primetyme finished,
your youth passed, you old age come, it were much more conueniente to take
order for amendment of old sins, and reformation of your life, than to
execute the office of Captain over rebelling co^moners. If you will not
follow Christ that made you, yet follow sir Jews of Acuna that begat you: at
whose gates many poor every day did feed, and at your gates we see not but
playing and blaspheming soldiers.

A lewd office for an old bishop.
To make of soldiers priests, it passes: but of priests to make soldiers, is
an act most scandalous: whereunto I will not say your Lordship consented, but
that you exactely have performed. You brought from Zamora to Tordissillas,
three hundredth Massing Priests, not to instruct the Kings subjects, but to
defend that Town against the King: and to remove your Lordship from evil
toungs, as also for the better salvation of their souls, Prelates for the
body.
you brought them from Zamora, in the beginning of Lent, in such wise that like
a good pastor and an excellent Prelate, you removed the^ from praying to
fighting: in the assault which ye Gentlemen gave at Tordessillas against your
band, I saw with mine eyes one of your priests with an harquebuse overthrow
eleven men behind a window, and the grace was, that when he did level to
shoot, he blessed him self with his piece, and killed them with the pellot. I
saw also, before the assault was ended, the Soldiers of our side, that
were without, give that good Prelate such a blow in the forehead with an arrow,
that the death of that caytise was so sudden, as he had neither time to
confess his sins, nor yet so much as to bless himself. But now the soul
of that Bishop that removed that priest from his church, and the soul of that
priest that slew so many men, Doubtful to be answered.
what excuse can they have before men, and what accounte may they make to God?
It were a sin to take you from the wars, but much greater to make you of
the church, since you be so offensive, and in nothing scrupulous, and hereof we
be most certain, for yt you make no account to fight and to kill, and also to
be irregular.

I would gladly know in whether book you have read most, which is to wit, in
Vegetius, which entreats of matters of wars, or in S. Austine his book of
Christian doctrine? and that which I durst auouche is, I have seen you many
times handle a partisan, but never any book: and it seems unto me not a
little grievous, that to the souldioures that assaulted and fell at the taking
of the fort of Impudia, they say, that you said: So my sons up, fight and
die, behold, my soul for yours, since you dye in so just an enterprise, and a
demand so holy. My Lord Bishop, A Bishop utterly void of a scrupulous
conscience.
you well know that the Soldiers that there were slain were excommunicate
for sacrilege, traitors to the King, robbers of churches, thieves on high
ways, enemies of the common wealth, and maintainers of civil war. It is most
evident, that the soul of that Bishop that speaks such blasphemy, is not
much scrupulous, that desires to die as a soldier: neither do I marvel
that he desires to die like a desperate Soldier, that never made account of
his estate as a Bishop. If you had raised this war to reform the common
wealth, A bishop fighting for a bishoprike.
or to have made free your country from some oppression and taxation, it might
seem you had occasion, although in deed no reason) but your Lordship has not
risen against the king for the weal of the kingdom, but to make exchange for a
better Bishoprike, and to drive the Earl of Alua de Lista, out of Zamora. If
you enter in reckening with all those of your band, which go in your
company, certainly you shall find that passion was your foundation, and not
reason, neither zeal of the common wealth, but ouermuche desire in every one
to augment his own house and estate.

Sir Peter Giron would have the possession of Medina: the Earl of Saluatiera
command the royal Pastures: Fernando de Aualoes revenge his injury: John de
Padilia be master of S. James: Sir Peter Lasso the only ruler in Toledo: An
Abbot fighting for a bishoprike.
Quintanilla Controller of Medina: Sir Fernando de Hulloa expel his brother
out of Toro: the Abbot of Compludo obtain the Bishoprike of Zamora: the Doctor
Barnardine, the Auditor of Valiodolid: Ramir nimez the possession of Leon: and
Charles de Arrelano join Soria with Vorobia. The wise man says, he seeks
occasion that will depart from a friend: in like manner we may say, that
sedicious men seek not but rebellious times: for that it seems unto them
which want and are in necessity, while rebellion lasts, they may feed of
the sweat of other men's brows, and profit by their neighbors loss. The art
seems not a little gracious which you have used to deceive and persuade
Toledo, Burgos, Valiodolid, Leon, Salamanca, Auila, and Segouia to rebel,
saying, that by this mean they shall be established and made free, as Venize,
Geneua, Florence, Sena, and Luke: in such wise, that from henceforth they
shall not be named Cities, but Seigniories. Musing what was to be said in this
matter: a good space I had my pen in suspense, and in the end, I conceived that
upon so great a vanity and mischief (never like heard of) there is nothing to
be said, much less to be written. For I hold it for certain and dare avouch,
that you make not those Cities free, but a pray, not entitle them with
seigniories, but profit your selves with their riches. Those ye will take in
hand any enterprise that naturally is seditious or offensible, have not to
consider of the occasion that moves the^ to rise, but only the good or evil
end which thereof may proceed: for all famous offenses have had always a
beginning of good respects. Silla, Marius, and Cateline, which were famous
Romans, and glorious Captains, under the color to deliver Rome from evil
governors, made themselves tirants of the same. At sometimes it is less evil
in great Cities to bear with some want of Justice, than to move the people,
and thereby to raise war: for that war is a certain net that catches away all
weal from the common wealth.

The great Alexander being demanded for what cause he would be Lord of the
whole world, made answer: All the wars that are raised in this world, is
for one of these three causes, which is, either to have goods, many laws: or
else many Kings: therefore would I obtain the same, to command throughout the
whole world, that they honor but one God, serve but one king, and observe but
one law. But let us now confer your Lordship with Alexander the great, and we
shall find, that he was a King, and your Lorship a Bishop: he a Pagan, and
you a Christian: he bred in the wars, and you in the Church: he never heard
of the name of Christ, and you have sworn to observe his Gospel: and with
all these conditions he would not for the whole world have but one king, and
your lordship would have seven only for Castile. I say unto your Lordship, that
you would establish seven kings in Castile, for that you would make the seven
Cities of the same seven seigniories. The good and loyal gentlemen of Spayn
use to remove kings, to make one king, and such as be traitors and disloyal,
do use to remove the King, to make kings.

For us and our friends, we will no other God but Christ, no other law but the
Gospel, or other king but the Emperor Charles the fifth. And if you and your
commoners will have an other king, and an other law, join your selves with
the Curate of Mediana, which every sunday does establishe and take away kings
in Castile. And this is the case. In a certain place named Mediana, which is
near unto Palomera of Auila there was a Biskay priest, and half a foot,
which was moved with so great affection to John of Padilia, that at the time
of bidding of beads on the holy days, he reco^mended after this manner: My
brethren, I commend unto you one Aue Maria for the most holy communaltie, that
it never decay. I commend unto you an other Aue Maria for the majesty of king
John of Padilia, ye God may prosper him. I commend unto you an other Aue Maria
for the Queens highness our mistress and Lady Mary of Padilia, that God may
preserve her: for of a troth these be the true kings, and all the rest before
time were tyrants. These prayers continued about three weeks (little more or
less.) After which time John of Padilia, with his men of war passed that
way, and the soldiers that lodged in the priests house enticed away his
woman, drank his wine, kilde his hens, and eat up his bacon. The sundaye
following, in the Church he said: It is not unknown unto you my brethren,
how John of Padilia passed this way, and how his soldiers has left me never
a hen, have eaten me a flitch of bacon, The prelate lost his Catelina.
have drunk out a whole tinage of wine, and have carried away my Cateline, I
say, for that from henceforth you shall not pray unto God for him, but for
king Charles, and for our Lady Queen Ione, (for they be the true Princes) and
give to the devil these strange kings. A tinage is an earthen can used in
Spain of no little syse to hold their wine.
Behold here my Lord Bishop, how the Curate of Mediana is of more power than
your Lorshippe, for that he made and unmade Kings in three weeks, which you
have not performed in eight months: and yet I do swear and prophecy, that
the King that you shall establish in Castile, shall endure as little as that
king which was made by the Curate of Mediana. No more but that our Lord be
your protector, and lighten you with his grace.

From Medina del rio secco, the.xx. of December.1521.
A letter unto the Bishop of Zamora, sir Antony of Acunna, in which the Author
does persuade him to turn to the service of the king.

Repugnancie in respect of estate and manners.
Reverend and disquiet bishop, by the letter of Quintanilla of Medina, I was
advertised in what manner your lordship received my letter, and also
understood, that in the end of reading thereof, presentely you began to
grove, and murmuring, said: Is this a thing to be suffered, that the tongue of
Friar Antony of Gueuara, may be of more power than my lance? and that he be
not contented to have withdrawn Sir Peter Giron, (even from betwixt our
hands) but also now even here does write me a thousand blasphemies. It has
much pleased me, that my letter was so well co^fected, yt with such swiftnes it
pierced unto your heart: for I did not write that you should read it, but that
you should read and feel it. The patie^t that does determine to receive a
little rubarbe, suffers the bitterness that it leaves in the throat, for the
profit it does him against his fever. I would say, that it shall little
profit your Lordship, though you know how to complain: if you do not likewise
determine how to amend: for that your Lordship is an Oforio in blood, in
dignity a Bishop, in authority a gentleman or a knight, and in profession a
Christian, I hold you in great reverence: but jointly therewith, as concerning
your furious complainses and threats, I esteem them very little: for there is
a God that beholds his servants, and a Prince that stands for his subjects.

I conceive no evil, that you be a warrior, and that you go armed, upon
condition that your armor be such, as the Apostle speaks of, quod arma
militiae nostrae non sunt carnalia sed spiritualia: because your war ought
not to be with enemies but with vices, and as Seneca says, more glory was
deserved by Cato in banishing vice out of Rome, than of Scipio for conquering
the Carthaginians in Africa. But since you would needs go on warfare, and make
war upon the whole common wealth of Castile, to foil your enemy the Earl
of Alua de Lista, what fault had the King and Queen committed? To pardon many
for the merit of one is the office of Christians, but to chastise many for one
man's offense is the condition of tyrants: in such sort, The condition of
tyrants.
that from henceforth we may not call you Bishop of Zamorra, but tirant of the
common wealth.

Many times I stay, to consider to what purpose your Lordship would needs
disobey the king, alter the kingdom, raise up the people, make armies, join
with communers, cast away your self, and hurt and endamage the commonwealth: I
am not able to comprehend any occasion, muchlesse any reason (except it be
that, as you desire to be Archbishop of Toledo you would obtain by strength,
that which you deserve not by virtue.) If the matter might come in judgment
before God, yea, and also before me^, your Lordship may be sure, that more
demerites would be found in you to be dispossessed of your Bishoprike that you
now possess, than merits wherefore to give you the Archbishoprike that you
crave. The dignities of the Church of God ought not to be given unto such as
does procure them, but unto those that do refuse them: for so much the more
worthy is he to govern souls, that thinks himself most unworthy to
perform the same. To deserve the Archbishoprike of Toledo, your Lordship ought
rather to shed tears, than blood: to be in the temple, and not in the fields:
to accompany the religious, and not soldiers: too pray at your hours, and not
to alter the common wealth: but your Lordship seeing that you cannot deserve
by virtue, you determined to obtain by armed strength. You ought too have
remembered that God has chosen you for a Bishop, and not for a Captain, The
office of a Bishop.
for the Church, and not for the war: to preach, and not to fight: to be
invested with surples, and not with a shirt of maile: to succor Orphans, and
not soldiers: and also to give orders, and not to order stales and ambushes to
skirmish. The first bishop of this world which was S. Peter, found amongst all
the Apostles but two swords to defend Christ, and there is to be found a M.
Hagbuts within your house to ruinat this Realm. In such wise we have to
praise you, not for your books that you read in, but for the armor you do
possess.

Maldonado (your servant and my friend) has advertised me, that you have
given him a benefice of ij. C. Ducats. I demanding if he understood to read his
divine prayers? He made answer: Sir you are in a wrong account, for at this
instant in the house of my Lord Bishop, none has skill to pray, but we all
learn to skirmish. A Bishop practices his household not to pray but to
skirmish.
The houses of good prelates, are not but certain schools of virtues where
none may have acquaintance with lies, or learn to play the glutton, or too go
at large, or to be idle, either yet to delight in much talk, either to
quarrel, or to be ambitious: which is not so in your house, where all become
absolute, and glory and presume too be dissolute. When the governors of the
kingdom this other day sent me thither unto you, to offer conditions of
peace with those of the convocation in the town of Braxima, and saw your
Lordship armed, like a clock compassed with soldiers, environed with such
multitude of shot, acompanied with such numbers of commoners, and laden with
affairs, and business of so great importance, I was in a dout with my self,
whether that which I saw was a dream, or else the Bishop Sir Turbin were risen
again from death. If you will not call to remembrance that you are a
Christian, that you are a priest, that you are a Preacher, and that you are a
native of this kingdom: yet become advised that you descended of noble blood,
and of an ancient house (although it be most true, that as you be an Osorio
in blood, so are you rash and desperate in condition.) It grieueth me (my Lord
Bishop) that you use armor, not as a wise man, but as one ouerrash, Armor
used to wrong purpose.
not as one that defends, but as one that offends, not as you ought, but as
you list: for I perceive you follow opinion, and fly reason: all your
displeasure rises for following your will, and employing your ability to a
wrong purpose, but as Seneca says, in the house where will does command,
very sildome reason does inhabit, and (as Muscoso makes report,) that eating
many times you say at your table, is there no man that will take me master
Gueuara, to hang him at a window for the disceite and intising away of sir
Peter Giron out of our percialitie? To say that I deceived him, I deny it: to
say that I delivered him from disceite I confess it: and whether it be good
or evil for him to remain there or turn hither, I am sure he repents not
to have believed me, neither I to have given him counsel.

Your Lordship does well remember when your Captain Lares did take me, and
so taken brought me before you: and notwithstanding you reprehended and delte
evil with me, I requested you on the behalf of the governors, that you would
leave war, and accept an honest concord, in which Embassage you esteemed me
very little, of that I said made small account also, and skoffed at that which I
spoke. My lord Bishop you do well know, how many evil days I have passed, how
many injuries I have suffered, what froward words with me have been used, what
perils I have past, what despites have been done unto me, with what
threatenings I have bin threatened, and also what slanders they have raised upon
me: for that I have followed the King, and procured peace unto the Kingdom.
When I was at the town of Braxima with your Lordship and with the Commoners, I
preached nothing unto you but penitence, and to the kings governors at Medina
del rio secco I persuaded nothing but clemencye: for it was impossible, if the
one did not repent, and the other pardon, that these kingdoms might be
remedied, neither so many euilles and dangers cut off. Now since I have
traueled after this manner, and suffered so great trauails, I know not why you
should call me traitor, desire to kill me, and to hang me at a window, since I
desire not to see your Lordship hanged, but amended. Titus Liuius makes
mention of a Roman Patricide, A wrong mean to obtain fame.
who being ambitious of honor, and a coward to obtain the same, determined to
set fire on ye treasure house where all the people of Rome laid up their
treasure. This evil disposed fellow being taken, tormented, and examined of
the cause of his enterprise, made answer: I would have done this hurt to the
common wealth, for that writers should make mention of me in their Chronicles:
which is to wit, as touching the treasures of Rome, though I had not ability
to obtain them, yet had I skill to burn them. I thought good too put your
Lordship in remembrance of this history, to the end you may understand,
considering I am Preacher and Chronicler unto his majesty, in which imperial
Chronicle, there shall be sufficient report of your Lordship, not that you were
a father and a pacifier of your country, but rebellious, and an inuentor of
these wars. How may I with troth write of the rebellion of Toledo, the death
of the ruler of Segouia, the taking of Tordesillas, the imprisonment of the
counsel, the siege of Alaheios, the convocation of Auila, the burning of
Medina, the alteration of Valiodolid, the scandal of Burgos, the loss of
Toro, Zamora, and Salamanca, without I make mention of your Lordship? How may I
make report of the evils that Vera the Lockier has committed in Valiodolid:
Bobadilla the shereman in Medina: the Lockiar in Auila, A sclaunderous
fraternity.
and Burgos: and in Salamanca the Skinner: but that in that holy brotherhood we
must find the Bishop of Zamora? I report me unto you my Lord Bishop, shall I
raise any slander upon you, by reporting in my Chronicle, that I saw at the
town of Braxima, all the artillery brought together to the gates of your
house. I saw watch and ward kept round about your lodging, I saw all the
Captains of your bands feed at your table, I saw them all join to consult in
your chamber, and that al did exclame for long life to the bishop of Zamora?
All these things which your Lordship has done, I would gladly leave them
unwritten, if your Lordship would amend, and also remedy the mischief you
have in hand: but I behold you with such eyes, and with such an opinion: that
you will rather lose your life wherewith you live, than the opinion which you
follow. I conceived no small compassion, when this other day I saw you
compassed with the commoners of Salamanca, with villains of Saiago, with
manquellers of Leon, with rebels of Zamora, with Cappers of Toledo, and with
hit makers of Valiodolid. All which in general you are bound to content,
Difficult to content.
and not license to command. This kind of people that you lead of the
communaltie is so vain and fickle, that with threats they will follow you,
with intreatance be sustained, with promises be blinded: fighting with fear,
walking with suspicion, living upon hope: not contented with little, or pleased
with gifts: for their intent is not to follow those that have most right, but
such as give best wages. There is a certain difference betwixt us and you,
which is: that we which follow the King, hope to be rewarded, but you have no
such hope, but by violence to please your selves, which we know well that you
your self have promised to your self the Archbishoprike of Toledo, Vain
promises.
we well know that John of Padilia (he himself) has promised unto himself
the Mastership of S. James, we do know that Clauero (himself) has promised
unto himself the Mastership of Alcantara, we well know that the Abbot of
Compludo (he himself) has promised unto him self the Bishoprike of Zamora,
we well know that the Prior of Vadiodolid (he himself) has promised unto
himself ye Bishoprik of Valentia, sir Peter Pinentel, Maldonado, Quintanilla,
Sarabia, A quent of Maruedis which be 6. for a penny. amount. 2500 Dukats.
ye Lice^ciat Barnardine, and the doctor Cowsehed: None of these at this day
will give their hope for a good que^t of rent. Ramir Nunez and John Brave do
accept to be called Lords, John Brave for yt he has hope to be Earl of
Chincon, and Ramir Nunez Earl of Luna: it may be that one of the^ or both may
first lose their heads, before they have obtained their estates.

Wherefore my Lord Bishop, retire, repent, and amend, because the loyalty of
Castile does not suffer but one king, neither endure but one law. No more, but
that our Lord be your instructor.

From Tordesillas the tenth of March. 1521.
A letter unto Sir John of Padilla Captain of the Commoners against the King,
wherein he persuades him to surcesse that infamous enterprise.

Repugnancie of speech in respect of noble blood, and want of judgment.
MAgnificent and unadvised Gentleman, the letter that with your own hand you
have written unto me, and the credit and trust you sent me, with your servant
Montaluan, I have received here in Medina: and to say the troth, I did not more
delight to see your leter, than I received grief to hear your message: for
that it seems you determine to proceed with your enterprise, and to finish
the ruin of this common wealth. Sir you do well understand, at the assembly
of Auila, I said unto you, that you were lost, deceived, and sold: because
Hernando of Auila, Sir Peter Giron, the Bishop of Zamora, and the other
commoners, had not invented this Civil war with zeal too redress the
offenses in the common wealth: but to take vengeance of their enemies. Sir also
I said unto you, that the resolution of that assembly seemed unto me great
vanity and no small vaunte, A frivolous devise.
and that which the common people demanded, which is to wit, that in Castile
all should contribute, all should be equal, all should pay, and that they
should be governed after the manner of segniories in Italy, the which is
scandalous to hear, and blasphemy to speak: for as it is impossible to
govern the body without arms, so is it impossible that Spain be sustained
without Gentlemen. Also I said unto you, that being of blood undefiled, of
person so well compact, in arms so expect, of mind so valiant, in judgment
so advised, in condition so well liked, in age so tender, and in the flowers of
your youth, it were much more convenient for you to serve the King in
Flaunders, Notable qualities evil employed.
than Castile to trouble his kingdom. Also I did advertise you, how in that of
late the King had created the Admiral and the Constable for governors, which
with all the mighty and nobles of Spain, joined in Medina del rio Secco, to
give order for the succor of Tordisillas, and to chase away the Rebels from
the town of Braxima, my desire and judgment is, that you should rather
esteem to be a soldier with the Gentlemen, tha^ a Captain over Rebels.
Also I said unto you, that ye governors had commanded a scaffold to be made,
whereupon a King at arms being ascended made public proclamation, that all
Knights and Gentlemen that repaired not within fifteen days with Horse and
Armor under the Kings Standerd to serve and be resident, should be holden as
traitors and disloyal, and that it seemed unto me that you should rather have
accomplished that which the governors commanded, than that which in Toledo
they had desired. Also I said unto you that commonly civil and popular wars
decay in puissance, prevail sildome, and may not endure, and after they be
finished, and the common wealth pacified: In rebellon use to pardon the poor,
and to behead the Captains.
the Kings and Princes of the same do use for custom to pardon the common
people, and behead the Captains. Also I said unto you that you should not
blind your self with foolish lies, either with words of uncertain
purposes, which is to wit: if any shall say unto you that you are the
father of the country, the refuge of prisoners, the repair of the grieved,
the defender of the common wealth, and the restorer of Castile: for the very
same persons that to day do name you redeemer, on the morrow will proclaim
you traitor. Also I said unto you that you ought to have before your eyes,
that your father Peter Lopes, and your Uncle Sir Garcia, and your Brother
Gutiere Lopes, and all your friends and alies, be all in service of ye King in
the governors Camp: and that you alone (of all your lineage) amongst rebels
bend against the King, whereof there follows that you alone being in fault,
they here in general receive the shame.

Also I said unto you, that since the King had given you no cause of offense,
either taken from you any reward or bounty, or commanded you any injustice.
It were very unjust that you should be the whip wherewith Hernando of Aualos
should revenge his injury. For if he has sworn to be revenged of Xeues, also
you are bound to be faithful unto the King. Also I said unto you, that you
should give to the Devil the prophestes, witchcrafts, and enchantments of the
Lady Mary your wife: which is said that she and a certain woman slave do
practice? for that to speak and practice with the Devil, it may not be
otherwise but that she-looseth her soul, and you to lose your life and honor.
Also I said unto you, that you should not care to attempt to enter the Covent
of Vcles, with intent to be master of Saint James, either to throw Sir John del
rio Secco out of Toledo, since it were a vanity to think it, and a great
lightness to take it in hand, for to be master of saint James, you have not
done such service wherefore it should be given you, neither sir John has done
any treason, why it should be taken from him. So many and so good Counsels, so
many and so profitable aduises, so many and so perswasible words, so many and
so importune desires, so many and so great promises, so many and so great
assurances, as I gave, promised, did swear, desire, and importune, and assure
you, might not proceed from a suspicious friend, either from a man of a
double condition, but rather as from a father to a son, Persuasions of a
perfect friend.
from a brother to a brother, and from a friend to a friend. I would to God
you did thoroughly know my heart, and the heart of Hernando of Aualos your uncle,
then should you see most clear, how it is I that do love you, and he that
does deceive you: I that give you the hand, and he the man that offreth you
deceyts: I that show you the deapth, and he that sendes you to the bottom: I
that set up the mark, and he that takes away the white: I that lettes you
blood in the right vain, and he that lameth your arms. Finally, An eloquence
rarely used.
I am he that would cure and open your impostume, and he is the man that gives
end to your life, and burieth your renoume. If you had taken my counsel, I had
placed you in my Chronicles amongst the glorious personages of Spain, with
the famous Viriato, the venturous Cid, the good Fernan Gonsalis, the Knight
Tiran, and with the great Captain, and other infinite Knights and Gentlemen
worthy of praise, and no less to be followed. But since you would needs
imitate and credit Hernando of Aualos, and the other rebellious commoners, I
shall be forced to place you in the Cathaologe of the famous tyrants, that is
to say, with the Justice Castromino, and Fernan Centeno, with captayn Sapico,
the duchess of Villalua, the Marshal Peter Pardo, Alfonso Trusillo, Lope
Carasco, Rebels of Spain.
and Taymayo Isquirdo.

All these and many other with them, were tyrants and rebels in the days of
king John, and king Henry. And this is the difference betwixt you and them,
that every one of them did tyrannise but their own countries, but you the
whole country of Castile. I can not comprehend your intention, either can I
conceive what you may obtain in following this enterprise, and to contend upon
so unjust a demand, since you know, and all we understand, that if your
enterprise should hap to prevail, there is none that would accept,
gratify, or take it in good part: and if your purpose be made frustrate, there
is a King that will revenge the injury, for the greatenesse and Majesty of
Castile knows not to endure disobedience to their kings, either suffer
themselves to be commanded by tyrants.

When this year ye came to talk with me in Medina del campo, and I went with
you to see the bit maker, and Viloria, the skinner, Bobadilla the sheareman,
Pennelas the card maker, Ontoria the lockier, Mender the bookebynder, and
Lares the enseigne bearer, that were the heads and inuentours of the commoners
of Valiodolid, Borgos, Leon, Zamora, Salamanca Auila, and Medina: I assure you,
I was dismayde and ashamed for that presently I did both see and know that
passion was your guide, Evil guydes not to be followed.
and they conducted by opinion, and that you all, did flee reason: but for that
I am in life a sinner, in habit religious, in office a preacher, and in
knowledge simple, you have not to make small account of my counsel: for as
Plato said, we are not a little beholding unto those that do advise us wherein
we err, and do direct us in what we ought to do: for it is much better we
amend by others correction, than lose our selves by foolish perseverance.
Believe me, and be out of doubt, Master John of Padilla, if you had spoken
first with me in Toledo, as you did after talk with me in Medina, you had
never taken this enterprise in hand: for as the Emperor Traiane did use to
say, men that possess noble hearts and blushing vysages, ought never to
begin that, which lies not in their hands to perform: for otherwise, they
shall leave with great shame, that they began with great hope. Sir, you do
well know, that all those that you lead in your camp against the king, be
thieves, murderers, An eloquent persuasion.
blasphemers, and seditious Commoners: all which as they are a base people,
and men of handicrafte, you have to entreat them, but not to force them:
suffer, but not to chastise: to pray, but not to command: to flatter, but not
to threaten: for they follow you not to remedy things amiss, but to rob the
goods that others have in possession. That day that the king shall enter into
Castile: that day that you shall lose any battle: and also that day that you
have not to pay the men of war, then shall you see how they will trudge
from you, without taking any leave, and also make a secret sale of you.

Sir, have compassion of your age so tender, and of your blood so undefiled,
of your parentage so honorable, of your house so ancient, of your condition
so good, of your ability so ^ntier, and of your youth so evil employed: all
which things you have vnfauourly infected, and also in a manner mortifyed. If
you will believe me and give credit unto my words, incommende your self unto
God, leave this enterprise, turn unto the king, go unto the Governors, and
shake hands with these commoners. Forasmuch as the king is pitiful, and all
men desire your remedy and welfare: he would much more accept your coming
to serve with the rest, than to have raised this war against him. Let not the
devil deceive you, either any vain or fantastical imagination hinder you to
perform the same, neither to conceive that they have to charge you with
unstableness, in that you have enterprised, either as a traitor for yt you
have taken in hand: because in all ye histories of this world they be acompted
loyal that serve their king and such as rebel be called disloyal, and
traitors. Also if a Ge^tleman be reproved for slothfulness, he rises more
early, and uses more diligence: if they call him babbler, he keeps silence:
if they accuse him for a glutton, he uses temperance: if they charge him as an
adulterer, he abstayneth: if they burden him to be furious, he suffers: if
they impute him to be ambicious, he abaseth: if they name him a sinner, he
amendeth: but if they call him by the name of a traitor, there is no water that
may wash or make it clean: either any excuse that may excuse it. Neither is
the King so much offended, or the kingdom so much altered, or affairs so
aforehand, nor the Governors of so hard disposition, but that you may be
reduced and find time very convenient to serve the King. The words of a very
friend.
The which if you would perform, I promise you by ye faith of a Christian,
and do swear unto you by the law of an honest man, that amending this wrong,
my pen shall change his style.

Montauan, master of your house, and I have communed in secret things of
great importance, and since he did herein credit me, it shall not be amiss
that you believe him there, and if you will not, I wash my hands of all your
fault, and from hence forward do take my leave of your friendship. No more,
but that with the faith and credit that I have received your letter, with the
very same it may please you to receive this of mine.

From Medina del camop the eight day of March, in the year of our Lord.1521.
A letter unto a Gentleman, and secret friend to the Author, wherein he does
advise and reprehende him for his wretched covetousness.

Repugnancie in speech, in respect of birth and manners.
MAgnificent and covetous Ge^leman, the good Emperor Titus, that was son to
Vaspasian, and brother to Domitian, was of himself so virtuous, and of all the
Roman Empire so well-beloved, that at the time of his death they did engraue
these words upon his sepulcher: Delitiae moriu^tur generis humani, which is to
say, To day is dead in Rome yt did rejoice all mankind. Of this good Emperor
Titus is read in Suetonius, yt being at supper on a time with many Princes of
ye empire, A famous speech of an heathen prince
and other Ambassadors of diverse kingdoms, sodeinly gave a great sigh, and
said, Diem amisimus amici, as if he should say more clear: Let not this day be
accounted amongst the days of my life, because this day I have not performed
any bounty, neither given any reward. Plutarke does report of Alexander the
great, that when many Philosophers had disputed in his presence wherein
consists the good hap of this life, he made answer: Believe me friends,
and be out of doubt, that in all this world there is not equal delighte or
like pleasure, as to have wherewith to be liberal, and not wherefore to
chastise. A magnifice^t answer of a pagan king.
Also it is said of Theopontus the Thebane, who being a Captain of men of
war, a souldioure craved of him some piece of money to buy bread, and
having none to give, pulled of his shoes, saying: If I had better, I would give
thee better, but in the mean while take these shoes of mine for that I have no
money: An exceeding humanity of a general to a poor souldior
for it is more just that I go barefoot, than thou an hungered. Dionysius the
tyrant entering upon a certain day into his sons chamber, and seeing there
many jewels of silver and gold, said: Son, I did not give these riches to
the end thou should keep them, An excellent counsel to make enemies
tender, and to conserve friends.
but because thou should give and imparte them. For there is no man in this
world of more power, than the giving and liberal man: for with his giving he
conserueth his friends, and makes tender his enemies. I have made this
discourse to utter a certain thing unto you, which if you were in Castile, as
you are in Andolozia, my pen should never have written unto you, but my tongue
should have spoken it into your ear: for our assured friends, notwithstanding
we have license to blame them, yet we may not use our liberty to defame them.
Some of Andolozia has told me here, and some of your friends have written me
from thence, that your delight exceeds to far in hoording up of money, and
no less enemy with the spendyng thereof. Of which deed and disposition I am
not a little grieved, and also much ashamed, because honor and avarice be so
contrary and in such contention and defiance, yt they never dwell in one
person, neither at any time had any affinity. All vicious men in this life
have some taste in their vices, except it be the miserable and most unfortunate
covetous nigard, which is tormented with that which others do possess, and
takes no taste in that which he has. The painful travel of the covetous
nigarde is, that always he walks suspicious and in fear, that the raging
floods carry away his Milles, that the hierd eat up his meades, that hunters
steal his game, and that thieves rob his treasure: but in fine, the miserable
covetous man, from no man does so much defend his goods, The covetous man
defends his goods from himself.
as from his own person. That wherein the covetous man takes most savor, is to
hutch up double Ducates, to tell gold, to hyde money, to sell his wine dear,
to hoord much wheat in garners his Eawes to have good yeaning, not to rain in
April, and to have much wheat in May. The highest glory of the covetous man
is, to be gettyng, to be hoording, none to crave of him, and never to spend.
And although in these few things he takes some taste, with many other he
passes great torments, which is to understand, if they ask an halfepenie
for spice, a penny for candles, a dandiprat for an earthen pot, a farthing for
oil, two pens for salt, he riues the house with yelles, and gives unto the
devil both wife and children, exclaming that they are all bent to rob him. God
endueth that (...) with singular grace to whom he gives a shamfast
cou^^^^unce, and an heart of noble disposition. For if the wretched nigard had
once tasted how sweet a thing it is to give: the things most necessary to his
propre use, he should not be able to retain. The noble minded and liberal man
gives not so much as they give him: for in recompense of every bounty, they
give themselves wholly at his liberty to be commanded.

The liberal and noble minded, is Lord of his neighbor.
The liberal and noble minded man is Lord of the people where he dwells, and
of all men with whom he has conversation: for being assured that he will
gratify them, no man has the face to deny him any thing. The contrary does
chance to the miserable nigarde and hard hearted covetous man, unto whom no
man will approach, no man will talk, no man will accompany, no man gives any
thing, no man enters his doors, neither any man will fetch fire at his house.
Who will crave any thing of the covetous nigard? much less enter his house,
The vile conditions of the covetous.
seeing him wear his shoes torn, his hose rent, his cap threede bare, his hat
greasye, his shirt ragged, his doublet lose and vnpoynted, and he walking
alone? How will he remedy the necessity of a stranger, that will not mende
the gutter of his house? How will he give any man an alms that trusseth
himself with a points end? How will he succor the unknown, that kills his
own with hunger? How will he give wood to the hospital, that warmes himself by
the trash of straw? To whom will he lend money that burieth his own? How
will he imparte and give of his wheat, that has hope in May to sell for double
price? Who dare be a friend to the covetous and wretched nigard, being an enimye
to him self? How many covetous men have we seen and do see every day, unto
whom God gives force to get riches, wit to sustain them, a mind to defend
them, a life to possess them, and gives them not license to enjoy them? but
where they might be Lords of other men's, Slaves to their own goods.
we see them slaves to their own proper goods. Of how much more excellency
is honest property, than is cursed avarice, which is to be known most
clear: because the poor man is contented with his little, and the rich man
with his abundance seems to be in necessity? What greater disgrace, either
greater mischance may happen to the welthy covetous man, since for all things
he sees in others he sigheth, and all that he has in possession he lacks?
The covetous man has his eyes occupied in his vines he planteth, his hands in
the money he receives, Wanting that which he possesses.
his tongue amongst his factors with whom he chideth, his feet in wandering to
his herds and granges, his time in wiles that he frames, his ears in
accounts be receaueth, his body in bargains he makes, and his heart on the
Ducates that with great watch he keeps: in such wise, that as he goes
wandering besides himself, so he observes no part to himself. That the
covetous man has not the heart or courage to give to his friends or kindred,
it is most true. Dare they bestow any cost upon themselves? no surely: no
truly: but hold it as evil employed whatsoever they bestow upon themselves,
as that which is stolen from them. To the covetous miserable nigard they raise
a slander upon him, in saying that he is rich: because, not he the riches, but
ye riches does him hold and possess: in such wise, that he passes great
trauelles in gathering of them, danger in keeping them, law in defending them,
and torment in departing from them: for if shame did not let him, he would
rather eat bread and onyons, than lay out one peney. The covetous man is not
of so good disposition as is the dirtie Potter, since the one profits
himself by earth, and the other dare not touch gold: and farther and besides
this, the poor Potter gets his living by selling of pottes, and the
wretched covetous man loses his honor by hoording of riches. The wretched
niggard having his money never so much buried, watched, and kept, yet from
none does he so much keep it, as from himself, Two kayes to his cofer, but
two C. in his heart.
because if he have two keys unto his coffer to make all safe, he has two
hundredth in his heart to save the^ from spending: men shamefaced and of noble
minds, have great cause to beware that they begin not to hourd or lay up
money: for if he once give himself to hourd and hide money, be it never so
little, be it no more but to gain one only groate, he shall every day fall into
a thousand evils, shames, and confusions. For any man to be revenged of a
covetous manne, he has not but to desire that he may live long, for a much
worse life is obtained by the wretched nigard with his avarice, The whole life
of the niggard is spent in penance.
than we would give him with some great penance. I do lie if I did not know
(being warden of Areuallo) a great rich man, which did not eat of all his
goods, but the feign fruit, the rotten grapes, the mustie Wheat, the sour
Wine, the Rateaten bread, the wemmy cheese, and the resty Bacon: in such wise
that he would not enterprise or adventure to eat, but that he could not sell.
I confess that sometimes I went unto his house, more to behold than for any
business, and saw his chambers full of Cobwebs, his doors vnhanged, the
windows cleft, the locks decayed, the flowers uneven and full of holes, the
tiles vntiled, the chaires broken, the chimneys fallen down: in such wise,
that it was rather an house to murmr at, than to dwell in. Although it be a
shame to spell it, I will not leave to say that which the neighbors and his
friends has said unto me: that if there happened any kinsman or friend to visit
him, he was driven to seek lodging at his neighbors, or to borow all that was
necessary. Great (of a troth) is that couetise, and much infamous is that
avarice, which is not repressed with the shame of this world, neither cut off
by the fear of death. The covetous wretched niggard, that he goes seeking,
The fruits of covetousness.
is carfulness for himself, envy for his neighbors, spurs unto his
enemies, a pray for thieves, peril for his person, damnation for his soul,
malediction for his heirs, and law for his children. All these things Sir I
thought good to write, thereby to give you to understand the gross office you
have taken in hand, and the evil opinion they do couceyue of you (the which
to us your friends is great shame, and to you a most great infamy.) Sir amend
your fault, and take some other order in your life, for in the house of any
honest manne, any lack of goods is tolerable, but no want in honor. If you
shall always continue to be a miser, a niggard, and shall give your self to
keep and hoord money, from henceforward I take my leave of your friendship,
and also to call you my acquainted: For I never delighted to hold acquaintance
with the man that would presume to lie, and give himself to keep. This
letter I send you without head or foot, which is to wit, without date or
firm, for going with such choler and so unsavory, it is not reason he should
be known that did write it, neither to whom it was written. No more.

A letter unto the Lady Mary of Padilia, wife to Don John of Padilia, wherein
the Author does persuade, that she turn to the service of the king, and give
no occasion of the loss of Castile.

MAgnificent and unadvised Lady, in the days that the good Emperor Justinian
did reign in the East, a certain Captain of his did govern the kingdoms in
the West yt was named Narsetes, a man of great capacity to govern, and of
great valiantnes in fighting and giving battle: of this Narsetes the Romans
did say, that in him only was the force of Hercules, the boldness of Hector,
Notable conditions of the captain Narsetes.
the nobleness of Alexander, the wisdom of Pirrhus, the valiantness of
Antheus, and the fortune of Scipio. After that this glorious captain had
overcome and slain Atholia King of the Goths, Vncelino king of the French
men, Sindual king of the Brittons: and also pacified and triumphed over all the
kingdoms of the West, the Romans sought means to disgrace him with his Lord
and master Justinian, saying and giving him to understand, that he sought
means to obtain the Empire: wherefore Narsetes was constrained to depart
from Rome and to pass into Asia to appear before the Emperor Justinian, and
the Empress Sophia his wife, to declare his innocence, and to make proof
that envy had raised that sclaunder: certain days were then past that the
Empress Sophia had conceived disdain against Narsetes, some say it was for
his great wealth, others for that he commanded in the Empire with too much
authority, and others because he was a gelded man: and when she saw time to
utter her hatred, she said unto him in Court on a certain day: since thou
Narsetes art less than a man, and half a woman (being an Eunuche) I command
thee to leave the government of the Empire, I cruel commandment.
and that thou get thee up to weaue where my maids do weaue and knit caules,
and that there thou help them what they command thee. Although Narsetes were a
man of great authority and of no less gravity, these words did so deeply
pearce him to the quick, that he changed countenance, the tears brake from
his eyes, and so chafed, with tears he said: Serene Princes, I would right
gladly that you should chastise me as a Lady, but not to defame me like a
woman: it greeueth me not so much of that you have said, as the occasion which
you give me, how to make you answer: and said more, I presently depart unto
Italy to weaue, knit, and frame such a toil, A sharp answer.
that neither thou may comprehend, nor yet thy husband able to unweave.
Coming now to the purpose, my Lord Abbot of Compludo gave me here in Medina a
letter from your Ladyship, which contained such ouerthwarts, such want of
measure, and so great rashness, that he was ashamed too have delivered it,
and I astonished to see the contents thereof. And as the good Narsetes answered
the Empress Sophia, it greeueth me not of that you have said, but of that
which I must answer, His pen is constrained to make combat
for of necessity my pen must stand forth to make combat with your tongue.
Your Ladyship does say in your letter, that you have seen the letter that I
sent unto your husband John of Padilia, and that it does well appear in the
same, that it came from a friar, irreguler, foul spoken, overthwart, absolute
and dissolute: and that if I were one of the world, not only I would not dare
to wright such things, neither yet so much as in corners to speak them. Also
you do extreemely charge me that I have suborned Sir Peter Lasso, dissuaded sir
Peter Giron, contended with the Bishop of Zamora, resorted to Villa Braxima for
the Governors, that I preach publicly against the commoners, and that in my
mouth there is no truth, nor in my deeds any fidelity. Also you blame me,
charge, condemn, and threaten me for the letter I did write unto your
husband, and for the counselles and aduertisementes I gave him: affirming and
swearing, that since he had conference with me, he has always been
sorrowful, penu^ue, melancholicke, and also unfortunate.

Also you note, blame, and charge me, that I never cease too lie unto the
governors, deceive the commoners, discourage his men of war, preach against
the commonaltie, promise that which the King commands not, go and come to
Villa Braxima, and to lead all Castile in suspense. These and such other
things are contained within your letter unworthy the writing, and scandalous
to recount. But since your Ladyship has first laid hand upon the sword,
complain not if I happen to give you some wound on the head. To that which
your Ladyship says (if I were of the world as I am of religion,) I durst not
wright such a letter unto your husband, your Ladyship speaks great troth:
for I being the son of Sir Beltram of Gueuara, and cousin to Sir Ladron of
Gueuara, and to be there in the world, I should not write unto him but fight
with him: not make pens, but sharpen the lance: not give counsel or
persuade your husband, but defye him: because the contention betwixt loyalty
and treason, Loyalty and treason fight not with words, but with swords.
ought not to be tried with words, but with swords. I am in profession a
Christian, in habit religious, in doctrine a divine, in lineage of Gueuara, in
office a preacher, and in opinion a gentleman and no commoner: for which cause
I presume to preach the troth, and to impugn the communaltie. I hold for
sure, that those which defend the troth, be the most noblest knights and
gentlemen in your Camp: for they rob not upon high ways, neither steal out of
Churches, destroy no corn, burn no houses, spoil no people, neither do
consent to men of vile conditions: for they observe the law, and obey the king.
I hold these for rebels amongst the commoners, Hernando of Aualos that did
invent it, your Ladyship that does sustain it, your husband that does
defend it, the Bishop of Zamora that does prosecute it, Sir Peter Giron that
does aucthorize it, Sir Peter Lasso that does publish it, Sarabia that does
commend it, Quintanilla that does accompany it, Sir Charles of Aurellano that
does honor it, and Sir Peter Pimentel that commands it: all which know not
what they follow, much less what they demand.

I do well understand that Hernando of Aualos was ye first that invented the
state of all things in common, and I know that in your house was commanded and
ordained, to make convocation in Auila, and the order to raise all Castile, in
such manner, that he made the fire, and your Ladyship did blewe it. A black
correction was that of Giberaltar, which was taken from Hernando of Aualos.
Since it was the cause that he deceived you, and you John of Padilla, and John
of Padilla Sir Peter Giron, and sir Peter Giron sir Peter Lasso, and Sir Peter
Lasso the Abbot of Compludo, and the Abbot of Compludo the Bishop of Zamora,
the Bishop of Zamora the Licenciat Barnardine, the Licenciat Barnardine
Sarabia, and Sarabia all the rest of the Letany. I have many times thought,
devised and also enquired, what motion might move your Ladyship to vow the
alteration of this kingdom: and all your friends and kinsfolk do answer,
that you have diuined or else dreamed, to see your husband master of Saint
James, which if it be so, is a most certain great lightness, and no small
vanity: for it may come to pass, that in the place to give him the cross,
they may put him upon the cross. If you would make your husband Master of
Saint James, you must take some other order, and give him some other counsel:
for so great a dignity in times past was not obtained to the masters thereof by
rebellion, (as you that have raised all Castile) but by fighting valiantly with
the Moors in the viage of Granado. In all the common welthes of this world
there be friends and enemies, contented and discontented, prosperous and
unfortunate, and also loyalties and treasons, wherein the one or the other is
known: the loyal in that they give themselves to serve, and the traitors to
spoil and rob. Your Ladyship has to remember that king John is dead, and king
Henry gone, they have cut the throat of the Marshall Peter Pardo, and they have
banished the Justice Castromino, the Captain Sapico was drowned in a well; and
Fernan Centeno was hanged: in whose miserable times, who could do most had
most, but now praise be to God, he that will have any thing, must not only
crave but deserve. If stories do not deceive us, Mamea was proud, Medea was
cruel, Martia was envious, Popilia was unchaste, Mirtha was malicious, and
Domitia was rash: but I have read of none that has bin disloyal and a
traytresse, but your Ladyship that has denied the fidelity that you owe, and
the blood from whence you are descended. Your Ladyship descending from a
parentage so honorable, of blood so ancient, of father so valiant, and of
lineage so noble: I know not what sins you have committed (that it should be
your chance) to match with a husband of so small discretion, and he to obtain
a wife of so great wisdom. Women naturally were wont to be pitiful, but your
Ladyship is cruel, they were wont to be mild, but you are fierce, they were
wont to be pacient, but you are quarelling, and also they were wont to be
cowardes, but you are over hardy: in such wise that to the Duchess of
Vilalua, succeeded the Lady Mary of Padilla. Assiria complayneth of their
scandal Semiramis, Damascus for Mithridates, Famous women.
Armenia for Pincia, Grecia for Helena, Germany for Vxodonia, Rome for
Agripina, Spain for Hecuba, and now Castile complayneth not that they are
raised for you, but that you have raised them. To quiet this City of Toledo
where you are resident, neither the commandments of the King is sufficient,
neither the promises of the Governors, neither the siege of the Prior John,
neither the threatenings of Sir John de Ribora, neither the intreatance of the
Archbishop of Varry, neither persuasions of your brothers, neither yet prayers
of the monasteries, but that every day more and more you are fleshed in war,
and less friend to peace. Also they report that you have a sorceresse or
rather a fool to your slave, which is a great witch: and (they say) that she
does affirm and make you believe, that ere it be long, you shall be magnified
with the title of Grace, and your husband with the title highness, in such
wise that you stand^ in great hope to succeed the Queens Majesty, and your
husband no less to succeed the Kings highness: which I cannot believe, nor
lightly will believe. But if by chance there be any thing, beware of the
Devil, and have no confidence in spirits: for Joseph did dream that he should
be Lord of his brethren, but he dreamed not that they should sell him into
Egypt for a slave. But it may be (considering the Devil is so skilful and very
subtle) he has prognosticated unto you the same that now you hold, the
authority that your husband now possesses, how the king should be absent, and
Castile rise and be in rebellion: but on the other side, he has hidden from
you how the communaltie shall be defaced, and how your selves shall be cast away.
Zorastes that was inuentor of that art of magike, Democritus the Philosopher,
Arthenius Captain of the bands, Pompeius Consul of the Romans, Iulia the
daughter of Julius, and others infinite with them, gave themselves to speak
with Devils, and to believe much in dreams: which (as they believed) if they
were alive, would recount unto us the great deceypts the Devil used with them
here on earth, and the great torments that they give them there in hell. I did
never see, Ungodly sciences.
neither ever did read man or woman to believe in dreams, use witchcrafts,
deal with Nigromancers, mark or study in Augurise, practice with Enchantors,
and incommende themselves to Magisians, that were not holden for light witted,
and for evil Christians, for the Devil with no man holds so straight
friendship, to the end to advise him, but to deceive him. Also they make report
of your Ladyship here, that you entered the vestorie or treasure house of
Toledo, to fetch the plate that was there, not to the end to renew it, but to
pay your men of war. The manner that you used in fetching the same has not
seemed here a little gracious, which is, that you entered kneeling, holding up
your hands, covered with black, A religiu^ theft.
striking your breast, weeping and sobbing, with two burning torches before you:
Oh fortunat theft, oh glorious pillage, oh happy plate, since thou have
deserved to be stolen with so great devotion from that holy Church. Men, when
they steal do fear, and weep when they be hanged: the contrary is found in
your Ladyship, since you weep when you steal, I think you will laugh at
execution. The Romans to send a certain present unto the God Apollo in
Delphos, all the Ladies and women of Rome gave their collers from their necks,
their rings from their fingers, their bracelets from their arms, and also
their ear rings from their ears: because they held them better employed to
be given to their temples, than to wear them to their own uses. Madame, God
grant that you be now a better Christian, than you would have then bin a
Roman: since you have presumed to take the plate from the Church of Toledo,
with an evil will would give your gold to the temple of Apollo. To take from
soldiers to give to the Church, it passes: but to take from the Church to
give unto Soldiers, is a thing very slanderous and intolerable: in such wise
as it was great sacrilege to take it from whence it was taken, and no less
horrible to give it where it was given. Humbly I beseech your Ladyship to cut
off these euilles, leave that people, open those gates, retire your husband,
quiet your own heart, give witchcraft to the Devil, and have pity on Toledo:
for if otherwise the affairs go on, as they have begone, we shall not want
wherefore to bewail, and you shall have to pay.

From Medina del rio secco, the sixtenth of January.2522.
An Oration made in the town of Braxima, unto the Knights and Gentlemen of the
assembly, wherein the Author does request them unto peace in the name of the
King.

MAgnificent and extreme Gentlemen, I do inuoke and call to witness the God
that made me, and I do swear by this holy temple that in all things that here
I intend to speak, An eloquent persuasion.
my intent is not to defame any man, and less to deceive: because the
religious habit wherewith I am clad, and the noble blood from whence I descend,
give no place that I should be of malicious entrails, either double in words.
Some of those that are here present do very well know my condition and my
conversation: and also you do know the liberty I use to take in speaking
franckly, and my bold plainness in preaching, and in the use of lying very
cold, and in reprehending absolute. Yesterday which was New years day, I
preached unto the governors, and to all the mighty and noble men of the
kingdom that was there with them. And for that I did sharply say what was to
be cut off, and in the kingdom to be amended: to day they have commanded me
to come hither with this letter of credit and of safe conduit, to the end I
should say unto you wherein you err, as I said unto them wherein they
failed. Also gentlemen I bring with me a large instruction firmed by the
Cardinal, the Admiral, and the Constable, in which is contained what word
the King does send you, and what they on his behalf do offer: because his
writing being seen, and my tale heard, from henceforth either cruel war
shall be determined, or a general and godly peace concluded. In sixteen days
I have come hither to confer with you seven times: and because the governors
will not any more command me to come hither, neither in these affairs farther
to travel, it is necessary that this day we determine, and as friends or
enemies to declare our selves: for otherwise being as you are so near
together, of necessity you must strike battle. I my Masters will say what I
think, and also will speak what is commanded me, to the end, that the one
and the other being heard, you may understand what you have to answer, and
determine what you have to do. But first I have to complain of your captain
Lares which took me, and misvsed me both in word and deed, he knowing very
well that a mediator passing from Camp to Camp, in all places is accustomed to
go safe. There is no reason that Lares should carrye me taken as a thief, and
use me with rudenes as a traitor, for I come in the Kings name, and at the
commandment of the governors, to bring peace and to avoid war, and
besides this, if I were one of the world, he would hold him self right happy
to be one of my servants: but leaving this apart, I will recite unto you what I
have passed, and the heinous mischaunces whereat I have been present. Since ye
king has been absent, and ye co^monaltie raised, (you may credit me in all
that I shall say unto you, which I have not deuined either dreamed, but with my
eyes have seen it) you well know of this your co^motion the beginner was
Harnando of Aualos, the captain sir Peter Ciron, the general John of Padilla,
the counselor the licenciat Barnardine, the accessory the Doctor Su^iga, The
auhors of Rebellion.
the enseigne bearer Peter of Mercado, the chaplain the Abbot of Co^pludo, and
the Metropolitan my Lord bishop of Zamora. I was present in Segouia at the
first rising that was in this kingdom, when upon the.xxiij. of May on a
wednesday after Easter, they pulled out of the Church of S. Mighell the
Justice Tordisillas, and carried him to the gallows, where they hanged him
betwixt two hogs, as Jesus Christ was betwixt two thieves.

I was present also in Auila, when all the procurers of the assembly were
joined together in ye vestry of the great Church and there did al swear to
prosecute and die for the service of ye co^monaltie, (except Antony Ponce and I
that would not swear:) whereupon commmaundement was given to pull down his
house, and that I should depart from Auila. Also I was present in Medina del
campo the.xxij. of the month of August, on a tewsday in the morning, when
Antony of Fons seca came upon them in the break of the day with.viij C.
lances, and for that they denied him the kings artillery, he burnt the town
and the monastery of S. Francis. Hard shifts.
Also I was present there when the Shereman Bobadilla did rise, and others with
him, and threw out at the town hall window, the Justice Nieto, and slew
Tells the Bookebinder, and forthwith took the house, placed porters, and
entitled him self with grace and highness, as though he had been presently
Lord of Medina, or that the King of Castile had been dead. I was present when
Valiodolid first rebelled in burning Medina, and al in armor went the whole
night pulling down howses, having for their Captain Vera ye bit maker. Also I
was in Valiodolid when the Cardinal fled away by the bridge, the President
put himself into Saint Benets, the Licenciat Vergas skaped out at a window,
the Licenciat Sapata we brought forth in Friars habit unto Sigales, and the
Doctor Gueuara my brother was sent in the name of the Counsel unto Flaunders:
all the other lords of the royal Counsel I did not see them when they were
taken, but I saw them afterward prisoners, and now I see them fled, that
they neither dare assemble, or execute justice. This other day I saw in Soria
where they hanged a Procurer of the city, being poor, sick, and old, not
because he had committed any evil, but for that some did wish him evil. To
report unto you how they have thrown the Constable out of Burgos, the Marquis
of Auia from Tordisillas, ye Earl and Countess of Duneas, and the knights and
gentlemen from Salamanca, and Sir James of Mendoza from Palentia, and how in
place of these gentlemen they have taken for their leaders and captains, An
untoward change.
bit makers, shereme^, skinners and lockmakers, is no small shame to recount,
and infamy to hear. The hurts, murders, robberies, and scandals, that is now
committed within this realm, I dare say, that of this so great fault we al
are in fault, because our God is so right a judge, that he would not permit
that all should be chastised, if all were not offenders. The affairs of this
miserable kingdom is come to such a state, ye through the same there is no way
sure, no temple privileged, none that tilleth the field, none brings
vitailes, none ye executes justice, none safe in their houses: A miserable
state.
yet all confess a king, and appeal to the king, but the disgrace is, that
none does observe the law, and none does obey the King: believe me, if your
people did acknowledge the King, and observe the law, neither would they rob
the kingdom, or disobey the King: but for that they have no fear of the
sword, nor doubt of the gallows, they do what they lust, and not what they
ought. I know not how you can say, that you will refourme the kingdom since
you obey not the King, you consent to no governors, you admit no royal
counsel, you suffer no Chancelour, you have no Judges nor Justices, no giving
of sentence in matters of law, neither any evil chastised: in such wise, that
your judgment to have no justice in the kingedome, A wrong devise to maintain
a common wealth.
is to refourme justice. I can not co^prehende how you will reform this
kingdom, since by your consent there is no subject that shall acknowledge a
preacher, neither any Nun that keeps her cloister, no Friar that remains
in his monastery, neither woman that obeys her husband, nor vassal that
observes loyalty, neither any man that deals justly: in so much that under
the color of liberty, every man lives at his own will. I know not how you
will reform the commonwealth, since those of your camp do force women, ravish
maidens, burn villages, spoil houses: steal whole slockes, cut down woods,
and rob churches, in such wise, that if they leave any evil undone, it is not
because they dare not, but for that they can not. I can not conceive how you
will reform the commonwealth, since by your occasion Toledo is risen, Segouia
altered, Medina burned, Halaheios besieged, Burgos fortified, Valiodolid
immutined, Salamanca stragled, Soria disobedient, and also Valentia an
Apostata. I can not perceive how you will reform the commonwealth, since
Naiarza is rebelled against the Duke, Dueas against the Earl, Tordisillas
against the Marquis, Chincon against his Lord, since Auila, Leon, Toro,
Zamora, and Salamanca, do neither more or less than the assembly does
command. So may my life prosper as I like of your demand: which is to weete,
yt the King be not absent out of this Realm, that he maintain all men in
justice, that he suffer no money to be transported out of the Realm, that he
give his rewards and offices unto the natural subjects of Spain, that they
devise not any new tributs: and above all, that the Offices be not sold, but
given to men of most virtue.

These and such other like things you have license to crave, and only the King
has authority to grant: but to demand of princes with the lance, that which
they have to provide by Justice, is not the part of good vassalles, but of
disloyal servants, we well understand that many people of this land do
complain of the new government of Flemmings, and to speak the truth, that
fault was not all theirs, but in their small experience, and our much envy.
Further, aduertising that the strangers were not more to be blamed than our
own country men, they knew not the state of things, either what offices to
crave, neither how they would be sold, but that they were advised and also
instructed in the skill thereof by the men of our own nation, in such wise,
that if in them there did abound desire of gain, in us there did exceed the
vice of cruel malice. Although Master Xebes and the rest have committed some
fault, I know not that our Spain has done any offense, Mischief for a
medicine.
that you should in the same and against the same raise any war. The medicine
that you have invented for the remedy of this mischief, is not to purge but
to kill. But since you will needs make war, let us examine here against whom
is this war? not against the king, because his tender youth does excuse him:
not against the Counsel, for they appear not: not against Xebes, for he is
in Flaunders, not against the Governors which have but now entered their
offices: not against the Gentlemen, who have not offended: neither yet against
tyrants, for the Kingdom was in peace: than is this war again your own
country, and against our own (lamentable) common wealth. The want of
providence in the king, neither the avarice of Xebes is sufficient cause that
we should see that which we do see, the people to rise against people,
fathers against the sons, the uncles against their cousins, friends against
friends, neighbors against neybours, and brothers against brothers: but that
our sin has so deserved to be chastised, and yours has merited that you
should be our scourge. Speaking more particular, you are not able to excuse your
fault, for beginning as you did the assembly of Auila, from which counsel
all this war has had his feeding, and of a troth presently I did divine and
also preach that is to wit, yt never was Monipody of any kingdom, whereof
did not arise some notable scandal. The kingdom is now altered, the king is
disobeyed, the people are now risen, the hurt is already begone, the fire is
already in flame, and the common wealth goes sinking to the bottom. But in
the end, if it like you, a good end may be made, from whence may proceed all
the remedy, for that we have firmly to believe, that God will rather hear
the hearts that pray for peace, than the fifes and drums that proclaim war.
If it may like you to forget some part of your anger, and the governors to
lose some part of their right, I hold it all for finished. And to speak you
the troth, in popular and civil wars, men do rather fight for the opinion
they have taken, than for the reason that they hold. My judgment should be in
this case, that you should join with the Governors to talk and confer for
the greeues and things amiss, and to understand for the remedy thereof: for by
this means you should grow to more ripeness for the things you have to
demand, and in our king and master more facility in that which he should
grant. If it may please you to leave your armor, and give faith unto my
words, I swear by the faith of a Christian, and by this letter of credence yt
I bring with me, do promise you that you shall be pardoned of the king, and
well entreated of his governors: that you shall never for this deed be
chastized, neither yet in words be blamed or defamed. And because it shall not
seem that your zeal has bin in vain, and that the Governors does not
desire the common wealth, I will here show unto you, what they will do for the
kingdom, and what kindness on his Majesty's behalf they will bestow upon
you, which is as follows.

First, they promise you, that at any time when the kings Majesty shall be
absent from this kingdom, he shall place a Castilian to govern Castile: Large
offers.
because the authority and greatness of Spain endures not the government of
strangers. Also they promise you, that all the dignities, holdings, and
offices of the kingdom and Court, shall be given to Spaniards, and not to
strangers: notwithstanding there be many noble personages that have well
deserved and in whom they were well employed. Also they promise you that the
royal rents of the people shall be rated at an indifferent rent, in such
wise, that the Cities may have reasonable gain, and no great loss to the
king. Also they promise you that if in the regal counsel shall be found any
examiner, or any other officer, (although it be the president) unwise or unapt
for government, and not learned to give sentence, or not honest of life, that
his majesty shall absolve him of his office: notwithstanding they may be
affectionate to some, and also offended like other men. Also they promise that
from henceforth his Majesty shall command his Justices of Court and
Chauncery, that they shall not use their commandments so absolute, neither
their chastisements so rigorous: notwithstanding that sometimes they be in some
things fierce, because they may be more feared and also more esteemed. Also
they promise, that from henceforth his Majesty shall command to reform his
house, and also remove the excessive charges thereof: considering that
disordinate expenses bring forth new tributes. Also they promise you, that for
any need the Kings Majesty may have, he shall not carry, neither yet
command to be carried any money out of this kingdom to be transported into
Flaunders, Almayne, or Italy: considering that incontinent, traffic decays
in kingdoms where money wants. Also they promise that his Majesty shall not
permit from henceforth, Biscay Iron, Alum of Murcia, Vitailes of Andolozia,
nor Sackes of Burgos, to be laden in strange botoms, but in ships of Biscay
and Galizia, to the end that strangers shall not rob, and our Country men
to gain whereby to eat. Also they promise that his Majesty shall not permit
to be given from henceforth, fortress, Castle, bridge, gate, or town, but
unto Gentlemen plain and courteous, and not unto Gentlemen or Knights of power,
which in reuolting times may rise with the same: considering that in the
ancient times none might have Artilery or Fortress, but the King in Castile.
Also they do promise you, that from henceforth his Majesty shall not permit
licenses to carry corn into Portingall, neither from Mancha to Valentia:
considering that many times to have license to transport thither, is here
amongst ourselves cause of great dearth. Also with all brevity his Majesty
will command the contentions and matters in law to be examined and considered,
that have been continued betwixt Toledo, and the Earl of Velalcassar, and
Segonia, and sir Fernando Chichon, and of Iaen with the town of Martos, and
Valiodolid with Simancas, and that of sir Peter Giron with the Duke of Medina:
considring that those in possession do delay, and the dispossessed complain.
Also they promise, that the King will command to reform the excesses, give
law for banquets, reform Monasteries, visit Chanceries, repair sorts, and
fortify all the frontiers: considering that in all these things there is
necessity of reformation and also of correction. If you my Masters be such
as you publishe your self throughout Castile, which is to wit: that you be
the redeemers of the Common wealth, and the restorers of the liberty of
Castile: behold here we offer you the redemption, and also the resurrection
thereof, because so many and so good things as these are, neither did you
remember to demand, either would presume to crave: now is the hour come
wherein of necessity it must be manifested, whither you speak and mean one
thing. For if ye desire the general wealth now is it offered you, and if you
pretend your particular interest, it may not be granted you: for speaking the
troth it is not just, but most unjust, that with the sweat of the poor common
wealth you should seek to amend the state of your own houses. But let it be
for conclusion since we be here in the Church of the town of Braxima, of my
part I do humbly beseech you upon my knees, and in the behalf of the
governors I do request you, Pithyly persuaded.
and on the Kings name I command you to leave your armor, to discamp your
camp, and to vnfortifie Tordisillas: if not, I justify this offer for the
governors, that all the evils, mischieues, and slaughters that hereafter shall
happen in this kingdom be upon the charge of your souls, and not upon the
burden of their conscience.

As I kneeled down at the speaking of these last words, forthwith came unto
me Alonso of Quintanilla and Sarabia, bare headed and with great courtesy, did
help me to rise and forced me to sit down. During the time I did speak
all that is aforesaid, it was a thing to look upon, and worthy consideration:
how some of them did behold me, some did stamp, some did eye me, and also some
did mock me: but I never the more did leave to note, either stay to speak.
After I had finished my Oration, they all with one voice said and desired the
Bishop of Zamora to speak his judgment, and that afterward they would all
see what were convenient to be done. Forthwith the Bishop took me by the hand
and in the name of the^ all, he said unto me: Father friar Antony of Gueuara,
thou have spoken sufficiently, and also for the authority of thy habit as a
man over rash, but for that thou art a young man and of small experience,
neither know thou what thou speak, either understand thou what thou
demaundest, either wast thou made a Friar being a boy, or else thou art angry,
or know little of this world, or thou want judgment: since thou
presumest to speak, and such things would make us believe: but thou father
(being stayed within thy monastery) know not of tira^nies which they
execute in the kingdom, and that which the knights and noble me^ has
tira^nised of the real patrimony, for which cause, A sharp reprehension.
thy intent shall be received, although thy words not believed. I have heard
say, that thou art rash in thy speech, and sharp in reprehending, and
jointly therewith I did believe (since the Governors had thee in their
company) that thou had a good zele and no want of judgment, but since they
suffer they foolishenesse, it is not much that we endure thy words. God has
bin thy good Lord that none of the captains of the war has bin present, for
according to thy disordred talk which thou have used, they would first have
taken away thy life before thou might have finished thy tale, and then it
might be in our hands to be sorry, but not to remedy. A friendly advise.
When some other day thou shall talk in the presence of so great authority
and gravity as these are which be present, thou ought to be in that thou
shall say very moderat, and in ye manner of thy speech very much measured,
because thy speech has bin rather to scandalize than to mitigate us, for that
thou pretendest to condemn us and discharge the governors: and since we be
but Captains to execute and not judges to determine: it is convenient that
thou give us by writing firmed with thy hand all that thou have said, and
promised on the Kings behalf: that we may send it to the Gentlemen of the
holy assembly, and there they shall see what they have to command us, and
to answer to thy embassage: presently they sent a post to Tordisillas, (for
there was the assembly) with the credence that I brought, and with the talk I
had used, which gave for answer, that so cold a message, and such disordred
talk deserves no other answer but to be well reprehended, and also grievously
punished. Presently they commanded me to depart from the town of Braxima
without any letter, neither any word that I should say to the governors:
except this Bishop yt said unto me, Father Gueuara fare you well, and beware you
come not again, for if you do, you shall return no more: and say unto your
governors, that if they have authority from the king to promise much, their
commission extends to perform very little. This done and said, I returned to
Medina del rio Secco evil used, and worse answered, and from thence after I
had spoken and the Bishop answered me, wars was determined, and peace never
more spoken of. It was no small grief unto Sir Peter Giron and Sir Peter Lasso
of the foul words they used with me, and of the evil answer their
fellowship gave me, for surely they would right gladly have been reduced to the
Kings service, and that peace should have been established. Sir Peter Giron met
me upon the way when I returned, and there conferred upon such and so delicate
things, whereof did rise that he retired from the Camp to Villalpandos, and
that the governors should march unto Tordisillas, and so it was brought to
pass. By that journey the Queen was delivered, and they of the assembly taken.

A letter unto Doctor Melgar Physician, wherein is touched (by great eloquence)
the hurtes and profits that Phisicions commit.

RIght reverent Doctor and Caesar's Physician, I have received your letter, and
the receipt that came therein: and whether I did speak or not speak unto the
President in your case, you may understand by the dispatch thereof, and by the
report of your servant: in such wise, that you have performed with me like a
Physician, and I with you like a friend. And whether you or I have done best,
it is to wit, you in curing of me, or I in dispatching of you, let good me^ see
and judge, since I remain with my gowte, and you have obtained good
deliverance. Sir I commanded those herbs to be sought, and the roots to be
gathered: and according to the tune of your billet, I have gathered, stamped and
drank them, and God give your soul better health, than they did profit me
any thing for my gout, for they did inflame my liver, and too much cool my
stomach. I will confess unto you that as in this my disease you did not only
err, but also you did hurt me: every time, that with the cold my stomach
begins to belke, Cruel prayers.
presently I say, a shame beshine Doctor Melgar, since my disease was not above
the girdle, but from the thigh downwards, I did not crave that you should
purge the humors, but deliver me from pain, I know not why you should chastise
my stomach, my foot making the offense? I co^moned with Doctor Sotto here in
Toledo, as concerning a Sciatica I had in my thigh, and he commanded to be
given unto me two Cautories with an bote instrument behind the ears, and the
profit I gathered thereof was, he gave all the Court occasion to laugh, and
mine ears to endure great pain. And in Alcala I co^moned with Doctor
Cartagema, and he did ordain me a certain receipt wherein was contained the
gal of an Ox, the ordure of a Rat, the bran of Otes, the leaves of nettles, the
buddes of Roses, and Scorpions fried, to make a plaster to be laid unto my
thigh: The profit and great ease I gathered thereof was, it kept me from
sleep three nights, and I paid to the Apoticary that made it ten grotes: but
from henceforth I renounce the counselles of such counselors, the Aphorismos
of Ipochras, The authors of Physic.
the fines or conclusions of Auicene, the cases of Ficino, the compositions of
Rasis, and also the Canons of Erophilo, if in their writings that wretched and
cursed plaster be to be found, which as it did not suffer me to sleep, much
less to take any rest, I did not only take it away but also buried it, for
that it did not only stincke most filthily, but burned me most grievously. I
remember that in Borgos Anno 21. Doctor Sotto cured me of a certain wandering
fever, made me eat so much Apium, take so much Barley water, and drink so
much stild Endive, that I fell into such a thirst, that only I could not eat,
neither so much as to abide yt favor of meat. Not many years after I went to
visit the same Doctor Sotto being sick in Tordisillas, and saw him eat an
Orange, and drink a cup of fragrant white wine after the cold had left him,
and the heat began to come upon him. Wherefore I did not a little marvel, and
half offended I said unto him laughing: tell me Master Doctor in what law is
it contained, or what Justice does suffer it, that you cure your self of your
Ague with wine of S. Martin, and on the other side you cure my Sciatica with
dung of oxen? Whereunto graciously he made me answer, your Lordship (Master
Gueuara) has to understand, that our master Ipochras has given commandment
to all Physicians his successors, that upon pain of his malediction we should
cure our selves with wine, and our pacientes with stilled water. Although
Doctor Soto told me this tale in jest, A tale told in jest, believed in
earnest.
I did firmly believe it, because you Master Doctor did once say unto me in
Madrid, that in all the days of your life, you never received compound
purgation, either proved the fast of stilled water. There is no art in this
world that makes me lose the stirops (or to say better) my wits, but the manner
that Physicians do use to cure: For we see them desirous to cure, and enemies
to be cured. And because Master Doctor you write unto me, also you swear and
conjure me, by the desire I wish to the welfare of my father, that I write
unto you, what is my judgment of Physike, and what I have read of the
inuenters birth and and first rising thereof. I will perform your request,
although it be more than others would wish, for it is a matter that the wise
Physicians will delight in, but wherefore the foolish will give both you and me
to the devil.

Of the most ancient inuenters of Physike and medicine.
IF Pliny do not deceive us, there is no art of the seven liberal Arts,
wherein there is practiced less troth, and which has passed more
mutabilitie than the Art of Medicine. Because there has not bin kingdom,
people, either notable nation in this world, where she has not bin received,
and after entertaynment, again thrown out of the same. Great travails that
physik has past.
For if as she is a medicine, she were a man, immesurable were the travels that
she would report that she had suffered, and many and very many are the kingdoms
that she has traueled, and provinces that she has wandered, not because they
neglected to be cured, but for that they held Physicians suspicious and to be
doubted. The first that amongst ye Greeks found the art of curing, was the
Philosopher Apollo, and his Son Aesculapius, which for being so famous in
Physic, Physic has wandered many countries
they concurred unto him, as unto an Oracle throughout all Grecia, but the
chance was thus. This Aesculapius was but a young man, and by great mischaunce
was slain with lightning. And as he left no disciple that knew his secrets,
neither that could make his medcines, the master and the Art of medcine jointly
did perish. Four hundred and forty years was the Art of Physic lost, in such
wise, Physic utterly decayed the space four hundred years
that in all the world there was not a man found that did cure publicly, or
was called Physician: for so many years passed from the time that Esculupius
died, until the birth of Arthaxerxes the second, in whose time Ipochras was
borne, Strabo, Diodoro, and also Plini makes mention of a woman of Grecia,
that in those most aunciente times did flourish in the art of Physic, of whom
they recite so many monstrous things and so incredible, that to my judgment
they be al, or the more part of the^ feigned: for if they should be true, it
seemed rather that she raised the dead, than cured the sick. In these days
there did rise in the province of Achaia an other woman, that began to cure
with psalms and words, without applying any medcine simple or compound: which
being known in Athens, was condemned by decree of the Senate to be stoned to
death: saying, that the Gods, neither nature, had given remedies for sickness
in words, but in herbs and stones. In the days that they had no physicians in
Asia, the Greeks held for custom when any man had made experience of a
medcine, and did heal with the same, he was bound to write it in a table, and
to hang it up in the temple of Diana, that was at Ephesus: for that in the like
case any other might use the same remedy. Trogos, Laertios and also Lactantius
says, that the cause whereby the Greeks did sustain themselves so long time
without Physicians was, Rules to be noted.
that in May they did gather sweet herbs which they kept in their houses:
they were let blood once in the year, did bath once every monthe, and also
they did eat but once a day.

Conformable to this Plutarch does say, that Plato being demanded by the
philosophers of Athens, if he had seen any notable thing in Tinacria, which is
now called Sicilia, made answer, vidi monstrum in natura, bominem bis saturum
in die, which is to say, I did see a monster in ma^s nature which did fill or
feed himself twice in one day: he said thus by Dionysius the tyrant, which
was the first that invented to eat at noone, and afterward to suppe at night:
for in the old worlds they did use to suppe but not to dine. I have curiously
considered, and in great variety of books I have sought, and that which I
found in this case is, that all the nations of this world did eat at night,
and only the Hebrews did feed at none: but following our intent, it is to
understand, that the temple most esteemed in all Asia, was the Temple of Diana:
the one cause was, for that it was stately of buildings, another, for that it
was served with many Priests, but the most principal cause was, for that the
tables of Medicines were hanged there, to cure the diseased. Strabo says,
that eleven years after the battles of ye Peloponenses, The place whereas
Ipochras was borne, and other famous men.
the great Philosopher Ipochras was borne in a little Island named Coe, in
which also were borne those glorious personages Licurgus and Brias, the one
Captain of the Athenians, and the other Prince of the Lacedaemonians Of this
Ipochras it is written, that he was of small stature, somewhat poare blind,
with a great head, of much silence, paynefull in study, and above all, of a
high and delicate judgment. From xviij. years unto thirty five, Ipochras
continued in the schools of Athenes studying Philosophy and reading, and
notwithstanding that in his time many Philosophers did flourish, he was more
famous, renoumed, and esteemed, than all the rest. After that Ipochras
departed from the studies of Athenes, he wandered throughout diverse kingdoms
and provinces, inquiring and searching of all men and women, what they did
know of the properties and virtues of herbs and planets, and what experience
they had seen of them. At which things he did write and incommend unto his
memory. Also Ipochras did search with most great diligence for other books of
Physic, written by any other ancient Philosophers, The diligence of Ipochras.
and it is said that he found some written books, in which their authors had
written no medcine that they had made, but such as they had seen made.

Of the Kingdoms and Provinces where Physicians were banished.
Twelve years Ipochras did travel in this peregrination, after which time he
retired unto the temple of Diana that was in Ephesus, and translated all the
tables of medcines, and experiments that were there preserved many years, he
put in order all that was before confused, and added many things that he had
found out, and other things that he had experimented. This Philosopher
Ipochras, is Prince of all Physicians in the world, for he was ye first that
took pen to write and to put Physic in order.

Also it is said of him, yt he never made error in that he prognosticated,
either in any disease he took in cure. Ipochras did give counsel to
Physicians, that they should never take in hand to cure any disordered
patient, and did counsel the sick to shun the unfortunate Physician: for
(says he) he that cures may not err, where the patient is of good
government, and the Physician fortunate.

The Philosopher Ipochras being dead, for that his disciples began to cure, or
to say more truly, to kill many sick people of Grecia, (for that ye science
was very new, and the experience much less) it was commanded by the Senate
of Athenes, Physicians banished out of all Greece.
not only that they should not cure, but also depart out of all Grecia. After
that the disciples of Ipochras were thrust out of Grecia, the art of Physic
was banished and forgotten an hundred and threescore years, so as none durst to
learn, and much less to teach the same: for the Greeks had their Ipochras in
such estimation, that they affirmed that Physic was borne and buried with
him. Those hundred and threescore years being past, another Philosopher and
physician was borne named Chrisippus, in the kingdom of the Sicionians, which
was as renoumed amongst the Argiues, as Ipochras amonst the Athenians. This
Philosopher Chrisippus, although he were very well learned in Physic, and
very fortunate in the experience thereof, of the other part he was much
opinionatiue and of presuming judgment: for all the time of his life and
lecture, and in all his books that he did write, his purpose was none other,
but to impugn Ipochras in all that he had said, and only to prove most true
that which he affirmed, in such wise, that he was the first Physician that
pulled medicine out of reason, and put it in opinion. The Philosopher
Chrisippus being dead, there was great alteration amongst the Greeks, which
of the two doctrines they should follow, which is to wit, that of Ipochras or
of Chrisippus, and in the end it was determined that neither the one should be
followed, or the other admitted: for they said, Another hundred years physic
banished out of Greece.
that neither life nor honor ought to be put in disputation. After this the
Greeks remained an other hundred years without Physician, until the time of
one Aristrato a philosopher which did rise amongst them. He was cousin to ye
great philosopher Aristotle, and was reside^t in the kingdom of Macedonia,
where he of new did exalt the art of Physic, not for that he was more learned
than his predecessors, but for that he was more fortunate than all the rest.
This Aristrato recovered fame by curing king Antiochus the first, of a
certain disease of the lights, in reward whereof the young prince his son that
was named Ptholemus did give a thousand Talents of silver, An exceeding reward.
and a cup of gold, in such wise, that he wan honor thoroughout all Asia, and
riches for his house. This Philosopher Aristrato, was he that most defamed the
art of Physic, because he was the first that set Physic asale and began to
cure for money, for until this time all physicians did cure, some for
friendship, and some for charity. The Physician Aristratus being dead, there
succeeded him certain his disciples, more covetous than wise: which for that
they gave themselves to be more handsome men of their money, than to cure
diseases, The first physician that cured for money.
they were commanded by the Senate of Athens, that they should not presume to
teach physic, much less to cure any person.

Of other travels that Physic did pass.
ANother hundred years in Asia was physic forgotten, till the time that
Euperices was raised in the kingdom of Tinacria, but for that he and another
Physician did vary upon the curing of King Crisippus (the which at that time
reigned in that I Will) it was determined by those of the kingdom, Physic
banished another C. years.
that they should only cure with simple medicines, and not presume to mix or
make compositio^s. Long time the kingdom of Sicill continued, and also the
greater part of Asia, without the knowledge of the art of medicine, until the
time that in the I Will of Rhodes there remained a certain notable physician and
philosopher named Herosilo, a man that was in his time very learned in physic,
and very skillful in Astrology, Many do say that this Herosilus was master to
Ptolomeus, and others say yt he was not, but his disciple: but be it as be may,
he left many books written of Astrology, and taught many scholars also. This
Herosilus held opinion, that the pulse of the patient ought not to be taken in
the arm, but in the temples, saying: that there never wanted that, which in
the arm was sometime hidden. This physician Herosilus was of such authority
amongst the Rhodians, that they held this opinion, to take the poulse in the
temples, all the days of his life, and also the lives of his scholars, who
with his scholars being all dead, the opinion took an end, although it were
not forgotten. Herosilus being dead, the Rhodians would never more be cured,
neither admit any other physician in their country: the one cause, was not to
offend the authority of their philosopher Herosilus: and the other, for that
naturally they were enemies unto strange people, and also no friends of new
opinions. This being past, physic fell asleep other.iiij. score years, as
well in Asia as in Europa, until the great philosopher and physician
Asclepiades was raised in ye Island Mitiline: A man sufficiently well learned,
and most excellent in curing. This Asclepiades held opinion, that the pulse
ought not to be sought in the arm (as now they seek) but in the temples, or
in the nose. This opinion was not so far besides reason, but that long time
after him, the physicians of Rome and also of Asia did entertain the same. In
all these times it was not read that any physician was borne in Rome, or came
into Italy: for the Romans were the last of this world that did entertain
Clockes, Iesters, Barbars, and Physicians. In four hundredth years, Rome
reserved no Physicians.
Four hundred. iij. years and ten months, the great city of Rome did pass,
without the entertayning of any Physician or Chirurgian. The first that has been read to have entered Rome, was one that was named Antony Musa, a Greek
borne, and in science a Physician. The cause of his coming thither was, the
disease of Sciatica, that the Emperor Augustus had in his thigh: the which when
Antony Musa had cured, and thereof wholly delivered him, in remuneration of so
great a benefit, the Romans did erect unto him a picture of Porphiry in the
field of Mars, and farther and besides this, did give him privilege of
citizen of Rome. Antony Musa had gathered exceeding great riches, and also
obtained the renoume of a great Philosopher, if with the same he could have
been contented, and not to have exceeded his Art of physic: but this was the
chance of his sorrowful fate. Giving him self to cure by Surgery, as also
by medicine, it is some time necessary in that Art to cut of feet, or fingers,
and to make incisions: the Romans being not used to behold such cruelties, and
to suffer so intolerable grieves, in one day and in one hour they stoned him
to death, and drew him al abouts in the streates. From the time they stoned
this miserable Antony Musa, they consented not to have any Physician or
Chirurgian in all Italy, Nero brought from Greece vices and phisitio^s.
until the time of the wicked Emperor Nero, which at his return from Grecia,
brought unto Rome many physicians, and also many vices. In the times of the
Empire of Nero, Galba, Octo, and Bitello, physic did much flourish in Italy,
and the physicians did greatly triumph in Rome: but after the death of these
Princes, the good Emperor Titus commanded the Orators and also the physicians
to be driven out of Rome. The Emperor Titus being demanded why he did
banish them, Physicians banished by Titus the Emperor.
since the one were advocates for matters in law, and the other did cure the
diseased? he made answer: I banish the Orators, as destroyers of the customs,
and also physicians as eni^^^^ to health. And more he said, I do also banish
the physicians to take away the occasions from men that be vicious, for that we
see by experience, in the Cities where physicians be resident, there is always
abundance of vices.

A letter written from Grecia to Rome, wishing them to beware of the Physicians
that were come thither.
THE great Cato of Vtica was no small enemy to all physicians of this world,
specially that they should not enter within the Empire of Rome, Cato an enemy
of Physicians.
who from Asia did write a letter unto his son Marcellus that was in Rome,
after this manner. In thee and in me it appears most clearly, that more is
the love that ye Father bears unto the son, than ye son unto the father:
since thou forgettest thy self to write unto me, neither yet to provide for
defense of thy necessities. If thou will not write unto me as to thy father,
write unto me as unto thy friend: not withstanding it is much more which thou
owe unto my hoare hairs, and also unto my good and friendly works. As
concerning ye rest, my son Marcellus, thou know that I have been resident a
Consul here in Asia five years, of which the most time I have continued here
in Athens, where al Grecia do hold their notable studies of their renowned
Philosophers, and if thou will understand what I conceive of these Greeks, it
is, they speak much and perform little, they call all men barbarous, and
only themselves Philosophers: and the worst of all is, they be ready friends
to give counsel unto al men, and enemies to accept the same, injuries they
know to dissemble, but never to pardon: they be very constant in hatred, and
very mutable in love and friendship. Finally my son Marcellus I say unto thee,
that naturally, they be proud to command, and vntamable to service. Behold
here what in Grecia the Philosophers do read and teach, and what the popular
people do learn: and if I do write unto thee, it is, for that thou shall not
pain thy self to come into Grecia, neither to pass thy thought to leave
Italy. Since thou know and also do understand, that the gravity of our
Mother Rome, neither may suffer youthly wantonness, neither admit novelties.
That day that the fathers of our sacred Senate shall permit the Arts and
letters of Grecia to enter Rome, from that day I hold our common wealth as
lost: for our Romans do esteem and make account to live well, and the Greeks
but only to speak well. In those kingdoms and Cities where schools and
studies be well ordered, and on ye other part their common wealths evil
governed, notwithstanding we see them flourish, very shortly we shall see them
famish, for there is not in all this whole world any thing that justly may be
termed perpetual, but that which upon troth and virtue is founded. Although all the arts of Grecia be suspicious, pernicious and scandalous, yet I say to thee
my son Marcellus, for the commonwealth of our Mother Rome, the worst of them
all is physic, for that all these Greeks have sworn to send to kill by
medicine those which they might not overcome by arms. Every day I see here
these physic Philosophers hold amongst themselves great altercations, about
the curing of infirmities and the applying of certain medicines: and that
which is most to be wondered, that doing what the one commands, and the
other counsels, we see the patient cruelly tormented, and sometimes finish
his days: in such wise, that their question rises, not how they shall cure
him but how with medicines they may kill him. My son Marcellus, thou shall
advise the fathers of the Senate, if they bring thither vj. physic
philosophers which be departed hence out of Grecia, that they suffer them not
to read or teach physic, either to cure in the commonwealth: because this
art of medicine is so perilous to be exercised, and so delicate to be
understood, that there be many that do learn, and very few that do know it.

Of seven notable benefits that proceeds from the good Physician.
BEhold here master Doctor, the beginning of your Physic declared, and how it
was found, how it was compiled, how it was lost, how it was banished, how it
was received, and also how sorowfully she went wandering from commonwealth to
commonwealth. Master Doctor, by your letter you also crave of me, that I write
unto you, not only what I have read of Physic, but also my judgment thereof:
which I will accomplish to do you pleasure, and also for that it may Nota
be seen, how much profit rises from the good Physician, and what hurtes
from the evil. Medicine is to be praised, because the maker of all things did
create the same for the remedy of his creatures, giving virtue to waters,
plants, herbs, stones, and also in words, to the end that with all these
things men should be cured, and with their health serve him. The causes of
praise of physic.
God is much (...)ed with the patience which the sick manne uses, but much
more with the patience, charity, and hospitality that the whole and sound man
performs. It is a thing religious and also necessary to procure bodily
health, and to serve God, for if the sick man have good desires: his works
be weak, but he that is whole, sound, and virtuous, has good desires and
excellent, and also notable works.

Medicine is to be praised, when it is in the hands of a Physician that is
learned, grave, wise, stayed, and of experience: for such a Physician with his
science shall understand the infirmity, with his wisdom seek his medicine,
and with his great experience what and when to employ the same.

Medicine is to be praised, when the Physician uses not the same but in sharp
diseases that be very perilous: which is to wit, for the Pluresy, Squinancy,
inflammation, sharp Fever, or Apoplexy: because in cases so dangerous, and in
perils so perilous, all things for health is to be provided, and the
Physician in all things to be credited.

Physic is to be praised, when the Physician is so wise, that he does heat a
great repletion or heat of blood, by washing the megrim with a fume, a grief
of the stomach with a sacket: a heat of the liver with an ointment: bleared
eyes with cold water: a constupation of the belly with a Glister: and a plain
Fever with good diet.

Physic is to be praised, when I shall see the Physician that cures, profit
more with simple medcines that nature has created, than with compoundes which
Ipochras has inuented^ in such wise, that having power to cure me with clear
water, he force me not to drink stilled Endive.

Medicine is to be praised, when the physician is expert, that knows the
times to be considered in a sick man, that is to wet: when they have their
beginning, increasing, and also their declinations, ordering the rule and
remedy according to the disease and the estate thereof traveling to know the
complexion of his pacient, inquiring his estate past, and judging aforehand
what may happen in time to come, giving order for the case present, always
having regard to the strength and puissance of the pacient.

Physic is commendable, when the physician sees a sick man in great peril,
and stricken with a doubtful sickness, does delight that they shall call an other
unto him, (and more if the pacient desire) upon such condition, that every one
of the^ do give themselves to study and to consult for the recovering of
health, and not that they prepare to argue and contend. The physician that with
these conditions does use to cure, we may safely call and put our trust in him,
and also with our purses pay him: because the effect of physic consists to
have ability to understand the grief, and experience to minister.

Of nine pernicious euilles that Physicians do commit.
I Lament me unto you Master Doctor of many filthy Physicians, idiotes, rash,
and inexpert, yt which having heard a little of Auicene, or for that they have
been reside^t at Gadulupe, or servants to the Queens Doctor, they
transporteth mselues to the university of Merida, or else with a rescript from
Rome, they take degree of Bachelors, Licentiates, and Doctors, of who^ the old
proverb may justly take place, which says, Physicians of Valence, long robes
and small science.

I complain me unto you Master Doctor of many common physicians and inexpert,
the which if they take in hand any strange or perilous diseases, after they
have purged the sorrowful patient, let him blood, oynted, and given him Sirope,
they know not to apply any other remedy, either practice any other experience,
but to command him after supper to receive a culesse prepared, and in the
mornings tisan clarifyed.

I complain me unto you master Doctor, of many young and childish physicians,
and without judgment, which to an ague that is simple, ordinary, common, not
furious, neither dangerous, they make their receiptes as large and deep from
the Apoticarie, as if it were an inflamed pestilence, in such wise, that it
shall be less hurt unto the sorrowful patient to endure the evil he
possesses, than to abide the remedy that such provide.

I complain me unto you, master Doctor, of many of your companions that
presume of learning, and (of troth they be no fools) which do never cure us
with simple medicines, either do minister unto us that which is plain, gentle
and not furious: but to give us to understand, that they know that which
others know not, they make their receipts of things so strange and out of
use, that at the present they be very difficill to be found, and afterward
more difficult to be received.

I complain me unto you master Doctor, of many of your servants and doltish
batchelers, in consideration yt a^ infirmities having their chreticke or
determinatiue days, going from day to day making their course, that they have
no care to consider thereof, and much less to reckon on what day the disease
began, either the hour wherein the access did first offend, to behold
whether the disease goes increasing or diminishing: because to apply or
minister a medcine in one hour, or in an other, there depends no more but
the life of the man.

I complain me unto you master Doctor, that generally all you that be
Physicians, do wish each other evil, being different in condition, and
contrary in opinions, wherein it appears most clear, that some follow
Ipochras, some Auicen, some Galen, some Rasis, some the Counselor, some
Ficine, and other some none at al, but their own judgment, and that which is
most to be lamented, is, that all the mischief lies not but upon the
sorrowful patient, because at the time you should cure him, you give your
selves to disputing.

I complain me unto you master Doctor, of many physicians that be childish in
age, new in office, rude in judgment, and not well stayed in their wits,
which in any experience that they have seen, read, or heard, be it never so
difficult to be done, or perilous to take, presently they command it to be
performed, although it be not requisite but hurtful to the disease, whereof
ryseth many times that one foolish experience does cost the sick man's life.

I complain me unto you, and also of you master Doctor, that generally all
you Physicians do make your receites for such things as you command us to
take, in dark latin, in blind cypherings, and in terms unused, with great and
large receyptes, which I know not wherefore nor to to what end you use it for
if it be evil that you command, you ought not to do it, and if it be good,
let us understand it: for that we, and not you, must take them, and also pay
the Apoticarie for them.

The Authors judgment of Physic.
BEhold here master Doctor delicately touched, not only the commodities that
good Physicians do perform, but also the great hurts that the evil Physicians
do commit. And to say the troth for my part I do believe it, that
notwithstanding my complayntes be many, your faults be much more: since to the
cost of our lives you win great fame, and obtain great wealth. The rule
and Lordship of the Physician
With the rule and Lordship of the Physician no man may compare, for at the
instant they enter our door, we do not only put the^ in trust with our persons,
but also we part with them our substance, in such wise that if the barber draw
forth three ounces from the vain of the head, they draw forth ten from the
vain of the chest. After the charitable exercise of alms giving, there is
nothing better employed tha^ that which is given to the Physician that happens
to perform his cure, and on the other part, there is nothing in this world so
evil spent, as that which the Physician gets that erreth in his cure,
which does deserve not only to be unpaid, but also for ye same to be well
chastised. It was a law much used, and also a long time observed amongst the
Goths, A law amongst the Goths.
that the sick man and the Physician betwixt them made bargayne, the one to
cure, and the other to pay, and if by chance he did not cure according to his
promise and band: in such a case the law commanded that the Physician should
lose the travel of his cure, and also pay the Apoticary. I assure you Master
Doctor that if this law of the Goths were observed in these our days, that
you and your companions would give your selves more to study, and would be
better advised in the things you should take in hand, but for that you be very
well paid whether the pacient be cured or not cured, and if ye happen to
perform the cure, you attribute the glory unto your selves, but if not, you
lay all the fault in the poor pacient. This appears most clear, for
commonly you charge the pacient that either he is a glutton, drinks much
water, eats much fruit, sleeps at noone, does not receive that he is
commanded, takes too much air, or does not endure to sweat: in such wise
that the sorrowful pacient which they cannot cure, they do not forget to
defame. It seems not a little gracious unto me, that which your Ipochras
affirms, which is, that the Physician is not to be esteemed, that of
himself is not well fortunate: whereof we may infer that all our lift and
health does depend not in your medcines that you minister unto us, but in the
fortune good or bad, that the Physician holds. He seems to have small
confidence in Physic, that durst publish such a sentence: for if we stay our
selves by this rule of Ipochras, A sentence of Ipochras.
we must fly the wise Physician that is ill fortunate, and seek to be cured
with him that is unwise and fortunate. In the year of xviij. I being sick in
Osoruillo, which is near unto your house of Melgar, coming to visit me, you
said that I had to consider, for that you had killed Sir Ladron mine Uncle, Sir
Beltram my Father, Sir James my cosyn, and the Lady Ynes my Sister, and that if
I had a mind to enter into that brotherhood, you would rather undertake to kill
me, than to cure me: although Master Doctor you spoke it in jest, yet in deed
it was most true: for which cause since I heard you speak it, and read that
rule of Ipochras, I determined in my heart never more to offer my pulse,
neither incommend my health unto your counsel, because in my lineage of Gueuara
your medcine is unfortunate. Of many famous phisitio^s I have seen performed
diverse famous cures, and of many foolish Physicians, I have seen brought to
pass many and great doltish follies. I speak it for this cause master Doctor,
for in the hands of the Miller we lose but our meal, in the Ferrar but our
Mule, in the Lawyer but our goods, in the Tailor but our garment, but in the
hands of the Phisitio^ we lose our lives. Oh how great necessity ought he to
have, and how convenient it is for him first to consider, that at his mouth
has to receive a purgation, or to consent that in his arms they let him
blood, for many times it does hapen that the sick would give all that he has
to be delivered of his purgation, or to recover his blood into his arm.

In this whole world there be no men of more health than such as be of good
government, and reck not to follow physic: The Emperor Adrians opinion of
Physicians.
for our nature craves to be well ruled, and very little to understand with
Physic. The Emperor Aurelius died of the age of threescore and six years,
in all which time he was never purged or let blood, neither did use Physic,
but every year he entered the Bath, every month he did vomit, every week he
did forbear to eat one day, and every day did walk one hour. The Emperor
Adrian, for that in his youth he was greedy in feeding, and disordered in
drinking, he came to be in his age much grieved and sickly of the gout, with
great pain in the head, whereby he went ever laden with Physicians; and of
great experience of many medcines. If any man be desirous to know the profit he
found by physic, and the remedies be received of Physicians, he may easily
understand in that (at the hour of his death) he commanded these words to be
engraven upon his tomb, per ^ turba medicorum, as if he should speak more
clear, mine enemies having no power to kill me, am come to die by the hands of
Physicians. They report a certain thing of the Emperor Galienus, of a troth
worthy to be noted, and gracious in hearing, which is, that the Prince being
sick and very evil of a Sciatica, a certain famous Physician had the cure of
him, which had used a thousand experime^ts without any ease or profit: on a
certain day ye Emperor called and said unto him, take Fabatus two thousand
sexter(...) and also understand, that if I give them, A notable reward in the
place of punishment.
it is not because it (...) have cured me, but for that thou shalt never more
hereafter cure me. To how many Physicians might we say (...) those days as the
Emperor Gabenus said unto his Physician (...) which although there be not
named Fabates, with great reason we might tear me them Bobates: for they
neither knowethe him(...) that offends the disease, either (...) apply a
necessary or convenient medcine. As God sai^ and master Doctor, for my part I
do firmly believe, that it should be sounder counsel for us, for no cause to
pay the ignorant Physicians (to the end they shall not cure us) than for that
they should minister unto us: for we ^earely see with our own eyes, Valiant
physicians.
that they kill more with their receipts from the Apoticaries, than their
predecessors have slain fighting in the wars. The authors opinion of Physic.
But this shall be the conclusion of my letter, that I do accept, approve,
praise, and bless medcine: and on the other side I do curse, reprove and
condemn the Physician that knows not to use the same. For, according to that
which your Pliny says (speaking of medcine) non rem antiqui damnabant sed
artem. As if Pliny should speak more clear, the ancient wise men and such
as banished Physicians out of their common wealths, did not condemn medcine,
but the art of curing, that men had invented in the same: for nature having
laid up the remedy of diseases in simple medcines, they have framed and shut
it up in things compound, in such wise, that many times it is less
painful, to suffer the disease, than to abide the remedy. No more but that
our Lord be your protector, and give me grace to serve him.

From Madrid, the xxvij. of December. 1525.
A letter unto Mosen Puche of Valentia, wherein is touched at large, how the
husband with the wife, and the wife with the husband, ought to live. A letter
for the new married.

Young and new married Ge^tleman Mosen Puche, to be married unto the Lady Mary
Gralla: and the Lady Mary Gralla to be married with Mosen Puche, from hence I
wish them good success of their marriage, and from hence I pray unto God they
may delight each other long and many a day. Mosen Puche to be married with a
wife of xv. years, and the Lady Mary to be married unto (...) husband of xvij.
if I be not deceived, there remains unto them sufficient time to enjoy their
matrimony, and also to bewail their marriage.

Ancient laws for the married
Solon So^onio commanded the Atheni^es that they should not marry until the
age of xix. The (...) commanded the Lacedaemonians that they should not marry
until the age of xxv. The Philosopher Promotheus commanded the Egyptians that
they should not marry until the age of xxx. years. And if by chance any durst
marry before the appointed age, the fathers were publicly chastised, and the
children not holden for legitimat. If Mosen Puche and the Lady Mary Gralla were
of Egypt (as they be of Valencia) they could not escape unpunished, and also
their children disinherited.

For the great curtesy that I have received of your mother, and for the entire
amity and perfect love I held with your father, in the time I was Inquisitor at
Valencia it greeueth me to see you married in so tender years, and laden with so
great a charge: for so great a burden is matrimony, as you neither may have
license to leave it, either have you age to suffer and support it. If your
father did marry you of him self without consent, he used with you no small
cruelty: and if you married without license, you have committed no less
rashness. For a young man of xvij. and a young woman of xv. to dare set up
house, their deeds declares great temeritie, and want of good counsel in the
consent thereof: for the poor yonglings, neither do they know the burden they
take in hand, either feel the liberty that they lose. Let us understand what
conditions the wife ought to have, The conditions of the hapily married.
and what conditions the husband must hold in possession, to the end they may
be happily married: and if it be found in Mosen Puche, and in the Lady Mary
Gralla, from henceforth I confirm and ratify their marriage, and condemn my
self to have spoken without skill. The properties due to a married wife is, that
she have gravity when she walks abroad, wisdom to govern her house,
patience to suffer her husband, love to breed and bringing up her children,
affable with her neighbors, diligence to lay up and to save goods
accomplished in things appertayning to honor, a friend of honest company, and
a great enemy of wanton and light toys.

The properties appertayning to the married husband is, A note for the married.
to be reposed in his speech, mild of conversation, faithful wherein he is
trusted, wise wherein he gives counsel, careful for the provision of his
house, diligent in the ordering of his goods, of sufferance for the
importunities of his wife, zealous in bringing up of his children, advised in
things of honor, and a sure man with all men that he deals. But now
demanding answer, if in the xvij. years of Mosen Puche, and in the xv. years
of Lady Mary Gralla, we shall find all that we have said, or that ever they
thought thereof. In men of so tender years, and married so young, it is to be
suspected, that such and so delicate things, neither do they know to
understand when they be told them, neither yet being wanting to ask for
them: but I answer and also prophesy unto the xvij. years of Mosen Puche, and
to the xv. years of the Lady Mary Gralla, that if they will not learn all
these properties, and after their learning observe them, that in a little
further process of time, they with their burden shall fall to the ground, or
else either of the^ seek new love. I hold it not for so weighty to be
admitted a nouice friar, as a young man to be married, for the one may refuse
and come forth, and the other may not repent. The incommodities that do follow
the marriage of xvij. with xv. Mosen Puche and the Lady Mary Gralla can more
effectually declare, than I can write. For if I say ought, it is by guess, but
they may affirm it as feeling witnesses. For men to marry themselves very
young, there follows great hurtes: which is to understand, their wives are
broken and spoiled in their child bed, weaken their strength, laden with
children, spend their patrimony, soon moved to ielousy, not comprehending
what appertains to honor, they understand not to provide for the household:
the first loves finishe, and new cares approach, in such wise, for marrying
them selves so young, they come afterward to live discontented, or else to be
separated in their old age. A grave sentence of Plato.
The divine Plato gave counsel to his common wealth, that they should marry
their children in such an age, wherein they should understand what they did
choose, and very well perceive what they took in hand. Grave and very grave
is this sentence of Plato, for to take a wife, or to choose a husband is no
hard thing, but to understand to sustain an household is very difficult. I
have not been married, neither have had any motion to be married, but for as
much as I have seen amongst my kindred, and have read in books, by that I have
suspected of my neighbors, and by which I have heard of my friends, I find by
my rekoning, that those that chance to be well married, have here their
Paradise, and such as have had worse chance, of their house they have made an
hell. What man to this day, that has matched with a woman of such perfection,
that wished not in her some things to be amended? What woman has chosen a
husband so accomplished, that found not in him some thing to be misliked?

In the first view of wowers and of their contraction few marriages be
displeasant, but in process of time few things be liked, and that which is most
certain being in want, and money spent, incontinent without delay,
displeasures knocks at gate. Oh sorrowful married man, if thou marry with a
gentlewoman, thou must bear with her pomp and folly: If thou encounter with a
woman that is mild and wise, thou must accept her poverty: if thou match with
one that is rich, The travels of the married man.
it may happen thee to be ashamed of her kindred? if thou choose thee a wife
that is fair, thou have mischaunce sufficient to watch her: if it be thy
chance to obtain a wife that is foul, after few days thou will shun thy
house, and also seek new lodging: if thou boast thy self that thy wife is
wise, and of goodly personage, also thou complaynest that she is costly and no
house keeper: if thou say of thy self that thy wife is a good huswife,
forthwith it is reported that no servant may endure her fierce cruelty: if
thou do glory that thy wife is honest and chaste, many times thou do
abhor her for that she is too much jealous: what will thou that I say more?
Oh thou poor married man, that which I speak, besides that is spoken, is: If
thou shut thy wife within doors she never ceasseth to complain: if thou give
her leave to walk at liberty, she gives occasion for thy neighbors to
talk, and thy self to suspect, and if thou do much chide, she goes always
with a crooked countenance: and if thou say nothing, none may endure her: if
thy dispense be in her disposition, the stock goes to wrack: if the laying
out be in thine own hands beware thy purse or secret sale of thy goods: if
thou keep thee much at home, she thinks thee suspicious: and if thou come late
home, she will say that thou do wander: and if thou give her good garments
she must go forth to be seen, if she be not well apparelled thou art bidden
to an evil supper: if thou show thy self loving she esteems thee little,
if thou be negligent therein, she suspecteth thee to be in love else where: if
thou deny what she craves, she never cease to be importunate: and finally
if thou unto her discover any secret, she cannot but publish it: behold here
the reason, and also the occasion wherefore, if in the common wealth there be
ten well married, there be a hundred that do live abhorred and in repentance,
which presently would depart from their wives, house and chamber, if they could
finish with the Church, as they can perform with their conscience. If
matrimony amongst Christians were as it is amongst the Gentiles to be divorced
at every man's liking, I swear there would be more have to the lent of
diuorcement, than to all the rest of the year to be married.

That no man do marry but with his equal.
THe rules and counsels that I will give here unto those that are to be
married, and also unto such as be already married: if they be not profitable to
live contented, at the least they shall serve them to avoid many displeasures.
The first wholesome counsel is to understand, Equality betwixt the married
very necessary.
that the woman choose such a man, and the man such a woman, that there be
equality both in blood and in estate: which is to wit: the Knight with the
Knight, the merchaunt with the merchaunt, the Squier with the Squier, and the
ploughman with the ploughman: For if herein there be disconformitie, the more
base shall live most discontented, and the other of more worthy degree very much
repentant. The merchant that marieth his daughter unto a Knight, and the rich
ploughman that takes a man of worship unto his son in law: I do say and
affirm, that they bring into their house a proclaymer of their infamy, a
certain moth for their garments, a tormenter of their fame, and also a
shortner of their lives. In an evil hour has he married his son or
daughter, that has brought into his house such a son in law, or daughter in
law, that is ashamed to name him father, Household enemies.
whose daughter or son he or she has married: in such mariadges it can not
truly be said that they have brought to house a son, but a Devil: a daughter
but a Snake: not: to serve but to offend: not: children but basilisks: not to
honor him, but defame him. Finally I say, that he that marieth not his
daughter with his equal, shall find it less evil to bury than to marie
her: for if she die, they shall bewail her but one day, but to be evil
married, is to bewail her many years. The rich merchant, the poor squier, the
wise plough man, and the good townflike crafts man, needs no daughter in law
that can frill and paint her self, but such as he skillful very well to
spinne: for that day that such men shall presume to have in ure the carpet and
pillow, A caveat for Parents.
that day they spoil their house, and their goods sinketh to the bottom.

I return again to say and affirm, that such men beware, that bringes into
their houses a son in Law that presumes of woorship, and knows not but to
walk up and down the streates: that accompteth to be a trim Courtier, and
that is skillful at cards: and dice: or boasts himself for running of
horses: for in such cases the poor father in law must fast, to the end the
foolish son in law may have to spend in follies. But the conclusion of this
counsel shall be, that al men marry their children with their equal and
according to their estate, otherwise I do certyfie before the year be out, it
shall reign upon their heads that seek a foolish or an inconvenient marriage.

Also it is a counsel very expedient that every man choose a wife according to
his complexion and condition: for if the father marry ye son, or if the son
do marry of necessity and not at his liking, the sorrowful young man may not
say (of a troth) that they have married him, but for evermore have marrd him. To
the end that marriages be perpetual, loving and pleasant, betwixt the man and
the woman there must be a knitting of hearts, A knitting of hearts before
striking of hands.
before stryking of hands: it is very convenient that the Father give counsel
unto the son that he marry to his contentation, but in no wise to use
violence to force him against his lyking: for all violent marriages engender
hatred betwixt the married: contention betwixt the fathers, scandal amongst
the neighbors, law betwixt the parents, and quarrelles betwixt the kindred:
neither is it my opinion that any should marry suddenly and secretly, as a
vain light young man: for every marriage done only in respect of love without
further aduisement, most times do end in sorrows.

It is a thing very common that a young man of small age and less experience,
but of to much liberty, knowing not what he does love, and much less what
he takes in hand, grows enamoured of a young gyrle and marries with her,
which (at the very instant) when he has finished to taste her, he begins
presently to abhor her. The thing that is most to be procured betwixt the
married is, that they love entierly and fervently: Love comes running, and
retorneth flying
for otherwise they shall all day go sorrowing with crooked countenances, and
the neighbors shall have no want whereof to speak. Also I will advise them to
have their loves fixed, true and sure, settling in the heart by little and
little: for otherwise, by the self same way that love came running, they shall
see her return flying. I have seen many in this world love in great haste,
which I have known afterward abhor at great leisure. One of the most
painfullest things contained in man's life is, that if there be a hundred
permanent and constant in love, there is also a hundred thousand that never
cease to abhor. It is also to be advertised, that the counsel which I give
unto the father to make no marriage without consent of his son, the same I
give unto the son, that he marie not against the will of his Father: for
otherwise, it may come to pass, to receive more offense by the malediction of
his father, than his marriage portion may yield him profit. Young men when they
marry in their youth have no further consideration but of their pleasure, and
only content them selves to have their wives beautiful: but the father and
mother, for that it touches both honor and goods, they seek him a wife that
shall be wise, rich, gentle, honest and chaste: and the last thing they behold,
is, her beauty. The marriages that be made, hidden and in secret, I say it
grows of great lightness, and proceeds of no small cruelty: for it gives
to all the neighbors whereof to talk, and to their old parents wherefore to
weep. It happens many times that the mother ouerwatcheth her self to spinne,
and the Father to grow old in gathering a sufficient portion. And at the time
they shall entreat or talk of an honest marriage, the foolish young man
remains secretly married, whereof after follows, that the mother remains
weeping, the father ashamed, the kindred offended, and the friend scandalized:
and yet thereof proceeds a greater grief, which is, that the son has
chanced to match with such a wife, that the father holds his goods not
only evil employed, but is much ashamed to admit her into his house. Also
another offense rises in the like marriage, which is, many times the fathers
do determine, with the sons portion to remedy and amend the daughters
marriage: and as the young man's most principal intent is to enjoy the maid
without care of goods: the sister remains cast away, the son deceived,
and the father derided. Plutarche in his politikes says, that the son
which married without consent of his Parents, amongst the Greeks, was
publicly whipped: amongst the Lacedaemonians they did not whippe, but
disinherite. Laertius says, that unto such (so married) it was a custom
amongst the Thebanes, not that they should only be disinherited of all goods,
In old time the fathers blessing preferred before hope of inheritance.
but also openly be cursed of their parents. Let no man esteem it light to be
cursed or blessed of their elders: for in the old time amongst the Hebrews,
the children (without al comparison) held more account of their fathers
blessing, tha^ of their Grandfathers inheritance.

That the woman be very shamefast, and no babbler or full of talk.
ALso it is a counsel very necessary, that the man which shall marry and set
up house, Want of shamefastnes in women most hurtful.
do choose a wife shamefast, for if forceably there should be in a woman but
one virtue, the same ought to be only shamefastness. I confess that it is
more perilous for the conscience, but (I say) less hurtful to honesty, that
a woman be secretly dishonest, than openly unshamefast. Very many infirmities
be covered in a woman only by shamefastness, and many more suspected in her,
that is of ouerbold and of shameless countenance. Let every man say what he
will, but for my part I do firmly believe, that in a woman of a bashful
countenance there be few things to be reprehended, and in her that is
otherwise, there wants all things wherefore to be praised. The safety of
women's reputation.
The safety that nature has given unto a woman to keep her reputation,
chastity, honor, and goods, is only shamefastness: and that day, that
thereof she has not great regard, let her yield her self evermore for a
castaway. When any man shall enquire marriage of any woman, the first thing he
has to demand is not, if she be rich, but if she be shamefast: for goods is
every day gotten, but shamefastness in a woman once lost, is never recovered.
The best portion, the greatest inheritance, and the most precious jewel that a
woman can bring with her, is shamefastness.

For if the Father shall see that his daughter has lost the fame, it shallbe
less evil for him to bury her, than to marry her. The manner is, that many
women presume to be talkers, and to seem gracious in taunting, which office I
would not see them learn, and much less put in ure for speaking the troth,
and also with liberty, that which in men we call gracious, in women we term
it witless babbling.

News, tales, vain fables, and dishonest talks, an honest woman ought not
only shame to speak them, but also loath to hear them. The grave women and of
authority ought not to care to be skillful of talk and news, but to be
honest and silent: for if she much presume of talk and taunting, the very same
that did laugh at her device, will afterward murmur at her manners. The honor
of women is so delicate, that many things which men may both do and speak,
is not lawful unto women that they once dare to whisper them. The ge^tlewoman
or women that will be holden grave, ought not only to keep silence in things
unlawful and dishonest, but also in lawful things, if they be not very
necessary: for women seldom err by silence, and by much speech they seldom
cease to give cause of reproach. Oh sorrowful husband, whose lot has chanced
to light on a wife that is a great babbler, and yet would seem a curious
speaker. For truly, if any such once take in hand to recite a matter or to
frame any complaint or quarrel, she neither admits reason, or patiently
suffers any word to be said unto her. The evil life that women pass with
their husbands, is not so much for that which they commit with their persons,
as it is for that which they speak with their tongues: if the woman would
keep silence, when the husband begins to chide, he should never have bad
dinner, neither she worse supper: which surely is not so, The cause of
domestical Combatts.
for at the instant that the husband begins to utter his grief, she
begins to scolde and yell: whereof does follow, that they come to handy
grypes, and also call for neighbors.

That the wife be a home keeper, and avoiding all occasions.
IT is also a commendable counsel that the wife presume to be honest, and an
housekeeper: for when women in their houses will be absolute, they come
afterward to wander the streates dissolute. The honest woman ought to be very
well advised in that which she speaks, and very suspicious and doutfull in
all things she does: because such manner of women as have no regard to their
words, do afterward offend in deeds. For how simple and ignorant is that
man, but he easily knows the honor of women to be much more tender and
delicate than of men: and that this is true it appears most clear, for that a
man may not be dishonored but with reason, but for a woman to shame her self,
occasion is sufficient. She that is good and presumes in goodness to continue,
may hold it for most certain, that she shall be so much better as she shall have
of her self less confidence: I say less confidence, to the end that she
neither adventure to give ear to wanton or light words, or presume to admit
feigned offers. Let her be as she may be, and deserve what she may deserve, and
presume what she thinks good: that if she delights to hear, and suffer to
be served, early or late she shall fall. And if they shall answer that they
do it for pastime and to laugh and be merry: to this I reply, that of such
iestes, they use to remain all to be iested. I advise, and readuise any Gentle
woman, or other Dame of City or town: that she do not venture with cousin or
Uncle, either with any other of her kinsmen to encommend her self or go alone:
for if to be alone with a stranger there is to be feared of that may chance:
with her Cousin or kinsman let her doubt what may be spoken. Let no honest woman
have confidence in saying, the kindred betwixt them is so near, that it is
impossible that any may mistrust them: for if the malice of man will venture to
judge the thoughts, it is no credible that he will pardon that which he sees
with his eyes. The Gentlewoman or others that shall hear or read this my
writing, I would they should note this sentence, which is: Suspicion no small
enemy to women's lives.
That to a man for that he is a man, it is sufficient that he be good,
although it does not appear: but the woman, for that she is a woman, it is not
sufficient that she be good, but that also it be manifest.

It is to be noted and noted again, that as the provision of household
depends only on the husband, even so the honor of all depends only of
the woman: In such sort, The honor of the husband depends on the wife.
that there is no honor within thy house, longer than thy wife is honorable.
We do not here entitle honorable such as be only fair of fare, of gentle
blood, of comely personage, and a keeper of goods: but only her that is honest
of life, and temperat and advised in her speech. Plutarch reports that the
wife of Thucides the Greek, being demanded how she could endure the stench of
her husbands breath, answered: A notorious example of a Greek.
As no other but my husband has come near me, I thought all other men's
breath had been of the very same savor. Oh example worthy to be known, and
much more to be followed, which is taught us by that most Noble Greek: that
the honest woman is so much to be advised, that she consent not the haunt of
any dishonest company so near as to smell his mouth, either so much as to touch
his garments.

That the married woman be not proud or cruel.
ALso is right worthy counsel, that the wife be not cruel and ambitious, but
mild and suffering: for they be two things that give no small hindrance unto a
woman, which is to wit: her much talk, and little sufferance: A furio^ woman
is compared to the hill Ethna.
and thereof proceeds, that if she be silent, all men do esteem her: if she
suffer her husband, she shall be very well married Oh how unfortunate is that man,
yt is married unto a froward and a cruel woman: the hill Aethna does not whirle
out fire so furiously, as she throws poison out of her month. Without
comparison much more is ye fury of a woman to be feared, than the ire of a
man: for the angered man does but discover his mind, but the fierce woman to
scold, yell and exclaim can find no end.

The amused manne, and the woman that presumes of honesty, ought not to
contend with any other woman that is furious: for at the instant that she
loses her shamefastnes, and kindles her choler, she only says not what she
has seen or hard, but also what she has dreamed. It is unto me not a little
gracious, that when a woman is kindled with a furious rage, neither hears she
her self, nor understands others, neither does admit excuse, nor suffer
word, neither takes counsel, or comes near to reason: And the worst of all
is, that many times she leaves to quarrel with whom she was first offended,
and spitteth her malice against him that came to make peace. When any furious
woman brauleth with any man or woman, and some other co^mes betwixt to make
peace: she will not only afterward give him small thanks, but also will raise
against him many quarrels: Saying that if he had been the man she thought of,
he would have chidde on her behalf, and also revenged her cause. The woman
that naturally is fierce and crabbed, she never thinks to be angry with out a
cause, neither skoldeth without reason, and therefore it is much better to
lean her than to resist her. I return to rectify my saying: which is, that
the house is unfortunate where the wife is a brawler and quarellous: for such a
one is always ready to chide, and never to confess her fault. The cruel
brawling woman is very perilous, for she causes her husband to be fierce,
she gives offense unto her kindred, she is hated of her cosins, An evil kind a
measuring.
and the neighbors fly from her: whereof follows sometimes, that her
husband meets her body with his feet, and combeth her hair with his
fingers. Unto a furious brawling woman on the one side it is a pastim to hear
her chide: and on the other part it is terrible to understand what she will not
let to speak: for if a procession of people shall take in hand to answer
her, she shall weary the^ al with a letanie of injuries. Unto her husband
she says, that he is negligent, his servants slothful, the mayds sluttish,
her Sons glutonous, her daughters windowgazers, that friends be in grate,
Malice finds many faults.
that the enemies be traitoures, the neighbors malicious, her Gossippes
envious: and above all the rest, she says that no man deals truly with
another, either observes loyalty with his wife. I do lie, if I did not see
two honorably married, separate themselves for no other occasion, but for that
the seely married man was sometimes sad at Table, and other times did sigh at
bed. The woman said that her husband had some treason against her at the Table:
and for the beauty of some other that he loved he did sigh in bed: and the
certainty of the matter well known, the troth was, that the man was bound in
a perilous suertiship, and could not be merry, but in the end for any thing
that I could entreat, preach, or chide, I could never bring them agreed,
until he had sworn and given me his faith, Commodities following a pacient
wife.
not to be sad at the Table, neither to sigh at bed. The woman that is
patient and suffering, shall be blessed of her husband, well served of
servants, much honored of neighbors, and in great reverence with her kindred.
And where it is otherwise, let her hold it for certain, that they will all fly
from her house and bliss them selves from her tongue. When a woman is fierce,
proud, and cruel, small delight has her husband that she is descended of
gentle blood, of comely personage, rich of goods, and allied into his house:
but he curses the day he was married, and blasphemeth the man that first moved
the matter.

That Husbands be not rigorous, chiefly when they be new married.
IT is also an aceeptable counsel, that the husband be not fierce, nor
disorder with his wife: for betwixt them there shall never be concord, if the
woman do not learn to keep silence, and the husband to have patience. I dare
say (and in a manner swear) it shall rather be the dwelling of fools, than
the house of friends, The dwelling rather of foles than friends.
where ye husbands wants wisdom and the wife patience: for in process of
time they shall either separate, or else every day be in battle. Women
naturally be tender in complexion and weak in condition: to this end a man is
a man, that he know to tolerate their faults, and cover their weakness, in
such wise, that once they must support them biting, and an hundred times
licking.

If there be compassion of the man that is matched with a fierce wife, much
more of the woman that is encountered with a furious husband: For there be men
so fierce and of so small patience, that the poor women their wives, neither
is their wisdom sufficient to serve them, neither their patience to suffer
them, sometime for their children, sometime for their servants, and sometime
for want of money: betwixt man and wife offenses may not be excused: and in
such a case I durst avouch, A time for the husband to seek his wits.
that then when the wife is angry, he has need to seek his wits, which is
to wit, to take all things in jest, or not to answer a word. If unto all
things that the wife will be grieved and frame complaints, the wise man should
answer and satisfye, let him hold it for certain, that he needs the
strength of Sampson, and the wisdom of Solomon. Mark well married man what I
say unto thee, which is, that either thy wife is wise, or else thy wife is a
fool. If thou be matched with a fool, it avails little to reprehend her,
and if thou be married unto a wise woman, one sharp word is sufficient:
because my friend thou have to understand, that if a woman be not corrected by
that which is said, she will never amend by that which is threatened. When a
woman shall be inflamed with ire, the man ought to suffer her, and after the
flame is somewhat quenched, to reprehend her: for if she once begin to loose
her shame in the presence of her husband, they will every hour cleave the
house with yelles.

He that presumes to be a wise man, and to be a good husband, he ought rather
to use his wife with mild reasons and sagacitie, than with rigor and force:
for the woman is of such disposition, that in the end of thirty years
marriage, there shall every day be found thwartings in her condition, and
alterations in her conversation. Also it is to be noted, that if at all times
the husband ought to shun quarrelling with his wife, much more he ought to
avoid the same when they shall be newly married: for if at the beginning she
shall have cause to abhor and hate, late or never will she return to love.
At the beginning of their marriage, the wise husband ought to fawn, flatter,
and to enamour his wife: for if then they recover love each to other, although
afterward they come to some household words and grudgings it proceeds of some
new unkindness, and not of old rooted hatred. Forget not to make choice to
harbor such guests.
Mortal enemies be love and hatred, and the first of them that takes lodging
in the heart, there he remains inhabitant all the days of life, in such wise,
that the first loves may depart from the person, but never forgotten at the
heart. If from the beginning of the marriage the woman do take the bit to abhor
her husband, I commend them both unto a miserable life, and also unto an
unfortunate old age. For if he shall have power to make her to fear him, he
shall never have strength to force her to love him. Causes rather of pity than
of envy.
Many husbands do boast themselves to be served and feared in their houses, of
whom I have more pity than envy: because the woman that abhors, does
fear and serve her husband, but she that likes does love him and cherish him.
Much ought the woman to travel to be in grace with her husband, and very much
ought the husband to fear to be in disgrace with his wife: for if she do
once determine to fix her eyes upon same other, he shall enjoy her in despite
of her husband: for so long a journey, and for so painful a life, as
matrimony is, the husband ought not to be satisfied that he has robbed his wife
of her virginity, but in that he has possession and use of her will: for it
is not sufficient that they be married, To be noted.
but that they be well married, and live very well contented. The man that is
not beloved of his wife, holds his goods in danger, his house in suspicion,
his honor in balance, and also his life in peril: because it is easy to
believe, that she desires not long life unto her husband, with whom she
passes a time so tedious.

The Husbands be not over jealous.
ALso it is a counsel to be embraced, that married men do avoid to be with
their neighbors malicious, and of their wives jealous: because only two
kinds of people be ielous, which is to understand, such as be of evil
condition, and such as in their youth have spent their time in wantonness. Such
kind of men do imagine, that their wives give the like entertainment unto
others, as they received of their neighbors wives: the which is no small
vanity to think, and no less foolishness to speak: for if there be some
that be dissolute, there be also other some wise, honest, and advised. To say
that all women be good, is of too much affection: and to say that all be
evil, is to great want of reason. It is sufficient to say, that amongst men
there is many things to be reprehended, and amongst women there wants not
wherefore to be praised: I hold it not for evil, that unto her which is vain
and light, they use her not only with reason, but also taking away occasion:
Good counsel.
but withal it is to be understood with this condition, that they use her not
with such straytnesse, either give her so evil a life: whereby under color to
keep herin, they bring her to despair. We cannot deny but there be women of
so evil condition, and so dishonest of inclination, that will not be corrected
with force, either amended by chastisement. But it seems that such were
borne into this world, only to torment their husbands and to shame their
kindred. And on the other side there be women many and very many, which of
their own proper nature be of so tractable condition and chaste inclination:
that it seems not that they were borne into the world, but for a mirror to
the common wealth, and a glory unto their whole kindred. I return once more to
say, that sometimes it is not evil to shut the door, to remove her from the
window, to deny her going abroad, and to deliver her from some suspicious
company: Aduertisements worth the following.
but this the husband must bring to pass with great skill, that he always show
a greater faith in the liberty she has, than in the watch or direction he
gives. I do praise and approve, that men with their wives be cautelous, but I
hold it not for sure that they be over ielous: for women be of such quality,
that they procure nothing so much as that which is most forbidden them. If the
husband have the wife in suspicion, he ought to profit himself by skill, not
uttering it in words: for if a woman do once find her self ashamed, she will
not fail to find out the means and manner, to make the suspicion true, and not
so much for the appetite she has to be vicious, as she has to feel her heart
revenged of her husband. The force of Sampson, the science of Homer, the
prudence of Augustus, the cautels of Pirrhus, the patience of Job, the sagacity
of Haniball, and the vigilance of Hermogenes, be not sufficient to govern a
woman, either to bring her will in subjection: for finally and in the end, in
all this world there is not so great force, that can make one good by force.
The negligences, wants, and weakness that the husband shall see in his wife,
it were no wisdom to proclayme them, neither yet presently to chastise them,
but some he must gently correct, some advisedly admonish, some severely punish,
some cut off, and the most and greatest part he must dissemble. To be
considered.
For wise and patient though a woman may be, only two things she cannot endure
to hear, neither is her patience sufficient to suff^^, which is to
understand, that any hold her for evil of body and foul of face: but
notwithstanding she be evil, she will be holden for good, and being foul,
she will be praised for fair. But let it be for conclusion, that when the
husband is sure of all things, which is to wit: that his wife makes no
market of his person, that his fame wander not the streates, and that his
goods go not to wrack, in my judgment it is meet, that he never handle her
as one that is jealous, or speak unto her as one that is malicious: because the
woman is much bound to be virtuous, when the husband in her commends great
confidence.

That if betwixt the married there happen some unkindness, they ought not to
give part thereof unto neighbors.
ALso it is a right profitable counsel, that in such wise the husband and
wife behave themselves in their unkindness and differences, that they give no
part thereof unto their neighbors: for they have to understand, that if they
wish the^ evil they will rejoice, and if they wish them well they give them
whereof to talk. There be men so combersome, An evil manner of co^fere^ce
and women of such evil suffering, that they know not to chide, but yelling:
nor the other to answer but crying: in such wife that their neighbors have an
office in the week time to pacify them, and on the holyday to hear their
greeues. The husband complayneth saying, that his wife is fierce, and that no
Devil may deal with her. He also co^playneth that she is ielous and
suspicious, and that he is not able to live with her. He also complayneth, that
she is impacient and foul tonged, and continually reuileth him. He also
complayneth, that his wife is weak, foul, and sickly, and that he spends al
in curing her. Also he complayneth, that she is costly, slothful, and always
sleeping, and that she rises not till noone.

Also he complayneth, that she is sluttish, idle and negligent, and that the
things of his house she neither knows to gather together, and much less to
lay them safe. Also he co^playneth, that his wife is a seeker of kindred, a
gossip, a street gadder, and that if she once take the door, until the
stars shine she returns not to house. The wives complaynt.
On the other side the poor women for that they have no force to revenge, they
profit themselves to complain with their tongs. The wife complayneth of her
husband that he is sad, sullen, and melancholicke, and that of an extreme evil
condition: neither liked of his neighbors, nor endured of his servants. She
complains of his husband, that he is furious, proud, and of evil suffering,
and that many times when with choler he is inflamed, he beswingeth her maids,
and also teareth her kerchife from her head. Also she complayneth, that he
vpbraydeth her to be foul and evil favored, a slut, a filthe, and a Jew: and
that sometimes he speaks so many and so great dispitefull words, that they
break her heart, and tear the tears out of her eyes. Also she co^playneth
that he consents not, that she go to see her father and mother, nor visit
her friends and kinsfolks, and of pure malice he does not suffer her to go out
at door: and commands her at the mids of service to depart home from the
Church. Also she complayneth, that her husband is jealous and suspicious
without any occasion, and much less with any reason, and for that cause he
does not suffer her to go out at doors, or to look out at window, neither
put on good garment, neither dress her head, or speak a word with any man,
but that she must be watched as a maid, and hid in like a Nun. Also she
complayneth of him that he believes nothing that she speaks, neither does
accept any service she can do him: for if he be once angry, presently he
charge her with a lie, and whirleth all that he catches. Also she
complayneth of him that he leaves no married woman that he serves not, nor
widdowe that he follows not, or woman at large to whom he goes not, or
wench with whom he dallieth not: and that he keeps her (sorrowful and most
unfortunate) to no other end, than to make ready children, dress the pot, and
sweep the house. Also she complayneth of him, that not contented to take the
wheat, the bacon, the butter, the oil, the cheese, to give unto such and such
out of the door, but also steals from her, to give unto his minion that which
she spinneth at the rock, and also what she gets by making of lace. Also
she complains of him, that he is a common gamster at tables and dice, and
that not contented to play all the rent, and all that he can get: but also he
plays the furniture of his house and the jewels apperteyning to her person.
Also she co^playneth of him, that many times he comes from abroad so
furious, so troubled, and so be deuild, that none may abide him, or much less
suffer him, but that he whippeth and chideth the children, he brawleth and
maddeth with the maids, Froward out of measure.
he teareth and pulls the boys by the hear, and also behayleth her by the
locks. Of those and other such like things does the man and the wife compain
each of other, whereof to give part unto such as can not remedy it, neither
convenient that they should understand it, it seems unto me, that in the man
it is too much simplicity, and in the woman too much vanity.

I return to say, that it is of small skill, and too much ignorance, since
they will show unto none what they have in their chests, and at times will
utter all that is in their stomachs. For a friend to show unto his friend, his
bread, his wine, his money, and his garner, there is no inconvenience at all,
but the inconuenie^ce is in that we love, in that we desire, and in that which
we worship: all which is not only to be kept secret, but also hidden and
removed. The love and hatred that is fixed in the heart, it is necessary that
it be locked and also sealed. For what do I reserve for him that I like very
well, if I say unto all men what is hidden in my heart? unto him that loves us
with his heart, and we wish him good with all our heart, to him alone and to
none others we have to manifest our heart. A counsel to be embraced.
The passions that they give us, and the misfortunes that they offer us, it is
no wisdom to discover, but unto him that will help us to remedy it, and also
will help to bewail the same: because the tears of a friend does not a
little disburden the heart of travel. If this be true, as it is, to what end
does the husband complain of the wife, and the wife of the husband, unto any
which they know can give them no remedy, but jest, skorne and deride them? If
any ouerthwarting of the husband, or any weakness be in the woman, it is
great foolishness and little wisdom to utter where it is not known, for it
is less evil, that others do suspect it, than to give them to understand it
of their own mouth.

That the Husbands provide things necessary for the house.
IT is also a sound counsel, that the husbands be diligent and careful to make
provision for their houses, to cloth their wives, to bring up their children,
and to pay their servants, because in voluntary matters men may be negligent
but the necessities of their house, do neither suffer negligence, or
forgetfulness. The office of the husband is, to get goods, and of the wife,
to gather them together, and save them. The office of the husband and of the
wife.
The office of the husband is, to go abroad to seek living, and of the woman
to keep the house. The office of the husband is, to seek money, and of the
woman not vainly to spend. The office of the husband is, to deal with all
men, and of the woman to talk with few. The office of the husband is, to be
entermedling, and of the woman to be solitary and withdrawn. The office of the
man is, to be skillful in talk, and of the woman to boast of silence. The
office of the man is to be zealous of honor, and of the woman to presume to be
honorable. The office of the man is to be a giver, and of the woman to be a
sauer. The office of the man is, to apparel him self as he may, and of the
woman as it becomes. The office of the husband is, to be lord of all, and of
the wife to give account of al. The office of the husband is to dispatche all
things without door, and of the wife to give order unto all things within ye
house. Finally I do say, that the office of the husband is, to husband ye
goods, and of the wife to govern the family. I thought good to say thus much,
to the end that the house wherein every one performs his office we may call a
college of quietness, and ye house wherein every one shifteth for him self, we
may term it a hell.

That the wife shall demand of her husband things superfluous and very costly,
neither ought she to crave it, or the husband to give it: but if she require
things necessary, they ought not to be denied, for the husband has to
conceive for most certain, that upon the gages of honor, many times the wife
does provide for her self and her household. The husband that gives not unto
his wife, a coat nor mantell, smock nor shoe, kerchife nor sleeue, neither to
clothe her children, nor yet to pay servants: and on the other part he sees
all these things provided for free, and made better: certaynely such a one may
well think that she rather gets them trotting, Rather trotting than
spinning.
than spinning. Oh how many women be evil, not because they would be so, but
for that their husbands gives them not that which is convenient: The which,
by exchange of chastity, do supply their extreme necessity.

To maintain house and family, it is not sufficient that the wife do spinne,
weaue, sow, work, watch, and ouerwatch: but that also the husband do watch,
sweat, and travel: and if not, he may hold it for certain, that his house
shall be provided to the cost of his honor, and to the charge of her person.
For poverty or weakness, no woman ought to do any thing to shame her self,
or dishonor her kindred: but jointly with this, I dare auouche, that many
times the negligence of the husband does bring to pass, that his wife with him
is absolute, and with others dissolute. I know not with what face, either with
what heart he dare beat or chide his wife, since she never sees him put hand
to his purse to buy meat.

The husband that conformably unto his estate does maintain his family and
sustain his house, just and most justly he may chide with his wife for the
negligence that she uses, and for the excess that she commits, Causes of
spiteful patience.
and where it is not so, he must suffer what she speaks, let pass what he
hears, use silence in what he suspecteth, and also dissemble what he sees.

That the Husband bring no suspicious persons to their houses.
ALso it is a convenient counsel, that married men be friends and familiar
with honest persons, and procure to avoid evil company. There be many that
be evil married, not for the faults that in their wives is seen, but for she
vicious words that unto her the malicious speaks. If the husband be an Ox I
say nothing, but if he be of judgment and discreet, he has to take it for
scorn and shame, that any man dare say any evil of his wife, since others
sees her not once a week, and he has her every night in his chamber, every
day at his table, and every hour in his house. If the wife be a fool, a
babbler, a goer at large, wanton, light, absolute or dissolute, the husband is
the first that should understand thereof, and the man that should presently
therefore give remedy: and if he know it and do not amend it, No small offense
to God.
such an Ox and so behorned, they ought to permit to himself, since he will
suffer it. One of the most grievous offenses that we may commit against God,
is: to bring hatred betwixt the man and his wife, and the wife and her husband:
for if there shall any negligence he seen in the man, or any weakness found
in the woman: we are bound to advise them, but have no license to accuse the^.
Many times the husband is in fault, and over easily gives credit unto his
friends, neighbors, and also to his servants, the which if they advertise him
of any evil of his wife: it is not so much for the zeal of his honor, as it
is for the malice they bear unto her. Also it is hurtful unto the husband to
be conversant with evil me^: by the infamy that may proceed of their
conversation, for there be some men so evil and of so far a fetch, that they
procure friendship with the husband, to no other purpose, than to have an
entry more sure to deal with his wife. It may be well suffered, that the
neighbor, the friend, the kinsman, and the acquainted with the husband may
have friendship with the wife, but no familiarity: because friendship
requires no more but communication, but familiarity leads to conversation.
I am not of the opinion, that a man should have such confidence in any man:
that certainly he durst say, upon my vow I assure thee, that I entered such a
man's house, and with his wife did eat, laugh, and play, talk, and pass the
time: because she is much my good Mistress, friend, and devout. I defye
that friend that has no other pastime but with his friends wife. That which
is tolerable to be said in such cases, is: that such a man is my friend, The
wife and sword must not be lent.
and his wife of some acquaintance: because it is an old proverb That the wife
and the sword may be showed, but not lent: If unto the husband there happen
any infamy for bringing his friend to house, and to bring him acquainted with
his wife, let him complain of him self that was the cause, and not of his
wife that stumbled.

Plutarch says, that it was a law amongst the Parthians, that the wives might
not hold other particular acquaintance, but the friends of their husbands: in
such wise, that amongst those barbarous people, the goods they held was not
only common, but also the friends that they loved. I should think it good,
that the wife should love the friends of her husband, and that the husband
should love the kindred of his wife: because if he will obtain peace in his
house, he ought to be served of his wife, and of her kindred honored. The
husband ought not to be so wilful or careless, that when the kindred of his
wife shall come to house, that he leave to talk with them, and to entertain
them with some cheer: because it should be unto her no small disgrace, and
unto him great want of good nature. Sometime also the wives do conceive
affections, and take in hand friendships to be excused (although not
suspicious) for the sustayning whereof, they come to some quarelles with their
husbands, and also sometime unto extreem unkindness, the which I allow not,
neither much less do I counsel: because the honest or honorable and advised
woman, has to hold no friendship so dear: that it may be sufficient to breed
unkindness with her husband. In any honest woman it is not tolerable to say,
this is my friend: but to say this is of my acquaintance: because the married
woman ought to have none for enemy, and only her husband to hold for friend.
Also it seems not well unto me, that some women be to much affectioned,
passioned, and bending, the which sometimes for defense of their friends and to
stand forth to help their parties: do mete their hair by the fistes, A
foolish fashion to take up dust.
and also take up dust with their shoulders.

That women ought to gather and to sow.
ALso it is a right necessary counsel, that married women do learn, and also
know very well to govern their houses, which is to weete, to gather, to sow,
to work, to sweep, to play the Cook, and to sow with the needle: Necessary
exercises for the married wife.
because they be things so necessary, that with out them, they them selves can
not live, and much less content their husbands. Suetonius does say, that
Augustus the Emperor commanded the Ladies his children, to learn all the
offices and qualities wherewith a woman might live and be maintained, and
whereof she ought to boast her self: in such wise, that al which they did
wear, they did spin and weaue. For the greatness of any gentlewoma^s estate, or
noblenes of blood, or estimation of great wealth, so well does a rock become
her girdle, as a knight his lance, or a priest his book. When the Romans
upon a certain wager, did send from the wars to Rome, to understand what
every man's wife did at home: amongst them all, the most famous and most praised
was the chaste Lucrece, and for no other cause, but for that she only was found
weauing, and all the rest idle. If they say unto one, that amongst the nobles it
is a matter of no account to understand in these simplicities: to this I
answer, that the honest woman has not to be ashamed to spinne, and to lay
up, but to eat, rest, and talk: because the honor of a gentlewoman does not
consist to be set at her ease, but to be in business. If women would take pain
in their houses, Idleness and chastity are greatenimies.
we should not see in the streets so many cast away, because in this world
there is not so mortal an enemy unto Chastity, as is idleness. A woman that
is young, in health, at liberty, fair, lusty, and takes her ease, what is it
that she thinks leaning upon a cusshin? That which she performs is, to set
her down at leisure, to devise what form she may use for liberty to lose her
self: in such wise, that she deceyueth all men, saying that she is good, and
on the other part she enjoys her life at pleasure. What a delight is it to
see a woman rise earlye in the morning, to stir about, her kerchiefe not all
dressed, her coat tuckt up, her arms bare, without slippers, chyding with the
maidens, calling up servants, and dressing her children? What a pleasure is it
to see her make her own partlet, to wash her clothes, to air her Wheat, to
syfte her Meal, to gather her things together, to bake her bread, to sweep
the house, to make the fire, and to set on the pot: and after meat to take her
cusshin for boane lace, or her rock to spinne? The works of an huswife.
there is no husband in this world that is so foolish or insensible, that will
not like his wife much better on the saturday when she works, than on the
Sunday when she fristeth. I like not well of those women, that know no other
thing but to go to bed at one, rise at eleven, go to dinner at twelve, and
talk till night: and more and besides this, they know nothing but to trim
their chamber where they shall lie, and to dress a withdrawing place where to
work in, in such wise, that such be not borne but to eat, sleep, rest, and
talk. Leaving apart the chamber wherein they sleep, and the place where they
work, if you make a turn about the rest of the house, you will be ashamed to
see it, and lothed to walk in it. where all things lies disordred, and worse
swept: in such wise, that many Gentlewome^ to mayntaine an estate, make their
house a stable. For a woman to be good, it is no small help to be always in
business: A friendly warning to al mothers.
and by the contrary, we see no other thing, but that the idle woman goes
always pensitiue. Let all manner of women believe me, that in any wise they busy
their daughters in some honest exercise for I give them to understand (if they
know not,) that of idle moments, and wanton thoughts, they come to make evil
conclusions. No more but that our Lord be in your proceeding:

from Granada the.4. of may.1524. years.
A letter unto Mosen Rubin of Valentia, wherein he answers to certain
notable demands. A letter very convenient, for the woman that marries an old
man.

RIght worshipful aunciente, renewed with youthely motion, your Letter read
and considered, that which I conceive and comprehend thereof, is, that it
contains much writing, and comes written in very gross paper, whereof it
may very well be inferred, that you have wast time, and want of money. Small
comfort should he have at your hands, that at this instant should crave
your alms for a Cote, A Mareuedy is the sixth part of a penny.
that has not a Maruedye to buy a sheet of paper: Although I hold it for
most certain, that if you have not at this present a Mareuedy to buy paper, at
other times you use to set an hundred Ducats at a rest. The property and
condition of Players is, sometimes to have great abundaunce, and at other
times to suffer great lack, in such wise, that to day having too many
Ducats to play, on the morrow they have not to pay for their dinner. I have
said it many times, and also written in my doctrines: that I envy not these
gamesters for the money that they win, but at the sighs that they give:
because, if they cast the dice with courage, with great sighs they wish their
chance. But coming to the purpose of your demand, and answering to your
request: I say, that if to all the demaundes of your letter, I shall not
answer with grace and good eloquence, impute the fault to my disgrace, and
also unapt disposition. And the cause of my disgrace endures not to be
written with ink in paper. But it suffiseth a man to be at Court, where be few
things to be commended, but many to the contrary. Sir you write unto me to
advertise you of my opinion of ye bailiwick of Orihnela, which ye Queen has
given you, and the guard of the frontires of Caspe, whither the Moors of Pampe
do pass, and they of Africa do enter. To this I answer, that you have to
make small accounte, that the Queen has given you the charge of Justice if
god deny you his grace: because preheminent offices, by virtues be conserved,
but heroical virtues amongs offices, do run in peril. In him that
administreth Justice, it is necessary he have good Judgment to give sentence,
temperance in his speech, patience to suffer, good counsel to discern, good
disposition to Justice, and fortitude to execute. If in the budget of your
household stuff, you find your self furnished with all these kind of goods:
you may safely be Judge of Orihnela, and also governor of Valentia. And if
your ability stretch not so far, it should be more sound counsel for you,
to keep your house, than to bring your honor in question and disputation. Also
you wright unto me, to advertise you what was contained in the countess of
Concentainas letter, which the queen showed me. That which passed in this
case, is: that the Earl of Concentaina being dead, my Lady the Countess
presently did wright unto ye vassalles of ye Earldo^r, a certain letter of the
sorrow and grief of her husbands death: and in the end and conclusion of the
letter, they placed according to the manner of such Ladies and widows, which
is to wit, the sorrowful and most unfortunate countess, and added there unto
in ye place of ye firm thereof, two great blottes. The letter being received,
and read by her vassals, in their counsel before all men: they advised to
answer my Lady the Countess, and also to give her to understand, of the
sorrow they conceived of the death of the Earl her husband and their Lord.
And it seemed good unto them, that since she had changed the style of her
firm, that also they were bound too alter the style of their letter: In
which, the superscription thereof said thus: Unto our sorrowful Lady and
most unfortunate countess of Concentayna: withinin the upper face of the
letter, where they place the words of curtesy and congratulation, was after
this manner: Right magnificente and most sorrowful Lady: at the end where was
said, by the ordinance of ye counsel, justice, and governors, were made three
dasshes much blotted, in such wise, that according to the tenor of her writing,
she answered: My Lady the Countess received no small offense thereof, and yet
with good grace she said unto me, that she wished the error had passed by one
man's fault, and not as it was by all their consents. Also you write unto me to
advertise you how it stands with Mosen Burela, since the time he received
that so great distress in Xatina: Sir unto this I answer, that unto me he
gives great sorrow to behold him, and no less compassion to hear him:
because I see him wander laden with thoughts, and no less forsaken of friends.
Believe me sir and be out of doubt, that he falls not in all this world, yt
falls not out of his princes favor, because ye fashion or style of Court is,
that the private and in favor, knows not himself, and with the fall, and
out of favor, no man will grow aquainted. The houses and Courts of Princes be
very fortunate unto some, and no less perilous unto others: because there,
either they prevail and grow very great, or else utterly lose themselves.
All Courtiers seem to me, to resemble the Be, or else the Spider: wherein
there be some persons in Court so fortunate, that all things whereon they lay
hands, turns to gold, and others so unlucky, that all which they pretend
co^uerts to smoke. As concerning our Mosen Burela, I can say unto you, that he
is thoroughly smoked, as touching his honor: and no less stumbled and fallen in
respect of his goods, because he has lost the office that he held, and the
credit wherewith he was sustained. Sir, also you wrighte to me, to advertise
you of the state of the Sons of Vasko Bello, your friend and my neighbor: to
this I answer, that their parents having past their lives in the trade of
merchants, they have converted themselves to the state of Gentlemen: and to the
end you understand me better, I say, they be not of ye Gentlemen of ancient
right, but such as have obtained by prise and purchase, because their goods
being consumed, I hold their gentry fully finished. In the state that men do
get their living, in the same they ought to conserve themselves: for otherwise,
of rich Merchantes, they become poor Servants. The Sons of Vesko Bello have
quartered their goods, as if they should have quartered the same by justice:
for the one part they have given to women, another to banquets, another to
dice, and the other to wanton devises, in such wise, that that which their
fathers gate in Fayres, they spend and consume in follies. Sir, also you write
me to advertise you of my judgment, of a certain new marriage that they offer
you in Villena with a woman that is rich, young, fair, gentle, and above all of
good report and fame.

As concerning the first, Sir I can say unto you, that such a marriage as this,
is of many desired, and of few obtained, because there is not in this world, a
woman so perfect and accomplished, ye has all in her, that of her husband may
be wished, and nothing found in her to be removed and rejected. There be some
Gentlewomen, the which if they on the one part be rich, of gentle blood,
young, and fair, they hold on the other part, a certain ouerthwartnesse in
condition, and certain frowardness in conversation, that their husbands hold
it for less evil to dissemble that they see, tha^ to chide or grow angry for
that which they feel. Leaving this apart, Sir you have to consider, that if
she be young, you are old: and if she be fair, you are hoare headed: and that
it is not sufficient that she do content you, but that she also of you have
very good liking: for otherwise, she walking with a crooked face, you shall
pass with her a very tedious life. Amongst the married, it is less evil that
misliking do happen unto the man, than unto the woman: because the husband if
he be wise, can dissemble his grief: but ye wife, neither can she dissemble
it, neither yet keep silence. If the wife which they give you, be rich, I hold
it for profitable: if she be fair, I hold it for delectable: if she be of
gentle blood, I hold it for honorable: but if she be young, I hold it for
perilous, because she shall have wherefore to sigh, to see you so old: and you
shall not want, wherefore to watch, to see her so young. I cannot say in whether
of you both I may lay the blame, or rather which I may not blame: you, for
choosing, or she in accepting: because a young wench of twenty years, with an
old man of threescore years, is a life of two years. Consider well what you
do, and have regard what you take in hand, and be advised with whom you
marry: for a man of so great an age, to marry with so tender years, from
henceforward I prophesy, that either she shall hate you, or else defame you,
either else finish or make an end of you. Sir, finally I say, that if you will
accept my counsel, and escape anger and displeasure, you shall keep your
house, and procure and follow your profit: and if you will needs marry, you
shall marry with the fatlings of Algezi, with the lambs of Polop, with the
white wine of Monuiedro, and with the Claret of Venicarlo, the which shall
yield you substance, and enlarge your life. No more but that I incommend my
self, to the grace of the Lady Leonora of Villa noua.

From Granado the xij. of February. Anno. 1526.
A letter to the Chanon Osorius: wherein is declared, that we know not the
things that profit or hurt us in this life.

Reverend Chanon, Cornelius Rufus in the late time of Omitus Cincinatus, lying
one night in his bed in good health, dreamed that he had lost his sight, so as
he was constrained to be lead like a blind man, which afterward was found true,
for awaking from sleep he was so deprived of sight, that he never after could
see either heaven or earth. Phalaris the Theban being grievously sick of a
disease in his lungs, enterprised himself to enter into battle, wherein he
received a wound with a Spear, and such was his fortune, that he was not only
healed of the hurt which in the battle he received, but was also discharged and
cured of his former malady. Mamilius Bubulus king of Hetruria receiving in
battle a wound with an arrowe which entered his body up to the feathers, the
same being drawn out, the head thereof remaining still in his flesh, had
afterward by fortunes favor this good chance, one day going to chase, in
pursuit of a Heart was cast down Horse and man into a ditche, out of which
mishappe sprang his better luck, for by means of the same he voyded from him
the arrow head before left and closed in his flesh, and became afterward more
healthful than ever he was before. So as we may infer by that which has bin
said, that men full little know what is profitable or hurtful to them: sure it
appears that Cornelius Rufus sleeping in his bed became blind, Phalaris the
Thebane by hurt of a spear recovered remedy of his former sickness: and
Mamilius by mishappe of a fall to receive happy auoydance of the arrowe head
which before lay closed in his flesh. Wherefore I conclude and say that all
the chances of this present life have in themselves alone no more good or
evil than according to their sequel and effect they bring, so that if we find
they have conclusion to our liking, we count them happy and good: and if
contrary to our desires and expectation they bring misfortune, unfortunate and
evil, which gives me just cause to say that we should not for any flattery
of fortune, or of any good hap be proud, nor yet for any her frownings and
contrary haps despair. I have made all this recital before, to gratify your
new recovered health and the departure of your sickness, that is to say, that
having bin three years grievously sick of a fever quartan, there has happened
to your mind some so great a grief that the force thereof suffered to drive
and beat the quartaine from your house, which makes me once twice and thrice
to affirm that we know not what to require to be helping to us, because diverse
times with great care we seek that we should flee and eschew, and we flee
from that we should with all diligence seek and follow. Amongst the high
precepts of the divine Plato this was one, that we should not pray to the Gods
to give us this or that, but with importunat prayer to require, that it would
please them to give us that which stood with divine pleasures best to bestow,
and to our need most commodious. The Hebrews being long time ruled by Judges,
demanded of God a King to govern them, whom they might obey, which God
performed, rather to satisfye their earnest petition, than of any proceeding
from his merciful pleasure: he gave them such a person to their King, as it
had bin better for the^ never to have demanded or had any at all. Now be it as
it be may, or happen what shall happen, I return again to rejoice with you
for ye departure of your troublesome fever, and the bitter anger which has
chaced it from you: though I remember not that ever I red and much less heard
the Lady Sorrow at any time caused any good thing to happen unto us. I certify
you Sir Chanon, if all the diseases might be cured like yours with heaviness
and sadness, pensiveness and cares would then be more dear in our hearts,
than Rubarb is now in the Apoticaries shops: and if we should buy sighs,
sobbes, and tears in the market for money, I assure you very many both men and
women would thereby grow exceeding rich and happy, which now are poor and
unfortunate, because sorrow with every body is so common, that there is neither
corner nor place so secret wherein she is not found. Touching my self I tell
you, if the sighs I have breathed, and the sorrow I have endured, might serve
for medicines to cure the quartaine, I would be bound to set up such a Shop
of those merchandises, that it should serve both Spain and France. I have
seen many in this world whereof some wanted their eyes, some their ears, and
some their hands: othersome lack houses, others goods, and some other
apparel: But I never knew nor heard of person were he never so poor that had
not sorrow and grief: so is there no house in the world so rich, that
sometimes wants not money, and of enuies and sorrows is never destitute.
Sadness says Solomon dries ye sinowes, and co^sumeth the bones, which by you
cannot be proved, since it is apparent, that melancholy sullenness has not
wasted your bones, but purged your body of all evil humors and restored your
health. Now from henceforth, if any one come to visit you when you are sick,
he cannot (as I think) more pleasure you tha^ to give or minister occasion to
move you to choler. But sir I curse your complexion and hate your co^ditio^s,
since anger, envy, and sorrow must be your Physicians to cure your
maladies, for men that be reasonable, do usually give money to enjoy mirth and
solace, and to escape some sorrows and troubles. Now if you will believe me,
and hereafter follow mine advice, be glad for the loss of your quartayne,
but say not that you drive him from you with anger and grief. For I swear to
you by the law of a freende, if you do, that all men will therefore diffame
you, and say that you are compounded and furnished with choleric, aduste,
and evil complexion: but for this matter let this suffice. There be many
things here in the Court to be talked of in secret, and few to be written
openly. For murmurings be matters of counsel, and my letters often pass
through many men's fingers, which when they cannot rightly understand and
perceive their effect, then every one judges and gloseth thereof after their
own devise and opinion. I pray God be your guide, and give us grace evermore
to fear him.

A letter to Count Masaoth Marquis of Cenolte, wherein is expressed why amongst
the sects of Mahomet, some be termed Turks, Sarracenes, and others, Moors.

HOnorable Lord and singular friend, it is now ten days paste since you
requested me in the Emperors chamber, to resolve you one doubt, the which to
do I have searched with pain, and used what diligence I possibly might:
holding it but justice to submit my travel to your commandment, that never
denied me any thing which I requested of you: desiring you withal to respect,
that if I seem long in satisfying your demand, it is not want of diligence
to search, but of good hap quickly to find that which I seek, and you
desire to have, because a man of your state and calling, must be served with
truths and reason, and not with fabling vncerteynties. Your Lordships desire
is to know why the great Turk is termed the Great Turk: and wherefore the
followers of Mahomets feet be called Sarracens, some Mores, and some Turks,
being all of the law and religion of their only god and Lord Mahomet? For the
discussing of the which doubt, and for that you may the better understand my
resolution of the same: I am forced to recite the history to you (as it were
from the first or beginning. Understand my Lord, The original of the Turks
that Asia the less is a region which with many other Regions is enclosed,
all which generally are called great Turquie: it boundeth toward the East,
on the confynes of Arabia minor: on the west it is enclosed with the great lake
Cynia: and on the north side with the floude Euponius: and on the southe cost
it is walled with the mount Pithmiaus. In this Turquie near to Armenia, by
the great hill Paton, was an ancient City named Truconia, whereof the
inhabitants were named Truconians, after the name of the City. Within this
City Goths did come to inhabit, who because they could not call it
Traconia, pronounced and called it Turquie, and Cityzens Turks: so that the
word Turquy is a name corruptly come from the word Traconie. Within the
country of Turquie is sundry provinces: as the Province of Licaonia, whereof
the chief city is Icaonia: Likewise Cappadocia, the chief whereof is
Cosaria: the Province Isanca, whose head city is Solenna, which now is called
Briquemust: the country called Icaonia, whose chief city is Fer, in old
time named Quisguaince: also Paflagonia, whose capital or Metropolicke town
is Gernapolis, in which most properly ended the whole Asia. And as within this
cuntry of Turquy is contained many several countries and provinces, so has it
ever been peopled with men of several cuntries and nations, as with Asians,
Greeks, Armenians, Sarracenes, Iacobines, Jews, and Christians: The which
albeit they acknowledge the Great Turk for chief Lord, yet notwithstanding
they were not all in obedience to one kind of law and religion.

In like manner you must note that in the kingdom of Palestina, which
bordereth upon Damas, there were three Arabies, as Arabia Silapide, The first
Saracyns.

This Mahomet was borne in Arabia, issued of the line of Ismaell and of a base
place: he being an Orphant was sold to a great Merchant, his master dyed, he
married his wydow, he was instructed in false doctrine by a Moonke named
Sergius a fugitive from Constantinople, he afterward challenged and the people
attributed certain divine veneration unto him, which the unlearned Barbarians
were prompt to believe, so as when by force of the falling sickness he fell, he
feyned to the people that he could not endure the brightness of the Angel
Gabriell, whom he affirmed to celebrate with him the secrets of the highest,
with many such abominable errors, and such like abuses he abused the people.


that now is Siria mayor: Arabia deserta, joining upon Egypt: and Arabia
Petrosa, which is compassed with Judea. In Arabia Petrosa, by the flood
Iordanus near the mount Libanus, there dwelt an ancient kind of people called
Saracyns, which were so called after the name of Sartato their chief and
Metropolitan City, which at this present be still so named Saracyns. This kind
of people in times past were much esteemed for their strength and valiantness
in wars, and were then had in reputation therefore, as the Swissers are
accounted of at this day in Europa, in such wise, that no Prince durst
enterprise against any other to battle, except he were aided with the strength
of Saracyns. It chanced that Heraclius a Roman Emperor passing through Asia
to invade the Persians, requested aid of the Saracyns in the same voyage and
journey, to whom he promised good usage and true pay, the Saracyns agreeing to
Heraclius request, came thoroughly furnished with 40000 footmen souldiars,
whose Captain general was a gentleman of their own country called Mahomet, a
man subtle in wit, of valiant heart, and fortunate in exployt of war, as he
manifested most puisantly by obtaining more honor than any other in the Camp,
whereby he grew in daily reputation amongst his own companions, and more
fearful than the Wolf is to the Sheep, to the hearts of his enemies, which
hanging the times of these wars, caused the Emperor Heraclius to favor him
above all others. The wars ended, and license given for all the strangers to
depart, he sent the Saracyns away discontented and not well paid, which moved
them, and their general Mahomet to raise mutine and coniuration, in such
wise, that they assailed Palestina, which before they had subdued, and invaded
the countries of Egypt, Damas, the two Syrias, Pentapolis, and Antioch,
without resistaunce of any person.

Here also you must understand, that Mahomet was by his father a Gentile, and
by his mother a Jew, which is the cause why he was fostred in Judea. He held
one Sergius which was infected with the heresies of Arius and Nestor, a very
ambitious man, for his especial friend. By whom Mahomet understanding well,
what honor and reverence the Saracyns yielded unto him: and accompting him
self their head and chief, determined to become their King and lawegiuer, to
the end, as King to be reputed, and for lawmaker to be worshipped. And as this
mo^ster Mahomet had a Ge^tile to his father, a Jew to his mother, and a
Christian Heretic to his chief friend and instructor: so each of them used
their several laws: out of which three he determined to elect one, to
satisfye, or more properly speaking, to delude all nations. Thus this miscreant
(nothing regarding the souls health, nor due reformation of the common state,
but thristing after the renoune of a Prince during life, and the fame of their
lawgiuer after death) instituted and published a sect, or rather a rabble of
abominable precepts, and detestable counsels: thereby to change the
virtuous, and therewith to delight the vicious and wicked.

In the year 630. Heraclitus inferred and began his wars against the
Persians, and in the year 632. the wars ended. In yt year 632. Mahomet by
conquest subdued the greatest part of Asia, and in the year 636. he gave his
laws to the Saracyns his countrymen, the which he first brought into Arabia
Petrosa, not by preaching in word, but murdering with sword. The government of
the East thus resting, it chanced in the year 642. that an infinite number of
barbarous people, passing by the streets of the mountains Caucasus, to invade
that part of Asia Minor that bordereeh on Asia Mayor, whose coming brought
good success to the Nations adjoining. These people by descent were of three
mighty rude countries, that is, of the Scithians, now called Persia, of the
Panonia^s now named Hungaria, and of the Escaines now called Denmarcia: which
barbarians departed forth of their native soil, as it is judged, constrained
with penury and want of victuals, as also with the Civil wars which they
had amongst themselves. For being without a governor, they lived by robbing
and pilling one from another, evermore driving the weakest to the worst.
Whereat Mahomet astonished at this their arrival, and seeing the Scithes and
Paenonians daily more and more to endamage Asia, and to become so stout, as to
furnish themselves with places of defense, he determined with a mighty power of
Saracyns to encounter them. This thing dismayed the Barbarians, and caused them
to assemble together, where they chose one Trangolipique for their general, a
man in wars much fortunate, and in peace most vicious.

Now the wars of the Scithians and Saracyns grew so hot, so long, and so
cruel, that in three years and a half was soughten six mighty and bluddy
battles, wherein Fortune declared her mutabilitie, for to the Saracyns she was
unfriendly, and to the Scithians nothing favorable, sometimes gyuing victory to
the one side one day, and triumph to the other side on the next day. Which the
Scithians well noting, and perceiving that their number was much decreased by
means of those wars: and also the Saracyns beholding the present spoil of
their countr^* they agreed amongst themselves upon Articles ensuing, to
continue friends for ever: that is, that the Scithes should receive the law
of Mahomet, and that the Saracyns should give them that country to inhabit.
Which accordingly took effect, and was concluded in the year 647. that the
Saracyns and Turks became friends and confederates, and from that time
forward, did wholly submit themselves to the obedience of Mahomet, taking him
for king, and vowing fidelity to his laws.

Strabo, Plynie, Pomponius Mela, and Gelaton, which have described all
countries in the world, make little account of Turkey before such time as
the Scythes began to inhabit the same, who in the end became so strong, and
the Great Turk and Turquy so famous, as at this day it is reputed one of the
most renowned Empyres in the world.

How the love of Mahomet entered Africa.
Understand you, that in the year 698. a puissant Pirat named Abeuchapeta,
passed from Asia into Africa, leading with him 70. Galleys and 100. other
vessels furnished for his exployte, with which he pilled, and pirased, such as
he met withal by Seas, and did also many times much hurt on the firm land.
This Abeuchapeta was a man valiant, hardy, and rich: and a Saracyne observing
the law of Mahomet, of whom the Arabian Historiographers report, that he
never sacked any Town that would submit themselves to him, nor raunsomed to
liberty any person that he had taken prisoner. This companion (for so
henceforth will I term him,) understanding that in the Realm of the Moors,
(otherwise called the country of Mauritania, and now called the kingdom of
Marrucos) were extreme cruel and civil wars: he determined to hasten
thither with his fleet, and to establish himself Lord of all: who passing ye
straites Giberaltare, and being arrived upon firm land, immediately practiced
to acquaint himself with one of the chief bands of the Moors, by which
policy in short time he obtained afterward to be chief of the Realm, and
compelled them secretly to accept and observe the Mahometicall laws and
religion, by killing some and banishing others. Whereby it came to pass, that
such as this companion brought thither with him, and the subdued inhabitants
of Marrucos, were the first in Africa that togythers embraced the laws of
Mahomet, who as before time were always called Moors, do still at this
present and ever after continue the name of Moors or Morisques: so that the
inhabitants of Thunies, which be those of Tunis, and the Numidians which are
the people of Fesse, and the Maurentines, which are the people of Marrucos, be
al generally termed by the name of Moors: though ye countries do much differ
in scituatio^. This then is the resolution of your letter, and the answer to
your demand: that the name Saracyns was first found in Arabia, where Mahomet
was borne: the name Turks invented in Asia, where Mahomet remained, and the
name of Moors establed in Africa, when the law of Mahomet was there first
received.

Now rests it to discover unto your Lordship, wherefore this name Great is
attributed to the Turk, seeing it is a title which none but he uses: other
Princes being only and simply called by the names of Kings or Emperors.

For better understanding whereof, know you, that in the year 1308. when
Michael Palealogos was Emperor of Constantinople, and Bonifacius the 8. chief
Bishop of Rome. There sprang amongst the Turks a family of Othomans, much
fortunate and famous over all Asia, in such sort that those Turks surnamed
Othomans, enlarged the limits of their rule, and revenues of their crown,
more in 200. years, than any of their predecessors had in 800. These Othomans
descended of base lineage, and were naturally of Prusea three days journeys from
Trapezoncia. The first Prince of this nation called Othoman, took this name
upon him at his erecting of a Castle in the country of Gallana, which he did
to perpetuate ye memory of the Othomans name. Othoman.
This Othoman the first subdued many provinces of the Kings his adjoining
neighbors, he wan all that which stretched from Bithynia unto the Sea Cocsin.
He brought to his obedience many fortresses, toward the Sea Pontick and all
the Cities standing on the Sea costs named Teutonica, with the Town of Sina,
aunciently named Sebastia. Leaving to succeed him his only son named
Orchanees, Orchanees.
second Emperor of the Turks of the race of Othomans, which conquered many
provinces from the Empire of Palialogos: but especially he obtained the
countries of Lycaonia, Phrygia, Missina, and Carye: he took by force Prusia,
now called Bursia, which was the abiding seat of the Kings of Bythynie in
which he received his mortal wound in the first year of the reign of John
King of France. Amurathes.
To whom succeeded Amurathes his son, who imitating the steps of his
Father and Grandfather, in passing an arm of the Sea Hellispont in Abidie, to
invade the Greeks, took Galiapolys with diverse other Towns, and afterward
suddaynely with a mighty power set upon the Emperor of Constantinople, that
nothing mistrusted him, and wanne Seruia and Bulgaria, but in the end he was
killed by a seruitor.

After Amurathes succeeded by succession two infants, Solomon and Baiazeth.
Solomon and Baiazeth, which by treason murdered his brother Solomon, whereby he
alone enjoyed the Empire of Turkey, and to revenge the murdering of his father,
he attempted sharp wars against Mark the Lord of Bulgaria, whom he
vanquished and flewe, and subdued a great part more of his country. Shortly
after he overcame the provinces of Hungaria, Albania, and Valachia, and there
committing many spoils and damages, he took diverse christian prisoners,
which he led in miserable captivity into Thracia, to which Baiazeth
succeeded in right of inheritance two infants, one named Mahomet, and the other
Orchanees, which by his unnatural brother Mahomet, was deprived of life, so as
the government of the Empire was wholly in Mahomet, who by might conquered the
Valachians, and laid upon them a grievous tribute: after, he invaded the
Satrapes of Asia, and recovered all the countries which the great Tamberlens
soldiers before had taken: he chased his own kynred and aliaunce from
Galacie, Pontus, and Capadocia, not sparing, nor once pitying any noble
personages or princes of his own blood. He always kept himself in Drinople,
the Metropolike City of Thracia, there placing his imperial seat: from
thence exiling such Christians as were remaining and inhabiting there in the
seventeenth year of his Empire.

To this Mahomet succeeded his son called Amurathes, he ordained first the
Ianissayres, (runnagate christians to defend his person) by whose valiancie,
he together with his successors have subdued the East. With force he invaded
Hungaria, Bosina, Albania, Vallachia, and Grecia: he took Thessalonia from the
Venetians, he obtained victory against Laodislaus king of Polonia, against the
Cardinal Julian, and against Huniades.

When Amurathes was dead, his son named Mahomet, Mahomet son to Amurathes.
succeeded in his place, which with homicide entered his government: for,
because his father should not be buried alone, he slew his yoonger broother,
to keep company with his dead father. This wicked Prince believed in no God:
he affirmed Mahomet a false Prophet, like unto himself. He also scorned all
Saints, Patriarchs, and Prophets. This Mahomet was of heart like Alexander
the great, in good fortune a Caesar, in travel a Haniball, in Justice a
Traian, in vices a Lucullus, and in cruelties a second Nero. He was of great
courage, well favored, evil colored, friend to Justice, and hyghly delyghted
in martial affairs. He was in feeding a glutton, and in the acts of Venus
much impacient: To hunting an enemy, and to Music no friend. He delyghted
to exercise him self sometimes with feats of arms, and sometimes in reading
histories. This Mahomet conquered from the Christians the Empire of
Constantinople and Trapezonda. He wanne two hundred towns and twelve
Realms, that is to say: Pontus, Bythinia, Capadocia, Pamphilia, Licia,
Sicilia, Papblagonia, Acbaria, Lydia, Phrygia, Hellespont, and Morea: He also
wanne the Segniories of Achaia, Carcania, and Epyrus, and all the Fortes and
Cities near the river Randabelo. He likewise obtained a great part of
Macedonia, and of the Province of Bulgaria, together with the land of Roscia,
and the mountains Serbye, even to the lake Nicomante. Moreover be conquered
all the Cities, Provinces, and Fortresses that were between Andrinopolis, and
the famous river Danubia and Balaquian: also the Isle Mitilene, and the
foresaid Bosina. These and much more did this miscreaunt Mahomet vanquishe
and subdue. And yet notwithstanding, as Historiographers report, Mahomet first
of ye race of Othoma^s, that took on him the name of Great Turk and Emperor.
he would amongst his wayghtie affairs consume much time in abominable
vices. This was he, which first acquyred to himself the glorious title and
name of Great Turk and Emperor, of all the house and race of Othomans, whose
predecessoures before his time were always intytuled Kings or Turks. He
raygned thirty two years, and dyed of the Collicke four days after he
syckened, in the year of our savior Christ. 1492. In which year of this
Tirantes death, was the City of Granado taken by the King Don Ferdinando. To
this Mahomet succeeded in Empire and name of Great Turk, a second Baiazeth,
who, in his Fathers life, To this Baiazeth succeeded Selim, which poisoned his
father, because he lived ouerlong, and to Selim succeeded Soliman which wanne
Belgra, Hu^garia, Buda, and Rhodes.
by procurement of the Ianissayres, and in the hope of their aid, purposed to
usurp the state and Empire to himself. And as the father being now very
old, could yield no remedy nor revenge to his disloyal son, dyed for
thought: so was his life, which by enemies could not be taken away, lost
by the enuyes of his children. Now if your Lordshippe desire more amply to
read the writers of this history, I will when it please you, bring them unto
you.

From Tolledo the.7. of January. 1533.
A letter to Don Frances of Villoa, expounding certain strange and ancient
Epitaphes.

MAgnificent and curious Knight, for answer to the letter which Peter de
Heredia (master of your house) delivered me at Carsares the 15. of the
month paste. I say, that after I had opened it, I stood long in doubt,
whither it should be a letter sent me from a friend, or the last will and
testament of some one departed: but then, when I better advised the
superscription, I found it a letter come from Don Frances de Villoa, a
friend, nay a singular friend to Friar Anthony Gueuara: and to say truly,
after I had perused and considered it, I rather wished two dosen of Quails,
and a gammon of Bacon, whereof you have plenty, than a sheet of paper: for
they would have delyghted mine eyes, and nothing have troubled my memory. But
notwithstanding this my pleasant speacke, I delyghted much in the receyte of
your letter: whereby I perceive that your hurt leg is cured, and that
presently you omit all tedious affairs, and only apply your self to
pleasant pastymes.

Also, I gather by your letter, that you much desire to understand of the
destruction of Spain, and the signification of certain Epitaphes, which you
have found written in a book in your coffers, and now you send the^ to me to
be expounded. For which I cannot yield co^digne thanks to your gentle heart,
which conceyueth of my ability such good opinion, that you judge my knowledge
sufficient to satisfy you in so high matters. Wherefore to arm my endeavor to
encounter your courtesy, I have most willingly in this my letter sent you the
exposition of those Epitaphes, and the discourse of the history, which you so
much desire, beginning with the Epitaphes, and ending with the rest.

The first Epitaph.
Semiramis Queen of Babylon set this Epitaph up in ye name of her husband
Ninus.
MIhi pater Jupiter Belus auus Saturnus Babilonicus: proauus Chus Saturnus
Aethiops: Abanus Saturnus Aegiptius: Atauus Caelus Foenix Ogiges. Ab Ogige ad
meum auum solorbem suum circumlustrauit semel ac tricies and centies.

Ab Auo ad patrem sexties and quinquagies: A patre ad me bis and sexagies.
Columnam, templum, statua, Ioui Belo Socero, and matri Rheoe in olimpo
Semiramis dicaui.

Semiramis Queen of the Assyrians graued this title on a pillar, and dedicated
it unto Belus her father in law, in the name of her late husband Ninus, as
then it was used amongst the^, which words englished, signify as follows.

My father was Jupiter named Belus: my grandfather, Saturnus Babylonicus: my
great grandfather was Chus Saturnus Aethiops: The father of my great
grandfather was Saturnus Aegipriacus, and the grandfather of my great
grandfather was Celus Faenix Ogiges.

From the time of the fludde until Ninus, the sun had performed his
course.330. times. Nemroth reigned.56. years. Belus my father reigned.62.
years. I Semiramis have dedicated this pillar, temple, and Image unto Belus my
father in law, and Rhea his mother in law in Olympia.

Now better to make you understand this antiquity so ancient, and this age so
old, you must note that these words Saturnus, Jupiter and Hercules were not
proper names, as Peter and John be, but they were common names or titles
attributed to men for their excellencies and dignity, as the names of
Emperors, Kings and Dukes. The most ancient kings that founded any chief
Town or City within their Realms or dominions, were called Saturni, and
their eldest sons Jupiters, and their daughters Juno. Their Nephews, and the
infants of their children, if they were valiant, were called Hercules. And
therefore when any Princes successors of the said first founders, did place
themselves at any time in other countries to inhabit the same, and founded any
new Cities or Towns (as oftentimes they did when their auncesters and
predecessors had sufficiently peopled such as they before had builded) such
Princes enjoyed a duble title, keeping the name of Jupiter by right of
succession, and the name of Saturn, by reason of their new foundation, and so
likewise the Princes which spra^g of them by succession, were also named
Jupiters in one respect, and Hercules in another: whereof proceeds the great
number of Jupiters, Saturnes, and Hercules, wherewith histories be so
replenished.

Belus was therefore here entitled by the name of Jupiter, for that he was
son and successor to Nemroth in the Assirian Empire. Nemroth also was termed
Saturn Babylonicus, because he first founded the City, and peopled the Realm
of Babylon. Chus was also termed Saturnus Aethiopicus, for that he first
peopled Aethiopia, and there founded towns and Cities. Cham for yt he first
peopled Egypt was called Saturnus Aegiptiacus. These Saturnius were called
children of the Heavens and of Earth. Thus have you now heard the first Epitaph
expounded.

The second Epitaph.
The Epitaph of Cata Ma^lia that was buried living.
C. Man. C. Man. F. inferno Plutoni tricorpori charissimae Proserpinae
tricipitique Cerbero munus mecum ferens, damnatam dedo animam vitamque. Hoc me
condo monumento, ne obrutis domus lapsu filijs sex, quos Publius Scipio patrijs
Camertibus ad Salid ex Libia incolumes restituerat, in desolata orbitate
supersim. Vixi An. 56. M. 1. D. 5. boras scit nemo: vale vita.

The exposition of the same.
ICaia Manlia, daughter to Caius Manlius, do carry with me mine own present,
for I give my condemned soul and life to the infernal three bodied Pluto, and
to Proserpina his most dear spouse, and to the threeheaded Cerberus. I have
enclosed my self in this Sepulcher to live in care and grief abandoned and
afflicted. I have vj. Children slain most miserably by the fall of a house,
after that Publius Scipio had led them into their country of Camerin out of
Libia traveling toward Salia. I lived lvj. years, one month, and five
days, but how many hours no man knows. Farewell life.

Now if memory deceive me not, and that my books be true, this Epitaph was
found in our time in Rome, which was of a woman of Camerin that was burned
living, because in those days they were so foolish and faythlesse, that they
esteemed it a thing deserving praise, and much honorable to be buried quick,
or violently to murder themselves with their own hands: and thus they did to
please themselves and serve the Devil. But law divine and humane does
manifest now unto us how execrable a vice this is, and forbids every man
to procure his own death, since we have our savior Christ the author of our
life.

The third Epitaph.
Belli potens valida natus de gente Gothorum, The Epitaph of Athaolphus king of
the Goths.

Hic cum sex natis Rex Athaolphe iaces:
Ausus es Hispanas primus descendere in oras,
Quem comitabantur milia multa virum:
Gens tua tunc natos and te inuidio sa peremit,
Quem post amplexa est Barcino magna gemens.
To understand this Epitaph you must note, that when the Goths (which were a
barbarous and cruel nation of the North) had sacked Italy, as by the ruins
remaining it appears, Athaolphus the 24. their King, determined to have
ouerrunne Spain, and to have spoiled it as they had done Italy, and other
places in their way. But when he came and was arrived at Barcelona, he, with
vj. of his children, were there by his own soldiers traitorously murdered and
buried, upon whose Tomb was placed this Epitaph, with his arms, which
englished imports as follows.

Here lies the valiant Athaolphus, with six of his children, issued of
Gothic blood: this was the first that adventured to enter Spain with an Army,
slain with his own men, and buried with great tears, in the great City of
Barcelone.

See here the exposition of your Epitaph, and the cause of the fame.

It rests now to reveal the occasion of the destruction of Spain, and how
the Christians lost the same to the Paynims, concerning which you must
understand, that in the time of the reign of king Roderic (which was of ye
line of the Goths,) there was in Spain a Prince called Julian, Earl of
Cepta, and Lord of Consuegra: which had a daughter of excellent beauty and
incomparable wisdom, named Caba. This Damesell being sent to the Court to
attend upon the Queen, to serve her according to the manner of the Country,
was cause of the destruction of Spain. The deflouring of a maide^, was cause
of the ruin of Spain, or rather the heresy of Arius wherewith they were
infected, was cause of that punishment.
For the king being surprised with her love, (when she would not agree to
accomplish his inordinate desires) determined by force, if not by love to
enjoy her, being thus drowned in extreme passions, he defloured her within
his royal Palace. The which when Count Julian understood, he was hyghly
offended therewith, and feeling himself much injured thereby: determined
revenge upon the kings own person, to the end he might make a perpetual
remembrance of the wrong done by the Prince to him and his defloured daughter.

This Count Julian kept secretly in his stomach, the mortal hatred he
bare unto King Roderic: and when he saw convenient time, he made semblance
to pass into Africa with an army which the King had committed unto him,
where with to repulse the Moors, which then invaded the borders of Spain.
And having conferred of his determinations with Muzza Liuetenaunt general of
that Province, to the great Miramamolyn Vlit, he secretly practyzed with him
in this sort, that if he would yield him sufficient supplye of soldiers,
he would put all Spain under his obedience. The which when Muzza
understood, he gave intelligence thereof to King Miramamolyn, who did not
only in courteous wise accept the offer of the Count, but also sent him a
sufficient army to bring his devised practice to effect.

The country being near the straites of Giberaltare, was well furnished with
men of great courage. He then following fortune, being stirred forward by his
wife, and the injury which he had received, rejecting all love of his cuntry,
and renouncing obedience to his Prince: Suddenly as he had embarked his army of
Moors in four ships, and strongly fortified himself, he revealed to his
friends and kindred the injury which the king had done him by deflouring his
daughter, and requested their friendly succor in his enterprise so weighty.
Whereunto they assenting, sent him aid both of men and money:

See here the exposition of your Epitaph, and the cause of the fame.

It rests now to reveal the occasion of the destruction of Spain, and how
the Christians lost the same to the Paynims, concerning which you must
understand, that in the time of the reign of king Roderic (which was of ye
line of the Goths,) there was in Spain a Prince called Julian, Earl of
Cepta, and Lord of Consuegra: which had a daughter of excellent beauty and
incomparable in wisdom, named Caba. This damsel being sent to the Court to
attend upon the Queen, to serve her according to the manner of the cuntrie,
was cause of the destruction of Spain. The deflouring of a maide^, was cause
of the ruin of Spain, or rather the heresy of Arius wherewith they were
infected, was cause of that punishment.
For the King being surprised with loving her (when she would not agree to
accomplish his inordinate desires) determined by force, if not by love, to
enjoy her, so as being thus drowned in extreme passions, he defloured her
within his royal Palace. The which when Count Julian understood, he was
highly offended therewith, and feeling himself much injured thereby:
determined revenge upon the kings own person, to the end he might make a
perpetual remembrance of the wrong done by the Prince to him and his defloured
daughter.

This Count Julian kept secretly in his stomach, the mortal hatred he
bare unto king Roderic: and when he saw convenient time, he made semblance
to pass into Africa with an army which the king had committed unto him, where
with to repulse the Moors, which then invaded the borders of Spain. And
having conferred of that which he would do, with Muzza Auuenokair Liuetenaunt
general of that province, to the great Miramamolyn Vlit, he secretly
practyzed with him in this sort, that is, if he would yield him sufficient
supply of soldiers, he would put all Spain under his obedience. The which
when Muzza understood, he gave intelligence thereof to King Miramamolyn, who
did not only in courteous wise accept the offer of the Count, but also sent
him a sufficient army to bring his devised practice to effect.

The Islands of this country being near the straites of Giberaltare, were well
furnished with me^ of great courage. He the^ following fortune, being stirred
forward by his wife, and the injury which he had received, rejecting all love
to his cuntry, and renouncing obedience to his Prince: Suddenly as he had
embarked his army of Moors in four ships, and strongly fortified himself,
he revealed to his friends and kindred the injury which the king had done him
by deflouring his daughter, and requested their friendly succor in his
enterprise so weighty. Whereunto they assenting, sent him aid both of men and
money: so as he took all the coasts of Spain, and much of the cuntry for the
Moors: which was the first entry of the Moors into Spain, and was in the
year of grace, 712.

When the miserable king Roderic had understanding hereof, and that if with
speed he ordered not his affairs, he should be in danger to loose his
realm and state: with all the has^^ possible he assembled an army to
encounter the Moors, and made a nephew of his Captain general. But the
Moors giving them the overthrow, mangled him and his men in pieces. About
which time, another army of Moors, which the fornamed Muzza had placed in
garrison in places before subdued, entered and took another country or
province. Which King Roderic understanding, and perceiving the Moors daily
to advance their force, committing to fire and swoorde all the country that
they subdued: he gathered together another army, in which himself in person
together with all the Nobility of Spain, The Moors being Lords of all
Spain except Biscay and the Mountains, which is Astiria and Cantabria,
divided it into kingdoms, as Cordubia, Carthage, and such like.
would go to search out the Moors, which then remained at Seres, and did so
in deed: where he made great slaughter both of the strange Moors, and of
his own Christians. But in fine, the Christian army was utterly destroyed, and
the king lost: in such wise, that afterward he could never be found quick
or dead. From this time Spain fell into the subjection of the Moors. This
battle was ended on a sunday the fourth of September, in the year of our
Savior 714. so as the Moors being then victors, might easily make themselves
Lords of all Spain.

A letter unto the Admiral Sir Frederirk, wherein the Auctor does touch the
manner that in old time was used on their sepulchers, and the Epitaphes that
were placed upon the same.

GLorious Admiral and curious Lord, neither does it profit me to be angry,
either to hold my peace, to exclame or complain, neither yet to cease to make
answer: but yt always I must continue in combat with your letters, as also
with your messengers, for absoluing your doubts. It is but.15. days since I
answered your letter, and not a month since I absolved a certain doubt: I am
determined with my self not to answer you to any letter, neither to declare
you any doubt until the counsel of Saratan have considered thereof, and they
of Villaunblalo do determine and judge therein.

To perform wherein you request me, and to execute the case which you co^mau^d
me: I may not deny unto your Lordship, that I have not seen much, heard,
passed, and also read much: but jointly herewith, your honor has to
consider, that I am now become old, wearied and also tired, and go lade^ with
great afaires, which be of necessity, but your doubts proceed of will.

I have said and also written unto your honor many times, as you are but of
little body, and have that mind so generous and noble, it should be much to
your ease, A necessary consideration betwixt will and necessity.
that you and Alonso Espinel made exchange, which is to wit, that he should
lend you some more body, wherein that heart of yours might be contained: and you
bestow on him some more heart, for that gross and so unwieldy a body.
Considering the great dulnes of Alonso Espinel, and the exceeding spirit and
liveliness of your honor: I do not think to be deceived, to vouche that your
Lordship is a soul without a body, and that he is a body without a soul. A
hard comfort.
One thing does yet comfort me, which is, that as your Lordshippe now grows
old, and I also, both old and sickly: we shall not much write each to other,
and much less use mutual visitation: because, as the divine Plato said, that
young men at times die suddenly, but old men may not live long.

Little or much, or much or little, may it please the king of heaven, that
that which we live, we may live to his service, An account to be made, not
what we live, but how we live.
for that we have no account to make, what we live: but how we live.

Leaving aparte both your iestes, and my complaints: I my Lord from hence
forth am determined to answer your letters with all brevity, as also to
declare unto you all your doubts: for as Horace the Poet says, it appertains
to wise men, A counsel of Horace the Poet.
to show a willing mind in that, wherein necessity constreyneth.

Coming to the purpose, your honor co^ma^deth me, to write unto you, ye manner
which they used in old time to make their sepulchers, and the fashion which
they observed in placing their Epitaphes: for as it seems, you mean to take
order for your sepulture, and to devise for the invention of your Epitaph. From
henceforth I say and divine, that all those which shall see my answer unto
your demand, will marvel, and also as it may chance to laugh, for that I
shall be forced in this place to relate histories very strange, and customs
never heard off.

Pliny in the beginning of his seventh book, reciting the great miseries
wherewith man is borne, and the immesurable travels wherein he lives, says
thus: Amongs all the beasts that nature has brought forth, only man crepeth,
only man is ambitious, Errors of man's life.
man only is proud, covetous, and superstitious, only desires long life, and
makes a sepulture wherein to be buried: most truly Pliny spoke great troth,
because all other beasts, neither riches does make proud, neither poverty does
make sad, neither care to lay up in store, neither travel to gather together,
neither weep when they be borne, neither grow sad when they shall dye: but
only travel for living, without carfulness where to be buried. A superfluous
care.
Only the foolish man is he, which fetches marble from Gene, Alabastre from
Venice, porphire from Candie, bone of Gelofe, and Iuory of Guinea: for no
greater purpose than to build a stately chapel, and to erect a sumptuous
sepulcher, where to bury his bones: and the worms to gnaw his intrailes. I do
not disalow, either reprove, but ye rather I admit, and praise, to build good
churches, to erect great Chappells, to endue with good doctrines, to paint
fair stories, and to make rich ornaments: but jointly therewith I say, that I
hold it for more safe, that a man travel and pain himself to lead a good
life, than make a rich Sepulture. A sound counsel.
Oh how many poor men which are buried in Churchyards, whose souls rejoice
and rest in heaven: and how many, which be buried in sumptuous and stately
Sepulchers, whose souls be tormented in Hell. On that night which Troy was
burned, Aeneas entreating his father Anchises to depart the City, to the end
he should not want a Sepulcher, A small boast of Anchises.
the old man answered Facilis iactura Sepulchri, as if he had said, There is
no less grief unto manne, than to want a Sepulcher. The King Anchises said
well in that he spoke, since we see the living man complain of the biting of a
fly, and of a flea that does offend him: but of a man that is dead, we never
hear any complaynt, for any lack of ringing, or want of sumptuous burial.

If Homer and Pisistratus do not deceive us: The Cithes were the people that
with most pomp did bury their dead, and in most reverence did hold their
Sepulchers. Zenophon the Thebane says, That the Cithes fleeing before Darius,
he sent word to know how far they would run: they answered, we Cithes
make no great account to lose our houses, our fields, S(...) of (...) thy(...)
neither our children, neither yet our selves, in respect of offense to the
Sepulchers of our forfathers: unto the which when thou shalt approach, oh King
Darius, there shalt thou see and know, in how much more we esteem the bones
of the dead, Th(...) me(...) they(...) An(...) eni(...) ceas(...) amo^(...)
than the life of the living.

The Salaminos buried their dead, their backs turned against the Agarens,
which were their mortal enemies: In such wise, that their enemitie endured
not only in time of life, but also when they were dead.

The Massagedas at the time of death of any man or woman, they drew forth all
the blood in their veins: and that day all the kindred being assembled, did
drink the blood, and afterward did bury the body.

The Hircans did wash the bodies of the dead with wine, and did anoint the
same with a precious oil: and after the parents had bewailed and buried the
dead, they kept that oil to eat, and that wine to drink.

The Caspians in finishing the last breath were cast into the fire: and the
ashes of the bones being gathered into a vessel, did afterward drink them
in wine, in such wise, that the entrayles of the living, was the Sepulcher of
the dead.

A strange Sepulture.
The Cithes held for custom, to bury no dead man, without burying a live man
with the same: and if by chance there were not that willingly would be buried
with the dead, for money a slave was bought, A violence without all reason.
with violence to be buried with the same.

The Bractians which were a people very barbarous, with smoke did cure the
bodies of the dead, as we now use to smoke our Bacon: after at times (in stead
of Martelmas beef) by peecemeale to boil the same in the pot.

An art most barbarous.
The Thibirins did by industry breed certain most cruel Dogs, the which
at the last gasp of the dead, were cast unto ye Dogs to be eaten and torn to
pieces: in such manner, that the bowels of the Dogs, was the place where the
Thibirins did bury their dead.

An use of the Chibirins most inhumayne.
And for yt it shall not seem that we speak of favor or at large, your honor
has to read S. Jerome against Iouinian, and the Poliantea, in ye title of
sepulture, where you shall find all that I have said, and also much more which we
have omitted here to be written.

Of the sepulture of Belus, of Minus, of Semiramis, of Promotheus, of Ogiges,
and of the other kings of Aegipt, Diodorus Siculus resiteth so many and so
fabulous things, the which I think better to omit than to wright, to avoid
his dishonor and mine own travel.

The Cithes did bury their dead in ye fields, incoffined with a certain wood
of Cithia incorruptible. The Hebrews did bury their dead in their inheritances
or vineyards: upon the same they erected a fair cover curiously wrought, and
of stone of great choice. Commonly in old time they did bury within their
houses, or in the mids of their possessions, and so at this present appears
in Italy, that wheresoever ye shall find any Tomb of earth and stone, it
signifies that there has been erected some honorable sepulture. Four
Sepultures have bin in Rome, The four notable Sepultures in Rome.
most rich and stately: that is to understand, of the great Augustus, which at
this present is called the needle of Adrian, which now is the Castle Saint
Angel: of the good Marcus Aurelius, which is erected in the field of Mars:
and of the valiant Seuerus, which was placed in the Vatican.

Many Princes, both Greeks, Latins, Romans, Persia^s, Medes, Argiues,
Hebrews, and Germans, did make and build many and very stately temples: but
we read of none that commanded or gave order for themselves to be buried
therein: but in the fields, and their Temples they did dedicate unto their
Gods. More than three hundredth years after the foundation of the Christian
faith, none at any time were buried within the Church: whereof it proceeds,
that it is not found in any of the ancient Legends of the martirs, but that
such a martyr was buried in Cimiterie of Pretexato, either of Calisto, or else
in the house or inheritance of some faithful Christian.

Long time after the great Constantine, this custom was brought into the
catholic Church, to be buried in the same: and it is to be thought, that it
rather proceeded of the devotion of the faithful, than for any interest to the
Clergy.

Also your honor says in your letter, that you hold me for a man both careful
and curious, for which cause you suppose, (for that I have passed diverse times
with Caesar into Italy, and have many ways traueled through Spain:) I should
have collected and recovered some Epitaphs of Sepultures, worthy to be seen,
and notable to be red. I cannot deny, but that after the manner of a
Drunkarde, that venteth for the best wine: A commendable manner of drunkenness.
so does mine eyes stare and wander to find out some old Sepulture, that may
contain some thing to read, or sentence or Epitaph worthy the writing: and as
I have traveled many and diverse lands and provinces, I have seen many and very
ancient sepultures, in which I have found some writings grave, some sharp,
others devout, some malicious, some gracious, and some foolish, in such wise,
that some are to be noted, some to be skoft, and others to be laughed at. If I
had thought that any would have been so curious, as to have craved or demanded
them, as I have bin careful and curious to search and find them: I would have
held them in more estimation, and also have commended them to more safe
keeping: for of them I have lent, given, lost, and some have bin stolen, and
othersome I have reserved.

But the case shall be thus, I will send unto your Lordship all manner of
Epitaphs, which is to understand, such as be grave, malicious, foolish, and
some that be gracious: for that in ye good your honor has to note, and in the
other whereat to laugh.

In an Hospital of the incurable, that is in Naples, Caesar upon a certain
festival day did hear service, where I saw in the great Chapel, a Tomb of
a young gentleman, whereon his old mother had placed this lamentable Epitaph.

Quae mibi debebas, supremae munera vitae,
Infelix soluo, nunc tibinate prior,
Fortuna inconstans, lex and varabilis aeui,
Debueras cineri iam superesse meo.
In the same kingdom and City of Naples, upon another festival day, Caesar
went unto a stately Monastery of Nuns of S. Clare, where I found a Tomb of a
certain gentlewoma^ betrothed, which happened to die the same week she should
have bin married: upon whom her parents bestowed this lamentable Epitaph.

Nate beu miserum: misero mibi nata parenti,
Vnicus vt fieres, vnica nata dolor,
Nam tibi dum virum, taedas, thalamumque parabam,
Funera and inferias, anxius ecce paro.
In the City of Capua, I found a Sepulture very old, and in a manner defaced,
in which these letters were engraven, although very short, yet comprehending
much.

Fui non sum,
Estis non eritis.
In the City of Gaieta, one of the strongest upon the Sea coast in all Italy,
being there with Caesar, I met with a Sepulture not of the oldest, upon which
were written these words.

Siluius Paladius,
Vt moriens viueret,
Vixit vt moriturus.
In Rome walking the stations of Saint Paul, passing at great leisure
beholding the Church: I encountered with an old Sepulcher upon the ground: on
the stone whereof these words were engraven.

Hospes quid sim vides,
Quid fuerim nosti,
Futurus ipse, quid sis cogitae.
In the Monastery of Minerua in Rome, which be of the order of Preachers, I
saw in a certain Tomb written these words.

O mors, O mors, O mors,
Aerumnarum portus,
Et meta salutis.
Caesar being in the wars of Africa, the Viceroy of Cicilia died, which was
called the Earl of Monteleon, Lord of Calabria. And for that by justice he did
cut the throat of the Earl of Camarato, and with him many others, the
Cicilians did deadly hate him for the same. The cause was thus, being buried in
Saint Frauncis of Mezina, by night they added this title upon his Sepulcher, as
I was advertised by the warden of the house.

Qui propter nos homines,
Et propter nostram salutem,
Descendit ad inferos.
In the year a thousand five hundred twenty and three, coming out of France
by Nauarne, in a little Church in Viena not far from ye Growine, I saw an
Epitaph upon the Tomb of the Duke Valentine: which without writing, I commended
unto my memory: and as I think thus it said.

Here lies clad in a little clay,
That mortal men did fear,
Which in peace and war the full whole sway,
In all this world did bear.
O thou that go with care to seek,
Worthy things of praise most meet,
If worthy things thou would praise,
Here thou have to direct thy ways,
And therein farther to spend no days.
In the wars of Lumbardy there dyed an ancient soldier, which was valiant
and meanly rich, who was buried by his friends in a little Village betwixt
Plazentia and Voguera, on whose Sepulture were written these words.

Here Campuzano does lie,
With whose soul the Diuill did fly,
But his goods had Sir Antonie.
In Alexandria de la Palla, I found another soldier buried in the Church
within the Castle; upon whose Sepulture, that is to say, upon ye wall, I saw
written with a Cole these words.

Here lies Horozco the Sergeant,
Which lived playing,
And died drinking.
In the City of Aste, when Caesar went to make war in France, we stayed
certain days: A Soldier was buried in the monastery of Saint Frauncis, and
as it seemed being very poor, made his will very rich, upon whose Sepulture
another Soldier placed these words.

Here lies Billandrando,
Which all that he had did not let to play,
And that which he had not he gave away.
In the City of Nisa, we buried an honorable soldier that had bin Captain:
but in the morning, and at night, with a Cole I saw written upon his Tomb these
words.

Here lies the Soldier Billoria,
Whose body to the Church by his friends did send,
But his heart to his love he did incommende.
In a place of Spain which shall be namelesse, I found the Sepulture of a
certain Gentlewoman, upon whose Tomb these words were written.

Here lies the Lady Marina in earthly press,
Which died thirty days before she was countess.
In the.18. year, I being warden of the City of Soria, going to preach to the
Camp of Gomara, in a little Village I encountered with an old Sepulture, upon
the stone whereof were written these words.

Here lies bald John Hussillo,
Which taught boys to swim,
And wenches to dance very trim.
This year past, in visiting my Byshoprick of Mondonedo, I found in the
Archdeaconship of Trasancos, in a little Church by the Sea side, an ancient
Tomb, which they said was of a gentleman natural of ye place, which had these
words written.

Here lies Vasko Bell,
A good Gentleman and a fell,
The which never drew his sword indeed,
That made any man ever to bleed.
Going for Custos of my province of conception, in a general Chapter, jointly
with certain religious Portingalls of my order bound to the same place:
amongst the which the warden of Sanctaren a man both wise and learned,
understanding me to have delight in old things, said that in his Monastery,
upon a Tomb of a Portingall Gentleman were written these words.

Here lies Basko Figueira,
Much against his will.
An amplification upon a small cause.
So high a sentence, so delicate words, and so certain a troth as this, as God
save me might not proceed, either be inverted, but of a man of an high and
delicate judgment: they were spoken in Portingall, in a Monastery of
Portingall, in the behalf of a Portingall, and a Portingall said them:
whereof I gather unto my self, that the nobles of Portingall be wise in their
attempts, and of sharp judgment, in what they speak. To my judgment, my
appetite, and to my taste and liking, to this day I have not heard or red a
thing so gracious, as ye letter of that Sepulture: because, there may not be
said a greater troth, than to say that Basko Figueira, or any other person, is
in his Tomb much against his will. What Sepulture is in this world so rich,
wherein any man desires to dwell, or wishes to be buried, what man is so
insensible, that would not rather live in a narrow houell, than in a large and
ample sepulture. Not only Basko Figueira lies in his sepulture against his
will, but also the Machabees in their Piramides, Semiramis in her Polimite, the
great Cirus in his Obiesko, the good Augustus in his Columna, the famous Adrian
in his Mole magno, the proud Alaricus in his Rubico: All which if we could
demand of them, and they answer us, would swear and affirm, that they
dyed without their own consent, and were buried against their wills. My
Lord Admiral from henceforth I divine, that if Basko Figueira lies dead in
his sepulture against his will: with an evil will I dare auouche you will be
buried in yours, although most certain the chapel is rich, and your Tomb
very stately.

Your honor has to understand, that I thought good to enlarge this letter, to
the end you should have, whereat to marvel, and also wherewith to laugh with a
protestation that I make, that if you write again within this half year, I
will refuse to answer: for that I have in hand certain works of mine own,
presently to be printed, and after to be published. No more, but that our Lord
be in your keeping.

From Valiodolid, the.xxx. of March, 1534.
A letter unto Sir Alphonce Manrique, Archbishop of Civil, wherein is
declared a certain passage of holy Scripture, convenient to be read of Judges
and prelates that be cruel.

Right Noble and pitiful Prelate, if your reverend Lordship do conceive that
for the gallant baye mule which you have sent me by Orlande your Steward, I
should submit my self to do you great service, either to render great
thanks, ye are greatly deceived: for although she be both fair and good, I
have won and gained the same by a sentence pronounced against your honor,
for the costs of process, and the amends wherein you are condemned, when
your most reverend Lordship and the Duke of Naiarra, upon a certain
contention did elect me for your judge: which is to weete, where the situation
of Sagunto should have stand, and the renowned Neomantia should have been:
wherein to determine and verify your doubt, I studied very much, and
traueled not a little. And since you are condemned in a Mule, and consented
unto the sentence, once again I advertise your honor, that I will neither
restore her, and much less pay for her. My Lord the Duke of Naiarra your
brother, at Court does daily threaten me, that either by violence he will
take her from me, or else cause her to be stolen: wherefore I humbly pray your
honor, to command that he leave me in peace, otherwise I promise you, to
prove unto him, by my ancient histories, that the borders and limits of
Naiarra, have been two leagues within the Duchy.

But now setting aside all iestes, to speak in earnest, I shall perform with
right good will, what your honor does command, as touching the exposition of
the passage in Exodus, which I preached last in the presence of Caesar.

An exposition of the.25. chapter of Exodus.
In Exodus, the.25. chapter, it is written, that our Lord God said unto Moses:
Emunctoria quoque facies, and vbi ea quae emuncta sunt, extingantur, fiant de
auro purissimo. As if he would have said, About the lamps of the Temple, thou
shall have snuffers of most fine gold, to snuff withal: and also thou shall
make a basen of gold, wherein to lay the same.

A necessary manner to expound the Scriptures.
But now to understand this text very well, it is convenient and necessary to
take hold of the Scripture farther of, and more deeper: because in the profound
and delicate passages of the holy scripture, it does much importe to declare
the text from the bottom and very root.

Wherein it is to be noted, that immediately after our Lord God had delivered
the children of Israel out of the country of Aegipt, he gave them a law to
observe, Priests to inform them, magistrates to govern them, a land to
inhabit, Manna to sustain them, and a tabernacle to pray in. The curious
reader shall find in the Psalms and Prophets, many times these names repeated:
that is to say, Tabernacle, Sanctuary, Altar, Propiciatorie, Sancta
Sanctorum. Which names although they were verified in the synagoge of the
Hebrews, there was notwithstanding a difference of the one and other.
Tabernacles among the Jews was as much, as among the Christians at this
present we call Church. The order whereof although it be difficile to write,
nevertheless it is very mystical, and worthy the understanding.

In the mids of the host, where the Hebrews did advance their pauilions, A
description of the Tabernacle.
they left a certain space of an hundredth cubits in length, and fifty of
breadth: where on both sides they erected two stately pillars, which did serve
for distinctions or separations of the room for the Priests from the people.
All which place as well in length as breadth, the Israelites did name
Tabernacle, which is as much to say, as a place dedicate only to God. In
the mids of this tabernacle, was placed a solemn and a magnificent altar,
where upon the sacrifice was done: there was also the great basin of water,
where the Priests did wash: and for that unto that place, and no further, the
Israelites might not enter, it was named Sanctuarium, which is to say, a place
sanctified.

Within the Sanctuary there was another separation, of the space of thirty
cubits in length, and ten of breadth, made of Sittim woodde, and alofte having
the fashion or form of heaven, it was covered with a triple couerture, whereof
the one was made of red shepes woolle, the other of goats hear, and the other
of Taxus skins, which was for defense of the rain and Sun. Under this
said heaven, and in the mids of this said place, there was the holy table,
upon which was set the holy bread, called the loves of proposition, and the
holy incense, and other sweet odors. This place here named, was called the
holy Tabernacle, because the Priests only might enter: unto the which place
no other person would adventure to approach.

In the mids of this tabernacle there was a great curtain strained betwixt
the pillars, within the which was the tabernacle of witness: wherein also was
placed the tables of the law, the Manna of heaven, and Aarons rod. This place
was entitled the holy of holiest: wherein the high Priest might enter once a
year. Within the said Arc there was a table of fine gold, somewhat more long
tha^ broad, whereon were placed two Cherubins of gold at every corner, their
wings alofte stretched abroad, beholding each other. In the mids betwixt the
cherubins, there was a dark cloud, within the which was the Angel that gave
answers, as God commanded: And also answered what the good old Moses
determined. In this place where these cherubins are, was the most secret and
sacred of all the tabernacle. This place was called the Propitiatory: because
in that place, the Lord God did manifest himself more propice and near, as
well to pardon, as to answer them. Besides the propitiatory, and near the
altar of the tabernacle, night and day was fire, wherein also they did burn
the holocaustes, sacrifices, and oblations.

Within the tabernacle and propiciatory, ten paces or there aboutes off the
mercy seat, or Sancta Sanctorum, was placed a magnificent candelsticke of
fine gold: whereon were fyxed six lamps full of oil Olyue, which did burn
day and night, to give light to the tabernacle. Here it is to be noted, that
neither in the ancient Tabernacle of Moses, either in that famous Temple of
Solomon, it was not commanded, either permitted to burn tallowe candels,
either tapers of wax, but lamps of oil: for the mystery of the wax, the
only woorkmanshippe of the honey Be, was left to lighten the Catholic
Church. And because the Tabernacle, the Sanctuary, the Altar, the mercy
Seat, and Sancta Sonctorum, were holy places, and edifyed only unto God: The
law commanded they shooulde be decked, nete, clear, and gladsome: and not
foul, or fylthie. Wherefore the Priests had always near unto the
candelsticke, snuffers of gold to snuff the lamps, and a basen of gold,
incontinently to place and put out that which was snuffed. Behold the
litterall sense, and that which was permitted in the Synagogue, now right
reverend, it is great reason that we declare what we understand as
touching these snuffers, and the snuffing of the lamps.

The signification of this discourse touching the mystery of the snuffers of
Gold.
SVrely a thing worthy the noting, and also to be marvelled at, that fire or
flame, being a thing that does purify, mundifie, and give light:
notwithstanding it throws from it self and produces fume and smoke, both
tedious and stinking: and therefore I would gladly demand of him that shall
hear or read the same, what he would answer, whereof it is, A question.
That the altar being holy, the Tabernacle holy, the Propipitiatorie holy, the
Arcke holy, the candelsticke holy, and all that there is, holy and blessed:
notwithstanding there remains always in the Temple, to clippe, to nete, to
purge, to snuff, and whereupon to set the foot. We have hereby to understand
and to infer: That there has not been, neither is there any nation,
congregation, common wealth, estate, An imperfection of all estates.
or person so holy, so perfect, or so reformed, that there is not in the same
to be amended, or else purged, wiped, and also snuffed. For to say the troth,
we see no person live so well, that might not, and ought not to live better
than he does.

And how comes it to pass, A note for the Pope and papists.
that any dare canonize for Saint the most holy man in this world: seeing the
scripture says, The child newborn to be in sin. God finding causes to
chasten the Angels, does he not find wherefore to purge and snuff men?

He that hears the royal Prophet David speak after this manner: Ecce enim
in iniquitatibus conceptus sum, and in peccatis concepit me matter mea: Durst
he peradventure say, that in him was no sin?

And God said unto Noe, Quod omnis caro corruperat viam sua^: what may he be,
that will say, he had no sin, considering that God condemns the universal
world of sin?

Since the Psalmist says with most clear voice, Omnis homo mendax: how
co^mes it to pass, that any dare excuse himself of sin? The Scripture
saying thus, Adam sinned in eating of the defended fruit: Cain sinned in
killing his brother: King David sinned by his adultery: Ionathas sinned in
eating the honey: Absalon in conspiring against his father David: and also
Solomon sinned by idolatrye. Then since these glorious personages be fallen
down flat, is there any person, that may think himself safe from stumbling?

And in the name of God, I crave to be answered, for what cause did the divine
Paul cry, saying: Qui se existimat stare, videat ne cadat, but to the end
that every man should consider with himself, that he is fallen into sin,
or that shortly he may fall into sin?

An example not to be forgotten.
He that considers the most unfortunate fall of Judas the disciple of Jesus
Christ, accompanying Jesus Christ, and hearing Jesus Christ: dares he
adventure to trust and have confidence in himself? Since we are descended of
sinners, have taken our birth of sinners, be conversant with sinners, and
commit so enorme and deadly sins: say we not most true, that they be most
unjust, which affirm and esteem themselves for just and rightuous?

I admit that every man say what he will, and perform of himself what he
thinks good: For if I will confess the troth, that in me there is many
things to be amended, many things to be clipped or shorn, many things to be
purged, and to too much to be snuffed.

No small part of justification, to confess our sins.

And yet imperfect without correction.


And surely, it is no small part of Justification, to confess our faults:
notwithstanding the confession suffiseth not, if we do not enforce our selves
to correction. For if a candell have too long a snuff, it suffiseth not a
little to dress and erect, but to snuff the same. And for that, if in this
whole world there were but one vice wherein we might fall, all men would
beware thereof: But seeing there be so many quagmires, wherein to be myred, it
is a thing too common, that if we sincke not to the bottom, at the least we
remain all bemyred.

If we will have the candle clear, and of himself give light, it is very
necessary that he be often snuffed. By this that I have said, I would say, that
the man that has shame in his face, and would preserve his conscience,
presently when he has committed the fault, he must determine to amend. For
if he once harden his conscience, late or never does he amend his life.

To this purpose the wise Solomon said, Impiuscion in profundum malorum
venerit, contemnit: as if he should say, Contempt of amendment yeldeth utter
confusion.
He that the Lord does refuse to succor with his merciful hand, deferring
from day to day to amend, he goes deeper and deeper to the bottom, being
clad in such manner with sin, as he in no wise will yield to correction.

Wherefore God in commanding that at the foot of the lamps that did light in
the Temple, there should be snuffers to snuff them, it is no other thing, as
me thinks, but that every man ought to seek with whom to be indoctrined,
in that which he ought to follow, and removed from his error wherein he
offended. For in his own cause, it is not permittible for any man to be Judge
of himself.

But how contrary is the fashion at these days in this miserable world. The
glorious Apostle S. Paul said, In nouissanis diebus coaceruabunt sibi
magistros prurientes auribus, which is, A change of fashion.
They shall more delyght to have with them, flatterers to deceive them, than
directers by good counsel to advise them.

I return to say and reiterate, that it is no other thing to command to have
snuffers nyghe unto the candlestick, than to give us to understand, that we
ought often to accustom our selves to purge our conscience. For if it be
necessary in one hour, three or four times to snuff the candle, it shall
not be ouermuche, that every week at the least, once or twice to purge and
snuff the soul. The candle having a great snuff, may not well give light,
and the soul laden with sins, may find no merit. And therefore it is
necessary to give and maynteyne much; as to a lamp, or to snuff him well as
a candle: because, sins that be rooted and grown old, be difficile to
confess, and hard to amend.

Therein it is also to be understood, God commanded that the snuffers,
wherewith they should snuff the lamps, and also the basin wherein they
should lay the snuffers, to be not of gross, but pure and most fine gold,
to give us to understand, The understanding of the snuffers of most pure and
fine gold.
that the King, the Prelate, the Judge, the governor and giver of
chasticement, ought not to contain in themselves any vice, wherefore to be
shorue, clipped, or snuff: for that it is not permittable by the laws humane or
divine, that one thief should judge another thief to be hanged.

The snuffers of lead or iron to be noted.
And then are the snuffers of lead, or of iron, when the Judge or governor is
of a life less honest, in his speech inordinate, and wherein he judges of
partial affection. For otherwise it shall be more expedient, to neat and
purge the snuffers, than to snuff the Candelles,

And then be the snuffers of fine gold, when the Judge or Prelate is of a
sincere life: modest in his purposes, zealous of his Common wealth, Notable
qualities of a magistrate.
and a right Iusticer, as also by the voice of common consent to have nothing
whereof to be amended, and less to be desired.

Faciebat David iudicium and iustitiam omni populo. This is written of David in
the second book of Kings, which is as much to say, A notable example of king
David.
That the good king David did sit openly giving audience to every man, and
doing justice to all men. Certainly there be many, that as Judges do hear all
in public: and small is the number which gives right to all men: And some that
do justice unto diverse, but not many that equally minister justice to all men.
Which ought in no wise to be done, much less to be consented unto. For the
law ought not to go as the king wills: but rather the King as the law
wills. O words most certainly to be noted, and to memory be
incommended: To be incommended to the memory of Princes.
by the which is said of the good King David, not by the hands of another, but
of himself: not in his house, but openly: not once, but every day: not to one
person, but to all the people: not that he would prolong them, but it is said,
from the present hour^ in which he heard them, he did dispatche them.

The Judges that God did constitute and send into diverse places, all have been
holy and just, which is to say, Noe which was sent against the idolaters, Loath
that was sent against the Sodomites, Moses against the Aegiptians, Helie
against the false prophets, and Daniel against the false Judges.
Notwithstanding they found much wherefore to correct, yet in them there was not
found any thing whereof to be snuft. And therefore of the Prelate, which is
wise, virtuous, and not cruel, all me^ take pleasure to be advised of their
negligences, and corrected of their faults. But if such a one be absolute, or
dissolute, with great grief they endure to be chastised.

Neither serves it to great purpose, that the snuffers wherewith we snuff the
candell, be of gold or silver, if in the place of snuffing, we dowte the
candel: whereby I would say, A note for Judges.
that the true Judge or Prelate ought to conceive better of himself, to be
pitiful, than rigorous, stretching his intention rather to amend the fault,
than discredit the sinner. With snuffers of gold does he snuff the candell,
when the Judge or prelate do chastise the mischief, and on the other part
has pity on the offender. For otherwise God will accept the patience of him
that is corrected, and condemn the will and froward disposition of him that
corrects.

Neither is it also without mystery, that God commanded in his law, that under
the holy candelsticke the snuffers should be placed, and the basin of gold,
wherein they should bestow the snuffings of the lamps. For in the sacred
Scripture, there is no word that is not mistical. Surely I suppose it is no
error to say, that the Candlestick is the Church, the ca^dell the sinner, the
snuffers the Prelate, and that which is snuffed, is sin: An excellent
expo^^tion.
which God commands to be snuffed, and incontinently in water or sand to be
covered, to the end it do not offend or give ste^ch unto him that snuffeth the
same. And therefore the Judge or governor of ye common wealth, ought curiously
to consider, not only the act of correction of faults, but also which
concerns the preserving of credit. And it is no other thing, when God
wills, ye presently after the snuffing of the lamp, the snuff should be
buried, but yt the sinner be chastised, and not dishonored.

Admitting that our Lord Jesus Christ had sin in great horror,
notwithstanding he did not hate the sinner. For he himself said, No^ veni
vocare iusto, sed peccatores. And of him thus was said, Hic peccatores
recipit, and manducat eum illis. The Lord and redemptor with golden snuffers
did snuff the la^pes, and in a golden basin did lay the snuffers, when he
called sinners; did preach to sinners, and was served of sinners, having no
disdain to have them in his company, and to sit with them at one table.

If we ought to use our skill in snuffing the candels, much more delicately we
ought to correct sin, which to say, that the correction be in secret,
discrete, and done with Christian charity, and not as a Prelate or Judge
cruel and inhumane. Jesus Christ understood very well, that Judas should sell
him and deliver him into the hands of the Jews, and yet notwithstanding he
washte his feet, An example to be embraced
did communicate as with his other disciples, did sit at table with him, and
gave him leave to talk and confer: to give us to understand, that with such
modesty we should correct the faults of our neighbor, that by no means we
should hinder his credit.

In this wretched world, that which we snuff from the candle, we cast upon the
ground, and tread upon with the foot, I would say, that from the hour that
a poor sinner commits any notable crime, from thence forth he is abhorred
of al men, and likewise defamed, as though we were not accustomably used to
prosecute sin, behold sin, and commit offenses. I assure your Lordship,
that if all men which know to sin, that be given to sin, and glorify
themselves to have sinned, should fail or dye: we should then have small
cause to build houses, neither yet to sow wheat. But it is not so, nor has
bin so in the house of God. For that which was snuffed, was laid in the basin
of gold, For that God pardons sinners, it is convenient that sinners do
pardon each other.
to give us also to understand, that he which sins by frailty, either does
err by negligence, we ought not presently to defame, and much less to
dishonor.

For if God which is most injured, give pardon, there is no reason that another
sinner as great, should condemn him. Behold most noble and my good Lord,
what it is that I understand as concerning this passage, and that which I
preached unto the Emperor in the palace at Madrid, the.12. of August, Anno.
1527.

A discourse made unto Queen Elenor, in a sermon of the transfiguration,
wherein is touched by an high style, the great love that Christ did bear us.

RIght high and magnificent Princes, the most ancient among the Auncientes,
and the most famous amongst the famous Adages or Proverbs, is the same which
was given by the Oracle of Apollo unto the Orators of Rome: which is to wit,
Nosce teipsum: and, Ne quid himis: As if he would have said, All the weal of
the common wealth is contained in that, that every man do know himself, and
that none do manifest himself, his deeds and atte^pts extreme. Inasmuchas
that presumption, and to great self lyking, imports danger, and every
excess likewise, and leads unto travel. Words more brief, and sentences
more compendious certaynely might not be spoken, either found in writing: For
that (to say the troth) if every man did consider with himself the small
worthiness that he contains, he would not so lightly judge of others, and
if no man would so extremely determine to perform his will, so many
errors, violences, and faults would not be committed.

And for that cause, the man that is in his conversation presumptuous, and in
his affairs headstrong, vnbrydeler, To row against the stream, and fish
against the wind.
and opiniatiue, no man ought to bear him envy, or impair his rent, since he
roweth against the stream, and fysheth against the wind.

To eat too much, is extreme and excess: too much cold and to great heat,
is the same: great abundance and miserable poverty is likewise extreme,
whereof we may infer, that only virtue is that, which is equal in
balance, and that only is vice, The notes of Virtue.
that endures no equality. One man to call another man extreme or excessive,
is to touch him with to great an injury, considering that every man which
is headdy and extreme, The garments wherewith a fool is clad.
he is not far from the state of a fool. Insomuch that folly is no other
thing, but when a man without respect does all things to his own liking.

Then I demand if this be true, as it is, wherefore says the Gospel, that
upon the Mount of Thabor, Moses and Helie did talk with Jesus Christ, of the
great excess which he should use and perform in Jerusalem.

Truly these be words very strange, the perfection of God being such, yt his
powerserueth not to commit any thing superfluous, neither yet defective in any
thing he takes in hand. And what is he that dares to say, that there is any
thing, which he cannot do? or performs yt which is not reasonable?

Then presently let us examine the life of the good Jesus Christ, and we will
see if we can find, wherein he has bin extreme, or wherein he has used
excess, since we all confess, that his life has not bin but as a clock to
govern us, and as a butte whereat to shoot.

Neither are we able to say, that he committed any excess in eating or
drinking, for presently after he was baptized, he went to fast in the desert
forty days and forty nights on a ta^ke.

And less did Jesus Christ use excess in his apparel, since it is not found
written that he had more than two coats, and yet went bare foot.

Not in sleeping, either in recreating that he used excess: since that many
times he passed the night without rest, sleep or lodging, and tired with
travel, was driven to repose upon the wells side of Samaria.

Not in words, either in his Sermons, since his enemies did say, that never
any man spoke so little, so well, and with such modesty,

Not in the law which he has given us, either in the precepts which he has
ordained: for he has not commanded in his Gospel any thing which is
profane: and in recompense he has promised the obseruers thereof life
everlasting.

Neither has he used excess in hourding of treasures or other comfortes of
man's life: for that he lived Apostolic, and all those of his college, which
partly lived of Alms, and did eat ears of corn in the fields for
necessity.

And to say the troth, and to speak clearly of this matter, the excess and
the great extremity which the blissed Jesus committed, was not, as it is
said, in drinking, eating, sleping, An extreme excess committed of Christ.
or in any other thing, but only in love: for all his other works and actions
were finished, except the love which he did bear, that was infinite and had no
end. And therefore if any would ballaunce the griefs, sorrows, afflictions,
and tears of Jesus Christ, with the love that he did bear us, without
comparison he shall find his love far to exceed and surmount his
torments, for that upon the tree of the Cross, his passion had an end, but
his love and affection did never cease.

And certainly Jesus Christ in all things used great moderation, except in
his love, which he did bear unto the universal world, being so excessive,
that it exceeded the humanity, approaching very near unto the divinity. And
therefore, if he had not been God and man, as he was, it had been impossible to
have loved with so great affection, and to have bestowed so great and
marvelous things, for that which he loved.

Most certainly Jesus used excess and great extremity, to suffer so many
thorns to pearce his sacred head, and so many other passions and torments to
afflict his most divine body: which passions and torments, did far excede
the afflictions which the Martyrs endured. Therefore we say, Thirste ceasseth
not to commit excess.
that great was the excess and extreme was the love that Jesus Christ did
bear us: which he did manifest in the works of a most true and perfect lover.

Moses and Helie did not common with Jesus Christ, of government of the
family, neither of their synagoge, but of the ignominious and staunderous
death, which Jesus Christ should endure at Jerusalem, and how he should die for
all men, and that he should be tormented with exceeding afflictions, which
he should endure with an heart accompanied with extreme love. Si diligitis me,
mandata mea seruate: which is to say, My dear disciples, it is not sufficient
to say, that you love me, if otherwise you be negligent to observe my
commandments: for that you see, I am not satisfied to love you well in
words, but that I show and perform the same in deeds. If we would profoundly
regard these words of Jesus Christ, Love of effect more than of affection.
we should find the love of God not only to consist in affection, but in
effect.

I would say that good works be more exorable unto God than holy desires. For
him that is feeble and sick, it suffiseth that he love, but he that is hole
and sound, ought to love and work: for Jesus Christ our God does accept the
want of power, but is displeased with want of will.

Want of power, but not of will is accepted.
Diligite inimicos vestros, and benefacite ijs qui oderunt vos: As if he should
say, Love your enemies, and do good unto them that persecute you. Jesus Christ
gyuing to understand, that love ought to be put in effect.

Likewise the scripture says, Ignis in altari meo semper ardebit, and sacerdos
nutriet illum mittens ligna: Within the Temple that is dedicate, says the
Lord, and upon the Altar which is consecrate unto me, I will that it be always
furnished with fire, one of the Priests having charge with wood to maintain
the same that it go not out. In such wise that God is not satisfied, that for
his own time, there should be fire of love: but also therewithal he
commands, that it be entertained with the woodde of good works. For as fire
goes out, if it be not maintained with wood, so likewise love grows cold,
which is not mixed with good works: and as the fire without wood turns to
ashes, so does love without works take an end and finishe.

Love has his maintenance by good works.
The Philosopher will say, that, habitus, is engendered of actus: and the Divine
will say, that the good love is conserved by the mean of the good work.

Speaking of the extreme love that God did bear us, Jeremy says, In
charitate perpetua dilexi te: which is, I love not as others, neither is my
love like the love of others: for I love mine with charity, and do entreat
them with pity.

The love of man is such, that if they determine to love any thing, it is most
likely they love the same, for the perfection thereof. As if he should love an
Orient stone, it is for the property or beauty thereof: if he love meat, it
is for the taste: If he love gold, it is, for that it is precious: If he love
Music, it is for that it gladdeth him: If he love his wife, it is for her
bounty or beauty. In such wise, that man aduaunceth not to love any thing, in
which he has not some opinion, that it shall like or please him. But far
otherwise is the love which God bears us. For we know not in ourselves any
cause, Weak causes to obtain the love of God.
why God should be in love with us, which is most evident, for that our eyes
delight to behold nothing but vain things, our ears to hear lies and
flatteries, our hands ready to rapine, our hearts bent upon couetise: In such
wise, that in our wretched and miserable person, God finds not any occasion
why he should love us, but many wherefore to hate us. Notwithstanding the
blessed Jesus, determined to remedy the sins that he saw in us, and the
ingratitude that he found in us: it pleased him to succor us with his mercy,
and to lend us his blessed grace, by the means whereof we might bring forth
the fruits of good woorks, whereof he himself might be amourous, and our
conscience comforted.

Then Saint Peter, that denied him, S. Paul, that pursued him, S. Matthew that
as a Publican did exchange, the thief that did steal, might not have found
the house of Jesus Christ if he himself first had not given his grace.

Oh love never heard of, oh lover not to be compared, Against the hear of
mundaine love.
the which against the hear of mundaine love, both give love, and the
occasions of love.

In charitate perpetua dilexi te, said Jesus Christ by the Prophet, that the
love wherewith Jesus Christ does love us, is not feigned, much less
transitory, but perpetual, and stable: which is most true, in as much as
by the mean of his own grace, he is pleased with us, before our good works
can declare us to be his friends.

A divine love not used among men.
That with a perpetual and perfect charity thou love me, oh thou love of my
soul and redeemer of my life, considering the love which thou bear us is
thine, and the profit thereof is mine, prete^ding no other thing of thy love
which thou bear to all creatures, but by demonstration to declare thy
sovereign bounty, in placing upon us thy most great and ardent charity.

With perpetual charity, O Lord, thou do love us, considering that great
day of thy passion, wherein neither the torments of thy body, either the
despitefull malice of the people, A most sovereign and vnremouable love.
might in no manner withdraw thy sovereign bounty, or darken thy most great
charity: but rather with innarrable sighs, and tears incomparable, did
pray for them that did crucify thee, and did pardon them that did offend
thee.

And most certainly, with a perpetual charity did our good Lord love us,
since from the present hour wherein he finished his prayer, and rendered his
spirit, incontinent was manifested the fruit of his passion, and the efficacy
of his prayer.

Non rogo pro ijs tantum, sed pro bis qui credituri sunt in me. Jesus Christ
speaking unto his father the night before his passion, said, O my father, I
pray not unto thee only for my Apostles and Disciples, but also I pray as
well for all the faithful which shall believe in me, and that shall love
thee. For even as thou and I be one self thing in divinity, so they and I be
one body mystical by charity.

O Redeemer of my life, oh repayrer from all my distresses, what may I do that
may please thee, wherewith may I recompense thy great goodness, wherewith I am
indebted? if I be not sufficient to give due thanks for the good things that
hourly thou do bestow upon me, what ability may I find to satisfy the
great love which thou bear unto my soul?

Surely the words that the Lord Jesus Christ did speak in his prayer, be
right worthy to be noted, retained, and to memory to be commended,
considering we were not yet borne, neither yet our great Grandfathers. Christ
extended an ardent love unto us, before we had being.
He prayed unto his father with such instance and great efficacy, for the
health of all his Church, as much I say, as for those, which were with him
at supper: in such wise, that the good Lord, as he should die for all, would
pray for all: whereof we may infer, that we ought fully to believe, and to
be out of doubt, that since our redeemer had us in remembrance before we came
into the world, that he will not now forget us, when by faith we enter into his
service.

I pray thee gentle Christian say unto me, A great cause of hope.
if Jesus Christ had not pitied our estate, what had become of us? surely if
the Church of God at this present do contain, or is endued with any obedience,
patience, charity, humility, abstinence, or co^tinence, all is to be imputed
to the arde^t love that Jesus Christ did bear us, by the prayer he made unto
his father on our behalf, redeeming our disgrace with his precious blood, and
by his prayer placing us in favor.

To be in love with such as be present and absent, to be in love both with
quick and dead, it passes: A love never hard of.
but to love such as be yet to come; and be not yet borne, certainly is a
thing that was never heard of: the which our redeemer has performed and
brought to pass, and yet hates the wicked liver, and loves the good not yet
borne.

In such manner is cuppled together, both life and death, love and hatred, he
that loves, and the thing loved, that al takes end at an hour, which is
contrary unto the love which Jesus Christ does bear us: for his love had
beginning before the creation of the world, and yet shall not end at the day
of judgment. The conclusion of all that we have said shall be: An everlasting
love.
that the excess or extremity which was spoken of in ye mount of Thabor, was
of the extreme and excessive sorrows, that Jesus Christ should endure, and of
the most great and excessive love that he did bear us, and in time to come
should show us here by grace, and after by glory. Ad quam nos perducat Jesus
Christus Amen.

The taking and overthrow of Carthage, done by Scipio the great, with a
singular example of continency which he there expressed, written to the Bishop
of Carthage.

MOst honorable Lord, and Catholic Prelate, I have received in this City of
Toledo, in his Majesty's Chamber, the letter that you have written, and the
Emrode which you have sent me, the which surely is very fair and rich, but
notwithstanding, in respect of the place and from whom it comes, I rather
hold and esteem it more dear, and incontinuall remembrance. And I understood
by your letter, your estate, and how you behave your self in your bishopric,
and that you are not as yet disposed to come to this Court, for that you are
there in greater quietness, and have leisure to serve God, whereof doubtless
I do not a little envy your felicity: for this life at Court is no other
thing than a languishing death, The manner and fruit of life in the Court of
Spain.
a certain unquiet life, without peace, and principally without money, and a
certain purchase of damage and offense to the body, and of Hell for the soul.

If it pleased his Majesty yt I might retire unto my house, I promise you by
the faith of a Christian, I would not stay one hour at Court. For the Court is
neither good or convenient for me, either I for ye Court. But being confessor
unto his majesty, and Amner unto the Emperesse, I may not escape one day from
the Court. Notwithstanding amongst all these discommodities, The commodities of
the Court of Spain.
we receive this benefit, which is, we understand in this Court all that is
done, or in practice, through the world, which is a matter wherein man does
much delight, and content his spirits, having no regard to other things,
that might turn him to more profit.

As touching you my Lord: you possess your house with great quietness
delivered of all fantasy to come to the Court, as well for the reasons
abouesayd, A good rule for a Bishop
as also for that your people shall be indoctrined and maintained in better
behavior, and your haule and buttry more thoroughly furnished.

Farther, you command me to write unto you particularly, when the
Carthaginians entered into Spain, and at what time Scipio the African did take
Carthage, the chief City of your Bishopric: and that you have laid a wager
with the Lord sir Peter of Mendoza governor of the same City, upon the same
matter, and being of contrary opinions, have chosen me for judge or arbitrator
of your contention. Certainly these be things very far from my profession:
for being religious as you know, it should serve much better to the purpose,
to sit and understand of the time that my religion was invented, and in what
country S. Francis was borne, than to understand when the Carthaginians
entered Spain, and at what time ye Romans did sack and subvert Carthage. But
since you have chosen and established me for your judge, and will yt I shall say
my opinion, A matter without remission.
and that which I know: I shall not fail to yield and render my endeavor,
without any remission of ye Mule which you promised me.

But coming now to the purpose, you have to understand, during the wars
betwixt ye Gaditains, The Gaditains be those of Caliz.
and the Turdetaynes, the Gaditains sent their ambassadors to the
Carthaginians, to draw the^ to their party, and to have succor from them:
whereunto ye Carthaginians consented, and at the instant sent Marhaball, a man
very valiant, to go into Spain to the succor of the Gaditains. This Marhaball
under ye color of giving aid unto the Gaditains, A possession and a secret
commission to be noted.
brought himself in possession of a certain part of Andolozia, and reduced the
same under the government of the Carthaginians, following his secret commission,
and the order which was given him in his ear: This was brought to pass in
the year of the general Flood. M.D.CCCX.

This was the first descent of ye Carthaginians in Spain. In the days when the
Romans expelled their kings. But afterward, the Carthaginians diverse times
by diverse Captayns, did invade and had possession of many countries and cities
of Spain, which they held unto ye time that the Romans coming unto ye
succor of the Saguntines, where ye Carthaginians were discomfited, distressed
and driven away: both the armies being conducted by Hanniball and Scipio, the
first being the leader and Captayn of ye armies of Carthage, the other for ye
Romans. This Scipio was the^ entitled Scipio the great, and renoumed with ye
surname, African, for yt after he subdued ye great Carthage, and did take the
same by diverse assaults. This City as is known to your Lordship, A description
of the situation of Carthage.
it holds on the East part, a certain hill with a ridge, compassed with the
Sea, and on the other side where this hill or ridge joins unto the City,
there is a lake on that side of Bize.

The Carthaginians supposing their City to be sufficiently strong upon that
side, gave no order thereof either for watch or ward. As Scipio battred the
City by Sea and land, he had aduertiseme^t by certain fishermen of Tarresko,
which at othertimes had repaired and gone to Carthage, that the water of the
lake did use to fall at an hour. A most unfortunate report of a neighbor.
By which advertisement Scipio caused the water to be sounded, and having
found the greatest depth but to the girdle, and in most places but to the
knees, he caused certain chosen soldiers to enter the water, which passing
without impediment, did climb the walls, and entered the City, obtaining
thereby possession with small loss, having executed great slaughter of the
people thereof, and Hanno the Captain of the City being taken prisoner. And
as the Romans did prosecute and performed the destruction of the City,
forcing to pass by the edge of the sword all that ever they met, a Damsel of
Spain of a noble house, ye wife of Madonius, brother to Indibilis, Lord of the
Illergets, did yield her self prostrate and groueling at the feet of Scipio,
most humbly beseeching, that it might please him to vouchsafe to recommende the
honor of the women unto the soldiers. And as Scipio answered, that he would
gladly perform the same, this Lady replied saying after this manner:

O Scipio, I am charged with one particular and right sorrowful grief, A
duble fute of a virtuous Lady.
which pearceth my heart in this present fortune to solicit thy excellency
to use thy mild favor with great diligence: for I have here my two nices
(showing two most excellent right singular young Ladies) daughters of Indibilis,
which hold and esteem me as their only mother, who tear mine entrayles and
break and pearce my heart, to see them in servitude amids the armies.

Whereof Scipio being moved by great compassion, and no less reverence, made
answer unto this Lady: Madame, you have to understand, that notwithstanding the
common courtesy of the Romayne people, and my natural condition do provoke me
to defend the honor of Ladies: yet therewithal, An answer of a noble and
virtuous mind.
your great virtue and dignity constraynes me to use more speedy diligence
therein: considering that in the mids of your adversities you forget not the
chief point of honor, which al Ladies of chaste renown ought to mayntaine,
keep and defend. A chief point of Ladies of chaste renown


The which being said, he commended these three Damsels to the guard and defense
of a gentleman of name and much esteemed for his virtue, straightly commanding
the same, to entreat and serve these Ladies, with no less courtesy, than if
they were the wives or daughters of gentlemen of Rome.

And now, since you have bin advertised of one virtuous act of Scipio, I will
yet recite another right famous deed, A spectacle for young Captains.
of great virtue, to show unto the world, that Scipio does worthily deserve
eternal praise, to serve as an example and perfect spectacle of continency to
all young Captains.

The cause was this: at the very instant that Scipio had dispatched these
three Ladies aforesaid, ye Soldiers brought unto him a certain young Damsel,
the fairest that ever they had seen: but Scipio understanding that she was
betrothed to Lucius Prince of the Celtibires, and that she was descended of
parents very noble, would in no wise touch her, but rather had a duble care to
defend her honor. And having commanded the father and the husband of the said
Lady to be called unto his presence, and also understanding the said Prince to
love with an ardent desire, and an inflamed affection: said thus unto him: O
Lucius, having thy love in my power, and being young as thou art, I might well
enjoy the delight of her beauty: Scipio of singular continency.
but having advertisement that thou bear her great and most perfect
affection: I have thought good not only to defend but also to preserve her for
thee, and render the same into thy hands as chaste a virgin, as she was
delivered unto me. And I will no other recompense at thy hands, but that thou
continue a faithful friend unto the Romans, for thou shall not find a Nation
in this world of so perfect friendship as are the Romayne people, neither of so
great merit for their worthy virtues.

Whereunto Lucius could say no other thing, but kissing the right hand of
Scipio, besought the immortal Gods, to remunerate the great goodness and
passing courtesy he had used unto him, confessing his great want of ability,
for the recompense of so great a bounty.

And after returning unto the parents of the said Damsel, rendering their
daughter without any ransom: They most instantly besought him, that it might
please him to accept the gold which they had brought for her ransom, in
token and as a pledge of their amity and dutiful affection.

Scipio being pressed of them, did accept the same: and placing it at his
feet, in the presence of them all, called Lucius and said: A rendered ransom
given to the marriage of an enemy.
behold Lucius, I give thee this gold which thy father and mother in law have
presented me, as a gift unto the marriage of thy wife, besides that which
before was appointed thee. Take and refuse it not for my sake, and as a token
for remembrance of sound friendship in time to come.

Then Lucius and his father and mother in law, receiving the Damsel and the
gold, did take their leave of Scipio, and retired into their country,
publishing in all places where they past, most greatest praise of Scipio and the
Roman people.

A recompense for courtesy received.
Very shortly after Lucius came to seek Scipio with fourteen hundredth horse,
to attend and assist the Romans. After which time Scipio departed from
Carthage to Tarzacone, to give order for the wars, in effect to chase and
expulse the Carthaginians out of Spain.

My Lord behold here my opinion as touching your demand: and if your honor,
or the governor be not of the same opinion, which is, that if Marhaball were
not the first Carthaginian that entered Spain: and that the great Scipio the
African, did not take, sack, and subvert new Carthage: I will say no more, but
that if Titus Liuius were alive, he would give you such a co^bat with the Camp
of his Decades, that he would thoroughly give you to understand of your wrong
information.

Of news there is no other, but yt his Majesty is in health, and twice a
week goes to ye assembly. The Emperesse also is in health, and this hot
weather feeds very little. This other night from Civil they brought a
paquet of letters unto his majesty: News.
wherein he was advertised of ten ships from Peru, to be arrived in ye haven
of Civil with twenty Millions of gold, whereof there were eight for his
majesty, and twelve for other particular persons. Diego of Acunia the bearer
hereof, shall farther make report of all that passes here at Court. No more
but God have you in his keeping and give me grace to serve him.

From Toledo the 22. of July. 1537.
A disputation and discourse holde^ against the Jews of Rome, wherein is
declared notable authorities of the sacred Scripture.

ALiama Horranda, which is to say, honorable troop of Inis, I remain with the
long disputation past, so weery, and my head so distempred with your cries,
that if it were not for the service of my Lord Jesus Christ, and for the
zeal of your souls, the profession of a divine, as also for the honor of my
law which I confess and soundly believe: you should be assured that I would
neither dispute with you any more, or enter at any time into your Sinagogue,
for that as touching your conversion ye are too too much obstinate, To be
obstinate and opiniatiue expresses enimitie to the troth.
and in the manner of disputation extremely opiniatiue. Neither unto you either
yet unto me does it apertayne, that the difficulties or opinions which either
of us defends, should be verefied with offensive arms, much less with
injurious words assuring, that at the Schools where I have studied, and of the
masters of whom I have learned, he was not esteemed wise, that cried strongly,
but could perform and speak very well.

And since we debate not upon any matter of your goods, much less is my
coming for the same or any such purpose, but only for the verifying of the
sacred Scripture. I pray you for the love of God, interrupt not my reasons, but
hear me with patience until I have finished my tale: for all you of this
Sinagogue hold for custom, yt if any word be spoken against your taste or
liking, forthwith ye begin to garboile, cry and brable. Therefore hear me, and
I will hear you: speak, or else I will speak: give ear unto me, or else I
will hearken unto you: suffer me, and I shall endure and suffer you: since we
talk, confer and dispute of matters so high and divine, it is good reason that
such difficulties, and so great mysteries should be disputed after the manner
of wise men, and not crying as fools: considering that the wisdom of the
wise is known by his talk, The wise is known by the manner, and modesty of
his talk.
and his prudence in the modesty which he uses in his speech.

I have said all this, for that in the disputation which we have had betwixt
us, eight days past, ye did not only impugn and speak against both the
authorities which I alleged of the holy Prophet Esaias, and of King David, but
also joining your fistes to my eyes, ye charged me with the lie, injuriously
and threatening.

The Inis dispute with their fists.
If ye should say, that I am a great sinner, a dasterd, dull, and simple, I
confess the same.

But to say that is false which I alleged, or erroneous which I defended, I
utterly appeal and deny: for my good Lord Jesus Christ of his mercy either
could or would fail me therein. But coming to the purpose, me thinks to
commit no injury, to bring forth and allege the passages of the holy Bible,
and therewithal, of the holy Prophet David, and a king amongst you best
beloved, and of Esaias the Prophet, of you most esteemed. The which have said
and prophesied, of the ignorance which ye should have, from the which I beseech
God to draw you and with his grace to enspire you: for certaynely I have
compassion to consider your great infamy, having in times past above all
nations received most favor of God.

Psalm. 63.
Scrutati sunt iniquitates, defecerunt scrutantes scrutinio. The royal Prophet
David said, speaking of the doctors of your law, as if he would say, King
David did Prophecy the errors and false interpretation of the Inis.
the ministers of the law be set, to interpret and declare the sacred
scripture, from the which, they have not drawn but falsehood and malice.

But now honorable Inis, I pray you to say, of whom does your Prophet here
speak: And tell me what they be, that dare falsifye the sacred scripture? to
the end we may understand to shun them, or else as Heretics to burn them.
For as the divine Plato said, he ought to be accused of high treason, that
falsely does interpret the law.

If ye will say, that the Gentiles, Scrutati sunt iniquitates, The Gentiles be
excused of false interpretation of the scripture.
which is to say, That they have evil interpretated the law, I answer that
you speak unjustly and raise a false testimony against them: for the princes
of the heathen have more gloried and given themselves unto the wars than to
the interpretation of books.

If ye will say, that those which presently be called Moors or Turks, be the
same people, whereof the Prophet speaks: Scrutati sunt iniquitates, hereunto
I answer, The Turks, Moors, and Sarasins, were not acused by the prophesy of
King David, to be false interpreters. The Christians be defended of false
interpretation of the Scriptures.
that as false is the one, as the other: for as much as if we will have
regard unto the time of the reign of King David, which did prophecy the
same: until the time of Mahomet the first inuentor and conductor of the sect
of the Moors, we shall find, that there did pass, less than 2000. and more
than 1800. years.

If we would say and affirm that the Prophet did mean, and direct his speech
unto the Christians, I say also it is most false, and repugnant unto all
troth, for being admitted, that the Christian faith had beginning to reign
600. years, before the sect of the Moors, and more than 3000. years after
the beginning of the Gentilitie or the Heathen from the time that this
prophecy was written at Jerusalem, unto ye time they began to name themselves
Christians at Antioch, there passed more than a thousand years, and also three
hundred years more for advantage.

Behold here truly verifyed, that since the prophecy may not be aduouched upon
the Gentiles, the Moors, neither yet the Christians, that it is to be
understood, and spoken unto you Jews, more expressly, for yt the Prophet
says not Scruteront, A manifest proof that the Prophet only charge the
Jews of false interpretation.
but Scruterent, giving us to understand, that many years before King David
did pronounce the same, your auncesters had then already begone to corrupt the
sacred Scriptures, and to add unto the same erroneous glosses.

I lie not, neither do I repent to have said, that your ancient fathers,
Scrutati sunt iniquitates, since they have no grace to understand the Prophecy
of Jeremy which says, Jeremy. 31.
post dies multos (dicit dominus) dabo meam legem in visceribus illorum, and in
cord eoru^ ad scriba^ legem meam As if he would have said: After many days,
and after many years, I will create a new people, and will give them a new
law, which I my self will wright in their bowels, A comfort unto Christians
and hide within their hearts: to the end that no person shall falsefy the
same, and much less shall they be able to forget it.

Then as the Prophecy which says: Scrutati sant iniquitates. etc. is spoken
only unto you, and not to all men: in like manner this Prophecy of Jeremy
which says, dabo legem in visceribus illorum, etc. is spoken unto us
Christians, and not to you Jews.

For as much as our Catholic faith consists more in that which is rooted
within our hearts, than in that which is written in books: in such manner the
weal of the Christian lies not in that which he reads, but in that which
he believes. The weal of the Christian is faith.


The maruels that Christ has done, and the doctrines which he has given
unto the world: It is necessary and well done, to know and also to read them:
but it is much more found and sure to believe them: for the number is
infinite which be saved without reading, but not one person without well
believing.

Many be saved without reading, but not one person without believing.
The Edicts and Proclamations, which they ordained, and the laws of Moses,
Promotheus, Solon, Licurgus, and Numa Pompilius, were all written with their
hands, and preserved and kept safe in their originals within their liberties:
but the law of Jesus Christ, ought most certainly to be written within our
hearts: for that, in as much, that the Lord gave us no other law, but the law of
love, he did like and thought it better, that we should search and find the
same within our hearts, Love is the law of Christians.
than within our books.

And not without great mystery, God said by the mouth of your Prophet, yt the
law which his son should give us, yt he should first write it within the
hearts, before ye Evangelist should reduce them by writing into books: for after
this manner, it might not be forgotten, neither yet burned.

And so, if your ancient predecessors, had obtained the law of Moses
written in their hearts, as they had them written in old parchment: they had not
in times past worshipped the Idols of Baal, Bell, Pegor, Asterot, Bahalim, and
Beelzebub: for which offense, you were carried captive into strange countries,
and fallen into your enemies hands.

How it came to pass, that the Hebrew tongue was lost.
IN like manner ye used me with no small despite, for that in disputing
against you, Chapter.49.
I alleged your Esaias, where God the Father speaking unto his own proper
son, said these words, parum est mihi, vt suscites tribus Jacob, and feces
Israel: dedit te in lucem gentium vt sis salus mea vsque ad extremum terrae.
As if he would have said: it is no great matter, that thou serve me, to
suscitate and raise up the lies of Jacob, and to convert the dregs of
Israel: for I have given thee also for a light unto the Gentiles: to the end
that thou shall be my saving health unto the end of the world.

There is no man, having read although but little in the holy Scripture, that
will not say and affirm, that the Prophet Esaias was not an Hebrew borne, a
Prophet of a noble line, and right eloquent in the scriptures: for which cause,
you ought rather to blame and complain of him, which does call and term you
lies and dregs of Jacob, than of me, the which in all our diputations, have
not at any time alleged any Christian doctor, but only Hebrewish Prophets.

I say again, that you have small reason to be offended with him or me: for
there is another Prophet which does call you off scowring, another venim,
another lies, another dregs, another ordure, A report as true, as miserable.
another slime, another smoke, another filthe, in such wise, that as often as ye
did not cease to sin, so did they not cease to blason, and to express you
with most perfect terms.

Are ye able to deny, that of your priesthood, of your Scepter, of your
Temple, of your Realm, of your law, of your tongue, An heavy destenie.
either of your scripture, is there any remaining but the lies which smells,
and the dregs which stinketh?

Surely, that which was in your law, clear, nete, precious, and odoriferous,
long before the incarnation, was consumed: and that little which remained, in
Jesus Christ did take an end. And as concerning the priesthood of your law, the
great sacrificer, or the high Priest, ought he not to be extract out of the
Trybe of Leuy, whereof you have nothing left but the lies? for yet in the time
of younger and better days, it was no more given unto the Leuits that did best
deserve it, but unto him that offered most silver: in such wise that to him that
offered most, Nothing left but lies.
and had greatest skill to flatter, the priesthood was given: as when a garment
is sold by the drum.

Likewise of your Scepter royal, what have you but ye lies? for Herod
Eskalonite a stranger, did not only usurp your Realm, but by industry
caused the Prince Antigonus, son to Alexander your King, to be drowned: the
final end of your Realm of Judea, Nothing left but dregs.
and of the Crown of Israel.

What shall we say of your most ancient Temple, so magnificent in buildings,
and so holy in the action of sacrifice: surely ye have no other thing but the
lies.

For ye well know, that forty years and no more. After ye crucified the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Emperors Titus and Vaspasian the father and son, Nothing
but lies.
did sack, destroy, and burn the same.

Of the Monarchy of your kingdom much less have you not of any thing, than
the lies, for that, from the time, ye great Pomp^y passed into Asia, and
subdued Palestine, he never after committed faith to any Jew: I say to give
him any special charge of government in the City, or defense of any
fortress, Nothing but dregs.
but perpetually did show your selves subject to the Romans, not as Vassals,
but rather as slaves.

If we should speak of your ancient language, and of the old carrecters of
your wrightings, we should likewise find, that you have not any thing left but
lies: and for proof thereof, first I pray you tell me, which is he amongst
you, that knows the language of your ancesters, either can read, Nothing but
lies.
or else understand, any of the ancient Hebruish books?

But now to bring you to the knowledge thereof, I shall deduce,
notwithstanding it does not like you, directly and successively, the beginning
of your Hebrewish tongue, and how by little and little it was lost again. The
beginning and ending of the Hebrew tongue described.
Wherein you have to understand, that the Patriarch Noe, with his children and
Nephews, escaping the Flood, went and did settle in the country of Caldea:
the situation whereof, is under the fourth Climate, the Regio^ after the Flood
first inhabited and populat, from whence be issued the Aegiptians, Sarmits,
Greeks, Latins, and all other Nations. In the same Region, I mean beyond the
river Euphrates, and near unto Mesopotamie: the Patriark Abraham was borne and
nourished, the which being called of God, came to dwell in the country of
Canaan, afterward named Siria the less: the country where the good old
Abraham and his generation did most inhabit.

In those days in that country of Canaan they had in use to speak another
language named Sirien, very different from the Calde tongue: But as Abraham and
his posterity dwelling in that country many years, these two languages by
process of time, grew to be corrupted, Abraham his family and successors,
being not able to learn the Sirien speech, neither the Siriens the Calde
tongue: of these two languages there remained in use one, which was named the
Hebrew.

Also you have to understand, that this name Hebrew, is as much to say, as a
man that is a stranger, or come from beyond the River: and for that Abraham
was come from the other side of the River Euphrates, he was generally called
Hebrew, in such wise, that of this name Hebrew, by the which Abraham was
called, the speech, tongue, and language, was also named Hebraique, and not
Caldean, notwithstanding that he was of Caldea.

Many Doctors, Greeks and Latins, have said, that the Hebrew tongue does come
from Heber, the son of Sale: and that it was the language, which was in use
and spoken before the general Flood: notwithstanding, Rabialhazer,
Mosanahadach, Aphesrura, Zimibi, and Sadoc, your most anciente and famous
Hebrew doctors, do swear and affirm, that the first speech and language in
this world, was lost in the construction, or to say better, the confusion of
the tower of Babylon, without perfection remaining in any one word of their
language.

And then, since the language of Noe was lost, the Caldean converted into the
Sirien, and the Sirien into the Hebrew, it came to pass that Jacob with his
twelve sons, went to dwell in Egypt, where they did soiorne so long Captives,
that very near they forgate the Hebrew tongue, neither aptly could learn the
Egiptian language, remaining in their speech and pronounciation corrupted.

And as after the destruction of the second Temple, as also the total and
final loss and destruction of the holy land. That your brethren were
dispersed throughout the world, and for the most part Captives, and that in
you there remained nothing but the lies of Jacob, the things desolate of
Israel, God did permit that they should jointly take end, both the form
of your life, and the manner of your speech.

The Jews lost both the form of their life, and the manner of their speech.
Behold here honorable Jews, sufficiently proved by your own doctors, that of
your country, language, renown, glory, and the whole state of your Sinagoge,
ye have nothing left but the lies, as the Prophet says, and the dregs and
grounds of the tubbe.

In such manner, that ye have neither Law to observe, A marvelous desolation.
King to obey, Scepter to esteem, priesthood to advance your honor. Temple
to pray in, City to inhabit, neither language to speak.

And for that the scope and proof of your obstination, and our health and
salvation, does lie and consist in the verity of the Scripture which we have
received, How, where, when, and by whom, the scriptures were falsified
and the falshoode and corruption of the^ which you confess: it shall be
expedient to recite, how, where, and when, your Scriptures were corrupted and
lost, even as I have produced and brought forth the loss of your language.

Ye have therefore to understand, that the five books of the law, the which
your great Duke Moses did write, after he came forth of the Land of Egypt,
and before he entered the land of promise: and those which were written by
the Prophet Samuel and Esdras, were all written in the Hebrew tongue without any
addition of the Egiptian language, for your Moses (being inspired by God in
all the things he did take in hand) did wright these books in the most
ancient Hebrew tongue, which is to understand, in the very same that Abraham
did speak at his coming out of Calde: God giving you thereby to understand,
that you should have followed your father Abraham, not only in the form of
your life, but also in your speech.

During the time that Moses, Aaron, Iosue, Ezechiell, Caleph, Gedeon, and all
the fourteen Dukes, did govern your Aliama, until the decease of the
excellent King David, Aliama a troup or company.
the law of Moses was always well understood, and indifferently well observed.

But after the decease of these good personages, and the kingdom and
government being come into the hands of the successors of David, the Sinagoge
was never more well governed, neither the Scriptures well understood: I would
say not well understood generally of the twelve Tribes.

There were notwithstanding, always some particular persons of the house of
Israel, the which were agreeable and also acceptable unto God, and to the
common wealth very profitable.

That your law was not from thencefoorth well understood, is most evident: for
it was prohibited and defended in your Aliama, A prohibitio^ amongst the Jews
to read the scriptures.
that neither the visions of Ezechiell, the sixth Chapter of Esaias, the book of
the Canticles of Solomon, the book of Job, neither the lamentations of Jeremy,
should be read, or commented by any person: which was done, not because the
books were not holy and approved, but rather because ye could not understand
them.

Much less may you deny me, that your Rabby Salmon, Rabby Solomon, The Jews
doctors aleaged.
Rabby Fatuell, Rabby Aldugac, and Rabby Baruch, do not say and affirm by
their writings, that after your second deliverance from the Captivity of
Babylon, ye never more understood, to perform the Ceremonies of your temple,
speak the Hebrew tongue, either understand the holy Scripture, much less to
sing the Canticles of David.

And no less may you deny, that of all sorts of your Jewish people in the
days of the great Priest Mathathias, did repair unto the Court of king
Antiochus, to sell the Realm, and to learn his law: and that which is more
vile, ye consented that all the books of Moses, should publicly be burnt,
and likewise permitted schools in the City of Jerusalem, to read the laws of
the Gentiles, A most wicked exchange.
placing also an Idol in the holy temple, unto whom was offered incense, and
other odours, as if it had bin the true God: the which most certainly I would
not have spoken, if I had not found it written in the book of Machabees.

And then our Lord God, seeing the wine of the law in a manner consumed, and
that there remained nothing but lies and dregs, and the time approaching that
the Gentiles should be called and converted, and that in them the Church
should begin: he did permit and ordain that all the holy scriptures should be
translated into the greek tongue, foreseeing yt the Hebrew tongue should be lost.

And how so famous a translation and interpretation came (...) as touching
their law, having also in ye same charge to judge all differences betwixt the
people. They had likewise the charge to command, and to make ordinances as
touching the government of the Common wealth, even to the assignement and
direction, what every one should have in his house.

These were the me^, hat did ordeyne and command, that before the Hebrews
should suit at table, The apostles accused by the Jews, and defended by Christ.
they should wash their hands: the transgression of which Ceremony the
Jews did accuse the Apostles, but as well defended by Jesus Christ.

For surely, if these auncientes had not dealte farther than with the
government of their common wealth, and judging their causes, it had been
notwithstanding a thing tolerable. But by their authority they thrust in
themselves, to gloss the Bible, and garboyle the scripture. Whereof the
principal that thereto did first give attempt, was Rabby Salmon, Rabby Enoch, A
cause of error in the scripture.
Limuda, Rabby Adam, Rabby Elechana, and Rabby Ioiade, whose gloses ye have as
much praised and esteemed, as if God him self had ordained, and Moses written
them. Co^gregatio^s or Common wealths.
Whereof has risen many errors in your Aliames, and many wrong and most
untruths in the Scriptures, which you have.

Neither are ye able to deny unto me, that by the mean of your false
interpretations, and the erroneous understandings that your predicessors have
committed and done upon the Bible, there has not risen in your Synagoge, The
three cursed sects, Asees, Saduces, and Pharisees.
those three cursed sects, of the Assees, Saduces, and Pharisees, the which
heretics caused in your common wealth great scandalles, and in your law
great doubts.

And to the end you shall understand, that I know all your secrets. It is not
unknown unto you, The auctor knows the secrets of the Jews.
that.40. years before the incarnation of Jesus Christ, there was in Babylon a
Jew named Jonathan Abemiziell, so much esteemed amongst you, and his doctrine
so much reverenced, that your auctors have said, that in him was renewed the
faith of Abraham, the patience of Job, the zeal of Helie, and the spirit of
Esaias.

This Rabby Abemiziell, was the first that translated the Bible out of the
Hebrew into the Caldian tongue, with such diligence and fidelity, that he
was thought to be inspired of the holy Ghost in the doing thereof.

This good Jew Abemiziel, is the same, the which, whereas the Psalmist says,
Dixit Dominus Domino meo: he said, Dixit Dominus verbo meo.

And in that Psalm which says, Ego mortifico: he said, Ego mortificor.
And where it is said, Percutiam and ego sanabo: he said, Percutiar and ego
sanabo.

And where it is said, Aduersus Dominum, and aduersus Christu^ eius: he said,
Aduersus Dominum, and aduersus Messiam eius.

And where Solomon says: Viam viri in adolescentia, he said, Viam viri in
adolescentula. In such manner, that in his words he seemed rather to
prophecy than to translate.

The translation of this Jew Abemiziel, is the same, which at this present we
call the Caldian translation, and the which is most in use in the Oriental
Churches, likewise is used of the Armenians, the Caldees, the Aegiptians, and
of many Greeks.

The Jews began to convert Christians.
But the doctors of your law, perceiving that many Jews did convert Christians,
and that also conformable unto his translation they gathered, that Christ was
the true Messiah. The which when they perceived, they did assemble in the
City of Babylon, in the fourth year of the reygne of the Emperor Traian:
The Jews condemn and dury ye translation of Abemiziel, doubting the
conversion of the Jews to Christ.
wherein it was ordained, and commandment given, under great penalties, that
any of that translation should never more be used, but in all places whersoeuer
it should be found, without remission to be burned.

The translation of Abemiziel being condemned by the common consent of the
Jews, it came to pass in the sixth year of the said Emperor Traian, a
certain great and famous heathen Priest, borne in the Isle of Pont, named
Aquile, did convert himself to the law of Moses, the which conversion he
did not perform of conscience to save his soul, but to obtain in marriage an
excellent fair Iewishe woman, with whom he was far inflamed.

And for that this Aquile, was a man very skillful in the Greek and Hebrewe
tongues, he found no better opportunity more aptly to show his spirit,
than to take in hand the translation of all the holy Scripture, out of Hebrewe
into Greek.

This same was the first translation that was performed after the incarnation
of Jesus Christ, The first traslatio^ after ye incarnation of Christ.
in the year.104. after his nativity. The which translation among you Jews,
was in small estimation, because it was done by such a one as in times paste
had been a Heathen or Gentile, and of the Christians much less esteemed, for
that it was brought to pass by him that was converted a Jew.

Fifty two years after the death of the said Aquile, it is to be
understood, in the eight year of the evil Emperor Commodus: The second
translation.
There was another Greek translation performed by a Jew named Theodosius, the
which after became a Christian: which removed and made perfect all the errors
of Aquile.

Thirty seven years after the death of Theodosius, which is to understand,
The third translation.
in the nynth year of the Empire of Seuerus: there was another translation
performed out of the Hebrewe into Greek, by a man learned and virtuous, named
Simachus, the which was approved, well allowed, and reseued throughout all the
East: notwithstanding that, not long after it was reproved and rejected.

In those times, there raygned in the greatest parts of Asia, the Heresy of
Ebionites, whereof Saint John in the Apocalips makes report: notwithstanding
that Theodosius and Simachus had been faithful in their translations, and of
troth and veritable in their words: our Church would at no time receive their
scriptures, having no confidence in the credence of their persons.

Fourteen years after the death of Simachus, which was the fifth year of
the Empire of Heliogabalus, it came too pass, that a certain Patriarcke of
Jerusalem, being named Ioannes Budeus, found in a cave at Jericho, faithfully
written and catholikely translated out of Greek into Latin, all the old and
new Testament.

The fourth translation allowed in the Christian Church.
This is the translation the which at this present the Latin Church does use,
this is that which we call Quinta editio: and of others is named the
Translation Hiericontini, which is to say, that which was found in Hiericho:
the auctor whereof was never known.

In the eight year of Alexander Seuerus, the son of Mamea, which was about
ten years after the translation Hiericontine was found, a Doctor of ours named
Origene, did correct the translation of the.70. Interpreters, which is to
understand, in adding where they had bin brief, A fifth tra^slatio^ by Origin
after Christ.
declaring the dark mysteries, placing a little star, as a mark, where he
had made declaration of any matter, and where he did remove or take away, he
added the mark of a little arrowe.

All these six translations above mentioned, which is to say, of the.70.
Interpreters, of Aquile, of Simachus, of Theodosius, of Jericho, and that of
Origene, our ancients did use for custom, of them all to make one book,
writing in every leaf, by six divisions, and this book was named, Hexapla, ab
ex, quod est ex Latin, quasi sex traductiones in se continens.

Four hundredth years after this, a certain Doctor of ours named S. Jerome,
most certainly a man very holy, and in his time and of his temple most learned,
and greatest understanding in the sacred Scriptures and human letters, and no
less expert in the Greek, Hebrewe, and Caldee tongue. This man did in like
manner correct the translation of the.70. Interpreters, and made also another by
it self out of Greek into Latin, as well of the old as of the new Testament.
The greatest part whereof, is now in use in our Catholic Church, and is the
same that we most esteem.

In like manner I will that you understand, that in the 314. year after the
nativity of our savior Jesus Christ, there was raised among you a certain
Jew of Idumaea, named Maier, a man very subtyle, and in the art of
Nygromancie no less skillful, which obtained such credit and reputation
among you, that he made you fully believe, that God had given two laws unto
Moses in the mount of Sinay: One of the great and manifest causes of the false
belief of the Jews.
the one in writing, and the other in word: and said, that God had done the
same, knowing that in time the written law should be lost, and that law
should raygne which was given by word.

This cursed Jew Maier, further said, that God had revealed this law unto
Moses only and alone, A Cruel suggestion of the Devil.
and Moses did reveal the same to Iosue, and Iosue to his successors, and so
from hand to hand it was revealed unto him, and that unto him only God had
commanded to put the same in writing, and to manifest the same to his Jewish
people. Insomuch that the law of Moses began to be abolished, and the
people and their law to be lost.

This law which your Jew Maier had invented, in the Hebrwe speech was named
Misna, which is to say, the Secret law. This said law was glosed
afterward by many of your doctors, namely by Rabby Manoa, Rabby Andasy, Rabby
Butaora, and Rabby Samuel: the which in like manner with him did write many
wretched and cursed things, and no small lies, in prejudice of the law that
Jesus Christ had preached unto you, and the law which Moses had given you.

This law is the same which your Rabbyes have otherwise named the book of
the Talmud, wherein your doctors do say, that when God upon the Mount of Sinay,
did give the law unto Moses, that then were present the souls of David, of
Esaias, of Jeremy, of Ezechiel, and of Daniel, and of all the other Prophets.
And likewise they say, that there was present all the souls of their Rabbyes
of the Synagogue, Vanities affirmed by the Iewishe doctors.
which should declare both the laws of Moses, and also said, that shortly
after God would anew create their bodies, to infuse these souls.

But it is right well known unto you, that according to the Prophesies, and
the laws of Moses, the true Messiah, which was Jesus Christ, was then come,
and that all your Jewish Common wealth is now finished: for which cause ye
have preferred this law named Misna, and his gloss, named Talmud, by the mean
of which law and gloss, ye bold abused all the common people, and yield
destruction to your Iewishe estate.

This prophecy of David verified upon the Jews.
Concluding, I say, that very well, to good, right, and direct purpose, I have
alleged against you that text of David, which says, Scrutati sunt
iniquitates: And the other of Esaias, which says, Parum est mihi vt suscites
feces. In so much, as you have falsified the Scriptures, This prophecy of
Esaias verified upon the Christians.
and inverted other new laws.

Wherefore, in respect thereof, I have done you neither wrong nor injury,
considering also that at this present ye do more defend the law of Maier,
than the law of Moses. And for that I have dilated this discourse, more than
I thought to have done, the rest shall remain to be verified in some other
disputation.

An excellent disputation, which the Auctor held against the Jews of Naples,
wherein is declared the high mysteries of of the Trinity.

HOnorable Rabbyes, and stiffenecked Jews, in the last disputation holden
betwixt us on saturday last, ye would have plucked out mine eyes, and also have
beaten me: because I alleged the^ these words of Jesus Christ, which say: Ego
principium qui and loquor vobis. Answering ye said, that neither Jesus Christ
understood what he said, either I much less what I defended: scornfully
mocking ye affrmed that I was but simple: the which in deed may be very true.
But to note my Lord Jesus Christ of falsehoode, most certainly of your part it
proceeds of your to too great wretchedness, and most exceeding and extreme
wickedness: being utterly repugnant unto his bounty to deceive, and to his
divinity to lie. Were it in you, or had ye the grace to believe, as I, and all
others do, and ought to believe, that his humanity and word is united, ye
would in like manner believe and confess that it were impossible, that the
blissed Jesus might err, in that which he commanded, either exercise his life
as sinner, either his speech as liar.

But forasmuch as ye remain obstinate in your laws of Moses, ye deserve not
to understand so high mysteries. The law of Moses I do not deny, but your
Cabal I can in no wise credit, but utterly defy, and firmly believe the Gospel
of Jesus Christ. And also most faithfully am fully persuaded, that when Christ
in his humanity did take beginning, your ceremonial law did then take ending.
And from the present hour that ye Lord Jesus Christ said upon the cross,
Consummatu^ est, he gave us to understand, that then was finished the
holocaustes, sacrifices, oblations, figures, ceremonies, and also your royal
scepter had then taken end, and pontifical dignity declined and in short
time after utterly consumed, and in the same moment our church began to spring,
and your synagoge to be buried.

There is now more than.1500. years past, that ye have had neither King to
obey, sacrifising priest to command, temple to pray in, sacrifice to offer,
prophets in whom to give credit, either as much as a city wherein to be
succored or repair unto: in such wise, that to all men it is manifestly
seen, that your sorrowful synagoge is dead, and ended without all hope for
evermore to rise again.

Jesus Christ said, that your kingdom should be removed and taken away, that
your temple should be subverted and overthrown, that ye should be dispersed
throughout the world, ye Jerusalem should be destroyed, and that your law
should be lost. In like manner Jesus Christ said, that ye should dye obstinate
in your sins, and so continue wandering as vacabunds until the end of the
world.

Notwithstanding that ye remained in bondage, servitude, and slavery, in those
two great captiuities of Aegipt and Babylon, yet there remained with you some
re^na^t of priesthood, of prophet, of king, or of law. But after ye coming of
Jesus Christ, all was lost, al was finished, and al was vanished away, nothing
remaining unto you, but the name of Jews, and the liberty of slaves. There is
not any nation in this world, be it never so barbarous, that has not some
place to retire unto, or some captain to defend them, the Garaments of Asia,
the Messagetes bordering upon the Indians, and the Negros of Aethiope, bearing
witness, except you most miserable Jews, the which in all places and
countries be fugitives and captives.

Certaynely, most obstinate and stiff necked people, I do not marvel that I
have so little profited, and done so little good amongst you in these five
months, in arguing, preaching, and disputing: in so much that Jesus Christ
with his excellent doctrine and marvelous miracles, could do no more in.30.
years, having no grace to accept the same in better part, than to crucify him
for his great bounty.

Then since the principal cause of your loss does consist, in that ye
believe not the new Testament, neither understand the old, which is most
true. For, if soundly and intierly ye had understanding of the sacred
scripture, with your own hands ye would set fire unto the synagogue.

And for that you have all in general, and every one in particular, desired
me, to say and give you to understand, what, or how the Christians do
conceive, and what our doctors and learned men do teach, as touching the right
high mystery of the Trinity.

I pray you also honorable Rabbis, to be intentive to that which I shall
propose, and to have regard to that which I shall determine, for that the
mysteries of the Trinity, be of such depth and profunditie, that they ought
to be believed with the understanding, although reason may not show and
comprehend them. Forasmuch as all you Rabbis and Jews, which be present, do
well understand the Latin and the Spanishe tongue, and I understand your
Hebrew and the Italian tongs, I will endeuoire and undertake to declare the
best that I can, this mystery of the Trinity, partly in Latin, and partly in
Hebrew, and partly in Spanishe: for the matter is so high, that one language is
not sufficient to declare the same.

scilicet singularitatis, incommutabilitatis: et dignitatis. By this I
understand, that for one person, to be a Divine person, it is requisite,
that he should have three things, which is to understand, that it have in
it some singularity: which is not found in any other, Incommutabilite,
which unto it and to no other, is communicated: And some dignity, which in
it, and not in any other is to be found. The person of Jesus Christ our
God, by all these reasons here above said, is a person Divine,
notwithstanding, it be cladde with humayne flesh. As touching the first,
which is to have some privilege of singularity, that has been found, in
the Soul of Jesus Christ, the which only by spetiall grace, from the hour
it was create, it was united with the Divine word.

The second privilege of Iucommutabilite, was found in the Sacred body of
Jesus Christ, the which in the Womb of his glorious mother, likewise, was by
the holy Ghost fourmed, Et a verbo Assumptum. The third privilege, which
is of dignitye, is likewise found in the Soul and body of Jesus Christ,
remaining in his humayne nature, and not, but one person: the which was and is
Divine.

You have farther to understand, honorable Rabbis. That there are two
terms: the diffinicion of which, is very necessary to be known unto them,
That seek to understand any thing in the holy Scripture, which is to say:
Acts essentialles, and acts personalies. The example thereof is written in
the first Chapter of Genesis. Jn principio Creauit deus Celum et terram, etc.
In this place here, this name Deus, Accipitur essentialiter, Et non
personaliter, quia creare est actus essentiales, et non personalis: et conuenit
e rinitati, in quantum deus.

Also it is written, Dominus dixit ad me filius meus es tu: in which place,
this name ( dominus) Accipitur personaliter, et no^ essentialiter: Psalm. 2.
qui de patris persona precise intelligitur: et in diuini, generare est actus
personalis, et non essentialis, et est notio ipssius patris. Likewise ye have
to understand, that as in Jesus Christ, is one person divine, there is in ye
same divine nature: human nature, and mistical nature. Prima est eterna,
Secunda est a verbo assumpta. Tertia est in Adam corrupta, qui licet no^ sunt
altera spetie ab humanitate Christi, tamen est altera secundu^ conditione^
nature sauciate. In the scriptures Jesus Christ is introduced sometimes, Psalm.
30. Psalm. 119. Psalm. 20.
speaking according to divine and eternal nature, as when it is said: Dominus
dixit ad me filius meus est tu: Sometimes speaking in the human nature, As
when he says: In capite libri scriptu^ est deem et illum: non est exaltatu^
cor meu^. etc. And sometimes is brought in speaking according to the nature
mistical, and corrupted. So as, Long A salute meaver ba delictorum meorum, et
illud: Delicta labiorum meorum non sunt a te abscondita. The which he said, as
of the pain, not touching ye fault, for as much as the body mistical did
perpetrate, and his true and very body did pay and suffer. Our amity is so
little. That our proper sins we discharge upon others: And in Jesus Christ,
charity is so great, That he takes the sins of others, upon him self: in
such manner that he confesses to have many sins, for as much, as he is the
redeemer of many sinners. Behold honorable Rabbis, what it is that the
Christians do understand, of his divinity, and that which we confess of his
humanity. Unto which faith I exteeme to live, and protest to dye. And for that
I have said more then I thought to have done, yea and more then ye would have
heard: we will remitte for another disputacion, both your doubts, and my
aunsweres: Considering that my Lords the Prelates, And the noble men that be
here, do stay to go to dinner, and to withdraw them selves. etc.

A Letter to Sir Ferdenando of Cordoua, wherein is discoursed the eleven
persecutions of the Church: when, and by whom they were persecuted.

WOrshipful Sir and Christian Knight, John de Cabreta your Steward delivered me
a letter from your worship, which was as long as between Madrid and Almagro,
where at this present you do remain: whereby if you think to receive no short
answer: by writing so long a Letter: you do much abuse your self, for wanting
opportunity and leisure to study: I may not imploye my self to write such
long and tedious Epistles: especially, when he to whom they are written is
simply, but a friend: Yet true friends delight, not only in reading long
letters, but are grieved if their friends write not every day: al which above
said, is not to say: that I esteem not to place you in the chiefestes ranks
of my best friends. And if you imagine the contrary, you are much deceived:
For your friends and mine do well know that Don Ferdenand de Cordoua, and Friar
Anthony de Gueuarra Bishop of Mondoneto be two bodies joined in one will,
linked in a chain of in dissoluble amity. But omitting this discourse, and
retorning to your letter: I assure you it pleased me very much, and chiefly in
that I perceived your good disposition, which is no small matter in ye midst
of these perilous heates. Now touching the persecutions of the myllitant
Church: whereof you have written, and whereof the Prior of Calatrana and you have
liberally discoursed: I answer, that there have been many persecutions of
the Church: done at sundry times and by several Princes. And for that I
greatly desire to do you that service which lies in my power, I have not
failed to send you the said persecutions in order as follows.

The first persecution was in the reign of ye Emperor Nero, the which
(possessed with ye Devil, in whose bonds his offenses did impriso^ him)
perceiving the number of Christians daily to increase at Rome (by grace of ye
euangelical word which Peter and Paul preached there, where they were martered
for such conversion of ye people) determined with his power to persecute and
destroy the Church: whereby he murdered many Christians, as well in Rome as else
where, which was the first persecution of the Church. For albeit the Church
since the suffering of Christ has been continually persecuted in her
particular members, yet notwithstanding until the coming of Nero, there went
forth no commandment to persecute the Christians.

Touching the constancy of the Martyrs, and the diversity of the torments
which they endured (beside the Catholic Historiographers which write thereof)
Cornelius Tacitus a Painim writer, and enemy to the Christians (yet very
credible in his writing) does report the same: who making recital of the
persecutions made by the ordinance of the Emperor Nero, (of whom Sueton
makes also mention) does say of the slaughter of Christians, both men and
women: that amongst a thousand diversities of punishments and deaths, they
cast the Christians to be torn in pieces with dogs: And to make the dogs
more fierce upon them, the men were braced in skins of Bears, and other
sauadge Beasts. Which persecution was performed (as witnesses Cornelius
Tacitus and Suetonius) after the huge fire of Rome: In the eleventh year of
the Empire of Nero: by whose decree the glorious Apostles Peter and Paul were
martyrred. It may well be, as I also believe, that this martyrdom continued
little more then three years: For though it were done at that time (according
to the Prior of Calatrana his opinion) yet God would preserve his Apostles, and
defer their martyrdoms until the foresaid time.

The second persecution was in the time of the Emperor Domitian. This wicked
and accursed monster, understanding that there should one spring out of the
line of David, which should expel him out of the Empire, he caused search to
be made with much diligence, for all those which descended from the race of
David amongst the Jews, and caused them to be put to death: only raunsoming
as Eusebius says two persons of the same family, who further for the
accomplishment of his deuillishe devices, at the motion of the fiende he
determined to persecute the Catholic Church: Whereby at his commandment a
great slaughter was made of Christians within Rome and without. In which
persecution multitudes of the Christians were at the first committed to
banishment, who after were tormented, and then murdered by most horrible pains
and cruel deaths, as affirmed Eusebius: Orosius and many other Christian
Historiographers. This was the second general persecution of the primitive
Church, in which S. John the Evangelist was confined, or exiled into the Isle of
Pathinos where he saw the visions of the Apocalips. It were hard to know how
long this persecution endured, but as we may gather by Eusebius, it continued
two years and a little more. For he says that Domician did moderate and cease
his execution, and yet notwithstanding as well by reason of the said persecution
as for his other vices, the same Domician has been holden to be one of the
most wicked and cruel Princes that ever lived.

The third persecution of the Church was under the government of the Emperor
Traian, who allured by the Devil and his other ministers determined by
torments to punish the Christians: and therefore by public edict, ordained
that the Christians should worship the Idol of the Gentiles upon pain of
death: Whereunto the Christians not wylling to obey, he made a great slaughter
of them. This was the third persecution of the Church Catholic, whereof
Eusebius and diverse other Historiographers Christians do make plentiful
mention, and that was in the tenth year of the Empire of Traian, which
afterward also commanded this persecution to be stayed as does apeare by some
writers, and especially in the letters of Plyny directed to Traian, and in the
answers thereto sent by the same Emperor which are at this present extant,
where he prescribed that the christians should be permitted to live in their
Laws and under their liberties: If they did not commit any other wickedness
therewith.

The fourth persecution was in the time, and under the dominion of the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius surnamed the Philosopher, whose life we have discribed in
another book apart by it self, this Prince during the time that he made
wars against the Parthians, as Eusebius and Orosius do declare, endeavored his
power to persecute the Christians, which remained in Europe and Asia, where
Lucus Varus was governor. This was the fourth persecution of the Church
myllitant, so that it follows that God suffered this general pestilence to
reign amongst them, and a thousand other callamities to happen unto them
enduring the government of this Prince as we have largely declared in his
Cronicle.

The fifth persecution of the Church was during the reign of Septimus Seuerus
the Emperor the which by the instigation of ye devil, made a great butcherie
of the faithful Christians. This fifth persecution was the cause (as faith
Osorius) ye God did not permit this Prince to live in peace, for one of his
Captains rebelled against him, named Albinius, the which made all Brittany to
revolt from him, calling him self Emperor during the time of his life.

The sixth persecution of the Church was in the time of the Emperor Maximius,
the cursed Prince being offended that Alexander Seuerus had supported the
Christians, by express ordinance and commission made a great and blooddye
spoil of the Christians, and principally of ye ministers of those which
executed any authority amongst the Christian people: This was the sixth
persecution as says Eusebius and Orosius in the which this Prince used many
unaccustomed torments, and caused diverse cruel punishments to be invented,
whereby the poor Christians might be miserablye handled, who had such an
opinion and presumptuous pride of himself and his power, that he esteemed that
no person might once hurt him, and that it were impossible to wound or to kill
him. In which opinion he most deuillishlie pursued all his cruelties and
torments.

The seventh persecution was in the rule of the Emperor Decius: This Prince
although otherwise he were of good natural disposition, was notwithstanding in
religion an Infidel, and in that respect sought the vexation of the millitant
Church, so that no such crueltye were before time used, as now in his time
toward the afflicted Christians. The which is affirmed that he only did in
despite of his prodecessour Phillip: who had before been Christened. And so
this seventh persecution was in the time of this Decius.

The eight persecution was enduring the reign of the Emperor Valerian: who
(as Eusebius does report) was so favorable to the Christians in the beginning
of his reign, that he would not permit that any person did them any wrong
or violence: for he bare such affection and honor unto them that his palace
was a true college and sanctuary for the Christians: but toward the end of
his reign, he suffered him self to be seduced by a Magicien of Egypt, who was
a deadlye enemy to the Christian religion, because the same did impugn the
deceiptes and Sorceries of the Magicians. In such sort that he did not all
only change his opinion toward the Christians, but also persecuted them
with great slaughter. This was the eight persecution of which Orosius does
liberally discourse, but such was the justice of God for his cruel excess,
that such evil fortune followed Valerian after this deed, that he was taken
prisoner and fell into the hands of Sapor King of Percia which did entreat
and handle him most cruelly.

The ninth persecution of the Church was in the time of the Emperor Aurelian,
who having most lovingly used the Christians in the first six years of his
reign (as appears by the writing of Eusebius and Orosius) in the end by the
provocation of the Devil and other most wicked persons, he persecuted the
Christians generally throughout all the confines of his Empire. And this was
the ninth persecution of ye faithful. Now it happened that as this Prince was
ready to sign a commission which he was to dispatche to the governors of the
Princes of the Empire against the Christians, an arrow fell from Heaven so
near unto him that those which were present, thought that it had killed the
Emperor. But besides this sign and advertisement God suffered the effect to
follow, that is to say, the death of the aforesaid Prince, for he was
miserablye slain by his own men and servants, and by the same received the
guerdone and payment of his desartes and offenses.

The tenth persecution was in the time of the Emperor Diodesian. This Prince
being in quiet rest from all his affairs, styrred by Beelzebub and his
ministers: he being a Painim and norished in the supersticions of the Idolatrye
of the Gentiles, began to persecute and pursue the Catholic church, which
was the tenth general persecution of the Christians, (to accoumpt from the
same of Nero) and this was the most cruel and longest of continuance of al
others, the which endured by the space of ten continual years. Now the
Christians had long time lived in rest and quiet since the persecution which
was in the government of the Emperor Aurelian, in such sort yt the Christian
religion was now become of great force in all churches. And all the Cities and
Towns, as well within the dominions of the Emperor, as without the limmits of
the same: and the Christians were exceedingly multiplied in number, and had
great assemblies in their Churches. But as says Eusebius, this rest and
liberty which they enjoyed, was cause that the policy and manner of living of
the Christians began to be corrupted, so that many iniquities and wickedness
did grow presently, and the old former sanctimony began to deminishe, and such
disorders and discentions began to be moved amongst the Bishops and the
Prelates, that as the said Eusebius witnesses: God permitted this persecution
to serve in place of revenge, and chastisement of his Church. This persecution
was so great, so cruel, and so blooddy: that it is impossible for any pen to
write the unnatural slaughters which the Paynims used: neither is there any
tongue that is able to pronounce them. The which Eusebius does well declare,
being a present witness, beholding the same with his eyes, as done in his own
sight: for he says that he cannot discribe nor speak that which he saw
executed before his face. To whom Orosius does condescend, writing in the same
sort, that there was not any heart so hard that would not be moved to
compassion, reading the cruelties of this persecution. Which amaseth me to
consider of the constancy of the Martyrs which endured such torments so
valiantlye, and of the cruelty of those which murdered and tormented them so
maliciouslye. And to the intent that you and all other should know what
punishments this butcherly Prince ministered unto the Christians, I have
willingly recited some notable parts of the same, which be these. First this
Prince did ruinate and sack all the Churches of the Christians, and forbid them
to make any assembles for the service of God in any part: be commanded all the
books of the holy Scriptures to be burned which they might find. Also he
ordained that all Christians of what estate or condition so ever they were,
should not be admitted to estate or any office of Magistrate, and yt those
presently which were placed in any offices should be removed, and counted
infamed, and some were put to death for example.

Further they appointed that the goods of the Bishops and Prelates Christians,
should be declared to be consticate and for fayted. The Christian bond man
could not be manumitted or enfranchised. And these Laws were published through
the confines of the Empire. Besides the which constitucions, the poor
miserable Christians, were otherwise most wickedly entreated, and received
diverse outrageous injuries: diverse being enforced to dye cruellye and with much
shame. And in some provinces where they were blinded with affections and
particular occasions which the Devil guided by the permission of the divine
God, they used many cruelties and incredible horriblenesse toward the
Christians, as in Frigia, Suria, Egypt, and diverse other countries, for some
were broyled and scorched in life, and others had their flesh carded as though
it had been well, or flax, which poor Christian creatures after such
burning and torments, were thrown into strait prison, in great feebleness,
and yet honest and constant in the faith, they were hanged naked by the feet,
to prolong their deaths the more with shame and dishonesty. And by that means
endured double torment, of some they cut of the noose, the ears, the fingers,
the hands, and the feet, and only left them their eyes to behold their
misery, and to increase their grief and pain, they tare some alive quite in
the midst, tying one leg to a great arm of a Tree bended with force, and
the other leg to another tree crooked in the same manner: Afterward letting
the same Trees to return into his natural place, for to cleave the body in
sunder. So others they used this cruelty, that they pricked sharp needles and
great thorns between the nails of the flesh and the hands, which be the
most sensible and tenderest parts of all the body. Some other men were beaten
with round balls, and pellets of Lead and Tynne. In conclusion they were
enforced to endure and sustain the most cruel torments which might be
devised, by the Deuilles policy. And this slaughter of the Christians was
exceeding great, during this persecution.

The eleventh and last persecution generally of the Church was enduring the
government of the Emperor Iulianus, which was an Idolater, and Sacrificer to
the Devil: Which Emperor studied by all means he might to persecute the
christian church. Who likewise to attain the effect of his purposed devise,
did use a singular and unaccustomed subtlety, by the which under cloked and
collor of shadowed courtesy and benignity, he did enfeeble the Christian
religion as much as he could, giving them always yet to understand, yt he was
soft and gentle by nature, and not cruel and rigorous. This new inue^cion in
persecuting the Church was subtly found out by him as I think, because he had
seen and by experience did understand yt the blood of ye martirs did cause the
christian religion to spring more frutefully. And therefore he determined to
work and proceed contrary to ye other Emperors his prodecessors had
performed, yt is to say, to draw ye christians unto his Idolatrous worshipping
by advancement of estats, offices, and dignities, as witnesses Ruffinus, S.
Hierom and Casiodorus, so yt hereby he caused diverse ambicious and covetous
persons to deny christianity, and to follow Idolatry, by means of ye estates
and offices which they had given them. This was the greatest wound that ever
the Church received, for diverse Christians by the means of this inuencion,
removed their faith, but in the end when the Emperor Julian perceived that
these devises served to small end to his intent, although he made them not to
leese their lives, neither did violentlye constrain their consciences. Yet he
published diverse hurtful edictes against the Christians, and very vicious for
Christianity. First he commanded that no Christian might obtain any degree
in School, keep Lecture, or read in any art or science, whatsoever, neither
that he might be admitted to studdie, unless he did worship the Idols. The
which he did to the end yt the Christians banished from the knowledge of
learning should be brought to Idolatry, or that they should else remain fools
and ignorant Idiots, and so by continuance that none should be able to preach
the Euangelie. Also he ordained that no Christian should be admitted to any
estate, office, or dignity of Magistrate, either in war or peace. In
conclusion this monster searched out all the ways to raise battle against
Jesus Christ, without shaedding human blood, which was the right devise of
the Devil, to deprive the blessed Martyrs from the glory and crown which
they should have obtained for their martyrdom. Behold the first, and most
notable persecutions, which the church millitant sustained: since which time
there has been many other, in every several place, but they were of small
importance in respect of these before said. Touching the rest, because I am
weery of writing this long letter, and that my pen can do me no more service
therein. I say nothing else but this, that I will more redeelie employ my self
toward the County of Osarno, for ye affairs of Vasco lopes, which you have
reco^mended unto my favor: as soon as the said Cou^tie may attend the same,
for he keeps his bed at this instant, and laboreth grievously of ye Gowte.
The Lord have you in his keeping, and give me grace to serve him.

From Valiodolid the.15. of June. Anno. 1541.
The Table of the familiar Epistles of Sir Antony of Gueuara.
AN Oration made unto the Emperors Majesty in a Sermon at the triumphs,
when, the french king was taken. fol. 1 An Oration made unto the Emperors
Majesty in a Sermon on the day of kings wherein is declared how the name
of kings was invented. fol. 4. A discourse or conference with the Emperor
upon certain and most ancient stampes in metalles. 12 A relation unto Queen
Germana declaring the life and laws of the philosopher Licurgus. 20 A letter
unto Sir Alonso Manrique, Archbishop of Civil, and Sir antony Manrique Duke of
Nauara, for the judgment of a matter in co^tentio^. 21 A letter unto the
Constable Sir Ynnigo of velasco, vvherin the Author does persuade in the
taking of Founterabie, to make proof first of his vvisdome, before he
experiment his fortune. 38 A letter unto sir Antony of cuninga, Prior of saint
John, in which is said that although there be in a Gentleman to be
reprehended, there ought not to be cause of reproach. 41 A letter to the Earl
of Miranda, vvherin is expounded that text of Christ, which says, My yoke is
svveete. 45 A letter unto sir Peter Giron, vvherin the Author does toutch the
manner of ancient vvriting. 53 A letter unto sir Ynnigo of Velasco, Constable
of Castile, wherein the author does teach the breifnes of vvriting in old time.
59 A letter unto the Marquis of Pescara, wherein the Author does note what a
captain ought to be in the vvarres. 66 A letter unto sir Allonso Albornos,
wherein in is touched that it is a point of evil manner not to aunsvvere to a
letter written unto him 72 A letter unto sir Gonsalis Fernandes of Cordoua,
great captain, in which is touched that the knight escaping the vvarres ought
not from thenceforth to depart his house. 77 A letter to sir Enrique Enriques,
wherein the author does aunsvvere to many gracious demaundes. 83 A letter for
sir Anthony of Cneua, wherein is expounded an authority of holy scripture. 88
A letter unto Master friar John Beneuiades, wherein is expounded the text,
which says: The evil spirit sent of God came upon Saul. 94 A letter unto
the Marquis of Velez, vvherin he vvriteth unto him certain nevves of the
court. 98 A letter unto the Bishop of Tui nevve president of Granado, in
which is said what is the office of Presidents. 103 A letter unto the
Warden of Alcala, in which is expounded the Psalm which says: Let the
living descend into hell. 1^7 A letter unto Diego de camina, vvherin is
treated how envy reigns in all men. 111 A letter unto sir John de Moncada,
in which is declared what thing is ire, and how good is patience. 115 A
letter unto sir Jerome Vique, in which is treated how great liberty is
much hurtful. 121 A letter unto sir Jerome Vique, where in is declared an
Epitaph of Rome. 125 A letter unto the Bishop of Badaioz, wherein is
declared the ancient laws of Badaioz. 127 A letter unto sir John Palamos,
wherein is declared which was Saians horse, and Toloze gold. 129 A letter
unto the Duke of Alba sir Frederique of Toledo, wherein is entreated of
infirmeties and the profits of the same. 134 A letter unto sir peter of acunia,
Earl of Buendia, wherein is declared a prophecy of a certain Sibill. 138 A
letter unto Ynigo Manrique, in which is recompted what happened in rome
betwixt a slave and a Lion 141 A letter unto sir Peter of Acunia, Earl of
Buendia, wherein is touched how lords should govern their estates. 152 A
letter unto the Admiral sir Frederique, Enriques, in which is declared that
old men have to bevvare the year three score and three. 168 A letter unto the
admiral sir Frederique Enriques, wherein is expounded wherefore Abraham and
Ezechiell did fall forwards, and Hely backevvardes 172 A letter unto the abbot
of Monserrate, wherein is touched the Oratoris that the Gentyls used. 176 A
letter unto the Admiral sir Frederique Enriques, wherein is declared a
certain authority of holy Scripture 178 An other letter unto Jews Brave,
wherein is touched the conditiones that honorable old men ought to have. 185
A letter unto sir Ieames of Gueuara Uncle to the author, wherein he does
comfort him 192 A letter unto Master Gonsalis Gill* in which is expounded
that which is said in the Psalmiste, Inclinaui cor meum. 198 A letter unto
the Abbot of saint Peter of Cardenia, in which he much praises, the Mountain
country. 201 A letter unto Doctor Manso Precident of Valiodolid, wherein is
declared that in other men's affairs we may be importunate. 204 A letter unto
the Earl of Beheuent sir Alonso pimentill wherein is entreated the old
ancient order of the knights of the band 208 A letter unto the Constable of
Castile sir Ynigo of Valasco, in which is touched that the wise man ought not
to trust his wife with any secret of importance. 220 A letter unto the
Constable sir Ynigo of Valasco wherein is touched, that in the heart of the
good Knight, there ought not to reign passion or anger. 223 A letter unto the
Constable sir ynigo of Valasco, which is said what the Marquis of Piscara
reported of Italy. 227 A letter unto the Constable sir ynigo of Valasco, in
which is declared the prises of things in old time in Castile. 229 A letter
unto sir Alonso of Fonsica, Bishop of Burgos, president of the Indians,
wherein is declared wherefore the Ringes of spain be entitled catholic.
2^0 A letter unto Moson Rubin of Valentia being old and enamored. 237 A letter
unto the Bishop Zamora Sir Antony of Acuna, wherein he is sharply
reprehended, being captain of the commoners that rebelled in spain. 242 A
letter unto the said Bishop of Zamora, in which he is pesvvaded to turn to
the service of the king. 248 A letter unto sir John of Padiila, captain of the
commoners revolted. ^54 A letter unto a gentleman, and secret friend to the
Aucthor, wherein he advises and reprehendeth his vvretched covetousness.
260. A letter unto the Lady Marye of Padilla, wife to Don John of Padilla,
wherein the Aucthor does persuade that she turn to the service of the king.
265 An oration made in the Town of Braxima, unto the knights and gentlemen of
the assembly, wherein the Aucthor does tequest them to peace in the name of
the king. 272 A letter unto Doctor Melgar Physician, wherein is touched the
profits and disprofites of Physic. 282 who first invented medicine and
practiced Physic. 282 Of kingdoms and provinces that banished Physic. 287
The travails of Physic. 289 A letter sent from Grec^a to Rome, with a
caue^t against Physicians. 291 Of seven notable benefits proceeding from the
good Physician. 293 Of nine perniciou^ evils, that Physicians commit. 295 The
Aucthors judgment of Physic. 297 A letter unto M^sen Puche of Valentia,
wherein is touched at large how the husband with the wife, and the wife
with the husband etc. 300. That none do marry but with his equal. 304 That
the women be very shame^aced and no babbler. 3^8 That a woman be a home keeper
and ^hun occasions. 309 That the married woman be not proud or cruel. 311
That the husbands be not rigorous, especially when they be new. etc. 313 That
the husbands be not over jealous. 316 That if betwixt the married there pass
any unkindness, they give no part thereof unto their neighbors. 318 That the
husbands provide things necessary for the house. 321 That the husbands bring
not to their houses suspicious persons. 322 That married women ought to learn
to sovve and gather together. 325 A letter unto Mosen Robin of Valentia,
wherein he answers to certain notable demands, a letter very convenient,
for the woman that marries an old man. 327 A letter to the cha^on Osorius:
wherein is declared, that we know not the things that profit or hurt us in
this life. 331 A letter to count Nasaoth Marquis of cenece, wherein is
expressed why amongst the fectes of Mahomet, some be termed Turks, some
saracens, and others Moors. 334 A letter to Don Frances of vlloa, expounding
certain strange and ancient Epitaphes 344 A letter unto the admiral sir
Frederike, vvherin is touched the manner that in old time was used on their
sepulchers, and the Epitaphe upon the same. 351 A letter unto sir Alphonce
Maurique, Archbishop of civil, wherein is declared a certain passage of holy
scripture. 361 A discourse made unto queen Elinor, in a sermon of the
transfiguration, wherein is touched, the great love that christ did bear us.
371 The taking and overthrow of carthage, done by scipio the great. 378 A
disputation and discourse holden against the Jews at Rome 383 An excellent
disputation, that the author had with the Jews of Naples, wherein is
declared, the most high mysteries of the trinity. 398 A right high and,
profitable discourse apertayning chiefly unto the learned. 401 A letter to sir
Ferdena^do of Cordoua, vvherin is discoursed the eleven persecutions of the
church when, and by whom they were persecuted. 405
FINIS.
The favvtes that be escaped in printinge.
Foll. 328. line. 2. Read caspe for pa^pe.

Foll. 329. line. 4. Read they for flee.

Foll. Idem. line 16. Read fallen for fall.

Foll. 331. line. 11. Read algezire for algezi.

Foll. Idem line. 20. Read Tincinatus, for omitus.

Foll. 336. line. 26. Read during, for ba^ging.

Foll. 335. line 13 Read enxo^ius, for enponius.

Foll. Idem. line. 14. Read pithiniachus, for pithanius.

Foll. Idem. line. 17. Read thesithes, for goths.

Foll. Idem. line 23. Read Cesaria, for ^osar^a.

Foll. Idem. line 24. Read Isawrus, for Isauca.

Foll. Idem. line 24. Read feleuce, for solenua.

Foll. Idem. line 25. Read briquiene, for briquemust.

Foll. Idem. line 26 Read, fes, for fee.

Foll. Idem. line. 6. Read quisquiane, for gnisquaince.

Foll. 354. line 27. Read ninus, for mimus

Foll. ^6^. line 5. Read demanded, for determined.

Foll. 384. line 20. Read neither, for either.


