THE French Kings Proclamation, containing the agreement with the King of
Spain, for the taking away of the new Imposition of thirty in the hundredth.

Published in November last.

Translated out of French.

VERITAS (...) VULNERE

Printe^ by T. C. for Cutbert Burby ^welling (...) C^^^rch-yard, at the Sign
of the Sw^^ne ^604.

The French Kings Proclamation, containing the agreement with the King of
Spain, for the taking away of the new Imposition of thirty in the hundredth.
HENRY by the grace of God, King of France and Navarre,
to all present and to come, salutatio^s.
After that it was manifest that the Imposition of ^^^tie the hundredth hereto
fore imposed by (...) the King of Spain, and (...) Flaunders, upon the
merchandise (...) should be brought thither o^ (...), of which might be (...)
Country and D^ (...) ^ubiects also the difference (...) follow the said
Imposition) were by us published to all our subjects concerning trafficque into
the Countries and Dominions of the said Princes, which wholly might alter the
traficque which was wont to be between our estates, and which is also one of
the chiefest and most firm bonds for the entertainment of peace, which our
most holy Father the Pope well considering, and that the same in time to come
might effect and draw much worse consequence, has had care through his
fatherly affection which he bears us, to continue the said peace, and for
the good and quietness of our estates, exhorted us with holy counsel to cease
our differences which had happened by our said publications, and to restore the
liberty of trade which had bin always since the said peace. As (...) brother
the King of (...)^like endeavor toward (...) that with one accord ^^ing the ^
to cause our Minister^ (...), the cause (...) the differences, the (...)
determined with (...) sealed she (...) agreement, which arch^ (...) ^ectiuely
ratified. And desiring for our part, that it may be inuiolably kept and
observed, and to that end that it may be manifested and known to al men: Be it
therefore known and manifest to all, That the Articles following were handled,
agreed, and signed, by our cosen the Lord Marquess of Rosny, great Master and
Captain General of the Ordenance of France, and the Lord of Sillery, one of
our privy Council for us: and for our said brethren the King of Spain and
Archduke, Dom Baltazar de Cuuiga, Ambassador for the said King of Spain and
the Senator Alexander Rouidius, and afterward respectively confirmed and
ratified as is before said. FIRST, It is agreed on both sides, and at one time:
that the Proclamations published concerning the thirty in (...) ^dictio^ of
trade, should by the said (...) Archduke be taken away and surcease ^EM, It is
agreed that the said (...) Christian king, shall forbid (...) ^^^sently after
the (...) articles, tha^ (...) ^assalls, or inhabita^^^ (...) ^ort, directly
nor indirectly by any manner or means whatsoever, neither in his own name, nor
in the name of any other man, neither shall lend his name, nor any ship,
vessel or wagon, to carry or convey ships, marchandizes, wares, or any
other things, from the Provinces of Holland and Zealand into Spain, or into
any other Kingdoms and Dominions of the King of Spain and Archdukes, neither
shall lade in his ship or vessel any marchandizes of Holland and Zealand to be
tra^sported into the said countries, on pain of his Majesty's indignation, and
other forfeytures imposed by his ordinances upon the Offenders. And for the
avoiding of the frawds which may ensue by reason of the resemblance of
marchandizes; It is agreed in this present article, that the marchandizes, of
France (...) ^^ported and conuay^^ into the Kingdoms and countries of (...)
said Catholic King and Archduke (...) ^ed and sealed with (...) place from
wh^^^ (...) being so registre^ (...) and held for French n^ (...) ^^proued and
admitted, excepting the proof of the frawde, without any let or hindrance to
the course of merchandise, or shipping notwithstandanding: And touching such
merchandise which shall not be registered and marked, the same shall be
confiscate, and taken for good prize. Likewise al Hollanders and Zealanders
which shall be found in the said ships may be taken and arrested. ITEM, it is
agreed that the marchandizes which the French merchants shall buy in Spain,
and other countries of the said Catholicque King, and the same transport in
their own shipping, or in other ships hired and lent them for their use,
(excepting notwithstanding the ships of Holland and Zealand as is before said,)
shall not pay, the said Impositio of thirty in the hundredth, so as they carry
the same into the Country of the said most Christian King or to the Ports
under the obeisance of the said Archdukes, or unto (...) forbidden by (...)
^ning this in, (...) of these (...) frauds (...) and avoided, and that the
sats^ (...) ^zes be not carried to any other place, and especially into Holland
and Zealand. And it is resolved, that at such time as the said marchandizes are
laden in their ships in Spain, or in any other Kingdoms and dominions under
the obedien^e of the said Catholicque king and Archduke^, they shall bind
themselves before the magistrate of the place where they shall take in their
lading, to pay the said imposition of thirty in the hundredth if so be they
shall carry the same to any other place, and within a year to return a
certificate, from the Judge or Magistrate of those places where the said
marchandizes shall be discharged, whether the same be done in the kingdom of
France, or in the Ports and haue^s of the said Archdukes, or in any other
place, not prohibited by the said Edict, which certificate being returned, the
obligations concerning those matters shall be (...), and remain void and of no
effect. And it is (...) ^ed, that after publication of this (...) most
Christian king shall comma^^ under (...) man shall bring any march and (...)
Spain, or out of any other of the C^^^olicque kings dominions, but into
France, and to the ports and havens of Flanders, and places before specified,
or else where, no^ prohibited by the said Edict, on pain to forfeyte the said
marchandizes, to the use of the said most Christian king, whereof the moitie
(or the value thereof) shall be to the Informer, (thirty in the hundredth being
first deducted) which shall be paid to the Commissioners appointed by the
said Catholicque king, upon the credit of the prooses lawfully taken and made
in Spain, and sent into France, in Attentique form (excepting the exceptions
and defenses against the said proofs.) And it is also agreed, that some
magistrate of the places and towns of the said kingdoms, which shall give
certificate of the discharging of the ships, or of registring the marchandizes,
shall use no fraud therein, on pain of his Majesty's indignation, to be
discharged from his ^ffice, and of more gree^^ (...) punishment as the cause
required (...) as much as the intent of the (...) is to procur^ the greater
com^ (...) and profit* by the trade between their subjects, they shall give
order as much as in them lies, for free passage to go and come to their
Ports, Kingdoms and Dominions, to the end that the said subjects may more
freely pass with their marchandizes. And as concerning the reuocation of the
tolls imposed at Calais, since the meeting at Veruins, concerning such
marchandizes which should be transported out of Spain into Flanders, and out
of Flanders into Spain. Which article having bin already agreed upon, at the
instant suit of the Cardinal of Buffalo, in the name of his Holiness, the same
shall be put in execution, according to the form and tenure thereof. All the
articles above mentioned shall be reciprocallie published, with all therein
contained, and the ratificatio^ of the said Princes shall be solicited, that
publication thereof may be made in one day, on both sides, forty days after
the date hereof.

Dated the ^^^ day of October. 1604. Signed Maximillan de^ne, N. Bruda^t at
S^^ery, Dom B^^^^^zar (...) Alexander Rouidi;^^^


And a little (...) was written,

Seeing ^^^se article* before ^entioned. His Excellency is of the same mind,
touching the allowance or approbatio^ above mentioned, the said year, and
sixteenth day of the same month at Arras..

Signed John de on Gondest,

with this addition.

We command our friends and faithful Councellers, those which keep our
Courts of Parliament of Aid, Bailiffs, Seneshalls, Prouosts, General
Treasurers of France, Officers of our Admiraltie, and of foreign business, or
their Lieutenants, and others our Officers, Iustises and Subjects, to who^ it
shall appertain, that every one of them in his place, shall cause these
presents to be registered and published, and to keep, follow, and observe the
Articles therein contained inuiolablie, according to their form and tenure,
ceassing, and causing to cease, all troubles and impeachments hereunto
contrary or repugnant, for such is our pleasure: And to the end that this may
remain for ever firm and stable, we have caused our Seal to be put hereunto,
reserving in other matters our right, and grant at all times.

Given at Fontainbeau in the month of November, and in the year of grace,
1604. And the 16. year of our Reign. Signed HENRY.

On the foulde was written the Kings Register his Manuell sign, ^^d sealed on
a knot of red and green silk: the great Seal in green wax; and on the
fold was written, Read, Published and Registered, and heard, and the general
Procurator of the King, desiring that the contents thereof might be kept and
observed, according to the tenure and form at Roane in the Parliament, the 22.
day of November, 1604.

Signed CVSSON, the Notaries knot or manuell sign.

FINIS.

