PHILADELPHVS, OR A Defense of Brutes, and the Brutans History.

Written by R. H.

Imprinted at London by John Wolf. 1593.

TO THE MOST NOBLE LORD, the Lord Robert Deuoreux, Earl of Essex, of her
Majesty's privy Counsel, Knight of the Princely Order of the Garter.
RIght Noble, my very especial good Lord, I present now unto your Lordship,
this historical Essay, in print, which I offered before in writing, either
because I am urged to this duty by your most honorable munificence toward me,
or because I cannot provide my other exercises written of greater and grauer
matters. Yet I take the defense of mediocritie for a matter of some weight,
both in this history of Brute, which is made litigious, and in any other
position of much less importance, even of hair it self; insomuch as
mediocritie cannot be disalowed.

It is manifest, that some have written more of Brute then behooved them, but
some have behaved themselves unkindly against Brutans, and done less for them,
then they should.

They are on both parts, too learned for me, I am not worthy to be their
moderator, in this question of Brute: howbeit, as they have freely delivered
their opinions with out any stop, so would I show the good will I bear to the
one part, without any hatred to the other. God forbid, that diversity of
studies, should bring forth a diuorcement of hearts among neighbors and
friends: it were better no books at all were written, then to a break the
bond of unity, and loosen the yoke of obedience by them, seeing we may live
better without them, men without these.

I hope, I am clean from any abuse in this present treatise, I will ever
honor strangers, for their good qualities of learning and life: but I must not
hold my hand and pen still, when I see them too busy, in tossing our histories
and acts, at their own pleasure, which appertain not unto them: they cannot
stay me from my study, more then I kept them from this practice. I favor the
history of Brute, without regard of their disfavor, as they dislike it,
without respect of other men's liking. I cannot in loyalty defend every Brute,
but I may without any breach of duty, defend this great Brute of Brutanie.

Wherefore I most humbly beseech your most excellent good Lordship, to accept
of this mighty Captains present defense, even as your worthy honor, uses to
allow the reasonable suits of approved men, which are like to do God good
service, and this kingdom.

Thus trusting to your Lordships magnificent, and sweet favor herein, I most
heartily commend your true renowned honor, to the blessed estate of
immortality.

Your Lordships in all thankful duty. Richard Haruey.

A DEFENSE OF BRVTES HISTORY.
MAster Buchanan, though some call you the trumpet of Scotland, and some the
noble Scholar, yet I will be so bold, as answer your larum, touching the
history of mighty Brute: because your inuectiue treatise, is in truth, more
factious, then effectual. You and such hotbraines, have devised a faction, and
diuorcement of opinions, (I dare say) without fruit, and I believe, without
cause: For my part, your denial is not able once to move me, and your reasons
against Brutes history, shall never persuade any sufficient reader, to agree
with you, and remove the marks and circuites, that Geffry Monmouth has set
down. Yet by reading your allegations and probations, we may best areede, who
is most credible, he or you, a Monmouth or a Scot, a Moonke or a Trauailer, and
if neither barrel be better herring, then by their words they shall be saved
from blame, and by their words they shall be damned, says the wise Judge:
wherefore I take you of your word, and I say: that

We seek no Noilitie, from Brute, we count not of our forefathers nobleness,
but of our own. Nobility I can tell you, goes not by birth and riches in
Brutany, but by virtue: it stands not upon antiquity, but upon right: we
ever say, that nobleness is a superiority or dominion in virtuous acts, and
that other things without virtue are but minority and subjection, and
colors, and naught worth.

We cannot think that Brute was ^atricide: let them that judge him so, prove
him so. I pass not for that he has done aforetime in other lands, but I
only respect his Actions in this Island. Yet, if he were in that huge and maine
fault, he may well enter into Sanctuary, till you and yours have proved the
deed voluntary. Mishap is not rashness, chance is not counsel, there is a
folly in meeting an arrowe, there is no sin in shooting it at a beast in the
forest.

We compare not Brutus with Romulus, no more then we compare your Chronicle now
with this that shall write one 200. or 300. years hereafter: but this is your
flourish, to no other purpose, then to show reading, where it does no good, and
may do some little hurt to a young Reader; who by your words will go nigh to
say, that Brute and Romulus are much of a time, because you set them together
in a Chronicle, which should report that is past, or record that is present
only.

We are not Brittons, we are Brutans: we account not Brute our author and
founder, seeing here dwelt as Noble men before Brute as ever since that time. No
good country or bad, has been without noble men from the beginning, and to let
go all Histories, I dare say this word, That nature has made as ancient a
generation of men upon the earth, as of other creatures, and of chief men in
their companies at first, as well as of other chief creatures in their kinds
and their heardes at first, yea and much rather of men, because of more
government and order.

We speak not of Brutes wealth and language, before he came hither, neither
can you prove, that he had not wealth enough to serve his uses, or tongue
enough in every place of his travel. Cannot an Egle fly from place to place,
and take here a lamb, there a kid, here a goose, there a swanne, unless he
can speak the language of lambs, and kids and geese and swannes? what
traffic should a venturer have with any people, when he has set all the
earth or one part thereof before him, to make himself king in some place or
other? He will not ask, what price bears your marchaundise? but a Brute will
have it for taking: he will be above your commercies, and throw you into the
marshes, if you give him not whatsoever you would not, whenever he will.

What if the Romans could scarsely set foot in this Island, when they were in
their greatest fortune and strength? could not Brute therefore possibly get
into it? how know you, whether his nativity, or his good hap, or his manner of
entering, were not better or happier then Caesar's?

If one company cannot enter by force, cannot another company enter by wit and
fairer means? It is not number, nor money that make a Conqueror, it is good
success, which comes of a good forecast, that is in a Grecian more then in a
Roman, and why not in Brute more then in Caesar? If Brutes Chronicles had been
preserved as well as Caesar's, I doubt not of this matter and of Brutes
immortality in all writings, then Caesar had been half a Brute.

We have not any thing here for Italians, till we be served our selves, we
are only in Brutanie and among Brutans. Let other men have leave to speak of
Saturn and Latium, of Ianus and Ianiculum, and other things before Brute, who
might be among his neighbors, as singular and fortunate a man for foresight,
as Noah was among the men of former times. It is no reason that Brute could
not be given to travel, because the Italians were not given to traveling,
among whom you say he dwelt before. So you may deny almost every actors Acts,
that has lived admirably in the world. It may be, that Brute and is fellows
swornemen were worth all the rest in lively and manly action abroad, as Abraham
and his company were singular among the Assyrians, and proved the rare man of
the world.

We say not, that Brute walked on the Sea, or came hither by land, and
therefore your Alps, and your Hercules have no present use, but as table talk
to pass time, and make a noise. Yet men having lived more then 2800. years
from Adam to Hercules upon the earth, and Comer the son of Lamech, and Cham
and Sabati, and other great men lying in Italy before Hercules was borne, and
seeking out the parts of the earth every way, we can believe reasonably, that
they passed over the Alps before him. Or if Hercules must needs be the only
man, what a single reason is it? that Brute might not follow him that way,
because Hercules only had gone before. I had rather conclude thus: Hercules
made a way through the Alps so easily, that any hardy trauailer might follow
him that way. Since Brutes time the Alps have been passable enough, and the
Gauls have ouerrunned them; and other people trod on them, your Adhuc alienis
is somewhat unskillfully written of you.

Truly I would Tamerlane were even now here, to answer your Ocean argument:
he could tell you, that his multitude of rude Scythians and shepheardes could
do more Acts then all the fine gay troops and ranks of Baiazete, that it is
no good consequent which you bring forth, as if the Albane shepheardes and
clownes might not be as valiant in vanquishing the Alps, as the Carthaginian
soldiers: unless it be an infallible Item, that the iolliest men are ever
greatest actors by sea and land: your argument a maiori is easily set a minori
in this manner: The lightheaded Grecians and such other have passed the Ocean,
much more is it probable, that the manly and most hardy Albanes have done the
same thing, having neither less wit by comparison of their Acts, nor less
courage in any point. The actions of one do not prove any thing of another,
but of that one pro or contra: or else how should we have arguments of
contradictories, of unequals, of vnlikes, of divisions? or if your reason be an
history, I see no cause, why mine history of Brute, may not be credited
as well as yours of the Massilians, who were long enough after Noah's Arc and
other ships of other men, I believe, to have some ancestors in shipmastry
and many fellows. He that goes aspying goes aspeeding: opportunity makes
men do strange works: have you never heard of players and iesters, that by
devises of games and pastimes have obtained very great victories? Remember man,
I say, the famous and strong name of Brute, and consider the nature of warly
trauailers, and never stand so stiffly in your naked conjecture.

How knows Buchanan, that there was no such renowned Brute in the world
before the bannishment of the Tarquines in Rome? might there not be another
Brute 500. years before this counterfeit Brute of Rome? or was there none
such, are you sure, because the Roman and Greek Historians of other nations,
forsooth, have made no such record? It is no sufficient reason, to carry
Brutans from their own old Registers by the words and silence of outlandish
writers. You know and I am sure, there are no mean matters left out of
profane Histories, which are in ecclesiastical Histories, and nevertheless
allowed. The more they leave out the glory of our land, the more I presume by
the nature of foreign countries, that our land was envied, because it was most
glorious. I tell you I cannot think it necessary, that he which is named
Brute in our Chronicle must be so named in other Chronicles: the same man may
have diverse names severally set down in several books of several languages,
and as for this most Noble Brute, it is like enough, he changed his name, as
he changed his habitation.

You may easily say, A Moonke was the deviser of this Brute, you will say, that
he played the Poet, that he carved and painted him in this manner: but you
cannot yet prove in this have, that the Moonke or student had not good proof
in his readings of this Brute, that he had not his Author for them. It is out
of question, that many books have been written but once, and that many such
singular books have been lost for want of coppies, and it is probable, that
this Moonke had some old monument or book, which may be in Cambry to this
day, though Buchanan and Liuy never heard of it, and may be as true of Brute,
as their old Scottish Things and Romish Decades are accounted true by their
favorers and countrymen. If the history of Brute be not true, because they
have not seen the proof thereof, no more is their history true, because we
have not seen the proof thereof, which was acted so many years ere we were
borne: thus it is as lawful to conjecture for Brute as against him, seeing he
is but denied only by conjectures and probabilities.

But what is this you say? are men's mouths stopped with a mask and show of
Religion? cannot men tell what to say against A show and appearance? do men
that name the heathenish religion account it religion in Christendom? I
warrant you, the Moonke was so far from purposing, to stop men's mouths with
the idolatry of Diana, that he never esteemed half the tenth part so much of
her, as Demetrius did for his profit in Ephesus, and I dare say, that the
Religious Author thought it no religion, or imagined, that the Brutanes would
so esteem it, but only named Diana, as Castor and Pollux are named of S. Luke
the Evangelist.

Your Synchronisme of Faunus, of Sybilla and Praenestine is to no purpose: it
seems by this History of Brute, that Dianaes Oracle was not unknown, as you
seem to avouch. But here you will take the Moonke at a dead lift, as you
suppose, and yet I tell you me-thinkes you and very bookishly and literally
wise, not reasonably and discoursiuely. Must Diana needs speak latin,
because this Historian reports her Oracle in latin? Are you not advised, how
many things are written in Greek and Latin of the Beginning of the world,
though there were neither Greek nor Latin 2000. years and more after the
Creation of heaven and earth? and such a reason might partly be brought against
your self in your first king Fergusius, if I would follow so needless a
cause, in comparing his time with the times of the latin tongue, wherein you
write of him. You might have done well, to prove that the Moonke says, how
Brute received his answer of Diana, and asked her Counsel in latin speech,
which because you have not proved, your Horatius and your Saliare carmen, and
your Numa, and your words are but wind. Cannot an Historian report the
Orations of the Indians, of the Germans, of the Numidians in latin, unless
the Numidians and Germans and Indians spoke latin? were the Orations in your
Chronicles, Master Buchanan, spoken first in latin? So your Penitus obliti and
ne tenue quidem, and other bootlesse words are vain and little, or naught worth
in this present question. It Is not ever true that has a quidem. I cannot
certainly say, that the Brutans language was used in Italy in the days of
Brute: but I may well say, notwithstanding your trifling mycterisme, that if
the Oracles and men had spoken it, they had been never the worse, nor the
language never the better. But you were in a running thought and supposed your
self subtle enough, when you had brought your invention to a disjunctive
proposition, with much effect, I promise you, when it tends hitherto, even to
prove, that the Brutan speech then was not the same our Brutans use now in
Cambry.

Yet by your leave, Buchanan, it is no proof against this language, in that
many tongues appear in it in your time, seeing Brutanisme might at first be
as full of diverse tongues by reason of much travel as it is now, and then
your argument has nor use nor force in your question: and in truth, though
Scots be called generally false, yet Buchanan may be true: so Moonks may dream
dreams, and yet Geffry Monmouth write a truth. Why should not a Moonke be as
credible as a Paedanty? or a solitary student understand that he reads as
much as a busy schoolmaster? or a Cambrian read Chronicles which a Scot never
saw? or Geffry be as plain and verifiable as Buchanan, being not so deep over
head and ears in verses and Poetry as he? yet now at last the George
confesses, that his own reasons are but minims, and minute persecutions and
slender things, and is feign to say, that the Moonke himself seems to
acknowledge his fiction, though it appears not so by the Moonkes words. Thus
it cannot be proved evidently, that the history of Brute is a fained and
poetical narration, unless it be first proved, that there were no more
Intelligences and Registers in the life of Geffrey then of George, and that
Geffrey had no Authors for his defense, because George cannot know them. If
nothing be true in one country which has not suffragees from another Country,
I cannot tell what history may stand irrefragably by this determination, no
not when we read the auncientest parts and primitive records of best
historiographers. Was there not an Apostle Paul under Nero, because Suetonius
and Tacitus name none such? much Iustine teach the Jews how to think of the
delivery of Israel? But I omit those instances which might be given against
you, because in a question I regard the argument more then the illustration
thereof, and so should you too by your leave, for all your 24. years travel.

Are they male callidi, and is vanity in them that call Diana an huntresse and
say, that in the time of Brute Diana was accounted a Goddess? I confess, I
cannot see, how they are lewdly and fraudulently vain that write thus: then it
remains, that you make these words good, if you can: The chaste body the
painful body, but labor and continency in man's body breed a kind of
divinity in man. I pray, when you in your Psalms, as they call them yours,
devise the most kinds of verses that you can, do you confess, that David made
them at first in so many sorts of verses as you have written them? surely you
will deny it. Iwis, it is not necessary, that Brute and Diana should speak
verses, because Geffry Monmouth records their words in verses. But, let be,
suppose they did speak in these or in other verses, then he, doubtless, or
some other for him translated their words into hexameters and pentameters, as
you see. What vanity or falsehood is on either side? never think to carry it
away with threedbare words, or to lead your Readers where you list.

A wise perswader are you: is Diana called Loxias in your books? or if Apollo
be oblique and crooked, and intricate in his answers, must Diana needs be so?
or if Dianaes Priest be commonly obscure and foulded up in speech, cannot it
be, that he should be perspicuous at any one time? are you to appoint him how
to speak so many years after his death? I pray, if Pythia be ever doubtful,
and oblique, because she is so for the most part, what doubtfulnesse or
obliquitie is in this answer? You are come to my rich temples, Lycurgus
beloved of God and of all that inhabit the heavenly houses, I am in doubt
whether I should call thee a mon or a God, but I much rather believe, that thou
art a God, Lycurgus, as Herodotus has recorded in his Clio: and what
ambiguitie is in that Answer which Pythia gave unto Craesus in the same book
of Herodotus? what say to Aristodocus in the same book, who neither asked in
verse nor was answered in verse? what say to them of Marea and Apia, which
asked Hammons Oracle in prose, and were answered in prose? as it appears in
Euterpe. What say to the Dove of Dodona, or the Oracle of the city Butis
given to Pheron that spoke in prose? in the same book: to let pass such
answers a good many given without verse or ambiguitie: Or if they were given
in verse being now written otherwise with allowance of Readers, what has the
Moonke done amiss in the manner of these verses? he may as well register prose
in verse, as they register verse in prose.

As for your Opinor, this may be well answered in your verbal manner, O pinor
narras? non recte accipis: you know the maker Terentius. I that am young may
as well bestow my labor to answer you, as you being old may object so
unfruitfully. How is that proved a manifest fiction that this Island at Brutes
coming was a wilderness, being yet so this day still in many places? Can
two Gyantes and their two families, or so many Giantes as make an Army, so
fill this country, that it shall not rightly be called a desert? when they are
all in one shire, the other shires are very deserts: when they being so few,
are scattered into so many shires between the Orcades and the I Will of Wight,
how can they so fill it, that it may not be well named of Diana a desert? in
comparison of the Cities and Kingdoms in other lands, where she abode most.

The name of Gogmagog is no more monstrous then the name of Onosconcoleros, nor
Tentagol more vast and strange then Nabuchodonozor, neither shall those Names
prejudice the History more with us then these Names have done with other in
the History of the Assyrians.

Thus I may very justly and reasonably maintain and uphold the history of
Brute, for any thing that master Buchanan has said against it. Concerning
Dioclesian and his daughters, I have willingly lost all that delight of reading
and answering, although I see evidently, that this History which you account a
tale may be defended for ought you have alleged. Yet master Buchanan takes
much upon him and charge some body with impudency and a lie, and plaieth
the Terrible schoolmaster, and yet when he has done his best and his worst,
it is not proved, that 24. years were not sufficient for Brutes retinue, and
the inhabitants of this land, together with other of their kindred that
resorted hither and remained here, to replenish the Country with men of War, to
erect three kingdoms, to accomplish great Acts by sea and land. Let him look
into the kingdoms of Grecia in old time, and he shall find fewer men in a
kingdom then Brute alone with his company might raise in 24. years: let him
remember the huge kingdoms of three men, Sem, Ham, and Iaphet: let him
consider, that mighty Actions are not done by money and number, but by
industry and virtue: let him prove, either that this Generation of Brute cannot
possibly be true, or else cease to spend his time with opinions and
likelihoodes, that may be repelled with the like again: rusty Antiquities more
reverend then scoured Novelties. Yet, we are not desirous, that Brute should be
our Conqueror, we wish not subjection to him, or any other outlandish
Nobleman: we had rather win the land that this Brute came from, and subdue it
under our feet: but when Brutans have published an History and allowed it a
long time, we would not have a Scot so presumptuous, as to control it, much
less to reject it, as this one Scot has done very rawly and unadvisedly.

So I leave you, master Buchanan, and wish you to sacrifice unto the wiser
dimi-goddesse Palinodia.

TO HIS MOST LOVING BROther, Master Gabriell Haruey, Doctor of Laws.
WHen I saw, both how iestingly, and seriously our History of Brute was
rejected of some ancient and new bookmen, I tried their marvelous iestes and
reasons, and felt them too weak to move me. Now my Answer is on foot with
their Reply, I may justly hold mine own, and stand on Brutes side against all
challengers that are or will come. I say, Puissant Brute is no fabulous
Prince, but a true example, no counterfeit man, but a corporal possessor of
this Island; let them say what they can. With this mind I have here taken one
Essay of our Chronicles in the best historical Method that I could make out
of the best Historiognomers. I am sure, any History is easier for memory, and
readier for use this way, then any other way, which I have hitherto seen in
other men's Collections, Tables, Directories, or any such other inventions: yet
as it is proof, so approve it, or reprove it; I am not wedded to myself, nor
tied to any sect in the world, but heartily wish every man to take every thing
as it is, not as it is made of this and that scribler or pratler, which can
tell better, how to play the mocking Ape, then the just controller. Almighty
God defend you daily, and amend them one day: you know my mind in all my
matters, and that I would those petite Momes had better manners: the scholars
head without moderation is like the merchantes purse pennilesse without all
credit: I desire that every student may smell as the Lillies of Solomon, and
that every wild Lilly may be set in his Gardens. I say, out Hemlocke, out
Bramble, out Weeds, and let the blood of furious Ajax himself, says Ovid, be
turned into a pleasant herb. I write not this, to flatter any that should
seek after me, but to follow you, good Brother, in your last Letters, in whose
Example I ever yet dwelt, and am like to dwell, even till my Soul shall dwell
in the Commonwealth of Heaven. I cannot bid you farewell in a better mind, and
in this respect I set me rest here, I remember your counsel, and begin my
Essaye. 1592. the 14. of June.

Your loving brother R.H.

AN ESSAY, OR TASTE OF THE first part of our Brutan Chronicles.
The History of Brute and Brutans sets forth. Principally and antecedently
their persons, and in them shows the geneallogy or issue which they had.
arts which they studied. acts which they did. This part of History is named
Anthropology.

Accessorily and consequently the times when they began to Rule. How long
they ruled. This part of History is named Chronology.

places in the Island, of Brutany; This part of History is named Topography out
of the Island of Brutany; This part of History is named Topography



When a man is borne into the world, he learneth some thing or other: by
learning he is brought to do somewhat: but as all deeds are done in the compass
of a place, so are they bounded with their beginning and ending.

THE GENEALOGY OR ISSVE of Brute.
BRute the first begat three sons of Innogen: the first was Locrine the
second Camber, the third Albanact.

Locrine the eldest son begat Madian of Guendolin and Habren of Elstrid which
had a skin as clear and white as Iuory, or Lillies, or Snow it self.

Madian begat Memprise,

Memprise begat Ebranke,

Ebranke a very goodly person among thousands and strong, begat Brute the
second, and nineteen sons and thirty daughters: these fifty children were
borne unto him of twenty women.

Brute the second begat Leyl,

Leyl begat Hurdibras,

Hurdibras begat Bladud,

Bladud begat Leyr,

Leyr begat three daughters, the first was Gonorill, the second Ragan, the
third Cordeil, but left no son behind him. Cordeil the youngest daughter, as
it came to pass succeeded her father, but Morgan and Conedag her two nephews
deposed her: Conedag the son of Ragan being provoked by Morgan the son of
Gonoril his coosin german slew him in battle and ruled alone, and begat
Rival, Rival begat Gurgust, and Sisill Gurgusts brother succeeded Gurgust,
and Iago Sisils next kinsman succeeded Sisill, and Kymer, Iagoes brother
succeeded Iago, and begat Gorbodug, Gorbodug begat Ferrex and Porrex of Wyden,
whose generations and issues are unknown to us, as the issues of Ebranks nine
and forty children are not known very well, nor the generations of Camber, of
Albanact, of Morgan, of Gurgust, of Sisill and of Iago.

Thus the eighteen Rulers that came of Brute the first are come to an end, as
a tale that is told in sport, or as a tree that is dug up in earnest. Yet
neither seven Polydores more, nor ten Buchanans shall persuade me, that this
Genealogy is a fabulous Tale. Let Polydore get him to Vrbin in Italy, and
Buchanan hye him to Buchany in Scotland: it becomes not these outlandish
intruders to usurp the censure of the Brutan Histories: if they look well
about them they have enough to do at home: we need none of their gossiping
cups: but they are dead, and their historical judgments are interred with
them: if any man will raise them from the grave, who will believe their
mortified Ghosts? A Brutan may justly except against the witness of an
Italian, or a Scot: Jealousy and malignity are two blind guids: Then hold your
own, ye brave Brutans, and guide your selves, your own heads are fittest for
your own bodies.

THE ARTS AND ACTS OF Brute, and his Brutans were in their Virtues and Vices.
Their virtue and Temperance appeared in
Friendship and communion

Between man and wife in marriage. Locrine married Guendolin: Leyr married his
two eldest daughters with two Dukes: Cordeil was married to Aganip Duke of the
Gauls for her womanly virtues, and virtuous womanhoode.

Talk and conference,

Between superior and inferior, the ruler and the subject. Guendolin after
her husbands death lived contentedly and lovingly with her kindred and
acquaintance in Cornwall till she dyed. Brute the second carried ever a
green shield with him, to signify, what a mind he did carry withal, even a
mind and desire, to have all things grow and flourish like the fruitful
fields unto a joyful harvest: whereupon he was named Greeneshield, a Prince
gentle toward all men, and merciful to the needy. Leyl lived peaceably in his
young days. Hurdibras allayed the factions and quarrels that he found among
his people, and of unquiet men made them very quiet. Leyr lived moderately with
his subjects. Cordeil behaved her self so lovingly and patiently, that she
would not punish the two sons of Maglan and Hennine for their fathers: she
thought it no reason, to plaster one body for an other bodies sores, to beat
one for another fault. Riual lived quietly. Gurgustus kept his country in
rest and wealthy peace by some learned counsel.

Between the father and the child: Cordeil being ever modestly and maydenly
shamefaced, either would not or could not flatter her father Leyr with
needless phrases and vain oaths, but answered him mildly and simply without
ostentation or deceit, that she loved him as her natural father with an
obedient ever and thankful hearth unfeignedly.

Between two coosins: When Conedag was informed by his old trusty friends,
and told from his mortal ennemies, that Morgan began roundly to make open
war against him, he himself desired peace by letters, and sought it with all
good means otherwise by Ambassadors, he was so unwilling to shed blood, if he
might choose, or even to carry armor against his kinsman.

THIS WAS THEIR TEMPERANCE in Deeds and Words.
Their vice and Intemperance appeared in
Words: First, Gonoril told Leyr, she loved him more then her own soul: then
Ragan said, she loved him unspeakably.

Leuity: When Locrin saw Elstrid, he would have rejected Guendolin: Memprise
lived loosely, and spent most of his time in pastime and licentious games.

Drink: Gurgust by some natural infirmity of brain was dronken once a day:
this drunkenness neither shortened his life, nor hindered his actions, as it
seems by the years of his government and life.

Discord: Madian was subject to much impatience and tyranny. Memprise,
procured the death of those great men whom he feared for their virtue and
therefore hated for his own guilty life.

Venery: Locrine kept Elstrid his captive for his Concubine, and accompanied
her a long time, too long by six years and twelve months. Memprise sold
himself to adultery, he gave his body to buggery and beastly love, which was
love, saving your reverence. Ebrank had twenty wives, some say, but I think
nineteen of them were huswifes, as we commonly say, and she his wife only
that married him and knew him first: A right line is between two, to go aside
is to go amiss.

Their virtue, or wisdom is seen in
Discipline or desire of knowledge: Madian, though he were borne a mortal
Prince or earthly God, was in his childhood sent into Cornwall to his most
valiant grandsir Corin, that he might learn of him all experienced manhood fit
for a sovereign Ruler. Bladud in his young years was sent otherwise and
carried over seas to Athenes, that he might, forsooth, be taught the wisdom
of the Grecians: this Athenian English Prince at his return brought home with
him no less then four great Philosophers, to teach the Brutans, and either
found or founded Schools for them at Stamford or Stanefoda after the smoothest
and Atticall Idiome.

Arts, both Geometry, and Astrology: Brute presently upon his Arrival
searched this Island optically and thoroughly, he and his surueyed it
quantitatiuely and queintly to the purpose. Hurdibras taking in his head and
hand, to build the city, or woodworke and stoneworke of Caerpalladour, called
for the judicial advise and devise of Aquila his Astrologer in laying the
foundations of that starry and elementary City, that the world might better
esteem it.

Philosophy, both natural and moral: the four wisemen of Athens, that taught
some of the Brutans, even as Bladud the king appointed them, had many times for
their variable and strange voices a wonderful great audience, and those
wisemens scholars succeeded them and continued orderly about the times of
fourteen hundred years after with great glory, but but how good, I know
not. Bladud found the hot Bathes in this Island by his Geomanticall and
Hydromanticall skill and subtlety. Brute the first made many good politic
laws for the benefit and direction of himself and his subjects. Guendolin
ministered true judgment to the people well and wisely, at last, fearing by
reason or inspiration that the king Madian her son would scarsely use her
Honorably, as the son should use his mother, went her way and dwelt far enough
ought of sight in Cornwall among them that were glad ever of her daily
company. Ebranke for his sons sake and his own, sent his thirty daughters
to Siluius an Italian Duke, that they might be married with their own blood,
the old Trojan blood, and thereby get their father many friends or welwillers
abroad, to strengthen him in his need, if need were.

Words of counsel: Cordeil told her father in a melancholicke vain, That as
his riches were more or less, so he should be loved and feared more and less.

This was their Prudence in teaching and learning.

Their vice or folly is seen in
Deceit by bulding: Locrine for want of better conueiance built a cave for his
Concubine, and made some few men of his privy Counsel, but told other men,
that it was a secret place for prayer and sacrifice in the manner of his own
outlandish religion: when he heard and knew of Corins death, he crowned Elstrid
queen and rejected Guendolin, whom he seemed to love hitherto for fear of
Corin, and not for liking.

Deceit by weapons: Memprise slew his manly brother Manlius by faithless
craft, to be out of his emulatiue danger and dangerous emulation.

Magicals: Bladud dedicated his Bathes to Minerua a dead woman: he taught
Necromancy in all parts of his country: he undertook to fly aloft in the air
with devised wings and means artificially, and so fell down inartificially
and died sensibly, neither could he become admirable this way, as he hoped.

Words: Leyr forgetting his Honor asked his three daughters a fond needless
question, as some use to dally with young children, and would forsooth, hear
of them that were women grown, How much they loved him: they might have showed
on their finger.

Ignorance: the Gyantes of this Island being only strong, and wild men without
any great forecast, were subdued for want of art and government. Sisill let
all matters go and run at adventure. Iago had the same vile fault, and died of
a frenzy, as he lived with a megrim.

Their virtue and fortitude is known by their Acts in
Peace, These honorable Rulers approved their Princely magnificence, and
Philotimy in a brave manner. Brute the first named this Island Brutanie of his
own Noble and famous Name: He built a fortunate City by the Tems, and called
it Troy-new in perpetual honor of his own Country. Ebranke built a fair
City in his land Northward, which he called Caerbranke after his own name:
He built another City with a Castle in Albany, and called it Edenbrough, in
regard of his daughters. Leyl built a City in this land Northward, which he
called Caerleyl by his own name. Leyr built a City in the midst of his land,
and called it Caerleyr in respect of his own name. Thus they purchased their
Glory with heroical expenses, and public actions profitably. Then the
virtuous subjects showed their excellent magnanimity in good sort: They
suffered not Madian to rule over them, till he was able to carry armor in the
Field, and lead an army. Duke Corin went to king Locrin with his ordinary
battle Axe in his hand, and behaved himself so manly, and plainly with the
king, that he would not or durst not reject Guendolin his spouse, as he before
had purposed. Good warly rhetoric.
War at home Those Dukes Maglan and Hennine suffered not their wives king
Leyrs two eldest daughters to be kept from the Crown by Cordeil the youngest
daughter. Locrin fought with Humber and flewe him in battle, because he had
slain his younger brother Albanact the Prince and ruler of Albany. Conedag and
Morgan the sons of those two Dukes deposed even Cordeil their aunt from her
usurpation and royal government. Conedag defended his land against Morgan, and
put him to flight, and slew him, and joined Morgans kingdom to his own.
Guendolin the queen gathered an army against her husband Locrin the king, and
in their conflict he was slain with an arrow.
abroad. Ebranke got great victories, and rich spoils both in strange
countries far off, and near hand, and then returned home with his money and men
in safety and joy: it is no less courage, to get out of troble, then to go
through it.


This was their Fortitude, in doing for their friends, and undoing their foes.

Their vice or extreme fortitude is known by
Covetous ambition: Manly warred with his elder brother Memprise to deprive him
of the kingdom, accounting it his own, if he could win it. Leyrs two sons in
law Maglane and Hennine expelled him out of his land, and usurped his place a
while, no time to count of. Morgan raised war against Conedag his coosin
german, with whom he lived neighbourly aforetime, but now he aspired to
Conedags kingdom. Porrex made sudden war upon Ferrex his brother, and put him
to flight, and slew him, to be ruler himself alone.

Audacious anger: When the people might do what they would in the reign of
Sisill, they being naturally given to fighting, fell to civil war among
themselves, and spilt much innocent blood. Rage is blind: villanes sometime
turn wars to their vile uses.

Pusillanimity or base idleness: Leyl for want of a good heart could not rule
his subjects when he was old. Cordeyl being at her wits end despaired of her
liberty, and murdered her self in prison. Gorbodug lived without any
memorable act, like an idiote or a very swain. Sisill by continual ease fell
into many cold and phlegmatic diseases, and at last a lethargy made an end
of him: as he sowed, so he reaped: of a lasie life, came a loathsome death.

Their virtue or Justice is proved in
Dividing in the generations of the eighteen kings the Crown is ever justly
possessed, either by the sons, or by the brethren, or by the next of the kings
blood, except the next to king Leyr.

Brute the first divided Brutany among his three sons, the eldest had the
best third, the youngest the worst part, the middle son the mean part, not
so good as the best, nor so ill as the worst.

Ebranke built a Temple in Caerbrank and appointed an archflamin to ouersee it.
Leyl built a Temple in Caerleyl and ordained a flamin to rule over it.
Hurdibras built Caerkent, Caeruin and Caerpalladour, for the benefit of the
country, and in every of them he made a Temple. Bladud built a Temple in his
City Caerbadon, which was made by him for their use that kept the Bathes or
came to them.

Conedag and Morgan the sons of two sisters parted Brutany between them, and
lived quietly: So did Ferrex and Porrex two brethren for a time: but the
comedy became a tragedy.

Rewarding: Brute the first gave Cornwall to Corin his fellowsouldier for
ouercomming Gogmagog the Giant in wrestling. Locrin bestowed the spoils of
Humbers armies upon the soldiers that won them in battle. Cordeil welcomed
her father Leyr most reverently when he fled unto her for succor, and restored
him to his kingdom. Kymar kept his land in right frame and order, by giving all
brave men that they truly deserved: the chief policy with good natures.

Challenging: Corin seeing changeable affections of Locrin charged him with a
promise and contract made between him and Guendolin, and urged him so straightly
and severely, that he made him content to stand to his word, the rather for
that good service which Corin did his father Brute.

Revenging: Locrin revenged the death of Albanact his brother with the death of
Humber. Guendolin fought against her own husband, to plague him for his
whoredom and other injuries, and provided so well for her self, that in the
trial of their Cause he was slain, and his whore drowned with her base
daughter, the fiery and deceitful root Baaras with the leaf. Conedag and
Morgan deposed Cordeil from the kingdom which she held from them a long time
with some title by her father though insufficient, seeing these were the sons
of her eldest sisters. Wyden with her waiting women chopped her son Porrex in
pieces by night, for killing his brother Ferrex without any just cause.

Punishing: Gurgust was abhorred of the Brutans for his daily drunkenness, but
suffered to be king for his birthrightes sake. Madian and Memprise were hated
of good men and feared of wicked men for their extreme and beastly cruelty:
so between both they were secretly forsaken in time of hunting and the wild
beasts suffered to destroy them. Here we may very fitly consider, how the
Power from heaven punished the people of Brutanie with raining blood three
days, and vexing them with infinite swarms of venomous strange flies, that
stung their king Riual and many other to death. See, what life is that flies
may take away, even little flies with their little stings.

This was their Justice in Religion and Policy.

Their vice or Injustice is proved in
Dividing: Locrin crowned Elstrid his concubine queen, when Guendolin his true
wife lived. Ebranke dedicated the Temple of his City to a living name and
dead carcass Diana, that could not defend it or him. Leyr gave half his
goods to his two eldest daughters at their marriage, and made them mightier
then himself, for speaking to him fairly or paintedly, but he gave nothing
with Cordeil to her dowry, because she told him an open truth without any
forgerie.

Rewarding: Leyr at his death, gave his half kingdom to Cordeyl, for
defending him in trouble: the people made her queen by common consent, and
thereby hindered the right of her two Nephews the very next apparent heirs.

THE CHRONOLOGY OF Brutes offspring.
BRute the first began to rule in the year of the world, 2855. and ruled 24.
years, about the time of Samuel the mighty Prophet in Israel.

Locrin began in the year 2879. and rule 20. years, in which time he kept
Elstrid seven years, about the time of Saul the first king of Israel.

Guendolin began in the year 2899. and ruled 15. years, about the time of
David the kingly Prophet in Israel.

Madian began in the year 2914. and ruled 40. years, about the time of
fair Absolons fame in Israel.

Memprise began in the year 2954. and ruled 20. years, about the time of
Salomons magnificent buildings in Israel.

Ebranke began in the year 2974. and ruled 60. years, in the 23. year of his
reign he built Caerbrank, about this time the fiery Prophet Elias of Israel
began to teach.

Brute the second began in the year 3034. and ruled 12. years: about this
time Baals Prophets were slain at the brook Kison by the commandment of
Elias the Prophet of God.

Leyl began in the year 3046. and reigned 25. years: about this time
Eliseus the great Prophet began to work wonders in Israel.

Hurdibras began in the year 3071. and reigned 30. years: now Lycurgus the
Lacedemonian lawmakers flourished.

Bladud began in the year 3101. and reigned 21. years: now Hesiodus the Poet
was famous, now Homer lived.

Leyr began in the year 3122. and reigned 40. years: now Sardanapalus the
last king of Assiria was in his pride and sensuality.

Cordeyl began in the year 3162. and ruled 5. years: now Esaias the Prophet
began to prophecy among the Jews.

Conedag began in the year 3167. and reigned 33. years: now Romulus and Remus
were borne: now the Olimpiades began.

Rival began in the year 3200. and reigned 46. years: now Room was builded:
now Sennacheribs army was destroyed by an Angel of God in one night.

Gurgust began in the year 3246. and reigned 38. years: now Gyges got the
kingdom of Lydia and Numa of Room: heereaboutes Herodotus begins his
histories, which contain 230. years.

Sisill began in the year 3284. and reigned 49. years: now Tullus ruled in
Room, and Ieremias the Prophet began to prophecy.

Iago began in the year 3333. and reigned 25. years: now Ancus Martius ruled
in Room and Nabuchodonosor in Babylon.

Kymar began in the year 3358. and reigned 54. years: now Daniel and Ezechiel
the Prophets began to prophecy: now the seven wisemen of Greece were famous.

Gorbodug began in the year 3412. and reigned 64. years: now Tarquinius was
expelled out of Room: now Pythagoras lived: now Cyrus the great, was in his
glory.

Ferrex and Porrex began in the year 3475. and reigned 5. years: now Xerxes
began his Greek wars: now Anaxagoras the Teacher of Pericles, Socrates and
Thucydides was famous and somewhat singular.

Thus Brute and his offspring seem to end in the year of the world 3480. and
to have continued in the Government of Brutanie 735. years. There is a time of
life, and a time of death, a time to arise, and a time to fall, a time for one
stock and a time for another. Yet infinite be that time, which is predestined
for the name of Brute and his Brutans, everlasting be that honor which is due
to the branches of such a Tree as grows without withering, is strong without
decay, and may best serve even for the Phoenix of all men, and Vna of all the
women in the earth.

The Topography set down in the History of Brutes generation.
The places mentioned in this Island are universal
More: Locry the south part of Brutanie, Cambry the west part, Albany the north
part so named, of Locrin and Camber and Albanact the sons of Brute. All the
kings that succeeded Locrin reigned in Locry, and Conedag ruled it as his
heritage. Morgan fled into Cambry from Conedags army: he was ruler in Albany,
which was assigned him for his portion. One of Leyrs sons in law was Duke of
Albany.

Less: Cornwall so called of Corin, is in the bounds of Locry: there
Guendolin wrought her chief practices: there Madian was brought up: one of
Leyrs sons in law was Duke thereof. Glamorgan is in the limits of Cambry,
there Morgan was slain, and his Army overthrown, of whom that part had the
name.

Other places ar less particular.
In the water: Brute built Troynew by the River Tems. Locry and Albany are
divided by the river Humber, where Locrin vanquished the Duke of the Albans
called Humber, of whom that river had the name.

Cambry is parted from Locry by the river Seuerne, called otherwise Habren, in
which Elstrid and her daughter Habren were drowned by Guendolins commandment,
and of that daughter the River had the name.

In the land: Brute landed at Totnes Haven. Troynew built by Brute: here
Locrin made Elstrids cave: here Bladud, Conedag and Gorbodug were buried.
Caerkent the City of Kent or Canterbury, Caerwin or Winchester, Caerpalladour
or Shaftsbury built by Hurdibras. Caerbadon or the City Bathe, and Stamford
built by Bladud. Caerleyr or the City of Leyr or Leecester built by Leyr.
There he was buried: there Cordeyl was buried: These are in Locry: Caerbranke,
or the city of Ebrank, or York, and Edenbrough, or the city of Maids,
built by Ebranke. Caerleyl the city of Leyl: these are in Albany.

Places more particular are
Temples and religious houses: Ebranke built a Temple in Caerbranke, and there
he was buried: there was Rival buried, there Iago was buried. Leil built a
Temple in Caerleyl, and there was he buried.

Hurdibras built three Temples in his three Cities, and in the Temple of
Caerwin was he buried. Bladud built a Temple in Caerbadon: there Sisill was
buried. Bladud fell down upon the altar of Apollo, when his flying failed him.

Profane places: Ebranke built a Castle in Edenbrough. The Cave of Elstrid
built by Locrin. The bellies of beasts were the toombers of Madian and
Memprise.

Places out of this Island mentioned are
Nearer us: Germany: thence Elstrid was brought by Humber: thence Ebranke
brought great spoils. Gallia whence Ebranke got many riches: there Aganip the
husband of Cordeil was Ruler: Leyr and Ferrex in their need fled thither.

Farther from us: Latium in Italy: whether Ebranke sent his 30. daughters.

Athens in Greece, where Bladud was taught and schooled. For the travails of
Brute before he came to us pertain not to us in respect of the places or
otherwise. Till he was of our Commonwealth, he was not with us, but against us.

THE GENEALOGY OR ISSVE OF CLOTO.
CLoto Duke of Cornwall descending from Corin, Great Brutes nephew began the
second family of the Brutan kings, and begat Mulmucie,

Mulmucie begat two sons of Conwen his wife, the first was Belin, the second
was Brenne, a very personable man, yet he left no known seed behind him.

Belin begat Gurguint.

Gurguint begat Guintelin.

Guintelin begat Sisill, the second of Martia his wife.

Sisill begat Kymar the second.

Kymar begat Elane.

Elane begat Morind of his concubine Tanguestela.

Morind begat 5. sons, the first Gorboman, the second Archigall, the third
Elidure, the fourth Vigeny the fifth Peridure, which died without any natural
issue, only Elidure begat Gorboman the second.

These are the 14. Generations of Cloto in the kingdom of Locry, which 14.
only are well registered, and acknowledged as true heirs in the succession of
the Brutan Crown. There are differences of Houses as well for number as for
time: but opinion destroieth nature often, or else some families would last
ever, the force of education is mighty.

THE ARTS AND ACTS OF Cloto, and the Clotoans, are in their Virtues and Vices.
Their virtue or Justice appears in
Dividing: Mulmucy of all the kings was first crowned with gold: he founded
the Temple of Troynew. Belin the first brother possessed the first part, and
Bren the second inherited the second: after that Bren fled out of this Island
and left no children, Belin took his kingdom for his own. Elidure being a
younger brother to Archigall, gave over the kingdom unto him, accounting it
rightly Archigals good for his life time. Peridure after the death of his elder
brother Vigeny took the kingdom into his hands, because Vigeny died without
issue, and joined his own kingdom and this in one.

Rewarding: Mulmucy made of his Temples privileged sanctuaries, that none
should die or suffer any violence in them: his laws which he writ approve his
righteousness. Belin repaired the old Cities which other kings had built
aforetime: he offered sacrifices and gifts freely to the Gods, and most
solemnly thanked them for the victory he got against Brenne and his Norwaies.
He ordained three archflamins in three Cities, he confirmed his fathers
laws. Martia was generally allowed for Ruler and king of the realm, even in
the days of her husband and her son, because her gift in judgment was most
singular, and vnmacheable. Gorboman repaired all the Temples in his whole
kingdom throughout. Elidure was chosen king three sundry times for his upright
dealing in all cases. That constant virtue is happy that finds her friends
constant like herself.

Punishing: Belin would not restore Brens kingdom unto him, because he had
lost it by falshoode, and in trial of war. Belin would not deliver
Guilthdake the Danish intruder out of prison, and send him home to his kingdom
in Denmark, until he had taken a most sure order for a yearly tribute in
consideration of his present delivery to be paid to Belin and his heirs for
ever. Gurguint, when the Dane denied his yearly tribute, plagued the Dane
incessantly by fire and sword, till he agreed to pay him the yearly tribute,
which was lawfully due to the king of Brutanie. Archigall was deprived of the
kingdom by his subjects for his wicked life. When Morind had overthrown the
Mores that invaded his land, he burnt them before his face, because they had
burnt in some parts of this Country. Here we may well consider the Justice
of Heaven, which slew many of Brens soldiers, and wounded him to death, when
he had spoiled a Temple.

Their Vice or Injustice appeared in
Dividing: Archigall sought by all means, to advance base men and rude
vassals, whom he favored most, and to pull down the great and rich men, whom
he liked not so much as them. Like will to like: tyranny respects only
herself. Peredure and Vigeny envying the grace and glory of their brother
Elidure, made war against him and took him prisoner, and kept him in hold
while they lived, without any other reason, but the unreasonable power of
forcible entry.

Punishing: Kymar the second being hated of some ungracious and desperate
subjects was slain by them most wrongfully: the more unhappy man he that
could not foresee. Morind was of so violent and boisterous a nature, that
whosoever offended him should surely dye for his fault, though it were but a
small trespass, because he was displeased. Every offense is not deadly: no
man lives without offenses: but a Prince without patience does ever most
mischief.

Their Virtue or fortitude, is seen in
Peace at home: Mulmucy built Blackwell Hall and Malmesbury: he began to cut
and lay out 4. Highwaies universal to this Land: he restored chiualry. Belin
built those 4. ways, and finished them: he built a City and a Haven with
fair gates in Troynew and a Tower. Guintelin built a City: Gorboman the
first, built two Cities.

Peace abroad: Bren built some Cities in Italy and repaired some.

War at home: Mulmucy vanquished 4. great Dukes, which warred with him for
the crown of this kingdom. Belin overthrew Brens armies twice, he took
Guilthdake prisoner, and those ships that were sent against the Land. Morind
slew an Irish Sea Monster: he destroyed a Duke of the Mores and his men, that
arrived in this Island to destroy it.

War abroad: Belin and Bren sailed together with both their forces into
Gallia and subdued it.

Bren sought afterward new kingdoms abroad, he vanquished great parts of
Italy, and sacked Rome it self: he got infinite spoils in Macedonia. Gurguint
sailed into Denmark, and forced the king there in his own Land to yeald unto
him.

Revenging: Bren gathered himself an Army in Norway, to recover his kingdom of
Belin thereby. So he provided for himself afterward in Armoricke against Belin
upon the same cause, and for the like purpose.

Their Vice or extreme Fortitude is in
Ambition: Bren arose with all his powers against Belin, to take from him his
right Dominion, if he could. Vigeny and Peredure conspired against Elidure,
and took his kingdom from him by open force.

Rage: Bren threatened Belin with words of great defiance, if he had not his
kingdom of him again. He spoiled the Temple of Macedonia in despite of all
government.

Pusillanimitie: Elidure was content to be taken and prisoned, rather then
give any cause of bloodshed among his people by means of war.

Their Virtue or Prudence is set forth in
Writings: Mulmucy made many positive laws in his native language, and caused
them to be published, that all men might read them for their direction and
better aduisement.

Marcia a queen made many statutes, to teach the subjects aright and easy way
of moral life. Right in respect of the crooked way, and easy in respect of
the loose and careless way which breeds sorrows.

Doings: Mulmucie favored all learned men of all kinds, being minded to use
every one in his mystery. Belin fortified the late kingdom of his brother, and
now his own kingdom, with his own soldiers, and put out all Brens men for
his sake, and his own safety: he allowed his fathers laws for his time,
less any man should obiectiuely quarrel with him. Archigall seeing by daily
experience, the daily miseries of a wicked and inconsiderate life, learned a
new lesson, and led his life orderly ever after. Bren knowing his own bodily
beauty applied himself to that vain, and got goodwill by marrying great
women in foreign Lands, when he could not stay at home. Belin was more
careful of his own land, then for outlandish goods, and returned from Gallia
to Brutanie, where his greatest charge was.

Their vice or folly is in
Conceit or opinion: Mulmucy dedicated a Temple to Apollo, as if the dead man
were wise and mighty.

Ignorance: Elane ruled fondly and vnrulily.

Presumption: Morind fought with a Sea monster, and made no man of his counsel
herein.

Improuidence: Kymar was slain by his enemies in time of hunting, where they
took him alone at a dead vantage.

The best Remedy against Follies Wichery is, a trial of all causes, which
belong to any effect. He that can follow this Rule infallibly, cannot be
foiled in his Actions.

Their Virtue or Te^perance is known by
Liberality: Mulmucy, accounting the City, and the Country two pillars of
his kingdom, privileged the ways which went to Cities, and which were for
plowes, that the Citizens and husbandmen of the land might be loved the more,
and better used for their immunities among themselves, and with soldiers. Bren
gave much treasure to his Noble Lords in little Brutanie, to win their
goodwill, and wage battle with their help against Belin. A man alone is but
half himself.

Marriage: Bren married the Duke Elfinges daughter in Norway: he married the
dukes only daughter of little Brutany, and thereby was mighty in both places
for favor and power: but I cannot tell certainly, what became of his first
wife: he was an od man of wit and practice.

Concord: Conwen the mother of Belin, and Bren joined her two sons in one,
yea even them two, which was somewhat strange: but what may not words do, if
they be well tempered, and seasoned with true modesty? when they were ready
with their armies to join in battle, insomuch that straitwaies they ruled
their former rages, and went brotherly together against the common enemy.
Gurguint lived peaceably: so did Guintelin: so did Sisill the second: so did
Kymar the second: so did Gorboman the second. A sober heart makes peace, a
drunken head, strife.

Mercy: Gurguint meeting with a Navy of 30. strange ships in the Scottish
Seas, and seeing plainly their extreme need, and hearing withal their
pitiful Supplication, gave them his goodwill to dwell in Ireland, and assured
them of his good favor, so long as they lived well and neighbourly. Elidure
for his notable mildness, and merciful nature was named Meek: he heartily
lamented his brother Archigals poor and wretched estate, therefore he feigned
himself sick, that by these means all his Noblemen, and Lords might come
and visit him, and at their being with him, he sued to them, as it had been
for his life, That he might resign his kingdom unto Archigall.

Their Vice or Intemperance is known by
Anger: Morind was outrageous always and intolerable in his heat.

Maleuolence: Archigall gave himself to breed quarrels chiefly against his
Noblemen and Richmen.

Incontinency: Bren being wounded to death in a tempest sent from the clouds,
slew himself in a desperate rage. Who can save him whom God hates? It was
wondrous, that the Heavens should fight for Apollo. I may think the Sprite of
the Air was suffered, to play this part, to uphold Apollonisme.

THE CHRONOLOGY OF Clotos offspring.
AFter the year of the worlds Creation, 3480. there was civil War
continually in this Island for the space of 50. years: in which time
vainglorious Xerxes was weakened of the Greeks, both by Sea and Land: then the
12. Tables of Laws were brought to Room: then Euripides was born: then Esdras
began to restore the Temple at Jerusalem.

Mulmucy began in the year 3530. and reigned 40. years: in which time Bellum
Peloponnesiacum began and ended: then Socrates died violently by poison and
malice.

Belin began in the year 3570. and reigned 26. years: in the first five
years he and his brother Bren lived quietly together: in this time Room was
taken of the Gauls: now Aristotle was borne, may the world be glad thereof?

Gurguint began in the year 3596. and reigned 19. years: in this time
Xenophons greek History is ended: now Alexander the great is borne, to begin a
piece of a new world.

Guintelin began, 3615. and ruled 26. years: in which time Plato dyed, the
more the pity: then Isocrates and Demosthenes played their parts with Philip:
then the Greek Monarchy began to go on foot: hereabout Buchanan begins his
Scottish kings, 330. years before Christ's Nativity.

Sisill began, 3641. and ruled 7. years: in this time Alexanders kingdoms were
divided between his worthies.

Kymar the second began, 3648. and ruled 3. years: in this time Cassander
restores the City Thebes the 20. year after Alexander destroyed it.

Elane began, 3651. and reigned 9. years: in this time Seleucus began his
reign in Syria, and Demetrius delivered Athens from the Macedonian yoke.

Morind began 3660. and reigned 8. years: in this time Flauius a Secretary
published the Civil Law, which the high Priest only knew aforetime.

Gorboman began, 3668. and reigned 11. years: in which time Decius the son
devoted himself to death for his Country Rome in the wars of the Samnites.

Archigall began, 3679. and ruled 5. years: in this time the Consul T.
Coruncanus began first to profess the Civil Law: now Pirrhus the Epyrote made
war with the Romans.

Elidure began, 3684. and ruled 5. years: in this time Ptolomeus Philadelphus
entertained many learned and wise men.

Archigal began again, 3689. and ruled 10. years.

Elidure began again, 3699. and ruled 2. years.

Vigeny and Peredure began, 3701. and ruled 9. years: in this time the 70.
translated the Bible into greek: in this time the first Punick war began:
now Phalereus the Rhetorician, now Theocritus the Poet, now Euclides the
Geometrician, now Aratus the Astrologian lived.

Elidure began again, 3710. and reigned 4. years.

Gorboman the second began in the year of the world, 3714. and reigned 10.
years: in this time the people created T. Coruncanus the high Bishop in Room.

Thus the Time of Clotoes offspring seemeeh to end in the year of the word,
3724. and to have endured 194. years in the Rule of Brutany: a very little
time of continuance for so many kings: but all plants have not root alike:
some are rooted broadway, as Elmes, and fall quickly: some are rooted downward,
as Oaks, and stand in the mids of the winds, even till the violent axe or
very age ouerturne them.

THE TOPOGRAPHY MENTIOned in Clotoes Offspring.
The places named are in the Island general Cambry, where Rudank ruled in the
conflict of Mulmcy. Locry, where Pinnor ruled in that conflict. Belin and his
successors ruled there. Vigeny ruled there. Albany, where Statery was Ruler in
that time of conflict. Bren and Peredure reigned there. Northumberland, there
Yeuan ruled in the time of the conflict: here Belin prepared an Army against
Brens coming.
special, More burials, Mulmucy buried in Troynew Temple: so was Gurguint:
Belin at Belinsgate: Guintelin in the Temple: Archigall at Grantam: Elidure at
Caerleyl.
Less, cities and the four highwais. etc Warwick built by Guintelin:
Cambridge and Grantam built by Gorboman: Caerusk built by Belin, here he
ordained an archflamin. Troynew, where Belin consulted with his Lords and with
Bren.



Other places not so general are these: the Tower of Troynew built by Belin:
there Elidure was imprisoned. Belinsgate built by Belin: Blackwell Hall, an
Malmesbury, and Paul's founded by Mulmucy: Bristo by Bren: Calater a wood near
Caerbranke, where Bren was discomfited in his first and second wars against
Belin: there Elidure met Archigal. Caerbranke the place where Belin counseled
with his Lords about Guilthdake: there he ordained an archflamin: there
Elidure restored Archigall by the assent of his Lords.

The places named out of the Island general Ireland: there Gurguint placed the
30. sail of ships that he met on the Sea. Orcades: there he met those ships
wa^dring. Norway: Bren fled thither from Belin, and there he gathered his
second army against him. Armorica or little Brutany, where Bren prepared his
third Army. Denmark, from that country Guilthdake, came in arms against this
Island. Gurguint sailed thither, to fight for his own goods. Gallia: there
Bren ruled, and repaired some Cities. Italy: here Bren became most victorious.
Macedony: here Bren spoiled himself and all. Mauritany: Morind overcame an Army
of Mores, which came against this Island.
special Room: here Bren made havoc of all. Capitol: Bren besieged it, and
for one thousand pounds of gold, brake up and departed. Millan, Pauy,
Bergomum, Comum, Brixia, Verona, Tridentum, Vincentia, and other Cities built
or repaired by Bren the ravenous and magnificent Prince.


Thus one Generation of men passes, and another comes, but the virtues of
men are everlasting, yea and their bodies by traduction are immortal: So a
virtuous man shall be a mortal God, if his mind or body have their issues.

THE THIRD GENERATION or rather succession of Brutan Kings.
THe death of Gorboman the second begat a politic body in this Island without
an head. This Acephalia begat Unruliness in the lower parts.

Unruliness begat Strife, among the Nobles and Commons,

Strife begat Trouble on both parts.

Trouble begat Weariness and Weakness,

Weakness begat Desire of rest,

Desire of rest begat Election, and

Election begat Morgan, and made him Ruler.

Morgan begat Goodwill in his subjects,

Goodwill for his sake begat Emerian his brother, who died as the other did
without issue, his death let Ambition a traitor out of prison,

Ambition begat Sedition,

Sedition begat Confusion,

Confusion begat Unquietness,

Unquietness begat Desire of order,

Desire of order begat Deliberation, and

Deliberation begat Iual and made him king.

The death of Iuall begat Emulation,

Emulation begat Wit and Invention.

Invention begat Friendship,

Friendship begat Rimo, and made him Ruler. When he was dead his companion
Geruncie was made king in respect of that familiarity which he had with Rimo.
Then Cathel so handled his matters in pleasing the chief men by his liberal
behavior, that he reigned next and dyed. Then Coil overcame men's hearts with
his virtuous actiuitie, and was anointed king, and dyed: then Porrex the
second wrought many good works, and was next king to him, and dyed.

Then Cheryn fed all the mad fellows humors in the realm that he could hear
of, and by voices got the kingdom.

Cheryn begat a son, and called him Fulgen, who dyed without issue: then
Eldrid by fair and large promises got the Crown and dyed: then Androgy
outwent him in all kinds of allurement, and succeeded him and begat Vrian that
dyed without issue. Then Eliud by his mystical arts did extraordinary and
admirable acts, and thereby was made king.

After him Merian by inuenting new practices for wars, and occupations was
so honored generally, that he was Ruler. Then Bladune arose from private
deserts to public favors, and at length he was king: the same kind of
nature begat Capene, and next him Ouine, and even such a pacificatory mind
preferred Sily. After him Bledgabrede by his pleasant demeanor and
merrimentes, pleased all the Nobles, and became their Ruler. Then Redargy arose
next him in such a sort, and so did Samuly: But Penisell being vnmachable in
strength succeeded him: then Pirrhy for his strange swiftness, and
incomparable dexterity in all feats of manhood, was ruler of his brethren. In
those days public actions made kings.

These are the 24. rulers, which succeeded Gorboman the second, and make a line
of succession rather then of genealogy. Yet we may call this a politic
generation rightly in the whole body of the realm, though it be not a natural
generation in their own proper bodies from Morgan to Pirrhy. All men have not
the gift of children: of all these Rulers here are but two sons, and their two
fathers, the other seem to have left no seed behind them. Sometime the
imperfection is in the wife, sometime in the husband: there are watery loins,
and rotten thighs in both sexes. Some men are barren naturally, some are
barren artificially, some are barren by old age, some make themselves barren
with preternaturall diet, some are made of other men by chirurgicall incisions.
Or if they had children and were not barren, the more unhappy they that could
not continue as they began. Some families are taken away by sickness, some by
wars, some by mischances in their diet and exercise, some are put from their
own, and are ever in thraldom, and are never again heard of in the world.
God almighty knows all things from the first to the last: but if a man
should suck the stars, or be sucked himself as they say, of the king of
Fayries, he should not find a perfect History of this time of these Kings.
Yet such as it is, I believe, a reader may go farther and speed worse: the most
morals the best History, but a man may insert physical observations upon
occasion to good use and purpose, so long as History is an example of life in
both ways of Action.

THEIR ARTS AND ACTS are set down in their Virtues and Vices.
Their Virtue or Justice was approved in
Dividing: Emerean succeeded Morgan, because he was his brother: for brethren
are twigs of the same branch, fingers of one hand, parts of the same body. If
one twig fall off, the sap of the tree must feed the other twig which stands
on. If some of the fingers be cut off, the veins must serve the fingers that
remain: if one arm be rotted of, the other arm must be in stead of both
arms. Fulgan succeeded his father Cherin, and Vrian his father Androgy. For
the sons body is the fathers body derived and continued: it is the old body
made young again: the sons and fathers body are as the same body of one tree
in right length: the seeds of trees bring forth all their own kinds: in
which respect Morind is a true king by Natures law.

Rewarding: Iual among the Noblemen was chosen the king for his moderate
virtues, and equal judgments that appeared ever in all his words and works.
A rare instance of worthiness worthily considered, and may of it self deserve
a Treatise to prove the Civility of old Brutanie, which many disgrace for
malice, and more for ignorance, and most for company.

Their virtue or prudence was showed
In the art of Music: Bledgabrede both studied and practiced music: he was
very famous: and I think, in respect of his charge and government, very
wonderful. A monastical liver, and much more an oeconomicall has no parts
of time for such young childish studies, if he look well about him: and how can
a king that is the keeper of all other men have any time for such vain
insignificant voices? Yet the circular wisdom of this king had such a
capacity by some myraculous infusion from heaven, that he was fit both for
the grauest and the lightest studies, either to learn them by contemplation,
or to use and teach them by action. He saw by his instruments, how to tune and
string his kingdom: he could prevent and pacify tumultes with his music: he
might perhaps allay the waves of the Sea, and break the thunders aloft with
his divine melody: he could keep himself from weariness by his music: he
could mitigate the violence of diseases with his sweet voices: music was his
prosody, his pronunciation, his disposition, his instrument of instrument, and
the life of his life.

Their virtue or Temperance appeared in
Behavior: Coil lived all his time quietly without any war and tumult: A
contented mind is not contentious. Porrex the 2. behaved himself, either
fatherly toward his youngers, or brotherly toward his equals, or gently toward
all men. By this mean he was more happy with the help of the Graces, then
the first Porrex, whom the Furies destroyed. The Graces are moderate Virtues,
the Furies are immoderate Vices.

Their vice or Intemperance was in
Diet: Cheryn was a drunkard, a cupleache, a bellygod, a water rat, he had been
well used if he had been punished with abasement, and turned out of his throne
into a wineseller, and of a winebibber, made a winedrawer.

Manners: Vrian was nothing but a carnal man, his wit was carnal, his body
was carnal his life was sensual, he was without any divine or humane
excellency. What should such a man have an excellent place in the
commonwealth? why may the Heavenly Power abide so unholy a beast, to represent
his invisible king in so holy a Seat as the imperial Seat of a Prince? a
singular place, a singular incumbent.

The other kings that are not once noted with any virtuous or vicious acts
might as good have not been borne: they are certainly miserable men that leave
no memorable act behind them: but are only named, as a man may give a name
for distinctions sake to a tree, or a hill, or a house, or a field, or a stone,
or any dead thing, without any father account, or regard of them. The greatest
Name makes and shows the greatest man, the least name, the least man: the
greatest name springs from the greatest actions, it is not the number of
Acts which beget a great Name. All goods that a man has within and without
him, all are given and lent him to do good: the Pillars of the life are
Health, Wisdom and Riches, yet some men are famous for their sickness, folly
and beggary: A memorable man even with these three plagues is happier then an
obscure man with those three blessings: all the goods we have serve for the
life, and yet the life consists not in the possessions which we have: Riches
serve for Health, and Health serves for Wisdom, and the actions which belong
unto her, Wisdom serves for life, and to keep us from the paths of
destruction and death. Life serves to get a Name by doing good. I would
rejoice more in this, to have my name written in heaven, where it may ever be
in sight and remembrance, then be all these 24. kings fortunati infoelices,
whose renown is laid in Hell, and devoured of the Grave. A living Cynick, more
happy then a dying Caesar. A living dog better then a dead Lion. Yet let go
vainglory and bannish selfewill: A name without true virtue deserves no
memory: Many are recorded that are not worthy of a register: now there is no
remedy: or else it might have probably been wished, that no object or vile
examples of base men had been written. For my part, I cannot think, that so
many kings could live and die without some glorious actions, howsoever mishap,
or envy, or the Devil has blotted them out from our eyesight.

The Times of these Kings.
MOrgan began to reign in the year of the world. 3724. and ruled 14. years:
now the Panareton of Syracides was written, and then the Panareton of Brutanie
fell into a dead sleep, wherein it lay still above 100. years.

Emerian began in the year, 3738. and reigned seven years: now was Ennius the
Poet borne: now Archimides the Mathematician lived with admiration.

Iual began, 3745. and reigned 20. years: now Naeuius and Plautus
flourished: now Hanniball began the second Punick war.

Rimo began* 3765. and ruled 16. years: in this time Hanniball fled to
Antiochus for succor.

Geruncy began, 3781. and reigned 20. years: in this time Antiochus raged in
Iewry.

Cathel began* 3801. and ruled 10. years: now the Macabees bestirred them
like Bees: now Terence the Poet flourished.

Coil began, 3811. and reigned 20. years: in this time the third Punick Wars
began.

Porrex the 2. began, 3831. and ruled 4. years: now the City of Numantia in
Spain was rased.

Cherin reigned one year: Fulgen two years.

Eldred ruled one year: Androgy one year.

Vrian reigned 3. years: Eliud 5. years.

Merian ruled two years: Bladune two years.

Capen ruled 3. years: Ouine two years.

Sily reigned 2. years, eleven kings in 24. years: About this time the
Saduces and Pharisees began their sects in Iewry: now the war of Iurguth
began and ended: now Tully was borne in the year of the world. 3859, an
hundred and three years before Christ.

Bledgabrede began, 3860. and reigned 20. years: in this time was Pompei borne
into the world.

Redargy began, 3880. and ruled 3. years: in this time was I. Caesar borne
into the world.

Samuly ruled two years? Penisell three years.

Pirry reigned 2. years, four kings in 10. years, and ended in the year of
the world, 3890: in which time Antony and Crassus the Orators of Room, and
in Q.M. Scaeuola the Lawyer lived:

So these 24. kings continued 166. years in the Government of Brutanie.

Here is no Topography, here is no place named: they were now I may well say
kings Abstracts: that they did it no where, either incomprehe^sibly like Gods,
or metaphisically like strange men. The music of Bledgabred and the actions
of the rest were, belike, in no place of any great account. Yet because they
were kings and enjoyed their kingdoms, their doomes must needs be given
somewhere, and their cunning must needs be showed in some place, and that was
even the general Land of Brutany, without any particular nomination of less
places. Right Sovereigns and perfect kings, whose Acts were universal and
common to the whole realm, not appropriate or fancied to any one Region
therein. If the head move and guide the body it does more then if it move or
guide one part thereof. A general praise is greatest, and this was these
kings special glory above others, to rule all places, to rule the Land. The
best use of one commendation or other is, to encounter some one dispraise or
other that has been or may be, but they that do all things well, have no
need themselves of particular History. If Sily ruled 2. years, suppose in
reason, he was no silly one. If the other kings were kings, that was all in
all. A king cannot possibly be without his excellencies, and memorials.

Now I divine modestly, here were actors without recorders of their actions,
patrons of learning, but no learned men: or, they were of both sorts, but
their studies came to no effect, by some force: or, they were very old when
they came to the Crown, and could do nothing: or, the furies and helhoundes
raged so extremely, that the Muses and Graces could not be quiet for them:
or, their acts were wrought in needleworke only, and so worn out: or, the
senses, and senseless desires so ruled them, that their lives were not so short
as their acts: or, the Histories were written in some strange kind of
polygraphy and steganography, and could never yet be read, but remain in some
obscure place: or, they made little account of writers, and these set as light
by them: or, they that take most pains at their book, were not most regarded:
and thereupon studied to themselves: or, some unfortunate and maleuolent
configuration of mouable skies and stars, and spirits removed all Histories
out of the way: or, the Kings and People agreed among themselves, to be
remembered by being not remembered, wishing to have their time called The unknow
Regiment, adiudging secrecy greatest wisdom: or, our Countrymen listened so
much after other Noble Actors in the earth, that they had no leisure, to do
any thing themselves: or, they disdained to have them their judges after their
death, whom they would scorn to have their judges in their life: or, some
outlandish envy destroyed the rowles and registers of our Histories, to make us
seem barbarous: or, the University men of Stamford had by some Privilege got
them wives, and so forth: and had no leisure to do any thing but live: or,
before the kings were crowned, they were worthy men, and after their
coronations they fell to make books of nothing: or they could tell, how to get
a Sovereignty, but they knew not, how to keep it: or, they writ their
Chronicle hieroglyphically, and set the pictures of other creatures in the
places of their kings, and by the ignorance of some careless men were
esteemed as gaies, and not otherwise regarded: or, it was not thus, or so:
perhaps, neither this, nor that, but some other way, I cannot tell how, nor I
care not greatly, for fear I may be thought neither idle, nor well occupied.
Now, good Reader, albeit I join a moral genealogy with a natural, and seem
to break the style of history, yet, because affections rule otherwhile as much
as kings, I may truly say, my devise is allowable in itself. Where issue
wants in the Prince, there the issue of the people is considered, seeing some
Princes are begotten of the people, as some are of their parents: these are
heirs by the law of particular nature, and they by the reason of universal
nature and of grace. As for the other parts of this third Offspring, I hope,
they are seemly and fit enough for this place. It is lawful to make the best
use and most gain that we can honestly, of any thing that we read or write:
probable additions, and reasonable collections are never amiss: it is better,
of the two extremes, to make more then we need of our Countreimen, rather
than make less of them then we should: superfluity is not best, nor
scarcity: that history is most worth which does a man most good.

THE FOVRTH GENEALOGY or issue of Capor.
Labor the son of Parsimony the daughter of Queen Temperance, made Capor a
man of infinite wealth: then Order, the son of Reason, the daughter of the
Empress Truth, made him a man of greatest favor in this Land: by these two
means joined with his royal blood, he became Ruler of Brutany, and begat
Dinel,

Dinel begat Hely,

Hely begat three sons: the first Lud, the second Cassiuelan, the third
Stenny.

Lud begat 2. sons: the first Androgy, the second Tenancy. Then came Death,
and took away Lud and his brother Stenny, while his two sons were children,
and Age made Cassiuelan Ruler: then came Discontent and begat Rage in the mind
of Androgy, that he went away: then arose Parentage, and created Tenancy for
the king.

Tenancy begat Cimbelin,

Cimbelin begat 2. sons, the first Guinder, the second Aruirage: then came
Deceit, and slew Guinder: then Devise set forth Aruirage, and made him right
king.

Aruirage begat Marius of his wife Senissa, the daughter of Claudius the
Emperor.

Marius begat Coil the 2. Coil begat Lucy, which dyed without issue.

These are the 11. heirs males and successors of Capor in his kingdom: for the
Generation of Cassiuelan, of Stenny, of Androgy and of Guinder, are unknown,
the more is the pity, seeing they were very singular men in their kinds.
Albranches of a tree prosper not, ever some are withered and rotten.

The Arts and Acts of Capor, and the Caporites are seen by their Virtues and
Vices.
Their Virtue or Justice is in
Defending and regarding: Lud and Stenny were at great variance between
themselves, because Lud would have the City of Troy new called Caerlud by his
own name, but Stenny would have it keep the old name in honor of the
predecessors, and Trojans from whom he came. It is justice, both to respect our
ancestors, and justice to consider our own glory: This were a pretty question
for discourse, which name ought to take place, and stand in force, if it were
well handled.

Dividing and deposing: Cassiuelan the 2. son of Hely, was the Protector and
Governor of the Realm in the minority and nonage of Luds two sons, his two
nephews. Kingdoms are too heavy for childrens shoulders. Cassiuelan ordained
a common sacrifice to God that gave him the victory against the Romans, and a
public feast to his Nobles that helped him in the battles, and devised many
pastimes, in honor of God and men.

Tenancy was made king by the treasonable absence of his elder brother Androgy.
Every one of these kings has his right succession, except Cassiuelan which
usurps.

Punishing and correcting: Cassiuelan summoned Eueline to appear before him
and the Council, to answer for the death of Hirelda. When he could not
prevail with Androgy by fair means, he made war upon him, to plague him
for his stubbornness. Ought Androgy to be at his call? a disputable matter of
great use. Nature prefers the kings son to the Crown before the kings
brother, but Policy preferred Cassiuelan before Androgy, a good man before a
bad.

Their Vice or Injustice is in
Dividing: Cassiuelan appointed unto Androgy the eldest son of Lud the City
of Caerlud, and the land of Kent, and to Tenancy the younger son the Land of
Cornwall, and kept the kingdom from them, though they were his elder brothers
true sons, and usurped it himself by force. He is not fit to be a Protector
that is ambitious: it is a woeful thing, to be a child among our enemies, or
amongst the envious sectaries.

Revenging: Androgy being unable of himself to withstand Cassiuelan sent
letters to I. Caesar in Gallia, and certified him, that if he would come into
Brutany he should be welcome: when he had gotten Caesar's Army to set upon
Cassiuelan in the valley of Dorobernia or Canterbury, and the fight had endured
till both parts were almost weary, he came upon Cassiuelan with a fresh reply,
and put him to flight: and thus he displeased the whole realm to please
himself, yet his own hurt was never the less for making the misery of his
Country greater. But when Cassiuelan thought to punish Androgy, he punished
himself as much as him, he did even put fire to Brimstone, and flax to the
flame. It was traitorously done of him, to war against his legitimate king,
and of Androgy, to make his native Country subject to outlandish Powers.

Their Virtue or Prudence is in
Order: Cassiuelan brought up Androgy and Tenancy, Princes sons, princely in
all points. Cassiuelan considering, that the two victories which he had gotten
of the Romans, concerned himself, and all his Noblemen most specially, caused
an assembly of them to be made, that in a general meeting, there might be a
general thanksgiving to God almighty, and to one another for their services
and acts done in the Field. Nothing teaches men more courage then a belief
of heavenly assistance, with an honorable remembrance of their virtues: this
way of harting men is chiefest.

Desire of knowledge: Lucy seeking al means to make his people true and loving
among themselves, and hearing that Christians were without hatred and falsehood,
desired to hear their religion and receive their doctrine, and sent two Noble
scholars, Eluane and Meduine to Eleuthery Bishop of Room with letters,
desiring to be taught Christianity.

Reformacion: Lucy changed the three Archflamins, and the 28. Flamins into
three Archbishops, and 28. Bishops: he destroyed the Temple of Apollo in the
I Will Thorney, and made a Temple in honor of the Almighty God, which we now call
Westminster.

Discipline: Lucy seeing that men were executed for disobeying the law, because
herein they disobeyed God, and that the kings pardon was not so much to be
esteemed as a pardon from God, and perceiving the hearty and unfeigned
repentance of some offenders, and knowing that God forgave such men, thought it
no reason, that such Penitents should be put to death, but reserved to a better
use: wherefore he ordained, that if any man did offend by mischance and repent
him, or any one were oppressed, and could not otherwise escape oppression then
by appealing to Gods word, that such men should get them into the Temple of
God, and there approve themselves to be true godly men, and so be safe both body
and goods.

Their vice or folly is in
Permission: the Brutans forgetting the true title that Luds two sons had to
the kingdom of their father, and feeling the liberal gifts of Cassiuelan an
usurper, suffered him to keep the Rule and Key of all the Land, and taught one
another, to disinherit one another by causeless and deceitful popularitie and
flattery.

Hatred: the Brutans could not agree upon a king, no not in fifteen years
space when Lucy was dead, though every country must needs see one nearer the
Crown then another, if they could advise themselves and mark every family in
good ma^er. They could not foresee the miseries of foreign Dominion, they were
blinded with malice, and selfewill among themselves.

Improuidence: Cymbelin was brought up in Room, both in contempt of all his
own country learning, and in slavery to outlandish with. Coil the second was
brought up in Room, as if he were borne to serve Room, and not to serve
Brutany. Of the two extremes, it is safer to have our men vplandish, then
outlandish, plain then perilous.

Deceit: the Brutans set great long sharp stakes closely in the banks where
the Romans should arrive, and so troubled them extremely in their landing: a
poor and pitiful invention to slay and Host.

Their virtue or temperance, is in
Behavior: Lud was bountiful in housekeeping, and by that means beloved
generally. Cimbelin with the moderate usage of himself, so pleased the
Emperor, that he loved him greatly, and received many good words and gifts
from him: if this were not intemperance, to please an enemy. Aruirage got into
such favor with Claudius the Emperor, that he married his daughter Genissa: if
this were not incontinence, to be linked with outlandish, that was mightier
then himself. He was beloved of his subjects for his usage toward them in all
cases.

Marius was of honorable demeanor every way. He accepted the pitition of the
vanquished Pictes, he allotted to them the fardest part of Albany: afterward he
gave himself to the wealth of the realm. Lucy was loved of all his subjects
for his good life: his loins were in the clouds, and his seed among the
stars: he had rather be a father in Morals, then in Naturals: such was his
abstinence. It may be, Galaxias the milky and bright way in heaven was made in
honor of such men as Lucy was, no meaner then a Saint.

Marriage: the Brutans would not in any case join their daughters in wedlock
with the Pictes, whom they knew to be barbarous Scythians by descent of bodies,
and consent of minds, and very unfaithful.

Their vice or intemperance is in
Rashness: Hirelda and Eueline two knights in gaming fell to wrestling, and
in heat fell to words, and in anger fell to blows, and in rage fell to
wounds, and Hirelda was slain in the tumult that arose by these means. A
gaming not so profitable as the death of a good knight is hurtful in a realm.

Disobedience: Eueline being sent for by the Protector Cassiuelan and the
Council departed from the Court with Androgy his kinsman, and took no leave
of them: Will is it self witless: a stomach without a heart, makes a man a
swine.

Revenge: Aruirage used such means, that he got Hammon the Roman, who sieve
his brother Guinder guilefully, and when he had him in his hands he caused him
to be cut in pieces, and threw him piece by piece into the Sea at
South-hampton, satisfying herein his insaciable anger for his brothers death
and supposing vainly and madly, that he killed Hamon so many times as he had
pieces of him.

Their virtue or fortitude is in
Glorious desire: Hely called the I Will of Ely after his name, that he might be
famous for ever. Marius set up a Colosse in remembrance of the victory he had
of the Picts, with Marij Victoria graven in it: a warly Register.

Magnificence: Lud repaired old Temples and Cities and built new. He made
walls about Troynew, and called the West gate Ludgate in honor of his own
name, and then dwelt most there because he had built most there. Aruirage road
about the realm, to renew the decayed Cities which the Romans defaced: he
built a Castle at Dover to strengthen that part of the Land against foreign
Powers.

Words: When the Romans thought to terrify the Brutans by their letters,
these sent them word, that as they must, so they would defend their Country
from all forces. Aruirage being for his Nobleness made the Emperors son in
law, and wishing to have a memorial of Claudius his queens and wives own
father, called the City where he married Claudiocestria or Gloucester, the
rather, to be free from tribute in respect of his wife, though he were free of
himself by his virtue.

Victories: Cassiuelan made the Romans fly to their ships at their first
battle, and at the second: beware the third.

Deserts: Cymbelin in his youth led so manly a life in Room, that the
Emperor Augustus made him a knight there in his order of knights.

Exercise: Hirelda and Eueline two brave knights wrastled openly at the Feast
which was made after the victories against the Romans.

War: Guinder denied to pay tribute to the Romans, and chose rather to sight
with them then yeald otherwise. Aruirage did the like, and when they came
against him; he made them fly from the southeast part of this Island to the
southwest, there he drove them from Excester and Totnes, and within seven days
made all well. Marius stayed the fire and sword of the Picts in Albany and slew
their armies.

Devise: Aruirage seeing his brother Guinder dead, took on him presently his
armor and Princely cognisa^ce, that the Brutans might not suspect their kings
death and be discomforted: then he continued the battle so steadfastly and
heartily, that the Brutans were stirred up to fight valiantly by his lively
example, till they overthrew the Romans.

Their vice or extreme fortitude is in
Bold rashness: Stenny Cassiuelans brother in the wars against the Romans
can to I. Caesar and pulled his sword out of his hand, and slew Labienus a
tribune of the Romans therewith, and was slain.

Obscure glory: When Stenny was dead, he was buried at Caerlud: and the sword
which he pulled from Caesar with his deaths wound was buried with him, that it
might be a remembrance of one venturous action even in a hole.

Abasement: Cassiuelan was tributary to Room nine years. Tenancy was too
deligent in paying tribute to Rome, even 3000. pounds in gold. Cimbelin having
choice to pay or not to pay tribute, forgot the slavery of the act and paid it.
Aruirage was persuaded by his wife to pay tribute when he had resisted the
Romans valiantly. He should have sent such a wife for the tribute unto Room
from whence she came, and kept the money in his cofers for wars. Coil saw in
his poreblinde eyes, that it was best to yeald to Room, and agreed to pay
tribute. Androgy departed to Room with Caesar: a mad and fickle courage.

THE TIMES OF THESE KINGS.
CApor began his reign in the year of the world, 3894. and reigned two
years: now Mithridates raised wars in Asia, and Lucullus was sent against
him.

Dinel began in the year, 3894. and rule 4. years: in this time Verres
spoiled Sicilia three years together: now Vergill the Poet was borne.

Hely began, 3898. and reigned one year: in this time Hortentius the Orator
flourished in Room.

Lud began, 3899. and rule 11. years: in this time the Poet Horace was borne,
the conspiracy of Catiline was detected, Jerusalem was taken of Pompey, Caesar
entered the wars in Gallia.

Cassiuelan began, 3910. and rule 19. years: in this time M. Crassus spoiled
the Temple of Jerusalem, the civil wars began between Caesar and Pompey,
Caesar corrected the Roman year, Ovid the Poet was borne.

Tenancy began, 3929. and reigned 23. years: in this time Mecaenas lived, the
patron of Horace, Vergill, and other learned men, and governed Room and Italy
in the absence of Caesar Augustus so named for that reverence was given him in
a divine manner: now Vergill dyed.

Cymbelin began, 3952. and reigned 35. years: now Horace died: the Angel
Gabriel was sent to Zachary and Mary: Christ was borne the 13. year of his
reign, Onid and Liuy dyed.

Guinder began, 3987. and ruled 28. years: now Iohn-baptist preached and was
slain, Christ taught the Jews, Paul was converted, James was slain, Seneca
was made Neroes teacher.

Aruirage began, 4015. and ruled 30. years: in this time Paul did most of his
Acts, James the less was stoned, 70000. Romans were slain of the Brutans.
Paul was beheaded, Peter crucified, Seneca and Lucan bled to death.

Marius began, 4045. and reigned 52. years: in this time John evangelist writ
his Revelation, Plutark and Tacitus lived, Timothy was stoned, Dyonisius slain
with the sword.

Coil began, 4097. and reigned 54. years: now Ptolony and Galen lived, the
Christians by their prayer got a strange victory of the Marcomanni, and
obtained a mighty great reign from heaven: now Lent was appointed by
Telesphorus.

Lucy began; 4151. and ruled 12. years: in this time the Gospel was first
preached in Brutany by Fugacius and Damianus: Commodus would be called Hercules
and Deus, but was strangled of his own man in Vestilians house.

So this Generation of Capor, and the 11. Caporites ended in the year of the
world, 4163. and seem to have endured the times of 274. years in the kingdom
of Brutanie.

THE PLACES IN THIS HISTORY.
The places are at home more universal Albany the Province of the Archbishop of
Caerbrank or York, Cambry the Province of the Archbishop of Caerusk. Locry the
Province of the Archbishop of Caerlud or London.
less universal Kent, Cornewal. VVestmaria named of Marius, the I Will of Ely.
more particular Ludgate: the Temple of Apollo: the banks where the Romans
landed in Cassiuelans time: the Northgate of Caerlud where Stenny was buried:
Hamons haven: Dover Castle: the havens of Sandwich and Totnes.
less particular Caerlud, there Tenancy and Cymbelin where buried. Dorobernia
or Cantorbury: the valley there. Caerbrank, there Cassiuelan and Coil were
buried. Claudiocaer or Gloucester, there was Aruirage buried. Excester, the
Town under the Wood. Caerliel, there was Marius buried.

abroad Gallia. Room.


The reasonable metaphors of this fourth genealogy may well be allowed, because
they stand upon reasonable causes. The morals which follow them might be more
sententious and effectual by much then they are, if I might speak no more
then good reasons fitly used: but all words are not fit personally which are
most fit really, and so I let them go for this time, perhaps looking for a
better conuenience of time and place to utter them. The Synchronisme which
follows is right, if the chronology be right, which nevertheless agrees
with one writer, though it differs from another: that is worth the labor
which is material: the quantities of times teach us no qualities of good life:
Mathematics have not the rules of moralities: the heart of histories is the
actions of men: the life of the actions is the virtue of the actors. If the
phrase be not exquisit, or the observation not singular, or the method not
exact and perfect, it is but one part of an Essaye among the rest, it is but a
trial of that may be done, it is but the token of a good mind to this
business. Yet take me even as I am, and I know that my Essaye is not behind
any other writer in this theme, whom I have seen for those uses, which are
required in a History: even take me as ye find me, not as any momes feign
upon me.

The Genealogy of the Romano-Brutans.
BRutany by means of much trouble, bred doubtfulnesse in it self, and hereof
grew Resistance, till Resolution held with Kindred, and took the son of a
Brutan before the child of a Roman: thus Basianus Caracalla was for his good
mothers sake made king, but his elder brother Geta was refused. Business sent
Caracalla to his Roman Empire: Favor made Carasse the Viceroy for a time, and
Flattery with Persuasion and Usurpation made him Ruler: War overthrew him:
Victory created Alectus a Roman the king of Brutany: Displeasure pulled him
down, and Comparison set up Asclepiodate, Duke of Cornwall: yet Coil the
Earl of Colechester brought the peoples goodwill into such a wheel, and so
turned it to himselfeward, that he slew Asclepiodate, and was the third of that
name king next him: then Fear amazed Coil, till Marriage joined Constantius a
Roman Duke with his daughter Helen, the fairest maid alive: then Contentment
settled them both in the kingdom, and Love brought them forth into the world
Constantine the first, whom Excellency lifted up to the Roman Empire: but
Agreement appointed Octauy Duke of Cambry the ruler of this Island: then Envy
flew from Room, and brought Traherne on his wings against Octauy, and made
him fly abroad for a time, but Strength and Hope carried him home again, and
Providence counseled him to marry his daughter with Maximinian one of Helens
kindred, and him Conueyance made king against Conans mind: then Superiority
removed Maximinian to Room, and Gracian by grace and desert supplied his room
in Brutany: but Cruelty so alienated the people from him, that Force destroyed
him as an ungracious Ruler: then ill Neighborhood in Albany made the Brutans
to seek upon Room, and Submission obtained help of the Romans two times, but
variety of Wars made Room leave Brutany at this time, and good Neighborhood
in little Brutanie caused their king Aldroene to assist the great Brutans, but
yet dangers held them without a Ruler many years.

When Romans reign as much as Brutans, I must not make long account of them
both, and in this respect I call them Romanobrutans or Brutanoromans, which you
will: their Genealogy is so mingled and put together, that a Grammarian Doctor
might make a great question of the name, and show much conceit. I had rather
point at such slight and needless questions, then entreat of them more or
less: and partly upon such a cause I contain Topography, at this time in the
moral Tables of Virtues and Vices, and would choose to join the places with
the actions hereafter, rather then divide them, and set them severally, as I
did before with more reason then I can now. One day tells an other, and one
night certifieth another: new and old names are diversely considered.

Their Arts and Acts are in their Virtues and Vices.
Their Virtue or Justice is in
Dividing: the Brutans knowing, that Bassian the second son of Seuerus the
Emperor was borne of a Brutan woman, and that the first son Geta was borne
of a Roman, judged that a Brutan had more to do in Brutanie then a Roman: and
therefore joined with Bassian against Geta and made him king, but Geta was
slain: Consanguinitie is more valuable then Primogeniture, the part then the
adiunct, life then time.

Correcting: the Brutans feeling, how Alectus brought in many exactions cruelly
upon them, forsook him and chose Asclepiodate a Brutan for their king, and
pursued the Romans from place to place, til they had slain their captain
Alectus by Caerlud for his cruelty. Asclepiodate threw Liuius Gallus a Roman
captain into the Brook which ran from More-field into the Tems, and drowned
him for his rebellion: in remembrance of this justice, he called the river
Galbrooke, or Walbrooke to this day, that other outlandish might ever learn,
to be quiet with our Princes in their own Countries and Kingdoms.

Obeying: the Brutans seeing, how Gracian held his Rule only by force of arms
against all right and reason, arose against him, and slew the Roman by force,
and rid himself from his enforcementes. Conan Meriadock being commanded from
Octauy his Prince, to be quiet, and not once seem to hinder the coming of
Maximinian into this Land whom he sent for, obeyed his Princes rather then his
own will, laid away his armor, suffered him to enter, and do even as Octauy
would. What should a subject strive against his Sovereign? a stranger may come
into the land if he be sent for.

Rewarding: When Maximinian had overcome the Gauls in Armorica, the Brutans and
Romans his soldiers proclaimed him Emperor in the field for his glorious Act.
See what it is to please good subjects: A Princes chief treasure. Seuerus
buried at Caerbrank, so was Constantius: Alectus in Caerlud, Coel at
Colchester, Carasse in the field: Octauy in Caerusk: Asclepiodate where Coil
slew him.

Their vice or Injustice is in
Persecuting: Maximinian living quietly and honorably, both because he was a
chosen Prince, and married a Brutan kings daughter, was not content with the
Brutans due reverence toward him, but he sought means to destroy them, yea the
most honest and innocent men among them, even the good Christians which were
like harmless lambs in the Land, whom he persecuted unrighteously upon the
opinion of his own heathenish religion more then any right judgment. A true
christian never deserves death, he is so moderate and reasonable in all points,
so that he is most unjust that will trouble such a man. He that aforetime was
injurious to a Philosopher was accounted a tyrant, but he that tormenteth a
true Christian, which is a true Philosopher, and a perfect wise man, is worthy
to be judged a devil incarnate, a bloudsuccour, a monstrous man. Such a man
was Maximinian, and may well be chronicled the king with the hellish heart and
bloody hand.

Their virtue or temperance is in
Marriage: Helen the daughter of Coil the third married Constantius, a Roman by
the agreement of the Brutans, not on her own head, less she should seem
incontinent: she was but a part of her country, not above it, or out of it.
Octauy married his daughter to Maximinian a Roman, by the consent of his
Lords, less he should seem to make more of his own will then the benefit
of all other men: a public matter must be allowed publikly of them whom it
concerns most. Dionote Duke of Cornwall sent his daughter Vrsula and 11000.
Virgins with her to Conan a Brutan the king of Armorica, that he should not
join himself and his knights, and men with strange blood, but with very
right Brutans.

Conan desired this, and Dionote performed it, both constant and provident to
avoid confusion of nations, which causes all Tragedies and Rages in the end.

Words and liberality: Constantius was a man of special affability, and
familiarity with all his men, which property if he had not at Room, he
learned in Brutanie, where the people are generally of freest hearts, fardest
from bondage, and must be well used in speech, of all things: he was of a
singular liberality, he cared more for his subjects goods then his own: his
saying was, That wealth does more good in many hands then in few or none, or
in the Princes Treasure house: a saying far enough from tyranny. Octauy so
behaved himself toward the Brutans of all sorts in the time of his Royal
Lieuetenantship, that all men for the most part favored, and furthered him
greatly, even to the attainement of the kingdom it self: the chiefest wonders
and noblest acts, and famous things have ever commonly begun and ended with
the power of words: the ordering of words makes a man above beasts, and
that man a king of men that can order them best of all other. Maximinian gave
the country of Armorica to Conan a Brutan, to hold it from him and his heirs
for ever, and to content him for missing the kingdom of great Brutany: by this
means they were good friends at the last, and forgot old enmities.

Toleration: Constantine the son of Helen suffered the Brutans, to use their
religion: he was no tyrant in forcing them against their consciences, as other
had been, although he were a Pagan, because he desired chiefly to keep them in
peace.

See what a good mother does otherwhile in time of need: I believe, Helen
played the Princely Orator for Christians, and defended them before her son
for good men and good subjects, and was their best friend in Brutany next the
invisible and immortal defense that came from heaven, and bred a desire of
peace in Constantines mind, by besetting him with business on every side.

Their vice or intemperance is in
Flattery: Carasse being unable to overthrow the Picts, and loving them somewhat
for helping him against the Romans, stood in a maze between hope and fear,
and gave them a part of Albany for their possessions, that they might be quiet,
and not stir up war against him: liberality or courtesy showed to a
barbarous nature, is a weapon turned upon your self: Bores and Bares cannot
understand fair words and deeds: never hold up a candle to the devil.

Rusticitie: Constantius was of so vile provision in housekeeping, though he
were a king, that on festival days he borrowed plate of his friends to
furnish his tables and cupbordes therewith: It is an unseemly thing for any
man, to set forth himself with other men's goods: it is small credit for a
scholar to seek credit by using that oration or sermon that is not his own:
among all men a Prince must be sufficient of himself for all matters that
pertain unto him, if he be deficient, his grace is lost, his majesty
diminishyd, and he even rurified like a private subject. Let not the beasts
eat man's flesh in any case, less they love it.

Their virtue or prudence is in
Discerning: Helen in her virginity was learned in all points of true moral
wisdom: afterward, either by some divine inspiration, or by some humane
information at Jerusalem, she found the Cross whereon Christ was crucified,
and the three nails wherewith he was nailed: they that seek in zeal shall
find in joy. Constantine used to have the book of God, which is the Spirit
and Rule of Regiment, carried before him wheresoever he want: he caused the
Bible to be copyed out, and sent into the parts of his kingdom: he saw by a
vision a cross in heaven with these words upon it, In this sign is victory.
Such are the heavenly fruits of a heavenly mind: so we shall reap ever as we
sow.

Providing: Octauy being restored to his kingdom, gathered together infinite
riches, to be better able then he was aforetime, to wage war against the
ambitious and laborious Romans: Soldiers run to the greatest pay. He sent for
Maximinian coosin german to Constantine the Emperor, and offered him his
daughter in his life time, less he should be marred with ill Counsel, and
married to another after his death, which he perceived to be at hand: guide
them that cannot guide themselves. Maximinian made his son Victor fellow with
the Emperor of Room, that he might strengthen himself on both sides, both at
home and abroad: it is surer standing on two legs then on one: surer holding
with two hands then with one.

Their vice or imprudence is in
Murder: An Earl of Brutany that favored Octauy much, seeing how woefully he
was fled into Norway for fear of Traherne and the Romans, which overcame him
in Westmerland, and considering in his hot wit, that Traherne being Helens
uncle and a Brutan, ought not to have done such wrong for the Romans sakes to
the king of Brutany, but have rather fought for him, neither undermined him one
way nor other, but with a butcherly wisdom laid violent hands upon him, and
slew him, that Octauy might return safely into the realm again: Defect of
invention turns a man into a bloody beast.

Improuidence: Maximinian gathered his riches so vnauisedly, that with them he
gathered the ilwill of the Brutans.

To have is not the rule, but to get well: a man's glory is not in money, but
the glory of money is in a man.

Their virtue or fortitude is in
Victories: Bassian and the Brutans slew Geta, and the Romans by night.
Maximinian ouerranne great parts of Gallia and Germania. Octauy overthrew
Traherne and the Romans three legions near Winchester, and made them fly
even into Albany, and pursued them into Westmerland. Gracian being sent into
the field from Maximinian, overcame Guany the Duke of the Huns, and Melga the
Duke of the Pictes, and kept this Land from their furor by the help of the
Brutans. Coil Earl of Colchester, which he built rose against Asclepiodate,
and slew him and was made king.

Battles: Bassian was able to endure all the pains of war: a right Emperor for
the camp. The Brutans seeing the valiant wit of Carasse, made him their king
in spite of the Romans, and rather then they would yield to Room they dyed in
battle: Death is better then slavery among enemies. Constantine the first
armed himself with the Brutans, and fought against Maxentius: did he not good
among them to do them the more mischief, as the Philistines suspected David
who was a true saint of God? Conan Meriadocke made war with Maximinian at
diverse times, because he was a Roman: O it is an hard bone to digest Rome
which counts all birds dawes besides her own chickens: the man that has
another master beside himself in his own house is beside himself, or else I
believe, he shall be set beside his cushion at the last.

Magnanimity: Maximinian called Armorica Little Brutany in honor of Brutans,
because they conquered it: that a man wins is his own: a man may call his
own possession by what name it pleases him: new Lords will have new names
for their new lands. Octauy being appointed king in the absence of
Constantine, and hearing that Constantine was then made Emperor of Rome,
thought verily, that he had enough to do in Room, though he meddled not with
Brutany, and took the Crown to himself, and chased the Romans up and down
in the land, and played Rex with them at all hands, to redeem his Country
from thraldom as he counted it. Home is for the homeborne.

Their vice or extreme fortitude is in
Ambition: Carasse a Brutan of low birth, of a high heart, but a venturous
man, a very hardydardy in deed as ever lived, keeping the Havens, and playing
the Sea captain, aspired to the kingdom and got it, both by greater promises
then he could perperforme, and by gathering more bankrupts and ruffians to
his side then he could keep, and contemning all noble and great men in the
Land: there was but one way with him, and that was in his head only: all was
one with him, so that one might be all: self-love was selfewill, and both were
for himself.

Abiection of mind: When Coil the third saw, that Constantius was come from
Room with a great army, he feared and granted him tribute and peace, and
every thing else, to be out of danger, yet the most danger and damage in
granting these: A babies wit in a kings estate. The Brutans being afflicted by
the Picts two times promised the Romans a tribute to help them: then they
submitted themselves to Aldroene of little Brutany, that he might succor them.
O Heavens: where was old Brutanie now? where, but in the Sea as a dead sea
Whale?

THE TIMES OF THESE Romano-Brutans.
AFter there had been a king for 15. years space, (in which time Clemens
Alexandrinus lived: the Prophets were translated into Greek) Bassian began his
Reign in the year of the world, 4179. and reigned 6. years: in this time
Papinian the great Ciuilian Chauncellor to Seuerus flourished.

Carasse began in the year, 4185, and ruled 8. years: in this time Origin
began to show himself: Tertullian flourished.

Alectus began in the year, 4193. and reigned six years: about this time
Zephirine changed the Communion cup into glass for more decency, which had
been of wood commonly.

Asclepiodate began, 4199. and ruled 30. years: now Calistus appointed the 4.
Ember weeks for the 4. quarters: Urban ordained that divine vessels should be
gold or silver.

Coil the third began, 4238. and reigned 27. years: now Philip was the first
christened Emperor: Cyprian was martyred. Decius the persecuter was swallowed
of a quagmire: Paul the first Hermit lived.

Constantius began, 4265. and ruled 30. years: in his time Eutychian bishop of
Room buried 300. martyrs with his own hands: Carus the Emperor was killed
with lightning: the City Spira in Germany was built.

Constantine the first began, 4295. and reigned ten years: now 20000.
Christians were burnt in a Church on Christmas day at night: Arnobius was
famous.

Octauy began, 4305. and ruled 54. years: now Siluester refused to wear a
golden Crown, which great Constantine offered him: the great Nicene Council
was held: Lactantius and Hilary were famous: Moonkes began in Antonie the
Hermit, and Nuns in Marcella and Sophronia: Constantinople was built.

Maximinian began in the year, 4359. and reigned 8. years: about this time
Athanasius and Basilius flourished: the Thalmud of the Jews was compiled by
Rabbi Iohanan: Julian the Apostata and Libanius raged.

Gracian began, 4367. and ruled 4. years: now Epiphanius wrote against
heretics: Vphila found out the Gotes Letters, or a b c: about this time
Gregory Nazianzene and Ambrose flourished.

So the Government of these Brutanoromans continued for the space of 183.
years: but here was no certain Ruler in Brutany for 36. years after.

THE SIXTH GENEALOGY OF Brutan Kings.
THe Brutans chose Constantine the second, the son of Aldroene king of little
Brutany for their king, and he reigned over them and begat three sons, the
first was Constancy, the second Aurely, the third Vter, but then Credulity
slew him.

Constancy the eldest son succeeded his father, but died without issue: for
Doltishnesse and Treason slew him, and Force lifted up Vortiger to the
kingdom, but Self-will sharpened him so, that the people hated him, and by
plain might created his son Vortimer their king: then Wichery pulled him
down, and Insinuation restored Vortiger: yet Right and Vengeance at last
destroyed him: then Common Consent made Aurely the second son of Constantine
the second a king, but the devils Art slew him, and he dyed without issue: so
Vter the third son of Constantine succeeded him in the kingdom, and begat
upon Igerne his wife, or rather concubine Arthur the king, who reigned and
left no seed behind him: then Constantine the third, the son of Cador a
Cornish Duke Arthurs coosin was made king, but lasted not, for Conan his
kinsman slew him and became king, and begat Vortipory, who lived and dyed
without issue: then Malgo the nephew of Conan reigned as king: he was of
stature and personage the goodliest among all men of his time, but left no
Royal seed behind him: thus Carency got the kingdom by the goodwill of
Brutans, and lost it by his quarrellous nature: so Cadwan was chosen king, and
he begat Cadwallin the king, who died and left no seed behind him: then
Cadwallader by his Nobleness and manhood together obtained the Crown and dyed
without issue, and was the last king of the Brutans in the seat of Locrine.
But, who can tell the genealogies of Camber? how happy is he in his dwelling
places, which no man takes from him? His loins are like a springing well: he
runs within his banks, and is not stopped: surely his River is one of Gods
Rivers: his Hills are the mountains of Safety. Locrine lay more open to the
winds then Camber: his branches are dried up with the Northeast winds, and
the boisterous storms have broken them, but Camber had the favorable
Westwindes ever in his borders. The waters of Camber grow full of soothsaying
reeds, the pens of Writers have set him in more honor then his brethren, he
alone vpholdeth his fathers house. The great God of the world keep him
evermore with his invincible right hand and stretched out arm, make his naule
whole, and fill his bones with marrow and heat, give him plenty of the fruits
of the earth, and increase his cattle without number: lead forth his sons in
Triumphs and his daughters to the marriages of the mightiest, make him blessed
among all the nations of men, and raise up the meanest of his people to renown
and glory: exalt thy friends and convert thy foes, fill thy coasts with all
earthly and heavenly joys that be or may be.

THEIR ARTS AND ACTS are in their Virtues and Vices.
Their virtue or prudence is in
Discipline: When Constantine the second saw, that his eldest son Constancy
was slow of wit, and given to be solitary, he made him a moonke in the Abbey of
Saint Swithune in Caerguent, and committed his other two sons to Guetheline
Archbishop of Caerlud to be taught. If children be set into that way which they
have most mind unto, they will prove best in that way. A young Prince cannot
be brought up better under any, then under a reverend and Princely churchman,
seeing they are both pastors of the people, and bishops of men.

Providence: the two sons of Constantine being unable to get the Crown by
might of arms, and fearing, that treason should be wrought against them as it
was against their eldest brother, looked to the safety of their lives, and
fled into little Brutanie. If we cannot do that is right and due, the best way
is to save the principal that is most worth. It is no shame to fly, when
resisting is wilful death. Bruciuall saved 50. moonks of Bangor by flying from
Ethelfride duke of Northumbeland, when 1200. had been slain by him. The
Bishops of Caerlud and Caerbranke in Carencies time fled to Rome for fear of
the cruel Saxons, and dealt so wisely with Pope Gregory, that they were saved
from bloody hands.

Doctrine: Aurely desiring to teach the Brutans, to beware of outlandish
friendship, which had in his days so intrapped and infected them, caused Merlin
by his Art Sovereign, to fetch the great stones out of Ireland, which are now
upon Salsbury plain, and set them near the place where Hengist and the Saxons
against their Oath did murder hundreds of the best Brutans with knives secretly
provided for the purpose, and took Vortiger their king prisoner, and ransomed
him at their pleasure, That when they should see those stones or hear of them,
they might remember the stony hearts of outlandish friends, the hypocrisy of
Saxons, the untruth of strangers, and either appoint them true overseers, or
else away with them out of the Land.

Government: Vter after his brother Aurelius death ruled the Realm so orderly
and circumspectly, both in respect of treacherous flatteries, and trusty
friendship, and all matters both common and extraordinary, that he was
surnamed Pendragon, A Prince as mighty and subtle among men, as the Dragon is
among the beasts of the field. A good name is a treasure, but why do men
commend a man, which ought to be the phrase only of dispraise? He that can
shut his hands from strangers, as Vter did, shall prevent many woes. Arthur
disposed all things in order, sailed into Gallia, left his nephew Mordred for
king, and wrought great miracles abroad. It had been more wisdom, to have
wrought them at home, if they were good, to do his own people good: or if they
were deceites, to have practiced them privily, that his name might not be
blotted and diminished.

Their vice or imprudence is in
Credulity: Constantine the second favored a Pict so much, that he might have
access to him at all times, even into his bed chamber, though he had been the
greatest enemy that the Picts had in Brutanie many years: this Pict knew it
too well, and waited his time: and at last took him alone, and slew him in his
bed chamber. Strangers cannot be true friends, if they and we have at any
time been at ods. Thy desire to pleasure us with their service, to serve us
such a turn, as the Fox does the simple Kid or Lamb. Vortiger entertained
Hengist the second time for this daughters sake, that is one foe for another
foes sake: he never imagined, that Hengist was his foe, though Vortimer his son
had chafed him, and chased him out of the land: he met him on Salsbury plain,
to entreat of peace that should be between them, and came peaceably with his
men, as the agreement was, without weapons, but presuming childishly, that all
was well, when nothing could possibly be safe in any reason: he searched not
Hengistes company, to see if they carried any weapons under their long gowns,
and by this babish credulity spoiled himself of his liberty, and 460.
noblemen Brutans of their lives.

When Aurely lay sick in his bed, his friends that were about him, being as sick
in their wits as he was in his body, suffered a Saxon to be his Physician, and
to minister unto him, till he poisoned him. If the Brutans knew not, that he
was a Saxon, they were unreasonable to take they knew not who^, if they knew
him, and yet trusted in his help, they were senseless and utterly out of
their wits. Cadwallin joined in friendship with Penda a Saxon, but afterward
he never thriued in any wars which he took in hand as he did aforetime: he
that could not see, that the Saxon would only undermine him, was unwise: he
that would trust him at all, was not wise, seeing he might live well enough
without his help.

Dissimulation: Vortiger Duke of Cornwall provided king Constance the Sheep a
guard of 100 Wolves or Picts, and then used all means to please them with words
and gifts: when he had made them dronken, he complained to them of his
poverty even with tears: anon they devised such an help for him as they
could, he so pierced their headless hearts, and heartlesse heads, that
as soon as he was gone from them in sorrow, they followed him with the head of
Constance: he lamented for joy of his death, and less he might be suspected of
the fact, he caused the 100. Picts to be executed after the law, and of all
men was most against them, yet so, that some men perceived his shites. He that
has any lawful title in any possession is wisest, if he seek it lawfully, or
else, he may be put justly from his own. The Duke of Cornwall had more right to
the Crown then the Dukes son of little Brutanie, but was it not extreme
folly to challenge it in so villainous a manner? and was not Constance a most
improuident creature, to be guarded with them which scarsely regarded him so
much as a countriman does his beast? Surely God was angry with Brutans, when
he suffered their Rulers to live so rudely without the Rule of wisdom. O ye
Heavens bless ye our Nobles, and al other Regents on the earth, or else they
will be without Regiment in their lives and end basely with vile death.
Constance had been fit to be a poor man's Sow in a sty, which is content with
any usage, so the trough be full and the bones at rest: lay a logge into a
cloister, and it will come out all worm eaten, and fit only to be burnt.

Their virtue of fortitude is in
Magnificence and Magnanimity: When Vortimer saw that he must die, he called
his soldiers before him, and gave all that he had among them, and exhorted
them, ever to hold their own against the Saxons, and all foreign enemies. A
true heart is virtuous to the last gasp. Ambrius built the Abbey of Amsbruy,
Arthur built the castle of Windsor, and founded the order of knights of the
round table: Artgall the first Ear of Warwick, one of Arthurs knights chose a
Bear for his beast, because Arth in that language signified a Bear, in
remembrance of his name among all his posterity. Quicheline gave seven miles
compass of land to Berine Bishop of Winchester, to build his See there, and
Kenwalke his son finished it. Saint Osuald gave his daughter Elfleda xii.
Lordships, to build xii. Monasteries with them, vi. in Bernicia, and vi. in
Deyra. When Cadwallader had conquered the Saxons in Kent, and in the I Will of
Might, he gave the fourth part of the I Will, that is, 300. households to
Wilfride in honor of religion and of his own name.

Victories: Edolf Earl of Chester seeing how Hengist slew the Brutans with
secret knives, got him to a hedge, and defended himself with a stake, and slew
of the Saxons 70. men and escaped.

Vortimer the son of Vortiger hated the Saxons more then his father loved
them: he pursued them and gave them battle at the river of Darwent, and
overthrew them, at Epyford he overcame them, he chased them by the sea side
into the I Will of Might, he vanquished them at Cole More, he turmoyled them in
Norfolk, in Essex, in Kent, he put them out of their possessions, he drove them
to the I Will of Tenet, there he besieged them by water and by land, and never
left them till they fled out of the land. Aurely with the aid of the king of
little Brutany took Caerbranke from Octa and took him prisoner: he sought
with Hengist at Crekinford, and slew 4000. soldiers and 4. Dukes of the
Saxons: he drove them out of Locry every where, except Kent: he quitted
himself from Ella and Porth, two mighty Saxons. Vter in the time of his
brothers sickness put to flight Pascenty the son of Vortiger with his army
of Germans, and afterward slew him, and Guillioman the Irish Prince at S.
David's in Cambry, and Cossa and Octa the Saxons. Arthur fought 12. battles with
the Saxons, and every time overthrew them: he made them pay him tribute: when
he was in Gallia, and heard of Mordreds treason, he returned and fought with
him at Sandwich and overcame him, and again he overthrew him at Winchester,
and at Bathe he slew him. Constantine the third vanquished the two sons of
Mordred and put them to flight when they rose against him and challenged the
Crown by their fathers title. Vortipory the son of Conan discomfited the
Saxons in many battles and got the upper hand of them always. Malgo subdued
the Saxons in all his wars, he conquered Ireland, Scotland, Iseland, Norway,
Denmark, the Orcades, and possessed them. Arthur slew in one day an hundred
and forty Saxons with his own hand. Cadwallader slew Lothary Prince of Kent,
and Athelwald king of Southsex, and possessed those lands. Cadwallin drove the
Saxons all along to Middlesex and made Penda pay him tribute. Now armies stay
in Saxony, and papermen fly from those coasts: these do more harm in many
places then those old armies did: these will be sauced as they were, and hunted
out of the land by order of discipline: none so busy as they, and yet none
more slight then they: there is an Arthur in paperworke against their
invasions, which may in all right and equity give them twelve disgraces at the
least, and perhaps twelve times twelve: let the trial prove all, or let that
labor be lost, if they can recover there 12 losses of this new Arthur.

Their vice or extreme fortitude is in
Ambition: Vortiger took Constance out of a Monastery to be king, that he
might do what he list in the kingdom under such an innocent and milksop, and
make his simplicity a means for himself to get the Crown, as it proved
afterward. Mordred Arthurs kinsman being appointed Vicegerent in his royalty,
gave great gifts and castles more then his own to Cerdrick a Saxon, and
agreed with him to be crowned at Winchester with his goodwill, so that himself
might be crowned at Caerlud by his liking. The two sons of Mordred the
usurper rebelled against Constantine the third for the kingdom and lost it. No
right or truth can stay an aspyring humor.

Pusillanimitie: Arthur gave two Shyres to Cerdrick Duke of the Westsaxons, to
the end he might be quiet: those two shyres could do Brutans more good then
Arthurs peregrination: an enemy must not give or take any thing, but win all
by might or slight. When Cadwallader had reigned 12. years, he forsook all
his princely attire, and went to Room, and led a monastical life ever after:
he preferred rest before riches, the hood above the Crown.

Rage or cruelty: The Pictes to please their captain Vortiger slew Constance
their king, and presented his head to Vortiger, imagining they had done the
best act that could be, to redress his poor estate, whereof he had complained
to them. Renown the daughter of Hengist, the concubine of Vortiger, seeing
what Vortimer had done in spite of the Saxons her countrymen and friends, how
he had taken away their possessions, how he reedified Churches which they
destroyed, how he was like to destroy them all, if he lived a while, sought
out witches and magicians, to charm or charactize him to death by some
practice, but when they could not work upon him, she insinuated her self to
one of his nearest men, and so corrupted his mind and sense with words and
gifts, that he consented to poison his Lord, and so he did. Conan loved
quarrellours above other men, he made away his own uncle that should have bin
king, and slew his two sons. Ethelfride Duke of Northumberland massacred
1200. moonks of Bangor in a beastly immanitie, to please Ethelbert king of
Kent, which had offered prayers to God against him. Carencie was so given to
civil wars, that he loved them above all other acts, whereby he fell into
such hatred, that he was not able to stand against the Saxons. Out of all
question, it is extreme madness, to admit any strangers into our country,
that are either more militar or more politic then the commonaltie, unless it
be for a time, and then away with them, or they be kept in their bounds with
certain company, and neither see nor hear more then belongs to strangers:
what should strangers but be used strangely? they pretend poverty, but they
intend to weaken our land: they fly for religion, but they foster heresies:
draffe is their errand, but drink they would: either they are devils in their
own likeness: or else they are Angels with the entrals of Devils: foolish
pity destroys the City: provide for the weakest, the strongest can save it
self: the malignant hand will spoil the impotent people, when it cannot spill
the blood of Nobles: but if Hares wurry Hounds, and Hearts be wounded of
Ferrets, then is the world turned vpside down, the Hunters are vile keepers,
and the keepers are vilest men: Let Brutans be fed and taught as is meet for
them, and let my life go, if they make not their ennemies round about them like
Hares and Ferrets, which ever avoid the presence of men.

Their virtue or temperance is in
Life and manners: the Clergy in the time of Cadwallin behaved themselves so
soberly and fatherly in all points, that they were honored of most men,
insomuch, that as they went too and fro in the streets and other places, the
people would kneel down to them, and ask them their blessing, and gave them
whatsoever they demanded.

Words: Berine Bishop of Dorchester converted Kingelist the king of the
Westsaxons, and christened him, which he could never have done without most
temperate and well seasoned speech: by the like moderation Pauline converted
Edwine king of Northumberland to the christian faith. Melite Bishop of Caerlud
converted Sebert king of Essex to Christian religion. The Clergy of Kent dealt
so with their king Ercombert, that he pulled down the Temples of his false Gods,
and kept the Lent fast, and became a Christian. When the Brutan Bishops saw,
that Austin took upon him as their sovereign, they would not resist him
presently, but stayed a while, to see his life and behavior, and then to use
them thereafter, either friendly or aduersly.

Liberality: When Ethelfride had put away his wife being great with child,
Cadwan received her into his Court, and kept her honorably till she was
delivered, and so long after as she would. Osuald Duke of Bernicia liked so
well of Cedda Bishop of Winchester, that he gave him land to build and Abbey
thereon. The more is given for the promotion of Gods Majesty, the more he
gives to our benefit.

Their vice or intemperance is in
Love: When Ronowen had saluted Vortiger with a golden cup of wine, and desired
him to drink of it, he beheld her beauty, and was presently so inamored of
her, that he could not be quiet, till he had put away his own wife, by whom he
had three sons and married her, and for her sake loved Saxons more then
Brutans: he lay with his own daughter to have issue of her, but in vain. Vter
fell in love with Igerne the wife of Gorleis Duke of Cornwall, and slew him
at his castle Tintagel, and took her to wife. Malgo fell into the sin of
Sodom, and lost all that he had gotten aforetime: let not sense rule reason.

Liberality: Vortiger entertained Hengist, and Horsus with their three ships,
he gave them ye hire of soldiers, he bestowed the I Will of Tenet upon them: he
granted Hengist so much ground as he could compass with a bulls hide: he took
away the Earldom of Kent from Garangon, and gave it him.

Anger: Constantine the third sieve one of Mordreds sons for rebelling against
him even in the Minster of Winchester: the other for the same cause in the
temple at Caerlud. Dionote Abbot of Bangor would not yield to Austin, because
he was of another Province, neither would he preach to the Saxons, because they
spoiled the land, do Ethelbert king of Kent what he could unto him.

The virtue or justice is in
Rewarding: Constantine the second received the crown and rule of Brutanie by
a covenant that he made with the Brutans, when he delivered them from the
tyranny of the Picts. When Aurely remembered, how fast the Brutans resorted unto
him, and Vter at their landing at Totnes, and how truly they served him in his
wars, did them one good turn for another, and repaired their temples and
houses, which the Saxons destroyed, and restored their religion to them again.

Dividing: In the time of Carency it was determined at Worcester by a Council
of the chiefest men, That the goods of the Church should be bestowed on the
Bishops, their Clergy, the Churches the poor people, and then Gregory the
great, appointed the two Archbishops of Brutany at Caerbrank, and Caerkent. The
Archbishop of S. David's had under thim these 7. Bishops. Hereford, Cardiff,
Landaff, Bangor, S. Asaph, Worcester, Morgan.

Punishing: The Pictes to revenge the death of the 100. Picts that guarded
Constance, made war against Vortiger: the friends of Constance devised to
overthrow him for the death of their Prince: thus he was tossed up and down
the land, that he could not be safe. The Brutans seeing Vortigers extreme
affection toward the Saxons, deposed him: when he was taken prisoner by
Hengist, they forsook him: Aurely and Vter burnt him to ashes in his Castle.
The Bishops refused Austin by the advice of an old Anchorite, who judged him no
man of God which used his brethren like his servants. Cadwan slew Edwine and
Osricke and Eufricke Saxon kings for the blood of the Brutans which they had
poured out like water on every side of the Realm.

Burials: Vortimer was buried solemnly at Caerlud. Aurely and Vter were buried
at Stoneheng in Salsbury plain. Arthur was buried in the valley of
Glascenbury. Constantine the third at Stoneheng. Vortipory, Vortiger, Malgo,
and Carency were not orderly buried for their vile lives. Cadwan died in war,
and was buried accordingly. Constance deserved his fair burial.

Their vice or injustice is in
Covetousness: Vortiger forgetting his loyalty to his Prince abused him
intollerably, and got him by his own consent the strongest Castles, and best
treasure that he had: he ever defended the 100. Pictes what naughtiness soever
they committed in the Court.

Unthankfulness: the Brutans being desired by Vortimer on his death bed, to
bury his body at the haven where the Saxons used to land, in a sepulcher of
brass spire like, to put them in fear with the remembrance of him and his
acts, either neglected his will or forgot it. O unjust men that take such a
farewell of their friends. Vter died by force of poison at Verulam in
Hertfordshire near S. Albons. Constantine and Constance, the father and his
son were not buried after the manner of Princes.

I have not that peculiar regard of places now, which I had before, partly by
reason of forenamed causes, and partly in that they are sufficiently set forth
in these moral tables. I desire herein and ever a quiet judgment, and then I
doubt not of any censurer, but he will speak fairly. Yet I must leave every
man to himself, to do as he is caused in his deliberatiue and considerate
insight. If I omit some histories of Saxons, I do but my duty: what have I to
do with them, unless it were to make them tributary to Brutans? otherwise, let
their own men commend them if they will, I owe them no service by writing or
speaking. Yet I have named some of the Saxons, though I do it more for their
sakes with whom they dwelt, then for any merit of their own. Let them lie in
dead forgetfulness like stones, that have desired, or do desire the trouble
of Brutanie: let their names be clean put out, and not come among the
righteous. When men play the parts of beasts, let them go among the numbers of
cattle in Zoography and keep their fit place. An ape must not come among
Churchmen, Serpents must not dwell in chambers of Counsel, make bates are not
in case to co^uerse in the dwellings of peaceable Lords, who can abide, to have
a deformed mocker with his distorted mouths, a venomous hisser with his noysom
breath, a railing stage player with his trifling actions for his companion?
Arise ye sons of Ebranke, and ye kinsmen of true ancient Brutans, and make
those stonehearted creatures know, that they are made to be your servants and
drudges: let not any double forked tongue persuade you, that Brutanie is under
any part of the earth.

THE TIMES OF THESE KINGS.
Between the death of Gracian, and the reign of Constantine the second, were
about 36. years passed over in Brutanie without a Ruler. In this time
Theodosius was excommunicated by Ambrose for murder: Jerome and Austin and
Gouldmouth flourished: Claudian the Poet was famous: Siricius Bishop of Room
forbad Priests to marry.

Constantine the second began to reign in the year of the world, 4407. and
reigned ten years: in this time the Goths and Hunnes invaded Italy, and
possessed it: the Vandals entered into Spain and spoiled it: the first Council
was set against Pelagius the heretic a Brutan.

Constancy began in the year 4417. and ruled 5. years. In this time Jerome
died: S. Alban was martired at Moguntia: Saluian the teacher of Bishops
flourished in Massilia: Burgundians were converted to christian religion.

Vortiger began to rule, 4422. and ruled 16. years: Then Vortimer began
4438. and ruled 7. years. In this time Austin died: Cyrill, S. Patricke and
Cassian flourished: Theodosius founded a general School at Bononia: Attila
with 500000. soldiers spoiled the Romans horribly, and all parts where he
went. Clodoue the first famous king of France lived.

Vortiger began to rule again, 4445. and ruled 9. years:

Aurely began, 4454. and reigned 19. years: in this time Genserick with the
Vandals subdued Room: the Venetians began to dwell in their Islands where they
dwell now: Mamertus a Bishop invented Letanies: Hilary of Room adorned
Churches with gold and silver.

Vter began, 4473. and ruled 16. years: in this time Honorick the son of
Genserick banished 334. Bishops and Priests out of Afric, and slew many
thousand christians, but at last he was eaten up of worms: Fulgentius the
Bishop of Hispalis flourished: Theodoricke the king of Goths did many noble
and virtuous acts in Italy, and builded decayed places.

Arthur began 4489. and reigned 26. years: in which time S. Patricke dyed in
Scotland being 62. years old: Theodorick would not suffer the Romans to
practice any feats of war, or to have any weapons, for fear they should
rebel: Cassiodore of a Senator became a Moonke.

Constantine the third, began, 4515. and ruled 3. years: at this time Gildas
the Brutan lived, surnamed Sapiens, Boethius the Christian Philosopher lived
and was martired.

Conan began 4518. and reigned 3. years: in this time Symmachus the Roman
prelate took upon him to be supreme ruler and judge of all Councels in
Christendom.

Vortipory began 4521. and ruled 4. years: now Clodoue the French king vowed
christianisme and was baptized: Olympius an Arrian, for blaspheming the
Trinity was slame with lightning from heaven.

Malgo began, 4525. and reigned 35. years: now Justinius the Emperor was first
crowned by the Roman Bishop: Iustinianus made the Codex of the civil law:
Tribonianus disposed the Digests of the same law: S. Benedict and his sister
Scholastica wrought woonders. Priscian lived.

Carency began, 4560. and ruled 3. years: but after his death the Brutans had
no king for 24. years space, till Cadwan was made king: now Totilas the tyrant
of the Goths raged in Italy, and Narses sent from the Emperor slew him: the
nation of the Hunnes was almost utterly extinguished in Greece, by the Emperor:
Armenij received Christian faith.

Cadwan began 4587. and reigned 22. years: in this time S. Brigit the Scot was
famous: Gregory of Room called himself Servant of Servants: the Latin
tongue was not used in Room, because all men conuersed there.

Cadwallin began 4609. and ruled 48. years: now Heraclius slew Phocas and got
the Empire, and married his sisters daughter: the Arabians received the law of
Mahomet, and were called Saracens: Isidore Bishop of Hispalis lived: Sabinianus
Bishop of Room appointed bells to distinguish the times of the day: Honorius
spoiled the Temple of Romulus to build the Temple of Saint Peter.

Cadwallader began 4657. and ruled 12. years: in this time the Saracens got
great part of Africa. Martin of Room constituted that his Clergy should vow
chastity, or loose their livings.

Thus these kings reigned 238: years. I omit the interraignes, before
Constantine the second, and Cadwan: one was 36. years, the other 24. years.

THREE SVPPOSES OF A STVdent concerning History.
The first Suppose.
A Nobleman or Captain of men despises common matters in his own person: he
desires to find in himself the commendable singularities of singular men in
all ages: he would be loquent as Mithridates, that could speak 22. languages:
he would be eloquent as Orpheus, that could persuade the Devils and men as he
listed: he would be logical as Ramus, that could judge every man's writings
and not be deluded by any writer: he would be arithmeticall as Pythagoras that
was admirable by the knowledge of Numbers: he would be geometrical as
Arithimedes that compassed many great matters by the mystery of proportions:
he would be astrologicall in all questions, as Stoflerinus was in one, who
foresaw and foretold the fall of monasteries: he would be effectually
musical, as Timotheus that could either inflame, or quench Alexanders
spirits with his melody: in a word, he would be a right noble Artist in all
these seven Arts, or in some of them.

Now I am sure, that all the historical Records, which I have yet seen, and
I believe are commonly to be seen of Mithridates, Orpheus, Ramus, Pythagoras,
Arthimedes, Stoflerinus and Timotheus, are not able by the hundred part to make
any student as renowned an Artist as they were, though the be read and perused
most exquisitly.

Another Nobleman or Captain of men, desires to be Honorable by Navigations
as Vespusius was: delights to search the secrets of warfare as Hanniball
did: wishes to rise from an obscure Country life, to a Princely seat as Numa
did: could be glad of such a medicinal faculty as Aesculapius had in raising a
dead man to life: he wishes to himself the spirit of Moses in making laws and
working miracles: in a word, He studieth to purchase himself a glorious Name,
both for his life time, and after his death, as these men have done aforetime.

Now I dare say upon sufficient reading, that the Histories which are written
of Vespusius, Hanniball, Numa, Aesculapius and Moses, are not able to beget
such a man, as every of them was in his kind, neither can the causes that
served them, according to their registers, serve other men for effecting of
like actions.

I cannot of a Man be made a Be, and gather honey out of all sweet flowers and
herbs, but if God will I may be a Collector of the wisdom of all ancient
books, and make Ambrosia rather then honey out of them. I have need of these men
once, to see what they did, as younglings do: and again I read them, to see if
their Histories can instruct me to do the like: and now I must depend upon the
proof of other Arts, then are comprehended in Histories: these give but a
light in the way, which I would walk in: I must have eyes in my head ere I
come to that way, and feet and strength to bear me through it: else the way is
not for me, but for them that can go in it, what make I there? I hear much of
it, and when I would go in it, I want eyes and feet to bring me thither, and am
driven to say, That God which gives eyes to the blind, and walks to the lame,
had need give me more then Histories have in them, or else I shall never be that
I would be in one Art or other. Then seeing Histories breed only desires and
wishes and expectations in the hearts of students and nothing but affections,
seeing they never create any habit or perfection in them: I omit the verbal
and talkatiue uses of histories, which other men stand upon, and conceive in my
mind this Idaea of one that would be a man of men, as God is named the Lord of
Lords.

The second Suppose.
A Man that is borne of healthful and strong parents, that are under thirty
years and above twenty, is commonly in good health, and of great strength: for
sound timber must needs make a strong building, if advised workmen have the
framing of it.

He that is brought up in all kinds of labor from his childhood will endure
any pains in his manhood: for custom is a second nature, as those arms of an
oak or other tree, are strongest ordinarily which are toward the North.

A man will not feed abundantly for pleasure, but necessarily for health: for
he has seen, that a body neither full nor empty is seldom or never
distempered and sick.

He will not be idle at any time, but either studying, or practicing great and
small matters for himself and his friends continually: for the more good we
think and do, the nearer we are to God almighty.

A man will not reject the speech and face of any man on the earth, but he will
only have use of them that are like himself in disposition and action: for
the hatred of any man is hurtful, and where all agree in one, there is
happiest success.

He does not respect, how they lived and apparelled and employed themselves
that are dead, but what good soever he can do, he does it with all his mind
and might, and never cease from his work till it be finished in the best
manner: for commonly men may do greater acts then they do, if they measure
not themselves by other men, seeing he that tries his own parts most, is ever
most glorious.

A man will be skillful in all things which prolong life or shorten it, that
he may preserve himself and his friends, and destroy his and their enemies:
for in death al Noble Acts are cut off, and the overthrow of contraries is the
generation of concord, and multiplication of consent.

He will believe that he knows himself by trial, he has an eye in his hand
and heart that never sleeps: for he that trusts other men's words and deeds
without proof of them, is carried every way with every faction and fiction of
the world.

A man will so arm his body with moderate antidotes, that no poison shall
easily overcome him: for he provides for the worst, and remembers withal,
that the best can save it self.

He is prepared for all changes and chances that may come upon him in this
life, and considers rather what may happen unto him then peruse the fortunes
of other men. Thus I have written generally, but I may not tell my tale and
idee particularly in every point, till I be a few years elder.

The third Suppose.
TWo noblemen that partly by nature, and partly by art, could make their bodies
indefatigable for every attempt and exploit agreed between themselves to try,
whether books of history, or devises of their own would make the more brave
man. He that followed books, desired only to be like the best Worthies of
other ages: he that relied upon his own devise was not content with the
examples of books, but invented the means to excel the best that ever was: the
bookman putting his felicity in imitation, came short of those patterns, and
yet was glad when he came near them: the deviser setting his mind on
emulation, searched the causes of ancient excellencies, and by adding to the
causes added to the effects, and went beyond them all in what case he would.
The bookman says, give me the life of Alexander, the life of Caesar, the life
of Sanderbeg, and then thinks he has gotten the spoils of the East and
West, and all patterns of glory that may be gotten: the deviser says, let me
see the causes that made those three men so eminent above other men: so I shall
perceive a defect of these causes in Historians: then I must supply them, and
excel those three in mine own person, or in ruling others: the most od and
special acts that ever they did, may not only be matched, says he, but also
ouermatched well enough, I believe, and to be plain, I see nothing even in
Ulysses or Achilles, but it may be seen, I hope, in another, unless these
books will give me leave to try, whether I may surmount their Nobilities, I
will be so bold in reason as to say, that books were made to keep men under a
certain height, and within a certain compass, and to make men half the men
that they might be, and as it were very woodcocks in comparison of that they
should prove, by trying all and trusting none, but which they find certainly,
and experimentally true. Thus the bookman is a gallant man with an ear mark
and chains of bondage about his neck, but the deviser himself is a sovereign
author of manhood, having no cognizance of subjection about him besides the
mortality of his flesh, which notwithstanding he makes in some sort
immortal, either in leaving the life thereof in his succession, or in spending
the might of it in contemplative assaults and atchiuements: for study spends
the outward man more then action. The Deviser says, that men of chiefest note
have ever been of his mind: they have not believed that old bookish rule,
Oporter discentem credere, for then they had never been better then other men's
scholars, whereas by the means aforesaid they are become captains in their
kind: yet if they had never been borne I am sure, says he, that I had been of
this mind, Mundus est omnes libri, this rule is manly, Oporter discentem
dubitare, unless he will be deceived, and run on the head half his life
time: in a word, it appears plainly, that many men which cannot read in
books use daily the same or better means to try out maysteries then the
graundest bookmen: if my judgment be an error, I would know, from what cause
the first Doctors had their Arts before books were made: the sword makes not
the warrior: no help is equal with the principal: nature is mightier then
Art: the actor more worthy man then his scribe.

Wherefore in respect of the premises, and such other considerations, I have
rather taken an Essay in our Brutan history, then made a Work. If I be faulty
in writing too much, I confess I know no method of writing briefly: If I be
blamed in writing too little, I will not deny, that the old Brutans deserve a
large Chronicle: if I have kept in the midst of both, it agrees most with my
desire. But why should I doubt of this or that? of friend or foe? Let every one
speak and write freely, not licentiously, in honor of his own Country, that
is, not against his kindred and himself, which are parts thereof. It is a
dangerous position to refuse the offspring of Brute, both in regard of all
reverend antiquities of history, and in respect of our own Countreimen and
neighbors, to whom I wish all concord and agreement among themselves and
against their enemies for ever.

FINIS.

