THE CONDITIONS OF CHRISTIANITY: OR, The terms upon which Christ will be
followed. A necessary consideration for them that otherwise would be apt to
take up Religion upon trust, and only keep company with CHRIST a while for
fashion sake.

By Mr. Christopher Harvey, sometime Minister of GODS Word at Bunbury in
CHESHIRE.

LONDON, Printed by R.B. for P. Stephens, and C. Meridith, and are to be sold
at their Shop at the sign of the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1636.

TO MY DEAR MOTHER Mrs. HELLEN PIERSON.
MOst dear, and most worthy to be most dear, Mother, I remember a speech
which diverse years a go, fell from you, peradventure then but casually: when
looking upon a book that was Dedicated by a Son to his Mother, you said, you
did hope one day to see the like from me. It may be your words were then more
agreeable to your desire then your expectation: yet you see them in some sort
fulfilled now. This only is the difference, that what he published was penned
by himself, but that which I present you with, is no otherwise mine, than it
was yours before, being part of the fruit of the labors of my reverend Father
you former husband: which being by you, with the rest of his papers, reserved
for my use: is now at last come to my hand by the much lamented death of your
late reverend Husband Master Tho. Pierson

Two such Husbands and Fathers few women and their sons have. I should
esteem it not a little happiness, if I might be a means to add but ^alfe
that credit to their memories, that you did comfort ^o their lives. For the
former, the penne-man of this ^ittle Treatise, to expatiate in his praises
would be neither seemly for me who am his son, nor seasonable now when
already he has had his rest in peace these four and thirty years and
upward, nor suitable to the proportion of so small a volume, unto which even
this may seem too large an entrance. For the Treatise it self, such as it is
I received it from you, and return it to you and thorough your hands commend
it to the use of all them that desire to be Christians, in an earnest, not in
word and tongue only, but in deed and truth. So humbly craving what I know, I
have your daily prayers for blessings upon me and mine, I rest though much
unworthy, yet most desirous to be still,

Your every way observant and obedient Son, Christopher Harvey.

THE CONDITIONS OF CHRISTIANITY.
Luke 9.23. And he said unto them all, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his Cross daily, and follow me.


Our blessed Lord and Savior, having signified unto his Disciples, and such as
followed him, that the time drew near, when he should accomplish the thing,
whereto he was sent into the world; and that he should suffer many things, as
reproves, slanders, revilings, even of the Elders, and chief governors of
his people, and o^ the High Priests, which challenged to themselves the chief
rule in GODS Church, and of the Scribes, that took upon them to teach and
instruct GODS people in the truth; yea, that they would not leave him til they
had his blood, and had slain him, sets down this thing; to be noted of
all such, as had made profession of him, that if they would go after him, and
bear him ^ompany, they must wil^^ngly every one of them ^^ke up their Cross
on their shoulders, and come ^^ter him.

Which is in very deed, Luke 14.27, etc.
as our Savior declares, the ^^st lesson, that every one ^ust learn, that
has determined to follow Christ, to be ^^s Disciple, to be a Christi^^ to be
saved, and inherit ^^e kingdom of heaven. ^or, as a man that determines to
build him an ^ouse, if he have any wit and common sense with him, will cast
with himself, and make account with the most, what it is ^^ke to cost him, and
what ^ll things thereto necessarily appertaining will ly^ him in, that so he
may understand, whether his ability will stretch so far, a^ to bring it to
pass, le^ otherwise he be enforce^ to leave off that which h^ has begun,
and so be^ mocked, as a fool, of a^ that see his doings. So^ says our
Savior, He that means, and has full^ purposed in his heart, to become a
Christian, and to inherit the kingdom o^ heaven, must first sit him down, and
cast his account, what it will lie him in, that knowing the price he may see,
whether he^ may attain it, or no; lest, not knowing the matter, he give over
in the mids^ of his travel, and be condemned for a fool and ignorant person.

This kingdom of heaven is a house, far passing (...) worldly possessions
whatsoever, a pearl, more ^^ecious than the whole world besides: there is no
^^an, which has heard of (...) but would be desi^^us to attain it, and
eve^^one, that would be cal^^d a Christian man, has ^^solved to purchase it:
^^at, for want of know^^dge, there are many, which having begun to ^uild,
have given over, when they saw how great (...) matter it was, and what ^he
price was, that it would cost them, ere they had ended. This cann^^ then but be
a necessary le^son for us all, which have this purpose to follo^ Christ, to be
with him, (...) live with him: this is the first lesson, as I said, i^ Christ's
School: namely ^ to know the sum of o^ charges, what it will ly^ us in, if
we will attain ^ this pearl, our Saviou^ delivers it unto us brie^ly, that
we need not labou^ to search it out: for he^ has taught us all things ^ which
are necessary for u^ to know. It is this then ^ he, that will follow Christ
must deny himself, take up his Cross daily, and follow him.

He that will follow Christ, to be his Disciple, his ser^ant, and so with him
to ^igne in joy, with God ^e Father, these two ^ings are necessarily re^uired
of him, without which he cannot attain his estate: First, he must ^eny
himself: Secondly, ^e must be content to take ^p his Cross willingly, and
bear it, not for a day, ^r a year, but continually, and for ever, and so
follow him.

He that will be conten^ed to do thus, him Christ will delight in, him he will
make an inheritour in heaven with him, he shall enter into the joy of his Lord,
and and be made partaker of all the blessings, which GOD has prepared in
heaven for such as love him.

An excellent pearl this is, dear brethren, and o^ great value, a worthy
house, and of high price but it will cost us all that ever we have to buy it,
and the cost to build it will be^ as much, as all we have a^ mounteth unto. Now
consider with your own hearts what to do; whether you will play the wise
Merchants, or no: whether do as wise builders or as foolish persons. What
thing so happy for you, 1 Cor. 2.9.
as to follow Christ, to inherit the kingdom of heaven, and those eternal
joys, which heart cannot think, nor have ever entered into the mind of any
man, to be blessed, and happy for evermore?

I will not endeavor to ^ell you the excellency of them, that shall follow
Christ: my tongue cannot utter it, the tongue of any man is but the tongue of a
^abe to tell you these things: a small taste thereof in our souls will en^lame
us, with a longing after it; one glimpse thereof is sufficient to ravish us,
with a desire of it. Our Savior, in a word, tells his Disciples, asking him,
what they shall have, that have left all, and followed him, Mat. 19.28
that they shall participate with him in his sovereign glory, and in his
kingdom shall sit on thrones, like Princes, and Judge the twelve tribes of
Israel. Ye^ shall be made Kings, not o^ earth, or earthly things, bu^ of
heaven: 1 Cor. 6.3.
ye shall judg^ the tribes of Israel, yea, the very Angels themselves ^ as
Paul teaches. Tha^ thing, which we see the greatest in this world, to be a
King, Matthew. 20.23.
a Judge, tha^ which Zebedees Children desired in this life: that, and far
greater, shall every one of them have that follow CHRIST: not Zebedees
Children, but every one of us, that follow Christ, shall sit on his right hand,
in his heavenly kingdom.

But let us see, what condition is required, of them that must come to this
exceeding glory, what the price thereof is, and what we must lay out, if we
will attain it. Two things Christ requires: First, that we should deny our
selves: that is, utterly to renounce whatsoever is naturally in us, whether it
appertain to our wit, or knowledge, or whether it belong to our affections,
actions, deeds and practices. For our own wit, not to credit it, to refuse our
own counsel, to renounce what flesh and blood puts in our heads, and to be
content to know nothing, to understand nothing, but what Christ has taught us,
and willed us to know. 1 Cor. 3.18.
Which Saint Paul declares, when he says, that, if any will be wise, the
only way is to become a fool, a fool to the world, a fool to flesh and
blood, a fool to all, that have not submitted themselves to Christ; this is
the way to be wise, this is the first step, which we must make in following
Christ. The first thing, when we come into Christ's School, that we must
tread upon, is our own neck.

A hard lesson, dear brethren, for flesh and blood, which naturally is puffed
up with a selfe-liking of it self, and of those things, which belong to it:
which is the cause indeed, 1 Cor. 1.26.
that so few wise, so few noble, so few mighty, are called to follow Christ:
for that they are hardly brought to this pass, to deny and defy themselves,
to account of their wisdom as folly, their strength weakness, their
nobility baseness; to esteem all things in them, as dung, to win Jesus
Christ.

And yet, so it is, that until we be brought to this pass, to deny all that is
in us, to lay even our crowns at Christ's feet, we cannot follow him. Neither
must we only deny our knowledge, wit, and understanding, to learn, and know
only what Christ has taught us; but we must also deny our own deeds, such
thoughts, and works, as we are naturally given unto. For, he, that will
follow Christ, 1 Pet. 1.15. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15.
must be holy, as he is holy: for, what fellowship can there be betwixt light
and darkness? Christ, and the sons of Belial? wicked and ungodly persons,
Amos 3.3.
and our Savior Christ? Can two walk together, except they be agreed? By
nature we are all sinners, our hearts are set on fleshly lusts, and ungodly
deeds, which God hates, and his soul has no pleasure in: and all sinners are
his enemies, whom his soul hates. Wherefore, till such time, as we have
denied these ungodly lusts, and natural transgressions, wherein we walk, even
from our birth, we are enemies to God; and therefore, being not agreed, and made
friends, we cannot walk together with God, we cannot follow Christ. 1 Ioh.
1.6.
Wherefore Saint John tells us, that whosoever says, that he has fellowship
with Christ, that he is his companion, that he follows him, and walks in
darkness, in his own way, he lies, there is no truth in him. For none can
follow CHRIST, but he, that has denied himself, forgone his wicked life,
which naturally he is inclined to, and is become a new Creature.

Here we may mark, that our Savior bids us deny our selves. He says not,
deny ungodly works, deny the wisdom of the flesh, though he means, as has
been said, such things; but deny our selves: to show unto us the great
corruption, which is in our nature, Romans 6.6.
that we are not only sinful, but even sin it self, as it were, this body of
sin, we must deny our selves. Col. 3.5.
So Saint Paul calls them our members. Mortify your earthly members. To
which purpose also the Scripture speaks, when it says, that we are not only
sick in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1.
or wounded, or maimed, but even dead: of no more power, and ability to do
that, which GOD likes, then dead men to perform the actions of this life.
Ioh. 5.25 28.
And our Savior Christ teaches, that it is the power of his Gospel, to
raise, not such, as are fallen, not such, as are a sleep, but even those, that
are dead, yea such, as are in the graves, over whom death has dominion, who
are buried, as dead men, Ps. 51.10.
in sins and transgressions. Which also the holy Prophets acknowledged, when
David prays, not to reform, or amend, as a thing, in which some small, fault
was, but to create a new heart within him, to frame him again, and cast him, as
it were, in a new mould. Create in me a clean heart, O Lord, and renew a right
spirit within me.

If you ask of me, how can this be? This is an hard speech, that we are dead,
that we can do nothing: to what purpose then is Gods word preached to us? Why
are we commanded to serve God, to follow Christ? If we be dead, we cannot do
it: it is in vain to command any such thing. Nay, God forbid we should so
think. Our Saviors words be truth and life. He says, his Gospel is
preached, even to them that are as dead men in the graves. And how then? Is
that to any purpose? Yea sure, Ioh. 5.28.
for he says, that the power thereof is such, that they shall hear, which
are in their graves. We be dead in sins, not able to move one whit to any
good thing; yet is the Gospel preached to us, etc. that it will quicken us, it
will revive, and set us on our feet, it will raise us from the death of sin,
and create us anew, to serve God, and walk in his Commandments.

Which point the Lord opens in the Prophet Ezekiel, speaking of the gathering
together of his Church, he says, Ezekiel. 11.19.
I will give them one heart, and put a new spirit within their bowels, I will
take the stony heart out of their bodies, and I will give them an heart of
flesh, that they may walk in my statutes, and they shall be my people, and I
will be their God. He shows, what we are by nature, what metal we are
made of, stones; the workman, that does this great fear, is God. I will take
the stony heart out of their bodies. Man can make new faces, Hypocrites can
alter their countenances, but it is GOD alone, that makes new hearts. There
is, within each one of us, a heart of stone: is it then any marvel, though we
be beaten upon, never so hard, that we yield not? though the seed be cast,
never so often, that it grows not? though the dew of heaven fall, never so often,
that we fructify not? Why, our heart is of stone, which beats back the
stroke, and will not yield, it is a rock, on which the seed cannot take root,
a hard flint, into which the hard drops cannot pierce. And how shall we do?
Heb. 6.7.7, 8.
the ground, which receives the rain, and brings not forth fruit, is
cursed, and shall be burned. GOD alone, dear brethren, can rippe us up, and
pull up this stony heart, and place for it an heart of flesh. The only hammer,
that breaks this stone, Ier. 23.29.
is the word of God: wherefore, we must willingly suffer it to be stricken
therewithal, that it may be bruised. The rod of Gods power, Ps. 110.2.
(as it is called in the Psalm,) if it strike the rock, the waters shall gush
out of it. But before this, our heart is a stone, which cannot yield, which
cannot be bowed, untoward, nothing fit without preparation, not fit to be
taught, it cannot be mended, we must needs have a new. It is stone, hard
metal, nothing fit for this purpose, it must be taken away, quite away, and
another sort of matter put in place. If we will follow Christ, we must
renounce, even our selves.

The second general point is, the taking up of our Cross, we must take it up.
It is not a badge of Christians, to have a Cross on their backs, for the
wicked also have very many: but the difference is this, the wicked have crosses
laid on their backs, which they bear, but against their wills: the godly,
that follow Christ, have taken up their Crosses, that is, have willingly
submitted themselves thereunto. A wild and unruly horse, which is to be broken,
bears his rider on his back, but it is against his will, he flingeth, and
runs, and chafeth, but in vain, he took not up his rider, but bears him
against his will. So is it with the ungodly, they are often in misfortune, and
trouble, and adversity, they have many crosses on their backs, but feign would
they shake them off, if they could; but all in vain: the godly have stooped
down, and taken up their Cross, and patiently carry it, because they know, it
is Gods appointment, so to exercise al those, whom he means to make
inheritors of his kingdom.

The name of Cross in this place, as in diverse others of the New Testament,
is used, for any misery, trouble, affliction, distress, vexation, of body, or
mind, which it pleases GOD, to send upon his Children: which, because it is
diverse, and not after one sort, Christ commands each one, to take up his
own Cross; GOD having laid this on one, that on another, according to his
mercy, and wisdom; which disposes, as pleases him, of them: on some he
lays a lighter, because he knows their weakness, and being faithful, will
not tempt them above their strength; on others a heavier, to whom he has
given a greater measure of patience, and endurance. But whatsoever it be,
whether small or great, light or heavy, we must be content to sustain it.

The name of Cross is not used, without great cause, in this, and the like
places. The death of the Cross was a punishment, not only most painful, but
most ignominious also, and full of all shame, and reproach: and so much the
more, Deuteronomy. 21.23.
among the Jews, for that he was pronounced accursed, by GODS own mouth, that
came to this death. The Gallows among us is shameful, as you know, and to be
hanged, we count it commonly a dogs death: but this cannot be in such
contempt, as was the Cross, which, by GODS own mouth, brought a ^rse to every
one that han^^d on it. And, so much ^^emore, was the shame of them, that so
dyed, for that they were enforced, as the Evangelists, and other ^^ophane
writers teach, to ^^rry it on their backs, which they should present^^ be
hanged upon. For, ^here we read, that Simon ^ Cyrene was enforced, Mar. 15.21
to ^^re the Cross, which our ^^viour dyed on, it was, ^ that he, being
wearyed, and weakened, with pains and sorrows, did himself, then he was in
the way, ^^nt under it, not able to ^^rry it any longer. Wherefore, when Christ
talks ^ere of a Cross, which every one must take up, ^ is meant, that they
should prepare themselves, for the most grievous, and m^ shameful, and
contemp^^ous dealing, which (...) world could devise agai^^^ them. So that we
m^^^ be content, to sustain (...) griefs, miseries, loss (...) friends, of
goods, bani^^ment, imprisonment, to (...) slandered, envied, bely^ evil spoken
of, reproache^ in a word, to endure, wh^ the naughtiness, and malice of all
the world, c^ devise against us, even (...) the very death. For this (...) to
take up our Cross, the is the charge we must b^ at, if we will build o^
house; the precious pear^ ^l cost not a whit less.

Again, when all our af^^ctions, which God sen^^th us, are called crosses, ^is
to our great comfort, ^hen we see, that whatsoever we endure, for Christ's ^e,
and his Gospel, we ^e crucified, as it were, that (...) communicate with him
suffering, and that, after ^ort, Christ bears this ^rosse with us. For such
fellowship, and partaking there, betwixt Christ the ^ad, and his servants the
members, that when they ^^ffer, Acts 9.4
he suffers with them: Paul persecuted ^^em, and therefore persecuted him:
and so, I trow, ^aint Paul himself afterward calls his sufferings Christ's.
Col. 1.24.
Now fulfill (...) my flesh the rest of the ^flictions of CHRIST He has
suffered perfect to redeem us, but the suffering of trial, and proo^^ he
endures in his members, partaking with the^^ all their punishments, (...)
afflictions are Crosses. (...) that, when we are in a^ calamity, for Gods
cau^^ let us call to mind, the this is our Cross, and ta^ it on our back
patient^^ remembering, that Christ in our company, to partake with us thereof.
Ru^^ found such goodness (...) Naomi her mother in Law that, Ruth 1.16.
when she was to depart out of Moab, when Ruth was borne, and brought up, into
the land of Israel, Ruth would not leave her, in any case, though her sister in
Law had returned, but requested her, not to will her so. Entreat me not, says
she, to leave thee, neither to depart from thee; for whither thou go, I
will go, where thou dwell, I will dwell, thy people shall be my people,
thy God my God, where thou dyest, will I dye, and there will I be buried: the
Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought, but death, depart me and thee. Did
the courtesy, which Naomi had showed her daughter in law, so tie her heart unto
her, that she was content, to leave her own people, and her fathers house, and
her gods, to go into a strange land, to strange people, yea to swear solemnly,
that nothing, but death, should depart them? What could Naomi do for Ruth? a
woman, a widow, deprived of her husband, and children, now not Naomi,
beautiful, but Marah, bitter, to whom GOD had given much bitterness* whom he
had humbled, and brought into adversity, whom he had loaded with an heavy
Cross? yet would not Ruth leave her, she would take up her Cross, and follow
her, till death should depart them. Oh that faithful soul, which has taken
such delight in Christ, as to love him, as Ruth did Naomi, that forsakes
father, and mother, wife, and children, all the world, to go after Christ, who
entreats us, not to leave him, nor to depart from him, but wills us to
follow him! O happy man, that has said in his heart, Lord Jesus, which art
sweet, and in whom is no bitterness, whose love is pleasanter than Wine, thou
call est me after thee: draw me, good LORD, and I will run after thee: thou
biddest me take up my Cross, see, LORD, I am ready, I rejoice in all
adversity, I think my self happy, that I suffer for thy names sake, I will
not leave thee, O LORD, nor depart from thee, whithe^ thou go, will I go,
i^ into banishment, I leav^ mine own Country, if into prison, I refuse all
liberty, if into reproach, an^ reviling, I give my cheeke^ to the scorners,
where thou dwell, I will dwell, thy people shall be my people, thy God my
God, the Lord do s^ to me, and more also, if tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or the sword, yea if death it
self depart thee and me? Death must depart Ruth and Naomi, death cannot depart
us and CHRIST; Nay, where their comfort ended, there does ours begin: for death
joyneth us most near to Christ: it takes the Cross from our shoulders, and
sets a Crown on our heads. It makes an end of all the love of this world:
man and wife, that are one flesh, are but tied till death come; death undoeth
all knots, but this, wherewith the faithful soul is tied to Christ; for this
death makes most sure, which never shall be loosed. Ye see then, that by the
name of Cross is meant, all affliction, which God lays on us, for our
trial, and that this name is used, to teach us, that we must endure it, how
full of pain, or shame soever it be, and that in it Christ does after a sort,
partake with us.

Now it follows, in our Saviors words, let him take up his Cross daily and
follow me. Take it up? when? or how long? daily. This is not added, by our
Savior, without just cause: for such is our blindness, and overthwartnesse,
in such things as God commands us, that we seek for starting holes, to
shrink out at, and either make doubt of the matter, or, most commonly, define
of our selves, what sense the things must bear, which it pleases us to call
in question. So, our Savior, having taught his Disciples, and in them us, to
forgive our brethren, if they offend, or trespass against us, as we pray our
heavenly Father, to forgive us; Peter, in whom yet flesh and blood, and the
wisdom thereof remained, makes a doubt, where none was, what our Saviors
meaning should be, when he commanded him to forgive his brother. Lord, says
he, thou have taught me, to forgive my brother, but thou have not told me how
often: we must know that too: how often must I so do: what, Mat. 18.2^
till seven times? must I do it so often? Our Savior answers, I say not to
thee, seven times, but seventy times seven times: so often, as he can offend
thee, so often, must thou forgive him* Was it not a strange matte^ that Peter
should make such a doubt, who was taugh^ to pray, forgive us our trespasses, as
we forgive them, that trespass against us? would Peter ask, how often GOD
should forgive? What seven times? But so ignorant, and blind are we, till God
have opened our eyes. This was a thing, which flesh and blood had revealed to
Peter, that he must forgive his brother seven times. Wherefore our Savior,
to remove such a question, as might be made, Lord, thou' have commanded us, to
take up our crosses, and follow thee, when must we do it? when must we begin?
how long must we hold on? when must we lay it down? what in our age? when
our strength is spent? for seven days? or a year? Nay, our Savior has
limited out the term, daily, every day, there is no vacation: the term for
this exercise ends with this life.

This then is another thing diligently to be noted, for there are many, that
fault herein. Christ may have all the world to follow him, if it were to eat
bread, to be satisfied with such things, as this present life desires; but
not so many, when they hear, that they must carry a Cross on their shoulders.
Yea many there are, that would be content, to take up their Cross too, and so
go with him: but they would have leave for a while, to bid their kinsfolks
farewell, to take leave of their Parents, or to bury their Fathers, yea some,
that have without delay forsaken all, and followed him, that in the midst of
their journey have fainted. Some, that have laid their hands to this plough,
but not wholly regarding, what they had in hand, have looked back to other
matters, and become unworthy of the kingdom of God. These all were foolish
builders, that had not made a perfect account of their charges. Wherefore, we
must take this with us, for one part of our reckoning; that the Cross, which
we talked of, must be taken up every day. We are not for Christ's company, if to
day we be content to carry his Cross, but not to morrow: for either ever, or
never. We have therefore here to note, that in this life, the children of God,
are not to look for any rest, but that, as one day follows another, and one
night another, so one Cross or calamity must accompany another. Then, that we
must be prepared to constancy, and perseverance, to settle our selves, and be
resolved, unmovable in this point, whatsoever, whenever, how often soever, it
pleases God to lay his Cross on us, to bear it willingly, and follow him.

Such was the estate of Gods Children, yea of Christ himself, to whom it
behooves us, in this point, to be made conformable. This was the cause, that
moved Jacob to answer Pharaoh, Genesis 47.9.
demanding his age, few and evil, says he, are the days of thy servant,
small in number, and continuance, full of evil, full of troubles, calamities,
and crosses. And so might Jacob well say: for of the hundred and thirty years
of his Pilgrimage, how many days passed he, without sorrow and trouble? Nay
in his mothers womb, before he saw the light, he was at war, in trouble:
his brother, ere he was yet borne, strove with him, or, as some read, Genesis
25.22
hurt him. Afterward, from the time, that the Children were able to discern
their right hand from their left, he abode the malice of his brother, whose
nature and disposition was quite contrary to his: he a plain, simple,
innocent, harmless thing, abiding at home, his brother a jolly hunter, a man
of the field, and fierce wood man. But, when he had lost his birthright, and
fathers blessing, deprived of both by his brother, no marvel, if the fire,
which bred in the womb, burst out to a flame, if he vowed, that when the days
of mourning for his Father Isaac were come; he would kill his brother Jacob.
Then was it time for him to fly, being forced to leave his old blind Father,
now ready to yield up the ghost, and dear and kind mother, that loved him no
less, then her own soul. But leave them he must, if he will save his life; his
mother conselleth him, to run to her brother, his Uncle Laban, and there to
abide, till his brothers wrath were assuaged. So he parts from his Parents
forward on his journey: by the way, he rests his weary limbs on the ground,
and under his head for a pillow, Genesis 28.14
has he laid an hard stone: but, even then God comes to him, comfort him,
promises him, and his seed a mighty increase. At length he comes to Haran,
and is entertained of his Uncle Laban; but as a servant, in his own occupation,
which he had been taught: Laban promises him wages for his travel, and so
he binds himself prentise, for seven years. His wages was Rachel, for whom
he served seven years, and although, because he loved her, it seemed but a
little while to him, yet endured he no small trouble, the heat of the day, and
cold of the night; and that which passed all, he was cousened and beguiled of
his Wife, when his term was ended, so that he was feign to serve seven years
more for her again. What should I rippe up unto you, the discourtesies, and
hard countenances of his Uncle, and father in law, the envy and grudging of his
Wives brethren, the often changing of his wages? yet, under all these crosses,
GODS blessing was with him, and he increased exceeding. At last, he fled from
Laban, not taking leave of him; for which cause Laban was wrath, and pursued
him, and had certainly done him some evil, had not God forbad him expressly.
Well, it pleased GOD, that his heart was changed, and they departed friends:
but, no sooner escaped he this fear, but, behold, he was overtaken with a
greater. For he meets with Esau his deadly enemy, accompanied with no less,
than four hundred men. No marvel, if now he were afraid, lest the day were
come, when he, his Wives, and Children should be destroyed at once: but God
had mercy on him, turned the hard heart of Esau, and softened it. He runs to
meet his brother, falls on his neck, kisseth him, and weepeth with him.

Being so rid from him, he comes into Canaan, and dwells among the
Shechemites: but alas, what sorrow, and grief sustained he there? to see his
daughter ravished, and his sons commit that horrible and cruel murder, by
their falsehood and naughty dealing, upon all the poor Shechemites: yea Jacob
was in fear, lest the Canaanites would have risen up against him, and slain
both him and all his house. It were too long, to stand upon the sorrows, and
reckon up all the crosses, which he after sustained, which yet the Holy Ghost
has, for our instruction, laid out at large. What a grief, that Reuben the
eldest, should climb up into his Fathers bed, and defile it? what a death, to
lose Joseph, and to have him, as his Sons made him believe, torn in pieces
of wild beasts? What care, and pensiveness, to provide in the great famine,
for his great household? The grief he abode, when Simeon was kept behind in
Egypt, and he must part with Benjamin also, on whose life his depended,
Genesi^ 44. verse 30. Well* through all these, GOD delivers him, and a^
length brought him into Egypt, and restored him to his son. But, you see in
part, what a world of misery he passed thorough, how many cross^ he carried,
with what patience he endured, what a good end GOD put to them all, and how
justl^ he might say to Pharaoh that the days of his pilgrimage were but few
i^ number, but full of evill^ and sorrows.

Now what has been said of Israel, may be seen true in all his seed and in
all the Israel of God how that this is the badge, and cognizance of all Gods
Children, of all such, as follow CHRIST, daily to bear a Cross: The Scripture
is nothing else, but, as it were, a tragedy of all the Crosses, which the godly
have daily endured, and a plain demonstration of Saint Paul's speech, that all
that will live godly, must suffer persecution: 2 Timothy 3. verse 12. that
whosoever will follow CHRIST, must deny himself, and take his Cross daily,
and follow Him. we must therefore hold but unto the end, if we will be
saved; which the Commandment requires of us, and the reward, for the
performance, and punishment for the transgression thereof, do with all
necessarily enforce ^ unto.

This is the cause, wh^^ the Church of Thyatir^^ commanded, to hold f^^ till
CHRIST come, Re^ 2. verse 25. Why we a^ all enjoined to continu^ and not to
faint in w^ doing. Why a Crow^ is promised to those, the strive manfully, James
^ verse 12. He is blessed the endures: we must be pa^ent unto the LORD
coming, as the Husband man waits for the precio^ fruit of the earth, and ha^
long patience for it, unto he receive the first and t^ ^ater rain, James 5.
verse (...) etc. The seed of joy and peace and all happiness (...) sown for
the righteous: (...) is sown, it lies hid under the earth, Psalm 97. verse
11. we must expect the fruit thereof in patience, for we shall ^eape it, if
we faint not, in good time: a fruit more precious, than that of the earth,
such gladness, such joy as passes that of theirs, whose corn, and wine, and
oil is increased, Psalm 4. verse 7. For it is nothing to begin, unless we
continue. And, as they that run in a race, though they set outnever so
lustily, and run never so swiftly, yet receive not the reward, till they come
to the end, but loose the labor, and beat the ayr^ if they faint in the midst,
(...) give over, before they come to the Jail: so for this Crown of glory
though we run forth while, never so hastily, ye^ if we stay in the midway or
leave before we come to the end, we loose our reward. And not that only but
our case will be such that better it had been for us, never to have begun*
then to have given over. Unwise Galatians, that began in the spirit, and made
an end in the flesh: Gal. 3* verse 3. that ran well at the setting out, but
were hindered, or they received the price, Galat. 5.7. Foul ^wine, that, when
they are washed, return to their wallowing in the mire, 2 Pet. 2. verse 22.
He that is just, let him be more just, he that is pure let him be more pure,
he that is holy let him be more holy, Revelations 22. verse 11. he that
bears Christ's Cross to day, let him bear it also to morrow, and every day,
or else it were better, he had never laid hand to it. He that has laid his
hand to the plough, let his eyes look straight before to his furrow, and not
look back to other things.

Our Savior bids us Remember Lots Wife, Luke 17. verse 32. Lots Wife was
brought out of Sodom, she was commanded not to look back to that wicked
place: she began well, and walked on with her face forwards, but she held not
on to the race end, but in the midst looked back, and was presently turned into
a pillar of salt.

Hos. 4.6
The LORD, by the Prophet, makes this complaint against Ephraim; O Ephraim,
what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, how shall I entreat thee? For your
goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the morning dew it goes away. GOD
would, and he knew how, deal favorably with them, but he cannot show them
any pity, which be temporizers, time-servers, which will serve him only for a
while: what goodness is in them? or to what shall it be likened? it is like,
says God, a morning cloud, which appears for a while, but behold it
vanishes, or as the dew, which in the morning covers the earth, but when the
Sun arises, it gets it self away, and leaves no sign of its presence
behind. Such are they, which will follow Christ, and bear his Cross, for a
while: they appear in the morning, before the Sun arise, but in the heat of
the day they appear not: when affliction, and the heat thereof appears, they
hide their heads, and get them into their lurking holes.

Let us therefore consider, that the taking up, and daily bearing of our
Cross, is not a thing of our own voluntary will, to be undertaken, or
omitted, but necessarily enjoined by Christ, not to a few, that would be
excellent, and above their fellows, but even to all, and every one, that would
follow him, that would be his Disciple, that would be a true Christian, and
that we continue herein, and not faint, and be weary, or in any case moved
from our standing: considering, that even such, as he vouchsafed to deliver
from great destruction, yet for not continuing, and holding on in that, which
they had well begun, are most severely punished: that God knows not, how to
show mercy to such, as are but as morning dew, and morning clouds, appearing
for a while, and suddenly vanishing: but rather let us remember, that the
crown of glory is proposed to such, as fight lawfully, not to such, as beat
the air, to such, as come to the end of the race, not to them, that run well
for a while, and so give over: that such shall receive the fruit of that peace,
which is sown for the just, that patiently endure the Lords leisure: finally,
that such shall follow Christ, and be fit for his company, as daily take up
their Cross, and as it follows, follow him. If any man, says our Savior,
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily, and
follow me.

Being thus prepared for the purpose, having renounced our selves, and all that
is in us, and taken up our Cross on our shoulders, we must, in GODS name and
fear take our voyage after our Savior, and blessed LORD. For, as the Soldier
prepares himself, and buckleth his harness about him, not therein to stay at
home, or bestow himself about his common business, but to join himself to the
army, and follow his Captain; So, each true Christian, and sworn Soldier of
Christ, must be prepared, with his Cross on his shoulders, not to sit still,
or lie down under it, or to take what rest he can, but he must get up on his
feet, and be going, he must march on lustily, and with a bold courage.

And for that all this were to no end neither, either to be under the Cross,
or to go on, unless we knew whither to go, where to stay; we are here
taught, what steps we are to tread which way to travel, and how to journey.
For, if we should take a wrong way, what would it profit us, though we made
never so great have. Now indeed so many ways there are, and bypath, and we,
like simple Sheep, so easy to stray, and miss the right way, that we had
need have the way trod out before us, and be well instructed, which we should
take. For, there is a broad way, which we can hardly keep us out of, for many
there are that walk in it, and it leads to death and destruction. There is a
way, which is full of darkness, and men loving darkness more than light,
rejoice to walk in it: but, because they want the light, they stumble and fall
in it. Yea, that which is worst, there is a way, which seems to be the right
way, and the narrow way, and the light way; but the end thereof leads to
destruction. In a word, each man has a way of his own, which seems to be
right in his own eyes, but is not so. Wherefore, need it was for us to know,
seeing we are to bare a Cross, and follow on, whom to follow, which way to
take.

Whom then must we follow? Our Savior says, follow me. We must neither
follow our own ways, nor any man's else, but his alone, that here speaks
unto us. I have considered my ways, says the Prophet, and turned my feet into
thy testimonies, Psalm 119. ver. 59. The Prophet considered his own ways,
those wherein he walked of himself, and whereinto he was slipped, by that
corruption of nature, which leads us all astray, and considering thereof, and
of his duty to GOD, which had appointed him to walk another way, he drew
back his feet from that path, and turned into the way of Gods testimonies. So
ready are we to decline from following the right path, as he says also in the
same Psalm; Before I was afflicted, I went astray: Verse 67. that is, Before I
had the Cross on my shoulders, I walked after mine own hearts lust, and
followed not thee. Or, as some read it, before I could speak, I went astray;
even from mine infancy, even from the womb, I have wandered and followed mine
own steps. Therefore, it is convenient for us, to call our ways to
remembrance, it is good for us to be afflicted, that we may learn whom to
follow. We must then not follow our ways, neither the steps of any man, but
only of CHRIST our Savior. If then we will be sure not to wander, let us
consider whom we must follow, for this is the thing, whereof we must have a
diligent regard.

How many have there been, who because they have not known the necessity of
this commandment, have walked, and wandered in bypath, yea wearyed
themselves therein, and lost their labor? for that they have followed, either
their own ways, or the ways of men; whereas, the only way is CHRIST, and
who so follow not him, they stray, and are out of their path. If then we would
know, what the will worship of men, their own inventions to serve GOD, their
own devises, and good meanings, their outward holiness of their own
imagination, what all these profit them; mark and see, whether these things
have been by CHRIST commanded them, whether therein they follow him, or no:
which if they do not, let them have never so fair a show, yet are they most
abominable in GODS sight; nay there is nothing, which his soul more abhors,
then such care, and diligence in doing that, which he has not commanded. What
man, that has not learned this lesson, but would commend the doing of King
Saul, and his zeal to Gods service. Being commanded to fight against Amalek,
and to slay both Man and Woman, infant and suckling, Ox and Sheep, Camel and
Ass; he destroys, as the Scripture shows, all the people, only the King
of the Amalekites he took alive, and the better Sheep and the Oxen, the fat
beasts, the Lambs he reserveth. The LORD comes to Samuel, saying, It
repents me that I have made Saul King, for he turns from me, and has not
performed my Commandment, he has left following me, and is ^one after his
own ways. But what thinks Saul? sure, that he had done marvellously well:
for, meeting with Samuel, he saluteth him, Blessed be thou of the Lord, I
have fulfilled the Commandment of the Lord. See, I pray you, how ready he was
to justify himself: he was in a mind, that he had done marvellously well,
and no man could mend it: I have, Sir, says Saul, fulfilled Gods Commandment.
Is it so, says Samuel? what means then the bleating of the Sheep in mine
ears, and the lowing of the Oxen, that I hear? Saul answers readily, they
have brought them from the Amalekites, they are of the best of the Sheep, and
the Oxen, and they will forsooth, sacrifice them to the Lord thy God: the
remnant we have destroyed. But Samuel tells him, that herein he has done
wickedly: he replyeth, and disputes out the matter. Nay, it is not so, I have
obeyed GODS voice, and have gone the way, which the LORD sent me, and have
brought Agag, and have destroyed the Amalekites: the people indeed have taken
of the chiefest things, but it is to offer them to the LORD thy GOD. What harm
is in this? Is it not a good meaning? Is it not to a good purpose? comes it
not of a good intent? Sure we have obeyed the voice of the Lord. But Samuel
said, has the LORD as great pleasure in burnt offerings, and sacrifices, as
when his voice is obeyed? even sacrifice it self is not acceptable to GOD,
unless his voice be obeyed, unless it be his commandment, how fair a show
soever it make, though it be a sacrifice, yea of the best of the Sheep, yet
it is displeasant in his sight: for to do any thing in Gods service, but what
he has appointed, to choose our own ways, and not only to follow CHRIST, is
rebellion against his Majesty, which is as the sin of witchcraft, this
transgression is wicked idolatry. All our good intents, all our good meaning,
all our will worship, and service of our own invention, is Idolatry, nothing
better, so far from being meritorious, or acceptable to GOD. And why
Idolatry? Even because they make, and imagine to themselves another GOD, then
there is indeed: for they think they serve a GOD, that will be pleased with
such obedience as they devise, and that will like whatsoever they fancy. Now
indeed, our God is no such God: for he will only be served, but as he has
commanded. Wherefore, while they thus think, and thus do, they imagine to
themselves such a God, as is not, and worship him they know not. The only safe
rule therefore for us, is to follow CHRIST, not to walk in our own ways, or
follow after men: for his sheep hear his voice, and a stranger will they not
hear. Ioh. 10.27.
And this is the cause why our Savior limiteth us whom to follow, even him,
even him alone, and none but him.

But if it be so, may you say, why does Paul command the Corinthians to be
followers of him? 1 Cor. 11.1. Phil. 3.17.
Be ye followers of me: and walk as you have us for an example: and the
Shepherds are commanded to go in and out before their flock An easy thing
to understand this. Paul lays open this meaning: follow me, says he; but
how long? When? Even as I follow CHRIST: so long follow me. If I step aside, it
is no warrant to you: for Christ must you only follow, and me, so long as I
follow him. For as Soldiers are said one to follow another, while they all
follow their Captain, so may we be said to follow Paul, or any servant of
Christ, so long as they walk in Christ's steps, and follow him. But, if, they
decline, beware how ye follow them. Were he as great as Paul, that was rapt up
into heaven, yea as an Angel sent down from heaven, we have no warrant to
follow him, any further, then he follows Christ.

Moreover, when our Savior bids us to follow him, he expresses the duty a
good Captain, who says not to his Soldiers, go you, but come you, and
follow me, do as you see me do; I require no other thing of you, than I will
my self be content to abide. I bid you not go, but I bid you come on, and
follow me. Of a good Shepherd, that leads forth his Sheep and guides them.

FINIS
Imprimatur.

Thomas Weeks.


