THE SECOND BOOK OF THE DIALOGVES OF S. GREGORY THE GREAT, THE FIRST POPE OF
THAT NAME

CONTAINING: THE LIFE AND MIRACLES OF OUR HOLY FATHER S. BENEDICT.

To which is adioined the Rule of the same HOLY PATRIARCHE translated into the
English tongue by C. F. priest and Monk of the same order.

Permissu superiorum* Printed Ann. 1638.

TO THE HONORABLE MISTRESS Mrs ANNE CARRY DAVGHTER TO THE LORD VICOVN^ OF
FAVKLAND.
MISTRESS CARRY,
Since my first zeal of printinge this work I have had two notable
objections: the first because I could not use means more effectual to discover
my own unworthiness: the other (if in the Epistle Dedicatorie which was left to
me) I should speak of your worth and virtue, according to my own
conscience, to them who know you not I should be thought extremely to
flatter; to that them that know you malicious or ignorant. These are the
reasons which stayed the printinge of it, and caused me to seek to engage
some in the making of an Epistle, who by reason of the are neerenes to you,
might seem to some to be excluded from it, but to me most fit, thinkinge noe
other worthy to commend you. He that translated part of it (who I am sure
has a prime place in your memory) intended it to you, but since death
prevented him from doing this (though I hope it has inableled him to do you
better service by prayinge for you and all your family in heaven) I have taken
upon me to supply his place in finishinge and dedicatinge this to you. Our
holy Father S. Benedict whose Rule in our time has never been wholly
translated in to the English tongue, deserves a reverent respect from all the
world, but especially from English men, since his children cannot be denied the
honor of conuertinge this country to the faith of Christ. And for this present
of S. Benedicts to my country, part of the obligation is due to you for whom it
was principally done. God bless you with perseuera^ce in those gifts he
has bestowed upon you, and to that end he shall be often solicited by.

Your devoted beadsman. B. E. T.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE DIALOGVES OF S. GREGORY THE GREAT, CONTAINING THE
LIFE AND MIRACLES OF S. BENEDICT.
BENEDICT blessed by name and grace was a man of venerable life, from his very
child hood grave and stayed for his demeanor surpassing his age, he gave
himself to no disport or pleasure; but living here upon earth, he despised
the world with all the glory thereof at such time as he might have most freely
enjoyed it. He was borne in the province of Nursia, and from thence sent to
Rome to study the liberal sciences. But when he saw there many through the
uneven paths of vice run headlong to their own ruin, he drew back his
foot, but new set in to the world, least in the search of human knowledge, he
might also fall in to the same dangerous precipice: Thus co^temning learning
and studies, and abandonning his fathers house and goods, he desired only to
please god in a virtuous life. So that he departed skilfully ignorant, and
wisely unlearned. I have not attained unto all this man did, but these few
things which I here set down were related unto me by four of his disciples,
namely Constantine a very Reverend man who succeeded him in the government of
the Monastery in monte Cassino. Valentiniane who for many years bare Rule in
the Monastery of Lateran. Simplicius likewise who was third superior of that
Convent after him, and Honoratus who yet governs the Monastery which he first
inhabited.

How St. Benedict miraculously made whole a brooken sieue. CHAP. I.
BEnedict having now left the schools resolved forth with to be take himself
to the desert, accompanied only with his nurse who most tenderly loved him,
and would by no means part from him. Coming therefore to a place called
Sufide, and remaining for some time in the church of S. Peter by the charitable
inuitement of many virtuous people who lived there for devotion; So it chanced
that his nurse borroed of a neighbor a sieue to cleanse wheat, which being
left carelessly upon the table was found broken in two pieces. Wherefore at her
return finding it broke, she began to weep bitterly because it was only
lent her. But Religious and pious Benedict, seeing his Nurse to lament in that
manner was moved with compassion, and taking with him the two pieces of the
broken sieue, with tears he fell to his prayers, which no sooner ended, but he
found the sieue whole and sound not any sign remaining that it had been
broken. The^ presently retourning to his nurse he restored to her the sieue
whole to her exceeding comfort. This miracle was diuulged unto all that lived
thereabout, and so much admired by all, that the in habitans of that place
caused the same to be hanged up in the church porch, that not only those who
were then living, but all posterity might know with how great gifts of grace
Benedict was endoued from the beginning of his conversion. The sieue remained to
be seen for many years after, and hung over the church door even until the
troubles of the Longobardes. But Benedi^^ more desirous to suffer crosses and
afflictions in this world, then covetous of praise, and rather willing to
undergo labors for the honor of God, then to be extolled with the faours of
this world, fled secretly from his nurse to a remote place in the desert called
Sublacus, distant forty miles from Rome, in which a fountain springing with
cool, and crystal waters, extends it self at first in to a broad lake,
and running farther with increase of waters, becomes at the last a river. As
he was traveling to this place, a certain Monk called Romanus met him, and
asked whither he was going, having understood his intention, he both kept it
secrett, and affoarded him his best help, moreover he gave him a Religious
habitt and assisted him in all things. The man of God being come to this place,
lived for the space of three years in an obscure cave unknown to any man
except Romanus the Monk, who lived not far of in a Monastery governed by fa:
Theodacus, from whence he would piously steal forth, and upon certain days
bring to Benedict a loaf of bread which he had spared from his own allowance.
But there being no way to the cave from Romanus his cell by reason of a steep
and hige rock which hung over it, Romanus used to let down the loaf by a
long cord to which also he fastened a little bell, that by the sound of it the
man of God might know when Romanus brought him the bread. But the old enemy
envying the charity of the one, and the refection of the other, when on a
certain day he beheld the bread let down in this manner, threw a stone and
brake it. Not withstanding Romanus afterward failed not to assist him in the
best manner he was able. Now when it pleased the divine goodness to free Romanus
from his labors, and manifest to the world the life of St. Benedict for an
example to all men, that the candle set upon a candlestick might shine, and
give light to the whole church of God, our Lord vouchsafed to appear to a
certain priest living far of, who had made ready his dinner for easter day,
saying to him, thou have prepared good cheer for thy self, and my servant in
such a place is famished for hunger, who presently rose up, and on the solemn
day of Easter went toward the place with such meat as he had provided for
himself, where seeking the man of God amongst craggie rocks, winding valleys
and hollow pits, he found him hid in a cave. Then after prayers, and thanks
giving to God they sat down, and after some spiritual discourse the Priest
said. Rise Brother and let us take our refection, for this is Easter day. To
whom the man of God answered, I know it is Easter with me, because I have found
so much favor in the sight of God, as this day to enjoy your company. (For not
having a long time conuersed with men, he did not know it was Easter day.) The
good Priest did therefore again affirm it, saying truly this is the day of
our Lords Resurrection, and therefore it is nor fit you should keep
abstinence, and for this cause I am sent that we may eat together, that which
Allmighty God has pleased to bestow upon us. Where upon they said grace, and
fell to their meat; their discourse and dinner ended the priest returned to
his church. About the same time certain shepherds found him hid in a cave,
who at the first espieing him amongst the bushes clothed in the skins of
beasts, took him for some wild beast; but afterward knowing him to be a man
of God, many of them were converted from their saudage life to virtue. By this
means his name began to be famous in the country; and many did resort unto
him bringing with them necessaries for his corporal nourishment, for which
they received spiritual food.

How he ouercam a grievous tentation of the flesh. CHAP. II.
THe Holy man being on a certain day alone, the temptour was at hand, and in
the likeness of a little black bird commonly called an owzell began to fly
about his face, and that so near, and so often as he might have taken her with
his hand; But no sooner had he blessed himself with the sign of the cross,
but it vanished. When presently so great a carnal tentation assailed him, that
in his life he never had felt the like. For the remembrance of a woman which
sometime he had seen was so lively represented to his fancy by the wicked
spirit, and so vehemently did her image inflame his breast with lustful
desires, that almost overcome with pleasure, he was determining to leave the
wilderness. But suddenly assisted with divine grace, he came to himself, and
seeing near him a thicket full of nettles and briars, he threw of his garments,
and cast himself naked in to the midst of them, there wallowing and rooling
himself in those sharp thorns and nettels; so that when he rose up, his body
was all pitifully rent and torn. Thus by the wounds of his flesh, he cured
those of his soul by tourning pleasure in to pain, and by the vehemence of
outward torments, he extinguished the unlawful flame which burnt within him,
over coming sin by changing the fire. After which time as he himself related
to his disciples, he was sofree from the like temptation, that he never felt
any such motion. Many after this began to forsake the world, and put
themselves under his government; for being now altogether free from vice, he
worthily deserved to be made a Master of virtue. As in Exodus God commanded by
Moses, that the Levites should from five and twenty years and upward, and
after fifty years they should be appointed to keep the holy vehels.

Peter. I Have already understood something of this testimony alleged, yet I
pray make it more plain unto me.


Gregory. IT is manifest Peter that in youth the tentations of the flesh are
great, but after fifty natural heat waxes cold; Now the souls of good men
are the holy vessels, and therefore while the elect are in tentation it is
necessary that they live under obedience, and be wearied with labors, but when
by reason of their age the feruor of temptation is aswaged, they are ordained
keepers of holy vessels, that is become instructours of souls.


Peter. I Confess you have given me full satisfaction, and therefore this
place of scripture being clearly expounded I pray go on with the holy man's
life.


How St. Benedict brake a glass in pieces by making the sign of the holy
cross. CHAP. III.
Having thus vanquished this tentation, the man of God like a good soil well
manured and weeded, brought forth abundant fruit of the seed of virtue. So
that the fame of his sanctity began to spread it self more largely. Not far
of was a Monastery whose Abbot being dead the whole Convent repaired to the
venerable man Benedict, and with earnest persuasions requested him for their
Abbot, which he refused for a long time, forewarning them that his manner of
life and theirs were not agreeable; yet at length over come with importunity he
gave his consent. But when in the same Monastery he began to observe Regular
discipline, so that none of the Monks (as in former time) were permitted by
their disorder to swerue any way from the path of virtue, they repented
themselves of their choice in receiving him for their Superior, whose
integrity of life was disproportionable to their peruersenes. And therefore
when they perceived themselves restrained from unlawful acts, it greiued them
to leave their desires, and hard it was to relinquish old customs, and begin
a new life: beside the conversation of good men is always odious to the
wicked, they begane therefore to plot his death, and after consultation had
together, they poisened his wine. So when the glase which contained the
empoisened drink was according to the custom of the Monastery presented at
table to be blessed by the Abbot, Benedict putting forth his hand and maknig
the sign of the cross, the glass which was held far of presently brake in
pieces, as i^ in stead of blessing it, he had thrown a stone against it. By
this the man of God perceived easily that the glass had in it the drink of
death which could not endure the sign of life. So presently rising up with a
mild and cheerful countenance, having called the Brethren together, he thus
spoke unto the^. Almighty God of his mercy forgive you Brethren, why have you
dealt thus with me? Did not I fortell you that my manner of life and yours
would not agree: Go and seek a Superior to your liking, for you can have me
no longer with you. This said he forth with returned to the solitude he loved
so well, and lived there with himself in the sight of him who sees all things.

Peter. I Do not well understand what you mean he lived with him self.


Gregory. IF the Holy man had bin longer constrained to govern those monks
who had all conspired against him, and were so contrary to him in life and
manners, it might peradventure have diminished his own vigor and fervor of
devotion, with drawing his mind from the light of contemplation, so that over
much busied in correcting the faults of others, he might have neglected his
own; and so perhaps lost himself and yet not gained others. For as often as
by contagious motions we are transported out of our selfs, we remain the
same, but not with ourselfes, because not looking in to our own actions, we
are wandering about others things; for do we think that he was with himself
who went in to a far country, consumed the portion allotted to him, and after
he had put himself in to the service of a citizen of that country, kept his
hogs and was glad to fill his belly with the husks they eat; not with
standing when he began to consider what he had lost (as the scripture
testifies) being come to himself he said. How many of my fathers hirelings
have plenty of bread? For if he were before with himself, how was it true that
he returned to himself? I may well say therefore that this holy man lived
with himself, because he never turned the eye of his soul from himself, but
standing always on his guard with great circumspection he kept himself
continually in the sight of the all seeing eye of his Creator.


Peter. HOw is it then to be understood which is written of St. Peter the
Apostle, when he was led by the Angel out of the prison? Who retourning to
himself said, now I know assuredly that our Lord has sent his Angel, and
has delivered me out of the hands of Herod, and from all he expectation of
the people of the Jews.


Gregory. TWo ways Peter we are carried out of our selves: for either by
^ubricity of thought we fall beneath ourselfes; or by the grace of
contem^lation we are raised above our selfs. He therefore that kept the hogs
by his inconstancy of mind and uncleanness, fell beneath himself; but he whom
the Angel loosed, and rauis^ed in to an ecstasy, was indeed also out of
himself, but yet above himself. But both of them returned to the^ selfs,
the one when reclaming his ^ewd life he was converted at heart, ^he other when
from the height of contemplation he returned to his natural and ordinary
understanding Thus venerable Benedict in that solitude dwelt with himself for
as much a^ he kept himself with in his thoughts for as often as by the fervor
of contemplation he was elevated, with ou^ doubt he left himself as it were
beneath himself.


Peter. I Like well this you say, but resolve me, I pray you, should he have
left those Monks of whom he had once taken charge.


Gregory. IN my opinion Peter, a bad co^munity may be tolerated where there
are found at least some good which may be helped, but where there is no
benefitt to be expected of any good, labor is many times lost upon the bad:
especially if there be any other present occasions whereni we may do God better
service. Now who was there whom the holy man should have stayed to govern,
when they had all conspired against him. And many things are considered by the
perfect which ought not to be passed in silence; for they perceiving their
endeavors to be without effect, depart to some other place there to employ
themselves more profitablely. Wherefore that famous Preacher who desires to be
dissolved and be with Christ, unto whom to live is Christ and to dye is gain,
did not only desire himself to suffer, but did also animate and encourage
others to undergo the like. He I say, being persecuted at Damascus caused
himself to be let down from the wall by a cord and basket, whereby he escaped
privately. Shall we say then that Paul feared death which he earnestly desired
for the love of Christ as appears by his own testimony. No surely, but
whereas he fore saw that his endeavors there would profitt little, with much
hazard and difficulty he reserved himself to labor in an other plac^ with
better success. For this valian^ champion of Allmighty God would not be
confined to so narrow limitts but enlarged himself to seek battel^ in the
open field. So you may observe that the holy man Benedict left not so many
incorrigibile in that place, a^ he converted to a spiritual life el^ where.


Peter. YOu say true as both reason and the example alleged proves but I
pray, return to prosecute the life of this holy Father.


Gregory. THe Holy man for many years increased wonderfully in virtues and
Miracles, whereby agreat number in those parts were gathered together in the
service of God; So that by the assistance of our Lord Jesus he buil^ there
twelve Monasteries, in each of which he put twelve Monks with their
Superiors; and retained a few with himself whom he thought to instruct
further. Now began diverse Noble and devout personages from Rome to resort to
him; and commended their children to be brought up by him in the service of
God. At the same time Eunicius brought unto him Maurus, and Tertullius a
Senator his son Placidus both very hopeful children, of which two, Maurus
although young yet by reason of his forewardenes in the school of virtue,
began to assist his Master; but Placidus was as yet a child of tender years.


How he reclamed An indeuout Monk. CHAP. IV.
IN one of those Monasteries which the holy man had built there about was a
certain Monk that could not stay at his prayers, but so soon as he saw his
brethren knele and dispose themselves for their mental prayer, he would go
out, and there spend his wandering thoughts upon wordly and transitory things.
For which having bin often admonished by his Abbot, he was brought before the
man of God, who also sharply reprehended him for his folly; but retourning to
his Monastery he scarce remembered two days what had bin said unto him, for the
third day he fell to his old custom, and at the time of prayer went out
again, where of when the holy man was informed by the Abbot the second time,
he said, I will come my self and reform him. And when he was come to the same
Monastery, and the Brethren after the Psalms ended at the accoustomed time
betook themselfes to prayer; He perceued a little black boy who pulled this
Monk out by the hemme of his garment; which he insinuated secretly to
Pompeianus Abbot of the Monastery, and to Maurus saying, see you not there who
it is that draws this Monk out? who answered noe. Let us pray (replied he)
that you may likewise see whom this Monkefolloweth. After prayer continued for
two days Maurus saw, but Pompeianus cold not perceive any thing. The next day
when the man of God had finished his prayer, he went out of the oratory and
found the Monk standing with out, whom he forth with struck with a wane for
his obstinacy and boulddenes of heart, and from that time ever after the Monk
was free from the wicked suggestion of the black boy, and remained constant at
his prayers. For the wicked fiend as if himself had bin beaten, durst no more
tempt him to the like offense.

How by the prayers of St. Benedict A spring issued from the topo of a
mountain. CHAP. V.
THree of the Monasteries which he founded in that place, were built upon the
cliffes of a mountain, which was very trouble some to the Monks to be forced
to fetch up their water f^o^ the lake, for besides the toil, it was also
dangerous by reason of the high and steepie descent. Here upon the Religious
of these three Monasteries came all together to the servant of God Benedict;
and told him it was very troublesome to go down for water as far as the lake,
and therefore the Monasteries of necessity, were to be removed to some more
commodious place. The holy man with confortable words dismissed them, and at
night with little Placidus (whom we mentioned before) went up to the rock, and
there prayed a long time, and having ended his prayers, he putt three stones
for a mark in the same place; and so unknown to all, he returned to his
Monastery. Not long after when the Brethren came again to him for want of
water, go (says he) and on the rock where you shall find three stones one
upon an other dig a little, for All mighty God is able to make water spring
from the top of that mountain, that you may be eased of this labor. At their
return to the mountain they found already the signs of water in the rock,
as Benedict fore told them, so a pit being dug, it was presently full with
water which issues forth so plentifully, that to this day it continues
running down to the foot of the mountain.

How he miraculously caused the iron head of a bile fallen in to the water, to
fasten it self again in the haft. CHAP. VI.
A Certain poor Goth desirous to lead a Religious life, repaired to the man
of God Benedict, who most willngly received him; and one day willed the
Brethren to give him a bile to cut up brambles in a place which he intended
for a garden. This place which the Goth had undertaken to accomodate, was over
the lakes side. Whilst the Goth labored a maine in cutting up the thick
briars, the iron slipping out of the handle, fell into the lake in a place so
deep, that there was no hope to recover it. The Goth having lost his bile was
in great perplexity rune to the Monk Maurus, and told him the mischance, who
presently advertised Benedict thereof, and immediately the holy man came
himself to the lake, took the haft out of the Goths hand, and cast it in to
the water, when behold, the iron rose up from the bottom and entered in to the
haft as before, which he there rendered to the Goth saying, take it and work
on cheerfully and be not discomforted.

How Maurus walked upon the water. CHAP. VII.
ONe day as venerable Benedict was in his cell, young Placidus (a Monk of his)
went out to the lake to fetch water, and letting down the bucket to take up
water, by chance fell in himself after it, and was presently carried away by
the stream a bows shoot from the side. This accident was at the same time
revealed to the man of God in his cell, who presently called Maurus saying, Go
quickly Brother Maurus, for the child who went to fetch water is fallen in to
the lake, and the stream has carried him a great way. A wonderful thing and
not heard of since the time of St. Peter: Maurus having asked and received his
benediction upon the command of his Superior, went forth in have, and being
come to the place upon the water to which the child was driven by the stream,
thinking still he went upon dry land, took him by the hair of the head, and
returned speedily back, but no sooner had he foot upon firm ground, but he
come to himself, and looking back perceived that he had gone upon the water,
much astonished, and wondering how he had done that which wittingly he durst
not adventure. So retourning to the holy man, he related what had happened,
which venerable Benedict ascribed to Maurus his prompt obedience, and not to
his own merits; but contrary wise Maurus attributed it wholly to his command,
not imputing the miracle to himself which he had done un wittingly. This
humble and charitable contention the child who was saved, was to decide, who
said, when I was drawn out of the water, methought I saw my Abbots garment
over my head, and imagined that he had drawn me out.

Peter. THese are wonderful things you report, and may be to the aedification
of many, and for my own part the more I hear of the good man's miracles, the
more I desire to hear.


How a Crow carried a way a poysened loaf. CHAP. VIII.
When as now the places and bordering Countries thereabout were very Zealous
in the love of our Lord Jesus Christ, many abandoning the vanities of the
world, and putting themselves under the sweet yoke of our Redeemer (as it is
the custom of the wicked to repine at the virtues of otheres) one Florentius a
Priest of a church hard by, and grand father to Florentius our subdeacon, began
by the instigation of the devil to oppose himself against the virtuous
proceedings of the holy man: and injuriously to derogate from his course of
life, hindering also as many as he could from resorting to him. But seeing he
could not stop his progress, the fame of his virtues still more increasing,
and many upon the report of his sanctity refoming their lives daily; he became
far more envious and malicious; for he desired himself the commendations of
Benedicts life, but would not live commendablely. Thus blinded with envy, he
sent to the servant of God a poysened lowfe of bread for an offering; which the
man of God receued thankefully, although he was not ignorant of the poison in
it. There used to come to him at time of dinner a crow from the next forest,
which he was accustomed to feed: comeing therefore as she was wont, the man of
God cast before her the bread that the Priest had sent him: saying I command
thee in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to take this bread, and cast where no
man may find it. The crow gapeing and spreading herwinges run croaking about
it, as though she would have said, I would willingly fulfill thy command, but
Iam not able. The man of God commanded again saying, take it, take it up, and
cast it where no man may find it. So at leng^h she took it up in her beak,
and carried ^t a ways and twoe hours after returned again to receive from his
hand her ordinare allouance. But the venerable father seeing the Priest so
peruersely bent to seek his Life, was more sorry for him, then fearful of
himself. When Florentius saw that he could not accompli^h his wicked design
upon the body of his master, he attempted to try what he could against the
souls of his scholars, in so much that he sent seven naked gi^les in to the
garden of the cloister in which Benedict lived, that so playing lasc^u^ously
hand in hand, they might entice the Religious to naugh^ines. Which when the
holy man espied out of his cell, to prevent the fall of his young disciples,
considering that all this malice proceeded from hatred to him, he gave place to
envy and withdrewe himself. So after he had disposed of the oratories and
other buildings, leaving in them a competent number of Brethren with
Superiors, he took with him a few Monks, and removed to an other place.
Thus the man of God with humility avoided his hatred, whom All mighty God
struke with a terrible judgment: for when the foresaid Priest standing in his
summar house to his great content and joy, understood that the holy man was
gone, the room wherein he was, fell down, crushed and killed him, all the rest
of the house remaining immovable and entyre. This Maurus the disciple of the
man of God thought fit to signify forth with to Benedict who was yet scarce
gone ten miles, willing him to return, for the priest who persecuted him was
slain. Which the man of God hearing took very heauely; both because his
enemy was dead, and because his Disciple rejoiced the^eat. Where upon he
enjoined him a penance for presuming in a joyful manner to bring such news to
him.

Peter. THese are wonderful strange things, for in the drawing water out of a
rock me thinks I behold in him Moses, in raising the iron from the bottom of
the water he representeh Elysaeus; in walking on the water Peter, in the
obedience of the crow I conceive him an other Helias, in bewayling his enemies
death, a David. That man had united in him the spirits of all the just.


Gregory. THe man of God Benedict had in him (Peter) the spirit of God alone,
which by the grace of free redemption replenished the hearts of all the elect,
of which St. John says. There was true light which illuminateth every man that
comes in to this world. Of which again he writes. Of his plenitude and
fullness we have all ^eceiued: for the holy ones of God could indeed receive
graces from God, but they could not impart them to others. He then gave
miracles, or signs of power to the lowely, who promised that he would show the
miracle of Jonas to his enemies, daigning in their sight to dye, and in the
sight of the humble to arise. So that the one should have what they would
contemn, and the other what to reverence and love. By which mystery was
occasioned, that while the proud were spectatours of his ignominious death, the
humble with glory might receive power against death.


Peter. But declare I pray; whither the holy man removed, or if he wrought
miracles in any other place.


Gregory. THe holy man by removing changed his habitation, but not his
adversary; for he e^dured their more sharp conflicts. For as much as he found
the author of malice openly to assault him. The castle called Cassine is
situated upon the side of a high mountain, which stretching forth in a forked
manner, enuironeth the same castle, and rises in to the air three miles
high, on which stood an old temple where Apollo was worshipped by the foolish
country people, according to the superstitious custom of the ancient heathens.
Round about it likewise grew woods and groves in which eue^ until that time
the paynims offered their idolatrous sacrifices. The man of God comeing to this
place, brake down the idol, over threw the altar burnt the groves, and of the
temple of Apollo made a chapel which he dedicated to St. Martine, and where
the profane altar had stood, he built a chapple of St. John, and by daily
preaching converted many of the people there about. But the old enemy incensed
with these proceedings, not couertely, or obscurely, but openly and visibly
appeared in the sight of the father, and with hideous cries complained of the
violence he suffered in so much, that the brethren hard him, although they
could see nothing. For as the venerable told his Disciples the wicked fiend
represented himself to his sight all on fire, and with flaming mouth and
flashing eyes; seemed to rage against him. And the^ they all heard distinctly
what the wicked spirit said. For first he called him by his name, and when the
man of God would make him no answer, he fell to rail and revile him. And
whereas before he cried Benedict, Benedict, and saw he could get no answer;
them he cried maledict not Benedict (that is cursed not blessed) what have thou
to do with me? why do thou ve^e me? But now we shall behold new assaults of
the enem^e against the servant of God, to whom he ministered not so much com^^^s
willingly, as occasions of victory against his will.


How an huge stone by his prayer was made portable. CHAP. IX.
ONe day as the Brethren were building the celles of the cloister, there lay a
stone in the midst which they determined to lift up, and put in to the
building; and when two or three were notable to move it, they set more to it;
but it remained as immovable as if it had bine fixed in the ground, so that it
was easy to conceive that the enemy sat upon it, since that so many men
were not able to lift it. After much labor in vain they sent to the man of
God with his prayers to drive away the enemy, who presently came, and having
first prayed, made the sign of the cross over it, when behold, the stone was
as easily lifted as if it had no weight at all.

How the kitchen by the illusion of the enemy appeared all on fire. CHAP. X.
THen the man of God advised the Brethren to dig in the place where the stone
lay, when they had entered a good deepenes, they found a brazen idol, which
happening for the present to be cast by in the kitchen, presently there seemed
a flame to rise out of it, and to the sight of all the Bre^hren it appeared
that all the kitchen was on fire, and as they were cryeing one to another, and
casting water to quench this fire, the man of God hea^ing the noise came, and
perceiving that there appeared fire in the eyes of the Brethren, and not in
his, he presently inclined himself to prayer, and called upon them whom he saw
deluded with an imaginary fire, willing them to sign their eyes that they
might behold the building entyre, and not that fantastical fire which the
enemy had counterfaited.

How a boy crushed with the fall of a wall was healed. CHAP. XI.
Again when the Brethren were raising the wall a little higher for more
conuenience, the man of God was at his devotions in his cell, to who^ the
enemy in an insulting manner appeared, and told him he was going t^ his
Brethren at work; the man of Go^ straigh^ waise by a messenger advertised the
Brethren there of, warning the^ to have a care of themselves for the wicked
enimye was at that hour come to molest them. Scarce had the messenger told his
errand, when the malignant spirit over threw the wall that was a building, and
with the fall thereof bruised a young Monk, son to a certain Senator.
Hereat all of them much grieved, and discomforted, not for the loss of the
wall; But for the harm of their brother, brought the heavy tideing to their
venerable Father Benedict, who bid them bring the youth to him who could not be
carried but in a sheet, by reason that not only his body was bruysed, but also
his bones crushed with the fall. Then he willed them to lay him in his cell
upon his matte where he used to pray: So causeing the Brethren to go out he
shutt the door, and with more then ordinary devotion fell to his prayers. A
wonder to hear, the very ^^me how^e he sent him to his work ^gaine whole and
sound as ever he was before to help his Brethren in making ^p the wall;
whereas the enemy ho^ed to have had occasion to insult over Benedict by his
death.

Of Monks who had eaten out of their Monastery. CHAP. XII.
NOw began the man of God by the spirit of prophecy to foretell things to
come, and to certify those that were present with him of things that passed
far of. For it was the custom of the Monastery that the Brethren sent abroad
about any business, should neither eat, nor drink, till their return, this
in the practice of the rule being carefully observed, one day some Brethren
upon occasion went abroad, and were forced to stay later then usually, so that
they rested and refreshed themselves in the house of a certain devout woman of
their acquaintanc^ Afterward coming home very lat^ they asked as was the
custom the Abbots blessing. Of whom he streigh^ way demanded saying, where
dine^ you? they answered no where; he replied, why do you lie? did you no^ go
in to such a woman's house? eat^ you not there such, and such meats drank you
not so many cups? When the venerable Father had told them both the woman's
lodging, the seueral^ sorts of meats, with the number o^ their draughts. They
all in great terror fell down at his feate, and with acknowledgeme^t of all
they had done confessed their fault, which he straigh^ ways pardoned,
persuading himself they would never after attempt the like in his absence,
knowing he was always present with them in spirit.

How he reproved the Brother of Valentinian the Monk for eatinge by the way.
CHAP. XIII.
Moreover the Brother of Valentinian the Monk, whom we mentioned in the
beginning, was very devout although but a Saecular, he used every year once to
go from his dwelling to the Monastery, and that fasting, that he might partake
of the prayers of the servant of God, and see his Brother. As he was in his way
an other trauayler who carried meat with him put himself in to his company,
and after they had trauayled a good while he said to him. Come Brother let us
refresh ourselves, least we faint in the way. God forbid (answered the other)
by no means Brother, for I never use to go to the venerable Father Benedict
but fasting. At which answer his fellow trauayler for the present said no more;
when they had gone a little farther, he moved him again, but he would not
consent, because he resolved to keep his fast. So the other was a while
silent, and went on forward with him, after they had gone agreat way wearied
with long trauaille, in their way they came to a meadow, and a spring with what
else might delight them there to take their repast. Then said his fellow
trauayler loehere is water, here is a meadow, here is a pleasant place for us
to refresh and rest us a while, that we may without endangering our health make
an end of our journey. So at the third motion (these words pleasing his ear,
and the place his eye) he was over come, consented and eat. At the evening he
came to the Monastery, where conducted to the venerable Father he craved his
benediction and prayers. But presently the holy man reproved him for what he
had done in the way saying, what was it Brother that the malignant enemy
suggested to thee in the way by thy fellow traveler. The first time he could
not prevail, nor yet second, but the third time he prevailed, and obtained his
desire. Then the man acknowledging his fault, and frailty, fell at his feet
more sorry for his offense by reason that he perceived he had offended although
absent in the sight of Father Benedict.

Peter. I Discover in the breast of the holy man, the spirit of Helisaeus which
was present with his disciple far of him.


How he discovered the dissimulation of king Totila. CHAP. XIV.
Gregory. BE silent Peter with patience that you may vnderstang strange^
things. For in the time of the Goths, their king informed that the holy man
had the gift of prophecy: as he went to wards his Monastery he made some stay a
little way of, and gave notice of his coming, to whom answer was made from the
Monastery, that he might come at his pleasure; the king of a treacherous nature
attempted to try, wheter the man of God had the spirit of prophecy. There was
one of his followers called Riggo, whom he caused to put on his royal robes
and buskins on his feet, and so commanded him taking on him the kings person
to go forward toward the man of God, three of his chief pages attending upon
him, to wit Vsilrike, Roderike, and Blindine, to the end they should wait
upon him in the presence of the servant of God, that so by reason of his
attendance, and purple robes he might be taken for the king. When the said
Riggo with his brave apparel and attendance entered the cloister, the man of
God sat a far of, and seeing him come so nie as he might hear his voice, he
c^yed to him, saying, putt of son, putt of that thou cariest it is not thine.
Riggo straight ways fell to the ground sore abashed for having praesumed to
delude the holy man, all his followers likewise fell down astonished, and
riseing they durst not approach unto him, but returned to their king, and
trembling related unto him how soon they were discovered.


How Benedict by prophecy foretold the king, and Bishop of Canusina future
events. CHAP. XV.
AFter this, king Totila came himself to the man of God, whom so soon as he
saw sitting a far of, he durst not come nigh, but fell prostrate to the ground,
the holy man twice or thrice bad him rise, but he durst not get up, then the
holy man came himself to the king and lifted him up and sharply reprehendet
him for his wicked deeds, moreover he foretold him in few words what should
befall him. saying, much mischeife have thou done, much wickedness have thou
committed, at least now give over thy iniquity. But I foresee thou will enter
into Rome, thou will pass the seas, reign nine years, and dye the tenth. At
the hearing where of the king sore apalled, craved his prayers, and departed,
from that time forward he was less cruel, and not long after he went to Rome,
thence failed in to Sicely, and the tenth year by the just judgment of God
lost both life and crown: moreover the Bishop of the Diocese of Canusina used
to come to the servant of God and for his virtuous life was much respected. He
conferring with him concerning the comeing of Totila, and the taking of the
city of Rome. The city doubtelesse (said the Bishop) will be so spoiled, and
dispeopled by this king, that it will never more be in habited. To whom the man
of God answered, Rome (said he) shall never be destroyed by the paynimes; but
with lightning, tempest, and earthquakes shall decay in it self. The ve^itie
of which prophecy is already sufficiently manifested, for in this city we see
the walls ruined, houses ouerturned, and churches thrown down with
tempestuous winds, and we may observe buildings to decay, and daily fall to
ruin. Although Honoratus his disciple (from whose relation I had it) told me
he heard it not himself, from his own mouth, but was told it by the Brethren.

How venerable Benedict for a time disposessed a certain Clearke from the
Devil. CHAP. XVI.
AT that time one of the clergy of the church of Aquine was molested with a
wicked spirit whom the venerable man Constantius Bishop of that Diocese had
sent to diverse Martyrs shrines to be cured; but the holy Martyrs would not free
him, that the gifts of grace in Benedict might be made manifest. He was
therefore brought to the servant of Allmighty God Benedict, who with prayers to
our Lord Jesus Christ presently drove out the enemy. Having cured him he
commanded him saying. Go, and hereafter never eat flesh, and praesume not to
take holy orders, for what time soever you shall praesume to take holy orders,
you shall again become slave to the devil. The Clearke therefore went his
way, and (as present punishments make deep impressions) he carefully for a
while observed this co^mande. But when after many years all that were above
him there in holy orders were dead, seeing also his inferiors to be promoted
before him by reason of their holy orders, he grew careless, and forgetful of
what the man of God had so long ago said unto him, so that he like wise went,
and received priest hood when presently the devil who before had left him,
again took power of him, and never ceased to torment him till he severed his
soul from his body.

Peter. THe holy man I perceive understood the secret decrees of God, in that
he knew this Clearke to be delivered to the power of the enemy, lest he should
praesume to receive holy orders.


Gregory. Why should not he know the secret decrees of the divine providence,
who kept the commandments of God, since it is written that he who adheereth to
God is one spirit with him.


Peter. IF he who adheereth to our Lord become one spirit with him, how comes
the same excellent Preacher to say: who has known the mind of our Lord, or
who has bin his counselor? for it seems altogether unlikely that he who is
made one with an other, should not know his mind.


Gregory. HOly men so far as they are one or united with God are not ignorant
of his ordinances as the same Apostle says. For what man knows the things of
a man, but the spirit of a man that is in him? So the things also that are of
God no man knows, but the spirit of God. And to show that he knew the things
of God he adds. And we have received not the spirit of this world, but the
spirit that is of God. And again that eye has not seen, nor ear has neard,
neither has it ascended ^n to the heart of man what things God has prepared
for those that love him; but to us God has revealed by his spirit.


Peter. IF then those thing which appertained to God were revealed to the said
Apostle by the spirit of God. What means he to make this praeamble saying. O
depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God: how incomprehe^sible
are his judgments, and his ways unsearchable? But as I am saying this,
another quaestion arises: for the Prophet David says to our Lord. In my
lips I have uttered all the judgments of thy mouth. And whereas it is less
to comprehend or know, then to pronounce, what is the reason St. Paul should
affirm that the judgments of God are incomprehensible, and David professes
not only to know them, but also with his lips to express them?


Gregory. TO both these difficulties, I briefly answered before when I said,
that holy men (so far as they are one with God) are not ignorant of the mind of
our Lord: for all that deuoutely seek God, in their devotion, and
contemplation, are with God, but in regard they are depressed with the weight
of this corruptible body, they are not wholly with God, and therefore for as
much as they are united with God they know his secret judgments, of which
likewise they are ignorant, for as much as in respect separated from him: And
so they profess his judgments incomprehensible which they cannot as yet
thoroughly understand. But they who in spirit adheere unto him, in this
adhaesion to God know his judgments either by the sacred words of scripture,
or by hyden revelations, so far as they are capable; these therefore they know
and declare, but they are ignorant of those which God concealeth. Where upon
the Prophet David when he had said in my lips I will pronunce all thy
judgments, immediately adds of thy mouth, as if he had said plainly. Those
judgments I could both know, and pronounce which thou did tell me, for those
which thou speak not, thou concealeth from our knowledge. Thus the saying of
the Prophet agrieth with that of the Apostle, for the judgments of God are both
incomprehensible, and also those which proceed from his mouth are uttered with
the lips of men, for being so manifested they may be both conceived and
expressed by men, nor can they be concealed.


Peter. BY occasion of the difficulty I propounded, you have explicated and
reconciled the testimonies alleged, but if there remain ought concerning the
virtue of this Man I pray declare it.


How S. Benedict foretold the destruction of his Monastery. CHAP. XVII.
Gregory. A Certain noble man named Theoprobus was by this holy Father S.
Benedict converted from the pleasures of the world to the Service of God, who
for his virtuous life was very familiar, and intimate with him. He entering one
day in to the holy man's cell found him weeping bitterly, and when he had
expected a good while, and saw he did not give over (although it was his
custom in prayer mildely to weep, and not to use any doleful lamentations)
he boldly demanded of him the cause of so great grief. To whom the man of God
presently replied. All this Monastery I have built with what soeuere I have
prepared for my Brethren, is by the judgment of Allmighty God delivered ^o the
heathens: and I could scarce ob^aine to save the lives of the monks ^n this
place; His words Theoprobus ^eard; But we see them verified in ^he destruction
of his Monastery by ^he Longobardes. For of late these Longobardes by night
when the Re^igious were at rest, entered the Monas^ery, and ransacked all, yet
had not ^he power to lay hand on any man. But All mighty God fulefilled what he
had promised to his faithful servant Benedict, that although he gave their
goods in to the hands of the paynims, yet he praeserued their lives. In this
blessed Benedict did most clearly resemble S. Paul whose ship with all its
goods being lost, it pleased God to bestow upon him the lives of all those who
were with him.


How S. Benedict discovered the hiding of a Flagon of wine. CHAP. XVIII.
Our Monk Exhilaratus whom you know well, on a time was sent by his master
with two wooden vessels (we call flagons) full of wine to the holy man in his
Monastery. He brought one, but hid the other in the way not withstanding the
man of God although he was not ignorant of any thing dove in his absence,
received it thankefully, and advised the boy as he was retourning back in this
manner; Be sure child, thou drink not of that flagon which thou have hid, but
turn the mouth of it downward, and then thou will perceive what is in it; He
departed from the holy man much ashamed, and desirous to make further trial of
what he had heard, held the flagon a side and presently there came forth a
snake, at which, the boy was sore afrighted, and terrified for the ^uill he had
committed.

How the man of God reproved a Monk for receiving certain napkins. CHAP. XIX.
NOt far distant from the Monastery was a certain town, in which no small
number of people by the moueing exhortations of Benedict were converted from
their superstious idolatry. In that place were certain religious women, and
the servant of God Benedict used to send often some of his Brethren thither to
instruct and edify their souls. One day as his custom was he appointed one
to go; But the monk that was sent after his exhortation took of the Nuns
some small napkins, and hid them in his bosom. As soon as he came back the
holy Father began very sharply to rebuke him saying: How has iniquity
entered thy breast: The monk was amazed, and because he had forgott what he had
done, he wondered, why he was so reprehended. To whom the holy Father said.
What? Was not I present when thou tookest the napkins of the hand maids of God,
and did put them in thy bosom? where upon he presently fell at the feet of
the holy man, and repenting his folly threw away the napkins which he had hid
in his bosom.

How the man of God understood the proud thought of one of his Monks. CHAP. XX.
ONe day as the venerable Father late in the evening was at his repast, it
happened that one of his monks who was son to a lawyer held the candle to
him: and whilst the holy man was eating he standing in that manner began by
the suggestion of pride to say with in himself. Who is ^e whom I should wait
upon at ta^le, or hold the candle unto with such ^ttendance? Who am I who
should ^erue him? To whom the man of God ^resently turning checked him shar^ely
saying; sign thy breast Brother, what is this you say? make the sign of the
cross on your breast. Then he forth with called upon the Brethren; and willed
them to take the candle out of his hand, and bad him for that time to ^eaue
his attendance, and sit down quietly by him. The monk being asked afterward
of the Brethren concerning his thoughts at that time, confessed to them how he
was puffed up with the spirit of pride, and what con^emptible words he
harbored in his thought against the man of God. By this it was easily to be
perceived that nothing could be kept from the know^edge of venerable Benedict,
who was ^ble to penetrate the very secret ^houghts of the heart.

Of two hundred bushels of meal mir^culously brought to the Monastery gate.
CHAP. XXI.
AT an other time also in the country of Campania began a great famine, and
great scarcety of victuall^ so that all the wheat in Benedict hi^ Monastery
was spent, and but fiu^ loaves of bread remained for the Brethrens refection.
When the venerabl^ Father perceived them sad, and discontented, he endeauored
by a mild an^ gentle reproache to reprehend their pusillanimitie, and with
fair promise to comfort them saying: why are you sad for want of bread? to day
you are in want, but to morrow you shall have plenty. The next day there were
found two hundred sacks of meal before the Monastery gates, by whom God^
Allmighty sent it as yet no man knows. Which when the monks beheld they gave
thanks to God and by ^is were taught in their greatest want ^ hope for plenty.

Peter. But resolve I pray, is it to be thought that this servant of God ^ad
continually the spirit of prophe^^, or only at certain times with ^^me
discontinuance?


Gregory. THe spirit of prophecy Peter does not always cast his beams upon
^^e understanding of the prophets; for ^s it is written of the holy Ghost. He
^^eatheth where he will; so likewise ^ust we conceive also when he plea^^th.
And therefore Nathan being de^anded by the king if the might build ^he temple,
first advised him to do ^^, afterward forbad him. This was ^he reason that
Helyzaeus knew not ^he cause why the woman wept; but said to his servant. Who
did oppose ^e let her alone, for her soul is in anguirh, ^^ our Lord has
concealed it from me, a^^ not made it known. Thus God Al^mighty of his great
mercy disposet with singular providence; to the en^ that by giving the spirit
of prophec^ some times, and at other times with drawing the same, the minds of
the Prophets be both elevated above themselves; and also be truly humbled, for
by receiving the spirit they may kno^ they are inspired by God, and against
when they receive it not, they man consider what they are of themselves.


Peter. IT stands with good reason wha^ you have said; but I beseech you
prosecute whatels you remember o^ the venerable Father Benedict.


How by a Vision he gave order to contriuc a Monastery. CHAP. XXII.
AN other time the holy Father was requested by a certain devout an to send
some of his disciples to ^^ild a Monastery in a mannourie of ^s near the city
Tarracina; to which ^^quest he condescended, and made ^oise of his monks whom
he sent, ^^pointing them an Abbot with a ^rouost, and as they were setting
for^ard on their journey he spoke to the^ ^ying: Go, and upon such a day I
^ill come, and show you where to co^^^iue the oratory, where the refectory, ^^d
lodging for guests, or what else ^^all be necessary. So they received his
^^essing and departed in hope to see ^im at the appointed day, for which ^^ey
praepared all things they thought ^^t, or necessary for their venerable ^ather
and his company. The night before the appointed day, the man o^ God appeared in
sleep to him whom he had constituted Abbot and to hi^ Provost, and described
to them mos^ exactely how he would have the building ordered. And when they a
wake^ they related to each other what they had seen: yet not altogether
relying upon that vision, they expected the holy man according to his promise
but seeing he came not at his appointed time, they returned to him very
pensive saying: we have expected (Father) your coming as you promised, but
you came not to show us where and what we should build. The holy man answered.
Why Brethren? Why do^ you say so? Did not I come according to my promise? And
When said they came you? Did not I replied he, appear to each of you in your
sleep, and described every place? Go and according to the direction was given
you in that vision, contriue the Monastery. A^ these words they were much
astonished, and so retourning to the manor they erected the building
according to the revelation.

Peter. I Would gladly be informed how and in what manner he could express his
mind to them so far of; so that they should both hear, and understand by an
apparition.


Gregory. What is the reason, Peter, thou do so curiously search out the
manner how it was done? It is evident that the spirit is of a more noble and
excellent nature then the body. And we are taught by the scripture how the
Prophet was taken up in Jury, and set down with the dinner he carried with him
in Chaldee; who after he had refreshed an other Prophet with his victuals found
himself again in Jury. If then Abacuc in a moment could corporally go so
far, and carry his dinner; what wonder if the holy man obtained to go in
spirit, and intimate to the spirits of his brethren what was necessary? That as
the other went corporally to conueigh corporal food, so he might go in
spirit to inform them of things concerning a spiritual life.


Peter. I Confess by this your discourse you have given full satisfaction to
my doubt, yet I would gladly know what kind of man he was in his common
conversation.


How certain Religious women were absolved after their death. CHAP. XXIII.
EVen his ordinary discourse (Peter) had a certain efficatious virtue, for his
heart being elevated in contemplation, would not let a word pass from him in
vain. Nay if at any time he had uttered any thing by way of threatening, rather
then determining, his words had the same force and effect as if he had
absolutely decreed it. For not far from his Monastery two Nuns of noble race
and parentage lived in a place of their own, and a certain religious man
provided them all things for the exterior; but as in some, nobility of birth
causes baseness in mind, so that those who bear in mind their own greatness,
do less humble themselves in this world: these foresaid Nuns had not as yet
refrained their tongues by a religious habit, but by their unadvised speches
oftentimes provoked to anger the good man who had care over them. Wherefore
after he had for a long time endured their contumelious language, he complained
to the holy man of the in^uryes he suffered; which as soon as the man of God
heard, he commanded them forth with saying: have care of your tongues, for if
you do not amend, I excommunicate you: which sentence of excommunication not
withstanding he did not pronounce, but threaten. Yet for all this they nothing
changed in their former conditions, within a few days after, departed this
life, and were buried in the church, at such time as in the church a solemn
Mass was soong, and the deacon (as the custom is) cried alowd: if there be
any that communicates not, let him go forth: then the Nurse of the two
virgins (who used to make offeringes to our Lord for them) saw them rise out of
their graves, and go forth. This she observed sundry days, that always when
the Deacon cried in that manner, they went out not able to remain in the
church, and calling to mind what the man of God had said unto them, whilst they
were living (for he excluded them from communion unless they amended their
language and manners) she with great sorrow informed the servant of God what
she had seen who presently with his own hands gave offering, and said: go,
and cause this oblation to be offered to our Lord, and they shall be no longer
excommunicated. When therefore this offering was made, and the Deacon according
to the ceremony cried out, that such as did not communicate should go out of
the church they were not seen to go forth any more; whereby it was apparent;
that whereas they went not forth with the excommunicated, they were admitted by
our Lord to communion.

Peter. IT is merueilous strange that this venerable and holy man as yet li^ing
in this mortal life, should be able ^o release those who were under the
invisible tribunal.


Gregory. ANd was not he (Peter) in this mortal life to whom it was said:
whatsoever thou' shall bind upon earth, shall be also bound in heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall unbind on earth, shall be also unbound in heaven. Whose
place, and authority in binding, and looseing they possess, who by faith and
virtuous life obtain the dignity of holy government. And that man (an earthly
creature) might receive this sovereign power; the Creator of heaven, and
earth came down from heaven, and for the redemption of man kind, God himself
became man, that this spiritual power might be granted to flesh* For so
Allmighty God condescending (as it were) beneath himself, raised our weakness
abowe it self.


Peter. HIs miraculous power is confirmed with good reason.


How a Boy was cast out of his grave. CHAP. XXIV.
ON a time a certain young Monk of his, who was over much affected toward
his parents, went out of the Monastery without his benediction; and the very
same day as soon as he was come to them, he died, and being buried, the day
following they found his body cast up, which they enterred the second time, and
the next day after it was found in like manner lying above ground as before.
Here upon they ran streightway, and fell at the feet of the most Father
Benedict imploring his aid. to whom the man of God with his own hand gave an
host of the blessed Sacrament, saying. Go, and with all reverence lay this
host of the body of our Lord upon his breast, and so bury him. This done the
earth kept his body, and never after cast it up. By this you perceive (Peter)
of what merit this man was with our Lord Jesus Christ, since the very earth cast
forth the body of him who had not received the blessing of Benedict.

Peter. I Do plainly perceive it, and am much astonished thereat.


Of a Monk who leaving his Monastery met a Dragon in the way. CHAP. XXV.
Gregory. ONe of his Monks of a wandering, and unconstant disposition would by
no means abide in the Monastery. And although the holy man had often
reproved, and admonished him of it, he remained deaf to all persuasions, and
oftentimes entreated earnestly to be released from the congregation. So the
holy Father overcome with this importunity in anger bid him be gone. Scarce was
he got out of the Monastery, when he met in the way a Dragon that with open
mouth made toward him, and seeing it ready to devour him, he began to
quake, and tremble crying out alowde help, help, for this Dragon will devour
me. The Brethren upon this sudden noise ran out, yet saw no Dragon, but
found the Monk panting, and afrighted; so they brought him back again to the
Monastery, who forth with promised never to depart from the Monastery; and from
that time he remained always constant in his promise, as who by the prayers of
the holy man was made see the Dragon ready to devour him, which before he had
followed undiscovered.


How St. Benedict cured a boy of the leprosy. CHAP. XXVI.
I Will also relate what I heard of a very honorable man named Anthony, who
affirmed that a servant of his Father fell into a leprosy, in so much that his
hair fell of, and his skin wa^ swollen, so that he could noe long hide the
deformity of his disease daily increasing- This servant was sent by the
gentleman's Father to the man of God, and by him restored to his perfect health.

How St. Benedict miraculously procured money for a poor man to discharge his
debt. CHAP. XXVII.
NOr will I conceal that, which his Disciple Peregrine was wont to relate, how
an honest poor man constrained by necessity of a debt, thought his only
remedy was to have recourse to the man of God; So he came to the monastery,
where meeting with the servant of God, he told him how he was extremely urged
by his creditour for the payment of twelve shillings. The venerable Father
answered him, that in very deed he had not twelve shillings, but yet he
comforted his want with good words saying: go, and after two days return
hither again; for at this present I have it not to give you. These two days
as his custom was he spent in prayer; and upon the third day, when the poor
debtor came again, there was found thirteen shillings upon a chest of the
Monastery, that was full of corn, which the man of God caused to be brought
him, and gave them to the distressed man, that he might pay twelve, and have
one to defray his charges. But to return to the relation of such things as I
learned of his disciples of whom I spoke in the beginning. There was a certain
man had an adversary, who bare him deadely hatred, and so great was his malice
that he gave him poison in his drink, which potion although it procured not
his death, yet it so altered his color that his body became all speckled like
a leapour. This man was brought to the holy Father, who by his only touch,
caused the diversity of colors to vanish away, and restored him to his health.

How a glass bottle cast down upon stones was not broken. CHAP. XXVIII.
AT such time as the great famine was in Campania, the man of God gave all he
had to those he saw in want and necessity; in so much that there was no
provision almost left in the spence, save only a little oil in a glass
vessel; yet when one Agapitus a subdeacon came humbly entreating to have a
little oil given him, the man of God (who had resolved to give all upon earth,
that he might have all in heaven) commanded this little oil that was left to be
given him. The Monk who was dispencier heard his command, but was loath to
fulfill. And the holy man a little after demanded whether he had done what he
willed him, the Monk answered that he had not given it, saying that if he
should have given that, there would be nothing left for the Religious; hereat
the good Father much displeased, bad some other take the glass bottle in which
there remained a little oil and cast it out of the window, that nothing of the
fruits of disobedience might be left to pester the Monastery; which was
accordingly done: under the window was a steep fall full of huge rough stones,
upon which the glass fell, yet it remained as whole, and entyre as if it had
not bin thrown down, so that neither the glass was broke, nor the oil
spilt; which the man of God commanded to be taken up and given to him that
asked it. Then calling the Monks together he rebuked the Religious man before
them all for his pride, and want of confidence.

How an empty tun was filled with oil. CHAP. XXIX.
Having ended the chapter he and all the Monks fell to their prayers. In the
place they prayed was an empty tun closse covered. As the holy man continued
his prayer the cover of the said tun began to be heaued up by the oil
increasing under it, which run over the brim of the vessel upon the floor in
great abundance. Which so soon as the servant of God Benedict beheld, he
forth with ended his prayer, and the oil ceased to run over. Then he
admonished the distrustful, and disobedient Monk to have confidence in God,
and learn humility. So the Brother thus reprehended was much ashamed, because
the venerable Father did not only by word admonish him; but also did
miraculously show the power of Allmighty God. Nor could any man afterward
doubt of what he promised, since as it were in a moment: for a glass bottle
almost empty he had restored a tun full of oil.

How he dispossessed a Monk. CHAP. XXX.
ONe day as he was going to S. John's chapel, which stands upon the very top
of the mountain, he met the subtle enemy upon a mule in the habit, and
comportment of a physician, carryeing a horn, and a mortar, who being demanded
whither he went, answered he was going to the Monks to minister a potion. So
the venerable Father Benedict went forward to the chapel to pray, and haueing
finished returned back in great have, for the wicked spirit found one of the
ancient Monks drawing water, and praesently he entered into him, threw him
down, and tortured him pitifully. As soon as the holy man retourning from
prayer found him thus cruelly tormented, he only gave him a blow on the cheek
with his hand, and immediately drove the wicked spirit out of him, so that he
durst never after return.

Peter. I Would know whether he obtained these great miracles always by
prayer, or did them sometimes only by the intimation of his will.


Gregory. THey who are perfectly united with God as necessity requires, work
miracles both ways; sometimes by prayer, sometimes by power; for since
according to St. John, As many as received him, he gave them power to be the
children of God; what wonder is it if they have the privilege, and power to
work miracles who are exalted to the dignity of the children of God. And that
both ways they work miracles is manifest in St. Peter, who by prayer raised
Tabitha from death; and punished with death Ananias and Saphira for their
falsehood. For we do not read that he prayed when they fell down dead; but
only that he rebuked them for their fault committed. It is evident therefore
that these things are done sometimes by power, sometimes by petition; since that
by reproof he deprived these of their life; and by prayer revived the other.
But now I will produce two other acts of the faithful servant of God Benedict,
by which it shall appear evidently, that some things he could do by power
received from heaven, and others by prayer.


How St. Benedict loosed a Husbandman by his only sight. CHAP. XXXI.
A Certain Goth named Galla, was of the impious sect of the Arians. This
fellow in the time of their king Totila was most maliciously bent against all
good, and devout catholics; in so much that if any clargie man, or monk came
in his sight, he was sure not to escape alive from him: This man enraged with
an insatiable covetousness of spoil, and pillage, light one day upon a
husbandman whom he tortured with several torments; the man not able to endure
the pain, professed that he had committed his goods to the custody of the
servant of God Benedict, this he feigned to the end he might free himself from
torments, and prolong his life for some time. Then this Galla gave over
tormenting him, and tying his arms together with a strong cord, made him
run before his horse, to show him who this Benedict was that had received his
goods to keep. Thus the poor man run before him with his hands bound,
and brought him to the holy man's Monastery, whom he found sitting alone at the
Monastery gate, and reading. Then the countryman said to Galla who followed
furiously after him: lo this is the holy man Benedict, whom I told you of. The
barbarous ruffian looking upon him with enraged fury, thought to afright him
with his usual threats, an with hydeous noise cried out unto him rise, rise,
and deliver up this fellows goods which thou have taken into thy custody. At
these clamorous words the man of God suddenly lifted up his eyes from
reading, and saw him with the husbandman whom he kept bound, but as he cast his
eye upon his arms, in a wonderful manner the cords began to fall of so
quickly, that no man could possibly have so soon untied them. When Galla
perceived the man whom he brought ^ound so suddenly loosened, and at ^^berty,
struck in to fear at the sight of so great power he fell prostrate, and
^^owing his stiff, and cruel neck at the ^oly man's feet, begged his prayers.
Not with standing the holy man rose not from his reading, but called upon his
brethren to bring him to receive his benediction; when he was brought ^gaine
unto him, he exhorted him to ^eaue his barbarous and inhumane ^ruelty. So
pacified by the holy man's ^dmonition, he departed never after ^resuming to ask
any thing of the ^ountry man, whom the man of God ^nloosed not by touching, but
by cas^ing his eye upon him. Thus you see (Peter) as I said before that those
who ^re the true servants of Almighty God, ^ometimes do work miracles by a
^ommanding power; for he who sit^ing still abated the fury of that ter^ible
Goth, and with his only look ^nloosed the cords where with the ^nnocent man's
arms were fast pinioned, shows evidently by the quick, an^ speedy exhibition
of the miracle, tha^ he wrought it by a power received, and actually resideing
in him. Now I will also show you how great, and strange ^ miracle he obtained
by prayer.

How he raised a dead man to life. CHAP. XXXII.
AS he was one day in the field laboring with his Brethren, ^ certain peasant
came to the Monastery caryeing in his arms the dead body of his son, and
with pittiful^ lamentation for the loss of his only son, inquired for the
holy Father Benedict. Understanding that he was in the field, he presently laid
down the dead corpse at the Monastery gate, and as one distracted through
grief, began to run to find out the venerable Father. At the same time
the man of God was coming home with his Brethren from labor, whom when he
distressed man espied, he cried out unto him, Restore me my son, Res^ore me
my son. At the hearing here^f the man of God made a stop, and said: what
friend have I taken your ^onne from you? The man replied he ^s dead, come, and
raise him. When ^he holy man heard this, he was much greiued, and said, Go
Brethren, go, ^his is not a work for us but for such ^s were the holy
Apostles. Why will ^ou impose burdens upon us which we cannot bear? Not
withstanding the ^han enforced with excessive grief, ^erseuered in his earnest
petition, swea^ing that he would never depart until ^e raised his son to
life. Then the ^an of God demanded saying where ^he? He answered: his body
lies at ^he Monastery gate. Whither when ^he man of God with his Brethren was
^ome, he kneeled down, and laid ^imselfe on the body of the child: ^hen
raising himself with his hands held up toward heaven he prayed: ^ Lord regard
not my sins but the faith of this man who craves t^ have his son restored
to life, and restore again to this body the soul which thou have taken from
it. Scars^ had he finished these words, but a^^ the body of the child began
to tre^bl^ at the reentry of the soul, that in the sight of all who were
present, he wa^ seen with wonderful quakeing t^ pant and breath whom he
presently took by the hand, and delivered him a live and sound to his Father.
It seemet^ to me (Peter) he had not this miracl^ actually in his power, which
he prostrated himself to obtain by prayer.

Peter. What you have said is undoubtedly true, for you effectually prove, and
confirm by deede^ what was said in words. But (I pray certify me, whether
holy men can effect, and obtain what so ere they will, or desire.


Of the Miracle wrought by his sister Scholastica. CHAP. XVII.
Gregory. Who was ever (Peter,) in this life more sublime in perfection, and
sanctity chan. St. Paul, who not with standing three times craved of our Lord
to be free from the motions of the flesh, yet could not obtain it? To this
purpose I must tell you a passage concerning the venerable Father Benedict,
that there was some thing he desired, and was not able to accomplish. His
sister Scholastica who was consecrated to God from her very childehood, used to
come once a year to see him; unto whom the man of God was wont to go to a
house not far from the gate with in the possession of the Monastery. Thither
she came one day according to her custom, and her venerable brother like wise
with his disciples, where after they had spent the whole day in the praise of
God, and pious discourses, the night drawing on, they took their refection
together. As they were yet setting at table, and protracting the time with holy
conference, the virtuous, and Religious virgin his sister began to importune
him saying: I beseech you (good Brother) leave me not this night, that we may
entertain ourselves until next morning in discourses of the joys of heaven.
To whom he answered. What is this you say, sister? by no means can I stay out
of my Monastery. At this time the sky was very clear, and not a cloud was to
be seen in the air. The holy Nun therefore hearing her Brothers denial,
laid her hands upon the table fast closed together, and upon them inclined her
head to make her prayer to Allmighty God: As she raised up her head again from
the table, on a sudden began such vehement lightning, and thunder, with such
abundance of rain that neither venerable Benedict, nor his Brethren were able
to put foot out of doors. For the holy virgin when she leaned her head on her
hands, powered forth a flood of tears upon the table, by which she changed the
fair weather into foul, and rainy. For immediately followed that inundation
of waters, and such was the coherence with her prayers, and the storm; that as
she lifted up her head, the crack of thunder was heard; as if the raising up
of her head, and the bringing down these floodes of rain had concurred in one
and the same instant. The holy man perceiving that by reason of thunder, and
lightning with continual showers of rain, he could not possibly return, was
in great anguish of mind, and said unto her: God Allmighty forgive you (sister)
what is this you have done? she repleyed, I made my request to you, and you
would not hear me; I prayed to Allmighty God, and you see he has granted it.
Now therefore if you can go forth to the Monastery, and leave me. But he not
able to return was forced to stay against his will. Thus it so fell out that
they spent the night in watching, and received full content in spiritual
discourse of heavenly matters. By this it appears (as I said before) that the
holy man desired some thing which he could not obtain. For if we consider the
intent of the venerable Father, without quaestion he would have had the fair
weather to continue in which he came forth. But it pleased Allmighty God, by
means of a woman miraculously to cause the contrary. And noe wonder if at that
time, a woman were more powerful then he, considering she had a long desire to
see him; and therefore since as St. John affirms God is charity with good
reason she was more powerful who loved more.


Peter. I Grant it, and am wonderfully taken with your discourse.


How St. Benedict saw the soul of his sister in form of a dove. CHAP. XXXIV.
THe next day the holy, and Religious virgin went home to her cloister, and the
man of God to his Monastery. Three days after standing in his cell, he saw the
blessed soul of his sister depart out of the body, and inform of a dove
ascend, and enter into the caelestiall mansions. Wherefore with joy
congratulating her heavenly glory, he gave thanks to God in hymns, and
praises, and straight ways certified his Brethren of her departure, whom he
forth with sent to bring her body to the Monastery, and caused it to be buried
in the same tomb that he had praepared for himself. To the end their bodies
might not be separated by death, whose minds were always united with God.

How the whole world was represented before his eyes: And of the soul of
German Bishop of Capua. CHAP. XXXV.
AN other time Seruandus Deaco^, and Abbot of that Monastery (which was built
by Liberius sometime a senator in the country of Campania) used often to visit
him; for being also illuminated with grace, and heavenly doctrine, he repaired
diverse times to the Monastery, that they might mutually communicate one to an
other the words of life, and at least with sighs, and longing desires, taiste
of that sweet food of the caelestial country, whose perfect fruition they were
not as yet permitted to enjoy. And now the time of rest being come, venerable
Benedict went up to the higher room of the tower, and Seruandus had his
lodging in the lower, from which there was an open passage to ascend to the
higher, and over against the said tower was a large building in which the
disciples of both reposed while as yet the Monks were at rest, the servant of
God Benedict riseing before to the night office, stood at the window, and made
his prayer to Allmighty God about midnight, when suddenly he looked forth,
and saw a light glancing from above so bright, and resplendent, that it not
only dispersed the darkness of the night, but shined more clear then the day
it self. This was a merueilous strange vision, for (as he afterward related)
the whole world compacted as it were together, was represented to his eyes in
one ray or sun beam. As the venerable Father had his eyes fixed upon this
glorious luster, he beheld the soul of Germanus Bishop of Capua carried by
Angels to Heaven in a fiery globe. Then for the testimony of so great a
miracle, with a loud voice he called upon Seruandus the Deacon twice, or thrice
by his name, who much astonished thereat, came up, looked forth, and saw a
little stream of the light then disapearing, at the sight wereof he was struck
into great admiration; and the man of God after he had related to him the whole
passage, sent presently to Theoprobus a Religious man in the castle of Cassine,
willing him to go the same night to Capua, and enquire what had happened to
the Bishop Germanus. And it fell out so, that he who was sent found the most
Reverend Bishop Germanus dead; and inquiring more exactely, he learned that his
departure was the very same moment in which the man of God had seen him ascend.

Peter. THis was a strange, and admirable passage; but whereas you said the
whole world was at one view represented to his sight, as I never experienced
the like, so I cannot imagine how, or in what manner this was possible, that
the whole universe should be seen at once, and by one man.


Gregory. TAke this Peter for an assured verity, that to a soul that beholds
the Creator, all creatures appear but narrow; for should we partake never so
little of the light of the Creator, what soever is created would seem very
little, because the soul is enlarged by this beatificall vision, and so delated
in the Divine perfections, that it far transcendes the world, and it self
also. The soul thus raptin the light of God, is in her interior lifted up,
and enabled above it self, and while thus elevated it contemplates it self,
it easily comprehendet how little that is which before it was not able to
conceive. So the Blessed man who in the tower saw that fiery globe with the
Angels retourning to heaven, could not possibly have beheld these things, but
only in the light of God. What wonder then if he saw the world at one view,
who was in mind exalted above the world. But whereas I said that the whole
world compacted as it were together was represented to his eyes, it is not
meant that heaven, and earth were streigtened by contraction, but that the mind
of the beholder was dilated, which raised to the sight of Allmighty God, might
easily see all things beneath him. It follows therefore, that the exterior
light which appeared to his senses, proceeded from an inward illumination of
mind, by which he was elevated to higher mysteries, and taught how meanly
these inferior things are to be esteemed.


Peter. I Blame not now my ignorance which has bin the occasion of so large,
and profitable discourse: But since you have clearly explicated these things
unto me, I pray, go forward with your discourse.


How St. Benedict wrote a Rule for his Monks. CHAP. XXXVI.
I Would willingly (Peter) relate more concerning this holy father, but that I
must of purpose omit many things to speak of the acts of others; only this I
would not have you to be ignorant of, that the man of God amongst so many
miracles where with he shined to the world, was also very eminent for his
doctrine; for he wrote a Rule for Monks as clear in stille, as excellent for
discretion. And if any man desire to know more exactely the life, and
conversation of this holy Father, he may there behold it as in a mirror: for
the Blessed man could not possibly teach otherwise then he lived.

How he prophetically foretold his death to his Brethren. CHAP. XXXVII.
THe same year in which he departed out of this life, he foretold the day of
his death to some of his Disciples who conuersed with him, and to others who
were far of, giueing strict charge to those who were present, to keep in
silence what they had heard; and declaring to the absent by what sign they
should know when his soul departed out of his body. Six days before his
departure, he caused his grave to be opened; and immediately after he fell into
a feuour, by the violence where of his strength began to decay, and the
infirmity daily increasing, the sixtday he caused his Disciples to carry him in
to the oratorie. Where he armed himself with the precious body and blood of
our savior, then supporting his weak limbs by the arms of his Disciples, he
stood up his hands lifted toward heaven and with words of prayer breathed
forth his holy soul. The very same day two of his Disciples, the one liueing
in the Monastery, the other in a place far remote, had a revelation in one, and
the self same manner. For they beheld a glorious way spread with precious
garments, and enlightened with innumerable lamps, stretching directly eastward
from his cell up to heaven. A man of a venerable aspect stood above, and asked
them whose way that was, but they professing they knew not: This says he, is
the way by which the beloved of God Benedict ascended. Thus as the Disciples
who were present saw the departure of the holy man; so also those who were
absent, understood it by this sign foretold them. He was buried in the
oratorie of St. John Baptist which himself had built upon the ruins of
Apolloes altar. In the cave also in which he formerly lived, even to this day
miracles are wrought upon such as repair thither with true faith.

How a mad woman was cured in St. Benedict his cave. CHAP. XXXVIII.
FOr very lately happened this which I now relate. A certain woman bereft of
reason, and altogether distracted in her senses, run mad over mountains,
and valleys, through woods, and plains, day and night, never resting, but
when she was forced for weary somenesse to ly down; one day as she ranged
thus madly up, and down, she light upon the cave of Blessed Benedict, and by
chance entered, and remained there: The next morning she came out as sound, and
perfect in her senses, as if she never had bin out of them, and from that time
remained all her life in health, and quiet of mind, which she there recovered.

Peter. What should be the reason that we experience even in the patronages of
martyrs that they do not bestow so great favors by their bodies, as by some
of their relics; yea and do greater miracles where their bodies are not; at
least not whole, and entyre?


Gregory. Where the bodies of holy Martyrs lie no doubt (Peter) but there they
are able to show many miracles, as they do. For to such as have recourse unto
them with pure intention, they show many marvelous favors. But in regard
weak souls may doubt whether they be present to hear them or no, in such
places where men know their whole bodies are not: it is necessary for
confirmation of their presence to show more miracles were the weak of faith
may have occasion to doubt. But they who do steadfastly believe in God,
increase their merit in that, although their bodies lie not there, yet they
assure themselves to be heard by them. Wherefore Truth it self to increase
the faith of his Disciples said, unto them: if I go not the Paraclete shall
not come to you. For where as it is undoubtedly certain, that the Holy Ghost
the comforter always proceeds from the father, and the son; why does God
the son say, he will go from them that the Paraclete may come who never
departs from the son? But because the Disciples conuersing with our Lord in
flesh, did desire always to behold him with their corporal eyes it was
rightly said unto them: unless I go away the Paraclete shall not come. As if
he had said plainly: If I withdraw not my bodily presence, I do not show you
the love of the soul; and unless you cease to see me carnally, you shall
never learn to love me spiritually.


Peter. YOu say well.


Gregory. NOw let us rest a while; that by silence we may be the better enabled
for further conference, if we intend to prosecute the miracles of other Saints.


The end of the second book of the life of St. Benedict.
FINIS.
The approbation of the Rule given by St. Gregory the great.
I Gregory Prelat of the holy Roman sea, wrote the life of Blessed Benedict: I
have read the Rule which the Saint himself wrote with his own hands. I
praised it, and confirmed it in a holy synod: I commanded it to be most
diligently observed by all who shall be admitted to the grace of conversion
through diverse parts of Italy wheresoeuere the Latin tongue is read, even to
the end of the world. I do also confirm the twelve Monasteries which the
Saint erected.

THE RVLE OF OUR MOST HOLY FATHER S. BENEDICT PATRIARCHE OF MONCKE.

THE PROLOGVE OF OUR MOST HOLY FATHER St. BENEDICT TO HIS RVLE.
HARKEN o son to the precepts of a master, and incline the ear of thy heart
willingly to hear the admonition of a pious ^ther and effectually accomplish
them. That by the labor of obedience thou ^aist return to him from whom by
^he sloth of disobedience thou have ^eparted. To thee therefore now my ^eech is
directed who renouncing ^y own will, being to fight under our Lord Christ the
true king take to thee the most strong and bright armor of obedience.

First of all that what good thing soever thou beginst to do, thou beg of
him with most earnest prayer to perfect it: that he who has now vouchsafed to
reckon us in the number of his children may not herafter be contristated by our
ill deeds: for we must so at all times serve him with the goods he has
bestowed upon us, that neither as an angry father he may not herafter
disinherit his children; nor as a dreadful Lord exasperated by our offenses
deliver us over as wicked servants to perpetual punishment, who would not
follow him to glory.

Let us therefore at length arise the scripture exciting us, and saying; It is
now the hour to rise from sleep. And our eyes being opened to the deifying
light, let us with astonished ears hear what the divine voice daily cryeing
out, admonishes us sayeing. This day if you shall hear his voice, harden not
your hearts. And again; He that has ears let him hear what the spirit says
to the Churches: and what says it? Come children, hear me; I will teach you
the fear of our Lord. Run whilst you have the light of life, least the
darkness of death surprise you.

And our Lord seeking his labourer amongst the multitude to whom here he
speaks, says again, Who is the man that will have life, and desires to
see good days? which if thou hearing answerest; I. God says unto thee; If
thou will have true and everlasting life, refrain thy tongue from evil, and
thy ^ips that they speak not guile, Decline from evil, and do good: Seek
after peace and pursue it. And when you have done this; my eyes shall be upon
you; and my ears shall be open to your prayers, and before you can call upon
me, I will say, Behold I am present. What thing dear brethren can be more
sweet unto us, then this voice of our Lord inuiting us? Behold our Lord through
his piety shows unto us the way of life.

Our loins therefore being girt with faith and the observance of good works,
and our feet shodde by guida^ce of the Gospel of peace let us walk in his
ways, that we may deserve to see him who has called us unto his kingdom. In
the tabernacle of whose Kingdom if we desire to dwell, we must apply our
selves to good works which is the only means whereby it is to be attained.
But let us ask our Lord with the Prophet sayeing unto him; Lord who shall
dwell in thy tabernacle, or who shall rest in thy holy hill? After this
question brethren let us hear our Lord answering; and showing us the way that
leads to his tabernacle, saying. He that walks without spott, and works
justice. He that speaks truth in his heart, that has not forged guile in his
tongue. He that has not done evil to his neighbor, and has not received
reproach against his neighbor. He that rejecting out of his mind the malignant
Devil, with all his suggestions has brought them all to naught, and has
taken his beginning thoughts and dashed them against Christ.

They who fear our Lord do not take pride in their good observance and well
doing, but knowing that all the good they have, or can do, proceeds not from
themselves, but is done by our Lord, magnify our Lord thus workinge in the^,
saying with the Prophet; Not to us Lord not to us, but to thy name give glory.
So Paul the Apostle did not impute any thing of his preaching to himself
saying by the grace of God I Am what I am. And aganie he says. He that
gloryeth let him glory in our Lord; And here upon also our Lord says in the
Gospel. He that hears these my words, and performs them, I will liken him
to a wiseman, that has built his house upon a roche. The floods came, the
winds blew, and beat against that house, and it fell not; because it was
founded upon a rock. Our Lord fulfilling these things, expects daily that
we should by deeds answer to these his holy admonitions.

Therefore for the amendment of our evils, he prolonges the days of this our
life according to the words of the Apostle saying, Know thou not that the
patience of God brings thee to repentance? For our pious Lord says, I will
not the death of a sinner but rather that he be converted and live. Having
therefore my brethren demanded of our Lord, who should be the Inhabitour of his
Tabernacle, we have hard what his duty and charge is; which if we fulfill, we
shall be Inheritours of his heavenly Kingdom.

Now Therefore let us prepare our hearts and bodies to fight under the holy
obedience of his commandes, and what nature in us is not able to perform, let
us beg of our Lord to supply it with the assistance of his grace. And if we
desire to avoyde the pains of Hell, and to attain to everlasting life;
whilst yet time serves, and whilst we live in this mortal flesh, and that
we may perform all these things by the light of Grace, let us hasten and do
that now, which may be expedient for us for ever hereafter. We are therefore
now to institute a school of the service of God. In which school or
institution we hope nothing shall be ordained too rigourous or burden some.
But if in somethinges we proceed with a little severity, reason so requiring,
for the amendment of vices or preserving of charity, do not straightwayes for
fear there of fly from the way of salvation, which is always straight and
difficult in the beginning. But in process and continuance of this holy course
and conversation, the heart being once dilated, the way of Gods commandments is
run with unspeakable sweetness of love: so as never departing from his
school, but perseuering in the monastery in his doctrine until death, by
patience we participat of the sufferings of Christ, that we may deserve
afterward to be partakers of his kingdom. Amen.

Of the several kinds or life of Monks. CHAP. I.
IT is well known that there are four kinds of Monks. The first is of
Coenobites, that is monasteriall or conuentuall living under a Rule or Abbot.
The second kind is of Anachorits, that is, Hermits, who not by a Nouitiall
fervor of devotion but by long probation in a monastical kind of life have
learnt by the comfort and encouragement of others to fight against the Devil,
and being well armed, secure now without the help of any are able by Gods
assistance to fight hand to hand against the vices of the flesh and evil
cogitatio^s; and so proceed from the fraternall army to the single combat of
of the wilderness. The third and worst kind of Mo^ks are the Sarabaits who
having not been tried under any Rule, by the experience of a skillful master,
as gold uses to be tried in the furnace; but softened according to the nature
of lead, by their works adhering yet to the world, are known by their tonsure
to be disloyal to God: who two or three or perhaps single without a shepherd
are shut up, not in our Lords sheepfolds but in their own: and the pleasure
of their desiers is to them a law, and whatsoever they like or make choice of,
this they will have to be holy, and what they mislike, that not to be lawful.
The fourth kind of mo^ks be those which are called Girouagi or wanderers, who
all their life time wander through diverse provinces, and guest*wise stay two or
three days in one Monastery, and then in another, and are allways wandering and
never settled, and giving themselves altogether to their own pleasures, and to
the inticements of gluttony, are generally in all things worse then the
Sarabaits. Of the miserable conversation of all which, it is better to be
silent then to say much. And therefore leaving these, let us by Gods assistance
set down a Rule for Coenobits or Conuentualls which is the principal sort of
all.

What kind of man the Abbot ought to be. CHAP. II.
AN Abbot who is worthy to have charge of a monastery, ought allways to
remember what he is called, and to express in his actions the name of Ancient.
For in the monastery he represents the person of Christ, seeing he is called
by his name or title, as the Apostle says. Ye have received the spirit of
adoption of children in which we cry abba father: And therefore the Abbot ought
to teach ordain or command nothing but what is conformable to the commandes of
our Lord (and God forbid he should do otherwise) But let his commands and
doctrine be mingled in the minds of his disciples, with the leaven of the
divine justice. Let the Abbot allways be mindful that in the dre^dfull
judgment of God he is to give account both of his doctrine, and of the
obedience of his disciples. And let him know that it will be found the
sh^pheards fault, what want of profit soever the master of the family shall
find in his sheep: But if he have bestowed all diligence on his unquiet and
disobedient flock, and have employed the uttermost of his care for curing of
their corrupt manners, then shall he be discharged in the judgment of our
Lord, and may say with the Prophet, I have not hidden thy justice in my heart, I
have told thy truth and thy salvation: but they contemning despised me. And
then finally death as a just punishment shall be inflicted upon the disobedient
sheep.

When therefore any one takes upon him the name of an Abbot, he ought to
govern his disciples with a twofold doctrine, that is, To show them all virtue
and sanctity more by deeds then by words: and to capable disciples he may
declare the commandments of God by words, but to the hard hearted persons and
to such as are more simple, he must show them by his actions and life. And all
things which he shall teach his disciples to be unfitting, by his own actions
let him show that they ought not to be done: least preaching well to others,
he himself be found reprobate, and God say unto him sinning. Why do thou
declare my justices, and take my testament in thy mouth, Thou have hated
discipline and have cast my speeches behind thee. And, Thou who have seen a
moate in thy brothers eye, have not seen a beam in thy own. Let there be no
acception of persons in the monastery. Let not one be loved or favored more
then an other, except such a one as in good works and obedience shall be found
to surpass others. Let not a free man or of better parentage coming to
Religion, be preferred before him who is of servile or meaner condition, except
there be some other reasonable cause for it. But if upon just considerations
the Abbot shall so think fitting let him do it, in any rank or degree what
soever, otherwise let every one keep their own places. Because whether
bondsman or free man, we are all one in Christ, and bear an equal burden of
servitude under one Lord; for with God there is noe acceptio^ of persons. Only
in this he makes a difference, if in good works and humility we surpass
others.

Therefore let the Abbot bear equal love to wards all: and let all be subject
to the same orders, and discipline according to their deserts. For the Abbot
ought all ways in his doctrine to observe that Apostolical form where it is
said, Reprove, entreat, reprehend, that is; tempering, as times and occasions
require, fair speeches with terrors. Let him show both the severity of a
master, and the pious affection of a father: that is, he ought sharply to
reprove such as are disordered and unquiet, and of the other side to deal by
entreaty with tuch as ar obedient mild and patient, exhorting them to go
forwards in virtue. But by all means the negligent and contumacious persons
let him severely reprove and chastise.

Let him not dissemble the sins of delinque^ts, but as soon as they appear,
let him use all possible endeavor utterly to root them out, remembering the
danger of Hely Priest of Silo. The more honest and understanding dispositions
let him for the first and second time admonish by words; but the stubborn,
hard hearted, proud and disobedient, even in the very beginning of sin, let
him chastise with stripes, and bodily punishment, knowing that it is written.
The fool is not corrected with words. And again; Strike thy son with the
rod, and thou shall deliver his soul from death.

The Abbot ought always to remember, what he is, and what he is called, and
that to whom more is committed, from him more is exacted. And let him consider
what a difficult and hard task he has undertaken, to govern souls, and to
accommodate himself to the humors of many. Whereof some ar to be led by fair
speeches, others by sharp reprehensions, and others by sharp reprehensions, and
others by persuasions. Therefore let him so conform himself to each one
according to their quality and understanding, that he may not only suffer noe
loss in the flock committed to him, but may also rejoice in the increase and
profit of his virtuous flock.

Above all things let him take heed least he dissemble or little regard the
salvation of the souls committed to him, and have more care of transitory and
worldly things: but let him always consider that he has vndertake^ the
government of souls, of which he is also to give an account. And that he may
not complain for want of temporal means let him remember what is written.
Seek first the kingdom of God and his justice, and all these things shall be
given unto you. And again, Nothing is wanting to such as fear him. And let
him know that he who undertakes the government of souls must prepare himself
to give an account of them. And what the number of brethren under his care is,
let him certainly know that at the day of Judgment he is to give an account to
our Lord of all their souls besides the account he is to give for his own.
And so always fearing the future account of a pastor for the flock committed
to his charge, whilst he is sollicitous for other men's accounts, he is also
made care full of his own. And whi^st he reclaymeth others by his admonitions,
himself is freed from vices.

Of calling the Brethren to counsel. CHAP. III.
AS often as any principal matter is to be done in the monastery, let the
Abbot call together all the congregation, and let him declare what the matter
is. And hearing the counsel of his brethren, let him consider prudently with
himself, and do what he shall judge most expedient. And the reason why we
ordain that all be called to counsel, is because our Lord often reuealeth to
the younger, that which is best. And let the brethren give counsel with all
subjection and humility, and not presume stiffly to defend their own opinions,
but let them refer it to the Abbots discretion; and what he shall think
expedient, to that let them all submit. And as it belongs to the disciples to
obey their master; so it behooves him to dispose all things prouidently and
iu^^ly. In all things therefore let all follow the Rule, as their mistress, and
let no man rashly swerve from it. Let none in the monastery follow their own
wills. Neither let any one presume with in or with out the monastery peruersly
to contend with his Abbot: which if he do, let him be subject to regular
discipline: Not with standing let the Abbot do all things with the fear of
God, and observance of the Rule, knowing that he shall u^doubtedly give an
account of all his judgments, to God our most just Judge. And if any lesser
things are to be done for the benefit of the Monastery, let him only use the
counsel of the Seniours, as it is written. Do all things with counsel and
thou shall not afterward repent thee of it.

Which be the instruments of good works. CHAP. IV.
FIrst of all to love our Lord Go^ with all his heart, with all his soul^ with
all his strength. Then his neighbor as him self. Then not to kill. No^ to
commit adultery. Not to steal. No^ to covet. Not to bear false witness To
honor all men. And what he will no^ have done to himself let him not do^ to
another. To deny himself to himself that he may follow Christ. To chastize
his body. Not to seek after delights. To love fasting. To relieve the poor. To
cloth the naked. To visit the sick. To bury the dead. To help those that are
in tribulation. To comfort the sadd. To withdraw himself from worldly
businesses. To prefer nothing before the love of Christ. Not to give way to
anger. Not to bear revenge in his mind. Not to foster guile or deceit in his
heart. Not to make feigned peace. Not to forsake charity. Not to swear ^t all,
least perhaps he forswear himself. To speak the truth from heart and ^outh.
Not to do evil for evil. Not ^o do any injury. Yea and patiently to ^uffer
an injury done. To love his ene^yes. Not to speak ill of such as speak ^^l
of him, but rather to speak Well of them. To suffer persecution for ius^ice.
Not to be proud. Not a lover of wine. Not a great eater. Not drowsy. Not
slothful. Not a murmurer. Not ^ detracter. To put his trust in God. When he
shall see any good thing in himself, let him attribute it to God, not to
himself. But let him always know that evil is done by him self, and
therefore let him attribute it to him self. To fear the day of judgment To
be afraid of Hell. To dester life everlasting with spiritual th^rst. To have
death always before his eyes. To observe eue^y hour the actions of his life.
To know for certain that God beholds him in every place. Presently with the
remembrance of Christ to put away evil thoughts entering into his heart, and to
reveal them to his spiritual father. T^ keep his mouth from evil and
naughty words. Not to love much talking Not to speak vain words and such a
move laughter. Not to love much and dissolute laughter. Willingly t^ hear
holy readings. To pray often devoutly. To conses daily to God i^ prayer evils
past, with tears and sighs* To amend those evils for the time t^ come. Not to
fulfill the desiers of the flesh. To hate his own will. To obey the
commandments of the Abbot i^ all things, although he him self (which God for
bid) should do other wise being mindful of that precept of ou^ Lord, what
they say do ye: bu^ what they do, do ye not. Not to desire to be called
holy, till he be so, an^ first to be so, that he may truly becalled. so.
Daily to fulfill in deeds, the commaundeme^ts of God. To love chastity. To
hate noe man. To fly enui^ and emulation. Not to love contention. To fly
haughtines. To reueren* his elders. To love his inferiors for Christ his sake.
To pray for his eni^yes. To make peace with his aduer^^ry before the setting
of the son. and never to dispare of Gods mercy. Behold these are the
instruments of ^pirituall prosession, which things when they shall night and
day con^tantly be performed by us, and laid ^pen in the day of Judgment, that
reward shall be given us in recompense ^y our Lord, which he has promised,
that eye has not seen, nor ear ^eard, nor has ascended in to the ^art of
man, what God, has prepared for those that love him. The work house where all
these things ^re to be done, is the cloister of the monastery and stability in
the Congregation.

Of the obedience of the disciples. CHAP. V.
THe first degree of obedience is obedience with out delay. This beseems
those who esteem nothing more dear to them then Christ, by reason o^ the holy
profession they have made, o^ for the ^eare of Hell, or glory of life
everlasting. Presently as soon as any thing shall be commanded them by the
superior, as if it wear commanded by God, they make noe delay in doing it.
Of whom our Lord says; From the hearing of the ear he has obeyed me. And to
Superiors and teachers he says. He who hears you hears me. Therefore such
persons as these leaving presently all their own occasions and forsakeing
their own will, casting out of their hands and leaving imperfect what they
were about, with the speedy foot of obedience follow with deeds the voice of
the commander. And as it were in one moment the command of the ^aister, and the
perfect work of the sciple in the fear of God, go both ^ntly together, and
are speedely effe^^ed by those who thirst after life euersting. These take the
narrow way of which our Lord says; Narrow is the ^ay which leads to life,
not living ac^^rding to their own will or following ^^eir own desiers and
pleasures; but ^^ing in monasteries, and having an Ab^ot over them, walking
according to ^s directions and commandes. With out ^oubt such as these imitate
that sentence ^f our Lord where he says; I came ^ot to do my own will but
the will of ^^m who sent me. And This obedience ^ill the^ be acceptable to God
and plea^^ng to men, if that which is comman^ed be done, not fearfully,
slowly, ^oldly, or with murmuration, or with an ^^swer she wing unwillingness.
Because ^e obedience which is given to sueriours is given to God; who has ^id.
He who hears you hears me. and it ought to be done of the disciples ^ith a
good will: because God loves a cheerful giver. If the disciple obey with an
ill will and shall murmur no^ only in words, but also in his heart though he
fulfill what is commande^ him, it will not be acceptable before God, who
considers the heart of the murmurer. And for such a work h^ shall not get
reward, but rather in curreth the penalty of murmurers if he do not amend and
make satisfaction.

Of Silence. CHAP. VI.
LEt us do according to the sayeing of the Prophet. I have said I will keep
my ways, that I offend not in my tongue. I have been watch full oue^ my mouth.
I have held my peace and humbled my self and been silent from speaking good
things. If' therefore some times according to this saying o^ the Prophet for
silence sake we are to abstain from good talk; how much more ought we to
refrain, for the guilt and penalty of sin from evil words. Therefore for the
gravity of silence let leave of speaking seldom begiuen, even to perfect
disciples, though of good and holy matters and tending to edification. Because
it is written. In much speaking thou shall not eschew sin. And in another
place. Death and life in the hands of the tongue. For it behooves a master to
speak and teach, and it beseems a disciple to hold his peace and hear.
Therefore if any thing be to be asked of the Priour let it be done with all
humility subjection and' reverence, that they may not seem to speak more then
is necessary. But scurrilities or idle words and such as move laughter, we
utterly condemn and forbid in all places. And do not permit a disciple to
open his mouth to such speeches.

Of Humility. CHAP. VII.
THe holy scripture cries to us brethren saying, Every one who exalts
himself shall be humbled, and he who humbles himself, shall be exalted.
Hereby declaring unto us, that all exaltation, is a kind of pride, which the
Prophet shows how carefully he avoided, saying; Lord my heart is not exalted
neither are my eyes lifted up; neither have I walked in great things, nor in
wonders above my self. But what? If I did not think humbly but have exalted
my soul: As a child weaned from his mother, so will thou reward my soul.
Wherefore brethren, if we will attain to true humility, and will speedily come
to that heavenly exaltation to which we asce^d by the humility of this present
life; by our ascending actions that ladder is to be set up which appeared to
Jacob in his sleep, where he saw Angels descending and ascending. That desce^t
and ascent signifies nothing else, but that we desce^d by exalting our
selves. and ascend by humbling our selves. And this ladder thus erected is our
life here in this world, which by humility of heart is lifted up to heaven by
our Lord; And the sides of this ladder we understand to be our body and soul,
in which the divine majesty has placed diverse degrees of humility, and
discipline to be ascended.

The first degree of Humility.

THe first degree of humility is to have always the fear of God before his
eyes, and not to forgett himself But to be still mindful of all things that
God has commanded: and to remember that such as contemn God, ^all into hell
for their sins; and that ^uerlasting life is prepared for such as feate him.
And so to keep himself from all sin and vice of thought, word eyes, hands,
feet and proper will; and so speedely cut of all fleshly desiers. Let him
think himself to be always beheld from heaven of God; and all his actions,
wheresoever he be, to ly open to his divine sight, and to be presented to God
every hour by his Angels. The Prophet declares this when he says God to be
allways present to our thoughts in these words, God searches the heart and
reins And, Our Lord knows the thoughts of men that they are vain. And
again, Thou have understood my thoughts a fare of. and The thought of man
shall confess to thee. Let therefore the humble brother, that he may be
careful to avoid evil thoughts, allways say in his heart. Then shall I be
with out spott before him, if I shall keep me from my iniquity. The scripture
also forbids us to do our own will saying, Leave thy own will and
desire. And besides we beg of God in our daily prayer that his will may be
done in us.

We are taught therefore with good reason to take heed of doing our own will,
the scripture saying. There are ways which seem right to me^, the end where
of plungeth eue^ into the deep pit of hell. And again speaking of negligent
persous; They are corrupted and made abominable in their pleasures. And in the
desiers of the flesh we ought to believe God to be always present to us,
according to that of the Prophet speaking to our Lord Before thee is all my
desire. Let us then take heed of ill desires, because death is near to the
entrance of delight, where upon the scripture commands. Follow not thy
concupiscences. If therefore the eyes of our Lord behold both good and bad, and
our Lord always looks down from heaven upon the sons of men, to see who is
under standing or seekeing God; and that our works are by our Angels
Guardians day and night told to our Lord and maker; We must always take heed,
Brethren, least (as the Prophet in the Psalm says) God sometimes behold us
declining to evil and become unprofitable: and though he spare us for the
present because he is merciful and expects our conversion and amendment,
least he say to us hereafter, These things thou have done and I have held my
peace.

The second degree of humility is, If not loving his own will he seek not to
satisfy his desiers, but imitate that saying of our Lord, I came not to do my
own will, but the will of him who sent me. The scripture likewise says; The
will has punishment, and necessity purchases a crown.

The third degree of humility is, If for the love of God he submit himself
with all obedience to his superior, imitating our Lord of whom the Apostell
says, He was made obedient even to death.

The fourth degree of humility is, If that in obedience hard and contrary
things and also injurious being done to him, he embrace them patiently with a
quiet conscience; and suffering grow not wearye, and give over, according to
that of the scripture, Who perseuereth until the end he shall be saved. And
again, let thy heart be comforted and expect our Lord. And showing that the
faithful man ought for our Lord to bear all things, though never so
contrary, he says in the person of the sufferers. For thee we suffer death all
the day long: we are esteemed as sheep of the slaughter. And being assured
by hope, of a reward at Gods hands they go on rejoicing and saying, But in
all these things, we overcome by the help of him who has loved us. And
likewise in another place the scripture says. Thou have p^oued us o Lord: thou
have tried us with fire as silver is tried. Thou have brought us into the
snare; Thou have laid tribulation upon our backs. And to show that we ought to
be under a Prior or superior he follows on saying. Thou have placed men over
our heads, Fulfilling also by patience the precept of our Lord in aduersityes
and injuries, being struck on the one cheek they offer the other: leave their
cloakes to him who takes away their coat; and being constrained to carry a
burden one mile, go two miles. And with Paul the Apostle suffer false
brethren and persecutions, and bless those who revile and speak ill of them.

The fifth degree of humility is, to manifest to his Abbot by humble confession
all the ill thoughts of his heart, and secret faults committed by him. The
scripture exhorts us hereunto saying. Reveal thy way to our Lord, and hope
in him. And again, Confess to our Lord because he is good, because his mercy
is for ever. And furthermore the Prophet says, I have made known unto thee
mine offense, and I have not hidden my iniustices. I have said, I will declare
openly against my self to our Lord mine iuiustices: and thou have pardoned the
wickedness of my heart.

The sixth degree of humility is. If a monk be content with all baseness and
extremity, and in all things which are enjoined him, he think himself an
evil and unworthy servant, saying with the Prophet. I have been brought to
nothing, and knew not. I have been made like a beast with thee, and I always
with thee.

The seventh degree of humility is, that he not only pronounce with his
tongue, but also with his very heart believe himself to be inferior to all and
most abject; and humbling himself say with the Prophet. I am a worm and not
a man, the reproach of men and the outcast of the People. I am exalted, humbled
and confounded. And again, It is good for me that thou have humbled me, that I
may learn thy commandments.

The eight degree of humility is. That a monk do nothing but what the common
Rule of the monastery or the examples of his seniors teach and exhort him.

The ninght degree of humility is, For a monk to refrain his tongue from
speaking and be silent till a question be asked him, remembering the saying of
the scripture. In many words sin shall not be avoided; and that a talking man
shall not be directed upon earth.

The tenth degree of humility is, Not to be facile and prompt to laughter, for
it is written, The fool exalts his voice in laughter.

The eleventh degree of humility is, For a monk when he speaks, to speak
gently and with out laughter, humbly, with gravity or few words, and
discreetly, and not be clamorous in his voice; for it is written, A wise man is
known by speaking few words.

The twelfth degree of humility is For a monk not only to have humility in his
heart, but also to show it in his exterior to all that behold him; at work, in
the Monastery, in the Oratorie, in the Garden, in the field, in the way or
where soever, sitting, walking or standing, that he have always has head
inclined and his eyes fixed on the grownde, thinking himself ever guilty for
his; sins, and ready to be presented before the dreadful judgment of God,
and so saying to himself with the Publican of the Gospel; Lord, I a sinner
am not worthy to life mine eyes up to heaven. And again with the Prophet; I am
bowed down and humbled on every side. And thus all these degrees of humility
being ascended, a monk shall presently come to that love of God which is
perfect and expels fear, whereby all things which at the beginni^g he
observed through fear, he shall now begin to do by custom without any labor
as it were naturally, not for the fear of Hell, but for the love of Christ,
and out of a good custom and a delight in virtue, which our Lord will by the
holy Ghost voutchsafe to work in his servant now clear from vice and sin.

Of the divine office in the nights. CHAP. VIII.
IN the winter time, that is, from the kalends of November till Easter
according to a reasonable consideration, let them rise at the eight hour of
the night, that they may rest till a little after midnight, and then after
disgestion rise. As for the time that remains after Mattines, let the Brethren
who want some thing of the Psalter or lessons, bestow it on meditation. But
from Easter to the Kalends of November, let the hour for Mattines so be
ordered, that a little time being left for the Brethren to go forth to the
necessities of nature, by and by the Lauds which are to be said about the
break of day may begin.

How many Psalms are to be said in the night hours. CHAP. IX.
IN winter time having first said the verse Deus in adiutorium moum intend,
Domine ad ad^uuandum me festina, then Domine labia mea aperies and os meum
annunciabit laud^m tuam is to be repeted thrice. To which is to be added the
third, Psalm, and after it a Gloria Then the 94. Psalm with an Anthym is to
be said or so^ge. Next after let a Hymn follow: and then six Psalms with
Anthymes, which being said with a verse, let the Abbot give blessing, The^ all
sitting down on benches, let the brethren read three Lessons by turns, the
book lying on a trill, and after every lesson let a responsory be song. Let
two responsaries be said with out a Gloria: But after the third lesson he who
sings it, let him also singe a Gloria which when the singer begineth let all
rise from their seats, for the honor and reverence of the holy Trinity. And
let the scriptures as well of the old testament as the new be read at mattines,
and the expositions upon them made by the most famous orthodox and Catholic
fathers. After these three lessons and their responsories, let other six
Psalms follow, song with alleluya. After this let a lesson out of the Apostle
be recited by heart, and a verse and the supplication of the Litanies that is a
Kyrie eleyson, and so end the mattines or night Vigills.

How the matines or night office is to be celebrated in summer. CHAP. X.
FRom Easter till the kalends of November, let the same number of Psalms be
observed as before we have appointed, but let not the Lessons be read because
of the shortness of the night, but in place of those three lessons, let one be
said by heart out of the old testament, and after that a short Responsory, and
let the rest be performed as before is appointed, so that their never be fewer
then twelve psalms said at mattines, besides the third and 94. Psalm.

How the mattins or night office is to be celebrated on Sondayes. CHAP. XI.
ON the sundaye let them rise to mattines more timely, and obs^rue this order,
that six Psalms being song (as be fore we have ordained) and the verse, let
all sit down decently in their seats, each one in their order, let four
Lessons be read out of a Book with their responsories, and in the fourth only
let him that singes it say the Gloria; at the beginning of which let all rise
with reverence. After these lessons, let six more Psalms follow in order with
their anthyms and a verse as before. After which again let there be read other
four lessons with their responsories in the same order as the former. And then
let three canticles besaid out of the Prophets such as the Abbot shall appoint
which canticles are to be song with alleluya. Then the verse being said and
the Abbo^ having given the benediction, let other four lessons be read out of
the new testament in the same orde as before, and after the fourth responsory,
let the Abbot begin the Hymn Te Deum laudamus which being said, let the
Abbot read a lesson of the Gospel all standing with reverence and trembleing:
which being read; all answer Amen: and then let the Abbot presently go on with
the hymn Te decet laus: And the blessing being given let him begin Lauds.
This order is always to be observed on Sundays in saying the vigills or
mattines, as well in summer as winter except perchance, (which God for bid it
happen) they rise late, be cause then some what is to be shortened of the
lessons or responsories. But let good heed be taken that this happen not and if
it do, let him by whose neglect it happens make satisfaction for it in the
Oratory.

How the solemnity of Lauds is to be performed. CHAP. XII.
FOr the sundaye Lauds, let first the sixth Psalm be said plain with out
anthyme, after which say the fiftieth Psalm with alleluya, and after that the
hundred and seventy Psalm and the sixty two Psalm. Then the Benedictions and
praieres with a lesson out of the Apoc-lips by heart; and a responsory, a hymn
and a verse with a canticle out of the Gospel and the Litanies, and so end.

How the Lauds are to be celebrated ^ private days. CHAP. XIII.
ON private days let lauds be thu^ celebrated. Let the sixth Psalm be said
with out an anthyme^ plain and protracting it (as upon sundaye) that all may
come to the fiftieth which is to be said with on Anthyme. After which let other
two Psalms besayde according to the custom, that is on mundaye the fifth an^
five and thirtieth: on Tuesdaye the forty two and the fif^ieth six. On
wednesday the sixty third, and the sixtye fourth. On Thurday the eighty seven*
and the eighty ninth. On friday the seventy five and the ninty on: and on
saturday the hundredth and two, and the canticle of Deuteronomie is to be
divided in to two glorias. But on other days let every canticle, be said in his
day out of the Prophets according to the practice of the church of Rome. After
these let the praises or Laudate follow, then a lesson without book out of the
Apostle, a responsory, a hymn, and a verse, a canticle out of the Gospel,
the Litanies and so end. And let this all ways be observed, that in the end
of Lauds and Even song, our Lords prayer be said by the Prior a ^^oude that
all may hear it, for fear of scandalls that are wont to arise, but being putt
in mind by the covenant of this prayer, in which they say, for give us our
trespasses as we for give them that trespass against us; they may purge them
selves of this vice. But in celebrating other hours, let only the last ^art be
said a loud, that all may answer. ^ed libera nos a malo.

In what manner mattines is to be celebrated on the feast days of saints. CHAP.
XIV.
Upon the feasts of saints and in all solemnities, let the same order be
observed as upon sundays, only l^^ their be said Psalms anthymnes an^ lessons
pertaining to the day, but for the rest let the a foresaid manner b^ observed.

At what times Alleluya is to be said. CHAP. XV.
FRom the holy feast of Easter vntil^ whitsontide with out intermission let
alleluya be said, as well with the Psalms as the responsories. From
whitsontide till the beginning of Lent let it be said at the Nocturnes with the
six last Psalms only. And upon every sunday out of Lent let the canticles of
Lauds P^ime, terce, sext and none be said with alleluya, but Euensong with
anthymes. And let the respon^orie never be said with alleluya, but only from
Easter till whitsontide.

^n what manner the work of God or divine service is to be performed in the day
time. CHAP. XVI.
Seven times adaye (says the Prophet) I have song praises to thee. Which
sacred number of seven shall be accomplished by us. If at theses times, of
Lauds. Prime. Terce. Sext. None Euensonge and Complin, we perform the office
and duty of our service: Be cause of these hours the Prophet has said, seven
times in the day. I have song praise to thee. For of the night vigills or
mattins the self same Prophet says. At midnight I did rise to confess to
thee Therefore at these times, let us give praises to our savior, for the
judgments of his justice. That is at Lauds. Prime. Terce. Sext none Even
song and compline and in the night let us rise to confess unto him.

How many Psalms ar to be said at the rest of the hours. CHAP. XVII.
WE have already set down the order of the office for the Nocturnes and
Lands, now let us dispose of the hours following. At the first hour or Prime
let three Psalms be said severally, and not under one gloria, and a hymn of
the same hour presently after the verse Deus in adiutorium meum intend,
Domine ad adiuuandum me festina, Before the Psalms. And after the end of the
Psalms, let there be recited a lesson, a verse and kyrye eleyson, and let them
have license to depart. Terce Sexta^d: None are to be recited after the same
order: that is a verse and a hymn, at the same hour three Psalms, then a
lesson, a verse, and kyrie eleyson, and after that leave to depart. If the
convent be great let them be song with anthymes if little, only recited. But
let euensonge be said with four Psalms and anthymnes after which Psalms let
a lesson be re^ited then a respo^sory, a hymn, a verse ^canticle out of the
ghospel the lita^ie and our Lords prayer so end. For ^omplin let there be three
Psalms re^ited plain with out anthymes, after which, a hymn fit for that
hour, a ^esson, a verse, kyrie eleyson and a Be^ediction, and so make an end.

In what order the Psalms are to be said. CHAP. XVIII.
IN the day hours first of all let them always begin with the verse, Deus in
adiutorium meum intend, Domi^ead adiuuandum mefestina and a Gloria, ^hen the
hymn of that hour. At ^rime on sondayes there are to be said ^ower Chapters
of the hundred and ^ighteenth Psalm. And at the rest of ^he hours to wit,
Terce Sext and None let there be said three chapter of the same hundred and
eightieth Psalm. Prime on mondaye let there be said three Psalms, that is the
first second and sixth, and so every day at Prime till sunday let three
Psalme^ be said in order unto the ninetieth Psalm, but so that the nineth and
seventh Psalm be divided in to two Glorias; And so it will fall out that on
the sunday at mattines we shall always begin from the twentyeth Psalm. At
Terce Sext and none of the sundays let the nine chapters which remain of the
one hundred and eightieth Psalm be said by three and three at the some hours.
The hundred and eightieth Psalm therefore being said over in two days, to wit
sunday and mondaye; At Terce, Sext and none upon Tuesday let the Psalms be
sung in order by three and three from the hundredth and ninetieth to the
hundredth twenty seventh, that is, nine Psalms. And these Psalms ar all ways
to be repeated at the some hours the rest of the week till sunday; An uniform
order also of the hymns, Lessons, and verses, being every day observed; so
they may all every sundaye begin from the hundred and eighteen Psalm.

Even song is every day to be song with four Psalms, which Psalms are to
begin from the hundredth and ninth Psalm going on to the hundredth forty
seventh, excepting only such, as ar sequestered for other hours, that is from
the hundred and seuent ten Psalm to the hundred twenty and seven, and the
hundred thirty three, and the hundred forty two. All the rest a^ to be said in
euensonges. And be cause there fall three Psalms short, those Psalms which are
found longest ar to be divided, that is the hundred thirty eight, the hundred
forty three and the hundred forty four; And let the hundredth and sixteenth
because it is short be joined with the hundredth and fifteenth. The order
therefore of the Psalms for euensonge being set down, let the other things
that is lessons, Responsories, hymes, verses, and Canticles be ordered as we
have said before. At complin let the same Psalm be repeated every day, that
is the fourth, nintieth, and the hundred thirty three.

The order of the day office being thus disposed, let all the Psalms which
remain be equally divided in to the seven Mattines or night Vigills, dividing
still the Psalms which are longest: And let twelve be appointed for every
night. And if this disposition and distribution of the Psalms displease any,
let him if he think good order them otherwise, so he provide that every week
the whole Psalter of a hundred and fifty Psalms be song; And that upon sunday
at Mattines they begin it again. Be cause Monks show them selves over
negligent and indeuout, if in the circuit of a week, they singe not over the
Psalter with the accustomed canticles, since we read that our holy fathers
have courageously performed all that in one day, which God grant we tepid and
negligent persons may perform in a whole week.

Of the order and discipline of singinge. CHAP. XIX.
WE believe the divine presence to be in all places, and the eyes of our Lord
continually to behold both the good and the bad: But then especially and
particularly, when we are at the work of God. Therefore let us be allways
mindful what the Prophet says: Serve ye our Lord in fear and again; Singe
ye wisely, and In the sight of Angels I will sing unto thee. Therefore let us
consider in what manner, and with what reverence it behooves us to be in the
sight of God and the Angels, and let us so sing in the quire that our mind
and voice accord together.

Of the reverence of prayer. CHAP. XX.
IF we presume not to speak with any great person, but with humility and
reuerance, how much more ought we to present our supplications to our Lord the
God of all things with humility and purity of devotion. And we must know that
we shall be heard, not for our many words, but for our purity of heart, and
compunction of tears. And therefore prayer ought to be short and pure, unless
perhaps it be prolonged by the inspiration of divine grace. But in the convent
let prayer always be short; and the sign being given by the Priour, let all
rise together.

Of the Deanes of the Monastery. CHAP. XXI.
IF the Convent be great, let their be chosen out of them some Brothers who ar
of good repute and holy conversation, and appointed Deanes, who ar to be
careful over their deanries in all things according to the commandment of
God, and the precepts of their Abbot. And let such men bechosen for Deanes,
whom the Abbot may securely rely on to bear part of his burden. And let them
not bechosen by order, but according to their desert of life and learning. And
if perhaps any of them puffed up with pride, shall be found worthy of
reprehension, and being rebuked once twice or thrice do not a mend, let him be
put out of office, and an other who is worthy, substituted in his place. And
the same we ordain of the Prior or Prepositus.

How the Monks ar to sleep. CHAP. XXII.
LEt the Monks sleep a part in several Beds, and let them have bedclothes
befitting them according to the appointment of the Abbot. If it can be, let
them sleep in one place. But if the number permit it not, let the^ sleep by
ten or twenty in a place with their several seniors who have care of them.
And let a candel burn in the same cell till morning. Let them sleep clothed
and girt with girdells or cords, but let them not have knives by their sides
while they sleep, lest perhaps they be hurt there with sleeping. And let the
Monks be always ready, that as soon as the sign is heard, rising speedely
each one may hasten to come before his fellows to the work of God, yet with
all gravity and modesty. Let not the younger brethren have beds by themselves,
but mixed with the elder: and rising let the^ modestly exhort one another to the
work of God; for the excuses and delays of such as be sluggish.

Of excommunication for offenses. CHAP. XXIII.
IF any brother shall be found stubborn, dissobedient, proud, murmuring, or
contrary in any thing to the holy Rule, or to contemn the orders of his
seniours, let that man according to the precept of our Lord be once or twice
secretly admonished by his semours, and if he do not amend, let him be
reprehended publicly before all, but if with all this he amend not, then let
him be liable to excommunication, if he understand what kind of punishment it
is. And if he be obstinat, let him be liable to corporal punishment.

What the manner of excommunication ought to be. CHAP. XXIV.
According to the quality of the falt, the measure of excommunication or
punishment ought to be extended; which is to depend on the judgment of the
Abbot. If any brother be found in a lesser falt, let him be deprived of the
participation of the table: The manner of this deprivation shall be this: that
in the oratorie he shall neither begin Psalm, nor anthyme, nor recite a
lesson until he have made satisfaction. And let him take his refection of
meat alone after the brethren have taken their refectio^ in such measure, and
at such time as his Abbot shall think fitting; as (for example) if the
brethren take their refection at the sixth hour, let that brother at the ninth:
if the brethren at the ninth, let him at the evening, until by dew
satisfaction he obtain pardon.

Of more grievous faults. CHAP. XXV.
But that brother who is guilty of more greeuious faults, is to be suspended
both from the table and the oratorie. And let none of the brethren discourse
with him or keep him company, let him be alone at the work enjoined him
persisting in penance and sorrow, knowing that terrible sentence of the
Apostle, who says that such a man is delivered to satan to the destruction
of the flesh, that his spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord. And let
him take his allowance of meat alone in such measure and time, as the Abbot
shall think fit, neither let any man bless him passing by, or the meat
which is given him.

Of those that keep company with excommunicated persons without the command
of the Abbot. CHAP. XXVI.
IF any brother shall presume without command of the Abbot to join himself in
any sort to an excommunicated brother, or to talk with him, or send to him,
let him incur the same penalty of excomunication.

How the Abbot ought to be careful of such as be excommunicated. CHAP. XXVII.
LEt the Abbot have a special care of the delinquent brethren, for the
Physician is not needful for such as a^ in health, but for the sick. And
therefore he ought to use all the means of a wise Physician, and to send to them
some private comforters. That is some ancient and discreet bethren, who may as
it wear secretly comfort the troobled brother, and stir him up to humble
satisfaction. And let them comfort him, that he be not opressed with over much
sorrow but as the Apostle says; let charity be confirmed in him and let all
pray for him. The Abbot ought to be very solicitous and careful with all
prudence and industry, that he loose none of the sheep committed to his
charg. Let him know that he has under taken the charge of infirm souls, and
not any tyranicall authority over such as be well. And let him fear the
threatenings of the Prophet, by whom God says: what ye saw well liking that
you take to your selves, and what was weak you threw away. Let him imitate the
pious example of the good shepherd, who leaving ninety nine sheep in the
mountains, went to seek one sheep which was gone astraye, on whose infirmity
he took such compassion, that he vouchsafed to lay it on his shoulders and so
to carry it back to the flock.

Of those Who being often corrected do not amend. CHAP. XXVIII.
IF a brother have been often admonished of a fault, or been excommunicated
and yet do not amend, let him be more severely corrected, and punished with
stripes. And if for all this he amend not, so but rather puffed up with pride
(which God for bid) will also defend his doings, then let the Abbot do like a
wise Physician, after that he has applied the fomentations, and ointments of
good exhortations, the medicines of divine scripture, and last of all the
punishment of excommunication, and the stripes of Rods, and yet find his
labors take not effect, let him add that which is more then all this to wit
his prayer, and the prayers of all the Brethren for him, that our Lord who can
do all things, would vouch^afe ^o wo^k acure upon the infi^me brother: and if
by this means he be not healed and amended, then let the Abbot use the sword
of ab^e^ssio^ according to the saying of the Apostle: Take away evil from
amongst you. And again. If the unfaith full breaking his promise depart, let
him depart, least one diseased sheep infect the whole flock.

Whether brethren gonne out of the Monastery ought to be received a gain.
CHAP. XXIX.
THat brother who through his own fault goes forth, or is cast forth of the
monastery, if he will return, let him promise first the amendment of the
fault for which he went forth, and then let him be received in the lowest rank,
that by this, his humility may be tried. And if he go out again let him be
received again till the third time. But afterward let him know that all
entrance will be denied him.

Of Children of younger years how thy ar to be corrected. CHAP. XXX.
EVery age and understanding ought to have a proper government. And therefore as
often as children, or such as are younger in age and can not understand how
great a punishment excommunication is, let such as these when they offend be
punished with rigorous fasting or sharp stripes, that so they be cured.

What kind of man the Cellerarius of the Monastery ought to be. CHAP. XXXI.
LEt such a one be chosen out of the convent to be Cellerarius of the
Monastery, who is wise, grave of behavior, sober, noe greet eater, not
turbulent, not injurious, not slow or negligent, nor prodigal, but one that
fears God, who may be as a father to all the convent: let him have care of
all things, and let him do nothing without the command of his Abbot. Let him
observe such things as ar commanded him, and let him not contristate his
brethren. And if any brother request any thing of him that is not reasonable,
let him not contristate him by contemning him, but let him with humility and
just cause deny his vnreasonnable request: let him have regard to his own
soul, and be mindful of that rule of the Apostle: That he which serves well
gets him self a place amongst the just, Let him have a diligent care of the
sick, of the infants, of the guestes, and of the poor, for of all these let
him know at the dreadful judgment day, he is to give an account; keep and
regard all the vessels and goods of the Monastery, as if they were sacred
vessels of the alter, let nothing be neglected never. Let him neither be
covetous no^^ prodigal or a w^ster of the goods of the Monastery* But let him
do all things with (...) and according to the comm^^d ^f ^he Abbot, above all
things (...), to conserve humility, and if any thing be asked of him which he
has not to give, let him at the least afford them a good answer, for it is
written, a good answer is before the best guest, Let him have a care of all
things which the Abbot inioyneth him, and let him not presume to do any thing
which he forbids. Let him give to the brethren their allowance of meat
appointed, with out lessening or delayeing it, that they be not scandalized,
being mindful of our Lord sayings in the Gospel, what he deserves that
shall scandalize one of the little ones. If the convent be great, let assistance
begiue^ him that so being helped he may quietly perform the office committed
to his charge. Let such things as are to be given or asked, be given and asked
at convenient hours, that noe man may be troubled or contristated in the
house of God.

Of the Iron tools of the Monastery. CHAP. XXXII.
FOr keeping the Iron tools, Clothes, or other things belonging to the
Monastery, let the Abbot provide brethren of whose life and conversation he
may be secure, and to them let him allot all things to be keept, as he shall
judge most expedient. Of all which things let the Abbot keep a note, that
when other brethren succed, the one may know what he takes, and the other wh^t
he quiteth, and if any one shall sluttishly or negligently handle the things of
the monastery, let him be rebuked. And if he do not amend, let him be liable
to discipline.

Whether the monks ought to have any things proper to themselves. CHAP.
XXXIII.
THe vice of giving or taking without the leave of the Abbot, or calling of any
thing whatsoever, even of a book or pen his own is especially to be rooted
out of the monastery. Because it is not lawful for them to have their bodies
or wills in their own power. But to hope for all necessaryes from the father
of the monastery. Nothing which the Abbot does not give or permit may be
lawfully keept but all things to be in common, as it is writ^en. Nor let any
call or presume any thing to be his own. And if any one shall be found to be
given to this most wicked vice, let him be admonished once or twice, and if he
shall not amend, let him be subject to correction.

Whether all ought to have necessaries alike. CHAP. XXXIV.
AS it is written, let there be distributed to each one according to their
necessity; to signify, not that there shall be acception of persons (which god
forbid) but that consideration be had of every ones infirmities. And therefore
let him who needs less, give God thanks, and not be contristated. And he
who needs more, let him be humbled for his infirmity and not proud for the
mercy showed him, and so all the members shall be in peace. Above all things
take heed there be noe murmuration upon any occasion what so ever by word or
sign, and if any one shall be found falty in this, let him be liable to most
severe discipline.

Of the weekly officers which are to be in the kitchen. CHAP. XXXV.
THe brethren are so to serve each other, that noe man be excused from the
office of the kitchen, unless they be hindered by sickness or other business of
more profitt. Because from thence a greater reward is gotten. And for the
weaker sort, let them have help that they may do it which alacrity and not with
sadness; and let all generally have help and solace according as the number of
the convent and situatio^ of the place shall require. If the convent be great
let the Cellerarius be excused from the kitchen, and as we have said before,
such as ar employed in matters of greater profit. But let the rest serve each
other in charity. He who goes out of the week, let him upon saturday make all
things clean. Let him wash the linen with which the brethren wipe their hands
and feet. And let both him who goes out, and he who comes in, wash the feet
of every one. And let him give back by tale to the Cellerarius the vessels of
his office made clean and whole, that he may know what he gives and what he
takes.

And these week officiers may take an hour before refection, each one a
draught of drink, and a piece of bread a boue the appointed allowance, that at
the houer of refection, they may serve their brethren with out murmuring or
great labor. Not withsanding on solemn days, let all forbear till mas. The
week officers entering in, and going out, upon sunday in the oratory,
presently after Lauds, shall make low inclination at the feet of their
brethren, and desire to be prayed for. And Theye who goes out that week,
shall say this very. Benedictus es Domine Deus, qui adiuuistime and
consolatus es me. which being thrice repeated let him who goes out receive his
blessing, and let him who entret^ immediately follow and say Deus in adiutorium
meum intend, Domine ad adiuuandum me festina, and let this be lik^ wise thrice
repeated of all. And having received his blessing, let him enter i^ to his
office.

Of the sicke-brethren. CHAP. XXXVI.
BEfore and above all things a special care is to be had of the sick, so that
they be served, even as Christ himself because he has said; I have been
sick and ye have visited me* And what ye have done to one of these little
ones, ye have done to me* let the sick brethren consider that they are
served for the honor of God, and therefore let them not contristat their
brethren who serve them, with their superfluityes. Who notwitstanding ar
patiently to be borne with all, because of such, a more abundant reward is
gotten. Therefore let the Abbot have a special care they be not neglected. For
the sick brethren let their be a cell appointed by it self, and a seruitor
fearing God, that is diligent and careful. Let the use of bathes be allowed to
the sick as often as shall be expedient: but to such as are in health
especially to young men, let it be seldom granted. More over let eating of
flesh be granted to such as are sick, and weak, for their recovery. But when
they are recovered let them after the acustomed manner, wholly abstain from
flesh. And let the Abbot have a special care, that the Cellerarius or
seruitors neglect not the sick, be cause whatsoever is done amiss by his
disciples, is imputed to him.

Of old men and Infants. CHAP. XXXVII.
ALthough man's nature it self be inclined to pity, these ages, that is, old
men and Infants, not withstanting it is also fitting that by the authority of
the Rule they should be provided for. Let therefore their weakness be all ways
considered, and let the rigor of the Rule in victuals be by noe means kept
with them, but let there be a pious consideration had of them, and let them
come timely to the canonical hours.

Of the weekly reader. CHAP. XXXVIII.
REeadinge ought not to be wanting at the Table whiles the brethren eat;
Neither ought any one to presume to read, who shall take up, the book by hap
hazard, but let him that is appointed to read for the whole week enter in upon
sunday. And then after mass and communion let him desire all to pray for
him, that God may keep from him the spirit of pride, and let this* verse be
thrice repeted in the oratory, he first beginning it. Domine labia mea aperies,
and os meum aenuntiabit laudem tuam. Then after the benediction given, let him
enter in to read. Let great silence be kept at the table, so that noe voice
or muttering be hard, but only of the reader, and for such things as ar
necessary for meat and drink, let the brethren so provide, that no man need
to ask any thing. And if any thing shall be wanting, let it be asked rather by
the sound of some sign then by voice: nor let any one there presume to ask
any thing of that which is read, or any thing else, least occasion o^ speech
be given, unless perhaps the Prior will make some brief exhortation for the
edification of the brethren. And let the hebdomadarius take a few pottage
before he begin to read, for holy communion sake, and least perhaps it be
troublesome to him to fast so long and afterward let him eat with the other
weekly officers of the kitchim and seruitours. And let not the brethren or
read by order, but such as may edify the hearers.

Of the measure or quantity of meat. CHAP. XXXIX.
AT the daily refection as well of the sixth as ninth hour at all tables, we
think two dishes of hot pulse will be fitting, by reason of the infirmyties of
diverse, that he who can not eat of one, may make his refection of the other.
Let therefore two dishes of hot pulse suffice the brethren, and if there be
any apples or fruit, let them have it for a third dish. Let a pound of bread be
the allowance for one day, whether there be one refection, or both dinner and
supper, and if they be to suppe, let a third part of that pound be reserved by
the Cellerarius for their supper. And if their labor be great, it shall be in
the power of the Abbot to add to their ordinary allowance what he shall think
expedient, having always a care to avoid excess and surfiting that the monks
be not overtaken with indisgestion, be cause there is noe sin more contrary
to a christian then gluttony, and our Lord says; see that your hearts be not
oppressed with gluttony and drunckennes. But to children of younger age, let not
the same quantity be given, but less then to the elder; observing always
moderation and frugality. And let all generally abstain from eating of four
footed beasts, excepting such as be very weak and sick.

Of the measure of drink. CHAP. XXXX.
EVery one has his proper gift from God one thus and another thus: and
therefore we apponit the measure of other men's victuals not with out some
scrupu^osity. Yet considering the weakness and infirmity of many, we think a
pint of wine will suffice each one a day. But to whom God gives the giuft of
abstinence, let them know they shall receive their proper reward. And if either
labor, heat of the summer, or situation of the place require more, let the
Prior do what he thinks good, having ever a care that fullnes or gluttony
creep not in. And although we read, wine to be in no sort the drink of
Monckes, yet because in these times they will not be so persuaded, let us
atleastwise consent to this, that we drink not our fill but sparingly and with
moderation, because wine makes even wisemen to Apostatike. But where the
necessity of the place will not allow that measure appointed, but less or
perhaps none at all, let them praise God that live there, and not murmur. And
this above all things we admonish, that there never be any murmurations.

At what hours the brethren ar to take their refection. CHAP. XXXXI.
FRom the holy feast of Easter until whitsontide, let the brethren take their
refection at the sixth hour, and suppe at night. But from whitsontide all the
summer long, if they labor not in the feilds, or the extremity of the heat
does not molest them, let them fast wedensday and friday till the ninth hour,
but on other days, let them dine at the sixth hour: Which sixth hour of
dinner if they work in the feilds or the heat of the summer be great, shall
be continued, at the discretion of the Abbot, and let him so temper and
dispose all things, that souls may be ^aued and what the brethren do, may be
done without murmuring. But from the Ides of september until the beginning of
Lent, let the brethren always refresh themselves at the ninth hour; And from
the beginning of Lent until Easter, let them refresh in the evening, but let
it be so ordered, that then in the evening there be noe need of a light at
time of refection, but that all be done by day light, yea at all times whether
supper or not supper, let the hour of refection be so ordered, that all
things be done by daylight.

That noe man may speak after Complin. CHAP. XXXXII.
Monks ought to keep silence at all times but especially in the night hours.
And therefore at all times, whether they be days of fasting ordining, when it
is a day of dining, presently after they are risen from supper, let them come
all together, and being set, let one read the collations or lives of the
fathers, or some other thing that may edify the hearers, but let them not
read the Heptateuch or book of kings, be cause it will not be profitable for
weak understandings to hear this scripture at that hour, yet at other times
it may be read. But if it be a fasting day after that Euen-songe is said,
with in a little space let them come to the reading of the Collations as we have
said: and four or five leaves being read, or as much as the time permits, all
being come together in this time of reading and namely those who perhaps were
occupied in some special works enjoined them when all ar assembled together,
let them say Complin, and after they go out from Complin, let noe leave be
granted to speak that night. And if any one shall be found to break this Rule
of silence, let him be liable to most severe punishment, except there besome
necessary occasion by reason of the coming in of some guests, or that the Abbot
command any thing, And let that also be done with great gravity and
moderation.

Of those that comes late to the work of God, or to the Table. CHAP. XXXXIII.
LEt all come presently as soon as the sign shall be given with all have to
the divine office, leaving whatsoever shall be in their hands. Yet with gravity
and avoiding all kind of scurillity, let nothing therefore be preferred before
the work of God. And if any shall come to the Mattines after the gloria of the
94. Psalm (which of purpose we will have to be said with protraction and
leasurly) let him not stand in his order in the quire, but let him stand last
of all, or in the place which the Abbot shall appointe a part, for such
negligent People, that he may be in the sight of the Abbot and all the rest,
until the work of God be ended, that so he do penance and make publik
satisfaction; And we ordain that they stand in the last place, or apart, to
the end that being seen by all, they may amend even for shame. For it may be
such a one who if he remain out of the oratorie, will perhaps setle himself to
sleep or idle talk, and so give occasion to the enemy. Therefore let him
come in, that he loose not all, and be amended for the time to come.

And in the day hours, he that shall come to the work of God after the verse
and gloria, of the first Psalm, according to the before said order, let him
stand last, and let him not presume to associate himself to the quier of the
singers, until he have made satisfaction, except the Abbot shall give leave by
his permission, yet so, that afterward he make satisfaction. And to the hour
of refection, he that comes not before the verse, so that they may say the
verse and pray all together and sit down together at the table, he I say
that through negligence shall offend in this, let him be rebuked until the
second time. If after he do not amend, let him not be admitted to the
participation of the common table: But being sequestered from the company of his
brethren, let him eat a lone, and his portion of wine be taken from him till
satisfaction and amendment. And let him in like manner suffer, who is not
present at that verse which is said after meat. Nor let any man presume to
take any meat or drink, before the appointed hour, or after it. Moreover if
any thing be offered to any one by the Prior and he refuse it at the time he
shall desire, let him not receive that or any thing else until he have made
sufficient satisfaction.

Of those that are excommunicated how they may satisfy. CHAP. XXXXIV.
HE who is excommunicated from ^^e oratorie or table for more grievous
offenses, at the hour in which the work of God is celebrated in the oratorie,
let him lie prostrat before the doors of the oratorie saying nothing, but
lying his head on the ground, prostrat all along at the feet of all those that
go out of the oratorie. And let him do this so long, till the Abbot think
he has made sufficient satisfaction: Who being commanded to come to the Abbot,
shall cast himself at his feet, and afterward at the feet of all his brethren,
that they may pray for him. And then if the Abbot shall command, let him be
receued in to the quire, and in the rank which the Abbot shall appointe, yet
so, that he presume not to begin a Psalm, or Lesson, or any thing else in
the oratorie, unless the Abbot again command. And at all hours when the
w^^ke of God is finished, let him cast himself on the earth in the place where
he stands, and let him satisfy in this manner until the Abbot command him to
cease from this satisfaction. But they who for little faults ar excomunicated,
only from the table, let them satisfy in the oratory as long as the Abbot
commands: And let them do this, until he bless them and say, it suffices.

Of those who committ any error in the Oratorie. CHAP. XXXXV.
IF any one while he reciteh a Psalm, responsorie, antiphone, or Lesson, shall
err, and makes not humble satisfaction there before all, let him be liable to
greater punishment, as one that will not amend with humility, what by
negligence he has done a miss, and let children be beaten for such a fault.

Of those who offend in lesser matters. CHAP. XXXXVI.
IF any one whilst he is in labor either in the kitchen, cellar, or any
office, in the bakehouse, garden, or in any art, shall do any thing a miss
or break or loose any thing, or shall committ any excess, and do not
presently come before the Abbot or convent, and of his own accord satisfy and
confess his offense; when it shall be known by another, let him be liable to
greater punishment. But if it shall be private to his own soul, as being a
sin, let him only manifest it to his Abbot or spiritual seniours, who know
how to cure their own wounds, and not to disclosse or publish an other man's.

Of appointing the hour of divine service. CHAP. XXXXVII.
LEt it be the Abbots care night and day to signify the hour of the work of
God, either by himself, or committing the care there of to some vigilant
brother to see that all things be done in competent hours. And let them who
ar appointed, begin Psalms and antiphones each one in their order after the
Abbot. And let not any presume to singe or read, but he that can so perform
the office, that the hearers may be edified by it. Which ought to be done with
humility, gravity, and trembling, and by him whom the Abbot shall appoint.

Of the daily hand labor. CHAP. XXXXVIII.
Idleness is an enemy of the soul, and therefore at certain hours the
brethren ought to be employed in handye labor, and other whiles in spiritual
reading. And therefore we think that both times may thus be well ordered:
that is, from Easter until the kalends of october, in the morning going out
from Prime, they do that which shall be necessary until well nigh the fourth
hour. And from the fourth hour till well nigh the sixth hour, let them be
employed in reading, and after the sixth hour rising from table, let them rest
on their Beds with all silence, and he who then perhaps desires to read, let
him read so to him self, that he disquiet not other. Let None be said some
that sooner, about the eight hour, and after that let them do what they have
to do until evening. And if the necessity of the place, or poverty require
that they themselves be employed in reaping their corn, let them not be
contristated. Because they are then truly Monks when they live by the labor
of their hands, as both our fathers and the Apostles did. Yet let all things
be done in measure by reason of such as are pusillanimous.

And from the kalends of october until the beginning of Lent, let them be
employed in reading till full the second hour, and at the second hour, let
Terce be celebrated, then until the ninth hour, let all labor in the work
which is enjoined them. But the first sign of the ninth hour being given, let
them all depart from their work, and let them be ready when the second sign
shall be made. And after refection let them be employed in reading of
spiritual books or Psalms.

But in Lent let them be employed in readinge from the morninge till the third
hour complete: and until the tenth hour complete let them do the work
enjoined them. In whih time of Lent, let each one take a book out of the
Library, read it all over in order; and let these books be given them in the
beginning of Lent. Let there be diligent care taken, that there be one or two
seniors appointed, who may go up and down the Monastery at the hours in
which the brethren ar employed in reading, to see least any of them be sloth
full, or apply himself to idleness or foulish talk, and neglecte his reading,
and so not only unprofitable to himself, but also an impediment to others. If
such a one (which god forbid) be found, let him be reprehended once or twice,
and if he amend not, let him be liable to regular discipline, so that others
may take warning by it. Neither let one brother associat himself whith an
other at incompetent hours. On sunday let all be employed in reading, except
such as are deputed for officers. And if any one shall be so slothful or
negligent, that he will not or cannot meditate or read, let him have some work
enjoined him to keep him from idleness. To the weak brethren, and tender of
constitution, let such work or art be enjoined as they may be kept from
idleness, and yet not oppressed with so much labor so as to be driven away,
whose weakness therefore ought to be well considered by the Abbot.

Of the observance of Lent. CHAP. XXXXIX.
ALthough at all times the life of a Monk ought to be as a continual Lent,
yet because few are so virtuous, we therefore exhort them at least in this
holy time of Lent, to lead their life in all purity and to wash away all the
negligences of other times. Which then we shall righly perform, if we refrain
from all vices, and apply our selfs to prayer with weeping, to reading,
compunction of heart and abstinence. Therefore in these days, let us add some
thing over and above our wonted task, peculiar prayers, and abstinence from
meat drink, so that every one above the ordinary measure appointed him, of
his own free will, with joy of the holy ghost offer some thing to God: That
is, that he withdraw from his body some what of his meat, drink, sleep,
talk, laughter, and with spiritual joy and desire, expect the holy Easter.
Yet let every one make his Abbot acquainted with this very thing which he
offers, and let it be done with his prayer and consent. Because whatsoever is
done whitout the permission of the spiritual father, shall be imputed to
presumption and vain glory, and meriteth note reward. All things therefore
are to be done with the leave and permistion of the Abbot.

Of brethren who labor far from the oratorie, or such as ar on the way.
CHAP. L.
THe brethren who ar in labor very far of, and cannot come in a competent
hour to the oratorie, and the Abbot knows it is so, let them there do the
work of God, where they labor, kneeling with fear and reverence. And let
the^ also who ar sent a journey, have care not to slip the appointed hours,
but do as they can, and by no means neglect to perform their task of divine
service.

Of Brethren who go not far of. CHAP. LI.
THe Brethren who go forth upon any errand and hope to return that day to
the Monastery, let them not presume to ea^e abroad, although they be entreated,
unless their Abbot command them. And if they do otherwise, let them be
excommunicated.

Of the oratorie of the Monastery. CHAP. LII.
LEt the oratorie be that which the name signifies, and let not any other
thing be done or wrought there; The work of God being ended, let all go
forth with exceeding great silence making reverence to God, that the Brother
who perh^ps will peculiarly pray by himself, be not hindered by the lewdnes of
an other. And if an other will also pray privately by himself, let him simply
enter, and pray, not in a clamorous voice, but with tears and attention of
heart. Therefore let no^ any who does not pray, be permitted to stay in the
oratorie after the work of God be finished, least he be ahinderance to others.

Of the manner of entertayninge Guestes. CHAP. LIII.
LEt all guests that comme to the Monastery be entertained like Christ: because
he will say: I have been a guest and ye have entertained me. And let due
honor be given to all, especially to those of the household of faith and
travelers. As Soon therefore as a guest is come, let the Prior meet him or the
brethren with all show of charity; and let them first pray together, and so be
associated to each other in peace. And let not the kiss of peace be offered,
but after prayer, by reason of the illusions of the devil. And in the
salutation it self, let all humility be showed The head being bowed down or
all the body prostrate on the earth to all guests coming and goeing, let
Christ who is received in them be adored in them. Let the guests received be
brought to prayer, and afterward let the Prior or whosoever he shall command
sit, and keep company with them. Let the divine law be read before the guest
that he may be edified, and afterward let all courtesy be showed to him. Let
a regular fast be broke by the Prior for the entertainment of a guest: unless
it be a principal day of fast, which ought not to be broken. But let the hold
on their custom of fasting. Let the Abbot give water to the guests hands, and
let both the Abbot and the whole convent wash the feet of the guests, which
being done let them say this verse, sus^epimus Deus misericordiam tuam in
medio templi tui. And let poor people and strangers especial^y be diligently
entertained with all care, because in the^ Christ is more truly received. For
the fear or terror of rich men does it self exhort an honor to them.

Let the kitchen of the Abbot and guest be apart, that guest without who^ the
Monastery never is, coming at un certain hours, may not disquiet the
Brethren. Into which kitchen let then enter two brothers for a year who can
well perform that office. To whom as occasion requires let help be given,
that they ma^e ^erue without murmuring. And when the have less employment, let
them go forth to labor, where they shall be appointed. And not only in these,
but in all other offices in the Monastery, let thi^ consideration be had, that
when they want help it be given them, and when they are vacant, they obey and
do^ what is commanded them. And for the lodgings of the guests, let care there
o^ be commended to a brother, whos^ soul the fear of God possesses where let
there be a sufficient numbe^ of beds made, and let the house o^ God be wisely
governed by discree^ men. And let not any but such as ar appointed associate
himself, o^ talk with the guests. But if the shall meet or see them, humbly
saluting them and asking their benediction, le^ him pass by, saying that it is
not lawful for him to talk with a guest.

Whether it be lawful for a Monk to receive letters or tokens. CHAP. LIVE.
LEt not a monk in noe wise sen^ or receive letters tokens or any presents
neither from his parents, or any other man whatsoever or from one an other
without the leave of his Abbot. And if any thing be sent to him even from his
parente, let him not presume to receive it, unless it be first told the
Abbot, and if he command that it shall be received, let it be in the Abbots
power to appoint to whom it shall be given, and let not the brother be
contristated to whom it was sent, that their be noe occation given to the
Devil. And whosoever shall presume to do otherwise, let him be liable to
regular discipline.

Of the clothes and shoes of the Brethren. CHAP. LV.
LEt clothes be given to the brethren according to the quality of the places
where they dwell, or temperature of the air: Because in cold countries there is
need of more, and in hot countries of les. Let it therefore be in the Abbots
power to order this. Not withstandinge for temperate places, we think it will
be sufficient for each Monk to have a coule and a cassoke, a coule in the
winter haueing a high nap, in the summer smoth or old, and ascapular for work,
shoes and stockings to put one their fett; and for the color or coursenez of
these things, let not the Monks find fault, but let them be such as can be
provided in the province in which they dwell, or such as may be bought at a
cheaper rate. And let the Abbot see to the measure and decentnes of these
garments, that they be not to little for such as use them, but of a fit size.
When they receive them, let them always restore the old to be laid up in the
wardrope for the poor: for it is sufficient for a Monk to have two cassockes
and two coules for the nights, for washing and change. Now what is over and
above is superfluous, and must be cute of. And as is said, let them restore
what soever is old when they receive new. Let those who go a Journey take
breeches out of the wardrope, and when they return let them restore them back
washed. And let the coules and cassockes at such times be better then those
they ordinaryly use, which goeing a Journey they take out of the wardope and
returning restore.

For bedding may suffice astraw bed, a quilt bed, a couerlet, and a pillow,
which beds are often to be searched by the Abbot, least there be any propriety,
and if any be found to have any thing which he has not received from the
Abbot, let him be liable to most sharp discipline. And that this vice of
propriety may be rooted out, let all things be given by the Abbot which shall
be necessary, that is a coule, a cassocke, shoes, stockens a pair of sleeves,
a knife, a steel, a needle, a handkerchefe, table books, that all excuse of
necessity may be taken away. Let the Abbot not with standing always consider
the sentence of the acts of the Apostles, there was given to every one
according as, they had need. And let him therefore consider the infirmities of
such as want, not the ill will of such as envy, And in all his ordinances let
him think of the retribucion of God.

Of the Abbots table. CHAP. LVI.
LEt the Abbots table be always with the guests and strangers. Yet when there
are noe guests, let it be in his power to call which of the brethren he please.
But let him provide that there be always one or two of the seniors left with
the brethren by reason of discipline.

Of the artificers of the Monastery. CHAP. LVII.
IF there be artificers in the Monastery, let them exercise those arts with all
humility and reverence, if so be the Abbot command. But if any of them be
proud of the knowledge he has in his art, because he may seem to get some
what by it for the Monastery, let him be taken from it, and let him not
exercise it again; unless after his humiliation the Abbot shall permit him.
And if any thing of the work of the artificers be to be sold, let them by
whose hands they are to pass take heed, least they presume to deceive in any
thing. Let them remember Ananias and Saphira least the death which they
suffered in body, these who committ fraudin the good of the Monastery suffer
in their soul. And in the prices and valuations, let not the vice of avarice
creep in, but let things be allways sold some what cheaper then by seculars,
that God may be glorified in all things.

Of the manner of receauinge Nouices. CHAP. LVIII.
IF any one come newly to conversion let him not easyly be admitted. But as the
Apostle says, let spirits be tried whether they be from God. If therefore
coming he shall persevere knockinge, and shall be seen for four or five days
patiently to endure injuries offered him; and the difficulty which is made of
his entrance, and to persist in his petition, then grant him entrance, and let
him be in the cell of the guests for a few days. And afterward let him be in
the cell of the nouices, where he is to meditate, eat, and sleep, and let such
a senior be deputed over him, who is fit to gain souls, who must curiously
and carefully look to him, to see whether he truly seek God: and if he be
careful in the service of God, in obedience, and in suffering reproaches. Let
there be suggested to him the rigor and austerity by which we tend toward God.
And if he promise stability and perseuera^ce, after two months space let this
rule be read to him in order, and let there besaid to him. Behold the law
under which thou desire to fight, if thou can observe it enter in, if thou
can not, freely depart. If he shall still persevere, then let him be brought
in to the before said cell of the nouices, and let him be again tried in all
patience. And after the space of six months, let the Rule be read again to
him that he may know to what he enters in. And if he still persevere, after
four months let the Rule be read again to him. And if upon deliberation had
with himself he shall promise that he will keep and observe all things
commanded him, then let him be received in to the Convent, knowing himself
from that time forward to be under the law of the Rule, so that it is not
lawful for him to go out of the Monastery, nor shake of the yoke of the Rule
which he might either have refused or embraced after so long deliberation.

And when they admit him to profession let him in the oratorie before, all,
make a promise of his stability, and conversion of his manners, and obedience
before God and his saints, that if at any time he shall do otherwise, he may
know that he shall be condemned by him whom he mocketh. Of which promise let
him make a petition in the name of those saints whose relics are there, and
of the Abbot there present, which petition let him writ whith his own hand,
or if he can not writ, let an other requested by him writ it; and the
nouice himself put to his sign, and let him lay it on the alter with his own
hand; which when he has done let him presently begin this verse. Suscipe me
Domine secundum eloquium tuum and viuam, and non confundas me ab expectatione
mea. Which verse let all the convent answer the third time, addinge to it
Gloria Patri, etc. The^ let the said brother nouice prostrate himself the feet
of all, that they may pray for him: and from that hour let him be accounted
one of the conue^t. If he have any thing, let him either first bestow it on
the poor, or by a solemn donation give it to the Monastery, reserving for
himself nothing at all, because from that day forwards he must know that he
shall not have power as much as over his own body. Let him therefore presently
in the oratorie be stripped of his own garments where with he is clothed, and
let him be clothed with the garments of the Monastery. And let those garments
which are put of, be laid in the ward-rope to be kept. That if at any time by
the devils persuasion he consent to go out of the Monastery, (which God
forbid) then taking from him the habit of the Monastery, he may be turned out,
But that writing which the Abbot took of the altar, let him not have again,
but let it be kept in the Monastery.

Of the sons of Noblemen or Poor men which are offered. CHAP. LIX.
IF perhaps any noble man offers his son to God to live in the monastery: if
the child himself, be under age, let his parents make the fore said petition
or writing for him, and offering him let them wrap the said petition and the
hand of the child in the pall of the altar, and so let them offer him up. And
for his goods, let them either in the said petition promise under oath that
they will never by themselves nor by any other person or mea^s whatsoever,
either give him any thing, or give him occasion of having any thing. And if
they will not do this, but will rather offer up some thing in allmes to the
monastery, for their greater merit, let them make adonation of that which they
will give to the monastery, reserving (i^ they so please) the use or profit of
it for them selves. But let things be so ordered that noe suspicion remain
with the child, by which being deceived he may perish, (which God forbid) as in
others we have learned by experience. And in like manner let the poorer sort
do. But let them who have nothing at all simply make their petition, and with
an oblation give up their son before witnesses.

Of Priests who dosire to dwell in the Monastery. CHAP. LX.
IF any that has taken the order of Priesthood, shall request to be receued
into the monastery, let him not easily be admitted, yet if he shall still
persevere in this request, let him know that he is to keep all discipline and
observance appointed in the Rule, neither shall any thing be remitted him,
according to that which is written. Friend for what art thou come: Not with
standing let it be granted him to stand next after the Abbot, and to bless
and say mass if the Abbot do so command, otherwise, let him in noe sort
presume to do any thing, knowing himself subject to regular discipline, and
let him rather show to others examples of humility. If perhaps he be in the
Monastery for some treaty of ordination, or other occasion whatsoever. Let him
remember the place due to him according to the time of his entrance in to the
Monastery, not that which is granted him for the reverence of Priesthood. And
if any other clergyman shall likewise desire to be admitted in to the
Monastery, let him be ranked in a reasonable place, yet so that he promise
observance of the Rule and stability in it.

Of Monks that be strangers how they are to be received. CHAP. LXI.
IF any strange Monk shall come from far places and desire to dwell in the
Monastery as a guest, and will be content with the customs of the place which
he finds, and does not trouble the Monastery with his superfluityes, but is
well contented with what he finds, let him be entertained for as long time as
he desires. And if he reasonably and with humility and charity reprehend or
admonish any thing, let the Abbot prudently consider what he says, for perhaps
our Lord sent him for that end. And if after he desire to make his abode there,
let him not be refused, especially, because in the time while he lived a guest,
his life might be sufficiently known. But if in that time he be found given to
superfluity or vitiousnes, let him not only be refused, but also let him be
ciuilly bid to depart, least others be corrupted by his ill demeanure. But if
he be not such a one as deserves to be cast out, let him not only if he
demand it, be received into the society of the convent, but let him be
persuaded to stay, that by his exemple others may be instructed, because in
every place we serve one God and fight under one king; And if the Abbot shall
find him to be well deserving, he may also place him in a higher rank. And not
only a Monk he may thus exalt above his time in the habit, but also any of the
aforesaid degrees of Priests or Clergy men, if their life's deserve it. But let
the Abbot beware, least at any time he receive a Monk of an other known
Monastery to dwell, without the consent of his Abbot or letters of commendation
from him: because it is written what thou will not have do^ne to thy self, do
not to an other.

Of the Priests of the Monastery. CHAP. LXII.
IF any Abbot desire to have a Priest or Deacon ordered, let him choose one
that is worthy of the function of Priesthood. And let him who is ordered beware
of haughtines and pride, neither let him presume to do any thing but what is
commanded him by the Abbot, knowing him self to be much more subject to
regular discipline. Nor by reason of his Priesthood let him forget the
obedience and discipline of the Rule, but let him strive more and more to go
forwards toward God. And let him always consider the place which is due to him
according to the time of his entrance in to the Monastery, although perhaps by
the election of the convent and the will of the Abbot, he be promoted for the
good desert of his life. And let him know that not with standing, he is to
obseru^ the Rule ordained by the Dean^ or Prepositus. And if he shall presum^
to do otherwise, let him be judged not as Priest, but as one who is
rebellious. And if he shall not amend being^ often admonished, let the Bishop
als^ be called to witness. And if for al^ this he do not amend, but that hi^
faults grow daily more notorious, le^ him be thrust out of the Monastery; i^
case his disobedience be such as that he will not be subject, and obey the Rule.

Of the order of the Congregation. CHAP. LXIII.
LEt them so keep their orders in the Monastery, as the time of conversion
and meritt of life requires, or as the Abbot shall appoint. And let not the
Abbot disquiet the flock committed to him, nor as it were vfinge free power,
order any thing vnjustily: But let him always consider, that he is to give
account to God of all his judgments, and works. Therefore according to the
order he shall appointe, or which the brethren have amongst them selves, Let
them come to the pax, to the commuion, to begine a Psalm, to stand in the
Quire. And in all places whatsoever let not age be regarded in the order, nor
let it prejudice any man: Because Samuel and David being children, judged
Priests. Therefore excepting, those whom (as we have said) the Abbot shall for
special reasons prefer or degrade, let all the rest observe the order of their
conversion. As (for example sake) he who comes at the second hour of the day
must know himself in the Monastery to be his junior, who comes at the first
hour of the day, of what age or dignity soever he be.

And let children be put in mind of discipline and good order by all. Let
Iuniors honor their seniors, and the seniors love their Iuniors. And in the
calling of their name, let it not b^ lawful for any one to call an other b^
his plain name, but let the seniors ca^^ the Iuniors brothers, and the Iunio^^
call their seniors Domni, which sign^fieth a fatherly reverence. And let the
Abbot because he represents the person of Christ be called Domnus, an^ Abbot
not as assuming it himself, bu^ given him for the honor and love o^ Christ.
And let him remember t^ carry him self so, as he may be worth^ of such honor.
And where souer the brethren meet one an other, let the junior ask benediction
of the ancient and the ancient passing by, let the junior rise and give him
place to sit: neither let the ^unior presume to sit wit^ him, unless his
senior command him to full fill that which is written, preventing each other
with honor. Le^ the children or younger sort in the oratorie and at the table
keep their order with discipline, and a broad or where soever else let there be
careful watc^ ^^er them, that they always keep ^^od order until they come to
age of ^^derstanding.

Of ordaining the Abbot. CHAP. LXIV.
^N the ordaining of the Abbot let ^ allways that consideration be had, ^^at he
be chosen whom all the ^onuent with one assent in the fear of God, or else
apart of the co^uent though ^therwise small with mature advice shall choose.
And let him who is to be ^rdered or consecrated be chosen for ^is good desert
of life, learning, and ^isdome, though he be the last in the ^onuent. And if
the whole convent (which God forbid) shall with one consent choose a person
consenting to their vices: and the vices themselves shall by some means or
other come to ^ee made known to the Bishop, (to whose diocese that place
appertains) or to the Abbots or christians near at hand, let them hinder the
c^^sent of those wicked men from preua^ling, and constitute a worthy stewa^^
over the house of God, knowing th^^ for this they shall receive a good ^^ ward,
if they do it with a pure inte^tion and for the love of Gods as on t^^
contrary that they sin if they n^glecte it.

And the Abbot thus ordained, mu^^ allways consider what burden he ha^ under
taken, and to whom he is to gi^^ account of his stewardship; and l^^ him know
that it is more behouefu^ for him to do good to others, then ^^ bear Rule
over them. It behouet^ him therefore to be learned in the divine law, that he
may know from whence to bring forth new things ^^ old, and that he be chaste,
merciful, an^ sober, and let him always prefer mercy before justice, that he
himself may obtain mercy. He must hat^ vice and love his brethren, and in
correcting, let him not be rigorous or exceed, least whilst he seeks to
scou^^ the vessel he break it. And let him ^^lwayes suspect his own frailty,
and ^^member that a shaken reed is not to ^e broken. By this we would say, not
^^at he suffer vice to be norished, but ^^at with prudence and charity he seek
^^ root them out, in such manner as ^esees to be most expedient, and let him
^ady to be more loved then feared. ^et him not be turbulent or sad, ney^^er
let him be superfluous and obstinat ^or jelous, or over suspicious: for then ^e
will never be at quiet. In his com^ands let him be prudent and consi^erat;
whether they be things pertai^ing to God or to the world. Let him ^onsider
well, and moderat the works which he inioyneth, haueing in mind ^he
discretion of holy Jacob who said. ^f I shall make my flocks to labor ^uer
much in goeinge, They will all ^ye in one day. Having therefore these and
other testimonies of discretion, the ^^other of virtues, let him so temper ^ll
things, that both the strong may ^esire to accomplish, and the weak may not
shrink back from vn^ taking what is commanded. And ^^pecially that he observe
this pre^^ Rule in all things: that when he ^^ have served well, he may hear
f^^ our Lord what the good servant he^^ who gave corn to his fellow serua^^ in
his time. Amen. I say unto you, o^ all his goods he will place him.

Of the Prepositus of the Monastery. CHAP. LXV.
IT often times happens that ^ the ordaining of the preposi^^ great scandalls
arise in Monas^ries; whiles there are some puffed ^ with the malignant spirit
of pride, w^ esteeming themselves to be second A^bots, and taking upon them to
tyra^n^ over others, nourish scandalls a^ make dissentions in the convent, a^
especially in those places, where by ^^ same Bishop or Abbots, which orda^^ ^^e
Abbot, the prepositus is l^kewise ^rdained, which how unfitting a thing ^is,
may easily be perceived: Because ^^om the very beginning of his ordina^^on there
is occation given him of ^eing proud: his thoughts suggesting ^o him that he
is exempt from the Ab^ot, Because he is ordained by them by whom the Abbot
himself is ordained. ^ence arise enuies, chidings, detrac^^ons, emulations,
dissentions and disor^ers: and whilst the Abbot and the Pro^ositus are at
variance, it must needs ^e that both their souls runn a hazard ^^ this
dissension: and those who are under their charge, whiles they adhere to ^arties
and runn in to perdition. The ^ault of which danger lies principal^^y upon
them who were the authors of ^uch an ordination.

And therefore we fore see that it ^s expedient for the conservation of ^eace
and charity, that the whole ^ouernment of the Monastery depend ^f the Abbots
will: and if it can be ^onne, let it be governed by Denes; as before we have
ordained, that whi^^ the charge is committed to many o^ be not made proud. But
if either t^ place requier it, or the convent she reasonably and with humility
dema^^ it. And the Abbot judge it exped^e^^ whomsoever the Abbot shall choo^^
by the counselle of his brethren feari^^ God, let him ordain for his
Prepos^tus. And let the Prepositus do tho^^ things with reverence, which
shall ^^ enjoined him by his Abbot: doing n^thing against the will or ordinance
^ his Abbot, because by how much ^^ is preferred before the rest, by s^ much it
be houeth him carefully ^^ observe the precepts of the Rul^ Which Prepositus if
he shall be fou^^ vicious, or seduced by the haughtin^^ of pride, or be found
a contemner ^^ the holy rule, let him be admonishe^ with words till four
times, and if he d^ not amend, let the correction of regular discipline be
given him. And ^^ with that he amend not, let him b^ deposed from the dignity
of Prepositu^ ship, and let an other who is worthy, be substituted in his
place. And if afterward he be not quiet and obedient in the convent, let him
then be expelled the Monastery. Yet let the Abbot consider that he is to give
an account to God of all his actions, least perhaps his soul be inflamed with
envy or emulation.

Of the Porter of the Monastery. CHAP. LXVI.
AT the gate of the Monastery let there be placed a wise old man, who knows
how to receive and give an answer: whose age may not suffer him to wander,
which Porter ought to have his cell near the gate: that comers may always
find one ready to return them an answer. And by and by as soon as any one shall
kno^ke, or a poor man shall cry, let him answer Deo gratias; and with all
mildenes and fear of God let him presently give an answer with all charity.
And let the porter if he need for his comfort, have a Junior brother with him.
The Monastery if it can conveniently, ough so to be built, that all
necessaries, to wit watter, a mill, a garden, a Bakehouse, and other several
arts may be had and practiced in the Monastery, that their be noe necessity
for the monks to wander abroad, because it is in noe sort expedient for their
souls. And we will have this Rule often read in the convent, least any of the
Brethren excuse himself of ignorance.

Of Brethren that be sent a Journey. CHAP. LXVII.
LEt the Brethren that are to be sent a Journey, commend themselves to the
prayers of all their brethren, and of the Abbot, and always at the last prayer
of the work of God, let commemoration of all the absent be made. And let the
Brethren retourninge from a Journey in the very day in which they return, at
all the canonical hours when the work of God is ended, prostrate on the
ground in the oratorie, and desire the prayers of all for their excesses,
least perchance either any sight or hearing of some evil thing, or any idle
speech have stole upon them in the way. And let not any presume to tell others
what things he has seen or hard abroad with out the Monastery, Because it is
a great distraction to them. And if any shall presume to do it, let him be
liable to regular punishment. And likewise he that shall presume to go without
the cloisters of the Monastery, or to go any whither, or do any thing though
never so little without the command of the Abbot.

If impossible things be enjoined to a Brother. CHAP. LXVIII.
IF any hard or impossible things be enjoined any Brother, let him receive the
command of the bidder with all mildnes and obedience. And if he shall see that
the burden altogether exceed^ the measure of his strength, let him patiently
and fitly suggest the causes of the impossibility thereof to him is over him,
not showing any pride or contradiction, and if after his suggestion, the Prior
or ancient shall persist in commanding it, let the Junior know, that it is
expedient for him: and let him out of charity obey, trustinge in the assistance
of God.

That one presume not to defend an other in the Monastery. CHAP. LXIX.
THere must special heed be taken that upon no occasion, one monk presume to
defend or maintain another in the Monastery, though they be never so near of
kine, let none of them I say presume to do this in any sort: because from
thence exceeding great occasion of scandalle may arise. And if any shall
transgress in this point let him be severely punished.

That noe one presume to beat or excommunicate an other. CHAP. LXX.
THat occasion of all presumption may be avoided in the Monastery, we ordain
and constitute, that it be not lawful for any one to excommunicate or beat any
of his brethren, except those who have power and authority from the Abbot. And
let those that offend be reprehended before all, that the rest may be
afraid. But over Infants until they be fifteen years of age, let their be
strict discipline and care had by all; yet this also with discretion and
measure. For he who shall in any sort presume to do any thing to such as are
of riper years without the command of the Abbot, or shall be indiscreetly
severe even to Infants, let him be liable to regular discipline, because it is
written. What thou will not have done to thy self, do not do to an other.

That the Brethren be obedient to each other. CHAP. LXXI.
Obedience is not only to be yielded to the Abbot, but also the breth^e^ ar to
obey one an other, knowing that by this kind of obedience they shall go to
God. The command therefore of the Abbot or other superiors constituted by him
being first obeyed, before which we suffer not private commandes to be prefered,
in other things let the Iuniors obey their elders with all charity and
diligence. And if any be found contentious, let him be rebuked. And if a
Brother be rebuked, for any even the least thing by the Abbot, or by any of
his seniors, or if he shall but perceive the mind of his senior, to be troobled
or moved against him, though but a little, let him without delay prostrate at
his feet, and there lie till that commotion be appeased with Blessing, and if
any one shall contemn to do it, let him be either liable to corporal
punishment, or if he be contumatious, let him be expelled the Monastery.

Of the good zeal which Monks ought to have. CHAP. LXXII.
AS there is an ^il zeal of bitterness which seperateth from God, and leads
to hell: so there is a good zeal which seperateth from vices, and leads to
God and life everlasting. Let Monks therefore exercise this zeal with most
fervent love, that is, that they prevent each other with honor, that they
patiently suffer each others infirmityes, whether they be of body or of mind,
and that they strive to obey each other. Let none follow that which he thinks
profitable for himself; but rather what others think fitting. Let them show
all brotherly charity with a chaste love. Let them fear God, and love their
Abbot with a sincere and humble affection, and prefer nothing at all before
Christ, who vouch safe to bring us all to life everlasting Amen.

That all observance of Justice is not set down in this Rule. CHAP. LXXIII.
We have writ this Rule that by obseruinge it in Monasteries, we may show
ourselves to have in some measure either honesty of manners, or the beginning
of a good conversation. But for those who hasten to the perfection of holy
conversation, there at the preceps of the holy fathers: he observance whereof
brings a man to the height of perfection. For what side of a leaf, or what
word of divine authority of the old and new testament, is not a most straight
rule of man's life* or what book of the holy Catholic fathers does not sound
forth this, that we may come by a direct course to our Creator. Moreover the
Collations of the fathers and their institutes and lives, al^ the Rule of our
holy father Basi^ what else are they but examples of we^ living, and obediente
monks and instruments of virtues. But to us slothful ill living and
negligent people, they are a shame and confusion. whosoeue^ therefore thou art,
who hastens t^ the heavenly country, observe by the help of Christ this little
Rule writ for beginners: and then atlength by the protection of God thou shall
come to those higher perfections of doctrine, and virtues of which we have
before spoken. To such as fulfill these things the kingdone of heaven shall
lie open. Amen.

FINIS.

