To the Honorable, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House
of Parliament. The Humble Petition of Ierom Hawley Esquire, for and on the
behalf of Phillip Sture an infant, the son and heir of Tristram Sture.
Phillip Sture. John Sture. Henry Henry, who died without issue. Frances a
daughter 15. years old.
Tristram Phillip, six years old



HVmbly shows, That Phillip Sture the common ancester, 21. Eliz. upon the
marriage of John Sture his son and heir, with Elizabeth one of the daughters
of Sir Robert Denis, made a conueyance of his Lands, whereof the greatest part
he limited by that conueyance, to the heirs males, some to the heirs of the
body of John Sture. And the rest he suffered to descend in fee-simple.

This estate tail, has bin found in four several succeeding Offices, upon
the several deaths of Phillip Sture, John Sture, Henry Sture, and Henry Sture,
whereof in the 2. first offices the deeds are found in hec verba.

There are fifty Leases, all reserving rent to the heirs males, whereof the
first Lease recites a power contained in the deed of intaile to make Leases.

Yet Sir Miles Fletwood, having gotten the Wardship of Frances the heir
general, and to advance a marriage for his son after 35. years peace, that
is to say, Hill. 12. Iac. to draw into question this intaile against Tristram
then heir male, did so far prevail, as that Hill. 13. Iac. he obtained a
Decree.

This Decree has these parts. 1. It does direct a Jury in matter of fact, and
commands them to find, that the most part of the Lands limited to the heirs
male, did not pass by the conueyance. 2. It restraines a Jury to find
otherwise then is thereby directed. 3. It inioynes the defendant from giving of
evidence unto the Jury. 4. It forbids the Commissioners to take any verdict
offered by the Jury, if it pursue not the directions of the Decree.
Sir Miles Fletwood upon this Decree took forth three several Commissions,
18. Martij, 13. Iac. a Jury was impannelled in the Country, heard their
evidence, were agreed for the heir male. Sir Miles Fletwood, a judicial
officer in the Court, did prosecute this cause in person, and discovering the
opinion of the Jury, did publicly chide them, and with much importunity
persuaded the Jury to crave further time to consider of their evidence: and
thereuppon at the instance of Sir Miles Fletwood they were adiourned over unto
the next Sessions.

But in the mean time, Sir Miles got that Jury to be discharged upon a bare
suggestion, that the Jury was too mean to try so great a matter: whereas M.
Thomas Isacke the Foreman, is a wise understanding Gentleman, and has above
800. li. Land per annum, and 14. of the rest of that Jury, he that had least,
was worth 3000. li.

In Easter Term, 14. Iac. a new Jury of Esquires and Gentlemen was returned,
in July 14. Iac. they heard their evidence in the Country (Sir Miles still
prosecuting in person.)

But Sir Miles Fletwood afterward perceiving, that the Jury had declared
themselves to be against his pretended Title, got that second Jury likewise to
be discharged, and a new Jury of Knights and Esquires to be returned, who were
enjoined to appear at the bar. Which Jury accordingly appeared in Easter
Term, 15. Iac. the heir male brought his witnesses out of Deuon, and his
Council to the bar. But none were heard, the Jury was sent from the bar,
and charged to find according to the Decree. This matter being notorious to the
Country, the Jury returned answer, that the Decree alone gave their consciences
no satisfaction, and unless they might receive evidence, they could find no
office. Whereupon after 3. or 4. days attendance, they were adiourned over til
Michaelmas Term following. No. 3. they appeared again at the bar, continued
still of the same mind, were bound to appear de die in diem, were examined
upon Interrogatories, were threatened with fines and imprisonment, were
continued so from day to day, above 3. weeks, and then M. Hingston dying in
that service, the rest of the Jury were discharged.

By this time Sir Miles Fletwood did perceive, that able and understanding men
were not for his purpose; and therefore it was devised, that a meaner Jury
would be found more tractable, and thereupon a fourth Jury was returned, but
that was so mean, as that upon the Commissioners certificate, 8. of them were
discharged for insufficiency, and 8. others put into their rooms.

This Jury was often summoned, but the example of the precedent Jury so
terrified them, as that so long as there was any order to force them up to the
bar, they could never be drawn to appear: but that order being discontinued,
the Jury presently appeared, were sworn and charged in the Country: the
heire-male brought his witnesses and Council; pressed the Commissioners to
proceed, but the Council for Sir Miles Fletwood pretended they were not ready,
and therefore desired, that the Jury might be discontinued, which upon their
motion was done accordingly.

This Jury being thus discharged, Sir Miles invented a new project, got an
order for the resummoning of the same Jury again, drew paper draughts of such
offices as he desired to be found, procured the Court to sign those paper
draughts, and by order to give directions unto the Commissioners, not only to
fine the Jury, but likewise to bind them over to the bar, if they refused to
find the said offices.

Depending this Jury, the heir male was a suitor to the Court to review the
Decree, and upon a long suit, and many days hearing in Court, by the honorable
Justice of the now Master, the heir male was set at liberty from that Decree.

Only this inconvenience still rests upon the heir male, That there is a sixth
Jury returned, and by the solicitation of S. Miles they are enjoined to appear
at the bar, there to hear their evidence. This course is conceived to be,

1. A great taxation to the Country, to draw Jurors to London, almost 200.
miles from their dwellings, to find offices.

2. A great mischief to the heir male. For by this device, he shall lose the
benefit of his witnesses, they being many in number, and some of them blind
and very old, and cannot be brought to London, beside the great charge he has
already sustained, amounting to 1200. li. by means of this vexation.

Sir Miles Fletwood has bin finding of an office now full 7. years and more.
He has had 14. several Commissions, and 6. several Iuries. Those Iuries have
attended above 20. several adiournments. The Wards rents are sequestered. His
Majesty is kept by these suits, from the composition and benefit of Wardship.

Therefore it is humbly prayed, That by the wisdom of this honorable
Parliament, some provision may be made: 1. That the conscience of Jurors be not
from henceforth restrained in questions of fact. 2. That the subject may be at
liberty to give evidence. 3. That no Jury be drawn to the Bar, out of the
proper County to find any office. 4. That no Office be an informer in the
same Court.



