To the honorable Assembly of the Commons House of Parliament.
The humble Petition of Robert Harrison of Marleborough, in the County of
Wilts Inkeeper.
Most humbly showing,
THat five years since the Petitioner bargained with one Stephen Barber alias
Laurence, for the Inn called the White-hart in Marleboroogh and certain goods
therein for 350. li. whereof 50. li. was for the Lease, and 300. li. for the
goods. The Petitioner at diverse times agreed upon, paid all the said 300. li.
except only 100. li. for security whereof, John Booth and John Goldsmith,
became bound in a Bond of two hundred pound to Barber, and for their
indemnpitie, the Petitioner assigned over to them all the goods which he had
bought of Barber, being worth 300. li. the goods nevertheless to remain in
the Petitioners possession till the Sureties were damnified. Afterward Barber
being displeased with the Petitioner (for not permitting him to build a Barn
on the back side of the Inn, threatened to root him out, and ever afterward
sought means to undo him, and the better to compass his malicious purpose, he
combining with the said Booth, and Goldsmith, procured them (although they were
never damnified) privately to confess a Judgment unto him upon the said Bond
of two hundred pound, and thereupon sued out a Fieri facias, which being
delivered to the under Sheriff, he entered into the Inn, and summoning a Jury
there: inquired what goods were there of the said Booth and Goldsmith toward
satisfaction of the Execution, and there not only extended the goods which the
Petitioner bought of Barber, being worth as aforesaid 300. li. but also
(contrary to Law,) extended upon all the rest of the Petitioners proper
housholdstuffe and bedding, worth at the least 200. li. more, all which the
under Sheriff caused to be undervalued but at two hundred and eight pound, for
which, with the Lease the Petitioner was by one Master Wydley then lately
offered eight hundred pounds, which their indirect practices to undo the
Petitioner being perceived, he showed unto them a Protection from his Master
Mr. John St. Awbin a member of this House, hoping upon the sight thereof (in
reverence to this honorable Assembly,) they would forbear to do him wrong.
But they made a scorn thereof, Booth saying he cared not a fart for the same,
and Cocks the Bailiffe said in despite of the Protection, he would carry the
Petitioner to Prison for ten Groats recompencene, all the rest laughing and
jesting at the same. Then the said Master Wydley pretending great friendship to
the Petitioner satisfied the Execution and took the goods from the under
Sheriff into his hands, and then Master Andrew Holdipp a friend to the
Petitioner offering to pay unto him 140. li. for the Redemption of the goods
(which was as much as he was to pay for the same) he utterly refused to deliver
the same, saying, That his throat should be cut rather then the Petitioner
should keep that Inn again, and thereupon carried the goods out of the House.

The Petitioner further shows, That making declaration unto Sir Thomas
Richardson the Speaker of this honorable Assembly, of the contemptuous
behavior of the said parties, and of the wrongful taking away the Petitioners
goods without lawful authority as aforesaid, Master Speaker (commiserating
the Petitioners distressed estate,) did write to the High Sheriff, and the
rest that were Actors in the business, wishing them to deliver to the
Petitioner his goods so wrongfully taken from him. But the High Sheriff said
that he was sufficiently secured by his Under Sheriff, and the rest regarded
not the message nor would deliver the goods. By which means not only the
Privileges and Liberties of this honorable House are violated and contemned,
and the Petitioner his Wife and nine Children are utterly undone. But also his
Majesty's Subjects travailing into those parts are destitute of lodging and
entertaynment, it being one of the chiefest Innes of Receipt betwixt London and
Bristoll.

The Petitioner, therefore most humbly prays that the contemners of the
Privileges of this honorable H^use may answer their contempt, and that by
order of this House the Petitioner may be restored to his goods wrongfully
taken from him. And he shall daily pray, etc.


