A Bloody new-yeares gift, OR A TRVE DECLAration of the most cruel and bloody
murder, of master Robert Heath, in his own house at high Holbourne, being
the sign of the firebrand: which murder was committed by Rowland Cramphorne,
servant and Tapster to the said Heath: On new-yearesday last past in the
morning, 1609.

Whereunto is annexed, sundry exploits of Tendance, otherwise called Double
diligence, servant unto Derricke the Hangman, Who with his Consort (Old
dublets) was executed at Tyborne, in January last past 1609.

depiction of a hanged man (probably intended to represent Tendance)

London printed for B. S. and W. B. and are to be sold at their shop at the
great north door of saint Paul's Church. 1609.

L A
decorative header
To the Reader.
IN the relation (gentle reader) of the ensuing discourse, I have bin so
dilligent and careful, that I have rather failed to write so much as I might,
then any way I come short of truth and sincerity. I heard the offenders trial
and conviction, at the Sessions house, and according to the enstructions, there
delivered in evidence, have briefly set down the whole sum in effect,
though not so orderly (perhaps) as a better iudgemenr could have done. I stand
free (I trust from partiality, or sinister construction) being no way waged
for the one, or fearfully doubting of the other. And in the opening of such
criminal cases, concerning persons of no higher quality. I am of the mind,
that any writer (keeping himself within the bounds and limits of truth) has
freedom of his pen, and good ground for his publication; Because such examples
remaining to posterity, do express the care and industry of precedent times,
in punishing such sins, and serve as mirrours or spectacles, for others to
avoid the like monstrous enormities.

I have heard an infinite number of rumors, concerning this present murder
committed, and strange constructions, upon as strange observations. I was
never so giddily affected, as rashly to believe, or lean resoluedly to any,
but what I both saw and heard, in the honorable Court of Justice, and in the
best manner I could, I have followed the course of direct information, such as
from the worthy pains of the Coroner, his empanelled Enquest, and the Justices
that had the examination of the cause, was evidently, plainly, and justly
delivered.

Therefore, with that old grammatical rule, Foelix quem faciunt aliena
pericula cautum,

I knit up this short preface, desiring that the punishment of this man's
offense may so serve in example, as the like bloody sin, either in, or near
this famous City, may never hereafter (by any one) be committed.

FINIS.
A true declaration, Of the Araignement, Conviction, and Execution, of Rowland
Cramphorne a Tapster, for most cruel and bloody murdering his Ma. Robert
Heath a Cook, in his own house at high Holborne on New years day last in the
morning. 1609.
THe tragical discourse we have in hand to relate, does first very necessaryly
require, that we should speak somewhat concerning the person who was the Actor
of so dismal a stratageine, concerning his former life and noted behavior,
likely to suite with so wretched a conclusion: As (no doubt) there are many of
this profession, who are of honest inclination and good government, though it be
a quality subject to much inciuility, yet this young man had bin observed by
diverse, to be very idle in disposition, loose and giddie headed in affection
and behavior, and drink, which is the destruction of too many, had more power
of him, then was seemly or convenient.

And having by his wanton enticements, overcome the too forward yielding of a
comely young Maiden, with promise of marriage, oaths and other protestations:
when such time came, as she was known to be great with child, and (both for
support of her bruised credit, and avoiding such scandale, as thereby might
ensue to him) had betaken her self so out of sight, that no public detection
should lay hold on either: She was at last delivered, and then challenging him
of his former vowed faith and promise, to repair the ruin of her lost
reputation, he utterly abiured any knowledge of her, or that any such matter
had bin done by him, threatening to have her severely punished, if she durst
afterward lay any such reproach to his charge. She having no other help but
patience, or any friends to sted her in so woeful an extremity, was compelled
to be silent, and give over any further claim unto him, Only thus she parted
from him, with these or the like speeches. Farewell Rowland, thou and none but
thou (upon my soul) have bin the euerthrow of a poor Maid, I forgive thee
from my heart, but am persuaded, that (one day) God will revenge my cause, and
(though I wish it not, for I love thee but too well) that I shall line to see
thee come to some shameful end, nay worse then shame, if worse may be. For
mine own part, this badge of my deserved infamy, which I bear by thee, and
this poor child, ye fruit of a false and periurde father: I will bear, the
one as I may, and comfort the other as God shall enable me, not doubting, but
I shall get a penny to buy it food, when thou shall perish in shame and
disgrace.

I could likewise here set down other known det^ctions, as of an other woman,
who both before, and during all the time of his trouble was his only friend and
maintayner. Likewise, what all the neighbors there about have noted, in his
daily carriage and behavior, and what has bin said concerning his Mistress:
But let all these imputations now dye with him, and proceed we to deliver his
notorious offense.

Upon Friday, being the 17 of February, Rowland Cramphorne was endighted and
araigned at the Sessions house in the old Baylie, before my Lord Mayor, and
his Majesty's Commissioners in case of Justice; of wilful murder and petty
treason, for murdering his M. Robert Heath, with an iron fire Forke, giving him
his deaths wound upon his head. He pleaded to his Enditement, not guilty, and
for his further trial, did put himself upon God and his Country, according
to the ordinary proceeding in the like cases. Heerupon, diverse good and
substantial witnesses were there produced, that had before given in their
Evidence to the Coroners Enquest. But in regard they were many, to the number
of twelve, or there about: the proofs that were most pregnant, and nearest to
the purpose, were only made use of, which was the maid servant of the house,
the boy also of the house, who was bedfellowe to Rowland, a Gentleman lodging
in the house, and a Ioyner being the next neighbor, who heard the noise in the
house, when the bloody act was performed.

The effect of the maids Evidence, was, that her master, being one that kept
much company, bin abroad, and came home somewhat disguised in drink, where
sitting down in his kitchen by the Fire, after the departure of two or three
friends that had come in, and there fitten a while with him; he fell asleep in
his Chair, his wife going to bed about nine of the clock. And because the keye
of her Chamber Door was missing, and her husband used often to come late to
bed, she would hau^ the maid set the Table against the door when she came to
bed, that so she mighth me knowledge of her husbands coming, she said she did.
None now remained up in the house, but the Maid and Rowland, except the
Gentleman that lay in the house, who having bin hidden by Master Heath to
supper, and failing thereof by reason of his hosts late coming in went up
into his Chamber, and two more with him, where having a Fire made him, and
calling for a pot of beer. Rowland brought him up a Judge that held six penie
worth of Beer, whereof the Gentleman drinking but once, and being ouerwatcht
with sitting up the night before at play: leaning backward to his bed, he fell
a sleep, not waking again until he heard the Chimes go twelve a clock. In
this time, the other men that were there, had drunk up the drink, and
departed while he slept, but at what time, he knew not. He awaking, and
finding his fire ^ut, his friends gone, and him self to be very cold, knocked
for the Tapster, who coming up to him, and resolving him how long he had
slept, and of the others departure: the Gentleman desired to have some more
fire, but the Tapster made answer, that there were no Faggots in the house,
albeit there was then above two hundred in the Seller. He then required to have
a pot of Beer, but the Tapster replying, that he had lost the keye, would let
him have none. Then the Gentleman saying, that he was both cold and dry, said
he would go forth and knock up some body, where he might have both fire and
drink: where to the Tapster was very willing, making offer to go with him:
but when he heard the Gentleman say, that in regard it was solate, he would not
stay long the Tapsters mind was altered, and would not go at all. Whereupon,
missing the sheets upon his bed, and the Rugge also, which being brought up by
the maid, and by her and Rowland was laid upon the bed: the Gentleman, cold as
he was, and without any drink, was feign to go to bed, as him self being
there present, delivered in his Evidence, as has bin breifely declared.

The Maid, perceiving her Master to sit still sleeping, and that it was past
two of the clock, locking and bolting the doors both backward and forward with
her own hands went up to bed, setting the Table against the door, as her
Mistress had bidden her: now was Rowland left alone with his Master, when as it
after fell out, the devil prevailed so far with him, to do that horrible
deed of darkness. For albeit he went to bed to the boy, whom before he had made
drunk both with beer and sack: yet the boy felt when he arose away from him,
but could not tel^ when he came to bed again: And the maid before her going
to bed, had lighted a whole Candle and let by her master which she found in
the morning turned dounward into the socket of the Candle-stick, not fully a
quarter burned.

Now in this dead silence of the early morning, between two or three of the
clock, the Ioyner and his wife being in bed, and a friend of theirs lying in
the chamber likewise in the under bed, heard a great noise in master Heathes
house, as it were the fall of stools or Chaires: in so much as the stranger
said unto them (bearing the Ioyners dogs keep such a coil, the one howling,
and the other barking:) he wondered how they could sleep, when so great a
noise was near them. The Ioyners wife answered, that being New-yeares day,
surely master Heathes folks were up at work, about their Pyes or such like
business: moreover, they heard the door open, which served to the room where
Rowland lay and within a small while after, they heard it shut again: for the
Chamber where they lay, was just over the said room, and the door was never
opened or shut, but it would much shake their bed. And the Ioyner would have
risen to see who went out at that door, but that his wife persuaded him to the
contrary.

at this time (as by all circumstances appears) was this unnatural deed
done, and the murderer, hoping to outface the matter, as he afterward did,
goes to bed again, leaving the doors open every way, saving that of his own
lodging, which is on the same floor, and but divided from the Shop: which
leaving of the doors thus wide open, must needs be about six of the clock,
because a maid servant to a Barber, had bin there after five a clock for six,
and found them then to be fast shut. Not long after, the maid of the house
arises, and coming down in the dark, feels about the dresser boorde, and
finds the candle, so put out as before has bin declared. And having lighted
it, sees the woeful spectacle of her master: whereat being affrighted, she
goes and wakes dog-sleeping Rowland, and tells him what he knew too well,
that her m^ister was murdered: marie god forbid says Rowland, it is too true
replies the Maid, Peace. peace says Rowland. And being demanded, wherefore
he said so: made answer for fear of affrighting his Mistress.

The outcry of this murder being made, the Ioyner being up and ready, because
he frequented the morning lecture at Christs-Church: among other neighbors
went into the house, and being the first that laid hand upon M. Heath, heaued
him up upon his buttocks, and found him not to be quite dead, for he fetched a
sigh or two, and calling for Aqua-vitae, made means to get him up into his
Chamber, but in the carriage up, his life expired. The Ioyner demanding in the
name of God, how such a wicked deed could be done, none being in the house, but
they appertayning to the house? Rowland answered, he could not tell, the doors
were found wide open in the morning. The Wife of the house and the Maid, they
made the like answer, and no one could presently be said who did it. But the
Constable and other Officers being called for, they were carried before such
Magistrates, as are to examine matters of like nature.

Rowlands money in his pocket was found to be bloody, and so was the pocket it
self: he being then demanded how it so happened? made answer that it might be
with helping to lift his Master, who being much besmered with blood, might
bloody his hands, and so both his money and pocket might become bloody. But it
was approved, and by the Ioyner maintained, that he laid no hand then to help
up his Master, how butcherly soever he had smitten him down before. Beside,
upon the Fire Forke there appeared a drop of blood, as seeming that the act was
therewith performed: albeit he confessed afterward, that he did it with a
double Judge.

The day before, M. Heath being with some friends near unto his house, sent
for beer home to his own Tapster, which was three or four several times
denied him by the Tapster. And when money was sent, which made him fill the
drink, yet when it was told him it was his masters, and would pay him when
he came home, he caught the pot and put forth the drink again, and would
send him none. Moreover, it appeered that his M. had some dislike of Rowla^ds
behavior, and (as the neighbors have affirmed) not without good cause, so
that he had told him, he should make up his account, for as near as the
term was he would be rid of him. And it is said that that day when his
master came home, he gave him a box or two on the ear, for denying him
drink, and bad him provide himself, for he should serve him no longer.

The Jury finding him guilty of wilful murder and treason, did so deliver up
their verdict, and he had sentence of death, according to law. The tuesday
following being the 21, day of February; a Iibbet being set up at Graies-Inne
lane end, somewhat near unto the house where the murder was committed. In the
after noone of the same day, Rowland Cramphorne, being laid upon a hurdle, was
drawn to the place appointed for execution, where being by good and godly
preachers dealt withal, to clear his own conscience, and deliver the truth in
so doubtful a case, whether any other had hand or no with him in the action:
he would hear no speeches concerning his mist. or the maid, but cleared them
^smuch as he could, taking al upon himself: and loath to hear any further
admonishment, which with love and much charity was labored unto him: when he
was willed to make no haste, but take time to his owneliking, putting one leg
beside the ladder, and they calling him yet to stay, yea the hangman offering
to hold him by the choler of his doublet, he desperately threw himself off,
not willing to listen to any further good counsel.

A brief declaration of Tendance otherwise called double Diligence, servant to
Derricke the hangman, who with his Consort Old Dublets, were lately executed
at Tyborne, in January last 1609.
THe royal and Princely laws and ordinances of this Realm being so strict
and punishable as they are, should (as every man would Judge) move all men at
the very sight of the execution thereof to take warning, which way to avoid the
punishments and penalties of them. But as we find and see daily, none are so
apt to transgress the Law as men experienced in the Law: none more ready for
imprisonment, then such as have abode the danger thereof before: so that the
old Proverb is (as it were) falsified, namely, The burnt Child dreades the
fire. For as much, as many seeing the dangerous events which are like to proceed
and happen upon parties offending cannot (through the want of grace and serving
of God) eschew, but rather incur the same, or worse if worse might be. As for
example is to be seen, by a most ungracious, unlucky, false and dissembling
villain, who was servant to ye Hangman, or as some call it, his partner, who
was as apt and diligent in the quick dispatching of any his old yew-fellowes
or accquaintance, Cutpurses, which came under his jurisdiction, as ever any
hangman (master or servant) which ever were of the three coruerd order: Yet
note the villainous conversation of that shameless villain. There came not (by
report) any young rogue to be admitted into the order or fraternity of rogues
(as the custom is among them they must) but this slave was the chief
ministerer of their oaths of aleagance, to the upright man or whole assembly
of rogues, because that he being at their admittance, should lightly be at
their end making, so that he was as it were an Ouerseer of their whole lives,
both begi^ning, continuance, and ending: and could testify at their ends
whether they had done true service, in that their togish vocation whereunto
they were admitted.

There was not through the whole week any purse cut, but his malefactions
Gentleman, was at the account making of their booties or prays, and chief
sharer above all the master cutpurses about the town, say what they could or
do what they could: For if he had bin never so little crest, in his beastly
worships humor, by any of the trade, unless it were a great chance, either he
should be abridged of the liberty of roguing, or else through his means come
to be promoted to his own proper power, for he would bewray and appeach all
the doings of such as liked him not.

No cheating bargain, made either by coseners or gamsters upon peor or silly
men, neither any lock picked or house broke open, but he was made acquainted
with it, else was their oath broken, and for breach thereof, such offenders
lightly in lewe of their breaking of the same, either promoted to the gallows,
or else betrayed by him, and throngh his means to the punishment prouide^ for
them according to the desert of their offense, or eis clean shut out of the
order. The which if any master cutpurse, had but presumed further then his
authority, and had prayed or seized upon the booties of any cutpurs or slave,
who was to do service to those of higher power, if the party wronged had but
made way to Tendance, for so he was called, he should be sure to be heard and
have remedy for his wrongs: or if any of the inferior sort had neglected any
part of their duties, the which (by their oath at their stealing or admittance
into the order of Rogues) they were tied unto, They were all Subject to the
sentence which Tendance should pronounce against them, and in danger of such
penalties, as by the general consent of their whol^ Fraternity had before
time been established.

No whore or young strumpet could be admitted to be Doxis or Dels, or receive
any dignity or vocation without consent of Tendance, nor none be (broken of
the upright man or master Rogue) as their order is, unless by Tendance his
discretion it might be thought be fitting. beggars or idle Roges, or any such,
might not be admitted into the lazy roging order, but must first be brought
before Tendance, to the end he might allow of their proceedings, either old or
young. Besides, be had all the whole universal prorogatiue in every
particular, the ordinances established, for the upholding and supporting of the
total fraternity of Rogues.

But whether the fault were in the bad terms or in the want which ouercrowed
men's purses at their coming to the terms through yt dearth and hardness which
was imposed upon men of the Country, or any private falshood-were wrought
among his inferiors, by detaining of the right which he should have from him.
I know not* But as it is hard with honest men, it seems it was not beneficial
to him: for he was urged to leave his superiority, and bend to a more
inferior course, for he was driven by compulsion, to walk markets, faires,
thronges and crowds, and become accountable to him self of his own gettings
as well as of others: for either he became to be a base minded cutpurse for
need* or else he did it to pry into the dissimulations of other of his vocation.

But he was chiefly moved to it by an other consort which was a seller of Old
dublets who as his chief Counselor, peri waded him to make trial (as it
seemed) of the benifit which might grow or arise in places of resort through
the cunning devices which might be put in practice: which Old dublets having
obtained at his hands, and procuring him to make him his Ceequall in sharing,
practiced to effect as well as Tendance, and to be ayding at his hand. The one
to accomplish the full prosie and insight in to the art of Roguing, the other
to hans the commodity which might ensue of the benifit which other Rogues
should make, which were to practice that occupation.

Which commodity, Old dublets found sweet, by reason of the monthly
bargains which he purchased with his misbegotten stock: for every offender,
which Tenda^ce should think hardly of, was sure to be trussed, specia^ly such
as had any good suits to their hacks, which through Tendance his means, Old
dublets had the forsaking of, and had thereof very good pennieworths for
reasonable money.

This resolusion encouraged these two proggers to persist in their calling,
inso much that of late (besid^ the other sort) Leaden hall, Cheapside,
Newgat-market, nor any other place of meeting as Westminster Hall or any such
places of assembly, was voyte or desittute of the company of these two, the
Captain^ and Liestenant of the whole band.

So that upon a time, Tendance making trial to show his cunning over a purse,
which was something dangerous and hard to come by without suspicion, suddenly
was taken with the manner? and lawfully being thereof detected, was committed
into the hands of such as might command him, as he before had done others. And
imediatly after, whether for grief or for greedines of cempante, I know not,
But Oldedublets through his cunning, purchased lean to become Chamberfellow
with Tendance in Newgate, where like good companions, they passed a small time
away together, And being called by the reverend Judges and Maiestrats of the
land, they could scarcely answer their Faults with honesty, wherefore they
were adjudged meretoriously, to endure that which their deserts desired: and in
fine, having the sentence of condemnation pronounced against them, they both
lovingly ended in a hempen friendship.

Hereby may be seen the profits and fruits which may be gathered through the
falsenes, and undoing of others: the odiousnes of such which through hope of
benifit will join with others in ye practicing of another hurt, and the fall
which many a one has for want of grace, though they have never so many, nor
so good examples given them. Wherefore I pray God of his mercy, to amend in
every one, that which is amiss, and give all men grace to eschew the way which
will bring a man to his end before his time.


