THE RIVAL FRIENDS.

A Comoedie, As it was Acted before the King and Queens Majesty's, when out of
their princely favor they were pleased to visit their University of
Cambridge, upon the 19. day of March. 1631.

Cried down by Boys, Faction, Envy, and confident Ignorance, approved by the
judicious, and now exposed to the public censure, by

The Author, PET. HAVSTED Mr. in Arts of Queens College.

Non tanti est ut placeam insanire. LONDON, Printed by Aug. Matthewes for
Humphrey Robinson, at the sign of the three Pigeons in Paul's Churchyard.
1632.

Dramatis Personae.
Sacrilege Hook, a Simoniacall Patron. Pandora, his fair Daughter. Mistress
Vrsely, his supposed Daughter, deformed and foolish. Jack Loueall, a Court
Page, Nephew to Mr. Hook. Constantina, Jack Loueall's sister. Lucius. the two
Friends, and Rivalls in Pandora's love. Neander, or Cleopes the two Friends,
and Rivalls in Pandora's love. Luscinio, Lucius his Boy. Bully Lively, an old
merry fellow, that lives in the impropriate Parsonage. Terpander, an old
Gentleman. Anteros, his son, an humerous mad fellow, that could not endure
women. Laurentio, an ancient Citizen. Endymion, his son, and Page to Lucius.
Isabella, Laurentio's Daughter, in love with Lucius. Stipes, Hooke's
Shepherd. Placenta, his Wife, a Midwife. Merda, their Daughter. Nodle Empty,
an Innes of the Court man. William Wiseacres, a quondam Atturneys Clarke. Mr.
Mungrell, an elder brother. Hammershin, a Batchelour of Arts. Zealous
Knowlittle, a Box-maker, -- Suitors to Mistress Vrsely for the Parsonage sake.
Tempest All-mouth, a decayed Cloth-worker Suitors to Mistress Vrsely for the
Parsonage sake. Arthur Armestro^g 2. young scholars, robustious
footbal-players. Suitors to Mistress Vrsely for the Parsonage sake. Stutchell
Leg -- 2. young scholars, robustious footbal-players. Suitors to Mistress
Vrsely for the Parsonage sake. Ganimed Fillpot, a pretender to a Scholar, who
had once bin a Gentleman's Butler. Suitors to Mistress Vrsely for the Parsonage
sake. Hugo Obligation, a precise Scrivener. -- Suitors to Mistress Vrsely for
the Parsonage sake. Two Men, two Maids of Liuelyes. A Bedlam. Fiddlers.
To the right Honorable, right Reverend, right Worshipful, or whatsoever he
be or shall be whom I hereafter may call Patron.
IF thou do deal with the cracked Chambermaid,
Or in stale Kinswomen of thine own do trade,
With which additions thou do set to sale
Thy Gelded Parsonages, or do prevail
With thy despayring Chaplain to divide
That which should be entire, for which beside
Perhaps he pays thee too, know that from thee
(Be thou Squire, Knight, or Lord, or a degree
Above all these) nor I, nor yet my book
Does crave protection, or a gentle Look:
But if there be a man, (such men be rare!)
That 'midst so many sacrilegious, dare
Be good and honest, though he be alone,
With such a zeal, such a devotion,
As the old Athenians were wont to pay
Unto their unknown God, I here do lay
My self and book before him, and confess
That such a Virtue can deserve no less.
Read it (fair Sir) and when thou shall behold
The Ulcers of the time by my too bold
Hand brought to light, and lanch'd, and then shall see
Vice to his face branded and told that is he,
Incircled safe in thine own goodness sit,
Untouched by any line, and laugh at it.
'Twas made to please, and had the vicious Age
Been good enough, it had not left the Stage
Without it is due Applause: But since the times
Now bring forth men enamored on their crimes,
And those the greater number, 'twere difeafe
To think that any thing that bites should please.
Had it been borne a toothlesse thing, though mean,
It might have past, nay might have praised been:
But being a Satyr -- no. Such strains of Wit
Are liked the worse, the better they are writ.
Who ever knew one deep in love, commend
A Song though never so good, so aptly pend,
Set to the choycest note Music affords,
Sung by as choice a Voice, if that the words
Contained nothing else but a disgrace
Unto his Mistress and her borrowed face?
O happy Age! o we are fallen now
Upon brave times, when my Lords wrinckled brow
(Who perhaps labored in some crabbed Look
How to get farther into'th silk-mans book,
Not minding what was done, or said) must stand
A Copy, and his Anticke front command
The censure of the rest, to smile or frown,
Just as his squeesed face cries up or down:
When such as can judge right, and know the Laws
Of Comaedy, dare not approve, because
My Ladies Woman did forget to bring
Her Sp -- and therefore swor't a tedicus thing.
But (knowing Sir) rank not your self with these
That judge not as things are, but as they please.
Peter Hausted.

THE PRAEFACE TO THE READER.
INgenuous and understanding Reader, for if thou be not s, I neither regard
thee, nor thy censure. In this age of ^utsides, wherein to be modest, is to be
Ignorant, and to be impudent is called Learning wherein to please our walking
Things in silk, a man must write dust and cobweb; amongst the rest, though
with much difficulty and opposition, yet at the length I have obtained leave
for this poor neglected Piece of mine to salute the Light, and in spite of
all blackmouth'd Calumny (who has endeavored to crush it into nothing)
presented it to the open view. I am not ignorant what base aspersions, and
unchristianlike slanders (like a general infection) have spread themselves
throughout the Kingdom, nor can I hope that the publishing of it can stop all
those wide mouths which are opened against it; yet I must not despair of so
much justice from the Candide, (for their own honesty is interested in the
Action) as (when they shall behold the innocence of it) to confess, that I
suffer most unjustly in these reports. How it was accepted of their Majesty's,
whom it was intended to please, we know, and had gracious signs: how the rest
of the Court were affected, we know too; Such as were fair and intelligent
will yet give it sufficient Testimony: As for those which came with starched
faces and resolutions to dislike whatsoever they saw or heard, (all due
reverence being given to the fair fields they wear upon their backs) they
must perforce give me leave to be of that haeresie, and think that there is
something else required to the composition of a Judgment, then a good Suite of
taken-up Clothes, a Countenance set in a frame, and some three shakes of the
empty Noddle. The difficulties, and disadvantages we went upon were many, and
known, neither did we fail in the success we hoped for; for indeed we
expected no other thing then to be cried down by many-mouth'd Detraction.
Alas, we are all but men, and may err; and our offense was the same that was
imputed to Cicero, by a great Roman Lady, who told him that it was Sauciness
in him amongst so many Patricians of eminent blood, to dare to be Virtuous or
Eloquent. I do confess we did not go such quaint ways as we might have
done; we had none of those Sea-artes, knew not how, or else scorned to plant
our Ca^vas so advantagiously to catch the wayward breath of the Spectatours;
but freely and ingenuously labourd rather to merit then ravish an Applause from
the Theater. We never yet were so poorly ambitious (nor ever will) to court
the Claps of young Ones, who are more delighted to see an Ape play his forced
tricks, then to behold the truest and most natural Action in the world. Let
such as despair of the approbation of Men, cry, Let in the Boys, we shall
have no noise else. I envy not the applause comes from such hands or tongues.
As for the Objections made by Envy and Ignorance, such as I have heard, I will
answer, and then dare all their Snakes to hiss out more. And first, the
Lowness of many of the Persons did displease some; I conversed too much with
Sheepheards they say.

It is the misery of Poetry above other sciences, and in Poetry of the Dram
especially, that it lies open to be profaned by every adulterate judgment. The
Musician dares only judge of Music, the Philosopher in natural causes, the
Mathematician of those Arts: But what fly-blowne piece of Man is there, whose
best of virtues is to cry God dam him, whose top of knowledge the Alphabeticall
and Greek healths but thinks himself a Doctor of the Chair in what belongs
to the Scene? Let them look into Plautus, and they shall find the chiefest
person in his Persa to be a Servant; and it is accounted one of the greatest
excellencies in Sydney, that he was able so much to humble his phant'sy, as
truly and naturally to set forth the clownery of Dametas, the indigested and
unlickt words and phrases of his wife and daughter. But these squirt-wits, (who
are able only to bring forth a paper of verses in a year, it may be of a
hair that fell from their Mrs. Peruke, and think this sufficient to style them
Laureat) in the Description of a shipwreck (peradventure) would take great
delight to see a fair Cypress tree pictured. All that I will say to them is
this, if their mouths be out of taste, I am not bound to answer for it. But why
this before their Majesty's? say they. And I say, why not this before their
Majesty's, rather then higher things? (although they may perceive that the
strain is not continued.) The Court is not acquainted with such groueling
humors; Therefore (my obstinate Heretic) the better. To have showen them
nothing but what they see daily, had bin but course entertainment, and if that
was my error, that the two Changelings spoke no strong lines, but played at
Chackstones, when it may be some of our butterfly-judgements expected a set at
Maw or Primivista from them, let it lie upon my Conscience.

Next, whereas my discretion was called in question for making one to rail so
bitterly upon Women before the Ladies, who^ we should have labored to please
rather. I answer, that the Ladies (as some report) should take offense at
Anteros his part, will not yet enter me; for although I know many of that sex
weak enough, yet me thinks it cannot be that such as they, who are taken out of
the Ore, refined and wrought up unto such a degree of purity by the Court, that
we may not be afraid to say, that they are more then half men (that is) come
not far short of us in that which gives us our denomination, Reason; it cannot
be (I say) that these should so much discredit the opinion which the world has
of their apprehensions and judgments, as to be offended to see a Woman-hater
personated: for then, how shall we hereafter dare to bring upon the Stage a
Bawd, an Usurer, an Intemperate man, a Traitor, or one that commits Idolatry
to his Mistress, (which is as great a sin as most of these) if only to
personate be to approve? No, when we act a vice, it is not because we allow of
it, but rather labor to exti^pe it by showing the odiousness of it to the
world. As for that which they object against bringing in of the four Guls in
the third Act, as impertinent to the Plot; I answer, that it was a most
natural passage, and although it conduced nothing to the maine hinge on which
the chief carriage of the Comoedie turned, (no more then Liuely's drinking of
Sack, the Donation of the Living, with the bestowing of the crooked changeling,
Anteros turning shepherd, or Stypes being tied to the tree) yet if they
please to turn to the latter end of the fifth Act, they shall find that they
were not all foysted in as mere strangers. Let them show me (if they can) a
rule in Poetry, that binds us so strictly not to meddle with any persons but
what appertain primarily to the plot. If they can (which I cannot believe) I
will show them again that Rule broken by most of the prime Writers in this
kind, both of Ages past and present, I mean not only in our own Mother
tongue, wherein the Dram but lately is arrived at any perfection, but in
Latin, Italian, and others. But this is the bolt of some shallow and narrow
capacity, who peradventure was puzzled with the multitude of names, and would
have been better contented with three Actors and a half, and some seven or
eight papers of verses tied together with Cobblers ends. As for the false and
abominable imputations laid upon it by my Tribe with the short hair and long
ears, my formal outsides, that look demure, and snuffle; I do not much
regard them, because it is their Trade; nor are they only at open defiance
with this, but with all kind of learning. Yet I cannot see how any Good man,
should be displeased, or think Religion any whit wronged, to see those sores
and Biles of the Church brought to open view, (the only way to cure them) to
see those (cursed Simoniacall patrons) rowsed from out their dens, to see
such Mock-sch^llers, nay Mock-christians exposed to public laughter. -- A
Scrivener, a Box-maker, a Cloth-worker, a Fuller, and such mechanical sordide
people, must with unwash'd hands now adays dare to offer at Gods Altar, and
yet these men must not be touched, but Religion (forsooth) suffers in it. --
Read, and blush at thy credulity. -- Reader, not to tire thee with a Preface,
thou have it verbatim, and punctually as it was acted. I confess, I would
willingly have altered some things which upon more mature deliberation I have
found to be subject to mis-constructions, but that I knew the malice of some
would upon that take advantage, to make the world believe, that that which
has, or shall be spoken against it, is true. -- Read it with Candor and
Discretion, and then call me

Your Friend, PET. HAVSTED.

Amicissimo suo PETRO HAVSTED invitatio ut Comoediam suam Prelo committat.
QVid scrinij tenebris cerebri damnas opes,
Gazasque opulentioris ingenij invides
Luet? caloris enthet Genio s^tis
Inest tuo quod mill vatum pectora
Ditet, animosque liberet inopia: jacet
Supita virtus? evigilet. Calumnia
Lauro ruinam struxit, ut ubique colubrae
Convitijs epulentur. En! hoc effluit
Martyrio Castalidum cruor, rivuli-
Que sanguinis litantur. Exiti^m hilaris
Spectas? nimium crudelis, eripe (dum licet)
Flammis: oculos vei si beat spectaculum
Vt opprimi Drams videas, preli ferat
Tormenta; cruciatus, doloresque petat
Omnes elegans ars quos habet, poematis
Manebit illaesum decus, ne^ criminis
Fatebitur labem ullius: in lucem hilaris
Erumpe, laetusque intuere diem: joro
Spectante, Camaenae Carolus plausum tuae
Indulsit, invidi^ manibus torpe^tibus
Vulgi: in memoriam hoc revoca, and post haec tibi
Crimen erit venis tuts
Vnquam re^egare superbia^.
Quod si prolexitas fuit
Error, benigna Caesaris divinitas
Ignoscat; avara tenaxque nimis Musa metuit
Haberi epuias datura Regis auribus:
Amplamque dotem expendere vatis studuit
Luxurians ingenium: nil Tyria
Vellera, purpuramque moror: subsellium
Stipet corona papillionum, and citius
Sitirem ab istis laudem; inanis splendour hic,
Et inscitia superbiens ostro, dolor
Ingens theatri est and molestia. Prodigus
Autem nimis sum fellis, est mihi porti^
Minuta tantum, nec volo monopolium
Bilis meae, orbi dividam, fixum animo
Sedet generose impendere; sed ecce manum
Destituit charta, and huc usque ut solveret
Obsequium penna officiosa, jam mihi
Elapsa fugit. Vatis hoc furtum est pij.
Agnoscite candorem: mori
Hosts pro^ibet; stupidita^
Nec haec iners vocabitur
Sed inclyta patientia.
Ed. Kemp.

To the Author.
Would thou have taken my counsel (dearest friend)
Some humble Dedication thou had penned
To foul Detraction, swearing thou do owe
Thy work to her; because that she does show
By strength of Argument thy Labors be
Most white, and from all base aspersions free.
For Envy's Virtues parasite, and feeds
Upon her trencher, then this work must needs
Be good, which does at its sole charge maintain
Envy so well that she does burst again,
And split her strutting gorge, she goes before
Laughter in fatness, and commends thee more.
To the same upon the Arraignement of his Comoedie.
THe Court once set, straightwayes a Jury went
Upon thy Comoedie, was fully bent
To find it guilty, though the King did sit
As Judge himself that day, and cleared it.
If so, then let the foul-mouthed World condemn
Thy Innocent Piece, show that thou can contemn
And slight the false Inditements which they bring
To cast it, since it is quitted by the King,
And all the Comicke Laws; which not transgrest,
Why should thou be condemned, less to be pressed?
That the benefit o'th Book, which wont to save
From suffering, thou suffering thus may have.
I. R.

The Introduction.
Being a Dialogue betwixt Venus, Thetis, and Phoebus, sung by two Trebles, and
a Base. Venus (being Phosphorus as well as Vesper) appearing at a window above
as risen, calling to Sol, who lay in Thetis lap at the East side of the stage,
canoped with an azure curtain: at the first word that Venus sung, the curtain
was drawn, and they discovered. Venus. Drowsy Phoebus come away,
And let out the longed for day,
Leave thy Thetis silver breast,
And open the casements of the East.
It Is Venus calls, away, away,
The waking mortals long for day.

Thetis. And let them long, it is just and right
To shut them in eternal night,
Whose deeds deserve no day; lie still,
Arise not yet, lie still my Sun,
My night begins when thou art gone.

Venus. He woo thee with a kiss to come away.

Thet. And I with forty for to stay.

Venus. I Will give to thee the fair Adonis spear
So thou will rise:

Thet. And I to keep thee here
Will give a wreath of pearl as fair
As ever Sea-Nymph yet did wear.
It Is Thetis wooes thee stay, O stay, O stay.

Venus. It Is Venus wooes thee rise, O come away.

Phoebus. To which of these shall I mine ear incline?

Venus. Unto the upper world repair.

Thet. O no, I Will bind him in my flowing hair.

Phoebus. But see fond Mortals how they gaze
On that same petty blaze?
Thetis adieu, I am no longer thine,
I must away, For if I stay,
My Deity's quite undone,
They will forget to adore the rising Sun.
Here Phoebus arises from Thetis lap, and speaks. But what new spectacle of
wonder's this?
And have I lost my wonted Majesty
Where with I use to strike a general blindness
Through all the Stars? unto what height of pride
Are they aspired, that thus with open eyes
They dare outface me? Call out a powerful raye
And make those saucie sparks confess that all
Their luster is a debt they owe to me.

Venus sings. Gently, gently, God of light,
Profane not powers that are known
To be greater then thine own:
Here is not a fire does shine
That is beholding unto thine,
They are of themselves divine.

Phoebus speaks. And bless them all the Gods. But how come I
To be so blind to day? so dull? so heavy?
I know them now; Hayle fairest Albions King,
Live still the envy of the world; and thou
Resplendent Goddess, to view whose glorious face
I have often times in my swift course stood still;
Be all propitious to thy wished delights.
And since ye have vouchsafed your gracious presence
Here at the Muses Grove, command their Patron,
Who here stands pressed to serve ye.

Venus sings. Will he obey?

Phoeb. speaks. Or else let Daphne frown,
Or Phaeton resume my Chariot.

Venus sings. Then in their names I do command thee here
Lord of the year,
To entertain
This goodly Train,
Call back that day of mine
The sprightly Valentine.

Phoeb. speaks. Command me kill a Python, or recall
The Lion or the Crabb: thou art too modest
In thy requests; it is done, and for to add
A greater honor to this day, behold
I will recall those few spent minutes too
Which have runn out since I appeared, I Will back,
And fetch new rays that amorous Valentine,
This morning may brighter then ever shine.
At Phoebus his going in, the Chorus sing these two last lines. After the
Dialogue, enter a Boy. Ha ha he, here be fine feats. (I hope we shall have a
ballad made o'nt before night) ha ha he, the Sun must lay aside all his
business, and be at leisure (forsooth) to fetch back St Valentines day for the^,
ha ha he. In faith Gentlemen I pity ye, you are like to have a goodly Comoedy
here, Plautus his Captives translated, or some such thing I warrant ye: why
your Poet cannot endure a woman; and there are likely to be sweet raptures
where the Muse is not amorous and sanguine. But let me see, now I think o'nt,
I Will go fetch him out to ye, and ye shall laugh at him most miserably, and the
Ladies too; troth do, he deserves it. He has hired me this Valentines morning,
(for so ye must suppose it) to lead him out hood-winkt with a black scarf, into
the fields, because he would not see a woman. But Gods me! what have I forgot?
I should have had mine ears stretched for it if I had missed it. Ye must
suppose the Scene too to be here in England at a country village. Some low
homely slight stuff 'twill be, I doubt: pray heavens he does not hear me. And
here is an other dainty absurdity too (which I care not much if I tell ye)
concerning their clothes, which as far transcend the condition of the persons,
as the court does the country. But that they hope the Court will excuse, for
had it not bin here, they had bin forced (they say) to keep the true decorum.
But to my charge whom I left at the door, till I had discovered whether the
coast were clear. Come sir, now you may venture, you have a prospect as barren
as an Eunuchs chin. -- O me! why he is run away. I Will be whipped if he has not
smelt out my plot of exposing him to your view. -- But here comes the
Prologue, he perhaps brings some news of him; I Will leave ye to censure his
legs and cringes.

Exit Boy.
Prologue. Upon occasion of their Majesty's coming being deferred.
MOst sacred Majesty's, if ye do wonder,
To be saluted by an aged Prologue,
Know that upon these temples I do wea^e
An Emblem of our Mothers fate, who since
She has in expectation of your presence
Numb^ed the tedious moments, is grown old:
For each expecting minute that has passed
Has seemed an hour, and every hour a year.
But will ye see what power ye retain? He pulls off his head of hair and
beard.
We by your presence are made young again.
Actus primus, Scena prima.
Placenta, Constantina as a Boy, Isabella in Constantina's clothes. Pla.
FOrtune as yet is kind, well done my boy,
Hold up your head, a little higher, yet,
And can you weep?

Isa. I can, and have some cause,
O Lucius!

Pla. And sigh?

Isab. I would I could not.
Most wretched Isabella.

Pla. Constantina. She calls at the window

Isa. When shall mine eyes feed on that blessed sight?
Or when will thou with one kind look dissolve
This cloud which now obscures me? and makes me seem
Another from my self?

Pla. She stirs not yet
Why Constantina.

Isab. O my Lucius!
Might I but once more see thee, I could go
Unto the grave me thinks with such a look
As should make death enamored on me.

Pla. Ha?
Not yet? O what a sleepy girl is this?

Isab. But in this house I Have learned Pandora lives,
Who now does reap my harvest: here I hope
I may enjoy at least a sight of him,
And that is all that ever I must hope for. Constan. appears at the window
But I shall be observed.

Pla. O now she comes.

Constable. Placenta.

Pla. Not so loud (take heed) for fear
The Dragon should be waking; have you yet
Got on your masculine habit?

Con. Long ago.

Pla. Descend then, if your mind be still the same,
Before the Sun rise to betray your flight.

Constable. But have you dressed the Boy in my apparel?

Pla. It Is done, and not a creature but my self
And the dumb night are guilty of it.

Constable. Well,
I come.

Pla. In Troth I do confess I wonder
What should induce this peevish girl to take
This strange disguised habit, and forsake
Her uncles house, but it is love forsooth:
Well, be it what it will, I have procured,
By her entreatie, and the gold she gave me,
A boy as near her stature as I could,
Whom I have clothed in her own apparel,
And vayled in her scarf. Come on my boy.
You have not yet forgot, I hope, the instructions
I read to you within. Come, let me see
You vent a sigh now. Excellent: but be sure
You speak not very often.

Isab. Doubt not that:
They Are shallow griefs that make a noise.

Pla. Well said.
But tell me you, sir boy, what wast that made
You leave the London Players?

Isab. Indeed forsooth
I was abused there; besides, that trade
Begins to fail of late, most of your Gallants
Are grown so wise and frugall, that they choose
Rather to spend their money on a whore
(Which they call necessary) then on such toys.

Pla. Go to, you are a wagg. See now she comes. Enter Constable.
But o the Father! what pismire is this?
Ah, I shall swound to look upon her legs:
Surely one blast of wind will break them quite.
Now out upon her! mine are mill-posts to them.

Constable. Placenta, you do see how much I trust you,
That put mine honor thus into your hands.
Lead you this picture of mine into my chamber,
And there instruct him how he should behave
Himself, that no suspicion of my flight
Be nourisht by my Uncle, till I be
Past his recalling. So farewell good midwife.

Pla. How my left eye-brow beats? I do not like it,
It does presage no good. My Constantina,
Go back again I pray you, in good sooth
It Is very dangerous thus discompanied
To undertake a journey.

Constable. All in vain:
I am resolved either to find my Cleopes,
Or else to sleep with death closed in mine arms. Exit Constan.

Pla. If it must needs be so, why then farewell.
I cannot choose but weep: sweet Constantina --
Well, it was the goodest Gentlewoman -- but sh 's gone --
Many a dear morsel has she helped me to --
But we must all depart -- I do remember
When she was but a little one, she ever
Was fond of me -- but I must be content.
Come on my boy, let not your face so much
Be seen -- when I have shown her lodging to you,
And left you there -- I cannot yet forbear,
It will not from my heart -- I Will go and visit
The fair Pandora, that kind Gentlewoman,
And see if that her closet can afford
Any good thing to hold the heart. Come boy. Exeunt.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 2.
Anteros solus. Ant. I knew there was a woman in the wind.
I smelt her. Stay. -- but now she is gone -- I Will forward.
Why I am not at leisure now to take
An ounce of Tobacco in a week, they do
So haunt me up and down. And this forsooth
Is our Saint Valentine, wherein our lovers
Do use to imitate Iack-dawes, and Rookes,
Do bill and couple. But (my starre's be thanked)
I Am now delivered from those petulant females.
But stay, and let me recollect my self.
What part about me is it (I wonder) can
Be guilty of their sin of loving me?
In Troth me thinks I am not very fair;
A pretty winter countenance I wear
After a cup: and I have often seen
A better nose dwell better eyes between.
As for my legs (not for to flatter them)
Surely I think under a boot they might
Become the Court, so I refrained to play
At Goff -- but oh the traytor's apprehended,
I have him fast. Oh thou pernicious nose,
Rebellious member, have I so often raised
Thy dull complexion with the spirits of sack
Unto that height that thou have dared to ourface
The Sun in Cancer, and have I this reward?
But if I do not humble thee again,
Reduce thee to thy former state of palenesse
With rot-gut, and cuds-nigs -- let me be married.
But whom have we here?
It Is Lucius one of our loving fools:
O ho? why then I must be tortured,
That Is all that I can say, I must be tortured.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 3.
Anteros, Lucius, Endymion. Luc. Ah my Endymion, see thou yond rising Sun?

End. I do, but what of that?

Luc. Why nothing boy
But at his presence why do those lesser-fires
Pluck in their shamefaced heads? do thou not mark
Dull heavy Page? I can but meditate
Upon the wit of Nature, who by objects
Low and inanimate, as is that Sun --

Ant. Now heavens be good unto me, this is called
Lovers philosophy.

Luc. does read unto us
A lecture of her higher mysteries.
What do thou think is meant by that same Sun?
And those extinguished tapers? -- he alas
Poor aged wretch but coldly imitates
That which Pandora does unto the life.
Whilst she is absent thousands of petty beauties
Do twinkle in the night, let her appear,
And they all vanish.

Ant. Ha brave, is not this dainty? for all this,
Surely the man would take it unkindly now
If I should go and tell him he was mad.

Luc. Endymion, lend me thine eyes a little;
Do thou desire to see a Mapp, a Model
Of all the world in brief and in one word?
View this -- why readst thou not? thy happy lips
Should thirst me thinks to have that blessed air
Divorce them. read.

End. Pandora.

Luc. Ah Pandora.
Look here is the Sun, this place does Jupiter
Possess, here Venus, and there Phoebe; mark --
Here is the Earth, but in her bravery,
And smiling as when Sol does sleep betwixt
The twining Gemini.

Ant. Thou daring mortal:
But where in this your Idol of the world
Is Styx, Cocytus, or the blessed place
Of the dear Furies? or the three chapt Dog?
Are they without the verges of the World?

Luc. Fortune! how happy were I was this face
Of thine not counterfeite. Speak Endymion:
But art thou sure that my Neander drew
The fair Constantina for his Valentine?

Endy. I never said it Sir.

Luc. How never said it?

End. Only her name, so was Pandora yours.

Luc. O too too true presage of both our fortunes.
But let it be. When I do violate
That love, that more then mortal bond, wherewith
My soul is tied unto Neander, may
I fall vnpittied, may no gentle sigh
Be spent at my last obsequies, may I want
A man to wish me again, would that prevail.

Ant. Without all question this is Magic -- oh
How I do fear a Metamorphosis.

Luc. But I do feel a poverty of words
Begin to ceaze me. Good Endimyon,
Where is my boy Luscinio? Call him in,
That he may touch a string which may dissolve me
Into a flood of tears -- come on my boy, Enter Lusc. with a Lute.
Oh teach that hollow pensive Instrument
To give a true relation of my woes
Whilst I lie here, and with my sighs keep time.

Ant. O how I sweat. 300000 feauers
Are now upon me. O --
The Song.
Have pity (Grief) I can not pay
The tribute which I owe thee, tears;
Alas those Fountains are grown dry,
And it is in vain to hope supyly
From others eyes, for each man boares
Enough about him of his own
To spend his stock of tears upon:

Ant. O O O. Will it be ever done?
Woo then the heavens (gentle Love)
To melt a Cloud for my relief
Or woo the Deep or woo the Grave,
Woo what thou will so I may have
Wherewith to pay my debt, for Grief
Has vowed, unless I quickly pay
To take both life and love away.

Ant. Gods, and the World! you everlasting Twanger --
Avoid.

Lusc. What means the Gentleman?

Ant. I Will tell you.
The Gentleman does mean for to consult
With the entrals of your breeches, boy; the Gentleman
Does mean to whip you boy, unless you straight
Avoid the place with that seducing Fiddle.
And you his Squire his Pandar that procures
This bandy Cockatrice Music for him. fly.

ACT. 1. SCE. 4.
Anteros. Lucius. Ant. How fares it with our Lucius?

Luc. As with one
That is of all men the most miserable.
Ah my Pandora, when I record thy name,
(Thy name that is bounded with that sacred number
As showing all Perfection bides in thee)
Me thinks the numerous Orbs dwell in mine ear,
After which sound all others seem unpleasing,
Harsh, void of Harmony -- Pandora -- oh
How sweet a life had the Camelion
Might he but ever feed upon such aires!

Ant. Am I not yet transformed? me thinks I feel
My self becoming Wolf -- I am half Bear already.

Luc. Live happy still, and when thine aged head
Laden with years Shall be inueloped
Within this earth, may a perpetual spring
Be on thy Grave.

Ant. Shall I put forth my Paw,
And so command him silence?

Luc. But when I
Forget to love thee or thy memory,
May my white name be stained with the blot
Of baseness, and I dye without one tear
To wash it out.

Ant. Forget to love her? -- oh
Not for a world. And er't be long we shall
Have some decayed piece of Arras, that
Is brought to his last suit, and has no more
Lands for to sell or morgage for new plush
Will beg you for your fair revenues Sir
-- Death Sir I cannot flatter,
Let me not live a minute if I can.
You look not like your self in that same passion;
It is not man-like; ere I Would loose a sigh,
Or set my soul one scruple of a note
The lower for these scarcrowes in clean linen
These chippings of nature: I Would dam my self
To a thatcht Alchouse, and St. Kitts Tobacco,
And dabble there eternally:

Luc. Ah Anteros, thou art too rough a Surgeon
To handle my wounds.

Ant. Pandora, ah Pandora.
Does not this sound deliciously from a man?

Luc. Do not blaspheame good Anteros; she is
The model of the world.

Ant. Why so am I,
And you, and every man besides, we all
Are little worlds.

Luc. But my Pandora is
The abstract of them all; when she was borne,
The whole house of heaven did meet, and there decreede
Only in her mortality should reach
Perfection.

Ant. And for heavens cause why in her?
Are we not all made of the self same clay?
And of the same ingredients? by the same workman?
It Is madness Lucius this, it is not love.

Luc. Sir I must leave you.

Ant. Nay but stay a while,
I have not finished yet. Besides all this,
If you do love her so, what hinders then
But you might marry her, since (as I hear)
The Girl is not composed of adamant
Or flint, but of a supple and kind nature,
And loves you too?

Luc. O my dear friend Neander,
Shall I do this to thee? to such a friend?

Ant. Oh I am undone. Farewell.

ACT. 1. SCE. 5.
Lucius in insidiis, Pandora. Neander* Luc. But see Pandora.
Oh how amazed and sudden is the flight
Of all the spirits of darkness, when the day
But shows her face!

Pan. What if I take this way?
It may be I shall find them in the grove,
Whither they often resort -- but stay, perchance
They may be in the arbor that does look
Into the forest.

Luc. Oh ye immortal Gods!
Why did ye suffer those vain Lunaticke Poets
So much to antedate the works of nature,
Who living many ages since did write
I know not what of many Nymphs and Graces,
Muses and Sirens? they are mere fables all;
With my Pandora they had all their birthes,
And when she dies they will perish with her.

Pan. Ah?
How like unto this Dazy was I once
Whilst I did live recluse! my innocent heart
Like to this little Globe of gold, enclosed
Within the whiteness of my thoughts, was safe
From all the violence that Love, or shame
His child could do: but when his warmer beams
Displayed that Ivory guard, and laid me open
Unto the tyranny of his assaults,
I was -- but I will sighe out all the rest.
Ah Lucius.

Luc. Oh happy name!

Pan. Why Lucius?
Neander is as dear to me as he.
Do thou not blush to speakt * thou shame of woman?
But here he comes, I will address my self. Enter Nean.
With all the winning Graces that I have
To entertain him.

Luc. It Is my friend Neander.

Nean. Fair Nymph, God save you.

Pan. Dearest love Neander.
The welcom'st man alive.

Nean. Nay but sweet Lady
Forbear the encounter.

Pan. Whether do thou turn
So cruelly from her that loves thee more
Then her own soul? are you not well good Sir?

Nean. You see I walk, look fresh, and laugh. (ha, ha, he)
Symptoms of one that is not very sick.

Pan. But am I thus despised?

Nean. You're troublesome.
Ha, ha, he, it is pretty, very pretty
* How scuruily does sorrow laugh? (ha, ha, he) aside.
Most excellent, beyond compare (ha ha, he)
Why do you follow me?
I do not fell complexion Lady, nor
Have I the art to cure the tympany,
I have no great devotion to the tub
Nor the hot house, as yet, what are you rampant?

Pan. But pray thee speak Neander, am I so
Deformed grown of late, for to deserve
All this neglect?

Nean. What shall I answer? Madam,
If you have spoke all that you mean to speak
And have no greater business, I desire
I may crave pardon, I must take my leave,
I have affairs expect me. O misery!
That which I long for most, I fly from farthest.
Where shall I find my Lucius?

ACT. 1. SCE. 6.
Lucius. Pandora. Neander. Luc. What is he gone?

Pan. Lucius, were you so nigh, and not discovered?
All hail, but whither in such haste my love?
If thou do love me stay a little.

Luc. Love you?
Now all the God's forbid it. I love you?
My better Angel guard me from such a sin.
Should I love you, a Thief?

Pan. A theife?

Luc. A theife
I and the worst of Thieues -- * Villain thou lie. aside.

Pan. But why a Thief? Speak.

Nean. My divining soul
Tells me that Lucius is not far from hence. Redit in scenam Neander.
Ha! it is he, I will observe a little

Luc. Lady, I Will tell you, since you do so long
To hear your praises trumpeted to the world,
First, thou have robbed thy Father, thine own Father,
Of all that little stock of virtue and goodness
Which nature gave him, and (most covetous)
Have powered it to thy greater heap; besides
Thou have undone thy Sister, stolen from her
All that was beautiful and lovely in her;
That fair maiestick straightness which attracts
The eyes of thousands to admire, Was hers;
Those rosy buds that open on your cheeks
Were cropped out of her garden; upon her ruins
Is that fair Aedifice of thine erected:
Last, thou have stolen from me and from Neander
(Which are not two that have deserved the worst
Of thee in all the world) our happiness
All our content, our joy, our very selves.
You see how amiable a creature you are,
How well deserving love. Should I love you?
I Would first embrace a Succubus, court the plague,
Or kiss a cloud that is big with lightning -- (heavens, Aside.
Have ye no thunderbolts in store to strike
This sacrilegious head that thus blaspheames
One of your dearest pieces? --) I love you?
Whose face dressed up in that same innocent lawne
Shows like a dunghill set about with Lillies.
* (Thou art a perjured wretch) -- should I love you! Aside.
Whose eyes are like two fired barrells set
Upon a Beacon only to astonish Aside.
And fright the neighboring people -- * (oh my heart!
It is a hundred thousand miles betwixt
Thee and my tongue) -- what do you meditate on?

Pan. The nearest way unto the grave.

Luc. The grave?
If thou would have the shortest cut to hell,
To that same receptacle of black souls,
(Where such as dye for love do walk in shades
As dark as were their thoughts, whilst they lived here)
Lend me thy hand and I will show it thee.

Pan. Let it be speedy then good Lucius.

Luc. Why thou art at thy iourneyes end already.

Pan. Where Is that?

Luc. Amongst the departed souls, below
Where the dire furies have their habitation,
It Is in this breast.

Pan. Why do not open then
And let me in? -- Oh if they live so here,
Farewell for ever to the upper world.

Nean. Ha? does he embrace her? sure it cannot be.

Luc. Away thou prostitute, immodest, go.

Nean. Who is it dares say I must not love this man?

Luc. Or you, or I must leave this place.

Pan. Stay Lucius.
It Is I that will be gone, the most unhappy
Of all, on whom nature has written woman;
Forsaken Constantina, thou and I
Will have a Dialogue in tears anon. Exit.

Luc. Neander!

Nean. Lucius! They embrace and so go out.

ACT. 1. SCEN. 7.
Lively. His boy. 6 Suitors to Mistress Vrsely. Liu. I, I, love on, ha, ha, he,
and see what ye will get
By that at last, I Will love my sefe, my self, ha, ha, he,
This day old Lively thou art just fourscore,
Quickly some Sack, I have not yet baptized
Mine eyes this morning as I use to do.
Why boy? ha, ha. I am as lusty now,
As full of active spirits, as when I wore
But twenty on my back, ha ha, he, this laughing
Surely's restoratiue above your gold,
Or all your dearer drugges. The very thought
How quaintly I shall gull my expecting Scholars
My Neophytes that gape to hear the news
When I shall nod into the grave, does add
Such vigor to me, that I do not feel
Not feel the ground I stand upon. Began. Filpot passes over into Justice Hooks
house, after him Tem. All
But see
More Suitors still -- Then Arth. Armst. and Zeal. Know.
Now they begin to flock.

Arth. Arm. Sir if I may advise you wade no farther
Into this business, but desist; I have
A promise (I Will assure you) from the Justice.

Zealous Kn. Sir I may use the same words unto you
I have a promise too, but yesterday
My Father did present him with a horse
Of Robin-red-breast's getting -- They strive who shall go first into HOO. house.
by your leave.

Art. Ar. Nay Sir come on, if you be good at that. --

Liu. You have a promise. God-a-mercy horse. ha, ha, he.
These and some dozen more do daily haunt
This Cormorants house, and all (good men) pretend
It is pure love unto his crooked daughter
That draws them thither, when there is not one of 'em
That would vouchsafe her a look, nay hardly a thought
Unless it were for to contemn her; but
There is a thing they call a Parsonage
An impropriate Parsonage which the well given Matrons
Have rescued from the Laity, and returns
After my death unto the Church, which living
The Justice here has sold them, but reserving
The first donation for himself, with which
He intends to put his foolish daughter off.
'Twas once my brothers land, but this same Hook
By a golden bayte did pluck it from him: well,
It is no matter, I have my life in it. Ha, ha, he.
But I will cheat them all, will cozen them.
Enter Boy with a glass of Sack. Why Boy.

Boy. Here Sir.

Liu. Well said my honey, well said.
Oh how it smiles upon me! (hum hum) give it me
This is mine Antidote against the Sith of time.
He that desires to live, let him do thus -- He drinks.
Drink Sack in the morning. Boy, another cup.
How now? another? see how he prunes himself. Enter Stutch.

Stutch. Boy, there is a teston for you, see you look
Well to my Nagge -- I must be generous now.
But let me see, I will accost him thus.
Sir if it please your worship -- (it must be so)
These Country Justices do love a life
For to be worshipped at every word,
I come now from my Lady.

Liu. (And you may
Return again unto her Ladyship
And tell her that old Lively is not yet
Intended for to dye.

Stutch. And do desire
That as you shall approve of my good parts --
Well 't will do -- now I will knock --
But I will open and enter, it is a Solaecismo
For to be modest in such businesses.

The Boy with another glass of Sack. Liu. Well done my Squire o'th bottles,
stand you there.
Sir I do come now from my Lady, ha, ha, he,
And do desire, that as you shall approve
Of my good parts -- ha, ha, he -- He drinks.
Well take the glass, and get you home, hum, hum, hum.

Hug. If I can win the Girl, I Will find a trick Enter Hugo Obligation.
For to dispatch old Lively presently
And with much ease; a piece of bread and a pin
Will do the cure, or else an honest burre
Lapt up in butter.

Liu. Here Is a precious rogue,
Oh it is Hugo Obligation
The precise Scriuener, that these three years space
Has labored for orders, this same villain
Sure is the likeliest man to carry her --

Hugo. But see where Lively stands, I Will not be seen. Exit.

Liu. Being one whom he does use in all his Covenants.
But I Will out live them all, the Knaves. I Will now
Go taste a bowl of pure refined air
Upon yond hill. Exit.

ACT. 1. SCE. 8.
Anteros. Loueall. Ant. Yet stay a little, who is this? he is gone.
Once more the coast is clear, now I Will adventure
Toward the Sheepheards door: not far from hence
Hid in a thicket I have provided for me
A Sheepheards robes, these, if I can prevail
With this same Stipes for to undertake
A Servant of my commendation,
Will I straight leap into, and so remain
Disguised with him, for (as I understand)
The family does consist of himself and's dog,
As for his wife she seldom is at home
Being a famous Midwife. Blessed house!
Surely in such a place Hippolytus
Did hunt away his solitary hours.
But I forget (tick tock) why Shepherd, Stipes. How?
Not yet awake?

Lou. Is not this Anteros? Enter Love all.

Ant. How I was dealt withal by nature when
She molded this same lump of clay together,
And seasoned it with soul, I know not, but
Let me get out o'th world with obloquy
If ever I could find in all the herd
Of womankind yet so much excellence
As could procure a sigh, or kindle in me
The least spark of a desire.

Lou. It Is he, his phrase
Betrays him.

Ant. I confess like Whelps or Kitlings
Whilst they are young, and suck, and do not know
The use of tongue, they are pretty creatures, and
They may be looked upon without the danger
Of either stool or vomit -- but --

Lou. But -- Well Sir Ruffian, I hope to see this Blasphemy of yours against
that feathered Deity sent home with a shaft in your bosom for interest ere
long.


Ant. What my little vbiquitary Loueall? my Page of the Smock? my commodity
above stairs? my Court Shittlecocke? tossed from one Lady to an other? The
Kernel of thy glove sweet lack.


Lou. Take shell and all.


Ant. Why here is a Parcel of man's flesh of another temper now, that has the
art of placeing his affections wisely, can love one because she is fair, a
second because she is modest, and has his packets of reasons in readiness too;
if he meets with a wanton Girl, that property takes him, there is hope of
actiuity, she will not fill a bed like Pygmalions Image before he sacrificed
to Venus: if she be rude, and ignorant, her harmless simplicity catches
him; he loves this for the graceful writhing of her neck; another because she
can veil her borrowed teeth neatly with her Fan when she venters at
laughter: nothing can escape him, every part of woman is full of limetwigs to
him: which though it be an humor contrary to mine, who care for none, yet I
like it far above your whining constancy as sauouring more of the Man.


Lou. True. For why should I confine my love to one Circle? we see that
laborious creature the Be, which is often set before us for a Copy of
industry, not always droaning upon one flower, but as soon as she has sucked
the sweetness from one, throws her little ayrie body upon a second, and so to
a third, till at last she comes home with her thighs laden with that pretty
spoil.


An. Well said my Loueall, I perceive thou will never dye for love then.


Lou. No, If I do, let me lie when I am dead by that Cynick Philosopher with a
staff in my hand, to fright the beast sand fowls from my unburied carcass.
--

But is there any news I pray thee grown
Up in this country since I went to court?

Ant. O tanto e piu.
First Cleopes your sisters Lover --

Lou. What? he is not dead I hope?

Ant. I would he were.
Is gone, has forsook her.

Lou How?

Ant. And she forsooth
Since his departure has betook her self
Unto a veyle, silence, and tears; in which
Monastic habit she does spend her days.
I do but tell you by tradition Sir,
Not from my self; but this I can assure you,
It is with us the Parenthesis of eating.

Lou. There Is nothing man within me. After such vows?
Such protestations? but the Gods make Loueall
No creature, if he does not suffer for it,
Buy this disloyalty of his, at a dear rate.

Ant. Can you be quiet? next your fair Kinswoman
Sweet Mistress Vrsly (who without all question
Was Kitlin to Nib, o'th Queen of Faries Kitchen,
Sent to your Uncle for a Newyeeres gift
Upon exchange by the Elfe) has the Parsonage
Old Lively lives in hung on her crooked back;
With which fair bait, your good and virtuous Uncle
Does angle for some young and hungry Scholar,
And daily expects the taking of the Gudgeon.
This very hour no less then 6 or 7
Are nibling at it, but the hook is seen;
Your Uncle is not cunning in his fishing,
And so I pray you tell him --

Lou. But stay Anteros.
I have discovered (unless mine eyes deceive me)
A stranger thing then is all this you told me,
What Is that in your hatt? it is not a Valentine
I hope?

Ant. But I have got a counter hope
Against that hope of yours; I hope it is.

Lou. But art thou turned a Lover? have thou got
A Mistress? thou a Mistress? let me see
That I may worship that great name, that has
Begot this miracle in thee.

Ant. Away,
Keep back those common eyes, they be profane.

Lou. By all the lips of honor I must see it.

Ant. Come you have learned such perfumed oaths at Court,
By all their Feather-men and Tire-women,
Boxes of sucus, cabinets for cerusse --
Nay look you now -- not for a million.

Lou. For a far lesser sum sweet Sir nay come
I must and will.

Ant. Death! what a mad man's this?
Why if you must and will, then see.

Lou. What Is here?
Rex et regina magnae Britanniae? what is this? what is this?
What are the King and Queen thy Valentines? ha, ha, he.

Ant. Yes marry are they; why do you laugh so Loueall?

Lou. Who can refrain? ha, ha, he.

Ant. For whom should I admire,
Love, or adore more? I tell thee Jack, I care not
For such poor weak Idolaters that lie prostrate
To every little Star that can but twinkle;
Those petty votaries of Egypt, which
Worship this Onion and the Leeke -- for me
I will not bend a knee unless it be
Unto the Sun or Moon.

Lou. Thou art mad, stark mad,
A citizen of Bedlam.

Ant. I am mad,
Yes, Yes, I am. You then that are so wise He pulls him back.
Enjoy your wisedomenesse alone -- farewell.

Lou. Come back in the name of goodness -- Anteros --

Ant. My company may infect you Sir, I am mad.

Lou. What is my little boy grown sullen now,
And will not eat its dinner?

Ant. Well, what then?

Lou. This day my Anteros I will dedicate
To thee and laughter, to morrow I will study
Some deep revenge for my abused sister
Upon that villain; but no more, thy hand.
Shall we be merry and laugh each man his rubber?

Ant. I Am for you for a single game or so.

Lou. Well, shall I make a motion then? stay you He offers to go out hastily.
But here a little.

Ant. Call you this a motion?
One word before you travail, whether now?

Lou. I will return immediately.

Ant. So you shall. He offers again and Anteros pulls him back.
Speak ere you go.

Lou. Well, if I must I will.
Last night it was my chance to overtake
Upon the way a brace of fine tame fools,
Which I have brought along with me, these now He offers to go, Anteros pulls
him back.
Will I go fetch unto thee.

Ant. Peradventure.
Surely the man has Quicksiluer in's heels.
I pray thee tell me, what are they for creatures?

Lou. We shall loose time.

Ant. Rather shall gain it Sir.

Lou. The first of them is a fine spiced gallant,
One that has been some three years in codling
At the Innes of the Court, and (as he tells me) intends
To lie, and soake a while to make him relish
In the rose water of a Knighthood, strewn
Over with the Sugar of a yearly rent
Of some nine hundred -- after the old man's death.
And all this cookery is to please the palate
Of some nice Minion, who to make her weight
Drags peradventure some three thousand after her.
The thing (to do it right) beside the managing of it is rapier, and a pretty
competencie of play parcels, can salute you, and take it is leave of you in
French, but so miserably harsh that any one may conclude, he never trauail'd
for his language further then Littleton -- He --


Ant. Is a very ass, no more of him; but what is the other?


Lou. His kinsman. What he is now he knows not himself, else he would have
told me, but he has been a Lawyer; Clerk in's days, his prattle is
altogether about the complections, and he will read you a lecture of simple
bawdery for some two hours in your ear if you will suffer him, and after all
this, he feels you by the nose, and cries Mark the end on 't.


Ant. And is this all? give me thy hand, I have a brace of the like creatures
at my service. I will play with thee from a Stiuer to a Guilder, from a Guilder
to a Doller, from a Doller to a French crown, from a French crown to a pound,
from a pound, to a hundred (mark what I say) in the way of friendship, with
those two grand coxcombes thou have all to be worded so.


Lou. You will, are you so confident?


Ant. Yes marry am I. Only I will not cloy you with an inuentory of your
dishes before hand, take this in brief. One of them is a Scholar newly warm
in a lambskin, Nephew to old bully Lively, at whose house they are both now,
the other is an elder brother, and an heir, and he shall tell you so as soon
as he sees you. But stay where shall our Campus Martius be?


Lou. No place Better then this, but speak the hour.


Ant. Let me see, [Hee looks upon his watch] it is just eight now, some half
an hour after nine I will not fail.


Lou. To bring your champions with you.


Ant. Or else I Will make good the place my self, which I would be loath to do
I tell you. Exit.


Lou. My first work now is for to see my Uncle,
And as I hear my melancholy sister.
That done through the back door that leads to the Stables
(where they are taking order for their horses.)
I will go visit my two creatures and
Prepare them for the Combat.

Finis Actus Primi.
The Song.
Cupid if a God thou art,
Transfix this Monsters stubborn heart.
But if all thy shafts be flowne,
And thy quiver empty grown,
Here be Ladies that have eyes
Can furnish thee with new supplies.
Yet winged Archer do not shoot at all,
It Is pity that he should so nobly fall.
ACT. 2. SCEN. 1.
Stipes making of himself ready with his Sheepe-hooke in his hand. Mistress
Vrsely, Merda. Sti. Heigh hoe --
It Is a fine morning this as I have seen,
And a most early Spring -- but daughter Merda,
Why Merda I say, why daughter Merda, what,
Have not the Fleas yet made a breakefast of you?
You Will rise? or do you mean that Mistress Vrsely
Shall take you in your bed? she will not be long
Ere she be here -- Oh me! she is here already. Mrs. Vrsely enters.
Why Merda, Merda I say, go to,
I, I by'r Lady.

Vrs. Fa, la, la, la, I have found six Checkstones in my She sings.
Father's yard, all in my Father's yard, and now I
Will go see if Merda will play with me --
Oh Stipes, where is your daughter Merda?

Sti. Oh sweet Mistress Vrsely, oh that I were a young
Scholar now for your sake; ha, this is she that
The beggars fight for: come on in faith young Mistress,
Which of all the blackcoates do you love best?

Vrs. Blackcoates? I care not this for any of them,
I never will love any but Anteros;
But pray you Stipes call your daughter Merda,
Is she not up yet?

Sti, Merda, will you come? or do you long until
I fetch you out -- At length forsooth: are Enter Merda.
You not ashamed of this you great Maukin you?

Vrs. Oh Merda, will you play at Checkstones with me?

Sti. Where is your answer, and your curt'sie Maiden?
If it please you forsooth, say.

Mer. If it please you forsoothsay.

Sti. Say? thou filthy harlotry, thou;
Oh here is a Girl brought up most daintily;
Well was it not for shame I Would take you up -- He offers.

Mer. Father, good Father, forgive me but this once, I Will never
Do so any more.

Vrs. Stipes, you shall forgive her,
I Will make my Father take his house from you,
And the North close, unless --

Sti. Thank your young Mistress; young Mistress I
Do thank you say.

Mer. Young Mistress I do thank you say.

Sti. Again? but oh the diggers!
What do I see? My Sheep have quite disgrest
Their bounds, and leap't into the several.
Whu, whu, why Scab, the last, the last, there scab
It Is the best Curre
That ever mumbled crust.
How daintily he caught that Sherehogge! there,
So, so, au, au: why so; haup, haup, you rogue
But I will follow him.

ACT. 2. SCEN. 2.
Mistress Vrsely. Merda. Vrs. Come Merda, will you play now?

Mer. No, I will not unless you will give me those bracelets.

Vrs. Take them.

Mer. And your gloves to.

Vrs. Here, fa, la, la.

Mer. Stay while I put them on though.

Vrs. What shall we play for?

Mer. Two pinnes a game.

Vrs. Stake then: heigh ho Anteros!

Mer. How many shall we make up?

Vrs. One and thirty.

Mer. Will you have Winter, or Summer?

Vrs. -- Summer -- no Winter.
^i, Winter, Winter, Winter:

Mer. But you said Summer first, I will not play.

Vrs. Au, but I said Winter afterward though.

Mer. Begin then.

Vrs. One --

Mer. So, so, you touched the other stone, now I must play.

Vrs. You ly, I did not touch it.

Mer. You ly, you did touch it, and you shall have no pins here.

Vrs. Sh'ant I so? but I will though; do you scratch hussie?

Mer. I that I will scratch, and bite too.

Vrs. Give me my gloves, and bracelets again.

Mer. You may go look 'vm, I will not, as long as you gave
Them me. Give a thing, and take a thing
That Is the Devils gold-ring.

Vrs. Well if I don't tell my Father of this, you Pusse you.

Mer. You Munkey.

Vrs. You Bastard.

Mer. Do you abuse one's friends you Jade you?

Vrs. And you call me Jade you are a Whore.

Mer. Do you call Whore?

Vrs. I that I will call Whore, well, well, the next time
That you eat any Cheesecakes at our house
You shall have better luck shall you.

Mer. Your Cheesecakes? we have as good of our own.

Vrs. Au, hau, you shall nere make no dirt pyes
With me in our Barn hussie.

Mer. Who cares? then you shall gather no more Violets, nor
Primeroses in our Close.

Vrs. Your Close? I Will gather there in spite of your teeth.
It is my Fathers Close, so it is, so it is.
Your Father does but hire it -- Oh here he comes
Here he comes, here comes my Father,
Now you shall see.

Mer. Au but I Will run home.

ACT. 2. SCE. 3.
Justice Hook, the six Suitors, Mistress Vrsely, Lively. Hook. Come on, I am
not of that rank of Patrons
Which set to sale the livings of the Church.
(Oh are you here my daughter? wipe your nose;)
I take no bonds in secret, sell no horse
For his price centuple, nor do I send
The eager suitors up unto my Lady,
That she might judge which is the better gifted.
(Sir if your father will be bound to pay He takes Stuc. aside.
The first years revenues, you are the man shall speed,
A reservation of mine own tithes too
Must be concluded on before you have it)
But as a true lover of virtue, do
Choose rather to confer a double good
Then the least damage on the man I deal with.
Behold my young and tender daughter here;
I do confess she is not the rarest piece
That ever nature drew, nor is it fit
That such as you, who either are, or should be
Wedded unto your Books, should have a loud
And clamorous beauty to disturb your studies.
You need not fear the thought of her perfection.
Will call you from a piece of Greek to read
Miracles in her face. Hold up your head, Enter Lively.
And tell me now which of this goodly troop
You have most mind to, for on him will I
Bestow old Liuely's Parsonage, and thee
In Marriage.

Live. Excellent, excellent good, ha, ha, ha.

Vrse. I will have Anteros, Terpanders son.

Hoo. Let me not hear another syllable,
You peevish girl, you; you have Anteros?
What do you weep? no more: come on your ways,
And sit you down here by me, while your Suitors
Explain themselves and their good parts before you.

Vrs. Father, huff, huff, I will none of those two men
With the short hair, do what you can I will not.

Hoo. Why so my daughter? peace.

Vrs. Huff, huff, -- because I know
As well as can be by their looks, that they
Cannot contain themselves within an hour,
And you do know I cannot hold my wa --

Hoo. Peace thou most arrant fool, before your wooers
Thus to proclaim your imperfections?

Live. Ha, ha, he: another bout with my conserues for that;
This box shall add three months unto my life, He eats conserues.
And this same slice of Quinces seven. I, I,
Begin to plead, do, do.

Zeal. My sweetest Mistress, This fellow speaks through the nose.
I will divide this my Oration
Just into three and thirty parts, all which
With your vouchsafed patience at this time
I will run through.

Hoo. The candle of the day
Will burn within the socket, ere thou'st done;
I pray thee leave.

Zeal. No sir, I will not leave,
I am not yet arrived at the point.

Began. And he does use to tire all his hearers.

Hoo. Oh; he has don't already, don't already

Zeal. Besides all this --

Hoo. Now out upon his lungs,
My dinner will be spoiled, the capon burnt,
The beef as black as mummy; this man's breath
Will blast them all.

Live. Ha, ha, he.

Hoo. Have thou taken Orders fellow?

Zea. If It please you, no.

Hoo. Did e're preach?

Zea. Only one Sermon sir
For approbation to a female Audience.
But I have here letters of commendation
From seventeene honest men of good report
Amongst their neighbors.

Hoo. Spare your pains good sir.

Tem. As for my self, fair Gentlewoman, This is hoarse.
I cannot but inveigh against these times
Wherein --

Hoo. What says he?

Arth. If it please your Worship,
Has lost his voice with railing against Bishops,
And the fair discipline of the Church.

Hoo. Oh villain,
Command him silence.

Stuch. It Is a courtesy sir
You inflict upon him, it is not a punishment.

Began. The holy Matrons now will rob their husbands
To contribute to the afflicted Saint.

Live. And think they merit in it. But no more;
I will go gull them all, and presently. --
o -- o -- o -- o -- oo -- ooo --
The longest day I see will have his evening,
o -- o -- o -- oo -- o -- ooo --

Hoo. But see old Lively; stand close and observe.

Liu. O! now the wished for minute does approach
Which I so long have waited for, and not I
Alone -- but let them now enjoy their wishes.
o -- o -- oo -- ooo --
I feel my heart strings crack, and the whole lump
Groans for a speedy dissolution.

Ho. How Is this? but yesterday he was in's sack,
Told me he hoped to live to eat a Goose
Which grazed upon my grave: so suddenly?

Liu. Have I no friends about me? must I go
Out of the world in private thus? from home?
Without one friend to take his leave of me?
Kind Justice Hook, O that good man Mr. Hook.

Hoo. Peace, not a word: what does he name me for?

Live. Would thou wast here, but to participate
Of my last dying breath, I would pronounce thee
Mine heir in total.

Hoo. Bear witness Gentlemen --
Good Mr. Lively, 'lasse how fares it with you?

Live. Whoe's that names me?

Hoo. He whom you asked for,
Sacrilege Hook.

Live. Sacrilege Hooke's mine heir, he falls down as if he were dead.
And so farewell thou false and flattering world.

Arth. Alas he 's dead.

Ho. Peace, not so loud for fear you call him back.
Ye all can bear me record I Am his heir.

All. We can.

Hoo. Why Robert, Oliver,
Run to the Church immediately, and cause
The bell be told with speed: old Mr. Lively
Is newly dead -- Alas, I can but weep
To view this spectacle of mortality,
And I have cause to spend some tears for him -- ha ha he.

Arth. I doubt he is not fully dead yet Patron,
Shall I make sure work with him? give him a knock?

Hoo. Offer no violence unto the dead
I charge you, it is as bad as sacrilege,
Which I have always hated.

Live. So has the Devil.

Began. Sweet Mistress Vrsely.

Zeal. Fairest Lady.

Temp. Stay,
No haste good sir.

Arth. But by your leave sweet sir.

Hu. It Is I have right unto her, she is a creature,
And you are one o'th wicked.

Stutch. Out thou rascal that liv'st upon thy railing;
Good Mistress Vrsely, -- They all lay hold on her.
I have a share therein.

Mrs Vrse. Why father, father,
O me, me, me, they will pull me into pieces;
O my hand, O my arm, my arm, O my back.

Live. Ha, ha, he.

Hoo. Forbear this rudeness gentlemen, my daughter
Shall have her choice; these are not ways to gain her,
They must be gentle, soft behaviors
That win a woman, not such boisterous Rhethoricke. --
But hark, the bell does toll: I Will presently
Go seize upon his goods and chattell,

Liu. Ha? he rises.
And will you so? but I do know a trick
VVorth twenty of that. -- I pray good M. Hook,
Whom toll's this bell for?

Hoo. Oh! for my hopes,
What does he live again?

Liu. And lives to laugh at thee, and at thy baseness,
Covetous wretch. Ha, ha, he.
Sir, as I take it I may change my will. Ha, ha, he.

Hoo. Oh what a knave is this? a rank old knave?
A stinking knave? a knave in grain? fie, fie,
That I should thus be gulld? follow me daughter,
And you Gentlemen.

Live. Ha, ha, ha, Away you Ravens,
I Will make ye all go barefoot ye young villains.

He beats them in with his staff. ACT. 2. SCEN. 4.
Lively solus. But let me now muster my wits together
Call all my fancies into rank, and place
Each several quirke of this my working brain
In its true file. -- It Is an unheard of love,
A miracle of Friendship this, for two young men,
In the exaltation of their bloods, both Rivals
In such a beauty, for to plot and sweat
How to be miserable, that is how to place
His friend in the fruition of his Love;
It Is not within the compass of a faith.
This morning each of them entreated me
In private, that I would invent some way
To win the whole affection of Pandora
Not for himself, but for his friend: which is
(Though in another Idiome) as if
They should have said, get me a comely rope
My Bully Lively, and hang me up, or else
Provide me an ounce or two of Mercury,
Which I will take in posset drink and dye.
But Lucius is the man whom I desire
To pleasure most, therefore I now have counsaild
Neander for to counterfeit a wedding,
Which being fancied true by Lucius
And the indifferent Gentlewoman, might cause
A speedy marriage 'twixt his friend and her.
This does he swallow, and now there nothing wants
But -- ha? what is here to do? what Boy is this
That Stipes thus dragges after him?
ACT. 2. SCE. 5.
Lively, Stipes, Constantina, Merda. Sti. Why quickly Merda, bring me a chair
out quickly. --
O O you villain. -- Why when? -- So, so, go to, go to,
Tarry you still my daughter,
That you may hear some of your Fathers wisdom. --
Come on you Crack-rope, what is your business, 'pray you,
To lurk thus in my Masters grounds? you are
A scout? one that discouers are you not?

Live. It is a pretty Lad, and being dressed
May easily pass for Woman. Well I Will mark

Sti. O you're a stubborn gallows, you will answer?

Con. O me unfortunate; what shall I say? Merda plays with babes clouts.

Sti. Heigh!
An ill year on you, you great Maukin you,
Making of Puppets? one of your age and breeding?
You have an Husband Minion? you a rod. --
But to return again unto the purpose,
Where dwell you sirrah? will you not answer me?
Come on your ways, I Will have you to my Master. --

Con. Unhappy wretch! what shall I answer him?
Nay good Sir stay, I Will tell you: oh how I tremble --

Sti. Then quickly Sirrah.

Con. Lest this robustious Clown
Should hale me before my Uncle in this habit.

Sti. What Is that you mutter on? you have a trick
To say your prayers backwards? have you not?

Live. This Lad is mine, I Will take him from the Shepherd.

Con. Not far from hence I had both friends and parents.
(Howsoever how I want) but cruel Fates
Have envied them their lives, and me my friends.

Live. It shall be so, I Will make a contract straight
Betwixt Neander and this Boy. Now Stipes,
God save you.

Sti. Salve Domine. But why put you your Sickle
Into my Harvest thus? go to, go to,
You're troublesome -- well Sirrah.

Live. Well Sirrah? Slave,
Thou vnpollish'd piece of clay, how dare thou thus
Vncivilly use a young Gentleman
Whose friends and kindred I have known to be
Worthy of more respect then thou of scorn,
Which both come near to infinite?

Sti. Very good.
And do you know his friends and kindred then?

Live. Would thou did know thy betters half so well,
Vntutourd dunghill. -- In what state you sit? He overthrows Stipes, chair
and al.
Stand up, or else I Will make thee lie for ever.

Sti. Are you in earnest or in jest?

Live. How think you?

Stip. You great Rigs-norton you, do you stand still He strikes her.
And see your only Father wronged thus? ha? --
Well, if I do not fit your cap for this
(If it be made of wool) when you tithe Lambs,
I Will never go to Church more, if the whole flock
Has any worse then other t'shall go hard
But some of them shall fall unto your lot.

Con. Alas I doubt he knows me
His eyes so dwell upon me.

Live. Come my boy,
What will you go with me?

Con. Thanks to my stars;
He knows me not.

Stip. Boy will you dwell with me?
Thou shall have dumpling Boy, enough, and Bacon
Shall be so deep in fatt, that thou may wade
Up to the chinne in lard: Salute your Master.

Mer. And kiss your masters daughter that is the next
Thing you must practice.

Live. You his Master, Hempseed?

Mer. Truly me thinks I could e'ne love this Boy
It Is such a pretty thing; Father, I pray you
Good Father, let him dwell with us.

Sti. No more,
Peace, so he shall.

Live. Hands off you lease of Sheepe-skinnes.

Con. No, I will dwell with this old Gentleman.

Live. Well said, sweet youth.

Con. But on this condition,
That you will use me like a Gentleman
Of quality and worth, for I must tell you
With tears, how e're my fortunes are dejected
Now, I do come of no mean house nor blood.

Live. Fear not my boy, thou shall have cause to thank me:
Follow; my maids shall presently vnpage him,
And hang woman on his back.

Con. But I do hope aside
That some kind God or other will find out
Some means for my escape; if not (I Have said it)
This hand shall make a passage for my soul
To leave this body.

Live. Boy, do you come?

Con. I come.

Exeunt Lively and Constan. Merda plays with babies clouts again. Sti. What
is he gone? -- hi-day! what again?
Let me be hanged, my dog and my whole Family,
My Wife and all, I Will put her in, if I
Do not so 'flict your buttockes Minion;
I Will break you of this trade of making children
Before your time, if I can find a willow
Within a mile of an Oak. Exit

Mer. What shall I do? oh what shall I do? what shall I do?
My father's gone to get a rod, what shall I do?
Oh, oh, here comes my mother. --

ACT. 2. SCE. 6.
Pandora, Placenta, Merda. Pan. Placenta, you have heard my cares, my griefs
And which has caused them all, you know my love,
Now by those tender years, by that first raye
Of blessed light these infant eyes received
Upon those vigilant knees, I do conjure thee
Forsake me not in these my miseries

Mer. Mother, Mother, Mother, what shall I do?

Pla. What news with you, you fayrie brat? you changeling?
Daughter to Madam Pusse the kitchen maid,
Take that and get you in, or I Will -- She beats her.

Mer. Vm vm, vm.

Pla. Will you not stir?
Carry that chair in with you Milderkin. Exit Merda.

Pla. What would you have me do?

Pan. You Have heard my sickness,
It Is the physician must prescribe the medicine
And not the patient.

Pla. Will it suffice
If ere the Sun does set you do embrace
One of your Lovers?

Pan. By all my vows it will;
Nor am I much solicitous in the choice,
So I have one.

Pla. But I must have your help,
You must not merely be a patient
In this same plot; can you dissemble think you?

Pan. I am a woman, and may learn in time.

Pla. Well then it is thus: you see your pampered Lovers
(Like two fat Oxen in a Stall) stand blowing
Upon their meat, are nice forsooth, and squeamish,
Will not fall to, because they are cloyd with dainties,
The only way for to procure them stomachs,
Is to withdraw their fodder; take your love
Before their eyes, and give it to another,
Or seem to do at least, 'twill fetch them back;
And make them lick their lips at you, scratch for you:
I know not by what Fate, but true it is,
We never prize ought right till the departure,
And then our longing's multiplied. Can you feign
A love unto some other Gentleman?
And seem quite to neglect them and their service?

Pan. I fear I cannot, it is too hard a Province:
But what will this advantage me I pray you?

Pla. So much, as nothing you can do, will more.
A Louer's like a Hunter, if the game
Be got with too much ease he cares not for it;
She that is wise in this our wayward age
Will keep her Lovers sharp, make them to ceize
Upon a firebrand for meat. -- What say you?

Pan. Why I will try I say.

Pla. Try? Oh that I
Had but that beauty in my managing,
In-faith I would not part with a good look
Under a brace of Tens.

Pan. Indeed Placenta
As you are now, you would need to sell them dear,
It is a rare commodity, your Shop
Affords not many of them.

Pla. For a kiss
I Would have a Lordship; a whole Patrimony
For a nights lodging; Come, you Maidens now
Are grown too kind, too easy in your favors,
A few smooth, oily, verses now adays
Bought of some Poet, and so justly called
The Gallants own that sends them, where your tresses
Are termed Sunbeames, and your rubie lips
Congealed Nectar, have more power to win you,
Then in my days two velvet Petticoates,
Or an hundred acres turned into Taffaties.
Speak, can you do it?

Pan. Sure I think I can,
If need require.

Pla. It is enough, but see,
What Strip^ing's this comes here? Ha? it is most happily
This is Endymion Lucius his Page.

ACT. 2. SCE. 7.
Endymion. Placenta. Pandora. Endy. There Is not a solitary walk, nor Grove
Wherein a Lover may retire himself
Free from the eyes of the prophaner people,
But I have trauers'd over to find my Master;
I have not left a Spring unquestioned,
Or any spreading Oak, whole quauering top
Is but half Phoebus proof, nor can I hear
Ought of Neander his companion.

Pla. Pandora, this same Boy was sent on purpose
Unto this place by some kind Nymph or other
Inhabiting these Woods in mere compassion
Of thee and of thy miseries; we could not
Have studied for a better Stale then this:
Prepare your self to feign a love unto him.

Endym. But see Placenta, and my Masters Love,
I will enquire of them.

Pla. Endymion
All happiness.

Endy. As much to you Placenta.

Pan. And what to me?

Endy. What you deserve fair Lady,
Which is above my wishes.

Pla. But Endymion,
Pri'thee sweet Lad, let me entreat a courtesy,
What Countryman are you?

Endy. What Countryman?
An English man I take it.

Pla. An English man?
I rather think thou art a Russian
Thou carryest such a Winter in thy breast.
How can thou suffer such a winning beauty
To stand neglected? without a salutation?
Go to, you shame-fac'd fool, go kiss her, go.

Endy. How kiss her? it does not become a servant
To be so saucy with his Masters Love.

Pan. It rather not becomes Endymion,
A Youth of that same molde and symetry
To be so bashful before a Gentlewoman:
As for thy Master I disclaim his love
As one unworthy.

Endy. How? disclaim his love?

Pan. And with his love, all the whole world of men,
Except 'be thee my soul: why flyest thou me?

Pla. Come on, Come on you little frozen-nothing,
I think we must be feign to make you take
Your love potion in a horn, you are so skittish.

Endy. Nay but Placenta. -- Placenta holds his hands whiles Pandora kisses him.

Pan. O most redolent!
Aurora's spiced bed is not more sweet,
Not all the odours of the early East.

Endy. You do but mock me.

Pan. How? but mock thee sweet?
By all the Cupids in thy face, I love thee
Beyond the expression of a woman's tongue.

Pla. This was that simple one that could not counterfeit.

Pan. By this same nest of kisses I protest --
What would thou more?

Endy. More of your protestations.

Pan. But can thou love me then?

Endy. Indeed fair Lady
I do not know, I am but newly entered
Into this loving trade.

Pla. You are a Wagge:
Take her by the hand and streine it gently, so. --
Now kiss her fan and sigh. -- Good, excellent.
(Well I have seen some Gallants in my days,
Though 'twas my fortune to be married,
To that same lob my husband, but no matter;)
Fie on this modesty, it is out of fashion,
Give her a green gown quickly, she will thank you.

Endy. Will not as much satin of the same color
To make her one do as well?

Pla. Come, you are a fool;
Down with her, she will discard you else,
As bashful, and unfit for Ladies service. -- [Pandora slips down and pulls
him after her.]

Pan. Ay me! what mean you Sir?

Pla. Why there, why so; --
Oh for Neander now and Lucius
To view this spectacle, this would crack that great
That strong and mighty bond of friendship, and
Make them both quarrel for her: nay Endymion,
As she did pluck you down, so it is your office
To take her up, else she will forget her self
Good soul, and slumber there eternally. --

Pan. Now fie upon you Sir, you have spoiled my linen.
Pray Heavens no body saw us: good Placenta
Reedifie what is amiss.

Pla. All Is well,
All Is well, save only here does want a pin.
But stay I Will furnish you. --
Yes, here is a knot molested too. --

Pan. Fair Sir,
This may seem lightness in me.

Pla. Rather gravity
Who naturally tend downward thus.

Pan. But Sir,
Let me entreat you for to entertain
A better faith of her that is your servant,
Give it the right name Sir, and call it Love.

Endy. I Will call it what you please fair Gentlewoman.

Pla. He never thinks of's Master: well this Boy,
Must we train farther with us till we meet
With our two icy Lovers. Come Pandora
Will you entreat your fairest Paramoure
T'accompany us into the Grove? we may
Perchance there meet his Master, whom he seeks.

Pan. Sweet shall I crave?

Endy. Not where you may command

Pla. So, so, I Will now go plant this billing couple Exeunt Pan. Endym.
Under some pleasant tree, which done I Will go
And range the fields for Lucius and Neander,
And bring them to behold their close embraces,
This certainly will make them hungry, and bite,
Waken their dull and sleepy appetite,
We never prize ought truly, think it dear,
Until the time of parting does draw near. -- Exit.

Finis. Actus Secundi.
The Song.
To the Ladies, Joy, delight,
And a servant that dares fight;
No need of painting, but a face
With perpetuity of grace.
To the Lords a gracious eye
If they have a Mistress by.
To them both, more then all this,
Their Princes happiness, and bliss.
ACT. 3. SCEN. 1.
Anteros. M. Mungrell. Hammershin. Loueall. Ant. The day's our own, we have
the Sun, the wind,
And all that can be called advantages, bear up.

Mung. As I Am a Gentleman, and an elder brother --

Ante. St, not a word.

Mung. You wrong me Sir, I will swear out my swear, as
I am a Gentleman I must, and will swear.

Ant. Nay sweet Master Mungrell
Mistake me not, I do not go about,
For to deprive you of that ornament,
That fashionable quality: I but entreat you,
For to be frugall in your language, and,
To husband your lungs; you have an enemy
That will require them all, had you more oaths.

Mung. How? Do you think I have no more? by my --

Ante. Oh, hold, hold, hold.

Mung. Nay, you shall hear me, by -- Ante. stops his mouth.

Ante. O, O, O.

Mung. By my -- by -- my indad law.

Ante. By my indad law, you will spoil all, why you will spend
all before the time. But see your adversaries are at hand.
This is their Captain, their Conductor. Love. Stay. Enter Loueall. and pulls
out his watch.
I Have hit the very punto, this same minute,
Does cut the hour into two equal portions.

Ant. You that are grown a Time-obseruer, you
With that fine pocket Saturn in your hand;
Look this way.

Lou. But are these your Champions?

Ant. They are my Conqerours, if you please: but where are your employments?


Lou. They Will be here immediately.


Ant. No more. Loueall, please you to take notice
Of these Gentlemen, they are of rank, and my friends.

Lou. Sweet Sir, my only wish is that my fortunes were but of growth, to show
in what degree of honor, I hold any whom you shall vouchsafe to call a friend.
-- I thirst to know you Sir.


Ant. Do not swear yet.

Mun. Why so?

Ant. Nay as you please.

Mun. Sir I desire you to pardon me, I must not swear yet, my General will
give the word when I must vent.


Ante. It Is no great matter, if you throw away Cudnig^,
Or beswiggers, or some such innocent oath upon him.

Mung. Say you so? [The Scholar offers to salute Loveall who regards him not]

Ham. When will he come toward me?

Lou. Sir may I know your name?


Mung. My name Sir? why Sir? I am not ashamed of my name Sir. My name is Sir M.
Mung. Sir. A poor elder brother Sir. And yet not very poor neither Sir. Heir
to six, or seven hundred a year Sir. My father is a Gentleman Sir. I have an
Uncle that is a Justice of Peace Sir. I can borrow his white Mare when I please
sir. She stood him in thirty pieces sir.


Lou. A Mungrell Sir?


Ant. Only be sure you be not dashed.


Lou. Ashamed of your name, say you? You come of a very great house, I Will
assure you; I know many of the Mungrels that are able to dispend, yearly, more
then I am willing to speak of at this ^ime; and which keep their Sons as
Gentlemanlike, at the Innes o'th Court wi^h as good clothes on their backs, as
rich belts, and as fair guilt rapiers, as the best Gentlemen of the Land Sir --
O well said, come lift up bravely now.


ACT. 3. SCE 2.
Anter. Noddle-Empty. Love. Will Wiseacres. Hamershin. Mr. Mungrell. Anter. It Is
a hundred to nothing, but these are they, look to your standing, and be sure
you suffer him to offer first; you have the more advantage.


Nodd. Let me alone, if I do not utterly confound him, let me never wear
good suite of clothes more, I have not read the Arcadia for nothing.


Lou. Anteros, a co^pie of friends of mine.


Ante. Sir I shall count my self fortunate in their acquaintance; Sweet Sir
-- worthy Sir.


Nodd. Sans complement Mounsieur, Ie suis, vostre treshumble varlet.


Lou. There Is one of his parcels gone, he has but three more in all the world.


Ant. Signior mio molto honorifico, per testa del mio padre, io non he altro,
advffirirui, che me stesso, pero fate capitale di me, e splendetemi per quel
chio vaglio.


Nod. Does he speak French Sir?


Lou. How think you Sir?


Noddle. Nay but well I mean?


Lou. O admirably, take heed what you do, he is a great Trauailer I tell you.


Noddle. Gods me! is he so? I Will not meddle with him then, I would have
tickled him else.


Ante. Signior, io mi terrei ricco s' io hanessi solamente le decime de i
vostri favori.


Nod. Nay Sir I am not so well skilled in the language, as I could wish I were,
for your sake, I can speak a little Sir, Un peu, Monseur, tellement quellement.


Ante. May I be so bo^ as to bear your name Sir?


Nod. My name is Nodale Empty Sir.


Ant. An Inns oath Court man Sir?


Nodd. I have pist in some green pots in my days Sir.


Will. Wis. My name is William Wiseacres Sir. I am of a Sanguine complexion.


Ante. In good time Sir.


Wise. Very melancholy sometimes Sir. He offers to feel him by the nose end.


Ante. Like enough Sir


Wise. Ha, he, he, he --


Love. Ha, ha, ha, he, -- O my sides --


Ant. Gods my life! I should loose it all were my patrimony laid on it. Come on
Sir, brace me your invention to the height, you see your Antagonist.


Love. To him, ferret him, ferret him.


Nodd. Noble Sir may I be so ambitious, as to desire my name, to be enrolled
in the Catalogue of your well wishers.


Ham. I do honor the very shadow of your shoe strings.


Love. Your mocked Sir, he wears boots.


Hamm. And am wholly yours cap a pea.


Noddle. Pox on 't, I made full account, to have had that next my self, how
came he by it trow?


Ham. What say you Sir?


Noddle. I say Sir, that it is your best course, to take heed how you make a
deed of gift of your self, for fear some of your friends suffer for it, for
the Physnomy of your boot, tells me, it was never made for you, I do not
think but you borrowed them.


Ham. And I say Sir, that it is better to borrow then to take upon trust, and
never pay, as many such gallants as you do.


Ante. Loueall, this heat is done, lets rub, and walk.


Love. Agreed, Master Empty, take some pity on the Scholar, let him breath a
little, wilt please you walk? Lovell and Nod walk. Ant. and Ham. walk.


Nod. I am your Servant.


Ant. Well done, 'twas smartly followed; but lets walk;


Wise. Ha, I don't think never go Law, but I have seen you some where.


Ant. You're beholding to your eyes for that.


Mun. It may be so.


Ant. Loueall, look, look, look, another heat.


Wise. Don't you use sometimes about Stamford side?


Mun. Yes Sir, I have hunted, and hawked, there abouts Sir in my days, and
been in Sara's he^e too Sir, I was at the last horse race, Sir, when
Veluet-heeles, and Currants run Sir, I have some reason to remember it, I am
sure, I was cheated of twenty pieces there, I Will swear unto you Sir as I Am a
Gentleman, and an elder Brother, I Am a very fool --


Lou. Out you Nullifidian, don't let the Gentleman swear, take it upon his bare
word.


Wise. Nay Sir, I Will believe you without swearing.


Mun. Nay but conceive me Sir. I was a very fool (as I said before) to be
drawn in after that manner, I would feign see the best cheater of them all,
gull me of so much now.


Wise. Well sir, I desire your better acquaintance. I have the best wine in
Town for you, please you to accept.


Mun. Thank you sir. [They shake hands, he feels him by the nose end.]


Wise. I think you and I are much upon a complexion. He, he, he, you have lost
your mayden-head. If it please you Sir to come to my lodging Sir, when you come
to London, I shall think my self very much bound to you, I have some pretty
books there to lend you, I have Aristotle's Problemes in English, and Albertus
magnus de secretis, I, as I am a living soul.


Lou. Let Us take 'em off. [They part, Lou. walks with Wis. Ant. with Mun.]


Nod. Troth Sir you have a very neat suit there, I am much taken with the
proportion of your hose, it is a deep French Sir. I have a Satin suit to make
shortly, and I would bestow, some twenty dozen of gold lace upon it, if I could
but purchase the knowledge of such a Taylour as yours, I should think my
self beholding to my Stars for it.


Ante, O your walking faculty, it is the only thing, now adays your Gentlemen
practice.


Ham. Indeed Sir, I think it be time for you to seek out for a new one, for
I think your old one will trust you no longer.


Ante. Should you but see them walk in Paul's, or in the Temple, with what a
rauishing garb -- you would admire.


Wise. He, he, you are such a merry man, but indeed I hold that Tobacco is very
good for Phlegmatic complections.


Ant. Your hilt a little forwarder; very good, your very rapier speaks French;
I protest he shows in the graceful carriage of his leg, as though he had
been a man of forty plays, fifteen moutings.


Mun. Nay, I shall do well in time.


Nod. Gods me! you have staind your cloak sir, how will you do? I doubt the
Gentleman that lent you it will be angry.


Ham. Think you so sir?


Ant. Well, there is no remedy, I must go and relieve my Scholar. -- Sir, a
word in private, do you know that gentleman?


Nod. Yes sir, I have read Overburies Characters; he is a silly fellow in
black, I take it.


Ant. Well sir, how ever you dis-esteeme him, I could wish you would take heed
of him; I wonder he did not strike you all this while. Go to, I say no more, I
hold him to be the stoutest man of his hands in all this side o'th country.


Nodd. Is he so?


Ant. Why he is sent for far and near by the valiant of the Parishes, to play
matches at football: I tell you he is the only Hammershin this Shire can
boast of; not a Servingman can keep a leg or an arm whole for him, he has a
pension from all the Surgeons within the compass of forty miles, for breaking
of bones.


Nod. Nay for my part sir, let him be as tall a man as he will, I do not care
a (...) for him, (do you see) for I do not mean to quarrel with him, only
I make account to jeere him a little.


Ant. Well, take heed, say I.


Nod. Nay sir, I Will take your counsel, I Will go and fetch my rapier I left
within, and then let him do his worst. Ex. Nod.


Ant. Follow him, follow him, the exalted mushroome -- a whoreson butterfly, he
has nothing to jeere you for but your borrowed cloak and boots; and I don't
think but they be your own for all his talking.


Ham. No indeed, to tell you the truth, I borrowed them of a Batchelour of our
house, mine own lie in limbo at a Barbers shop for Tobacco.


Ant. But why do not beat him man? Gods me! beat him.


Ham. Nay, I would have bin at him, but that I was afraid -- They say many of
'em are very desperate fellows.


Ant. Faith, to do them right, there be many of' um that have run through the
discipline of a Bawdy House, and learnt to quarrel there, and have seen the
entrails of a Fence-schoole too, and in one word are sufficiently valiant; but
that proves not a generality. There are of them (I Will warrant you) as there
are of your scholars, some that wear swords, only to scare fools.


Ham. Nay sir, I would have you to know, that I am neither afraid of him, nor
his sword: but I would not willingly die yet, if I could help it.


Ant. Fear 't not man, thou shall live I warrant thee, to see thy good name
buried before thee. Have you nothing about you to strike him with?


Ham. Yes, I have the key of my study door in my pocket.


Ant. O nothing better then that, follow him, to him, to him.


Ham. Shall I, in faith? shall I?


Ant. Never stand, shall I? shall I? but do 't.


Ham. Never go, and so I will: I Will teach him to abuse any of our cloth
again. Exit Ham. He whispers him.


Ant. St, Mr Mungrell.


Mun. As I Am a Gentleman, and an elder brother --


He runs after them offering to draw. Love. But how now Anteros? what business
is this?


Ant. Can you but hold your peace, and follow them
With your sweet William? nay, but will you go? Ex. Love. and William
You Will loose the banquet if not presently.

ACTVS 3. SCENA 3.
Anter. Endym. Pandora, Placenta. Anter. O, O. --
Would I could loose my self, become a Mouse,
Or fly, that I might find a cabin here,
To hide my self from these same women. O, -- He climbes the tree.
But I will climb this tree --

Pla. I wonder much
Where our two loving friends should lie so close;
There Is not a place where they do use, but we
Have visited this morning. I do long
To give them this most pleasing spectacle:
But I will now search the Justice his house,
Perchance they may be there.

Pan. Endymion, Exit Pla.
Another kiss; lo thus I will revenge She kisses Endym.
My self on those two frozen Lovers; thus,
And thus, and thus -- Revenge, how sweet thou art
Unto a woman!

Ant. O -- I am afraid
They will offend, commit, commit before me.

Pan. And can thou love me, sweet Endymion?

End. Behold a taste what I can do.

Pan. These kisses He kisses her Redit in scena^ Pla.
Have not that masculine relish yet me thinks,
Which I enjoyed in the manly embraces
Of Lucius, or Neander.

Plac. It is strange,
Not one about this house that can instruct me
What should become of them, I wonder at it;
But I am glad that Constantina's flight
Is not suspected yet, so well that Boy
Does personate her.

Pand. Are they not there Placenta?

Pla. St; No. O yes your Uncle is at home.
It will not yet be dinner time this hour;
You may embrace another walk.

Pand. Content;
Endymion, will it please you to accompany us? Exeunt.

ACT. 3. SCEN. 4.
Anteros, Hook, Mistress Vrsely. Ant. Why so then -- What again?

Hoo. You Will leave your blubbering, Minion, come your ways.
You set your mind on such a man? yet more?
You might as well be in love with that same Sun,
And should as soon enjoy it.

Ant. He speaks high,
Pray heavens he does not look so high, for fear
He should descrie me.

Vrse. Father, I cannot last
Out two days longer without Anteros.

Ant. How Is that? now all my stars be merciful!
It is a vision sure, this cannot be.

Hoo. Come, you are a foolish girl, he marry you?
That day that he does marry you, will I
Bring back to life all that were dead before
The universal Deluge.

Ant. Nay, I Will help
You with a far better expression, sir,
That day that he does marry her, shall you
Become an honest man; a harder Province
Then to bring all the dead, to life again.

Hoo. There are a hundred reasons (daughter) why
You should not hope it, first he hates all women,
Next if he did not, you that are deformed,
Lame, and misshapen, black, besides, ill manner'd. --

Ant. (He does not see the wallet on her back.)
Have the lest cause to hope.

Vrs. But there are (father)
Six hundred reasons, why I should love him.
His manly carriage, his full breasts, his hair,
And his fine clothes, his golden breeches, and --

Ant. His traitorous nose: I, I, it is that I know,
It Is like the Ivy-bush unto a Tavern,
Which tells us there is Wine within; but I
Will take an order with you Sir e're long,
And have you pared.

Vrs. Well I will never leave
My crying (that is resolved) until I see him.

Ant. O! Could I commit a crime e're I was made,
Against nature worthy such a punishment?
It is decreed, I will vnman my self, immediately.

Hoo. What shall I do? it is strange --
Well, 't must be so: I will go seek Terpander,
And move him to this match: most of his lands
I have in mortgage, nay indeed they are
Forfeited to me, for the day is past
Wherein he was bound to pay in the money,
The' advantage of this forfeiture, will I
Threaten to take, unless he does compel,
His son to take my daughter, to his wife.
Nay, rather then I will be disappointed,
He for a portion, shall have in his bonds,
Come daughter, be of comfort, we will go
Directly to Terpander, where I Will use
Such arguments, as shall enforce him make
His son both love, and marry you. Exeunt.

Ant. Like enough.
It Is very likely Sir, but that this tree
Does not afford any such fruit, I Would throw He comes down.
An old shoe after you, -- such arguments
As shall enforce him make his son, both love,
And marry you -- well how his pills may work
Which the old man, I know not: for my self
I will provide a quick deliverance.
Why shepherd? Stipes? [tic toc:] now I must, and will
Go forward in this plot, of my disguise.

ACT. 3. SCE. 5.
Anteros. Loveall. Love. What make you there?


Ant. Why nothing Jack.


Love. Come on, you are a fine fellow, to go and set them together by the ears
thus, are you not?


Ant. But have they done it finely?


Love. Finely do you call it? why your Scholar has so mauld Mr. Noddle with
the key of his study door, made such a breach in his Pericranium, that without
question all his French ends have taken their flight, through that passage; as
for my cosen Mr. William, he is crept into an old hole, behind the hangings,
that in the days of old, h'as been the Asylum, for decayed boots, and shoes
out of date, and there lies he, all alone, very melancholy.


Ant. Ha, ha, he, but how was my Gentleman, and my elder brother employed all
this while?


Love. As Gentlemen use now adays, in swearing; when he saw that he could not
draw his sword, he ran up and down the room, and measured out the time of
the combat with oaths.


Ant. Death! that I had but seen this.


Love. Would thou had: for I have e'ene taken a surfer of them. I pray thee
let us invent some way, or other
For to be rid of them, can thou not think?
Think, think, man -- think -- which I Will effect, unless
All that is called Fortune, does forsake me.
See thou that brace of Cabbins, on each side
My Uncle's house?

Ante. They Are Dog-kennels I take it.


Lov. They are, no more, but see they come, I Will slip
Aside lest I be seen.

Ant. I wonder what
His brain is now so hot in travail with.

ACT. 3. SCE. 6.
Ant. Love. Wise. Noddle Empty, with his head, and face all bloody. Ant. How
now?


Nod. Lend me your hankercher, if you have one about you Cosen, mine has not
a dry place in it.


Ant. What do you bleed Mr. Noddle?


Nod. Yes Sir a little wild blood, hold that Cosen, un peu Mounsieur.


Ant. Did not you tell me, all his French ends were gone? un peu will not
forsake him.


Love. Not a word.


Nod. A whoreson cowardly slave, to strike a man e're one was aware of him, and
to give one no time, to draw his rapier --


Ant. S'me, it is somewhat deep I doubt.


Nod. Nothing by Hercules Sir, a scratch, a scratch, well I Will say nothing, but
by this good blood, that runns --


Ant. Faith if you had done as that good blood does, Mr. Noddle, it had been
better for you.


Nod. No Sir, I scorn it, I am not of that strain in faith, and that he shall
know, the sempiternall rascal.


Ant. Come on Mr. Wiseacres, I believe you and your Kinseman are much of a
complexion.


Wise. I am very melancholy at this time.


Ant. I but you must take heed of these fits, they will spoil you, I heard say,
that you crept into a private, retired room e'ne now, and there conversed with
spiders and crickets, fie upon it, you must labor against that humor; but
indeed me thinks your Cosen is of a very deep sanguine.


Wise. Ha, he, you are such a witty man.


Nodd. Cosen? Yes I am much beholding to my Cosen; I might have been killed for
him.


Ant. Come, come, I like him well for it, the Gentleman does weigh how much the
Republ. might be impeached, by the loss of a man.


Nodd. Republique? Repuddingpy. By this light, a man is little better then mad,
that will keep company with such snow-heapes, such white-liverd, counterfied
lackdawes -- but all is one.


Ant. I, I betwixt friends, and kinsemen; ye two are all one I know. Your Cosen
is very choleric now.


Wise. I but I am very seldom so, for Albertus Magnus faith -- [Loveall as
though he came from his Uncles.]


Lov. Now the good Gods! where shall I find these most unfortunate Gentlemen?


Ant. Why how now Jack? what inauspicious wind
Has raised this cloudy weather in thy face?

Love. O Anteros, we are undone, undone;
I Will have this day wear black in the Calender,
That after ages may beware of it,
It is so full of Omen --

Ant. What Is the matter? I pray thee speak. He faines to hear some body
coming.


Lov. O they be here, -- who is there?

Pray heavens it be not the Constables officious industry: how will you do
Sir? You have slain the Scholar.


Nodd. I would I had else.


Love. Nay Sir, this is neither time nor place for such idle wishes, here has
been a Surgeon already, that lives hard by, and his sentence is, that he
cannot live above two hours, he swounded six times since you left him, it
seems you bruised him so with falling on him, with the hilt of your rapier,
that he bleeds inward -- I know not what to say to it -- I was bewitched I
think, nay think, think, think what course you will take, you must be
sudden, the officers are sent for to apprehend you.


Ant. Is this in jest (I wonder) or in earnest?


Nodd. Is he so indeed? I pray you tell me true Sir.


Lov. Why, what do you take me to be Sir? have I this for my love, and care
of your safety? as you sowed, so reap for me; I hope you will believe your
own senses, I think I see the officers coming.


Nodd. 'Sme! what shall I do? Mr. Loveall, nay good Sir, I do believe you, I
know not which way to take.


Love. Nay there is no stirring that way, you will meet them in the teeth.


Nodd. What if I go through the back door, and take horse?


Love. They Will meet you that way too.


Nod. Any thing, good Sir, I beseech you, look the door goes, I protest twenty
Serieants could not have struck such a fear into me.


Love. Well, will you trust your fortunes into my hands?


Nod. And lives sweet Sir.


Love. Quickly then enter here, I Will shut you in until the search be past:
nay will you in? who is there? immediately, good Master William. He shuts Nod.
into one of them.


Wise. Nay sir, I Will go to my horse if there were twenty Constables, they have
nothing to do with me, for I am sure I did not strike a blow, no as I Am a
living soul. --


Love. Gods me, what will you do? were not you in the company with him? that
makes you accessory; have you read so much law, and know not that? nay, will
you in? -- Ha, ha, he.


He puts him into the other. ACT. 3. SCEN. 7.
Anteros, Loueall. Love. What sai'st thou now my Anteros?

Ant. What say I?
I say thou art an arch-dissembler,
A workman in the trade: By all that is good,
I should have been thus gulled my self, thou did
So smoothely act it, with such passion,
And anger at their incredulity.
I was afraid thou would have beat the fool,
Because he would not let himself be gulled
So soon as thou would have him, but stay now --
How shall we dress our other brace?

Lou. That province
Is yours; as for mine own, you see I have
Provided for them, and conveniently:
Yet if you will embrace my counsel, write
After the copy I have set you, do,
Behold a pattern, and see (happily)
A chest where Stipes in the days of old
Has kept tame Conies, now uninhabited.

Ant. Right, but I fear, it is not capacious
Enough for both.

Lou. It Is nothing, look you here,
See you that fine spruce new erected hogstie
On the other side of Stipes house?

Ant. I do.

Love. And do you see it may be pinned without?
Hist, easily, softly, I Will fill up the time They enter.
With some discourse, till you have framed your countenance.

ACT. 3. SCEN. 8.
Love. Ante. Mr. Mung. Sir Hammer. Ham. Wu'd I might never stir Mr. Mungrell,
if I care a pin for a hundred such, an Inns oth' Court man quoth a? nere go, I
think they learn nothing there, but how to swagger, and be proud.


Love. Nay Sir, now I must chide you, will you accuse all, for the default of
some particulars? by the same reason, I Will conclude, that all ye Scholars,
are coxecombes, because I see one that is so.


Ham. Meaning me Sir?


Lov. Meaning you Sir? pardon me it is mere injustice in you, I Will assure you
Sir, this whole realm, yields not better qualified Gentlemen, and more
gentilely parted, then many of them are, and to whom, the common weal is more
indebted.


Ham. Because he has got a good suit of clothes upon his back (I Will be
hanged if they be paid for yet) and a ring in 's band string, to play withal
when he wants discourse, he thinks he may carry the ball on 's toe before
him, and that no man must dare to meet him.


Love. No more Scholar, you have met with him sufficiently, why Anteros, when?
and here is a brave Pylades too, that would not see his Orestes oppressed by
multitude. [Hee claps him on the back.]


Mun. Arrest me Sir? soft, and easily Sir, more words to a bargain; s'duds! I
think my sword be mortil'd into a snayle, [Hee flies back and offers to draw]
I cannot entreat him out of his shell. Arrest me Sir? As I Am a Gentleman, and
an elder brother, I owe no man a farthing that I mean to pay him. Nay come
Sir, I am fleshed now i'saith.


Love. You will not quarrel with your friends Sir, will you?


Mun. Friends Sir? I know not whether you be my friend, or no; I am sure you
use no friendly language.


Love. Pri'thee Scholar, tail off Mr. Mungrell a little, he will never leave
now he has drawn blood once.


Ham. Come, you are a fool; the Gentleman's of worth, and our friend.


Mung. Nay I have done now, I did but try how I could quarrel a little.


Lov. Faith Sir, this would have made a fair show in a Country Alehouse.


Mun. Nay Sir, as soon as my father dies, (which will not be long I hope, for
he lies sick now) I Will go to Londorn, and learn to quarrel there, for a
year or two, and then come down again, and practice amongst my Tenants.


Love. Why Anteros; pray thee releive me.


Ant. St, not a word, for a million of worlds. Hark you Scholar. [Hee
whispers with the Scholar.]


Mun. I hope you are not angry?


Love. Angry old Bully? he had a hard heart, that would be angry with thee.


Ant. It Is as I tell you, his wound has been searched by a very skillful
Surgeon, and his Pia matter is found to be perished, and when that is gone, you
know there is small hope.


Ham. None at all Sir, I Have read it in Magirus, Cozen Mungrell, come hither
quickly --


Love. Now, now, how greedily the Scholar sucks it in.


Mun. What Is the matter? but is this true?


Ant. As true as you are a Gentleman.


Love. He never emptyed a buttry pot after a match at footeball, with greater
appetite, then he devours this gullery.


Ant. Take heed what you do, the least protraction is full of danger.


Ham. O the Lord! what will become of us?


Ant. Loveall stir the door a little -- passion O me! there is some body at
the door, look, look, creep into this chest, I Will shut you in. He shuts up
the Scholar.


Ham. Any where good Sir.


Mu. Where will you hide me sir? I Will go into the chest too.


Ham. Here Is hardly room enough for my self.


Ante. Stay, stay, stay. In good sooth Mr. Constable here is no such men this
way -- what say you, you three-penny crack crown? I tell you, they have
already taken horse. Here, here, here, creep in, stoop man, stoop. [He shuts
Mun. into the hogsty.]


Love. Ha, ha, he.
Why so, wee'r now at Liberty, farewell.
My sisters wrongs, and sorrows call for me,
And shall be answered.

Ant. Well adieu sweet Sir. Exit.
I must be sudden, or l'me lost for ever. [tic. toc.]
By this time sure my father melts (why sheepherd.)
The ample benefit, that shall acrew
Unto him by this worthy match, this instant
Arriues at 's weather-beaten apprehension;
(I do but know it, am but sure of it)
O, what a dainty pleasant thing it is
For to be free from care! to sleep a night,
Without the dreaming of a Creditour,
Or the disturbance of that gobling Forfeit!
It cannot but be so, upon my soul,
He trades in this same cogitation,
This very minute -- Stipes. che ti venga l' cancro.
Well, if he be above ground, I will find him,
Or loose my self, I Will seek him in the pastures. Exit.

Finis Actus tertij.
The Song, sung by two Trebles.
1. Treb. But why
Do the winged minutes fly
so fast away?
Stop your course ye hasty hours,
And solicit all the powers
to let you stay.
For the earth could never show forth
An object of a greater worth.

2. Treb. But why
Do the winged minutes fly
so fast away?

1. Treb. It is because that they which follow,
Crowd on to have a sight as well as they;

2. Treb. Hark how the ghosts of passed moments groan,
'cause they are gone:
And rail at Fate,
And curse the date
Of their short lives expired so soon.

Chor. Then stop your course, you hasty hours,
And solicit all the powers
to let you stay,
For the earth could never show forth
An object of a greater worth.

ACTVS 4. SCENA 1.
Lively solus. Ha, ha, he,
I have discovered more then e're Columbus,
Or our own water-fowle, Drake: my pretty stripling,
Which I did take away from Stipes even now,
Is proved a woman, proved an errant Lady,
That is in quest after her errant Knight,
Who is enchanted. It Is the Niece (forsooth)
Of our good virtuous Justice, Mr Hook,
Who has put on this habit for to follow
Her lover Cleopes, who has forsook her.
All this did she confess to me in private,
'Soone as she saw I had descried her sex
And name; but I have stayed her pilgrimage,
She Is fast enough, I warrant her, in the noose
Of wedlock now, to stir in haste. No sooner
Did I read woman in her looks, but straight
I did command my mayds for to unpage her,
And cook her in her kind, in her own sauce;
She Is pickeld now in some three yards of lawne:
Here she has it, and there she has it, fie, fie.
Was I a young man now again, and should
Venture on such a dish to carue, by'r Lady,
I should not know which side for to begin on:
Hardly distinguish breast from back. Well, well, --
Beshrew my heart the queanes, where e're they had them,
Have hung good rags about her; sure they borrowed them.
This being done, I went unto Neander,
Told him, that I had got a Boy, and dressed him
Fit for his palate: he rejoiced, made haste
Unto the contract, and (as kind Fortune would)
That very time a good old merry Vicar
Of my acquaintance came to visit me.
I craved his aid, and (in one word) I brought her
Vayl'd, but first softened by a thousand threatenings,
If she but moved toward a discovery.
The good kind Gentleman thinking her boy,
And therefore in his power when er'e he please
For to untie the knot, is before witness,
Contracted to her by the Vicar. -- Oh for Lucius now.
ACT. 4. SCEN. 2.
Lively, Lucius. Live. See where he comes; but yet how heavily!
How full of earth me thinks his paces be!
He looks as though his teeth had played this fortnight,
Kept Holyday. But I Will accost him. -- Lucius.

Luc. The Gods befriend thee, whosoever thou art,
That I am thought worth naming yet, not lost
Unto all mankind quite, though to my self!

Live. These words do savor of too much distractio'n.
You must take comfort sir.

Luc. Who 's that dares talk
Of comfort to me? But once name the word
That is exiled whole Nature? good Mr Lively
Wast you that spoke?

Live. It was, and I must have you
Remove this same December from your looks:
I come to make you happy.

Luc, Thou art come
To loose thy labor then; I am below
Both all the love, and all the spite of Fortune,
She will not make me happy, and she cannot
Make me more wretched then I am. I lie,
She may do both. But speak thou reverend head,
Has ought that 's good befallen my Neander,
That thou dare venture out that name of happy
So confidently upon me? -- say.

Live. There has,
But more to you.

Luc. What Is that?

Liu. Good, happiness.

Luc. How? happiness to me? thou should have put
The space of fifteen ages 'twixt those words,
They are so far from reconciliation;
Thou have no Grammar in thee, know no concord.

Live. But I have Music in me, and that is better.
I Will make thee dance my solitary one.
Pandora shall be thine to day.

Luc. How? mine to day?

Live. Thy wife, thy self, but in another character.

Luc. Vnspeak't again, it must not be.

Live. It must.

Luc. Do thou intend to buy me to thee? and
To break me and my fortunes with a courtesy,
Which I shall never be able to repay?
Employ thy art then, all thy quicker plots
To further my Neander in his love:
Who by how much the more his virtues be
Greater then mine (who hardly have so much
As will redeem me from the name of vicious)
So much the more will apprehend the benefit,
So much the more reward thee.

Liu. Speak no further,
Pandora's thine, she is thine, thine own, beleeu't.
He is already married to another.

Luci. I do confess that I am something fallen
Often from that height of reason which before,
While I had liberty, I did enjoy:
But thou do wrong me much, if thou do think
That Love has eaten up all man in me.
I tell you, I do know your plots, your drifts,
And all your consultations, as well
As if I had had a cabin in your bosom,
And had from thence betrayed them; did not I
Hear when Neander did solicit thee
For to procure a Masculine Bride for him?
Did not I hear thee promise him to do it?
Have thou not now performed it? are not they
By thy procurement now contracted? speak;
It Is not so easy to deceive the eyes
Of Love, how e're our frantic Poets say
He feeds on naught but Lolium.

Live. Lucius,
As I do hope to live, as I do prize
My lungs, my breath, laughter, and sack, (believe me)
I have Neander fast, he 's married
To one that is as truly woman, as
Was she that did produce thee, and because
You shall be certain of 't, it is Constantina.

Luc. But can thou utter this (without a blush?)
Or has thy many years
Blocked up those channels of thy blood, that now
They are not able to afford that face,
(That starved face of thine, bankrupt of virtue)
The least relief? but I Will undo your plots.
Since you do force me, I Will confess a secret,
Which hitherto I Have hardly whispered
Unto my privat'st thoughts. I am no husband,
No husband (mark you) for Pandora, nor
For any woman living; for kind Nature
Has stamped Eunuch on me from my cradle.

Liu. What do I hear?

Luc. That which is true.

Li. An Eunuch!

ACT. 4. SCEN. 3.
Lively, Neander, Constantina velat a facie, Lucius. Live. But see Neander
comes with his new Bride.

Nean. Why do you weep and sigh so boy? no more.

Luc. Do you hear that?

Nean. But see my Lucius.
I must quite alter my discourse, my garb,
And all my actions. Hence dull melancholy,
I now must find a face that must out-smile
A morn in June. Lucius, a thousand hayles.

Constan. Unhappy Constantina! to whom Fate
Neither permits to live, nor yet to die.

Liu. Break off those sighs you peevish girl, or i will -- not yet?

Nean. What means this strange and ponderous eye?
As though you were to take our Altitudes
Lucius? what? and do you smile? faith speak.
How do thou like my Choice? perhaps you wonder
At this so sudden match; but (Friend) you see
What Love and a fair Gentlewoman can do.

Live. I am the boldest wretch alive. It cannot,
Cannot be long before he needs must know her.
What will become of thee then Lively? ha?
You must be sure not to unvaile him Sir,
The boy would not be known.

Nean. What muse you on
So deeply Lucius? does your first sons name
You shall beget on the most fair Pandora
Perplex you now? come on, I Will answer for you,
He shall be called Fortunate.

Luc. Not so,
Rather that name belongs to you Neander,
That shall have no such care to trouble you:
For if my art deceiues me not (fair creature
Your hand) this wife of yours is never likely
For to bear children, but on her back, or arms.

Nean. Why pray thee sweet?

Luc. 'Cause in this little vale
That lies at the foot of Venus mountain, here,
I do discover something too much for mother.
Come, come, Neander, these are poor devices,
Tricks of the Scene, and stale, they will not take.
And you gray hairs, me thinks that thou should owe
A greater and more filial reverence
To the fair Ceremonies of the Church, then thus
To stalk with them, to make them stales unto
Such base ridiculous --

Live. Lucius, do but hear.

Luc. I will not hear thee.

Live. Here Is a benefit
Placed most deservingly! I do not like it.

Nean. I do not apprehend him.

Luc. A fair gown
Indeed, and soap, and starch enough, to dazzle
The eyes of some young country heir, that has
Never been drilled through Drury lane, or Bloomsbury.
But 'pray thee (friend) whose daughter have thou married?
What may she have to name?

Nean. What shall I answer?
I am in the briars.

Live. Tell him it is Constantina
Our Justices Niece.

Nean. Most excellent dissembler!
As though you know not Constantina sir.

Luc. But is this Constantina?

Nea. True.

Liu. It Is truer;
Somewhat then you do believe it is.

Luc. Is this
Jack Loveall's sister?

Nean. It Is.

Luc. But is this she
Whom Cleopes once loved, and has forsaken?

Constable. O me! why do I live and hear that name?

Live. Did you not mark that sigh? how smartly't came?
No, no, I have not fitted you, I have not.
It Is a young Roscius I tell you. No sooner
Was Cleopes named, but the arch-villaine sighed,
As if it had been truly Constantina.
I do not like this business yet.

Luc. Is this
That cried up wonder? that Fidelia?
A sudden change.

ACT. 4. SCE. 4.
Placenta, Lively, Lucius, Neander, Constantina. Pla. Yet at the last? it is
well, I Will give the word
Unto Pandora: but with special care
That the boy knows not of his Masters presence.

Liu. What business is it that this same Midwifes face
Does fetch and carry thus about I wonder?
Hy, she appears again.

Plac. All health old man.

Liu. Old? and how old? but what is the news that you
Are rig'd with now? and whither bound I pray you?

Plac. Next to that loving pair of friends, whose sorrows
I have lamented often, and amongst which
I judge it not the least, that while ye two
Discourse in sighs, and tears, that wanton maid
That is the cause of all your heaviness,
Lasciuiously does sport herself, and melts
In the embraces of an other.

Amb. How?

Plac. Regardles of your woes, or her own honor.

Nean. Now all the Gods! where is he?

Luc. Woman speak,
What is he for a man?

Plac. I know him not,
So far as to his name; but this mine eyes
Dare witness, it is a composition
Of blood and spirits not to be despised.
A feature able enough to tempt; besides --

Luc. Neander, whilst we strive about the shadow
We have the substance ravished from us.

Nean. Ha?
It cannot be, 'tas noe affinity
With truth; It must not be belieu'd good Lucius.

Plac. Can ye retire your selves under this tree
A little, and expect? but e're I go,
Ye shall both promise as yee'r Gentlemen
To endure the sight with patience.

Amb. We will.

Plac. It is enough.

Luc. But does this woman gull us? Exit Plac.
Or is it real think thou?

Liu. Hark.

Luc. No more.

ACT. 4. SCE 5.
Placenta. Lucius. Pandora. Neander, Endymion. Lively. Constantina Plac. Can
ye believe it yet? are your eyes yet
Instructed?

Luc. It Is my boy Endymion,
Now hell and tortures!

Pan. Were all odours lost,
And beggered Nature had not sweetes enough
TO embalme the dying Phoenix left, from hence
From this same lip, She might restore her self.

Nean. Ah Lucius! must he not dye?

Luc. Neander,
It is a sacrilege unpardonable
To pluck him from that Altar.

Pan. Once more sweet --
Two pendant Cherryes when some gentle gale
Makes them to kiss, meet not with such a touch!

[They both draw, and run at him, he saues himself behind Pandora.] Luc.
Villain, and Traitor dye.

End. O me! my Master. --

Plac. What do you mean? ah.

Pan. Alas. -- Sweet Gentlemen. -- She lays hold on Neanders arm.

Luc. Did all mankind inhabit in that breast,
I Would put the Gods unto a second trouble
For to create that species a new.

Nean. Woman forbear.

Liu. I do not like these tumults.
I Will get me home and drink a cup of Sack.

Paud. Neander, --
Lucius, --
Ah by that Monster of my love, your friendship,
Lucius, by these eyes of mine, which thou
A thousand times and more have dared to liken
Unto the brighter star of Venus, which
Is both the Prologue and the Epilogue
Unto the glorious Sun: By thine own eyes
Which are two clearer stars, I do conjure thee
Forbear to prosecute such a revenge
Upon this innocent Boy: for here I swear
By all those blessed powers, which know our thoughts,
I never loved him.

Nean. Most impudent woman,
Did not our eyes behold it?

Luc. O Neander,
Why do we stand thus coldly here? and not
How out a passage through this prostitute
To travail to the just destruction
Of her base Lover, and my baser vassaile?

Pan. Rather let all your fury end in me,
See here my naked breast employ your valors:
Why do you stand and gaze one on another?
What is the naked bosom of a Virgin
A spectacle of such terror? if it be,
And that the fight of it has cooled your bloods,
Then hear me speak: you Lucius may remember
That ancient stock of love, those many vows,
Those many tears, those many longings, which
Have past betwixt us: nor can you justly style it
A fault of mine, that Time is now so old
And yet does see us two; but partly yours
Partly my ^athers neerenesse (for I must not
Give it the name it merits, Covetousness)
Who seeing your so fervent love unto me,
Did strive to thrust me out with nothing, or
At least with such a portion, as you liked not;
Whilst thus I wauered, betwixt hope, and fear,
It fortuned, that this Gentleman Neander
Became your Rival* who had not long been here,
Not long solicited, but I (shame of women)
Began to love ye both, and which is more
I loved ye with an equal flame, (but see
What Pageants Cupid can play!) it chanced
(Contrary to all men's expectations)
That by degrees such a strong tie of friendship
Did grow betwixt ye, that each of ye refused
(For his friends sake) what then was proferr'd you,
My love; whilst I bewayl'd my miseries
Unto this Midwife here, my friend, and grieved
At this my harder fortune -- Good Placenta She weeps.
Give them the rest.

Plac. Then take it in a word.
Supposing it the only way to win
One of you to her, I counsail'd her to feign
A love unto some other Gentleman.
Whilst we were busy in these Consultations,
As fortune would, your Page Endymion
Came hither (Lucius) to seek his Master.
We lay the train for him, she courts the Boy,
And he (poor Lad) thinking her serious
Was caught immediately.

Luc. But is this true?

Pan. Would I could call it false -- But otherwise
Then was expected has it prospered. She weeps.

Con. Placenta, ah Placenta.

Pla. Who Is that calls me?

Con. Shall I disclose my self? I am ashamed. [They put up their swords.]

Nean. If it be so, Pandora, we crave pardon.
And do restore him life; but now (fair soul)
If thou do aim to reach a life so happy
So full of all content, that thou may fit
Within thy Sphere (like Venus) and look down
On all thy Sex, and pity them; love this man.

Nean. Love this man. For as for my self I am
Already furnished with a Mistress, see
My wife here -- Sweetest wife.

Pand. Is this your wife?
I judge her happy who so e're she is,

Luc. Believe him not, this is Boy, a villain
(Whom I, but that --)

Nean. Lucius forbear.

Luc. Dressed up
In woman's Clothes by that same dotard Lively.
Sweetest Neander leave.

Nean. It is a woman.

Luc. By all the gods, it is a boy, it is false.
But for to rob you of all hope of me
Give me but care, I am an Eunuch, if
You can endure to have a frozen statue,
Sleep by your side, whilst you awake, recount
The tedious minutes of your widdowed nights
And sigh, and think, and think, and sigh again,
Behold an husband for you, I am he. She swonnes.

Pan. O me! an Eunuch?

Plac. Hold the Gentlewoman
Ay me! she swonnes, sweetest Pandora, ah.

Luc. What is the matter?

Plac. Ah good Lucius help,
She Is gone -- alas good heart. What shall I do?

Nean. But see she breathes again.

Plac. Ah honey sweet
Pandora speak.

Pan. Ah!
Hands off thou outside of a man; and thou
Vxorious creature, I do crave no aid
From you, forbear.

Plac. How does my sweetest honey?

Pan. I am not well Placenta, let us go
Into your house a while.

Luc. Please you fair Lady
To use my service?

Pan. How? Your service sir?
You can do nothing, nor do I expect it.
But if your love toward me be worthy, lend me
Your Page, but for an hour.

Luc. He is yours.

Pan. Then sir adieu.

Nean. Shall I be vanquished thus Plac.
In friendship? But I will once more to Lively. Plac.
And see what further counsel he will give me, Endym.
Fair wife let us go -- Rise up you villain boy;
Lucius farewell.

Luc. What is he gone? so soon? Exit.
To's Engineer I know, to his contriuer;
But I will follow them so fast, that not
A syllable shall pass without my Knowledge.
Stipes runs against Lucius.
How now you Rascal? where are your eyes I wonder?

Exit. ACT. 4. SCE. 6.
Stipes solus. Stip. In as a good a headpeece as yours, I warrant you that, for
all your fine clothes, Sands, I think my penny as good silver as yours, every
day in the week, I Will tell you but so.

A Maid of eighteen, to play with babes-clouts, well, it is no matter, Let
that pass though, go to, go to, it is an ill wind that blows no body good,
cry I, sure ^rose o'th right side to day, I shall have a servant by and by, and
a lusty Knave too, and here is the chincke, the chincke; as I was getting this
rod even now, for my wise daughter, comes me Terpanders son, the angry boy,
the smoaker of Tobacco, the whoreson which could not endure his mother, S^nds I
was afraid at first to see my self alone with him, he did so stare with'is
rolling eyes, and 'twas no force by'r Lady, for I had five good shillings in my
purse; But he to put me out of doubt salutes me most lovingly, as thus, Stipes
God save you, Save you Stipes -- no, Stipes God save you -- Stipes be hanged --
a blockhead, Sd^nds J doubt I should make but a scuruie Gentleman, I want the
trick ont. -- But let that pass though, I have the money here, and presently,
my man will come, which Anteros will send me, whom, if I have not paid me
every morning my forty brace of legs and caps -- no more.


ACT. 4. SCE. 7.
Anteros disguised. Stipes. Ant. Why so, I me fairly accoutred, as becomes a
Sheepheards servant -- But swig for see my Master. Here must I quite disrobe my
self of all my former manners, garb, behavior, and put the plod o'th Country
on. --


Stip. How now? He whistles and dances:
What jolly whistler have we got here trow?
Hi, hi, a dancer too? I, I, by'r Lady
For ought I know, this is the man I spoke of,
Or else if not, here is one could wish he were.
A sturdy knave, a lusty proper knave.
I like him well, he has a back for burdens.
You Sirrah, you;

Ant. What say you, you?


Stip. I say whom do you seek here you?


Ant. I seek a Shepherd you.


Stip. I am a Shepherd.


Ant. But I seek a Shepherd, whose name is Stipes.


Stip. I am the man you knave, you come from Anteros?


Ant. Yeas.


Stip. To serve me?


Ant. Yeas.


Stip. In good time, how now saucy Jack? how now proud, prodigal knave? where
are your twenty legs unto your Master? Go to, Go to, to work, begin, well
said. Anteros makes legs. 1.2.3.4 5 6. So, so, enough, I do forgive the rest.
Turn you about, vm, vm, a good squat fellow, a well quarterd man, By'r Lady,
and if he had but moanes would make a pretty husband for my daughter Merda.


Ant. Has he a daughter? and are there women here? o o o -- O I am fallen from
heaven into a Colepit!


Stip. Why Merda, I say, my daughter Merda I say, the foolish girle's affrayd I
know, go to, go to, I will forgive her. Merda I say. But you Sir Squire'oth'
dog, what is your name? Hy, which way look you?


Ant. My name is Ieoffry.


Stip. I, I, how now? how Ieoffry? a hard name by'r Lady. why when?


Ant. O I could creep into a catskin purse,
Endure the sent of a Court-fardingall
For a concealment now.

ACT. 4. SCE. 8.
Merda. Stipes. Anteros. Merd. Good-hony-sweet-sugercandy Father, forgive me
but this time, and if ever I do so any more, I Will never be seen neither
bide, or hair again.


Stip. Ho, ho, oho, ho a great lob, stand up.

I do forgive you, but on this condition, that for your penance you shall
wear this rod, stuck at your back till night.


Mer. With all my heart good Father stick it on.


Stip. So: how do thou like my man Chuckin? go to, look on him well.


Merd. Does he come a wooing Father? if he does, I Will run away, and make him
believe I Am ^oy. -- [She offers to run into the house. He pulls her back with
his hook.]


Stip. Whither now you great baggage? You Will come again? But stay am not I an
old fool? an old dotardly fool, that have not inquired what my man can do
yet? Ieoffry. --


Mer. Is his name Ieoffry? Father, good father do, pray you father let him
dwell with us, you know you promised me, that you would hire a man, and buy him
a Cloak, that he might go before me as they do before Gentlefolkes
daughters, when my new gown was made, I that you did, so marry did you.


Ant. What have we now to do?


Stip. Peace and catch a mouse.


Mer. There Is claglocks ^now 'ith house to make him a cloak Sweet -- honey --
sugar -- comfit father let him.


Stip. No more. Ieoffry, how now you sloutch? how do you stand? Come hither,
go to, go to, did you ever wear a cloak in your life? answer me roundly.


Ant. No not I, I cannot tell how.


Stip. Ah beggars brat! how now? but I must have you learn, that you may man
your young Mistress there sometimes. Come on let me see how finely you can do
the feat, walk before her, follow him daughter. [Hee walks, Merda stays
behind, tying her shoe.]


Ant Here Is a sweet office!


Stip. You great lobcocke you. [Hee beats him.]

I Will teach you to look behind you, to see whether your charge follows, or no,
what? would you be gadding without your charge?


Ant. I, am I arrived at this? -- whoffer did you strike one?


Stip. Do you prate too? look you here, mark but me, I have seen the day,
when I could have stinged it before my sweet heart. -- short and thick
citizen like, you mankin, what? two acres breadth at a stride? I, I by'r Lady;
I Will cut you short in smock-timber, for this minion; is your smock so wide, with
a murren to you? short and thick citizen like: how now?


ACT. 4. SCE. 9.
Stipes. Anteros. Merda. 2 Rusticall Servants. two Mayds. Fiddlers. 1. Rust. Hy,
strike up brave boys, hy, for our town.


Stip. Hy, for your town say you? you are a company of lazy, lubberly knaves,
there is the short and the long on it, ho, ho, boys, ho, ho boys? what drabs
too? girls too? doxyes too? ye are a company of slowbackly Queanes, there is
sauce for your eeles.


2. Rust. Come Kate, croude on.


Ant. O, O, the whole torrent of all woman kind is broke in upon me, what
shall I do?


Mer. Cuds, cuds, these are Mr. Livelyes men and mayds, that are come to dance
upon the green. Pray you Father let me dance with them.


Stip. ^ou dance with them? you are a great princockly puplady; there is
mustard for your biefe too, since you will needs have it; 's^nds I have been a
wit in my days, there is some relics left yet, go to, go to.


1. Maid. Oh Stipes! I pray you let your daughter dance with us a little.


Stip. Dance with you? pray you vpsolue me this question, what holy day is
this? Latter Lammas? or St. Ginnyes Even?


Rust. 1. Come on brave Shepherd, our Master ha^ given us leave to trip it
for an hour, or two, In Faith we have had a wedding at our house to day.


Stip. A wedding? a wedding? what wedding? vpsolue me that question.


1. Rust. Between a gentleman and a gentlewoman, but what care we what they
be.


2. Maid. Come on old Grummelseedes, what must we stand thrumming of caps all
day, waiting on your grave ignorance? by the faith of my body, either let your
daughter dance with us, or I Will make your old bones rattle in your skin, I Will
lead you a Coranto In Faith.


Ant. An Amazon, by heavens an Amazon, a Penthiseleia.


Stip. I, I by'r Lady? are you avis'd of that?


Mer. Pray you forsooth, good-hony-sweete-plumpudding father, we will have but
one spirt In Faith law; Sellengers round in sippits, or put on thy smock on
monday.


1 Rust. But what flap-mouth'd fellow's that behind the tree there?


Ant. Now comes my Cue.


Stip. Who he? another gates fellow then you take him for, go to, go to, it
is my man I tell you.


2. Rust. But can be dance?


Stip. Oh in print, he trips it like a fayry.


Ieoff^y. Hy, hy, how now? what? tricks? how now?


2. Maid. How now young man? what so modest? come on, take me by the hand.


Mer. Take me Ieoffry. I Will dance with our Ieoffry, or else I will not dance at
all, no I will not, law you now.


Ant. I cannot dance.


Stip. He Is a lying knave, I saw him my self; to him, to to him, frolic it
nimbly whilst I come back; because it is his first day he shall have leave, my
daughter too, for half an hour, no more. Go to, go to. Exit Stipes.


ACT. 4. SCEN. 10.
Anteros, Merda, two Rusticall Servants, 2. Ancilla, Fiddlers. 2 Rust. But
strike it out, we burn daylight.


Merd. Ah the Lord! but where is our Ieoffrey?


1 Anc. Cuds me! I doubt the great clowne's run away.


2 Anc. Whoo! he is got up into the tree there.


1 Rust. Where? where? oh cuds wowkers and swowkers, I have him by the leg:
Robin, help here Robin.


Ant. What a murren ails you? cannot you let one alone?


2 Rust. Come, come, you must needs dance, we want one.


Ant. Cannot dance.


2 Anc. Cannot you dance, my little shamefaced one?
Can you kiss a pretty wench in a corner?

Ant. Let one alone, I cannot I tell you, I will not dance.


1 Rust. I but you shall sirrah, in spite of your teeth.


Ant. Pish, 'won't dance.


1 Anc. Come Merda, you must entreat him, he will dance with you I know.


Mer. Prithee now Ieoffrey do, prithee now good Ieoffrey do, wu'd I might
never stir law, if I don't make you a bisning posset, with a great lump of
honey in it, when my father and mother be gone to bed, if you will.


Ant. Pish I cannot dance.


1 Rust. Come let the great fool alone, we will dance our selves.


Mer. Prithee now Ieoffrey.


Ant. What shall I say? you will laugh at one.


Mer. Wu'd I was whipped if I do.


1 Anc. Besworne I will not.


2 Anc. Nor I on my mayden-head.


Ant. Come on then, since there is no remedy. they dance


2 Rust. Hi, now every one kiss his marrow.


Ant. I never was miserable 'till now Merda wipes her mouth, and expects


Mer. Ieoffrey, Ieoffrey.


2 Anc. Why don't you kiss your marrow?


Ant. I will not, I cannot kiss.


1 Rust. No cannot? we will try that: Robin, hold his the other arm fast: so, so,
now Merda, now, well said, again, again; why so then. They all laugh.


Ant. They live in Paradise that thrash.


1 Anc. Tihy.


2 Anc. Tihy, Robin, come hither.


Ante. Those happy Paracelsians are in heaven,
That trade by night in the mineralls of the city.

2 Anc. What do you mean to fight Merda?


Merd. Ay-me -- I forgot the rod. They laugh.


1 Anc. Fie, why do you blush so Merda? She throws it away.


Merd. I don't blush, you are a liar.


1 Russ. Fie upon you Merda, a great maiden, and blush.


Merd. Aw, but you lie though, I did not blush, I will not dance no more with you.


2 Rust. O by any means do not forsake us yet, one dance more; who was it
that said she blushed? she did not blush, I know she scorns to blush; come
take your Ieoffrey by the hand again.


Ant. I Am weary, I cannot dance no more.


1 Rust. Weary? faith I Would squiffe it; weary? about with it I say. They dance
again.


ACT. 4. SCE. 11.
Stipes, with two dead lambs upon his hook, and caeteri. Sti. O lazy varlets!
is this a time to dance? you idle persons; What will you leave I say? look
here I pray; does this same spectacle agree with turning on the toe, or
capring? go to, go to, fie, fie, ah my sweet lambs, I dare be sworn for you,
ye think no body hurt at this instant. Come hither you my nimble skipper,
upsolue me this question, what is your 'pinion must be done with these?


1 Rust. Pish lets away, strike up, Stipes adieu.


1 Anc. Farewell Merda.


2 Anc. And you my ninny pease-straw-wispe that cannot kiss.


2 Rust. Stipes farewell, hey. Exeunt.


Stip. Stipes farewell? but Stipes cannot farewell, if his affairs go thus
quite arsy varsy; you whoreson crab-fac'd lyzard, you left-leg'd rogue, what is
there nothing else belongs unto this gear, think you, but only to stare on
them with your two sawcers of mustard? s'duds, either take them up quickly, and
to work about them, or I Will -- Stipes strikes him.


Ant. This is the second time; this once I Will suffer:
But by yon palace of the Gods I swear,
Let him but once more touch me with the top
Of his least finger, and I Will ram his truncke
Into the center: I have said it.

Stip. Are you muttering? you will in with them, and dispatch them; go you home
too, my daughter Merda.


Merd. Vm, vm, vm, you might have let one dance a little longer, so you might,
so you might; I am not yet hot in my geares. Exeunt Ant. Merda.


Stip. Are you mumbling too? what my whole family turned rebels? s'duds -- I
promise you, I promise you, it is not my best course I see to beat my man thus
often; a surly knave by'r Lady, a surly knave, a strong knave too, I do not
like his looks, he has a vinegar countenance: but peace and catch a mouse, cry
I.


ACTVS 4. SCENA 12.
Laurentio, Stipes. Laur. But see, I will enquire; honest man, a word.


Stip. Honest man in your face, whosoever owes you; 'sduds, have I nothing to
do, but to prittle, prattle, with every one I meet, think you? Exit.


Lau. What an unheard of rudeness have we here?
Are these the manners of the country? well.
This is the place, as I am told, wherein
That Lucius lives, who not long since prevayl'd
With his fair flattering speeches, for to have
My son Endymion to be his Page.
But oh ye awful powers!
I had no father in me should I suffer
Mine only son to lead a servile life
With one that is mine enemy, nay more,
The ruin and subversion of my family.
O daughter Isabella!
Whilst thy false Lover melts within the arms
Of his new purchac'd Mistress, thou (poor girl)
Embracest scorn and poverty, or else
(Which I do rather wish were true) cold death.
But I do hear,
Since my arrival, of some Country people,
That they have seen, some fortnight since or more,
A pretty boy, lingering about this village
Much about her stature, and complexion,
Which did enquire for a Gentleman
That was without a Page; this may be she,
Who for the love of Lucius, has put on
Some strange disguise. Whom cannot love transform?

ACTVS 4. SCENA 13.
Placenta, Laurentio, Pandora, Endymion. Plac. Ha, ha, he.
Whilst the poor fly does sport her self too long
About the amorous flame, she burns her wings.
Her counterfeiting of a Love, is now
Turned into earnest. Endymion's now the man
She swears she loves; as for the other two
She has forgot their very names already.

Lau. Does not this woman name my son?
Let me see, is not this Endymion? it is he, Enter Pand. Endymion.
And with him a fair gentlewoman. Ha?

Pand. But tell me dearest, did thy Master Lucius.
Once love thy sister Isabella so,
Whom now he has forsaken?

End. Yes.

Pan. Behold
That treachery repayd him.

Lau. See, they kiss.

Pla. But what old Gentleman is this?

La. I Will show my self.
All health to this fair loving couple.

End. O, --

Lau. Why do thou fly me?

End. It Is my father, -- father
God save you.

Lau. Dearest son, my best of blessings.

End. How have you done sir, since I saw you last?

Laur. As well as one can do that has departed
With His only daughter.

End. Why, is my sister dead?

Laur. I know not that. But I am sure her credit,
The candor of her name is perished.

End. Good sir, as how? Instruct me.

Lau. Ah Endymion,
Since that most treacherous Lucius left the City
I have not seen her, only I hear of her,
But little to my comfort. -- But no more,
I have forgot her, and her folly both.
Prepare thy self (my son) immediately,
To leave this place and service; for thy fortunes
(How e're they were before, slender and poor)
Must not now see thee hold a trencher for
A better man then Lucius. Thy old uncle
As he lived well, in a seasonable age
Is gone into the grave, and by his will
Has given to thee eight thousand pound, and three
Unto thy sister, (though unworthy) what
Else he was worth in lands and goods, is mine.

Pla. Pandora, kiss me girl, kiss me I say,
I have deserved it, 'twas my invention,
My plot this (girl) thou art happy wench, thou art happy.

Pan. Is this your father sweet?

End. It is fair Mistress.
Sir, I congratulate our fortunes with you;
But if you do desire to have my joys
Full and overflow their banks, grant me your leave
To marry this fair Gentlewoman.

Laur. Alas,
This is not in my power Endymion:
But if thou can procure her friends consent --

Pan. Sir fear not that, I will entreat my father.

Laur. As for a portion, it is not thought upon
My son, if you be pleased.

End. Sir, I am pleased,
She is to me most dear.

Pan. Placenta, run,
See if my father be within, -- I know Ex. Pla.
(Most worthy sir) that I shall win him to it.

Laur. But can thou tell no news of Isabella,
Sweet son?

End. No, none at all sir.

Lau. Ah poor heart!
But it is no matter, I Will forget her quite. Redit in scenam Plac.
Where is thy Mr Lucius?

End. I know not.

Pla. Your father's walked abroad with Mis. Vrsely
Your sister, but whither, there is none can tell me.
As yet the plot concerning Constantina to herself.
Is not descri'd.

Pan. Most reverend sir, wilt please you
To walk into the pastures, peradventure
There we shall meet my father.

Lau. But I had rather
That I could compass that same villain Lucius,
That he might hear what he deserves. Lively runns in, Nean. following with
his sword drawn.

Nean. Villain.

Live. I am undone.

Pla. Ah me! Neander with his naked sword!
Ple run in here.

Pan. Ah!

End. Let Us away good father, Exeunt.

ACT. 4. SCEN. 14.
Neander, Lively. Nean. O that thou had
As many lives as hairs, that I might be
An age in killing thee, that I might score up
Each passing minute with a life: -- But speak,
How durst thou thus abuse me?

Liu. I did not know
She was a woman.

Nean. No, did thou not know it?
But thou shall know thy self to be a man,
One that can dye.

Liu. -- O -- O --

Nean. How poor is this revenge? have thou any children,
Or kinsfolks (speak) that I may kill them too?
Ha? will thou not answer? how durst thou offer this?

Liu. Because I loved your friend Lucius
Better then you.

Nean. Better then I? that word
Does merit death though thou had been preserved
White from thy cradle to this hour. --
Do thou love Lucius? ha?

Liu. Yes.

Nean. Live; no, no thou must not;
Thou might have killed my father, broke the vrne
Wherein my mothers ashes sleep, far cheaper.
But for his sake, thus much I Will grant thee, choose
The manner of thy death -- shall I take off thy head?
Or had thou rather dye upon the point?
Think quickly, nay be instant.

Liu. Worthy Sir:
Let me entreat some little space to pause
I have not yet determined.

Nean. Well thou have it. But see that it be speedy.

ACT. 4. SCEN. 15.
Laurentio, Lucius, Neander, Lively. Lau. Most perfidious. Contemner of all
goodness. --

Luc. Excellent.
Nay forward, on, we know you have a tongue.

Nean. Ha? is this Lucius?

Lau. Where is my Isabella,
Whom thou have laden with disgrace? restore me
Her honor (villain) her good name.

Nean. I must
Defer my just revenge I see a little.
He must not know that I am angry, not
How I am gulld.

Laur. Thou base unworthy man.

Luc. Would you could raise your voice a little sir,
You are not heard.

Laur. Thou stain of all mankind.

Nean. Thou owe thy life unto my Lucius.
I am not now at leisure for to kill thee.

Liu. Nor I for to be killed for a trick I know. Ex. Lively.

Luc. Are you drawn dry so quickly, Mr Lickthumbe?
Have you no more good names in pickle for me?
Nay come in faith, let us have an other bout.

Nea. But is he gone? he must not so escape me. Ex. Nean.

Lau. Where is my daughter? where is my daughter, rascal?
Ah Isabella.

Luc. So: but Sir resolve me,
Have ye no Empericks? no Physicians
In The City, that you thus do send your mad men
Into the country to be cured? but Sir
I Will leave you.

Laur. But I will not so leave you.

Luc. You will not?

Lau. No, I Will be a torment to thee.

Luc. You will? but yet take heed that your ill language
Procures not me to turn Physician.
This sword of mine opens a vein but harshly,
Do you hear.

Finis Actus quarti.
The Song.
Have you a desire to see
The glorious heavens Epitome?
Or an abstract of the Spring?
Adonis garden? or a thing
Fuller of wonder, Natures shop displayed,
Hung with the choycest pieces she has made?
Here behold it open laid.
Or else would you bless your eyes
With a type of paradise?
Or behold how Poets feign
Jove to sit amidst his train?
Or see (what made Acteon rue)
Diana amongst her Virgin crew?
Lift up your eyes and view.
ACT. 5. SCEN. 1.
Stipes solus. Why so then, now we are all alone. We? you great near,
What have you pig's in your belly? by'r Lady, If I wist
I had, I would not vnkennell this secret yet, well if there
Were hog's in my belly too, I see that it will out;
This mouth of mine was not cut out for secret's --
O wicked servant! lewd daughter!
O Merda, Merda, thou have lost thy self
For ever, thou have defiled my house, my good name, my family. As I even now
came from my sheep, I found my daughter, at her nooning forsooth, fast a sleep
upon her bed, and there was she (as she uses often) campring to her self
alone in her sleep, 'scoursing to her self, but what was her 'scourse think
you? Not about her huswifery; not how many hens were with egg, but fie upon
you Ieoffry are you not ashamed? O! Ah! fie upon you Ieoffry are you not
ashamed to touch one by the skin? I Will tell my father (nere move) if you will
not be quiet. I, I by'r Lady, worse then this, worse stuff then this, what
shall I say? without all doubt this left legd-rascall has dubbed me Gran-father
without Matrimony. But peace and catch a mouse cry I, some wiser then some, old
birds will not be caught wi^h shaffe. I have a trick in store if it will take,
to be revenged sufficiently -- no more. Ieoffry, Why Ieoffry.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 2.
Anteros, Stipes. Ant. What gaping knave is that?


Stip. How now Ieoffry? know you not me Ieoffry? know you not me? But let
that pass though -- I Will be with you anon in faith for all this geere. Come
hither Left-legs, come hither. Peace and catch a mouse cry I. Did you ever when
you were at your old Masters, learn to set a trap, Ieoffry?


Ant. Yes a mouse trap.


Stip. O sirrah, sirrah; but we must have to do with other gates kind of
cattle, I mean a fox trap Left-legs, come hither, come hither, look you
here, and learn, for this same night must I send you into the Pastures to
inuit my fine Reynold to morrow to breake-fast, go too, go too, he is
something too familiar with my Lambs, mark you that left-legs? A little nigher
I pray you. Help me to twist this Cord -- Well said, be a faithful servant
Ieoffry. You know I have a daughter Ieofry. Peace and catch a Mouse Ieoffry.
You great dunder nose -- Souds -- You'^e lay both hands to work -- A bots on
you; you hang on my back to see you. Your the other hand in, and draw behind thus,
thus look you here. [He gets his hands into the cords, and on a sudden ties
him too a tree.] Ha, ha, he, foh. How rank he smells? but it is no matter, I
begin to grow old, and it is good (they say) Against the Palsy. Ha, ha, he, he,
ho. You villain, He loves Mutton well, that dips his bread in'th wool.
No less then your Masters daughter Left-legs?
Come on in troth, vpsolue me this question is she not tender?
is she not delicate? a pretty morsel? does she not relish well? a pretty
morsel? but I Will teach you sirrah to play the Mason, and lay your chips o'th
rock where you're desired Left-legs, where you're desired. But I am something
feeble through my age, And cannot longer hold out 'scourse with you,
Without my staff, without my supporter, sir,
I pray you do not stir till my return,
But let me find yeu here, I have some business,
Go to, go to, I have some business with you. Exit Stipes.



ACT. 5. SCE. 3.
Anteros, Loueall. Ant. Nay it is no matter I deserve it all,
Troth I do hope that he will bast me soundly.
Beshrow his fingers if he does not, soundly.
I must be in my tricks, forsooth, my tricks:
Have my devices, and my turns, my changes. Enter Loueall.
But torment of all torments! here comes Loueall.
Why this is worse then five and twenty beatings;
O that some greedy undertaker of lives
Would give me but a double Stiuer now
For mine, that I might cozen him. As sure
As Death, or Justice Hooks devouring paws,
I shall be ieer'd to death, immediately.

Love. It is a strange dark melancholy this
That thus torments my Sister, I have been
An hour with her, and in all that time
Cannot persuade her troubled soul to form
The least air she breathes, into articulate language.
But stay what have we here?

Ant. Now it begin's.

Lou. A man tied to a tree?

Ant. I would your tongue
Was tied as fast; then there was hope I might
Escape with life.

Lou. What are you fellow, speak?

Ant. You may go look, go meddle with your own.

Lou. So angry 'pray thee? how came thy hands in morgage?
Shall I redeem them?

Ant. Redeem your own land's I pray you,
Let me alone or else I Will spurn yo u -- yet
He knows me not.

Lou. Sure I have seen that face.

Ant. O, O, O --

Lou. Is 't he or not, ha? Anteros.

Ant. No more.
Death not a word.

Lou. But heaven and earth man! how
Comes this to pass? What has begot this change?

Ant. Will thou vnty me? I will tell thee all.

Lou. But pray thee Anteros. --

Ant. But pray thee Jack
Thou will undo me quite by thy delays,
Will thou undo me?

Lou. It Is not a friendly part.

Ant. Pox of that jest, as common as a woman,
Or her Synonomy; will thou vnty me? He vntyes him.

Lou. It Is done.

Ant. Thou art my Patron Loueall, So.
But stay a while, I must desire your aid
A little further.

Lou. What has he now in hand?

[He pulls off his Shepherds robes which were above his own, pluckes Garters,
Pumps, Roses, a Band out of his Pocket.] Ant. Can you become a peaceable man?

Lou. How now?
A Snake, a Snake; he is young again, ha, ha, he.
What? Pinkes and Roses too? Why so, he pluckes
June out of 's pocket.

Ant. Can you be quiet yet?

Lou. And Garters too?

Ant. That slipper* tongue of yours
I doubt will spoil all.

Lou. What? and a band? so, so;
The veil of Tempe's not so fresh, the picture,
The very picture of the Spring, when the earth
Lays by her freeze-coate, and turns Forrester.

Ant. Thus far it prospers, once more your help sweet Jack,
Nay come, and take me that same rope again,
And bind me as I was before, directly
In the same garb you found me -- Do not stand
Gazing, but do 't.

Lou. Thou art not mad I hope?

Ant. If I be mad, I will not trouble you
For counsel, nor for Physic; nay will thou come?
But hold a little, I must first borrow of you
Your Hat, and Sword. [Hee lends him his hat and sword.]

Lou. Which way this plot will look
I know not -- there -- come let me see your hand's
Since you will needs.

Ant. Why now you are right, you are right,

Lou. What will you have me do besides? come on,
Your legs too if you will.

Ant. No more, St. hark.
The Sheepheards door. Trouble us not good Loueall.
Only stand close and hear.

Lou. What should this mean?

ACT. 5. SCEN. 4.
Stipes with a cudgel in his hand. Anteros. Loueall. Stip. Fie Ieoffry, are
yeu not ashamed, to touch one by the skin? My daughter denies all this most
stiffly but I will Ferret-claw my Lobcock in faith. So, now I am armed. Go to,
go to, come you knave, where are you?


Lou. Ha, ha, he.


Stip. Ha? ha? ha? How now by'r Lady? How now? I, I by'r Lady? what is this?
What Is this? gaudy? gaudy? Fine clothes? fine clothes? Ha? has no body stole
my eyes? let me be sure of that in the first place. Am I Stipes or not? ha? ha?
ha? Is this our Ieoffry or not?


Ant. Stipes, Stipes I say.


Stip. This is another voice an other face
Without all question this is Fayrie Ground;
My man is changed.

Lou. ha, ha, he.


Ant. St. Stip. hi, hi, hi. A sweard too? a sweard too? a whiniard too?


Ant. Stipes.


Stip Well I will venture to speak what ere come on 't, but stay, I Will first
say over the charm my Mother learnt me.

Be thou devil gentle, or be thou devil cursed,
In the name of Saint Swithin do thy worst.
There Is sauce for your Ecles what e're you are. Now see if I cannot shape you
an answer.


Ant. Come nearer to me.


Stip. Are you auis'd of that? older and wiser, Soft fire makes sweet Malt, No
have to hang true men; come nearer quoth you? I am near enough already for the
good you will do me I doubt, Come nearer say you? No good M. Devil I am very
well I thank you, go to, come nearer when you have a Sweard, a Twybill?


Ant. My hands are bound man.


Lou. What will become of this?


Ant. St'. Stip. If your feet were bound too, I Will not trust you As long as you
have a Sweard by your side, a Whiniard.


Ant. Do but hear me. Had not you a man to day called Ieoffry?


Stip. Yes marry had I; what say you to that now? Nay I Will keep my self out
of your clouches I warrant you.


Ant. But what is become of that same Ieoffry?


Stip. Become? become? 'spose I spurd you an answer, and said I know not, what
can you make of that now? make me a horsenaile of that.


Ant. Do you desire to know?


Stip. Yes marry do I. Crack me that nut now if you be a Gentleman Devil. --


Ant. I am that Ieoffry, but no servant now
Of yours, but mine own man: and am become
Since your departure, noble, rich, valiant,
Am formed a new out of the Mint, -- behold me.
And this great miracle Obron the Fayry King
Has wrought upon me.

Stip. Oberum? Oberum? you tell me strange things.


Ant. But shall I tell thee stranger things the^ these?


Stip. 'Spose you did.


Ant. And such as shall be for thy benefit? --


Stip. Would you would else. Nay stare on with your gogles till Barley comes to
six pence a bushel. You know your wages, some wiser then some, cry I: I Will
keep far enough off you: I Will tell you but so. Go to, go to, I am a crafty
colt.


Ant. You know I was your servant to day.


Stip. Well put the case.


Ant. Poor, ill apparelled.


Stip. Put the case the second time.


Ant. But now you see how strangely altered.


Stip. Well put the case again.


Ant. What will you say now to the man that shall
Pet you into the same condition?
Recover you from rag's and Russet, and
Dye you in scarlet: lick that rude lump your body
Into the shape, and garb o'th court? or (once)
Make you a gentleman as I am now?
Would you not thank him Stipes? ha? would you not thank him?

Stip. Thank him Mr. Ieoffry? I, with all my heart.


Ant. Set him at liberty then that will perform it. Quickly unloose me? [Hee
vntyes him.]


Stip. I, I by'r Lady? will you so Mr. Ieoffry? will you so? go to, go to, a
gentleman? said you me so? I con you thank Mr. Ieoffry.


Ant. So, now will I unfold the mystery.
But first you here shall promise me that you
Will take noe prentises to learn your trade,
When I have taught you the art; you will impouerish
The herald's office, and forestall his market.

Stip. No truly Mr. Ieoffry.


Ant. I am satisfied;
See thou that tree? 'twas made for thy advancement.
Give me thy hands that I may tie them quickly.

Stip. Are you avis'd of that?


Ant. What do you mean?
You Will be prevented by another -- death!
Yonder comes one will be before you -- quickly
There Is such a virtue (man) in this same tree,
That who-soere is bound unto it, shall
Be turned immediately to a gentleman.
Nay come.

Stip. but is this true?


Ant. believe your eyes.
Heart of my father, man! you will be prevented.

Stip. A gentleman? said you me so? go to, go to, [He ties Stipes to the
tree.] Good Master Ieoffry quickly -- so but stay. When I Am a gentleman may I
not use, my old trade of sheepherd still? I would not leave it.


Ant. O, and enclose; it is all in fashion.


Stip. I, I, by'r Lady? that's well, but stay again.


Ant. Nay you are like to stay now, I have you fast enough

Stip. 'Sduds, if thou be'st a good coniurer make me a knight to. I have a
pestilent itch after a knighthood.


Ant. You must take gentleman first 'ith way.


Stip. Let me skip gentleman good Mr. Ieoffry, 'duds
I know knights in this country that never were
Gentlemen -- but vpsolue me this question? can you make
My daughter Merda a gentleman too?

Ant. A gentlewoman
Stipes I can.

Stip. I, I, so I meant it -- Merda, Merda,
A bots on you, Merda, are you dreaming again?

Ant. O for some nimble pated fellow now
To make an Ob'ron of.

Lou. I Will furnish thee.
There is a notable witty bedlam begging
At our back gate just now. I Will fetch him to thee.

Ant. If thou do love me, do. -- Exit Loueall.


Stip. Why Merda, you will come when your nowne father calls?


ACT. 5. SCE. 5.
Merda. Stipes. Anteros. Loveall. A Bedlam. Merda. What do you say Father
forsooth?


Stip. That 's a good girl. Nay she 's towardly enough, shee'^ quickly
learn. Why do you stare so on Mr. Ieoffry?


Merd. What man is this Father?


Stip. Come you are a fool, let that man alone. We shall be gentlefolkes
ourselves my chucken, give him your hands to ty I say, be obedient.

Thou presently shall see thine own sweet father,
As fine as he, and thou my little Sweet-lipp's
Shall be a gentlewoman too, go to, good Ieoffry tie her hands.

Ant. How Ieoffry?


Sti. Good Mr. Ieoffry.


Ant. That Is another thing.


Mer. Father forsooth shall I have as fine clothes on as Mistress V^sly forsooth?


Stip. O! she is half turned already: forsooth and a curtsey at every word;
Mrs. Vrsely? thou shall put Mrs. Vrsly into a pint pot.


Merd. O the Lord! pray you forsooth Sir who soever you are do me quickly
forsooth.


Ant. But here 's not rope enough.


Stip. Take off your garter quickly you Maukin you.


Mer. Here forsooth. And father, must I take place of my mother when I Am a
Gentlewoman?


Ant. Good.


Stip. Marry shall thou goldy locks, and be a Lady, and contemn her.

Call her the good old country woman too.


Ant. Stipes, but one word more and then I Will leave you
Unto your new creation -- have you nothing
Within your house to cover you? the crows
Perhaps may be too impudent and saucy
With you, and now you can not help your self you know.

Stip. I, I by'r Lady? 'twas well thought upon,
Good Mr. Ieoffry step into my house, He goes out and returns presently with a
long gray cloak.
You there shall find my cloak, use that.

Ant. It Is of a swooping cut, but new be sure
You do not speak a word what noise so ere
You chance to hear, perhaps the fairy King
Will take some pawse, study a while, consult
With his Queen Mab about you how to polish
And frame you of a purer shape then ordinary.
Do you mark that? St, not a word good Stipes.

Stip Ah sweet Mr. Ieoffry. [Enter Loueall with a Bedlam.]


Ant. Peace and catch a mouse cry I.


Love. Come on brave Tom, come on brave Tom, Remember your instructions Tom.


Bedl. Let brave Tom alone. Let brave Tome alone.


Ant. A most authentic rogue, how he does stretch it? paratragoediate?


Bedlam sings. Newly from a poach'd Trade, and
A broyl a Viper, King of Fayry land
I Ob'ron do arise, to see
What mortal Fortune here has tied unto my sacred Tree.

Stip. O Mr. Ieoffry, is that Ob'rum? Pray you let me see him. [Ant lifts up
the cloak and Stipes sees him.] Is this Obrum? 'sduds, he is but poorly
parrelled himself me thinks.


Ant. St. Stip. Peace and catch a mouse cry I, but once more good Mr. Ieoffry.
Let me have but Ant lifts up the cloak again. one sight more of him. Mr.
Ieoffry does he use to give away his clothes when he makes gentlefolkes?
'sduds I doubt he has none left for me.


Ant. What do you mean?


Stip. Peace and catch a mouse cry I.


Mer. Good father let me see Obrum too ^ah, he has a horn like a Tom of
Bedlam.


Stip. Peace, I wu'd not for the best cow in my yard that he should hear thee.


Bedlam sings. Be thou ruder then was e're
The half excrement of a Bear,
Or rougher then the Northern wind
Came thou of a Satyrs kind.
Be whatsoever thou can be
So thou shall remain for me.

Ant. Did you hear that Stipes?


Stip: I, good Master Ieoffry, stand farther you great baggage and make room
for your rathers' proaching greatness.


Ant. But see my father,

Loveall. 'Pray thee convey away the Bedlam any whether, carry him into your
house again and shoot him out at the back door.


Love. Anteros, I Will leave you to your business. I Will in and fetch an other hat.
Come bra^e Tom. 'Bed, Let brave Tom alone. [Ex. Lou. and Bedlam.]


Ant. The Justice too, it is so. Now am I hunted for about a wedding.


ACT. 5. SCE. 6.
Justice Hook, Terpander, Anteros Mrs. Vrsly. Hook. Terpander, you have heard
how much this match
May both concern you and your Son, your fortunes:
The greater part of your inheritance
You know is mortgaged to me, nay (I Will tell you)
If I would use that rigor of the law
It Is forfeited and past recovery;
Think therefore quickly, if you would be free
From all those cares and troubles which afflict
Such as do live in debt, compel your Son
To marry this my daughter.

Ant. I am a witch,
A witch, a witch a rank, stark stinking witch.

Hook. It is an ample dowry I confess,
And little it is agreeing to my nature
To buy a husband at so dear a rate,
But I have something that sounds father in me;
And must not loose a daughter, if there be
A remedy in nature. True it is,
That (by what angry Deity I know not)
She has so fixed her love upon your Son,
That I do think naught but a quick fruition
Can rescue her from a death.

Ter. Good Justice Hook,
I do confess your offer's fair, and would
Accept it willingly, but that --

Hook. But what?

Ter. I fear my Son will not agree unto 't.

Ant. Sir had you taken an oath upon the same
I would have borne your sin, had you been perjured.

Ter. You know he hates all women.

Hook. very good.
Is he not yours, and under your command?
We fathers make our children refractory,
By being too indulgent over them;
Besides, I am persuaded that his virtues
Will not permit him for to contradict
The authority of a father.

Ant. O ye Gods!
Can ye permit this Villain to profane
The sacred name of Virtue thus, who himself
Is nothing elss but a mere heap of vices?

Ter. I ever yet found him obedient,
Nor do I doubt to win him now: how ever,
I am resolved if he in this shall cross me,
I Will disinherit him immediately.

Ant. I? is it come to that already? well
Prepare thy self now Anteros for the encounter.

Hook, But see your son. It Is your best course at first
TO accost him gently.

Ter. How now my son? how fare you?

Ant. I am not well sir.

Ter. How not well? your color
Does not proclaim you very sick, but say.

Ant. There Is something in my eyes that troubles me.

Ter. What Is that?

Ant. A mote, a woman.

Ter. After the old fashion still?
Come on my son, I have bin seeking of you,
And peradventure you may guess the cause.

Ant. I would I could not.

Hook. Hold up your head my daughter
And summon your best looks into your face.

Ter. As I did walk even now into my pasture,
I did begin to think.

Ant. That I was old,
That must be next.

Ter. That now I Am struck in years.

Ant. Good, struck in years;
And could he not as frugally have dispatched it
In that one word of old?

Ter: And --

Ant: That it will be a comfortable sight
To see you married before I dye.

Ter: That it will be a comfortable sight
To see you married before my death.

Ant: I told you so, it is the common road
Which they all use when they would pin a wife
Upon the son. I wonder all this while
The staff of's age, propp of his family
Did not come in.

Ter: Whilst I was thinking thus,
Old justice Hook, a Gentleman of rank,
And of a family not to be despised,
Came to me with his daughter, and desired
Our friendship and affinity; and to be brief,
We have concluded 'twixt ye two a marriage,
Which must be present; as for the portion,
H'as promised in the wedding fire to sacrifice
The Bonds wherein our Lands stand forfeited.
A thing beyond my hopes, or your deserts.

Ant. A pox upon that thumb under the girdle,
There 's mischief ever toward's: I never knew
One of that garb that proved an honest man.
It Is the grave cheating posture of the city.

Ter. What Is that you mutter to your self? come speak.

Ant. I am contented sir.

Ter. Well said my son.

Ant. But upon this condition, that it shall
Be lawful too for me to sacrifice
Unto the aforesaid fire a certain trifle
Of mine.

Ho. What Is that?

An^. My wife, and your fair daughter.

Ter. Out on you traitor.

Ant. Sir, by yea and nay
It cannot be afforded cheaper.

Hoo. Wretch
And profane person.

Ter. Sai'st thou so thou villain?
Have thou no more regard into thy father,
Nor to his shipwrackt fortun, that thou thus*
Do study his undoing plot his (...)?

Ant. But father, if I marry her to day,
When must the wooing be? to morrow sir?

Hoo. Thou shall not need to woo her Anteros,
She is thine own already.

Ant. Is she so?
Would you was hanged sir for the nowes.

Ter. Pish, dome,
I will not spend an article of air
Upon him more -- good Mr Hook lets go,
The following hour shall see him no son of mine.

Hoo. O, mildly sir.

Ant. It is determined
By all the stars, they have consulted, plotted
To make me miserable.

Hoo. Come Terpander,
You are too harsh with him, I know your son
Does more esteem of Virtue and Religion --

Ant. Good Master Sucriledge, a word in private:
(A little farther, yet a little farther)
How came you by that strange exotic word
You used but now? had you are on interest?
Or was it lent you gra^ of a friend?

Hoo. What word good Anteros?

Ant. Religion,
For I am sure yet thou never had,
Nor ever wilt have any of thine own.

Hoo. O profane person!

Ter. This once I speak it.
Wilt have his daughter?

Ant. What shall I answer him?
I shall be dis-inherited that is certain.

Ter. He melts, Mr Hook, he melts, I feel him coming.
He is our own.

Ant. But why so suddenly?
Good sir, at least give me some time to think.

Ter. Never hope it.

Ant. But why sir to day?

Ter. Because it pleases him it most concerns.

Ant. Do but deferr it till to morrow sir,
(Could I obtain but this request, I was happy, aside.
I Would keep to morrow in another world)

Ter. Until to morrow? not for an hour: I know
Your disposition son too well for that.
I have you now, but where you will be next day,
He 's wiser then your father that does know.

Ant. But father, I beseech you hear.

Ter. But son
I will not hear, I tell you. Master Hook,
You here do give your daughter?

Hoo. Willingly.
Anteros, receive thy loving wife.

Ter. How now?
You will not urge me? -- go too, do not do it.

Ant. O that mine arms are now at liberty!
O Stipes, happiest man alive, thou have
No hands to make a contract, -- is there never
A Mouse-hole hereabouts to creep into?
But stay a while, my paper portion.
The writings.

Hoo. Take them.

Ant. You Are an honest man.
[He gives them him, and Ant. tears the^ in pieces.] It Is right.

Hoo. Now take your wife.

Ant. I wish you a Barber sir.
Is that fair Edifice yours?

Hoo. It is my son.

Ant. Gooder and gooder still; my son? then take
My counsel sir, go to your house and purge,
You will be mad else presently; prevent
The current of the humor, for I see
(With that poor little reading which I have
In The volume of man) by your distempered looks,
That some strange deep, and conquering Melancholy
E're long will seize you: why do you follow me
Thus with your braided ware? nay never frown,
Good Mr Justice, let us have no Warrants made,
Nor Mittimusses with your distorted looks;
We have a forehead too, and can look grim,
And make as ugly and prodigious faces,
As the most ignorant Justice of you all.
But shall I tell you (sweet Mr Velvet-hose)
What I will do, because you were so kind,
For to deliver in the Bonds for nothing?
Nay sir, I must transplant these thumbes, before
I can resolve you: so. -- Thou 'rt a damned rascal,
And I will cut that throat of thine (do you mark?)
And when I Have done, will fillip that morsel, woman,
On an embassage to my Hawks, no more;
By heavens I Will do 't.

Hoo. Oh Traitor, Miscreant,
Daughter take heed; Terpander, O Terpander,
He threatens me to cut my throat.

Ter. How Is that?

Ant. Sir, you must pardon him, the man is mad.

Hoo. He swears he will make hawkesmeat of my daughter.

Ant. On my virginity sir, he does me wrong;
I did not charge a syllable upon him,
But fell as coolely from me as a dew.
Upon a drooping field; each word I vented
Was steeped in an hony-combe. I did but bid him
In a plain, civil dialect to provide
An other husband for his daughter: for
I doubted that I should not be at leisure
This brace or two of years to marry her.
And I may tell you sir, indeed I cannot.

Hoo. O, O, am undone, cheated and gulled, undone,
Villain I Will bind thee to thy good behavior.

Ant. I would you could sir, I would thank you for it:
But fie M. Hook, a head of that silver dye,
A beard of such an honorable length,
For to be gulled? and so egregiously?
By a young man with never a hair o'ns face?

Ter. Come son, I do not like these courses, nor
Do they become a Gentleman, I Will not have
That contumely dwell on our family,
That we should use such indirect proceedings
For to reedifie our tottering fortunes.
By all the Magic in the name of Father
I do conjure thee; by this aged head,
And these gray hayres, by thy dead Mothers Vrne,
By all her cares and fears, by what is dearest
Unto thy soul, I charge thee, take his daughter.

Ant. Without all question I am the first, the first
That ever piety has made miserable.
Well Master Hook, you see what may be done,
What angry spirits a man may lay, while he
Does stand secure within the circle of father.
Your daughter I will have; only know this,
There is another thing which belongs to her,
Which I must have too, that is the Parsonage;
'Twas ever yet allotted for her portion,
And I expect my right.

Hoo. How? woe is me,
I am undone.

Ant. Before I stretch forth a paw
Toward her, i will have it.

Vrs. Father, good father let him,
He will go back from's word else.

Ho. Well, he shall have it.
Hold: by the virtue of this writing, it
Is lawful for you (after old Liuelyes death)
For to present the first Fie, fie, fie, fie.
I had this drawn (alas) for another end.

Ant. My law does tell me it will do. Come on,
Since there is no remedy, let us even to it.
Yes hangman, I forgive thee heartily,
It Is but thy office.

Hoo. Come Terpander, we
Will keep the wedding, at my house, but hear you?
The cost and charges shall be yours.

Ter. Agreed,
Most willingly. Follow me son and daughter.

[She fits down, and pulls stones out of her pocket] Vrse. Come husband
Anteros, will you play at chackstones
With me?

Ant. Follow, follow, follow, follow,
I will be there immediately: nay go.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 7.
Anteros, Stipes, Merda ad arborem, Ante. So, I have made a fine days work of
this: --
Well, there is no remedy, it must be so.
But I must take my leave in form: Farewell
Ye chimney gods, protectours of our family;
Stipes.

Stip. A bott's upon you, that same tongue
Of yours must needs be wagging.

Mer. Indeed Father
I did not speak a word, no that I did not.

Stip. We must begin again now for your tatling,
Did not the Gentleman command us silence?

Ant. Stipes adieu, I am exceeding sorry
I cannot stay to see you a Gentleman.
Spruce M. Noddle, even adieu to you.
Good M. Mungrell, kind Sir Hammershin.
Sweet M. William, I am Melancholy
To part with you as I am a living saul.

ACT. 5. SCE. 8.
Anteros. Loueall. Lou. Why whether in such have?

Ant. To banishment.
My name is written in the oyster shell;
I am too happy in a wife Jack Loueall,
My fellow Citizens do envy me.
Farewell.

Lou. In troth I thank you heartily,
I hope you will first deliver back again
My Sword and Hatt.

Ant. By my best wishes Jack
I thought not of them; 'pray thee take them to thee.

Lou. I will take thee my little Cupid-whipper.
You must not go.

Ant. Let me alone good Loueall,
Do thou not hear how with an even gale
That Southwest wind murmers amongst the trees?
Within these four and twenty hours I may
Touch on the Belgic shore.

Lou. The Belgic shore?
What will thou do there man?

Ant. I Will traile a pike,
Turn Lanceprezado, or Bedee, or any thing
To patch up a wretched life.

Lou. You Will turn a coxcombe.

Ant. I never shall endure to live a husband
The very name of wife will turn my stomach.
I shall have threescore vomits in a day.

Lou. What will thou say now Anteros if I set thee
As free from this same marriage, as the child
Which ten months since was but an Embryo?

Ant. Thou can not.

Lou. I can do it, fear it not.

Ant. Thou can nor man, it is past recovery.

Lou. What will thou give me if I do effect it?

Ant. Give thee? I Will sacrifice my self unto thee
My Jupiter, build up a Temple for thee
Shall take the heavens from Atlas shoulders, and
Give him a Iubile for ever -- Speak.
He shall be at leisure all the rest of's life,
For to catch Butterflies -- But you do mock me,
Farewell.

Lou. But stay.

Ant. Do but effect it Jack.
And I will straight make war upon the Turk,
Give thee his Diadem and Scepter -- Speak.
The Persian shall be the Master of thy Horse,
The Germane I will make thy cup bearer.

Lou. Ha, ha, he. And so I shall have all my drink drunk up,
Thank you for that.

Ant. Nay will thou speak, or else
Let me be gone. -- The Dukes of Italy
Shall be thy footboyes.

Lou. Here Is a brave promiser!
Why this out does the Court; but do thou hear?
How will thou do all this?

Ant. Nay 'troth I know not,
But I will do it, and let that suffice.

Lou. Well then be silent. -- Placenta the Shepherds wife
Soon as she heard a marriage was in motion
Betwixt my Kinswoman and your self, came running
To me in have, and cried what do they mean?
It is not fit, nor can it be (unless
That they will violate the laws of Nature)
That Anteros should have this Gentlewoman;
I ask the cause, the Midwife answers
Because she is his Sister.

Ant. How? my Sister?

Lou. And is it possible that this is true?

Lou. True.

Ant. Stay.

Lo. Nay will you hear with patience?
Or else --

Ant. as silent as a midnight minute,
Or else a Counselor without a fee,
I Will stand and hear, and suck it in, and --

Lou. Yet?

Ant. I Have done.

Lou. Then hear; it seems that Dorothaea
My Uncles wife, some seventeen years ago
Supposing she had been with child, provided
Such necessaries for her, as a woman
That is in her estate might stand in need of;
'Twas famed about the Country: but at last
She found her self deluded by a tympany,
But fearing lest she should prove the table talk o'th country,
Takes counsel with Placenta for to faigne
A birth, and to that end employeth her
(Being a Midwife) to procure for money,
The Child of some poor woman new delivered.
At the same time it fortuned Anteros
That your mother cried for Innos help,
Which she obtained, and was delivered
Of this your Sister, whom when she perceived
To be deformed, and distort; at length
She was or'ecome by the Midwife for to part
With her new purchac'd Infant, it was agreed,
And the birth straight given out to be abortive,
And which is more, believed, and for to color
The matter over the better, they did bury
An empty coffin. In the mean time your sister
Was secretly conveyed unto my Aunt,
Who presently did faigne to be in travail,
And was delivered in conceit of Her,
Who but a while ago was called your wife.
It Was not long after, but the brace of mothers
Did travail both together to the dead,
And left my uncle a supposed daughter.
You have the history.

Ant. And with it heaven,
And immortality: O Loveall, Loveall;
By all the Deityes I could embrace thee
For this thy happy news, were thou a woman.

Love. But what is become of all your promises?

Ant. O it is a taste, a spice of greatness, Jack,
To promise.

Love. And to perform just nothing.

Ant. You do not hear me say so. What Is the matter?

ACTVS 5. SCENA 9.
Hook, Loueall, Anteres, the 6. Scholars. Love. But see the wooers are
discarded quite
My uncle beats them out of doors.

Hook. You villains --
Out of my house ye brood of caterpillars. --
Son of a hedge and Moone-shine; go -- fie, fie, fie.
O misery beyond -- come out you rascal,
And bring your piping nose along with you; --
A fire upon this hollow ruff of yours,
It Is like your heart -- out rogues, and ruffians --
O I am undone. -- Exit.

Ant. Ha, ha, he. Loveall, these men are mine;
I am the Patron of the living now,
Do thou see this?

Lou. I heard as much within.

Ant. I will behave myself most scurvily,
Like to some surly crabbed Patron now,
That has some 6, or 7 tired horses tied
At ^ door. How now?

Zea. Patron.

He salutes Anteros winking, He in the mean time cuts away the black box that
hung at his girdle. Ant. What says my Client?
Loveall, I pray thee catechize this box,
There Is good stuff in 't I warrant thee.

Zea. Good Patron.

Arthur. Hear me Sir, I Will dispatch it in three words,
This is a tedious Ass, and reads naught
But English Treatises.

Zea. Sir, will it please you
To take particular notice? --

Tem. Sir.

Stu. But Patron --

Omnes. Patron.

Ant. Who! now the sent grows hot, it is rank,
The game's in view. Haup, -- rate them there -- no more
You Sir, that are the ringleader of this rout. --

Zea. Kings be profane.

Ant. 'Sdeath! what a pack of rogues
Are got together here? what is your name?

Zeal. Zealous Knowlittle:

Ant. Zealous Knowlittle? good;
Of which University?

Zeal. Of both the Universities.

Ant. A very likely thing: good Mr Knowlittle
Separate your self a little from the people.

Zeal. With all my heart, I Will separate.

Ant. Your name?

Temp. My name is Tempest Allmouth sir.

Ant. How? Tempest Almouth? where are thy brains man?

Arth. He has not any.

Ant. Bear him company.

Love. What have we here? Item, to send forth tickets
To all the Brethren that do inhabit
Within this Shire, to give them intimation,
That M. Mother Tongue stands the first of June.

Ant. You that are next him?

Arm. Arthur Armestrong sir.

Ant. You there Collosse?

Stutch: My name is Stutchell Leg.

Ant. Troth, and thou art well underlay'd indeed,
A couple of football players I warrant them.

Lou. Item: -- a pox upon it, here is bawdery,
I Will rake noe deeper in this puddle. -- so.

Ant: And what must we call you?

Began: Ganimede Filpot*

Ant: Thou should be a good fellow by thy name.
Come on; what glorious title I beseech you
Has bounteous Nature fixed on you: nay open.

Hugo. My name is Hugo obligation.

Ant: How? Hugo obligation? 'pray thee Loveall
Is not this shorn bearde villain the precise Scriveneur,
Would feign turn Priest?

Lou: The very same I take it.

Ant. Meddle not with me

Jack. Nay do not hold me.
A whoreson Inkebottle, and two skins of parchment, He draws his Sword.
Dares he hope for my sister, and a living?
You slave, are Parsonages in this age so cheap?

Lou: 'Pray thee Anteros.

Ant: Do not entreat me Loveall,
He dies: this hat is not more mortified.

Lou: 'Pray thee be quiet.

Ant: Hang him, a death's too good
For such a rascal. -- Sirrah, 'le cut indentur's
Upon your skin. And here is another Villayne,
Whose very countenance speaks Servingman,
Filpot come hither.

Lou. Nay but Anteros.

Ant: Death man! our Universities do swarm,
They have more Scholars then they know to spend
While they are Sweet: and must such Rogues as these,
Whose height of knowledge, is to spit and snuffle,
And talk some 3. hours nonsense, shoulder them
Out of their places? what is 't that makes so many
Of our quick witt's turn Jesuits, and forsake
Both their Religion, and their Country think you?
Sirrah noe more then thus, lie and thou dyest.
Have not you been a Serving man sometimes?

Began: Yes truly sir, I Will not deny't, I was
A gentleman's butler once.

Ant: I told you so.
The very chipping's hang in's eye-brow's still.
His face unto this instant minute shines
With broken beer that was his fees, stand by,
And do not hope so large a benefit
From me as to be killed, live, live, unhappy.
You M. know little know you whose box is this?

Zeal: Truly it is mine, verily.

Ant: Away you stinkards,
I will be visited no more to day.
Avoyde I say. Have I not done it well? Exeunt Suitors.

Lou: Oh noe, you want the pawles, and the hums,
And the grave thumb under the girdle too.

Ant: Oh, that is for old living brokers, I Am a young one.

Lou. You must indent then with them, for to keep you
Some hounds or cocks, and get a handsome wife
To entertain you.

Ant. A wife? a thunderbolt
Is entered me, 'pray thee no more.

Lou: How now?

ACTVS 5. SCENA 10.
Justice Hook, Terpander, Mistress Vrsly, Loveall, Anteros, Placenta, Neander,
Constantina (as dead,) brought in by two of Lively's servants, three Fiddlers,
one of them carries all the fidles, and Neanders sword, the other two lead him
in. Hook. And get you packing too, thou old impostor,
With your distorted puppet here; and you
That make the custardes quake where ere you come,
Thou enemy to sweet meats.

Ter. Mr. Hook
'Twould relish more of wisdom if you did
Bear out this matter coolely. Come my daughter.

Hook. O me! the very boy's will laugh at me.

Ter. Anteros salute your sister, and embrace her.

Ant. I am undone again! what shall I do
Loveall?

Lou. What shall you do? why kiss her man.

Ant: Sister god save you, -- and as much to you
My never-to-be-hereafter father in law.

Hook: Woe's me! what shall I say? what shall I do?
I have given in the morgage, and without money.
But what new spectacle is this?

Lou: What Is here?
How? the dead body of a gentlewoman?

Pla: Is this Neandur?

1 Rust. Hold the cut throat fiddlers
Whilst we do bring this gentlewoman before the justice.

2 Rust: A kind and loving husband sure, that has.
Made a fair hand on's wife thus the first day.

Lou: Ha? what is this I see? O traiterous eyes:
Can I believe ye any more? my sister?
Constantina?

Hook: How Is that?

Pla: It cannot be.

Lou: It Is she. O partial heavens! but yet it is not,
It Is not long since I left my sister safe
With in her chamber, and in another habit --
By all the powers it is she -- I do profane
The god's; it is not she, it is not. -- once more.
The twins of Leda were not half so like.
I Will be resolved immediately.

1 Rust: Good M. justice, Exit.
I pray you hear me. As we did dance even now
In your North field, we found this gentlewoman,
Lying all along (as to say) even quite dead,
And this her husband with his naked sword
Standing hard by her.

Hook: Another riddle yet.
Her husband? ha? Why is not this Neander
One of the rivall's in my daughters love?

2 Rust. Ander, or Pander, we know not that,
But it is her husband, that wee'r sure of
Is he not Robbin?

1 Rust. I that he is our Edward,
We both were present when they were detracted.

2 Rust. Subtracted you fool. But as I said before
Seeing him stand so desperately with his sword
We stole behind him, and so caught him.

Ant: A valiant act believed. Good sir, let us go.

Pla: Ah Constantina, ah good heart! was this
The journey you intended?

Ant: Sir, I beseech you --
We shall be poisoned with these women's sighs He offers to go.
It Is worse then a Germayne hot-house.

Ter: Anteros
Stay, we will see the end of this.

Hook: Fie, fie, Hell is broke loose upon me: all her furies
Are come at once t'assault me.

Con: Ah Cleopes! she revives

Nean: She lives again, O miracle of women!

Con: Where art thou Cleopes?

Nean: Oh hated name,
Enough t'infect the world, but that it comes
Out of those lips.

Pla: Speak Constantina.

Con. What have I to do
With light or heaven? I will not live.

Pla: O me!
She swounds again.

1 Rust. Why do you rub her head
And face so much, you foolish woman you?
Let me alone, I Will find her wound I warrant you.

Pla. Forbear, or I Will find that swines face of yours.
She strikes him.
Constable. I am too bad for hell, they will not receive me,
They are afraid I should infect those souls,
Those virtuous souls which do inhabit there.

Nean Art thou not softened yet Neander? Ha?
Had thou an heart cut out 'oth Diamond rock,
Sure this would melt it.

Constable. O my Cleopes!

1 Rust. What will you give sir, and I will let you
Shift for your self?

Nean. What thou deservest villain.

2 Rust. Half part, or else she shall not go.

Nea. Take half.
He breaks loose, and beats them out. I will divide my gifts betwixt ye --
there.
Thou Temple of Virtue, fairest Constantina. --

Constable. Oh I shall die again if I see him.

Nean. But will you live if I do presently
Make a divorce betwixt you and Neander?
And place you in the arms of him you so
Love, and adore, your Cleopes?

Constable. You cannot.

Nean. You Are all divinity, indeed I cannot.
See where Pandora comes; but now I can.
Behold my Lucius.

ACT. 5. SCE. 11.
Laurentio, Lucius, Endymion, Pandora, Isabella, cum caeteris. Laur. Nay, I
will still persist to follow thee
Basest of men.

End. Good father.

Luc. Suffer him;
His tongue has learned the palsy from his hands;
Alas he is old, and must be pardoned for it.
But what imports this multitude? and see Neander
With his Boy-bride. Pandora, sweetest Lady --

Ant. An other tempest! where shall I shelter me?

Luc. By all the joys in Love, by all the sorrows,
By all his Roses, and his Worme-wood, take
Thy thoughts from me, and let them doubled fall
Upon my friend Neander. -- Fairest foul,
Do but contemplate that most curious frame
Of man, in what a pleasing harmony
Nature has married all those provinces
His limbs together: view but his sparkling eye,
And read divinity there; look on his hair,
Survey his face, and fee how Majesty
And sweetness there do strive for victory,
And still the issue's doubtful.

Nean. Lucius,
Thou shall not overcome; disguise farewell.
O thou that art the shame of all thy sex,
Fair Constantina, yet not half so fair
As virtuous, here behold thy Cleopes;
He discovers himself. Neander's vanished; why do you wonder so?
I do confess I loved that Gentlewoman,
And for her love I took on this disguise,
And here for thine I put it off again,
And on my bended knee do beg my pardon
For all the wrong I Have done thee

Ant. Cleopes!

Hoo. It is a miracle: but the bonds, the living.

Pla. O heavens! it is he, most happy Constantina!

Constable. My Cleopes? grant me some respite joy
Before thou kilst me -- Oh my Cleopes!
Whom do I embrace? into whose arms am I fallen?

Cleo. O constant virgin!

Constable. But how shall I hereafter
Give any credit to my senses? O
Placenta, courteous Midwife, pray thee tell me,
Where am I now? in heaven?

Pla. Bridle your passion.

Luc. Am I my self? or do I dream all this?

Cleo. Lucius, take truce with wonder, I am Cleopes,
And I do hope though now I wear that name,
As dear to thee as when I heard Neander.
You may remember when as first the beauty
Of fair Pandora did attract your eyes
To wonder, and to love, that I was then
A busy wooer unto Constantina:
But so it pleased Cupid, that while I
Drew out a languishing and lukewarm suit
To her, the vigor of Pandora's beams,
(As does the Sun unto our culinar fire)
Did quite extinguish that same petty flame.
Thinking it vain t'attempt her in that shape,
I presently did take some discontent,
And feigned a journey into Belgia,
And not long after took on this disguise,
And returned hither; where I have remained
Your Rival, and capital friend together:
And (which I wonder at the most) unknown:
You have my Metamorphosis. But sweet,
How came thou 'pray thee, unto Mr Lively?
And by what tricks did he inveagle thee
Unto this contract, since thou did not know
That Cleopes was there invisible?

Con. My better Genius, you shall hear within
The story whole, it is too tedious
To be told here.

Cleo. But now Pandora, why
Stand you so dully here, and do not fly
Into his strict embraces, who alone
Loves you, and who alone deserves your love?

Luc. Do I love her? do I deserve her love?
Have thou (sweet friend) for me forsaken her,
Whom thou did prize above thine own proper soul?
And now have married her whom thou did fly?
And all for my sake, and shall I thus repay thee?
But for her love thou never had been Neander;
And but for mine had been Neander still;
Friend Cleopes, or if thou will Neander,
(Under both titles most beloved of me)
Was she all Venus; did each hair of hers
Fetter a Love, were there as many Cupids
That hovered o'e her head, as there be lights
Which guild yon Marble roof, by them I swear,
By all that is Sacred, by what ever flies
The touch of mortal eye, I swear again,
I would disclaim her and her love for ever.

Pand. Troth Lucius, I do pity you, that do^
Spend so much breath unto so little end,
What need all these deep protestations?
I care not this for all your love, nor yet
For your friend Ianus there with the two faces;
Nor do I think ye men.

Luc. So quickly?

Pan. Yes.
I do confess I am a woman; see,
Here is the man has won what ye have lost;
Stout soldiers sure, that when the City gates
Were open to ye, durst not enter in.

Luc. O Isabella, it is for thy sake I know
That all these miseries do happen me.
(Forgive me good Laurentio) Isabella,
At length I have experience what it is
To love an outside, the mere bark of woman,
And to forsake an inward virtue: but
If once I have thee in possession more --

[Redit in scenam Loueall cum Isabella] Love. Follow me Witch, devil,
strumpet, prostitute.

Isab. Ah whither will he drag me? oh my heart!

Love. What have ye done with my dead sisters body?

Con. Thy sisters body now has got a soul.
(O my sweet Cleopes!) most welcome brother.

Love. But does she live then?

Constable. And so happily,
As I have called it impudence to wish
What I do now enjoy.

Laur. Whom do I see?
My daughter Isabella?

Love. But is this Cleopes?

Luc. I dare not look upon that wronged face.

Constable. It is, and now thy sisters husband.

Cleo. Brother,
All health, all happiness.

Love. More then all to you,
Good Cleopes. -- But do thou live, my sister?
Why wast thou dead but now?

Constable. Thou shall hear that
Some other time.

Laur. See thou that virgin?

End. Yes, it is my sister Isabella.

Laur. Peace.

Isab. I am undone! my father, and my brother.
Sir, I beseech you pardon what my love,
And younger years have trespas'd.

Laur. Rise my daughter;
Joy will not suffer me for to be angry.
See thou that face?

Isab. It is Endymion
My brother. -- Brother, God save you.

End. Sister!

Lau. Thy Brother? it is thy traitor that I mean,
That has undone thee and thy name.

Isab. It Is Lucius.

Ant. Sir I beseech you do not hearken to him.

Ter. No more.

Ant. A pox upon this honesty,
It will undo us all: it is ten to one
But that his tender Conscience will persuade him
To pay in the money for all this.

Luc. Fair soul
Can thou forgive thy Lucius?

Isa. Can thou love
Thy Isabella?

Luc. Give me a man dares ask
That question? Good Laurentio let me crave
Your likeing and consent.

Lau. Consent? to what?

Luc. To marry this your daughter.

Lau. Marry my daughter?
No perjured wretch.

Isa. Sir I beseech you grant it.
O Lucius! O happy hour!

Lau. Thou have her,
And with her such a portion as shall please thee.

Luc. I will not hear of Portion, she her self
Is dowry enough to me. -- O Isabella!

Pla. What? Is the Players boy proved woman too?

Pan. Father.

Hook. I say trouble me not -- the morgage.

Pan. Sir I beseech you hear me.

Hook. Fie, fie, fie.

Pan. And let me have your approbation*
In this young Gentleman for my husband.

Hook. O.

Laur. Perhaps sir you may doubt of his estate,
But if you will credit me, I can instruct you,
I am his Father, he mine only Son,
And (I do thank my stars) our fortun's are
None of the meanest. Speak Sir, will you give
Your daughter here, without a portion?

Hook. Without a Portion? take her what er'e thou art
So, So, that care is past yet, this a little
Help's out with the other losses.

Ter. Master Hook,
You shall not frown, since all things here do smile;
To morrow I will pay you half your money,
So you will grant me a general acquittance;
It Is in my power (you know) and I may choose
Whether I Will pay a farthing, but no more,
(There is a thing called conscience within me;
And) you shall have it: therefore be frolike Sir.

Hook. Thou art an honest man. Ye are all honest, ye are all honest.

Enter Lively having heard the other Scene. Liu. All this while have I
Employed mine cares about this business.
Now show thy self, and of what house thou come.
All health to this fair company -- much joy --
Much happiness -- and a young Son to you;
Are you at leisure for to kill me yet?
You see I Am come again.

Nean. Let me embrace thee
Thou instrument of all our good.

Live. Yes, yes,
I was a fool, knew nothing, knew just nothing,
Could not divine a whit, not tell, not tell,
How this same gear would come to pass, not I;
How do you like your Lively now? your Lively?

Hook We will discourse of that within. Terpander,
Sir will it please you follow? you my Son,
Gentl'men you are all my guests to night. Me
Think's I am grown Pestilent kind upon the suddayne,
The Music too, we will be merry, come,
Nay come, come, take me while the homours hot.

[Exeunt omnes, but Loveall and Anteros.] Ant. Loueall, a word: nay troop on,
let them troop.

Lov. The news?

Ant. 'Faith nothing but to take my leave,
Bid you far well.

Lov. Why so? I pray thee stay,
You Will in I hope.

Ant. What among such a kennell
Of women? noe, adieu.

Lou. Nay preethee go.

Ant. Not for the Fay'ry Kingdom.

Wise. Mr. Loveall,
Sweet Mr. Loveall.

Mung. Anteros.

Ant. How now?

Mung. As I am a gentleman, and an elder brother, I am almost choked.

Wise. Sweet Mr. Loveall, O Mr. Loveall. It Is utterly against my complexion,
To lie here any longer.

Ant. Death! our fools,
Our dish of buffles: as I hope to prosper
My thoughts had lost them quite.

Lou. I thought not of them.

Nod. Good Mr. Loveall are the officers gone?

Ham. Anteros, Anteros, is the coast clear yet?

Ant. But how shall we dispose of them?

Lou. We Would best
Barrel them up and send them for new England.

Ant. A pox there is fools enough already there.
Let Us pickle them for winter Sallads.

Lou. No;
They are not capable of Salt, man; rather
Let Us get some broaken trumpet, or old drum,
And show them to the people from some strange
Beasts out of Afric

Mer. Father, my gown is not silk yet.

Stip. A bots on you.

Ant. Hark, there is another egg sprung, my shepherd and his fair daughter.


Wise. Loveall, Mr. Loveall, I am of a sanguine complexion.

Ham. Anteros.

Ant. Now all the world! what shall we do with them?
But stay, a word, -- perform it, I Will take order [Hee whispers with Loveall]
TO uncase vm' to your hands. --
Now quickly Nodle, all is quiet now, -- Exit Loveall.
Come Mr. William -- Not a mouse is stirring --
Safe, safe, all 's safe. Ha, he, he.

[They all 4 come out at the 4 corners of the stage.] Nod. I Have spoiled my
clothes quite, would I had a brush;
How now? wee're gulled.

Wis. I, as I am a living saul. -- mark the end on it.

Ham. Who have we here? does his ghost walk?

Nod. We are all gee^'d I perceive it plain now.

Wis. Who Is that? Mr. Mungrell? is the Scholar alive again? I should have
been very melancholy to have been hanged as I am a living saul.


Nod If I could get my raepier and a brush, [Redit in scenam Loveall and
Placenta with a cudgel.]
I Would steal away.

Pla. Would you have a brush? I Will brush ye ye villains,
Nay, Mr. Loueall told me what dusty companions ye were,
And that ye wanted brushing, and how ye bad
Abused my husband, and my daughter, ty'de them
To a tree, come one your ways, want ye brushing?
Ye rascals, I Will brush you, would ye be brusht* She beats the^ forth
Come on, lets see what covered dish ^'haue here now? She unties them
Hy day! you lubberly knave; what Madame Gillian too?

Stip. What? is she come now to trouble us!
My daughter, I do charge you on my blessing
Look scuruily upon her.

Mer. Yes forsooth Father.

Stip. Call her not Mother darling, but disclaim her,
She is no wife of mine, she does conspire
Against our gentility daughter, and she lies;
Call her the plain old woman, sweet-lips, do;
I Will bear you cut in it, do as your father bids you.

Pla. How now?


Mer. But forsooth father, my neckercher is not turned into Gold yet.


Pla. They are both mad of a certain.


Stip, I am a gentleman, and I will be a gentleman, I will enclose, and I will
raise rents -- I will be a lower house man, and I will be --


Plac. An old cox-combe, and you shall be beaten. [She beats him.]


Stip. But does this stand good in law?


Plac. Fear not that; I Will find an old statute for it, doubt it not. You are a
gentleman? and you will be a gentleman? I Will make you gentle enough e're I have
done with you.


Stip. O, O, O.


Plac. And you my sweet lips that will not call me mother, but look scuruily,

Come on your ways I have the common law on my side too for this. [She beats
Merda.]


Mer. Oh mother, I Will never be a gentlewoman more while I live, nor never
talk of gold neckerchers, no that I will not truly.


[Shee beats Stipes again.] Plac. Yes, you shall be a Lower House man, you
shall; I Will take you down a Pin, you are too high now.


Stip. O, O, good wife -- O, O, honey wife.


Pla. You Will in? [Exit. Plac. and Merda.]


Stip. Buz, peace and catch a mouse cry I.


[Enter Hammershin] Ant. What is my Scholar returned? prithee go in Jack
Loveall, I Will change but two words with him Exit Love. And follow. Well said,
nay look not sowerly on the matter.


Ham. You have abused me Sir, and go to the fence School with me if you
dare, or else wr^stle a fall with me.


Ant. He give thee satisfaction my rowser
My Hit-her better, nay put off these frowns;
What say thou to my sister, and the Living?
I know you have heard the news from out the Cabin,
And you was once a Suitour to her; speak,
Will that content thee? come you are not the first
Has got a Parsonage with fooling Sir,
I will procure it for thee, fear it not:
Nay spare your Hatt, it will be tedious,
My thanks shall be in Oats.

Stip. But Master Ieoffry.


Ant. Follow Jack Loveall in. [Exit Ham.]


Stip. You know I was your Master to day.


Ant. Well put the case.


Stip. Poor, and ill parell'd.


Ant. Put the case again.


Stip. But now you see how strangely altered.


Ant. Put the case the third time.


Stip. Are you avis'd of that? I Will n'ere trust winking beast again for your
sake, I Will tell you but so. Did you not tell me that Obrum would make me a
gentleman? Obrum? Obrum? if Obrum has no better tricks then these, let Obrum
keep his tricks to cool his porredge, 'sduds I looked every minute when Obrum
would have put a green scarlet suite upon my back like yours, all to be
daubed with spingle spangles; and in the mean time comes my wife with a black
and blew home spun of her own making. Well that same Obrum is a sembling cony
catching knave, and I know what I could call you too, but for your whiniard,
and your staring goggles.


Ant. Stipes, no more, advaunce thy duller eye,
Know thou what all those blazing stars portend?

Sti. I, I, by'r Lady? how now? 'sduds I think forty Obrums have been here,
(Master Ieoffry is that Obrum that makes gentlefolkes, a Tailor?) one Obrum
could never have painted them thus.


Epilogue.
PEace profane rudeness; what alteration's this?
What mean these bended Knees? but are these women?
Am ^a Convert then? so suddenly?
Surely some Power greater then all that Sex
Is interposed, vayl'd in a femall outside,
Else how come I so supple ioynted, that
Before was stiffer then the Rhodian Statue?
There is an Homage due, and I must pay't
Spite of my proudest nerves. Most Sacred Goddess,
Behold a Penitent, that falls thus low
Before your feet: as you have shown your self
More then a Mortal, in converting me,
Confirm it by your Pardon; it is a Virtue
No less deserving, and as near to miracle.
And You great Monarch, that the world may know
How nigh a Kin to heaven and all the Gods
You are in blood and power, confute that bold
Erroneous tenent, prove the Age of Wonders
Still to endure. What I have promised
Unto this Shepherd (as a miracle)
To be performed by Obron and this tree,
Do you effect; make us all gentlemen.
Which one Kind ray sent from Your gracious eyes
Will do, and in that confidence we rise.
FINIS.

