THE TOVCH-STONE of the Reformed Gospel.

Wherein sundry chief Heads and Tenets of the Protestants Doctrine (objected by
them commonly against the Catholics) are briefly refuted.

BY The express Texts of the Protestants own Bible, set forth and approved by
the Church of England.

With the ancient Fathers Judgments thereon, in confirmation of the Catholic
Doctrine.

The fourth Edition, augmented.

Out of thy own mouth will I Judge thee.

Luc. 19.22. Permissu Superiorum. 1634.

TO THE CATHOLIQVE READER HEALTH, AND ENCOVRAGEMENT in his Holy Faith.
COurteous Reader before thou peruse this little Book, I would entreat thee,
to read these ensuing points very necessary to serve thy self of, with fruit
and profit.

1. The first point is, that in the Textes of Scriptures alleged throghout
this Treatise, it is not specified out of which English Bible, the said
passages are extracted, for as much, as this were over troublesome unto thee,
since England has set forth within these few years past, a great number of
several sorts of Bibles, much differing one from another; So that our
Adversaries (to whom I wish from very heart, as I do to thee, that this little
Book may prove profitable) have not all one sort of Bibles themselves.
Notwithstanding know for certain, that they are all faithfully taken forth of
the Bibles in quarto, and octauo, printed at London by Robert Barker, anno
1615. So as if by chance any one shall show thee some other Bible wherein they
be not set down, word, for word, as here thou find; yet rest assured, and
out of doubt, that thou shall find them so written, and faithfully cited out of
the foresaid Edition of Robert Barker, set forth by his Majesty's special
Commandment.

2. The second point is, That thou admire the sple^dor of Truth, the which is
such, and so passing bright, that notwithstanding our Adversaries main, and
serious endeauours to obscure the same, by so many varieties of Translatio^s,
and by such a number of gross corruptions and falsifications; yet nevertheless
their condemnation is so expressly set down in this their own Bible, and is
so clear to all the world, that nothing else is needful heerto, but that thou
know to read, and have thine eyes to behold the same, at the opening of this
their Book. This cannot choose but be an exceeding comfort unto Catholics
against their Adversaries, concerning the vprightnes of their cause, to offer
to be tried, and to confound them by their own Bible: the Translation whereof,
notwithstanding does in a number of places, and particularly in many of those
that are in question, swerve and differ notoriously from the authentical
Latin, and to the incredible disparagement, darkning, and obscuring of the
Catholic cause. Never did yet (nor I presume dare) our Adversaries offer to
give the like advantage unto us, as to stand to be tried by our Translations,
and that in above fifty maine Heads, and Points of Doctrine, that are this day
in controversy between us.

3. The third point is, That when thou shall urge, or allege any passage, in
favor of thine own faith and doctrine; if any one return their charge, be it
by way of recrimination and blaming of the Roman Church, or by alleging some
obscure texts, and those ill understood, to counterpoyze such as are brought
by thee; do thou show them amiably, that this is not to proceed in due order,
nor to deal with thee as they ought, in oposing a passage dark, and obscure,
to confund another that is most clear and evident. For example, when we set
before their eyes these few words (as clear as the Sun at Noone day) Take,
eat, this is my body, this is my blood which shall be shed for you etc. (Marc.
14.25.) they will straight suppose to have found another important place, yea,
and to have given unto us the overthrow, if they presently do reply, that our
Savior says in S. John 6.63. The flesh profits nothing, the words that I
speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life; a passage far more
obscure, then that which is in question, and which affirms nothing less,
then that which they pretend to prove thereby. For how absurd were it to say,
that the flesh of Christ profits nothing? And if (as they themselves say) we
must interpret one passage by another, then doubtless it is better to explicate
an obscure one, by one that is clear, then one that is clear, by a passage
obscure: and that one text give place to many, rather then many give place to
one.

4. The fourth point is, That if they shall reject any of the passages which
thou producest, pretending the same to be Apocriphall; know that to prevent
this objection, no such Scriptures as they call Apocriphall are here produced
alone, but that always there go accompanied with them others that be
Canonical, even by their own confession: and so far forth as Apocriphall
Scriptures, shall, and do agree with Canonical, they themselves, by their own
Rule, are bound to receive them. Which will also stop their mouth, in their
common pretense of Conference of places; for rarely have thou here less then
three, or four several passages cited at large (besides references) for the
proof of every several point: All our Adversaries put together, being never
able, in their defense, to do the like; that is, to produce so many in number,
so express and clear, and for so great a number of Controversies, as are
here disputed, and couched in so little a Treatise.

5. The fifth point is, that if they shall contend with thee, not about the
words themselves, as being clear, but about the sense and meaning of them;
for such places, I say, as may be subject to this cavil, thou shall forthwith
have recourse unto that which the Scriptures call, The Rule of Faith, to wit,
unto the euer-constant and uniform Judgment of the Church and Ancient
Fathers, who in every age since Christ, have understood the points in question,
in that sense which Catholics do. An example whereof thou may lay down
before them, out of that learned Treatise, entitled, The Summary of
Controversies, debating the question of the Blessed Sacrament. Which thou
having done, bid them do the like, and thou will yield unto them; (a thing
which they can never do in their defense.) So as, no man of reason will reject
this Rule, grounded so clearly in holy Scripture, and prefer the private
interpretation of some silly Cobbler before S. Chrysostom, of a Baker before S.
Basil, of some Tinker before Tertullian, or of any Nouellist whatsoever,
before the judgment of the Church, and the whole stream of ancient Fathers.

This point therefore being ^^ important, shall be the first, which I will
fortify, and prove by the word of God in this present Treatise, I mean this
Rule; and therefore in no wise forget, always to inuolue thine Adversary
within this Rule, as often as he shall become so unruly, and thou shall be sure
to get the victory.

6. The sixth, and last point is, That I here protest, in the presence of God
(whom I call to witness in this behalf, and pray thee also to call upon, for
the salvation and reduction of all those that walk astray) that it is not in
the power of any one, no not of all our Adversaries that are in England, to
find in their own Bible, one only express Text, I say one only, I say, in
their own Bible, by which they ca^ possibly prove, one only point of their
false Doctrine, without their usual art of adding, diminishing, chopping or
changing it by some interpretation, or other: which yet should be to alter the
Text it self, and to employ man's fancy, instead of the pure word; a thing by
their own Confession, flatly forbidden unto them, protesting, that the Word of
God, does in such sort contain all that which is necessary to salvation, that
it is not lawful neither for men, nor Angels, to add, diminish, or alter
ought thereof; and commanding their followers and adherents, utterly to renounce
all Antiquity, Custom, Multitude, Humane, Wisdom, Judgment, Decrees,
Edicts, Counsels, Visions, yea and Miracles themselves, to the contrary.

THE TOVCH-STONE of the Reformed Gospel.
Protestants affirm. I. That there is not in the Church one, and that an
infaillible Rule, for understanding the holy Scriptures, and conseruing of
Unity in matters of Faith.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Romans 12.6. Having then
gifts, differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether Prophecy
(that is interpretation) according to the proportion (or Rule) of faith. Whence
we gather, that Prophecy according to the Rule of faith, is one of the gifts
which God bestows on his Church. Therefore there is in the Church, one, and
that an infallible Rule, for understanding to the holy Scriptures.

Philip. 3.16. Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let us mind the
same thing. Lo how plainly the Apostle speaks in this second place, of a
certain Rule to be walked by: clearly presupposing, that in matters of faith,
we can never be of the same mind unless we walk by the same Rule.

Gal. 6.16. And as many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them, and
mercy. And 2. Cor. 10.15. Having hope when your faith is increased, that we
shall be enlarged by you, according to our Rule, abundantly, to preach the
gospel in the Regions beyond you, and not to boast in another man's line. Lo
here again because that every man is to direct, and order his belief,
according to the doctrine of the Church, therefore it is called by S. Paul, both
the Rule, and Line of our holy Faith.

Again 1. Cor. 11.16. But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such
Custom, nor the Churches of God. Lo how S. Paul still pleads the Rule, and
Custom of the Church, against the contentious: which if it could then, by the
sole prescription of twenty, or thirty years, and by the authority of so few
Pastors, stop the mouths of new Sect-maysters, what ought not the Custom of
sixteen hundred years, and the Decrees of so many hundred Pastors gain of
reasonable, modest, and humble men?

And here I would have it to be noted, that this Analogy, or Rule of Faith
(besides the tytles already recited) the holy Scripture in other places,
calls by the name of Form of Doctrine Romans 6.17. A thing made ready to our
hand, 2. Cor. 10.16. The Depositum (or Treasure) committed to the Churches
trust, and ever most carefully to be kept by her, 1. Tim. 6.20. And withal in
the very self same places, always styles that which is contrary to this
Rule, by the name of Disunion, Discord, Disobedience, forsaking of our first
vocation, Division, Contention, Profane and vain babbling, Opposition of
sciences etc. Whence plainly appears, how great the necessity is for every
Christian, to keep this Rule; the least breach whereof, does presently crack his
Christian credit with the Church of God, and with all good Christians.

See more Romans 6.17. Gal. 1.6. Romans 16.17. Acts 15.2. 1. Tim. 6.20. Romans 12.16.

According to this very Rule, the Ancient Fathers affirm the same. S. Irenaeus
l. 4. cap. 45. Tert. de praescrip. And Vincent. Lyr. in suo Commonitorio,
says: It is very needful in regard of so many errors proceeding from the
mis-interpretation of Scriptures, that the Line of Prophetical and
Apostolical exposition, should be directed according to the Rule of the
Ecclesiastical and Catholic sense. Thus writes this most worthy witness.
Tertul. praescrip. adu. haeres. cap. 15. and cap. 19. says: We do not admit
our adversaries to dispute out of Scripture, till they can show, who their
Ancestors were, and from whom they received the Scriptures. For the orderly
course of doctrine requires, that the first Question be, whose the Scriptures
are by right, from whom, and by whom, and to whom the Form of Christian
Religion was delivered? Otherwise prescribe against him as a stranger etc. Thus
he.

Lo, how these two last ancient Fathers, lay hold off, and urge these two very
terms, Rule, and Form of Faith, and Religion, even as before the Holy
Scripture did, from whence doubtless they took the phrase. And with very great
reason: for the knowledge of Tradition (which is this Form or Rule) goes
before the knowledge of the Scripture: for the Rule must be first known, before
the thing ruled can be assuredly known; as the Carpenter cannot know
certainly, that he has measured his timber, nor the Tailor that he has
measured his cloth aright, except he first assuredly know, that his measure be
both true and right: but the Rule of Faith, to wit, the Sum of those points
that every Christian is bound expressly to know, as delivered to him from hand
to hand, is the knowledge of Tradition.

Protestants affirm, II. That in matters of Faith we must not rely upon the
Judgment of the Church, and of her Pastors, but only upon the Written Word.
COntrary to the expres words of their own Bible. Mar. 23.2. The Scribes and
the Pharisees sit in Moses seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe,
that observe and do. In which words, Christ not only commands us in matters
of Faith, to have recourse to somewhat else besides the only written word (to
wit, to the Pastors of the Church) but bids us moreover to obey them: and
that not only in some principal matters, but in all whatsoever, without
distinction or limitation. Therefore in matters of faith, we are not tied to
rely only upon the written Word.

Luc. 10.16. He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you,
despises me: and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. Here
again Christ our Lord honors, and gives as much authority to the Preachers
of the Word, as he can possibly do to the word it self, saying: He that
hears you etc.

Matt. 16.19. Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall he loosed in heaven. Where it is to
be noted, that he does not say whosoever, but whatsoever; giving us thereby to
understand, that, not only the bonds of sins, but as well all other knots and
difficulties in matters of faith, are to be loosed by S. Peter and by the
Pastors that succeed in the Church.

See more Deuteronomy. 17.8. Aggeus 2.11. 2. Chron. 19.8. unto the end. 2. These. 2.15.

The holy Fathers that affirm the same, are S. Gregory Naz. in orat. excusat.
Tertul. lib. de praescrip. aduersus haer. S. Cyprian lib. 1. epist. 3. S. Aug.
lib. 1. cont. Cresc. cap. 33. and lib. cont. Fund. cap. 5. Vincent. Lyr. in suo
commonit. And S. Anselme lib. de incar. c. 1. writing to Pope Urban, says thus
unto him: Unto no other is more rightly referred to be corrected, whatsoever
arises in the Church against the Catholic faith etc.

They affirm, III. That the Scriptures are easy to be understood, and that
therefore none ought to be restrained from reading of them.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, 2. Pet. 3.16. where S.
Peter speaking of S. Paul's Epistles, says: In which are some things hard to
be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable, wrest, as they do
also the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction. But all unlearned
Reformers, do both read, and are allowed to read those hard things (yea the
Book of Apocalypse also, yet harder) without any restraint to man, or woman,
which yet they understand not: therefore they wrest them, as also other
Scriptures, to their own destruction.

Acts 8.30. And Philip said: Understand thou what thou read? And be
said: How can I, except some man should guide me? Where first may be noted,
that this Noble Eunuch freely confessed, he could not understand the
Scriptures, without an interpreter to expound them, albeit he was a great, and
serious student in them, and withal a holy and humble man, as S. Hierome
notes of him Epist. ad Paulin. de stud. Scrip. and next, that he says, Except
some man guide me: So as he fled not to his private spirit, nor yet to
conferring of place with place, as our Adversaries do, Therefore the Scriptures
are not easy.

Luc. 24.25. and 27. Christ called two of his Disciples fools, and slow of
heart etc. And beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets he expounded unto them
in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself. How then are the
Scriptures so easily to be understood of the unlearned, when Christ's Disciples
themselves could not understand them, till first they were expounded to them?

Reuelat. 5.1. etc. The Angel speaking of the Book sealed with seven seals,
wept much because no man in heaven, nor in earth, was able to open the book,
nether to look thereon. A strange case! to read in Scripture it self, that the
book of Scripture should be shut with so many seals: but much more strange,
that even in S. John's and the Apostles time, none could be found, nether in
heaven nor earth, able to open the same, nor to look thereon, which every
Apprentice now a days without, any difficulty will undertake to do.

See more 2. Pet. 1.20. Mat. 13.11. and 36. Luc. 24.45. 1. Cor. 12.10. Luc.
8.10. and 54. Luc. 2. 50.2. Tim. 3.7. 1. John 4.6. John 5.35. Psalm. 119.18. and
34 Revel. 51. etc.

The Holy Fathers that affirm the same are, S. Irenaeus l. 2. cap. 47. Origin
l. cont, Cells. S. Amb. epist 44. ad Constant. where he calls it: A sea, and
depth of prophetical riddles. S. Hier. in praefat. comment. in Ephesians. 5. And
S. Aug. epist. 119. cap. 21. says: The things of holy Scripture that I know
not, are many more then those that I know. So S. Greg. hom. 6. in Ezech. and
many other Fathers confess the same of themselves. S. Denis Bishop of Corinth
cited by Eusebius lib. 7. hist. Ec. 20. says: Of this Book (of Scripture to
wit) this is my opinion, that the matter thereof is far more profou^d then my
wit can reach unto.

They affirm. IV. That Apostolical Traditions and ancient Customs of the
Church, (not found in the written word) are not to be received, nor do oblige
us.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. 2. These. 2.15. Therefore
Brethren stand fast, and hold the Traditions, which ye have been taught,
whether by word, or by our Epistle. Hence it is clear, that some Traditions
were delivered to the Thessalonians by word of mouth, and those of equal
authority with what was written, if not of more; for the holy Ghost does name
them first (as they were indeed the first in being:) yea it is certain, that
before the new Testament was written the Apostles delivered all by Tradition,
and word of mouth. Therefore Apostolical Traditions are to be received, and do
oblige us.

2. These. 3.6. Now I command you brethren, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every brother that walks
disorderly, and not after the Tradition which he received of us. Lo, he says
not, I counsel you, but, I command you. But these men rejecting all
Traditions, walk disorderly: therefore they break the Apostles commandment.
Yea, they stand not, but are fallen; they let go, what the word it self, does
will them to hold: and therefore in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, let all
good men withdraw themselves from them.

1. Cor. 11.2. Now I praise you brethren, that you remember me in all things,
and keep the Traditions, as I have delivered them unto you. But these reject
all Traditions: therefore needs must S. Paul speak thus unto them: Now (none
of my brethren) I dispraise you, for that you forget me in all things, and
keep not the Traditions, as I have delivered them unto you.

Lastly, If nothing at all be to be believed, but only that which is left us
written, wherein should the Church have exercised herself from Adam to Moses,
the space of two thousand six hundred years?

See more 1. Tim. 6.3.20. and 2. Tim. 1.13.2. Tim. 2.2. John. 20.30. and 21.25.
and 16.12.1. Cor. 11.16.34.2. ep. John 12. 3. ep. of. S. John 13. Acts 16.4.
and 15.28.

The Fathers that affirm the same are S. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 4. Origin. in cap.
6. ad Romans S. Damas. l. 4. c. 17. S. Chrysostom. in 2. These. 2. And S. Basil. de
Spiritu sancto says: Some things we have from Scripture, other things from
the Apostles, both which have like force unto Godliness. S. Chrysostom. hom. 4. in
2. These says. If is a Tradition, seek thou no further.

They affirm. V. That a man by his own understanding or Private spirit, may
rightly judge and interpret Scripture.
COntrary to the expersse words of their own Bible 1. Cor. 12.8. etc. To one
is given by the spirit, the word of wisdom: to another the word of knowledge
by the same spirit: to another the working of miracles: to another Prophecy:
to another discerning of spirits: to another kinds of tongues: to another the
interpretation of tongues, but all these works that one and the self same
spirit, dividing to every man severally, as he will. Where the Apostle in
express words, opposes and refelleth this unsavory doctrine, teaching that
the gift of prophesying, or truly to interpret the holy Scripture, is not given
to all the faithful, but to some only in particular: yea, he presupposes that
one may have the gift, even to work miracles, and yet may want the gift, truly
to interpret the word of God. Therefore a man by his own private spirit cannot
righly interpret Scripture.

2. Pet. 1.20. Knowing this first, that no Prophesy of the Scripture is of any
private interpretation, for the Prophesy came not in old time (in the margent,
or at any time) by the will of man, but holy men of God speak as they were
moved by the holy Ghost. Loc, how clearly the Apostle takes this faculty and
authority, from a private and profane man, restrayning the same to a company
and society of men, and those also of some special note for their sanctity and
holiness, assuring us that they spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

1. John. 4. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether
they are of God. By which words we are taught, that the spirits of others are
to be examined, whether they proceed from God or not: but this Caveat cannot be
understood of the spirit of the whole Church, since then it would follow, that
there should be none left to try the said spirit of the Church (every
particular man being included therein.) If then it be to be meant of private men
(as needs it must) it follows, that a private spirit cannot be this Judge,
since it self is to undergo the judgment, and examination of some other.

The Fathers that affirm the same, are S. Aug. epist. 162. and l. de Baptismo
cap. 18. ad Epictetum, S. Basil. epist. 78. S. Amb. epist. 32. S. Leo epist.
53. S. Hier. lib. cont. Luciferianos. Vincent. Lyr. cont. prophan. here is.
nouitates. Yea Martin Luther himself (the Protestants great Grandfather)
says, lib. de potest. Papae: We are not certain of any private person, whether
he has the revelation of the Father or no: but that the Church has it, we
ought not to doubt.

VI. That S. Peter's faith has failed.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible Luc. 22.31.32. Simon,
behold Satan has desired to have you that he may sift you as wheat: but I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Lo Satan required to sift
them all (the Apostles) but our Lord here prayed for Peter only, that his
faith principally might not fail. Therefore S. Peter's faith has not failed.

Mat. 16.18. And I say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I
will build my Church, and the gats of hell shall not prevail against it. But
had S. Peter's faith failed, the gates of hell had long ago no doubt prevailed.

Mat. 23.2. The Scribes, and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat, all therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. How could Christ bid the
people of the old law, do all whatsoever he should bid them, by those that sat
in Moses Chair, if they could err? But God has no less preserved the truth
of Christian Religion, in the chair of S. Peter, which is in the new Law,
answerable to that of Moses in the old. Therefore neither S. Peter's Faith, nor
Chair has failed.

John 11.49.51. speaking of Caiphas the High Priest, says: And this be spoke
not of himself, but being High Priest that year, he prophesied, that Jesus
should die for that nation. Lo, how in this most wicked time of the Sinagogue,
the very Dregs and outcast of that disobedient people, yet speaking forth of
that Chair which Christ had commanded to be heard and obeyed, touching
mattters of faith, they answer truly, and their chief Bishops prophesy.

S. Leo ser. 3. de assump. sua affirms the same: The danger was common to all
the Apostles, but our Lord took special care of Peter, that the state of all
the rest, might be more sure, if the Head were invincible.

VII. That the Church can err, and has erred.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Isa. 59 21. As for me,
this is my Covenant unto them, says the Lord. My spirit that is upon thee, and
my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor
out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from
hence forth, and for ever. Therefore the Church cannot err.

Joan. 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter,
that he may abide with you for ever, even the spirit of truth. But the Apostles
themselves abode not for ever, therefore this is to be understood of the
perpetual abode of the spirit of Truch, with their Successors.

Mat. 18.17. And if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an
heathen man, and a Publican. Whence is clearly to be gathered, that the Church
in her Censure cannot err. Isa. 35.8. And a high way shall be there, and a way,
and it shall be called the way of Holiness; the unclean shall not pass over
it, but it shall be for those: the way faring men though fools, shall not err
there in. How far deceived then are many simple souls, who do affirm, that the
whole Church, and all holy men that ever have been therein, for these thousand
years (how wise soever) have all erred?

Ephesians. 5.27. That he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not
having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and
without blemish. Note well these words, without spot, wrinkle, any blemish,
and tell me now if it be possible, that reading this, thou can ever believe,
that she has ever taught such horrible blasphemies and abominations, as at
this day she is charged with?

See more John 16.13. Ephesians. 5.27. Isay 9.7. Ezech 37.26. Luc. 22.32. Mat.
23.3. 1. Pet. 2.9. John. 17.17. 1. Cor. 11.25. Psalm. 101.23.29. Ephesians. 2.10.
Ihon 10.16. Acts. 4.32. Ephesians. 4.5.11. Luc. 10.16. Deuteronomy. 17.8. Ierem. 3.15.
Malac. 2.7. Mat. 16.18. Acts. 15.28. 2. Cor. 13.8. 1. Tim. 3.15.

The Fathers affirm the same expressly. S. Aug. cont. Crescon. lib. 1. cap.
3. Also upon the 1^ 8. Psalm. the place begins: Ne auferas de ore meo verbum
veritatis vsquequaque. S. Cypr. epist. 55. ad Cornel. number. 3. S. Ireneus lib.
3. cap. 4. with many others.

VIII. That the Church has been bidden and invisible.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Mat. 5.14.15. Ye are the
light of the world, a City that is set on a hill, cannot be hid. Neither do
men light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick, and it
gives light to all that are in the house. But the Catholic Church is such a
light, such a candle, and such a City, built upon Christ as upon a mountain,
therefore has not, nor cannot be hidden, nor is invisible.

Mat. 18.17. Tell the Church, if he neglect to hear thee: but if he neglect to
hear the Church, let him be unto thee, as a Heathen man, and a Publican. But
it were a very hard case to be condemned for a Heathen, for not telling, or
hearing a Church which has so closely layne hid, that no man could hear, see,
feel, or understand it, for a thousand years.

2. Cor. 4.3. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. Lo
the censure of S. Paul upon all such as affirm that the Church, or her
Gospel can be hid.

Isa. 2.2. And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of
the Lords house, shall be established in the top of the mountains, and shall
be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it. In hundred of
places do the Prophecies make me^tio^ of this Kingdom of Christ, as Dan. 7.14.
Mich. 4.7. etc. which should be all in vain if this his kingdom could be
invisible; for a prophecy must be of things, which may be seen and perceived
by our senses; otherwise every man might be a Prophet, and fortell of things
to come, which if they should not come to pass, he might answer, that they
had come to pass in very deed as he had prophesied, but that they were
invisible to the world. Lo the visible absurdities of this invisible Church.

See more Psalm. 27.8. Romans 10.14. 1. Cor. 11.19. Psalm. 19.3.4. Isa. 60.20.
Acts. 20.28. Isa. 61.9.

The Fathers commonly affirm the same. Origin. hom. 30. in Matt. The Church is
full of light, even from the east to the west. S. Chrysostom. hom 4. in 6. of
Isa. It is easier for the sun to be extinguished, then the Church to be
darkened. S. Aug. tract. in Joan. calls those blind, that do not see so great
a mountain. Also S. Cyp. de vnitate Ecclesiae.

They maintain. IX. That the Church was not always to remain Catholic, or
Universal: and that the Church of Rome is not such a Church.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible Psalm. 2.8. Ask of me,
and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the earth for thy possession. And Luc. 1.33. He shall reign over the
house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end. But none of
these promises have been any where else so much verified, as in the Church of
Rome; therefore both the church has been always universal, and the Church of
Rome only such a Church.

Colos. 1.3. etc. We give thanks to God for you etc. since we heard your faith
etc. for the hope which is laid up for you in heaven whereof ye heard before in
the word of the truth of the gospel, which is come unto you, as it is in all
the world, and brings forth fruit, as is does also in you, since the day you
heard of it, and knew the grace of God in truth. But no Faith, or Gospel
has, or is, so dilated in all the world, nor has fructified, and grown (for
so we read) as the faith of the Roman Church has done, as appears more
plainly by this which follows.

Romans 1.8. First I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your
faith is spoken of throughout the whole world. Where in express terms. S.
Paul calls the faith of the whole world (or Catholic Faith) the faith of
the Romans, that is, of the Church of Rome. Therefore the Church of Rome. and
no other, is truly, and indeed such a church.

See more Colos. 1.23. Genesis 22.18. Mat, 24.46. Acts 1.8. Dan. 2.35. Luc. 24.47.
Psalm. 46.9. Psalm. 72.8.( we 7^.) Marc. 6.20. Ezech. 13.3. Math. 28.19. Acts
1.8.

All which places are to be understood, not that the whole world should be
Catholic at one and the same time, but that the whole should be converted to
Christ at sundry times, and that it should comprehend a greater part of the
world, then any Sect of heretics should ever do: and this is the true sense of
being Catholic, or Universal.

And to follow still our former Rule, hear the Fathers that affirm the same.
S. Cypr. ep. 57. writing to Cornelius Pope of Rome, says: Whilst with you
there is one mind, and one voice, the whole Church is confessed to be the Roman
Church. S. Aug. de vnitat. Eccles. cap. 4. says. Who so dissent from the body
of Christ, which is the Church, that they do not communicate with all the whole
corpse of Christendom, certain it is, that they are not in the Catholic
Church. S. Hierome in his Apology against Ruffinus, and in other places,
says, that it is all one to say the Roman Faith, and the Catholic Faith.
Again, S. Aug. upon the Psalm. 45. ( we 44.) but much more excellently in ep.
161. ad Honorat. The place begins: Dignare ergo rescribere nobis. As also
cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. cap. 16.

The Reformers hold. X. That the Churches Unity is not necessary in all points
of faith.
COntrary to the expres words of their own Bible. Ephesians. 4.5. One Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism. Therefore Unity is necessary in all points of faith. The
reason is, for that the Church being a Congregation of the faithful, one Faith
is necessary to make one Church; but our Adversaries differ in matters of
faith, therefore they have not the Unity requisite to one Church.

James 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole law and yet offend in one point,
he is guilty of all. And even so is it in our faith, for who so denies one
article, denies all.

Acts 4.32. And the multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of
one soul. And again 1. Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you Brethren, by the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no
divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment. But our adversaries will needs join with us
in unity of the Church (yea and with others also) who differ from them in
matters of faith. But this as you see, cannot be.

See more Ierem. 32.29. Can. 2.6. Psalm. 67.7. Mat. 12.25. Marc. 3.24. Luc.
11.17 Mat. 18.19. Ephesians. 2.14.15.16.18.22. Ephesians. 5.27. Philip. 3.16. Philip.
1.26.27. Galat. 59. and 1.8. Colos. 3.15. John. 17.11.2. Cor. 13.11. Psalm.
121.3.

And lastly to check by our common Rule, the breakers of this Unity and Rule,
S. Aug. cited by the Manuduc. p. 134. says: In Cathedra vnitatis posuit Deus
doctrinam veritatis: In the chair of Unity God has placed the doctrine of
verity. As also cont. ep. Par. l. 3. cap. 5. The place begins: Qui non vult
sedere. S. Cyprian lib de vnitate Eccles. number. 3. says: This unity of the
Church, he that holds not, does he think he holds the faith? S. Hilary
lib. ad Constantium Augustum, and many others.

XI. That S. Peter was not ordained by Christ the first Head, or Chief amongst
the Apostles, and that amongst the twelve, none was greater, or lesser then
other.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Mat. 10.2. Now the names
of the twelve Apostles are these: The first Simon, who is called Peter. All the
Evangelists do put Peter in the first place, and wicked Judas in the last. And
wherefore this, but because the one was first in dignity and worthiest of the
rest; and contrariwise, the other last, worst, and unworthiest of al his
fellows? Again, why, as Peter is called First, are not the rest called,
Second, Third etc. but to show thereby, that they did not therefore call Peter
First, because he occurred first to be named; but because he was the First,
both in dignity and authority, whom therefore they all number First, and call
the First?

Mat. 16.18. And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock
I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.
Words clearly insinuating S. Peter's Supremacy in the Church of God; for
according to the Greek and Syriack text (as our Doctors note) these words;
Thou art Peter, sound thus: Thou art a rock, and upon this rock I will build
my Church. So that, to say, that Peter is the rock of the Church, is as much,
as to call him Chief, or Head of the Church.

Neither without especial mystery, did our Lord impose upon him this new name,
the name of Peter (a Rock or Stone) being one of the most excellent names of
Jesus Christ, who is many times in holy Scripture, termed by the name of a
Rock, or Stone, as Psalm. 117.22. Isa. 28.6. Dan. 2.34. Mat. 21.42. Romans 9.33.
So that this Sovereign, and absolute Pastor of the Church, did communicate
this new name unto his Vicar, to represent the more lively, the supreme
authority, which he would give unto him over his flock.

And not, that Christ says not, I have built, or, I do build, but I will
build; the Church being built upon himself from his Incarnation: so as these
words referred to Christ (as our Reformers use to do) do not well agree, to
the building of the Church upon Christ, as head thereof for the time to come;
but do most fitly agree to S. Peter, as Head thereof, for the time to come.

Matt. 16.19. And I will give unto thee, the keys of the kingdom of Heaven
etc. By these words also, no less then by the former, is clearly signified S.
Perers Supremacy. For none has the government or commandment of the keys of
any Town, or City, but the Prince, Governor, or Magistrates of the same. And
that sovereign Power is signified by the Keys, is likewise proved by that of
our Savior Christ: I have the keys of hell and of death. Apoc. 1.18. As also
by the key of David, which opens, and no man shuts, shuts and no man
opens.

Now add to this that has been said, the correspondency of the words of our
Savior to S. Peter, with the words of S. Peter again to him, and how clear
will this doctrine appear? For when our Lord asked his disciples Matt. 16.15.
Whom say ye that I am? he demanded not, how they called his name, which was
Jesus (for that they knew full well before) but what his quality, office, and
dignity was? And S. Peter answering: Thou art Christ the Son of the living
God, Jesus told him not his Name (which was Simon) but gave him another name,
and such a one, as likewise signified the office, quality and dignity that he
bestowed upon him, saying: Thou art Cephas, or Petrus, that is to say, Rock or
Peter. Therefore he ordained him Head etc.

1. Cor 3.4.22. For while one says, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I of Cephas,
I of Christ etc. Lo, how from those he would have esteemed lesser, he
ascends to those whom he would have esteemed greather, and places Peter
next to Christ.

Luc. 22.31.32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon etc. when thou art converted
strengthen (we read confirm) thy brethren. Now what other thing is it for
Peter, to strengthen (or confirm) his brethren, but to practice and exercise
his greatness over them? For he that does strengthen (or confirm) others, is
the greater: and they who are strengthened (or confirmed) are made thereby
inferior to him who does strengthen (or confirm) them.

Luc. 22.26. He that is greatest amongst you, let him be as the younger: and he
that is chief, as he that does serve. Where the words, He that is greatest is
chief do evidently show, that amongst the twelve, one was greater then
another, and was so accounted even by Christ himself.

John 21.15.16.17. Jesus said to Simon Peter: Simon love thou me more then
these? Feed my lambs, feed my sheep (where the Greek has in the second
place for feed, govern, or rule.) Hence it follows, that either the Apostles
were not accounted to be in the flock of Christ, or else they were subject to
S. Peter, as to their head, when Christ commanded him to feed or govern, not
only his lambs (to wit, the lay people) but his sheep also, to wit, the
Apostles and Pastors themselves: for besides lambs and sheep, there is
nothing in the Church of God. Again, if S. Peter loved our Lord more then al
his fellow-Apostles did; it follows necessarily, that he receives more power
to feed, then all the rest did. For it cannot be conceived, that he is willed
to love, more then to feed: but he loves more then others, therefore he is
willed to feed more then the others; and consequently, to be head of the others.

Mat. 12.25.26. Every kingdom divided against it self, is brought to
desolation. And if Satan cast out Satan etc. Satan therefore has a Kingdom
whereof he is the Chief. If then there be, not only a visible Head of the
Church triumphant in heaven, but also a visible head even in Hell; why not a
visible head also on Earth?

See more, Psalm. 18.42. Psalm. 45.16. ( we, 46.) Marc. 2.16. Acts 1.13. Luc.
1.33.2. Cor. 11.5.

The holy Fathers do commonly affirm the same. Theophilactus 23. Luc. calls
Peter, Prince of the Disciples. Eusebius in Chron. calls him the First Bishop
of Christians. S. Cyril of Hier. cat. 2. Prince, and most excellent of all the
Apostles. S. Chrysostom. ho. 55. in Mat. Pastor and Head of the Church. Euthym.
in cap. vlt. Joan. Master of the whole world. S. Leo epist. 89. Head and
chief of the Apostles.

They hold. XII. That a woman may be Head or supreme Gouernesse of the Church
in all causes, as the late Queen Elizabeth was.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. ^1. Tim. 2.11.12. Let the
woman learn in silence, with all subjection. But I suffer not a woman to
teach, nor to usurp authority over the man. Therefore a woman cannot be Head of
the Church,

1. Cor. 14.34. Let women hold their peace in the Churches, for it is not
permitted the^ to speak, but to be subject, as also the Law says. Therefore
etc.

I produce no Fathers for disproose of this point, for never was any Woman so
presumptuous in our Forefathers days, as to take upon her such authority: but
will content my self to refure the folly, with this evident and conuincing
argument.

Whatsoever power an inferior Minister of the Church has, that the Head of the
same church has (at the least) if not much more. But every inferior Minister
of their Church, has power to Baptize, to give the Communion, to marry, to
bury, and to preach in the pulpit: therefore Queen Eliz. could Baptize, give
the Communion, marry, bury, and preach in the pulpit. And who now is so simple,
as sees not the ridiculous sequel of this doctrine? For the denial of which
notwithstanding, hundreds of Catholics have been hanged, drawn, and
quartered, as traitors to her Person, and the State.

But that no secular King can be this Head, an infinity of Fathers do affirm.
S. John Damascen ser. 1. The place begins: Tibi o Rex. And again. Non
assentior: I consent not that the Church of God be governed by Kings Theod*
hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 28. recounteth of one Eulogius that he answered to an
officer of the Emperor Valens (telling him the Emperor would have it so) with
this pretty quippe, saying: What, was he made a Bishop, that day that he was
crowned Emperor? The place begins: Tum ille. S. Ignatius Epist. ad
Philadelph, wills all men without exception, even the Emperor himself, to
be obedient unto the Bishop: the place begins: Principes obedite Caesari. S.
Chrysostom. hom. 5. de verbis Isaiae, calls the Bishop, a Prince as well as the
King, yea and that a greater also. And hom 38. in Mat. 21. The place begins:
Quia in rebus spiritualibus.

XIII. That Antichrist shall not be a particular man; and that the Pope is
Antichrist.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. 2. These. 2.3. Let no man
deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come, except there come a
falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition.
Where these words, man of sin, and, son of perdition, do plainly prove,
that a succession of men (as the Popes are) cannot be this man of sin: for so
S. Peter also should be Antichrist, for he was Pope, and the very first of all
the Popes. Therefore Antichrist shall be a particular man.

Reuelat. 13.18. Let him that has understanding, count the number of a man.
Therefore the great Antichrist, that egregious Apostata, or notable Enemy of
Jesus Christ, shall be a particular man.

1. John 2.22. Who is a lier, but he that denies that Jesus is Christ? This is
Antichrist, which denies the Father, and the Son. But the Pope denies neither
of both: Therefore the Pope is not Antichrist.

Again, in 2. These. 2. before alleged v. 4. the Scripture says, that
Antichrist shall be extolled above all that is called God: and verse. 8. that
our Lord Jesus shall kill him with the spirit of his mouth, at his coming: But
none of all these agree to the Pope, no more then that our Lord Jesus is come
the second time.

John 5 43. I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not: If another
shall come in his own name, him ye will receive. He means specially the
wicked Antichrist: how then can the Pope be he, seeing the Jews receive him
not?

See more Dan. 7.7. and cap. 12.11. Revel. 13.17. and cap. 17.8.11. Luc. 13.14.
Mat. 24.25.

To follow our common Rule, the Fathers that affirm the same are, S. Chrysoft.
and S. Cyril, who do both thus understand this very place last alleged. S.
Amb. upon the 2. These. 2. Hierom. in ep. ad Algas. quaest. 11. S. Aug. 29.
tract. in loan. S. Irenaeus l. 5. cont. haeres. Valentin. Theodoret in his
epitome of the divine decrees, cap. de Antichristo.

XIV. That no man, nor any but God, can forgive, or retayme sins.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible John 20.21. As my Father
has sent me, even so send I you. Now Christ was sent by his Father, not only
to teach, preach, administer Sacraments, and to work miracles, but also to
forgive sins: But the Disciples were sent with power to teach, preach,
administer Sacraments, and to work miracles: Therefore also to forgive sins.

Ibid. v. 22.23. When he had said this, he breathed on them, and says unto
them: Receive ye the holy Ghost; whose soever sins ye remit, they are
remited unto them, and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.
Christ having first showed his own commission, which was to pardon sins,
presently gives his Apostles power to do the same, breathing upon them the
holy Ghost. He therefore that denies man to have this power, either denies,
that the Holy Ghost can forgive sins, or that Christ gave not his Disciples
the holy Ghost to this end and purpose: both which are clearly false and
against the Scripture.

Mat. 9.3.8. But when the multitude saw it, they marvelled, and glorified God,
which had given such power unto men, as to forgive sins. Which though they
knew to appertain to God only by nature, yet they perceived that it might be
done by man's ministry on earth, to the glory of God. Yea those who affirm God
only so to remit sins, that the ministerial power thereof cannot be
communicated to men; deny the one part of Christ's distinct, or double manner
of remitting of sins, to wit, only in heaven, and not in earth.

See more Mat. 16.19. and Mat. 18.1. Cor. 5.5.1. Tim. 1.20.2. Cor. 2.10.2. Cor.
5.19. Number. 5.6.

The ancient Fathers which affirm the same are, S. Aug. tract, 49. in Joan.
And in his book of fifty homilies hom. 9. S. Chrysostom. de sacerdotio l. 3. S.
Ambr. l. 3. de poenitentia. S. Cyril. l. 12. cap. 50. or 56. in Joan. says: It
is not absurd, that they should remit man's sins, who have in them the holy
Ghost. S. Basil. l. 5. cont Eunom. proves the holy Ghost to be God (which that
destable Heretic denied) because he forgiueth sins by the Apostles. S.
Irenaeus l. 5. cap. 13. S. Greg. hom. 6. in Euang.

XV. That we ought not to confess our sins, to any man, but to God only.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Mat. 3.5.6. Then went out
to him (to wit, to S. Io. Baptist) Jerusalem, and all Iudaea etc. and were
baptized of him in Iordane, confessing their sins. Not by acknowledging
themselves in general to be sinners, but every man to utter, and tell his
particular and secret sins. Therefore we may confess our sins, not only to
God, but also to man.

Acts 19 18.19. And many that believed came and confessed, and showed their
deeds (behold Confession.) Many also of them which used curious arts,
brought their books together, and burned them before all men: and they counted
the price of them, and found it five thousand pieces of silver (behold
Satisfaction.) Therefore we may confess our sins to man.

Number. 5.6. When a man, or woman shall commit any sin that men commit etc.
then they shall confess their sin, which they have done etc. And that this
is not understood to be confessed to God in heaven, but also to his Priest on
earth, the whole Chapter, from verse 12. unto the end, does clearly testify.
Add heerto, that he says not, they shall confess their sins (to wit, in
general) but their sin, to wit in particular.

See more Marc. 1.4. James. 5.16. Mat. 18.18. Mat. 17.14.

See the holy Fathers that affirm the same. S. Iraeneus l. 1. cap. 9. Tertull.
l. de poenitentia, where he reprehendeth some, who for human shamfastnes,
neglected to go to Confession. It is written of S. Ambrose, that he himself
sat to hear Confessions, Amb. ex Paulino. S. Clement S. Peter's successor,
speaks wonderful pithily to this purpose Epist. ad fratr. Dom. But of all
others Origin is most plain for this point l. 3. Periar. S. Chrysostom. l. 3. de
sacerd. and hom. 85. in Joan. S. Aug. cited as before. S. Amb. orat. in muliere
peccatrice says: Confess freely to the priest, the hidden secrets of thy
soul.

XVI. That Pardons, and Indulgences, were not in the Apostles times.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. 2. Cor. 2.10. To whom
ye forgive any thing, I forgive also: for if I forgave any thing to whom I
forgave it, for your sake forgave I it, in the person of Christ. The Corinthian
aforesaid, was excommunicated, and put to penance by the Apostle, as plainly
appears 1. Cor. 5.3. and here in 2. Cor. 2. cited above, he gives order for
his pardon. A plain proof of the Apostles power, there of binding, here of
loosing: there of punishing, here of pardoning. Therefore pardons were in use
in the Apostles times.

2. Cor. 2.6. Sufficient to such a man, is this punishment (or Censure) which
was inflicted of many. Whence it is clear, that it lies in the hands of the
spiritual Magistrates, to measure the time of such punishment, or penance
imposed.

See more Matt. 18.18. and Mat. 16.19.

As also the Fathers that affirm the same. Tertul. lib. ad Mart. cap. 1.5. S.
Cyp. lib. 3. ep. 15. and sermon. de lapsis. Council. Lateran. Can. 62. The decrees
of Innocentius 3. and 4. de paenitent. and remis. cap, Quod autem. S. Amb. l.
1. de poenit. cap. 2. the place begins; Dominus per ius. S. Aug. ep. 75. ad
Auxil. Episcop. The place begins, Spiritalis poena. S. Chrysostom. l. 3. de
sacerdot. the place begins: Si rex aliquis. Lastly, Pope Urban the 2.
granted a plenary Indulgence to such, as went unto the Holy War.

They Protestants hold. XVII. That the actions, and passions of the Saints, do
serve for nothing to the Church.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Colos. 1.24. I now
rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind (we read
wanting) of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which
is the Church. Hence has the ground been always taken, of Indulgences (but
much more principally, from the superaboundant merits of Jesus Christ.) There
the actions and passions of the Saints, do serve for something to the Church.

Philip. 2.30. Because for the work of Christ, he was nigh unto death, not
regarding his life, to supply your lack of service toward me.

Contrary also to an article of our Creed, I believe the Communion of Saints.
For to what purpose believe we this, if their actions and passions may not be
imparted to us, nor serve to any purpose to the Church?

See more Psalm. 119.63. (we 118.) 1. Cor. 12.12.2. Cor. 11.28. Psalm. 53. (we
52.) 9.2. Mac. 15.16. Mat 17.3. Luc. 9.30.31. Mat. 27.52. Apoc. 5.8. Genesis 26.5.
and 48.16, Exodus 32.13. Job. 5.1. Hier. 15.1. Isa. 37.35. Marc. 14.36. Luc.
8.44. Acts 5.15.

All these passages contain actions, or prayers of the Church triumphant, for
the militant or patient, or for both, I care not which they grant, and yet one
they must needs confess.

See the Fathers that affirm the same, S. Aug. lib. de cura pro mort. cap. 1.
The place begins; Etsinusquam. And again the same Saint in the same book,
the place begins; Prouisus sepeliendis. S. Maximus ser. de sanctis Octauio
and Aduentio, the place begins; Cuncti martyrs. S. Bid hist. Eccles.
Angliae. l. 3. cap. 19. the place begins: Furseus. S. Aug. in Psalm. 61. the
place begins: Vnus enim homo: as also S. Anselme upon the same Psalm.

XVIII. That no man can do works of Supererogation.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible Mat. 19.21. If thou will
be persect, go and sell that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall
have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me. Hence it plainly appears,
that man by the assistance of Gods grace, may do some things counseled, which
are of more perfection then the things commanded: and these we call, Works of
Supererogation.

1. Cor. 7.25. Now concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord, yet
I give my judgment (we read Counsel) as one that has obtained mercy of the
Lord to be faithful. And v. 38. He that gives her in marriage does well, but he
that gives her not in marriage, does better. To do that which is counseled is
not necessary, because one may nevertheless be saved: but he who omitteth what
is commanded (unless he do penance) cannot escape eternal pains.

Mat. 19.12. There be Eunuchs which have made themselves Eunuchs for the
kingdom of heaven: he that is able to receive it (we read take it) let him
receive it. But this cannot properly be said of precepts, as S. Aug. notes
upon this place, ser. 61. de temp. for of precepts it is not said, Keep them
who is able, but keep them absolutely.

See more Luc. 10.25.1. Cor. 7.1. Revel. 4.3. Acts 2.44. Acts 4.34.

And the holy Fathers affirm the same. S. Amb. l. de viduis. Origin in c. 15.
ad Romans Those things which we do over and above our duty. Eusebius. 1. Demonstrat.
cap. 8. S. Chrysostom. hom. 8. de act. poenit. Blame not our Lord, he commands
nothing impossible; yea many do more then they are commanded. S. Greg. Nissen.
15. Moral. cap. 5.

XIX. That by the fall of Adam, we have all lost our Freewill: and that it is
not in our own power to choose good, but only evil.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, 1. Cor. 37. He that
stands stedfaist in his heart, having no necessity, but has power over his
own will, and has so decreed in his heart that he will keep his virgin, does
well. But if a man have not freedom of will, as well to the one, as to the
other, why does the holy Ghost (Prou. 23.26.) require of us to give him our
heart, if we cannot consent but unto evil? Therefore it is in our power to
choose good, or evil.

John 1.11.12. He came unto his own, and his own received him not: but as
many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God. Words
which plainly imply a liberty of will. For when he says, some received him,
and some not, who sees not the liberty both of the one, and of the other: for
these would not receive him, and those would.

Deuteronomy. 30.19. I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore choose life,
that both thou, and thy seed may live. And rightly may we call heaven and
earth to witness against them, who commit the same fault touching Grace, which
the Turks do touching Nature. For the Turks believe that the fire burns not,
nor water wets not, but that God does it, by the fire and the water. And so our
Adversaries say, that a man desires no good, nor does no good, but only that
God does all by man: but this is false. Therefore etc.

Luc. 13.34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem etc. how often would I have gathered thy
children together, as a hen does gather her brood under her wings, and ye
would not. I would, (says Christ) and ye would not. What, for Gods sake, can
be spoken more plainly?

See more Luc. 10.42. Acts 5. 4. Ad Philem. v. 14.1. Cor. 7.37. and 9.1.14.2.
Cor. 9.7. Ose. 3.9. Number. 30.14. Joshua 14.13.2. Reg. 24.12.3. Reg. 3.5. Eccles.
15.15. Mat. 19.17. Iosue 24.15.2. Samuel 12. Pro. 11.24. Revel. 3.20. Isa.
1.19.20.

See the ancient Fathers. Eusebius. Caesar. de praep. l. 1. cap. 7. says, that
those who hold this opinion, do pervert, and overthrow Vniuersam vitam
humanam, all the whole life of man. And in very deed his reason is good, for
upon this consideration of man's Freewill, are grounded all political laws,
precepts and prohibitions, pains and rewards, which else were merely
superfluous, and against reason. S. Hilary l. 1. de Trinitate, says: He would
not, there should be a necessity for men to be the sons of God, but a power.
S. Aug. l. 1. ad. q. 4. says: To consent unto Gods vocation, lies in a man's
own will. So teaches S. Amb. in Luc. cap. 12. S. Chrysostom. hom. 19. in Genes.
S. Iraeneus l. 4. cap. 72. S. Cyril. lib. 4. in Joan. cap. 7. We cannot in any
wise deny freedom of will in man. And S. Aug. before recited says lib. 2. cap.
4. de act. cum Felice Manich. How should our Savior reward every one according
to their works, if there were no Freewill?

XX. That it is impossible to keep the Commandments of God, though assisted
with his grace, and the holy Ghost.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Philip. 4.13. I can do al
things, through Christ which strengthens me. Therefore it is impossible to
keep the Commandments, or else it is false, that he could do all things.

Luc. 1.5.6. The Scripture speaking of Zachary and Elizabeth, says: And they
were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances
of the Lord, blameless. Yet they usually say, that none are so righteous as
that they can keep any of them: but these two were so righteous as they kept
all of them: now whether of these will thou believe, S. Luke, or our Reformers?

Luc. 11.27.28. Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou
have sucked. But he said; Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the word of
God, and keep it. Christ pronounces them blessed, who hear the word of God
and keep it: but the commandments are the word of God (which they affirm no
man can keep) therefore they affirm that no man can be blessed. And like unto
this is that of John 13.17. Matt. 12.50. John 14.23. with an infinite number of
such like places, in their own Bible: with all which this this new doctrine
does seem to dally, in plain terms.

Luc. 11.2. Thy will be done as in heaven, so in earth. In this petition,
either we demand a thing impossible; or else the Saints in Heaven fulfill not
the will of God in all things; or else it may be fulfilled also by us on earth
(one of the three:) But the two first are full of absurdities: therefore the
later is to be granted.

1. John. 5.3. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and
his commandments are not grievous. If the Commandments were impossible, they
could bind no man: for it is not to be conceived how one should sin in a
thing, which he could not possibly avoid. And Christ, saying to the young man
in the Gospel: If thou will enter into heauen' keep the Commandments, is as
much as if he had said; If thou will enter into heaven, take hold of the Moon
between thy teeth.

See more Ezech. 36.27. Mat. 11.30. and 19.17. Eccles. 15.15. Romans 13.8.10. and
7.3. Joshua 11.15. and 22.5. Psalm. 17.3. Deuteronomy. 30.11. 1. John 2.4. Job. 27.6.
and 1.22. Romans 2.27. Luc. 10.28. and 15.7. 3. Reg. 14.8. and 15.5. Ephesians. 1.4.
Galat. 5.14. Genesis 6.9.

See Origin. hom. 9. in Iosue. S. Cyril. l. 4. cont. Julian. S. Hilar. in Psalm.
118. S. Hier. l. 3. cont. Pelag. S. Basil, who says: It is an impious thing to
say, that the commandments of God are impossible.

The maintain. XXI. That faith only justifies, and that good Works are not
absolutely necessary to salvation.
COntrary to the expersse words of their own Bible 1. Cor. 13.2. And though I
have the gift of Prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and
although I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have no
charity, I am nothing. Therefore faith only does not justify: yea this plainly
proves, that faith is nothing to salvation, without good works.

James 2.24. Ye see therefore, how that by works a man is justified, and not
by faith only. Wherefore S. Aug. lib de fide and operibus ca. 14. writes that
this Heresy, was an old Heresy, even in the Apostles times. And in the preface
of his Comment, upon the 32. Psalm. he warns all men, that this deduction
upon this speech of S. Paul Abraham was iustifyd by faith, therefore works be
not necessary to salvation, is the right way to hell and damnation. See the
Rhemes Testament upon this place.

Iac. 2.14. What does it profit my brethren, though a man say, he has faith,
and have not works? Can faith save him? This proposition (but especially the
former) is directly opposite to that which our Adversaries hold. Neither can
they pretend that there is the like opposition or contradiction, betwixt S.
James speeches and S. Paul: for though S. Paul say, Man is justified by faith,
yet he never says, by faith alone.

Gal. 5.6. For in Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but faith which works by love. Note well this place; for if
our Adversaries (who pretend conference of places, to be the only Rule to
explicate the hard passages of holy Scripture) had followed but this their own
Rule, this one text would have cleared unto them al other, wherein Justice and
Salvation might seem to be attributed to Faith alone.

See more Mat. 7.21.22. Mat. 5.21. Mat. 19.17. and 11.16. Mat. 12.33. Mat.
16.16. Gal. 3.12. 1, Tim. 5.8. 1. Joan. 2.4. 1. Joan. 3.22. Romans 3.31. Philip.
2.12.

The Fathers that affirm this are, Origin in 5. Romans S. Hilar. cap. 7. in
Matt. And S. Ambr. in 4. ad Heb. says: Faith alone suffices not. S. Aug. de
fide and operibus cap. 15. says: I see not, why Christ should say, If thou will have life everlasting keep the commandments, if without observing of
them, by only faith, one might be saved.

XXII. That no good Works an meritorious.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Matt. 16.27. For the Son
of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his Angels, and then he
shall reward every man according to his works. He says not that he shall
reward every man according to his mercy, or their faith, but according to their
works. So S. August. de verbis Apost. sermon. 35. does interpret.

Matt. 5.12. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. The word
Reward, in latin and greek, signifies wages, and hyre due for works, and so
presupposes a meritorious deed, as the Rhemish Testament notes upon this
place.

Again Matt. 10.42. Whosoever shall give to drink, a cup of cold water only,
in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise loose his
reward. Therefore good works are meritorious.

1. Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good, or had. Words most clear, that heaven is as well the
reward of good works, as Hell the stipend of evil works; howsoever the
enemies of all good life and works do teach the contrary.

See more 1. Cor. 9.17. and 18. 25. Heb. 11.26. Psalm. 18.20. 1. Cor. 4.5. and
3.8.2. Esdras 15.19. Apoc. 22.12. Apoc. 16.6. Apoc. 3. 4. and 22.12. Romans 2.6.
Eccles. 12. 2. Colos. 3.23. Luc. 16.9. and 6.38. Genesis 15. 1. Ierem. 31.16. Sap.
5.16. 1. Tim. 4.8. 2. These. 1. Romans 11.21.

The holy Fathers affirm the same. S. Amb. de apolog. David ca. 6. S. Hier. l.
3. cont. Pelag. S. Aug. de spiritu and lit. cap. vlt. and others.

XXIII. That Faith once had, cannot possibly be lost.
COntrary to express words of their own Bible, Luc. 8.13. They on the rock,
are they, which when they hear, receive the word with joy, which for a while
believe, and in time of tentation fall away. Therefore faith once had, may
afterward be lost.

1. Tim. 1.18.19. This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy, according to
the prophesies which went before on thee, that thou by them, might war a
good warfare, holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put away,
concerning faith, have made shipwreck. Both which places do plainly reprove
this false doctrine, That no man can fall from the faith, which he once truly
had.

2. Tim. 2.16. etc. Shun profane and vain bablinges for they will increase
unto more ungodliness. And their word will eat as does a canker, of whom is
Hymeneus, and Philetus, who concerning be truth have erred, saying that the
resurrection is past already, and overthrow the faith of some. If faith once
had could not be lost, this saying of the Apostle should be false.

See more 1. Tim. 6.20. Reuelat. 2.5. Luc. 19.24. Mat. 25.8. etc. Romans 11.20.

The Fathers affirm the same frequently, and among the rest S. Aug. de gratia
and lib. arbit. de correp. and gratia, and ad articulos falso impositos.
Council. Trid. sess. 6. cap. 9.12.13. and others.

They maintain. XXIV. That God by his will, and inevitable decree, has
ordained from all eternity, who shall be damned and who saved.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible 1. Tim. 2. 3.4. God our
Savior, who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth meaning, by his conditional will, that is to say, if men will
themselves, by accepting, doing, or having done all things requisite by Gods
law: for God uses not his absolute will, or power toward us in this case:
therefore, he has not willed, and incuitably decreed any at all to be damned,
as our Adversaries hold.

2. Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise etc. not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. Therefore he is
far off, from ever making any such decree as our Adversaries would persuade us.

Wisdom 1.13. For God made not death, neither has he pleasure in the
destruction of the living. The reasons which conclude this truth are manifest:
for we must assure nothing of those things, which depend upon the only will of
God, without clear and evident revelation. But predestination is such.
Therefore etc.

See more Ose 13.9. Ezech. 18. 32. Wis. 11.24. Joan. 3.16. Romans 11.20.32. Prou.
20.9. and 28.14. Phil. 2.12. 1. Cor. 4.4. and 9.27. and 10.12. Eccles. 5.5.
Job. 9 21. Joel 2.14. Jonas 3.9. Acts 8.20. Ierem. 17.9. 2. Joan. 1.8.

See the Fathers that affirm the same: in particular S. Aug. l. 1. Ciuit.
Tertul. orat. ca. 8. S. Cypr. l. 4. epist. 2. And S. Amb. lib. 2. de Cain and
Abel, will not, that we refer unto God, the preuarication of Adam, or the
treason of Judas, though he knew the sin before it was committed.

Moreover they hold. XXV. That every one ought infallibly to assure himself
of his Salvation, and to believe, that he is of the number of the Predestinate.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. 1. Cor. 9.27. I keep
under my body, and bring it into subjection, least that by any means when I
have preached to others, I my self should be a castaway. A man would think,
that S. Paul might be as sure, and as confident of Gods grace and salvation, as
any one of our Protestants be; and yet you see he durst not adhere unto their
presumptuous, and unhappy security.

Romans 11.20.21. Thou stand by faith, be not high-minded, but fear, for if
God spared not the natural branches, take heed least he also spare not thee.
Behold therefore the goodness, and severity of God: on them which fell,
severity; but toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his goodness, otherwise
thou also shall be cut off.

And Philip. 1.12. Work out your own salvation, with fear and trembling.
Most plain and forcible places, against the vain security of salvation.

See more, Pro. 28.14. Eccles. 9. 1.2.2. Tim. 2.15.2. Pet. 1.10. Tob. 12.2.13.
Pro. 20.9. Eccles. 5.5. Job. 9.20. Psalm. 18.13. 1. Cor. 4. 4. Deuteronomy. 4.29.2.
Cor. 10.18.1. Pet. 1.17.

See S. Amb. ser. 5. in Psalm. 118. S. Basil in constit. monast. cap. 2. S.
Hieron. l. 2. aduers. Pelagianos, and l. 3. in Ierem. cap. 13. S. Chrysostom.
hom. 87. in Joan. And S. Aug. in Psalm. 40. says: I know full well that the
Justice of my God remains; Whether my own justice remain or no, I know not;
for the Apostle terrifieth me saying: He that thinks himself to stand, let
him take heed least he fall. S. Bern. ser. 3. de Aduent. and sermon. 1. de
septuages. says: Who can say, I am one of the Elect etc.

XXVI. That every man has not an Angel Guardian, or Keeper.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Matt. 18. 10. Take heed
that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, that in
heaven, their Angels do always behold the face of my Father, which is in
heaven. Therefore they have their Angell-keeper. A thing so plain, that John
Calvin durst not deny it, although he would (forsooth) needs doubt of it. lib.
1. Inst. cap. 14. sect. 7.

Psalm. 91. (we 90.) 11.12. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep
thee in all thy ways: they shall bear thee up in their hands, least thou
dash thy foot against a stone. This very passage S. Cyrill. of Alexandria lib.
4. cont. Julian. applies to our Angell-keeper.

Acts 12.13. etc. S. Peter knocking at the door, they said; It is his Angel.
Lo, how apparently the faith of the primitive Church appears, concerning
this point.

See more, 1. Cor. 11.10. Zachary 3.10. Luc. 15.10. Luc. 16. 22. Tob. 5.15.20.
Tob. 12.12. Tob. 5.27. Exodus 23.23. Iosue 5.13. Numb. 22.22.31. Genesis 24. 40.
Dan. 6.22.

See S. Greg. dial. l. 4. cap. 58. S. Athanas. de communi Essentia. S.
Chrysostom. hom. 3. in ep. ad Colos. lib. 6. de sacerd. Greg. Turonens. lib. de
gloria mart. S. Aug. ep. ad Probam cap. 9. and epist. 69. ad fratres in eremo.
lib. 11. cap. 31. ciuit. S. Hierom. upon these words; Their Angels etc. Matt.
18.10. teaches; That it is a great dignity, and marvelous benefit, that every
one has from his nativity, an Angel for his custody and patronage.

XXVII. That the holy Angels pray not for us, nor know our thoughts, and
desires on earth.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Zachary 1.9.10.11.12.
Then the Angel of the Lord answered and said: O Lord of Hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against which
thou have had indignation these threescore, and ten years. And what, I pray
you, is a prayer, if this be not? Therefore the holy Angels pray for us.

Tob. 12.12. Now therefore, when thou did pray, and Sara thy daugter-in-law, I
did bring the remembrance of your prayers, before the holy One. He who pleases
to read the whole Chapter, shall clearly see the manifold benefits besides this
one, which men receive at the hands of Angels; for which see the annotations of
the Catholic Bible upon this place.

Reuelat. 8.4. And the smoke of the incense of the prayers of the Saints,
ascended from the hand of the Angel before God. What can be possibly spoken
more plain, to prove that Angels offer up prayers before God? yea this very
place is so understood by S. Irenaeus l. 4. cap. 34. toward the end.

See more. Genesis 19.18. and 20. Dan. 8.15. Dan. 9.20. Act. 5.19.

See also S. Hilary in Psalm. 129. who says: The intercession of Angels Gods
nature needs not, but our infirmity does. S. Amb. lib. de viduis. Victor
Vtic. lib. 3. de persecut. Vandal.

XXVIII. That we may not pray to them.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Genesis 48.16. The Angel
which redeemed me (we read, delivered me) from all evil, bless these laddes
etc. Here some perhaps will say, that this was God, and not an Angel. This is
but a sorry shift, for God had not then redeemed man, but long afrer. Yea this
very passage is applied by S. Chrysostom. to our Angel Guardian hom. 3. upon the
1. to the Colos. And by S. Hierome upon the 66. of Isa. Also S. Basil l. 3.
cont. Eunom. affirms, that this was spoken of a true Angel, and not of God:
which being so, who can with reason say, he prayed not unto him?

Tobie 5.16. And when his son had prepared all things for the journey, his
father said: Go thou with this man, and God which dwells in heaven, prosper
your journey, and the Angel of God keep you company. Lo, both God is here
prayed unto, and his Angel also at the same instant, saying: God prosper you
in your journey, and the Angel of God keep you company.

Osee 12.4. Yea, he had power over the Angel, and prevailed; he wept, and made
supplication unto him. Lo, what is plain, if this be not, for proof of
prayer to the blessed Angels?

But some perhaps will say; I could be persuaded to pray to Angels, if I could
assure my self that they could hear me, and knew what passes here on earth.
To this I answer likewise out of their own Bible, Luc. 15.10. There is joy in
the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repents. Now what
more plain then that the Angels in Heaven know what we do on earth; which if
they did not, how could they rejoice at the conversion of a sinner? Therefore
we may pray lawfully unto them.

See more, Osee 12.4. Song of the three Children verse. 36. Psalm. 148. Number.
22.34. Genesis 19.18. and 20. Psalm. 148.2.

S. Augustine expounding those words of Job. 19.21. Have pity upon me, have
pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the hand of God has touched me, says
expressly, that holy Job addressed them to the Angels. As also those other of
Job. 5.1. Call now, if there be any that will answer thee etc. the same S.
Aug. expounds of praying to Angels, in his Annot. upon Job.

XXIX. That the Angels cannot help us.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Dan. 10.13. Michael one
of the chief Princes came to help me. Which is further verified Revel.
12.7.10. where the self same Angel, with his fellow-Angells, fought a battle
with the Dragon, and with his Angels. Therefore they can help us.

Ibid. verse 21. And there is none that holds with me in these things, but
Michael your Prince. Therefore the Angels can help us.

Acts 12. from verse 7. to verse 12. Now I know of a surety, that the Lord has
sent his Angel, and has delivered me.

See more Mat. 2.13. Mat. 4.6. Psalm. 91. (we 90.) 11.12. Act. 5.19. Act. 27.23.
Psalm. 104. (we 103.) 4. Heb. 1.7. Luc. 16.22. Genesis 19.10.15.16. Genesis 21.17.
Isa. 63.9.

The ancient Fathers affirm the same. S. Justin. Apol. 2. S. Amb. l. de vid.
Vict. Vticens. l. 3. de persec. Vand. And S. Aug. de Ciuit. l. 12. cap. 31.
says: The holy Angels do help us without all difficulty, because with their
spiritual motions (pure and free) they labor or travel not. Again in Psalm.
62. he says; The Angels wait upon us Pilgrims, and by the commandment of
God, do help us: the place begins; Attendunt nos peregrinos.

XXX. That no Saint deceased, has afterward appeared to any upon earth.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Mat. 17.3. And behold
there appeared unto them Moses, and Elias talking with them. Therefore Saints
deceased, have afterward appeared to some on earth.

Matt. 27.52. And the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which
slept, arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into
the holy City, and appeared unto many etc.

2. Mac. 15.12. Onias the High Priest after he was dead, appeared to Judas
Machabaeus alive. The like did Samuel unto Saul. What shall we say then to
those, that will deny a truth to clear? For some such my self have met
withal.

See more Luc. Luc. 16.27.28. Joan. 11.44. Luc. 7.15 and 23. Mat. 9.25. Marc.
5.42.

See S. Bid l. 5. cap. 13. hist. of England. S. Gregory in his book of
Morals, in sundry places.

XXXI. That the Saints deceased, know not what passes here on earth.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Luc. 16. 29. Where Abraham
knew that there were Moses and the Prophets Books here on earth, which he
himself had never seen when he was alive, as S. Aug. witnesses lib. de cura
pro mortuis cap. 14. Therefore the Saints deceased, know what passes here on
earth.

John 5.45. Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father, there is one
that accuses you, even Moses in whom we trust. But, how could Moses (dead
two thousand years before) accuse those that were then living, if the Saints
deceased, know not what passes here on earth?

Like unto this, is that Revel. 12.10. And I heard a loud voice saying in
heaven etc. The accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accuses them
before our God, day and night. Now she devils cannot accuse men day and night
before God, but they must first know whereof: who then will for shame deny that
unto Saints and Angels, which must needs be granted to the very devil?

2. Kings 6.12. (we 4. Kings) O King, Elisha the Prophet that is in Israel,
tells the King the of Israel words that thou speak in thy bedchamber.
Hence I thus argue: If the light of Prophecy could extend it self so far, as
to make known, see, and understand things so secret, yea even to inward
thoughts: who can with reason deny, that the light of glory can do the same in
the souls of the blessed?

The like is proved out of many other places of holy Scripture as 2. Reg. 5.26.
where the Prophet Elizeus being a far of, saw all that passed betwixt Naaman,
and Giesi his servant. S. Paul was rapt into the third Heaven, and saw that
which was not to be told to man 1. Cor. 12. S. Stephen saw from earth, Christ
sitting at the right hand of his Father, Act. 7. The Rich-glutton saw from hell
to heaven (as Protestants confess;) how then say they, that the Saints cannot
know, or see from heaven to earth?

And without some reciprocal knowledge, there could be no communion at all,
between the Saints in Heaven, and the faithful on earth (the which is an
article of our creed;) which notwithstanding the continual passage of souls
thither, does convince.

See more Matt. 19.28. Revel. 2.26. Luc. 22.30. Acts. 5.3.1. Kings 28.14.
Eccles. 4.6.23.

See Eusebius sermon. de Annunt. S. Hier.in epitaph. Paulae. S. Maximus sermon. de
S. Agnete.

XXXII. That the Saints pray not for us.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Reuelat. 5.8. The four
and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them harpes,
and golden vialls, full of odours, which are the prayers of Saints. Lo, how
among so many divine and unsearchable mysteries set down in holy Writ without
exposition, it pleased God, that the Apostle himself should clearly open this
point unto us, saying: which (odours) are the prayers of Saints, that so our
Adversaries may have no excuse of their error. Therefore the Saints pray for us.

2. Machab. 15.14 Then Onias answered saying: This is a lover of the brethren,
who prays much for the people, and for the holy City, to wit, Ieremias the
Prophet of God. Ancient Origin hom. 18. in Joan. says: It appears that
Saints departed from this life have care of the people, as it is written in the
acts of the Machabees, many years after the death of Jeremy.

Ierem. 15.1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not
be toward this people. Hence S. Hierom. in his Commentaries, and S. Greg. lib.
9. of his Moralls cap. 12. do gather, that Moses and Samuel after their death,
both could, and did sometimes, pray for the same people: for otherwise it
should be absurd to say: Though Moses and Samuel stood before me etc.

Baruch. 3.4. O Lord almighty, thou God of Israel, hear now the prayers of the
dead Israelites (we read) of the dead of Israel.) And Theodoret paraphrasing
upon the Prophet Baruch, interprets this place as Catholics do. Therefore
the dead of Israel, prayed for the living.

Revel. 2.26.27. And he that overcomes and keeps my works unto the end, to
him will I give power over the nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of
iron. Since Jesus Christ therefore imparteth his power unto them upon nations,
therefore they may with Jesus Christ, pray for those over whom they are thus
established. So S. Augustine expounds the same, writing upon the 2. Psalm.

We read also in the 16. of S. Luc. that the Rich-glutton in hell, prayed for
his brethren that were on earth. If therefore the Saints in heaven pray not for
us their brethren on earth, then we may say that greater is the Charity of the
damned, then of the saved. But this were too absurd to say. A conclusion which
S. Aug. draws from this very place.

See S Aug. sermon. 15. de verbis Apost. S. Hilar. in Psalm. 129. S. Damascen
lib. 4. de fide cap. 16. with many others.

XXXIII. That we ought not to beseech God to grant our prayers in favor of
the Saints, or their Merits: nor do we receive any benefit thereby.
TWo ways there are of praying, by the mediation of the blessed Saints. The
one, by beseeching God to grant our desires in favor of them, and their
merits. The other, by expressly praying them, to intercede, and pray to God for
us. Both being impugned by our Reformers, we will prove them our of their own
Bible.

The proof of the first is contrary to the express words of their own text,
Exodus 32.13. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy servants, to whom thou
swarest by thine own self, and said unto them: I will multiply your seed,
as the stars of heaven etc. And our Lord repented (we read, was pacified) of
the evil, which he thought to do unto his people. Lo, how plainly Moses
prayed to God, by the meditation of the holy Patriarchs. A form of prayer so
pleasing to him, as having said a little before, that for their sin of
Idolatry, he would consume them, the memory of his holy Servants being but laid
before him, he presently pardoned them. Therefore we may beseech God to grant us
our prayers in favor of them. Theod. quaest. 67. in Exodus writes that Moses
not thinking himself sufficient, to appease God by himself, added the
intercession of the holy Patriarchs. And the like does S. Aug. quaest. 149. in
Exodus

2. Chron. 6.16. Now therefore, O Lord my God of Israel, keep with thy servant
David, that which thou have promised him. And Psalm. 132. (we 131.) Lord
remember David, and all his afflictions. Lo again the faith of the ancient
Church of God, before the coming of Jesus Christ, and how seruent they were in
this devotion, still alleging the memories and merits of their Saints
deceased, thereby to move Gods mercy toward them. So prayed Solomon 2. Chron.
1.9. So prayed Isay 63.17. So prayed Hester 13.14. So prayed David 1. Chron.
29.18. naming Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, for his intercessors. Who ever heard a
Protestant to say; Lord remember thine own mother, and all her afflictions; or
Peter and Paul and their persecutions? Nay they desire the Papists to hold
them blameles for fear (forsooth) least they should blaspheme.

Exodus 20.5. I the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
fathers, upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandments. Here again God threatens to punish the demerits of wicked men
deceased, unto the fourth generation of their children alive: and to reward the
merits of good men deceased, unto the thousand generation of their children
alive. Therefore, we at this very day, receive benefits by means of our godly
Ancestors, deceased a thousand generations ago. Thus much for the proof of
the first point, and now to pass unto the second.

XXXIV. That we ought not expressly to pray them, to pray, or intercede to God
for us.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Luc. 16.24. Father
Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his
fingar in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame. Lo,
two Saints are prayed unto, and besought, in one verse; and yet our Reformers
usually bid us show them so much as one place in all the Bible for proof
hereof. Where then, for Gods sake, are their eyes?

But they will reply, and say that this is a parable and not a Prayer: which we
deny, offering to be tried by the voice often renowned and Ancient Fathers, all
affirming this to be a true history, and not a Parable, as Theophilact.
Tertullian, Clemens Alex. S. Chrysostom, S. Irenaeus, S. Ambrose, S.
Augustine, S. Gregory, Euthymius, and our own Contreyman Venerable Bede.

But grant it to be a Parable, what does this make, either for them, or against
us? For every Parable is either true in it self, and in the persons named, or
at least is, or may be true in some other; or else it were a flat lie, or at
least a fiction or fable, which I presume they will never deny.

Whereupon I thus conclude, as S. Aug. did a little before upon the self same
history: If the rich Glutton in Hell, prayed to Abraham who (as our Reformers
say) was in heaven; why may not we, who are in earth pray to them who are in
heaven?

Job 5.1. Call now, if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the
Saints will thou turn? (we read, and turn to some of the Saints.) Now if it
had not been the custom in the time of Job, to invoke the holy Saints, it
had been frivolous for Eliphas, to have asked Job, to which of the Saints he
would turn him. Whereto I add, that S. August. expounds this very place in
his annotations upon Job, in the same sense that Catholics do; yea and long
before him the seauenty Interpreters.

See more 2. Pet. 1.15. Dan. 3. 28. Hester 13.14. 1. Chron. 29.18. Luc. 16.9.
and 15.10.

The Fathers that affirm the same are, S. Dionysius cap. 7. Eccles. Hier. S.
Athanasius sermon. de Annunt. S. Basil. orat. in 40. Mart. S. Chrysostom. hom. 66.
ad popul. Finally S. Hierome prayed to S. Paula, in Epitaph. S. Paulae. S.
Maximus to S. Agnes, sermon. de S. Agnete. S. Bernard to our B. Lady, and the
like.

XXXV. That the Bones or Reliks of Saints, are not to be kept or reserved, no
virtue proceeding from them, after they be once dead.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. 2. Kings (we 4.) 13.22.
where it is written, that the Bones of Eliseus, being touched by one that was
dead, they did revive him. But this could not be, had not some virtue proceeded
from them.

Acts 5.14.15. And belieuers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both
of men and women: in so much that they brought forth the sick into the
streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at the least the shadow of
Peter passing by, might ouershadow some of them. It follows in ours (and that
they all might be delivered from their infirmities) which is quite left out in
the later English Bibles, though those set forth in the beginning of Q.
Elizabeth's raygne have it as ours, in particular, that of anno 1560. Whereupon
S. Aug. ser. 39. de Sanctis says: If the shadow of S. Peter's body could help
then, how much more now the fulness of his power? Wherein he supposes two
things. The one; that the shadow of his body being here on earth, did both
help and heal infirmities (which the late English Bibles all leave out, as I
said, and I know no reason for it.) The other; that being in heaven, he can
still help us, by his power.

Act. 19.11.12. And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul, so
that, from his body were brought unto the sick, hand-kerchers, or approns, and
the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them. S.
Chrysostom tom. 5. cont. Gentiles, Quod Christus sit Deus, in a whole book
proves hereby, and by the like virtue of other Saints, and their Relics,
that Christ their Lord and Master is God, whose servants shadows, and
napkins, could do such wonders.

See more Exodus 13.19.2. Reg. 2.8.14. John 1.27. where S. John had a reverend
esteem of the very latchet of our Saviors sho, as of a Relic, which he was
not worthy to unbuckle, or touch with his hand: And the woman with the bloody
flux, of the hemme of his holy garment.

See the ancient Fathers that affirm the same. Eusebius. lib. 7. hist. cap. 15.
S. Athanasius in vita S. Antonij. S. Basil in Psalm. 115. S. Chrysostom. sermon. de
sanctis Iuuentio and Maximo. And S. Ambrose says: But if you ask me, what I
honor in flesh dissolved? I honor in the martyrs flesh his wounds received
for Christ's name: And, I honor his ashes, made holy by the confession of
Christ.

XXXVI. That creatures cannot be sanctified, or made more holy then they are
already of their own nature.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. 1. Tim. 4.4. For every
creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with
thanks giving, for it is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. Yea it was
a common use in the primitive Church, to bring Bread to the priests to be
hallowed, Author oper. imp. hom. 14. in Mat. and being blessed, to se^d it for
sacred presents from one Christian to another, as S. Aug. witnesses, ep. 31
34.35.36.

Mat. 23.17. Ye fools and blind, whether is greater, the gold, or the temple
that sanctifies the gold?

Mat. 23.19 Ye fools and blind, whether is greater, the gift, or the Altar
that sanctifies the gift? Lo how plainly our Lord affirms in both these
places, that the Temple sanctifies the Gold, and Altar the Gift: and generally
all creatures, severed from common and profane use, to religion and worship of
God, are thereby made sacred and holy. Are not they therefore much to be blamed,
who keep such a scoffing at holy water, holy ashes, and the like?

See more 2. Reg. 2. (we 4.2.) where the Prophet Eliseus applied salt, to the
healing, and purifying of the waters. Toby 6.8. where the Angel Raphaell used
the liver of a fish, to drive away the devil. 1. Samuel (we 1. Kings) 16.
where David's Harp and Psalmody, kept the evil spirit away from Saul.

See S. Greg. l. 1. dial. cap. 4. S. Aug. lib. 18. de ciuit. Dei. S. Hierom. in
the life of Hilarion, post medium. S. Bid lib. 1. cap. 30. hist. Anglic.

XXXVII. That children may be saved by their Parents faith, without the
Sacrament of holy Baptism.
COntrary to the express words both of truth it self, and also of their own
Bible. John 3. 5. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be borne of
water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Therefore
they cannot be saved without Baptism.

Titus 3.5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to
his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy
Ghost.

Marc. 16.16. He that belieueth, and is baptized, shall be saved: but he that
belieueth not, shall be damned. Seeing infants therefore cannot believe, they
must at the least be baptized, or else they cannot be saved.

Here they will object against us, that of S. Paul 1. Cor. 7.14. That the
children of the faithful are sanctified. But if they understand by their
sanctification, that they are borne without sins, they do directly oppugn S.
Paul, who affirms (Ephesians. 1.) that we are all borne the sons of wrath. Yea
S. Paul in the self same place says, the unbelieving woman, is sanctified by
the believing man: and yet I hope they will not say, that she obtaines thereby,
the full remission of her sins.

Genesis 17.14. The uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people. But Circumcision, was
not more necessary to the Israelites, then Baptism to the Christians.
Therefore etc.

See S. Aug. lib. 1. de peccat. merit. and remiss. cap. 30. and epist. 90.92.
S. Leo. epist. 80. ad Episcop. Campaniae. S. Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 19 S. Cyp.
lib. 3. ep. 8. ad Fidum.

XXXVIII. That the Sacrament of Confirmation, is not necessary, nor to be used.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Acts 8.14. Peter and John
prayed for them, that they might receive the holy Ghost (for as yet he was
fallen upon none of them, only they were baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus.) Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the holy Ghost.
Lo the holy Ghost is given in Confirmation, which was not given in Baptism:
how then is it not necessary, nor to be used?

Heb. 6.1. Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us
go on unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from
dead works, and of faith toward God, of the doctrine of Baptism, and of
laying on of hands. Lo, Confirmation is here called, one of the Principles of
the doctrine of Christ, and a foundation of repentance: How then not necessary,
nor to be used?

See the Fathers that affirm the same. Tertul. lib. de Resur. carnis. S.
Pacianus lib. de Baptismo. S. Ambr. lib. de Sacram. S. Hierom. contra Lucifer.
And lastly S. Cypr. lib. 2. epist 1. speaking both of Baptism and
Confirmation, says: Then they may be sanctified, and be the sons of God, if
they be borne in both Sacraments.

XXXIX. That the bread of the supper of our Lord, was but a figure or
remembrance of the body of Christ received by faith, and not his true, and very
body.
COntrary both to the express words, and truth of their own Bible. Luc.
22.15. With desire I have desired to eat this pass-ouer with you before I
suffer. Now to refer these words, to a figurative eating only by faith, were
most absurd: for we cannot say that Jesus Christ could receive or eat himself
in this sense, since all Divinity forbids us to admit faith in the Son of God:
Therefore, that Pasche which he so greatly desired to eat with his Disciples
before he suffered, was the Pasche of his own true body.

Luc 22.16. For I say unto you, I will not any more drink of the fruit of the
vine, until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God. Words of wonderful
force, and which cannot be understood figuratively, no more then the former; it
being a thing as clear as the Sun, that of material bread and drink, there
is no use at all above in heaven.

John. 6.51. I am the living bread, which came down from heaven; if any man
eat of this bread, he shall live for ever And the bread that I will give, is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. Beza is very angry, when we
ask him, If the bread that came down from heaven, be living, or life-giuing
bread? He willingly grants us the later, but cannot endure to hear tell of
the former, and therefore translateth life-giuing, instead of living. But this
is absurd, or the Sun is life-giuing but is not living: and being granted to
be living, what else is it then his body?

And note withal, that thus our Lord spoke of this blessed bread before he
gave it.

Mat. 26.26. Take, eat, this is my body. And Luc. 22.19. This is my body which
is giuin for you. What I pray can be spoken more plain? Notwithstanding, they
will needs mantaine and affirm, that what he gave, and they received, was
nothing else but bare bread.

Note also, that our Lord spoke this at the very giving thereof. 1. Cor. 10.16.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? And 1. Cor. 11. he adds: He that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body. Lo
how both before our Lord gave it, at the very giving of it, and his Apostles
and disciples after he had given it unto them, and they to others, all of them
call it our Lords Body.

Finally, against their true and real receiving of Christ by faith, I say:
Either the soul ascends to heaven, there to feed on Christ by faith (which
Calvin confesses:) or else Christ descends to earth to feed the same. Not the
first, for so the unglorified soul of man, should be in two places at once,
which yet they deny even to the glorified body of Jesus Christ. Not the second,
for so Christ should be in two places at once, whom yet they say, that the
Heavens must contain till the day of judgment, Acts 3.

See Fathers that affirm the same. S. Ignat. in ep. ad Smyr. S. Justin Apol.
2. ad Antoninum. S. Cyprian sermon. 4. de lapsis. S. Amb. lib, 4. de Sacram.
says: It is bread before the words of the Sacrament, but after etc. of bread
it is made the flesh of Christ. S. Remigius says: The flesh which the Word of
God took in the Virgins womb, and the bread consecrated in the Church, are
one body.

XL. That we ought to receive under both kinds: and that one alone suffices
not.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, John 6.51. If any man
eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, and the bread which I will give, is
my flesh. Lo, everlasting life is attributed by our Lord himself, to the
eating only under ohe kind. Therefore one alone does suffice.

Luc. 24.30.8.35. Christ at Emaus, communicated his two Disciples under one
kind. Both S. Augustine and Theophilact expound this place of the B. Sacrament
lib. de consens. euang. cap. 35. S. Chrysostom. hom. 17. operis imperfecti. S.
Thomas of Aquin, and many others.

But they will allege to the contrary that of S. John, Unless you eat the
flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you.
The answer hereto, is very easy; which is, that the conjunction and, is there
taken disiunctiuely instead of or, as is learnedly observed by Doctor Kellison,
in his Reply to M. Sutclisse page 189. Again, Christ in those words, teaches
us the precept, and not the manner of the precept; that is to say, he
commands us to receive his body and his blood, without determining, whether
under one kind or under both, as the Council of Trent declares. For he that
said; Unless you eat the flesp of the Son of man, and drink his blood you
shall not have life in you, has also said; If any one eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever. And he that said; He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, has life everlasting, has also said; The bread which I will give, is
my flesh for the life of the world. He that said; Who so eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him, has likewise said; He that
eats this bread, shall live forever. Therefore one alone does suffice.

See more Act. 2.42.

XLI. That there is not in the Church, a true and proper Sacrifice: and that
the Mass is not this Sacrifice.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Malachy 1.11. From the
rising of the sun, even to the going down of the same, my Name shall be
great among the Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be offered to my
Name, and a pure offering. But this Sacrifice, or pure Offering cannot be
understood of Christ upon the Cross (as they would have it) which was offered
only once, and in once place, and then also not among the Gentiles, nor yet can
be ever iterated: therefore neither is, nor can be other, then the daily
Sacrifice of the Mass.

Psalm. 110. (we 109.) 4. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent: Thou art a
Priest forever, after the order of Melchisedech. But Melchisedechs Sacrifice
was made in bread and wine: therefote it must either be granted, that our
Savior does now sacrifice (yea and ever shall) in bread and wine above in
Heaven (which were absurd to say:) or else, that this is meant of the Sacrifice
of the Mass, whereon the Eternity of his Priesthood does depend on earth. Nor
can this be in a spiritual sort only, for that would not make him a Priest of
any certain order, as Melchisedech was.

Luc. 22.19. This is my body, which is given for you. Which words do plainly
prove, not only that Christ's body is truly present, but withal so present, as
that it is given, offered, or sacrificed for us. For Christ says not, which is
given to you, broken to you, or shed to you, but, for you; Which clearly
shows it to be a sacrifice: it being evident, that one would never say of the
Sacrament (in the quality of a Sacrament) that it is given for man, but to man:
that it to say, that a man receives it: and contrary wise of a Sacrifice, that
it is offered, not to man, but for man.

See more Heb. 7.15.16.17. Heb. 8.1.3. Heb. 9.11.

The Fathers that affirm the same are S. Clement Apost. constable. lib. 6. cap.
23. who calls it: A reasonable, vnblouly, and mystical Sacrifice. S. Aug. A
singular, or most excellent sacrifice. lib. 1. cont. aduers. leg. and prophet
cap. 18.19. S. Chrysostom. hom. in Psalm. 95. The mystical table, a pure and
unbloody host, a heavenly and most reverend Sacrifice. Isichius in Leuit. cap.
4. says; that Christ preventing his enemies, first sacrificed himself in his
mystical supper, and afterward on the Cross. S. Greg. Nissen. orat. 4. de
Resurrectione, proving that our Savior gave his body and blood in sacrifice
for us in his last supper, says excellently; That a man cannot eat the
sheep, unless the slaughter go before; and yet auerreth this to have been done
by Christ in his last supper.

XLII. That Sacrament all Unction, is not to be used to the sick.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. James 5.14. Is any sick
among you? Let him call for the Elders of the Churth, and let them pray over
him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith
shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed
sins, they shall be forgiven him. Hardly is there any Sacrament, whereof the
matter, the minister, and the effect, are more expressly specified in all the
Scripture, then of this. The form is the prayer, Let them pray over him. The
matter, the oil, Anointing him with oil. The minister, a Priest, or Elder of
the Church, Let him call for the Elders of the Church. The primary effect is,
the forgiveness of sins, and the secondary, the easing of the sick in body,
saying: And the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed sins, they
shall be forgiven him. Therefore Sacramental Unction, is to be used to the sick.

Marc. 6.13. And they anointed with oil, many that were sick, and healed
them. Where it is clear, that the Apostles themselves, put in practice this
holy vnctio^. Which Beza confesses in his Annotations; saying that it was a
Symbol of admirable and supernatural virtue. And had he not reason so to say?
For oil of it self, could not be naturally the Antidote of all diseases: and
albeit it were, yet the Apostles were not sent to practice physic, but to
preach the gospel; Yea it were a thing both ridiculous, and impious to make
them Triaclers, Druggers, or Paracelsians.

Marc. 16.18. They shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. But
first, our Reformers are no true Priests. Secondly, they lay not their hands
upon the sick. Thirdly, they anoint them not with oil in the name of the
Lord, as S. James wills. Let them say the truth then, and shame the devil,
are not they sick in their wits, who will oppose so plain Scriptures?

See the Fathers that affirm the same, Origin. hom. 2. in Leuit. S. Chrysostom.
lib. 3. de sacerd. S. Aug. in Speculo and sermon. 215. de temp. Venerable Bede in
6. Marc. and 5. Iac. with many others.

XLIII. That no interior Grace is given by imposition of hands, in holy
Orders. And that ordinary Vocation, and Mission of Pastors is not necessary in
the Church.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. 1. Tim. 4.14. Neglect not
the gift (we read grace) that is in thee, which was given thee by Prophesy,
with the laying on the hands of the Presbitery. Lo how plain it is that holy
Orders do give grace. Doctor Kellison handling this question touching the
mission of the Reformers, proves learnedly, (in his Reply page 7. and 44.)
that this foundation being disproued, the whole frame of their Church and
Religion falls: yea that they have neither true faith, nor worship of God;
and his reason is this: If faith depend of hearing, hearing of preaching,
preaching and administration of Sacraments of ministers and preachers, and
preachers and ministers of their mission, where there is no mission (as they
have none) there can be no true faith, nor lawful administration of
Sacraments, and consequently no Religion. Therefore vocation is necessary in the
Church.

1. Tim. 1.6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift
of God which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands. Lo how plain the holy
Scripture is against them. But they reply, that laying on of hands is not
needful to them who have already in them the spirit of God, and inward
anointing of the holy Ghost. To which very question Theodoret makes answer,
that God commanded Moses (Numb. 27.) to lay his hands upon Iosue, whereas by
the testimony of God himself Iosue had already in him the spirit of God. S.
Paul although he were called immediately from heaven, yet was afterward sent,
with laying on of hands. Acts 13.3.

Heb. 5.4. And no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called
of God, as was Aaron. Here our Adversaries reply again, that Aaron had no
external vocation. But this is easily solued, for Aaron was the first of his
Order, and therefore could not have his calling by succession, and whose case
is far unlike to our Reformers, unless they will confess also that they are
the first or their order, wherein they shall be easily believed.

See more Act. 13.2. Tim. 1.6.1. Tim. 5.22.2. Tim. 1.8. Nu^b. 27.23.

. See also the Fathers S. Aug. lib. 4. quaest super Number. S. Cypr. ep. ad
Magnum. Optat. Mileuit. the place begins: Ne quis miretur. Tertull. in
praescript. The place begins; Edant origines.

XLVI. That Priests, and other Religious persons who have vowed their chastity
to God, may freely marry, notwithstanding their vow.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Deuteronomy. 23.22. When thou
shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it; for the
Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and it would be sin in thee: but
if thou shall forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee. Out of which
words, two things are clearly proved. The one, that it is both lawful, and
laudable to make vows. The other, that Vows being once made, do bind, where
otherwise there was no oblagation before. Therefore such as have vowed Chastity,
may not, nor ought not afterward attempt to marry; which if they do, they
break their Vow.

1. Tim. 5.11.12. But the younger widows refuse, for when they have begun to
wax wanton against Christ, they will marry, having damnation, because they have
cast off their first faith. All the ancient Fathers that write upon this
place, expound these words of the Apostle, of the vow of Chastity, or of the
faith and promise made to Christ, to live continently; as is abundantly proved
in the Rhemes Testament upon this place.

1. Tim. 5.15. For some are already turned aside after Satan. Lo, to marry,
after the vow of chastity once made, is here termed by the Apostle himself,
turning aside after Satan. And herupon it is; that we call the Religious that
after marry (as Luther, Bucher, Peter Martyr, and the rest of that lascivious
rabble) Apostata's, Gods adulterers, incestuous, sacrilegious, and like.

See more Psalm. 66.16. Numb. 6.2.18. Iosue 21.26. Ierem. 35.18. Eccles. 5.3.
Act. 21.23.

See also the Fathers in confirmation heerof. S. Aug. lib. de bono viduit. cap.
9. S. Athanasius lib. de virginitat. S. Epiphanius haeref. 48. S. Hier. cont.
Iouin. lib. 1. cap. 7. What is it to break their first faith (says S. Aug?)
They vowed and performed not, in Psalm. 75. The place begins: Quid est primam
fidem etc.

XLV. That fasting, and abstinence from certain meats, is not grounded on
holy Scripture, nor causes any spiritual good.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Ierem. 35.5. And I set
before the sons of the house of the Rechabits, pots full of wine, and
wine-cups, and I said unto them, drink ye wine. But they said, we will drink
no wine, for Ionadab the son of Rechab our Father, commanded us saying; Ye
shall drink no wine, neither ye, nor your sons for ever. Thus have we
obeyed Ionadab our Father, in all that he has charged us. Therefore fasting is
grounded in holy scripture.

Luc. 1.15. For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink
neither wine, nor strong drink. Lo abstinence not only foretold, but also
prescribed by the Angel; which plainly proves that it was both a worthy thing
and also an act of Religion in S. John Baptist, as it was in the Nazarites, and
Rechabits aforementioned.

Acts 13.3. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on
them, they sent them away. Hence the Church of God has sufficient ground and
warrant, for the using, and prescribing of public fastes, (which was not
fasting from sin, as our Reformers (forsooth) pretend, for such fasting they
were ever bound to keep) and that at such times, or seasons as the Church
pleased to prescribe (as in Lent, or the like) and not when every man lists, or
the toy takes him in the head, as Aerius and other Heretics did teach,
testified by S. Aug. haeres. 53.

Mat. 17.21. Howbeit, this kind of devils goes not out, but by prayer and
fasting. Lo the great force of prayer and fasting, able to expel the very
devil. Therefore it causes great spiritual good.

See more Joel. 2.12. Mat. 6.16. Mat. 9.15.29. Toby 12.8. Luc. 2.37. Act.
14.22. 2. Cor. 11.27. 2. Cor. 6.5. Numb. 30.14. 1. Tim. 4.3.

And the Fathers, S. Ignat. ad Philip. S. Basil orat. de Ieiunio. S. Chrysostom.
orat. in sanct. Lauacrum. and hom. 1. in Genesis S. Amb. ser. 4. S. Hier. in cap.
18. Isa. and many others.

XLVI. That Jesus Christ descended not into hell, nor delivered thence the
souls of the Fathers.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. 1. Ephesians. 4.8. When he
ascended upon high, he led Captivity captive (in their margent, or a multitude
of captives and gave gifts unto men. Now, that he ascended, what is it, but
that he also descended first, into the lower parts of the earth? These freed
Captives to be the souls of the glorified, no man in his right wits will say;
Nor the souls of the damned, for so the devils should be brought again into
heaven; therefore they were the souls of the Fathers, which Christ delivered
out of Limbus.

Acts 2.27. Because thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou
suffer thine holy one, to see corruption. These very words S. Aug. applies to
the proof of a third place, and says: Who but an Infided, will deny Christ to
have descended into Hell? Epist. 99. ad Euod.

1. Pet. 3.18.19. Being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit,
by which also he went, and preached unto the spirits in prison. Now to
understand by the word prison, heaven, there is no sense, since it is called the
seat of God, and not the prison of God. To understand it of the wicked, Calvin
himself opposes this opinion, and maintayneth, that S. Peter speaks of the
good, which were known from the days of Noe. Add heerto, that this doctrine
destroys an article of our Creed: Therefore Christ descended into hell.

Heb. 11.38.39.40. And these all having obtained a good testimony, through
faith, received not the promise (to wit, of Heaven) God having provided some
better thing for us, that they without us, should not be made perfect: to wit,
in their perfect and complete glory. Whence it follows necessarily, that they
must needs grant another place, distinct as well from the Heaven of the saved,
as from the Hell of the damned, wherein these holy souls were detayned.

Mat. 12.40. For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly,
so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights, in the heart of the
earth. But how I pray, is this Figure fulfilled, if Christ were not as many
days and nights in the heart of the earth, as Jonas was, who was not in the
whales belly in body only, but also in soul? Whence it follows, that either
Christ's holy soul, was three days, and three nights in the heart of the earth,
as well as his body, or that this place of Scripture, is either false, or
unfulfilled. But this were most absurd to say.

Mat. 27.52.53. And the graves were opend, and many bodies of Saints which
slept, arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into
the holy City, and appeared unto many. Understood by S. Ignatius Bishop of
Antioch, of Limbus Patrum, writing to the Citizens of Trallis thus: Many arose
with our Lord, for the Scripture says, that many of the bodies that slept
arose with our Lord. He descended alone, but returned with a multitude.

Zachary 9.11. As for thee also, by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent (we
read let) forth thy prisoners, out of the pit, wherein is no water. Both S.
Hierome and S. Cyril, understand this pit, to be meant of Limbus Patrum. And
with very great reason, for how absurd were it to say, that the damned have
their share in the blood of the Covenant? Or that they are let forth of their
infernal pit? Or that they may be said to be thy prisoners (that is Christ's)
but rather the prisoners of the devil? Yea, where I pray (to speak properly)
has Christ had any prisoners at all (which he has let forth) if not out of
this place? Therefore, either Christ let forth prisoners our of Limbus Patrum,
or this place likewise as the former, is either false, or not yet fulfilled.

Like unto this, is that of 1. Samuel 2.6. The Lord kills, and makes alive,
he brings down to the grave (we read, hell) and brings up (we read, back
again.) Lo, how plain and conform, the faith of that old Church, was and is
to this of ours, brings down to hell, and brings back again, which
hardly in any clear sense can be auerred, if Limbus Patrum be denied. As for
the word Grave, which they erroneously have added instead of Hell, to diminish
the force of so plain a place; why do they not as well foist the same into
their Creed, instead of Hell, as here they have done, and say, Was crucified,
dead and buried, he descended into the grave? How absurd this is, who does not
see?

See more Osee 6.3. Psalm. 16.10.2. Pet. 3.19. Zach. 9.11. Ro^. 10.6. Eccles.
24.45. Ps. 23.7. Genes. 37.35.

See also the Fathers that affirm the same. S. Hier. in 4. ad Ephesians. S. Greg.
lib. 13. Moral. cap. 20. S. Aug. in Psalm. 37. v. 1. The place begins:
Futuru^ est enim.

XLVII. That there is no Purgatory fire, or other prison, where in sins may be
satisfied for, after this life.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. 1. Cor. 3.13.15. The fire
shall try every man's work, of what sort it is. If any man's work shall be
burnt, he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved, yet so, as by
fire. S. Augustine writing upon the 37. Psalm, and drawing these very words
of the Apostle into his discourse, says: Because it is said (he himself shall
be safe) that fire is therefore contemned. Yea verily, though safe by fire, yet
that fire shall be more grievous then whatsoever a man can suffer in this life.
Thus he. Therefore there is a Purgatory fire, wherein sins may be satisfied
for after his life.

John 11.22. But I know, that even now, whatsoever thou will ask of God. God
will give it thee. S. Martha, the sister of S. Mary Magdalen believed, that our
Lord (whom then, she held only for a holy man or Prophet, and not for the Son
of God) could obtain of God, something profitable to her brother Lazarus, who
was deceased. For having said: Lord if thou had been here, my brother had
not been dead, she presently added: But I know, that even now whatsoever thou will ask of God, God will give it thee. Which speech she could never have used
in any good sense, if she had not learned this doctrine of the Sinagogue, who
offered sacrifices, alms, and prayers for the departed, and unless she had
known and believed, that the dead might be helped by the piety of the living;
as Cardinal Allen learnedly concludes, in his Treatise of Purgatory.

Acts 2.14. Whom God has raised up, loosing the sorrows of hell. In which
words two things are to be noted which clearly make for the proof of
Purgatory. The one, that in this place where Christ was, there were certain
sorrows and pains. The other, that some there were inflicted for sin upon
whom he bestowed that gracious benefit, as to discharge and loose them of
those pains. For as the Rhemes Testament very well notes, Christ was not in
pains himself, but loosed other men of their pains.

1. Cor. 15.29. Otherwise what shall they do, that are baptized for the dead?
From this place an evident proof is drawn, touching the help which the souls
departed our of this world, may receive by the Church on earth, and
consequently (...) ^urgatory; understanding the pains and afflictions which
voluntarily we do inflict upon our selves, to exempt those that are therein:
for to baptize, signifies to afflict ones self, to do penance, to suffer
death etc. as is evident in S Luc. 12.30. But I have baptism to be baptized
with: and Marc. 10.38.

Luc. 16.9. And I say unto you, Make to your selves friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations. S. Ambrose upon this place, and S. Aug. lib. 21. de Ciuit. cap.
27. say, that, it is to receive succor after death according as the word (
fail) inforceth.

Luc. 23.42. Lord remember me, when thou come into thy kingdom. S. Aug
says in his fifth Book against Julian (about the midst) that the good
thief in this prayer, presupposed, that (according to the eommon opinion)
souls might be helped after death.

2. Mac. 12.44.45. For if he had not hoped, that they that were slain should
have risen again, it had been superfluous and vain, to pray for the dead. And
in the next verse he concludes, That it was an holy and good thought etc. This
place of holy Scripture, is most clear for prayer for the dead: for had it not
been the continual doctrine and practice of the Church to pray for the dead,
neither could Judas Machabaeus (who was himself a Priest) have ever thought of
any such remedy, as to gather twelve thousand drachmes of silver, to send to
Jerusalem, to have prayers made for the relief of the souls slain in the
wars: neither would the multitude of people have either contributed, or the
Priests of the Temple, received the same, had they thought (as these men do)
that it had been superstition to pray for the departed, or, that there had been
no other place, then the Hell of the damned, or the Heaven of the saved.

See more 2. Tim. 1.18.1. John 5 16. Isa. 4, 4. Isa 9.18. Acts 2.24. Matt.
3.11. Mat. 12.32. Mat. 5.26. Micheas 7.8. Psalm. 66.12. Tobie 4.18. Phil. 2.10.
Zachary 9.11.

As also the Fathers that affirm the same. S. Amb. upon the 1. Cor. 3. and
sermon. 20. in Psalm. 118. S. Hier. lib. 2. cap. 13. aduers. Iouin. S. Greg. lib.
4. Dialog. cap. 39. Origin. hom. 6. in cap. 15. Exodus with many others.

XLVIII. That it is not lawful to make, or have Images.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Exodus 25.18. And thou
shall make two Cherubims of gold, of beaten work shall thou make them, in the
two ends of the Mercy seat. These graven Angels, were Images of the highest
order of Angels (one excepted) which is in heaven, and were made with faces of
beautiful young men, and commanded to be set up by God himself in the Holy of
Holyes: which S. Hierome witnesses the Jews to have worshipped, epist. ad
Marcellam. Therefore it is lawful to make Images.

1. Kings 6.35. And he carved thereon Cherubims, and Palme-trees, and open
Flowers, and covered them with gold, fitted upon the carved work. Hence is to
be gathered, that the precept of not making graven Idols, does nothing at all
concern Images, that is to say, the true representation of things merely
imaginary and not subsisting, for as S. Paul says 1. Cor. 8. An Idol is
nothing. So that the Idol represents that which is not, the Image that which
is (a most remarkable difference.)

Again, seeing an Idol is that properly, which being nothing (as S. Paul
says) is represented to be something, or that which represents the thing that
is not; if our Reformers believe the Images of Christ crucified to be an Idol,
they then believe, that Christ was never crucified: for so it would follow
necessarily, that the Image of Christ crucified, being an Idol, therefore
christ was never crucified.

Heb. 9.1.5. Then verily, the first Covenant, had also ordinances of divine
service, and a worldly sanctuary etc. and over it, the Cherubims of glory,
shadowing the mercy-seate. Lo S. Paul calls the images of the Cherubims
which Solomon made, an ordinance of divine service, which our Reformers call,
the making of Idols: whom shall we sooner believe, Blessed S. Paul, or a
Reformed Brother?

To conclude, an Image, is of such divine and natural right, that all
understanding, imagination, and sense, as well interior, as exterior, is made
by way of Images, called species sensibiles, and insensibiles. The body cannot
be in light, without its shadow: the Moon, and the Stars imprint their image
in the water: a man cannot look in a glass, without making his Image;
Therefore, either God, and Nature it self, does break this commandment as
well as we, or else it is absurd to say, that we do break it, in making of
Images.

See more 1. Kings 7.36.42.44. Number 21.8. Mat. 22.20. Exodus 31.2. Exodus 33.30.
where painting and engrauing of Images, is so far from being counted Idolatry,
that it is proved to be a science divinely infused into Beseleel by God
himself; and so the invention of good Images, came first from God.

The Fathers that affirm the same are, Tert. lib. 2. de pudicitia. S. Greg.
Naz. ep. 49. ad Olymp. S. Basil orat. in S. Barlaam. S. Aug. lib. 1. de
consens. euang. cap. 10. witnesses, that in his time, Christ was to be seen
painted, in many places, between S. Peter and S. Paul.

XLIX. That it is not lawful to worship Images; nor to give any honor to
dead, or insensible things.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Exodus 3.5. And he said,
Draw not nigh hither, put off the shoes from off thy feet, for the place
whereon thou stand, is holy ground. Lo, how clear a place is here
produced against our Reformers, wherein an insensible Creature was commanded by
God himself to be honored: for the refrayning to tread upon it, was the doing
of honor to it. Therefore all dead Images, representing unto us a holy thing
may be honored.

Psalm. 99.5. Adore ye the footestoole of his feet. Which place is spoken
literally of the Arc of the Testament, according to that of 1. Chron. 28.2. I
had in my heart to build a house of rest, for the Arc of the Covenant of the
Lord, and for the footstool of our God. Now the principal reason, why the
Arc was worshipped, was in regard of the Images, that were set upon it, which
the Jews did worship, as S. Hierom witnesses in his Epistle ad Marcellam.

Philip. 2.10. That at the Name of Jesus, every knee should bow, of things in
heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth. Now, that is the
Name of Jesus, which either is pronounced by another mouth, printed in a
book, or painted and engraven in a image: but at any of these we are commanded
to bow the knee.

Again, if Images ought not to be worshipped, we may not (whatsoever the
Apostle says) bow our knee at the Name of Jesus; seeing words (as Aristole
says, and as the truth is) are signs representative of the things they
signify; and are the images of the ears, as the others are of the eyes.

Number. 21.8. And the Lord said unto Moses: Make thee a fiery Serpent, and set
it up upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bit, when
he looks upon it, shall live. Hence are evidently proved diverse things,
against our Reformers. 1. That God commanded the making of this Image. 2. The
setting of it up for a sign. 3. He promised that the lookers thereon, should
assuredly receive succor and help. 4. He warranted the making, the setting up,
the behoulding, and the reuerencing thereof, to be exempted from breach of the
first Commandment, by working so many, and so manifest miracles, at, and
before the presence thereof. Therefore an Image may be made, may be set up, may
be looked on, and be reverenced, as Doctor Sanders most learnedly concludes,
in his Treatise of Images.

See Fathers that affirm the same. S. Amb. sermon. 1. in Psalm. 118. S. Aug. lib.
3. de Trinit. S. Greg. lib. 7. epist. 5. ad Ian. Finally S. Basil says (in
Julian. citat. in 7. Sinod.) I honor the histories of Images, and do publicly
worship them, for this being delivered us from the holy Apostles is not to be
forbidden. S. Chrysostom in his Mass, turned into Latin by Erasmus, says. The
Priest boweth his head to the Image of Christ. S. Damascen. lib. 4. cap. 17.
says: The worshipping of the Cross, and of Images, is a Tradition of the
Apostles.

But before I conclude this Point, I desire to solue a few objections, which
usually our Reformers bring against the Honor of holy Images.

Their 1. Objection.
Is taken out of 2. Kings (we 4.18.) where King Ezechias, broke down the
brazen serpent (whereof we last made mention) seeing it to be the cause of
Idolatry.

Answer.
This indeed is a common place, from whence our Adversaries collect sundry
false and sophistical arguments, to wit, from the abuse of any good thing, to
destroy it utterly, together with the right use thereof. But by the same
argument, they may as well collect, that the Sun and the Moon should be
taken out of the Firmament, because they were worshipped by the Gentiles for
Gods. Likewise that the holy Bible should be burnt, because many a one draws
damnable heresies forth of the same, to his own perdition. Yea, this silly
argument borrowed from the abuse of things, serves very fitly to prove the
quite contrary, thus: Images have been sometimes abused, therefore they were good
in themselves: for those things which are evil by abuse only, must needs be
good, being well used.

Their 2. Objection.
You give that honor to Images, which is due to God alone; worshipping,
adoring, and creeping to them, as to God.

Answer.
We say the contrary, which thus we prove. The difference of honor, proceeds
principally from the mind, and not from the exterior bowing or demeanor of
the body: For if I prostrate my self before an Image, or kiss the same, well
knowing the while, that it is no God, nor reasonable Creature, but only a
rememhrance of God, toward whom I desire to show mine affection; God knows
how far off mine honor is, from that honor which is due to him alone. As
contrary wise, if I lay prostrate at Christ's feet indeed, kissed them, knocked
my breast, held up my hands unto him, called him the Son of God; yet all this
while, think him not to be so in my heart, mine honor truly should be no
honor at all, but a very contumely, and affront unto Christ. Add heereunto
that the words which betoken honor, adoration, worship and the like, are in a
manner confounded in all languages: but the heart from whence the honor
proceeds, knows well the difference of every thing. D. Sanders de Imag.
page 10.

Their 3. Objection.
It is expressly forbidden by God himself, to fall down before any Image, or
to worship it.

Answer.
Our Reformers themselves confess to honor the Sacrament of Christ's Supper,
which they teach to be an Image, or representation of Christ's body and blood.
And seeing they believe no other substance to be in the Sacrament, besides
bread, and wine, nor will not give the honor of latria (as we call it)
thereunto; hence it follows inuincibly, that they do worship, or honor some
Image. Now, as they would not for all this have us to judge, or call them
Idolaters: even so, let it please them (for their own sakes) to spare us. For
as they do not place, or stay this honor in the bread and wine, but from
thence refer it to Christ himself: even so do we transfer all our honor from
all Images, unto the first form or pattern, not suffering the same to rest,
or end in the Image which we honor. Sander. ibid. page 52.

Their 4. Objection.
An Image is a Creature, and no God; and to set up a Creature to be worshipped,
or adored, is flat Idolatry.

Answer.
Images are set up in Churches, not specially to the intent that the people
should worship, or adore them, but partly to instruct the simple, and partly to
stir up our minds to follow the example of those holy men, whose Images we do
there behold. So that the worship and reverence which is there given to Images,
is given as it were by a consequence, and rather, because it may be lawfully
given, then because it is principally sought to be given. As for the Idolatry
which is objected, we are to understand, that the word is compounded of Latria,
and Idolum, and is as much to say, as, the giving of Latria, or of Gods honor,
unto an Idol. But our Images, are no Idols, nor the honor we give unto them, is
that of Latria; how then can it be said, that Images are set up to be used to
Idolatry?

Thus much have I thought good to add in this place, for the instruction of
the ignorant and unlearned people, who use to stumble at the doctrine Of the
worship of Images, because indeed they understand it not. And what is said for
the worship of them, may also serve for the lawfulnes of making them since the
one supposes the proof of the other.

L. That no man has seen God in any form, and that therefore his Picture, or
Image cannot be made
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Genesis 3.8. where God
appeared unto Adam walking in the garden of Paradise, in a corporal form. And
Genesis 28.12.13. to Jacob, standing above the ladder, whereon the Angels
ascended, and descended. For we must know that it is only the outward shape and
form of the thing, which is expressed, either in this, or the like Image, and
not the inward substance thereof, which is not possible for any Painter or
Caruer to express; which though it express not all that is therein, yet that
which it expresses is a truth: and thus may God be expressed to us. Yea, why
may not God be expressed in the same form and manner, wherein he has
manifested himself to mortal eyes? Therefore his Picture, or Image may be made.

Exodus 33.11. God appeared, and spoke unto Moses face to face, as one man
speaks to another. To the Prophet Isay 6.1.5. Sitting upon a throne. To
Daniel 7.9. Sitting, wearing garments, and having hair on his head, like pure
woll. How then can any wise man doubt, but that, that thing may be lawfully set
forth, or expressed in an outward Image, which necessarily must be conceived by
an inward?

1. Kings (we 3.) 22.19. I saw the Lord sitting on his throne, and all the
host of heaven, standing by him on his right hand, and on his left. But perhaps
they will say, that God commands us to hear his word, and the Histories
which speak of his apparitions, but not to paint them. I answer, that seeing
we learn by our eyes, as well as by our ears, there is no reason, why that
may not be painted before our eyes, which may be preached to our ears. Again,
seeing we may find the aforesaid Visions and Histories in the Bible; why may we
not as well see them painted in pictures, as written in a book of white paper?

LI. That blessing, or signing with the sign of the Cross, is not founded in
holy Scripture.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible. Reuelat. 7.3. Where one
Angel said to four other Angels: Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the
trees, till we have sealed (we read, signed) the servants of our God in their
foreheads.

Again, Marc. 10.16. And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon
them, and blessed them. Therefore signing and blessing is founded in holy
Scripture.

Luc. 24.50. And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lift up his
hands, and blessed them. Therefore etc.

See the Fathers that affirm the same. Dionys. Areopagita cap. 4.5.6. Eccles.
Hier. Tertul. lib. de corona milit. Origin. in Exodus cap. 5. hom. 6.5. S.
Cyril. Cat. 1. S. Basil. lib. de spir. sanct. cap. 37. S. Chrysostom. hom. 55. in
Mat. cap. 16.

LII. That Concupiscence remaining after Baptism, is truly and properly sin,
though not imputed to the faithful.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, James 1. 14.15. But every
one is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust, and entised. Then when
lust has conceived, it brings forth Sin: and Sin when it is finished,
brings forth death.

Here 4. things are distinguished, Concupiscence, that is, a power of
covering, prone to evil and her 3. motions Suggestion, Delectation, and
Consent. Now, Concupiscence and her first motion, S. James does not call Sin,
but a Temptation to Sin. Delight, but not fully deliberate, he calls Sin,
but not mortal; the which only Consent causes.

See in confirmation heerof S. Cyril l. 4. in Joan. e. 51. S. Austine l. 5.
cont. Julian. c. 3. and 5. where he calls Concupiscence not Sin, but, the
punishment of sin; besides the whole stream of Fathers.

LIII. That Bishops, and Priests are not bound to live a single life, but may
lawfully marry wives.
COntrary to the words of their own Bible. Exodus 19.22. And let the Priests
which come near to the Lord sanctify themselves, lest the Lord break forth
upon them (we read strike them.) Those also that were to eat the Paschal Lamb,
were commanded to have their Loins guirt, Exodus 12.11. that is, as S. Gregory
expounds, observing Continency. hom. 22. in Euangel.

In the New Testament S. Paul teaches that a Bishop must be given to
hospitality, gentle, sober, just, Chaste, 1. Tim. 3. where instead of the word
Chaste, the Protestants in their later Editions, translate of good behavior,
thereby to elude their state of living without wives. Also 2. Tim. 3.4. Thou
therefore endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that
warreth, intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please
him who has chosen him to be a soldier. Which all the Fathers do understand
of living a single life, and not to be entangled with wives.

See Council. 2. Carthag. can. 2. Where it is expressly decreed that all
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and those that handle the Sacraments, be keepers of
Chastity, and to abstain themselves, even from wives. S. Hieron. l. 1. cont.
Iouin. and Apol. ad Pamach. c. 3. Origin. hom. 23. in Number. Epiphan. haer. 59.
Ambr. in 2. Tim. 3. and others.

LIIII. That the public service of the Church, ought not to be said, but in a
language that all the people may understand.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Luc. 1.8. And it came to
pass, that while he executed the Priests office, before God, in the order of
his course, according to the custom of the Priests office, his lot was to
burn Incense in the Temple of the Lord; and the whole multitude of people were
praying without, at the time of Incense. Where it is to be noted. 1. That this
was then the common custom. 2. All the people were without, and the Priest
within; how then did they understand him? Therefore the public service of the
Church may be so said, as all the people understand it not.

Leuit. 16.17. And there shall be no man in the Tabernacle of the congregation,
when he goes in to make an atonement in the holy place, until he come out,
and have made an atonement for himself, and for his househould, and for all
the Congregation of Israel. Therefore etc.

I shall not need to produce the authorities of Fathers for this point, when the
as practice of the whole Christian world, for these many hundred years
together has been directly contrary to our Reformers heerin, against which to
dispute (as S. Aug says) were insolent madness. See to The. Test. page 46. But
against this they will object out of Scripture this their probablest place, 1.
Cor. 14.16. When thou shall bless with the spirit, how shall he that occupyeth
the room of the unlearned, say Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say? For thou verily give thanks, but the
other is not edifyed.

Here to I answer, that there be two kinds of prayer, or giving of thanks in
the Church. The one Private, which every man says by himself alone. The other
Public, which the Priest says, in the name and person of the whole Church.
As concerning private prayer, no Catholic denies, but it is very expedient,
that every man pray in his own tongue, to the end he may understand what he
says. But for the Public prayers of the Church it is not necessary that the
common people understand them, because it is not they who pray, but the Priest
in the name of the whole Church. For as it was enough for the people of the old
Law to know and understand, that in such a Sacrifice consisted the worship of
God, although they had not so clear an understanding of every thing that was
done therein (as has been said:) even so in the new Law, when the people
assist at the sacrifice of the Mass, acknowledging thereby that God is
worshipped, and that it is instituted for the remembrance of Christ's death and
passion, although they understand not the Latin tongue, yet are they not
destitute of the vtiltty and fruit thereof; besides the help of the Godly
Ceremonies therein, which do instruct them in the whole.

And indeed this place by them alleged serves nothing to the purpose, but
rather against them, seeing it proves, that the common service of the Church,
was not then in a tongue which every man understood, but in another language,
which was not so common unto all. For S. Paul saying, How shall he that
occupies the room of the unlearned, say, Amen, at the giving of thanks,
seeing be understands not what thou say, shows, that such giving of
thanks, was not accustomed to be made in the vulgar, tongue; and requires, or
rather supposes, that in the service of the church, there should be some other
to supply the place of the unlearned, that is, one that should have further
understanding of that tongue, in which the service of the Church is said. But
had the Service been in the vulgar tongue, there needed no man, to have
supplied the place of the Idior, that understands not. So that, S. Paul
shows most clearly, that such service was not exercised in a vulgar tongue,
but in another which was not common to the whole people (such as the Latin
tongue is now in England, as also throughout the whole East) and yet was not in
the contrary extreme, that is to say, wholly strange, or utterly barbarous.

And seeing our Aduersaires have this place continually in their mouths, and
thereby deceive the simple people, I would have them to know that this text of
S. Paul, is greatly perverted by the Reformers themselves. For whereas the
Greek and Latin text has, He who supplies the place of an Idiot, how shall he
say, Amen? the Ministers of Geneua, in many of their Bibles, have turned the
same most deceitfully and maliciously, thus: He that is an idiot, how shall he
say Amen? As if there were no difference betwixt an Idiot, and he who supplies
the place of an Idiot?

Moreover, the thanksgiving to which S. Paul says Amen should be answered, is
not at all practiced in many of our Reformed Churches, where neither Idiots,
nor those that supply the place of Idiots, do answer Amen as S. Paul wills;
seeing they have altered Amen, into So be it, which is plainly repugnant to his
meaning, as also to the practice of the whole Church. For they can not say for
their excuse, that S. Paul wrote to those, who spoke in the Hebrew tongue (for
Amen is Hebrew) since he wrote to the Corinthians who had their public service
in Greek, and not in Hebrew: A main argument, that the word Amen, ought to be
retained in all languages, as it hitherto has ever been amongst all
Christians, before the days of our Reformers; in so much that the most learned
S. Augustine writes, that it is not lawful to turn Amen, into any other
vulgar language, without the scandal of the whole Church. Aug. epist. 118. and
2. de Doct. c. 20.

To conclude, I cannot but much marvel at the simplicity of the common
people, who notwithstanding the great light of their reformed Gospel, see not
the looseness and vanity of this their Leaders cavil. For, neither the
masters, or scholars, are so senseless, I hope, as to say that their own
service, consisting partly of the Psalms of David (the hardest part of all the
Bible) and partly of lessons taken out of the old and new Testament, is
understood of all the people present thereat; since the greatest Divines that
ever were, durst never say so much of themselves. How wrongfully then, do they
wrangle with us about this matter? But perhaps they will say, that though the
simple people understand not the hard places contained in the psalms and
Service, yet (to their great comfort) they understand at least some part
thereof: even so say we of our Mass, and of our simple people who assist
thereat: And so conclude as I began in the title of this Book, By thine own
mouth I judge thee, naughty servant.

A TABLE OF THE CONTROVERSIES handed in this Book.
1.COncerning the Rule of Faith. Page 14. 2. Of the Judge of Controversies in
matters of Faith. page 21. 3. That the Holy Scripture is not easy to be
understood. page 24. 4. Of Apostolical Traditions and Customs of the Church.
p. 29. 5. Whether one may judge and interpret holy Scripture by his Private
Spirit. page 33. 6. Whether S. Peter's Faith have failed. page 37. 7. Whether
the Church can err, or has erred. page 39. 8. Of the inuisibility of the
Church. page 43. 9. Of the Universality of the Church. page 46. 10. Of the
Unity of the Church. page 50. 11. Of S. Peter's Headship. p. 53. 12. Whether a
secular Man, or Woman, may be head of the Church. page 62. 13. Whether the Pope
be Antichrist. page 66. 14. Whether none but God can forgive sins. page 69.
15. Whether Confession ought to be made unto a Priest. page 72. 16. Of Pardons,
or Indulgences. page 75. 17. Whether the Actions and Sufferings of Saints be
profitable to the Church. page 77. 18. Of works of Supererogation. page 80.
19. Of Freewill; Whether lost by the fall of Adam. page 82. 20. Of the
Possibility of keeping Gods Commandments. page 87. 21. Whether faith alone
without works justifies. page 91. 22. Whether Good works be meritorious.
page 94. 23. Whether faith once had may be lost. page 97. 24. Whether God have
ineuitably decreed who shall be damned, and who saved. page 99. 25. Whether every
one ought to assure himself of his salvation. page 101. 26. Whether every one
have an Angel Guardian. page 104. 27. Whether Angels pray for men on Earth.
page 106. 28. Whether men may pray unto them. page 108. 29. Whether Angels can
help men or Earth. page 111. 30. Whether Saints deceased have appeared to men
on Earth. page 113. 31. Whether they know what passes here on earth. page
114. 32. Whether Saints pray for us. page 118. 33. Whether we may allege their
merits in our behalf. p. 122. 34. Whether we may pray unto them. page 126. 35.
Whether Relics of Saints may be honored. page 130. 36. Of the blessing or
hallowing of Creatures. page 133. 37. Whether Children may be saved without
Baptism. page 136. 38. Of the Sacrament of Confirmation. page 138. 39. Whether
Christ's body be truly in the Sacrament of the Altar. page 140. 40. Whether we
ought so receive under both kinds. page 145. 41. Whether the Mass be a
Sacrifice. page 148. 42. Of Extreme-Vnctio^. page 152. 43. Of Holy Orders, and
Ordinary Vocation, and mission of Pastors in the Church. page 155. 44. Of
Vows. page 158. 45. Of fasting and abstine^ce from certain meats. page 161.
46. Of Limbus Patrum, and whether Christ descended into Hell. page 164. 47. Of
Purgatory. page 171. 48. Whether Images may be lawfully made. page 178. 49. Of
the worship of Images. page 182. 50. Of making the picture of God the Father.
page 193. 51. Of the sign of the Cross. p. 196. 52. Whether Concupisence
after Baptism be sin. page 197. 53. Whether Bishops and Priests may lawfully
marry. page 199. 54. Of service in the Church in an unknown tongue. page 201.
FINIS.

