THE Great Victory which God has given unto eight Holland ships, in their
passage toward the East Indies:

Against 17. great Spanish ships on the first of APRIL, 1613.

Translated out of the dutch Copy, printed at Middleborough, by Simon
Mollenaer, 1613.



LONDON, Printed by George Eld, for Thomas Bushel. 1613.

The great Victory which God has given unto 8. Holland ships, in their passage
toward the East Indies, against 17. great Spanish ships, on the first of
April 1613.
WHereas of late there has been a commotion in the united Provinces of the
Neatherlands, under the command of his Princely excellence, Count Maurice of
Nassaw, and the Lords general states thereof, by men of all qualities and
conditions using the art of navigations into diverse and sundry other maritime
parts; It is thought fit and convenient, by the said most Princely Excellency,
and Lords states, for the general good of their said governments, and
reformation of abuses concerning the said Seafaring men, to enact and decree
by these their Edicts or Proclamations as follows.

That the said most Princely Excellency Count Maurice, and the said general
Estates do by these their Edicts or proclamations ordain and command that in
all the provinces, cities, towns, governments or places of their dominions,
that noe man, what-so-ouer, using the Art of navigations, presume to employ
himself in any ship or shipping appertaining or any way belonging to any
foreign prince or potentate whatsoever, and more over that all those that have
heretofore, before these our Edicts or proclamations employed themselves in any
foreign service at Sea, forth of our united gouernements, do with all speed
and diligence, upon the notice of these our Edicts or proclamations, repair
to or tovards our said united provinces, cities, Towns or dominions within
the space of three months, next ensuing these our Edicts, upon pain of
confiscation of life, lands and goods: and moreover we do, by these our Edicts,
strickly charge the parents, kinsfolks or friends of the said Nauigators;
employed in the service of any Prince, state, or potentate, forth of our
dominions, to give (with all possible speed) notice to their said parents,
kinsfolks or friends imploid in any foreign service at sea to make their
speedy repair forth of the said foreign employments into the dominions,
teritories, cities, or towns of our said united provinces within the term of
three months above said, as they will be hereafter answerable thereunto. And
that the world may take notice of the necessity of our just proceeding herein,
these are to give them to understand that it is to prevent, as nere as in us
lies, the employment of our most expert Pilots and Mariners in other
dominions, which could not in time to come but prove very prejudicial to our
said united provinces.

Moreover hereby we give notice that his Majesty the King of great Britain
having given leave to his subjects to send a fleet for the discovery of
certain Islands depending upon the Indies, where Christians never before
inhabited, and that they his said subjects at their great cost and charges by
the prudence, valor, and Magnanimity of diverse valiant and difcreet commanders
have attained the possession of certain of the said Islands, forcing the Savage
people (by their valor and courage) to retire far up into the Country, and
withal building fortresses and towns, inhabiting them with men, women and
children of all professions, providing for them all necessary provisions for
the use of Man, as houses to dwell in, oxen, kine, horses, sheep, goats, and
all other sorts of living things convenient* with all necessary supplies
thereunto belonging; which his Majesty of Spain perceiving (being informed
that the Countries and Islands which his majesty's subjects of great Britain
sought after, were like to prove rich, fruitful, and flourishing, and withal
that they were a dependency of the Continent of America, commonly called the
Indies) sought by all means possible to prevent and hinder the plantation of
the English in the said countries and Islands, and therefore he caused a great
fleet to be prepared; consisting of Caracks, Gallyons, Hulkes, Pynaces and
other sorts of shipping, to the number of seauenteene sail, well provided with
all store of Munition for war, as ordnance, shot and poulder, full stuffed with
mariners and soldiers, all which fleet (by the command of his said Majesty of
Spain) set sail (at their appointed time) out of Spain for their intended
voyage of the Indies, hoping to prevent the designs of their enemies, but as
the sequel shows it proved far otherwise with them.

IN the year 1612. last past there went out of Holland and Zealand for the
East Indies eight very fair, great, and strong ships, which meeting together
at Englands end, took their course to further their voyage withal speed
possible.

And in short time they came under the Salt Islandes where they spyed many
Sails showing to be of great burdens, which was the before said Spanish fleet.
The Hollanders, having descried them, held on still their right course which
the Spaniards seeing came with full sails upon the Hollanders, for they had
the wind with them: The Hollanders, not thinking, or having any purpose to
fight, yet seeing they could not beeryd of the Spanish fleet, prepared
themselves for the fight. At the first aproach the Spanish Admiral came so
fiercely upon them, shooting with all the terrible fury that could be imagined:
which the Holland Admiral perceiving turned his ship and got above the
wind, the Spaniards still mocking and scoffing at him, but the Hollands.
Admiral with his forepeeces of great ordinance shot him quite through from
the hinder-part of the Admiral ship through the forepart and presently
discharged all the ordnances of his own ship vpthe said Spanish Admiral, and
turning his ship discharged like-wise the other whole side upon him and shot so
terribly that the blood in the Spanish Admiral ran out of the scupper holes.
At which time another Gallion coming to assist the said Spanish Admrall
entangled her-selfe in the great tackle of the Admiral so that he being all
on fire, did sink and the Gallion also with him.

Then the Hollanders Admiral went to assist his Vice Admiral, which most
valiantly was fighting with two Spanish ships, where after many thundering
peales of Ordnance, on both sides interchanged, the Spaniards having many
slain outright, and many sore wounded, began to faint, and yield; which the
Hollanders perceiving, entered into these two ships and cast them all over
board, possessing themselves of all that was contained in them, which
amounted to a very great sum, they being very richly laden.

In the mean time, the other six Holland ships were fighting, likewise, with
the other Spanish ships, and most valiantly defended themselves with vehement
shooting, so as the very Sea seemed to have been on fire; Many of the Spanish
ships were fired and sunk: but not one of the Hollanders, only some few
men slain and some wounded: One of the Holland ships had boorded the Spanish
Vice Admiral and cast all over board, where they likewise got great store of
treasure and riches.

This terrible fight begun at nine of the clock in the morning, during all
that day and the next day until evening, the Holland ships got for prize and
booty above 3. tons of gold, besides all other costly wares: but the honor
and praise of this Roman deed is greater, in that 8. Holland ships, have
overcome 17. well manned Gallions of the mighty King of Spain, that did so
little esteem and regard the Holland ships and men.

After this furious and dreadful fight, the Hollanders Admiral (with advise
and counsel of all the officers and ship-companie) caused the prize, booty
and pilledge to be divided and distributed to every man according to his rank
and place, or merit and desert: The pillage was so great, that every ordinary
man had to his share whole armefuls of silks, veluets, clothes ready made,
with diverse other rich commodities.

Thus having given thanks to God, who is the giver of victories, relieved their
hurt and mayned men, and repaired what was most needful in their shipping,
with merry hearts for the atchieuement of so great a victory, they continued on
their former course for the performance of their intended voyage to the East
Indies.

By this you may perceive that victory consists not in multitudes, and
therefore with this admonition to all men in general, but more particularly to
all those that use the sea, I will conclude this relation: that they neither
glory or presume upon their numbers, or strength, but have recourse to him who
does and ever will spare the humble and beat down the proud.

God of his infinite goodness and mercy who is the governor of land and sea,
so steare there course, and direct their purposes, that, to his glory, the
honor and profit of their country, the joy and comfort of their wives,
children, and friends, they may return to their desired home with prosperous
and speedy success

Amen.
flower

