A Help unto Devotion: Containing Certain Moulds or Forms of prayer, fitted to
several occasions; and penned for the furtherance of those, who have more
desire then skill, to pour out their souls by petitions unto God.

By Sam. Hieron.

Phil. 4. verse 6. In all things let your requests be showed unto God, in
Prayer and Supplication, with giving of thanks.

Imprinted at London by H. L. for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bull-head, 1608.

To the right Worshipful the Lady Mary Strode, of Newingham in Deuon.
MAdam, if I should undertake a discourse of the worth and excellency of
Prayer, it would be much harder for me to keep measure, then to be
furnished with matter. How it is commanded by God, and commended by the
frequent practice of all the faithful, there is no man reading the Scripture
can be ignorant: and what sweetness it brings to the Soul and Conscience,
by having such a continual intercourse and communion with the Lord, I hope
your Ladyship can witness from your own experience. This is all I will say on
the behalf of Prayer, that as it is one of Gods titles of Honor to be styled,
The hearer of Prayers (Psalm 65.2.) so to call upon the Name of the Lord is put
for the whole duty and as it were the life and substance of a Christian. ( 1.
Cor. 1.2. 2. Ti. 2.19.). Prayer is that which seasoneth all other services
which we offer unto God, it is an argument of a man's effectual profiting by
other exercises of godliness, it is a thing which the persecuters of the
Saints, when they violently cause all public acts of worshipping God to be
intermitted, cannot abridge until life it self be extinguished. Much talking
there is of Prayer in the world: but if, setting aside men's lip-deuotio^,
enquiry be made into them, what apprehension they have of their own wants,
what conceit of the Majesty and presence of God, what knowledge and
understanding of his promises, what care (when they come to pray) to watch
over their own straggling thoughts, and to tie their hearts to that business of
devotion, we shall find such an universal scarcity of these things, that it
may be safely affirmed, that albeit there be many kneelers and speakers, and
repeaters of words, yet there are few true petitioners unto God. Now among
those fevve which make conscience to perform this duty as they ought, I have
observed a great defect: namely, that for want of exercised wits, of
knowledge in the Scriptures, and especially of experience in the power of
godliness, and of a lively sense and distinct conceiving of their own personal
necessities, they are not able to be their own messengers, nor to do their
own errand, in presenting the sacrifice of Prayer before the Lord. They would
pray with their families, but they know not how; they have a vvillingness
upon other occasions to become suitors unto God but they cannot devise which way
to begin. To help these, I have lately taken a little pains: not with an
intent to bind their devotions to my words, (for who am I, that I should take
upon me to limit the motions of another man's heart, to a form of my
devising?) neither yet to cherish any in this their insufficiency to deliver
their own apprehensions and particular cases unto God: but that by seeing the
order and course of Prayer, and by acquainting themselves with words and forms
of speech agreeing to the nature of such an exercise, they may at last, like
little children, who by creeping, and by the leading of others, learn to go,
be able to perform this holy duty with co^tentment to themselves, and with
comfort also to others upon occasion. Having ended this little labor, I
emboldened my self to offer it to your Ladyship: not so much for your own
need (who I hope are able with Hannah, out of the abundance of inward feeling,
to pour out your Soul before the Lord, 1. Sam. 1.15.16) but as a pledge of
my love, and as a witness of my thankfulness unto God for his graces in you.
And so leaving this Manuel with you, as a memorial of that respect which your
Ladyship may many ways challenge from me, I pray God in Christ to keep you
by his mighty Power through faith, unto Salvation.

Modbury, the 10. of October. 1608. Your La. in all Christian duty, Sam. Hieron.

To the Christian Reader.
I Am not ignorant (good Reader) that set forms of Prayer are very distasteful
unto many: They are adjudged to be a kind of confining and limiting of Gods
Spirit: And some which do allow them a lawful use in the Congregation, do
yet not so well approve them for private purposes. For mine own part, as I
favor neither their fondness who scarce account it praying, unless it be by
a book; nor their carelessness, who labor not to attain to an ability of
commending their personal occasions (even in words of their own conceiving)
unto God: so I could never see good reason, why platformes of direction for
those, who are yet but beginners in this spiritual exercise of Prayer should
be thought any way inconvenient or needless amongst Christians. There is a
great deal more art in the carriage of a suit to be put up unto God
(especially when a man is to be the mouth of others, as in a family, or in
visiting the sick, or the like occasion) then every one, though perhaps he
have some good feeling and understanding in Religion, can at the first attain
unto. Neither is it (as is pretended) any straitning or bounding of Gods
Spirit; but a means rather of quickening and stirring up the spirit of him
that prays, when he shall see the necessity of bemoning some corruptions, or
of craving some graces, or of giving thanks for some blessings received, which
himself did not so much as think upon before. Besides, that he may according
as his spiritual feeling shall increase, enlarge any particular request, if it
be not so full to his present case; or insert his own more personal
concernements, which he, who went about only to give him some general
directions, was not able to conjecture. And touching that which I do here offer
to the world, I profess sincerely, that in my first undertaking it, I had no
meaning to take upon me to set down laws for other men's devotions, or to
prescribe any man in his particular occasions of going to the Lord, to speak
so or so and no otherwise, as though I would reduce all supplications to be put
up into the high court of Heaven, unto a proportion and scantling of my
conceiving: He shall wrong me very much, whosoever shall so imagine. Only this
was it I intended and thought: I saw the ignorance of that place, where I
lived. I had often and earnestly commended Prayer. I had many times, with the
best reasons I could persuaded the use of it in private families. I perceived
withal in some, a better inclination to it, then power to perform it.
Hereupon I thought with my self, that as familiar Catechismes, and plain
Treatises have their use being joined to the public ministry, to bring those,
which are yet but babes in Christ (1. Cor. 3.1.) unto knowledge; so also some
help in this kind might be good, to beget feeling, and to be a guide to those
which have as yet but stammering and lisping tongues, until they shall be
able, having tongues as fined silver (Pro. 10.20.): plainly and distinctly to
speak the language of Canaan (Isa. 19.18.). For this cause I gave my book no
greater title the^ A HELP to DEVOTION, because I would not be mistaken, or
thought to intend any thing else, but only to further their religious purpose,
who would feign learn to pray orderly and effectually unto God. And in this
course, I am sure, that I am not without Examples. Worthy Divines have in these
latter times bestowed their pains this way: M. John Bradford, M. Edw. Deering,
M. H. Smith, M. R. Rogers (page 421. of his 7. Treatises.) M. Brinsly (in the
second part of the True Watch) and others whom I need not name. I might
mention others of other countries, as M. Calvin (in the end of his
Cathechisme,) etc. But the warrant of the Scripture is above all. I will say
nothing of those forms which we find appointed for public use in the
Temple: that which I endeavor to justify, is the lawfulness of forms for
private help. I might tell thee of the words of Prayer, which the Prophet bade
the people to take unto them, and to say unto the Lord (Hos. 14.3): of the
form which Habakkuk was wont to use for the ignorances of the people (Chap.
3.1.): of the many Psalms which are styled, Psalms of instruction, not only
because the matter was of use to instruct Christians, but also because the very
mould it self might remain as a help in Prayer for those, who should at any
time fall into the like occasion, which the enditer of the particular Psalms
was exercised with. These and other things might I insist upon: But I find a
title given to one Psalm, which shall be to me in stead of many proofs,
Psalm. 102. It is this: A Prayer of the afflicted when he shall be in distress
and power forth his meditation before the Lord. Which Psalm, though aiming
perhaps at some more special affliction, in which the servants of God then
were, yet inasmuch as it is reported in the title to be for the general use of
an afflicted person (as indeed it is excellent for such an occasion) it
seems to me abundantly to satisfy all those who shall doubt of the
conueniencie of such set directions

Thus having acquainted thee with my whole intent, and labored (least thou
should be forestalled by any mis-opinion) to show warrant for my doing, I
commend my endeauours to thee, and thee to the Lord, praying him to furnish
thee with the spirit of supplication (Zech. 12.10.) that thou may be so
full of holy matter (Job 32.18.) and so abou^ding with gracious speech (Col.
4.6.) that thine ability to utter thine own feeling unto God, may bring much
sweetness to thy Soul, and no less comfort to others, if thou be at any
time occasioned to speak in the name of others unto his Majesty: Adding this
withal, that if thou aim not at this grace, but content thy self still to
speak no other words but such as are put into thy mouth, thou wrongest thy
self greatly, and all those who have labored to bring thee unto more
perfection. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord, Sam. Hieron.

A short Aduertisment, touching Preparation before Prayer. In which is showed
1. The necessity of it, 2. The manner of it.

THe necessity of Preparation may appear many ways.

1 By our saviors platform, in which the Petitions are not set down
abruptly; but a solemn preface is prefixed, like a fair porch to a
beautiful house: to teach us to frame our affections and set them in due
order, before we draw near to speak unto the Lord.

2 By express commandment: Be not rash with thy mouth, nor let thine heart
be hasty to utter a thing before God. Eccles. 5.1. It is a dangerous thing to
babble out undigested and unadvised words in his ears.

3 By example. O GOD (says David) mine heart is prepared, so is my tongue etc.
Psalm. 108.1. It was the difference betwixt him and hypocrites, that he washed
his hands in innocence, before he would compass the Altar Psalm. 26.6.

4 By due proportion from outward things. If a man go before a Prince, or man
of authority, he will think upon his carriage, he will set his tale in order,
and meditate what to say: how much more then should we prepare when we come to
speak to God, who is higher then the Kings of the Earth?

2 The manner of Preparation stands in Praying, Meditating.

1 PRaying: Marvel not that I make Praying a preparatiue to prayer. A little
eating prepares a weak stomach, and sets an edge upon the appetite to
eat more; so in prayer: Therefore David before prayer, prayed, Let my prayer
be directed in thy sight as incense etc. Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth,
and keep the door of my lips, Ps. 141.2.3. A lifting up of the soul to
heaven, with a desire of direction, is a good preparatiue.

2 Meditating, upon three things: 1 GODS majesty: 2 GODS promises: 3 Our own
vileness. The reason is this: There are 3 things chiefelie requisite in prayer
which are helped by this threefold meditation: 1 Humility and lowlines of
spirit, begotten by the due consideration of Gods Majesty; 2 Confidence and
assurance to be heard, bredde by the knowledge of Gods promises; 3 Feruencie of
affection, springing from the apprehension of our own vileness.

That the majesty of God must be thought upon, is proved, Eccles 5.1. He
that speaks to God, is bidden to remember, that God is in heaven.

That the promises must be muzed upon, appears, 2. Sam. 7.27. Thou have
reueiled unto thy servant etc. Therefore has thy servant been bold to pray
etc. Genesis, 32.11.12. I pray thee deliver me, etc. for thou sayedst, I will
surely do thee good. What courage can we have to go to the throne of grace
without the warrant of promise?

That our own vileness must be remembered, it is evident. Genesis 32.10. I am
less then the least of thy mercies. Ezra, 9.6. O my God, I am ashamed and
confounded to lift up mine eyes, etc. for our iniquities are increased, etc.
Thus then prepare thy self to pray: Exercise thy thoughts before hand upon
these three things: 1 what a presence full of majesty thou must come into: 2
what sweet promises he has made to encourage thee: 3 what need thou have to
fly to his mercy. This will furnish thee with humility tempered with
cheerefulnes, and both whetted on and quickened by the feeling of thy own
necessity.

To help thy meditations of Gods majesty, remember Psalm. 104.1. O Lord my God,
thou art exceeding great, thou art clothed with glory and honor etc. 1. Tim.
6.16. who only has immortality, and dwells in a light that none can attain
to, etc. and such like places.

To supply thee with words of promise: consider Psa. 50.15. Call upon me etc.
so will I deliver thee etc. Is. 65.24. yea before they call I will answer, and
whiles they speak I will hear. John, 14.13. Whatsoever you ask in my name,
that will I do: and many such testimonies.

To bring thee to see thy own vileness, ponder Job, 5.14. Man drinks iniquity
like water. cha. 25.4. He cannot be clean that is borne of a woman. Psalm,
51.5. I was borne in Iniquity etc. Romans, 7.18. I know that in my flesh
dwells no good thing. Gather account of thy particular sins as Job did,
Chapter, 9.3. View thy self often in the glass of the Law.

1. A Morning Prayer, for private Families.
MOst gracious GOD and loving FATHER, in all humility of soul, and unfeigned
acknowledgement of our bounden duty, we present our selves here before thy
throne of majesty, and glory, desiring in some measure to show our
thankfulness for the multitude of thy mercies heaped upon us thy most unworthy
servants. By thee at the first we were fearfully and wonderfully made, thou
coueredst us in our mothers wombes, thou gave us the shape of men and women,
when it was free for thee to have equalled us us unto thy basest creatures:
since, it has pleased thee to preserve us, to watch over us and to guard us by
thy providence, to open thy hand, and to replenish us with good things, to give
us food and raiment, health, liberty and peace: O Lord thy compassions fail
not, but they are renewed every morning: even in this night past, we have
received an apparent evidence of thy love: For whereas, for the sins
committed the day before, thou might even in the dead of sleep have taken
our souls from us, and so suddenly have brought us to our account, it has
been thy pleasure yet to spare us; and not only so, but to refresh us with
quiet rest, and to bring us in safety to the beginning of this day. Grant (O
Lord) we pray thee, that the ordinary use of these thy kindnesses, may not
make us the less to esteem them: but so affect our hearts with the
apprehension of them, that we may learn to admire thy mercy, which dealest so
graciously with such unthankful persons as we have always been, and may
even bind our selves to strive to show all obedience and duty to thee, which
do so enlarge thy goodness unto us. But chiefelie (O Lord) raise up (we
beseech thee) our hearts and our affections from these outward favors (the
least of which notwithstanding is greater then the best of our deseruings) and
draw us to the serious consideration of those blessings, which do more
directly concern a better life. Make us thankefully mindful of the grace of
election, by which thou freely chosest us in Christ to be vessels of mercy,
before we were; of thy sending thy son out of thine own bosom, being in
thine own form, to take on him the form of a servant, and to become obedient
unto the death even ye death of the Cross for our sakes; of thy calling us out
of the kingdom of darkness by the power of the gospel preached, of thy shining
into our hearts by the enlightening of thy spirit; of quickening us when we
were dead in trespasses and sins; of thy begetting us again unto a lively
hope; of the first fruits of the spirit, and of that earnest of our
inheritance which thou have given us: of the daily free use and liberty of
thy word, whereby that great mystery of godliness yea even thy whole counsel
is cleerelie revealed to us. O Lord teach us to consider what miserable
creatures we were in our selves, and what a fearful case we had yet been
in, if thou had left us to our selves: that so the veiw of these unspeakable
and undeserved favors may even ravish our spirits, and so possess our hearts
that we may constantly resolve, henceforth to give up our selves as a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto thee, and to deuote all our powers both of
soul and body to the glory and honor of thy name. And (Lord) enable us
hereunto we pray thee; for we are not suffcient of our selves, to think any
thing, as of our selves, we are naturally reprobate to every good work. Open
therefore the eyes of our mind, that we may see what is good, and what thou
requirest of us; teach us to make thy word our delight and counselor; that by
it we may be informed in thy paths: put thy spirit within us, and cause us to
walk in thy statutes; let our ears continually hear a word behind us, saying,
This is the way; give us hearts of flesh, yielding, and pliable affections;
subdue the crookednes of our nature, and bring it under the obedience of
Christ. And when thou have entered us into a good course, uphold us therein by
thy alsufficient grace, stablish us in every word and good work, fill us
with the fruits of righteousness, let us not be idle nor vnfruitfull-in our
profession: but grant that we may be even rich in good works, and so may
adorn the doctrine of thee our Savior in all things, making the adversaries
of thy truth ashamed, when they shall have nothing concerning us to speak
evil of. And shield us (O Lord) we earnestly entreat thee, against the
malice and rage and fury of the devil: give us wisdom to discern his
policies, and courage to resist even his most fiery assaults: make us wise
against the beguiling entisements of this sinful world: let us not be carried
away with the stream of these corrupt times: harden our faces, against the
reproaches and enmities of evil men: suffer us not to be wearyed nor to faint
in our minds for any tribulations, sanctify unto us every affliction, that it
may be a means to purge out our corruptions. Draw our minds from the love
of this present world, teach us to use it as if we used it not, grant that
we may ever remember that we have here no continuing city; that so we may
seek for that kingdom that cannot be shaken, but is eternal in the heavens:
Cause us to depend upon thy providence, and to cast our care and burden upon
thee; assuring our selves that thou which have given us Christ, can not but
with him give us all things also. And (Lord) if at any time we fall by
occasion into a fault (as who are we, that we should presume?) put under thy
hand we beseech thee, deliver us out of the mire that we sink not, let not
sin swallow us up, let it not grow strong upon us, least we perish. Enable
us unto diligence and faithfulness in our several callings, teach us to lift
up our hearts to thee for a blessing upon our endeavors, and to remember
that we are always in thy presence; that so we may study to walk with thee
and to approve our very thoughts unto thee. Give us a sober use of thy
creatures, make us ready to reach out our hands unto the wants of others;
beget in us a godly jealousy over our selves, that we may walk
circumspectly, taking heed to our selves, in our eatings, in our apparel, in
our company, in our recreations, often considering our ways, and laboring
quickly after every error, to turn our feet into thy testimonies. And
(Lord) cause us to be earnestly mindful of the estate of thy whole Church:
bless all kingdoms and states professing thy truth, be gracious especially
to this our kingdom, forgive the crying sins of the times, continue thy
gospel, disappoint the hope and expectation of all Papists, let them perish as
many as have evil will at Sion, discover Antichrist more and more, enlarge
the territories of thy church, stablish thy kingdom of grace, hasten the
kingdom of glory. Heap thy blessings upon our gracious King, make him a
further instrument of much good unto thy chosen, bless his Queen, prosper the
work of thine own hands begun in the young Prince, show mercy to the rest of
the royal progeny. Be gracious to the Council, to the Court, the Nobles, the
Gentry of the Realm, grant that they may all aim at the honoring of thee,
by whom they have received honor amongst men; Be with the Magistracy and
Ministry of the Realm, make thy word to grow by the labors of those whom
thou have appointed to the service of thy church: Contain the subjects in
their due obedience to authority, bring to naught all tumultuous and rebellious
practices; comfort al thine afflicted servants, refresh them with a sweet
feeling of thy favor. Give us compassionate hearts, and a fellow feeling of
others miseries; prepare us unto the day of trial, and keep us by thy
mighty power, through faith, unto salvation. Grant us these good things, for
Christ's sake: in whose name, we commend our selves and our suits unto thee,
saying as he has taught us,

Our Father etc.

2. An Evening Prayer for private Families.
O Lord our GOD, most merciful and gracious in Jesus christ, among other thy
mercies, with which thou do even follow us thy most unthankful servants, we
acknowledge this to be none of the least, that we have this comfortable freedom
of coming into thy presence, there to pour out our souls before thee, and to
lay open our necessities unto thee. We pray thee teach us to value this
privilege according to the true worth thereof; that we may come together to
the performance of this duty with glad hearts, and cheerful spirits,
rejoicing in it that we have opportunity given us, to testify some part of
that great duty, which in many respects we owe unto thy majesty. And now
(Lord) being come before thee, we cannot but confess the vileness of our
estate: we were conceived in sin, and in sin we have continued all our
days, we have even drunk iniquity like water, we have drawn it after us,
and tied it unto us as with cartropes, wickedness has been sweet in our
mouth, we have favored it and would not forsake it: we have even made a mock
of sin, and it has been a pastime to us to do wickedly. Thou have often
called us, but we have still refused: thou have again and again stretched out
thine hand, but we have not regarded: thou have sought to reclayme us, but we
have hardened our necks as it were iron sinews, and have hated to be reformed.
Thou have waited to have mercy upon us, thy spirit has striuen with us, thy
very bowels have been troubled for us; and how graciously have thou called
upon us by thy word? saying, Return ye sons of Adam: why will ye die? Come
unto me and ye shall find rest for your souls: Yet we notwithstanding have
despised thy patience, we have abused thy goodness, we have turned thy graces
into wantonness, and have given thee cause to heap upon us all those
fearful plagues, and punishments, which in the extreamitie of thy law are
belonging to the wicked. When we look into our hearts, we see nothing but a
confused heap of gross corruptions, vanity, ignorance, frowardnes,
vnteachablenes, dulnes, unwillingness and unaptness unto good, pronenesse and
readiness to any manner of evil, secure, irreligious, profane, unclean
envious, covetous and greedy thoughts, perverse and disordred affections, all
these (as it were) marching together to rebel against thee, and leading us
captive unto sin. The very wisdom of our flesh is death, and the spirits
of our minds are defiled: when we look forth into our lives, we behold sins
more in number then ye hairs of our head: when we take view of our selves in
the glass of thy Law, we can see in our bodies and souls, in our outward and
inward man, nothing but vglines and deformity. Yea the sins of this one day
are sufficient to bring down upon us the eternal weight of thy displeasur.
How negligent have we been in our callings! how have we yielded to our own
unbridled lusts in the use of thy creatures! how have we cherished in our
selves worldly, carnal and voluptuous thoughts! how many blessings have we
unthankfully enjoyed, never thinking upon thee which did bestow them! how
have we misspent this precious time which thou vouchsafest us! how many good
opportunities have we let slip, by which we might have edified our selves, and
done good to others! how negligentlie have we kept our hearts, by means
whereof satan has got great vantage against us! how slenderly have we
bewailed the iniquities of the times! how poorly have we striuen against
our own corruptions! O LORD, if thou should straightly mark our
iniquities, O Lord, how shall we stand, where shall we appear, what shall
become of us? what answer shall we be able to make thee to one of a
thousand. And yet (most gracious God) which is worst of all, custom in evil,
has bred such a hardness in us, and has brought such a crust upon our
consciences, that we cannot be persuaded that thy wrath is so terrible, or our
sin so grievous, or our estate so woeful as indeed it is. Hence it comes
that we do not stand in such awe of thy majesty, as we should, we do not so
tremble at thy justice, nor esteem thy promises and mercies as we ought to
do: we beseech thee therefore to take the stony hearts out of our bodies, and
to put new spirits into our bowels, that we may with feeling and with a
lively and sensible apprehension, confess our selves to be, as we are;
poor, and wretched, and miserable, and blind, and naked, such as in whom there
is no goodness, such as to whom there is nothing due but shame and confusion of
face for ever. And here (Lord) according to that measure of spiritual feeling
which by thy grace we have attained to, we do utterly renounce our selves,
we do wholly disclaim all hope of help by our selves, we account all that
is in us but as dross and dung, and do most earnestly entreat thee to look
upon us in thy son Jesus Christ; accepting his death and his passion as a
sufficient, absolute and complete discharge for all our sins whatsoever. O
Lord, let the chastisement of our peace be upon him, and let us be healed with
his stripes: we have no other name under heaven in which we can be saved: and
we know that thou have sealed him, and sent him into the world, to save thy
people from their sins: we beseech thee therefore for his sake to be at
peace with us, put away our transgressions like a cloud, and our sins as a
mist, forgive our iniquities, and remember our offenses no more. And withal
seal up to our souls and consciences the feeling of this thy love by the
gracious testimony of thy spirit, that we may know that there is peace in
heaven for us, and that Christ is made of thee unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, and that nothing shall ever be
able to separate us from thy love in him. We do beg this at thy hands, so
much the rather, because we see the vanity of all things in this world; all
things in it are subject to uncertainty: they are all lighter then vanity it
self; But thy love in Christ is firm and perpetual. For, with thee there is
no shadow of change, thy calling and gifts are without repentance; and
therefore we pray thee, settle us in the assured persuasion of thy love, to ye
end that we may have some comfortable understanding, that whatsoever do be fall
us here, howsoever we be tried, yet after all, we shall lay down our heads in
thy peace, and be made partakers of thy glory. In the mean space, so long as
thou shall be pleased to respite the days of pilgrimage upon this earth, we
pray thee, do not leave us to our selves, neither forsake us; but give us, as
pledges of thy love, those Spiritual blessings in heavenly things, wherewith
thou art wont to furnish thy chosen; that so we may make our conversation such
as becomes the Gospel, we may never discredit our profession, or be a
scandal and offense unto others, but rather by our holy carriage may provoke
and win others unto thee. Help us to this end, we beseech thee, against
our manifold infirmities, against those evils to which our natures do most
incline, enable us to shake off that sin that hangs so fast on: strengthen
us to every good and holy duty, make us perfect in good works, sanctify us
throughout, and keep our whole spirits, souls and bodies blameless unto the
coming of Jesus Christ.

Make us thankful (as becomes us) for thy many favors, for that continual
preservation which thou affordest us, for the comforts of this day both to our
souls and bodies, for thy enlarging our time and opportunity to repent:
grant, we pray thee, that our thankfulness may not stand only in outward
shows, but that we may be thankful in deed and in truth, laboring to be
dutiful unto thee, which art so merciful unto us.

And inasmuch as, O Lord, we do profess to believe the Communion of Saints,
therefore it becomes us to be mindful of others in our Prayers besides our
selves: we are suitors to thee on the behalf of all thy people, sparsed over
the face of the earth: thou (O Lord) art privy to their several wants: thou
art only able to make a gracious supply: we beseech thee for them as for our
own souls. More particularly, we power out our souls before thee for those
Churches which amongst us thou have planted and united under one government.
Our sins (O Lord) chiefly our contempt of thy glorious Gospel, do deserve
a curse, even that thou should remove our candlestick, and clean put out
the light of thy holy word, and withal make us a by word to the world by some
extraordinary judgment; But, we pray thee in Christ, vouchsafe to reuerse
those plagues which we have deserved, continue those favors which we have
hitherto enjoyed, continue and enlarge the freedom of thy word, stablish the
truth of Religion amongst us by a perpetual decree, both for us and for our
posterity after us. To this end bless all good means; above others, our
Sovereign and King, enable him every day more and more to the discharge of
that great duty wherewith thou have entrusted him; lengthen his days, prosper
his Reign, defeat his enemies: give him and us comfort in his Queen, and joy
in his posterity; Increase wisdom in his Council, faythfulnes in his
servants, loyalty and true-heartednesse in his subjects. Stir up Magistrates
and men in Authority, to seek the advancement of thy glory and the wealth
of thy people. Make thy Ministers able and willing to publish the secret of the
Gospel, water their endeavors with the deaw of heaven, that daily such as
belong unto life eternal may be added to the Church. And seeing thou art
pleased to exercise diverse of thy servant with the cross, some with
sickness of body, some with perplexity of spirit, some with loss of goods,
some with restraint of liberty, some in one kind, some in another, we pray
thee to sweeten their afflictions and to season their sorrows with the comfort
of thy spirit; furnish them with a measure of patience agreeing to the
proportion of their trials, and put an end to their grieuaunces when thou
shall see it fit.

And (O Lord) make us ready for affliction: teach us to remember, that we
must through many tribulations enter into thy blessed kingdom.

In our health, make us mindful of sickness, of death, and of our last
account; that these things may not come upon us as a snare, but that we may
be prepared always in some good measure, to submit our selves unto thy most
wise and holy appointments.

And now, O Lord our God, we pray thee, to bear with the weakness and
coldness of our Prayers. Take us this night into thy blessed tuition: we know
that thou do neither slumber nor sleep, keep us from evil, keep us from
the malice of Satan, from security and carelessness, from dullness and
drowsines of spirit, that if it shall be thy pleasure to let us live until
the morning, we may become so much the fitter to serve thee in our several
callings, so as may be most for the glory of thy great Name, through Jesus
Christ: in whose Name we commend our selves and our unworthy Prayers unto
thee, saying as he has directed us in the Gospel, Our Father, etc.

3. A Morning Prayer for a private Person.
O Almighty Father, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in him my Father
also, how unworthy and wretched a Creature were I, if receiving so many
blessings from thee I should not stir up my self to return some
thankfulness unto thee for the same! It is even thou (O Lord) which from my
first being until now, have covered me under thy wings, and under thy feathers
I have been sure. My body and soul, my health, my strength, my maintenance,
whence have I these things but from thee? The safety of this night, the quiet
rest, wherewith I have been refreshed, to whom can I ascribe it but only unto
thee? That I have lived hitherto, that I have not been swallowed up with some
sudden judgment, that Satan had not had his will upon me, that I know the
way and the means unto a better life, that I am delivered from the power of
darkness and translated into the kingdom of thy dear Son, that I have
daily access into thy glorious presence, whence are all these, but from the
freedom of thy grace?

If thou had given me my desert, I should have perished long ago: it is
from thy mercy alone that I am not consumed.

O Lord make me ashamed of mine unthankfulness, wound my heart with the
consideration of my own dullness, whom so many kindnesses have not wrought
unto more obedience. And vouchsafe, I pray thee, notwithstanding the smalnesse
of my deserving, yet to look graciously upon this my morning sacrifice of
praise, which I do here tender unto thy Majesty: let not, I beseech thee, ye
scantnes and barrennes of my service, make thee to turn away thine eyes, and
to have no regard unto mine offering; But as thou art wont to spare thy
servants even as a man spares his own son that serves him, and in them to
accept the will for the full performance: so be pleased to look upon me in
Jesus Christ, and for his sake to remit my former ungratefulness, and to
strengthen me by thy grace for the time to come, in some good measure to
reform the same. And to the end (O God) that I may manifest the truth of my
desire to be thankful, I beseech thee, to beget in me a holy care both this
day and for ever, to walk worthy of that calling whereunto I am called, to
study to please thee with reverence and with fear; and by a blameless, pure
and unrebukable conversation, to shine as a light amongst men. I cannot, I
confess, do this of my self, I have in me the same corruption of nature
which the most wicked has: I entreat thee therefore to work in me that which
is pleasant in thy sight: Give me a clean heart and a right spirit: make me
to understand aright the way of thy precepts, direct me in the path of thy
commandments, knit my soul unto thee, and make it to cleave unto thy
testimonies: stay me, and stablish me, that my footsteps may not slide.
Crucify my flesh with the affections and lusts: mortify my members which are
on earth: suppress and subdue that law in my members, which leads me captive
unto the law of sin: Grant that I may sensibly feel the power of Christ's
death killing corruption in me, and the power of his resurrection raising me
up unto newness of life; Make me to resolve, to renounce even my sweetest
and best-pleasing sins, and not to take liberty to my self to continue in
any known ungodliness. Let it be enough that I have hitherto given the
raynes unto mine own lusts: grant that hereafter I may take no thought for
the flesh, to content it, but may strive rather to curb and to subdue it, and
to bring it under the yoke of due obedience. And (good Lord) increase my
faith, and better my feeling and apprehension of thy love, that I may with
courage and cheerfulness run the race which is set before me; Bless me
also this day in the duties of my calling. Idleness and godliness cannot
agree: and it is thy will, that in the sweat of my face I should eat my
bread: Preserve me from all fraudulent, guilefull, oppressing, greedy courses:
draw my affections from the love of the world: fix my heart upon the things
which are above: If things succeed according to my mind, make me thankful
to thee which have given the blessing: If any cross come, make me patient and
careful to profit by every chastizement. And because the daily occasions of
danger to my soul are infinite, teach me to put on thy whole armor, and to
keep my heart with all diligence, to furnish my self with holy meditations,
to make a covenant with mine eyes, to keep my mouth with a bridle for the
avoiding of all filthy communication, to use such words as may minister grace
unto the hearers, to be sober in diet, wary in disports, moderate in apparel,
choice in my company, and ever to practice that continual fear which has a
promise of blessedness. Finally (Lord) so guide me through the course of this
whole day, both in my private and more public employments, that if I live by
thy sufferance until night, I may have much comfort in the taking notice of
thy grace and goodness toward me: and all this for Christ Jesus sake thy
only Son, and my alone Savior. Amen.

4. An Evening Prayer for a private Person.
MOst merciful God and gracious Father in Jesus Christ, were it not that thou
have made a gracious promise in thy word, that whatsoever is asked of thee in
ye name of thy Son, shall be bestowed, I should not dare to press into thy
presence, being guilty to my self of so many sins which I have heaped up in
thy sight, from the beginning of my days until this present. I am by nature
(O Lord) the child of wrath, a vassal of Satan, no better then a very
firebrand of hell. It is thy great mercy, that I escaped the fury of thy wrath,
due unto me at the very instant of my birth, in respect of that mass of
corruption which I brought with me from my my mothers womb. Neither have I,
since I came to understanding, any whit amended or bettered my first estate:
but I have added to it a numberless number of transgressions, breaking every
of thy commandments by thought, word and deed, sinning in many things against
knowledge, against conscience and against that light which thou have given me;
yea, clean against many vows and promises of better obedience. I have no
color of excuse, nothing have I to plead in the defense of my many slips: If I
dispute with thee, I must needs lay my hand upon my mouth, and learn to
abhor my self in dust and ashes. And (Lord) give me, I beseech thee, a
fleshy and melting heart, that nothing may more affect me, or touch me more
deeply then to see my own vileness, and how disobedient and stubborn I have
been toward thee, which have even heaped upon me so many favors. Make me
ashamed of my barrenness and unfruitfulness in my profession, who have given
thee just cause to range me among those hypocrites which make a show of
godliness, but yet deny the power thereof. Beget in me that godly sorrow which
causes true repentance never to be repented of; that I may be grieved in my
very soul for my sins, not so much because of the danger of hell that
follows, as because I have offended thee, the love of whose majesty ought to
be a sufficient motive to obedience. And for the furtherance of my humiliation
and sorrow, cause me, O Lord, to search and to try my ways, to call my self to
a strait account, that I may see my sins in particular, the vanity of my
heart, my extreme deadnes and security, my pride and hautines of spirit, my
backwardness to all good services, my worldly-mindednesse, my ambitious rising
and craving thoughts, my want of charity and mercy to others, my miscariage in
my place and calling, my idle and unbeseeming speeches, my offensive and
scandalous behavior: thus (O Lord) make me careful to rip up my heart and
life, that so I may set my sins in order before me, and may thereby become the
more humble and the more forward to cast down my self before thee, and to
judge my self, that I may not be judged of thee. Yet withal (most gracious
God) make me able in ye midst of all this, to reach out the hand of faith,
and to lay hold upon Jesus Christ, who^ thou have ordained to be ye
reco^ciliatio^ for my sins. I know (O Lord) ye virtue of his blood, yt it can
make my sins, though they were as crimsm, yet to become as white as snow. O
then (I beseech thee) cover my filthy nakedness with his glorious
righteousness; cloth me with the garments of his Salvation, that so thereby I
may be holy and unblameable and without fault in thy sight. Speak peace unto
my Conscience by thy holy Spirit. Say unto my soul, I am thy Salvation. My
faith (O Lord) is but weak and poor: strengthen it, I beseech thee, and
bring it forward, by thy mighty working, unto more perfection. Thou have
promised not to quench the smoking flax, nor to break ye bruised reed: bear
then, I pray thee, with my scantnesse, and help my unbelief, perfect the
work of thy own hands, perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. My faith
is that I must live by; it is my victory: thou (O Lord) in mercy have begun
it: cherish it (I beseech thee) together with all those graces which accompany
salvation, that they may be in me, as a well of water, springing up into
everlasting life. And grant, yt I may not be presumingly secure touching mine
own estate, but may ever and anon be proouing and examining my self,
whether I am in the faith or no; and that I may also study and strive to give
evidence of my faith, by showing forth good works, and by bringing forth good
fruit, even fruit worthy amendment of life. I am compassed about with many
weaknesses, and (as I have found by the experience of this one day) Satan is
full of malicious cunning, to work upon all advantages; O Lord, strengthen
me to resist him, give me holy wisdom to to discover his sleights, and
grace to withstand his most sharp assaults. Arm me also against the
reproaches and obloquies of the world. I have learned in thy word, that if I
serve thee in sincerity, my name shall be put out as evil amongst men: give
me both care to carry my self out of the reach of just exception, and
resolution also to sacrifice my credit and estimation, yea, even my life it
self if need be, to thy glory.

Teach me to learn of the author and finisher of my faith, to despise the
shame, and to endure the speaking against of sinners, in respect of that
eternal weight of joy and glory which is set before me. And now (Lord) with
the bowing of my Soul, I bless thy name for this days preservation. How many
evils have I escaped to which I was subject by nature, and to which I had made
my self subject through sin? It is thou (Lord) only which make me to dwell
in safety. Stretch out the wings of thy grace and protection over me this
night: though sleep seize upon the eyes of my body, yet let not security
oppress my soul: keep me from idle fancies and from vain dreams: give me
a sober and sanctified use of al outward refreshings, that I may always in all
things aim at this one thing, namely, how I may be the better fitted to serve
thee faithfully in my place and calling; and that for Christ Jesus his sake,
thy only Son, and through thy mercy, my loving Savior, Amen.

5. A more particular Morning Prayer on the beginning of a Sabbath day.
MAnifold (O Lord) are thy mercies, and thy goodness is infinite. In every
particular which befalls me, I have abundant experience of thy love. It is
much (most gracious God) that I, which have so many ways provoked thee, should
be let to live, to behold the light and comfort of the day: But much more is
it, that having been heretofore a profaner of thy holy day, a barren and an
hypocritical professor of thy word, a fruitless and an unprofitable hearer, I
should yet enjoy the blessed opportunity of another Sabbath. How justly
might thou long since have fatted up my heart and given me over unto a
reprobate mind, taking from me the comfortable and happy freedom of going
into thy house, and of giving attendance upon the posts of thy doors! O teach
me (I pray theee) to value thy mercy in this behalf according to the true
worth thereof: Suffer me not slightly to entertain either this or any other of
thy favors. And, as thou have brought me to the beginning of this holy rest:
so enable me, (I beseech thee) to thee sanctifying it, and to such a kind of
spending the same as thou requirest. Teach me to remember that it is thine
own ordinance, even one of those unchangeable laws, which thou wrotest with
thine own finger, that this day should after a more special manner be
diuerted and devoted to thy service, and that thou have not therefore
restrained outward employments in our callings because idelenes pleases thee,
or because ease given unto ye flesh is a part of thy worship; but yt you have in
thy infinite wisdom so appointed it, that being freed from all other
encombrances, we might wholly apply our selves, either to the public or
private exercises of godliness Give me therefore grace (I most humbly entreat
thee) that I may call thy Sabbath a delight to consecrate it as glorious unto
thee, and that I may beware of doing mine own ways, or of seeking mine own
will, or of speaking vain words, and may even bind my self to a serious and
continued course of serving thee in the practice of such duties as belong to
the hallowing of this day. I know (O Lord) that herein I shall meet with many
lets; mine own corrupt nature will repine and think this a yoke and a burden
that cannot be endured: abroad in the world, I shall see many vain fashions,
followed by great troops, making thy day a day of carnal pleasure; I shall be
derided and scorned, if I refuse to do as others do. I shall meet also with
many cunning perswaders, which will seek by plausible reasons to draw me from
diligence and constancy in this course. O Lord (I beseech thee) even with the
bowing of my heart, to make me strong against all these withdrawments: Grant
that I may more esteem obedience to thee, then either the co^tenting of mine
own sensual affections, or ye avoiding of reproach among profane persons, or ye
satisfying of men; be their pretenses, what they may be. I am taught (O Lord)
and I do believe it, that thy yoke is easy, and that thy commandments are not
grievous: and I know that by a holy use in these religious services, I shall
make them so familiar unto me, and shall also find that exceeding sweetness in
them, that I shall even long for thy Sabbath before it comes, and the time will
seem short unto me that is so bestowed. And for this day (most loving Father)
I pray thee bless unto me the particular businesses thereof. In praying, give
me reverence to thy Majesty, sense of my own wa^ts, faith in thy promises,
fresh remembrance of thy former kindnesses, charitable and compassionate and
yielding affections toward others. In hearing vouchsafe me an unlocked and an
understanding heart, a right judgment, meekenes of spirit, liuelines of
affection, fastnes of memory. In communicating at thy table, bestow on me an
humbled soul, a hungring heart, a conscience purged from dead works, power of
sweet meditation upon the death of Christ. In looking upon the administration
of Baptism, afforde me mindfulnesse of mine own vow, remorse for my often
failing in that solemn promise, earnestness of desire for the good of the
baptized, joy for the increase of thy Church. In singing, take from me all both
dulnes and vanity, make me to sing with a grace in my heart, still striving to
lift up my soul unto thee. Enlarge my heart toward others, as occasion shall
be offered, that I may be ready to give to those that want, forward in every
good work, comfortable to the sick, tender hearted to those whom thou have
humbled, apt to make peace, where discord is. Let all works of mercy be a
delight unto me, and make me carefulll not to stay till I am provoked, but to
seek occasions to do good. And when I am private (O Lord) sanctify my
thoughts, that I may meditate in good things, and may hide thy word in my
secret parts, and may love it, and especially that I may show the fruit of it
in all my conversation. Finally, I humbly pray thee, so to guide me both in
public and private duties, that when it comes to evening, I may feel my
knowledge to be increased, my faith strengthened, my soul and conscience
abundantly refreshed, and all this for Christ Jesus his sake, and for thine
own Names sake Amen.

6. Another Prayer something more special, respecting the hearing of Gods word.
Eternal God, most gracious and merciful in Jesus Christ, every good giving
and every perfect gift comes down from thee: thou have commanded yt if any
man lack wisdom he should ask of thee, and thou have promised to deny
nothing that is asked of thee in thy Sons name; In obedience unto this thy
commandment, and in assurance of thy readiness to make good thy promise, I do
here cast down my self before thee, praying thee, as at all other times, so
now especially to be good unto me. I am now (O Lord) by thy gracious
providence, to be a partaker of thy holy word, ye preaching whereof is the
ordinary means appointed by thee to save my Soul, and to draw me out of the
power of satan unto thine own self. I, for my part, am unworthy of so great a
favor as to be admitted to hear it, and I am every way unfit and unable to
hear it with profit. My heart is full of blindness and ignorance, my affections
are froward and intractable. I am even reprobate by nature unto every good
duty: I am dull of hearing, slow of conceit, backward to entertain, but apt to
let slip any good instruction. I beseech thee in Jesus Christ, by the working
of thy spirit, to reform within me these corruptions: Make me as a newborn
babe to desire the sincere milk of thy most sacred word: grant that I may
rejoice at it, as one that finds a great spoil, let it be better unto me
the^ thousands of gold and silver; Open my heart, as thou did the heart of
Lydia, that I may even with a kind of hunger and greediness attend unto the
things which are delivered: clear the eyes of my mind, and anoint them with
that precious salve of thy spirit, that the scales of ignorance may fall from
them, and that I may see the wonders of thy Law, even thy hid wisdom, which
my nature of it self is not able to discern: And, because thou have promised
to guide the humble in thy way, and to reveal thy secret to the meek, take
from me, I pray thee, a proud heart, teach me to become a fool in my self,
that I may be wise in thee: Suffer me not to measure the mysteries of thy
kingdom by mine own blind reason and corrupt affection; but give me grace to
deny my self, and to labor to bring mine own thoughts into captivity under
Christ, that I may not dare to oppose mine own conceits and fancies unto the
majesty of thy truth revealed in thy word. Give unto the Preacher, a door of
utterance, that he may open his mouth boldly to publish the secret of thy
Gospel. Direct his tongue that he may speak unto my conscience, and that if
there be any close corruption lurking in me (as Lord, who can understand his
faults) ye searching power of thy word may discover it, and rip it up even to
the very bottom. And vouchsafe unto me that meekness of spirit, and such
calm and yielding affections, that I may not repine nor murmr at reproof,
but may love him rather that rebukes, and may take it as a special favor
from thee, that I am not suffered to go on in sin, nor given over to mine own
corruptions. In every point of holy doctrine taught me, make me to remember who
it is ye speaks by the mouth of man, that I may receive the word as a
message from thee, whether it be comfort, or reproof, or instruction, and so
may give it ye reverence and that awful respect which is due unto thy holy
Orac^^s: And because (O Lord) as I am naturally forgetful, so the devil
watches to catch away the word as soon as it is delivered, therefore I pray
thee to stablish my memory that I may hold fast thy blessed truth, and may
always have it in store against the time of need. To this end, make me
careful in the use of all good private means, such as are Prayer, meditation,
conference with others as occasion shall require. Beget in me a godly
discretion, that I may diligently search the Scriptures, whether the things I
hear, are so, and may try all things; neither rashly rejecting, nor suddenly
believing whatsoever is delivered. And when I have found thy truth, so
stablish my heart, that I may not waver nor be carried about with every wind of
doctrine, but may continue in the things which I have learned, laboring daily
to be led forward unto more perfection. And seeing, hearing and knowing
without practice do but increase unto more condemnation, therefore (O Lord) do
thou so water that which I hear, with thy heavenly deaw, that it may bring
forth much fruit in my life, and that I maybe a credit to my profession, and
no disgrace nor slander to thy truth: Grant all these things for thy dear
Sons sake Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and thy blessed Spirit, I desire to
ascribe all honor and glory now and for ever. Amen.

7. Another of the like nature, respecting the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
I Am taught (O Lord) that without thee I can do nothing, and that all mine
endeauours are in vain without thy blessing. In due regard whereof, I am
become an humble suter unto thy majesty, that thou would be pleased to
prosper and to direct my present purpose of communicating at thy table. It is
thy will that I should often come unto this holy banquet, for ye strengthening
my faith, and for the preservation of ye memory of Christ's death. O Lord,
strike my heart with reverence unto it as unto thy ordinance, and as to a feast
to which thou have tied thy more especial presence, that I may not dare to
press in before thee unprepared. Before I come, teach me to grow into a very
strict examination of mine own Soul, that I may see how I have lived, and in
what measure I am furnished for so weighty a service. And, because I know that
the more I look into my self, the more I shall see mine own nakedness and
deformity, therefore I pray thee to supply me from thy infinite fullness; Give
me a through understanding of the misery of my estate, who am by nature a
child of wrath as well as others. Make me to see the heinousness of those
innumerable evils and gross sins which I have multiplied before thee from
time to time; nay, which I have run into since my last presenting my self
before thee at thy board, when I promised better obedience. O cause my stony
heart to bleed within me, when I think upon mine own scantnesse in good
duties and upon my delight and forwardness to transgress. Make me to be
ashamed and even confounded in my self for those many enormities which from my
corrupt and unreformed heart do continually break forth into my outward man,
every member being a very weapon of unrighteousness to do service unto
satan. Thus (O Lord) shall thy mercyes in Christ be sweet unto me, and I shall
come with an hungring and thirsting soul unto thy table. And I pray thee to
increase in me that gift of faith, that I may both come to this thine
ordinance with a desire to enlarge it, and may also feel it to receive
strength and growth of assurance of mine own personal and particular interest
into ye death of Christ. Remove far from me all swelling, disdainefull and
uncharitable affections: O Lord, this is a feast of love, and to it a
malicious and a reuengeful heart can be no welcome guest. And when I have
presented my self at thy table, I beseech thee to restrain my idle and
gadding thoughts, draw them to the earnest and serious meditation of that
which is ye life of the Sacrament, the death of my Savior. Ravish my Soul
with the admiration of his love, that should give himself to die for me a most
vile, unworthy and sinful creature. Stir me up, even to vow and
consecrate my self for ever unto him that has vouchsafed himself to be a
sacrifice for me. And after I have received these pledges of thy love, and
seals of thy favor in thy dearest Son, O make me truly thankful to thy
majesty, and careful both at the present, and ever after, to show forth the
fruits of thankfulness in an holy and religious conversation, to thy glory,
the good of others, and mine own eternal comfort in Jesus Christ my Savior.
Amen.

8. Presently after Receiving, before the Thanksgiving by the whole
Congregation, a man may secretly lift up his soul on this fashion.
AFfect my heart (O Lord) with this evidence of thy love, teach me in it to
see the riches of thy grace, who art pleased for my weakness sake by such
familiar means to figure out before me, and to seal up unto my soul, a
treasure of that infinite worth, as is thy favor in Jesus Christ. O that I may
as sensibly feel his death to be sweet unto my Soul, as I do these creatures
of bread and wine, to afford a pleasing taste and refreshing to my body. O Lord
evermore give me such a feeling. And now (O heavenly Father) suffer me not to
depart hence forgetful of thy kindness: but grant that I may now at this
instant even covenant with mine own soul, to walk in a better course of holy
obedience then heretofore, respecting all thy commandments, and endeavoring
always to have a clear conscience before thee and before all men; that so
glorifying thee in this life, I may be glorified with thee in thy kingdom
through Jesus Christ. Amen.

9. A Prayer for the afflicted in what kind soever.
O Gracious God, how happy am I, who have such a strong tower as thy great name
to run unto, especially now in this sad and heavy day of tribulation? I see (O
Lord) by continual experience, that the help of man is vain, and that all
earthly co^tentments, notwithstanding the flattering show they make, yet are
but as a staff of reed, upon which if a man lean, it will run into his
hand and pearce it. If I turn me to my ancient lovers and friends, it may
be they will stand aside from my plague, and mine old acquaintance will hide
themselves, and I shall be even as a stranger in the sight of my familiars: If I
seek to my neighbors. alas, what refreshing shall I find? Truth it is (O
God) and thou have so ordained, that he which is in misery should be comforted
by his neighbor: but men have forsaken ye fear of ye Almighty; so that he,
which is ready to fall, is as a despised lamp, and few are apt to weep with
him that is in trouble: Besides, the greatest part are so overcome with gross
ignorance, yt they are miserable co^forters and physicia^s of no value, not
able to minister a word in time to him yt is weary. Whither then, or to whom
shall I go but unto thee (O most gracious and tender Father)? Thou art a
pitiful God, thy compassions are great, thou art the Father of mercies, and
the God of all comfort, thou make the wound, and bindest it up, thou smitest,
and thy hands do make whole, thou have commanded to call upon thee in the day
of trouble, and thou art a help ready to be found. To thee, therefore do I
lift up my soul: Incline thine ear (O Lord) and hear, open thine eyes (O
Lord) and see, look mercifully upon thine afflicted servant: the days of sorrow
are come upon me, even changes and armies of miseries are against me. If my
grief were waighed, it would be heavier then the sand of the sea; I am broken
with one breaking upon another. Make me (I pray thee) to consider seriously, yt
it is eue^ thou which have done all this, that these things come not by
chance, but by thy providence and certain appointment, that so I may be dumme
and not open my mouth to murmr or repine. Open mine eyes that I may see mine
own deseruings, and what cause I have given thee even to crush me to pieces
with thy heavy judgments, yea to cause the pit of thy eternal vengeance to
shut her mouth upon me. What cause have I left unto me to complain, when I am
less then thy smallest mercy, and my sins greater then the greatest sorrow
thou have laid upon me? It is thy love (O Lord) from whence this proceeds.
In this course, thou do offer thy self unto me as to a son: thou know
my corruptions, the rebellion of my heart, the crookedness and vnreformednes
of my nature, thou see before some great evil that I am like to fall into,
if I be left unto mine own course, thou find me to be forgetful of my
duty to thee, cold in Prayer, backward and lumpish in holy services,
well-neere lulled asleep in the common security of the times: It is thy
wisdom to rouse me up, and to put thy hook of affliction into my nostrils,
to bring me back into that good way from which I am falling. I know thou
do therefore chasten me, that I may not be condemned with the world. O teach
me (I pray thee) to learn to judge my self, to search and to try my ways, to
pry into my course bypast, that I may find out those evils which bear in me
the greatest sway, and may in some measure understand, what it is which thou
aymest at in afflicting me.

And enable me withal to reform mine errors, to recover my wandering, and to
get a happy victory over my rebellious flesh: that I may be able to say
hereafter, It is good for me that I was in trouble, blessed be the time that
the Lord afflicted me; and how sweet is the quiet fruit of righteousness
which springs forth from the bitter root of tribulation? In the mean space
(O Lord) until it shall please thee to put an end to my present grieuaunces,
teach me, not to make haste, or to seek by vile and unwarrantable courses to
wind my self out of thy hands, but grant that I may tarry thy leisure with
patience, not daring to prescribe unto thee what to do. And when this storm
is over, and the sorrow past O keep me from security, make me to remember
the vows and promises of obedience which I now make unto ^hee prepare me to a
fresh trial, that my care may be to be provided for whatsoever thy pleasure
shall be to lay upon me. Hear me in this, and in all other my suites, for
his sake in whom thou art best pleased, even Jesus Christ the righteous. Amen.

13. A Prayer, in respect of some loss received, as of honor, or goods, etc.
O Eternal God, ye God of providence, the orderer and the disposer of all
things both in heaven and in earth: Be ready (I beseech thee) to hear the
Prayer of thy distressed servant. Help my weakness (I entreat thee) and
quicken me to the performance of this duty of calling upon thy Name. I am
eue^ ashamed of my self, to see mine own faintnes, and how soon I am cast
down upon every occasion. O raise me up (I pray thee) and make me to lift my
heart toward thee, according to whose good pleasure all things come to pass:
Is it not thou (O Lord) which have laid these things upon me? art not thou he
who both give and take at thy will? art not thou the judge which make low
and which make high? shall I murmr against thee, which have such an
absolute and uncontrollable soueraingty over al? shall I receive good at thy
hand, and not evil? O keep down my repining and mutinous and discontented
thoughts, allay ye height and hautinesse of my spirit, teach me how to be
abased and to have want, make me to see the vanity of that which I was wont
even to admire, and to set my heart upon. Let this abridgement be a school
master unto me, that I may learn by it to draw mine affections from these
fading and transitory commodities. O Lord, what is honor? Is it not a blast,
or as smoke which quickly vanishes? What is wealth? Is it not lighter then
vanity it self? does it not take her to her wings as an Eagle and fly into
the heaven? O knit my heart henceforth unto thee: O blessed Father, fasten my
affections on the things which are above where Christ sits at thy right
hand: make me to lay up treasure in heaven, and to seek after that kingdom
of thine, which cannot be shaken: frame my heart to the choice of the better
part, of which I can never be deprived. Let me affect the true honor which
stands in the faithful service of my savior. Let me labor for that enduring
and durable riches, which consistes in the knowledge of thee, and in the
feeling of thy gracious savor. Suffer me not (I pray thee) so to limit thy
power, as to think that thou art not now able to supply me, since the means
which I was wont to enjoy is taken from me; but make me faithfully to
consider, that thy hand is not shortened, but that thou have enough in store
for those that love thee. Thou art able to give me a great deal more, and
after thou have exercised me awhile, to bless my last days with more
abundance then the first: thou can make the little meal in the barrel not
to waste, and the small quantity of oil not to diminish: thou can cause a
small thing to be better unto me then great riches to the mighty, and a
dinner of green herbs to be more sauory to me, then a stalled Ox to them.
O therefore I beseech thee, restrain my desires, make me willingly to submit
my self to thy wisdom; Let thy providence and promise be my storehouse, and
the stock that I rely unto: let this satisfy me, that though I lose all that
I have, yet inasmuch as thou have once loved me in Christ, I shall never lose
thy favor. And let not the beholding of my children and family disharten me,
or make me to cast perils, and to say, Wherewith shall I feed them? How shall
I clothe them? O Lord they are better then many sparrowes, and dearer unto thee
then the lylies of the field; thy promise of mercy is entayled to my
posterity: O let my faith rest upon this foundation. Prepare me (I pray thee)
to further trials, make me ready by degrees to lose even my life it self, if
it may be for thy glory. And thus (O Lord) desiring to recko^ even this cross
(though my unreformed nature does gainesay it) among thy chiefest favors, I
commend my self and my poor Prayers unto thee in Christ Jesus thy beloved
Son, and my believed savior. Amen.

11. A Prayer, fitted to the loss of an especial friend, as a Father or
Husband, etc.
O Almighty Lord God, whose glory is above the heavens, and which have thy
dwelling on high, but yet abasest thy self to behold the things in the earth,
be pleased, even for thy dearest Sons sake, to cast down thy compassionate
eye upon my afflicted and grieved case. Comfort (Lord) comfort (I pray thee)
thy servants soul, suffer me not to be swallowed up of discouragement. Thou
have taken from me the very staff of mine estate, one, upon who^ (in the ey
of flesh and blood) al my comfort did depend; He is now gone ye way of all
flesh, and has made his bed in the dark: yet you (O Lord) still live, thou
art always the same, and thy years shall not fail. O raise up (I beseech
thee) my languishing and discouraged heart, my drowping thoughts: make me to
look toward thee, from whom alone all comfort comes. Have thou done this,
and shall I control it? Is death thy messenger, and shall I murmr at his
coming? Is my dearest friend, whom I loved as mine own heart, gathered unto
thee, his appointed months being now expired, and shall I lament his happiness?
Do thou still hold me with thy hand, and even compass me about with thy
gracious providence, and shall I distrust? Is thy purpose and promise and power
to be my God, ye same yet that it was, and shall I be doubtful, as though I
had made flesh mine arm, or as if you (O alsufficient God) were tied unto
outward means? Must not I also ere it be long make ye grave my house, and lie
down with others in ye dust? Is there not an assured hope yt all ye live and
dye in the Lord Jesus, shall be joined together after death, and at the last
day be caught up in the clouds to meet the Judge in the air, and after
that to be ever with the Lord! I most earnestly beseech the therefore (O my
most gracious God) to moderate my passionate and vnrulely thoughts, to bring my
violent affections into a holy compass: Let me not be sorrowful like those
which have no hope, make me to rejoice on his behalf, whose pilgrimage is at
end, and whose Christian and holy cause does even assure me, that thou have
received him into everlasting habitations. Teach me to have a holy and prepared
longing for the day of my dissolution: And grant me that grace and wisdom, so
to love those whom both Nature and Religion bind me to respect, that I may
always conform and submit my affections to thy most wise and sovereign
disposings. To be without apprehension of such losses, I know by thy word,
that it is impious; to be extreme and without measure in passion, is
desperate: Keep me, I beseech thee, in ye mean, that my sorrows may be
tempered with comfort, and my heart may always be fixed surely upon thee:
Afford me both this and all other needful favors in and for the merits of
my alone Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

12. A Prayer applied to the state of a man inwardly perplexed with the horror
of sin, with doubtings of Gods favor, and with the tentations of satan
tending to despair.
O Thou most pitiful God, and to those who^ thou love in Jesus Christ, most
tender Father, never did there any poor chased Heart bray after the rivers of
water, so as my distressed and amazed Soul pants after thee. Oh that I had
faith to lay hold upon that most sweet promise, by which thou call all that
are weary and laden to come unto thee. Feign I would (O Lord) approach into thy
gracious presence, and happy seem I to my self, if I might taste though but
(as it were) some crummes of thy rich mercy. Me thinks that all things
which I see in the world and which the sons of men do dote upon so
exceedingly, are but dung and dross in comparison of thy favor: Oh that I
might be but one of the lowest of saints, or (as it were) a seruitor or door
keeper among thy holy ones. Thus I see thy mercy, I admire it, I prefer it in
my choice before the greatest treasure: but when I would apply it to my own
particular case, Oh what a world of discourageme^ts do I meet with? My sins
do take such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up: they are so
many, yea more in number then the hayres of my head, that my heart does even
fail me to consider them. When I think how my Soul and Spirit is fraughted
and defiled even with whole millions of profane, hardened, secure, vicious,
worldly and unsanctified thoghts, how many offers of grace I have neglected,
how thy forbearance has been abused by me, how I have been a reproach and
slander to thy Gospel, how dead and lumpish and false-hearted I have been in
thy service, how barren in good works, and what little proceedings I have
made, going rather backward then striving unto more perfection, how I have
contented my self with shows of godliness: when (I say) I think upon these
and other my gross and palpable enormities, I cannot but utterly condemn my
self, neither can I believe that it is possible for so vile a wretch as I, to
be admitted into thy favor. Sometimes I conceive some little hope, and I seem
to my self to have some taste of thy favor, and some kind of assurance that
I am dear unto thee in thy Son; but suddenly my comfort vanishes, my hope
is ouerclouded with perplexed doubtings, and I am well-neere swallowed up with
mere despair. Can any mortal man (think I) know the mind of God: or if some
holy person may be so far graced, as to understand Gods purpose touching
himself; is it possible that so vile a creature as I, should come to such a
high prerogative? Can the Spirit of the Lord, dwell in such a stinking and
polluted soul as mine? will he vouchsafe to give me an assurance of Gods
favor? Or if I might know now that I am in the state of grace, what
assurance can I have, that I shall so continue, being beset with many
imperfections? Thus (O Lord) mine own thoughts oppress me, and mine own
soul does plead the case against it self: Neither is Satan, the ancient
enemy of thine Elect, wanting, to add affliction to my misery.

Heretofore his manner has been, to incite and to provoke me unto sin, by
hyding and covering the ugly and most loathesome face thereof, and to bear me
in hand, that it was a very easy thing to repent, and that also thy favor (O
Lord) might be procured by and by: Now he enlarges my evils, and makes my
sins to appear before my conscience in most terrible and hideous shapes; he
tells me, that my hypocrisy is apparent, that the guile of my heart is
written in great letters and cannot be denied, that it is now in vain for me
to sue for grace, there being no hope of mercy left for such offenders: that
it is to no purpose for me to pray; for as I can not pray as I should,
otherwise then in hypocrisy, so neither (if I could pray aright) can there be
any access unto the throne of grace for the requests of such a trespasser.
Notwithstanding (O most gracious God) even in despite of his suggestions and
amidst all those discouragements which mine own heart mustereth against me. I
do here adventure my self into thy most glorious presence; If I shall find
favor in thine eyes, show me the light of thy countenance and I shall be
safe: If thou say, I have no delight in thee, behold, here I am, do to me as
seems good in thine own eyes. I know what thou have spoken in thy word,
namely: that if I draw near unto thee, thou will draw near unto me, and
that thou will fulfill the desires, and accept ye vnexpresseable groans and
sighings of thy servants: Truth it is (O Lord) I dare not say that I draw
near unto thee as I should, or that my desires are such as they ought to be,
or that I groan under my sins with such an effectual and pearcing feeling
as is fit.

All that I am able to do, and that in much weakness, is to cry fayntly unto
thee, Oh draw me, and I will run after thee, make me to desire thy mercy in
sincerity, bruise my heart, that it may yield out many undissembled sighings
after thee. Yet (O Lord) though there be in me but such poor beginnings of
grace, suffer me not (I beseech thee) to cast away my confidence. I am well
assured that thou have not forgotten ye promise of not breaking the bruised
reed, nor putting out the smoking flax, and of giving a blessing unto those
which hunger after righteousness.

Is it possible (O Lord) that thou should leave off to be gracious, and
shut up thy tender mercies in displeasure? Did not thou send thy son into
the world to dye even for chief sinners? Is it not true, that when sin
abounds, there thy grace abou^deth much more? Could I ever so much as truly
desire reconciliation with th^e unless thou did work it in me? Is not this
request, Lord, help my unbelief, the very voice of thy spirit within me?
Could I complain of the hardness of my heart, or sincerely loathe mine own
corruptions as being displeasing to thy majesty, if thine own finger had not
effected it? Should I feel such a combat in my Soul, and such a tumult
within me, if thou had not truly begun to draw me to thy self? Would
satan so continually molest me, and so egerly pursue me with variety of most
malicious and sharp assaults, if I were still held captive by him at his will?
Raise me up therefore (O Lord) I pray thee, refresh my dejected and cast
down soul, perfect the work of grace which thou have begun within me, make
me to hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice. Thou have set me as a mark unto thy self, thou have written bitter
things against me, and made me to possess my former iniquities, thou have
hidden thy face from me, and taken me for thine enemy: comfort me now according
to the days that thou have afflicted me, let me behold thy face in
righteousness, and restore unto me the joy of thy salvation. Rebuke satan, I
most humbly beseech thee: though thou please to buffet me with his messengers,
yet let thy grace be sufficient for me, and make thine own power in reviving
me, perfect and manifest by my weakness, which of it sell is ready to be
pressed down with every tentation. Give me that holy wisdom, not to believe
satan, no, though he speak the truth; inasmuch as he is the father of lies,
and never speaks truth but for a wicked purpose. And (O Lord) as thou
encreasest my comfort, so withal increase my care, that I may not fall from
perplexity to security, but that I may always keep my heart with all
diligence, proouing my faith, and searching my ways, and exercising my self
unto godliness. Make me a careful and an understanding hearer of thy word,
since it is the word of life, a quickening word, a word which does rejoice the
heart; and because, except that be my delight, I shall utterly perish in mine
afflictions.

Make me circumspect to prevent sin, and fearful over my self, that sin
may not grow strong upon me: and grant that I may study to preserve the peace
of my conscience above all things, taking heed of wounding it with presumptuous
sins. And (O Lord) stablish me with thy free spirit, that albeit satan seek
to sift me and to winnow me as wheat, yet my faith may never fail, but may be
as mount Zio^ which cannot be removed, but remains for evermore. Thus (O my
gracious God) having, through thy mercy, peace in believing, and joy in thy
holy spirit, I shall finish my course in comfort: which I pray thee grant me
for his sake who is ye Prince of peace, even Jesus Christ, to whom with thee
and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, now and for ever. Amen.

13. A Prayer, then needful, when a man has some special combat with some
one or more special sins, against which he desires victory.
O Loving Father in Jesus Christ, it has pleased thee of thine abundant mercy
to give leave to every humbled and distressed sinner, to pour out his Soul
before thee, and thou have bound thy self by a promise both to hear and to
help all those which seek thee with an unfeigned heart; The confident
assurance hereof has given me courage (albeit most unworthy) to present my
self here before thee, and to conceive hope yt thou will not send me empty
away. Wounded (O Lord) I am with mine own heinous sins, my untamed flesh does
always rebel and lust against my spirit: some good motions and purposes I
sometimes have, but (alas) they are quickly quenched, and ye law of my members
so prevails, that I cannot do ye good which I would. I have in me (I
confess) the seed of every sin, and my nature is apt to be wrought unto any
kind of evil. But (O God) there are some principal corruptions which do bear
in me ye greatest sway, and they do so even reign in my mortal body, yt I am
forced to obey them in the lusts thereof: The devil also is full of most
malicious policy and he still works upon all adua^tages, and out of al
things almost takes occasion to add fuel to my wicked desires, and by
pleasing and delightful baits to lead them on unto a hellish perfection. The
more I strive, the stronger (me thinks) these corruptions grow: which makes
me to fear ye utter quenching of thy gracrs, and the grieuing of thy holy
spirit. Hereby my Prayers are interrupted, my meditations perplexed, and robbed
of their wonted sweetness, my hearing and reading of thy word is made
unprofitable: My faith is encountered with grievous doubtings, because I cannot
feel that strength and power of thy spirit which I would. O Lord, if thy mercy
be not my stay, I must needs be overcome: whom have I in Heaven but thee?
whither shall I fly but to thy gracious assistance? I beseech thee, to have
compassion on me, crucify and kill these unruly lusts, abate ye strength of
these violent and wicked desires: Weaken them, I pray thee, and suffer them not
to have dominion over me. Let thy Spirit guide me, and lead me into the land
of righteousness. Or if it be thy pleasure (O Lord) still to exercise me, yet
leave me not destitute of thy grace, but increase it in me, that I may grow
unto a larger measure of sanctification: Make me hereby the more fervent and
frequent in Prayer, the more strait to prevent all occasions leading unto
evil, ye more ielous over my ways, the more humble and vile in mine own
sight: that so even out of evil there may spring good unto me, and that I may
see the fulfilling of that holy promise, that all things work together for the
best unto thy servants. Hear me (I entreat thee) in this, and in all other my
requests, for Christ Jesus sake thy best beloved Son, and the only savior
of thy chosen. Amen.

14. A Prayer of Humiliation and sorrow, after some special sin committed.
O My God, I am ashamed and confounded to lift up mine eyes unto thee: mine
iniquities are increased over my head, and my trespasses are grown up unto the
heaven. I must needs wonder at thy great forbearance, that I am not even
swallowed up or swept away with some extraordinary judgment. And now (O
Lord) especially, having so grossly sinned against thee, and done so great an
evil in thy sight; How have I (vile wretch yt I am) wounded my own
conscience? How have I laid my self open to ye malice and mischief of the
devil? What a disgrace and slander have I brought upon my profession? What an
offense and scandal have I given unto others? What a joy will this be to the
wicked, that they have now by me gotten something to speak evil of? But (above
all O Lord) how have I dishonored thee, whose favors have bin so many and so
continual toward me? I know not with what names and terms to set out my sin,
sufficient to expres the heinous and hideous nature thereof.

When I think upon thy patience, upon the means of grace which thou have
afforded me, upon ye light of knowledge which thou have given me, upon the good
motions, (as it were so many gracious aduertisements) which thou have from time
to time, stirred up in me, upon the profession which I make, upon the sundry
promises and vows of better obedience with which I have tied my self unto thy
Majesty, upon the diverse admonitions which (by thy providence I know) have
been used to me by thy servant, purposely to prevent and to stop this
evil in me, me thinks I may call it rebellion (which is as the sin of
witchcraft) or presumption in the highest degree. And yet (O Lord) I feel such
a benummednesse to creep upon me, such a hardened crust to grow upon my
secret parts, that albeit I see my sin, and know it to be exceeding great,
nevertheless I cannot so bemone it, so lament it, so grieve for it, so detest
and abhor it, as I should. Smite (O gracious God) smite, I beseech thee my
flinty heart, make it even to melt within me, at the sight of mine own
transgressions; Settle in it ye godly sorrow, which canseth repentance unto
salvation: Humble my soul under thy mighty hand, and suffer me not to freeze
in the dregs of mine own corruptions. Make mine head full of water, and mine
eyes a fountain of tears which may run down, like a river, day and night:
Oh let me take no rest, nor suffer the apple of mine eye to cease: cause me to
power out my heart like water before thy face, that I may by all means
testify the unfeigned grief of my soul that I have so displeased thee. And
grant (O Lord) that I may not sorrow so much because of hell and condemnation
which I have made to be due unto me, but that my chief vexation may be to
think how I have abused thy mercy, and requited thy exceeding love with so
foul a trespass. Withal (O most gracious Father) seeing there is mercy with
thee, and that thou have no desire that the wicked should dye, give me leave to
become a sufer unto thy grace, not in mine own name (for what am I that I
should press into thy presence?) but in the name of thy dearest Son, the
alone Mediator, and the only Peacemaker of his chosen. I most humbly beseech
thee for his sake to have mercy on me: O Lord, a plaster of his blood shall be
a most sovereign medicine, to cure my running and rotten and festered sore.
His stripes and wounds are of an healing nature: no soap, nor nitre of mine
own tempering can purge away my filthiness: only his blood has that scouring
force, that it can make scarlet and crimson sin as white as wool. Oh then, I
pray thee, wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and according to the
multitude of thy compassions, cleanse me from my sin. Turn thy face from me,
and from my hateful and enormous course, and look upon the perfect and
unspotted righteousness of thy son. Supply my emptienes out of his infinite
fulness, the depth whereof cannot be fadomed, nor the store thereof consumed.
Cover my uncleanness with the rove of his holiness, even with the garment of
salvation, with which thou deckest and tirest thine elect. And albeit I am of
all others which either have been, are, or shall be, the most unworthy: yet
vouchsafe to certify my Soul of thy grace and favor, by the secret teaching
of thy holy Spirit, make me to feel inwardly the joy of thy salvation, restore
to me that sweet taste of thy love, which I was wont to have, and which I now
have robbed my self of, by this my disobedience toward thee. Let the
apprehension of my sin be tempered with a comfortable application of thy
mercy, that I may hold an even course betwixt fearelesse security and
faith-lesse despair; beholding at once, both my vileness to humble me, and the
riches of thy grace to revive me. And, as an evidence of thy love in this
behalf, strengthen me by thy grace to the making of the best use of mine own
corruptions: Grant that the thought of them may kill in me al pride of heart,
and may make me to abase my self and to become even vile in my own sight; Grant
me to be hereupo^ the more watchful over my course, ye more diligent to avoid
all inducements and inticements unto these or the like evils, ye more apt to be
taught, the more willing to be admonished, ye more forward to beg thy
assistance, and the more charitably co^passionate toward others, rather
pitying and bemoaning and praying for, then censuring their infirmities. And
(Lord) suffer me not, I beseech thee to satisfy my self with this, that I
have once made some show of humiliatio^ and sorrow for my falls: but grant, I
may increase in the performance of these duetyes, and may every day renew and
enlarge my repentance for particular slippes, growing still into a deeper
detestation of my sins, and desiring with more and more earnestness and
striving, to be renewed in the Spirit of my mind: that so being cleansed from
all filthiness both of the flesh and Spirit, I may grow up unto full
holiness in thy fear, through Jesus Christ. In whose name only I commend unto
thee my requests, and for whose sake thou have promised to deny nothing to thy
servants. So be it. *

11. A Prayer in respect of death, needful at all times but especially in
sickness.
O God, the God of the Spirits of all flesh, and which have the keys of hell
and of death; thou have prepared them both, and thou rulest them both at thine
own pleasure. I beseech thee be merciful to a poor trembling and
weak-hearted sinner, and vouchsafe to preserve me from the horror and
extreamitie of dread, into which I am even now ready to fall. When I consider
(O Lord) how that I dwell in a house of clay, my foundation being in ye dust,
and yt I must erelong make my bed in the dark, saying to corruption, Thou art
my Father, and to the worm, Thou art my Mother, and my Sister, O how my belly
trembles, and what a kind of rottenness comes into my bones! my spirit
seeming to fail me, and my heart within me being filled with dismayednes.
Especially, when I think upon the judgment that comes after it, and the
straitness of that account which I am instantly to be called to, and upon
those everlasting chains under darkness in which the wicked are reserved unto
the last sessions, I am then so even overwhelmed with amazedness, that I seem
to my self for the present, not to know where to find any true refreshing. I
am told by thy blessed and not-deceiuing word, that the sting of death is mine
own sin, and with it I daily feel my self goared and galled and wounded so
exceedingly, that (me thinks) to me (poor wretch) there can be no hope of
recovery, but death must needs be as a passage to lead me into the
bottomless prison of hell. Raise up (O Lord I beseech thee) these my sad and
unquiet thoughts, teach me how to overcome these discouraging and killing
perplexities, ye death may not be unto me as a king of fear: nor I, as one of
ye wicked, whose hope does perish with their breath, and the candle of whose
comfort is put out, when thou art pleased to take away their Soul Revive my
memory, that I may call to mind, and co^fortably ponder those things which thy
sacred word has taught me: namely, how the nature of death is clean altered
to thy servants, the sting is plucked out, and it self is swallowed up in
victory. To them the coming thereof shall be a time of discharge, they shall
by it be freed from sicknesses of body, from anguishes of spirit, from all
possibility of sinning against their God, from the tedious and discontenting
society of the ungodly: their flesh shall rest in hope, their graves shall be
unto them as beds of ease, being sweetened and seasoned by the burial of their
Savior: the Angels shall give attendance upon their Souls, to convey the^
into Abraham's Bosom, to the fellowship of belieuers, to the spirits of just
and perfect men; so shall they be with Christ: which is best of all. This (O
Lord) is the happiness which comes by death unto thy chosen: Oh what are
all the most torturing sicknesses, the bitter pangs and sorrows of the grave,
unto such a glorious exchange? Who would fear corruption, for a never sading
crown of righteousness? What is a momentany yielding of the body to
consumption in the dust, in comparison of the everlasting preservation of ye
Soul, with assurance also, that in the time appointed these vile bodies shall
by the mighty working of thy beloved Son, be fashioned like unto his own
glorious body, and so both bodies and souls be for ever with him in his
kingdom.

Teach me (O Lord) effectually to apply these things to mine own comfort,
that so this timorousness proceeding from the guilt of sin, may be turned
into a cheerful expectation, and even a longing for the day of my dissolution.

And, lest I should beguile my own Soul, in laying claim to that spiritual
refreshing which belonges not to me, make me to labor for those assured
evidences and vndeceiuing forerunners of a happy departure. I know (O Lord)
that if I live here without conscience, I shall surely dye without comfort.

Holiness here, is the way and path to future happiness. I must seek to
glorify thee, if I desire to be glorified with thee, I must fight the good
fight against satan, against the world, against mine own corruption, I must
faithfully fulfill my course, and perform the service to which thou have
appointed me, I must know thy truth, and keep the faith in soundnes and
sincerity to the end: otherwise it will be in vain to exspect a crown of
righteousness. I must come to the first resurrection, or else I shall never
escape the second death: Grant me therefore grace (I humbly pray thee) to
serve thee in holiness and righteousness all my days, and to endeavor
always to have a clear conscience toward thee, and toward men; Kill my
corruption in me, that I may be even dead to sin, but alive to thee in
Jesus Christ. And because if I live after the flesh, taking thought for it to
fulfill it, I shall dye; therefore, I beseech thee, to mortify the deeds of
the body by thy spirit, that so I may have my fruit in holiness, and my end
eternal life. Teach me often to number my days, and to consider the
uncertain certainty of my end, that I may dye even every day, still looking
and still preparing for my change, and making account that each day may be the
day of my dissolution. Strengthen also my weak and faint faith, make me
strong in thee and in the power of thy might, seal me with the holy spirit of
promise, as with the earnest of my heavenly inheritance, that so no anguish of
sickness may discourage me, no pang of death dismay me, no assault of satan
overcome me; but that, come death when it will, or in what manner it shall
please thee, I may boldly (through Christ) commit my soul to thee as unto a
faithful creator: Grant me this comfortable blessing for his sake, who dyed to
free me from death, and from him yt had the power of death, even for Christ
Jesus sake. Amen.

16. A Prayer more specially fitted to the state and occasions of a sick
person.
O Most merciful and gracious God, thou, whose providence reaches into the
most withdrawn and solitary places, and which causest the beams of thy
favor to shine even upon chief sinners, vouchsafe to cast thy co^passionate
ey upon thine afflicted creature, who^ thou have laid upon his bed of sickness.
Just (O Lord) it is with thee thus to chasten me: nay, if thou should crush
my body into many pieces, and suddenly plunge me into hell, it were no more
then my due desert. What a stained sinner am I by nature, stripped of al goodness,
and easy to be wrought unto any, even the vilest evil? What a world of
trespasses have been since committed by me, notwithstanding the greatness of
thy patience, and the variety of good means which thou have used both to
inform and to guide me unto godliness? I will not therefore (O Lord) I dare
not, I cannot plead against thee; It is my duty rather to magnify thy mercy,
who art pleased so mildly and so fatherly to correct me; it being free to thy
justice, to cut me off as an ear of Corn, and to give me over to the prince
of darkness, and to leave me for ever to that woeful kingdom of eternal
misery. Unworthy I am (I most willingly confess) because of my former
slackenes and coldness in this duty of calling upon thy Name, to have any small
access into thy presence: Yet seeing thou art wont ever more to respect the
truth of thine own promise, then the desert of those which pray unto thee,
therefore I beseech thee, which art pleased to call thy self The hearer of
Prayers; to hearken unto the hearty and unfeigned desire of my soul. Sanctify
unto me (O Lord) this present sickness, let it be as thy school, in which I
may truly learn to know my self more effectually then heretofore. Make me to
consider seriously that al pain and grief is but the fruit of sin, and
that as all sickness naturally makes way for death, so death (in it self) is
the forerunner of eternal condemnation. Bless this thought and this
meditation so unto me, that I may make it my first care (now in this
visitation) to seek peace and assurance of reconcilement with thy Majesty. To
this end give me a deep touch and a sensible understanding of my sins by
past, take from me all guile of spirit, all disposition to flatter or to sooth
up my self, or to lessen either the number or quality of mine iniquities;
Cause me even to break and plough up my heart, to search and to try my
ways, that so out of the abundance of my feeling, I may power out a most
plentiful and sincere confession before thee. Let me remember it to be in
vain to seek to hide that from thee, which thou (before whom all things are
naked and open) do know more fully and more directly then my self; and that
the discovery and laying open of my sins, is the next way to find thy mercy in
forgiving them.

Add withal that strength unto my scant and smoking faith, that I may, amidde
the sight of mine own transgressions, lay hold upon the merit and fulness of
my Savior. Make me heartily to disclaim all hope of help by my self, or any
other creature in Heaven or Earth whomsoever, and to cast all my burden upon
him, who by himself has purged sin, and whose death is an absolute and an
alsufficient sacrifice for the guilt of all belieuers. Oh that I may feel my
self knit and united unto him: so shall I, in and by him, be presented
blameles to thy Majesty. And because (O Lord) I am full of imperfections, and
there is in my nature much weakness, and a great deal of frowardnes and
readiness to repine and rebel against thy ordinance, therefore furnish me with
necessary graces, and with all such gifts as thou know to be fit for my
present case: Endue me with patience, to bear whatsoever it shall be thy
pleasure to lay upon me, and meekly to submit my self to thy most wise
appointments: Assure me that thou which know whereof I am made, and that I
am but dust, wilt not oppress me with more then thou shall give me strength
and power to endure. Let me not desire life, otherwise then for the further
advancement of thy glory. Subdue in me all love and liking of this present
world, grant that the hope of the glory which shall be showed hereafter, may be
so strong within me, that all things may seem vile unto me in comparison
thereof. Make me comfortably capable of the advice and counsel of my Christian
friends, which in their love shall go about to refresh my Soul. Make me able
also to speak profitably and for good to those that belong unto me; Put upon
me and in me charitable affections and thoughts, to, and concerning others,
being ready to satisfy where I have failed, and to remit even where I have
received the greatest wrong.

Prepare me to my last conflict, and strengthen me against satan's assaults,
that in despite of his malice, yet I may still hold me fast by thee, and
resolve, though thou slay me, yet to trust upon thee. And because (such is thy
great goodness to us thy poor creatures) sickness does not always exercise
his full strength upon our bodies: therefore give me (I beseech thee) that
wisdom to make use of every breathing, and of every little time of ease which
thou do afforde me, that in it I may gather strength against the times of
greater anguish. Bring still into my mind, those things which I have from time
to time learned by thy word, that thereby I may be quickened and find comfort
in my greatest need. And always (O Lord) as the time of departure shall
approache, so let my soul draw nearer unto thee, my heart powerfully crying,
when sickness shall take away ye use of my tongue, Into thy hands I commend my
Spirit: Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. And when death has parted my Soul from
my body, let thy Angels (which do always by thy appointment pitch their tents
about thy servants) convey it into that place of rest, which the blood of thy
Son has provided and purchased for thy chosen. To which thy Son with thy
self and thy blessed Spirit be praise and thanksgiving now and evermore. Ame^.

17. A direction for those who desire to perform the Christian duty of prayer
on the behalf of a sick friend or neighbor whom they come to visit.
We are unworthy (O Lord) to speak unto thy Majesty either for our selves
or others: yet this duty lying upon us by command, and having a promise of
hearing annexed thereunto, we are bold in Jesus Christ to commend unto thee
the weak estate of this thy servant. All sickness is from thee, and to thee
belong ye issues of death. Thou killest and you make alive thou bring down
to the grave and thou raysest up; to whom shall we go in this and other our
necessities, but only unto thee? We could wish (O gracious God) the
continuance of his Christian fellowship, the lengthening and enlarging of his
days, but we willingly subject our wills to thy determining; Thou (Lord)
know what is the best, and thereunto make us (we beseech thee) willingly and
readily to subscribe, and to desire both his life and our own, only so far
forth as may be for his and our further good in the more dilligent and zealous
advancement of thy glory. Frame him also (we pray thee) unto the like yielding,
and so bless unto him this visitation, that by it he may be more and more
humbled in the sight of his own sins and may increase withal in an unfeigned
and longing desire after Christ: Enlighten his eyes, that he may know what is
the hope of his calling, and what is ye exceeding greatness of thy mercy and
power toward all belieuers. Strengthen his faith, that he may with it
(utterly renouncing himself) lay fast hold upon the merits of our only
Savior. Protect him against satan, blunt the edge of his assaults, that they
may never wound him to despair. Remove from him a dull spirit, and all secure
and hardened thoughts, all worldly desires, al lingering after the deceiving
sweetness of these earthly things. Give him patience to bear, and constancy
to endure whatsoever it shall be thy pleasure to inflict. Vouchsafe him comfort
in conscience, joy in the spirit, peace in believing, together with a settled
and well grounded exspectation of eternal life and salvation by thy Son.
Grant to us tender and feeling hearts, that both his sorrows and the griefs
of other of thy servants may be apprehended, by us as if they were our own:
Let thy word of grace be in our lips, that we may be able to speak holily,
soundly and cheerfully to ye comfort of his soul. Teach us in him and in this
house of mourning to see the end of us all, and to lay it to our hearts, that
so we may labor to be prepared for our last departure. All these graces both
for him and for our selves, we beg in all humility at thy merciful hands,
in the name and worthiness of thy beloved Son, calling further on thee, as he
has taught us in his word; Our Father, etc.

18. A thanksgiving for a sick man, if God be pleased to send recovery.
SVffer me not (O Lord) to be in the number of those, who are forward to ask
in the time of need, but careless to show themselves thankful when mercy is
bestowed. Make me as desirous to come unto thee with this sacrifice of praise,
as I was ready to beg ease and refreshing in the day of my great necessity.
Thou have chastened me (O gracious God) and corrected me, but thou have not
given me over unto death. I looked to have been clean deprived of the
residue of my years and thought I should have seen man no more among the
inhabitants of the world: but it was thy pleasure to deliver my Soul from the
pit of corruption. Oh what shall I render unto thee for this and all other thy
benefits toward me! Oh how and by what means shall I show my self thankful
to thy Majesty! I have nothing (O Lord) to render thee but the calves of my
lips; accept my service (I beseech thee) in Jesus Christ: and let not the
memory of this thy kindness dye within me, but grant that I may often recount
thy mercy, working therewith upon mine own heart, and applying it as an
effectual motive to obedience. Make me ever mindful of the vows and promises
which I made in my sickness, to serve thee more faithfully then heretofore,
that I may make conscience to perform them, knowing that thou delightest not
in fools; and that by my neglect herein, I shall lay my self open unto a
greater judgment. Teach me also to remember this, that albeit thou have now
given me some little respite, yet I must not deceive my self in putting far
off the day of my death, but that I ought rather to use my health and strength
to the better fitting and more effectual preparing my self thereunto.
Together with the increase of bodily and outward strength, increase in me
strength of care to walk with thee, and to approve my self unto thee in all
holy conversation and godliness, being more zealous in Religion, more
watchful over my ways, more earnest in Prayer, more fervent in Spirit, more
careful to profit by thy Word, more faithful in my place and calling then
heretofore, always looking for the blessed hope and appearing of Jesus Christ
my Savior: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, let my heart feelingly and
effectually give all honor, praise, might, majesty and dominion both now and
for ever, Amen.

19. A Prayer for a woman in the time of her travail.
O Lord, I now find by experience the truth and certainty of thy word, and
the smart of that punishment which you laidst upon me being in the loins of my
Gra^d-mother Eve, for my disobedience toward thee: Thou have greatly increased
the sorrows of our sex, and our bearing of children is full of pain. Teach me
by this, to see the desert of sin, and to grow into the hatred of yt which
has brought into the world such store of misery. Give me true repentance and
pardon for my sins past, that they may not stand at this time and in this my
need, betwixt me and thy mercy: Give me a comfortable feeling of thy love in
Christ, which may sweeten all other pangs, though never so violent or extreme:
Make me still to lift up my Soul unto thee in my greatest anguish, knowing
that thou alone must give a blessing to the ordinary means for my safe
delivery. Strengthen my weak body to the bearing of what sorrow soever, by
which it shall seem good unto thee to take trial of me. Make me to remember,
that howsoever it be with me, yet I am always in thy hand, whose mercyes fail
not, and which can give issue to the greatest pain. And when thou have
safely given me the exspected fruit of my womb, make me with a thankful
heart to consecrate both it and the residue of my life to thy service, through
Jesus Christ my Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

20. A Thanksgiving after delivery.
BLessed be thy great Name, (O my most dear and loving Father) for thy large
mercy to me most weak and sinful woman. Thou have showed thy power in my
frailty, and thy loving kindness has prevailed against my unworthiness.
Thou might, for my sins, have left me to perish in my great extremity:
but thou have compassed me about with joyful deliverance. Maruailous (O Lord)
are thy works, infinite are thy mercyes, and my Soul by present experience
knows it well. O my Soul, praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me
praise his holy Name. My Soul, praise thou the Lord and forget not all his
benefits: he has heard thy Prayers, he has looked upon thy sorrow, he
has forgiven thine iniquities, he has healed thine infirmities, he has
redeemed thy life from the grave, he has even crowned thee with compassions.
Oh give me (I beseech thee) a thankful heart, not only now, while the
memory and sense of thy favor is fresh before me, but continually, eue^ so
long as I have my being Grant that I may learn by this evidence of thy mercy
and might, for ever hereafter to depend upon thee: Quicken me up to all holy
duties, that my thankfulness may appear in my pure and Christian carriage.
Make me a kind and careful Mother, willing to undergo the pains and
troubles of education: let no niceness or curiosity hinder me from those
services to which both Nature and Religion have appointed me. Let me also be
careful hereafter, when time shall require, to season that which thou have
given me, with the knowledge of thee, and of thy Son; that my desire may
manifestly appear to be set for the increasing of thy kingdom. Vouchsafe so
to order my affections, and to bring them into obedience under thee, that if it
should be thy pleasure either now or hereafter to take this infant from me, I
may patiently submit my self to thy appointment. And now (O good God) perfect
in me that strength which you have begun, make me to grow in care to serve
thee faithfully both in the duetyes of piety, and in other businesses of my
place and calling; that I may be a comfort to my husband, an example to my
neighbors, a grace to my profession, and a means of glory to thy Name, through
Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

21. A Prayer for those which are employed in the assistance and help of a
travailing woman.
IT is not our diligence (O Lord) or pains which can do any thing without thy
blessing, and our sins are sufficient to bring thy curse upon whatsoever we
undertake. Be pleased (we pray thee) to be reconciled to us in ye blood of thy
Son: Make us to remember yt we are here in thy presence, and yt all our
thoughts, words and actions are open to thy sight: prosper ye business for which
we are come together: put far from us all supersticious co^ceits, and idle
fancies, and teach us to seek help only from thy grace. Enable us to speak
comfortably to this pained woman, yt we may further her dependence upon thy
holy Majesty, and may be a means under thee of her true refreshing in her
sharpest fits. Furnish us with skill, and her with strength, patiently to
awaite ye appointed time of her deliverance: and knit al our hearts unto thee,
that we may fear thy Name, noting and observing thy mercy and power in all thy
works, and studying to give thee praise and glory for the same, through Jesus
Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

22. A Thanksgiving after, when God has blessed their pains in the woman's
delivery.
O Lord, we have seen thy goodness, and have received an apparent token of
thy readiness to hear the Prayers of those which call upon thee, and to succor
those which fly unto thee for thy help. Thou have given ease and deliverance
to the woman, light and life to the infant, joy and gladness to us all. The
glory and praise is thine alone; Fill our hearts with thankfulness, and make
us forward both now and hereafter to provoke and stir up one another
thereunto. And And let not our thankefulnes stand in words only or outward
shows, but cause it to appear in our whole course; that the obedience, the
sobriety, the modesty, the virtue of our lives may witness ye thankful
feeling of our hearts. Go on in thy mercy, (we pray thee) both to the Mother
and her babe, continue and increase their strength, so as may serve best for
thy glory. And as thou have added one unto the number of mankind, showing thy
wonderful wisdom and power both in the framing of him in the womb, and in
bringing him forth into this light: so in thy time add him also to thy
Church, and beget him again unto a lively hope, by the immortal seed of thy
holy word, delivering him from the power of darkness, (in which by nature we
are al) into the glorious liberty of thy chosen. And if it shall so seem good
to thee, to lay any further trial either of sickness or death upon this thy
servant, or upon the fruit of her womb, prepare us all to a patient and quiet
bearing of thy hand, and to a contented and comfortable resting upon thy
gracious providence, assuring our selves, that all things shall turn to the
good and benefit of thy chosen. Hear us (O Lord) and accept us, and forgiving
the weakness of our Prayers, grant us all needful graces out of the rich
storehouse of thy bottomless bounty, and that for Jesus Christ our gracious
Redeemer. Amen.

23. A Prayer for a Soldier, fighting for his Country, or the confederates
thereof.
O Lord, it is thy glory to be called (The Lord of hosts) and it is thou
alone, from whom, when men have made their most politic and puissant
preparations, ye victory must be looked for. Draw my heart, I beseech thee,
from all relying upon my own valor, or upon the strength of the battle in
which I stand; and teach me to look upward, and to wait and trust only upon
thee. Thou give conquest, and thou give courage; thou deliuerest from the
peril of the sword, or else make death a means of happiness to thy
servants. Forgive my sins, I pray thee, and assure me of pardon by the
witness of thy spirit, that the guilt thereof make not my heart to tremble in
me, and to behold death as a messenger to convey me into hell. If thou (O Lord)
be on my side, peace being made betwixt thee and my Soul through Christ, what
can be against me, what hazard can befall my Soul! Nothing shall be able to
deprive me of thy love. Let not spoil, or blood, or mine own advancement be
the ends of mine attempts, but make me to aim only at thy glory in the
defense of thy truth, and in the good and safety of the State wherein I live.
The issue of all things to thee (O Lord) is known, but to man it is hidden,
prepare me therefore indifferently to whatsoever shall befall me. If I dye,
give me comfort in my last breathing, and take my Soul into thy gracious
hands: If I be taken captive, give me patience, give me wisdom and godly
courage to do nothing contrary to the honor of my country, or prejudicial
to the profession of a faithful Christian. If I return with life and victory,
make me thankful; keep me from taking from thee any part of thy glory.
Preserve me from those riotous, lascivious and blaspheming courses, which are
the usual fruits of good success; Let me not think devotion to be an enemy
to resolution, or that a religious fear of thy Majesty does abate the spirit
that should be in a Soldier: but settle me in this, that the assurance of a
lawful cause, the hope and confidence of a better life by the merits of
Christ, the care to please thee and to depend upon thy power, are the only
true grounds of valor, which can give a man boldness and life in the day of
battle. Vouchsafe me these and all other needful favors in and for Christ
Jesus sake. Amen.

24. A Prayer for a man travailing by Sea, about his lawful business.
O Heavenly Father, unto whose ears the Prayers of humbled sinners have
freedom of access out of every place: let it please thee, to incline to me,
who being provoked by mine own present need, and taking heart unto my self
by thy liberal and large promises, do desire to power out my Soul before thy
Majesty: Here (O Lord) by reason of the calling and place, in which it has
been thy providence to rank me, I am come down to the sea in a Ship, and I
do now see thy works, and continually behold thy wonders in this deep. How
easy a thing is it unto thee, when thou raysest a storm, and liftest up the
waves, not only to toss us to and fro, and to make us stagger like a drunken
man, but utterly to swallow us up, and to turn upon our heads in a moment the
bottom of these moving houses in which we are! It is thy great and exceeding
mercy, that these swelling billows and foaming surges do not drink us in,
and so make our bodies to become as a prey, either to that great Leuiathan (the
Whale) whom thou have made to play here, or to some other of thy creatures,
with ^ire variety and troops whereof this vast body is replenished. But it is
even thou (O mighty Lord) which layedst the foundations of the earth, and
which did shut up the Sea with doors: thou did first gather these waters
together as upon an heap, and storedst up the depths in thy treasures: though
the waves are maruailous, though the floods lift up their voice: though ye
waters rage and be troubled, and the very mountains shake at the surges of ye
same, yet thou art much more mighty, thou soon appeasest the noise, and
turnest the storm into a calm.

Look graciously therefore upon me, I beseech thee, teach me to understand the
greatness of thy terror, by that fearfulnes of thy creatures which I do still
behold: Cause me to rest my hope and comfort upon the power of thy mercy, let
that be ye anchor of my Soul both sure and steadfast. And lest my sins not
being pardoned, should be a hinderance and stoppage to thy favor, I pray thee,
settle in me an hearty and unfeigned detestation of them, a godly grief and
sorrow for them, a steadfast resolution and purpose in the whole course of my
life to strive against them. Open my heart, that I may often and earnestly sue
and entreat for thy grace in thy son, and may never give over till I feel in
my conscience some comfortable assurance that thou have forgiven me. Fit and
prepare me to thine own appointments; If it be thy pleasure that I should
here end my days, I know well, that the soul which thou keep cannot
miscary: To thee therefore I commend my spirit, forsake me not (I pray thee) in
my last breathing. Albeit these waves may ouerwhelme my body, yet let them not
be able to quench my comfort, or to plunge me down into despair. Grant me
ever to lay fast hold upon my Savior, that neither sea, death, nor hell may
separate me from his grace. And if it shall seem good unto thee, to bring me
safe unto that haven where I would be; Oh that I may never forget thy
kindness, but may make conscience to perform that obedience which I am now
ready to vow in my necessity. Make me always to take as great delight to
serve thee, as I am now forward to ask, and desirous to receive life and
safety from thee. Hear me (O Lord) in these and other my petitions, forgiving
my unworthiness in the merits of Jesus Christ thy blessed Son, and my great
Redeemer. Amen.

25. A Prayer applied to the state and condition of a malefator, condemned by
law to die, and drawing near to the time of his execution.
VOuchsafe, (O thou God of all mercy and compassion) to look with pity upon
the most woeful case of a poor wretch, ready by the sword of Justice to be
cut off, as unworthy to live amongst men; and like also without thy speedy
favor to be shut out of heaven, and to have my part in the second death; Truth
it is (O Lord) that all this, though it be grievous, yet is no more then my
desert: and touching that bodily death, whereto I am adjudged, I must confess
it to be thy mercy and goodness toward me, that I have been found out by
the eye of the Maigstrate, and stopped by the power of authority from going on
into further evil. I beseech thee, that my death may be both a chastizement
to me, and an aduertizement to others, to contain themselves within the
listes of civil obedience.

But concerning my Soul, which is now ere long to appear before the Tribunal
seat of thy great Majesty, I humbly pray thee, to be merciful thereunto. I
cannot but acknowledge, that if thou give me my due reco^pense, I must needs be
thrust into that dreadful place of infinite and eternal torment, which thou
have prepared for the wicked, the burning whereof is fire and much wood, and
which thy breath like a river of brimstone does kindle: neither see I in my
self, or in any creature, any means or possibility to escape. Fearful unto
me has been the face of an earthly Judge, and the sentence of death to be
inflicted upon this my house of clay, has made my heart to quake within me;
What then will become of me, when I shall be arraigned before thee, at whose
rebuking the very fou^dations of the earth are discovered, and before whom no
man living can be justified? Thou (O Lord) know all mine iniquities, they
are sealed up with thee, as in a hug, they are all noted in thy registers:
Although I have many times sought for the covering of my evil ways to hide my
self in the darkness of the night, supposing that no eye should see me, yet
thou have still compassed my paths, and been accustomed to all my ways,
there has not bin a thought in my heart or a word in my tongue but thou have
wholly known it: Often have I said in my heart, God will not regard, he has
forgotten, he hides away his face and will never see, I shall never be moved
nor be in danger: Thy word I had no delight to hear, I hated knowledge, I
would none of thy counsel, I sought to damme up the mouth of my conscience, yt
it might not check me; when my friends admonished me, I hated and scorned their
reproof: Thus it was a pastime to me to do naughtily, wickedness was sweet
in my mouth, I favored it, and would not be persuaded to forsake it: Justly
therefore (O Lord) have thou thus overtaken me, and made me to eat the fruit of
my own way, bringing me to be a spectacle to the world, to dye as one of the
fools of the people; Yet (O gracious God) since there is mercy with thee, and
that thou art very ready to forgive, be favorable, I entreat thee, to me a
most unworthy sinner. Manasse being put in fetters, and bound in chains,
prayed unto thee, and humbled himself greatly before thee in his tribulation,
and thou wast entreated of him: The woman of Canaan, whom thou tearmedst to be
no better then a dog, yet thou did afforde her some crummes of thy mercy,
and did cause it to be unto her as she desired. The thief, at his
execution, confessed his sin, and prayed to be remembered in thy kingdom,
and thou did promise him an entrance into Paradise. O Lord, are not these
things written for my learning, that I through the comfort of these examples
might have hope? Has thy Word spoken it in vain, that at what time soever a
sinner sigheth unto thee, thou will put all his wickedness from before thee?
Shall I think that thou will call me being laden with my sins, to come unto
thee, and then when I come wilt not accept me? Make me (I pray thee) to see
the depth of my sins, that I may not beguile my Soul, by lessening either
the weight or number of mine iniquities: Work me to a true and undissembled
acknowledgement and confession of them, even before others, that they which see
my end and know mine evil, may have some evidence of my repentance, and may
learn by me to beware of the deceitfulness of sin. Enable me to look with
the eye of my faith upon my crucified Savior, casting my self wholly upon him
and desiring by him to be hidden from thy wrath. Give me some taste of thy
love, and some inward and secret pledge of thy being reconciled to me for his
sake. Strengthen me against the fear of death, that albeit I have every way
just cause to tremble at it, it being both the desert of my offense to men, and
the wages of my sin against thee; yet having some assurance in my Soul, that
the sting thereof is plucked out, I may embrace it in my bosom, and entertain
it as an end appointed for my misery, and as a means to bring me unto
happiness. Thus (O Lord) with fullness of desire (out of the bottom of this
misery and shame which I am fallen into) to fly unto thy mercy, and to be
shrouded under the shadow of thy grace, I commend my self, my soul and my
body into thy hands, praying thee not to cast off him, which has no hope but
only in thee, and that alone in and by Jesus Christ my only Lord and Savior.
Amen.

26. A Prayer rising out of the serious meditation of the last Judgment.
O Lord, thou have revealed it in thy holy Word, that the fashion and figure of
this world must pass away, and that as by appointment we must all dye, so
also we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and that from
thence some shall go into everlasting pain, and some into life eternal. This,
ye Atheists and Epicures and Libertines of the world do think to be but a
mere fable, they say in their hearts; The Lord will do neither good nor
evil. But yet (O Lord) as thou have deliuerd this in thy Word, (of which one
jot nor tittle shall not perish) so thou have not left it without a sufficient
proof in the very bosom of every man: The accusing or excusing of our own
thoughts, the secret checks accompanying those evils to which none is privy,
the fears of wicked men, who are continually as one that trauaileth of child,
flying often times when none pursues them, and being chased at the very shaking
of a leaf, are an evident proof of thy providence, and a certain assurance
written as with a point of a Diamond (which can never be done out) that verily
there is fruit for the righteous, and doubtless there is a God that judges the
earth. This truth (O Lord my God) thou have taught me to believe, and I make
no doubt, but it shall shortly come to pass. It was said long since that the
Judge did stand before the door, and that he which should come, would come
and would not tarry; and now, the height of iniquity is such, and sin is
grown to that perfection, that it cannot stand with thy Justice much longer to
forbear. Teach me (I pray thee) as I do know and believe this, so to make a
true and profitable use of my knowledge. Let it be ever in my thoughts, and in
my best and most serious meditations: when I am about by ye prouenesse of my
corrupted nature to do evil, let the remembrance hereof be a bridle to me to
restrain me: when I am like by the iniquity of ye times to suffer evil among
men, let the exspectation of the right which thou will then do to the
oppressed, be a comfort to me to refresh me. Especially (O Lord) grant me to
keep daily (as it were) a privy sessions in the closet of mine own heart,
arraigning my self before thy judgment seat, searching and trying my ways,
accusing my self before thee, from whom nothing can be hid, confessing my
unworthiness, bewailing my corruptions, suing with all instant earnestness for
thy grace and favor in thy Son. O that I may learn thus to judge my self,
that I may not be judged of thee in that day.

Suffer me not to flatter my self or to bless my Soul in any evil way, or
to go about to find hidings and couerts for my sins; inasmuch as all things
are naked in thy sight, and that in that great terrible day thou will lighten
the things which are hid in darkness, and make manifest the counsel of all
men's hearts. Let me not imagine this thy great session to be like the courses
among men, in which often times by unjust means the vilest offenders do procure
escapes: but make me to know, as the truth is, that with thee there is no hope
by corruption, or favor, or fraud, or importunity of suit, to find euasions.
Thou art the Judge of all the world, and thou will do right; every man shall
receive the things which have been done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or evil. And whereas (O Lord) it is a great grief
to thy servants, to live among the ungodly, it must needs vex their righteous
souls to hear and see their unlawful deeds, let this be my comfort, that
though it be thy pleasure to suffer with long patience the vessels of wrath,
and to permit the tares to grow up with the Wheat until the harvest, yet
then thy Angels shall come, and shall gather out of thy Church all things that
offend, and bring the just into the kingdom of their father. Seeing also (O
gracious God) that whosoever in this world will live godly, shall suffer, and ly
open to the wrongs and injuries and reproaches of ye wicked; Grant that if at
any time, either my name be put out as evil, or otherwise my estate or
profession, or life, for thy trueths sake be called into question, I may
possess my Soul with patience, looking for the blessed hope and appearing of
thy glory, knowing that then the just, what disgraces so-euer are now cast
upon them, shall shine as the light in thy presence. Finally (O Lord) make make
me daily to grow so weary of this vain and wretched world, and of the heavy
load of mine own corruptions, and of this body of death which is upon me, and
to strive to gather that assurance of an interest in that glory which shall be
showed hereafter, that I may look for this great day and in my desires may
sigh for it and hasten to it; and that whenever it comes, I being found
waking with my la^p of oil in my hand, may have cause to lift up my head, not
doubting but to have a gracious admittance into my masters joy.

Grant me this for his sake, which sits at thy right hand, to make request
for me, Jesus Christ the Mediator of thy chosen. Amen.

27. A Prayer fitted to the time of war.
O Almighty God, who art hie above all nations, and whose glory is above the
heavens, the comfortable success of all enterprises is from thee only to be
looked for; Thou art he which give victory unto kings, to thee it is all
one to save by many or by few, thou can make one to chase a thousand, thou
can cause the hearts even of the most valiant to melt, their hands to be
weak, their minds to faint, and their knees to fall away like water. If thou
fight for us, we cannot miscary: if thou favor us not, we must needs be
discomfited. O be gracious unto us, and be on our side, now that men are
risen up against us. They take crafty counsel against thy Church, and consult
how to cut us off from being a nation, and by what means to quench the light
of thy truth, which shines in our streets. Their desire is to embrue their
hands in our blood, and to advance their own ambition by our overthrow. O
turn their counsels into foolishnes, let not their mischievous imaginations
prosper, lest they be too proud: O our God, make them like unto a wheel, and
as the stubble before ye wind, scatter ye people that delight in war. Go out (O
Lord) with our armies, give wisdom and courage to our captains, gird them
with strength unto ye battle, be with our Soldiers, teaching their hands to
war, and their fingers to fight: Assist al ye consultations, prosper ye
policies, crown those enterprises with good success which are undertaken for
the common good and comfort of the State. Doubtless (O Lord) we have deserved
thine anger, and our sins do cry loud in thine ears for vengeance: and it were
but just with thee, if thou should make us a prey and spoil unto our
enemies; But (O gracious God) let us fall now into thy hands, (for thy mercies
are great) and let us not fall into the hands of men, whose displeasure at us is
not for our sins, but for our profession and religions sake, and that they may
fill their own enlarged and insatiable desires with those blessings of wealth
which thou have given us: Put therefore thy hook into their nostrils, and
bring them back by the same way they came. Let it appear yt thou art in the
mids of us, and that we shall not be moved, that thou will help us and
that very early: Let there be none invasion, nor going out, nor no crying in
our streets; But set thou peace in our borders, make strong the bars of our
gates, especially let the Gospel of thy Son sound yet louder amongst us, that
by it many Souls may be gathered unto thee. So we thy people and the sheep
of thy pasture shall praise thee for ever, and from generation to generation we
will set forth thy glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior.
Amen.

28. Another of like nature, respecting the time of Dearth and Famine.
Cleanness of teeth (O Lord) and scarceness of bread, have been aunciently
threatened by thee, as judgments upon the sons of men for their sins. Many
ways also thou have to turn a fruit-full land into barrenness for the
wickedness of the Inhabitants: Thou can make the Heaven over our head as
brass, and the earth under us as iron, by bringing a drought upon the land. Or
else thou can cause the seed to rotte under the clods, by commanding ye
bottels of heaven to power out rain in too great abundance: or when the Corn
is come up, you art able to smite it with blasting and mildeaw, or to send among
us thy great host, ye grasshopper, ye canker, the caterpiller and the palmer
worm, so that although much be sown, yet little shall be brought into the
barn. Or if the Corn do grow ripe unto the harvest, it is in thy power
suddenly to send in an enemy, to eat the fruit of the land, and to devour the
labor of the people. And though the bread do come to be set in plenty before
us, yet thy hand is not shortened, you can take away ye staff thereof, so
that we shall eat and not be satisfied. Thus (O Lord) you have even
storehouses of punishments, so that our hearts can not endure, nor our hands
be strong in ye day that you shall have to do with us. And hereof we have now
already some experience; For now thou have in part begun to punish our abuse of
thy creatures, our fulness of bread, our contempt of the spiritual food of our
souls, with outward scarcity: The time is com, by greedy worldlings long
exspected, in which they may make the measure small and ye prices great,
selling even the very refuse of the Wheat; Their treading is upon the poor,
their desire is to swallow up the needy of the land. Look mercifully (O Lord)
upon us, we beseech thee: lift up thine hand, forget not the poor. Thou
preparest for the raven his meat when his birds cry to thee, wandering for lack
of food, thou take no delight in the confusion of thy creatures: thou have
promised, that if we seek to thee, we shall want nothing that is good, thou will preserve us in the time of dearth, and in the days of famine we shall
have enough. Accomplish (we beseech thee) these thy gracious promises; Save us
from this increasing misery, and deliver us from their cruelty, which being
without all bowels of mercy, do respect nothing but their own commodity. And
because (O Lord) our sins do separate betwixt thee and us, and do hinder
good things from us: therefore humble our souls under thy mighty hand, make us
to see and to consider our own deseruings, draw from us an hearty and sincere
acknowledgement, how great cause we have given thee to affamish both our
bodies and souls for ever. Give us an understanding of our particular gross
sins which do lay us open to this judgment above others: namely our
wanto^nesse, our pride, our luxuriousnes, our riot, our feastings without
fear, our want of mercy to ye poor, our spurning with the heel against thee,
our forgetting thee in the days of our plenty, but chiefly our loathing of
that spiritual Mannah, that heavenly diet of thy sacred Word, provided in thy
abundant mercy for our Souls.

O make us ashamed for these and other our monstrous sins, besides those
personal evils wherewith we are each of us justly to be charged. Beget in us a
care to renounce and forsake our sins, equal to our desire for the putting
away of thy judgments. Forgive us in Jesus Christ, and vouchsafe us (as a
pledge of thy love) strength and grace to walk in a greater measure of
obedience then heretofore. And now (O Lord) teach us to rely upon thy
providing, and to know that when all things fail, yet thy mercies are the
same, and thy power to help is not diminished. Thou can suddenly by means to
man unknown, turn the greatest penury into plenty, thou can make a little
to stretch far, and can proportion our appetites to our store.

O make us to depend on thee, and to study more how to profit by thy hand,
then to have thy rod removed from us. And when thou shall show thy self to
have heard our Prayers, by sending greater plenty, let us not forget our
present want, but grant that we may labor to be thankful, and endeavor
after a more sober use of thy blessings then heretofore. Hear us in this, and
in all other our requests, for Christ's sake, and for thine own promise sake.
Amen. *

29. Another like, applied to the time of some great contagion.
WHither shall we go (O Lord) in the day of our affliction, but only unto
thee! Thou alone can save, and out of thy hands none is able to give
deliverance. Heavy at this time is thy hand upon us, and fearful is the
disease with which thou have afflicted us: We are afraid one friend and
neighbor of another, and nothing is before us but present death: Scarsely can
we look forth, but we see some one or other amongst us carried away to the
grave, and the mourners going about the streets.

We must needs confess that though this he grievous, yet it is the smallest
part of our desert; It is just with thee, to smite us with botches and scabs
that cannot be healed, and to make the pestilence even to cleave unto our
loins and to sweep us away from off the earth, even as a man sweepeth away
doung till all be gone. For, how have we multiplied our iniquities before
thee, and to what a shameless and intolerable measure are our sins
increased? Many warnings have been given by thy Ministers, thou have risen
early and late, and sent unto us by them; yet we have made our hearts as an
Adamant stone, and have put far from us the evil day, persuading our selves
that their sermons were but wind, and that they did but commend unto us their
own fancies; Thus have we encouraged our selves in evil, and have set thy
judgments at naught, every one turning to his own course, as the horse
rusheth to the battle, adding drunkenness to thirst, and falling away from
thee more and more. But (O Lord) give us now at the last remorsefull and
repentant hearts, make us (as it were) to smite upon our thigh as a sign that
we see our wanderings, and that we are ashamed of our sins: Embolden us in
the name of Christ to come into thy presence, and in all earnestness of spirit
to cry unto thee, Take away our iniquities and receive us graciously. Teach us
as well to fear sin, the cause of this wasting sickness, as we do the
sickness it self, which is the fruit of sin. Comfort us, according to the
days that thou have afflicted us, and let the sweet feeling of the gracious
testimony of thy Spirit, speaking peace unto our souls, prevail against all
other sadness, or cause of grief, or sorrow whatsoever. Say (O Lord) unto thy
destroying Angel, It is sufficient; hold thy hand: Or if it be thy pleasure to
stretch thine hand yet further, and to take us away also, O prepare us to thine
own purpose, endue us with a holy patience to endure the utmost trial: and
grant that whatsoever befall our earthly tabernacles, yet our souls may be
always acceptable unto thee, and al for Christ Jesus sake, who has loved us,
and given himself to be a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto thee. Amen.

30. A Meditation or Prayer necessary for a poor man.
Truth it is (O Lord) that to my mutinous and repining nature, want is of all
things most distastful, and poverty is a burden even intolerable. Sometimes I
am ready to call thy justice in question, who measurest out so large and
ouerflowing a portion unto some, and yet art so strait and sparing toward me.
Sometimes and do almost condemn Religion to be merely vanity, ye lovers
whereof lie open to so great extremity; Otherwhiles, my own heart charge me
with hypocrisy, telling me that no man ever perished being an innocent, and
that if I did so fear thee as I should, thou could not thus forsake me.
And much ado have I to master my own affections, and to restrain my self
from putting forth my hand to wickedness, and from taking some strange course
for my own supply. Thus (O Lord) I am straitened, thus I am even haunted with
whole troops of unquiet thoughts: all which, by the continuance and
enlargement of my own scarcity, and by the vncompassionatenesse which I find
among the men of this iron age, are rather multiplied and increased in me,
then any way slaked or diminished. But eternally blessed be thy great Name,
which have opened the gates of thy mercy, and given hope of hearing and of
help, to the basest and poorest amongst men. Thou acceptest not ye persons, no
not of Princes, thou regardest not the rich sooner then the poor. Behold
therefore (O loving Father in Jesus Christ) to thee do I cry, to thy
Mercy-seat do I stretch out my feeble hands. I have learned (O Lord) that
misery comes not forth of the dust, neither does affliction spring out of
the earth; the pillars of the world are thine, thou openest or shuttest thy
hand at thine own pleasure. Thy wisdom also is infinite, and thy judgments
are unsearchable: who shall plead with thee, to ask thee a reason of thy
ways? Let it be enough for me, that it is thy pleasure thus to debase me;
Am I not in thy hand as the clay in the potters? If thou do give me a larger
portion, it is thy bounty: if thou do abridge me, what have I to complain, or
what challenge can I make to that, which thou keep from me? Teach me (I
beseech thee) not to look so much upon this, what others have, as to consider
well, how little I for my part do deserve to have. If I do but breath upon
the face of the earth, if I had no house but the open air, no garments but
rags, no food, but the bread and the water of affliction, or the crummes that
fall from some rich man's table, it were infinitely more then then my best
desert. A sinful and unthankful wretch, as I have always been, what can I
say is due unto me but perpetual shame? When I judge rightly of all things,
so far am I from being able to say that thou have wronged me, or dealt too
straightly with me, that I must rather stir up my self to magnify thy
mercy which have not laid upon me the utmost of thy wrath, but have given
me a time and an opportunity to repent. Let these things (I pray thee) ye
soueraintie of thy power, the depth of thy wisdom, the foulenes of mine own
desert, the kindness which (notwithstanding some outward hardshippe) thou have
vouchsafed to my soul, moderate my violent affections, curb my raging and
discontented thoughts, bring my ranging passions into order, that I may always
say, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good; This is my sorrow and
I will bear it. Open my eyes withal, that I may see thy power, who can raise
the needy from the dust, and lift the poor out of the doung, and make him
families like a flock of sheep, who can command even the very ravens to
bring bread and flesh unto thy servant, the Heavens to drop down food,
and the rock of stone to yield streams of waters, to refresh those whom thou
art pleased to provide for. Shall I think thy power to be abated, or is thy
mercy less then it was wont to be? Have thou not made a promise never to
forsake me? Am I not always with thee, and do thou not hold me by my
right hand? Shall I imagine thee to be like the bird whom thou have deprived of
wisdom, and to whom thou have given no part of understanding, who shows
himself cruel unto his young ones, as they were not his, or as if he had
travailed in vain? No, I am assured that though a woman should forget her
child, and forbear to have compassion on the son of her womb, yet thou
can not forget those whom thou love in thy son. Thou know my wants,
thou art able to supply my wants, thy love will not suffer thee to leave me
destitute in that which thy wisdom knows to be convenient for me. Increase
my faith, that I may depend yet more upon thee, make me diligent in the place
and calling in which thou have set me, frame my mind and my desires to that
rate which thou have allotted me, keep me from unjust and unlawful courses,
from envying the abundance which others do enjoy: possess me with this
persuasion, that this my present state is the fittest for me, and that when it
shall be good for me to have more, thy hand shall instantly be enlarged toward
me: Stir me up to seek thy kingdom, and labor for the meat which endures
unto life eternal. Enrich my soul with spiritual blessings in heavenly
things: persuade my conscience of thy love in Christ Jesus, that the feeling
thereof may make all things sweet unto me. Cause me both to trust and to
wait for thy salvation, and in all things to strive to give thee thy deserved
glory, and all this in and for thy Sons sake my only Mediator and Redeemer.
Amen. *

31. Another of like nature, fit for one whom God has enriched with outvvard
things.
IT has pleased thee (O Lord) out of the freedom of thy bounty, to deal
more largely with me then with many of thy servants, and to furnish me with
store of those outward blessings, which others (every way as good by nature as
my self) do not enjoy. My heart is fraughted with much corruption: and though
riches be in themselves a blessing, yet without thy especial grace, they will
be unto me an occasion of many evils. Apt I shall be to lift up my heart, to
pride my self in my own conceit, to trust unto my wealth, to despise others,
to grow in love with this present world, to become cold and remiss in the best
services, to conclude that I am highly in thy favor, because thou have
enriched me. These be the diseases, which through the poison of our nature, do
rise by these outward hauings, neither can I say that my heart is clean from
these corruptions. Purge them out of me (I beseech thee) by the fiery power
of thy spirit: Give me poverty of spirit and humbleness of mind, amid this
outward fullness with which thou have endued me. Make me to remember that the
more I have, the greater shall be mine account, and the harder for me to be
saved: that by that means, my wealth may be so far from puffing me up with
secure presumtion, that it may move me ye rather even with fear and trembling to
work out my salvation. Cause me to think often upon the words of my Savior,
that riches are deceitful, and of a thorny nature, choking the good seed of ye
word and making it to become unfruitful: that so I may learn carefully to
handle them and to use them with great heedinesse and circumspection, lest I
should by them gal and wound my conscience, or be pierced through with many
sorrows. It is said (O Lord) that these high places of the world are slipperie
places, in which it is hard to go with a right foot, and to keep strait and
even steps; Oh, stir me up to so much the more care to ponder my paths and to
take diligent heed unto my ways; suffer me not to justify my self to mine own
soul, or to make my self believe that I am as I ought to be, because waters of
a full cup are wrung unto me: but teach me seriously to consider, that as
many of thy beloved servants do feel the smart of poverty, so even the most
wicked and those which do rebelliously trangresse, have a large portion in this
life, living, waxing old and growing in wealth, their goods oftentimes
exceeding the very desires of their hearts. Grant therefore that I may labor
for some better and more certain assurance of thy grace, not grounding my hope
upon my wealth: but rejoicing in this, if the due consideration of the danger
and vanity of abundance may work by thy blessing, to the abasing and humbling
of my heart. Oh let not mine eyes be dazzled, nor my heart bewitched, with the
glory and sweetness of these worldly treasures, which may be taken from me,
or I from them even in the twinkling of an eye: draw my affections to the love
of that durable riches, and to that fruit of heavenly wisdom, which is
better then gold, and the revenues whereof do surpass the silver, that my
chief care may be to have a soul enriched and furnished with thy grace,
fulfilled with the knowledge of thy will, in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding. And because (O Lord) in having much, I am but a steward under
thee, and a disposer of thy gifts, enlarge my bowels toward others, make me
rich and fruitful in good works, being a father to the poor, and causing ye
heart of the widow to rejoice, warming the loins of the naked with the fleece
of my sheep, not eating my morsels alone, but dealing my bread to the hungry,
and never hiding my self from mine own flesh. For why should I make gold my
hope? or wherefore should I strive to lade my self with this thick clay, still
plotting to set my neast on high, when all that I have or can have is in a
moment turned into vanity? Quicken me up therefore to good duties, that the
hearts of thy Saints may be comforted by me, and that in the place where I
live, I may by my forwardness draw on and provoke others to all the offices of
necessary benevolence. Let the bowels of the needy be my treasury, and let
it be my desire and care there to lay up in store a good foundation for my
self against the time to come, not trusting to be crowned for the worth of my
liberality (for what can that be to a Weight of glory?) but assuring my self
ye the mercy showed by me unto others, is a beam of ye love which shines from
thee upon my soul. Thus (O Lord) shall I by thy goodness have the true use of
thy blessings, together with a daily increase of much matter of thanksgiving
for thy great goodness to me so vile and unworthy; and all for Christ, and in
his most glorious and holy name: to whom with thee and thy spirit, one true
everlasting and only wise God, be all praise, and power, might, majesty and
dominion now and evermore, Amen.

32. A Prayer for the whole State.
Extraordinary (O Lord) have thy favors been unto this Kingdom; when we
recount our long continued peace, our victories, our plenty, our comfort by
religious and prudent governors: especially, the glorious light of thy Gospel
which has shined amongst us, our freedom from the miserable bondage of Romish
and Antichristian tyranny: we must needs say, that thou have not dealt so
with every Nation. Indeed the cry of our sins is great, the very heavens
may blush to look upon us, and the earth is weary to bear our gross, our
shameless, our presumptuous evils: Thou thy self (O patient God, art pressed
under us, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaues: Long have thou waited
for our repentance, and often have thou urged us by the Ministers of thy word,
to break off our sins, and even besought us by them to be reconciled unto
thee. But we have hated to be reformed, we have cast thy word behind us, thou
have stretched out thy hand, and we would not regard; we have despised and
mocked thy messengers, our hearts within us have been fully set to do evil.
Mercy has been offered, we have not esteemed it: judgment has been
threatened, we have not feared it: the very trial of our countenances
testifies against us, we declare our sins as Sodom, we hide them not; all
manner of foul enormities do march openly and confidently and without fear in
our streets. How justly might thou power out even the vials of thy wrath
upon us, making us to be a detestation, and a curse, and an astonishment, and a
reproach to other Nations, forcing us to wring out and to drink the very dregs
of that mixed wine of thy fierce and terrible indignation. If thou should
bring an utter dissolution and desolatio^ upon our State, making our enemies to
ride over over our heads, to clime above us up on hie, and us to come down
beneath below: If thou should take away from us the Judge and the Prophet,
the honorable and the Counselor, and appoint children to be our Princes: If
thou should make heaps of our Cities, and leave our Towns without
inhabitants; If thou should at once quench the light of thy blessed word, and
give us over to the service of dumb idols, and our souls to be swallowed up
in the darkness of popish ignorance and superstition; if thou should make
us by thy judgments a proverb and a spectacle to the whole world, it were no
other then we have deserved; nay, it is thy great mercy, that these things,
and more heavy then these, have not already overtaken us. But (O Lord) be
merciful to our sins for thy names sake: O thou which art the God of grace,
look graciously upon us in the Mediator of grace, Christ Jesus. We have
nothing to plead, but his merit, nothing can wash away the foulness of our
sins, but his most precious blood; Make (we pray thee) our hearts to mourn
within us, both for our own personal sins, and for all the abominations
which are done in the midst of the Land: Oh that we might turn unto thee with all our heart, with fasting, with weeping, and with sorrowing; Oh that we could
see the things that belong unto our peace: and might every man turn from his
evil way, and from the wickedness that is in his hand, and make his ways and
his works good. Let it be thy holy pleasure (we humbly beseech thee) to
continue and to enlarge thy wonted favors toward us; Stablish this our
peaceable government by a perpetual and unchangeable decree. Compasse-in this
Ila^d, with thy favor, as with a shield; Let never thine and our adversaries,
roar in the midst of thy congregation, or set up their banners as signs
of victory and conquest over us. Above all (O Lord) vouchsafe the comfort of
thy Gospel, and the liberty of thy blessed truth: Grant that that may still
be faithfully and soundly preached in our Churches. Oh remove not our
ca^dlestick, though our falling from our first love, and ye uniuersall slaking
of our zeal, has deserved it. Lengthen out the use of it (we entreat thee)
even so long as the Sun and Moon endures, that by it those that are yet
unborn, and shall come out of our Loins, may be guided and directed in the way
of peace. And to this end, we are most humble and instant suitors to thy
Majesty, even to thee by whom Kings reign, and whose dominion and soueraintie
reaches over all; that thou would multiply thy blessings upon thy King,
even thine anointed (King James) whose head thou have lifted up above others,
and into whose hands thou have committed the raines of these united Kingdoms.
O Lord, when we remember the days bypast, even the days of our fear, how
that after the death of our late renowned Queen, we looked for nothing but
co^fusio^, supposing that the times of our peace must needs have died with her,
and have even been buried in her grave, and consider withal, how thou then,
without any so much as drawing of a sword, or color of commotion, placedst in
her throne a King of the same royal blood, and of the same love and affection
to thy holy truth, under whose shadow, we enjoy all the accustomed comforts of
our ancient peace, we are like to them that dream, we are even stroke^ with
astonishment; so far have all things gone beyond our hopes, and exceeded our
exspectations. O pardon our great ungratefulness, that pass over thy mercies
so superficially, and do so seldom and so slightly meditate upon thy
kindness. Let not our unthankfulness turn away thy intended blessings from
us; stablish his throne (we beseech thee) let his soul be bound in the bu^dle
of life with thee, and cast out the soul of his enemies, as out of the middle
of a sling. As thou have prevented him with liberal blessings, and set a crown
of pure gold upon his head: so let his glory be great in thy salvation, and
make him glad with the joy of thy countenance. Go on to give him thy judgments,
that the righteous may flourish in his days, and that he may judge the poor
of the people, and save the children of the needy, and subdue the oppressor:
Let him not want a man of his own line, to sit upon his seat: but continue ye
kingdom in his posterity, until the time in which al earthly kingdoms must be
determined. And as thou have made his Queen, like a fruitful vine on ye sides
of his house, and a joyful mother of many royal pla^ts: so we pray thee lay
upon her much dignity and honor; and bless the^ both out of Zion, so that
they may see the wealth of Jerusalem all their days. Let their children be as
chosen shafts in thy quiver, make the^ as the plants growing up in their youth,
and as the corner stones graven after the similitude of a palace. Chiefly we
beseech thee to pour out a large measure of thy blessings upon the young
Prince Henry: enrich him with all princely virtues; water him so with thy
heavenly dew, that knowledge of thy truth, zeal for thy glory, love to thy
Church, perfect hatred of Popish Idolatry, may in him grow up with his years,
that so he may also in his appointed time become another Instrument under thee,
for the further enlargement of thy Gospel, and the prosperity and happiness
of these Realms. Always afford thy gracious presence to those honorable Lords
of his Majesty's Council: be^ thou the President at their Table, direct their
consultations, sanctify their policies, order their purposes, and guide all
their courses to such conclusions as may be most for thy glory, the honor of
the King, the peace of the State, and the comfort of thy chosen. Bless all the
Judges, Sages and Magistrates of the State, make the^ as hiding places from ye
wind, and as a refuge for ye tempest for ye oppressed; cause them ever to
remember that they are thy Ministers for ye peoples wealth, and that they
execute not the judgments of man but of the Lord; and that although thou have
honored them with thine own name, calling them gods, yet they shall die as men,
and fall like others: that so judgment may not be turned into gal, nor the
fruit of righteousness into wormwood, but ye justice may be executed truly and
uprightly in ye gates, and al things may be to ye praise of them that do well
and to ye punishment of those that are workers of iniquity. Neither may we (O
Lord) forget those who^ you have put in the service of thy church, to feed ye
flock which depends on them, to rule the^ and to go in and out before them,
and to labor in the word and in doctrine. Thou (O Christ) art the chief
shepherd and bishop of our souls, thou art the Lord of the harvest, build up
(we beseech thee) the breaches of thy Church, make the righteousness thereof to
break forth (yet more) as the light, and the salvation thereof as a burning
lamp. Continue the standing and increase the number of those seeing watchmen,
whom thou have placed upon ye walls of Jerusalem; stir them up that they
cease not, day nor nor night, working the work with which thou have entrusted
them, and faithfully dispensing that word of reconciliation which thou have
committed to them. Kindle in the^ the zeal of Samuel, that they may say, God
forbid that we should sin against the Lord, and cease praying for the people,
and showing them the good and the right way: Make them with Paul to say, Woe
unto us if we preach not the Gospel. And be pleased also so to bless their
endeavors, and to prosper their labors, by giving them a door of utterance,
and by preserving them from unreasonable and evil men, that they may from
every part of the Land bring many sheaues into thy barn, and that daily those
that are ordained unto life eternal may believe. And for a continual supply
and nurserie to thy Churches amongst us, bless the Universities and Schools
of learning; let not those fountains (O Lord) be poisoned with any popish
leaven: but grant that the doctrine which is according to godliness, being
taught and professed in them in sincerity, by the young pla^ts there springing
up, ye decais of congregations abroad may be renewed, and every place may be
furnished with a Pastor after thy own heart, which may feed ye people with
knowledge and with understanding. And (Lord) restrain and reform the
greediness of those which muzzle their mouths which should tread out the
corn, and bring forth the food of life unto thy people, which respect not
the Leuite, but abridge the hire of the labourer, and say one to another, Let
us take to our possession the habitatio^s of God. Throughout the Land and among
all the inhabitants thereof, plant the true knowledge and fear of thee, loyalty
to their sovereign, obedience to all subordinate authority, love and reverence
to their spiritual guides unity of affection, mercy and compassion either to
other. And inasmuch as (O Lord) we have continual experience of the malice
of the devil, in sowing the seeds of sedition and treason in men's hearts, and
in raising up the sons of Behal to ouercast (if it might be) the fair day of
our peace, with a cloud of hellish co^fusio^; we pray thee, without whom no
enterprises can be established, to make void their hopes, to discover their
practices, and (as thou have hitherto even miraculously done) to turn their
devises upon their own heads for their own confusion. There come daily out of
that Pit of Rome, many Locusts: and from that Sea, there is sent among us a
continual spawne of new conspirators: these encourage themselves in wicked
purposes, they commune together to lay snares, mischief they imagine against
the quiet of the Land; It vexes them to see the thriuing of the Gospel, and
the grouth of thy truth, and they do even breath out threatenings and slaughters
against the professors thereof. Let not (O Lord) their imaginations prosper,
let their eyes fall out with looking for that day which they have long desired;
Let thy hand, even thy right hand, find the^ out: and if they belong not unto
thee, make them like a fiery oven in ye time of thine anger, destroy their
fruit from ye earth and their seed from the children of men, put them apart,
and make ready ye strings of thy bow against their faces. And as for us (O
Lord) suffer us not to were wanton with the blessings of peace, nor to forget
to render to thee according to thy rewards bestowed: but grant that thy
kindnesses may bind us more strongly unto thee, and that we may resolve by thy
grace to serve thee faithfully, who with us dealst so graciously, and that in and
for Christ Jesus sake thy son and our Savior, Amen.

FINIS.
A Table of the Prayers contained in this Book.
A Morning prayer for private families. page 1. An Evening prayer for private
families. p. 15 A Morning prayer for a private person. p. 35 An Evening prayer
for a private person. p. 44 A more particular Morning prayer for the sabbath
day. p. 55 A prayer before the hearing of the word. p. 64 A prayer before the
receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. p. 72 A thanksgiving after. p. 78
A prayer for the afflicted in what kind soever. p. 80 A prayer in respect of
some loss, as of Honor, Goods. etc. p. 88 A prayer fitted to the loss of an
especial friend, as Father, Husband, etc. p. 95 A prayer applied to the state
of a man inwardly perplexed with the horror of sin, with doubtings of Gods
favor, and with the tentations of satan tending to despair. p. 100 A prayer
then needful when a man has some special combat with some one or more
special sins, against which he desires victory. p. 115 A prayer of
humiliation and sorrow after some special sin committed. p. 120 A prayer in
respect of death, needful at all times, but especially in sickness. p. 131 A
prayer more specially fitted to the state and occasions of a sick man. p. 141
A direction for those who deny to perform the Christian duty of prayer for
their sake whom they come to visit. p. 152 A thanksgiving for a sick man
after recovery. p. 157 A prayer for a woman in her travail. p. 161 A
tha^ksgiuing after delivery. p. 164 A prayer for those which are employed in
the assistance of a travailing woman. p. 168 A thanksgiving, when God has
blessed their pains in the woman's delivery. p. 170 A prayer for a soldier
fighting for his Country, or the confederates thereof. p. 173 A prayer for a
man travailing by Sea about his lawful business. p. 178 A Prayer applied to
the state of a Malefactor, condemned by law to die, and drawing to the time of
execution. p. 184 A prayer rising out of the serious meditation of the last
Judgment. p. 193 A prayer fitted to the time of war. p. 202 Another of like
nature, respecting the time of Dearth and Famine. p. 207 Another like, applied
to the time of some great contagion. p. 215 A meditation or prayer for a poor
man. p. 220 Another of like nature, for one whom God has enriched with outward
things p. 230 A prayer for the whole State. 239

