THE Fierce and cruel Battle fought by the three Kings in Barbary, nere to
the City of Maroques, the 25. of April last. 1607.

IHS



LOND^N Printed for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Popes-head-Pallace, nere the Royall-Exchange. 1607.

A Brief and true Relation of the notablest accidents that have happened in
Barberie since the eight of December 1606. until the 29. of April. 1607.
ON the eight of December 1606. Mouley Bufferes, King of Maroques, and Mouley
Abdela Son unto Mouley Sheck King of Fez, of the age of twenty four years,
encou^tred one another, about some two leagues and a half to the Southeast of
the City of Maroques, about nine of the clock in the morning.

Mouley Bufferes, being accompained with some twenty five or twenty six
thousand men, horse and foot, together with fifteen field pieces, or
Faulconets. Mouley Abdelas forces were in number about nine thousand men and
seventeen pieces, he had moreover with him 72 English Soldiers, which he had
got out of the ships of Captain Ferres, Captain Feyts, Captain Brist,
Captain Watter-drinker.

Item thirty five Neitherlanders of Captain John Franscens company of
Amsterdam, together with a leven Frenchmen, which had been taken by the
aforesaid English.

All these were taken in Laratche and Salee, by Mouley Sheck, who found great
riches in their Ships. These English, French and Dutchmen, behaved themselves
exceeding valiantly in ye Battle, as well in fighting as in skillful managing
and discharging their Ordinance (the rather to obtain their promised liberty)
that those of Maroques were put to flight, they remaining victors and masters
of the field. Those of Maroques lost about some five hundred men, for the most
of them were adicted and inclyned to the party of Mouley Abdela and therefore
they would not fight.

This done, Mouley Bufferes fled into the City, where taking some treasure,
and certain Women out of his Palace, left the City and fled up toward the
Mountains, but before he could reach them, he was met and assaulted by
certain Rebelled Alarbes or Peasants, who not only robbed and deprived him of
all his money and wealth, but also stripped his Women stark naked, and so let
them pass.

Thus according to the euerchanging course of this incertaine world, he was
(almost in an instant) seen changed from a mighty and great Emperor to a
miserable man, and in this estate does he yet continue in the mountains.

The same day Mouley Adlela would not stir from the place where he had got
the victory, but remained there all that day.

The next day, being the ninth of December, he set forwards for the City of
Maroques, pitching his Tents before the Gates, incamping himself on the East
side of the City.

The tenth of the same month in the morning, this victorious King entered the
City, and lodged himself in the Kings Palace, where he continued until
the twenty three of February 1607. During all which time his people committed
many wilful ryots and Insolences, boasting that they won and overcome the
City by strength and force of Arms, whereat so much the rather, because the
inhabitants of Maroques do account those of Fees but as Jews, whereat they
were greatly grieved.

In the mean time that those of Fees did dominere thus in Maroques, robbing
and Ryfling many houses of the Alkeydes or Noblemen, enritching themselves by
ye spoils thereof, for they got great booties, especially out of the house of
Alkeydes, Azus, who for his safety fled up to ye mountains to a Castle of
his, but he was pursued, and his house sacked, and they brought out of the
same 12 thousand Gowns, and Cloakes of cleath of Gold, silk and other stuffs,
with five of six hundredth ales of Roane-cloath, amounting to an infinite value,
besides his Jewels, money and costlye Housholdstuffe: running from thence to
the house of Alkey de Hamdt bemmaisor, whereof likewise they took great store
of riches, together with many such like housen, which they sacked, robbed,
ryfled and spoiled, which for brevity sake I omit to specify.

Mouley Abdela caused nine Alkeydens to be beheaded, Amongst the which was
Basha Zondier, general of Mouley Bufferes: all which heads he sent to Fez to
his Father, where they were set upon stakes.

This unexpected cruelty and misdemeanor of the Fezians, made many of the
people to forsake them, and fled unto Mouley Zidan, uncle unto the afornamed
Mouley Abdela, who watching for his good fortune, had placed himself in a
place half way between Fez and Maroques, but by means of this opportunity,
and upon certain intelligence had from those of Maroques, he removed his
Camp toward the City, And on the twenty two of February, he pitched the
same within two leagues thereof.

The same day being Thursday, and Market day, the Townes-men made a subtle
enterprise on the Northwest, and North side of the City, about three of the
clock in the morning, breaking upon the house of the Alkeyde Azus, where they
murdered a great Alkeyde, with his two Sons that were lodged there, and sent
their heads of Mouley Zidan.

From thence the stream of their fury drove them forwards to the house of the
Hamdtbemmaisor, where the general of the camp was lodged, intending to have
used him in the like sort, but he was accompayned with fifty or sixty
Soldiers of Titnan who defended themselves very valiantly until the day
break, then was he rescued by the Adalosen, who (not without great danger)
brought him through the city into the camp.

The same night they released the prisoners, which in number were about two
thousand, the which ran crying about the city Viue Mouley Ziden, which caused
a great commotion, yet all this while Mouley Abdela was in the city: During
this Tumult in the City, the Citizens together with some of Mouley Zidans
Soldiers, which they had let in that same night through a secret gate, made a
salley on the North side upon the Regiment of Zalee, where they took four
pieces of Ordinance, and would also have supprised the Camp of Mouley Abdela,
where stood thirteeene pieces more, and might very well have done it, for there
was but small resistance of men, and began already to give back and retire
(all which we perfectly saw from our house) but by the coming of the King
Mouley Abdela, who presently issued out of the City in their behalf, with
two thousand men or there about, together with certain English and
Netherlanders, they recovered their four pieces again, drove the enemy back
to the place from whence they came, holding them in a continual skirmish,
until three of the clock after noone. There were slain on either side about
three or four hundred men.

This enterprise was most subtlely plotted, and it wanted but very little but
those of Fees had been beaten and discomfited.

The five and twenty day, Mouley Abdela with all his power went to the South
and Northsides of the City, for Mouly Zidan was come to the North side
thereof upon the four and twentieth day, toward which place Mouly Abdela
caused to be shot from certain Turrets and Gates of the Kings house, where the
Ordenance stood: also in the City he set two thousand soldiers to keep the
Palace against the City, and himself with the rest of his forces, marched
without along the city walls, when coming half way, they met each other.
Those of Fees, charged them with ten or twelve pieces of Ordenance, so that
they returned back toward the North-side again, where Mouley Zidan lay with
his maine army.

The Fezians thinking that they had already got the victory, followed them
close even to their camp, drawing their Ordenance after them.

Their way lay between two high walls, and the same so narrow, that they
could draw but one piece after another, the which Mouley Zidan wellknowing,
encouraged his men, showing them the inconvenience wherein their enemies had
brought themselves into, by reason of the narowe passage, where by they were
barred from the use of their shot, which could not hurt them, he charged these
of Fees with four pieces, over running their footmen with his Horse, for they
had no means to use their Ordinance, by reason of their own men, so that by
their own disorder they lost the battle.

The Townsmen on the other side, slew them with stones from the City walls,
and issuing forth, fell on the tail of them, killing all what came to their
hands, so that there were slain about five or six thousand men, most of
them all hewed to pieces and slain by the Sword or sable.

The rest which were (near about one thousand,) were for the most part all
slain the two next days following, in such sort, that of all this great
Army, about seven or eight thousand men were slain, scarce two hundred
escaped: the like slaughter was never tofore seen nor heard of in Barbary.
And in the space of a leven weeks we saw three several Kings reigning in
Maroques.

The King Mouley Abdela, with some of his Horsemen escaped, and is with his
Father at Fees, where some report he strengthens himself again: he has
lately taken three or four ships, in Larathe, whereof is reported, the one to
be Captain Warrye a Pyrate, who has kept within the Streights certain
years, with thirty and two brass Pieces, the other are Netherlanders, but
this report is not altogether sure.

But as for the King of Fees, it is held for certain, that he will come
heather again. For the common people which served Mouley Zidan and help him
to win the City of Maroques, begin to fall from him, and to be his
contraries, for that he neither gives them any payment or other satisfaction.

And whereas they thought, that in making him King the country would be in
peace and quietness, and the other King be constraind to fly, either into
Spain, or Italy. This held for a certain truth, that he (to wit the other
King) holds correspondence with the king of Spain, of whom he receives great
assistance of Moneys, what the event will be, the time will show.

This King that now reigns, is a very severe man: yet he administreth good
justice in his Country, and is generally feared of all men. He imprisoneth and
fortureth many Noble men of the land to get their wealth. Also he causes many
to be beheaded, insomuch that it is greatly to be feared that most of the
chiefest of Maroques will all by little and little be made away.

The natural condition of this people is, every day to desire a new King:
for they are not true and faithful to their Kings, so that by all likelihoodes
our wars here are not yet done, but (as it were) do but begin, by reason of
this great bloodshed which happened. Whereby a great rage and enmity is
grown amongst the people, and has caused a great hatred one against the
other.

Besides, the Country is spoiled, and the dearth increases, for a sack of
corn is worth here at this instant in Maroques three pounds starling, and
vpwardes, and yet none to be got for money. All other necessaries are after
the rate extreme dear, for many persons die of mere hunger.

In the former battle were slain five and forty English men, amongst the
which were captain Ferres, and captain Feyts. Item eighteen of our
Netherlanders, ten Frenchmen, and five and thirty Spanish slaves. And have
used such tyranny over them, by reason that they did them much hurt with their
shooting, that they would not suffer them to be buried, but were eaten by the
Dogs. Such as are yet living are maintained by ye charity of good friends,
for there is nothing to be got of the King.

Thus have you heard all what has passed in these parts, until the 29. of
April 1607. what else from time to time shall occur, you shall with all fit
opportunity at his due time be partaker thereof, farewell.


