THE CHRISTIANS IOVRNALL: Showing both the course to be held, and the way to be
shund by all those, who desire (as they ought) to enter into life.

In three Sermons upon Matthew 7.13.14.

By SAMVEL HIERON.

Psalm. 86.11. Teach me thy way O Lord, and I will walk in thy truth: knit my
heart unto thee, that I may fear thy name.

AT LONDON, Printed by FELIX KYNGSTON for Thomas Man. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR FRANCIS BARRINGTON, of Barrington Hall in Essex,
Knight.
SIR, the Wiseman says, that Al rivers go into the sea Eccle. 1.7.
, showing themselves (as it were) homagers and tributaries to that place, from
whence (so far as we may credit Philosophy Plato in Phaedone.
) they have received their first beginning. It has bin often in my thoughts,
and more than often in my desires, that in testimony of my remembering that,
(which it were even a sin in me to forget) there might pass back from me to
your Worship, some little stream, of those larger brooks of your both
countenance and benevolence, with which my studies in the University being
much refeshed, and my first endeavors in the Ministry (as it were) by a kind
watring, helped forward in their growth, I confess my self to be become that
Little, which by the grace of God I now am in his Church. Wherefore having a
disposition for the satisfaction of some friends, to copy a draught of these
Sermons, I thought I might with one labor do a public good, and give the^
their private contentment. And withal it came into my mind to tender them to
you, not as the full payment of so great a debt, but as an insinuation of my
desire to be thankful, and of my meaning, hereafter to present you with some
matter of more worth, according as God shall enable me, and any convenient
vacation from the duties of my public function shall afford me opportunity.
Thus presuming, out of your former love, that this poor offer shall at the
least be kindly looked upon, with my many and unfeigned prayers for the
enlargement of Gods graces upon your self, your Lady, and all those young
plants, which by the great blessing of God have branched from you both, I
humbly take my leave. From Modbury in Deuon.

Your Worships ever much bound SAM. HIERON.

THE CHRISTIANS IOVRNALL. The first Sermon.
Matthew. 7.13.14. Enter in at the strait gate; for it is the wide gate, and
broad way that leads to destruction; and many there be which go in thereat.

Because the gate is strait, and the way narrow that leads unto life, and
few there be that find it.


THe scope and general drift of these words, is to arm and to prepare all
those that desire to be saved, unto a kind of The scope of the place.
hardship and restraint, and to withdraw them from framing themselves unto the
course and fashion of the multitude. The point is delivered in form of a very
brief instruction, or advertisement, as, (Enter in at the strait gate, The
division of the Text.
) it is backed with two reasons in natural opposition each to other; the first
is this, because the wide and broad way, which has greatest store of company,
leads to destruction: the second is this, because the strait gate and the
narrow way, which has in comparison but few passengers, is that which brings
unto life. This is briefly the scope and order of the place, I will treat of
it in the same method, that I have observed in opening it. And first of the
advertisement it self.

The first part.
Enter in at the strait gate: And therein first the meaning must be labored
for: the chief thing is, what is understood by the strait gate. What is meant
by Gate and way.
By the gate and way, which we are urged to enter into, is meant that holy
course, which the Lord has laid down unto us in his holy word; it is the same
which David Psa. 119.3.
terms the Lords way; the way of his Verse. 14.
testimonies; the way of Verse. 30.
truth: the way of Gods Verse. 32.
Commandments: the Ps. 25.10.
path of the Lord; and Jeremy, the Ier. 6.16.
good way. It is called a strait gate, Why it is called a strait and narrow
way.
and afterward a narrow way; first because of the restraint, and (as may
seem) hard condition which it lays upon flesh and blood, (as we shall see
hereafter in the farther handling it;) secondly because of the circumspection
and care to be used in walking in it, as in a way from which because of the
narrownes thereof, a man easily may decline. This is the way, that Christ
calls all that will be saved to enter into, because only this way leads unto
life. I will speak less by way of exposition and interpretation, because what
doubts soever may arise touching the sense, shall in the further enlarging of
every particular, be fully discovered. The thing that I will chiefly labor
in; is according to the drift of the place, to show what things ought of
necessity to be in every one that would be saved. It will be excellent matter
of direction, to all those that are yet unconverted, and of resolution and
confirmation to such as have truly cared to walk the way that leads unto
life.

The first thing which by authority of this text of scripture ought to be in
every one that desires salvation, is, Doctr. 1.
a right understanding, and a true acknowledgement of his own wandering. For
even in reason, before a man can frame himself to enter into a right course,
he must be resolved and persuaded of his own former mistaking; for why else
should he change his fashion? if he have not erred before, to what end should
he relinquish his present course, and betake himself to a guise, to which he
has not hitherto been accustomed? Reason it self must needs yield to this in
other things, and it must needs be true in this. How shall I persuade a man to
enter into the straight gate, If he do not feel and perceive himself to be
in a way in which it is not safe for him to continue? If we look into the
scripture we shall see good proof for this point, viz. that the
acknowledgement of our bypast error, is the very first degree unto sound
conversion. To what end think we is it, that by Gods special appointment,
the terrors of the law should first be preached, and should go like the
mighty strong wind (which in Gods appearing to 1. King. 19,
Elias, rent the mountains) before the calm, and gentle, and still voice of
the Gospel, I say to what end is that, and what did the Lord aim at herein,
but only this, that men might see where they be, and in what case they stand;
and that, holding on in the way which nature has set them in, there can
nothing follow but destruction? As the Lord himself at the first began with
our Grandfather Adam after he had sinned, forcing him by variety of demands
to see his errors, Genes. 3.
(Where art thou, and who told thee that thou wast naked, have thou eaten of
the tree?) so all the Prophets and Apostles after, held the same course: the
first thing they labored in, was to make men see that there was no hope of
happiness, without a present forsaking of their accustomed behavior. Jeremy
when he would show that among the people of his times; there was (for the
generality) no true conversion, reports the matter in these Jerem. 8.6.
words, I hearkened but none spoke aright, no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, what have I done? as if he had said, there was not a man,
that had any so much as a conceit of his own erring, they were all strongly
persuaded, that their courses were right and unblameable, and therefore every
man turned to his race, as the horse to the battle. The same Prophet
describing the repentance of the estate of Israel under the name of the Tribe
of Ephraim (which bare the sway in that kingdom) Ier. 31.18.
relates it thus, I heard Ephraim lamenting thus, Thou have corrected me, and I
was chastised as an untamed calfe, convert thou me and I shall be converted,
for thou art the Lord my God; now among other signs and evidences of
repentance, he says Ephraim smote upon his thigh, as who should say, Ephraim
having all this while run a stubborn course in the very depth of security,
now began to recall himself, and to think, that questionles he was out of his
way; the course was dangerous, and it was now high time to reform it. It is
noted in the prodigal son (the perfect pattern of a true convert) that when
he had run a lewd course, wastfully consuming the portion of goods which
fell unto him, supposing (as many younkers do) his stock to have been as a
living spring, which could never be drawn dry; at last he came to himself;
the bethinking himself of his bypast folly, was the first step unto his
recovery. Me thinks when I read that parable, I do see the young prodigal
like to a man riding fast in a wrong way, and at last upon a fodaine, by the
call of some that sees his mistaking, rayning up his horse, and even inwardly
chasing and fretting with himself for his former carelesnes; (he came to
himself) he thought all well before, but now he perceived how things went, and
what would be the issue if he so continued. When the Lord was pleased to call
Paul, who before (as himself confesses) was 1. Tim. 5.13.
a persecutor, and a blasphemer, and an oppressor, suddenly there came a voice
from heaven saying, Act. 9.4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? as if the Lord had said: O thou man,
know thou what thou do, understand thou who it is against whom thou
set thy self? conceiuest thou the danger that will follow it? so that the
first thing God sought to bring him to, was the sight of his own present error,
and that being once perceived, he became tractable, Act. 9.6.
Lord (says he) what will thou that I do? I might easily multiply examples
of this kind, but these may serve to show, that the sense and apprehension of
our own wandering is the first step to our entrance into life. And therefore it
is that the scripture is so full, in discovering our natural erring. The
spirit of God speaking of the whole race and generation of Psalm. 14.3.
mankind, (for so Romans 3.10.
Paul applies) says that all are gone out of the way. In Isaiah Jsay. 53.6.
All we (says the Prophet) like sheep have gone astray: it is a place worth
the noting; we have gone astray like Sheep, there is no creature more apt to
wander then a sheep, there is none more unapt of it self to return into the
right way again. The Ox (as the scripture says) knows his owner, and the
Ass his masters crib, the very swine accustomed to the trough, if he go
abroad, yet at night will find the way home again: but the sheep once
strayed of himself returns not. All we therefore (says the Prophet) like
sheep are gone astray, to show our simplicity, and how impossible a thing it
is for us of our own power to return: And the Prophet in the next words
gives a reason, We have turned every one to his own way: Gods ways and our
own ways are directly contrary Jsay. 55.8.
. We run naturally after the ways of our own hearts, and we cannot choose
then but wander utterly from the way of life. Again the lesson of our Savior
here belongs to all, Enter in at the strait gate, Entrance into a gate
presupposes a being without the gate; no man is bid to enter, that is already
within: if all be exhorted to enter, it argues that we are all without, and if
we be considered in our selves, then as the Romans 3.16.
Apostle says, Destruction and calamity are in our ways, and the way of
peace we do know. This care of the holy Ghost, in the whole course of the
scripture to acquainte us with our wanderings, argues the necessity of the
right understanding of it, if we desire to be saved. Let us make use of this
point.

It is a point of great use, Use.
helping us in the most needful point, the right iudgeing of our own estate,
let us not be wilfully careless herein I beseech you; why should we be
desirous to judge in other things, as of times and seasons, of the face of the
sky (as Christ says) of wares and commodities, of cases and questions in the
law, and yet never care to understand how it fares with our own souls? The
soul is the principal, and ought principally to be looked unto. Let us
learn to be able to judge of our selves whether it be with us as it ought to
be: Prove your selves (says the 2. Cor. 13.5.
Apostle): Let us search and try our ways, says Lam. 3.40.
Jeremy: Examine your heart upon your bed, says Psalm. 4.4.
David. We all have a hope that it is well with us, let us look to it, that
our hope as the Romans 5.5.
Apostle speaks, may be such as may not make us ashamed. There is no hurt
gotten by the trial of our selves, there is always danger in security. There
be thousands plunged into hell, that thought nothing less till they came
there, and now they are past recovery: we are all trauailers in one of these
two ways, and we shall arrive at one of these two places here mentioned, life
or destruction, there is no third: who would not be glad to know touching
himself, in which of the two ways he is, that if he be in the evil way he
may speedily come out of it, if he be in the right, he may go on therein
with cheerefulnes? This point is the thing that I have aimed at in choosing
this text, and by it you shall as easily understand it, as you do in your
going home judge by such styles and gates, and hedges, whether you are in the
true way yea or no. Now this I may deliver to you for a matter of certainty,
that all (excepting infants, the manner of whose conversion is known only unto
God) all I say which are partakers of life eternal, this is their first step
to it, the sight and understanding of their former errors; God first opens
their hearts, and makes them to perceive that they are in a course, the issue
whereof is eternal death; with this their hearts are smitten and appalled, and
they are even woe with themselves to consider it. Mark then this, Art thou one
that never yet saw the error and misery of thine own natural estate, that
never had yet any compunction of heart to consider thine own wandering, that
wast never grieved to think upon thy life past, to see how thou have all this
while hitherto been mistaken? art thou one that have always pleased thy self
in thine own courses, scarsely so much as calling it into question, whether
thou walk as thou ought to do yea or no? surely thy case is fearful and
damnable, and I may surely say unto thee, that if thou hold on so, thou
shall never be saved. Let us in the fear of God look unto it, it is a matter
that concerns the greatest part; we bless our selves in our own hearts, we
have lived hithertoo after our own lusts, worshipping God when and in what
manner our selves pleased, taking to our selves the liberty of gross sins,
hatred, envy, covetousness, oppression, drunkenness, and the like, and we be
not yet persuaded, nor can be, that the way we go, and the course we hold is
otherwise then it ought to be. There is not the vilest wretch, be his fashion
of life never so vile, but he will say, he hopes he is right, nay he will be
very confident in it that he is so, and yet never in his life had any true
remorse, nor ever knew, or perceived what it was to wander from the ways and
paths of happiness. Deceive we not our selves, either we must begin here, at
the sight of our old errors, or else we can never tread the path, that leads
unto life.

Doctr. 2.
The next thing which by the rule of my text must be in every one that would be
saved, is, care to seek out the true way, and the sure path, that leads and
brings the goers in it unto life. This is plain also (as to me seems) by
this scripture, for as the sight of a man's ancient wandering, must go before
his entrance into a new course; so of necessity when a man perceives his
errors, the right way must be sought out, and certainly understood, before
he can enter thereinto: so that he which bids me enter into the gate of life,
bids me withal to seek where that gate is, for otherwise my desire of
entrance is in vain. If a master will his servant to go to such a house, it
is presupposed that either he does know the way to it, or else must make
inquiry for it. And this care to enquire out the true way in this particular,
is the plain doctrine of the Jerem. 6.1^.
scripture; Stand in the ways, and behold and ask for the old way which is
the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls; there
is a plain charge, and an express commandment, in the multitude and variety
of supposed ways unto salvation, to make diligent inquiry which is the good
way, stand in the ways and ask. Try all things says the 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
Apostle; it is a rule given principally touching doctrine and precepts
directing to eternal life: Paul wills them to examine and ponder them all,
and never leave trying till they have bolted out the truth, as the men of
Beroea did, that heard Paul, they searched the scripture daily, whether those
things were so Act. 17.11.
. To halte betwixt two opinions, and to be in suspense, not knowing which way
specially to incline, and to be in religion as idle beggars are in their way,
ready to go which way soever the staff falls, how hateful a thing it is
in the sight of God, we may conceive by the sharp reproof used by Elias unto
the wavering people, 1. King. 18.21
how long will ye halt between two opinions? When there were differences of
opinions in the world touching Christ, some taking him for John Baptist, some
for Elias, some for Ieremias, some for one of the Prophets; our Savior called
his disciples together, and would needs know their Mat. 16.15.
judgment, but whom say ye that I am? Christ would teach thereby that when
there are varieties of opinions in matters of religion, some say this is the
way, and some say that, men should not (as the manner is) take occasion thereby
to stand doubtful, and to adhere to nothing certainly, but should enquire with
the greater care, that they may be certainly and soundly resolved in the
truth. There is no man professes any thing, but (if it be but for his credit
sake) he will labor to understand if it be possible the very mystery of it,
and to know the certainty of such things as are appertayning to it: How much
more in religion should the certain truth be labored for? error in other
things does prejudice the body only, and the things which concern it, but the
mistaking in this, I mean in the maine points of it, is the utter and
irrecouerable hazard of a man's soul. This may serve briefly for the opening
of this second point, let us now come to apply it.

This point also will convince us, Use.
to be not as yet entered into the way to life, in as much that we are so
exceeding careless in this duty of seeking and searching out the truth. Some
are drowned in the depth of ignorance, and never entertain so much as a
thought, whether their way be right yea or no: some are profanely desperate
and put all to an adventure, not caring what be the issue; if they be right so
it is, if not, what remedy, they must bear it as well as they may: some be
superstitious, and devoted to their forefathers steps and hold their course
for a sufficient rule, without further question: some are time-seruers, and
look only to the law, as that leads so will they follow, to day on this
fashion, to morrow on another, if need be: some are peevish and perverse, and
plead the diversity of ways, and the multitude of religions, and so think
to be excused: so that by that time we have put all to these several heads
which belong unto them, we shall find scarce a tenth as the Prophet says,
whose care it is to labor and take pains to seek and inquire which is indeed
the gate of grace, and which is the true path that leads unto heaven. Indeed
the world is full of business, and each man as his humor leads him is employed,
the covetous man for his wealth, the malicious man for his revenge, the
voluptuous liver for his pleasure, the wanton for his lust, the proud for his
back; for these things men seek far and near, all the devices, all the
means that may be possible; but an assurance that the way we have chosen to
bring us to heaven, is the right way, of all things else it is least thought
upon. It is a strange thing, there is no man so secure for his way to mill, or
to market, as he is for his way to life eternal. In those ways he will be
perfect, if he doubt he will ask, he will inquire, Is this ye way, what marks,
what turning to such or such a place? as for the other way we go all upon mere
conceit, we think it is so, we have heard others say so, but we seek not
for the certainty whether it be so. What a misery is this, and how has
Satan beguiled the greatest part, for the filling of his own barnes? In this
blindness he carries men hoodwinkre, (as a man would carry a hawke upon his
fist) whether he list, and they will be in the pit before they are ware of
it. I beseech you take notice of this point, it is no slight thing I entreat
of; he that may commands us, he that can condemn us, he which ere it be
long shall judge us, even he charge us here to enter in at the strait gate.
How shall we enter if we know it not, how shall we know it if we seek it not?
Neither is it a slight kind of seeking that we are called unto: there be many
by ways, but the right way is but one; as in shooting a man may miss
diversely, he may shoot under, he may shoot over, he may shoot wide on this
side and one that, but there is but one way to hit the mark, so a man may many
ways be mistaken, but there is but one gate that leads unto happiness, and
all the cunning is to find it. Well, the scripture will teach us, the word of
God will be as the Angel of God to Peter to direct us; and if we will
vouchsafe to attend the full opening of this text, I doubt not but by the help
of God we shall understand it. In the mean time let this prevail against our
security, and let it bring us so far on our way to life, as to make us say
with Act. 9.6.
Paul when he was stricken to the ground, Lord what will thou that I do, and
with the poor Act. 16.30.
Iaylor, what must I do to be saved? this good desire being once begotten in
us, the rest cannot choose but be supplied.

Doctr. 3.
The third thing which this text necessarily commends unto us, if we would
be saved, is, a resolution when we have felt our error, and found the right
way and the true gate, all delays laid aside to make a present entry. If you
ask how I prove this by my text, I thus make it manifest. It is a rule in
civil matters, that in bonds of debt between man and man, when there is no
certain day named, then the debt is due presently: so here, the commandment
and charge being given indefinitely, without any express limitation of any set
time, it follows that it is presently to be performed. Our Savior says not,
enter hereafter when thou art more at leisure; or to the young man, enter when
thou art old, or to the old man enter when thou art a dying, or to the covetous
man, enter when thou have glutted thy desire with wealth, or to the drunkard,
enter when thou art utterly disabled that thou can be drunk no longer; but
he says to all, at the instant Enter; do it presently, do it straightway,
defer not to do it. And this is also the plain doctrine of the Scripture; I
made have says Psalm. 119.60.
David, and I delayed not to keep thy Commandments. It is commended in Matthew.
4.20.
Peter and Andrew, that when Christ called them, they left their nets
straightway. When Christ called Luke 19.6.
Zacheus, the Text says, that he came down hastily. The reason why there
must be a resolution of present entrance is, because, as there is a time of
grace in which the gate of mercy stands open, so there is a time of judgment,
in which this gate will be shut up, and all hope of entry utterly removed.
David speaks of a time, in which God may be found Psalm. 32.6.
, which implies that there is a time in which God will not be found. The time
when he may be found, what it is, 2. Cor. 6.2.
Paul teaches, where speaking of the preaching of the word, and of the offers
of grace, that are therein made daily; he says, Behold, now is the accepted
time, now is the day of salvation; the time present is the only time, the time
to come is no time, no more then the time past, it is a matter of mere
uncertainty; To day if ye will hear, it is read unto us continually Psalm.
95.7.
. There is a time coming, and we know not how near it is, (though the
general end may be farther off, yet our particular account cannot be far,
we see daily how some drop away of all ages, and estates); I say there is a
time coming, in which (as Luke 13.24.
Christ says) many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able. O what
woeful yelling, and pitiful crying, and earnest knocking there will be then at
that gate, with, Matthew. 25.11.12.
Lord, Lord open unto us; when that heavy doom, depart from me I know you not,
shall be their portion? This is the reason why it is no safe delaying; I would
we would learn wisdom from our outward businesses: what makes husbandmen
break their sleep, and whiles it is yet night, to be traveling to the sea
side for their sand; It is the use of the west-parts near the sea, to manure
their ground with sand.
meet them, ask them the cause why they are up so exceeding soon? The answer
is ready, (you know it better then my self) the tide requires it, a piece of an
hour lost, may breed much hinderance, the time of the year hasteneth, and
when it is gone, it cannot be recalled. Oh, can we not command the tide to
stay us, but must we ride and post, and make such have to prevent it; and
think we to have the gate of mercy stand open at our pleasure? Be not
deceived, Esau came tardie, and sought the blessing with tears, but could not
obtain it Hebr. 12.17.
.

Use.
The use is to cure that evil sickness of delaying, which is the very bane of so
many souls. I remember the report the Hag. 1.2.
Prophet Haggay makes of the people that neglected the reedifying of the
Temple, This people (says he) say that the time is not yet come, that the
Lords house should be builded: so many think it is not yet time for them to
look to heauenward, youth must have his course, the covetous bag must be
filled, the pleasure of the flesh must be fully tasted, ambition must come to
his height, and then it will be time to retire. Prou. 6.10.
Yet a little more sleep says the sluggard: let God bear with us a little,
and in time we will enter. This is as the Scripture terms it, the very
deepenes of Satan, thus to beguile men; and no doubt there are many in hell,
which had a meaning in their life time to enter in, but God has cut the^
short, and deprived them of that, which when they might, they refused to accept
of. Well if we have seen our natural wandering, if God has opened our
hearts, that we perceive there is no remedy but a new course must be entered
into, if we have learned out of the word of God, which is the way; let us
resolve upon a present entry. Christ says, the kingdom of heaven sufferreth
violence Mat. 11.12.
, me thinks Christ there speaks of heaven as of a matter offered, which if it
be not presently taken, is presently lost; and therefore all men of discretion
that know the worth of it, press, and throng toward it, and catch after it,
and even swear about it, that they may have it while there is possibility of
obtaining it. I opened my mouth and panted says Psa. 119.131.
David, there was have; I follow hard toward the mark says Philip. 3.14.
Paul, there was speed. This is the third thing required to salvation; there is
no time named, therefore it must be done presently.

The fourth thing which now follows to be treated of, is the entrance it
self: our former wa^dering must be felt, the right and true way must be
fought for, when it is found, a resolution of present entrance must be put on;
and then next we must put forward. Enter in at the strait gate. To this act
of entrance there are two things required, the first is (that I may use terms
agreeable to my text) stooping; the second a stripping of our selves of
whatsoever may hinder our entrance. First there must be a kind of stooping,
because the coming in is low. It is said of heaven in the scripture, 2. Corin.
5.1.
that it is ab^use not made with hands: Now as in the matter thereof it is
differing from our earthly buildings, so is it in the framing and contriuing of
it. In great men's houses it is a great eyesore, to see a little, low, and
pinching entry to a large and spacious dwelling; but to the end all things may
be answerable, as the house is of great receipt, so the gates must be high and
lofty, and the coming in according. But now in this house which is eternal
in the heavens, it is otherwise. Indeed it is large within, for in my fathers
house (says John 14.2.
Christ) are many mansions; but yet the gate unto it is exceeding low, the
entry narrow, the passage in, very straight: It is the gate of humility. A man
that bears up himself aloft, in the pride, and security, and senslesnes of
his own heart, that leans to his own wisdom, that pleases himself in a
flattering opinion of the goodness of his own estate, that was never beaten
down by the terror of the law, and the due beholding of Gods justice, such an
one can never enter here, this gate is to low for his hautie, carnal, and
self pleasing stomach to enter in at. See an example or two of the stooping of
Gods children, in their entrance into grace. Look first upon Psalm. 38.4.
David; Mine iniquities are gone over my head, and are as awaightie burden too
heavy for me; me seems I see David in this passion, like a man oppressed
with some carriage more then he is able to stand under, which makes him
double, and crouch, and groan, and long to be eased; so David was with the
weight of his sins, he was stricken down with the sight and consideration of
them. What think we, did not Ezr. 9.6.
Ezra stoop, when he prayed, O my God I am confounded and ashamed to lift up
mine eyes unto thee my God, for our iniquities are increased over our heads,
and our trespass is grown up to heaven? Did not Job 42.6.
Job stoop when he said, O Lord I abhor my self in dust and ashes? Was not
Isay 38.14.
Ezechiah cast down when he cried in the bitterness of his soul, O Lord it
has oppressed me, comfort me? Look into the new Testament, what think we
of the Luke 7.37. etc.
woman that lay at Christ's feet, that washed them with tears, and wiped them
with the hairs of her head, was not here humility? How judge we of the Luke
18.13.
Publican, did he not manifest the humility of his soul even by the standing
of his body? he would not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven but smote his
breast and said, God be merciful to me a sinner. Consider well the example of
Romans 7.9.18.
S. Paul, I was once alive (says he) without the law; he once bare his head as
high as the best, and I warrant you would not have feared for profession of
religion, to set his foot to him that was holiest; touching the righteousness
which is in the Law (says he) I was unblameable: But when his eyes were opened
to see his former error, when he had found out the true way to life, and began
to frame to enter in it, then he stooped, I know that in me dwells no good
thing; I count al things but Phil. 3.6.8.
loss, for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord; I judge them
to be dung, that I may win Christ: here was a man stricken down, outwardly in
body, when he saw the light from heaven on the way, but much more in heart,
when he saw after his long wandering, the strait gate that leads unto heaven.
This is the course that all that will be saved must come unto.

It is of very great use. Use.
It will prove a great many of us to be mere strangers to the way to life. For
why? It may be truly said of us, as the Lord spoke once of the Ierem. 44.10.
Jews, we are not humbled to this day: the natural pride of our hearts is not
yet beaten down, there be but few that stoop and are cast down with the
sight of their own spiritual baseness, few that stand in awe of Gods
Majesty, and that tremble at his word. The proud Luke 18.11.
Pharisee that stood vaunting, God I thank him, I am thus and thus, has many
followers; but the poor Publican that hung down his head, the conscience of
his sins filling his face with shame, has but few like him: What one of many
has learned with 2. Sam. 6.22.
David, to be low in his own sight? Paul's 1. Cor. 3.18.
rule, If any man among you seem to be wise in this world, let him be a fool
that he may be wise: few know it, but fewer understand it, but they be fewest
of all that have practiced it. O when shall we be found to be humbled in that
measure as the Corinthians were, to whom Paul was forced to write a letter of
comfort to revive them? One is puffed up with a conceit of his own
sufficiency and knowledge, and scorns the simplicity of the Gospel, and to
sit in the learners form in Christ's school. Another is frozen in ignorance
and blindness, and knows nothing by himself, his very vices seem virtues unto
him, every thing is with him as it ought to be. A third is lifted up with a
presumptuous opinion of Gods mercy, and thinks it a matter of easines to
obtain it, so that he never so much as thinks upon yielding, and upon the
humbling of his soul before the Lord: so that we may well be said to be
strangers from the way of life, since we will not stoop so low, as this
strait gate of humility. Beg we of God therefore, that he would bind our iron
necks, that he would take the stiff stony hearts out of our bodies, and give
us hearts of flesh, yielding and flexible, and easy to be bent, that being
once become even as nothing in our own opinion, we may be sit passengers for
this little and low door that leads unto life.

Well it follows: Doctr. ^.
together with this stooping, there must go (as I said) a certain stripping of
our selves also; he that would go through a strait way, a narrow entry, it is
no wisdom for him to clog himself with many things about him, he had need
rather to lighten himself, that he may go through with the greater ease. So
must it be in this case, the gate you see to life, is strait and pinching, and
therefore as the Hebr. 12.1.
Apostle speaks to the Hebrews (very fitly for this purpose) The sin that
hangs so fast on, must be shaken off: the Ephesians. 4.22.
old man must be cast off; the Galat. 5.24.
flesh with the affections and lusts must be mortified: our Coloss. 3.5.
members that are on earth must be crucified; the Romans 6.13.
weapons of unrighteousness must be laid aside; we must leave our old sins
behind us, if we will enter in here, to bring them in with us at this little
gate it is impossible. The covetous man with his bags, the swearer with his
great oaths, the malicious man that swells with his malice, the ambitious
with his high thoughts, the vicious with his minions, the drunkard with his
full cups, these and the like to these can never enter here with their
dependances. What sin soever thou have formerly delighted in, if it were to
thee as thy right hand, or thy right eye, thou must cut it off and cast it from
thee, thou must strive to strippe thy self of it, or else this gate is much
too little for thee to go in at. This is like the hole the Snake creeps
through, where he leaves his old skin behind him. If thou mean to come here,
thou must then say with 1. Pet. 4.2.3.
St. Peter, It is enough for me that I have spent the time past of my life,
after the lusts of the Gentiles walking in wantonness, lusts, drunkenness,
gluttony, drinkings; and in abominable Idolatries; other things, better
things are now expected of me; eue^ that henceforth, I should live, not after
the lusts of men, but after the will of God. It is an excellent place. I could
bring in a cloud of witnesses to make good this point, that old sins must be
stripped off, when we once put our foot to the threshold of this strait gate.
This I may be bold to say, for I know it is true, that there is no man's or
woman's conversion recorded in the Scripture, but there is a manifest change
noted in them ^ Infirmities they had still, but sin reigned not in them, as
it did before. And there is great reason for it: For if a man entering into the
profession of Christianity, might still have liberty to follow the ways of
his own heart, and to please himself, in fulfilling of his own lusts; what
great thing were it to be religious? If he that had been ignorant, might be
ignorant still, he that had been filthy, might be filthy still, he that had
been an oppressor, might oppress still, and so in other specialties; all the
world then would be religious; what great thing then should Christ be thought
to work in us, and for us, if our old corruptions should reign, and we should
not be freed from the dominion of sin.

This point will discover unto many of us, the folly and vanity of our hearts;
Use.
we will needs be thought to be in the right way, and to have chosen the true
course unto eternal happiness, but yet in the mean time we will not forsake
our old fashions, somewhat or other is behind, which either for profit, or
pleasure, or estimations sake, we will not be beaten from some sweet sin or
other, that if it were possible we would even carry with us into heaven, and
so by that means we do utterly bar up against our selves, our entrance
into life. I pray you let us not be deceived: Let me propound unto you the same
question, which Paul propounded unto King Agrippa; Tell me, do you believe the
Scripture Act. 26.27.
Think you that it is true which Christ here says, that the gate to heaven
is a strait gate? If you do, think with your selves, what other reason can be
devised, why it should so be termed, then this; because it requires the
stripping off of our old corruptions? If you agree this to be the meaning, how
shall we then hope to be saved, and yet willingly, purposely, and advisedly,
retain, and hold fast our old sins, as though we would at once serve both
God and Mammon; walk both in the Lords way, and in our own way. These things
cannot hold, unless we think to make God a liar. Striving to enter in at the
strait gate, and a not striving against our own selfe-pleasing humors, these
things cannot agree. This is the use.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SERMON.
I Proceed still in the matter, which in the beginning I told you was most
agreeing to the maine scope of this place of Scripture, which is, to show what
things ought of necessity to be in all yt would be saved; Four particulars
have been treated of, the rest now follow to be handled. Doctr. 1.
The fifth thing then which by the authority and strength of this text, ought
to be in every that desires salvation, is a continual proceeding and going
on in good things. I doubt not but you shall see this plainly proved to be
comprehended in the text. Our savior here compares heaven to a place, from
which by nature we are all estranged; true religion is the way leading to it,
humility, (the denial of ourselves, and the renouncing the bypast pleasures
of sin, is the gate entering us into this way: Now the use you know of a
(...), is for trauelers, not for idle loyterers, or vain gazers, or time
deluding triflers, such is this spiritual way, it is a way leading to life,
and therefore requires a continual proceeding, from step to step, from grace,
to grace, without desisting, without tyring, until the iourneys end be reached
unto: and this is the express doctrine of the scripture. The author of the
epistle to the Hebr. 6.1.
Hebrews has two excellent places for this purpose; the first is in the 6.
chapter, where writing unto those that had been well and carefully instructed
in the first principles of religion (which he terms the doctrine of the
beginning of Christ) he exhorts them, that not satisfying themselves therewith
as though it were enough that they were thus entered, and as it were seasoned
with sound knowledge, they should now be led forward unto perfection; as if he
had said, Indeed it is true, you have begun well, yet you must not think that
sufficient, there is a kind of perfection to be aimed (...) you must still
press and endeavor onwards to obtain it: the second Hebr. 12.1.
place is, in the 12. chapter, cast away (says he) every thing that presses
down, (discharge your selves as much as it is possible of all encumbrances)
the sin that hangs so fast on, seek to be cased of it, and let us run
with patience, the race which is set before us; here, just according to this
text, he likeneth the course of Christianity to a race, in which there must
be a speedy hastening, without giving over until the end of the race be comne
unto. We have examples hereof in scripture, two chiefly; ye one in Psalm. 119.32.
David, I will run the way of thy commandments, there was a proceeding, a
going on, a grouth in godliness: The other in Phil. 3.13.14.
Paul, speaking of the excellent knowledge of Christ, of feeling the virtue of
his resurrection, and of being conformable to his death; Brethren (says he) I
count not my self that I have attained to it, (and yet Paul was more the^
ordinarily expert in the mystery of Christ) but one thing I do, I forget
that which is behind, that which I have done hitherto, I am even ashamed of it,
I account it not worth the naming, I endeavor my self unto that which is
before, and follow hard toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus: it is a place, and an example worthy (as the scripture
speaks) to be written with the point of a Diamond in the tables of every
Christian man's heart. David, describing the true worshippers of God that do
serve him in truth of heart without hypocrisy, Psalm. 84.7.
says they are such as go from strength to strength: men that do Psalm.
119.1.
walk in the law of the Lord: these manner speakings do necessarily imply
proceeding. It is truly said, that in religion not to go forward, is to go
backward, and that the man's knowledge and feeling is but a mere conceit, a
matter of fancy only, which is not accompanied with a desire of increase. All
preaching, all exercises of religion aim at one of these two, either to
convert those that are uncalled, or to build up those which are converted.
Desire the sincere milk of the word, says the 1. Peter 2.2.
Apostle, that ye may grow thereby; and God gives the spirit unto his chosen,
not only to renew them and to beget in them some little sparkles of grace, but
to make them Hebr. 13.21.
perfect in good works. We ought to thank God always for you, says 2 Thessalonians.
1.3.
Paul to the Thessalonians, because your faith grows exceeding lie. The
chosen of God are likened to Psalm. 1.3.
trees planted by the rivers of waters, which will bring forth fruit in due
season, whose leaf does never fade: this is not all, for they do not only
hold their own, but they are so full of sap, that they shall still bring forth
fruit in their Psalm. 92.14.
age, and even then be fat and flourishing. Evil men (says the 2. Tim. 3.13.
Apostle) wax worse and worse; and Jsay 1.5.
fall away more and more, from one extremity to another; adding drunkenness
to thirst, as Deuteronomy. 29.19.
Moses speaks. It cannot then but be a dishonor unto God, if his spirit
shall not be able to work to the making of those that are his, better, and
better, to the leading them by degrees nearer and nearer unto perfection. Thus
you see the certainty of this point, viz. that the enterers into this gate of
life, must not stand (as it were) about the door, and sit them down as soon
as they have begun to taste of good things, but there is a way before them to
be travailed in; and, as through the necessity of nature they come every day
nearer to the end of their days, so by the power of grace, they must strive to
come every day nearer to ye end of their faith, the salvation of their souls.
Let us apply it.

Use. 1.
To reprove that which has been reproved often, but is not yet reformed, and
that is our slacknes, and our sluggishnes in spiritual things. There is not
one man of many, but he thinks, and is verily persuaded, that he has
religion enough and that he is come far enough in the ways of godliness, he
knows enough, and he is zealous enough: I desire but the testimonies of your
own hearts to witness with me, whether that which I say be not truth; for if it
were not so that men were strongly persuaded, that for matters of religion they
were forward enough, how could it be that they should make so little account
of the means to bring them unto more perfection? how is it possible that they
should not be ashamed of themselves to be found at this hour, as ignorant in
the grounds of piety, and as slack in the duties of Gods worship, and in the
practice of holiness, as they were many years ago? There be a great many of us
touching whom if it be enquired what knowledge in religion they had some good
number of years since, what zeal they showed in the promoting of Gods
kingdom, what care in the hearing of Gods word, and in the worship and service
of his name, and again how it fares with them for these things at this
present, it will be found, that look how it was of old, so it is yet, ignorant
then, ignorant yet, careless then, careless yet, no alteration, no change unless
it be this, namely that now they are more dull, more unteachable, more hardened,
more cold hearted, more profane, more obstinate, then before. How can this hold
for good at the day of trial you see the course of christianity which lends
to eternal happiness has both a gate to enter at, and a way to go forward
in. How shall we think to arrive at the rest of the Lord, if we make no
conscience to proceed in goodness? if we stand at a point, propounding to our
selves a form and course, which we will still go round in, like a horse in a
mill, and further then so we will not pass, we will be at a stint in our
religion, and beyond that we will not go, it is as impossible for us to be
saved, as it is for him to come to a house or town many miles off, who seeing
the way to it, stands still in it, and never puts one foot forward from the
place where he took up his first standing. Think not the word of God has
spoken these things in vain, shadowing out spiritual matters unto us by
earthly things; Gods purpose is to make us conceive the truth the better, and
by such a place as this is, to convince us even by the light of our own reason,
yt there is no hope of salvation, without a care to add daily to our
spiritual estate, to increase in knowledge, to proceed in zeal, to be more
forward in the worship of God, to have more feeling of the love and favor of
God, every day then other. If we be glutted with these things, the forenoones
hearing fills our stomach, and we have no further appetite that day, this
days hearing does not sharpen us against the next day, but we are ready to
please our selves with that we do, and so to amplify it in our own private
conceit, as though no more were needful: It is a dangerous thing, I should
but deceive you, and pluck your blood upon my head, if I should tell you that
this were the way to eternal life.

Well for a second use, Use 2.
if it be so dangerous a thing not to go forward, what is it think we to
go backward, to decay, and grow cold in our love to good things. Their last
state, (says our Luke 11.26.
Savior) will be worse the^ their first: and it is better not to have known
the way of 2. Pet. 2.21.
righteousness, the^ after they have known, to turn from the holy commandment
given unto the^: The evil spirit yt is once cast out, brings with him seven
devils worse the^ himself. It is a matter to be thought upon by diverse of us:
There was a time when the word of God was more precious unto us, and when men
and women did even throng together to this place, many seemed even glad to
hear, and to be made acquainted with good things was a joy unto them: But now
we are full, we are (like the nice and unthankful Israelites) weary of this
Manna, the commonnes of Gods blessings has drawn them into contempt. Beware
of looking back, take heed of going from strength to weakness, from zeal to
coldness and deadnes of heart, from carefulnes to security, from the loving
the house of God, and the exercises thereof, to lothing them, or at lest to a
less and more cold esteeming them. We shall be unto us, if we shall now be
glutted with that, which sometimes we longed for: it is a sign that all our
shows were but shows, and all our protestations but hypocrisy. For if ye
have 1 Pet. 2.2.3.
tasted how bountiful the Lord is, then ye desire the sincere milk of the
word to grow thereby: if ye have found any sweetness in the exercises of
religion, it is certain your appetite will be increased rather then
diminished. If our spirits be dulled and tired out with the continual use of
these holy exercises, it is a fearful sign, and yet it is so common, that we
all have need to be admonished of it. And let us all that profess religion
remember that it is a way; life eternal is not by and by possessed. If there
be no proceeding it is dangerous, but if there be backslyding, if our
righteousness be but as the morning dew Hos. 6.4.
, which the heat of the Sun soon parcheth, it is worst of all: the dog to
the vomit, and the sow to the mire 2. Pet. 2, 22.
is the heauiest censure, that can be given of any man. They which have been
once enlightened, and have Hebr. 6.5.6.
tasted the gifts of Gods spirit, if they once fall back, it is impossible they
shoul be renewed by repentance; it is a woeful saying, it should make us even
tremble to consider it.

Now to this going on, and proceeding in the way to life, there are sundry
things belonging, which it is very meet that we should be made acquainted with,
they are impertine^t neither to the matter nor to the text. The first is,
continual guidance and direction. A man that is to Journey in a way unknown,
will not be satisfied with this alone, that he is set into the right way, but,
considering the possibility of erring, he will furnish himself with as many
directions as he can, glad he will be of any man's company that understands the
way; sometimes he will be at the charge rather then fail, to hire a man that
may conduct him: The way of peace which leads unto happiness, is a way which
flesh and blood is not acquainted with, and the nature of man is of it self
very subject to mistaking, therefore his duty that would grow in godliness, is to
get unto him the direction of some sure guide, which will not deceive him, that
so he may not fail of the end and mark which he desires. This was Psalm.
119.27.
David's care, as appears by many speeches of his: Make me to understand the
way of thy precepts: verse. 33. Teach me the way of thy statutes: verse. 35.
Direct me in the path of thy Commandments; verse. 133. Direct my steps in thy
word. The grand guide (whose directions are al-only to be looked unto, and
cannot deceive) is the Lord Jesus. I am the way (says John 14.6.
he) and no man comes unto the Father but by me. And ye Apostle to the Hebr.
12.2.
Hebrews, exhorting to run the race which is set before us, bids us withal to
look upon the author and finisher of our faith: his blood as the Chap.
10.19.20.
same Apostle speaks, has prepared a new and living way. The direction which
Christ gives, is comprehended in his Word, which is therefore often in the
Scripture termed the Lords way, because no course can bring a man unto
eternal life, but that which is there prescribed. David Psa. 119.105
says, this Word was a light unto his path: and 2. Pet. 1.19.
Peter co^mends those to whom he wrote, because they gave heed to it, as to
the best and surest instructor. The Word of God contained in Scripture is fitly
compared to the pillar of the cloud which led the people of Israel in the
wilderness; when that went forward the people marched, when that stayed, the
people stood still; all their journey was framed according to the moving of the
cloud: of the same use is this Word of God in the way to life, when that
calls, we may and must move, when that restrains, we ought not to put
forward, our care must be to suit our course and carriage thereunto. Now as
Christ the head guide has left the fulness of direction in his written Word, so
he has entrusted the Ministers of his Church therewith, he has committed it
unto them, as the 2. Cor. 5.19.
Apostle speaks, not that they should engrosse it to themselves, and lead
the people of God which way themselves please, but that they might study to
search out the hid matter thereof, and apply it to the direction of Gods
Church, according to every man's occasion. For this cause the Pastors of the
Church in respect of their function are called Heb. 137.17.
Leaders or Guides: and whereas Christ calls ignorant and erroneous teachers
Matthew. 15.14.
blind guides, it argues that sound instructors are well termed by ye name of
Guids. The interpreting of the Scripture, is called a guiding of the hearers.
When Philip demanded of the Eunuch, reading (as he rode) upon Esaias, Act. 8.31.
whether he understood that which he read; he answered him, how can I, except I
had a guide: meaning except he had one to expound unto him. So then, hitherto
the matter is now brought; he that would go on, and proceed as he ought in the
way to life, must get himself a guide. The head-guide is the Lord Jesus, he
has recommended his directions unto us in his Word, and for the common benefit
and instruction of his Church, he has given gifts unto men, and enabled them
to lay open the mystery of the Scripture, and by this his ordinance, he
guides and directs those that are in his eternal counsel ordained unto
life. So that as it is said of the journey of the Israelites, that God did
lead them like sheep by the hands of Psalm. 77.20.
Moses and Aaron: so it is true in this spiritual voyage, that the Lord
leads his chosen by the hand of his Ministers. By them he Ephesians. 4.12.
gathers together his Saints. These I am sure are all of them sure grounds
that cannot be denied; That the way of life is guide: Secondly, that Christ
Jesus is the guide: Thirdly, that he has registered the whole counsel of God)
and that for the dispensing of his Word (notwithstanding the private use which
every Christian may and ought to have of it) he has ordained public
teaching, by which to guide our feet into the way of peace. He that is
disposed to be captious, let him think well which of all these he can except
against: In the mean time we will take them for truth, and so make the best
use of them.

This shows that albeit the most of us at this day, that profess religion,
Use.
have chosen guides unto our selves, yet we fail in choosing the true
direction: some are guided by their own private conceits, some by the guise
of the times, some go with the drove and are carried with the multitude, some
are led only by the courses of their forefathers, they hold it a sure way to
do as they have done; the direction of Christ Jesus speaking in the
Scriptures, and revealing his advise unto us in the ministry of his Church, is
least looked after. Each man in those cases thinks himself wise enough, to
be his own aduiser. In Physic we fear our own judgment, and believe the
Doctor; in the Law, our Counselor: in other things we seek to men that
profess knowledge, and are of understanding in those things wherein we desire
direction: but in Divinity, and in the cases of the soul, most men imagine
they are able to afford themselves counsel good enough: hence is it that the
knowledge of Gods Word is not cared for, the opening of it by exposition, the
urging it by exhortatation and reproof, these things are little esteemed: and
indeed, if men be so wise, that they can by their wisdom guide themselves,
wherefore should they value them? But cursed be the man (says the Jerem. 17.5.
Scripture) that makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the
Lord. God curses the fancies of men's own hearts, and gives a blessing only
to the obedient yielding to his own ordinance: what course soever is framed
without the Word, be it in man's reason never so plausible; nay whatsoever is
sought for in the word with a relying upon a man's own private collections in
contempt or neglect of the public means, the Lord does never bless it, it
turns into error; and leads those that trust unto it into destruction. This
therefore we are taught hence, if we desire (as becomes us) to proceed in
good things, and according to the advice of the spirit of God, to be led
forward unto perfection, we must seek the direction of the only true guide
Christ Jesus in the Scriptures: If we be strangers in the book of God, we
cannot choose but be mistaken, if we would make true benefit by the Word, the
ordinance of God must be regarded: and what ever he be that would be guided in
the way of life, he must range himself among the common order of learners in
Christ's school. This is the right way, there is no blessing promised of God to
any other course. Now you will say to me (perhaps) this is a very uncertain
and hazardous course, to bind our selves to be guided by men, especially now a
days, when as the world is so full of seducers, and those seducers also so
full of subtlety, and every one making pretenses of the truth to be on his
side? I answer, I persuade not to this, to build upon men, as though we should
receive directions for matter of salvation upon trust, believing every thing
that is commended to us, by those that bear the name of teachers in Gods
Church: That were an intolerable bondage, and a slavery not to be endured; for
the spirits must be tried 1. John 4.1.
, and the Scripture must be examined whether their doctrine be according. If
you say there is yet no certainty, for as they may mistake in teaching, so may
you in judging also; I answer, we must be so much the more earnest with the
Lord in prayer, yt his spirit may conduct us; and this rule in most things we
may proceed by. That doctrine which aims at this, to bring men only to
Christ, by driving them out of themselves, to rest alone upon his worthiness,
and gives no color of liberty to any sin, but still strives to keep the
corrupt nature of man within compass; that doctrine I say is the true way, the
preacher that draws to this is a true guide, and his direction cannot deceive
us. This is a plain rule easy to be conceived, it is a short rule easy to be
remembered, it is a true rule easy to be confirmed, in as much as it agrees
with the whole scope of the Scriptures, which is, Christ Jesus freely
justifying us by imputed righteousness before God, and powerfully renewing us,
and sanctifying us by his spirit, to the declaring of the ftuites of obedience
before men. This is the first thing that must accompany our care to go on in
the way to life; a dependence upon the true guide Jesus Christ, revealing his
holy directions to us in his word. In some matters of interpretation of
partiticular text, or some points of religion of lesser moment, it is possible
for men of the greatest understanding finally to mistake, but he that will in
humility, and in a denial and renouncing of himself take the right course to
be settled, in maine matters that do necessarily concern the salvation of his
soul, cannot (though his learning be never so small) utterly be deceived.

The second thing that must accompany our purpose of going on in the way to
happiness, is circumspection and an earnest heeding of our course: so much is
very manifest by the text. You see here that as the gate of entrance is termed
straight, so the way of progress is called narrow: now a narrow way requires
heedfulnes, a little slipping or going to this side or that, may breed a great
deal of inconvenience. And if we examine the scripture, we shall see the like
heedtaking required in this spiritual journey. It is a charge of the holy
Ghost, that we should Ephesians. 5.15.
walk circumspectly, walk exactly, or curiously, or to speak truly
according to the words meaning, walk precisely: Make strait steps to your
feet, lest that which is Hebr. 12.13.
halting be turned out of the way. Paul calls the life of a christian a
Galat. 5.16.
walking by a rule, as if a man went by a line, which he will not, which he
dares not turn from. Take heed that ye do as the Lord your God has Deuteronomy.
5.32.
commanded you, turn not aside to the right hand, nor to the left. An example
we have in David; first his resolution, I thought I will take Psalm. 39.1.
heed to my ways, then next his Psa. 119.5.6.
prayer, O that my ways were made direct, or straight, carried as it were by a
kind of level, with a respect (as himself after speaks in the same place)
unto all Gods comma^dements, as when a man, has a mark in his eye, and
strives to keep an even and direct course unto it; or as when a workman
applies his rule to his work, and with his best endeavor orders the same
accordingly. This is briefly but yet plainly and undeniably the truth of this
point: he that desires to proceed in the way to happiness, must remember the
way is narrow, he may easily swerve from it, and it does therefore call upon
him for very great heedines and circumspection.

The use hereof is to discover two evils in ye times, the one is carelesnes,
Use.
the other is profanenes: touching the former, notwithstanding the straitnes
which the word of God enioynes, yet how great is our general dissoluteness?
who thinks himself bound to those strait terms, as that he should make
conscience of every sin? what man does even as it were combine, and covenant
with himself, to be ielous over all his ways, to set a watch before his
mouth, to take heed to his words, to make a covenant with his eyes, to be wary
of his looks, to ponder the path of his feet into what company he comes, to
put his knife to his throat as Prou. 23.2.
Solomon speaks, to beware of excess, to keep his heart with diligence,
looking to it, what thoughts he entertaines, to be always fearing, and ever
suspecting himself, lest he should be miscarried, to be still lifting up his
heart to heaven that the Lord may establish him: who I say enters into
covenant with himself for this spiritual heedfullnes? nay rather who does not
adventure to take liberty unto himself in some one thing or other, according
as his humor leads him; mincing and extenuating sin, and supposing
presumptuously, that a man may wander, and straggle a little from the way, and
yet return. And by this means Satan gets great advantage against many, for
while he allureth and tells them under a color of liberty from an even and
direct course, he draws them on further and further, until like a man that
has quite lost his way, they know not which way to return. Remember we
therefore that the way to life is a narrow way: it is not so (as some profanely
have said) that a man if if he will may (as in a journey hence to London) take
his pleasure by the way, and ride here and there upon occasion, and yet at last
though it be something the longer first, come to the place intended; and so in
traueling to heaven enjoy the pleasures of sin, and yet for all that,
although it be somewhat the further way about, arrive at the place of happiness;
no it is a narrow way, error on both sides, a man cannot be too circumspect.
The second evil which this point discovers is profanenes, because whereas the
word of God requires in a ma^s conversation very great heedfuldes, yet in the
world it is made a jest, and a matter of ignominy, and enough is supposed to be
spoken to a ma^s reproach, if he be charged with precisenes. True it is yt many
putting on a show of straitnes, are notwithstanding loose enough in many
things: but what then? though some do profess godliness in hypocrisy, yet
that can justly be no prejudice to those that do it in sincerity: certain
it is, that in the matters of God, no man can be too precise, in the watching
over his own heart, and in the pondring his ways, no man can be over
circumspect; And therefore let men of corrupt minds, who (as Solomon says
Prou. 14.9.
make a mock of sin, let such I say scorn as themselves list; yet let so
many as fear God, and desire to approve themselves unto him, ever remember the
narrownes of the way that leads unto life, and assure themselves, that a
little wandering after the vanities of their own hearts, a little satisfying
themselves in the pleasures of sin, may soon mislead them, and make the
right way very hard to be recovered.

The third thing which must accompany our purpose of going on in the way to
happiness, is a resolution and preparation for such encumbrances as may meet us
on the way. It is wisdom we know in traueling to be prepared for the wether,
to be armed against such as lie in wait to spoil, and do many times make a
pray of the goods, nay even of the lives of the passers by: so in this case, in
as much as a man intending to proceed in the ways of God, shall be assaulted
with many grieuances, it is good policy both to put on a resolution to wrestle
with them, and to be armed so that he may prevail against them. First in the
world a man shall receive many unkindness and indignities, much reproach.
David says, the very Psalm. 35.15.
abiects assembled themselves against him; they tare him, and ceased not; and
the drunkards made songs of him Psalm. 69.12.
: and the whole Psalm. 123.4.
Church complains, that their soul was to full of mocking of the wealthy,
and of the despitefulnes of the proud. Secondly the Lord also is wont to
exercise his dearest servants with many crosses, which to flesh and blood are
very grievous and heavy to be borne; Thine arrows O Lord (says Psalm. 38.2.
David) have light upon me: I am like a leaf driven to and fro says Chap. 13.
25.
Job. Thirdly, Satan is a professed enemy to every good course, and will lay
many baits, and use many means to withdraw: here pleasure assaults, there
profit, there honor and estimation amongst men, each of them of great force to
persuade: another while he rayseth up trouble against a man even out of his
own thoughts, setting upon him with the horror of sin, the terror of the law,
the fearefulnes of Gods Majesty, the strictnes of his justice, out of all
these he will raise matter of despair, and prevail many times very far to
the appalling and amasing of a christian. These things a man intending to
travail in the narrow way of life must think upon, and not only so, but make
provision also, that ouercoming all encombrances he may hold out the
profession of his hope without wavering unto the end. Toucing the reproach and
obloquie of the disdainefull world, he must consider, that in all reproach
which is cast upon him for his care of a good conscience, Christ is Hebr. 13.13.
his partner. The taunts which Moses endured at the hands of the Egyptians, are
called the Hebr. 11.26.
rebuke of Christ: Peter tells them which are evil entreated for the trueths
sake, that therein they were 1. Pet. 4.13.
partakers of Christ's sufferings; what greater comfort? secondly, that the
hatred of the world, is a testimony and an assurance to a man's soul, that he
is one of Gods chosen: If ye were of the world, the world would love his own,
but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you John 15.19.
. Again touching afflictions and crosses, he must know that they are trials of
faith, exercisers of patience, reformers of corrupt affections, means to
reclaim and withdraw form the world; this will make a man take up his cross
cheerfully, and even rejoice in tribulation. Thirdly concerning Satan's
assaults, he must be well persuaded of the bewitchings of worldly pleasures,
of ye poison that lurketh under the name of profit, of the vanity of honor
and credit amongst men, he must gather together all the gracious promises of
mercy in Christ, all experimental testimonies of of Gods love unto himself,
that so he may have comfort in the midst of the sharpest of Satan's
encounters. This he must do that would go on, in the narrow way that leads
unto life.

To reprove the secure neglignce of many professors of religion now a days,
Use.
that never make any provision for the hardship they are like to meet with, if
they will be Christ's disciples: and so by that means meeting unexpectedly with
the disgraces and injuries of the world, with the sharpenes of afflictions,
with the bufferings of Satan, of al which they had little thought before;
repent themselves of the course they are entered into, and so fall away unto
their wonted coldness. They are like an unadvised trauailer, that beginning his
journey in a fair morning, and supposing that the weather will not alter,
leaves his furniture behind by which he should be sheltred against a storm,
and then afterward the winds blowing, and the tempest rising, is driven either
to return back and so to loose his labor, or else to take some covert, such
as upon the sudden he can meet with, where though he find some little
comfort for a time, yet the storm increasing, he is driven thence also: so is
it with many professors, when the times seem to laugh upon religion, and the
entertaining it does not as yet hazard any thing which flesh and blood
affects, they are very forward, but when a storm comes which they looked not
for, the world opposes it self, pleasure must be sequestered, profit must be
neglected, credit must be hazarded, the^ they are found to fall back, not being
provided to bear it out, and so make their last days worse then their first.
Let this then among the rest be borne away: viz. yt he that would proceed in
the way of godliness must think upon the discouragements he shall meet with,
and must therefore harden himself against them, that what ever happen, he may
finish his course with joy, and may so run, that in the end he may be sure to
obtain.

The last thing which must accompany our purpose of going on, is an often
calling a man's course to an account, to see whether it be right and straight
yea or not he who iourneyeth in a way which he is not acquainted with, it is
wisdom for him ever and anon to be mindful of the directions which were
given him, and to remember the marks which were told him, the turnings and the
by-pathes which he was warned of, to the end that by thinking hereupon if he
find he is right, he may proceed with comfort, if he be deceived, he may
return quickly before he have wandered to far, and erred over much. So it
must be in this way: I have Psalm. 119.59.
considered my ways (says David) and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. You
see David's fashion what it was, often to view his own courses, to search, and
to try his ways, to see how he kept his feet in the path of Gods
Commandments, and where he perceived himself to have bin mistake^, straight
he returned, and endeavored to come back quickly: I turned my feet unto thy
testimonies; in the next verse he adds, I made Verse. 60.
have and prolonged not. When the same David wills and exhorts men to
Psalm. 4.4.
examine their heart upon their bed; what does he mean but that every man,
when he is alone by himself, should retire his thoughts, should look back
into the day past, to see what he has done, and how he has demeaned himself,
that so he may recover himself for his often slips by repentance, and renew
his vow of keeping an even course in the way of life. Paul bids we should not
let the sun go down Ephesians. 4.26.
upon our wrath: thence a general rule may be drawn, that no sin should be
suffered to lodge all night with us; an account should be taken of our falls,
and we should presently labor to recover. The Scripture speaking of the care
of Job in offering sacrifice for his children, thinking that in many things
they might ouershoot themselves in their banqueting; adds this clause; Thus
did Job Job 1.5.
every day: He that was thus daily careful about his childrens courses, what
was he (think we) for his own?

This point will discover as much carelesnes as any of the former, Use.
for who is amongst us that does thus call his life and carriage to an account,
that in an evening when he is about to take his rest, and knows not whether
he shall ever wake again or no, asks himself this question, what have I done?
how have I walked this day, how have I wandered from the path of Gods
Commandments, what duties have I failed in, how far have the vanities and
profits of the world prevailed against me to mislead me? who I say is wont to
keep this privy audite within himself; nay who thinks this to be a duty
that he is tied unto? And therefore no marvel if sin grow strong upon us, no
wonder if we stray far from the right course; and if we look not to it, we
will soon be drawn into such a maze, that we shall not know which way to
return. Let us take with us then this instruction among others, often to try
our ways, once a day at least to consider our courses, we do all err, in many
things (says S. James) remiss all James 3.2.
, but by this means, error shall not prevail against us, and by use we shall
grow so perfect in our ways, that we shall very seldom be mistaken.

FINIS.
THE THIRD SERMON. For it is the wide gate and broad way, that leads to
destruction, and many there be which go in thereat.
The second part of the Text.
WE have done with the advertisement it self, and are now come to the reasons
by which it is enforced. The first reason runs thus; because albeit the gate
and way which the most affect, be wide and broad, full of pleasing, and full of
company, yet in the end it leads to destruction. By the gate and way
mentioned in this first reason, is meant the same which elsewhere is called the
way of Psalm. 1.1.
sinners; a way that is not Psalm. 36.4.
good: the way of Ps. 119.104
falsehood: an Prou. 2.12.
evil way: it is the gate and way which by nature we all travail in,
therefore it is termed our Jsay 53.6.
own way: the way of our own Jsay 57.17.
heart: because it is a way which of our selves without a guide we go into,
and which of our selves we are never either able or willing to forsake. It is
said to be a wide and a broad way, Wherefore it is called a way, wide and
broad.
because it is a way of liberty to the flesh, and gives a man leave to run any
course, which his own private corrupt humor does affect: it is a way which
imposes no conditions of restraint, but whatsoever a man (led by the lusts of
his own heart) bends unto, it allureth him to it, and seems to say as the
flattering chaplaynes did to 1. King. 22.
Ahab, touching the expedition against Ramoth, Go and prosper. Now this way
notwithstanding the pleasingnes of it, our Savior says, it leads to
destruction; the issues of it are the ways of Prou. 14.12.
death; it brings no small inconvenience, or slight annoyance, such as loss
of goods, or blemish in good name, or sickness of body, but the surpassing
exceeding eternal curse of God, the utter ruin both of soul and body, an
endless, easelesse, hopeless misery. This then is Christ's reasoning, that in
as much as there be but two ways, a strait, and a wide; and the wide leads
a man to such an irrecouerable downfall, therefore we would beware of it, and
enter in at the strait gate. This is the meaning briefly: Let us now see what
necessary matter of instruction we may observe.

Doctr. 1.
First here we learn, that albeit the way of sin be, for the present time in
the sense and seeming of flesh and blood very delightful, yet the reward
thereof is misery, and the end destruction. This is the express doctrine of
the Text, and it is easily justified by the Scripture. First in general it is
said of all sin, that the Romans 6 23.
wages thereof is death; and that the end of the wicked shall be Psalm. 37.38.
cut off. Secondly in particular of several sins, the Word of God speaks
very expressly to this purpose. Of adultery Solomon says, (describing the
fashion of a harlot) that indeed her chamber is richly decked, her bed persumed,
and her words very intising; but (says he) her house is the way to the Prou.
7.27.
grave, which goes down to the chambers of death: and her Prou. 9.18.
guests are in the depth of hell. Of deceit, The bread of deceit is sweet to
a man, but afterward his mouth shall be filled with Prou. 20.17.
gravel, Of diu^kennes, The wine shows the color in the cup, and goes
down pleasantly, but in the end thereof, it will bite like a Serpent, and hurt
like a Prou. 23.32.
Cockatrise. Of the vanity of youth: Rejoice O young man in thy youth, walk in
the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes, but know that for all
these things God will bring thee to Eccles. 11.9.
judgment. In all these here is a broad pleasant way, giving liberty and scope
enough unto flesh and blood, but the end of all is destruction. The sweet meats
of wickedness will have the sour sauce of wretchedness and misery: we may see
the same also verified by examples. Eve was made believe by the Devil, that if
she would adventure to eat of the forbidden tree; she should receive by it
great advancement; ye shall be as Genes. 3 5.7.
gods knowing good and evil; (equiuocating with her, as our state Papists do
now a days, and beguiling her with doubtfulnesse of terms. Well, she saw the
tree was good for meat, pleasant to the eye, and to be desired to get
knowledge (here was a way broad and fair enough;) and she took and gave to
her husband, and they both did eat: But see now whither this way leads them,
Then (says the Text) their eyes were opened, and they knew they were naked:
the beginning seemed to delight, and to give hope of great contentment; but the
fruit was grief, and the end confusion, the issue clean contrary to that
which was expected. No doubt the murdering of Abel for the time gave very good
satisfaction to the malicious and blood thirsting humor of Came, but he which
looks upon the reckoning which followed, and considers how sin lay at the
door Genes. 4.7.
ever dogging him, and never leaving him, till he was even swallowed up into
despair; shall see a pleasing course carrying him that held it, into a depth
of misery out of which he was never able to recover. Moses speaking of the
times before the flood says thus, The sons of God saw the daughters of men
that they were fair, and they took them wives of all that they Genes. 6.2.
liked: here was liberty enough (all they liked.) but what was the issue, you
know the stories when they were in the very height of their iollitie, the flood
came and took them all away Matthew. 24.39.
here was a journey full of pleasure, but the place of arriual full of misery.
The rich man of whom Christ speaks, was clothed in purple and fine linen,
and fared well and delicately every day: here was outward contentment to the
full, but whereto did this way lead? we have heard what follows, the rich man
also died, and was buried, and was in hell in torments Luke 16.22.23.
I could thus easily give you many instances, all of them serving to show to
us, how sin deals with us as Ioah with 2. Sam. 20.9.10.
Amasa, he met him and saluted him lovingly (art thou in health my brother) he
took him by the beard with the right hand to kiss him, but withal he smote
him in the fifth rib, and shed out his bowels to the ground: Even so sin
creeps into our bosom, it makes show of delight, it pretendes the pleasing
of our minds, and the satisfying our humor, but yet it kills (as it were)
with kindness, and for a little momentanie pleasure, it brings eternal shame and
perpetual confusion.

Use. 1.
The use of this point thus proved stands thus, The first thing that ought to
be in him who desires truly to repent is a hearty lothing, and an unfeigned
detestation of sin; the fountain of repentance is the heart, and a man can
never frame himself to reform that in his life, which in his heart he
disliketh not: he therefore that would practice the duties of repentance as he
ought, must endeavor to feel in himself a deep and an implacable hatred
against sin. Now in my opinion there is nothing more of force to bring a man
clean out of conceit with sin, then the serious meditation upon that point
which I have now delivered. Who is there amongst us that would not in his heart
loath and derest such a one as the Prophet Chapter 9.8.
Jeremy speaks of, Who speaks peaceable to his neighbor with his mouth,
but in his heart lays wait for him, that puts on a show of friendship, and
yet under a pretense thereof, if he could, would cut a man's throat; will not
every man say, Lord keep me from such a friend? And yet even so sin deals
with us, it promises much contentment, much profit, many benefits, but in the
end in steed of contentment, there is nothing but vexation, in steed of profit,
the utter loss and ruin of a man's soul. It is good wisdom to have this
point ever in a readiness; to lay it up (as Mary did Christ's sayings) in the
midst of the heart, it will be as a bulwark, or brazen shield to blunt the
point of Satan's persuasions. It is his policy to lay a kind of siege to a man's
thoughts, with a seeming good, and as much as in him lies, to let us see
nothing of sin, but the outside painted over like whorish Iezebell with many
glorious shows, and bewitching appearances, pleasure, profit, honor, ease,
all very like to draw a man far, unless he be otherwise ouerruled by the
power of Gods spirit. Every one therefore that would (as S. James speaks)
keep himself unspotted James 1.27.
must be like the wise man, of whom Eccles. 2.14.
Solomon speaks, whose eyes are in his head, that is, who looks not only to
the present face of things, but casts his thoughts further toward the issue,
fearing lest where the entrance is so entising, the end may fall out not to be
according: the consideration of the misery which may follow, cannot but be a
preservative to keep a man from being enchanted with the fair shows of the
beginning. How many might be kept from gross sins, if they had care to
observe this rule. In covetousness, ignorance, pleasure, wantonness,
liberty, malice, drunkenness, excess, extortion, falsehood, men look only
upon the profit, ease, iollity, and worldly estimation that does accompany
them, but the poison that lurketh under these, the spiritual venom that
masketh under these deceitful shadows is either not believed, or not thought
upon, or else in men's private conceits so much lessened, that they post on
still the rode way being tolled along by the delight thereof, and so fall into
the bottomless gulf, before they are ware of it. Well it is the precept of
the holy Ghost, that we should be Hebr. 3.13.
exhorted, lest we should be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin. I
exhort you therefore, and in the Lord entreat you, not to be so unwise, as for
a little superficial pleasingnes and fleshly contentment in the wide and broad
way of vanity, to purchase to your selves such a misery, the horror, the
largenes, the everlasting and vnintermitting extent whereof, no man living is
able to esteem. The life of man here, is not unfitly compared to a Theater,
in which every man has his part, some longer, some shorter, some nobler, some
baser, according to the discretion of the appointer: now would any one take him
for better then a mad man, that in an idle humor to wear gay apparel, and to
have the standers by make obeisance to him, would be content all the residue
of his days to be a base drudge in a kitchen, or a slave in a galley, upon
condition that for an hour or two, he might be attired like a King, and sit
in a chair of estate and take upon him like a great commander? surely no. And
what are we then, who having a show or two to make upon the stage of this
world, are content to buy an endless bondage under satan, for a transitory
satisfaction to our own sinful humor, in some fleshly and sensual course,
and upon condition we may have our fill of it, will not stick to hazard our
better part, and to cast away our own souls? This is the first and chief use
of this doctrine.

Use. 2.
Secondly this point teaches us this good lesson which is a point of especial
wisdom in Christianity, namely always to have those courses in greatest
jealousy, and to be suspicious of them, that they are not such as it is safe
for us to enter into, which at our first beginning them, and at the working
upon our thoughts to entertain them, do make show of nothing but contentment
to our nature, that are ever charming us with the names of profit, of pleasure,
of advancement; it is meet for us to fear that under these baits, there
lies some secret hook, which if we do too greedely catch at the first
offer, may suddenly entangle us, and so as it were hook us in, that when we
would we shall not know how to get from it. The wounds of a lover, Prou. 27.6.
Solomon says, are faithful, but the kisses of an enemy are to be taken heed
of. Satan is our grand enemy, and sin is the thing he seeks to poison with,
he laps it up in the sweetness of some such thing which is tastfull to our
natural palate, and when he makes the largest offer, as he did to Christ,
Matthew. 4.9.
All this will I give thee; then some great mischief is to be feared, for
which he labors to procure entrance by his plausible and pleasing
persuasions. Happy is he that has learned this lesson, he has well profited
in the school of Christianity, that does not creedit the first offers, but
doubts a fearful issue, where the entrance promises nothing but contentment.
It is ever a rule that cannot fail, the broad, pleasant, even way, that to
flesh and blood brings little or no encombrance, but gives the raines unto it
to go where it will, is the way that certainly leads to destruction. And
thus much for the first property of this way, it is a wide and a broad way.

The second quality it has is, Doctr. 2.
it is full of passengers (And many there be which go in thereat) from which
words we are taught this doctrine: viz. That multitude in matters of religion,
is no good rule to proceed by, whether it be in points to be believed, or in
matters to be practiced. The reason is plain from hence. It is reported here
of the broad way which leads to hell, that there are many which go in
thereat; now if number were an argument sufficient to prove the goodness of a
course, why should it not be also a reason of value to prove this way which
Christ here speaks of, to be the way that leads unto life: If it be of no
force in this particular, neither is it in any other. A matter may be believed
and professed by many, a course may be followed and approved by a multitude,
and yet there may be neither soundnes in the one, nor holiness in the other. In
the days of Noah, it is said that God looked upon the earth, Genes. 6.12.
and all flesh had corrupted his way. When the Angels were entertained in Lots
house, the men of Sodom purposing villainy and filthiness, compassed the house
Genes. 19.4.
round about, from the young men even to the old, all the people from all
quarters. Four hundred Prophets at one time consented together in one thing,
and when the King asked their advise touching his journey to Ramoth, all said
1. King. 22.
Go and prosper, all seeking to flatter the Kings humor. There was a general
conspiracy against Jeremy for the faithful discharge of his duty: Come let us
imagine some devise against Ierem. 18.18.
Jeremy. When Pilate made a motion to the people, what should be done with
Christ, They Mat. 27.22.
all said, let him be crucified. When Stephen had made his Apology for
himself, against the false imputations which were put upon him, the Text says
the standers by gave a shout with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and
came upon him Act. 7.57.
all at once. Of Simon the sorcerer in Samaria, it is said, that to him they
gave heed, from the least of them, even to the Act. 8.9.10.
greatest. When Paul opposed himself to the Idolatry of the Ephesia^s, which
worshipped the Images of Diana, there arose, says the story, a shout for the
space almost of two hours, of all men, crying, Act. 19.34.
Great is Diana of the Ephesians. The Apostle co^plaineth of the state of his
times, and even of those which made profession of religion, and he delivers
his complaint in these words, Philip. 2.21.
All seek their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's. The Spirit of God
prophesying by Saint John of the coming of Antichrist, says, that Apoc.
13.8.16.
all that dwell upon the earth shall worspip him, whose names are not written
in the book of life. In all these examples we see great multitudes, even
swarms of people running one course with one heart, like men possessed and
ruled by one spirit, and yet all deceived: he that should have grounded his
religion upon these, must needs have run himself headlong into error.

Use 1.
The use here of is first against the Papists, who as appears in the writings
even of the best learned of the^, do make multitude a note and mark of Gods
Church; which howsoever it can little avail them, (because if we reckon only
such as know and understand what they do believe and profess, we may well
think there are in Christendom more of us then of them) yet notwithstanding
admit it were so, that the greatest part of Europe were advised and constant
professors of their religion, what have they gotten by it, must it needs be
true which is believed and maintained by a multitude? Cannot the generality be
deceived? Is it not possible for whole troops, yea even of learned men to be
mistaken? Yes certainly. If it be a good reason to say thus; behold this
religion is professed and received by the most, therefore it is true; then let
us disclaim Christ's advise of entering in at the strait gate, and let us all
choose the wide and pleasant way, for many there be that go in thereat. It is
thought probably, that at this day Mahometisme (the Turks religion) has more
under it, then Christianity, though we put Papists and Protestants, and all in
the weights against it; and that mere Paganism is larger then both. Where
many join in the truth, there is the Church, but not for the Manies sake, but
for the truths sake. It is a good saying of Augustine upon Psalm 39. Si
iustus es, noli numerare, sed appende, that is, if thou would deal
uprightly in this case, take not religion by tale or number, as though that
were best which most receive, but try it by weight, if it have the weight of
truth go with it, be they many or few that believe it, it skilleth not, it is
right though but one, nay though none did entertain it. This is the first use.
If Christ be true in his sayings, that many go in at the gate that leads to
destruction, sure then multitude is no mark of the Church, they may be the
greater part, and yet go the way that brings the goers by it into hell.

Use 2.
The second use is to reform the common folly and error of the world, who
think custom and fashion, and the guise of the greatest part to be a
sufficient plea, for any course which themselves affect or undertake,
especially it holds in matters of religion, if men can say as of old, our
fathers, our rulers, our ancients, the best, the most, the wisest, the
wealthiest amongst us thus they think, thus they do, the^ they imagine they
have alleged an argument which cannot be answered, a reason which cannot be
denied. Thus men make themselves like the froth as St. James. 1.6.
James speaks of, which is carried up and down, with the wind, and the water,
sometimes to this side, sometimes to that: or rather like the beasts of the
field, who think nothing but follow the heard, and so many times while they
suppose they are going to the pasture to be fed, they are driven to the
Shambles to be slain. Whom this people and all the men of Israel choose, his
will I be, and with him will I dwell, says 2. Sam. 16.18.
Chusa to Absolon; and so it is even the religion of many, we will not be
singular, look which way the most go, that way will we go. It is right as the
spirit of God speaks to the Psalm. 50.18.
ungodly man, when thou feast a thief, thou runnest with him, when thou see
an adulterer thou art partaker also with him. It is the property of a fool to
follow universally, that which he sees others do, he must needs also do the
same: yet it is an error we are all apt unto, and the reason is; It is a hard
matter to judge, but it is an easy thing to give credit. Well, let the
wisdom of God be followed, and let his counsel be preferred before our own
conceits. Certain it is, whatsoever we imagine, that the way to hell has the
greatest store of passengers; company is good; but it is better to go the right
way all alone, then to wander with a multitude. Therefore god gave a charge,
thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil Exodus 3.2.
. What though most men in their common speech take the name of God in vain,
what though the greatest part have the preaching of the word in no esteem,
make the Sabbath a day of carnal delight, neglect the public worship of God,
reproach and speak evil of the truth; what though all seek their own, as
Paul says, or as the Prophet speaks, from the greatest even to the lest, be
given to covetousness Ierem. 6.13.
, what though they go by troops (as Chapter 5. 7.
Ieremies words are) into harlots houses? what though the abiects do assemble
themselves together, as they did against Psalm. 35.15.
David, to draw good things into disgrace? let not this sway with you so far,
as to draw you into the fellowship of the same evils; remember, the broad way
to eternal ruin has many that travel it, so that though there be much good
fellowship, and iolity by the way, yet their way (says Prou. 4.19.
Solomon) is darkness they know not wherein they shall fall. And who will be so
in love with the fellowship of others, as to damn himself for company? The
counsel of the ungodly is pleasing, the way of sinners is delightful, the
chair of scorners is very easy; but yet blessed (says the Psalmist) is he
that has studied how to avoid them; when it comes to that which Prou. 1.21.
Solomon mentions, the eating the fruit of their own way, and to that in the
Psalm. 37.38.
Psalm, the transgressors as they have erred together, so they shall be
destroyed together: what are they then the better for their company? Thus much
for the first reason, why the strait gate and narrow way are to be chosen,
because though there be another course, more pleasing to our humors, and
better stored with company, yet it leads unto destruction.

The second reason follows which is in direct opposition to the former, viz:
that albeit the gate and way which Christ would have us enter into, be strait
and narrow, and such as few do travail by, yet it is the way to life, and the
end thereof is comfort, even the everlasting comfort of a man's soul. This is
the general meaning of the reason; Let us grow to a particular examination of
the points of instruction rising out of it.

As this reason is in an apparent opposition to the former, Doctr. 3.
so it affords doctrine in nature directly contrary to it; that told us of
sin, that beginning in pleasure, it does end in misery; this tells us of
the duties of holiness and righteousness; that howsoever they seem to lay a kind
of restraint upon man's nature, and to curb and limite him in some courses, and
fashions which he is prone unto, yet the issue of them is life, and the reward
is comfort. Christ confesses the gate to be strait, and the way narrow, but he
adds this withal, that it leads unto life. For the opening of this doctrine
I must show unto you two things; first that the duties of piety and godliness,
are at first something unpleasing to man's nature, (the crookedness and
corruption thereof considered): secondly that whatsoever the beginning is, yet
the end is full of sweetness. Touching the former how true it is, may in part
be gathered out of that which has been said heretofore, touching the things
co^curring with the very act of entrance; humility, and the elinquishing of the
pleasures of sin which we have formerly delighted in, both which are directly
thwarting and crossing to man's nature, there being nothing that he is of
himself more unwilling to do, then to confess ought against himself, to
renounce his own will, and to crucify and kill the strong affections of his
own heart. But this shall better appear if we enter into consideration of
particulars, what duty of godliness soever we think upon, we shall find the
beginning of it to be unsavory. If a man will labor after some knowledge in
religion at the first it will seem to be somewhat strait and cumbersome,
because it will require more care in redeeming the time, it will urge more
diligence in hearing, in praying, in meditation, more respect to the Sabbath
then a man was wont before to make conscience of. Here will be something to do,
and no small wrestling with a man's thoughts, before he shall get the mastery
over his own heart, to retire himself, and to divert the time formerly
accustomed to be spent in vanity, to the building of himself up in knowledge.
It will seem to a man that there is no life in these courses, nothing but
deadnes, and melancholines, and no kind of contentment. Again, suppose that a
man (heretofore negligent that way) should now begin to have some touch, and
should entertain a resolution with himself of keeping holy the Lords day, not
according to common opinion, but according to the true purpose and meaning of
the Lawmakers, think we that he should not at his very first entry into this
way, meet with many discouragements? what a burden will here be for a man to
seek to draw all his thoughts from earthly businesses (as much as is possible)
and to give himself wholly to some either private or public course, by which
the comfort and edifying of his soul may be helped forward, what a misery will
it seem, so as it were to hedge in himself, that he may not use a little
excursio^, and in some little degree give the raines to his own affections?
this is enough to make any man fly back, and to cry as the Disciples did in
another case, This is a hard saying who may endure it John 6.60.
. Time would fail me, if I should thus proceed to exemplify this doctrine, I
may be bold to say it, because all duties of holiness have one general nature,
that there is not one among them all, whether it respect our immediate service
to God, or our behavior to men, or that sobriety and even framing of our
affections in things which concern our selves; I say there is not any one such
duty, but if it be looked upon with an eye of flesh, it looks even as our
Savior did upon earth, of whom it is said, that in respect of state and pomp,
there was Esaias. 53.2.
nothing in him for which a man should desire him. And the reason is this.
Religion is the same to a man's soul, that Physic is to his body, it is
ordained to purge and to reform it; As therefore the Physic potion at the
first taking is clean against the stomach, so that men in wisdom will use
means to keep it in, that it may work upon the disease; so is religion at
the first taste without relish, ready to cause loathing, rather then to
persuade further entrance, and there must be a mind of striving with a man's
self, before he can drink deeply of it, and hold it fast, that it may work
upon his close and hidden corruption. It was not for nothing that the Lord
conditioneth with us at our first entrance into religion, to give him our
Prou. 23.26.
heart; for unless we have even resigned up our affections unto him, and have
even combined with our selves, to go through with it, it is in vain to make
any show or offer of obedience. Well, you see plainly the first point, that
the beginning of Good duties is harsh; let me not stay here, but proceed to
show that the end is comfortable. Our Savior says here; it leads unto
life; and what life does he mean, or can he mean, but life eternal. Godliness
(says the 1. Tim. 4.8.
Apostle) is profitable unto all things, which has the promise both of this
life, and of that which is to come. I may safely say of those which enter into
good courses, as the Psalm does, they do sow in tears, but they shall reap
in Psalm. 126.5.6.
joy, they went weeping and carried precious seed with them, but they return
with joy, and bring their sheaues. Nay the Scripture does not herein delay us
so long, as though there were no sweetness in religion till hereafter. I
remember Christ's words in one particular to Peter, when Peter told him, that he
and his fellows for Christ's sake had left all; I say unto you, there is no man
that has left house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children for the
kingdom of Gods sake, which shall not receive much more in Luke 18.29.30.
this world. So that even in the present life, there is a reward follows, the
children of God find an inward and an unknown sweetness, even in that which
at the first seemed very distasteful. Christ said of himself, that is was
meat unto him to do the will of him that John 4.34.
sent him: and so the duties of godliness do afford a kind of secret
satisfaction to those which are exercised in them: and though evil men when
they look upon the servants of God living in obedience, in contempt of the
world, and in a kind of sequestring themselves from the vain delights thereof,
do imagine they live a life very tedious and irksome, and such as has no
contentment in it, yet by use, the Lord making his yoke easy, and his burden
light, they find that facility in it, that sweetness and spiritual delight,
that if they might, they would not return back to their wonted liberty in the
flesh, but do carry eue^ a kind of loathing thereunto. I find (says Psalm. 4.7.
David) more joy of heart in the light of thy countenance, in the secret
apprehension of thy gracious favor, then the worldlings have, when their
wheat and wine abounds. Thus by the handling of these two points a part, I
have (I hope) made good my first proposition, that the way of true religion,
though it be strait and narrow, and at the first entertaines a man with shows
of hardship and restraint, yet the progress is more sweet, and the end it
self, does even exceed in comfort. Let us make use of it.

Use.
The use hereof is to be an encouragement to all that do begin inwardly and
unfeignedly to affect good things, they must learn to cast their eyes and
thoughts from the present straitnes which religion at the first entrance into
it, seems to threaten, and to look further upon the sweetness which does
certainly accompany it. For howsoever our obedience ought not to be a hired
obedience, but such as in all things does more respect the commander, then the
reward which he bestows; yet it pleases God to tender our weakness so much,
as to provoke us and to draw us on by the promise of recompense, lest we should
be weary and faint in our minds. Our Savior arming his disciples against
reproach, tells them, their Matthew. 5.12.
reward is great in heaven. Moses chose rather to suffer Hebr. 11.26.
adversity with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season; for (says the Text) he had respect to the recompense of reward. Nay of
Christ himself it is said (and in that very particular we are willed to follow
him) that for the Hebr. 12.2.
joy that was set before him, he endured the cross, and despised the shame.
Therefore whenever we feel (being leaning to a good course) any
discouragement to creep into us, or any secret conceit, that to do thus and
thus, as the word persuades will bring a burden upon us, and we shall by that
means deprive our selves of that fredome which others have, and which our
selves also have enjoyed, and therefore it is not good to be so strait; by and
by let us remember whither this narrow entrance, this hard and rugged way does
lead us, the further we go the better it is, and the end it self will exceed
all. The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither can it enter into
man's heart to consider, 1. Cor. 2.9.
what things God has prepared for them that love him. It is said of Jacob that
he served seven years with his uncle Laban, for Rachel his daughter, but they
seemed (says the Text) a few days, because he loved her Genesis 29.20.
. So let us labor to possess our souls with the love and delight of the
blessing promised, and we shall with ease swallow up all encombrances, and
grieuances in the mean space whatsoever.

Doctr. 4.
As it was said of the broad way, that many go by it, lest we should build upon
multitudes, so now it is said of the strait course, that few there be that
find it, teaching us thus much. That the best, and the holiest, and most
religious courses, have the fewest approuers, and the fewest followers: the
best number is for the most part the smallest number. The Scripture gives
great light unto the truth of this doctrine. Those whom the Lord reserved unto
himself in the general corruption that was among the Jews, are termed a
Isay 1.9.
small remnant: They are called a Isay 6.13.
Tenth, or (as we speak) the tithing part; there is ods enough; nine to one:
they are compared to the Jsay 17.6.24.13.
shaking of an Olive tree, two or three beries are in the top of the utmost
boughs, and four or five in the high branches of the fruit thereof. And
thereto serves the complaint made by the Micha. 7.1.
Church; Woe is me, for I am as the summer gatherings, and as the grapes of the
vintage, there is no cluster to eat! we know when the harvest is home and the
fruit gathered from the trees, a man may chance find one ear or two of corn
scattered in the furrows, or an apple here and there upon, the branches, but
they are nothing at all to count upon: so the Church laments her own
desolatenesse that she is like the gatherings, the number of the good is very
thin, not one for many wicked ones. In the Prophecy of Jeremy, there the
godly are said to be called out, one of a city, and two of a tribe Ierem. 3.4.
. In Chapter 3. 12.
Amos there is a notable similitude urged, of a Sheapheard, who when the Lion
has made his pray of one of his sheep, contenteth himself to take out of the
Lions mouth two legs or a piece of an ear, so (says the Lord) shall the
children of Israel be taken, here and there one as it were violently rescued,
and torn out of the common and universal Apostasy. Christ calls his flock,
a Luke 12.32.
little flock, And there are many called, but few chosen, according as of the
six hundred thousand that came out of Egypt, there was but only two, Caleb,
and Joshua that entered into Canaan. Consider a little further of this point by
examples. In the days before the flood, Genes. 6.12.
all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth, and only Noah was a just and
an upright man in his time. Not one just person in Sodom besides Genes. 19.
Lot. There were four hundred and fifty Prophets for Baal, when there was but
1. King. 18.
one Elias for the Lord. There were upon a 1. King. 22.
four hundred flattering Prophets, against one honest plain Preacher
Michaiah. Behold (says Isaiah) I and the children whom the Lord has given me
(that is, those whom I have by my ministry begotten unto God) are at signs
and wonders in Jsay 8.18.
Israel; it seems they were but a few, when they were gazed upon as monsters
amongst men. When Joseph's brethren co^spired against him, they had all
consulted to slay him, save only Genes. 37.
Ruben, there was but one for ten that took pity. When they sat in counsel
against Christ, there was none spoke for Christ, but John 7.
Nicodemus. When Paul stood forth for his answer before Nero, not one man
assisted him, but 2. Tim. 4.16.
all forsook him. On the contrary we shall see how the worst things have had
the greatest consent, and the fullest, and most general approuement. All
consented to the making of a Exodus 32.
golden Calfe. They came to offer violence to Lots house, from the young even
to the old, even all the people from all quarters. Genes. 19.
Pilate asked what should be done with Christ, they Matthew. 27.
all cried, crucify him. When Paul began to preach Christ at Ephesus, and to
cry out against Idolatry, there arose a shoute almost for the space of two
hours, of Act. 19.34.
all men crying, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. The Beast the Antichrist,
makes Apoc. 13.
all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive his mark
in their right hands, and in their foreheads. But what should we search the
Scripture for examples, when our own times and experience affords so many?
There be many ignorant people, but few that love true knowledge, many swearers,
few that make conscience of an oath, many Sabbath breakers, few that care to
keep it holily, many negligent and unprofitable hearers, few which take heed
how they hear, many usurers, few that lend (as Christ says) without looking
for ought again, many that wring and draw back in every good action, few that
are open hearted and handed to relieve, many that despise and contemn and
neglect the Word, few that honor it and take delight in it. In a word, look to
any profane, disordered, covetous, unruly, carnal, voluptuous course, and tell
me with what infinite troops it is followed consider again of any religious,
zealous, charitable, and holy fashion, and mark how few there be that do
regard it. So that it may be said of every society of men, of every assembly,
of every congregation generally, as it was of that of Revel. 3.1.
Sardie; to speak of the multitude; they have a name that they are alive, but
are dead, called Christians, but have little religion; If there be any better
disposed, they are but as it is said, they are the fewest number. And therefore
the course which Christ will take when he comes to judge the earth, will be
very like to the course which Joshua held to find out among the people, what man
it was that had stolen the Josua 7.16.17.18.
Babilonish garment; there were many brought together, and all to find out one.
So at the last day, all particular persons that ever were, are, or shall be,
shall be ascited to appear; out of them shall be deducted a smaller number
which have heard of Christ, out of them a smaller portion, which have professed
the true religion of Christ, and out of them, yet another company, which have
truly professed the true religion, which have professed it in sincerity: which
number howsoever in it self considered, it be exceeding great, yet compared
with the rest, it is but as a handful, or as it is said of the Israelites camp
in respect of the Aramites infinite troops, like 1. King. 20.27
two little flocks of kiddes. So will that be verified that is said; the Lord
will make a short count in the earth, and though the number of the children of
Israel (viz. of the people professing religion) be as the sand of the sea, yet
shall but a remnant be saved Romans 9.27.


The use hereof is twofold: Use.
The first Christ teaches, strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many I
say unto you will seek to enter in, and Luke 13.23.24
shall not be able: the fewer there be that are partakers of the true happiness,
the more should we labor to be in that number: we sit still in our security
and carelessenes, as though heaven should be cast upon us, and as if all the
world should be saved. The blessing of life eternal is great, but it is not
common, not all, no not the greatest part, no not the noblest, and wealthiest
part shall enjoy it: we should therefore throng and thrust to enter in, because
suddenly the gate will be shut up, and many (says Christ) shall strive to
enter in, but shall not be able.

Use 2.
Secondly, this serves to be a preservative against discouragement in those that
fear God: as for example. Art thou a man who having heretofore run the same
course with the greatest part, beginnest now being inwardly touched by the
force and power of the Word, to refrain from many things in which in time past
thou tookest pleasure, and to look more narrowly to thy ways then thou wast
wont, and to make conscience of some things, which formerly thou regardest not;
it may be, that comparing thy course, now, with the foregoing, thou find thy
self very solitary, like a man in a desolate, rugged and untrodden path,
having very little company, many to dissuade thee, few to encourage thee, many
that will labor to pull thee back, but few or none to provoke thee forward: be
not discouraged, be sure once that it is the course which Christ calls thee
to by his Word, and then remember that in comparison of the multitude, the
Lords part is but a handful, the way to hell has many passengers, and the
place it self is feign to be made larger to receive them; but as for the path
to life eternal; it is hardly entered into, and few there be that find it. And
therefore though it may be thy portion, in thy love to the Word, in thy
laboring after knowledge, in the duties of charity, in religious observing the
Lords Sabbath, in peaceablenes, and in diligent following of thy calling, to
be in a manner poast alone, like a Pelican in the wilderness or as an Owl in
the desert, yet say with Peter, Lord though all men forsake thee, yet will I
never leave thee Mat. 26.23.
.

Let God alone have the Glory.
FINIS.

