A new A B C paraphrasticallye applied, as the state of the world does at
this day require.

Mense marcii. 1557.

Cum priuilegio.

WHen children first begin to learn,
Their letters for to know:
Right their difference to discern
They learn their Christ cross row.
Christ his cross be my speed,
say they,
And good sainet Nycholas,
In our childhode this did we pray,
For so the custom was.
Then in learning we did proceed,
More knowledge to attain,
Which knowledge had, we fell in deed
To follow fancies vain.
For the first thing that then learnd we,
Was first our lord to know,
Three persons in the trinity,
Which faith we late fell fro,
Then learned we as Christ had taught,
For what, and how to pray:
But vice in us such wit has wraught,
That few can it well say:
The proof whereof does here ensue,
Let men them selves be judge,
Wherein if I do tell them true,
At it let them not grudge.
But now, or I do further pass,
Lest some would this disdain,
For naminge here saint Nicholas,
My meaning is this plain.
Christ his cross all our children pray,
In learning them to speed:
So should all we now at this day,
In like order proceed.
We have forgot our cross to take,
And after Christ to run,
Therefore all sloth we must forsake,
And turn where we begone:
Then shall his cross truly us speed,
More virtue to attain,
And grace in us such love will bread,
Our cross shall us not pain.
The holy man saint Nycholas
Our children call for aid:
I think most men knows not the case
And why it was so said.
Saint Nicholas a child being
His cross right soon he bore,
For his body with much fasting
He punished full sore:
To teach both children and old men
Their cross to take likewise,
And after Christ to bear it then
With often exercise.
And after this, his childhode past,
A bishop made was he,
All worldlynes from him he cast,
And walkte in charity,
Whereof he was such a myrrour,
That happy were we all,
If god by grace, gave bishops power
To the like life to fall,
And we to walk in the like trade,
All sorts both old and young,
Then might we hope god would us aid
And still by grace uphold.
But now alas my heart both quake,
To see our myserie,
My cross row now needs must I make,
To my mind coutrarye.
The cross of Christ some bears alas,
Against their wylles we see:
Goue hence is good saint Nicholas
And eke his charity.
In this life he did not only,
His body much chastise
But with alms much poverty,
He did releue likewise,
As in his life it does appear,
Which is mine author plain,
Whereby to you I make it clear,
His deeds I do not feign.
Now for this cause this saint I name,
To the end that we might all,
Perceive the cause as I do aim,
That we his aid did call.
Therefore since the world at this day,
Is turned up side down,
This A B C here turn I may,
In some part wrong to sown,
But now my will whole to express,
My wit can not attain,
Therein I find such feebleness,
It passes my weak brain,
Therefore Christ's cross now be my speed,
For here I will begin,
As cause does move me to proceed,
Thus do I enter in.
A Has first place, which place I must
As cause of woe to stand,
Avarice and eke fleshely lust,
Alone distroyed this land.
B Baren are we of blessedness
Blinded with worldly care,
Boldness in vice we se express,
Babes can the truth declare.
C Couitousnes with crafty deeds
Can scarsly hence be rydde:
Conspiracy much canker bredes
Covertly in hearts hid.
D Dread of God and eke his judgment
Driven have we from our hearts,
Dearth without cause some does invent
Devils can play no worfe parts.
E Envy has entered in such wise
Evil men thereby we see
Enuiouslye good men despise
Even of mere enmite.
F Fained falshode with flatery
Faithles folk have found,
Faininge a face fraudelently
Friendship for to confound.
G Gredines great for graceles gain
Grown is in such degree.
Ground of our grief which does us pain
Granted this needs must be.
H Horably do they our lord offend
His poor folk here to sterue,
Having wherewith as god shall send,
Honestly them to serve.
I Iniquity so ouerfloweth,
I never saw the like,
Ingratitude so her self shows.
Justly God must us stryke.
K Knowledge of God and our estate,
Kings to obey each one,
Kunninge our hearts so does inflate
Knockinge for grace is gone.
L Liberty lept over this land,
Lously at his own will,
Letchery to break wedlockes band
Likewise does lust fulfill.
M Madness of mind money to get,
Makes some god to forsake:
Money justice and law can let,
Much mischief it does make.
N Nigardes nedeles by nigardie
Never does any good,
Not he him self has joy thereby
Nor one of the like brood.
O Odible sin such does commit,
Offering to God to make
Of goods got by crafty wit,
Or bribes falsely to take.
P Pennury pincheth poor men sore,
Percing with hungers grief,
Pride yet did never reign here more,
Practice does make dew priefe.
Q Quickly if we do not amend
Quenching our sins by grace,
Questionles God great plagues will send
Quietness to deface.
R Riches from plagues will no man save,
Regard them here who will,
Rebellious hearts God will deprave
Rest they never so still.
S Swear and forswear some do not pass
Surenes of truth is gone,
Shame has got on a face of brass
Sin they think it is none.
T Traitorous tongues telling tales untrue,
Tumultes to make thereby,
Trust this they may if they will vewe
Time treason out will try.
V Usury is so usual
Virtue they would it make,
Vile vice it is, as know they shall,
Vengeance when God will take.
X Extorsion is purchase right,
Experience has taught,
Expelled is mercy by might
Extremity so wraughte.
Y Yockt are we unto misery,
Yet sin we without fear,
Yield we will not to charity,
Young nor old, any where.
Z Zache wrongs did full recompense,
Zele had he right therefore.
Zacharies doubtful diffidence,
We rather follow more.
and And if God will punish for sin,
And vengeance on it take,
And if heaven we intend to win.
We must our sins forsake.
con Confess our faults therefore must we,
Consideringe our evil estate
Constrained by gods plagues we be,
Convert then not to late.
Tittle though it no letter be,
In words may truth deface
A fool set in authority
Does justice often vnplace.
By prayer to God now let us call,
To procure grace, and then
After this life, have heaven we shall
To this say we Amen.
Our vnblessinge.
In nomine of whom do we our works begin:
Patris, nay God knows to much we do sin,
Et filij his wisdom so small we esteem,
Et spiritus sancti, his grace eke so little deem,
Amen, we can not say till we amend, and then
Being turned, enjoying grace, then may we say Amen.
The Pater noster.
PAter noster, to God daily we do call,
But lord, qui es in coelis, alas fro the we do fall:
Sanctificetur, If all our liuinges were,
Nomen tuum, in more honor should appear.
Adueniat, say we, but what must it be,
Regnum tuum, nay lord fro that far be we:
Fiat, as we lust in our covetousness,
Voluntas tua, thereby to transgress,
Sicut fro this world we should never go,
Our hearts is on earth, and not in caelo:
Et in terra, covetous hearts are so set,
That panem nostrum scarsly we can get,
Quotidianum, great hunger poor folk sustain,
Da nobis hodie they cry, but it is in vain.
Et dimitte nobis, our sins how can we say,
When debita nostra we force not to pay.
Sicut et nos, deserve lord reward not us,
But forgive us our sins more then dimittimus,
Debitoribus nostris, grant us grace to forgive,
Et ne nos inducas lord as our selves would live,
In tentationem most grievously we fall,
Sed libera nos by grace, and then we shall,
A malo, be sure defended to be.
That God will hear our prayers, amen say we.
The aue Maria.
AVe blessed lord, to the we may say,
Praisyng thy goodness in our Maria:
Who gratia plena, did so to us appear,
That dominus tecum to her we may say clear,
Benedictatu all men may think plain,
In mulieribus, that ever here did reign,
Et benedictus much more thou shall be,
If fructus ventris tui borne we may see,
Jesus Christus, grant this we the pray:
Amen all faithful christen hearts will say.
The Creed.
CRedo that plagues from us shall not pass,
Til covetous me^ in deu^ does set their solasse:
Patre^ they call God as they his children were,
But omnipotentem that they grant not clear,
Creatore^ of all things for man they be co^fessors,
But coeli et terrae they would here be possessors.
Et in Iesum Christum their faith is they cry off,
But echone filium eius on earth would set aloft,
Vnicum on avarice they so set their delight,
That dominum nostru^ fro the^ they banishe quite:
Qui conceptus est, of the flesh that they follow so,
They regard not the works de spiritu sancto,
Natus was Christ only for our sake,
And ex Maria virgin our nature did take.
Passus does Christ's me^bres almost as much woe,
As Christ did him self sub pontio Pilato:
Crucifixus was Christ of the Jews rigorous,
So do they for honger stryke many mortuus:
Et sepultus is charity fro many men so low,
That disse^ditad inferna, here he makes small show
Tertia die, nay the third year god grant this,
We may say that charity resurrexit a mortuis.
Ascendit up is Christ to the end that we,
Ad coelos might come by faithful charity,
Sedet ad dexteram in the substance divine,
Patris omnipotentis as faith does define,
Inde certainly when think least we shall,
Venturus est in glory with his angels all,
Iudicare upon earth all people in all parts,
Viuos and mortuos both after their deserts.
Credo some thinks that day will never be
In spiritum sanctum very few settes their felicity.
Sanctam ecclesiam while we do despise,
Catholicam charity shall never arise.
Sanctoru^ we thought great scorn to be taught,
Communionem till they in vutruly brought.
Remissionem I pray God grant unto them all
Peccatorum wherein God suffers them to fall,
Carnis they did, and does take such carefulnes,
Resurrectionem from sin they think nothing less,
Et vitam which Christ bought for them so dear,
They regard not, eternal they hope to live here,
Amen, god forbid I should say to this,
Yet I fear covetousness will bide where it is.
The psalm of venite wherein god calls us from covetousness as I apply it.
VEnite worldly people, and with one mind
Exultemus in virtue as god has assignde
in domino we should trust, and not in richesse
iubilemus for his gifts which we do possess,
Deo lift we our hearts from all vanity,
Salutari nostro eke most loving let us be,
Praeoccupemus to him then shall we be sure,
Faciem eius to behold for ever to endure
in confessione of his glorious majesty,
Et in Psalmis his name for ever magnify,
iubilemus and set we all vice a side,
ei we should run, but the flesh says abide.
Quonia^ worldly riches our hearts we set upon,
deus magnus we make of that wicked mammon,
dominus, of all sins hates most that kind,
et rex magnus in punishment they shall him sure find,
super all his creatures honorde he will be,
omnes deos beside him are but vanity.
Quonia^ this covetousness god does threate sore,
non repellet does man tho, one whit the more,
dominus grant his grace to turn couetouse me^
plebem suam for hunger so sterue shall not then,
Quia though wicked men will be wicked still,
in manu eius it is to amend all at his will,
sunt omnes so set not on the souls health
fines terrae they seek out for their worldly wealth.
et altitudines if they might here attain,
montium of gold to them selves should ragne
ipse yet our lord above raigninge I do mean,
conspicit their madness and will confound it clean,
Quonia^ ipsius is the earth and al wordly goods,
His est mare and al other water fluddes,
et ipse fecit illud: for the love of mankyn^^,
et aridam for all men's welthes he also assignde,
fu^daueru^t tho, our common wealth in a wretched case
in manus eius the evil man would wealth alon enbrase
venite from covetousness our lord again calls us
adoremus his majesty, and fly works vicious.
et procidamus with repentance true,
ante deum then, our sins we shall not rue
ploremus it is time, expirience has us taught
cora^ dn^o was never more wickedness wrought.
Quia fecit nos not in sinful life to live,
Quia ipse est dn^s whihch is life for us did give:
deus noster by grace and creation is he,
nos autem populus eius alas in mean degree
et oues in few men's hands still do remain,
pascui eius poor men small pleasure shall attain.
Hodie and many God, on us does call
si vocem can perse your ears, to more charity fall
eius whose voice but gods has called you from syn
audieritis, but to amend when will ye begin?
nolite obdurare as ye have done many a day
corda vestra against god, running from him astraye
sicut ye forced not for gods anger one whit
in exacerbatione o man beware of it.
secundum thou art warned in time to amend
diem of death you know not how sone god will se^d
Tentationis toward god man be not to bold,
In deserto as ye know the Jews were of old.
Vbi tentauerunt me, says god, by your infidelity,
Patres vestri were despised and that displeased me,
Probauerunt and viderunt as far as was meet,
Opera mea yet they denied as men indiscreet,
Quadraginta annis with xv. hundredth and more,
Proximus fui to us (he says) as I never was before,
Generationi huic my church, to which I promyst plain,
Et dixise^per eke, I would with it remain.
Hi errant cord where I to the Jews did say,
Ipsi vero did not err like some at this day,
No^ cognoueru^t all things as I shewde to you,
Vias meas to be like yours, yet some of you auow
Quibus iuraui that for this infidelity,
In ira mea revenged of it I will be
Non introibunt with that corrupt judgment
In requiem meam unless they repent.
Gloria give we with one heart and mind,
Patri who to us most loving lord we find
Et filio which here our base nature did take
Et spiritui sancto proceeding fro the^ for man's sake.
Sicut erat before that al worlds were wrought,
In principio which passes all men's thought,
Et nunc serve we him as does become us best,
Et semper let our faith by our deeds be expressed,
In secula seculoru^ then truly reign we shall,
With god in the joys which are perpetual. Ame^.
The collect. Oremus. Let us pray.
DEus a quo all grace does proceed,
Sancta desideria lord give us we have need,
Recta concilia we ought here to elect
Iusta sunt opera which with thee takes effect,
Da seruis tuis in this I Will of England,
illam which is wicked by grace to withstand,
Quam mundus loves most, that do we ensue
Dare our souls for it we force not, this is true
Non potest which loves this world, leave his covetousness,
Pacem since he seeks to have in his wicked riches
Vt et, in this world we may live pleasantly,
Corda nostra that to win wholly we apply.
Mandatis tuis alas lord men should have a love,
Dedita to ye flesh are they, as lust does the^ move.
Et hostiu^ their sore assalts though they mighty be,
Sublata by thy grace lord, most happy then are we
Formidine of which enemies being so put away,
Tempora sint after spent, as best please thee may.
Tua protectione then we doubt not, but certainly
Tranquilla we shall have here, and eke eternally,
Per Christum procured for us it is plain,
Dominu^ nostrum give us grace his peace to obtain. Amen.
Another collect for the clergy and all other people.
OMnipotens and undivided trinity
Sempiterne deus al honor be to thee,
Qui facis that by reason can not be thought,
Mirabilia magna for us thou have wrought,
Solus of these works thou art worker we se
Pretend so thy grace now of thy benignity,
Super famulos tuos (for great is the need)
pontifices to excite thereby thy flock well to feed
et super cunctas persons of all degrees,
congregationes having as all men sees
illis commissas with error spotted sore
spiritum gratiae lord send them all therefore
salutaris heavenly to have the possession
et vt thou will keep the^ from thy laws tra^gression
in veritate of faith also and errors to destroy,
tibi complacient then and after heaven enjoy,
perpetuum eis thy glory shine shall
rorem of thy grace, if thou on them let fall,
benedictionis in heaven that we may be assurde,
infunde out thy grace, which for us is procurde,
per Christum of his great benignity,
dominum nostru^ therefore ever praised might be. Amen.
The Author.
Thus end I this mine A B C,
Requiring all that shall it read
Since thus it is applied by me,
Well to accept my will and deed.
For as experience does led,
I to the time does it apply
Sin reproving which still does bread
Therefore for grace let us all cry.
Finis
quod Miles Huggard.
Imprinted at London, by Robert Caly, within the precinct of the late dessolued
house of the graye Freers, now converted to an Hospital, called Christ's
Hospital.


