TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE Lord and others of his Majesty's most Honorable
pritile Council.
Right Honorable,
IT is well seen, that all such in this Land as sear not Gods Judgments, are
loath to be judged by your Honorable it is also very apparent, that were it
not but for your Honors, there would be no end of oppression and wrong not
any living in this Land, neither for Poor nor Rith; and that therefore, all
the Kings loving and true hearted Subjects, both high and low, have cause
continually to pray for your Honors, next to our gracious Xing and his Royal
Issue.

Give me (your poote Suppliant) leave to declare the wrongs under which I have
a long time groaned; honing spent many years in the service of the Summer
Islands Company in much misery especially, in the two first years, wherein I
was like to perish through want of food, when the Governor had not so much
meal as would hold our one month, to give to every man one pound for a week,
did (our of his care to save some alive) cull out all such as were hartlesse
and lazy, and sent them into the maine, to line upon Berries, or to statue,
seeing there was no remedy: I then went to the Gouenor, and told him that it
was too much cruelty to let them starve in body and soul together, and
therefore did desire that I might go with them. With much importunity he gave
me leave to stay with them all the time of famine; in which time, I did pine a
way to skin and bone, and became so weak, as they were glad to lead me to
some low rock, on the side of an hill, where they set me down first, and
then sat down themselves in rows upon the ground, to hear the word of God
preached unto them. Their forwardness to hear Gods word, and the Governors
love in sending continually to know how I did, did so hear and make glad my
heart, as I made no reckning of the misery and want that I lived in.

When this Governors time was out, he came for England, and left the government
in the hands of six men to govern monthly.

In the time of the mis-rule of those six Governors, three of them went out in
a little Pinace (to seek for some reliese) with a promise from the other three
to admit of no Governor sent from England, until six month after there
arrival: not long after their departure, one of the other three (named John
Mansfield) became sole Governor, and for the strengthening of himself against
the Governor that was expected from England, did draw a large Petition as
though the People had drawn it to entreat him to keep the Government in his
own hand; they promising to maintain him against the Goluernor that was
expected from England to which Petition, he and one John Parker, a Blacksmith,
drew the people every where to subscribe. As Soon as I heard thereof, I followed
after from Tribe to Tribe preaching, and in my Sermons showing the
unlawfulness and evil that was like to come of the rebellion intended, and so
drew the people every where to renounice the said Petition.

The Usurper hearing that the people had renounced the Petition, and that I was
coming to the Town, did raise the whole Town up in arms, to apprehend me
and one Mr. Fosseth, that kept me company; the said Mr. Fosseth being
apprehended; they hung him up on the Wharse by the hands and feere, where he
hung is grievous pain, no man daring to relieve him; but the women, who
brought stones in their aprons, and thrust them under his body, to hear up the
weight of it. After they had so hung him up, Parker the Blacksmith, came and
with a Crow of iron brake open my Chamber door, and dragged me out to his own
house, where he kept me prisoner, till a tumultuous assembly was called, by the
name of an Assizes, and then brought me to the Bar, where I was arraigned and
condemned for a contemner of authority: The sentence pronounced against me,
was, that I should be deprived of my minist^y; and confined to a little stand;
where I should be kept from coming to the people.

This sentence did so offend the people, as they would by no means yield to
the execution of it; but told him, that they were starued enough in their
bodies, and that he had no reason to starve them in their souls, by depriving
them of my ministry. By which opposition, I had rest until the arrival of a
new Governor, one Captain Tucker. As Soon as the Usurper heard that a ship
was come into the Harbor with a new Governor, and what the new Governor had
spoken to me, to preach at the reading of his Commission; he the said Usurper,
caned the town people together, and told them, that if they would stand to him
like then, he would stick to them, so long as he had a drop of blood in his
heart; they promising that they would; he charged them to be up in arms the
next day betimes, and told them, he would not have me to preach, but Mr. Keath:
Mr. Keath was no Minister, but a poor Schollet, that cunningly had got
himself sent over for a Minister) who to further the rebellion intended, had
buz'd into the peoples ears, that it was lawful to resist the Governor that
was expected from England; and for proose thereof, did allege the example of
the Israelites, their putting down of Rehoboam, and setting up of Ioreboam in
his steed. And to stir up the Usurper to shed the blood of such as should
dare to oppose him, he did allege the example of Athaliah, who to usurp the
Government, did murder all the King^de. Also be (the Usurper) cold the people,
that presently after the Sermon, he would make a short speech to the Governor,
and that he would have them (as soon as he had left speaking) to cry a
Mansfield, a Mansfield, and then show themselves men.

The next meaning, as I was studying for my Sermon, and looking out at a
window, I saw the people up in arms, and heard one of them swears that he
would sheath his sword in the new Governors guts: Whereupon I made haft out of
my Chamber, and finding she Ship-boate ready to go off did enter in, to go to
the new Governor, to acquaint him with what was intended; the new Governor
being then on ship-boord: I was no sooner in the Boace, but certain Muscateres
were sent in have, by the Usurper to shoot at me, unless I would come out:
Whereupon, the Mariners fearing they would shoot, and kill some of them
instead of me, did set me on shore again.

The Usurper seeing me about to land, came with a rusty brown Bill on his
back, as though he meant to knock me in the head; telling the people, that
they had all of them cause, to curse the time that ever they saw my face; which
did put me in some sear, that either he or they would do me some mischief;
therefore I made have away, and locked my self in my Chamber.

About three or sour hours after, the new Governor came, and was suffered
quietly to go to the Church; where, as soon as Mr. Keath had made an end of
his Sermon, the Usurper made a short speech unto him, and did no sooner make an
end of speaking, but Mr. Keath (according as the Usurper had given order) was
the first man, that cried a Mansfield, a Mansfield; and so was like to set us
together by the ears, to cut one another throat, even in the Church; had not
the new Governor with speed caused his Commission to be read; the reading
whereof, did so daunt the Usurper, as he came down and gave place unto him.

Thus, I have in part delivered unto your Honors, the stir (that Satan in
his instruments) did make in the time of the mis-rule of the six Governors; in
hope thereby to bring ruin upon that poor new planted Vineyard of the Lord
Jesus.

What he was not able to accomplish then, he was like to effect in the new
Governors time; who was a fit instrument for him to stir up the people to
mutany, and so to overthrow the Plantation: For he was no sooner established in
his place, but he took from every one of the first Planters, half an Acre of
ground, that the Company had given to them and theirs, which was no small
discouragement unto them; considering the extreme pains that they had taken,
in much hunger and nakedness, without any wages, in making 11. Forts.

One Richard Sanders, and honest poor man, who had builded upon his half acre
a convenient dwelling house, and had bestowed cost and labor upon a Garden
Plot, where diverse good herbs and flowers did grow; and greeuing to have all
taken from him on the sudden; before he was provided of any other place, for
himself, his poor wife and children; did but ask if they might not complain
to the King to for asking of that question, Capt. Tucker did imprison him, and
put more Iron upon him, then no was able to hear, wherein hear lay upon the
ground night and day in grievous pain.

One Paul Deane, being arraigned and condemned, for stealing a piece of cheese,
pleaded the benefit of his clergy (according to the laws of England) was
rigorously denied, and so hanged.

The poor man that was put in Irons for asking if they might not complain to
the King (seeing how like a Tyrant Capt. Tucker behaved himself, in cudgelling
the poor people, and in arraigning and condemning for small matters, and
censuring such to roman perpetual slaves unto the cullony) he and four
more, to free themselves from, his tirannie, did desperately leave the Islands
and came for England, in a little Boat of two or three tons, or thereabout.

The fear of his tyranny did reclaim diverse of the lazy crew, so as they
became painful laborers, for which he was much commended.

The wrongs that he did me (your poor Suppliant) were like to tempt me above
my strength: as first, he took my servant from me, and so constrained me to
live comfortless alone; and to go up and down the Island, seeking for
firewood, and to bring it home on my back, and then to go from house to
house for fire, and to go with my Pitcher through the town, to the Pumpe for
water; and to do other base and seruill offices, very unbeseeming a Minister
of Gods word. Also he took from me a piece of black stuff, which St. Thomas
Smith had caused to be bought for me. I being then in great want of clothing,
and so poor, as I was constrained to go almost three years in one old
straw Hatte; and almost two years in one old pair of cobled Shoes, uriuen
full of nails.

Also, he took from me three acres of chaise ground for Tobacco, and two men
that the Company had given me.

Also, he did interrupt me in my Sermon, telling me, that I was out of my text,
and when the Sermon was ended, he did threaten to clap my neck and heels
together.

The matter that did offend him, was this: I seeing (to my grief) how in his
two last years, he game over all care of the Plantation, to build and plane
for himself; and did exhaust the store, to build a stately house of Cedar for
himself, Gods house all that while, being but a thacht Houell, which was kept
so badly, as when it rained, there was almost no place where the people could
sit dry: I took occasion on a day in my Sermon to show how the wrath of God
came on the Israelites, for the like neglect of Gods house: Whereupon, he stood
up, and with a loud voice, told me that I was out of my text, and to the evil
example of the people, went out of the Church in agreat rage; and as soon as he
saw me come out, came to me, and told me, that he would clappe my neck and
heels together: After that time, he he became an enemy unto Religion, so as he
constrained me to give over the Thursday Lecture because the people could not
come to hear me, he did so employ them about his own business; he spared
not the Sabbath day, but sent the people abroad, so as I was much discouraged
from preaching in the after noones.

In the time of his Government God did bring a great Judgment upon the Islands,
There are almost a 100 little Islands, the biggest is but 18. miles long and
almost two miles broad.
in that he caused Rats to abound, so as no Hand was free but were all like so
many Conney-warrens of Rattes.

The Rattes were a grievous plague unto the People, both within doors and
without; Within, they devoured all provision of food, clothes, and shoes:
Without, they devoured the Come, by scraping it out of the ground when it was
new set; the grains that were thrust in so deep as they could not scrape up,
they devoured in the blade, as soon as it appeared above ground: Where some
escaped them in the blade, they devoured in the ear. They devoured all other
fruit of the earth, which served for food; and did kill and devour almost all
the young Birds, and Chickens, and sucked, their eggs. I am not able to
express the sear that was in the people, that they should be starued, when
they saw that nothing that served for food, could be kept from the Rattes.

The people did spend their whole time, night, and day, in keeping the Rattes
under, by hunting them with dogs; setting of traps, and poison; and burning
the Islands twice over, whereby much timber and firewood was consumed.

Then, even then, when they endeavored by all means to destroy the Rattes,
they increased the more; till God in mercy, hearing our prayers, did take them
away on the sudden, in three or sour days, so as no man could tell how.

As Soon as the Rattes were gone, the people with glad hearts did betake
themselves to plant Come, and by the blessing of God, had a plentiful harvest:
Whereupon Capt. Tucker being minded to come for England, caused every man to
bring a certain quantity of corn into the Forts, to be kept there in store,
and handled the matter so (after he was come over) as he drew all the company
to believe, that by means of his industry and care, the Islands were so well
furnished with corn, and the Ratts destroyed: Whereupon, to require his care,
they did bestow upon him, the stately house that he had built, and three
shares of the best land in all the Islands.

At his coming away, he left the Government in the hands of one Captain
Kendall; who through poverty, was constrained to take out of the Forts, the
corn that Capt. Tucker and caused to be brought in.

After Capt. Kendall, succeeded Capt. Nathaniel Butler, a man well qualified
every way for such employment.

He no sooner saw how God had done his part, to make those Islands strong, and
safe from all foreign invasion, by fortifying them round about with fearful
rocks and shoules, so as there is no coming near with ships to invade
them, but in two narowe and durious channels, which do lead into two goodly
and large Harbors; and how the first Planters in Capt. Mores time, had done
them best endeauours in the matter, of artificial fortifications. as,

On the channel that leads into the west harbor, they had builded a strong
Fort, and a Castle, which they called the Kings Castle, where they had mounted
18. great Pieces, on carriages sent from England; which through the negligence
of succeeding Governors, were gone to decay. Capt. Butler took small rest,
till he had repaired such as could be repaired, and made new cariages of cedar
for the rest: so now those 18. great Pieces are very seruiceably mounted; so
also are all the other great Pieces in the rest of the Forts. As, not far
from that channel, toward the south, is a Fort built by the first Planters in
Capt. Mores time, called Charies Fort, where are two great Pieces.

On the North side of the Channel Capt. Butler bath built a strong Fort to
slanker the Kings Castie, which he called Southampton Fort, where are five
great Pieces, seruiceablely mounted by Cap. Butler on carriages of cedar: Which
Fort does make a great show to the sea, as though it were a Castle.

To the Northward of that Fort, the first Planters in Capt. Mores time, built a
Fort, which they called Pembrooke Fort, where are two great Pieces.

The other Channel that leads into the Fast Harbor, commonly called the
Town Harbor has on the one side, toward the North, a Fort built by the
first Planters in Capt. Mores time; called Rogers Fort, where are 7. great
Pieces.

On the other side, toward the South, is a Fort called Smiths Fort, built by
the first Planters in Capt. Mores time, where are 5, great Pieces.

Not far from that Channel, toward the north, is a Fort called Penistons
Fort, built by the first planters in Capt. Mores time, where is one great Piece.

A little from that Fort, is a Fort built by the first Planters in Capt. Mores
time, called Sands Fort, where are 2. great Pieces.

On a Hill near the Harbor, is a Fort built by the first Planters in Capt.
Mores time, called Warwick Fort, where are 3. great Pieces to command the
Harbor.

On a Hill near the Town was a high Mount, (built by the first Planters in
Capt. Mores time) blown down with a terrible gust of wind, and is now built
up again higher and stronger, by Capt. Butler: where is also one great piece,
mounted by Capt. Butler to gine warning.

In the Town, upon the Wharfe are 7. great Pieces, mounted by Capt. Butler, to
command the Harbor; which great Pieces he recovered out of certain Wrackes.

Captain Butler has built in the Town a fair town Hall of stone, and a
fair strong Prison of cedar.

In the Maine he has built throe fair long Bridges of cedar, like Kingston
Bridge.

In his time, the Kings I awes were established in the Islands, and the Assites
kept orderly, as they are in England,

Before his time, ever since Capt. Mores time, the Governors will went for
law, and some of the Kings Subjects were hanged contrary to the Kings law, and
some condemned and censured to perpetual slavery.

Captain Butler did ordain sort every Tribe a Justice of the Peace, a
Constable, Chu^h wardens, Sidemen, and Waywards; and did cause Cages, Stocks,
and Cucking-stooles to be made in every Tribe.

Notwithstanding, the great care that he had to suppress since, it did abound
every day more and more, through the want of Gods Word, the Islands being
pestered with lewd Persons, taken up out of the S^es, out of Newgate and
Bridewell.

In his time I came to England, to seed I could persuade some Ministers to go
over, and to dequaint the Company with the weak estate of the Islands, and
gr^uances of the people, which were ready to mutany.

When I came into the Barmude Court to present the grieuances of the People,
and weak estate of the Islands, St. Edwas Sand; (misinforthed by Capt. Tucker)
did stand up in the face of the Court, to accuse me of many soul crimes;
saying unto me, Mr. Jews, you do use in your Sermons to speak against the
Church of England, to rail upon Bishops, and to say that the Book of Common
Prayer is but in did Wises tale; and you will not Baptize Children, unless
their Parents do first make confession of their Faith.

To his first accusation, I answered; that the Church of England was my Mother,
and that all the knowledge, all the faith and hope of salvation that I have, I
had it in the Church of England, which I take to be the true Church of God; and
that therefore, my tongue shall be cut out of my mouth, before it shall speak
against the Church of England, as some do:

To his second, concerning tailing upon Bishops, I told him, that it were too
much peevishness for me, to meddle with the Bishops there, where they could
not meddle with me: The truth is, that preaching upon the suffering of our
Savior Christ, I showed how the high Priests, were the greatest enemies that
our Sausour had: and from them I gathered, that the grace of God and learning
dee not always go together; and for proof of my doctrine, I showed how the
Romish Lord Bishops are the greatest supplanters of Christian Religion, and
shedders of Christian blood; and did nominate bloody Bonner, Bishop of London,
and Gardner Bishop of Winchester: Not speaking a word of the reverend Fathers,
the Bishops of the Church of England, as it now stands, whom I honor from my
heart, for the good that I have and daily do receive out of their godly and
learned Works.

To his third accusation, concerning the Book of Common Prayer: I answered,
that I was so far, from speaking, as I never had, and hoped never should have
a thought in my heart, tending to that way: whereupon, Sr. Edwin did produce
mine Enemy Capt. Tucker, for his Informer.

Capt. Tucker did produce Capt. Kendall., who testified, that he had heard me
say that the Book of Common Prayer was good for old men and wowen to read at
home, when they were not able to go to Church.

The Court taking notice how they differed in their testimony, some said, Make
how these men cannot agree in their testimonies, feign they would do the poor
man some harm, but they have not agreed upon the matter.

Captain Kendall was one of the three Governors that promised to admit of no
Governor sent from England, he became mine enemy because I had acquainted the
Company with the wrongs that he had done the Islands in the time of his
Government, in taking the corn out of the Forts, and disfurnishing the Islands
of certain murdering Pieces, and other necessaries, which he sold to a
Pirat. I did acquaint the Company with nothing but what Capt. Butler (then
Governor) did advise me, and what I was bound by mine oath to declare, as I was
one of the Privy Counsel in the Summer Islands.

To his fourth accusation, concerning the Baptising of children, I answered,
that many poor boys and girls, (taken up, out of the streets, out of New
gate and Bride well and the Hospitals) were sent to the Summers Islands, where
they were brought up in ignorance like Heathen, so as, when they became men and
women, and were married, and had children, they were not able to bring up their
children in the Christian Faith: therefore, to bring such to have some care of
themselves and of their children, I gave out, that I would not baptize their
children, unless the parents were able to yield some reckoning of their Faith,
or at least, rehearse the Articles without book; and to encourage them
thereunto, I drew some of the better sort, (for example sake) to rehearse the
Articles, before their children were baptized.

After I had thus answered to his accusations, I desired the Court not to pass
over slightly; the things whereof I was accused but, take some pains to
examine and find out the truth: them, Sin Edwin (as though he had been
satisfied) did stand up, saying unto me, Well, well; Master Jews, it is enough
for you, that we know you to be an honest man, and that you have done much
good in the Plantation; as for these things, let them dye, stir in them as
further.

Though Sir Edwin made a show as though her were satisfied, and to have a good
opinion of nee yet, such of the Company as are couete ously minded, and do aim
altogether at their own end were so against me, as they denied to give any
thing to wards my charges in crossing the seas in lying sick and weak at
Falmouth, and in traveling from thence to London by land, bring eleauen soore
miles, with horse and guide, not able some day to travel about tenmyles; yea
they were so against me as they refused to relecue me with my wages, and so
constrained me, (for the bearing of my charges back again to the Summer
Islands) to take from my poor wife all that I could, and to leave her in great
want, which was no small grief unto me.

Within few months after my arrival, a new Governor, (one Captain Bernard)
was sent to succeed Captain Butler, and with him four Ministers.

One of the Ministers named Master Wright, was no sooner landed, but went about
the Islands inuaighing against me, almost three weeks before I could find him
out: at length, when I came where he was he told me that he took me to be a
dishonor to the, Ministry and a shame to all Ministers, and that Sir Edwin
Sands had told him that I was a man not fit to live in a Commonwealth: which
opprobrious speeches, I took patiently, because the standers by did clear me
of those things whereof he had accused me; so as he seemed to be satisfied, and
went about the Islands, speaking well of me where he had spoken evil, and dyed
within six or seven days after.

The new Governor then lying upon his death bed, and hearing that I did grieve
and pine away, because he and the Ministers had an evil opinion of me, did
send an honest man, one Willam More to comfort me, willing him to tell me, that
he found no truth in the reports that were made unto him of me by some of the
Company, and that if I would stay in the Islands, I should find his love:
within four days after this, It pleased God that he also dyed.

After the death of the Gouenour, diverse of the dishonest and unruly sort,
(taking notice how the Ministers and the new Officers that were sent over with
the new Governor, had an evil opinion of me) did so wrong and insult over me,
as was like to break my heart, and having received a lamenmentable letter from
my wife, signifying that the Company did refuse to pay the money that I did
allow her, out of my wages, and that she was in great want, I resolved to come
for England.

At my return back again? Sir Edwin Sands and Deputy Ferrar who then were
the chief managers of the affairs of the Summer Islands, had got a new matter
against me, which being openly read in the Court behind my back, did confirm
diverse of the Adventurers in the evil opinion that they had of me their new
matter was, certain false notes, collected out of a Sermon, that I made before
diverse that were inclined to mutiny, by means of which false notes, the hearts
of such as with their multiplicitie of voices bear most sway, are so set
against me, as I am like to lose the greatest part of my wages to my utter
undoing.

Being advised by my friends to petition his Majesty's Commissioners for
Virginea and Summers Islands, my petition was sent by them to the Company for an
answer; whereupon Master Nicholas Ferrar, then Deputy, came to the
Commissioners and told them, that there was nothing due unto me, and that if
there were, he would pay every penny himself.

Sir Edwin alone, did take upon him to answer my Petition in writing, and did
so wrong me, as one of the Commissioners told me, that there was such matters
against me, as they must turn me to a higher authority: whereupon I did
petition your Honors above twelve months since, and had an order to enjoin
the Company to give present satisfaction of what was due: whereupon Master John
Ferrar late Deputy came into the Court and openly in the face of the Court did
affirm, that there was nothing due unto me, unto whose testimony, the
multitude (who with their multiplicity of voices do bear all the sway) have
given such credit, as I have no hope to recover my wages.

The Governor Sir Thomas Smith, and others that are honorable and Christianly
minded, though they be willing, yet are not able to help me, because of the
multiplicity of voices that are against me: therefore I am constrained to
appear from the multiplicity of voices to your Honors for Justice.

The Demandes of me Jews Hughes for the time that I have spent in the service
of the Summer Islands Company and in suing for my wages.
I Did Contract with the Company but for three years after 50, pounds per
annum, as appears by their Order of Court made the 18. of March 1613. for
which I acknowledge my self to be satisfied.

The Copy of the Order.
TAking in consideration, the necessity of sending over sufficient Ministers,
they were given to understand of one Master Jews Hughes, who prosereth him
self to be employed for three years, and referred the determination to a
private meeting, which was held the 26. of this present, where they agreed:
viz. Master Governor, Master Deputy, etc. That be should, if he could not
enjoy his health return with the first shipping, and to have for the time he
stays 50. pounds per annum, viz. 10. pounds to himself, and 40. pounds to his
wife or to his Attorney.

Those three years being expired, I wrote to the Company for more Ministers,
that I might come home, they sending none, I was constrained to stay: For the
next year after the expiration of the Contract, viz. 1617. Wherein I was kept
there in much misery against my will, the people being increased, and dispersed
up and down the Maine into eight several Congregations, besides the Colony,
having no Minister but my self to look to them all, living more like a slave
then a Minister of Gods word, my servant being detained from me by the
Governor, so as I was constrained to live comfortless alone, and to go up
and down the Island for fire wood, and to bring it home upon my back, and then
to go from house to house for fire, and to go with my pitcher through the
Town to the Pumpe for water, and to do other base and servile offices, very
unbeseeming a Minister of Gods word: notwithstanding all these discouragements,
I did (through the help of God) preach constantly every Thursday once, and
every Saboth twice, besides Cathechising: therefore I hope that the Company
being Honorable, will not offer less then 100. pounds for that year,
considering that out of my love to the Plantation, I did go for 50. pounds per
annum, when they were willing and did offer to give to another 100. pounds who
would not go under 200.

For the year 1618. I require 100. pounds because the Company by an Order of
Court held the 24. of June did allow for four Ministers for each of them 100.
pounds per annum, and notwithstanding did leave me there alone to bear the
burden of that year, without the help of any Minister, the people still
increasing, and the Islands pestered with lewd disordered persons taken, up out
of the streets, out of Newgate and Bridewell. Some of the company do say,
that I was not alone, but had one Mr. Keath to help me: The truth is, that Mr.
Keath was no Minister, neither was he any help but a great plague unto me, and
was like to be the ruin of us all; when taking part with Mansfield the Usurper
against the lawful Gouernor', he was the first man that out of the Pulpit
cried a Mansfield, a Mansfield, and so was like to set us together by the
ears, to cut one another throat, even in the Church.

The Copy of the order.
THe Ministers shall be chosen here in a quarter Court, and the provision for
them there, is to be made on this sort: There shall be erected 4. Churobes,
and 4. Parsonages belonging to them, and shall have 50. acres for each
Parsonage, and upon each of those Parsonage Gleabs, there shall be placed 4.
men; taken off from the common land, to occupy the same to halfes, for the
behoof of the Minister, and for the yearly maintenance of the Ministers. Over
and above the houses and gleabs, it is ordered, that there shall bea
apportioned to them out of the fruits of the earth, (growing and accruing out
of their several Parishes) a certain portion, by way of charge upon every
share or Farm, so as to make each Ministers allowance in that kind, to the
value of 100. pounds.

For the year 1619. I require 100. pounds per annum, because the Company in a
Court held the 25, of February, agreed and order, that the said order touching
the Minister, should be prosecuted: and for the payment of the Ministers wages,
they laid 3. pence the pound on the Tobacco, and left me alone to bear the
burden of that year also, till the latter end of it, that one Mr. Lang was
sent to assist me, who dyed there; unto whose Widow, the Company have paid
after a 100. pounds per annum, according to the order.

The Copy of the order.
TAking into consideration, the defect of the Ministry in the Summer Islands,
having at this present but only two, viz. Mr. Jews and Mr. Bridges: and
understanding that the said Mr, Bridges is not sufficient to execute his
function, as they desire: It was thought convenient, for the educating the
Inhabitants in the fear of God, that two able Ministers shall presently be
sent to assist Mr. Jews, whom they wish may be desired to stay: And the said
two Ministers, to be seated and employed upon the Tribes; and for their
maintenance, it is agreede that the former order shall be prosecuted touching
the Ministry, and what shall fail in that, of making good to each of them
100. pounds per ann. that then there shall be an imposition of 3. pence the
pound) and not above) laid there upon the Tobacco, which shall return, the
occupiers being willing to bear half with the owners in the contribution: And
touching Mr. Bridges, it is thought fit to send for him home unless he please
to stay as a private man, without salary from the Company.

My Adversaries do say, that the Company, since my coming for England, have
paid their Moitye, and that I was to receive the other in the Islands; and that
therefore the Company are not to pay it.

To them I answer, that I never could have four men to manage the Gleabe-land
according to the order; and therefore, the people did not contribute there, but
have paid their Moitye in money hear, according to the imposition laid on
their Tobacco.

For the year 1620. wherein (finding my self to faint under the intolerable
butthen with I was constrained to undergo) I came to England, to see if I
could persuade some Ministers to go over, and also to acquaint the Company
with the grieuances of the people, which were ready to mutany: And also to
acquaint them with the weak estate of the Islands, most needful to be looked
into in time: I require a 100. pounds, according to their law. Because it was
never heard, that a Minister in England, coming to London about the Important
affairs of the Commonwealth, had his living sequestted from him for that time.

For the year 1621. Wherein I did return to the Summer Islands, the Company
then in their general Letters did desire the Governor to provide for me,
according to their orders; which he could not do, because the Tobacco Harvest
was past before their letters came; Therefore, I desire that the 100 pounds due
for that year may be made good some other way the poor people there having
paid their moity in money here, according to the imposition that was laid upon
their Tobacco.

For the year 1622. I am satisfied because the Governor (according to the
order) did leauie 600. weight of Tobacco, to make up the Tobacco which was made
that year on the gleabe land to the value of a 100. pounds starling.

For the years 1623. and 1624. wherein the Company have not as yet discharged
me of my Cure, neither by order of Court, nor by warning, nor by any
satisfaction; but have kept me in suspense, suing for my wages with much griese
of heart, being much indepted, having no means to pay my depts, nor to relieve
my self, my poor Wife and Family, but by borrowing and going on the soore, so
as my deptes are increased: The lease of my house which cost me 30. pounds,
laid in pawn for 12. pounds, is forfeited: It is also forfeited to the
Landlord for not paying the last quarters rent: a Bond of 60. pounds is
forfeited for non payment of 27. pounds. My poor aged wife whose heart is
almost broke with grieuing, is miserable weak and sick, I having not a penny
to buy her a loase of bread but as I borrow or beg; For these two years that
have been so grievous and chargeable unto me, I will thankfully accept of what
your Honors shall think fit, either by way of salary, because I am not as yet
discharged of my Cure; or by way of damage, in regard of my losses and
hindrances.

Concerning the agreement, which (as they say) was made at my returned to the
Summer Islands, viz. That if the Company would pay unto my Wife 95. pounds, and
give me the transportation of two men, I would be therewith satisfied, and put
the Company to no more charges: which agreement the Company did break first,
in refusing to pay the said 90. pounds to my wife, which has brought her to
such want and grief, as is like to cost her her life, and therefore I am not
bound to stand to it, considering they brake it first.

Thus I have delivered unto your Honors, the just cause of my complaints,
which in the bowels of CHRIST LESVS I commend unto your honors charitable
consideration, for speedy redress of my wrongs. In Witness of the truth of
all the premises, I have hereunto subscribed my name.

JEWS HVGHES.


