A IORNALL OF Certain principal passages in and before the Town of
S'hertogenbosh, From the 18. of August till the 1. of September, at what time
they fell to capitulation concerning the Rendition of the Town. Whereunto is
added, A Sermon made by the Bishop of S'hertogenbosh in S. John's Church,
(before the Town was rendered) to appease the Burgers and Inhabitants, which
were in an uproar:

LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Bourne at the South Entrance of the Royal
Exchange. 1629.

A Jornall of certain principal passages in and before the town of
S'hertogenbosh, From the 18. of August till the first of September, at what
time they fell to capitulation concerning the Rendition of the town:
From the Quarter of the Prince of Orange at Vucht the 21 of August. 1629.
IN this siege the Prince of Orange is very careful, and takes good order for
all, at the same time, the said Town was battred as well from this quarter as
of all other quarters as fast as the Ordnance could play, so that they make
great holes in the walls, they within played very fiercely with their Ordnance,
The gallery was with all haste that could be made almost brought into the
walls; on every side of the gallery is made a battery of two pieces of
Ordance, by the which we did keep the Ordnance Ordnance of the Enemies within
the City, that they can do nothing to hinder us: On the same day at night our
Ordance played upon the City all night long, and there were yet some granads
shot into the Town. The 22 came a Trumpetter from the Enemies, into the
Leager, for to ransom and release the Crabatts, which ours have taken
Prisoners, in the defeating of the Comp. of Crabatts, which we did defeat some
days since; Against night our Cannon begun again to play upon the walls and
houses, and continued the whole night through. They within had put upon the
walls an Ancient with a Bourgous cross, which we shot al in pieces. On the
same night have they within the Town made an alarm, calling fall to, fall
to; and they came out in the mean while with some boats, and took in the
battery, which lay between the great Sconce, and the quarter of Pinsen,
spoiling the victulers, but found none Ordnance, because it is everynight
brought under the great Sconce, and are so again returned into the Town.

Another the 22. of the same.
SInce yesterday we were speedily dispatched for the setting of the bints, or
beams, so that now already are set into the ditches 41. bintes, whereby to
day, there shall come ten more, and all is gone well forth without any
hinderance. Last night have ours with boats brought over the dommell, into the
ditch, above 60. Sconcekorues, for to make a new battery, wherewith we shall
hinder the Town, and yet we brought great store of earth and boughs, for to
fill up the ditches.

For to see what the Enemies did within the Town his Princely Excellence has
given order to be made two ladders, with boats by the Vuchter gate; But when
ours were for to clime upon the ladders, they within did so furiously shoore
upon them, that ours were forced to retire, with the loss of 8. men slain,
and 11. hurt, and brought their ladders again in the quarter. Last night were
brought upon the end of the ditch two half Cortowes, which did stand before
upon the new battery, and ours have the same night sent some granads into the
Town, which did work well. The 19. was slain (in the approaches of the
Prince of Orange) the Lieuetenant of the Collonell Vere. Our troops which have
been out, near Tongeren in the County of Luike, report, that they have
understood, that the Emperor would besiege Laycke, whereupon those of Luicke
have written for assistance unto their Bishop, which he refused; whereupon
they labored to have assistance from other Potentates, as of France, and of
Savoy.

From the quarter of his Highness Count Ernest, the 23. of August. 1629.
THe 17. we have brought over the little gallery into the Horneworke; and we
began presently to mine thereunder, the 19. we put a mine on fire, which flew
in the air, and did work well, and there were slain above 150. of the
Enemies side, whereupon we presently fell on our Enemies, that were within the
Town, and three several times, we were repulsed, with great staves, pikes,
and such other things, whereby our side were killed, and hurt, two Captains,
with one Lieutenant, and some others? Mean while we did play upon the Town,
with 8 half Curtowes, as fast as the Ordnance could play; which nevertheless
showed themselves upon the walls. Presently after that, we began to mine
again, which we put on fire, and wrought well: A Friesland Captain which had
the watch there, fell presently with all his forces upon the same, and made
them within the Town to retire, but be cause he was not presently assisted of
his Lieutenant, those of the Town did make him retire back again; So that the
said Captain, with some other soldiers were slain, and his son deadly hurt.

Yesterday after dinner time, at three of the clock, we have put on fire a
mine, by the Hornworke, whereupon ours presently did fall with great force upon
them, that they within not only did retire, but were forced to leave
altogether the Horneworke; wherein now ours did fortify themselves, and
approached to the Hintemer-gate. The water mills dried up the Land round about
the Town.

The 19. ours have gotten a Carre with powder, which came from Hasselt, out of
the County of Luike, saying, that he would sell it in the Leager amongst the
horsemen, though it is not believed; But it is likely, they would have brought
it into the Town, in little sackes, the powder is unladen, and the Carre-man
is kept safely, we have shot this night upon the Town as fiercely, as ever we
have done hitherto.

Another from the Leager before S'hertogenbosh the 23.
SInce yesterday we did not advance much with our gallery, because they within
did play very fast upon our new gallery, and have spoiled two of our bintes or
beams; And we are still busy to bring earth, and bavins. This whole night
we did play with our Ordnance upon the houses, and last night we have sent
some granads into the Town, therefore they within did play very fast with
their Ordnance.

Yesterday were taken by our men 50. horses, and some Prisoners, and brought up
to the Leager. The Lord of Brederode has this night played very fast both with
his Cannon, and musketts, upon the Town, we hope in a short time to be in the
walls by the Hintemer gate; because there is no ditch between the Horneworke
and the gate, that can hinder us. His Highness Count William does advance well
with his approaches, and shot yesterday very fiercely upon the Town.

Another of the Leager before S'hertogenbosh the 24. 26 27. and 30. of August
1629.
THe 24. we have here in the Leager made bone-fires, for the great victory of
Wesel, after we had given thanks unto the Lord; and the Triumph was after the
Leagers manner as follows.

His Excellence commanded, that none should begin, before the signal of the
Iacht before Creveceur were done. The Princess was her self upon the walls of
Creveceur, and the Iacht played his Cannon, then those of the fort Creveceur
did play with 18. pieces, and then were played by those of the Roudoutes along
the ditch of the Bosh, then the Lord Piusen, then the great and little Sconces,
and then the Ordnance about the quarter of the Prince of Orange; Then after
those the quarter of Brederode from his fort, against the Petteler. There his
Highness Count Ernest, with his whole and half Cortowes, as also at Orten.
When the Ordnance had played on all places, began all the Musketeers of the
whole Leager. Those of the quarter of his Princely Excellency began first, and
then Eastward the one after the other round about all the Leager as a running
fire; The Pikemen and the servants of the horsemen did carry burdens of straw
upon their Pikes and staucs, going so through all parts of the Leager, that it
made a great light. When the second charge of the Canon began was cast into the
Town a Mortar, what it did work we did not hear yet. Upon the same time we
shot upon the Town all the Ordnance, with the muskets, and other fireworkes of
flying dragons, and fire piles we did not want, so that the whole leager was
like a flame. The skippers in the quarter of Englen did burn pitch tonnes, and
did hang out lanternes on their masts. These bonefires were seen of the
Prince, and of the Princess, but not of Grobbendouck, because he had the
gout. Between 24. and 25. those of our side brought a great store of Sconce
korues upon the end of the ditch, where they are busy to make a battery: And
there was bespoken to be made a gallery for 28000. gilders along the ditch from
the Vuchter bulworke unto the gate, where those of the Petteler Sconce went it,
and out the Town, were set Sconce korues, and made Trenches for to hinder them
to go out and in the Town. In the night the Enemies did come out we thought
they would have come upon the dommell, but did nothing; only they took two or
three Prisoners of my Lord of Beeverworts Comp. with a voluntary, and hurt a
messenger, and slew a Wagoner, so they retired, with some loss of theirs. Upon
the 25. in the night there were 45. bintes of our gallery brought over, and
shall be made so strong, that no firebals shall hinder them. Our new batteries on
each side of the gallery play still upon the town, when they see advantage for
the defending of the gallery, they are daily busy on the dommel behind the
defense or blind; and are yet busy to make two batteries, with two Corpse de
gardes. The Trenches, which we make from the Vuchter gate unto the Petteler
gate are stayed for a time, because we have need of earth and bavins for the
galleries and batteries, which is to be fetched a great way off. Last night is
brought hither great store of earth and bavins more then we can spend to day;
so that the gallery will speedily be advanced. The 26. we played with our
Ordnance fiercely upon the Town. Yesternight we learned out of the quarter of
Count Ernest that of the Enemies, most of them were departed from the
Horneworke, and are retired in the half Moon. Those of the quarters of
Brederode, Count William, and Pinsen, did their endeavors with their Ordnance.

Since the 26. at that day and last night is the Town fiercely battred with
Ordnance, those within answered, but few times; our gallery before the Vuchter
gate does advance well, and there are at this present brought over 51. bintes.
Our new Batteries with the Corpse de gardes shall be ready to day, and the
gallery shall also be brought over, whereto already were brought great store
of Materials for to do it with the first. We have yesterday sent some
granads into the Town. We learn also from the quarter of Count Ernest, that
the Enemies yesterday did throw with granads upon the Horneworke, (which we
have gotten from them) which hinder us much, so that the great gallery cannot
speed so well.

Last night went out two Companies of horsemen and 200. fire locks for to try
their fortune, and to see what the Enemies will attempt upon us, because there
was speech that they would try their fortune again against us. The water
milles did not work, because the water did run very fast of it self, and that
the Mase began to grow little, and does run very fast down. We expect every
day some news, because ours were very busy for to get wood, bavins, and
earth, so that it shall not be long ere we be Masters of the Town.
Notwithstanding they put out upon the walls on all sides the Bourgous Crosses.
Now presently we got tidings that the Enemies have left the rest of their
Horneworke by the Hintemer gate, and that those of our side keep their lodging
there, and that ours advance with all force their approaches by the half
Moon. Now at this present came one that ran out of the Town, which was
brought to his Excellency, wherefore the Committies of the high and mighty
States, are by his Excellency, for to examine him, he that was run over said
that the house of the Governor Grobbendouck was kept with 9. guards, because
the Burgers will speak with him, and he will not hear them, therefore the
Burgers are in great alteration with him, they would feign yield the Town, the
Clergy seek all practices for to appease the Burgers, requiring them that they
yet would have patience for 14. days, if not, that they will employ some
other means. Among the Common Burgers there is great necessity, and two
months since they have not had in their houses neither butter nor cheese, (as
it is reported by the said man which was run out of the Town:) further there
is great mortality in the Town, there dyed of theirs 3400 men as well by shot
as otherwise. The 29 did those of our side play very fiercely upon the Town.
On the same day is brought here great store of earth and bavins with ships,
there are already set 55. bintes, we cannot set two bintes more. Last night
did seven men work all night in the gallery. Those horsemen and firelockes,
whereof I have spoken here before, have defeated a convoy of the Enemies, which
went for Breda, there were slain about 50 men, and have brought Prisoners with
them, 40. men, with a Ritmaster, and a Lieutenant, with a Cornet, and betwixt
70. or 80. brave horses well furnished.

On the 29. we began to make another gallery between the Corpse de guard,
whereof already are set 6. bints, running straight upon the town.

On the same day in the quarter of Count Ernest is brought about 200. wagons
with bavins for the great gallery.

On the same day we have thrown great store of bavins and earth into the
ditch, so that there do want but two Rods, and we thought betvveen the 29.
and 30. to fill the rest of the ditch, but those of the town did play so
fiercely upon us, that it was impossible; they throvy now every night with
pitchd crausses, for to see vvhereabouts ours do work, we hope
nevertheless next monday to mine again.

Those of the Town have this night made a fire upon the steeple, vvhereupon
we presume that it will not endure long with them.

The 30. is here taken Prisoner a Boor, which did take money of both sides.

The Ritmaster Pannecouck which was slain in the defeating of the said
convoy is buried to day.

At Middleborrow a man called Cock, whose Father had been Borromr. of Flushing
was beheaded, on the 23. because he had advertised the Enemies the designs and
enterprises of the Prince of Orange in former times, as also the secrets which
he could hear of the East and West India Companies, that he was familiar
with great persons of State.

The 24. was at Revesteiu quartered a Traitor, which thought to yield the
Town, being a Captain des arms.

Here follows a Sermon made by the Bishop within the Town in S. John's
Church, to appease the Burgers and Inhabitants, which mutined, before the
delivery of the Town of S'hertogenbosh.
THE BISHOPS SERMON.
MY loving Friends, and true Romish Catholics, all ye that are here
assembled upon defire to hear me your good and true teacher, admitted by our
most holiest, worthiest Father the Pope of Rome, Gods Lieutenant upon the
earth, by whose authority is given unto me power to exercise this holy, high
and worthy office, because I have heard and understood (by our good and
faithful brothers the Clergy) and I see also with heavy and sorrowful eyes,
how that yet every day more and more do increase your mutinies and
alterations, and in stead of giving one to an other a good and courageous heart
and mind, to withstand the violence of the heretics) you are in great
amazement and fear, though not without great peril and danger, because that
since the beginning of this tedious siege, there are in the town already
deceased so many thousand souls: But ye (O true good Romish Catholics)
should think at all times how happy such men are, which in this so holy place
(during this siege) are deceased, yea I know and assure you that the same, and
all those which yet may die, after they have been a little while in Purgatory,
shall be released, and be Children of the eternal and everlasting life; I
speak of them, which dyed with a good and holy conscience in the old Romish
Catholic faith. My loving Burgers, and true men of war, ye which are yet
alive, sight now manfully for the Mother of God, and the holy Church, and do
constantly believe that by Gods grace they will not suffer the destruction of
their people, by the unfaithful heretics the Geuses: Take a new courage, it
may be it is but a short time that we shall be oppressed, which you may believe
the rather, because the winter is drawing near, and they can not stay any
longer in the field, for the great misery which they shall endure. Let this be
the only aim for your eyes, That ye (good people) do know, that all the
Saints in heaven, to wit, Mary Queen of the heavens, and also all the loving
Apostles, still do pray for us unto the Father; yea not only for us which are
yet living, but also for such which (during this fiege) are dead: what a great
comfort, what a great glory is this for you to hear, That those of your
kindred, either Father, or Mother, Brother, or Sister, Uncle, or Aunt, Cozen,
or Niece, are gone to such a glorious and worthy voyage. Good people, if you
did but know, in how great and vaspeakable a felicity and joy they are now in
with all the Saints of God, I assure you ye should not sear death, but should
present your selves upon the walls, and run in despite against your Enemies,
that the sooner ye might come into such a blessedness and happiness. All what
I say here, (my good Catholics) ye may well belecue it, yea I will pawn my
life therefore) where be now the Geuses, have they such teachers, would or
could they assure their people? I warrant you they will not, they will not,
they have not the power as we have, to forgive the sins and the sinners: They
have not a Pope sitting upon Peter's Apostolical chair as we have, from
whence should come the power unto them; they have no Cardinals, no Prelates,
no Bishops, no Priests, no Purgatory, no Saints, no miracles: Also they do
deny the five Sacraments, the Confirmation, the Priesthood, the Marriage, the
Auricular Confession, the extreme unction: They deny also the adoration of the
Saints, and will not suffer their pictures in their Churches to be as books of
remembrance: they do no Pilgrimages, no Invocation of Saints, etc. I could
rehearse an hundred things more that they yet do deny, but the time will not
permit it, though I most tell you this, they dare stoutly deny, that our most
holiest, worthiest Father, the Pope of Rome has not power to forgive sins:
wherefore does then the holy Apostle Masthew write in his eighteenth Chapter,
Verily I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.
These are the words of Christ, who dare deny them? and because it is known to
all the holy Romish Catholics, what power our most holiest, worthiest Father
and Pope of Rome has, who is admitted of the most Highest as a Lieutenant on
earth over men, at present sitting upon the holy Romish Seat of the Apostle
Peter, having full power, when it pleases his Holiness, to put in, and out of
banne and pain, all Kings, Dukes, Princes, Counts, also all Spiritual and
Temporal persons: yea he has power of the most Highest, if any body does
offend and resist against our holy Mother the Romish Church, to pursue,
proceed, and prosecute against the same with power and sorces, and seek to
destroy these Heretics and Sectaries: our most holiest Father the Pope of
Rome, will presently break their attemps, intents, and desines: also bring
their Leager to nothing, and us oppressed Catholics he will release and
deliuet, chiefly this our holy Town of S'Hertogenbosh, which was never taken
nor inhabited by the Heretics, albeit this town has suffered several hard
sieges, but never so fast round about as it is now, though it seems impossible
for us to be relieved, and because the Heretics (the Geuses) have
unexpectedly taken the strong town of Wesell, which Count Henry vanden Berg
might and could well have helped, therefore we fear that our most holiest
Father can but little help us in this our uttermost need.

O my good true Catholics, all which are here assembled, let my words enter
into your ears, and remember them well in your hearts, because we are now all
hopeles to be relieved from without, so will I according to my power comfort
you, whereby ye may get again a good courage. Good people, remember how in
times past the City Bethulia was besieged, and almost famished by Holofernes,
so that there was no hope of relief for them to expect, yet by the desine of a
woman to wit, Judith, is Holefernes put to death, his Leager destroyed, and the
town relieved: this was not only by Judith, but by the prayers and fasting,
which they within (during the siege) incessantly continued, and confessed
publicly their great sins, and offenses, which they had done before.

Therefore, ye true Romish Catholics, Ye which are in like case, hear the
words I shall say unto you, what ye shall do, and it shall help us: Confess
your sins before God, then before the Priest: and then ye shall do
Sacrifices and offerings unto Mary the mother of God: also to all Saints which
are in heaven, unto them shall ye call, that they may be your Intercessors,
and pray for us, that this our holy town may not fall into the hands of the
Heretics, for the prayers of the Saints shall be sooner heard by God then our
prayers, and no doubt Mary the holy mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, shall
easily and surely command her dear Son, to release us out of all our
miseries, wherein we are at this present. Mean while: good people, pray and
fast incessantly: in the morning when you rise, ye shall say over thrice your
Beads or Roosencrosses, and five Aue Marias, with two Pater nosters: at dinner
ye shall read one Roosencrosse and three Aue Marias: at night again five
Roosencrosses, with three Pater nosters, and one Credo: it may be (true Romish
Catholics and devout hearts) that will help us, I do not doubt of it, be
ye no more so mutinous among your selves, I pray you, good people, be contented
yet for a day, three or four, if ye are not helped, then, as I have said, in
my Sermon, so do then what you please, and so I take my leave of you, and be
ye mindful at all times of that which I have taught here by this my Sermon:
So I commend you to God, the blessed Mary, the holy mother of God, with all the
Saints. Amen.

To the Reader.
You friendly Readers hear,
how that this foolish Prelate,
Poor peoples eyes would bleare
with fabl's he does relate,
In stead of giving glory
to God, and Christ our hope,
To trust in his false story,
and Pardons of the Pope,
And that to get forgiving
of their offenses all,
The way is to believe in
and on deaf Saints to call.
It Is time to open your eyes,
you of the popish faction,
Truth makes men bold and wise,
crowns with success each action.
FINIS.

