THE SIEGE OF BREDA WRITTEN IN LATIN BY THE R.F. HERMAN HVGO OF THE S. OF I.
TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH BY C.H.G. Collonll. Henry Gage

PRINTED WITH LICENSE. M.DC.XXVII.

TO THE SOVLDIERS OF OUR NATION IN GENERAL
GENTLEMEN
THE general approbation of this matchless history, so much sought after by
such as understand it, and not well understood by such as are best able to
spend their judgment of it, soldiers, and professors of the Art military,
who, for the most part, are unskillful in the latin tongue, the language in
which first this history came to light; was a motive to me to present you with
it in English, as a thing proper to you, in respect of the subject, and due to
you, from me, in respect of my profession. And, houbeit I have been half
persuaded by diverse of my friends, that it will be a present ill accepted, as
well for the authors sake who first compiled it in latin, as for the subject of
the history it self, which treats of an action, to which most of you
profess to be enemies in affection, and many of you did actually thew it in
your persons; yet when I reflect that you are Gentlemen and soldiers, and
consequently men as generous in your affections, as your actions, loving worth
for worths sake, wheresoever it appears, I resolved to stop my ears to the
suggestions of my friends, and adventure to present you with this history in
English, which in the Latin tongue has gained so general an applause. I
confess it is like to suffer, and loose of its first luster, by putting on
this unfashioned outlandish garment, the rather, because it is fallen into the
hands of a VVorkeman, whose profession is to manage the Pike, not the pen: but
when, after two years, I perceived no better pen would undertake it, and that
all presses were daily filled with unworthy pamphlets, whilst this excellent
history, which (as I am told) has traveled Italy, France and Spain, had not
yet, nor was not like, to pass into our Hand, I thought it better to wrong the
history, by clothing it out of fashion, then injury our whole nation, by
keeping from them such a history: and of our nation I found none fitter to
patronize such a subject, nor so able to judge of the worth of it, as your
selves. To you therefore, Gentlemen, I wholly dedicate this translation, wishing
no other Reader, then men of your profession, who are only capable of making
profit of it. Other men may peradventure read it to pick a quarrel with the
Author, whom, though they cannot convince of any falsehood in his history, yet
because he is a stranger to their nation and Religion, his phrase and delivery
of circumstances, will distaste their pallat. Others may chance to stumble at
the style of the translatour, because it is rough, and not so pollished as a
penman might have made it, not reflecting that he is to tie him self to the
conceit and phrase of the Author. Others again may blame the petty faults in
printing, without consideration that it was printed by a stranger. But you,
whose thoughts are fixed upon honorable objects, and profess to admire great
actions, even in your greatest adversaries, soar higher then to meet with any
of these obstacles, which take the eyes of shallow Readers, not the
understandings of judicious. Take you then this admirable history to your
protection, and give it that esteem your judgments find it worthy of, that it
may be your Square to direct you, and incitement to you to draw you on, to the
like, and greater atchiuements of honor. From my lodging this 24. of July 1627.

Yours most affectionately to serve you. H. G.

SI quid mutatum, Lector, deprehenderis in versione hac Anglicana a scriptione
mea Latina Obsidionis Bredanae, intelligas velim, quaedam rogatu meo adiecta,
paucula etiam dempta: quod praestitum ab Illustri viro Dn^o. H. G. Praefecto
Cohortis Anglicanae, qui Bredam ipse cum suo milite obsedit. Ita testor,
Bruxellae 12. July, 1627.

Hermannus Hugo.

THE SEIGE OF BREDA.
MANY things concur to the greatness of this Seige, What made this seige so
famous.
making it more famous then other enterprises of our late wars. First, 1. The
succors and emulation of strangers.
the great supplies demanded from all parts by the enemy, as if the strife had
not ben for the safety of one Town, but for the entire preservation and
houlding up of their Empire; so much the endeauours of strangers added to the
fame of it, and even out of emulation the glory of the victory increased. Next
the strange and unaccustomed largeness of the Works drawn about it, with
the circuit of a double Trench, against the inward and the outward enemy, the
like of which scarce any History has left a memory behind it. 2 The strange.
largeness of the double trench.
To this the incredible multitude of Redouts, Forts, Batteryes, and other
fortifications of that kind, raised in the hardest season of the year, and,
for so large a circuit, in an exceeding short time. Besides, 3. The multitude of
works.
that main difficulty overcome of conueying the provision of victuals, a long
and winter journey, by land, whilst by reason of the chargeable carriages of
wagons, sent by command of the Cuntry, and the spoiling of Towns and
villages, 4. The difficulty of bringnig our prouion, with the dearth of corn.
the dear rates af all things grew to be insufferable, and the soldier but
seldom, and then but half his wages paid. Lastly a certain peculiar
providence of Almighty God, 5. The singular providence of Almighty God.
protecting our designs and crossing those of the enemy, as if he had
particularly favored us, and ben offended with them. Of which hand of Heaven
so many undoubted signs appeared during the whole seige, that though the
labors of our Commanders were without intermission, yet all their endeauours
out of doubt would have proved in vain, without the singular assistaunce of
that souerainge Commander, God. And these for the most part ar the things,
which have so spread the reputation of this seige.

The Town of Breda, The circuit of the town vvalls.
of it self, is not great: The walls of it contain four miles in their
circuit, so that in less then an hour a man may walk about them. The Barony
and Town of Breda belonged in times past to the Duks of Brabant with eighteen
willages of the jurisdiction of that Barony. John the third, How and when it
fell to the family of Nassau.
Duke of Brabant alienated it from that Duchy in the year 1350. John Polane
Lord of Leck purchased it of him for three and forty thousand Hallengers. It
fell first to the family of Nassaw by the dowry of Ioane Polane, in the year
1404. who having the inheritance of Breda, was married to Count Ingelbert
Nassaw. How often Breda has been vvonne and lost.
By right it ought to have returned to the Duks of Brabant having ben alienated
from that Duchy for so invaluable a consideration. In the year 1567.
(William of Nassau being fled for treason) the Duke of Alua possessed himself of
Breda, for the King of Spain. Ten years after that, in the year 1577. Count
Hollac took it by composition, and it returned again to the family of Nassaw.
But it was surprised again by the Baron of Hautepen, partly by stratagem, and
partly by assault in the year 1581. and remained under the King the space of
nine year: till one Araugerius, in the year 1590. by the practice of a
carriage boat (in which threscore and ten soldiers lay hid, like the
Grecians heretofore in the Trojan horse) by the command of Maurice of Nassau,
since Prince of Orange, wholly possessed hinself of the Town and Castle.

The Town almost in the uttermost parts of Brabant, joins upon Holland,
The situation of Breda
by the River Merke. Not far from about it, it is compassed with the
neighbourehood of many good Towns and Villages. It lies in a pleasant Cuntry,
such, The pleasauntnes of it.
as many of our Commaundres and soldiers professed not to have seen the like
in Europe; so that Count Maurice, not without cause, was accustomed to call it
his Tempe. A Territory rich of Corn and pasture. The Meddowes, beset round
with young sproutes of Trees, were separated with small brooks, as with their
natural bound. Rows of Trees, set either in a right line, or ranged into an
order of five, shaded all walks and houses about the Town. Not far from the
Town four woods showed themselves; one of them of Pine, the other three of
Oak.

The Merke and the Aa, two Rivers, run into it, The two Rivers of Breda. The
River Aa runs about the Town.
and one of the two runs about the vvalis. The River Aa, made larger by the
running of some champion brooks into it, takes its course about the walls, kept
in by a sluice, least, by the ebbing of the River Merke (with which it ioineth
with in the Town) the Towne-ditch chance at any time to be left without
water; From vvhe^ce it is called Merkedael. The River Merk runns into the
Tovvn^.
it turns a Corne-mill in its passage, and with a gentle descent runs into
the Town. The place where these streams join, retayneth still a corrupt name
of both Rivers, called Merkendael, by the flowing of the Merk into the Aa. The
Merke separated from the Aa by two brick-walls in the ditch, runns into the
Town, divided of its own nature into many parts; and growing larger by little
and little, not far from Dordrecht, powers it self into the Holland Sea. It
ebbeth and flows twice every day, and ouerfloweth the grounds about the town
by the opening of sluices as often as pleases the inhabitants of the Town.

From the River Aa, it is thought, From vvhe^ce the name of Breda is derived.
the name of Breda was heretofore given to the Town by them of B^abant, in
whose language BREED imports as much as Broad, as if so they would have
expressed the River Aa, spreading abroad at larg its channel in that place. In
the midst of the Town a Toweris built, three hundred threscore and two foot
high, The height of the tower in the midst of the town.
from whence is a larg prospect into the neighboring Towns, fit to give and
take notice of anything from a far. The number of houses in the town.
The howses of the Town, are thought to be twelve hundred. The form of it
would be three-square, if the Castle built in the walls, were not more then
ordinary borne forward on the one side. The form of the Town.
The Castle fortified with walls, Bulwarks, Bridges, The descripion of the
Castle.
an Armory and a double ditch, takes up in compass more then a mile. It is
beautified besides with open and close galleries, Pillars, walks and so
pleasant a Garden, that it is hard to judge whether the strength or curiosity
of it excel. The walls are of Turfe, The town walls.
not of brick, set thick with a continued Row of Oaks. At the three corners of
the walls, are the three Ports of the Town, besides the Port whith belongs to
the Castle. The curtains, as well of the Town as the Castle wall, are
fortified with fifteen Bulwarks, Fifteen Bulwarks.
upon each of which some pieces of Artillery were planted, and here and there
a windmill. Upon the wall two platformes were raised from whence the Artillery
plays a far of. Platforms or Cats.
Under these, at the foot of the walls were two lesser Bulwarks in the ditch,
and in an other place of the wall a third of the same proportion, over which no
platform at all was yet raised. These lesser Bulwarks serve in the nature of
half moons, to which there is a passage by Ports under ground, and they
appear above water the height of four foot. A hedge of quickthorne,
At the foot of the wall a hedge of quick throne is set: the branches of this
hedge are turned and wrought together and so drawn out in breadth, that they
add an admirable defense to the Musqueters, and the walls. The Breadth of the
ditch.
The ditch in all places is not alike broad; where broadest, a hundred and
fifty; where narrowest, threscore and ten foot broad. In the ditch fourteen
Rauelins appear, cut triangle-wise; the River runs about them: three of
these Rauelins, by the Port-Bridges are joined to the Town wall; Fourteen
Rauelins.
two of them are joined to it, by two brick walls which part the streams of
the two Rivers in the ditch, and an other of them by the Castle bridge, is
joined to the Castle wall. The outmost shore of the ditch is BREDA AS IT WAS
FORTIFIED BY THE PRINCE OF ORANGGE BEFORE THE SEIGE LAID BEFORE IT. A.
Bulwarks. B. Rauelins. C. Cats. D. Half Moons in the walls. E. The
Counterscarpe. F. Horne-workes. G. Half Moons with their Parapet H. An Island
on the other side of the ditch fortified with a parapet. I. The Ports of the
Town and Castle.

rounded with a covered walk, five foot high, for the safety of the
Musqueters, enclining on the outside by little and little downward (a
Counterscarpe is the term they give it.) Five great works secure this
Counterscarpe, The description of the Out works.
cast up before the four Ports of the Town and Castle, and the longest
Curtain of the town walls, cut round with ditches thirty foot broad. The
level sides of these works are two hundred and ten foot long; broad, a hundred
and fifty. The largest of them, lying before the Castle, is two hundred and
forty paces long; two hundred paces broad. The front of them is shaped, like a
forke, into corners; hence they bear the name of horne-works. Diverse sharp
stakes stick thick round about them, to give a hindrance to the ascent, when
any attempt should chance to be made upon the wall On the other side of the
ditch, before these Outworks, Other Fortificatio^s to strengthen the Outvvorks.
lies a place of safe retreat (called a half Moon) fortified with a
Counterscarpe, a cubit high, for the defense of the Musqueters, and compassed
round with an other ditch. Some few paces distant from this ditch an other
Counterscarpe (such an one as runs about the whole town) does in the same
fashion shut in all these Outworks. Into this half Moon is a passage for the
soldier, from the front of the Horn-worke, by means of a little draw-bridg
thrown over the ditch.

All these inward and outworks ar so necessarily contrived and do so
correspond to each other, that some of them, The excellent oder and disposition
of all these works.
lying higher then others; and others again lying of equal height with one
another, defend each other from the flanks and from above, so that from the
outmost to the next to it, and from thence to the rest (when need requires) is
a safe retreat for the defendant. To conclude, The situatio^ of the Cuntry
about Breda.
the Territory about the town is of that nature and situation, that, either by
the ordinary sea-tydes, or by any extraordinary inundation of standing waters,
it is far and near inaccessable. Besides, the Island belonging to the Town,
cut, for the expedition of the course of shipping, on the other side of the
Castle, is fortified round with an indifferent high wall. In this sort Count
Maurice, about two years before, had commanded the walls to be raised, the
Bulwarks, Rauelins, Pallisadoes, Breda a pattern of rare fortificatio^s and a
school of military discipline.
Counterscarpes and ditches to be made. And by cause the conueniency and
situation of the Town seemed of its own nature to require the setting up of a
certain Seminary, as it were, of military discipline in it, the states of the
united Provinces desired that this Town, as the fittest place for military
exercise, should stand for a pattern and example to all others, and it seems
that strangers esteemed it to be so: for hither the prime youth of Germany,
France and England flocked to better their knowledge in the Arts of war:
hither, as to a pattern Count Maurice was accustomed to send men skillful in
that kind, whenever any speech was of exquisite or serious works of
fortification: hither, he had sent his nephew Don Emanuel of Portugalles son
Captain of a foot Company, with his Company: hither he had sent both his own
base sons, the one of which was Captain of a Company.

Justin of Nassau, Justin of Nassau Governor of Breda.
Count Maurice his base Brother, a man excellent for his long experience, who
by his counsel might be able to maintain, and by his good husbandry and
parsimony hold out aseige, John Aertse^ the Drossard.
had the Government of the Town committed to his charg. John Aertsen Lord of
VVermont a man of no less resolution then strong judgment, for moderating the
distribution of Corn, restrayning of Mutinies, and giving counsel in sudden
and desperate affairs, What was wont to be the ordinary garrison of Breda: and
what reinforcement was lately made.
bore the Office of Drossard. The ordinary garrison of the Town, were sixteen
foot Companies; one Company for the Castle; and five Troops of horse: in all
sixteen hundred men. But the noise of a seige being bruited abroad, The towns
men able to bear Arms Aertsen the town Coronell.
eight foot Companies more were sent to reinforce the former. Eighteen hundred
Townsmen were able to carry Arms, of whom Aertsen had the command with the
title of Towne-Coronell. The provision of the town against vvinter.
The soldiers provision against winter was 8200. measures of wheat, of Oats
2800. 3600. weight of cheese, and as many of dried Haberdine. And it was
commanded strictly (before we came to beseige the Town) that every Townes-man
should furnish him self with Corn for a twelve month, that for them
afterward it might not be needful to diminish the soldiers victuals.

Many things persuaded Spinola to attempt the seige of this town, and as many
again dissuaded him from it. The reaso^n which persuaded Spinola to think of
beseiging Breda.
The conueniency of the place did principally inuit him to it, as well for the
restraint of the often incursion of the enemies horse into Brabant, which from
thence into any place they often made with great ease, as for the hindrance of
all navigations betwixt the towns about Breda and other neighboring towns of
Holland and Zeland; a thing (by the surprising of some places therabouts)
conceived not to be difficult, to the in credible damage and disadvantage of
the enemy. Many other commodityes besides drew him rather to attempt this town
them any other; as, the ground commodions for the drawnig of Trenches, raising
of Banks and Batteryes, or any other work either of encamping or assaulting;
the River couenient for watring, easy to be shut up, by which the beseiged
might be utterly deprived of all succor; woods near for fuel; store of
fruitful feilds for forage: and lastly this concurred, that Breda being
possessed, Berghen op Zome and other neighboring Towns might with less
difficulty be recovered.

On the other side the strength of the Town fortified by art and nature
discouraged him from it; The difficultyes which discouraged him.
but principally the difficulty of conueying provision a far of, whilst, either
the enemy was to be avoided by fetching a great circuit, or all our Towns were
long days iourneyes distant by land, or those Towns them selves stood in need
of their own provision. Neither had we at our backs the conueniency of a
Riuernauigable by Boats of any burden for the carriage of our victuals. And
Breda was shut in, near at hand, with a theater, as it were, of enemy-Townes
about it. It remained that our Corn and other provision was to be transported
by great numbres of wagons, and long iourneyes, hindered by the winter season,
which questionless could not be performed either without imminent danger, or
double the forces we had then in the field.

The state of our affayers, and of the low Cuntryes at that time stood thus:
The State of the lovv Cuntryes when Spinola thought first of this seige.
Philip the fourth King of Spain had forbidden truce to be longer held with
the united Provinces, conceauing it to be far more prejudicial to him then
war. The Archduchesse Isabel Clara Eugenia Infant of Spain, Dowagere of
that excellent Prince Albert, thought it a thing unworthy that the flourishing
Army the King had then in the low Cuntryes, should loose it self, and decay
with idleness and sloth. Our rising from Berghen op Zome, for which the enemy
made such boasts, was scarce yet well disgested. Germany, wearied out with
wars, took breath again. The forces and reputation of the bastard Mansfeild
were now almost extinct. The couenaunts of peace made with the Kings of England
and France were inuiolably kept. A just quarrel was only kept on foot with
the Rebels of the united Provinces. Against them it was thought fit our forces
should be bent, nor for affectation or desire of Souerainty, but for the
reestablishing of Religion, and regaining what they usurped.

Spinola, keeping secret his designs to him felf, now that the season seemed
to inuit him to it, the corn being already ripe, upon the 21. of July 1624.
departed from Bruxels, and set forward with his Army But he had so provided
with him self for all casualtyes of war, that though he resolved to make an
attempt upon Breda, yet if he should perceive it a matter difficult to effect
(by the enemies reinforcing that garrison, with what intention Spinola
marched into the field that year.
as afterward it happened) he might from any place he should sit down,
undertake any other expedition, according as he should see fittest, being there
in person, turning his forces at his own liberty into what place he pleased.

The Army, The Army divided into three parts
purposely to distract the enemy, was divided into three parts, and iourneyes
commanded to other places then was intended. The Marquess Spinola took his
iournoy by The Pilgrimage called by English me^ Our B. Lay dyer of Sichem.
Montagu (that sacred Church of the Virgin Mother so famous for miracles over
the whole world) where, after he had been present at the Mysteryes of Catholic
Religion, and offered his prayers for the Army at the Altar of the Virgin Mary
he led his foot forces one way, Spinolaes devotion to the Virgin Mary.
whilst Don Lewis de Velasco Count of Salacar, General of the Horse, took a
different journey with the horse of the Army. John Brauo Governor of Anwerp
Castle, who was sent to lead that Army out of Merkland, which Don Goncalo de
Cordua had commanded, as Camp Master General, joined those forces with these
greater not far from Turnhout, about the same time, The Army was found to be
less then it was thought to be before.
(as he was commanded). Here by the way Spinola caused the Army to be mustered,
and found it to be less then it was believed to be when marching at length it
made show of a greater number then it contained. Otherwise, it was an Army of
choice and select men, able to make good, with their valor, the default of
their numbers. They were in all fifteen Regiments, consisting of 198. foot
Companyes. Nine and thirty truopes of horse. Scarce altogether eighteen
thousand men.

Justin of Nassau Governor of Breda, ignorant of our designs, but wary; so
soon as he understood Spinola to be arrived there, caused five foot Companyes
to march to him out of the adjoining Terntory of Swol; The Couernour reinforced
the garrison with tvvety foot Companies
and after ward fifteen more newly arrived at Swol, out of Holland; emonest
which was Count Maurice his own Company, with Prince Henry his Brothers, and
diuer men of quality, besides Hauteriue the french Coronell, the English
Coronell Morgan, and Loquerene the Hollander. And the next day, upon notice
given him that Spinola drew nearer, he dismissed to Gertrudenberg the three
trupes of horse of Count Culenberg, Count Styrum, He put out of the town
three troops of Horse.
and the french Captain Villibon, that he might not have too many horses for
the scarcity of his fortage, when two troops of horse with five and forty foot
Companies, were more then enough for the guard of the Town. The Coronells last
arrived had their Quartets allotted them in the Outworks and walls. Hauteriue
the french Coronell who commanded also the VVallons, had the guard of Gineken
Port; the English Coronell Morgan the Port of Bolduc; and Loquerene with the
Scottish and Dutch had Anwerp Port to defend. The new fortificatio^a without
the Hornevvorks.
Which done with all speed they caused to be cast up before each point of
these Outworks, an other Fortification proportionable to those points; and the
like fortification before the front of the Outworks, bending foreward
cubit-wise with a middle point; these three new fortifications representing all
together the form of a Trident. Without these new works again, they drew an
other ditch, and about that a Counterscarp, with a thick Pallisado, fenced on
the top (like a An Engine so called being a great Mast or beam stuck thorough
thick with heads of Pikes.
Porcupine) with two sharp nails, so to prevent any sudden irruption that
way. The space from the outmost shore of the Horne-works to these three new
fortifications opposite to their front and Corners, was a hundred and forty
paces, into which from the out sides of the Horne-works, the soldier had a
passage by a port under ground. These were the first works added to Count
Maurice his fortifications from the time that they of Breda began to fear a
Seige.

Spinola in five days iourneyes arrived at Gilsen with his Army, Spinola
hears his Coronells opinions.
(a Village two hours traveling distant from Breda.) where calling diverse of
his Coronells to counsel, each man a part, he began first to sound their
opinions about the attempting of Breda: but he found them all against him. They
alleged that the fortifications of The Town were invincible; The Coronells
reasons against the enterprise of Breda.
that the waters (when pleased the inbabitants to let loose the River) drowned
far and near round about the Town; that the Town it self in many places was
separated with the River; that the garrison was reinforced with eight and
twenty foot-Companies; that we had not forces to bear the brunt of so
dangerous an assault, to which as well multitudes THE HORNE-WORKES. A. The
front of the horne-worke. B. The ditch thirty foot brood. C. The half Moon.
D. The Perapet. E. The ditch without the half Moon. F. The Conterscarpe. G.
The Tonne Walls. H. The ditch of the Tonne Walls. I. The new fortification cast
up, by them of Breda, before the Out-workes, CXL paces chstant from them,
whilst our Army lay at gilsen. K. Three forked fortifications. before the front
and Corners of the Horne-workes. L. The Ditch. M. The pallisade upon the
Conterscarpe, about the Ditch.

as worth of men was required; that if happily the enemies Army should fall upon
us in the Rear, before we could possess our selves of a Town so inpregnable,
we should either be forced to retire with shame, or desperately expose our
weak forces to the hazard of a double charg in the van and the Rear.

The Coronells having thus delivered their opinions, Spinola aequaintedthe
Infanta with his Coronells opinions.
Spinola who knew well the office of a General to differ from that of his
Lieutenant General; the Generals being to determine peremptorily upon the
conclusion of all buisnesses, the other, to be guided and do all things by
direction, remained still with his Army at Gilsen, and acquainted the
Archduchesse Isable with these opinions: The Infanta dissvvadeth the enterprise
of Breda.
But she having had notice before of those notable supplies added of late to
the garrison of Breda, made answer, she would have nothing attemped with the
imminet danger of so many brave men; that she might justly be condemned of
injustice, if she should not value the lives of them at a dearer rate, whose
hearts and affections she knew to be such, that they would refufe no danger
whenever they were commanded; that Spinola notwithstanding should take it to
his care, that so select an Army should not return with loss of reputation
and attempting of nothing.

These affairs were consulted with Count Henry vanden Berghe, Governor of
Gelderland, These buisnesses were consulted with Count Henry vanden Berghe.
who lodged with an other Army near about the Rhene, to whom Spinola
dispatched the Sargeant Mayor Losano with letters to know his advise. He sent
from the Camp besides Charles of Burgundy Baron of VVaken, Captain of a troop
of horse, and great Baileife of the City of Gant, to Charles Bernard Fontayne
Coronell of a VVallon Regiment, and Superintendent of the forces of Flandres,
An attempt upon the Island of Casante resolved owe but left of again.
to treat with him about the surprising of Casante (an Island near Sluice.) This
matter was long debated betwixt them two, and in the end it came to be disputed
before the Cardinal de la Cueua, his Ma.ties Ambassador in the low Cuntryes;
and as each man's fancy led him, so one of them pretended to make the matter
difficult, the other endeauered to make it appear fecible. Fontayne dispaired
of it: Wake warrented success. Fontayne notwithstanding offered him self to
undertake it, provided, that (for his discharge) he might receive his commands
in wirting; for which purpose he presently took his journey to Bruges. Wake
within three days was dispatched thither after him. But all things being now
in readiness, the Archduchesse mistrusting the success of the enterprise,
commanded them to desist.

Mean while the Marquess consulted again with some men about him of best
understanding, Spinola sounds his Coronels opinions about the seige of Breda.
and calling his Coronells and some Captains to counsel, demanded of each
man his opinion a part, what they thought now of laying Seige to Breda, since
of late they had delivered that it was not to be surprised by assault. They all
dissuade him.
Here again they all (one Coronell excepted) objected the difficultyes of such
a siege: that the Town could not be entrenched round, Their reasons against
the seige.
but at an unreasonable distance; that the circuit of our Trenches (by reason
of the low situation of many places about the Town, partly inaccessible
through the marrishes and sea-flouds, and partly subject to be drowned
whenever pleases the Townes-men to stop the River by their Sluices) must of
necessity take up a journey of more then four or five hours; that that
distance was to be filled by so many gudards and Quarters of ours, that they
might almost meet and shake hands with each other, otherwise the passages to
the Town could not be stopped; that we had not forces to distribute into so
many several places; that an infinite provision of Corn was made for the
soldier, and commaundment given to the Towns men to make their provision
against winter; Brief, that it would prove a tedious piece of work to famish
a Town plentiful of all provision; the rather by cause, if the enemy bringing
greater forces should encampeat our backs with intention to raise us, we might
The figures signify the distance of mises * The stars the enemy towns
be compelled, without striking stroke, by the only intercepting and stopping
of our Conuoyes, That our Army would sustain more want in beseiging Breda,
then the enemy beseiged.
for want of provision to retire our selves: so main a difference is betwixt
us in this point, that they from any place, by means of their near Towns and
Rivers would easily be furnished with all sort of provision (the diverse
situation of their Towns and havens being such, that almost no wind can blow
amiss for some sail or other) for Gertrudenbergh, The neart Towns, of the
states, to Breda.
Seuenbergh and Heusden, neighboring Towns of the states, ly within three or
four hours journey of Breda, besides many other Villages not much farther from
it, all which have either the Sea or Some River running by them. That we on the
other side were likely to fall into wants sooner then the beseiged of Breda
themselves, in regard of our far, and difficult transportation of provision by
land, which only way would be left open to our Camp, and that besides exposed to
infinite dangers, and peradventure wholly possessed and taken from us by the
enemy: for Anwerp, Mechline and Lyre, were Towns of ours, The Kings Towns
far from Breda.
ten or twelve hours traveling distant from Breda; Bolduc and Herentals, the
nearest Towns we have, stood at the least nine hours journey from thence.

One Coronell there present was of an other opinion, Thereasone which one of
our Coronells alleged for the seige of Breda.
who making no reckning of the reasons alleged, affirmed, that for this only
respect Breda ought to be attempted that no greater corrasiue could come to
Count Maurice, who made a singular value and estimation of that Town; with the
loss of which he would loose much of his reputation with all men; that it was
not to be believed that the beseiged could be so absolutely furnished, that
nothing should be wanting to such numbres of men for the failing of which they
might not be forced in short time to surrender; that famine would press any
Town destitute of supplies; that the cutting of of their provision would beget
want, and wantes would breed dissension emongst the Soldiers and Towns men.

The Coronells Don Francisco Medina, They vvhe were sent to discover
wereagainst the Seige.
Matthew Ottannez and Don John Medecis had been sent before toward Breda to
discoure, who brought word that the ground about the Town was not amiss to
raise works and draw Trenches, that there was a River convenient for watring,
woods for all necessaryes, store of feilds and Barnes for forage, but yet they
all concluded that those things were infinitely to be suspected and feared
which the Coronells had before alleged against the Seige. Mean while Losano
returned from the Rhene with letters of Count Henryes who having heard the
Coronells objections against the Seige of Breda, Count Henry vanden Berghe his
counsel to beleige Em brick and Raes, or Grane with the Castles of Rauestyne
and Gennep.
proposed to Spinola the attempt of Embrick and Raes: he put him in mind that
he lay in person with is Army thereabouts; that his forces being somewhat
reinforced, and a Bridge of Boats, with a great Fort, made over the Rhene,
Embrick might be taken, which done, Raes of necessity must come under
subjection; or if for the scarcity of boats he thought it not convenient to
have a Bridge made, that Grave at least with the Catles of Rausteyn and Gennep
might be beseiged all at once; that he would be pleased to determine what he
would have done, consulting the affair with Antony Baron of Grobbendonck a man
expert, and particularly acquainted with those places. Spinola sending back
with Losano Don Franciseo de Medina Coronell of a Spanish Regiment, signified
that as far as concerned Grave, Rauesteyn and Gennep, he allowed of Count
Henryes opinion, and demanded what supplies he stood in need of for that
enterprise. The forces which Cont Henry demanded to beseige Grane.
Count Henry desired 5000 foot and 1000 horse, which, with his other forces,
would suffice for that service. He wished Spinola to ly still with his Army at
Gilsen, so to keep the enemy in suspense that he should not dare to draw forth
the garrison of Breda, or any other, to impeach our Seige intended before
Grave. Spinola relishing well this enterprise, and relying upon the word of so
great a Commander, Spinala ac quaintedthe Archdu enesse with Count Henives
Counsel.
gave notice of what had passed to the Archduchesse Isabel, by the Coronell
Medina; and commanding Antony Baron Grobbendonck to repair presently to him
(as Count Henry desired) demanded his opinion about the Seige intended before
Grave with the Castles of Rauesteyn and Gennep. Spinola asks Grobbendoncks
opinion.
He answered freely that so many several expeditions at once would prove a
thing more difficult then was conceived of it: Yet notwithstanding that credit
was to be given in that particular to Count Henry, a man akilfull in his trade,
and particularly acquainted with the nature of those places. The want of water
in the Camp of Gilsen.


Many days were spent in these doubts and vncertaynties whilst our Army at
Gilsen in the mean time began to loose heart. The River was two Six English
miles.
leagues from us (and that the nearest water we had to our Camp) The Wells,
which were but few, were either dried up by the heat of the year, or
exhausted by too much drawing, or the water drawn out of them was so troubled
and muddy, that it would not be settled or grow clear in a long time. The
impatience of thirst, concurring with the extreme heats of the year, forced
many to seek unwholesome water in ditches, or tracks of Cart-wheels, which was
a cause of great infection emongst them. Spinola being told of this
inconvenience, and being desirous to inform him self of the truth of the
buisnes, as one not easily giving credit to every idle report, called presently
some of his Coronells unto him; demanding whether their soldiers suffered
such want of water as he was made believe. But they, either fearful to
discover the error of the place chosen for our Camp, or measuring other men's
necessityes by their own plenty, being desirous with all to please, made
answer that their soldiers, wanted not water. Upon this the Marquess in
presence of the Coronells called for him who had complained of that want, who
whilst he persisted in the justification of what he had said, Count John Nassau
Coronell of two Regiments of Germains came in oportunely who making a relation
of his soldiers necessityes confirmed what the other had complained of before.
The Marquess finds out the truth.
Where upon one of the standers by who before had refused to acknowledge the
truth, whispered him privily in the ear who had made the complaint, Spinola
commanded vveils to be made.
giving him thanks for making a discovery of that which he him self was afraid
to complain of. Spinola having by this means discovered the truth commanded
presently many wells to be suncke, New losses and incon ueniences to our Camp.
a remedy which in part redressed the inconvenience. By the extreme heats of
the year, forty thousand loaves of Bread were corrupted in Gilsen Camp.
Almost about the same time the Cabins of two Italian Regiments, by an unlucky
accident, were set on fire and brunt. To all which extremityes, whilst to that
day no wages had been paid to the soldier, and the prices of all merchandise
grew to be excessive, diverse of our men began to forsake their Colors; which
Spinola mistrusting would prove an example to many more he sought to redress
it by the rigor of Justice. Justice done upon soldiers which ran away
from their Colors.
Four or five of these runne-awayes were taken in their flight and brought back
again, whose trial he caused to be put to fortune, and the dice condemned one
of them to die. Mean while many liberal discourses were every where heard in
the Camp: that the time of action was spent in consulting, and that our
reputation and soldiers were lost with delays. The enemies scoffs against the
King, and Spinola.
By the enemy many reproachful things were done in scorn of the King, and
Spinola. In Holland, Buffons and lesters instituted Comicall sports (not unlike
to those of Atella) which they called the Spanish Scarreerovv.
Bombomach. Ridiculous pictures, of the King seeking Breda with a lantern,
Spinola standing by him, scratching his head with both his hands, were every
where to be bought: to which there were not wanting satiricall Balads and
Rimes. Count Maurice in a kind of contempt of us taking his pleasure at the
Hage, assured, as he thought, of all things, is reported merrily to have said:
The Prince of Orange his bitter jest against Spinola.
that it had been better for Spinola toly idle at Gela (a place where mad men
recover their senses again) then at Gilsen. But these fopperies, being
contemned, vanished of them selves.

The resolution of beseiging Grave was now approved by the Archduchesse,
wherefore Spinola dispatched away Don John Medeces, a soldier of long
experience, with Orders to Count Henry, commanding him to march toward Grave,
with the Army he had about the Rhene, and promising, Count John Nassau sent
with suercours to count Henry vanden Bergh.
at a day appointed, to send him those other forces he desired. About the same
time, he sent from the Camp Count John Nassau (who had newly refused the offer
of being General of the Venetians Army) with a supply of 5000. foot, and four
troops of Horse; three pieces of Canon, eighteen Boats and other carriages.
Captain Conrade d' Aubermont sent along with Count John
He commanded John Conrade d' Aubermount Captain of a troop of horse, who
lodged with his troop in the Town of Bolduc, one who might stand him much in
steed for his knowledge and experience of the Cuntry therabouts, to march along
with him. The next day he sent after him Don Hyacintho de Velasco Marquess of
Belueder, with ten troops more, to the number of a thousand horse, commanding
him that he should chase all Cattle far and near from about the Territory of
Grave, and make good those places which Count Henry should make choice of for
the pitching of his Camp. Count Henry take Mo^delbergh, Cleue and Gennep.
Count Henry vanden Bergh in his journey toward Grave, falling upon the
Castle of Mondelbergh, the Town and Castle of Cleue, and the Town of Gennep,
took them, and placed his own garrisons in them; his authority and command of
his soldiers being such, forbidding them all pillage and spoil in the Town
of Cleue, that though they were forced to enter into howses plentifully
furnished with all kind of rich househould stuff, from the windows and roofs
of which they might the more commodiously shoot into the Castle, which yet made
resistance, The temper of Count Henlyes soldiers.
not the least complaint was made of any soldier, nor any thing known to have been stolen by any of them. Of which afterward when the Borrowmaster of Cleue
made report to Count Maurice, he admired as well the harmelesnes of the
soldier, as the integrity of the General, comparing him in this particular to
some Scaurus, in whose time even the fruits of the trees were protected from
the licentiousness of the soldier. He fortified Mouke, Count Henry encampeth
in the Village of Mouke. He goes to discover Rauesteyn and Battenburg.
a willage upon the Mose, commodious for the transportation of victuals, on
the other side of the River, where he lodged with his Army. From thence (to
deceive the enemy) with fifteen troops of horse and, 300. Musqueters, he went
to discover Batenburg and Rauesteyn.

The Marquess of Belueder, The Marquess of Belueder sends great store of
Cattle to Boldue.
well stored with Cattle, having drouen before him, and sent to Boldue all the
herds which he found bewixt Rauesteyn and Grave, left nothing behind him but
confusion and fear. Count Henry after a view taken of Battenburg and
Rauesteyn, called Count John Nassau and Conrade d' Abermont to him, Count Henry
signisieth to Spinola that he dispaired of taking Rauesteyn.
the later of whom he dispatched to Spinola, to let him knowthat Rauesteyn was
not so easy to be surprised as he had believed; but, letting Rauesteyn along
for the present, if Spinola thought good, he would attempt Grave, which, with
an addition of greater forces, he was not altoge ather out of hope to take in.
He commanded Count John Nassau to encamp, near Grave, on the contrary side of
the Mose, resolving to remain in person at Mouke, till Spinola had returned
answer what he would have done. A bridge of Boats made over the Mose.
He signified besides that he would make a Bridge over the Mose to pass and
join his forces if need should require.

About this time arose so fearful a Tempest one night, of rain, A fearful
rempest.
wind, thunder and lightning, that the elements, and he auen and earth seemed
to come together. The thunder and lightning was with out intermission, the
whirlwinds irresistable, the rain powerd down by floods, not by drops, all
things were in darkness, all things to the fearful expression of the later
day. Prince Henry of Nassau his design crossed by she tempest.
That night Prince Henry Fredrick of Nassau, had prepared with his whole Army
to fall upon our Camp, not yet fortified by Count Henry vanden Bergh, if this
great tempest had not crossed his design. Three days after that, giving order
to the garrison of Grave to make a sally at the same time, he came again with
greater forces to taste Count Henryes Camp: but they of Grave not being ready
in time, and Count Henry having not now left his Camp open and unfortified,
the matter was decided by a slight skirmish. Count John of Nassau had chosen a
place so commodious to encampe, near Grave, as he was commanded, that on his
right hand he had the River, A fit place to encampe chosen by Count John of
Naslau.
on his left hand and front, a little brook drawn out of the River. To this
notwithstanding, in that space which remained betwixt the waters and his Camp,
against the enemies passing over the River, he cast up a trench round about his
Camp. Before him grew a wood fit to lay ambushes. Near the town, stood diverse
little rising hills, which in the day time Count John of Nassau kept with his
horse, in the night time, for fear of ambushes, he was contented to quit:
Hence occasion was often given of some slight horse-skirmishes, when in the
morning our men came to dispossess the enemy of those Hills, which in the
night time they ever possessed.

The Governor of Grave Stakenbrouck, The Couernour of Grave pretends in
vain to searre us.
with a feined confused noise of the Enemies whole Army marching toward our
Camps, caused an alarm to be given us, as if he had been ready to fall on; who
the next morning, desiring license to speak with Count John of Nassau, and
being demanded by him, to what purpose he had broaken his, and his soldiers
sleep with such a confused clattering of Arms in the night time? made answer,
that it was rather to be admired that he, to whom in time the inheritance of
those Towns might, peradventure, fall by right of succession would offer, in
hostile manner, to come of surprise them: Count John Nassun his ansver to the
Governor of Grave.
To which Count John replied, that that inheritance (as a thing fallen now to
the Prince) was not to be thought of for the present, and that the thing he
most aimed at now, was his Government of Grave. To this the Governor made
answer, that it was necessary therefore for him to look well to the defense of
it, for which purpose he would return home: and with that he departed, and
commanded presently to let fly into Count John Nassaus Camp, in punishment, as
it were, of his ambition. It seems strange to Spinola that Count Henry vanden
Bergh made difficulty of the beseiging of Rauesteyn.


By this time d' Aubermont was returned to Gilsen, from Count Henry, whose
answer when Spinola heard, he admired that Count Henry should object so many
difficultyes against an enterprise which he had professed him felfe to be the
author of. But because nevertheless he perceived Count Henry to draw back from
what he had proposed at first about Rauesteyn, and this only upon his
diffidence and doubt of the sucesse of it, and that he was willing, if he were
commanded, to take his journey to Grave, he gave him order to march thither
with all the speed he could. Spinola caused twelve. Redouts to be made about
his Camp at Gilsen.
With these commands he dispatched Don Francisco de Medina, sending d'
Aubermont back with him again to Count Henry. And in the mean time he closed
in Gilsen Camp with twelve Redouts, that the enemy might not break in upon us
at unawares.

They of Breda, They of bredacaused their housholdstuffe to be brought back
again.
having notice of this, beleiuing we had left of the thought of beseiging that
town, gave order, like men out of danger of War, that their
housholdstuffe, which, for fear of a Seige they had conveyed to other
neighbourering Towns, should now by boats be brought back again, thinking no
more of making any farther provision of victuals, assuring them selves they
had already enough of that provision they had made against winter: Wherefore
they permitted a hundren Oxen, and two ships laden with cheese, newly brought
in, to be transported back out of the Town again, They of Bredibeing out of
fear admit many vunecessary persons nito the town to the great vvasting of
their provision.
all men refusing to buy them. The Pesants with their wives and children, who
at their first repairing to the Town, were put back and refused entrance, like
so many Mice and deuourers of Corn, for the better preserving of the Town
provision, at such time as a Seige was suspected, flying now thither again out
of the Cuntry therabouts, which lay exposed to the pillage and wasting of our
soldier, were admitted, to the infinite prejudice of the Town provision,
being men for the most part of more then ordinary appetites.

This manner of Spinolaes encamping, Spinolaes manner of proceeding begets
doubts in Count Maurice.
was cause that count Maurice could neither conceive what we seriously
intended, or what we only gave out and made show of, or whether our purpose
were to attempt Grave or Breda, or both of them together, or any other Town:
which thing begat so many doubts in his mind, that, whilst he durst not draw
part of his garrison out of one Town for the releife of the other, and had not
forces sufficient to secure them both from danger, he could in the mean time
provide well for neither. Yet at last departing from the Hage, his ordinary
place of pleasure, Count Maurice comes to the Camp and puts provision into the
Isle of Bommel.
he came to the Camp to his Brother Henry Fredrick Nassau, near Ninegen,
where he gave order that great store of Artillery and other provision of war
should be transported in to Bommel, and commanded all places near Bolduc to
be strongly fortified. And howbeit our affairs seemed to many to be ill
managed and unnecessarily delayed, what we gained by ourdelayes.
yet this advantage we got by our delays, that the harvest being now well
spent, no time was left the enemy to make provision for any other service, we
being already in readiness for any exploit.

The noise of our preparation, The Duke of Boullion departed from breda with a
desire to be present at the Seige of Grave
by which we made show of beseiging Grave, being bruited abroad, the Duke of
Boutlion, a french man, perceauing that war translated to Grave, which he had
expected would be at Breda, betook himself thither to make proof of some
adventure, and thinking to return afterward, when we beseiged Breda, (as the
report runns) found his passage stopped. Count Henry having discovered the
nature and situation of Grave, Count Henry found all things other wise about
Grave then he had been made believe by the discovery of Spies.
and heard the opinions of the Cuntry people therabouts, found all things to be
otherwise then before (relying upon other lmens discoueryes) he had made
Spinola believe. He foresawne at the Seige would scarce be ended in three
months, and these in the me ane season by, reason of the great Bottoms and
lord places about the Town (in which our Camp of necessity must have been
lodged) we should be forced to remove by the winter floods. The pesants and
others acquainted with the situation of the place, affirmed that in the later
end of Spring that enterprise ought to have been begun, and that by the end of
summer there might have been some hope of taking the Town. That at the end of
harvest all places therabouts were ouerflowed and inaccessible. Don Francisco
de Medina and d' Aubermont sent thither by Spinola, Spinolaes co^maunds brought
to Conut Henry.
with orders to Count Henry to beseige Grave, as he had undertaken, arrived
about the same time. They could him Spinola much marueiled at his dispairing of
the taking of Rauesteyn, of which he had given him so much assurance: That not
withstanding (if he found that could not commodiously be done) his will was
that withal speed he should attempt Grave. Count Henry answers the that
were sent to him from Spinola that for the present he dispaired of taking
Grave.
But Count Henry fallen now in like manner from the hope of taking Grave, made
them answer, that, for the present, he dispaired also of Grave; but, if Spinola
thought it fit, he would in a short time take in Gennep Castle; which won,
Grave at any other time might with less difficulty be taken.

This answer seemed strange, and amazed them much, who demanded what he meant
by that manner of proceeding? that they, The reply often hem that were sent.
for their parts, could not comprehend how Grave in so short a space, in which
neither the reinforcement of that garrison, nor supplies of provision, nor any
circumstance of time had happened preposterous, should upon the sudden become
so much stronger them it was before, that, in his opinion, it was not, now to
be taken: that they besought him, in Spinolaes name, to take heart; and to be
confident of the taking of one Town alone, who had proposed the taking of so
many together. Count Henryes excuse.
To this Count Henry had much to reply: that welneare three weeks were let
pas^^ from the beginning of which he ought to have had all things (...)
readiness, that in the mean time the enemy, at Nimegen had reinforced his Army
with English and french supplies, and lay not far of: that if Spinola him self
would draw nearer, sending him some part of his forces, he would yet make
proof what might be done.

Of this, and much more of this kind, because Don Francisco Medina, and d'
Aubermont, thought it best to carry back the relation in writing, they
demanded Count Henryes letter to Spinola, the substance of which was this:
Count Henry letter to Spinola by which he excuses him self.
That it was evident with what zele he undertook the things he had proposed,
when, for no other end, he surprised the Castle of Mondelbergh, the Town and
Castle of Cleue, and the Town of Gennep, with out which he could not have
releiued his Army. That he confessed himself to have been the author of that
enterprise, but with respect, and reference to Spinola, whom he had ever
perceived to be of a contrary opinion, and to have his whole thoughts fixed
upon Breda. That he did believe what he had proposed, to be fecible, but that
he had been deceived by the discovery of two persons, to whom he gave too much
credit, before he had made a discovery of it him self; That that counsel of
his needed not an Apology; that it was no new thing for spies to deliver things
heard of for things seen; that very great Commanders had been often so
deceived. That he was of opinion still that that Seige ought not, at this time,
to be begun; because he had now discovered many things likely to come cross
which before he did not foresee. That he was ready notwithstanding to do what
soever he should be commanded, shunning no danger provided that Spinola would
give him his commands in writing; and, jointly, excuse him to the King, if (as
already he presaged it would) the enterprise should have unfortunate success.

Upon the receipt of these letters, Spinola, Spinola resolves again upon
the seige of Breda.
who had all his thoughts yet fixed upon the Seige of Breda, put of till now,
being out of all hope of possessing of Grave, called back to his Camp Count
John Nassau and the Marquess of Belueder with the forces committed to their
charg, and some other Companies of diverse Regiments which lay before Breda: he
commanded Count Henry to disist from his attempt intended against Gennep
Castle, Count Henry is commanded to have a care of our Towns in Gelderland.
and carefully to observe the enemy; to have a special care of our neigbouring
Towns of Gelderland; not to remove with his Army, but when the enemy
removed; he rising, to follow him close at the heels. From the Camp he sent
Don Francisco de Medina to the Archduchesse Isabel to propose again to her the
resolution lately left of, of beseiging Breda. The Archduchesse, mindful of
the great difficultyes alleged before against that Seige, doubtful what to
resolve, allowed at last of the enterprise, subject to infinite dangers,
confiding in the valor and good fortune of Spinola.

Count Henry vanden Bergh, obeying Spinolaes commands, saved him self with
such art from the enemy lying by him, that Count Maurice having an Army of
twenty thousand men, durst not, Count John Nassaus care to march out of danger
of the enemy.
with all those forces adventure to charg him, he having but a weak Army of
4000. foot, and 1800. horse. Count John Nassau least in his return, being to
pass near the enemy, his men might chance to be charged and disordred,
divided his Army into three squadrons, and marched, ready to receive any charg.

A month and more was now spent in these doubts and demurrs, and so many
messengers sent up and down in vain. Many men detracted publicly from
Spinolaes deserts, saying the affairs of war were ill managed by him, and
that the consults held in the field, ought to have been held at home. Others
scoffed at him in their Cupps seming to presage that the like infamy to that of
Berghen op Zome would light upon our Army; as if they, forsooth, in their
drink, had had the caere of the overthrow Count Maurice. Some called in
question Count Henry vanden Bergh his integrity. Many men laughed and scoffed
at the Marquess Spinola.
Others said it were good we returned into garrison, having let slip, by our
delays, all oportunityes of doing any thing. Spinola who to this day had not
broaken ground, nor planted Artillery before any Town, or proclaimed by sound
of drumne any laws or ordinances of a Camp beseiging a Town, some one of
which by the discipline of war, is presumed should have preceded, before any
Town could be said to be beseiged, might hitherto say with Caesar, being to
pass over Rubicon: Yet it is lawful without dishonor to go back. But he
chose rather by some daring Enterprise to put all calumnies to a non plus. And
that Count Henry might not suffer in his reputation and integrity, Spinola
published Count Henryes letters to him, so to clear him of what some men
Suspected of him.
he thought good to send his own letters (written of the passages of those
buisnesses, now public to all men, in the presence of two wit nesses) to the
Archduchesse Isabel: not knowing better how to clear Count Henry, then by the
testimony of his own letters. A muster was taken of the Army


A Muster there fore was taken before the soldier was paid (a thing ever almost
observed during the time of the Seige) least by the gain which others looked
to make, Spinola might be deceived by a false relation of the numbers of his
men: and Count Henyne Coronell of a VVallon Regiment was sent from the Camp to
the Infanta, to raise new forces, Count Henyne sent to raise new troops.
to the number 6400. VVallons; order was given that Arms and other provision
of war should be bought; that the old soldiers should be drawn out of
garrison, and sent to the Camp, supplying those garrisons again with new
raised forces. In fine all hope of looking home being utterly cut of, without
farther calling of any new Counsel, Spinola concluded peremptorily to march to
Breda.

Upon the 26 of August about the entrance of night he sent Don Francisco
Medina before with ten troops of horse and 4000. foot (the Spaniards having
the van-garde) to take a new place for our Camp to lodge. He gave him order to
take in Gineken the nearest village to Breda, directing what, Don Francisco de
Medina took up the village of Gineke.
and how he would have things done. Paul Ballion Coronell of an Italian
Regiment, had order at the same time to take the village of Terheyde (a place
opposite to Gineken, Paul Ballio took Terheyde.
on the other side of the Town) accompanied with his own Regiment which had
the van-garde, and the Scottish Regiment of the Earl of Argyl, with fourteen
other Companies of several Regiments, a good command of horse, and some
pieces of Canon.

Thus in one night the two sides of the Town most convenient to give a
beginning or entrance to our Seige, were taken up both at one time: our coming
being sooner experienced by the inhabitants of Breda, and the Cuntry people
therabouts, then they could have news of it: Which when they of Breda began
to discover, toward break of day, our men by that time having taken up their
Quarter, they played upon us the whole day after with seven pieces of
Artillery they sent out soldiers to defend certain howses about the Town:
the Pesants betook them selves to flight, the soldiers to slight skirmishes
on all sides, Some slight skirmishes.
by which little hurt was done on either side, saving that the Canoners of
Breda (a pleasant sight to our soldiers) bestowed their Balls with such aim,
that they killed a Millar of their own, hard by the Town, and forced one of
their troops of horse which had the guard not far of to quit their Quarter, and
retire, for fear of their own shot.

The next morning, Spinola arrived with the rest of the Anny.
by break of day, Spinola departed from Gilsen with the rest of his Army and
about noone arrived at Gineken, where going presently to the top of the Church
steeple, he pointed out places, from above, fit for our Camp to lodge. Don
Francisco de Medina had taken up his Quarter near a small Brook, upon which
a Bark mill stood. This place the Marquess caused to be fortified, casting up
at first a trench, and afterward a greater work, with three little Redout,
The first work begun at Gineken.
and a fort, upon the high way, placing Musqueters behind the hedges and young
sprouts of trees to defend them: besides all which he put a Guard upon a Bridge
over the Merk, not far from Gineken Church. He sent Don John Medecis to
Terheyde, on the other side of the Town, to give order for the taking in of
places convenient, who brought word that it was necessary to take possession af
all Sluices, with which the champion waters ar either kept in, or let out into
the Merk, together with a great hill, called in the Cuntry language
CONEN-BERGH. Paul Baillio intercepted twelve carriage Boats of the enemies in
their journey to Breda.
This first day of the Seige, Paul Ballion, with some light portable Boats,
intercepted and took at unawares twelve carriage Boats, laden with store of
provision and houshouldstuffe, in their journey toward Breda: an infallible
presage of good fortune, when the surprising of so many Boats made way to the
regaining of that Town, which by the practice of a Boat had before ben
trecherously taken from the King. The Martiners, landing themselves upon the
contrary shore, fled faster then they could be recovered by our men. The prise
remained to our Soldiers and watermen. They of Breda burn diverse houses about
to Town.


All that day they of Breda made good certain howses belonging to the village
of Gineken, but at night they ransacked and quit them, setting fire, and
burning to the number of thirty howses. The next day Aertsen the
Towne-Coronell, A wood near the town is felled by the Tovvnesmen.
with eight Companies of Townsmen, felled a wood of Count Maurices (called
BELCKROMBOSCH) growing vnderthe Towne-VValls, least our men, hid in the shades
of those groves, should at unawares make approaches to the works about the
Castle. These woods were sold to such as would give most for them. Many Barnes
about the town burnt by the garrison soldiers.


The days following were entertained with diverse slight skirmishes, they of
Breda making sallyes in several places out of the Town, burning many Barnes
and farmehowses round about them. In the Town by command of the Magistrate, a
general search was made in all Burgers howses, A search, and a relation sent
of it to Conut Maurice, of what provision was found emongst the Tovvuesmen.
and an account taken of the quantity of all men's Corn, a relation of it being
sent to Count Maurice, the better to inform him of the State of the Town. The
mill called (Caesar's Mill) was broaken in pieces, and carried into the Town,
and the hill fortified, upon which the Mill stood. And four lesser Horne-works
were new made, for the strength of the four Bulwarks which defend the
Towne-VValls. Four new Hornevvorks made.
Breda with all these new works and fortifications, is here represented in the
Map following. Howses of Hage set on fire by the^ of Breda.


Diverse howses of the village of Hage were continually set on fire and
destroyed by them of Breda. Meane-while the two villages of Gineken and
Terheyde, being thus slightly begun to be fortified by us, Titeringen and Hage
fortified by our men.
the Marquess, within few days, gave command that Titeringen and Hage (two
Villages opposite to each other, on the other two sides of the Town) should in
like manner be fortified. The command of Titeringen was given to the Baron of
Ballancon, Coronell of a Burgundian Regiment: The Baron of Ballancon had the
command of Titeringen.
The village of Hage to Count Isenbourg Coronell of a Regiment of Germans. Each
of these Coronells had their own Regiments with them, and other Companies of
several nations, with a competent number of Horse. Count Isenburg the Command
of Hage.
The fortifications then made, were for the most part after this sort. Each
Quarter (Gineken excepted) was compassed about with a trench of earth, and a
ditch. The Trench was eight foot high, and eleauen thick, with a foot step
three foot high, drawn about it, on the inside, for the use of the Musqueters.
The greatness of our first trench cast about the town.
A ditch was sunk about this Trench seven foot deep, which at the bottom
had but four foot in breadth, lying above water ten foot broad from shore to
shore The village of Terheyde, because it reached far, was divided into two
Quarters, under the command of Paul Ballion, who lay in person which his own
troops upon the hill (called Cunenberg. A Bridge made over the Merke.
) Not far from that hill, he threw a bridge over the Merke, fastening Boats
underneath it, to bear up the floor; which boats, that they might not be
carried away with the tide, were made fast with anchors on both sides, from the
foredecke and hindecke. Before the entrance of this bridge a half moon of
Turfe was raised upon either shore. Above and below the Bridge, stakes set up
right, at a foot distance from an one other, Pallisadoes in the River.
were rammed into the bottom of the River with water pile sledges, the length
of them being proportioned BREDA FORTIFIED WITH NEW WORKS AFTER THE COMING OF
SPINOLA A. The Church steeple 162. foot high. B. The Castle of the Nassames C.
The Castle-garden. D. The River Merck. E. The River fla. F. Shices of the River
Merck. G. The mouth of the River fla, and the water-mill. H. The three Ports of
the Town, and one of the Castle. I. Two Cats upon the walls. K. Three half
Moons in the Walls L. XV Bulwarcks. M. Ahedg of quick-thorne at the foot of
the wall. N. XIV. Raucline. O. The Counters carp about the ditch. P. The
greater Horne-workes. V. Q. Half Moons before the Home-workes. R. The Forked
for tifications before the Corners of the Horn works S. Four lesser
horne-workes T. Pallisades with sharp nails on the top of them V. The Hand on
the other side of the ditch. X. The hill upon which Casars mill stood.

Spinolaes first en camping before Breda begun shen in two places, afterward
in four. K. The village of Hage. L. The front of Coune Iseu burgs Quarter. M.
The Villags of Titering. N. The front of the Baron of Ballancons Quarter. O.
The works be^^^ be^^^e Quarter and (...) Quarter A. The village of ginaler. B.
A Band will where we made our first fortifications. C. Redeuts upon the
highway. D. A Fort. E. The front of Spinclaes Quarter. F. The village of
Terheyde. G. Sluices. H. The front of Ballions Quarter. I. The Bridge of Boats.

The first onfrenching of Breda with a double french of slight work.
to the depth of the River. The carriage Boats we lately surprised lay at
anchor above the bridge, that the enemy might find no passage by Boats through
the River. Carlo Roma Sargeant Mayor to the Marquess of Compolatara, Carlo
Roma commanded the out most Quarter of Terheyde.
Coronell of an Italian Regiment, fortified the outmost part of the village of
Terheyde, in which place were the greatest Sluices for the conueyance of water.

Then at last from four several Quarters, A trench begun, at the same time,
from fourseuerall Quarters.
an enclosure began, at the same time, to be drawn about the Town. A Trench
of earth was raised from one Quarter to the other, and from one Fort to
another, Redouts and other works, at the distance of four, or six hundred
paces, being here and there intermingled, according as the situation of the
high way required, which served for a remedy against all sudden sallyes. The
manner of enclosing the Town.
Each Coronell, from his own Quarter wrought toward the next. From Gineken
toward Hage the Marquess of Campolatara; toward Titeringen Count John Nassaw
advanced the works. At Gineken was Spinolaes own Quarter, what space each
Quarter took, up.
shut in with a Trench of seven thousand paces, but discontinued, because in
the Rear of this Quartrr, the principal Horse-Quarter lay. In this Quarter,
nearest the Town, lay Don Francisco de Medina Coronell of a Regiment of
Spaniards, with his Regiment, which had the keeping of a strong fort, fortified
with a great ditch and a pallisado. Behind him, with his Regiment, lay Don Iuan
Claros de Guzman, who commanded an other fort, fortified with a ditch and
draw-bridg. That side of this Quarter toward the heath of Caem, the Coronell
Don Iuan Nino de Tauora, since viceroy of the Phillippines, and Emanuel Franco
Sargeant Mayor of the Regiment of Diego Luis de Oliueyra, made good with their
Regiments. The Trench of Paul Ballions Quarter, took up in compass eight
thousand five hundred paces. The Baron of Ballancons Quarter was enclosed
partly with a trench of three thousand two hundred paces, partly with the black
Causey (as they termed it) two thousand four hundred paces long. The circuit of
our first Trenches.
Count Isenburgs Quarter was enclosed with a continued Trench of nine thousand
five hundred paces. So that the uttermost circuit of this first enclosure
contained thirty thousand six hundred paces. The in ward Trench raised against
the Town was distant from this outward, two hundred paces, in which space was
our ordinary passage from Quarter to Quarter, and it took up in compass,
welne are five hours traveling. Neither the one Trench, nor the other, was
above five foot high, and seven foot thick, at the bottom. The height and
thicknes of each Trench.
The parapet raised upon them, rising by little and little, with a scarpe,
from the foot step, which ran round about these Trenches on the inside, was
of the thicknes of three foot at the top. On the outside of each Trench, a
ditch was sunk six foot deep, two foot broad at the bottom, but, upon the
superficies of the water, seven foot broad, both sides of the ditch being made
scarping, least the sand, if they had been made straight upward, should fall in,
and fill the ditch. The works in each Trench.
Forts, and Redouts, to the number of threscore and ten, were raised either in
the draught it self, or else without the Trench, in all which, parteyes of
soldiers were lodged. And thus with four Quarters opposite to each other (in
imitation of Scipio at Numantium) as it were with four Arms stretched out at
length, Spinola began by little and little to enclose the town, so that these
lesser fortifications, being compassed with greater, might serve in the nature
of Castles and forts: The reason of this manner of proceeding.
a course principally resolved on, to the intent that with the labor of few
men so great a work might quickly be finished, and that our forces, against
the Town sallyes might be every where equal; whereas if they had been much
separated and a sunder, they would have been more subject and exposed to the
enemy, and the work no whit the sooner have been ended: which manner of
entrenching, though it gave liberty to the Pesantes therabouts to transport The
first trench of earth cast about the town. Redouts of Turfe. Forts of Turfe.
The height and thicknes alike of the first forts and Redouts.

their Corn and Cattle into the Town, by which afterward the beseiged
releiued their hunger the longer, yet to us it was necessary, notwithstanding
that inconvenience. And questionless the knowledge and experience of the
Coronell Don John Medices, Marquess of St. Angelo, a man all other ways as
able, as expert in matters of war, was infinite useful to Spinola in the
ordering of these works: For he, by his advise and long experience knew how to
cross and prevent the enemies designs, and having the charge of viewing, and
designing places necessary to be possessed before the enemies arrival, gave
order, with infinite diligence, for the raising of all Trenches, Batteryes and
other fortifications what soever. The beseiged observing this, The garriso^
Soldiers of Breda burn many howses more about the Town.
set the rest of the howses on fire about the Town, least they might stand us
in steed for the laying of ambushes, or be a hindrance to them in bestowing
their shot. It was observed that in all four hundred and forty howses were set
on fire. A sally made by the enemy Count Isenburg gives the enemy a repulse.
They made a sally of a thousand Musqueters, out of Hage Port, falling upon
our men whilst they were at work, but after three hours continual skirmish,
they were beaten back into the town again by Count Isenburg, the Captain of
Count Maurice his own Company being sorely wounded, who within three days
died of that hurt, besides many other of them lost, none of ours being slain.
Which sallyes if they had continued in several places at once, it would have
proved infinite troublesome to us at the beginning, at what time we were but
few in number, The benefit we reaped by the ennemies forbearance of these kind
of Sallyes.
and extremely wearied out with the toil of the work, to be forced at the
same time to fortify and fight: But by means of this rest they gave us, the
walls of both enclosures were finished by little and little, Redouts built in
the walls, Forts raised by the walls, the form of which is represented in the
page before.

The Redouts of earth of the figure quadrant, The description of our Redouts.
no angle or corner appearing outward, on the in side, for the most part, were
fifty foot wide, on the out side fourscore, fortified with a pallisado of
sharp sparres (placed in the Curtain at the outer edge of the parapet) a
Countescarpe, The description of our Forts.
a ditch, and many of them, an other pallisado without the ditch. The Forts
were raised of green Turfe with four irregular Bulwarks 35 foot thick, the
Curtaynes of which were 100. foot long on the out side, fourscore on the
inside. As Well the Forts as Redouts were thirteen foot high from the ground on
the outside, and equally one with an other fifteen foot thick, the diches of
them both being equally twelve foot broad, and eight foot deep, with the sides
of the ditch cut scarping, as the outward face or form of both works was made
in like manner rising with a scarpe, fortified with sharp sparres, above the
middle of the wall, to entertayne and entangle such as should attempt an
ascent. On the inside, these works were raised eight foot high perpendicularly,
at which height a Walk was made five foot broad, fortified round with a
Parapet as many foot high, to cover our Musqueters, and bear of the enemies
shot. The entrance to them was upon a planke or stock of a Tree thrown over
the ditch, before which was a half moon, bending cubit-wise with one corner
outward, and some of these half Moons had a pallisado without them. This was
the ordinary form of most of our Forts and Redouts raised at the beginning.

But besides these many Fortifications already mentioned, The description of
the Causey raised in the Meddow-ground.
a Causey, of the length of two thousand five hundred foot, was cast up six
foot high from the village of Hage to the Bridge by which the village of
Terheyde is joined to Hage, which causey was 25. broad at the bottom, on the
top twenty. But the earth of this causey was at the first so soft and yiedling,
that it could not bear the weight of wagons and horses, till afterward, that
it was strewed with boords, and then it was able to bear great-peices of
Artillery. This work, Ingeners and others acquainted with the places
therabouts, counseled, as a thing necessary, to be raised in that place, The
reason why this Causey was raised in this place.
because the ground lay low, and the Meddowes of their own nature were watery,
to which the champion waters ouerflowing, and the River Merke swelling over its
banks, did rise of that height in the winter season, that it was nauigable in
that place, so that provision might that way be conveyed, by boats, into the
Town, and our Quarters ly separated one from the other.

Whilst these things were doing, Spinola ceased not continually to ride about
the Camp, encouraging the Coronells and Captains, The diligece used in raising
out works.
and calling upon such as had care of the works: and as to a willing mind
nothing seems over hastened, he gave order himself that fresh men should supply
the places of such as were tired, in so much that the night it self was not
exempted from working. By which industry it came to pass, that our two
Trenches of so larg an extent, together with so many Forts and Redouts, almost
in seauenteene days were finished, by a handful of men. But the infinite
concurse of principal men of note, flocking thither from all parts to better
their knowlegd in the arts of War, and the examples of many Princes, who
drawn thither by the fame and name of this Seige, took pay emongst the
ordinary and meaner sort af Soldiers, and with their own hands cut Turfe, and
carried Fagots, was a great furtherance to the dispatch of this work. Besides
this there arose from these works a benefit of no small importance for the
releife of the Soldiers wants by which thing alone our whole Army was
preserved from disbanding: for being the soldiers wages were but seldom, and
then but half paid, The soldiers wants releiued by vvorking for money.
and the rates of all provision grew to he dear, ready money was paid to such
as were willing to bestow their labors in working, and as new works were daily
let to hire till the end of the Seige, so the soldiers pains ever brought
them in ready money. But diverse of them chose rather to beg, The vanity of some
soldiers,
then to releive their wants by the gain of their labor, a thing which to
most men appeared extreme vanity, to few or none, wisdom, that the needy man,
for point of honor, should choose to beg and want victuals, rather then to
live well by some honest employment of his pains. How beit two things did much
ease the sufferings of our soldiers: first the situation of our Camp, The
situation of our Camp before Breda, better there that of Gilsen.
far better then that of Gilsen (for here we had a River and many small brooks
for watring; a rich soil, and Barnes (the Corn being already reaped)
plentifully stored:) to which, secondly, this concurred, a continual good
temper of the air almost all the time our soldiers were buisied in felling of
woods, making fagots, carrying boughs, cutting Turfe, or raising trenches or
other works. By which it came to pass that our soldiers health was almost
never touched with any desease, whilst the enemy was much molested with the
pestilent feauers and infections of Autumn: Our Army healthy whilst the
enemies was sorely infected.
for Spinolaes Army consisted of old soldiers, accustomed to hardness, such as
were not dishartned with cold, rain, or any hard weather, whereas the enemy for
the most part had new raised men, all, or the most of them unaccustomed to
hardness.

Mean while the enemy left nothing unthought of, Two excellent decrees of the
enemy.
that forecast and counsel could add to his defense: And emongst other things
he decreed two things, especially remarqueable. The first was that Aertsen the
Towne-Coronell should have equal authority, Aertsen admitted to the Counsel of
war.
with the rest of the Coronells, to deliver his opinion in a Counsel of war,
that so the soldiers and Burgers forces might be more firmly united, The
Tovvnesmen are bound by oath to confess what money they have lying by them.
whose disagreement would drawon their ruin, whilst their concord and union
would make them invincible. The Second was that every man, upon his oath,
should deliver to the Magistrates what store of money he had lying by him, and
consequently lend it to the Receauers deputed by the states, toward defraying
the charges of their works, and payment of their soldiers, in regard that
their Exchequer was but slenderly furnished. And least any man should conceal,
The Officiers and men of quality take this oath first.
or refuse to do this, the Governor of the Town, the Coronells, the Drossard,
the Escheuins, with the Captains of the soldiers and Burgers, took this oath
first: by which examples the common people being moved, were the less
backward to do the like. The summa which was gathered by this means
By this means there was brought into their Treasury a hundred and fifty
thousand Crowns, out of which sum the soldier was weekly paid, and the
expenses of the works were duly defrayed. Moreover a mark was put upon
certain coin worn out of date and not current, by which that coin was
known and commanded to run at the old rate, and other coin was enhaunced,
and made run above the value, by which course the sum gathered increased
and grew greater. Besides, Provision begun to be sold out of the public store
house.
their Butter and flesh being already spent, license was given to sell cheese
and dried Haberdine out of the public storehouse: but least the soldier
should chance to want, the Townsmen forbore to buy it.

The Marquess Spinola perceauing now his forces to be too weak to raise, and
make good, in so great a circuit, so many several works, all at one time; and
at the same time, on the one side to forage, on the other to guard our
provision brought from a far; but principally because it was noised that the
bastard Mansfeild would once again attempt to break into the Cuntry, Spinola
caused new forces to be raised.
and put in practice his wonted freebutting, but lately left of, so to raise
the Spanish Kings Army from this Seige, he caused 35. free Companies of Germans
to be raised, each of them consisting of 300. men, independent of any Regiment.
He dispatched besides Godfrede de Bergh then Baron, Godfrede Baron of Grimbergh
sent to the Duke of Bauere and Count John Tilly to demand supplies.
since Count of Grimbergh, from the Camp (where he commanded a Troop of
horse) to the Archduchesse Isabel, from thence to take his journey to his
Excellency Count John Tilly, and lastly to the Duke of Bauere, to demand one
of their Regiments, freed from their oath, to enter, and be sworn to the King
of Spaines service, who negotiated so that two Regiments were suddenly sent,
and arrived in good time. Moreover the Marquess advanced ten Captains of foot
to be Captains of Horse; conditionally that, at their own charge, they should
raise and arm so many Troops, for which purpose he dispatched them into the
Cuntry, with Comissaryes to receive into pay, and muster their troops. Count
Maurice recouereth Gennep Mondel -- bergh and Cleue.
Whilst these things were doing, Count Maurice recovered the Town of Gennep,
left first by our garrison, and took by composition Mondelberghe and Cleue,
with which, and with dismantling part of the walls of Cleue, his Army being
buisied, he gave liberty to us, in the mean time, to fortify and finish our
Camp. But the rumor being spread at last of his marching toward Breda, our
men opening their Sluices, drowned all the feilds far and near about the
Village of Terheyde, on that side where it was conceived he might best break
in. Spinola dispatched Losano to Count Henry vanden Bergh, Count Henry vanden
Bergh follows Count Maurice.
commanding him with his Army to follow Count Maurice, which Count Henry
performed with the small forces he had, notwithstanding he was to pass over
those dangerous passages of Campinia. By the report of these things Count
Brion a french man being encouraged, Count Brio^ in hope of seeing a Bartaile
resolves to stay in Breda.
after he had obtained license of Spinola to pass through our Camp from
Breda, where at that time he trayled a pike, out of a new hope he conceived of
seeing a Battle at Breda, he returned Spinola thanks for his license,
resolving not to make use of it at that time. Prey taken by the enemy, and
recovered again from them.
About this time certain horse troops of Berghen op Zome, who had taken some
prey, with horses and Carters from our Conuoy, were put to flight by greater
Troops of ours sent after them, and their booty was taken from them, and
recovered again. Provision sent for to Seuenberg.
From our Camp diverse soldiers were sent with great store of wagons to
Seuenbergh to take up provision, which Town because it was neuterall, that it
might not suffer damage by the licentiousness of our soldier, and that no
wrong might be done to the inhabitans of it, Spinola sent along with these
soldiers Theodore Schott, The Auditor General of the Army sent a long with
our soldiers to see good order kept.
one whose office was to decide all public and private differences of the
Camp, and to determine, as supreme Judge, of any offense committed, or of any
other controversy that should chance to arise about the division of spoils,
desiring the Magistrates of that Town to set a price upon their merchandise,
and undertaking that he would be their play master for them: but because there
was much more Corn then our wagons could carry away, and that therefore Spinola
had requested the Townsmen to transport it for him to the Camp, The States
forbid the Magistrates of Seuenberg totra^sport Corn to Spinolaes Camp, and
Spinola refuteth the money they offer him in lieu af that transportation. A
Minister with his wife and family saved from the fury of the soldiers by the
interuentio^ of two Priests of the Society of Jesus.
which the Magistrates fearing to do, had demanded the consent of the States,
who had forbidden them to do it, the Townes-men offered Spinola a sum of
money to buy Corn. But Spinola would not accept it, returning word that he
stood in need of Corn to be brought to his Camp, and not of their money or
Corn bought in any other place. With these troops went a long two Priests of
the Society of Jesus, of them who had assisted in the Camp all the time of the
Seige, for the Spiritual good and advancement of the soldiers, the intent of
whose going was to restrain, as much as lay in them, the pilfering of
soldiers boys, and to be a means that no wrong should be done to any man.
These men served to good purpose for the Burgers of Seuenbergh, and emongst
other charitable offices saved a Minister of the word, with his wife and family
(whom they found beseeching in vain that no hurt might be done them) from the
headlong fury of some of our soldiers. Which when they perceived, who had
ever believed and reported hardly of those kind of Priests, they were strooken
with admiration, and demanded: How it came to pass that that black Nation was
now become so white.

About that time VVladislaus Sigismund Prince of Poland and Swethland arrived
at Bruxelles to visit the Archduchesse Isabel, The Prince of Poland and
Swethland arrived at Bruxelles, and from thece came to sge our Camp before
Breda.
by whom he was magnificently and Royally entertained This Prince was no less
a wel-wisher of military discipline, then expert in it him self, and in
particular was famous for many victoryes won. He was desirous to see our
Seige, and was conducted to the Camp, toward the end of September, by the
Count of Salacar, General of the horse, who had been sent with many troops to
Anwerp to meet him.

Spinola, Spinola goes to meet the Prince of Poland.
accompanied with all the Nobility, riding two hours journey out of the Camp,
having sent before him diverse sumpture horses, received this Prince with much
joy, and expression of affection. He was magnificently entertained.
In the Camp a lodging was prepared for him, in which, though no curiosity was
wanting befitting the State and Majesty of so great a Prince, yet there was a
greater show of the furniture of a Camp, then of the delicacyes and
politenesse of a City. At night when the Prince was conducted to his lodging,
our drums and Trumpets sounded, An Eclipse of the Moon.
and all our great Artillery gave him three volleyes, and upon the sudden,
the Moon, shining bright, suffered an eclipse; a kind presage (if it were
lawful to guess at things to come) that that Prince, singularly expert in
affairs of war, should one day come to eclipse those The Turks Arms.
Moons of the Ottomans. Till that day Breda was never battered by our
Artillery, Our first shooting into the Town.
neither then did it suffer much by our shot, an express command being given
to our firemen, to bestow their shot only for the expression of joy, and not
with intention to make any slaughter, so that most of our Balls, with out hurt,
passed over the Town. The Prince of Poland rides about our Camp.
And in deed that shooting of ours proved more beneficial then domageable to
the beseiged, because from that time (as the custom is) they were freed and
exempted from all manner taxes. Next morning the Prince, attended with a strong
guard, being conducted by Spinola round about our works, was welcomed by the
Canon Balls of the beseiged, who bestowed them thickest, in such places as they
discovered most of his troops. The day following he rode about with Spinola
alone to take a view of the rest of the Camp, all men, to avoid mischeife,
being commanded to stay behind.

About the same time eight young french men, Eight french Gentlemen taken by our
men.
Noblemen in their Cuntry, whilst they had a design to pass, by stealth, from
Breda, through our Camp, to Count Maurices, were taken in the marashes, by
some of our men: they were ciuilly treated, not like enemies, but guests.
Spinola entertayneth them courteously.
Spinola entertained the better sort of them (emongst whom was the Marquess of
Griniol, Vicount Serre with his Brother, and the Baron of Blunuil, all hopeful
young Gentlemen) at his own table. And when he had signified to them that it
was not his custom to suffer any man to pass through his Camp to the enemies
(the thing which they demanded) he put it to their choice either to take their
iourneyes directly toward France, Spinola gave them their choice to go direct
ly toward France or to return again to the Town
or else to return to the Town, from whence they came. They made choice of the
later least they might appear more foreward to shun, then to endure the
hardness of the Seige, and accordingly were conveyed back in Spinolaes own
Coch, one of our Trumpetters conducting them to the Town.

VVladislaus Prince of Poland having taken a full view of our works, The Prince
of Poland departs from the Camp
not yet finished, is reported to have said, that the dice were cast betwixt
the two great Generals, Spinola and Count Maurice, His opinion of the
presentaffayera
and that both their reputations lay at the stake. Spinola, accompanying him
out of the Camp, and having performed all complements and ceremonies
requisite, gave charge to the Count of Salacar to conduct him again to Anwerp.

The day before this, the Baron of Beauoix, The Baron of Beauoix sent to take
and fortify a place which would have proved aduan^agions to the enemy.
Coronell of a Burgundian Regiment was sent with eleauen hundred foot and five
hundred horse, to take and fortify a place near Oosterhout, which, to our
infinite disadvantage the enemy might have possessed: from whence the next day,
hearing, the enemies drums, and sending scouts to discover, he gave Spinola
notice of the enemies marching toward us. He aduertiseth Spinola of the
enemies marching toward us.
Word had been brought by the discovery of spies that Count Maurice was landed
with his Army at Gertrudenbergh, but of this his new design nothing could be
learned in a long time by enquiry. We could not guess at the enemies designs.
Many men imagined that he would possess himself of Oudenbosch and Rosendale;
and these men were of opinion that those places were first to be laid hold of
by us, Some men's opinions of Count Maurice his intentions.
least we should come to have an enemy at our backs; fearing otherwise that our
provision could not commodiously come to us, or that we should be hindered from
forraging at our liberty. But Spinola was of a contrary opinion, knowing well
that those places could neither be convenient for the enemies ambushes, nor any
way prejudicial to the bringing of our provision, Spinolaes iudicions answer.
especially, if to avoid the enemies Camp, our provision were conveyed some
what a longer journey about, that to make so great a retreat would prove
dangerous to them, to us, by this avoiding them, the journey not unsafe. Not
long after, Count Maurice encampeth at Mede.
news was brought that Count Maurice, with his Army was encamped at Mede (a
willage two hours journey distant from Breda.) It seems he laid hold of
that opportunity for his coming, whilst al most all our horse were absent to
attend the Prince of Poland, which made all men the more marvel that, at that
time, Count Maurice attempted nothing upon us, our Army being so weak.
Spinola marches toward Count Maurice, and confronteth him which his Army.
Spinola nothing discouraged with the small numbers of his soldiers, leaving
all the works about the Town well manned, committed the charge of Gineken
Quarter to Don Francisco de Medina, and having sent his furriers to make choice
of a place fit to lodge his new Camp, marched him self with seven thousand
foot and thirty Troops of horse, to a place not far from Oosterhout, where he
encamped, within three miles of the enemy. The success of the whole enterprise
depended in the have Spinola made to take an aduantagions place before the
enemy.
And questionless in this speed of his in confronting the enemy, and
anticipating that place, so necessary for him, the success of the enterprise
did principally consist: for if either Spinola had let slip but one day by
delays or Count Maurice by hastening had prevented him but so much, by so small
an advantage Breda might have been saved: for betwixt Titeringen and Terheyde
lay vast void places, A. Breda. B. Count Mauricie his Camp in the Village of
Mede. C. Spinolaes new Camp. D. The Black Causey. E. The new Forts of Spinola.
F. Artificial Standing-waters. G. Ballions and Carlo Romaes Quarters. H. The
Baron of Ballancons Quarter.

of dry land and standing waters, over which land, by wagons provision might
easily have been conveyed to those waters, and from thence with as much ease, by
flat bottomed boats, into the Town, supposing that Count Maurice had possessed
himself of that place; And this he might have done with little or no
difficulty, in regard, that till then there were no works betwixt his Camp and
the Town, excepting four small Redouts upon the black Causey. Spinola
stops all Count Maurice his passages.
But Spinola had now possessed him self of that place before him, and stopped all
passages betwixt Count Maurice his Camp and that Causey, by which he cut of
from him all possibility of passage: Of so great importance is expedition, in
stratagems of war, and in this occasion particularly was a main cause of our
victory.

In this place was a large heath, where the Army might commodiously have been
put in battle array, Spinola chose a place fit for a Bataille.
if occasion had been offered. This heath Spinola took possession of,
distributing horse Centinells upon diverse little hills, and lodging the rest
of his horse, at a good distance, before his Camp. In the rear of these
horse, arose a natural trench betwixt the Town and the heath, upon which he
planted seven pieces of Artyllery, and lodged his foot behind it, felling the
young sprouts about the little brooks, in the meddow grounds, and filling up all
ditches, with all expedition. The guard of the great Fort, on the right hand,
which the Baron of Beauoix had now almost finished, was committed to the
Burgundians. The figure of this fort was quadrant, with four half Bulwarks,
The description of the great fort raised by the Baron of Beauoix.
so sollid that Artillery might be planted upon them. The fort was Canon
proof. The Curtaynes were a hundred and twenty foot long, eight and twenty
foot thick, fifteen foot high, which were stuck round with sharp long
sparres, to make the abbord, to the fort, more difficult. On the inside was a
walk upon the wall, with a Parapet five foot high, and ten foot thick, about
which a foot step was raised. On the out side, a ditch was sunk ten foot
deep, two and twenty foot broad upon the superficies of the water, and twelve
foot at the bottom; so that from the bottom of the ditch to the top of the
rampire, the fort was measured to be five and twenty foot high.

Our Army being thus ordered, Spinola expeeted Count Maurice two days in
bataille array.
Spinola expected the coming of Count Maurice, standing two days together in
battaile-array, it being put to his choice whether he would fight or no. There
wanted not a certain person, of more then ordinary quality, who hearing
Spinola peradventure argue it, by way of discourse, whether it were better or
no to draw the rest of his forces against Count Maurice, leaving his works
about the Town destitute; delivered his opinion, before he was demanded, that
Count Maurice was not in that manner to expected till he came, but that all our
forces, being drawn from about the town, ought to go seek him, and force him
to fight: for which opinion he cited the Duke of Parma to be his author, a
Prince famous heretofore for so many great victoryes, whom, by like, this party
had heard say, in the like occasion, when he, though without success, beseiged
Breda before, that if the enemy had come to raise him, he would have given him
Battle. Spinolaes discreet reply.
But Spinola speaking honorably, and with respect of the Prince of Parma, made
answer, that he could no way approve this man's inconsiderate counsel. That to
prefer the uncertain adventure of a Battle, before a certain Seige, were to
imitate the dog in the fable of AEsop, who in pursuing the shadow, lost a
real piece of flesh, and by that means was quit both of shadow and flesh.
That he would not so slightly expose his and his soldiers fortunes to danger;
and that it was the enemies part, if he thought fit, to offer him battle, his
part only to stand upon his guard.

Within few days after, Spinola disliketh this opinion also.
one of the Lieutenants of our Artillery proposed to Spinola, whether he
thought it amiss, to make an attempt upon Count Maurices Camp, playing upon
it with six or seven pieces of Artillery, in regard it was yet but slenderly
fortified? His wise answer.
to which Spiola replied, that DIVERSE FIGVRES OF THE GREATER SORT OF FORTS.
it stood not with his dignity to insult inconsiderately over his enemy, when
he was not assured that he should be able to retire honorably: that he would
not accustom himself to oftentation, but military circumspection: that, in a
General, forecast was no less requisite then forces.

Count Maurice being encamped in the Village of Mede, Count Maurice desisted
from ate^pting to pass having lost his place of advantage by the diligence of
Spinola.
kept himself with in his trenches, giving us no advantage over him, nor
suffering any of his men to go far from his Camp. Which Spinola perceauing
gave order that four forts more, proportionable to that first of the Baron of
Beaunoixes; should be raised anew, on the left hand, toward the Village of
Terheyde, by the Baron of Beauoix, Count John Nassau, Spinola caused five other
forts like the former to be made, to cut of all passage.
and Otto Henry Count Fugger, so to cut of all hope of passage from Count
Maurice: which space, being large, was taken in with trenches betwixt fort and
fort, and afterward annexed to the first enclosure made in have. The figure of
these forts differed according to the different situation of the places they
stood in, but the height and thicknes of them all was alike.

Count Maurice never offered to sally upon our men buisied with these works:
Count Maurice suffers v^ to work with out any impeachment.
About that time diverse of his new English forces, which he had caused to come
thither for a reinforcement, ran away from their Colors. Afrench Trumpet
being sent to Count John Nassau from the enemies Camp, Some french Ge^tlemen
disired to make proof of their valor
upon pretense of demanding some loss, brought him a challendg, in the name
of certain french Gentlemen there, daring him to draw somewhat near their
Camp, to try the fortune of a Combat with some of them. Count John Nassau
accepted their challendg.
The Count accepted the challendg, promising the next day to be there, at a
certain hour, himself and three companions, with no other Arms then each of
them their swords and their case of pistolls. Count John^ three Companions.
The next day, at his hour, he rode toward the enemies Camp, with one
Captain Steenhuys, and the two Lieutenants of the two Horse Captains,
Grobbendonck the younger and Bothergh-Vppon the sight of whom, four horsemen of
the enemies advanced them selves, fifteen others following them a loof of, and
three hundred more loking on, from the outmost trench of their Camp, emongst
whom it is reported, Prince Maurice himself was one, Young Briaute was the
author of this duel.
Emongst these four combatants, young Briaute was one, the son of him whom
Grobbendonck the elder had vanquished, and slain in the like combat before,
though with the loss of his own Lieutenant, Lackerbet. This man, it seems,
had been bred only to reueng the death of his Father, as if otherwise his own
ruin would have fallen upon him too late: For he had, some days before, sent
a Trumpet to Spinola, requesting he might be permitted to combat the son of
his Fathers Murderer (so he termed young Grobbendonck.) But Spinola had refused
him (putting a guard upon young Grobbendonck, least he should escape.) Briaute
therefore cast about for this other occasion, being a young man of a fiery and
daring Spirit. In the combat, Count John, having singled out one, for his
adversary, of the four enemy combatants, made toward him and discharged his
pistol, missing him so narrowly, that with the flame of his pistol he
scorched his soulder, having before received his enemies bullet, without hurt,
in the forepart of his own saddle. Young Briaute with a daring bold courage and
voice: Charge me, Charge me, quoth he, whosoever thou art that dare: behold,
I am Briaute: this day, this day shall reueng the murder of my Father: Briaute
slain.
with which words, setting Spurs to his horse, and in vain letting fly upon
young Grobbendoncks Lieutenant, was himself shot through with his adversaries
bullet, and catching hold of his saddle-pummell, with a dying hand, he quickly
fell down dead to the ground. Thus it was the fortune of the two
Grobbendoncks, being provoked to it, to prove the ruin of the two Briautes,
Father and son. Captain Steenhuys and one of the enemy being wounded, the
sixteen which stood without the enemies Camp, came in to part them.
VVhervppon our men retyring them selves, whilst, as they rode, they pressed
near one an other, one of them, in the press, getting the start of Count
John, with the hilt of his sword caught hold, and snatched the Counts bridle
out of his hand, his sword being so fast entangled in the bridle, that it was
drawn out of his scabbard: An un expected danger like to fall upon Count
John Nassau prevented by a sudden stand which his horse made.
which strange accident exposed them both to a danger not expected. But Count.
John Nassaues horse, otherwise furious and unquiet, being astonished, upon the
sudden made a little pause, giving time to his Master to recover his Bridle.
The other, leaving his sword behind him, retired himself. A Trumpetter of ours,
A Trumpet of ours vvounded Briaute in the head yet breathing.
coming thither to look on, being hindered, by the enemies coming in, from
stripping of Briaute, wounded him in the head, whilst yet he had life in him,
and leaping upon his horse followed the rest of our men. Few days after this,
A skirmish betwixt Bouteuille and the Baron of Beauoix.
some horse of ours lying in view of the enemies Camp, Boutteuille a french
man, with five other horsemen besides in his Company, made toward our men to
chase them away. The Baron of Beauoix riding that way, by chance, with a good
guard, came in, in the mean time, and relieved our men, forcing the enemy to
retire to a grove near at hand: from whence Boutteuille, aduauncing forward
alone, boasted what he was, and challendged any one of them to a single combat,
confiding in his near retreat, and a Corselet, he had on, under his
riding-Coate. His challendg was accepted, and he requested, to that purpose, to
ride farther from the grove: But because he would not remove farther then the
place where he was, he was wounded under the reins with a Musket ball of
ours, with the pain of which blow he let fall his pistol, Bouteuille vvounded.
and retired him self.

Mean while, Count Maurice, out of hope of releiuing Breda resolved to attempt
the Castleof Anvverp.
whilst all things seemed to sleep in the enemies Camp, and that no shot, nor
sallyes were made, or any other thing attempted to hinder the progress of our
works, Count Maurice, dissembling, by this means his, designs, knowing that
stratagems require time, and that it is unsafe to attempt great enterprises
with out deliberation, had contrived, in the night time, to fall upon Anwerp
Castle at unawares: which he did in this sort. It is to be presumed he had
notice, A small garrison of ours in the Castle of Antwerp.
that, excepting such, as, either for age or sickness were exempted from their
duties, there was then but a small garrison left in that Castle. The enterprise
appeared to him well worth his labor, and the gain greater then the loss of
Breda. At Berghen op Zome, Rosendale, and his Camp, he kept all men within
their quarters, with such care and vigilance, placing gardes for that purpose,
that not the least notice of so great an enterprise, was given to our Camp, or
to the Town of Antwerp. The charge of this expedition given to Brouchem.
He commanded Brouchem, Drossard of Berghen op Zome, and Captain of a troop
of horse, to repair to him, to Mede, committing the charg of the expedition to
him: who (as the report runs) took with him 1000. foot and 200. horse out of
the places mentioned, lading all his wagons with store of strange engines. The
soldiers of Rosendale and the Camp were made believe they should march to
Berghen op Zome; they of Berghen op Zome were told they should march toward
the Camp. When they had marched thus not far from their Quarters, command
was given that all their blew and Orange-tawney scarfs (such as the States
soldiers are accustomed to wear) should be put of, and red scarfs (such as
the Kings men wear) put on in their places, least, giving out afterward upon
the way that they were the Kings men, they might be known to be the enemy, by
the color of their scarfs, and by that means come to be discovered by the
Pesants. If by the way any man chanced to demand what they were, they were
taught to say, they marched to Anwerp for provision of victuals, whether, it
was reported, at the same time, our men were to go for provision. A Notable
stratagem of the enemy.
The Canuas cover of their wagons (marked after our manner, with the Burgundian
Cross) furthered much their deceit. And in this manner they arrived near the
Castle, protected the better by the extreme darkness of that night, having
before deluded, as appears, all the Pesants therabouts. They had made them
selves a passage, The attempt of the enemy and the success.
by pulling down three or four stakes of the pallisado, and diverse of them
were already got upon the bridge. The vvind being against the enemy, favored
their exploit.
The wind being against the enemy, was cause that they of the Castle could not
hear the noise, of the rolling of wagons, neyeing of horses, or the like: by
which means they adventured so much the more bouldly, to let down their Boats
into the ditch, fasten their scaling ladders, make ready their pincers,
hammers, leauers, and other artificial engines, to break a sunder Barracados,
One of the Centinells of the Castle discovers the enemy.
and heave Ports out of their hinges. Whilst these things were doing close
under the walls, Andreas Cea, an old soldier, whose fortune it was to stand
centinell at that time, began to listen attentively, suspecting some treachery
by the noise he heard, and gave notice of it, by discharging his Piece. The
Governor repaireth to the vvalls with his soldiers.
John Brauo Governor of the Castle, and they of the Guard, betook themselves
to the walls, from their Courts of Guard, and made ready for their defense. The
enemy was so encumbred with the rising of the wind and tempest (which at first
was not so great, The vvind and tempest growing greater hinders the enemy.
so that they approached with more ease) that now they could neither settle
their Boats, nor fasten their scaling ladders, nor in fine, exploit any thing.
Wherefore leaving behind them many of their engines, Boats and Ladders, The
enemy retireth with out doing any thing.
(when they found they were discovered) they retired with speed, put back, out
of doubt, by the interuention of Heaven, so that by this means, this great
exploit came to nothing, which other wise would have proved infinite cross to
our affayers. Andreas Cea rewarded for his good service.
Andreas Cea for his care in preserving the Castle, was rewarded (more
bountifully then heretofore the preseruers of the Capitol) by the Archduchesse
with a pension of fifteen Crowns monthly, by the Magistrates of Anwerp with a
rich suit of clothes, and scarf.

Count Maurice, Count Maurice his grief for the ill success of that
enterprise.
being deceived in his expectation of that, which he had framed to him self as
a thing infallible, lay still, for a time, with his Camp, pensive and
resolving nothing, being stricken with an extreme apprehension of sorrow. Many
of his soldiers Cabins were destroyed with this tempest, The enemies horse in
danger of being lost.
and his horse of Friseland, which by his command was arrived at
Gertrudenbergh, ran a great hazard of being utterly lost, for the Causeyes
and bridge over which they were to pass, being broaken by that tempest, they
were so separated from the rest of their Army, that it was thought they might
wholly have been broaken, and cut in pieces. Spinola had notice of it, and whilst
he was in doubt whether he should fall on with greater forces or no, The
wisdom of Spinola.
he chose rather to forbear to do hurt at all times, to then do the enemy this
affront with danger of his own loss. For (with Augustus) he compared them,
who with imminent dangers look after small gain, to such as fish with a
goulden hook, the loss of which cannot be repaired by any thing they take. In
conclusion Count Maurice having done nothing before Breda, Count Maurice sets
fire on his Cabins and retyreth from Mede.
two and twenty days after his encamping at Made, gave order for the fyring of
his Cabbins, and packing of bag and baggage, and retired from thence pensive,
and never after to return back again. It is reported he was scarce ever after
seen of his Army, so far he was from desiring any ease of his sorrow. Spinola
discovering the continual smoaks of those fires, with many troops of horse
rode toward the enemies Camp, and found it without soldiers, the rear of
the Army being then upon the retreat. The desire of some of our men to make
show of their valor in sight of their General.
Here all men, in the eye of their General, were desirous to make some show of
their valor, diverse of our soldiers attempting to chase such, of the enemies
men out of their Quarter, as remained for the safer retreat of their whole
Army, but by the turning of greater forces upon them, they retired themselves
fairly. Haberdashers of small ware, and victuallers of the Camp had left
behind them great store of provision, Booty left behind in the enemies Camp.
Count Maurice his wary retreat.
all which became prey to our soldiers. Otherwise, this retreat of Count
Maurices was performed with such order, that it begat him as much honor, as
his enterprise unfortunately ended caused affliction in him. So that he might
well say with Antigonus, making the like retreat, that he did not run away,
but that he prosecuted his own advantage, presenting it self to him: In this
retreat he had such a regard of his own, and his men's safety, that he was able
to save him self from any sudden assault of Spinola, by the works he had
raised, and cut of all possibility of pursuing him for the present. The causey
of Swoll reached to the uttermost part of his Camp, in which place the way of
Seuenberg begins: Works raised by Count Maurice for the retreat of his Army.
upon the entrance of which Causey he had cast up a fort, to retire his men
into. On the side of the Causey he sunck a deep ditch, drawing a parapet at
length upon the Causey it self to cover his men as they marched away. Hither
they might safely repair; from hence they might defend the rest of their men
marching, if any great troops of ours should, peradventure, charg them; and
out of this place they might securely sally, having this trench at their backs
to retire back again: for that work was so sollid and high, that it could not
be attempted but by scaling ladders on the side, and in the front, only by one
passage, and that exceeding narrow: in the rear an other work shut in this
parapet, in which place the Causey of Terheyde was cut asunder, least our men
might fall upon them, that way, in their retreat. Count Maurice marched away,
in two divisions, with his Army. Him self with Count Ernest Nassau, Count
Manrice mar cheth to Rosendale with one haife of the Army.
marched to Rosendale and fortified that place. Prince Henry Frederick Nassau
with the other half of the Army encamped at Sprang, where he raised many works
and other fortifications. Prince Henry with the other part marchethto Sprang.
Spincla some few days after Count Maurice his departure thinking he had made
a journey much to his praise and profit, returned again to his old Quarter,
nearer Breda. Count Maurice made no long stay at Rosendale, Spinola returned to
his old Quarter.
for his health beginning to fail him, he was fored to leave the Army.
Wherefore he committed that charge to Count Ernest Casimire Nassau, and took
his journey to the Hage, Count Maurice falls sick at Rosendale. He returns
sick to the Hage.
wearied out with the yrksomenesse of so many cross accidents: where, calling
all his enterprises, in vain attempted, to mind, and considering that nothing
had prospered, or had good success, he pined away by little and little, his
desease turning (as is reported) to the Consumption of the lungs. His only
hopes now left, were in this one thing; that if the Seige could be maintained
till the winter season (the harvest being then welneare at an end) we should
either be forced, by the sharp weather, to forsake the Seige, or by the
tediousness of our iournyes, and nearenesse of his Camp, be utterly cut of
from all our provision. Notwithstanding, least by our perseverance and good
fortune, he might chance to be deceived, he called Count Mansfeild to him,
Count Ma^sfeild called into Holla^d by Count Maurice to raise a new Army in
England and France.
into Holland, to employ him in the leauying of a new Army: who having
conferred with Count Maurice at the Hage, and afterward with Count Ernest
Casimire Nassau, at Rosendale, when he had treated such things as made most to
his purpose, he took his tourney toward France and England to raise new
supplies. Mansfeild like to be cast away by rempest at Sea.
But being forced to go to sea in the dead of winter, though when he took ship
the weather was fair, and seas calm, yet aftewards upon the sudden, the
rain began to power down out of heaps of dark clouds, and the raging waves
to rise with the winds, all things being filled with horror and darkness.
The Air and the seas were filled with tempestious winds, which drove all his
ships upon flats and Rocks. No Anchor could hold them, no pumpes could void
the water which rushed in by streams. All carriages and other necessaryes were
thrown over board, to disburden the ships which now by the raging of the waves
sailed on one side. In fine, the tempest increasing more and more, most of his
followers were cast way, and he himself suffered ship wrack, being saved with
much ado by means of a little Cock-boate, so that he was long after reported
to be dead. The king of England promith 14000. foot
His Majesty of England promised Mansfeild fourteen thousand foot. Some
Companyes he raised himself in the land of Liege, and other places. Two
thousand foot were leauied in Germany. The States reinforce their old Army.
The states resolved to make a strong reinforcement of their old Army, raising
new supplies in Germany, France, and England.

Spinola perceauing now the intentions of the enemy, Spinola putreth the
Infanra in mind to raise forces in tyine to make head against Man^feild.
gave notice of what passed to the Archduchesse Isabel that she, in time, might
demand supplies of horse and foot of the Emperor to make head against
Mansfeild; and of the Duke of Bauaria, the forces of the Princes of the leage
of Germany. He gave order to the Provinces, for their own defense, to raise
fifteen thousand foot (which they termed KEVRLINGS or choice men) and three
thousand horse (called BANDS OF ORDONNANCE) which troops partly the Provinces
themselves were to pay, partly the provincial Exchequer of the King, the foot
during the time of this war only, the horse ever after; and these forces to
be presently employed in all services, as often as any occasion of war should
offer it self, so to be able to defend or offend. The Archduchess gou^rn^th
and takes care for all things.
The Archduchesse Isabel, with a kind of sacred forecast, behoulding all
things, as at the stern, sparing neither night nor day to write and consult,
governed all general buisnesses, and managed wholly this great affair,
facilitating things the rather by the affections she had gained of her subjects
at home, and the reputation of her name with strangers abroad, more then it had been possible for any other then her self. Wherefore by her letters to the
Emperor she easily obtained the forces which Spinola demanded, and for the
same purpose she sent Count Octauio Sforza to the Duke of Bauaria. Count
Octau^o sforza sent to the Dake of Bauarta.
The Emperor promissed 3000. foot, and 2500. Horse: the Duke of Bauaria 3000.
foot and 1000. Horse. The Provinces had their forces ready in good time, The
Emperor and Duke of Ba^aria promise supplies.
according to the proportion they undertook to send. Only this remained now,
in which Spin^la employed all his endeauours, and in which alone consisted the
success of the whole buisnesse, Spinola provides for two necessary things:
wagons to transport his provision and an able man to command his conuoys.
to be able, with out danger to furnish so great an Army plentifully with
provision, for so long a time, as he foresaw this Seige would endure: and for
this, because he found two things to be infinitely necessary; first, numbers of
wagons to transport his provision, then, some one Commander, perpetually to be
present, to commanded his conuoyes in times and places of most difficultyes
and danger; he gave the absolute command of the Conuoyes to Count Henry
vanden Bergh, keeping Ochoa Gomez, Comissary General, as they style him, in
the Camp, whom hitherto he had employed in commanding the Conuoys, and of
whose service and industry he had now more use then ever, for the making of
excursious and discoueryes, with his horse, about Breda, and the rest of our
Quarters. Count Henyne sent to the States of Brabant to demand wagons.
He dispatched away Count Henyne, first to the States of Brabant to procure
wagons, that other Provinces, by their example, might be won to do the like.
Count Henyne applying him self particularly to each man apart whom he knew to
have any voice or sway in the counsel, easily persuaded them so that
afterward, in Counsel, they altogether consented, as men that had a special
care of the common good, and were particularly acquainted with the present
necessityes. The other Provinces follow the example of them of Brabant.
They of Brabant being first persuaded, Flanders, Henault, Artoyes and the
rest, easily consented afterward to the allowance of wagons.

The public storehouse was appointed at Lyre, whether the provision was first
to be brought, The public store house at Lyre.
and from thence afterward to be transported to the Camp. The greater part of
our Horse was with Count Henry vanden Berghe to guard the provision, for the
Camp before Breda, Count Henryes care in conducting the provision.
with the fortifications about it, was now able, without horse, to defend it
self. Though the only name of this Commander were fearful to the enemy, yet
his deeds did more scarre them, in these occasions, then his fame. His manner
of proceeding was this. In the morning, before day, he gave command to put in
order the disordred multituds of Carriages and wagons, then, sending first some
troops of horse before to discover, he commanded them to march. He placed
Artillery in the van and the Rear, to give warning of the enemies approaching,
The order he observed
that by the report of that Artillery his men might gather together (as his
order was) and repair to the place which should stand most in need. He guarded
both sides of the ways, toward Rosendale and Langhestrat (where the enemies
Camps lay) with loose wings of horse. He intermingled with these Horse, gardes
of Musqueters, and with the rest of his horse brought up the Rear; so that he
both marched forward with is men, and was ever prepared to receive any charg.
He provided, with all diligence possible, that the ways least subject to
ambushes should be made choice of, causing them to be repaired for the greater
ease of his wagons. If word were brought him of any danger, he had a care not
to come to blows in places of disadvantage, and therefore, he either made a
stay in places fit for him, or else made have out of those places of danger,
making use of his wagons, in steed of a Trench, drawing his men within them, if
there were danger of being charged. When his troops began to march, he was
ever the first man cut of his Quarter, and then he made a stand to vieu and
hasten the rest foreward, till almost all his troops were welneare passed by.
He ever marched in the rear of all, but now and then in his march advanced
before them all, and then again after all men came last into his Quarter. He
commanded his soldiers should be quartered before night, and whilst it was
yet day he rode about his Quarter. He called the Pesants to him, and informed
him self of the ways, and of the enemy. He placed gards where need required,
and either broake down or possessed him self of all bridges, so to cut of all
passage from the enemy. He gave order that his soldiers should always have
their horses ready bridled, upon the guard against any need or occasion should
require: others he dispersed continually abroad, so to try if they could win
or enueigle any man, by whom he might learn some thing of the intentions of
the enemy. His spies.
He wanted not his other spies to give him notice of all plots and designs of
the enemy, upon whom he spent great sums of money. In the night he gave
command that Centinells should be placed upon all ways and passages. And
least these diligences should chance to be neglected by custom (a thing that
happens ordinarily in the like cases) he often rode, unlooked for, about the
Quarter himself, not that he distrusted the vigilance of his Rounds, but that
his soldiers, by the example of their Commander, might be the more willing to
employ their own endeauours, he undergoing the same labor with them. His care
of the Pesants was no less then of the Conuoy: for he gave as strict a
command to his soldiers, to quench carefully all fires they had made for
their own use in the Pesants Barnes, His punish meant of such as were found to
be faulty.
as if he had been the particular Officer to have care of those fires. He forced
such as were careless in observing this command, by whose negligence the
fires, ill quenched, kindled afterward again, and took hold of howses or
did any other mischeife, to ly in the open air, to have their wages detayned
from them, and in fine to make good all domages sustained by those fires. He
exhorted them (in imitation of Aurelian the Emperor) to feed upon the spoils
of the enemy, not he tears of their Cuntrimen. He took the Pesantes witness
against the soldier, heard their complaints, and punished such of his
soldiers as he found guilty. By which discipline he brought to pass, The
benefit he reaped by these diligences.
that he Cuntry people (of whom there was great want and scarsity in all
Villages) brought such things to sell as before they had concealed and horded
up in Churches and strong Towers, whether most of them for fear were fled,
with their wives, children, house-hould stuff and Corn, returning again to
plough their feilds without fear or danger: with so little hurt he led his
Army through the Villages of Brabant, having a special regard of the Corn,
feilds, howses and inhabitants. The report of which exact discipline, so
punctually observed, was cause that the enemy never durst attempt our Conuoyes:
And the like honors done heretofore to Alexander Seuerus for his modesty and
restraint in leading his Army against the Parthians, Count Hery called by the
Croats, God of the Pesant.
were nowdone to Count Henry vanden Berghe by the Croats, who styled him the
God of the Pesants for the care he ever had of the Cuntry people.

But, howbeit by this care and vigilance of Count Henry, Spinola takes care
for forage, and the refreshing of his horse.
the provision of the Camp was safely brought in, yet because, by the great
numbers of horses which by this means came in, the forage of the Camp began
much to lessen, and the horses themselves, by their continual labor, became
lean and out of heart, most of them, of necessity, feeding upon stubble, and
chopped straw; Spinola thought upon a course for both these inconveniences. And,
He forbids the horsewhich guarded the proursion to enter into the Camp.
least what remained of our forage should come short for the horse of the
Camp, he commanded that the horse which guarded the provision should be lodged
in the nearest Towns and Villages therabouts, there to refresh themselves,
whilst the wagons, and provision was making ready at Lyre: and, that those
horses, when they had guarded the provision to the Camp, might not wast the
Camp forage; he gave a strict command that none of them should enter with in
the trench, and dismissed all Carts and carriage-horses so soon as they were
unladen. By which means it came to pass, that our Horse coming to full
feeding elsewhere, in a short time became fat, and in good case. And that these
things might be done with more security, he caused a large fortification to be
raised at Barle (a Village three hours journey distant from Breda) lodging a
good garrison in it, with one troop of horse. To his place afterward Count
Henry conveyed the provision with his horse. Here he made a stand till the
horses and Carts returned unladen from the Camp. And hither fresh troops of
horse and foot came from the Camp to guard it.

But that the ways might be yet less subject to danger against all accidents
that might peradventure happen, Count Isenburg raised a work in the Village of
Leur, against R^sendale, near about that place, where either the river is
fordable, o^els has a passage over it by Bridge. Spinola for tifieth the way
by which our provision was to pass.
Three other works besides were raised by Count Henry betwixt Lyre, Herentals
and Turnhout, and four more at Outturhout, betwixt which the soldiers that
guarded the provision took their rest in the night: Which way, though, by
much, it were farther about then the direct way of Hooghstrat, yet because it
lay farther from the enemies Camps, The longer journey though the safer chosen
for our prou^sion to be transported to the Ca^pe
it was held much safer, and less subject to danger; the rather because in
the two Castles of Hooghstrat, and Turnehout, an ind^fferent good garrison of
soldiers was left. By which warines, the passages becance so secure, that the
Pesants almost without any guard, from Turnehout especially, adventured in their
Carts to bring provision to the Camp, Some Pesants who ventred to freely to
bring un prouinon were taken by the enemy.
of which freedom of theirs in victualling our Camp, the enemy having notice:
once he set upon them and robbed their Carts, carrying away their horses and
Masters, not for from Barle.

Count Maurice, in his sickness, aiming at some new exploit, not being yet quite
out of hope of surprising Anwerp Castle resolved once agame to attempt it in
the night. An other attempt vppoir Antwerp Castle.
He committed the charg of the enterprise to Stakenbrouck Governor of Grave;
but the success of this attempt was no better then that before. The rain
powered down so thick, that their Muskets became unserviceable, through the
moisture of their powder: and they in the night, discovering fires a far of,
upon the walls, suspecting they were betrayed, retired suddenly with so
great confusion, that leaving their carriages behind them in certain
cumbersome passages, they made a retreat little better then a running away. It
was thought to be a conspiracy of some treacherous Burgers in the town, A
suspicion of treason in Anvverp and some men punished for it.
who led with the apprehension of nouelty, had persuaded the enemy to come.
Thirty of them, whose liberty of speech begat a iealiousy of them, were
condemned to banishment, but having their pardons again, most of them remained
in the Town.

Count Maurice perceauing he could effect nothing upon our provision, though,
purposely to entrappe us, A new diuice of count Maurice to hinder out
provision.
he had divided his Army: applied himself wholly to the molesting of such, as
were any way suspected to further our provision. They were apprehended who were
found guitly, and condemned in great fines: not so much as they who paid
contribution to the united states, were spared; others were terrified with the
greatness of the penaulty. Moreover all Corn mills were taken away, the irons
of them being broken. Mills, Oue^^ brevving vves^els broken by the command of
Count Maurice.
Brewhouses and Bake-houses were destroyed, their Ouens and cauldrons being
perced: And the brute is, it was consulted emongst them, whether it were
fitting or no to sack and spoil all such places of the Campinia (defended with
slender or no gards at all) as at that present gave releife to our conuoyes. A
question moved by the States about the burning of all, villages of the Came
pinta.
Some were of opinion, that all such places were far and near to be set on
fire, to which our men might any way have recourse for provision, least they
should stand us in steed for the plenty of our victuals. Others, mistrusting
we would do the like to their open Towns and villages, allowed not of that
opinion.

They made trial of many things (as men ar wont in desperate affayers. They
were take by the enemy that brought provision to our Ca^pe
) Out of Turnehout and Hooghstrat they took diverse men prisoners, who had
furnished our Camp with victuals and forage. Spinola, taking the same course,
commanded all men, in like manner, to be taken, whom he could learn had any
way releiued the enemy with forage or victuals, Spinola vieth the enemies
Pesants in the like manner.
and condemned them, every where, in very great fines. Diverse of them, pleading
their innoceny, sent their complaints to him by embassage: To whom he made
answer, That the present state and condition of war now required, that since
the enemy labored, Spinolaes arsvver to them that complained
by all means, to hinder our provision, he, in like manner, should endeavor to
restrain his: and if they desiered to find favor in this, that the enemy
should first cease to intercept our pesants. But if the enemy would not desist,
he was then resolved to hold the same course.

The victuallers and Pesants terrified with these examples, because they durst
almost bring nothing, The prices of al provision rose by means of the
penaultyes inshcted upon them that brought in provision.
but covertly, into our Camp, it begat a great dearth of. Bread, wine, Beer
and other necessaryes, for many days together, which Spinolae feared to
redress, by taxing the prices of all those commodityes, mistrusting, that by
how much he might benefit his soldiers by that course, Spinola sear full to
redress the dear rates of proui^io^ for fear of a greater in conuenie^ce.
by so much more he should endomage his Camp, it being a means to hinder the
resort of victuallers and other purveyers of provision (a people greedy after
gain and the high rates of all things.) For these causes about the same time,
diverse of our soldiers (more careful to serve their hungers, Some of
Spinolaes soldiers fed upon horse flesh.
then to observe decorum) shared emongst them (miserable food) the carcasses of
horse. This needines of our men, and the insensible famine of the beseiged,
together with the great plenty of Count Maurice his Army (releiued by the
neighborhood of his towns and Rivers) were the main difficultyes we were to
encounter: Less famine in the Town the^ in our Camp, and great plenty in
the enemies Ca^pe.
For the Town, hitherto, had plenty of corn, at no great rate and the
Magistrates had set a price upon all merchandise, no greater then that they
were prised at before our Seige, that so the towns men and soldiers might the
less feel the Seige. A measure of wheat was sold for eight A florene Is two
shillings English.
florens; Rye for five; Buck-wheat for four; Barley for three florens and a
half; Oats for as much. A sack of salt was sold for four florens; Dried
habberdine and cheese for three Astiuer is somvvhat more then a penny so that
ten stiuers make twelve pence.
stiuers the pound; green cheese for two stiuers the pound; otle for a florene
and two stiuers the quart; Oil of Rape seed for eight stiuers the quart;
Beef for three stiuers the pound. And it is incredible how much the cheapnes
of all things encouraged the beseiged. To the enemies Camp from all their
havens, whether our men could have no access, Corn, wine and forage was
brought, at very small rates. Spinola that he might in some sort redress the
wants of his Army, besides the ordinary allowance of Bread, caused Beer, out
of the public Storehouse to be, every day, distributed, which thing obliged
much his soldiers, and preserved their health. The Archducesse, Spinols
ginethcommaund that Beer thould be daily distributed to the sould^ers. The
liberality of the Infanta.
against winter, gave order that six hundred course gowns for Centinells
should be made, the better to be able to watch in the open air. Upon others
she bestowed shoes and stockins, to the number of eight hundred. They of
Breda, who lent a willing ear to whatsoever they desired should become of our
affairs (the inconveniences we suffered being made greater by report)
persuaded themselves that, in forty days, The vain hopes and belief of the
beseiged.
no manner of provision had been brought to our Camp; that the greater part of
our Army was wasted, and that the less half remained not behind; that now we
had not sorces to endure the labor of the Seige; and that they that remained,
either for sickness or want would be forced to forsake the Seige. They of
Holland wrote this and more to their friends, in favor of their own cause,
The un truths they diuulged.
and a certain Mercury (as they call him) or writer of news and occurrences,
stuck not to print things, yet more extrauagant, for the reputation of their
cause, and disparagement of ours. The beseiged, vpbraiding us with our wants,
The ostentation of the beseiged.
boasted their own plenty exteriourly, by turning their cattle to grass in
the Meddowes about the Town, whilst, in the mean time, in the Town, an
account being taken of the store of their Corn, the Town was found to be but
slenderly furnished. The good husbandry of the Magistrates.
The Magistrates (that that store might not be prodigally wasted which only
they had to serve them for a long Seige) commanded that no Beer should be
brewed of a greater) price then a crown the Barrel: That the glass and
leaden heads of all Stilles and Lymbecks should be taken from such as made Aqua
vitae, least so their Corn might be turned into wine, in victualling houses,
and Aqua vitae shops: and by this parsimony they were able to subsist the
longer. But this outward ostentation of their plenty seemed to deserve a
correction. Spinola therefore perceauing them, at their liberty, to wander up
and down without the walls (in such places as certain herbage and Roots had been sowed) to gather such roots and herbs as they could find: that they might
not so freely, without danger, reap the fruit of those feilds, and that our
trench might not ly open, for their messengers, to pass in and out, in such
places (as by reason of the great circuit of our trench, gards could not be so
carefully kept) he raised many little Redouts, and great works, and caused
three great Batteryes to be made, in three sever all places, nearest to the
Town. Those sides of these works and Redouts which beheld the Town, were made
Canon proof, 25. foot thick. Of the Batteryes, The description of the Batte
ties.
the form was this. The greatest of them, at Gineken, kept by the Marquess of
Campolatara, was a hundred and threscore foot long, a hundred and five and
twenty foot broad. In the Rear, and flanks of it, it had a wall fifteen foot
thick, saving that one side of this wall was thicker then the rest, rising with
a walk, and a parapet, on the inside. In the front, it was lined with two
exterior angles, the face of it rising with nine open windows, for Coronal
Wingards Battery. The Baron of Ballancons Battery. Count Isenburgs Battery.

so many pieces of Artillery to peep out, each window being two foot and a
half wide, opening more and more outward by little and little. On the inside a
groundselling was raised, like a bed, of turfe and fagots eight foot high, and
five and thirty foot broad, covered over with planks, for the speedy remoouing,
and recoiling of the Artillery. Behind this groundsell was a place of Arms a
hundred and thyrty foot long, fifty foot broad. The out side of the wall, under
the Canon windows, was stuck thick with sharp long Sparres. Before the Battery
a half moon was raised, guarded with Musqueters, and compassed with a
counterscarpe and pallisado, for the safety of the Battery. Round about the
Battery a ditch was suncke seven foot deep, and eight and forty foot broad,
the sides of the ditch being cut scarping from the top to the bottom, in which
place the ditch was eight and thirty foot broad. Upon the outmost shore of the
ditch stood a long pallisado, to hinder sudden assaults, Two other Batteryes.
and make the abbord more difficult. Two other Batteryes were built at Titering
and Hage, that of Hage indifferent larg, the other the least of the three,
saving that by the addition of a Fort it became the greatest of all. Their
manner of building was much after the same fashion, the only difference they
had being in length, breadth and Corners. One of them was kept by the Baron
Ballancon, the other by Count Isenburg. Whilst these things were doing, the
beseiged made often sallyes out of several Ports, and bestowed liberally,
though to little purpose, their Canon balls upon our fortifications gards: Our
works being finished, when now they perceived them selves to be brought to
these straights, diverse soldiers, Many of the beseiged run away
Tradesmen and Pesants, for fear of steruing, rendered themselves: for they
were wearied out with the extremity of the present inconveniences, and
afflicted with a dangerous infection, continual enclosure and alteration of
diet, their Corn being now not so prodigally dealt, and their flesh, fish and
cheese, as they understood, being welneare consumed. Bread spread with oil of
rapeseed was the daintyes of the common people. The hang man kept an ordinary
for the soldiers, for a sliuer and a half the meal, The Hangman keeps an
Ordinary of dogs flesh.
who having ten florens monthly allowed him for the killing of dogs, so to take
away all occasions of infection, furnished his table with those cates, and had
every day many guests, of such, as could be contented to feed upon that diet.
Many men run away from the Town.
But, as this life, of it self, seemed greiuious and hard to most men, so, with
the apprehension of the continuance, it be came much more tedious. Wherefore
they sought by running away to chang this state of life. But Spinola sending a
Trumpet, Spinolae's prohibition that no man should be permitted to come from
the Town.
with commands, to the Governor of the town, gave him warning, that no man
from that time forward, either under pretense of rendering him self, or
escaping by flight, should expect to find any mercy at his hands: that
whosoever, from that time, came from the Town, should either presently be
hanged, or put back into the Town. Besides he caused all places to be kept by
centinells, in which there was any possibility of passing through our Camp,
proposing a reward of 25. Six pound fine shillings. Gards placed to intercept
such as came from the Town
Phillips to whomsoever could intercept any man coming from the Town. All men
for the present were terrified with this, but in time (as the use is) some few
growing confident, committed themselves to the mercy of Spinola, who coming to
our works besought, earnestly, with tears in their eyes, to be received, and
releiued with some kind of victuals, The runneavvayes beg not to be put back
into the Town.
and rather to be massacred then put back into the Town. Spinola admitted the
wife of a certain Trades man of Anwerp, with her child, to whose husband he
had lately given permission to pass: the rest he caused to return back into
the Town. Spinolaes clemency to them that ranneavvay
But afterward perceauing that few, and very seldom any came away, he
despensed more liberally with that law, forcing no runne-away to return back
to the Town. Iustitle done upon
He caused two Pesants, in sight of the Town, to be hanged, who in the night
had attempted to carry corn into the town: These examples were requisite,
Some that transported provision into the Town.
and more necessary then compassion, other men afterward being terrified by
them. Count Maurice casting with himself how to convey some greater quantity of
provision to the beseiged (great store of Corn and other provision being
lately arrived at some havens of his neighbowring Towns) he caused eighteen
great flat bottomed Boats to be made, An attempt of Count Maurice to put
provision into the Town
able to brook the ebbing of the tide, which, being left by the water, need
not stand in fear of the sands, but might sit securely upon all fords and
shelfs. The sides and forestalls of them were made of strong timber, rising and
shcoting upward in two places, the better to be able to bear any brunt. A new
invention of Boats.
Each of them, built in this fashion, was armed with four or six pieces of Iron
and brass Caenon, and were furnished with great store of fire balls: And, in
conclusion, they were laden with Corn, shut up in pots, with great quantity of
cheese, lard, The guard and provision of those Boats.
and Bacon; To all which, they were filled with choice Musqueters. He gave
warning to them of Breda, about the same time, that they should make ready some
Boats for that purpose, and sally forth of the Town upon the day appointed,
driving them, with violence, upon our Bridge of Boats. They of Breda, ready to
obey, made ready fourteen boats, six of which they armed with as many pieces
of ordinance, and stored them with fire balls. They made choice of 300.
Musqueters to put upon those Boats, The beseiged prepare to assit Count Man
rice in his putting provision into the Town
and they had 600 more in readiness to sally out by land, near the River
side. Spinola, having intelligence of it, reinforced the village of Heyde with
greater supplies of men, and fenced the causey he had raised (by which the
enemy must pass of necessity) ramming in before it a pallisado of great trees.
He purposed besides to draw an other pallisado, binding the stakes of it
together, the length of 2400. paces, Spinolaes preperation against this
attempt.
betwixt the four little works made upon the black Causey, least by that
standing water, which all the winter season reaches to the Town, the enemy
might attempt to put in provision. For the nature and situation of those
meddowes is such, that as often as the tide comes in (which happens twice every
twelve hours) the champion brooks having made a standing poole there besides,
a passage might easily be made, by flat bottomed boats, to the Town, and after
the ebb again men might wade through a foot. But the wind no sooner blew
favorable for Count Maurice, the vvind and wea therturneth against cout
Maurice.
but suddenly, to our great good fortune, it turned against him, and,
contrary to course, the tide scarce flowed at all; so that once again the hand
of heaven, concurring with Spinclaes diligences, fought against the enemy. In
the mean season that these boats lay expecting fair weather, the quantity of
cheese and Bacon was so impawed, by the stealth of the soldier, The provision
flolen our of their Boars by their own soldiers.
that though petaduenture those boats should have forced their passage, little
of that provision would have come to the beseiged. The enemies pronision either
stoine or corrupted.
And not many days after, the Corn which had been pressed together in Tunns,
having taken rain and other sea moisture, sprouted out green through the
crannyes of the Tunns, after it was taken out of the Boats again. Thus the
enemy suffered one less upon the neck of the other.

Mean while, Our four raging subject to danger.
whilst our soldiers forraged and sought wood somewhat farther from the Camp
then ordinarily they were wont (all forage and wood near at hand being
consumed) the enemy conceived that, seeing them so scattered and dispersed in
their forraging, with their horse, they might easily cut them in pieces.
Wherefore they had ever a watchful eye upon us, and took all courses
possible to hinder us from wood and forage, which they imagined to be a thing
less difficult because they ouer-matched us in horse, ours, for the most part,
being all employed, either in garding our Camp or conducting our provision. It
was indifferent to them whether they cut our men in pieces, or took away their
carriages, without which our Seige could not be maintained. Hence it came to
pass (a thing not to be avoided) that whilst forage was to be sought in
houses scatterd and dispersed, The enemy began to intercept our forragers.
our forragers now and then were intercepted, in by ways, by some small
troops of the enemies horse, which though it did us not any great hurt, yet
somewhat it endomaged our soldiers boys, Carters, and horses. Spinola, that
the enemy might not long enjoy so much as this poor triumph, expected, We
sustained some losses, though small.
from thence forward, the return of those forces, with which Count Henry
guarded our provision, within three leagues of the Army, under the protection of
which troops our men forraged ever after securely in all Cuntry Villages round
about our Camp. And for his provision he took such a course, Spinolaes care
to save our forragers from danger.
that at the same time the wagons were lading wheat at Lyre, Oats were
transported to the Camp in other Carts, sending a competent number of horse and
foot to guard them; which carts being first unladen in the Camp, the soldier
might return to Lyre, in good time, to guard the rest of the prcuision to the
Army. In the mean time such horse as by long labor and leanenesse were almost
become unserviceable, were sent thither to garrison, where forage was more
plenty, whilst other horses supplied their places, to whom afterward, in like
manner, their Quarters were asigned to refresh. Thus by the redoubling of
tourneyes, with horse fresh and in good case, he quickly transported his
forage and Corn. The charge of which was committed to Alexander Heyse
lieutenant of the Artillery, who employed his whole endeauours in the speedy
lading, and ridding of wagons.

But after that the Cuntry (with whose approbation this transportation of our
forage and Corn was exacted) perceived the Seige to continue, and new
exactions, The Cuntry finds the charge of wagons to be too great for them to
continue.
every day follow, upon the neck of the former, being wearied out with the
expenses of continual supplies of wagons, were no longer able to defray so
great a charge; a new course was thought on for the transportation of
provision. In all willages Carts with two wheels were taken up at hire, which
by reason of the wide standing a sunder of the wheels, often times one horse,
A neweourse taken for the transportation of our provision.
for the most part two horses were able to draw, with much more ease, then
three horses drew those other wagons of four lesser wheels. A price was agreed
on for these Carts, dear at the beginning, by reason of the ill ways but,
afterward, in better weather, The benefit we reaped by this new invention.
the price was lesned by half. And thus our provision, with less charge, by
far, of horses and wagons, with less wast of forage, with the same
expedition, and in the same quantity, was easily transported.

This new invention deceived Count Maurice, who relying principally upon the
season of the year, assured him self we should never be able to overcome the
inconveniences of furnishing our Camp with provision; so far fetched, and so
tedious to be brought; the rather, because winter was already at hand, and all
Corn therabouts was conveyed in to Towns, all Villages, far and near, being
utterly diffurnished, and Cattle, for fear of war, being driven farther of.
It is reported that Count Maurice emongst some of his people; should
vaynegloriously utter those speeches which Pompey, heretofore, used of Caesar
at Dyrrachium: Cout Mautice his saying of Spinola.
That he would acknowledge himself a General of no experience at all, if
Spinolaes Army were not forced shamfully to depart; and that he would
unfeignedly attribute so much to his honor (if he were able to endure the Seige
all that winter season) that he understood, and was able to manage more then he
could, This victory must be acknowledged to come inmediately from Almighty God.
and more then the devils of hell were able to reach to. And indeed except the
hand of God had more assisted us flill then the power of man, and the winter
(at other times sharp) had not at this time ben strangely temperate, it had been impossible to endure the difficultyes of this Seige. It cannot be denied
but those floods which the townsmen, in November, turned upon our Camp, when,
stopping the mouths of the Rivers, they began to cast up a bancke to make the
Merke and the Aa ouerflow far and near, did, beyond measure, molest and scarre
us. But Spinola at the beginning could never have believed, Spinola, as first,
deceived in his opinion.
that it was possible the Seige could be prolonged so long, or that so great
numbers, or such an expense of carriages would beneedfull. All which charge if
the Cuntry had well weighed at the beginning, peradventure they would never
have undertaken it so willingly, as to the end of the Seige they afterward
continued it faithfully, disbursing the charges of four hundred wagons, and
paying besides the foot forces raised by the Cuntry. In which thing they showed
themselves faithful subjects to their Prince, The faith fulness of the subjects
to then Prince in this occasion.
and gained everlasting praise to themselves. Besides, who could have foreseen
so so many leauyes in all Europe for Breda alone? It was commonly bruited that
the provision of Corn and other necessaryes against winter, This happened during
this Seige that no man conld have fore seen.
was not sufficient for the beseiged in the Town. That the Townsmen
accustomed to plenty, unacquainted with war and famine, would never be able
to endure great wants. That the French, Scottish, English and low-Countrimen
(of all which there were diverse garrisoned in the Town) would not have
patience so long till their Corn and other provision should begin to fail.
That some of them by nature, others by custom did more affect delicacyes; and
for these reasons we persuaded our selves, they would not be able long to hold
out: so easy a thing it is to take Arms when men please, but hard to disengage
themselves till their enemy thinck good. The means by which the beseiged held
out the longer.
But, besides all that Corn with which every townsmen was commanded to
furnish him self, and which was provided in the public storehouse for the
soldier, the pesants (in that time our Army lay at Gilsen, and could not
conveniently stop all their passages) for fear of a Seige, transported great
store of provision to the Town. Moreover the Coronells and Captains for the
notable gain they made, appropriating, to their own use, the wages of their
dead soldiers, were the better contented to endure inconueniencyes, and this
so much the rather, by how much the greater numbers of their soldiers came to
die, by deseases, for by that loss, grew their gain, and their famine was
plentifully supplied, by the increase of their dead pays: by their soldiers
necessityes, they gaped after their death; by their death, the benefit of their
dead pays: so much more assurance is in money, then in the faith of men. the
number of the dead in Breda
The numbers of the dead were so great during the time of this Seige, that more
then five thousand were found registered in the survey of interrements which was
the third part of the inhabitans of Breda, the computation, at the beginning,
being but fifteen thousand persons: So that the decease of the dead, was the
food of the living. And, A course the enemy took to keep from us and the
townsmen them selves the number of them which died in the Town.
a thing which was neither observed by the towns men nor by us, was, from the
beginning, enacted by the decree of the Senate, that no man's funerals, how
rich or noble so ever he were, should be celebrated, by their parents, with the
tole of Bells. These things deceived not us alone, but generally the opinions
of the beseiged themselves (besides that the commanders, men otherwise of
greater credit and reputation, had in a manner engaged the trust reposed in
them, to their own private gain) and diverse runne-awayes out of the Town
made report that except succors were suddenly sent them, they could not be
able to hold out much longer: the same was written out of Holland to Count
Henry vanden Bergh. A certain Germane soldier who had served the space of
nine months under the Hollander, being taken by our men, A stratagem of Count
Isenbrug
and known by Count Isenburgh, to be a subject of his, having his pardon
granted, was sent upon those terms back into the Town, that when he
perceived the Town brought to extremityes, he should return to our Camp,
assuring him his life and a reward for his pains: after two months that this
soldier had remained in Breda, conversant emongst the soldiers, without any
suspicion, he returned again and brought word, that the want, in the Town was
such, that they began now generally to feed upon horse flesh, and that they
had not corn to hold out above two months longer at the most. That they
desired that Spinola would oftener batter the Town, for a color, at least,
that they might find some good pretense to render themselves. To these reports
some men giving an attentive ear, who willingly believe any thing they desire
should come to pass, could neither persuade themselves Count Henry his
intelligence to be false, nor that the German soldier would ly so grossly, in
so notable a buisnes, or that all the runnawayes were generally imposters;
importuned Spinola to give way, that fire balls might be shot into the Town.
He, albeit he knew well that those engines would little prevail with soldiers
accustomed to war, and that custom would make even the townes*men forget the
fear of it, yet he condescended to their importunityes, that from three
several places (where so many batteryes were raised against the town) the
walls and houses of the Town might be battered. About that time returned
oportunely to the Camp Phillip Count Mansfeild, late Coronell of the guard of
Adolphus King of Swethland, famous for the taking in of Riga, where he had the
supreme command of the Army. Philip Con^s Mansfeld inuenteth a new kind
Artillery.
He adding Art to experience (as use is the master of all things) had found out
a certain new invention of Artillery, easier to be drawn then the ordinary
Artillery, which, with a less quantity of powder would carry their balls
farther, and by that means be infinitely serviceable in these wars: for the
direction of which buisnes he had purposely taken a journey from the Camp to
Bruxells, and caused forty brass pieces and three and twenty Morters for
fireballs, to be cast. Thirty of the lesser sort, of no more then 180. pound
weight, carried each of them Balls of six pound a piece. Ten of the greater
sort, each of then of seven hundred and fifty pound weight, carried Balls of
five and twenty pound. These were more useful, and not half so chargeable as
the ordinary Canon. For the lesser sort of them, was drawn at ease with two
horses; the greater, with four: whearas each of our old pieces, asked six, ten,
and eighteen horses to draw them. With the third part of powder they carried
their balls farther then our ordinary old pieces. This advantage Count
Mansfeild gained by his experience, having found out the art of tempering his
metal in such sort, when it was dissolved, that he gave it the same hardness
the greatest pieces had notwithstanding his metal was more subtle, and
thinner by far, by which means they came to be so much the lighter; And the
Balls were, in that respect, carried farther, with a lessecharge of powder,
because the touchhole of these pieces, took not fire upon a flat ground, but
in the uttermost end of the piece (for there was the center of the touchhole)
upon a rising ground, made hollow to the shape of a spear head, contrary to
the old pieces, to which fire was given on the top, betwixt the ball and the
flatnes of the ground. Hence proceeded the greater force of the new pieces,
because the fire given in the uttermost part of the piece, is drawn with
equal force into a circle, which being all gathered together with in that
hollow place, An other invention of Count Mansfeilds.
throws out their Balls with much more violence.

An other admirable invention their was of this Counts. Out of a brass Mortar
to shoot Bomboes of more than a hundred pound weight, seven hundred paces
farther then any other. These Bomboes he shot, from a far, into the midst of
the Town, whereas otherwise, by reason of the distance, the use of Morters had
come to naught, our Batteryes standing at the least six hundred paces from the
Town. It was told us by run awayes that this shooting did as much hurt, as
terrify the beseiged. We saw afterward by experience when we entered the
town, The misheife these pieces of Count Mansfeild wrought in the Town.
great ruyns of howses overthrown by these Bomboes. One of them fell upon the
roof of the Armory (where their powder lay) which failing to take fire, did no
hurt at all, otherwise it would have made great spoil in the Town. but the
other Canon balls, with which in three several places we battered the town
(and that part especially which Count Isenburg commanded) struck so much
terror into them, that diverse of the inhabitants left their howses empty, and
was cause that the church-seruice was done at an unwonted hour, and with out
sound of bells, and that, in the end, the soldiers themselves were commanded
to enter the guard without beating drums. Aertsen the Drossards wife to
encourage the dishartned townsmen; at what time our Canon-balls flew thickest
about the Town, caused her self to be drawn in her Coche, about the walls,
making show of a manly spirit in a woman's body, her resolution being, to her,
in lieu of a rampire. Whilst the enemies affairs stood thus, it was commonly
bruited that Count Maurice and the states had conceived some cause of offense
against one an other, for the ill direction and managing of buisnesses: The
States, that he had given Spinola so much leisure, to fortify his Camp
(spending his time in dismantling the walls of Cleue; The States and Count
Maurice expostulate and blame one an other.
) that after two and twenty days unnecessarily spent, he retired his Camp from
Mede without doing any thing. Count Maurice on the other side laid the fault
upon the States, offering to quit the charge he had under them, emongst whom
he must both serve their turns, and follow every man's humor. That he left it
to them to consider, whether they had conferred more honor upon him, then he
had brought in profit to them, With this answer the States being troubled,
mistrusting that he intended indeed to quit his charge, they acknowledged him
without control, to be their supreme commander, and that they neither
mistrusted his trust, nor discretion, but that they had only made mention of
such things, as seemed to them would have proved to their advantage: that he
would be pleased to continue to protect their Common wealth with his valor,
and manage the war wholly at his own command: that they would make it appear
how much they took Breda to heart, sparing no charges to save it, for that only
respect, that it was the patrimony of the Nassawes. Count Maurice being
pacified with these promises and excuses, that he might not seem to neglect
the care of the Commonwealth, gave order that a thousand horse should be
leauied and armed at his own charg. The States themselves raised a thousand
more, to reinforce those troops which were expected out of France. Emongst
other things, they consulted about the raising of a great damme to stop the
course of the River Merke, not far from Seuenbergh: which only course they
thought now left for the safty of Breda, if, as often as the spring tide came
in, the sea ouerflowing all the low grounds, and the winter floods, (which
run by little brooks into the River) being kept in, they could put under
water all meddowes far and near: A new attept of the states to sue cour Breda.
that those waters would either ouerflow our Camp, or else serve to put
provision, by boats, into the town: Wherefore they undertook this work, a
thing of infinite labor and expense. They inteded to turn the course of te
River by raising a damme in it.
They sent to Seuenbergh Boats, Barks, and wherryes (of which they have great
store) from thence to repair to a certain place called Lamsgat, where the
mouth of the River is, and in which place, the Banks lying low, the River is
fullest of fords and shallow places. So great a provision of Boats was
necessary for the raising of this great work; Great store of Boats and work
men for the raising of this damme
in which besides they employed diverse laboring men and transporters of earth,
beginning to fell woods, cut fagots, carry stones, Trees, planks, load their
boats, and in conclusion to raise this damme from both shores of the River
opposite to each other. But within three days, by an unexpected frost, they
were forced to desist.

Upon Christmans night (which day the Enemy gave the first beginning to this
work) Stakenbrouck, Stakebrouke governor of Grave intended an attempt upon
marching out of Rosendale with diverse good troops of choice soldiers,
purposed to have made an attempt upon the Rear of Isenburgs Quarter. He was
made believe by his spies that by the filling up of a ditch not very large,
Quarter but was deceived by the false relation of his spies.
he might easily find a passage. For the filling of which, not above six of
seven spades, at the most, would be needful. He relishing well this
enterprise, made choice of eighteen horse troops, carrying along with him no
more them seven spades. When he arrived at the place, he found that a hundred
spades would not suffice for the filling of that ditch: notwithstanding,
sending some of his men before, he made trial what might be done. Our horse
Centinell who watched not far from that place, gave notice of it by the
discharging of his pistol, by which he warned our Camp to be ready in Arms.
but Stakenbrouck, finding himself discovered, commanded all his Trumpets to
sound an alarm, and retired, being satisfied only with disquieting our Camp.
All other passages were stopped by Count Isenburg with so many overthwart
ditches, The care of Count Isenburg in cutting of all passages about his
Quarter.
and so many branches and stocks of trees fastened into the earth, that one
single man could hardly have found passage. The frost breaking up, the workmen
(though the swiftnes of the River was a main difficulty proposed against the
going forward of that damme) returned again to their work left of, sinking
three long carriage Boats, laden with turfe and stones, and casting in store of
fagots and earth upon them: which done, they began to raise the damme from
both sides of the River, throwing in rows of turfe, with great stakes rammed
betwixt them, the better to bind the earth, toward the midst of the channel.
At Seuenberg they made sluices, on the other side of the River, to keep in, and
let out the tide, that the feilds being once ouerflowed, they might still be
kept so deep under water, as should be needful to bear boats laden with
provision. Having expected therefore the change of the tide, they put all things
in readiness for the arming of their boats.

Spinola was infinitely perplexed with the thought of this work. His
principal care was to know, by the discovery of spies, this invention of the
enemies.
what was done every hour of day and night in that place. And as often as any
new, or full moon happened (at which times the sea-tydes ar always at the
fullest) he sent great supplies to the Quarters of Hage and Ter-Heyde, where it
was suspected the enemy might break in. He continually supplied the places of
mostdanger with frethmen.
He caused the sluices of all Brooks (by which about Ter-Heyde the Champion
waters were let in to the River of Breda) to be set open whilst the tide
ouerflowed all the feilds, and to be stopped, and shut up again at the ebb:
so that when the enemy, at low water, began to work upon their damme, all
those sluices, being set open upon the sudden, turned that water violently
upon them, which was before kept in by the sluices, and washed away by this
means their damme to the great hindrance of the progress of that work. He gave
order besides that certain Mariners of ours, in the night time, should cut a
sunder the banks of the River Merk, in diverse, places for the length of five
leagues: which he did for two causes; first, that by this cutting the banks of
the River, he might divert those waters to an other place, which they stopped
by their damme, to make the channel swell and turn upon Ter-Heyde. Then that
how much the more water the tide had brought into those vast meaddowes, through
the banks; at the ebb, might be turned more impetuously upon the damme: which
thing came fo infalliby to pass, that by how much nearer the damme came
together, by so much the deeper the sand was washed away at the bottom.
Spinola dares scarce give credit to his own Ingeners.
In fine, having sounded the opinions of all his workmen and Ingeners, they
assured him that damme could not stand against the swelling of the current:
Spinola notwithstanding, for the greater security, thought it safe to do more
then less then they counselld, that he might leave no place open or free for
the enemy. Wherefore he commanded an other pallisado to be made, He fortified
the Causey.
thicker then the former before that causey which he bad raised, from the bridge
of Boats toward Hage (least a passage being forced) the causey might ly open
for the THE CAVSEY WHICH NOT A CAVSED TO BE RAISED in the medow-gro^^s
fortified with a parapet, pallisadoes, Ba^^ and other Works. A. The Causey
covered with boords. B. The Bridy of Boats betwixt Hage and Terheyde. C.
Halfe-moones before the Bridge. D. Ae double pallisade in the medon-ground. E.
Ae four-double pallisude in the River Merke. F. Batteryes. G. Ae Breast-worke.
of oues on the other side of the Merke.

enemy boats to pass) and to be fastened together on the top with overthwart
trees like the former. Upon the causey it self, on that side which lay next
this pallisado, he caused a parapet to be raised to place and defend his
Musqueters. At either end of it he raised two works to plant Artillery upon. A
double pallisado in the River.
And in conclusion he shut up the River it self in three or four several
places, a good distance from each other, with a pallisado of great trees, on
both sides of the bridge, against the enemy with in the Town, and against their
Camp without: that if their Boats should come to overthrow that work, the
force of them, being received and broken upon these stocks of Trees, might
less endaunger our bridge, or pass through our Boats. Betwixt these outward
pallisadoes of trees, the boats lately taken from the enemy lay at anchor, the
masts of them lying outward upon the foredeck, to take hold and tear the
sails of any Boats they should encounter: Upon them a bridge was made, Boats
lay at anchor in the River to hinder the enemies passage.
and upon the bridge a parapet raised of boords stuffed thick with stones. Some
of these boats were boared at the bottom, and stopped up again, so that the
stoppers being at any time taken out, they might draw water in abundance, and
sink upon the sudden, Boats boared at the bottom to sink upon the
sudden.
choking up the channel to stop the passage of any boats. Before the
uttermost pallisado floated two main masts, fastened foiningly at two ends.
Before these again lay a carriage Boat filled with pitch, rozzen, tow, and
other combustible stuff, which questionless, Other Boats full of co^bustible
stuff to take hold and burn the enemies fleet.
if the enemy had come, by taking hold of their fleet would have made great
slaughter. These things being ended on our part, the enemy en the other side,
was no whit less diligent in repayring the losses sustained by us in their
damme, in those places principally which lay nearest to us, raising two works
upon either shore of the River, least by our sallyes we might hinder the
progress of their work. They of Breda in like manner, either out of of a
desire to have some share in this great work, The enemy raises their damms to
make the Rivers over flow our Camp.
that the damme at Seuenberg might the better be finished, by their restrayning
the strong current of their River; or to make amends for their work attemped in
vain, in the month of december when by the raising the banks which divide
their Rivers, they made account to put our whole Camp under water; began now
again to raise those banks higher and thicker then before. Spinola draws a
ditch 2200, foot long to convey all waters into the River.
Spinola having notice of it (being he could not divert the course of the
River) caused a ditch to be drawn near the town walls two and twenty hundred
foot long (in which place the ground lying high kept in the water the better)
by which, drawing a little brook about one side of the town, he turned all
standing waters into the River Merk, The enemies works overthrown.
least, growing greater, they might at any time ouerflow our Camp. But before
this ditch of ours was made an end of, the damme which they of Breda raised
higher and thicker, being overthrown by the violence and swelling of the
waters, broake down many Sluices and works of the walls, with the endaungering
and shaking of the whole town besides. At Seuenberg, in like manner, the force
of the waters we turned upon them, violently bore away three carriage boats
they had sunk, from the bottom of the River, and overthrew the whole damme
raised upon them. The providence of Almighty God.
To which this followed of Almighty Gods providence, that during the time that,
by the hands of so many workmen, that ditch of ours was making, though they let
fly continually, out of the town, upon our men, one only soldier of ours was
hurt, and he only in one of his shoulders by a Musket ball.

They of Seuenberg notwithstanding were constant to what they had begun, The
perseverance of the enemy.
how difficult soever they had experienced that work to be, which they had
already attempted three or four several times in vain. Such as perceived the
impossibility of it, would yet at least encourage the enemy by a feined
confidence and assurance of the contrary. Wherefore they gave order the damme
should be begun again from both sides of the River, for the better
strengthening of which they rammed great trees, straight upward, into the
bottom of the River, and from hand to hand threw turf into it. They filled up
the spaces betwixt these trees with great stones, turfe and fagots. And that
the work might go on, without intermision, they raised heaps of turfe, like
rocks, in low places (at such times as the ebb had carried away the water)
that at high water they might, by boats, be transporting such turfe as appeared
above the water. And in conclusion by opposing the ordinary course of the
Rivers and Seas, they wrought in vain against nature it self. Justin of
Nassau, in like manner, began to make up his dammes again at Breda, The
Governor of the Town was not failing on his part.
and to repair his Sluices and works broken down; raising withal high
Rampires against our Artillery, to defend the Town from the fury of the shot.
Spinola, howbeit he now gave more credit to his engeners, believing it was not
possible for his Camp to be removed either by the swelling of the tide, or
ouerflowing of the towne-ditches, since by the cutting of his new ditch he had
drawn the standing waters out of the meaddowes into the Merk, Spinola still
suspecteth the worst.
yet because he knew the Hollanders to be expert in affairs belonging to the
waters, and perceived that they desisted not yet from their work, He employed
spies continually.
he omitted not to send his spies continually to Seuenberg, not satisfied with
any relation they brought him, by the report and hearsay of others, except
they protested to have seen with their eyes what they related. But when word
was brought that their damme (now near finished) went prosperously forward and
that their boats with provision lay at anchor, turned that way which the wind
blew toward Breda: behold again the hand of heaven, the wind which, till
then, The enemies work ouer-trowne by tempost.
blew fair, turned now against them, and so horrid a tempest arose upon the
sudden, that their trees, rammed with waterpile-sledges into the River, their
stonce turf, their fagots were carried away with the tide, their boats which
carried earth and other materials, blown against one an other, and all
together confusedly thrown upon the shore, all hope of success being cut of
for the present. They defer their work till a better season.
In conclusion the tempest, the inconstancy of the weather, and the violence of
the winds were so great, that they saw it was necessary to defer their work
till the month of March next ensuing.

The senate of Breda had notice of what past, The providence of the Magistrates
of Breda.
and least their provision might chance to fail them, by the long continuance
of the Seige, or their treasure growing low, they might want money to pay their
soldiers, they resolved to provide for both inconveniences. And for their
corn, by a more moderate distribution of it, they made it hold out the
longer. For having once, in September, taken a particular of every man's corn,
They examine all men's provision.
and after again, in October, cast up a general account of the corn of the
whole Town, in the same month presently, within two days after, they caused
all that Corn to be measured out, lodging the Captains street by street, and
distributing in every family a certain number of persons. And finding emongst
the townsmen twelve thousand measures of wheat, and in the public store house
five thousand; and five hundred head of all kind of cattle, they ordained that
the soldiers, out of the storehouse, should have five hundred measures
weekly shared emongst them, and the townsmen a thousand, out of their own
provision; eighteen oxen, every week, to be killed, and to be sold at two
stiuers and a half the pound.

But not yet content with this distribution, in November following, they caused
the Burgers provision to be visited again, and took and other account of
every man's corn, commanding upon the forfeiture of forty Ten pound.
Phillips, that no man, without license, should dare sell or transport any
corn out of his house: And upon the same penaulty they decreed, that no
townesman, from thence forward, should brew in his own house, least by brewing
secretly stronger Beer then ordinary, they might too much wast and consume
their own Corn. And yet more again, in December following, they commanded
that all men who had secretly hid or stored up any corn, should bring all
their corn, out of private houses into, a public storehouse. Te Magistrates
of the Town caused all corn to be brought to a public storehouse.
And to avoid all deceit, upon new years day, all men were summoued to deliver
faithfully, upon their oath, what store of wheat, meal Barley or Oats they
had, either of their own or of any other men's in their custody: provided, that
whosouer should refuse to declare the truth upon his oath, should forfeit ten
florens daily, till he conformed himself: and if any man should be known to be
perjured, They put every man to an oath Laws against Millers and Bakers.
he should incur the punishment of perjury, and forfeit besides two hundred
crowns: upon the same penaulty the Millers and Bakers were bound, not to bake
bread lighter then of six pound and a quarter, nor to sell any man, at once,
about two pound of corn or meal. These statutes being proclaimed upon the
second of January, the Magistrates and Captains searching all men's howses and
granaryes, carried away their corn, forcing all men to take their oath, that
they had no more corn concealed in their houses. For the failing of their
treasure, They take a course for their Treasury.
they took this course. The Governor of the town, the Coronells,
Lieutenant-Coronells and Captains deposed upon their oath, what store of
money every man had, that it might be known how much every man was able to
lend. whith done, New coin made in the Town.
five several sorts of coin, of silver and brass, were stamped, in a
apiece form. The silver pieces of a florene, of two florens, and three
florens: the brass of a stiuer, and a stiuer and half. And it was proclaimed
that those pieces should run current, according to the value of the mark set
upon them. Of the silver this was the form,

Mean while we received ill tidings of Goch, The enterprise of Goch by Lambert
Charles.
a town in Cleue-Land. Lambert Charles Governor of Nimegen for the States,
having intelligence of the weak garrison, and a place which lay open in the
VValls of Goch, A passage lay open in the Walls of Goch.
took men out of most of his neighboring Towns, and marched toward that
part of the wall which lay open, entering by force, and making himself Master of
it. Of nine hundred of our men garrisoned in the town, not above five hundred
were able to bear Arms; the rest either worn out with age, or deseases. The
Rampires worn away with moisture, lay open, and became a common passage for
Cattle, in such places especially where the ditch was fordable, and those
places, without pallisadoes, carelessly left unfortified. James Tourland
Governor of Goch had notice of the enemies stirring at Nimegen, The Governor
of Goch reinforceth his gards.
and gave warning of it to all the neighboring towns of the Kings, over
confident, as it seems, of himself and his own town. He rounded the walls
himself, and redoubled all his gards, the day before that attempt was made
upon the town. He placed a guard of fourscore men in that place where the
error appeared in the wall, and where by the decaying of the Ramper a passage
seemed to ly open. This done, he gave an account to Spinola of all things, of
the enemies being abroad, of what he had warned his neighbors about him; and
what he had done himself. Spinola, at the same time he received these letters
of Tourlands, Spinola gives the Governor of Goch a check.
received others from John Gonzalez Governor of VVesel, of the doubtful state
of their affairs therabouts, who returned answer to Tourland, with a check for
taking such care of the affairs of his neighbors, himself being over
negligent, or over confident of his own, giving him this Caveat withal, that
it was not possible for him to send him forces from the Camp, which would
arrive in time to succor him, if need should require. The forces of Nimegen,
setting forth about midnight, arrived early in the morning under the ruynous
part of the wall of Goch. The enemies forces arrived at vnawarres.
They were 4000. foot and 400. horse. Who whilst they were laboring to force
a passage in that ruinous part of the Rampire, The enemies forces arrived at
vnawarres
the 80. soldiers of ours, placed there to guard and make good the place,
terrified with the sudden coming and numbres of the enemy, forsook the
Sargeant that commanded them, and, for fear, betook themselves to a
shameful flight, Our men shamfully put to flight.
giving way to the enemy to enter at that place, the defense of which was
committed to them. The enemy having taken that part of the wall, possessed
themselves, not long after, of the Market place, and two Ports. Tourland
himself was forsaken by diverse of his men, and now that the enemy was entered
the town, was able no longer to bear the fury of the brunt: wherefore,
Tourland maks good the Castle and one ports of the Town.
gathering together his scattered soldiers out of flight, he betook himself
to the defense of the Castle, and one Port of the Town which yet remained
untaken. He dispatched a packet presently to John Gonzalez Governor of
VVesell, demanding succors of him, assuring him, he and his would hold out,
till they arrived. Gonzales returned him answer with speed, counselling him to
maintain the good opinion conceived of his valor, and promising suddenly to
send him supplies. Our men made good their places with extreme difficulty that
day. After the hot days service, Our men beaten from that port of the Town
which remained in their possession.
at night, they were beaten foom their Port. Only the Castle now remained to
them. Next day arrived succors, of 1000. foot, who contrary to Tourlands
direction, making account, at the posterne Port, to enter the Castle; with over
hastening themselves, broake down the bridge, three hundred of them being left
on the other side of the River, who were all either slain, or remained alive
to the mercy of the enemy. The succors which were sent our men, by disorder
and over hasting in danger to be lost, great part of them being slame Tourland
is sorely wounded.
Tourland, making up again, with ladders and boords, the bridge from the Castle
to the town, which himself before had caused to be broaken; and being now in
readiness to sally out upon the town, was shot through the belly, and
dangerously wounded. Then at last the Captains thought it high time to think
of surrendering upon honorable terms. And thus in three days the enemy
possessed himself of the town and Castle. The vnchristian-like proceeding of
Lambert Charles.
The commander of this enterprise Lambert Charles had the victory, but reaped
but small, and short contentment of it, for after the sacking of many houses,
pillaging of Churches, overthrowing of Altres, burning of pictures, and
promiscuouly confounding things sacred and profane, A just reward of his
profane carriage.
having nothing in reverence, bearing respect to nothing, as if to become
insolent and injurious to all men, had been only to enjoy a victory, struck dead
with a palsy, he received a just reward of his profane comportmet. We
sustained not any notable damage by the loss of that town, as appeared
afterward by the enemy themselves, nor they undertook not that enterprise
with resolution to keep Goch, so much, The States propose that Goch may be
neutrall.
as by that means, to raise Spinola from Breda: for after the taking of Breda,
they couenaunted with us (without demanding enterchangibly any conditions for
themselves) that Goch might, from thence forward, he held a neuter all town.
They of Breda ieere our soldiers about the Town.
Howbeit they of Breda, as soldiers in that kind ar ever accustomed, betook
them selves, upon this news, to the walls of their town, and from thence
cried out merrily to our Centinells, that our best course were to rise, and
retire to Goch. About this time news arrived, that the forces which Mansfeild
had gathered together, A report of Count Man's feilds arrival with his Army
upon our frontiers.
lay houering about the confines of Henault and Artoys (Provinces of ours
bordering upon France.) The Archduchesse ISABEL, albeit she could not believe
that any Prince would embroile his flourishing fortunes, with those desperate
and lost attempts of Count Mansfeild, The Archduchesse makes preparation
against him.
yet because she was not ignorant that the affections of Princes, are no less
changeable, then violent, she made preparation of war, according to the
greatness of the danger, with intention only to defend her self, where occasion
should be offered. To which end she lodged forces upon the confines of Henault
and Artoys, for the guard of those Provinces; giving Count Emden the command
of them of Henault; and Count Hooghstrot (one who before was Governor of
Artoys) the command, and leading of the forces of that Province. She
dispatched away Count Sforza, to hasten the forces of the Emperor, and Duke of
Bauere, against the coming of Mansfeild. She gave order that all Corn, and
Cattle should be conveyed to the most inland, and remote towns. She prohibited
the sending of horses out of Belgia into France, as the french before had done
the like, about the transporting of Corn out of France, into Belgia. Spine
makes now leauyes for the Palatinate.
Mean while Spinola grew iealious, least Mansfeild furnished with so many
English, German, and french forces, might have some design upon the lower
Palatinate: for the prevention of which, he have command to Don Guilielmo de
Verdugo, Governor of the lower Palatinate, to raise, for a reinforcement,
eight free foot Companies, and two new troops of horse; The forces of Germany
and of of the low Cu^tryes in a readiness
and to receive presently into pay, the Regiment of Coronell Gratz, with five
hundred horse more. Whilst these things were doing, the forces raised by the
Provinces, to the number of 3000. horse, and welneare 15000. foot, were ready
in Arms. The new Companies raised, in the later end of summer, were at hand.
Count Anholts Regiment, consisting of 3000. foot, was already arrived, with
1000. horse. The Emperors forces, The Imperial forces commanded by Carlo
Spinelli.
which were 2200. horse and 3000. foot, commanuded by the Marquess Carlo
Spinelli, who had a vehement desire to encounter with Mansfeild, were now upon
the frontiers (by the diligence and hastening of the Baron d' Ainsy.) The whole
forces raised by the Cuntry, were commanded by Don Carlos Coloma, Don Carlos
Coloma the late Spanish Ambassador in England, General of the Army of the
Cuntry.
late Viceroy of Majorque. Albert Arenberg Prince of Barbancon, from a Coronell
of a foot Regiment, was perferred to be General of the horse raised by the
Cuntry. This Army, in the beginning, The Prince of Barbancon General of the
horse.
had order to remain about Namure, to encounter with Mansfeild, if (as once
before he had done) he should attempt; again, an invasion upon our frontiers:
but news being brought that Mansfeild was to join with Count Maurice; they
both, with the Imperial forces, joined to those of the Cuntry, encamped near
Anwerp.

Spinola being now furnished with such an Army as the like had seldom ben
seen in the low Countries (for it consisted of 30000. foot and 8000. horse,
besides the ordinary garrisons of all frontiere towns) let slip no occasion,
the remayndure of the Seige, by which he might intercept the letters of Count
Maurice, and the beseiged, so to come to know what their designs were. For
which he caused diverse ambushes to be laid in several places, offering great
rewards to such as could intercept any letters. Three several persons were
cbserued to have passed into the town, either through the carelesnes of our
Centinells, or through their own swiftnes. In the place were these men passed,
some few days after, a little purse was found, by some who were curious in
seeking therebouts, Two letters of Count Maurices intercepted.
in which were two letters, besmeared over with wax, the better to be preserved
against all waters they might fall into. The Secretary Michael Rontart
decipreth them.
They were both from Count Maurice, the one to the Governor, the other to the
Senate of Breda, written in such ciphers, as could hardly be deciphred. In
which after many had labored in vain, at last Michael Router, Secretary to
the king, and the Marquess after much study, overcame the difficulty, and
found the sense of them. These were the contents of that to the Governor, that
to the Senate being of the same tenure, Count Maurice his letter to the
Governor of Breda.
but shorter:

That he was much comforted to understand of the great store of corn found
emongst the townsmen. That now their care ought to be, by a moderate
distribution of it, to make it hold out, till he could be able to send
succors to them, for which, great preparation was making in England, France,
and the united Provinces. That, for that purpose, Count Mansfeild was at hand,
who by joining his forces to theirs, might raise Spinola from his Seige. That
they were long since expected, and had been there already, if they had not ben
crossed by tempest, and foul weather. That 2000. french horse were already at
Bologne and 14000. English foot ready to embarque at Dover (besides other loose
troops in the land of Liege and other places.) That the rest of the foot forces
to the number of 2000. raised, by him, in Germany, and the united Provinces,
lay ready embarked, waiting their opportunity, and fair weather. That they had
once already put to Sea, but were put back by foul weather. That the States
would neither spare labor nor charges, to further Mansfeilds designs, and
succor Breda, for which purpose they had taken order for the raising of 4000.
new horse, besides the horse of the old Army, in England and France, where
also they were now raising six or seven thousand foot more then ordinary: so
that about the beginning of spring, they were in hope to have an Army of 40000.
foot and 6000. horse, with which they would find some means to releive Breda:
which that it might be effected to the most advantage of their Army, and the
Town, he desired that the corn (mentioned in the Governors letter) might be
made hold out till the first of May next ensuing: which, from the tenth of
that present January, was a hundred and eight days. That, though he was
confident their forces would be much sooner ready, yet he requested they would
spare their Corn, as much as was possible, that his own Army, and the other,
which yet lay-expecting upon the borders of France, might have so much the
more liberty to come to him at their ease. That whereas the Governor had
formerly written to him, to know his opinion about stinting the soldiers and
townsmen, with their wives and children, to a set proportion of Corn; is was
to be noted, that men, for the most part, eat most at such times, when they are
proportioned to a set allowance; at other times, they buy not more then
ordinarily is necessary for them, especially when corn is to be had for money.
Besides, that it was a thing would give occasion of tumult, how impartially
soever the distribution were made. That he therefore left it wholly to the
discretion of the Senate, and Counsel of war there, to determine what they
thought most convenient for the sparing of their Corn. That he had treated
with the States, to know what their pleasure was should be done with the
soldiers horses, when their forage was spent. That they had engaged
themselves they would repay to the horsemen, what money soever they might have
had more for their horses, being alive, then afterward they should sell them
for, being dead; provided, the horsemen valued them at a reasonable rate:
wherefore they should not spare, for the public good, freely to kill their
horses, to mantayne their hunger the longer. That, as long as any forage
remained, they should preserve their milch-kine to their ovtmost extremity
(milk being a thing so necessary and vefull.) And, though it was not to be
doubted at all, but he had lately, with the Senate, made a straight search,
over all the Burgers Cellars and granaryes: that he besought him again,
notwithstanding, ever to have a care, to mantayne the public store as much as
lay in him, if peradventure any man, by stealth, should chance to conceal his
provision. That the Magistrates had informed him of the affections of the
people, ready, with their purses and provisions to supply all, wants and
necessityes of the Seige, but with all, that complaints were brought to him of
the insolencyes of some soldiers, who, though they had no reason to complain,
either of their lodging, fire, wages, or dear rates of any provision; yet were
not afraid, as well by day, as by night, to break open houses, spoil gardens,
break down hedges, pillage stables, shops, and the very Cabins them selves;
and these things, for want of a strict observation of discipline, and suffering
some soldiers to escape unpunished, who had been taken in those offenses. Which
thing, out of doubt, would cause a remisnes in the Burgers, who hitherto had been punctual in keeping their guards, and who already began to mutter that
their own houses were more precious to them, then the town walls, and were
the rather to be made good against their domestical enemy. That he desired
therefore, if such insolences should happen hereafter, that severe justice might
be done upon the first delinquent, so to terrify others from committing the
like: that soldiers ar placed in garrison, with intention to defend, not to
offend the inhabitants of the towns where they live. That his desire was,
these his letters should be showed to the Coronells, and all others of the
Council of war, whom he besought to take some serious course that the
townsmen, who otheruise had a sufficient share of suffering, might be freed,
and secured from these insufferable abuses. That he had had intelligence, from
other places, of the new Causey made by the enemy; of their Counterscarp cast
up upon that causey which goes to Seuenberg; and of the strong pallisado of
tres made before it. That notwithstanding, the States desisted not from
choking up the channel of the River, near Seuenberg, which work would be
finished out of hand: though it remained a thing uncertain, in most men's
opinions, what success this stopping of the channel was like to have: Some
were of opinion it would drown all feilds far and near about the Town;
others believed otherwise. That, for his part, he would suspend his judgment,
till he had seen the event. Yet, that he was not ignorant (whether it were
possible or no to choke up that channel) that those feilds were of such a
vastnes, as without a world of waters, they could not be drowned; and that
those waters would not so easily make a passage for them through the enemies
causey which was so sollidly made, and fortified so strong. Yet howsoever, that
that work would much molest the enemy, when he on the other side, with his
Army, should come to succor the town. Wherefore it would not be out of
purpose, if against that time, he made ready some boats, to second him, out of
the town. This was the substance of the letter. At the bottom of the letter
this was added: that Mansfeilds Army had once again put to Sea, but was put
back by a contrary wind. That Lambert Charles Governor of Nimegen, had
surprised the town of Goch.

Count Maurice his design, to call so many foreign forces to assist him, was
thus laid open to us, by the intercepting of these letters; wherefore, Spinola
perceauing all these troops to be intended against him, and that of necessity
he must remain yet three months longer in the field (knowing Count Maurice
to be as eagerly resolved to succor Breda, Spinola raises new works about his
Camp.
as if the safety of their whole Republike lay a bleeding with that town)
throwing down first those fortifications which Count Maurice had lately
raised, and left standing at Mede, he began, with great labor, in the most
unseasonable time of the winter, to cast a trench about his Camp of an
incredible largeness, least the enemy, at unawares, with so great an army,
might break in at our backs in the spring time, as he resolved. Which trench,
The incredible largeness of his new Trench
when it was made an end of, contained in circuit two and fifty thousand paces;
so much greater it was then our first trench cast up in have, which contained
not in circuit above three thousand six hundred paces. After ages will stand
amazed, and Caesar and Pompey, if they were now living, would give no credit to
this relation, the one of which at Durace, made a trench of fifteen thousand
paces, the other of nineteen thousand, and thought them large works. But that
no man may believe I have erred in my computation, I thought good to set down
the number of paces about each quarter, a part, as I have faithfully observed
them, and measured them my self. Spinolaes quarter in the Village of The form
of the later trench drawn about the town, which took up in circuit LII.
miles,
Gineken, with the Quarter of Count Salacar, A particula calculation of the
paces of this Trench.
General of the horse, in the rear of it, was compassed about with a trench
of two and twenty thousand, six hundred, and three and thirty paces. Ballancons
with one of eight thousand six hundred paces: Isenburgs with a trench of
eleauen thousand five hundred four and fifty paces: Ballions with an other of
nine with thousand eight hundred and thirteen paces. Besides this outward
trench, Spinola had drawn an other within that, against the sallyes of the
beseiged. But this inward trench, because the town was rendered before, was
never thoroughly finished: yet, with its imperfect circuit, it took up in
compass sixteen thousand paces. Both these trenches were ten foot high, the
walls of them not rising perpendicularly, but scrping by degrees. At the
bottom they were fifteen foot thick, with two steps on the inside, for the
use of the Musqueters, above which steps was a parapet ten foot thick at the
bottom, and six foot on the top, rising five foot high, the ditch being sunk
seven foot deep about it, and fifteen foot broad from one brinke to the
other, being at the bottom not above eight foot broad. So much more sollid and
substantial were these latter trenches then the former, which were not above
five foot high, and seven foot thick; the dith of the same breadth. Within
the circuit of both these trenches, new Redouts, Works in the Trench.
and diverse Batteryes were made, of which there were two at the entrance of
each quarter, and a half moon before the entrance, on the out side: And
diverse forts besides, according to the different situation and danger of the
places. Moreover, Spinola^^ Camp fortified a now.
each Quarter (slighting the first lesser fortifications) was fortified, anew,
with so many new works, that one who has not ben eyewitness of it, will
hardly give credit to it: so that it appeared a kind of labyrinth of
fortifications. In our Camp only (besides such works as were raised in diverse
Villages abroad, either for the defense of our provision, The number of our
Works abo^^ the Town^.
or for the hindrance of the enemies breaking in) were numbered in all a hundred
threscore and eighteen works. The number of our works about the Town.
Redouts 96. Forts 37. Open and close batteryes 45.

Whilst these things were doing, Mansfeilds deceit and his letter to the
Archduchesse.
Mansfeild being furnished with diverse foreign forces, and beleiuing his name
wow to be grown fearful, making show of a desire to march toward the
Palatinate, besought the Archduchesse earnestly, by letters, that she would be
pleased to grant him safe passage through her Cuntry, and withal to victual
his Army, in his passage. That his purpose was, without any sinister intent,
only to pass through the Kings Cuntry to such places, as, to comply with the
king of England his Masters command, he must of necessity pass unto. That he
would not without her prtuity make any offer to pass, because he was confident
she would not refuse him passage; but if peradventure she should chance to
refuse him, that then he was resolved to make his one passage by force, which,
relying upon the justice and equity of his cause, he assured himself he
should find easy.

The Infanta, having often experienced the subtility of the man, thought best
to return no answer, that so it might appear how little credit she gave to
his words, and how less she stood in fear of his rude and unskillful Army,
fitter for the plough then the wars, consisting only of pressed, and fresh water
soldiers, her self having so great and choice an Army in the Cuntry.

Mean while, The wants of the beseiged in Breda.
they of Breda perceauing them selves so straightly besieged, having long stood
in expectation of Mansfeilds supplies, who being tossed long at Sea, had been
longer upon his way then could be imagined, began now to show some fear and
felling of their burden. For the prices of their provision began to mount high,
The dear rates of their provision.
and their Haberdine and cheese was already at an end. Butter was now, emongst
them at 25. stiuers the pound, oil at a crown the Quart, an egg at 3.
stiuers, pease at ten crowns the measure, bacon at 15. stiuers the pound.
Which dearth of victuals was cause, that the English soldiers, a nation
impatient of hunger, began now shamefully to feed upon carrion; and diverse
others, by means of the ill food, to which they were not accustomed, fell in to
the scuruy (a desease so termed by the Physicians:) for, after their long
sufferance, and a plague which raged sorely emongst them, Their deseases by
change of diet.
they were forced to feed upon old moldy corn, which had been long before
stored up for such an extermity. The townsmen, to lessen some what the often
watches, and other labors of the soldiers, took it to their charge to keep
the guard of the town walls, leaving only the Outworks to the soldier to
guard, from which labor no man, what priuiledg soever he might otherwise
challendg, would exempt himself. The Governor, to prevent all Mutinyes which
peradventure might arise emongst the soldiers, through the want and impatience
of victuals: and the more to oblige and endeare them to him, caused the poorer
sort of tradesmen to supply the places of the dead soldiers, performing their
duties, and drawing their wages, since it was not possible to get their living
by their labor; The Gouer nours indul gency to the soldiers for fear of a
Mutiny.
Besides which, he dispensed with the strict discipline ordinarily observed
before, suffering the soldiers to watch but auery third night, whereas they
were accustomed, every other night, to have the guard. To all which, The
Coronells exhort their soldiers.
their Coronells were not wanting, on their parts to encourage them, and their
preachers, in the pulpet, to persuade them to take heart, and not to sooth and
flatter themselves so grossly, thinking to qualify that, by the plausible name
of a surrender, The Mini sters in the pulpet persuade the.
which indeed was nothing else, but shamefully to stoop to the yoke? and
servitude of the Spaniard; that they should be confident of Mansfeilds coming;
that they were mistaken in thinking him not to be arrived at his day appointed,
and that he was nearer at hand then could be imagined, Vain hopes.
but that, by the stopping of all passages, the news was kept from them; that
Spinola did not persist so constantly in raising daily new works for his any
recreation or sport he took in it; that they might take their own eyes, and
Spinola him self to witness if they would not credit them; that the forces of
Germany, France, England, and the low Cuntryes were at hand, for fear of
which, Spinola wrought night and day; that it were too unworthy and shameful
an effeminacy, not to endure their wants till their succors could arrive,
which were now so near at hand; That their greatest sufferances were already
past, and liberty ought now to be the only thing they were to look after; that
they would not loose the reputation they had gained of their resolute enduring
so great and long wants, for a few days longer endurance. They endeauored to
conceal their wants
This done, the Coronels, least the soldiers should discover things to be
other wise then they made them believe, or that the miserable condition of the
town should be made known to us, by such as passed up and down betwixt us,
gave order, that no drum, or Trumpet what soever, sent from us to them,
should be permitted to enter the town, but should expect their answer at the
Ports, The Magistrates take a course a against Muunyes.
and there be plentifully entertained, and make good cheer, (a policy
heretofore practiced by Manlius) to make show of their plenty. The Magistrates,
or the other side, took all other things to their care, and, in imitation of
Augustus, forbad all public meetings, or assembleys of the townsmen, least
that might be a coulor for factious people to come together, and plot some
sedition. A watchful eye was had over the soldiers, by their Captains, as
often as they were observed to whisper together in any troops, and by the
interuention of the Captains, their discourses were broaken of. By these and
the like preuentions, the town was some what the longer preserved, and the
dishartned townsmen and soldiers were encouraged, though from that time
forewards, their wants, for the most part, were fed with bare hopes. Now at
last Count Maurice was arrived at Gertrudenberg with his foot forces, and now
again the power of heaven seemed to contest with him. Mansfeild lost many men
by tepest in the very harbor of Gertrudenberg.
The winds and tempests drove his ships, with that violence, one against the
other, in the harbor, that diverse of them were broken, and became utterly
unserviceable: on the other side, as if the cold of the whole winter had
benreserued to that time, an extreme sharp frost closed up all Rivers, that,
in many days, provision could not be brought to them. It is a known custom
of them of Gertrudenberg, that, out of the confidence they have in their
perpetual navigations, and neighboring towns, they never hord up any store of
corn, or other provision. Hence it came to pass, that, upon the sudden
arrival of so many soldiers, a great want followed, and scarcity of all
things; the rather, because by the unexpected great frost, all passages were so
frozen, that nothing could be brought in. To this, The desases and miserable
death of many of his soldiers.
many of them falling sick of feauers, plague, and other nasty deseases, out of
the straightnes of the place, loathsome stinks, and long enclosure at sea
(being all new men and not accustomed to tempest, or such other loathsomenesse
as they met with there) some of them dead, others half alive were cast over
board. It was reported that a boue four thousand of them perished in this sort.
Diverse of them, being thrown over board for dead men, recovered the shore by
swimming, and are yet living in the town. Dtuers dead bodies lay unburied,
upon the lad; others cast ashoare, by the waves, upon several coasts of
Holland, caused a greiuious plague in many neighboring towns: A miserable
sight to the English souldters to see their Cuutrimen, so hardly used.
A lamentable spectacle to rest of the English, to behold their
fellow soldiers so hardly entreated in a strange land, and in that Cuntry
especially which they came to releive. And which was most of all to be
lamented, whilst Mansfeild was afraid to put his men on shore, the most of
which were pressed, and served against their will, they came to perish by that
means, by which thought to preserve them; by being restrained from going a
shore. Diverse of them, notwithstanding, escaping by flight, half sterued,
unarmed, and in pitiful plight, reported themselves to be in far better case,
then the rest of the Army which remained behind, who were, for the most part,
pressed men, ignorant of their trade, and such as were yet to learn the handling
of their Arms, when now they should have been fit to bring into the field. It
is reported of some of them, that they charged their pieces with all their
powder, The ignorance and unskillfulness of some of Mansseilds new soldiers.
at once which was distributed to them for several charges, filling the whole
bore of the Musket so full, that scarce any place remained to receive their
bullet: so raw and unskillful these men were at the beginning. It appeared by
many letters that those troops were raised out of the scumme of the people,
and that in a short space, they were so lesned, what with deseases, and what
with running away, that of forteene thousand men, scarce four thousand
remained. Whilst Mansfeilds fleet lay thus fas frosen, the opportunity of the
season put us in mind of sandry exploits. Nordam fort, near Seuenberg,
inaccessible in the summer, by reason of the waters, might now, upon the Ice,
Diverse onterpuses proposed to us to which the season of the year with other
concurrences seemed to inuit us to.
have been attemped, on foot: It was thought no hard matter, at that time, to
take in Prinsland, Rosendale and Seuenberg. Wherefore spies were, every where,
sent out to discover: fireballs were made ready, to through into the enemies
Boats. But in vain, for the Ice (which seemed to be sollid and hard frozen)
was so weakened with the continual snow falling upon it, that it would hardly
bear the weight of three or four soldiers, at once; And the ways, lying deep
with snow, uneven, blown up and down, here and there in heaps with the wind,
were infinite dangerous for squadrons of men to march. The spies themselves
fell, some breast high, some mouth high, and were often times quite overwhelmed
with the snow, that they could not hear, or help one an other. Three of
Coronell Fuggers soldiers, being resolute bold fellows, coming to the
enemies Camp at Rosendale, after they had made what discovery they could upon
the boats which lay there, drinking and discoursing, without suspicion with all
men, were betrayed in their return, and escaped but narrowly by flight, one of
being taken, and greiuiously wounded. At other times Fuggers men had better
success in their exploits, and few of then often times, brought in many
prisoners; But the success of stratagems is not ever alike. There wanted not
some, who besought Spinola, that with the forces of Don Carlos Coloma, and some
of his troops added to them, an attempt might be made upon Rosendale, which
was but slightly fortified, assuring him, that, according to the report of
Spies, the enemy, there, stood in fear of us, and would sooner pack up bag and
baggage, and betake themselves to flight, then to fight: they were persuaded
that this attempt might be made with out danger, if, our horse being divided,
were sent, in the mean time, one half toward Berghen op Zome, and the other
toward Prinsland. Spinola, who always gave ear rather to safe and wary
enterprises, grounded upon reason, then to others which seemed plausible, and
by accident only might chance to prove fortunate, weighing all things seriously
wtth himself, and considering that that enterprise, would be little or nothing
benefictall to his main design, resolved rather to reserve his forces entire,
Spinolace warines in his undertaking any enterprise.
for some necessary occasion, then to discourage his whole Army, with the
opinion of the enemies valor, or encourage the enemy, with their good success
against us, if peradventure we should chance to receive a soil, and fail in
our enterprise, though with the loss of never so few men; knowing that in
matters of war, upon slight occasions, oftentimes, great alterations follow;
and that it were not wisdom, in a General, with imminent danger to pursue a
slight Vctory. The fourth of March was now at hand, which was the Aniuersary
day of the Surprising of Breda for the States, The aniuersary day of the taking
of Breda for the States.
by the deceit of a carriage-boate. This day, they of Breda were ever
accustomed to keep holliday: but now, because it was like to be the last year
they should keep this feast, they kept it so much the more solemnly, by how
much the more seldom they were like to observe it hereafter: more like the
funeral day of it, then the birth day: discharging their last duties of the
honor they ought it, by three vollyes of all their great and small shot.

Now the time was come, The enemy took in hand again the Damme in the River
which they had left of for a time.
till when they had deferred the raising of the damme, in the River: and in the
mean season that they had ceased from, that work diverse men's inventions had
labored hard in it. One emongst others, for a great price, undertook the
work, howbeit, for the most part, it was thought a thing impossible. This man,
in the presence of them whom the States had appointed to be ouer-seers of the
work, A new coursetaken for the raising of the damme.
made choice of a place, not far from that, where they began the damme before,
in which place the River is both narrow and shallow, where he threw in great
quantity of stones, wrapped up in Nets, least they might chance to be carried
away with the tide, and upon them again, a certain kind of sand, fater then
ordinary sand (brought for that purposed out of England and France) to stop up
all creases, and strengthen the damme. The damme oyerthrowne when it was
finisked.
The work seemed now to succeed better then at other times: but a sudden
tempest arising, such floods of water beat against the damme, (it being then
March Moon, in which season the Sea swells more then at other times of the
year) and such shewers of rain fell at the same time, meeting with the swow
now melted upon the ground, that that work at Seuenberg, and some others at
Rosendale, and diverse works about the Town of Breda were utterly overthrown:
Besides, the high ways of our Camp, and some of our fortifications, nearest
the town, were so ouer-flowne, that in three days no man could come to them
but in Boats: in which time, Our Camp in many places over flowne by the
floods, and our Quarters seperutud oue from the other.
our Quarters lying sperated by these slouds, we suffered much through the want
of victuals: for no wagons could bring us any thing, and we had not such store
of Boats, as, upon the sudden, could furnish all places sufficiently. The
River could not now be distinguished from the shore, or green feilds; all
things had the same face, all places overflowed. It never appeared more
plainly, how much God favored our Army, in preserving it all that winter:
for, if the winter had been so hard, and such quantity of swow had fallen, in
the beginning, as did now at the later end, or as ordinarily falls every
year in the winter season, out of doubt, for that only respect, we should have been forced to forsake the Seige. For, during that short time of the extremity
of cold, diverse soldiers had their limbs forzen, others were found dead whilst
they stood centinell: some of them had their hands and seet frozen, in such
sort, that it was necessary afterward to have them cut of. The Carters and
Sutlers, who brought us in provision, being oftentimes benighted, and cost
behind, Our Conuoyes hindered by the wet weather.
perished, by the extreme cold, in their journey to the Gampe, through the
great rain, snowwinds and foul ways. And generally, the conueyance of our
provision, was so hindered, that, for the space of three weeks (all which time
this great thew, and rain endured in extremity) scanse any provision was
brought to the Camp, saving what the Germane soldiers wives, running out
every day in noups, as if they had marched in squadrons, to the neighbowring
will ages, brought home upon their shoulders. Which women besides other
offices of of duty they performed to their husbands, were continually buisied
in fetching burdens of wood, seeking of forage, The love and respect of the
German soul diers wives to their thus bands.
dressing their meat for them, washing there linen, and carrying their baggage
upon their shoulders, whensouer the Camp marched; so that they ought rather
to be cherished, and esteemed, in this behalf, as necessary as Marius his
Mules, then to be reckned emongst the carriages, or impediments of a Camp.

These waters being fallen, the enemy began again, with their former
resolution, to raise their damme begun. Spinola caused the Sluices of a little
brook, called Terleure, which runs into the River Merk, to be broken, and to
stop up, and divert the course of other brooks, which ran into our Camp. The
manner of raising their damme.
He raised, besides, the causey, which he had caused to be made, in the
meddow-grounds, from the River Merk, toward Terhage three foot higher then it
was before; that, how much soever those standing waters might chance to swell,
no boats might be able to pass over that place. The enemy, to break the force
of the current, which came from Breda, a pretty distance before that place,
where they intended to raise their damme, raised two small promontoryes, upon
each shore of the River: and in the midst of the River (in that space which
remained open, betwixt the two hills, or promontoryes, where the water, finding
the passage narrower, ran with the greatest force) they rammed in great
stocks of trees, one by the other, in an order which represented the shape of a
trident, leaving but little space betwixt them, that the force of the current,
being first broaken there, might afterward run gently, and with less danger
of the damme. Behind this, they began to raise their damme, assured, as they
thought of good success. They wrought continually, upon this damme, many
days and nights, and had brought it to such perfection, having raised it from
each shore, that their remained now, in the middle, but a small gap to stop;
but the force of the water, restrained, was such, The force of the water over
throws their damine.
that whereas before the stream ran so gently, that it was hard to descerne
whether it ran upward or downward, now, the waters missing their ordinary
free passage, ran downward like an impetuous irresistable Torrent. The
pallisado before the damme, was loosned at the bottom and overthrown, by the
removing, and washing away of the sand. To all which, there rose so fearful a
tempest, about the same time, that the boats they had sunk, the stones, turfe,
fagots and trees which they had thrown into the River, to strengthen their
damme, were violently borne away, with the force of the stream, and the fleet,
in which Christian Duke of Brunswick had brought the french Cauallerie,
sustained great damage, diverse of his ships being lost, others blown into
other quarters, not able to keep their course. Then, at last, the enemy,
finding the loss of their infinite charges, thought it high time to desist
from thatworke, which they had so often before attempted in vain.

About that time certain letters of the Governor of Breda to Count Maurice,
and of Mansfeilds and Count Maurices again to the Governor, Letters of the
Governor of Breda to Count Maurice, and of Count Maurices and Mansfeirdsto the
Governor intercepted by a notable practice of a Pesant.
by which Spinola came to the knowledge of some secrets, which made much to his
purpose, were intercepted, by the subtility of a Pesant, worth recounting. A
certain person in the Army, desirous to show himself industrious in the
service, having found out a pesant, as expert of all places, and passages there
abouts, as ready to accomplish any thing, he should undertake, persuaded him,
by fair promises to carry Butter, Tobacco, and cheese to the Town, making
show of having narrowly, and with great danger, escaped our centinells, and
gards; and there to offer his service to the Governor, to carry letters from
him to Count Maurice. The fellow, in whom, otherwise, little trust was to be
reposed, gaping after the reward, and having nothing but poverty, of his own,
to trust to, was contented to put his honesty to sail: and being furnished
with those necessaryes, arrived under the town walls, according to his
directions. He was welcome to hungry men, for the provision he brought: and the
Governor, desirous to know particulars, examined him about our Camp, about the
passage he found into the town, and what was the General opinion abroad of
the state of their affairs: The fellow, being subtle, and dissembling as
falsely as an other Sinon, related many true things, and feyned as many, of his
own head, which begat a great belief, in them, of his honesty and trust: For
men or ever apt to believe wath they desire should be. In conclusion, being
asked whether he durst adventure to carry any letters, by that passage, by
which he escaped into the town, showing himself, at first, fearful, and
doubtful what to answer, suffered them by promises to work him to that, to
which of all things, under pretense of backwardness, he desired to be
persuaded. The Governor therefore trusted him with his letters to Count
Maurice, promissing him great rewards, if he brought him an answer. The
counterfaict promised to do his best; but being returned back again into our
Quarter, he brought the Governors letter to Spinola, to peruse: The contents
of it were these: That he was much conforted with the receipt of three of Count
Maurice his letters, The Governor of Breda his letter to Count Maurice.
by which he understood of Mansfeilds safe arrival with his English and
German forces, and of other preparations for the releife of Breda. That, for
his part, he would take care, as he had undertaken before, that the Corn they
had in the town, should hold out till the end of April or beginning of May,
unless happily it chanced to be fired, by the enemies often shooting of
fireballs into the Town. That he would shortly make an other search of the
Townsmen corn. That Spinola had drawn away some pieces of Artillery, from
his greatest Battery (opposite to their water-mill) to Ballancons Quarter, and
planted them upon the heath, toward Gertrudenberg, and that he began to
fortify that Quarter anew. That the garrison of Breda was much lesned, by the
plague, the flux and the scuruy, deseases which raged sorely emongst them.
That sick persons suffered much, for want of Physic, and good food. That such
as had their health were nothing dishartned, but waited some good occasion to
make proof of their valor. That their rapeoile was almost all consumed in
lamps, before they made any use of it in their meats, and that little or none
of it, was now remaining.

Spinola, having perused these letters, and sealed them up again, gave them
back to the same messenger, Spinola perused the letters, sealed them again,
and gave them back to the Pesant.
promissing to reward him liberally, if he could bring him back the answer of
Count Maurice and Mansfeild. Count Maurice, beleiuing he might confidently
repose his trust in one, who had been so careful in bringing him the Governors
letters, returned answer by this pesant, giving him a larg reward, and sent him
to Count Mansfeild, to take his letters along with him. The crafty messenger
brought both these letters to Spinola, and was liberally rewarded, by him, for
his pains.

By these letters, Cont Maurice his letter to the Governor
Count Maurice excused him self to the Governor for his delays, attributing
the stay of his succors to the unseasonable time of the year, and desiring
him, so to husband his provision, that the Town might hold out yet some weeks
longer, and if it were possible, beyond the end April; that it would be so
long before he could have his supplies in a readiness; that otherwise, all the
endeauours and charges of the States would prove in vain; That he acknowledged
this demand of his to be hard, and ungrateful to him, but that their fortune
was, now, to be bettered by their industry; the rather, because all the the
french horse, raised by Mansfeild, was already arrived at Bollogne, two only
companyes excepted, which they howerly expected. That the States ships, which
went to fetch them, were already arrived there, with a prosperous wind. That
one part of the french foot forces was already arrived, with the duke of
Candale, the rest were upon the way; and so was the rest of the horse and foot
raised in Germany for the States; That the other french, English and Germane
supplies, would be ready against that time, till when he desired him to hold
out the Town, that is, till end of April.Mansfeild wrote to Governor,
Mansfeilds Jetter.
that he hoped shortly to be his guest, that then they would be merry
together, and drink his, and his resolute fellow soldiers healths; That he
was arrived with a hundred foot Companyes, and forty troops of horse; that he
should not doubt of being succored.

Spinola, being now again assured of the small provision of the town, and of
the delays of their supplies, thought it high time, upon the 30. of March,
then Easter day, to taste the Governor, about the surrendering of the town. He
sent therefore secretly to him the Count Sallacars Trumpet, with letters of this
tenure: That hitherto he had not treated, Spinoldes first leffer ^d the
Governor of Breda abontthe surrender of the Town.
with him, about the rendering of the Town, by reason of the great store of
provision he had there. But now, that he was assured of the day till when,
precrsely, their corn would hold out, for which cause it were not wisdom,
for him, to defer, any longer, the surrending of the town; he thought good,
now, to offer him honorable conditions, if he would be contented to begin to
treat with him. And if, upon the confidence he had of the succors he
expected, he should desire, of him, any reasonable set time, to hold out
Town, in expectation of those succors (which hopes yet he himself might
easily guess to be vain, when he should consider the strength of our works,
and greatness of our Army) that he was contented to condescend to his desire,
and request, provided, that the treaty might begin, from that present;
otherwise, he should not expect the like favor hereafter,

The Governor, assembling presently the Counsel of war, read publykely to
them these letters of Spinola, but, being-confident of succors, upon the
large promises made him, and his provision being now increased, by the death
of so many of the beseiged, he returned this answer.

That he had perused Spinolaes letters, The Cover nours answer to Spinola.
and admired the strangeness of his demand; the rather, because he perceived,
that Spinola believed him, and so many resolute men as he had with him in the
Town, were to be dishartned and scarred which words, who, he assured him,
feared nothing, under heaven, but the loss of their reputation: That time
would show him his error, how grossly he mistook the State of the town, out
of a self-flattery and desire to have it: That he was confident he should be
forced to deliver the town to no man, but to them, who first committed the
defense of it to his charge.

Spinola, discreetly dissembled the matter, Spinoladiscreetly co^cealed the
buisnes.
and kept this answer to him self, least the tired soldier, hearing of it,
might be put out of heart, with the vain bragges of the beseiged, so puffed up
of late with hopes of releife. Houbeit it was commonly suspected, that Spinola
had sent a Trumpet to the Governor to treat of a surrender, which only thing
was enough to persuade them, that their sufferings drew now welneare toward
the period: though some men feared the worst, by the discourses of others, and
began to suspect that Spinola had been deceived in his hopes, and, that the
buisnes would ask a longer time then was believed. Howsoever, for the present,
the treaty was left to time, and, with the raising of strong works, we expected
the coming of so many foreign forces.

Mean while the enemy drew all his forces to Gertrudenberg, and Spranghen,
taking all his soldiers, The enemy began now to draw all their forces to
Gertrudeberg and Spranghe.
out of garrison, and hiring Burgers in their places, exp ecting daily the rest
of the Army, which wintred at Rosendale. But Spinola being iealious of those
long delays of the enemy, and fearing, least under color of coming thither,
they might chance to circumuent him, in some other place, reinforced the
garrisons of Rhenebergh, Spinola reinforchet such gairisons as were most likery
to be attempted by the enemy.
Bolduc and VVesel (places most likely to be attempted by the enemy, to divert
Spinola from the Seige of Breda.) He put into Bolduc, besides the ordinary
garrison, five hundred new men, raised by the Baron of Grobbendonck, Governor
of that town, to strengthen the Regiment lately bestowed upon him. He caused
seven foot-Companies to march out of the Palatinate to VVesel, with which
Rhenbergh also, not far of, might be supplied: but he was afterward assured,
by the intercepting of some letters of Count Maurice to the Governor, that all
those troops were intended for the releife of Breda, and that they were then
lodged not far from our Camp.

These garrisons being now reinforced, Count Mautice found means to set on fire
Gineken Cirurch were we had great prounion of Corn.
as has been said, Gount Maurice found means, by his spies, to set on fire
Gineken Church (where we had a provision of six thousand sacks of meal) with a
Granary of Oats adtoyning to the Church. The fire spread so suddenly with the
wind, that it was not possible to quench it; yet notwithstanding, two thousand
sacks were found entire, the next day, which lay within these that were
consumed, and spoiled. Spinola, not being moved more then reason requires,
for such an accident (sending presently about, to all places, to buy more
corn) in short time supplied, and made good that loss. Upon the sight of
this misfortune, Vincent Lasannia Ouer-seer general of the victuals,
presented him with three thousand sacks of wheat, which he had secretly
provided and concealed in the Camp, against any accident of fire, or other
misfortune whatsoever. They of Holland did so much exaggerate this loss, in
their letters, that six of the greatest Churches would not have been able to
contain the provision, They reported and strange reporu of the Hollanders upon
this loss of ours.
which they gave out we had lost, by this accident. They reported we had lost
two and twenty thousand sacks of wheat, twenty thousand sacks of Rye, six
thousand sacks of Barley, sixteen thousand sacks of Oats, four thousand sacks
of pease and Beans, four hundred gammons of Bacon, two bundred tun of oil,
two hundred barrells of Butter, three, hundred bundles of dried habberdin, two
hundred Barrels of herrings, two hundred tun of poudred beife, two hundred
sacks of salt, three and twenty thousand cheeses, great quantity of Meal,
syrrup and honey. And with these and like fables, invented and exaggerated by
the Hollanders themselves, they published our wants, and fed their own hopes.
And questionless, if we could have been scarred with these, and the like,
fopperyes, we had been long before raised from the Seige of Breda.

Spinola, being warned by letters, of the like danger, like to happen to his
munition house (which the enemy had a design to set on fire, Spinola
preuenteth the likemischeife like to happen to his munition house.
as they had lately done the Church) caused the guards of the munition house to
be doubled, and drew an other ditch about it, with order that, from thence
foreward, it should be more carefully guarded: and least, if such an accident
should peradventure happen, his whole provision of powder should be blown up
together, and his Army come to want, he transported welneare the half of his
powder, into an other store house, which, for that end, he caused to be built.

The States, having brought their affairs to these terms, and understanding
now, The great imposts of the States.
that their chief care must be to provide money, to accomplish what they had
begun, and bring their designs to some good issue: knowing that if they could
but find out any plausible pretense to demand money, they might safely exact,
and extort it from their subjects; besides an impost, not long before imposed
upon them, they taxed all merchandise, through their whole dominions, to pay,
to the States, fifty in the hundred Their confederates and allies sent them,
besides this, Money sent the States by their co^federates.
six hundred thousand crowns, in ready money, and as much more by bills of
exchange, to be paid them by Merchants. With which sums the enemy found
himself well furnished, The King of Spain his waut of money.
whilst we, on the other side, sustained some wants. For by reason of the
french Army, The Merchants corresponde^cy began to fail.
marching victoriously, and without resistance over the mountains, with
intention to fall upon Genua, whilst his Majesty's Army of Spain lay engaged
before Breda, and could not well rise, with out some touch of dishonor, many
men's credit began to fail them with strangers, Diverse ways proposed to raise
money for the present.
who fearing the Seige of Genua, refused to lend money; a thing long before
designed, and much labored, by the enemy. Diverse ways therefore were thought
of, to raise money for the present: some proposed the taking up, of the
tenaunts, before hand, the rent due, the next year, to the King. Others, the
borrowing money, of all towns, upon his imposts and toles. Others, to agree
with the Coronells of the Army, to pay either their soldiers, or their
Captains, or both, a month or two, for the King: or, if that seemed over
burdensome, at least, that the Coronels themselves and Captains, or such of
them as had other wise commodity enough of their own, would be contented to
serve two months without pay, suffering the money they should receive, to
run to the use of the private souldters; the latter of which propositions,
The forewardnes of some of the Coronells to supply the Kings wants.
diverse Coronells seemed to consent to; but it was thought more convenient to
forbear that course, for the present, least the nouelty of the thing, might
discover too palpably the wants we were in. In fine it was concluded that some
lordships of the kings, Acourse resolved on, at last, to raise money, for the
present.
should be engaged, and held in fee-sarme of the King, by which means the
necessityes of the Army were supplied, for the present. About that time his
Majesty of Spain made choice of Don Goncalo de Cordua for Campe-Master
General of his Army of Italy, as a man fittest to compose those new troubles
begun. He was then, and had been present, from the beginning of the Siege of
Breda. To him, and the Count of Salacar, Spinola imparted all his secrets,
opening him self to these two, concealing all things, from all others. Don
Goncalo, a man as well experienced in affairs of war, His modesty.
as any soldier, now alive, and famous, in particular, for his late chasing,
and defeating of Mansfeild, carried him self, with the like modesty, in all
his actions, as Velleius describes, and fashioneth the most modest, in their
comportment. In his outward actions, he made no show of intermedling in any
thing; assuming nothing to himself, and being a chief actor in all buisnesses
of most importance; yet valewing himself always below the estimations of
others. His countenance and carriage ever composed and grave; his advise ever
ready.

About this time, News of the death of the king of England.
news was brought of the death of the King of England, a thing which caused a
demurre in the proceedings of Mansfeild, and the States. Diverse English
soldiers forsaking their colors, came daily running to our Camp: our
soldiers taken prisoners by any of Mansfeilds troops, were returned home
without ransom, he making open profession not to be in enmity with the King of
Spain. But Prince Henry of Nassau, The States join all their forces
commanding the troops of Rosendale to march toward him, and drawing out all
his garrison soldiers (as if the buisnes were speedily to come to a trial)
caused his new men to be exercised daily, with intention to keep his soldiers
minds buisied, that they might the less think of running from their colors.
Spinola, that he might have all his forces and supplies in a readiness, placed
Count Henry vanden Bergh at Hooghstrat with his horse, Spinola draws his
forces to geather.
a thousand horse of the Duke of Saxony, and 3000. foot of the Regiment of
Count Collat (supplies sent by the Emperor.) Spinola himself visited the town
and Castle of Hooghstrat, and caused it to be fortified, and from thence to the
Camp, at a certain distance, caused six forts to be raised upon that river
which runs from Hooghstrat. In the void spaces, betwixt these forts, he
lodged diverse loose Companyes of soldiers, so thick that they almost met one
with the other: that the Army, at any time, upon the sudden, might make head
against the enemy, either at Breda, or at Hoogstrate, as need should most
require. He lodged Count Anholt, with his German forces, to the number of
three thousand foot of his own, and five and twenty hundred horse, partly of
his own, and partly of the Regiments of Count Giacomo Strozzi, and of the
Coronels Auendan^o, Gratz and Neers: and Don Carlos Coloma, and the Prince of
Barbancon, with the Army raised by the Cuntry, in the Villages near Anwerp
Mechline and Lyre. This Army was so great, Great want of forage emongst our
horse.
and had such store of horse, and forage, was every where so utterly consumed,
that our horses commonly fed upon the litter of each other, or upon dry
leaves of trees, or else upon heath and briers. Oats were not to be had in such
quantity, as would suffice all carte and carriage horses, Disordres and
insole^cyes of our foreign soldiers.
besides the horse of service. The foreign soldier, not a customed to our
discipline, but used at liberty, to wander up and down, could not content
himself with that ancient tolerable theft, winked at of old in soldiers, of
the daily deniere of silver, for their spear, their pike, their fuel, their
bottle, their bellows, candle, and the like; began to ransack howses, Our old
Army debauched by the examples of the strange souldters.
to spoil Villages, and, in hostile manner, make stay of our provision, and
often times also to murmer for their wages, threating to quit the service if
they were not punctually paid. Our old soldiers, trained up rather in waiting
oportunityes to offend the enemy, then hurt our own men, who to that time had
carried them selfues with as much temper, and moderation, as could be expected,
taught now by the example of others (as soldiers commonly have a natural
propension to do ill) betook themselves to the like disorders, abusing the
name of others, for a color of their own insolences. Spinola, giving first
their Commanders warning of it, and judging it mory necessary for him, at that
time, to content, then to exasperate such kind of people, Spinola fears to
make use of the rigor of justice.
condemned some of them to die, for those enormityes, giving, under hand,
instructions to their Captains to beg their pardons, of him; which he easily
granted, knowing the time unfit to use to rigor of justice.

Whilst our forces were distributed up and down in these places, Maurice
Prince of Orange, deseased at the Hage, Maurice Prine of Orangne deceased at
the the Hage.
happy yet in this, thad he lived not to lament his loss of Breda. The last
words he uttered, ar reported to be these: Whether Breda were succored, or
lost? so that it may be coniectured, he died with grief and apprehension of
the loss of that Town, the gaining, of which, gained him his first
reputation, in the world; and for the preserving of which, now, with the
infinite expense of his own private estate, and the the exhausting of States
treasure, he had almost stirred all Europe besides.

The States made choice presently of Prince Henry, Maurice his Brother, for
their General, a Prince well experienced in the wars, affable, and a great
Courtier. Diverse soldiers of the enemies Army as well as of ours, run from
their colors.
Whilst the States were buisied with the funerals of Count Maurice, and the
election of their new General, diverse soldiers of our new Army, raised by the
Cuntry, weary already of the wars, returned home again; and others, of our
old horsemen, tired out with the continual labor, and will payment of their
wages, fled from the Camp. But Mansfeilds french soldiers ran to us every
day, in greater troops, complaining they had been deceived, and made believe
they should be led into the Palatinate, and that, in the space of seven
months, they had received no pay at all. Diverse of them were not a fraid,
publicly, to profess, A beginning of a sedition in Mansseilds Army.
that they would not go against Spinolaes Army, though they were dragged
thither, by force. A young french man, Severe justice done upon one of
Mansfeilds soldiers.
in Mansfeilds Army, an Apothecary by his trade, was drawn in pieces with
four horse (the punishment of Mutius Suffetius) for debauching some of his
Cuntrymen to run from their Colors. Our soldiers, and they of the Town,
discourse with one auother.
Our soldiers before Breda, discoursed often times with them of the Town,
from their trenches, making an agreement betwixt themselves, to forbear
shooting, on either side, whilst their parle lasted, and breaking familiar
jests upon one an other, as if their Quarters had been one; our men throwing
pieces of cheese and Tobacco to them, and they again crusts of such bread as
they had, to us.

The States new General Henry, Henry Prince of Orange returns to the Camp.
now Prince of Orange, returned, within few days, again to their Camp, and
they of Breda, glad of their succor, which they believed to be at hand, let
fly their Artellery more freely into our Quarters. One Canon Ball, Spinola
escapes two imminent dangers.
lighting upon Spinolaes own Cabin, at such time as, by good fortune, he was
absent, carried away the Canopy of his bed, and broake in pieces two tables, in
his Camber; an accident not unlike that which happened heretofore to the Emperor
Suetonius
Augustus, who being departed first out of his Tent, at the entreaty of some
friends, had his Tent presently ransaked, by the rushing in of some enemies of
his, and his Couch cut in pieces and perced, in many places, his enemies
beleiuing the Emperor himself to have been there. Within four days, or
therabouts, after this accident, Spinola, riding up and down, upon a white
horse, desirous to make some descouery, some what near the Town, an other
Canon ball struck the bitt of his bridle, out of his horses mouth, leaving the
reins of the bridle in his hand. So that it is probable, that, either Almighty
God has a peculiar care of great Generals, or that, by how much the more a
man aduentureth himself, so much the less danger, for the most part, he
incurreth. Spinola, having now escaped these dangers, caused his supplies,
which he had at hand, Spinela draws his forces to a head.
to march nearer to him, and lodged them, in several places, behind the inner
and outward trench. Count Anholt, in the rear of Balancons Quarter, toward
the heath of Oosterhout, in which place it was suspected Mansfeild would break
in; The Baron of Beauoix, opposite to the Village of Mede (Count Maurice his
old Quarter) with that Regiment of Count John Nassawes, which was paid by the
Emperor; Count John Nassaw himself, with his other Regiment of the low
Cuntryes, toward the heath of Chaem; The Baron d'Ainsy, who commanded the free
Germane Companies, out of Regiments, with the title of a Coronell, in the rear
of Gineken Quarter, where also he was to defend the Quarter of the Horse; And
diverse other troops in diverse places about the Camp. He caused the horse
gards to be doubled, who marched, every day, from their own Quarter, to their
several gards. He visited the Rounds, oftentimes, him self, especially in
those places, where he suspected the enemy might break in, never omitting it,
any night, till the enemy retired.

The worth of this man never showed it self more then now. The proceeding of
Spinola.
His continual watching, or broaken sleep, never made him discurteous to any
man. When he awaked, out of his sleep, he looked as lively, and was again as
ready for any new buisnes, as if he had not before fallen a sleep at all;
sleeping again with as great ease, as if he had not ben waked, or broaken out
of his sleep: for, having first taken order for all buisnesses, he slept out
of fear. He contemned bravery in his apparel, being careless of his outside,
yet so, that he ever maintained the dignity of a great General. It was
indifferent to him, whether the weather were fair or foul, never regarding
either rain, snow, frost, or winds, or whether it were late in the evening, or
dark night. He fasted diverse, times two days together. His bed, for the most
part, was some Cart or soldiers Cabin. He was neither curious of his diet,
rest, or any thing about himself. The managing of all weighty affairs lay
wholly upon him, in which he labored, and took pains beyond belief. His
courage was invincible; his countenance ever the same, what accident soever
happened, by which he preserved and fed his soldiers hopes. He guided not
himself, according to his own opinion only, nor opened his buisnes to any,
but such as he had need of, doing nothing rashly, but disgesting all
buisnesses, with deliberation. His secrets were buried in silence. He did not
easily credit any news, upon the sudden, but was as hard of belief, in
such occasions, as he was apt to contemn any doubtful report, that might
deiect him, knowing the strength of wisdom to consist; in not being over
credulous. To foresee, consult, write, give audience, take order for
buisnesses, often visit and ride about his Camp, were pastimes to him. He
never retired him self for any wearines, nor denied any man access to him. He
was courteous to his soldiers, to the Pesants, and to his spies, as far as
stood with the honor of a great Commander, making use of spies only for
necessity. He bore more outward respect to such as stood ill affected to him,
whose power was able to change the face of buisnesses, then to his
bosome-freinds; houbeit, in him self, he feared no man's hatred.

In the Village of Hage, three spies were taken, going to the Town, Three
spies apprehended.
with a great packet of letters, a good quantity of Tobacco, and some Bottles
of oil, to cure the desease, called the Scuruy. At the instant they were
apprehended, they found means, in the woods therabouts, to hide the Prince of
Orange his letter to the Governor. But one of them, who had often times before
passed, through our Gampe, to the Town, by means of the carelessness of some
of our Gentinels, being put to the torture, confessed the letters, and place
where he had hidden them. The Prince of Orange his letter to the Governor, was
this:

That his Brother Maurice was deceased, The Prince of Orange his letter to the
Governor.
and the States had made choice of him, for their General, in his place. That,
that sad accident should be no hindrance to the succors they expected. That,
within three days, he would be with his Army, in the Village of Dunghen, two
leagues distant from Breda, where they of the Town might discover him, from
the top of their highest steeple. That it was not possible the Army could have been sooner in a readiness, but that now he would leave no means vnatempted to
releive them. That the Governor should have a care, by husbanding, or lesning
the distribution of Corn, to make it hold out; and to encourage the
soldiers, by representing to them the resolution of so select an Army of the
States, with the incredible expenses, and desire they had to releive them. That
he should write back to him, in what place, how, and by what means, he might
best break into Spinolaes Quarter; and, for the more facilitating of that
enterprise, that he, in like manner, should concur, and fall on with his
forces.

They of Breda, who by some other conueyance, had received an other of these
letters, were much comforted, and much afflicted, with the several tidings it
brought them. They lamented the loss of so able a General as Count Maurice,
and yet they were comforted again with the joyful news of their succors.
From the top of their Church-steeple is a large prospect into the Cuntry, from
thence they discovered their Army, congratulating, and comforting one an other
with that sight. They sounded a horn, from the top of the steeple, as if we
were already running away. They called out to us, from their VValls, to pack up
bag and baggage, vain comforts.
forgetful that they, and their Breda was the prey hunted after, and we, not
they, the huntsmen of is Dear. The Prince of Orange, being now arrived with
his Army at Dunghen, The Prince of Orange thought to surprise the Churchsteeple
of Oosterhout.
to the end that he might yet ly nearer us with his forces, sent diverse troops
of horse and foot, with many fireballs, to take in the Church steeple of
Oosterhout, kept by 21. Burgundian soldiers of ours, back, by 21 Burgundian
soldiers. Who defended the steeple.
for a place of discovery. Spinola, having notice of it, sent out Captain
Peter d'Aguirre with his horse troop, who put to flight the enemies Scouts,
making show of more troops of horse, at his back, to assist him. The
Burgundians, in the mean time, stood upon their guard, resolved, rather to
run any adventure, then shamefully to surrender, with out good conditions.
The enemy, having now, with a petard, blown up the Church door, and put fire
in the steeple, able to do no other hurt, retired themselves. Five of the
Burgundian soldiers were slain, in the defense; seven of them were sorely
scorched with the fire. Of the enemy, because their numbers were great, many
more were slain and hurt, with stones which our men threw down thick upon
them, for, being fearful of the fire, they wisely threw down, from the top
of the steeple all the powder they had. So that, with a handful of men,
resistance was made against many troops. The Burgundian soldiers rewarded.
The Burgundians, addressing themselves to Spinola, with their burnt faces,
besmeared with salues and plasters (honorable wounds) were rewarded, with a
months pay, in hand, and an advantage of some Crowns, added to their pay for
ever. The Sargeant, their commander, was rewarded with a Colors.

They of Breda, receiving now no letters, nor daring to adventure any messenger
out of the Town, They of Breda made use of a swallow to carry a letter for
them.
made use of a Swallow, to carry a paper for them, making it fast to his wings.
Count Isenburgs soldiers, perceauing a bird with a paper, fallen to the
ground, entangled in the thread which tied fast the paper, brought it to Count
Isenburg, who sent it away presently to the Marquess Spinola. The ciphers
written in the paper were these. 1-69-2-76. The eyes of the whole world were
now cast upon Breda, expecting, from thence, some strange event: all Kings and
Princes hearkened after the success. And, it seems, the Great Turk himself
stood in suspense what to do, as if the doubtful success A. The Causey which
goes to Gertrudenberg. B. The Causey which goes to Seuenberg. C. Carlo Romaes
Quarter. D. Paul Ballions Quarter. E. The place where Maurices Camp lay first
at Mede. F. The enemies troops. G. Standing-waters. H. The River Merke. I. A
four-double pallisado in the River.

of this war, had been a Rule to direct him, either to peace or war: so
great was this contention, not for Breda only, but for honor and reputation,
as appears by the many supplies sent, hither, from all parts.

Upon the fifteenth of May, about midnight, The enemy mak^th an attempt to
break in upon our Camp.
the Prince of Orange, desirous to make some trial what might be done, fell
upon our Camp, in the outmost part of the Village of Terheyde (a place
disaduantagious, either to break in, or to fight) in which enterprise, though
he received a blow, yet the body of his Army remained untouched. He had no way
to come to us, but the two Causeys of Gertrudenbergh and Seuenbergh; the one of
which was cut of, with a little River, and a pallisado on the out side of it;
the other, with two dry ditches, fortified with a little Redout, a
Breast-worke, the English had the honor of this attempt.
and an indifferent large Fort. But nothing appeared difficult to the new
General Henry, desirous to gain a reputation in the world, and stirred up
with the emulation of his Brothers good fortune. He sent before, upon the
Causey of Certrudenbergh, diverse choice Musqueters with two hundred Pike-men,
completely armed, all Englishmen, with their English Coronell What is said, in
this occasion, of Coronell Vere, is to be understood, ^^^^ke manner, of the
Right Honorable Henry Earl of Oxford who marched jointly with Coronell Vere,
in the head of these troops, and behaved himself bravely. But the author of
this history, being a stranger to our nation and not knowing the quality of the
Earl, and having he ard much, before, of the valor of Coronell Vere, who had
served leng in Holland, gives the honor of this enterprise only to him.
Vere, accompanied with other English in the Van-garde, whom the French and
Germans followed, for succors in case of need. They were, in all, welneare
six thousand men. In the rear of them, marched their Artillery, with their
wings of horse: The Prince of Orange was present in the midst of these troops,
expecting the event. Spinola, having intelligence of this design, gave warning
of it, with speed, to Paul Ballion and Carlo Roma, who commanded those
Quarters, wishing them to stand upon their guard, because the enemy, that
night, had a purpose to fall on there. They, presently disposed their Gards,
and Centinells in places of need, warning all their Captains and other
Officers to be in Arms, with their men, and omitting nothing, requisite in
such occasions. About the break of day, the Prince of Orange, to divert our
forces, commanded Alarums to be given, in diverse places, toward Ballancons
Quarter, as if he intended to break in therabouts: but, in the mean time, his
troops were arrived at this other Quarter, where indeed he intended to fall
on; they surprised a Centinell perdu of ours, so at unawares, that he had not
leisure to give notice of it to his fellows behind him; an inconvenience, easy
to have been prevented, if, but one horse-centinell had been placed upon the
Causey, by which means (how slight soever it appears) peradventure those
whole troops of the enemy might have been utterly cut of; but, questionless,
the slaughter would have proved much greater then it was. The English, with a
daring, and vndainted resolution, falling upon the Redout, commanded by an An
Ancient.
Alferes, with some few Italians; by their thick throwing in of fireballs,
forced them to quit the place, with loss of some of their lives: which done
(for the defense of the rest of their men, who yet advanced foreward) placing
certain Musqueters behind the Redout, in the dry ditches, cut through the
Causey, with the like success and resolution, they won the half Moon, The
English were adua^ced as far as the fort, it self.
before the fort, laboring, with hands and feet to get the top of the Rampire,
and plant their Colors upon the Fort it self, for their scaling ladders, and
hooking irons were left behind, through the fault of their wagon-men, who ran
away, for fear of our Canon, not daring to bring up the wagons which carried
those necessaryes; so that oftentimes great enterprises fail, A fault in our
fortifications.
by slight and triuiall occasions. Then, at last, we began to discover the
fault of our Redout and ditches; for, if a pallisado had been made before each
of them, at a convenient distance (as it was once commanded, but omitted,
either through forgetfulness, or the difficulty of bringing thither
materials) neither the enemy could have passed, with such ease, nor could, so
well, have made use of their fireballs, nor have layne covered in those
ditches, free from our shot. The Italia^s quit the trench of Seuenbergh Causey.
The Italians who defended the trench of Seuenberg Causey, percaeauing now the
enemy advanced so far, quit their trench, which, lying open, on that side,
to the enemy, it was not possible to make good. The valor and resolution of
the English.
The English maintained the fight, with that fury and resolution, as if there
had been no other occasion hut that, to make proof of their worths, nothing
being wanting, on their parts, of true valor and resolution. Carlo Roma,
Sargeant Mayor of the Marquess of Compolatara, had commanded Captain Camillo
Phoenix, with the rest of his Company, to succor his own men, distressed in
the Redout, but the Captain finding them, already, disordred and in flight,
was neither able to stay them by his coming in, nor himself able to withstand
the fury of the brunt, so that, what was, at first, intended for their safty,
proved a means to increase, and make the danger greater. But Carlo Roma,
perceauing the Captain to retire, with the rest of his men, beaten from the
Redout, snatching his target out of his hand (for he himself, The daring
attempt of Carlo Roma.
had no target of his own, at that time) sallyed out himself, with his naked
sword and target, in the head of his men, and adding new life to the fight,
which seemed now to die, on our side, fell bravely upon the English, who made
him as brave resistance, and with a courage vndainted, and as daring as an
other Caesar, broake the fury of them, and put them back from whence they came,
faster then they had advanced; some of them falling headlong from the top of
that Redout, from whence, not long before they had beaten our men; others
making a fair retreat; The enemy put back.
many being slain and wounded; and diverse of them either saving, or ending
their lives, in the standing waters. He, who striued to plant his colors upon
our Fort, was slain with a push of pike. Three others, who had entered the half
Moon, and were advanced nearest our Fort, were slain in the very entrance of
the Fort. Such as fought near at hand, were almost all shot through the head,
or the throat, and ended their days which wounds as honorable and fair, as
their resolute behouiours could deserve an honorable and brave death; The great
slaughter of the enemy.
worthy to have had the Victory, but that our men fought better, and for a far
better cause. They, who skirmished farther of, were, for the most part,
miserably butchered by our Canon, with loss of their hands, feet and heads,
almost no shot being bestowed so in vain, but that it slew diverse of them at
once, by reason of the many windings, and turnings of the Causey. The English
and french in the Rear, could not come up to maintain the fight, the Causey
being so narrow, and these men, in the van, being thronged so thick together:
which when they perceived, and were yet more and more followed and pressed, by
our men, they began, by little and little, The enemies retreat.
to make a fair retreat. The presence of the Prince of Orange, kept his men
from being disordred, and terrified with these dangers. In conclusion their
retreat was as orderly performed, as their assault, so punctually every man
kept his own rank. In this occasion Coronell And Henry Earl of Oxford.
Vere, Commander of this enterprise, gave an admirable testimony of his valor
and worth, who served bravely himself in the head of these troops, where the
continual shot flew thick about his ears, ever careful of his charge, giving
order, as occasion served, with the like constancy and resolution, that new men
should supply the places of such as were retired, fresh men make good the
places of such as were hurt, and such as were tired should be releiued by
others, till in the end, by a fair retreat, on both sides, the skirmish, by
little and little, ended of it self: houbeit, it appeared that every private
soldier was as expert in what he had to do, in the like occasions, and as able
to direct himself, as to receive his orders and directions from an other. This
fight by reason of a contrary wind, carrying the report of the shot an other
way, was neither heard in the Town, nor in any of our Quarters. Two messengers
sent to advertise Spinola, with speed, of this buisnesse, Spinola understood
not of this fight, till it was ended.
passed through the next Quarter (where he had been accustomed to lodge, some
nights before) and either our of ignorance, or confusion, rode foreward to
Gineken, his ordinary Quarter, to seek him: so that the fight was ended,
before Spinola could have notice of it. The morning first discovered the
lamentable slaughter. The causey lay covered thick with dead bodies, no color
appearing upon the ground but goary blood. Men's bowels torn out with the
Canon, their heads struck of, their hands and feet here and there scattered,
and generally their whole bodies miserably butchered; a lamentable spectacle,
on all sides, to behold. Some had thrown themselves headlong, into the
standing waters, others lay miserably groaning half dead, who being carried
into our Quarter, died afterward there. The Prince of Oranges own letters
made mention of above two hundred slain, but such as afterward ran away
from their Camp, reported that they lost five hundred in that attempt, emongst
whom, were eight or ten Captains, and other Commanders, with diverse men of
quality. Of ours, were not slain above twelve or fisteene, The little loss of
out men.
emongst whom, one was Captain Camillo Phoenix slain in the defense of the
fort. John Baptista Vrsino, an other Italian Captain, behauing himself
bravely, lost his right hand. It was admirable to observe the ambition of the
Italian Nation, to blot out the infamy, which till then, lay upon them, for
having once carelessly kept, and lost the Town, from the King. Spinola, Spinola
commands that Causey and other places therahouts; to be forufied a new.
having viewed well the places which the enemy took from us, gave order, that
the Causey should be fortified with an other great trench, and half Moon, and
thwarted with four great pallisadoes: that from the Fort, to the River side, a
trench should be drawn, and, that there, a square fortification should be
raised, with other works of that kind, and that great store of Artillery should
be mounted. The old trench, which ran along the heath of Oosterhout, almost
the space of two thousand paces, was fortified anew, and made Canon proof, the
form of the old works being altered, with new Forts, and Batteryes raised
without it. And because there was much wast ground, taken in with a trench
betwixt Titeringhen and Terheyde, he lodged there, diverse horse and foot
Companies, to defend that trench, causing sundry great Cabins, of straw and
clay, to be made for them. Of this victory, least the beseiged might not have
understood, our soldiers cried it out from their trenches nearest the Town,
telling them, by way of jest, that their succors were now arrived. They of the
Town were much perplexed with this news, the rather, because indeed they saw
they were not releiued, and the loss of Count Maurice was yet fresh in their
minds. Their soldiers began now to feed upon horse flesh, and the rates of
their provision began much to rise; in so much that Butter was sold, in the
Town, for six A Florene is two shillings English.
florens the pound; a calfe, seauenteene days old, for eight and Forty
florens; a hog, for a hundred and fifteen florens; Tobacco, for a hundred
florens the pound. About this time they made an other search of all Burgers
Granaryes, Great wants of the beseiged
and committed one of them to prison for having hidden his provision. Bakers
were forbidden to sell bread to any but Commanders of the soldiers, and they
commanded to distribute but half a pound daily, to each soldier. It was
commanded, in like manner, that no bisquet should be made (because bisquet
might be hidden and preserved a long time.) The beginning of a sedition.
These restanits caused a mutiny emongst the English and french soldiers, who
breaking up Bakers houses, gave enough to do, to their Coronells, to appease
them; but by the apprehending of three of the ringleaders, and giving liberty
again A Battery upon the Heath, near Oosterhout.
A Battery joining to the Baron of Beauuoixes fort upon the heath toward
Oosterhout.
to buy bread, as they were accustomed, this sedition was suppressed, before it
was thoroughly kindled. The care of the Coronells and Drossard.
The Coronells and Drossard, by fair words and persuasions, kept others from
doing the like, concealing, like so many scarres, or wounds of the body, all
wants and defects of their garrison whatsoever. Within few days again,
necessity forced them to make an other search of all Barnes and granaryes,
dividing the Town into two and thirty parts (not omitting the least Cabin or
Cottage in the Town) by which search they found not, in the whole Town, above
five and twenty measures of wheat.

The Prince of Orange, The Prince of Orange doubtfulle what course to take.
having beheld the slaughter of his English, being troubled, and in doubt what
course to take, and finding, that by lying idle in the Camp, his men ran
away in troops, consulted whether it were best to fall upon our Camp, in the
same place, or any other, The vigilance of Spinola.
or to leave of the thought of attempting us any more. Spinola, on the other
side, expecting him day and night, with all his forces, endeauored principally
to discover, what his next design would be. Our nimble-witted messenger seemed
the fittest man for that purpose, saving that he was not so well known to
Prince Henry, as he had been before to his Brother, Prince Maurice. An other
notable deceit of a pesants wife.
But he made his acquaintance by this divise. He had layne secretly in our
Camp, for many days together. His wife, in the mean time, took a tourney
to the enemies Camp, complaining to the Prince of Orange, of a sickness her
husband had caught, in carrying his Brothers letters to Breda, through the
waters, in the winter season, and beseeching him earnestly, he would be
pleased, to pay the remayndure of the reward promised her husband for that
service, which remained yet unpaid. The Prince, taking hold of this occasion,
being ouerioyed with the hope of finding yet a trusty messenger, undertook to
pay him what was owing him, with much more, if he would now adventure to carry
one of his letters to the Town, as he had carried many of his Brothers
heretofore. The woman objected, at first, the danger of the passage, and
desease of her husband: but in conclusion, she suffered her self, by degrees,
to be woone to it, and, with a fained, unwillingness, undertook to persuade her
husband. She departed, out of hand, to bring her husband to the Prince, who
returned with her, counterfaiting a lamenesse, as if his feet had been frozen by
the cold of winter. The Prince made an agreement with this trusty fellow (as
he thought) and gave him his letter to the Governor of Breda. The fellow
undertook the buisnes of infinite difficulty, The Prince of Orange deceived.
as he pretended, and with his letter, and reward, came directly to our Camp,
where he delivered his letter to Spinola, who bestowed upon him, for his
pains, a yearly pension, for ever.

In this letter the Prince of Orange gave notice to the Governor of the blow
he had lately received, The Princes letter to the Governor.
in his attempt made upon the Quarter of Terheyde; since which time, he
perceived us to be so fortified, with a stronger trench, that it was not
possible for him, to force his passage; That withal he remembered, for how
short a time their Town was provided; and that therefore, least in the end, he
and his soldiers, might be forced to suffer some foul affront, by delaying
time too long, he counseled him now to prevent it in time, and not to hazard
all their fortunes, by his too much obstinacy. That he should give notice of
the receipt of these letters, by shooting of three pieces of Artillery about
midnight, and, about an hour after, showing as many lights, in their Church
steeple, as he had yet days to feed upon his provision; assuring him, in the
mean time, that if any occasion happened, by which he might releive them, he
would be most ready to engage himself, and his Army for them.

An other of these letters was conveyed into the Town, before Spinola had
received, and decyphred his. A soldier of Count Styrums had carried an other
of these letters to the town.
A horse man of Count Styrums troop, expert in all ways, and passages
thereabouts, passed, through our Camp, to the Town, at midday, and was
welcomed, by the discharging of nine pieces of Artillery. About midnight they
gave notice of his arrival, by the discharging of three pieces of Canon; The
enemy gave notice by lights out of the steeple, how many days the town was
able to hold out
a thing done before we certainly knew the intent of it; houbeit many men gave
a guess at it. They showed eleauen lights in the Church steeple, signifying
how many days they were able to hold out.

About this time, VVolfgang William, Duke of Bauere, The Duke of Neuborg
arrived at our Camp.
Gulick, Cleue, and Bergh, arrived out of Spain, being infinitely desirous to
see our Camp. Spinola went to meet him, a good distance from the Camp, and
lodged him in his own Cabin, with great expression of. joy, for the arrival
of so great a Prince. A volley of all our shot was given to entertayne him, and
many other military expressions of a welcome. The days following he spent in
riding about our Camp, The opinion of the King of France of the seige of Breda.
admiring the sollidnesse and largeness of our works. He reported that the
King of France had told him (passing that way in his return from Spain) that
he did not believe Spinola would take Breda by this Seige. But many things at
that time put us in great hopes: Mansfeilds french forces ran away apace; the
enemy was slow in bringing his supplies; the provision of the Town began much
to fail; the beseiged were sorely afflicted with sickness; all Physic was so
dear, that, as much Tobacco, as in other places might have been had for four
Twenty shillings
Crowns, was sold in Breda for a hundred and twenty pound sterling.
twelve hundred florens, Tobacco being the only remedy they had against the
scuruy. And, in the space of eight days, our men had taken above six hundred
of the enemies horse, being carelessly put to grass near about their Camp.
Monsieur de Marquette Lieutenant General of the enemies horse, sought to
repair this loss, by giving us the like, The enemy falls upon our Conuoy.
and prepared to set upon our conuoy at vnawarres, with threescore and eight
troops of his horse. He sent before him Captain Randwick with six troops of
horse, laying the rest in ambush; these troops (lighting by chance upon part
of our provision which was transported, without a guard, an other way then
Count Henry vanden Bergh had appointed) fell upon our Carters, dr^ue away
their horses, with their Carts, and carriages, and spilt and wasted their
Corn, and other provision. Count Henry vanden Bergh, careful to prevent all
danger, howbeit he had not notice of this icurney of the enemy, had, many days
before, placed diverse gards of horse in all passages, that the enemy might not,
at vnawarres break in upon any place: The course which Count Henry vanden
Bergh had taken to prevent the enemies falling on upon our Conuoy.
for the better observing of which, he had given a strict command, that no
Captain should be absent when his troop had the guard; that one troop should
make a Corut of guard, as far from our Camp as was safe; that Centinells
should be placed, a good distance, from that court of guard; that, beyond those
Centinells again, one light horsman should continual be riding about, to give
notice of the enemies coming; that if he chanced to discover the enemy, he
should give an alarm, and retire him self to the Centinells; that the
Centinells, if the numbers of the enemy were great, should retire back to their
Court of guard; that they of the court of guard should fight with the enemy, if
they were not ouermatched, otherwise that they, in like manner should retire to
the Camp: so that by this course, the sudden breaking in of the enemy might
be avoided, and the gards, with out danger, might retire themselves; and the
whole Camp might, in good time, be ready in Arms. It chanced that day, that
Count Herman vanden Bergh, Son of Count Henry, The valor of Count Herman
vanden Bergh Son of Count Henry.
had the guard, a yoing Gentleman of a great spirit, and a diligent obsetuer of
his Fathers virtues. He (being not far of with his troop) and hearing the
noise of the enemy, gathered some, though not many of his troop together, and
fell in pel mel upon the enemies troops, whilst they were at pillage, and
passing once or twice through the midst of them, slew diverse, the flight of the
enemy.
and scarred and amazed the rest, putting them to flight, who carried news to
their other troops, that the whole body of our horse was fallen upon them:
they being now in a confusion, with the fear and flight of their fellows,
never so much as thought of making any resistance. They let loose our horses
they had taken, left behind them our baggage, and forsook their whole prey,
betaking themselves to flight. So that the enemy, Not so much as one of our
Conuoyes broaken by the enemy.
with so great an Army as he had then in the field, in so long a time as this
seige endured, and in so long, and ill iourneyes as our provision was to pass,
had never the fortune to break one of our Conuoys. The Prince of Orange, The
Prince of Orange cor^upeth some to see our Campe^ or Munition bouse on fire.
ready to lay hold of any occasion that (according to his promise) he might
leave nothing unattempted, by which he might raise our Seige; corrupted with
money, and fair promises certain roguish boys of the baser sort of pesants,
to fire our Quarter, and munition-house, if it were possible. But Spinola
apprehended some of them, and took a course afterward to prevent the like
mischeife.

And thus the Prince of Orange, The Prince of Orange retireth from Dunghen with
his Army, benig out of hope of relei^^nig Breda.
having in vain made trial of many things, upon the 27. of May, setting fire
on his Quarters, in the Village of Dunghen, retired himself, in the night time,
from thence to Langestrat. Which retreat of his, though it were a sad one to
him, for many other respects, yet the tempestious night added much to the
dolefulnes of it; for the winds blew so strong, and rain powered down so
thick, that the soldiers were noe able to march, the Artillery stuck fast in
the dirt, and no man was able to keep any order.

Spinola, so soon as he had notice of this retreat, Count Henry vanden Beigh
in Spinolaes name begins to ^ treat ^^thoy the enemy.
thought good to warn the Governor of it, by Count Henry vanden Bergh his
letters (for he was allied to the family of Nassau, and understood best their
language, and was acquainted with their and customs) who should lay before him
the small hopes he had left him of any supplies, the enemies Camp, which
should have succored him, being now retired. Count Henry wrote to the
Governor, and undertook, in Spinolaes name, that he should have honorable
conditions, if yet he would begin to treat of a surrender, which if he were
contented to do, he should, at his best conueniency, come forth of the Town,
to treat, and discourse with him, about that buisnes.

The Governor (least he might loose the opinion conceived of him, The
Gouernorus answer to Count Henry vanden Bergh.
by precipitating, or over hastening a buisnes of this nature) returned our
Trumpet with this answer: That but three days before he had had letters from
the Prince of Orange, concerning his releif. That if Count Henry knew any other
particularityes of it, he would be pleased to impart it to him, by letter, in
regard that he could not come to speak with him, by reason of an ague which
had lately surprised him. Spinola delivers the iginall letters of the Prince
of Orange to the Governor to Count Henry vanden Bergh, to be sent to the
Governor.
Spinola therefore the next day, delivered unto Count Henry vanden Bergh the
original letters of the Prince of Orange, written in ciphers, with the copy
of them decyphred, to send to the Governor, that he might see it was to no
purpose to hold out any longer. The Governor perceauing by this, that the st
ate of their buisnesses was well known to us, returned thanks to Count Henry
vanden Bergh for his good will, and promissed he would treat of a composition
with Spinola, The Gouuernous answer.
if (as he had undertaken in Spinolaes name) he might have such conditions, as
questionless, he and so many resolute soldiers, and Citizens deserved. Count
Henry vanden Bergh, having Spinolaes own letters in keeping, Count Henry his
reply.
by which he promissed honorable conditions to the Governor, soldiers, and
Townsmen, if without farther delay, they would presently begin to treat with
him, sent them to the Governor, adding (that which was expressly in Spinolaes
letters to him) that he himself had commission to treat with him about all
things: Wherefore he requested him, that, the next day, he would by pleased to
send some man out of the Town (in the midway betwixt their works and ours) to
demand those conditions, he desired, in writing; because he him self would be
present, in the same place, to expect him.

Till that day our soldiers and Marrines, Our soldiers first commanded to
cease their raising of the inner trench.
were continually buisied in raising the inner trench (of which there remained
now but little to do) who having espied, by chance, Count Henry vanden Bergh,
demanded of him in jest, with a kind of souldier-like freedom, to what
purpose they should trouble themselves to make an end of that trench, since
there was a treaty on foot about the surrender of the town. Count Henry had
scarce pronounced that they might cease their labor, but all men, leaping for
joy, threw away their spades, readier to cease their labors, Upon the sight
of Spinolaes letters, and Count Henry vanden Berghs, the counfell of war
concludes to treat of a compositie^.
then they were to undertake them. The Governor upon the receipt of the two
letters of Spinola, and Count Henry vanden Bergh, called his Coronells to
Counsel, showing them these letters. They all concluded, answer should be made
that they accepted the offer of Spinola, and Count Henry. VVher vppon-they
desired Count Henry, by letter, that he would be pleased, the next morning, by
seven of the clock, to come out of the Camp, and advertise them, by a Trumpet,
where he would be, that they would send some one, in all their names, to
demand conditions for them.

The next day, being the last of May, Count Henry vanden Bergh, with diverse of
the Nobility in his Company, Count Henry vanden Bergh goes out of our quarter
to treat with the enemy by word of mouth.
rode out of the Quarter, at the hour appointed, and advertised the Governor
of his coming, by a Trumpet. They who we to treat with him, came out of Town
on the other side, whom when Count Henry perceived, he commanded the rest of
the Nobility to make a stand, and he alone with Routart, The deputyes of Breda
meet Count Henry vanden Bergh.
Secretary of the King and Marquess, advanced forward to meet them. In the
midway he made a stand, expecting the Deputyes of Breda: they were the
Sargeant Mayor de la Caze, Dyden Captain of the guard to the Prince of Orange,
Captain Zouche, Aertsen the Drossard, the Borrow-master and some of the
Esheuines. A little after them, They present their conditions to Count Henry
vanden Bergh.
came Coronell Hauteriue. They, showing first their litters of credit,
delivered up the Articles they demanded, in writing. The buisnes was long
debated betwixt us and them, and we refused them absolutely only two Articles;
of a third there was yet some doubt. Whereupon the meeting was dissolved,
till three of the clock, in the after noone. The meeting dissolud till the
afternoon.
And in, the mean time, a Tent was pitched, near our utmost trench, where our
men dined, in sight of the Town. In the afternoon again the treaty began,
in that place, and the articles, excepted against in the morning, were now
again absolutely denied them, Only two of their conditions excepted against.
in the afternoon: those articles were about liberty of conscience for the
Protestant Burgers, and giving their bodies buiriall in the Church yard.
Difficulty was made besides about that other, of having liberty to carry out
four piece of Canon, and two brass Morters with the garrison; which to the
beseiged seemed a small matter, to Count Henry vanden Bergh it seemed much.

Wherefore, Secretary Routart was dispatched to Spinola, to know his pleasure
in that buisnesse; who returned answer that he would not refuse them so small a
matter as that. The beseiged, glad of this answer, returned him many thanks.
The affair being brought to these terms, a banquet was prepared, and
presently Justin of Nassau, Governor of the Town, and the rest of the
Coronells, with such of the Nobility as were in the Town, came forth. Diverse
of our Nobility, in like manner, who were not far of, advanced forward to meet
them, and many congratulations, and other ceremonies were performed on both
parts,

Upon the first of June, Dyden Captain of the guard to the Prince, brought to
Spinola two coppyes of the Covenants made betwixt us, that Spinola might first
sign them both; The conditions brought to Spinola to be signed
which done, he was to carry them to the Governor to be signed, and bring one
of them back again to Spincla, the Governor keeping the other. Upon the
signing of these couenantes, VVagons and Boats granted to the garrison of Breda
to carry away their bagand baggage, with their sick persons and oh^e^s.
they demanded twelve hundred wagons, and threscore Boats, to carry away sick
persons and others, with their carriages, and all their houshould-stuffe. They
had more wagons granted them then they demanded, and all the Boats in the
River of Breda. And Hostages were given on both sides. By them of Breda the
Sargeant Mayor de la Caze, And Ogle, Hostages given on both sides.
Captain of an English Company of foot. By Spinola were sent for hostages, the
Sergeant Mayor Francisco Losano, and Charles Philip le Count Captain of a
foot Company of Germains. And these were the Articles, upon which the Town of
Breda was surrendered to the King.

I.
IT shall be lawful for the Gonernour of the town, Articles demanu ded by the
Governor, and Garriso^ of Breda.
the Coronells, Captains, Magistrates, Officiers and soldiers, either of
horse or foot, to march out of the town armed, in such sort os soldiers ar
ordinarily accustomed to march: the foot with their Colors flying, drums
beating, completely armed, bullet in mouth, match lighted at both ends, their
chargers full of powder, and shot: the horse, with their trumpets sounding,
standards displayed, armed in such sort, as when they march toward the enemy:
and that none of the said soldiers, of what nation soever he be, shall be
questioned or detayned for any cause or pretext whatsoever, not though he have
formerly ben in service of his Majesty of Spain, the Archduke, or the
Infant, all without exeption, having free liberty to march the best and most
commodious way to the town of Gertrudenbergh in Holland, without any injury,
hindrance or wrong done to their own persons, their Arms, horses or baggage,
and this with all safty and assurance possible. And it shall be lawful for them
besides to take with them, their wives, children, household, houshould-stuffe,
horses and Carts, with the Arms, of all soldiers dead or hurt, sick or run
away, without any search or inquiery made after them.

II.
All Ministers, or preachers of the word Comissaryes of Musters, Officers of
contribution, with their Clarks, Ingeners, gentlemen of the Artillery, the
Auditor of the soldiers, Masters of fireworks, Captains of pioners, Canoners,
Surgeous of Regiments and private Companies, with all such as belong to the
train of the Artillery, Mariners, Notaryes, ouer-seers of works, Prouosts,
Pioners Carpenters, Smiths, Comissaryes of the victuals, and all persons
whatsoever, any way belonging to the Artillery, or engines, with their wives,
children, servants, horses, and Arms, shall be comprehended in the former
article, and enjoy the same privileges.

III.
All Boats found in Breda at this present, as well those which arrived last
with the Coronells, as with any others, shall be permitted, with all their
necessaryes and tackling, to return into Holland, guided by their own Pilots
and Mariners, in which it shall be lawful for them to embarque their familyes
and houshould-stuffe, with the Arms and baggage of the Coronells, Captains
and other officers of the Army; sick persons, with such as attend them, and all
others who soever desire to pass, by water, into Holland: and to this purpose
the River shall be open for them, during the term of twelve days, and then
they may safely repair to Blaec, and join themselves there, with their other
men of war, and from thence take their journey to what place they please, the
Boats remaining still to their own Masters, and owners. And during the said
term of twelve days, no man shall dare to molest or hinder those boats, but
shall permit them to pass freely, with their passengers, without searching
them, for any cause or pretext whatsoever. And if it chance that the passage
of the River be not yet freed, and made nauigable again (by which their
journey may be any way hindered) the time in which, by that means, their journey
has been stayed, shall not be re^kned emongst those twelve days, which term
they shall enjoy freely, and with all assurance, as well in the River it self,
as upon either shore of it, where Mariners, or any other passenger shall
have occasion to land, for their commodity or affayers. And if any of those
Boats belong to any man, who shall desire to reside still in Breda, they shall
be tied not withstanding to help to transport passengers, and baggage out of
Breda, and afterward return home again to their Masters.

IIII.
The Marquess Spinola shall allow the Governor any reasonable, and sufficient
number of wagons he shall demand, to transport his own, the Coronells,
Captains, Officiers, and other men's baggage of the garrison, to
Gertrudenbergh, from whence they shall return them again faithfully, and see
them safely delivered in Gineken Quarter.

V.
It shall be lawful for the Governor to carry out with his garrison, any four
pieces of Artillery, and two Morters, he shall make choice of, with all their
appurtenaunces, and as much powder and ball as they will bear at six charges:
and it shall be at his choice to transport them, with their carriages, either
by water, or by land. And for this purpose, the Marquess Spinola shall allow
the Governor, if he shall demand it, all Canon-horses and others, with their
wagons and wagon-men, as shall be requisite for the transportation of these
pieces of Artillery and Morters, with all their appurtenances.

VI.
It shall be lawful for the Prince of Orange, or any man who shall take care
of his buisnesses, in his name, to transport, to what place he pleases, all
houshould-stuffe belonging to him, either in the town or Castle of Breda, or
else the said houshould-stuffe shall be safely kept for him in the Castle of
Breda, till the Prince of Orange shall send word, how he pleases to have it
disposed of: which he must do with in the term of six months at the least;
and at any time, within that term, afree passage shall be given, without any
molestation or hindrance, either of the Boats or the Mariners, who shall come
out of Holland to transport it.

VII.
If it chance that any man, comprehended in the two first articles, shall be
unable, for his sickness to go out of the town with the garrison, it shall be
lawful for such to remain in the town, with their wives, families and
Servants, without any wrong offered them, till they have recovered their health
and strength again: and then a free pass shall be given them to depart, to what
place they please.

VIII.
No Officier of the Army, soldier or Captain, or any other whatsoever
comprehended in the foresaid articles, who shall now go out with the garrison,
or shall remain in the Town, till he have recovered his health, shall
afterward be troubled, as not being conprehended in the said articles; for by
virtue of these articles, it shall be lawful for him to go freely, at any time:
and he shall have credit for money upon his bond, or any other assurance he
shall be able to give.

IX.
The Governor, Captains, Officiers and soldiers comprehended in these
articles, or any other whosoever benig in pay, and subjection of the united
States, shall have in Breda any houses or possessions, mooueables or immoueabls
(comprehending as well the Captains, Officers and soldiers of the Companies
of Count Culenburg, Count Styrum and the Lord of St. Martin, as the widows
and children of these troops, or any other Companyes, which for two years
before have been in garrison in Breda) shall have a year and a half (beginning
within a month, after the signing of these Covenants) to transport their goods
to what place they please, or to sell, morgage, alienate, or exchange them,
according to the laws and customs in that particular: and in the mean season
they shall enjoy all rents, profits and commodities of their inheritances,
accrewing to them for the present, or to accrue; and in conclusion they shall
enjoy any thing belonging to them in the Town.

X.
The soldiers, either of the garrison, or our Camp, being now prisoners,
either in the town, or in the Camp, at the signing of these couenaunts, shall
be set at liberty without ransom, paying only their charges, according to the
taxation of the place.

XI.
No man shall take any thing from any of the garrison, of any prize he has
made, all such things being to pass under the title of the soldiers own
goods.

XII.
After the signing of these articles, it shall be lawful for the Governor of
Breda, to send any Officer, or whomsoever else, to the Prince of Orange, who
shall be permitted safely to go and come.

XIII.
After the signing of there covenants, there shall be a suspension of Arms on
both sides: howbeit, on each side, the soldiers shall mantayne their works,
permitting no man to come near them, either by day or night.

XIV.
Before the garrison march out of town, two sufficient hostages shable given,
who shall accompany the garrison to Gertrudenbergh, and shall remain there the
twelve days, in which the River is to remain open, and the couenaunts to be
fulfilled, and this term being expired, if the couenantes in any point have
not ben broaken, they shall return back again.

XV.
These couenauntes being signed, hostages on both sides, shall be given of equal
number and quality, and ours shall return home upon the delivery of the town.

XVI.
It shall be lawful for the hostages of the garrison of Breda to return as
soon as the said garrison has quitt the town, that they may depart away with
the garrison.

XVII.
The Governor, and garrison of Breda, promise to march away upon Thursday
next ensuing, early in the morning, being the fifth day of June,

Under the place of the seal was written.

We Iustine of Nassau promise to se the contents of the former Articles
fulfilled, as much as lies in us. In witness of which, with the consent of
the Coronells, and Counsel of war here, we have signed these; This 2. day of
June, 1625.

Iustine of Nassau.

I.
PArdon is granted to all Burgers and towne-dwellers of Breda, Articles
demanded by the Magistrates and Burgers of Breda.
of what quality or condition soever, for any offense committed before, or
since the surprising of the Town, in the year 1590. No inquiry, or
information shll be taken against any man, not so much as under the pretext of
treason, or of other offense whatsoever.

II.
All the said Burgers, or towne-dwellers, either absent or present, of what
condition soever, whether they be actually in service of the States, or the
Prince of Orange, or the Town, or whether they be not in service, may safely
remain in Breda the two first years: no enquiry being made after them for
matters of Religion, nor having no obligation to change their Religion,
(provided they carry themselves modestly, and without scandale) that in the
space of these two years, they may resolve either to continue their residence
here, or to go to any other place: and whenever they shall desire to depart,
they shall be permitted to go freely; and in like manner they shall be permitted
to enjoy their goods, carrying them with them, selling, morgaging, or
alienating them, at their own liberty, or at the liberty of such as shall have
the administration of them. The goods of such as dye within or without the
town, shall accrue to them, to whom they shall leave them, by their last
wills; or if they dye intestate, to the next heirs.

III.
It shall be lawful for any of the said Burgers or town dwellers, whether he be
now in service or no, if after these couenaunts he have a desire to depart out
of town (either to change his habitation, or for any other respect) to depart
at any time, either by water or by land, with his wife, children, family,
houshould-stuffe, merchandise or any mooueables whatsoever, without any
impeachment, for any respect what soever, only by virtue of this covenant,
without any other pasport. And such as desire to make choice of their
residence, in the Kingdoms, Estats or Provinces, either Neuterall, or such as
pay contribution, may at any time pass and repasse into the towns and
Cuntryes subject to the King of Spain, and traffic, or dispose of their goods
mooueables, or others, whenever they think good. And the Catholics shall
not stand in need of any other deed, more then these couenaunts, by virtue of
which to return and make their residence here, and possess such houses as
they have in Breda.

IV.
It shall be lawful for all such as desire to go about their occasions, into any
of the united Provinces, to take their journey thither four times in the year,
giving first the Governor notice of it, of whom they must of necessity demand
license, who shall not refuse them with out just cause. And they shall return
within the two years agreed upon in these Couenaunts, to continue their
residence in the town, or make choice of any other place, under contribution,
in all which places they shall enjoy the foresaid liberty of passing freely to
any place, about their buisnesses, and make use of any other benefit of these
Couenaunts.

V.
All Ministers may freely depart with their wives, children, familyes, goods
and mooueables, without any wrong or offense offered them: for which purpose
they shall have boats or wagons allowed them, and the fore said term to
dispose of all their goods.

VI.
All such, as since the taking of the town have executed the office of Elders,
Deacons, or any other Ecclesiastical chrage shall be comprehended in these
couenaunts.

VII.
All Officers, Comissaryes, Receauers, and other Burgers or towne-dwellers, who
have had any office about the money, rents, or pays of the soldiers, or any
other office whatsoever, shall enjoy the same conditions and priuiledg, to
depart with their papers, and other moueables, and all other benefits, jointly
with other townsmen, of this agreement.

VIII.
The same is understood of all Mariners, and others, who have Boats here, with
which in like manner, they may lawfully depart.

IX.
If it chance that, in the town, there be not wagons or Boats sufficient to
accomodate the Burgers, or towne-dwellers, who shall desire to depart, with
their moueables, and other goods; it shall be lawful for them, within the
foresaid term of two years, to cause wagons or Boats to come out of Holland,
or any other place for this purpose; which may return freely by virtue of
these couenaunts, without any other pasport.

X.
No other impost or taxes shall be imposed upon the Burgers, or towne-dwellers
of this town, then such as generally all other towns of Brabant, great and
small, pay.

XI.
The garrison of the Town, horse and foot, shall be orderly lodged with the
least hurt or damage that may be, of the townsmen.

XII.
All such as are now absent about the Town buisnes, or their own, shall
participate of these Covenants, and may freely return to the Town: and the
Pesants who had retired them selves to Breda, may as freely return again to
their own Villages.

XII.
All such of the other Religion as shall chance to dye in Breda, within the
foresaid term of two years, may be honorably buiried in any garden, or their
bodies, if please their friends, carried out of town.

XIV.
All sentences pronunced by the Magistrates, or other criminal Judges, called
de Hooft-banck, shall hold and he in force, if no appeal have been made from
them in time.

XV.
It shall be be lawful for all such as have lent any money to the town, to
demand their Principal and their interest: and all rights and rents which
fall, shall in like manner, he yearly paid.

All these Covenants, Points, and Articles, have been concluded, agreed on and
granted by the Marquess Spinola, and the commissoners of the town, who have
signed them severally; the Marquess vnder-taking o procure to have them
ratified, and approved by the Infanta, within fifteen days, with her letters
Patentes and broad-seale. Dated the 2. of June, 1625.

There wanted not some, of the seuerer sort of people, who understanding of the
favorable conditions which Spinola had granted the beseiged, thought it
strange that he would use the enemy with that curtesy: others, blamed him for
not being zealous in the cause, saying he ought to have used them with more
rigor, and to have forced them to pass under the pikes, accepting of no
surrender, except they had jointly surrendered up their Arms, who had brought
them selves to those extremityes, by their own extreme obstinacy, that they
had been famished, if we had kept them beseiged but two days longer: That there
was no reason their conditions should be left to their own choice, to whom it
had been a curtesy sufficient to have granted their lives: That, at least wise,
Spinola should have expected, til that had happened to them, which ordinarily
happens to all wilful persons, that they had been forced to beg that, which
before they had contemned: That they ought first to have besought us to accept
of their surrender, before we had sought to them to choose their conditions:
The complaints of the Burgers who resolved to reside in Breda.
That it was intolerable to permit the lewder sort of Burgers, to depart with
bag and baggage, before the Magistrates had repaied to the Catholic Burgers,
who remained in the Town, all such sums, as by public authority had been
exacted of them, toward the payment of the soldiers, and reparations of the
works; so just a cause of complaint these men seemed to have, who measuring the
affairs of Kingdoms by the level of their own affairs, The affairs of
Princes, and private men differ.
were ignorant that the condition of Princes differs from others in this,
that they, in all their actions, have a main care of their honors. But
Spinola, houlding it a point of wisdom to be merciful, rather then severe, An
unseasonable time to use rigor.
at that time especially, and knowing how much it imported the whole cause (for
the stopping of the troubles begun in Italy, France, Germany and Denmark) to
have the Kings Army at liberty, which had been so long engaged before Breda,
made a greater value of the least time he could gain, then of all the spoils
of the Town (which could not be great) or of any small affront he might do the
enemy, who had behaved themselves so bravely in the defense of the Town;
mindful of the saying: That there are occasions in which it is more expedient
to sustain loss, then seek gain. And questionless, in this occasion, he
had a greater regard of greatness and clemency of his King (whose person, in
this action, he did represent) then of his own honor, or the sweetness of a
reueng; judging it a thing unworthy, in such a plenty of warlike provision as
the enemy left behind them, not to allow them some thing at their departure, in
testimony of their valor, and reward of their long sufferance. For they left
in the Town 43 pieces of Artillery, and 450. Muskets (of which they were
permitted to take 150. with them, in lieu of their Arms broaken and spoiled in
that Seige.) 300. Hargubuses. 135000. pound of powder. 34000. pound of Match.
2000. of the greater sort of Canon Balls. Of the lesser sort, without number.
40000. pound of Musket Balls, with fifteen moulds to cast them. 2100.
Grenades. 344. Bomboes. 150. circles for artificial fire works. 40.
fireballs. 100. Barrells of salt. 30. Barrells of Pitch, Nitre, Brimstone and
saltpeter. Six Barrells of great nails. 11000. longer nails to knock
crosse-wayes through pallisadoes. An infinite quantity of stakes, ready perced
with these great nails. 4000. spades. 1600. Mattocks 1000. wheele-barrells.
Five Boats. Six great Cables. 40. grapling hooks. 130. horse-collers. 90.
pair of Cart-horse-harnesses. Fur boords without number. One canuas bridge.
Diverse gabions, or hurdles filled with earth for the defense of Artillery, or
speedy making of a bridge. A register of all which was given up to Thomas
Vingard, Lieutenant of our Artillery.

Concerning the disbursements made by the Burgers, The wisdom and discretion
of Spinola.
Spinola thought it needless to treat of that point, believing that the States
would be as punctual in their payments of such sums, as they would be in
supporting their credit and authority, which would utterly fail them hereafter,
if they made difficulty in repaying moneys disbursed for them, in case of
need, by people beseiged.

The garrison was to march away upon the fifth of June: Spinola. commands
that no than shall dare to jest or scoff at the enemy as they march away.
and Spinola had given a strict command; that no man should dare to jest or
scoff at them, as they marched, a thing ordinary emongst soldiers, in the
like cases; with so little show of ostentation he carried this victory. Our
boats and wagons were in readiness for them, against that day, and our soldiers
took the guard of the three Ports of the Town, and Castle. Count Herman
vanden Bergh, with five troops of Horse, marched before, conuoying them to
Gertrudenbergh, and betwixt every tenth wagon, some horse men of ours were
placed, to guard their baggage. Captain Bergagnes horse-troupe marched in the
van of them, and an other troop of their horse brought up the Rear, in both
which troops there were but few horses, so much they were both impaired by
this Seige. Betwixt these troops, marched their foot, and emongst the foot,
Justin of Nassau the Governor, on horse back, accompanied with Captain
Charles Philipe le Count, one of our hostages. Each Coronell marched in the van
of their own Regiments, and the Captains, at the head of their Companies.
They marched with Colors flying, and drums beating. They were not
altogether three thousand men, for their sick men were conveyed away by water.
It cannot be denied but they were select troops, as well in regard of the
soldiers, as of their Arms, and they made a far better exterior show then
our men, for they had been better lodged, having had the benefit of good fires;
and their bread never failed them, till the day they marched away.

Spinola, being accompanied with many of the Nobility, Spinolaes curtesy to the
enemy.
stood to behold this great solemnity of his Victory, in the space betwixt the
Town, and our inner Trench, saluting courteously the Captains as they passed,
and in particular, the Governor, a venerable old Gentlemen, with his wife and
children, and Don Emanuel de Portugalle, with Count Maurice his two base
sons, who all returned the like curtesey, with modest composed countenances,
and words making show of their resolution and constancy, bowing their colors
with respect to Spinola, as they passed. No word of reproach was let fall on
either side, but every one put on a cherfull countenance. The troops being
passed beyond Spinola, all men ran toward them, to give them much joy, they
returning the like to our men, attributing to one an other, with modesty,
Messengers dispatched to the Infanta, the King Spain and the Emperor of the
rendering of the Towns.
those praises, which each party deserved for they long sufferings.

The Coronell Don John de Medices was dispatched to the Arch-duchesse, with the
joyful tidings of the garrisons departure, whom the rewarded royally with a
rich Jewel for his news. Don Ferdinando de Guzman, Coronell of a Spanish
Regiment, was sent into Spain, with the same news, to the King. And to
Ferdinand the Emperor, the Lieutenant Coronell Theodore Camargo.

Count Anholt, Count Anholt marched after Mansfeild.
having notice of Mansfeilds departure, from the enemies Camp, departed
presently from our Camp, and marched after him with his troops. The report of
this Victory was hardly credited in France, Few men gave credit at first to
this victory.
England, Italy and Germany, not so much as emongst our friends, and such as
stood best affected to our cause. There was a Town, in which a false rumor
was proclaimed, and publicly printed of the enemies breaking of one of our
Conuoyes, the same day that the news of the loss of Breda arrived there. The
King of Spain himself dispaired of this victory.
His Ma. tie of Spain himself had written into the low-Cuntryes, to the
Infanta, wishing her to take it to her consideration, whether it were not best
to call Spinola from so long and doubtful a Seige; So discomfortably diverse
had written to some friends of theirs, of authority in Spain, of the utter
despair, and danger of this enterprise.

The Infanta resolved, The Infanta came to Breda.
in person, to visit her new Town, and her victorious Army. Wherefore Spinola,
leaving his ordinary gards at the Ports of the town, having first taken order
for the cleansing, and sweeping of of the streets, houses, Castle and Church,
went to receive the Infanta three leagues from the Town. The greatest part of
our horse, was either sent before to Anwerp to conuoy her, The majesty with
which she was received.
or made a stand in the midway to receive her, who as she approached gave
three volleyes of their shot, in token of their joy. The foot, divided into
many squadrons, were no whit less loud in expression of their joy. Upon
Hage-Port, where the Infanta made her entry into the Town, this Programma was
nailed, which I thought good to set down, moderating and leaving out, a word
or two of offense:

PHILIPPUS HISPANIAE REX EVBERNATE ISABELLA CLARA EVGENIA OBSIDENTE SPINOLA
HOSTIBVS FRVSTRA IN SVPPETIAS CONIVRANTIBVS BREDA VICTOR POTITVR.

Three volleyes were given, in like manner, The Infanta commanded that no
fires of joy should be made, till thanks had been first given to Almighty God
of all the Artillery about the walls, But the Infanta commanded no, bonfires,
nor other expressions of joy should be made, till the next day, that thanks had been given to Almighty God, the author of this victory, in the high Church. The
Cardinal Don Alonso de la Cueua, Ambassador for the King, said the first
Mass, the Infanta, with her Court, being present, and the whole Town. After
Mass the Arch duchess, The Cardinal de la Cuena said the first Mass.
walked about the Church, to se if any Monument remained of the old Religion.
There were yet to be seen, in diverse places, the empty rooms, where statuaes
had stood, a token of the Hugonots impiety to their predecessors deceased.
Inglebert the second Count of Nassau his tomb, of white and black Marble,
remained yet entire, built by his nephew Henry of Nassau. An other Tomb of an
other Count Ingelbert, and Count John of Nassau, was defaced, by the taking
away a statua of the Virgin Mary. A thing done by the instinct of one Sybill, a
prophetess, forsooth, particularly inspired, wife of Henry Buxhorne, Minister
and chief Preacher of Breda, sometimes, emongst us, a Catholic Priest. The
imprety of Sybill, wife of Henry Buxhorne Minister of Breda.
This Oracle soretould (inspired out of doubt with the Spirit of some
prophetical Sybill) that within six months after the Seige laid before the
Town, it should be taken by the enemy, except the statua of the Virgin Mary,
preserved, till then, entire in that place, and had in veneration, many years
before, by the zeal and devotion of our Religious forefathers, were broaken
down from thence, and utterly de faced, never any before that time, howsoever
auersed in other points of faith, daring, to attempt a thing so profane.
Which foul act I know to what best to impute, whether to the backwardnes and
tolleration of the Magistrates and people of Breda, winking at a thing so
gross and so in contempt of all antiquity, or to their sottishnes in giving
credit to such an imposture, or to the strange impudency of that foolish woman
against a picture consecrated to the Virgin Mary, by the Ancestors of that
most Noble Family of the Nassaues, and set up upon their Tombs for a monument
to posterity. From the Church walls were taken down certain profane
Epigraphes (in contempt of the King) of the enemies surprising the Town
heretofore, and in their place this was set up, alluding to the year in which
it was recovered.

AMBROSI SPINOLAE VIGILANTIA BREDA EXPVGNATA.

The ceremonies of the Mass being thus first performed, Fires of joy made in
the Town, and in our Camp.
at night fires of joy were set up in the Church steeple, of such brightness,
and in such number, as they were easily discovered in diverse places of Holland.
The Town was full of bonfires, and the Artillery played again round about the
VValls. But, that which was a sight most worth admiration, was a circle of
continual lights round about the inner Trench, for the space of sixteen
miles, a thing commanded by Spinola, and performed, by tying bundles of straw
on the top of soldiers Pikes, and so setting them on fire, with which the
shining of the continual shot being intermingled, it was a sight as pleasant
to behold, as the sudden appearing, and vanishing of so many stars.

But the liberality of this admirable Princess, to the Church of Breda, and
the two Religious Orders, the Capucins, and Priests of the Society of JESUS,
appeared no less then her singular devotion toward God, of whom she ceased
not continually to beg the surrender of that Town. It was the voice of all
men, that the continual prayers of the Infanta, and her Court, with other
devotions and supplications she commanded to be offered in all Churches, and
her almsdeeds, and great liberality to the poor, were a more efficatious
means to take in Breda, This Victory principally to be attributed to God.
then the powerful Army which lay before the Town. And out of doubt, the hand
of heaven stood us more in steed then any stratagem of man, which cannot be
more justly attributed to any thing, then to the known devotions of her, of
whom we may well say: One woman put confusion in the house of King
Nabuchodonosor.

She was welcome therefore to the Town, as a restorer of the ancient Religion
decayed, to the Camp as their supreme General. She took order that a Mass
should be yearly said, in honor of the B. Sacrament, upon the Eve of which
feast, the enemy first began to treat of a surrender, and upon the Octaue of
the same feast, marched out of the Town. She bestowed Four hundred pound
four thousand florens upon the Capucins, toward the building of a Covent,
and Five hundred pound
five thousand, upon the Fathers of the Society of JESUS (who had labored in
the four Quarters about the Town, The Infantaes gifts to pious uses.
all the time of the Seige, in the gaining of souls) toward the erecting of a
College. She gave great Alms to the old Monastery of Nuns, and toward the
reparation of Gineken Church (which Count Maurice had caused to be set on
fire.) Of which testimonies of a Religious Princess, the Cardinal Don Alonso
de la Cueua, Ambassador here for his Catholic Ma.tie having made mention in
his letters to his Holiness, Pope Vrbane the eight, supreme head of the
Catholic Church, the Pope returned this answer to the Cardinal: Beloved
Son, Health and Apostolical Benediction. Your last letters were, The letter
of Pope Urban the eight to the Cardinal de la Cueua
to us, those golden phialls full of perfumes, which recreate the Saints, in
their glory, and comfort mortal men, in their afflictions. We have taken some
breath in the midst of the tempestions Sea, when we beheld Religion to flourish
again in the Town of Breda. Almighty God is not forgetful of his mercyes,
for the Princes who fight for his cause, have legions of Angels to assist them.
This Victory, out of doubt, was won, against the opposition of nature, and
the wicked conspiracyes of many: and, houbeit it may remain to after ages as a
Masterpiece of military discipline, yet it ought to be acknowledged a
stratagem of that eternal warrior, who assuaged the raging of the waters, as
well as the fury of the enemy. And that Austrian Princess truly reapes the
fruit of so admirable a victory, when, with such a resolution, she
reestablisheth Religion: for the furtherance of which no means can be more
beneficial, then the functions of Priests, and industries of those Religious
Orders, placed, by her, in the Town, since the taking of it. To you, who first
had the honor, (to the comfort of the Church) to offer up that dreadful
sacrifice of the Mass, at those Alters which heresy had so long profaned, we
most affectionately impart our Apostolical benediction. And we commend your
Zeal, who being honored with the Roman purple, show your self worthy, in this
occasion, of so great a Preisthood. Your advise, and good counsel may make you
a sharer in this glorious triumph, for as the resolution of soldiers chaseth
impiety from the Rampires of a Town, so the examples and good deeds of
Priests, are able to displant it out of the hearts of the inhabitants; which
honor we truly wish you, heartily promising you our help and assistance. Dated
at Rome at S.t Mary Majors, under the fishers Seal this 9.th August, 1615. the
second year of our Papacy.

The Arch-duchesse, having given order for what was necessary in matters of
Religion, caused a months pay extraordinary, to be distributed to the
soldiers, The Infanta visits the works of our Ca^pe.
and ten thousand suits of clothes to be bestowed emongst them, as her gift.
The days following she spent in viewing the inner and outward trenches,
showing her self a lover of war, as she had done before of Religion. Mean
while Spinola furnished the Town, utterly exhausted by the tedious Seige, with
store of new provision, and appointed houses for the garrison soldier. The
Baron of Bala^con made Governor of the Town
The Infanta bestowed the Government of the Town upon the Baron of Balancon,
Coronell of a Burgundian Regiment. The modesty, vigilance and valor of this
man was so generally known to all men, and so far beyond envy, that all
nations in the Camp, held him the fittest man, and worthiest of that place.
The Townsmen, who had but heard the report of his worth, wished him the
government, and were petitioners for him; so bright virtue shines, and
enamoureth wheresoever it appears. Next this man, the Magistrates of the
Town were chosen. Henry Montens a grave old man, and learned in the law, one
who was Bourrowmaster of the Town, for the King, The Magistrates chosen.
at such time as the enemy surprised it, by the practice of the Boat, was now
again restored to be Borrowmaster of the Town, having ben ever constant to
his faith and Religion. Dingeman vander Locht, a quiet spirited man, and good
Catholic, was chosen his assistant. The rest of the Magistrates were such,
whose worth only, and Religion preferred to the care of the Commonwealth. The
Laws and customs prescribed to the Town, were such as the Town of Bolduc
observed: howbeit, in the beginning, for many respects, they could not be
punctually observed. The Magistrates being settled, they set up public schools
for the Fathers of the Society, which Religious Order Philip Duke of Arshot
commended to them, by command of the Princess, whose letters, to that effect,
he brought to the Magistrates.

The affairs of the Town being thus ordered, The garriso^ of the Town
appointed.
provision being made, and a garrison of 3000. foot, and seven Troops of
horse appointed, The works of our Camp slighted.
Spinola commanded that the trenches, and other works of our Camp should be
slighted, worthy to have been preserved, and remain a monument to posterity,
but that for the service they had done, so important for the gayning of this
admirable victory, the remembrance of them was never like to die. The foot,
divided into many squadrons, The Infanta departs front Breda with the Army.
betwixt Hooghstrat and Breda, saluted the Princess, as she passed, with their
military triumphs. The horse, put in order by Count Henry vanden Bergh upon a
large plain, not far from Hooghstrat, represented, in jest, the manner of a
serious horse fight. Fifteen troops, divided equally into as many several
wings, Count Henyr vanden Bergh represents in jest, a serious horse fight.
encountered one an other, and with a counterfeit skirmish expressed that sweet
war, which unexperienced people frame in their imaginations. There was the
charge, and retreat of horse, sound of Trumpets, raising of dust, glittering of
Arms and naked weapons, the shouts of soldiers in their encounters, fire,
smoke, report of pistolls, with Artillery playing from a far, and all other
expressions of a serious fight, but slaughter and blood, -- metuenda voluptas
Spectanti, pulcherque timor.
But, the sight most worth behoulding was Count Henry vanden Bergh himself,
compleately armed, betwixt two other Princes his confederates, coming in, as
it were, to his succor: these Princes were VVolfgang William Duke of Bauere
Gulick, Cleues and Bergh, and Rodulph Maximilian Duke of Saxe, who when the
skirmish was ended came all three, upon their carriere, toward the Coche of
of the victorious Princess Isabel, bowing, with reverence, the points of their
swords to her.

Spinola, lodging the Army within three leagues of Anwerp, Spinola waitheth
upon the Infanta to Anwerp.
himself waited upon the Arch-duchesse to that City, where they were
welcomed with the general applause, Count Henry vanden Bergh, remains with
his troops at Hooghstrat to put provision into Breda.
all men casting their eyes and acclamations upon Spinola. Count Henry vanden
Bergh, remained, with his troops, at Hooghstrat, to convey the rest of the
provision into Breda, who in the last Conuoy, before the enemy retired out of
the field, being desirous to add this labell to Spinolaes victorious laurel,
laid a plot to entrappe the enemy with an ambush, He had a de sign to entrappe
the enemy, but it took not.
into which he thought to entice them, by sending out diverse of his troops
near their Camp to discover. But the enemy, whether out of forecast, or
iealiousy, stirred not out of his Camp, which caused Count Henry to retire,
without doing any thing.

Whilst the Arch-duchesse Isabel remained in Anwerp, The Infantaes picture
curiously drawn by the famons Painter, Rubens.
famous Rubens that matchless Painter drew her picture, crowned, in a most
Maiesticall fashion, with a laurel of victory, which was afterward as
curiously engraued in brass, worthy, after such a triumph, to be so expressed
to life, and by no other, then by the hand of that famous Apelles. By the
scholars of the Society of JESUS, the Tragedy of King David was represented,
after a new manner, to welcome this victorious Princess, the whole history
past being showed again, to the life, in a dumb show, at the end of each Act.
All the Courtiers and great ones went, in the Infantaes name to se it. Within
few days after, The enemy retyring into garrison, our Army was commanded to
reure.
the enemy retyring his Army into garrison, our troops were in like manner,
commanded to retire. Spinola in the mean time went privately to Bruxells, and
though he concealed his coming, purposely to avoid the noise of salutations,
yet against his will, he was forced to accept of them. By this time the news
was arrived in Spain, his Ma.tie receiving the glad tidings of two great
victoryes together, the recovery of the Bay of Brasill, and the taking of
Breda. He bestowed upon the Marquess Spinola, for the subduing of so many
enemies, without loss of blood, Spinola rewarded by the King of Spain.
and taking in a Town and fortress so impregnable, the Encomienda Mayor de S.
Iago, a principal dignity in the Kingdom of Castile, either because this
reward was due to such a Victory, or because it stood with the liberality of so
great a Monarch, to bestow rewards of a higher nature, them any desert could
reach to. Pope Urban, stirred up with the greatness of so many remarqueable
things, wrote letters of congratulation, first to the Arch-duchesse, then to
the Marquess Spinola for his fortunate success and valor, in this occasion.
Both which letters I thought good to set down, as well for the singular
eloquence with which they were written, as for the wisdom and authority of so
grave a Prelate. His letter to the Arch-duchesse was this:

Almighty God, Pope Urban the eight his letter to the Archduchesse Isabel.
irresistable in his power, has laid his hand upon such as wished ill to his
Servants, and the right hand of the Omnipotent is glorified in you. We were
ouer-ioyed for the glorious Victory of the taking of Breda, and out of the
abundance of the same joy, we write these unto you, who surpassing, in an
eminent degree, the virtue of your sex, have succesfully employed the power of
the dreadful Arms of Austria, for the raising, and defense of the Catholic
faith. In your Camp, the troops of the celestial Army fought, and your
perseverance in warlike prowess made it appear to all nations (who flocked
thither to be eyewitnesses of that glorious seige) that no fortress, under
heaven, can be so defended, but that the resolution of an Army, backed by the
help of Heaven, may easily overcome it. You have met with enemies, contemners
of dangers, and cunning contriues of mischeifes unheard of, who seemed to be
able to turn the sea out of his bounds, upon your Austrian troops, and stop
the mouths of Rivers, ready to discharg themselves into the Ocean, so to
ouerwhelme your Army, with a kind of new Sea. But the wicked fell themselves
into the trappe they had designed for others, and our Lord reigns for ever.
For the Sea remained with in his bounds, and Rivers became dry. We
congratulate with you for that victory, so much desired by the prayers of the
Church, for which Rome the Mother of nations, reioyseth, and which historyes
will make famous to after ages. We have understood by the report of fame and
letters of our Agents, what excellent use you have already made of this
victory. Except our Lord preserve a City, garden are placed in vain upon the
walls; and he supplieth those Towns with legions of Angels, in which the
Catholic faith, preserver of public peace, is established. We have heard
how religiously sollicitous and careful you are, that heresy, mother of
falsehood, and foster of sedition, should be rooted out of the breasts of the
inhabitants of Breda. Wherefore since you stand not in need of our Pontifical
exhortations, to persuade you in that particular, with good cause we raise and
praise the glory of your name, commending you to Almighty God, in our best
devotions, that you may reap those fruits of so glorious a triumph, which the
Church desires, and impiety trembles at, most affectionately sending you our
Pontifical Benediction. Dated at Rome, at S.t Mary Majors under the fishers
Seal The 9.th of August, 1625. The 2. year of our Papacy.

His letter to Spinola was this: Heaven rejoices in your victoryes, whose
hands are washed in the blood of heretics, and support the foundation of
Catholic Religion. The taking of Breda shall remain a monument of your
valor to after ages; and the world shall know, that in our times, Italy brings
forth Commanders, in whom the glory of C^sars and Scipioes is revived again.
You have subdued enemies insolent with riches, raging with fury, and contemners
of death, who stopping the mouths of Rivers, forced them to ^^ange their
course, and turn upon your Camp. But the h^^d of heaven, and your
perseverance over came all. And your worth and industry has recovered that
Town, of which hereto^fre Treason, a lover of darkness, lu^^king in salse
deceipts, beguiled the invincible greatness of ^ustria. The memory of the Seige
of Breda shall remain ^o posterity, and Commanders, in times to come, may be
furnished, by this Seige, with examples of fortitude, and documents of the Art
of war. The savor of Almighty God showed in the taking of Breda was so
eminent, and appeared so clear to us, in the midst of our other cares taken
for the late troubles and dissension of the Italian Princes, that we resolved
to honor you, the author of so great a good, with the testimony of our
Apostolical letters, wishing you long life and health, with the offer of our
assistance, and bestowing upon you heartily our Apostolical Benediction. Dated
at Rome, at S. Mary Mayor under the fishers Seal, the 9.th of August. 1625.
The second year of our Papacy.

Great, but deserved praises, and confirmed now by the mouth of his Holiness.
And questionless neither the enemy can well feel the greatness of this
wound, it being yet green, nor we in this nouelty of joy, gi^e it the due
estimation it deserves. But, that which is as much or more to be esteemed then
any victory whatsoever, is, that since this strife was more for point of
honor, then the gain of Breda, the loss of that Town, which the States,
with so many s^pplies from all parts, with the stirring of all Europe, and so
great exhausting of their own private treasure, undertook in ^ayne to
defend, has gained immortal fame to his Ma.tie of Spain, the Archduchesse
Isabel, and the Marquess Spinola.

Conographicum REX BREDAM CEPIT QVINTA IVNII.

Typis Iudoci Dooms.

THE SEIGE OF BREDA ENDED A. The Marqueste spinolnaes Quarter. B. The general
of the horse his Quarter. C. The Baron of Ballanscons Quarter. D. Count
Isenburgs Quarter. E. Paul Ballions Quarter. F. The Baron of (...) Quarter. G.
Carlo (...) Quarter. H. Count (...) Quarter. I. The Batteryes toward the
Town. K. The inner trench about the Town. L. The Black Causey M. The new
County in the Meadow grounds with a double pallisailo. N. Artificial
Standing-waters. O. The ditch which Spinola caused to be made 2200 foot long to
couney the waters into the River.




