GODS LOVE TO MANKIND.

MANIFESTED, By Dis-prooving his Absolute Decree for their Damnation.

HOS. 13.9. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self: but in me is thy help.

WISD. 1.12, 13. Seek not Death in the error of your life; and pull not upon
yourselves destruction, with the works of your hands.

For God made not death: neither has he pleasure in the destruction of the
Living.

Imprinted, ANNO, 1633.

TO THE READER.
THe Author of this Treatise was persuaded to Pen the reasons of his opinion
against absolute Reprobation, that he might satisfy a worthy friend of his,
who required it. What satisfaction that learned Gentleman, his friend, has
received by these reasons, I know not: but sure I am, they have given good
content to some others, who have read them, and do still desire a Copy of
them for their further use. To ease whose pains in transcribing this Treatise,
it does now appear in this form. If any of contrary opinion, shall undertake
to answer or refute it; I wish, he would set down his opinion and reasons with
that perspicuitie and modesty, that our Author set down his. Such a course of
disputing will gain more credit to himself and his cause, then voluminous
Vagaries about impertinent things. If any shall use railing speeches, or
unnecessary diversions from the cause; I shall ever interpret that to be a
strong sign of a weak cause: or, at least, I shall think it to be an argument
of an obstinate mind, who neither knows how to yield to the Truth, nor to
defend his error. I hope the Reader, who loves his own salvation, will be a
more indifferent Judge in a question, which concerns him so nearly. And so I
leave him to Gods blessing.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
pa lin for read page lin for read 2 1 Saying Say. 52 26 viz. Gods, viz. that
God^ 9 ^ thressing, threshing. 53 20 transgressions, transgression. 11 1^ of
speculative, of certain speculative. ult fault of nature, fault of our nature.
26 which they, which, this they. 56 12 eo usque miseri, eo usque mistreri, 12 4
by this, besides this. 60 10 slow of anger, slow to anger. 13 8 second,
secondly. 27 that, how that, look how. 25 Peucer, Peucer. 62 ^1 (...) (...) 14
4 to error, to the error. 63 2 compatible, incompatible. ult escape it, escape
it. 65 5 and mercy, and his mercy: 16 15 sovereignty power, sovereignty and
power 66 14 Sublapsarians, Supralapsian^. 36 of God in, in God of. 70 34 if
had, if it had. 17 5 gavy, gave. 71 6 De nativit. De natura Dei. 21 3 sharp or
sensible, sharp and sensible. 73 9 commands, commanded. 22 29 ou^tam, ^cutam.
75 35 which bear, which bare. 24 15 other things, other sins. 79 6 God is,
yet God is. 35 that he has,, he has. 81 4 sacrificing himself, sacrificing of
himself. 26 10 3 Wicked, (3) Wicked, 38 to what use, of what use. 32 36 this,
is. 82 37 the end of, the end than of. ^3 3 2 (2) 89 13 ^e upbraid, he may
upbraid. 6 (1) 1 95 37 self, selves. ^8 5 put o, put to. 99 23 negiient,
negligent. 25 riged, rigid, 103 32 for the whole world, for the sins of the
whole world. 39 swim, any swim, or any. 41 29 any outrageous, any other
outrageous ibid. 34 thou art one of the whole world, thou art one of them yt
were lost, and thou art one of the whole world. ^2 2 2 Nor (2) Nor ult Works,
this Works, says this. ^4 33 most harsh, more harsh. ^8 9 included from
excluded from. 104 5 my lot to be, my lot not to be, Faults escaped in the
Margent.
pa lit. for read page lit. for read 2 Brand, Brand. 43 (s) injustitiaene,
injustitiave. 3 (b) per, par. (t) adv, adv. hares. 4 (e) Iustit. I^stit. 44 (w)
can. 2, can. 25. 6 (r) ad obj. ad obj. 7. 49 Heb. 20, 20, Heb. 10.38. ibid id
eo, ideo. 50 (y) aptum, apertum. 7 (a) credire, credere 57 (i) Ecclesiam.
Spiritu, Ecclesiam Spiritu. 0 (m) ausam, a^sam. (r) ipsumque, ipsamque. 5
Jonah, 4.22. Jonah, 4.2, 66 23.. 7. 6 (t) Epist. Job, Epist. 106. 67 (d) cum
dicemus, cum dicimus. 7 praed gag. praed. page 81 (p) delactionem, dilectionem.
6 (i) page thesi. page 29, thesi. 87 (s) que, quae. (n) illustrandum,
illustrandam. ibid excicantur, excitantur. (o) Reprobri, Reprobi. 89 (t) debit,
debet. ^7 (q) v. 18, cap. 18. (a) contractum, contra^am. (s) destivat,
destinat. 90 (e) a antecedancis. de Antecedancis. ^2 Instit. lib. 14, lib. 4.
97 (g) proterunt, poterunt. ^3 (r) 6. 2. dele cap. 2. 101 (q) sumusve, sumus^e.

GODS LOVE TO MANKIND.
SIR,
I Have sent you here the reasons, which have moved me to change my opinion in
some controversies of late debated between the Remonstrants and their
Opposites.

I do the rather present them unto you.

1 That I may show the due respect which I bear your Worship with my
forwardness to answer your desires, as I can with regard to conscience.

2 That you may see that I dissent not without cause, but have reason on my
side.

3 That if I can be convinced that my grounds are weak and insufficient, I may
think better of the opinion which I have forsaken, then I can for the present.

In the delivery of my motives I will proceed in this order.

1 I will state the opinion which I dislike. 2 I will lay down my reasons
against it.
Touching the first, your Worship knows these two things very well.

1 That the main (...) and question in these controversies, and that on which
the rest do hang, is what the decrees of God are touching the everlasting
condition of men, and how they are ordered.

2 That the men who have disputed these things, may be reduced to two sorts and
sides.

The first side affirms, that there is an absolu^e and peremptory decree
proceeding from the alone pleasure of God, without any consideration of men's
final impenitency and unbeleef; by which God casts men off from grace and
glory, and shuts up the far greater part, (even of those that are called
by the preaching of the Gospel to repentance and salvation) under invincible
and unavoydable sin and damnation.

The other side disavowing any such decree, saying, that Gods decree of casting
men off for ever, is grounded upon the foresight of their continuance in sin
and unbelief, both avoydable by grace, and consequently inferring no man's
damnation necessarily.

The first side is divided, for

1 Some of them present man to God in the decree of reprobation looked on out
of, or above the fall: and say,

That God of his mere pleasure antecedent to all sin in the creature,
original or actual, did decree to glorify his sovereignty and justice in the
eternal rejection and damnation of the greatest part of mankind, as the end;
and in their unavoydable sin and impenitency, as the means. And this way go
Calvin, Beza, Zanchius, Piscator, Gomarus, and some of our own Countrymen.

2 The rest of that side, thinking to avoid the great inconveniences, to which
that supralapsarian way lies open, fall down a little lower, and present man
to God in his decree of Reprobation, lying in the fall and under the guilt of
original sin, saying,

That God looking upon miserable mankind lying in Adams sin, did decree the
greatest number of men (even those men whom he calls to repentance and
salvation by the preaching of the Gospel) to hell torments for ever, and
without all remedy, for the declaration of his severe justice. This way went
the Synod.

The difference between them is not much, and even in their own account too
small a discord to cause a breach. Notwithstanding this petty difference
therefore, they agree well enough together, as we may see in the Hague
conference and Synod.

In the conference at Hague, the Contraremonstrants have these words; Col. Hag.
Braud. page 37. Quo ad sententiarum diversitatem in hoc argumento, quod deus
respexit hominem in hoc decreto nondum creatum, vel creatum and lapsum; quia
hoc ad fundamentum hujus doctrinae non pertinet, libenter alij alios aequitate
Christiana toleramus.
As touching the diversity of opinions in this argument, viz. that God looked
at man in this decree, not yet created, or created and fallen: because this
belongs not to the foundation of this doctrine; we do in Christian equity bear
with one another.

After this in the Synod at Dort, they permitted Gomarus to set down his
judgment in the upper way. And the Delegates of South- Holland were very
indifferent which way they took: For these are their words, Acta Syn. per. 3^
page 48. An Deus in elage^do co^sideraverit homines ut lapsos, an etiam ut
nondum lapsos; existimant non esse necessarium, ut definiatur; modo statuatur
Deum in eligendo considerasse homines in pari statu.
Whether God in choosing, considered men as fallen, or else as not fallen: They
(the Delegates of South-Holland) think it is not necessary to be determined; so
it be held, that God in choosing, considered men in a like estate. Antidot.
Remonstra. page 32.
Maccovius also Professor of Divinity at Francker, a violent and stiff
maintainer of the most unsavory speeches, which have been uttered in this
Controversy, and one that undertook in the very Synod to make good against
Lubbert his fellow Professor, that God did Velle peccata, ordinare homines ad
peccatum, qua peccatum, and neutiquam velle, ut omnes homines salventur, etc.
Will sins, ordain men to sin, and would not at all, that all men be
saved: and besides this, openly and peremptorily affirmed, that Except these
things were hold and maintained by them, they could not possibly keep their
own ground, but must come over to the Remonstrants. This man was not only not
censured, but publicly declared in the Synod to be pure and Orthodox, and
dismissed only with this kind and friendly admonition: that he should
hereafter take heed of such words, as might give offense to tender ears, and
could not well down with those, who are yet incapable of such Mysteries.

By these instances it appears, that they of the first side can easily bear
one with another in this difference. And (to say the truth) there is no reason
why they should quarrel about circumstances, seeing they agree in the
substance. For they both contend,

1 That the moving-cause of Reprobation is the alone will of God, and not the
sin of man, Original, or Actual.

2 That the final impenitency and damnation of Reprobates are necessary and
unavoydable by Gods absolute Decree.

These two things are the [maxima gravamina] principal grievances that the
other side stick at. So that these two paths meet at last in the same way.

Both these opinions of the first side I dislike.

My reasons why, are of two sorts; 1 Such as first made me to question the
truth. 2 Such as convince me of their untruth.


MY reasons of the first sort do indifferently respect and make against both,
and I will set them down against both together.

My second sort of reasons I will divide, delivering some of them against the
upper and more rigid way, others against the lower and more moderate way.

I begin with those reasons, which first moved me to question the truth of
absolute Reprobation, as it is taught both ways.

They are these four, which follow.

1. Reason, Novelty.
1 The Novelty of this opinion. Absolute and inevitable Reprobation has little
or no footing in Antiquity. The upper way was never taught or approoved by any
of the Fathers (even the stoutest defenders of grace against the Pelagians) for
the space of 600 (I may say 800) years after CHRIST: nor the lower way till
the time of St. Austin, which was about 400 years after CHRIST. They did
generally agree upon the contrary conclusion, and taught men in their times,

That it was possible for them to be saved, which in the event were not saved;
and to have repented which repented not: and that there was no Decree of God,
which did lay a necessity of perishing upon any son of Adam. This that I say,
Mr. Calvin himself does freely acknowledge, speaking of Election and
Reprobation according to Gods foreknowledge: Calv. Just. l. 3. c. 22. Sect. 1.
Neque haec vulgo recepta opinio solius vulgi est: habuit enim seculis omnibus
magnos authors.
This commonly received opinion (says he) of a conditional respective Decree)
is not the opinion only of the common people, but has had great Authors in
all ages. Reverend Beza likewise speaking of the same opinion, has these words
to the same purpose: Beza in cap. 11 ad Romans v. 35. In quem errorem sane
turpissimum Origines veteres plerosque tum Graecos, tum Latinos adegit:
Into which surely most foul error Origin has driven many of the Ancients
both Greek and Latin. To the same effect also Prosper (St. Austins follower)
has a remarkable speech. Prosper in Epist. ad Aug. prope finem. Pe^e omnium
parem inveniri and unam sententiam, qua propositum and praedestinationem dei
secundum praescientiam receperunt ^ut ob hoc Deus alios vasa contumeliae, alios
honoris vasa fecerit; qu^ fine^ uniuscujusque praeriderit, and sub ipso gratiae
adjutorio, in qua futurus esset voluntate and action praescierit.
Almost all the Ancients (says he) did grant with one consent, that God
decreed men's ends according to his foresight of their actions, and not
otherwise. To these speeches let me add that of Remigius Archbishop of Lions,
who to Rabanus Archbishop of Mentz, objecting that St. Austin wrote a book
called Hypognosticon, against Pelagius and Caelestius, wherein he denied that
Reprobates were properly Vsh. hist. Gotto. page 107.
[praedestinati ad interitum] predestinate to destruction; answers, that St.
Austin said not so: but some other man (as it is supposed) to purge the Church
of that calumny, which some ill affected ones did cast upon it: namely, that it
taught, that God by his predestination did impose upon men a necessity of
perishing, did withdraw the word (Predestination) from the point of Reprobates,
and gave it only to the Elect, and so gave great occasion of further error and
mistake. In this speech of his is clearly employed, that it was the constant
doctrine of the Church then, that Reprobates lie under no necessitating Decree
of Perdition.

The truth of this charge may further appear by a few particular instances.

Minutius Foelix brings in the Pagans objecting to the Christians, that they
held the events of all things to be inevitable, and did feign and frame to
themselves an unjust God, who did punish in men their unavoydable Destinies,
not their ill choyses. This is the Objection: Min. Foelix page 32. Quicquid
agimus, ut alii fato, ita vos Deo addicitis: iniquum igitur deum singitis, qui
sortem in hominibus pumat, non voluntatem.
Whatsoever we do, as others to fate, so you ascribe to God: you make
therefore to your selves an unjust God, who punishes in men their lot, not
their will. To this he answers, Illud fatum est, quod de unoquoque Deus fatus
est.
Christians hold no other Fates, then Gods Decrees; who Min. Foelix p 116 Qui
cum universam praescit materiam, pro meritis and qualitatibus singulorum etiam
fata determinat, and ita in nobis non genitura plectitur, sed ingenii natura
punitur.
fore-knowing all men and their actions, did accordingly determine their
retributions.

St. Hierom an eager opposer of the Pelagians, in many places of his Writings
says the same thing; Hier. ad Galat. c. 1. v. 15. Ex praescientia dei evenit,
ut quem justum futuru^ scit, prius diligat, qua^ oriatur ex utero, and quem
peccatorem, oderit antequam peccet.
From the foreknowledge of God it comes to pass, that who he knows will
be righteous, him he loves before he comes out of the womb; and who he
knows will be a sinner, him he hates before he sins. In another place he
speaks to the same purpose, Ad c. 1. Malac. Dilectio and odium dei, vel ex,
praescientia nascitur futuroru^ vel ex operibus; alioquin novimus quod omnia
Deus diligat, nec quicquam little oderit quae creavit.
The love and hatred of God, arises either from the foresight of future
things, or from the works; otherwise we know that God loves all things, nor
does he hate any thing that he has made. And in his book against Pelagius he
says Lib. 3. contr. Pelag.
[Eligit Deus quem bonum cernit] God chooses whom he sees to be good.

The sum of all which speeches is but this, that there is no decree of
damning or saving men, but what is built upon Gods foreknowledge of the evil
and good actions of men. Fulgentius is plain for it too: Fulgent. lib. 1. ad
Monimum. Quos praescivit deus hanc vitam in peccato terminaturos praedestinavit
supplicio interminabili puniendos.
Those whom God foresaw would dye in sin, he decreed should live in endless
punishment. I may take in St. Austin and Prosper also, who are judged to be the
Patrons of the absolute decree, as it is set down the Sublapsarian way: even
they do many times let fall such speeches, as cannot fairly be reconciled
with absolute Reprobation.

I will only cite Prosper (for St. Austin speaks in him) he discoursing of
some that fall away [a Sanctitate ad immunditiem] from Holiness to
uncleanness, says Prosp. ad obj. 3. Gall. Non ex co necessitatem percundi
habu^runt, quia praedestinati non sunt, sed ideo praedestinati non sunt, quia
tales futuri ex voluntaria praevaricatione praesci^ sunt.
They that fall away from holiness to uncleanness, lie not under a necessity
of perishing, because they were not predestinate; but therefore they were not
predestinate, because they were foreknowne to be such by voluntary
prevarication.

Not long after speaking of the same men he says, Prosper resp. ad Obj. Quia
illos ruituros propria voluntate praescivit, ob hoc a filijs perditionis nulla
praedestinatione discrevit.
Because God foresaw they would perish by their own free will; therefore he
did not by any predestination sever them from the children of perdition. And
again in his answer to the 12th, Objection, he has these words; Ib resp. ad
Ob. 12 Vires obedientiae non ideo cuiquam subtraxit, quia eum non
praedestinavit; sed quia recessurum ab ipsa obedientia esse praevidit, ideo eum
non praedestinavit.
God has not withdrawn from any man ability to yield obedience, because he
has not predestined him: but because he foresaw he would fall from
obedience, therefore he has not predestined him.

I will shut up mine instances of that Age with the judgment of the council at
Arles against the Pelagians in the year 490. or thereabout. This council
subscribed to the letter which was written by Faustus against Lucidus the
Predestinarian, and made the Anathemaes and curses, which therein he denounces
against him and such like to be their own: Some of which were these Anathema
illi qui dixerit illum qui peri^t non accepisse ut salvus esse possit.
Cursed be he that shall say that the man that perishes, might not have been
saved: and again, Anathema illi qui dixerit, quod vas contumeliae non possit
affurgere ut sit vas in honorem.
Cursed be the man that shall say that a vessel of dishonor, may not rise to
be a vessel of honor.

A testimony or two I will borrow likewise from some persons of note, and those
St. Austins followers too, who lived about 400 years after St Austins time.
Remigius the great patron of Gottschalk the zealous preacher and publisher of
absolute reprobation in those times) in his answer ^o that epistle, which we
suppose to be the Epistle of Raba^s; to Rabanus saying, that God did Bishop
Usher hist. Gotts^. p. 53. and 54. Sanabiles facere nationes orbis terrarum.
make the nations ^f the world healthful, and that he does [velle omnes
homi^es salvos fieri] will that all men be saved; he gives such ^n answer as
cannot stand with absolute Reprobation; Et hoc omnino verum est, quia nemini
deus imponit necessitatem pereundi, sicut nemini imponit necessitatem man
agendi.
This (says he) is very true, because God lays on no ^an a necessity of
perishing, as he has laid on none a necessity of ^inning. And a little after
he is plainer, Quos verissime praescivit impios and iniquos futuros and insua
impietate and iniquitate permansuros, justis and rectissimis de causis
decrevit, statuit, and praedestinavit peritu^os, sicut ipse ait, Qui peccaverit
mihi, ipsum delebo de libro meo.
Those whom God did foreknow would live and dye in their wickedness, for
reasons most just he decreed should perish, as himself says, Him which
sins against me, even him will J blot out of my book.

In the Valentine Synod assembled in favor of Gottschalk we may find these
words,

Can. 2. Nec ipso malos ideo perire, quia boni esse non potuerunt, sed quia
boni esse noluerunt, suo que vitio in massa damnationis, vel merito originali
vel etia^ actuali perma^serunt.
Therefore do the wicked perish not because they could ^ot, but because they
would not be good, and by their own fault Original or actual also, remained
in the mass of perdition. And in the end of their third Canon they denounce
Ana^hema to those, that hold that men are so predestined unto evil, as that
they cannot be otherwise. Can. 3. Verum aliquos ad malum praedestinatos esse
divina potestate, ut aliud esse non possint, non solu^ non credimus, sed etiam
si sunt, qui tantum malum credire velint, cum omni de^estatione, sicut Ara^sica
Synodus, illis Anathema dicimus.
That any should be (says the Council) predestined to evil by the power of
God, so as he cannot be otherwise; we do not only not believe but also if
there be any that will believe so great an evil, with all detestation we
denounce them accursed, as the Arausican council also did. By these
testimonies (which are but a few of many) it appears that absolute and
inevitable Reprobation ^ound but cold entertainment from Antiquity.

Which considering, I began to call it into question.

For albeit I make not the decisions and determinations of the Fathers or
councels the rules of my faith, (because they are but men, and therefore
subject to error:) yet I honor their gray hayres and their grave assemblyes,
and do vehemently mistrust those doctrines, which they never taught or
approved; but misliked and condemned.

2 Its unwillingness to abide the trial. I find that the authors and
abetters of it have been very backward to bring it to the standart; not only
when they have been called upon by their adversaries to have it weighed, 2
Reason, Unwillingness to be tried.
but also when they have been entreated thereto by their chief Magistrates,
who might have compelled them: a shrewd argument (me thinks) that it is too
light.

In the disputation at Mompelgart, anno 1586 held between Beza and Jacobus
Andrea, with some seconds on both sides, Beza and his company having disputed
with the Lutherans about the Person of CHRIST and the Lords supper, when they
came to this point, did decline the sifting of it, and gave this reason among
others, that it could not then be publicly disputed of Beza in Coll. Mompel
pa. 373. Sine gravi eorum offendiculo, qui tanti mysterij capaces non sunt.
without the great scandal and hurt of the ignorant, and unacquainted with
these high mysteries. Braud Col. Hag. pa. 57.
The contraremonstrants also in their Conference with the opposite parties at
the Hague in the year 1611, could not be drawn to dispute with them about
this point, but delivered a petition to the States of Holland and West
Friezeland, that they might not be urged to it, resolving rather to break off
the conference, then to meddle with it.

In the Synod likewise at Dort, in the years 1618 and 1619, the Remonstrants
were warned by the President of the Synod Act a Syn per 1. pa. 133. Vt de
electione potius quam de odiosa Reprobationis materia agerent.
That they should rather dispute of the point of Election, then the odious
point of Reprobation.

Can this Doctrine be a truth and yet blush at the light, which makes all
things manifest? Especially considering these things:

1 That Reprobation is a principal head of Divinity, by the well or ill
stating and ordering of which, the glory of God and the good of Religion, is
much promoted or hindered.

2 That there is such a necessary connection between the points of Election and
Reprobation (both being parts of Praedestination) that the one cannot well be
handled without the other.

3 That the Doctrine of Reprobation was the chief cause of all the uproares in
the Church at that time.

4 That it was accused with open mouth and challenged of falsehood; and
therefore bound in Justice to purge it self of the crimination.

5 That the Remonstrants did not at that time desire that it should be talked
of among the common people, who might have stumbled at it; but disputed of
among the judicious and learned, who (as the thressing Oxen which were to beat
the corn out of the husk) are to bolt out those truths which are couched and
hidden in the letter of the Scriptures.

That the doctrine which is loath to abide the trial even of learned men,
carries with it a shrewd suspicion of falsehood, the Heathen Orator shall
witness for me; who to Epicurus saying that he would not publish his opinion
to the simple people, who might happily take offense at it, answers thus;
Cicer. de fin. bon. and malorum, l 2 page 115, Aut tu eadem ista dic in
judicio, aut si coronam times, dic in Senatu. Nunquam facies. Cur nisi quod
turpis est oration.
Declare thine opinion in the place of Judgment, or if thou art afraid of the
assembly there, declare it in the Senate House, among those grave and judicious
persons. Thou will never do it; and why? but because it is a foul and
dishonest opinion.

This striving to lie close, is (peradventure) no infallible argument of a bad
cause, yet it is a very probable one. For true Religion (as Vives says) is not
a thing gilded over, but gold it self; the more that is scraped and
discovered, the brighter and goodlyer it is, and so is the truth. Vives de ve^.
fidei, l. 1. p. 16. Puriorem ac nitidiorem illam ^eddit bellum, quam pax
adversus gentes
Disputations illustrate and set forth true opinions more then silence can:
let us not fear therefore (says he) lest our Faith when it is laid open,
appear filthy to the eyes of beholders. Metuant hoc aliae religiones falsae
and umbranles.
Let false and Superficial religions, in which there is no soundness, be
afraid of this.

The Jew is loath to reason with the Christian touching his Law; and the Turk
is forbidden to dispute of his Alcoran: because their Religions are brittle,
like glass broken with the least touch. But the Christian Vives l. 4 page 4^9.
Qui veritate sua sidit, nihil reformidat examen ingenii: imo advocat, and
quantum potest, exacuit.
who is confident of the goodness of his Faith, fears no examination, but
rather as much as may be, soliciteth and provokes his Adversary to the Combat.

Truth whether it be in men or doctrines, is best, when it is uncovered; it
covets no corners, though error do; but is willing to abide the trial. Psalm.
139.23.24
Search me O Lord and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts: and see if
there be any way of wickedness in me; says the Prophet David, knowing his
heart to be without guile. And our Savior tells us, Ioh. 3.20, 21.
that every one that does evil, hates the light, and comes not to it lest
his deeds should be reproved; but he that does truth, comes to the light,
that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God. As St. Paul
says of an Heretic, Titus 3.11.
he is [(...)] Selfe-condemned; so we may say of Heresy and untruth; it
condemns it self, and by nothing more, than by refusing the touchstone. He
is to be thought an empty Scholar, who is loath to be apposed; and his gold to
be light and counterfeit, who will not have it touched and weighed, and those
opinions to be but errors, which would so willingly walk in a mist, and dwell
in silence, when it concerns the peace of the Church so much to have them
examined.

3. Reason. Infamy.
3 The Jnfamy of it. It is an opinion (especially as it is defended the upper
way) odious to the Papists, opening their foul mouths against our Church and
Religion; abhorred (mainteyned either way) by all the Lutherans: who for this
very Tenet call us damned Calvinists, think us unworthy to be above ground,
and in their writings protest, that they will rather unite themselves to the
Papists then to us. And it is also distasteful to all the Greek Churches,
which are very many. Molin in his Anatomy, speaking of the Supralapsarian
Doctrine, says Molin. Anat. Arm. c. 12. de Praed.
If it should be so that God has reprobated men without the consideration of
sin, or has ordained them to sin; yet it is the part of a wise man to
conceal these things, or not to know them, rather then to utter them; Quia
enunciata injiciunt scrupulos, and ausam praebe^t adversatiis infamandi veram
Religionem.
Because when they are taught and defended they fill men's heads with scruples,
and give occasion to the Adversaries of defaming the true Religion. The same
may as truly be said of the Sublapsarian way. For (as I have said) they are in
substance all one. And Sir Edwyn Sandys is of the same mind too. For in his
most excellent Book called a Survey of the State of Religion in the Western
parts of the World. Speaking of the deadly division between the Lutherans and
Calvinists in Germany, Sir Edwin Sandys page 172.
he has these words. That though the Palsgrave and Landsgrave have with great
judgment and wisdom, to asslake those flames, imposed silence in that part to
the Ministers of their party, hoping the charity and discretion of the other
party, would have done the like; yet it falls out otherwise. For both the
Lutheran Preachers rail as bitterly against them in their pulpits as ever, and
their Princes and people have them in as great detestation, not forbearing to
profess openly, that they will return to the Papacy, rather then ever admit
that Sacramentary and predestinary Pestilence.

For these two points are the ground of the quarrel, and the latter more
scandalous at this day, then the former. And in the same book, page 194. and
198. speaking of men whom he commends for singular learning and piety (whose
judgment he so sets down as that he declares it to be his own) he says, that
they think it were no blemish for the reformed Doctors to revise their
doctrines, and to abate the rigor of speculative opinions, (for so he is
pleased to call them) especially touching the eternal decrees of God: wherein
some of their chief authors have run into such an extreme to all Romish
doctrine, as to have exceedingly scandalized all other Churches withal, yea
and many of their own to rest very ill satisfied.

At the closing up of the conference at Mompelgart, Coll. Momp. pa. 566.567
Ofiand. Hist. Eccles pa. 1040. Cent. 16.
when Frederick Barle of Wortenberg exhorted his Divines to acknowledge Beza
and his company for brethren, and to declare it by giving them their hand; they
utterly refused, saying they would pray to God to open their eyes, and would
do them any office of humanity and charity, but they would not give them the
right hand of brotherhood, because they were proved to be guilty [errorum
teterrimorum,] of most pestilent errors, among which they reckoned for one.

Hemingius left his own side and joined with us in the point of the Sacrament:
but he would come no nearer, mainteyning always a distance in this.

And as for the Grecians, page 237.
we learn also by Sir Edwin Sandys his relation, that they do mightily
d^ssent from that doctrine touching the eternal counsels of God, which Calvin
(as some conceive) first fully revealed or rather introduced into the Christian
world; and since, some of his friends and followers have seconded: as thinking
it very injurious to the goodness of God, and directly and immediately opposite
to his very nature. Jn regard of which, one of their Bishops has written a
Book against it, which has been sent to Geneva and there received.

It is a morsel which the greatest part of Christian Churches cannot swallow:
and therefore (I think) it should not very easily without suspicion down with
us.

And to say one thing more; by this infamy of it among Christians, page 223.
224.
it is very probable, that among the too many scandals given to the Jews by
Christians, among whom they dwell; this doctrine is not one of the least rubs
in the way of their conversion. For they think it a bad opinion (says the same
judicious and learned Gentleman) Which some of great name have seemed to hold,
that God in his everlasting and absolute pleasure should affect the extreme
misery of any of his Creatures for the showing of his justice and severity in
tormenting them; or that the calamity, casting away and damnation of some
should absolutely and necessarily redound more to his glory, than the felicity
of them all, considering that his nature is mere goodness and happiness, and
has no affinity with rigor or misery. This is my third reason.

Reason, 4. Affinity to Fate.
The fourth, It Is affinity with the old exploded errors of the Stoics and
Manichees.

The opinion of the Stoickes was, that all actions and events were unavoydable,
determined either by the revolutions of the Heavens, and the qualities of such
stars as reigned at men's births, or by the concatenation of natural things
and the disposition of the first matter, all things being so put together from
eternity, that one thing must needs follow another, as it does; and the [prima
materia] being so disposed, that things cannot successively come to pass
otherwise then they do, but must of necessity be as they are, even [invito
deo] though God would have some things to be otherwise then they are.

The Mani^he^ held, that all men's actions, good or evil were determined too:
good actions by a good God, who was the author of all good things that were
created, and of all good actions that came to pass in the world; Evil actions
by an evil God who was the [primum principium mali] the prime author of all
evil things or actions that were extant in the world.

The Maintainers of the Absolute Decree do say one of these two things, either
that all actions natural and moral, good and evil, and all events likewise
are absolutely necessary; so the Supralapsarians: or that all men's ends (at
least) are unalterable and indeterminable by the power of their wills; so the
Sublapsarians. And this is upon the matter all one with the former. For first,
in vain is our freedom in the actions and means, if the end at which they
drive, be pitched and determined; since all actions are for the ends sake, that
it might be obtained by them, which without them could not. And second, the
determination of the end does necessarily involve the means that precede that
end; as if a man be fore-determined to damnation, he must unavoydably sin,
else he could not be damned.

Now in these 3 opinions we may note two things.

1 The Substance and formality of them, which is an unavoydablenesse of men's
actions and ends whatsoever they be: in this all of them agree, all holding
that in all things, at least in all men's ends, undeclinable fates and
insuperable necessity do domineere.

And therefore Melancthon does not stick sundry times in his common places to
call this Absolute Decree [Fatum Stoicum, and tabulas Parcarum] Stoicall fate,
and the Destinies tables: He also charge the Church of Geneva (the great
Patron of it) with a labor to bring in the Stoics error, as we may see in a
certain Epistle of Melancthons to Pencer, where he has these words. Melanct.
in Epist. ad Pen^. Scrib^t ad me Lelius de Stoico fato usque adeo litem Genevae
moveri, ut quidam in ca^cerem conjectus sit, propterea quod a Zenone differ^et.
O misera tempora! Doctrina salutis peregrinis quibusdam dubitationibus
obscuratur.
Lelius writes unto me, that in Geneva there is such strife about the Stoics
fate that one was cast into prison, because he dissented from Zeno. O miserable
times! etc. And by the Testimony of Beza too, who speaking of Melancthon says;
Beza in vita Calvini. Philippus de his rebus ita scribere caeperat, ut
Genevenses quasi Stoicu^ fatum invehentes notare quibusdam videatur.
Philip has so written of these things, as if he meant to tax the Geneva
Divines for bringers in of Destiny.

2 We may note the circumstance or the grounds of their opinions; The Stoics
derive this necessity from the Stars or the first matter; The Manichees from
two [prima principia, aeterna and ^aeter^] first principles of all things
eternal and coeternall. These last, from the peremptory decree of Almighty God.

So that they diffe^ in their grounds indeed; but in this difference the
Stoics and the Manichees in some respects have the better. For it is better to
derive this necessity of evil actions and unhappy events, from an evil God or
the course of nature, then from the decree of that God, who is infinitely good.
The substance of their opinions is all one, the ground wherein they differ is
but accidental to error.

Which being so, for this very reason alone may this doctrine of absolute
Reprobation be suspected: because those dreams of the Stoics were exploded by
the best Philosophers of all sorts; and this of the Manichees was generally
cried down by the Fathers, not only as foolish, but as impious and unworthy
of entertainment in a Christian heart, or Christian Commonwealth, not so much
for any thing circumstantiall in it, as for the substance of the error; because
it made all things and events to be necessary, and so plucked up the roots of
virtue, planted vice, and left no place for just rewards or punishments.

These are my reasons of the first sort.

THe Reasons that have convinced me of the untruth of absolute Reprobation, now
follow. And first of those that fight against the upper way.

They are drawn [ab incommodo] from the great evils and inconveniences, which
issue from it naturally: which may be referred to two maine heads.

1 The dishonor of God. 2 The overthrow of religion and government.
I. Jnconvenience.
It dishonors God. For it charge him deeply with two things, no ways
agreeable to his nature.

1 Men's Eternal torments in Hell. 2 Their sins on Earth.
First, it charge him with men's Eternal torments in hell, and makes him to
be the prime, principal and invincible cause of the damnation of millions of
miserable souls: the prime cause, because it reports him to have appointed
them to destruction, of his own voluntary disposition, antecedent to all
deserts in them; and the principal and invincible cause; because it makes the
damnation of Reprobates to be necessary and unavoydable through Gods absolute
and uncontrollable Decree: and so necessary, that they can no more escape it,
then poor Astyanax could avoid the breaking of his neck, when the Grecians
tumbled him down from the Tower of Troy.

Now this is a heavy charge, contrary to Scripture, Gods nature, and sound
reason.

1 To Scripture, which makes man the principal, nay the only cause (in
opposition to God) of his own ruin. Thy destruction is of thy self O Israel,
but in me is thy help. Hos. 13.9. As J live, says the Lord, I will not the
death of the wicked, etc. Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye dye? Ezech. 33.11. He
does not afflict willingly, nor greeve the children of men. Lam. 3.33. To which
speeches, for likeness sake, I will join one of Prospers. Resp. ad 12. Obj.
Vincent. Praedestinatio dei multis est causa standi, nemim est causa labe^di.
Gods predestination is to many the cause of standing, to none of falling.

2 It Is contrary to Gods nature Exodus 34.6.
who sets forth himself to be a God merciful, gracious, long suffering,
abundant in goodness, etc. and he is acknowledged to be so by King David.
Psalm. 86.5.
Thou Lord art good and merciful, and of great kindness to all them that call
upon thee. And by the Prophets Joel, Jonah, and Micah. He is gracious and
merciful, Joel. 2.13.
slow to anger and of great kindness says Joel. Jonah. 4.22.
I know (says Jonah) that thou art a gracious God and merciful, slow to
anger, and of great kindness. Micah. 7.18.
And who (says Micah) is a God like unto thee, that takes away iniquity? etc.
be retayneth not his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him.

3 It Is contrary also to sound reason which cannot but argue such a Decree of
extreme cruelty, and consequently remove it from the father of mercies.

We cannot in reason think that any man in the world can so far put off
humanity and nature, as to resolve with himself to marry and beget Children,
that after they are borne and have lived a while with him, he may hang them up
by the tongues, tear their flesh with scourges, pull it from their bones with
burning pincers, or put them to any cruel tortures; that by thus torturing
them he may show what his authority and power is over them Much less can we
believe without great violence to reason, that the God of mercy can so far
forget himself, as out of his absolute pleasure to ordain such infinite
multitudes of his children made after his own Image, to everlasting fire; and
create them one after another, that after the end of a short life here, he
might torment them without end hereafter, to show his power and soveraignety
over the^. If to destroy the righteous with the wicked temporally, be such a
piece of injustice, that Abraham remooveth it from God with an Absit, Will thou
destroy the righteous with the wicked? Genesis 18.25.
That be far from thee O Lord. Shall not the judge of all the world do
right? How deeply (may we think) would that good man have detested one single
thought, that God resolves upon the destruction of many innocent souls
eternally in hell fire?





For it is not compatible with these properties in God, to appoint men to Hell
of his mere will and pleasure, no fault at all of theirs preexisting in his
eternal mind.

1 It is not compatible with justice, which is a constant will of rendering to
every one his proper due, and that is, vengeance to whom vengeance belongs,
namely to the obstinate and impenitent. Aust. l. 3. cont. Julian. c. 1^. page
164. Bonus est Deus, justus est Deus: potest aliquem sinc bonis mericis
liberare, quia bonus est; non potest quenquam sine malis meritis damnare, quia
justus est.
God is good (says St. Austin) and God is just: he may without any deserts
free men from punishment, because he is good; but he cannot without evil
deservings condemn any man because he is just. In another place also he says,
Aug. epi. Job. ad Bonifac. Quemquam vero immeritu^ and nulli obnoxiu^ peccato
si Deus damnare creditur, alienus ab iniquitate non creditur.
If God be believed to damn any man that by sin deserves it not; he is not
believed to be free from injustice.

2 Nor is it compatible with goodness, which is an inclination of God in
communicating that good which is in himself to his creatures, as far as he
can without wronging his Justice: and therefore if God be (as the Scripture
reports him) good to all; it cannot be that he should of himself without any
motive in the reasonable creature provide for it from everlasting the greatest
of all miseries, and that before he thought of making it, or bestowing any good
at all upon it.

Perk. l. de praed. gag. 25.
that we do and may slaughter our beasts for our daily use, without any cruelty
or injustice: and therefore God may as well, nay much more appoint as many of
us as he pleases to the torments of Hell for his glory, and yet be just and
good notwithstanding: for there is a greater disproportion between God and us,
then between us and beasts.

Genesis 9.2.3. where we may observe, First, that God delivers up all Creatures,
beasts, birds, and fishes into the hands of men. Secondly, that the end why he
does so, is, that they might be meat for men and consequently that they might
be slain.

Which being so, our slaughtering of oxen, sheep, and other creatures for our
daily use, is to be accounted Gods doing rather then ours. And therefore the
objection should be made thus; God may without any breach of goodness or
justice appoint brute creatures to be slain for man's use: therefore he may
ordeyne men to be cast into hell torments for ever for his own use, that is
for the declaration of his sovereignty, etc.

This being premised, I answer further, that this comparison holds not: for
there is little proportion between the objects compared and less between the
acts.

1 There is but small proportion between the objects, beasts and men, creatures
of a different nature and made for a different end. Beasts are void of reason
and liberty in their actions, creatures whose beings vanish with their breath,
made only for the use and service of men upon Earth: but men are reasonable
and understanding creatures, able through the creators bounty to discern
between good and evil, and according to their first principles, to choose the
good and forsake the evil: they are the very image of Gods purity and
eternity, and were made for the service of God alone upon Earth, and his
blessed and everlasting society in Heaven.

So that albeit there be a very great distance between God and men, yet nothing
so great as between God and beasts. It follows not therefore, that if God
may appoint beasts to be killed of his own free pleasure for man's use, he may
with like equity and reason appoint men of his own will to destruction for his
own use. We read that God required of his people many thousand beasts for
Sacrifices, but not one man.

The first borne of other creatures he challenged for burnt offerings (except
they were unclean beasts;) but the first borne of men were to be redeemed:
which shows, that he put a wide difference between the blood of men and
beasts. Besides, in the 9 of Gen: he gives men power to kill and feed upon all
living creatures, but he straightly forbids them to shead man's blood, and gives
this reason of the prohibition; Man is the Image of God. So that we may well
conclude, that there is but small proportion between the objects compared men
and beasts, in respect of this act of killing or slaughtering.

2 There is far less or rather no proportion at all between the acts
compared, killing and eternal tormenting. A man may kill, but he cannot
without barbarous injustice and cruelty torment his beast and prolong the life
of it, that he may daily vex and torture it, to show what power and
sovereignty he has over it: so I doubt not (though there be some that will not
grant it, Vid. Molia ei c^dat. quaest. graviss. p. 12^.
but charge the Armininians with contumely against God for affirming it) I
doubt not (I say) but God may kill a man of his own free pleasure, yea and
resolve him into nothing without any cruelty or injustice; because in so doing
he does but take away what he had given him: but he cannot without both these,
antecedently decree to keep him alive for ever in Hell, that he may there
torment him without end, to show his sovereignty. For this is to inflict an
infinite evil upon a guiltless creature, to whom he had given but a finit
good. And so is the comparison most unequal too in the acts compared: and
therefore proves just nothing.

Dr. T^isse his vindi: gra. l 2. part 1. dig^. 1 page 17. Edit. 2.
But it is replied by some (who will rather speak unreasonably and against
common sense, then lay down the conclusions which they have undertaken to
mainteyne,) that it is better and more eligible to be tortured in Hell, then to
want or loose a being: for he that wants a being enjoys no good, but he that
is tormented in Hell, has a being; and by consequence some thing that is good.
If therefore God may take away a man's being that is innocent, and turn him
into nothing for his pleasure; much more may he torment him in hell.



1 The speech of our Savior concerning Judas: Math. 26.24.
Woe be to that man, by whom the Son of man is betrayed: it had been good
for that man, if he had never been borne. Two things especially are set forth
in these words of our Savior. First, the misery of Judas the betrayer of his
Lord, Woe be to, etc. Secondly, the greatness of his misery, It had been
good, etc. It is as much as if our Lord had said, Judas the Traitor shall be
damned; and therefore so woeful will his condition be, that it had been good
and happy for him, if he had never received a being: good in earnest as
Interpreters do generally expound it, not in the opinion and esteem of
weak-minded, faint-hearted men only, as some few understand it. For,

1 Let it be granted that the Scripture speaks of things sometimes according
to men's opinions; yet without reason to fasten such an exposition upon any
Scripture, is to do as Dunses do in the Schools, who being not able to
answer a place in Aristotle wherewith they are charged, shift it off and say,
[loquitur ex aliorum sententia] he speaks according to the opinion of others.

2 This Scripture cannot in reason be thus expounded,

1 Because it is an argument and ground by which CHRIST declares the truth or
greatness of the misery of Judas; Woe to the man, etc. And why woe? Because it
had been good, etc. But it were no argument to show his woeful estate by, to
say that it had been good for him that he had never been borne, in the opinion
of men who mistake the case, but not in truth.

2 Because this Exposition would teach and encourage men to be Atheists and
Epicures. In the second of Wisdom we read, how voluptuous men do stir up one
another to enjoy the good things that are present, to fill themselves with wine
and ointments, to leave some tokens of their jollity in every place, and to
practice all manner of wickedness: and what is their motive? A false
persuasion that they^ souls should dye with their bodies, and that they should
have no being after death. If this conceit could flesh them thus in their
impious and voluptuous courses, how freely and eagerly (may we think) would
they pursue their carnal and sinful delights, if they could be but once
persuaded, that after all their pleasures they shall be in a better case, then
if they had no being?

Secondly, I oppose common consent; where shall we pick out a man, but will
say (if he speak from his heart) that he were better to vanish into a thousand
nothings, then to be cast into hell? what is the reason why men are so afraid
of Hell, when they are touched to the quick with the conscience of their
ungodly lives, and the expectation of eternal vengeance, that with Job they
curse their birthday, and wish an hundred times over, that they had never
been, or might cease to be, that so they might not come into the place of
torments; but because they judge a being there to be incomparably worse then no
being any where? and why are men who are sensible of hell fire, so strongly
curbed and held in by the fear of feeling it, even from darling and beloved
sins, but because they apprehend it to be the most terrible of all terribles!
fear of being annihilated can never do that which the fear of Hell does.

The third thing which I oppose is common sense, which judges pains when they
are extreme to be worse then death. Hence it is, that Job being tormented in
his body by the Devil, cursed his birthday, magnified the condition of the
dead, and wished himself in the grave, plainly preferring the loss of his
being before that miserable being which he then had.

And hence it is, that men even of stoutest and hardest spirits (as we see by
daily experience) would (if they might enjoy their option) choose rather to
have no bodies at all, then bodies tormented with the stone or gout, or any
other sharp or sensible disease. It is a known saying grounded on this
judgment of sense, [Praestat semel quam semper mori] better it is to dye once,
then to be always dying.

This the Tyrant Tiberius knew very well: and therefore he would not suffer
those, toward whom he purposed to exercise his cruelty, to be put to a speedy
death, but to lingering torments, as Swetonius reports of him in that chapter
where he reckons up his barbarous and cruel practices.

Sueton. vit. Tib^ cap. 61. Mori volentibus vis adhibita vivendi.
Those (says he) who through the extremity of their torments would have dyed,
he used means to keep alive. [Nam mortem adeo leve supplicium putabat] For he
accounted death so light a punishment, that when he heard that one Carnulius a
man appointed to torments, had prevented him, he cried out [Carnulius me
evasit] Carnulius has escaped my hands. To a prisoner entreating him to put
him quickly to death, he gave this answer, [Nondum tecum redij ingratiam] I am
not yet friends with thee; accounting it great kindness to put him quickly to
death, whom he might have tortured.

Many that were called into question, did partly wound themselves in their own
houses [ad vexationem ignominiamque vitandam] to prevent that pain and
ignominy, which they knew they should endure: and partly poisoned themselves in
the midst of the court, as they were going to their arraignment, for the same
cause. Senec Epist. l 17. Epist. 101.
Seneca speaking of one Mecaenas, who was so afraid of being dead, that he said
he would not refuse weakness, deformity, [nec acutam crucem] no nor the
sharpest crucifying Dummodo inter haec mala spiritus prorogetur.
so that he might live still in the midst of these extremities; he calls his
desire [turpissimum votum] a base and most ignoble and unnatural wish, and
censureth him for a most effeminate and contemptible man; Quia distulit id quod
est in malis optimum, supplicit finem.
because in all his evils he was afraid of that which is the end of all evils,
the privation of his being. And certainly we must needs conceive and censure
them to be stocks and stones rather then flesh and blood, who can so put off
all feeling and sense, as to think a tormented being in Hell to be a lighter
and lesser evil then no being at all.

[Melius est esse quam non esse] it is better to be, then to have no being, I
answer that it is a sophisme or fallacy, a non distributo ad distributu^. To
be, in it self is better then not to be^ but it is not universally true in all
particulars. Again, it is true in some cases and ex hypothesi, [si caetera sint
paria] if there be any equality in the adjuncts. It is so far from being simply
true, that our Savior limiteth it, and puts a case wherein it is not true,
but the contrary to it is true: and that is the case of Judas, of which we have
said somewhat before.

It had been good etc. which words St. Hierom expounding, says, Hieron
comment. in Mat. c. 26. v. 24. Simpliciter dictum est, melius est non
subsistere quam male subsistere.
It is simply and plainly averred by our Savior, that it is better to have no
being then an ill being. This was the judgment too of Job cap. 3. v. 11.12.13.
Why dyed I not (says he) in the birth? why did the knees prevent me? and why
did J suck the breasts? for now should I have lain still and been quiet: I
should have slept then and been at rest. In which words he plainly implies,
that he thought it far better to have had no birth and being, then such a
painful and miserable being. This was also the opinion of Solomon. Eccles.
4.1.2.3. So J returned (says he) and considered all the oppressions that are
done under the Sun; and behold the tears of such as were oppressed, and they
had no Comforter, etc. Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead, more
then the living which are yet alive: yea better is he then both they, which
has not yet been, who has not seen the evil work that is done under the
Sun.

The words do clearly show, that Solomon did think it better to be dead and
to be deprived of being, or to have always wanted a being, then to be
oppressed by the mighty and to be without comforters: that is, then to have a
miserable and a mournful being.

Sr. Fr. Bacons colors of good and evil, the last color.
To this assenteth Sir Francis Bacon in his Colors of good and evil, where
against this mathematical position (as he calls it) that there is no
proportion between something and nothing; and that therefore the degree of
privation seems greater then the degree of diminution: he excepteth, that it
is false in sundry cases, and among the rest in this, namely, when the degree
of diminution is more sensitive, then the degree of privation. In this case, a
total privation is much better then a diminution: hence these usual forms of
speech, Better eye out then always ache: make or mar, etc.

Some evils and pains (perhaps) either for their lightness, because they may
be well endured; or for their shortness, because they are quickly over; are
less then resolution into nothing: and a man had better for a while endure
them, then lose his being to be rid of them; because his being may afford him
presently or afterward such and so many desirable good things, as will more
then recompense his pains. But when his pains are so many and violent, that
they leave him no other good then a poor being, or so pinch him that he cannot
enjoy or joy in the goods that remain; it were a thousand times better for him
to have no being. And such are the pains of Hell, which for their greatness
are infinite, producing many miserable weepings and waylings, and gnashings of
teeth; all symptoms of intolerable griefs: and for their length, eternal;
The worm never dies, the fire is never quenched: but the breath of the Lord,
as a River of brimstone does kindle it for ever. And therefore it is
incomparably better to cease to be, then to live in those torments, which
cannot be equalled by any good, which a being can make us capable of: much
less by that poor little entitative good, which is all the good the damned
do enjoy in Hell.

This sophistical evasion therefore and all others of the like sort
notwithstanding; I doubt not but I may safely say, that the unavoydable
damnation of so many millions cannot be absolutely and antecedently intended by
God, without the greatest injustice and cruelty which may in no wise be imputed
to God. Plut. de superst. prope sinem.
Plutarch speaking of the Pagans who to pacify the anger of their Gods, did
sacrifice to them men and women, says; It had been much better with Diagoras
and his fellows to deny the being of a God, then confessing a God to think he
delights in the blood of men. How much rather may we say, it were better to
be an Atheist and deny God, then to believe or report him to be a devourer of
the souls of men. The like argument is pressed by Eusebius against those
cruel and merciless Gods of the Pagans; Eusebius de preparat. l 4. c 16. p. 161.
edit Graecol. Enimvero, si boni vestigium in iis ullum esset, quamobrem bonoru^
appellationem jure sor^itentur eos utique cum natura sua benignos ac salutis
omnium cupidos, tum vero amantes justitiae, hominumque studiosos ac defensores
esse oporteret, etc.
Doubtless (says he) if there were any footstep or spark of goodness in
them, for which they might deserve to be called good; they would be disposed to
do good and desirous to save all men: they would love justice, and take a care
of men. And being such, how could they delight in their slaughter? etc. Yea, he
concludes that they were Ibid. c. 15. page 153 Non bonos sed malos fuisse
daemones: vel hac ipsa ratione confici existimo. Quicquid bonu^ est prodesse
solet; nocere vero contrarium.
Devils or evil spirits; and not Gods or good spirits; because, if they were
good, they would do good, whereas those which are evil use to do hurt. I
will therefore shut up my first reason with the speech of Prosper. Prosp. a^
Obj. Vincent. resp. 3. Omnium quidem hominum deus creator est, sed nemo ab eo
ideo creatus est, ut periret: quia alia est causa nascendi, alia pereundi.
God is the Creator indeed of all men, but yet of no man for this end, that he
might be damned; the reason why we are created is one, and why we are damned
another.

SEcondly, this opinion charge God with men's sins on earth, and makes him
the Author, not of the first sin only that entered by Adam into the world,
but of all other things that have been, are, or shall be committed to the
worlds end: no murders, robberies, rapes, adulteries, insurrections, treasons,
blasphemies, heresies, persecutions, or any other abominations whatsoever, fall
out at any time or in any place, but they are the necessary productions of Gods
Almighty decree. The Scriptures, I am sure, Psalm. 5.4.
teach us another lesson. Thou art not a God (says David) that has pleasure
in wickedness. And the Prophet Esaias tells the people, that when they did evil
in the sight of the Lord, Esaias. 66.4.
they did choose the things which he would not. Let no man say when he is
tempted; Iam. 1.13.14.
I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he
any man; but every man is tempted, when he is drawn away with his own
concupiscence. 1. Ioh. 2.16.
And S. John having referred all the sins of the world to three heads, the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life; tells us that
they are not of the Father, but of the world. To which speeches let me add the
speech of Siracides, though not of the same authority: Say not thou it is
through the Lord, that I fell away: Ecclesiasticus 15.12
for thou ought not to do the things that he hates. Say not thou that he
has caused me to err: for he has no need of the sinful man.

Pious antiquity has constantly said the same, and pressed it with sundry
reasons; some of which are these that follow. If God be the Author of sin,
then

1 He is worse then the Devil, because the Devil does only tempt and
persuade to sin, and his action may be resisted: but God (by this opinion)
does will and procure it by a powerful and effectual decree, which cannot be
resisted. This is Prospers argument Prosper resp. ad ad obj. 11. Vincent.
who to some, objecting that by S. Austins doctrine, when Fathers defile their
own Daughters, and mothers their own sons, servants murder their masters,
and men commit any horrible villainies; it comes to pass, because God has so
decreed: answers, that if this were laid to the Devils charge, he might in
some sort clear himself of the imputation; Quia etsi delectatus est furo^e
peccantium, probaret tamen se non intulisse vim criminum.
Because though he be delighted with men's sins, yet he does not, he cannot
compel them to sin: Qua ergo insipientia, quare dementia disinitur ad Dei
referendum esse consilium, quod nec diabolo in totum ascribi potest, qui in
peccantium flagitiis, illecebrarum adjutor, non voluntatum credendus est esse
generator.
What a madness therefore is it to impute that to God, which cannot be justly
fathered upon the Devil?

2 He cannot be a punisher of sin: for none can justly punish those offenses,
of which they are the authors. This is Prospers argument too: Prosp. Resp. ad
Obj. 4. Vincent. Insanum omniro and co^tra rationem est dicere, damnatorem
diaboli, and ejus famulorum, velle ut diabolo serviatur.
It is against reason to say, that he which is the damner of the Devil, would
have any man to be the Devils Servant. This reason Fulgentius uses likewise.
Fulgent lib. 1. ad Monim. c: 19.
[Jllius rei Deus ultor est, cujus author non est] God is the avenger of that,
which he is not the author. Tertullian also before them has said, Tert. l. 2
cont. Marcion. c. 9. Nec idem habendus est delicti author, qui invenitur
interdictor and condemnator.
He is not to be accounted the Author of sin, who is the Forbidder, yea and
the Condemner of it.

3 He cannot be God; because he should not be just, nor holy, nor the Judge of
the world, all properties essential to God. And this is S. Basils reason, who
has written a whole Homily against this wicked assertion. Basil. homil. quod
deus non est, etc. Tantundem est deum asserere esse authorem peccati, and
negare esse deum.
It is all one (says he) to say, that God is the author of sin, and to say
he is not God.

Upon these and the like considerations I may well conclude, that the opinion
which charge the holy God with the sins of men, is neither good nor true.

But this opinion does so. For albeit the Writers, that have defended it (
Piscator and a few more of the blunter sort excepted;) have never said directly
and in terminis, that God is the cause of sin; yet have they delivered those
things, from which it must needs follow by necessary consequence, that he is
so. For they say,

1 That as the decree of Reprobation is absolute, so it is inevitable: those
poor souls which lie under it, must of necessity be damned. Marlor. Comm. in
^ob. 15. v. 2. S^at igitur firma sententia: Quemcunque deus ante conditum orbem
elegerit, eum no^ posse pe^ire; quem vero rejecerit cum no^ poss: sal^ri, e^si
omnia sanctorum opera fecerit: usque adeo i^ratractabilis est sententia.
It is (says Marlorat,) a firm and stable truth, that the man whom God in his
eternal counsel has rejected, though he do all the good works of the
Saints, cannot possibly be saved.

2 That without sin this decree of Reprobation cannot be justly executed.
Piscat. l. contr. Schafin. page these. 27. Deus ^c consilio condidit homines, ut
teipso liberentu^: quippe cum nisi naratione perven^e no^ p^uent, ^d sines
illos s^os principales.
God (says Piscator) did create men for this very purpose, that they might
indeed fall: for otherwise he could not have attained those his principal
ends. He means the manifestatio^ of his justice in the damnation of
Reprobates, and of his mercy in the salvation of the Elect. Maccovius also
says the same: M^oc. disp. 17. p. 11. Locus misericordiae and justiu^
manifesta^ae n^llus fu^let fu^s, si precatum non ex^et.
Jf sin had not been, the manifestation of Justice and mercy (which is as
much to say, as the damnation of Reprobates) had never been.

3 That therefore God decreed, that Reprobates should unavoydably sin, and
sin unto death, that his eternal ordinance might be executed and they
damned. Zanch lib 5 d^ not. dei. c. 2. de praed. part. 4. resp. ad postr. arg.
prope finem Damus reprobos necessitate peccandi^ eoque and pereundi, ex hac dei
ordinatione constringi, atque ^ta constringi, ut nequcant non peccare, atque
perire.
. We gr^t (says Zanchius) that Reprobates are held so fast under Gods
almighty decree, that they cannot but sin and perish. A little after he says
Non dubitamus itaque confiteri, ex immutabili reprobatione necessitatem
peccandi, and quidem sine resipiscentia ad mortem usque pe^candi, enque and
paenas aeternas dandi reprobis incumbere.
We doubt not therefore to confess, that there lies upon Reprobates by the
power of their unchangeable reprobation, a necessity of sinning, yea of sinning
unto death without repentance, and consequently of perishing everlastingly.

Calvin also says, that Reprobates obey not the word of God, partly through
the wickedness of their own hearts, and partly because Calv. l. 3 Instit. cap.
24. Sect. 14. Inse utabili de^ judicio suscitati sunt ad gloriam ejus sua
damnatione illustrandum.
they are raised up by the unsearchable judgment of God to illustrate his
glory by their damnation. I will end this with that speech of Piscator. Pisc.
resp ad dupl. Vorst. part. 1. page 220. Reprobri ad utrumque hoe malum a Deo
praecise destina^ sunt, ut in aeternum puniantur, and necessario peccent, and
quidem ideo peccent, quo just puniri possint.
Reprobates are precisely appointed to this double evil, to be punished
everlastingly, and to sin; and therefore to sin that they might be justly
punished.

4 That as he has immutably decreed that Reprobates shall live and dye in
sin; so he procures their sins in due time by his Almighty hand, partly by
withdrawing from them grace necessary for the avoiding of sin, and partly by
mooving and enclining them by his irresistible and secret workings on their
hearts, to sinful actions. Calv. Instit. l. 1. c. 17. Sect. 11.
Calvin says, that devils and reprobate men are not only held fast in Gods
fetters, so as they cannot do what they would, but are also urged and forced by
Gods bridle [ad obsequia praestanda,] to do as he would have them. And in the
next chapter there are his words, Ib. v. 18. sect. 1. Quod nihil efficiant
homines nisi arcano der nutu, nec quicquam deliberando agitent, nisi quod ipse
jam apud se decreverit, and arcana sua directione constitua: ^ innumeris and
claris testimoniis probatur.
that men have nothing in agitation, that they bring nothing into action, but
what God by his secret direction has ordered, is apparent by many and clear
testimonies. In the Section following he says, Ib Sect 2. Et certe nisi intus
operaretur in mentibus hominum, non recte di^u esset, auferre labi^n a
veracibus, and a s^nibus prudentiam, etc.
And surely unless God did work inwardly in the minds of men, it would not be
rightly said, that he takes away wisdom from the wise, etc. In those two
chapters, that which he mainely drives at, is to show, that God does not only
behave himself privatively in procuring the sins of men, but does also put
forth powerful and positive acts in the bringing of them to paste. And in his
second Book and 4 chapter after he had said, that God may be said to harden
men, by forsaking them, he puts in another way, by which God hardneth men,
and that (he says) comes a great deal nearer to the propriety of the
Scripture phrases; namely by stirring up their wills: Instit. l. 2. c. 4.. 3 ad
exequenda sua jud^i^ per minist^u^ ^rae suae Satanam, and consil^a co^um
d^stivat quo visum est, and voluntates excitat, and conatus firmat.
God does not only harden men by leaving them to themselves, but by appoynting
their counsels, ordering their deliberations, stirring up their wills,
confirming their purposes and endeavors by the minister of his anger, Satan:
and this he proves by the work of God on Sihon king of the Amorites, Deuteronomy.
^.30. and then insinuates the end too, why God thus hardens men in their
wicked courses, which is, that he might destroy them, Quia p^ditum Deus
volebat, ob^tin^io cordis divina fuit ad ruinam praeparatio.
because God intended his ruin, he prepared him for it by his induration.

The sum of all these propositions is this; God, who from all eternity
appointed many miserable men to endless and unavoydable torments, decreed for
the bringing about of their intended ruin, that they should without remedy
live and dye in a state of sin: and what he thus decreed from everlasting, he
does most powerfully effect in time, so governing, overruling, and working upon
the wills of those Reprobates, that they have no liberty or ability at all in
the issue, of avoiding their sins, but must of necessity commit them.

Thus they teach: and therefore by just consequence they make God the author of
sin; as it will plainly appear by these following considerations.

1 It is ordinary to impute sin to those, who have not so great a hand in the
production of it, as has the Almighty by the grounds of this opinion. For,

(1) The devil is called a father of lies, Joh. 8.44. and by the like reason
of all other sins; and therefore he that commits sin, is said to be of
the devil, and to be a child of the devil, 1 John 3.8.10. and sin is
called, a work of the devil, which the son of God appeared to loose, verse.
8. And why is the devil so called, but because he does egg and allure men by
inward suggestions and outward temptations to fall into sin! This is all he
does or can do. But God does much more, if he necessitate and by his decree
first, and next by his powerful and secret working in the souls of men,
determine their wills irresistibly to sin. For to determine is infinitely more
then barely to persuade; for as much as sin must needs follow the
determination, but not the persuasion of the will. God is therefore a truer
cause of sin (by this doctrine) then the Devil.

(2) Wicked men are esteemed authors of their own offenses; because they plot,
purpose, choose and commit them, and are immediate agents in the acting of them.

But God (by this opinion) does more: for he overruleth the projects and
purposes of wicked men, and by an uncontrollable motion proceeding from an
immutable decree, carries all their deliberations, resolutions, choyses and
actions precisely that very way; so as they cannot choose but do as they do,
whatsoever they may think to the contrary. They have indeed [potentiam in se
liberam] a power in it self free, to choose what they refuse, or to refuse what
they choose, to determine themselves this way or that way as likes them best:
but they have not [liberum ^sum] a free use of this their power. God does
determine their will before it has determined it self; and makes them do
those only actions, which his omnipotent will has determined, and not which
their wills out of any absolute dominion over their own actions, have
prescribed. More rightly therefore, may God be called the Author of those
offenses; for Opera magis pertinent ad impera^tem, qua^ ad exequentem.
deeds whether good or bad, are owned more truly by him that over-ruleth them,
then by the servile instruments that only execute and do them.

3 Wicked counselors, and they who allure and advise men to sin, are
accounted by God and men to be the causes of those sins, to which they are
the perswaders; and have been punished for those misdeeds, which others
through their instigations have committed. Jezabell Ahabs wife, was reputed and
punished as the murderer of Naboth; because she counseled and contrived the
doing of it, as we may see 1. Kings. 21.23.25. But what is counselling to
enforcing? Evil counsels may be refused, but an almighty power cannot be
resisted? God therefore that uses this (according to their doctrine) in the
production of sins, is much more an author of them, then he that only uses
the other.

2 If we could find out a King that should so carry himself in procuring the
ruin and the offenses of any subject, as (by this opinion) God does in the
effecting of the damnation and transgressions of Reprobates, we would all
charge him with the ruin and sins of those his Subjects. Molin. Anat. c. 12.
de praedest. p. 73 Quis non regem abominetur sic loque^tem?
Who would not abhor (says Moulin) a King speaking thus; Ego hunc hominem
addico suspendio^ sed ut just suspendatur, volo patret homicidium vel
peculatum.
J will have this man hanged, and that J may hang him justly, I will have him
murder or steal? This King (says he) should not only make an innocent man
miserable, [sed and sceleratum] but wicked too, and should punish him for that
offense [cujus ipse causa esset] of which himself is the cause. It is a clear
case. Sueton vit. Tib. cap. 61.
Tiberius (as Suetonius reports) having a purpose to put certain Virgins to
death; because it was not lawful among the Romans to strangle Virgins, caused
them all to be defloured by the Hangman, that so they might be strangled. Who
will not say, that Tiberius was the principal author of the deflouring of
those maids? In like manner (say the Supralapsarians) God has a purpose of
putting great store of men to the second death, but because it is not lawful
for him by reason of his justice to put to death men innocent and without
blame, he has decreed, that the Devil shall defloure them; that afterward he
may damn them. It follows therefore, that God is the maine cause of those
their sins.

3 That God is the Author of men's salvation and conversion, all sides grant:
and yet he does no more in the procuring of them, then these men report him to
do in the Reprobates impenitency and damnation. The salvation and conversion of
the Elect (say they) he has absolutely and antecedently, without the
foresight of any deservings of theirs, resolved upon, and by irresistible
means in their several generations draws them to believe, repent and endure
to the end, that so they might be saved, and his absolute decree accomplished.
On the other side, the damnation, the sins and the final impenitency of
Reprobates, he has of his alone will and pleasure peremptorily decreed; this
his decree he executes in time, drawing them on by his unconquerable power and
providence from sin to sin, till they have made up their measure, and in
the end have inflicted on them that eternal vengeance, which he had provided
for them. What difference is here in the course which God takes for the
conversion and salvation of the Elect, and the obduration and damnation of
Reprobates? And therefore what hinders, but that God (by their grounds) may
as truly be styled the prime cause and author of the sins of the one, as of
the conversion of the other?

The Fathers thought it a plain case: and therefore they did generally make
sin an object of prescience, not predestination, and bent the most of those
arguments by which they refuted this foul assertion, against an absolute,
irresistible, and necessitating decree, as I could easily show, but that I
fear to be overlong. Only I will cite some few of those Authors words, whom
the learned and reverend Bishop has alleged in favor and for the defense of
the Predestinarians and the mainteiners of Gotteschalkes opinion.

The Church of Lions in their answer to the positions of Johannes Scotus which
he framed against Gotteschalk, has these words Bish. Usher. his hist. of
Gottesc. page 138. Qui vim and necessitatem peccandi deum intuliste homini vel
infer dicit, manifest horribiliter in deum blasphemat quem ad peccata
compellendo utique authorem peccati osse confirmat.
Whosoever says, that God has laid a constraynt or a necessity of sinning
upon any man, he does manifestly and fearfully blaspheme God, in as much as he
makes him by affirming that of him, to be the very author of sin. Remigius
Archbishop of that Church, explaining his Churches opinion in the point of
prescience and predestination in 7 several rules; in the 5th. of those rules
he has these words to the same purpose. God (says he) by his prescience and
predestination has laid a necessity of being wicked upon no man, Id. ib. p.
173. He enim si fecisset ipse utique esset author mal rum, etc.
For if he had done this, he should have been the author of sins.

And thus (in my judgment) does it plainly appear that by absolute
Reprobation, as it is taught the upper way, God is made to be the true cause of
men's sins.

Many distinctions are brought to free the Supralapsarian way from this
crimination: all which (me think) are no better then mere delusions of the
simple and inconsiderate, and give no true satisfaction to the understanding.

There is (say they) a twofold decree.

1 An Operative, Distinction, 1.
by which God positively and efficaciously works a thing.

2 A Permissive, by which he decrees only to let it come to pass. If God
should work sin by an operative decree, then he should be the author of
sin; but not if he decree by a permissive decree, to let it come to pass.
And this only they say they mainteyne.

Adam to sin, leaving him in the hand of his own counsel. Eccl. 15.14. he
suffered the nations in times past to walk in their own ways, Act. 14.16. and
daily does he suffer both good and bad to fall into many sins. And this he
does, not because he stands in need of sin for the setting forth of his
glory: for he has no need of the sinful man: Ecclus 15. but partly, because
he is [summus provisor,] supreme moderator of the world, and knows how to use
that well which is ill done, and to bring good out of evil: and especially for
that reason which Tertullian presses, Tertull. l. 1. contr. Marcion.
namely, because man is made by Gods own gracious constitution, a^ a free
creature, undetermined in his actions, till he determine himself: and therefore
may not be hindered from finning by omnipotency, because God uses not to
repeal his own ordinances.

2 It is true also, that a permissive decree is no cause of sin, because it
is merely extrinsecall to the sinner, and has no influence at all upon the
sin: it is an antecedent only, and such a one too, as being put, sin
follows not of necessity. And therefore it is fitly contradistinguisht to an
operative decree. And if that side would in good earnest, impute no more in
sinful events to the divine power, then the word (Permission) imports, their
main conclusion would fall and the controversy between us end. But,

(1) Many of them reject this distinction utterly and will have God to decree
sin [efficaciter] with an energeticall and working will. Colloq. Mompel. 2.
par. pa. 177.
Witness that discourse of Beza, wherein he averreth and labors to prove,
that God does not only permit sin, but will it also: and witness Calvin
too, who has a whole Section against it: calling it. -- A carnal distinction,
invented by the flesh, and [effugium] a mere evasion to shift off this seeming
absurdity, Calv. Instit. l 14 c. 18 Sect 1 and 2.
that that man is made blind [volente and jubente Deo] by Gods will and
commandment, who must shortly after be punished for his blindness: he calls
it also, [figmentum] a fiction, and says they do [ineptire] play the fools
that use it.

By many reasons also does he endeavor to lay open the weakness of it, taxing
those who understand such Scriptures as speak of Gods smiting men with a
spirit of flumber and giddiness, of blinding their minds, infatuating and
hardening their hearts, etc. of a permission and suffering of men to be blinded
and hardened, Id ib l. 21. c. 4. Sect. 3.
[Nimis frivola est ista solutio] says he, this too frivolous a gloss. In
another place he blames those that refer sin to Gods prescicience only,
calling their speeches [argutia] tricks and quirks, which Scripture will not
bear: and those likewise that ascribe it to Gods permission: and says,
Similiter quod de permissione afferunt, dilutius est quam ut subsistat.
What they bring touching the divine permission in this business, will not
hold water.

2 They that admit the word (Permissive) do willingly mistake it, and while (to
keep off this blow) they use the word, they corrupt the meaning. For,

(1) Permission is an act of Gods consequent and judiciary will, by which he
punishes men for abusing their freedom, and committing such sins day by
day, as they might have avoided, and to which he proceeds [lente gradu]
slowly and unwillingly, as we may see, Psalm. 81.11, 12. Israel would none of
me: so I gave them up, etc. Ezech. 18.39. Go and serve every one his Idol;
seeing ye will not obey me, etc. Romans 1.21, 24. Because when they knew God,
they glorified him not as God: therefore God gave them up to their hearts lust,
to vile affections, and to a Reprobate mind. Revel. 22.11 He which is unjust,
let him be unjust still. In these places and many more we may see, that persons
left to themselves are sinners only; and not all sinners, but the obstinate
and wilful, which will by no means be reclaymed. But the permission, which
they mean, is an act of Gods antecedent will, exercised about innocent men,
lying under no guilt at all in Gods eternal consideration.

2 Permission, about whomsoever it is exercised, obstinate sinners or men
considered without sin, is no more then a not hindering of them from falling,
that are able to stand, and supposes a possibility of sinning or not sinning,
in the parties permitted: but with them it is a withdrawing or withholding of
grace needful for the avoiding of sin, and so includes an absolute
necessity of sinning: for from the withdrawing of such grace sin must needs
follow, as the fall of Dagons house followed Sampsons plucking away the Pillars
that were necessary for the upholding of it Maccovins in two disputations,
expounding this word (Permission) circumscribes it within two acts: Maccov.
coll. theo^. disp. 9. page 10.
the first of which, is a substraction of divine assistance necessary to the
preventing of sin: and having prooved it by two arguments that none may
think he is alone in this, he says, that he is compassed about with a cloud
of witnesses, and produces two: 1 The first of them, is our reverend and
learned Whitaker, some of whose words alleged by him are these. Page 15.
Permiss^ p^c^i est privatio ^uxilu divini, quo positio peccatum impediretur.
Permission of sin, is a privation of that aid, which being present, sin
would have been hindered. The second is Pareus, for saying, that Sub^racto
auxilio dei, homo (Adamus) istis facultatibus ad standum been uti non potuit,
that help (which God withdrew from Adam) being withdrawn, Adam could not so
use his endowments as to persevere. And this doctrine (says he) is defended by
our men, as it appears out of Pareus lib. de gratia primi hominis. cap. 4.
page 46.

Their permission therefore of sin being a substraction of necessary grace,
is equivalent to an actual, effectual procuring and working of it. (For
[causa deficiens in necessariis est efficiens] a deficient cause in things
necessary is truly efficient) and so is but a mere fig-lease to cover the
foulness of their opinion.

Distinct. 2.
There are two things (they say) in every ill act, --

1 The material part, which is the substance of the action.

2 The formal part, which is the evil or obliquity of it. God is the Author
of the action it self, but not of the obliquity and evil that cleaves to it;
as he that causes a lame horse to go, is the cause of his going, but not of
his lame going. And therefore it follows not from their opinion, that God is
the Author of sin.

Saul's sparing of Agag, and the fat beast^ of the Amalekites.

2 It is not true, that they make the decree of God only of actions and not of
their aberrations: for they make it to be the cause of all those means that
lead to damnation, and therefore of sinful actions as sinful, and not as bare
actions. For actions deserve damnation, not as actions, but as transgressions
of Gods law.

3 To the Simile I say, that the rider or master that shall resolve first to
flea his horse or knock him on the head, and then to make him lame that for
his halting he may kill him, is undoubtedly the cause of his halting: and so,
if God determine to cast men into Hell, and then to bring them into a state of
sin, that for their sins he may bring them to ruin, we cannot conceive him
to be less then the author as well of their sins as of those actions, to
which they do inseparably adhere, and that out of Gods intention to destroy
them.

The will is determined to an Object two ways: Distinct. 3.
1 By Compulsion, against the bent and inclination of it. 2 By necessity,
according to the natural desire and liking of it.


Gods Predestination (say they) determines the will to sin this last way,
but not the first; it forces no man to do that which he would not, but
carries him toward that which he would: when men sin, it is true they
cannot choose; and it is as true they will not choose. It follows not
therefore from the grounds of their doctrine, that Gods decree is the cause of
men's sins, but their own wicked wills.

(necessity) and (compulsion;)) but used them in this argument promiscuously:
and did deny, that God did necessitate men to sin, lest they should grant him
hereby to be the Author of sin, as I have touched before, and shall intimate
again afterward.

Nor did the Schoolmen put any difference between them, as may appear by the
testimony of Mr. Calvin, Calv. Instit. i. 2. c. 2 Sect ^^
who speaking of the Schoole-distinction of the wills threefold liberty, from
Necessity, from Sin, from M^ery, says; This distinction I could willingly
receive, but that it confounds necessity with coaction.

2 That which necessitateth the will to sin, is as truly the cause of sin,
as that which forces it; because it makes the sin to be inevitably
committed, which otherwise might be avoided: and therefore, if the divine
decree necessitate man's will to sin, it is as truly the cause of the sin,
as if it did enforce it.

3 That which necessitateth the will to sin, is more truly the cause of the
sin, then the will is; because it over-ruleth the will, and bears all the
stroke, takes from it its true liberty, by which it should be Lord of it self
and disposer of its own acts, and in respect of which, it has been usually
called by Philosophers and Fathers too, [(...),] a power which is under the
insuperable check and control of no Lord, but it self. It over-ruleth (I say)
and makes it become but a servile instrument, irresistibly subject to
superior command and determination: and therefore is a truer cause of all such
acts and sins, as proceed from the will so determined, then the will is. For
when two causes concur to the producing of an effect, the one a principal
overruling cause, the other but isntrumental and wholly at the devotion of
the principal; then is the effect, in all reason, to be imputed to the
principal, which by the force of its influxe and impression produces it,
rather then to the subordinate and isntrumental, which is but a mere servant
in the production of it. We shall find it ordinary in Scripture, to ascribe
the effect to the principal Agent. It is not ye, that speak (says CHRIST,)
but the spirit of my father, that speaks in you. Math. 10.20. J labored more
abundantly, then they all, yet not J, but the grace of God which was in me. 1.
Cor. 15.10. And I live; yet not J, but CHRIST lives in me, says S. Paul. Gal.
2.20.

In these and many other places, the effect or work spoken of, is taken from
the instrument, and given to the principal Agent. Which being so, though man's
will work with Gods decree in the commission of sin, and wills the sin
which it does; yet seeing what the will does, it does by the commanding power
of Gods almighty decree, and so it does that otherwise it cannot do; the sin
committed cannot so rightly be ascribed to man's will the inferior, as to Gods
necessitating decree the superior cause.

4 That which makes a man sin by way of necessity only; that is, with and
not against his will, is the cause of his sin in a worse manner, then that
which constrayneth him to sin against his will: as he which by powerful
persuasions draws a man to stab, or hang, or poison himself, is in a grosser
manner the cause of that evil and unnatural action, then he that by force
compels him, because he makes him to consent to his own death. And so, if
Gods decree do not only make men sin, but sin willingly too; not only
cause that they shall [male agere] do evil, but [male velle] will evil, it
has the deeper hand in the sin.

Sin may be considered as sin, Distinct. 4.
or as a means of declaring Gods justice in men's punishments: God does not
predestinate men to sin, as it is sin, but as a means of their punishment.
He is not therefore (say they) the Author of Sin.

[bonum oritur ex integris] end, manner, yea and matter too must be good, or
else the action is naught. He that shall steal that he may give an alms, or
commit adultery that he may beget children for the Church, or oppress the
poor to teach them patience, or kill a wicked man that he may do no more hurt
with his example, or do any forbidden thing; though his end be never so good,
he sins notwithstanding. And the reason is, because the evil of sin is
greater then any good that can come by sin; for as much as it is [laesio
divinae majestatis,] a wronging of Gods majesty, and so [divino bono opposita,]
directly prejudicial to the good of Almighty God, as much as any thing can be.
This S. Paul knew very well: and therefore he tells us plainly, that we must
not do evil that good may come of it. Romans 3.8. Whosoever therefore wills a
Sin though for never so good an end; he wills that which is truly and
formally a Sin: and consequently God, though he will sin for ends never so
good, yet willing it with such a powerful and effectual will, as gives a
necessary being to it, he becomes Author of that which is formally sin.

2 The members of this distinction are not opposite: for Sin as Sin and in
no other consideration, is a means of punishment. If God therefore wills it
as a means of punishment, he wills it as Sin; his decree is terminated at
the very formality of it.

3 This distinction fasteneth upon God a further aspersion, and loadeth him
with three special indignities more.

(1) Want of Wisdom and Providence. His counsels must needs be weak, if he
can find out no means to glorify justice, but by the bringing in of sin,
which his soul hates, into the world, and appointing men to commit it, that
so he may manifest justice in the punishment of it.

(2) Want of sincerity and plain dealing with men.

Tiberius (as Suetonius reports) having a purpose t^ put the two Sons of
Germanicus (Drusus and Nero) t^ death Suetonius in vit. Tib. cap. 54. Varia
fraud induxit u^ con^tatentur ad conv^ S^concitati perde en^r.
used sundry cunning contrivances to draw them to revile him, that reviling him
they might be put (...) death: and herein is justly censured for great
Hypocrisy. And so, if God having appointed men by his absolute wi^ to
inevitable perdition, do decree that they shall sin that so they may be
damned for those sins which he decrees and draws them into; he
dissembleth, because he slaughtereth them under a pretext of justice; for sin
but yet for such sins only as he has by his eternal counsel appointed as
the means of their ruin.

(3) Want of mercy in a high degree, as if he did so delight in blood, that
rather then he will not destroy men's souls, he will have them live and dye in
sin that he may destroy them; like to those Pagan Princes, of whom I^st^
Mart. apol. 2. two or three leaves from the beginning says Videmini vereri ne
omnes celant justitiam, atque ita desint, in quos animadvertaris. Verum haec
cuia fuit magis ^a^u a qu^m bonorum principum.
They are afraid that all should be just, lest they should have none to punish:
But this is the disposition of hangmen, rather then of good Princes. And
therefore far be these foul enormities, and in particular this latter from
the God of truth and father of mercies.

And thus notwithstanding these distinctions, it is (in my conceit) most
evident, that the riged and upper way makes God the author of men's sins, as
well as punishments. And so much for the first general Inconvenience, which
arises from this opinion, namely the dishonor of God.

II. Inconvenience.
THe second Inconvience is, the overthrow of true religion and good government
among men.

To this, this opinion seems to tend, for these reasons.

1 Because it makes sin to be no sin indeed, but only in opinion. We use
to say, Necessity has no law: creatures or actions in which necessity bears
sway, are without law. Lions are not forbidden to prey, birds to fly, fishes to
swim, any bruit creatures to do according to their kinds, because their
actions are natural and necessary: they cannot upon any admonition do
otherwise. Among creatures endued with reason and liberty, laws are given to
none, but such as can use their principles of reason and freedom: fools, mad
men, and children, are subject to ^o law, because they have no liberty. To men
that can use their liberty, laws are not given neither, but in those actions
which are voluntary. No man is forbidden to be hungry, thirsty, weary, sleepy,
to weep, to laugh, to love or to hate; because these actions and affections
are natural and necessary: the will may govern them, but it cannot suppress
them.

And so if to deal justly, to exercise charity, etc. with their contraries, be
absolutely and antecedently necessary too, whether this necessity flow from a
principle within or a Mover without, we are as lawless in these, as in the
other.

Now if Necessity have no law, then actions in themselves evil, if under the
dominion of absolute necessity, are transgressions of no law and consequently
no sins. For Sin is a transgression of the Law. 1 Ioh. 3.4.

This that I say, has been said long ago. For Justin Martyr speaking against
destiny, has these words; Just. Mart. Apol. 2 a little beyond the middle. Si
fato fieret ut (...) aut improbus ^ut bonus, nec alii quidem probi essent (...)
man.
Jf it be by destiny (that is, by absolute necessity, for that the fathers do
generally call by the name of Destiny;) that men are good or bad, they are
indeed neither good nor bad. A speech like to this he has a little after
Videretur verum esse, ^l (...) v^rtute^ nec v^um sed opinione solum bona and m^
^c^ quae, (...) ^st m^xima impietas and injustiti.
It would seem, if this be so, that virtue and vice are nothing; but things
are judged to be good or evil by opinion only, which as good reason teaches,
is very great injustice and impiety. And surely well might he say so: for to
what purpose was the Son of God made man, and being man made a sacrifice for
sin? why was the Ministry of the word and sacraments ordained? to what end
are heaven and hell propounded? why are exhortations, disswasions, or any other
means to hinder men from sin applied, if sin be nothing but a mere
opinion?

CHRIST, the Christian faith, the word and Sacraments and whatsoever according
to the Scriptures has been don for the applying of the pardon of sin, are
all but mere sables, nay very impostures, if sin be nothing. And by
consequence it is no matter at all, whether men be Christians, Jews, Turks, or
Pagans, of what religion, or whether of any religion at all. Now whither
tends this, but to the overthrow of religion?

2 Because it takes away the conscience of sin.

Why should men be afraid of any sin that pleases or may profit them, if
they must needs sin? or what reason have they to weep and mourn when they
have sinned, seeing they have not sinned truly, because they sinned
necessarily?

The Tragedian says, Fati iita culpa est: nemo fit fato nocens.
when a man sins, his destiny must bear the blame. Necessity freet lo him
from all iniquity. Sins are either the faults of that irresistible decree
that causes them, or no faults at all. If either: then sorrow, fear, or any
other act of repentance whatsoever, may as well be spared as spent. This
conceit being once drunk in, religion cannot long continue; for the affections
have been the strongest planters, and are the surest upholders of it in the
world. Primus in or be Deos fecit timor.

3 Because it takes away the desert and guilt of sin.

Offenses if fatal, cannot be justly punished. The reason is, because those
deeds for which men are punished or rewarded, must be their own, under their
own power and sovereignty: but such are no fatal actions or events. Neither
temporally nor eternally can sin be punished, if it be absolutely necessary.

(1) Not temporally, as God himself has given us to understand by that law
which he prescribed the Jews. Deuteronomy. 22.25. which was, that if a maid commit
uncleanness by constraint, she should not be punished. His reason was, because
there was no cause of death in her: what she yielded to, was through
compulsion, being overborne by power; as a man that is wounded to death by his
Neighbor, so was a virgin in that case, a sufferer rather then a doer. This
particular law is of universal right: no just punishment can be inflicted for
sin, where there is no power in the party to avoid it. The speech of Lypsius,
is but a mere crotchet contrary to reason, [Fatali culpae fatalis paena]
Fatal faults must have fatal punishments. Did Magistrates think men's offenses
unavoydable, they would think it bootless and unreasonable to punish them. Nay
not only so, but we see by daily experience, that Judges following the
direction of reason, have very remissely punished such faults, as have been
committed through the power of headstrong and exorbitant passions: Yea, we may
read of some, who have not thought it fit to punish such faults at all.
Valerius Maximus tells, that Popilius a Roman Praetor, Val. Max. l. 8. c 1.
sitting in judgment on a woman who had in a bitter passion slain her mother,
because she had murdered her children; [neque damnavit, neque absolvit]
neither cleared her nor condemned her. Gell. l. 12. c. 7.
And Aulus Gellius reports of Dolabella the Proconsull of Asia, that when a
woman of Smyrna was brought before him who had poisoned her husband and son for
murdering a son of hers, which she had by a former husband; he turned her over
to the Areopagus (which was the gravest and most renowned judgment seat in the
world.) The Judges there not daring to acquit her being stained with a double
slaughter, nor yet to punish her being provoked with just grief; commanded the
Accuser and the Offender to come before them 100 years after. And so Neque
absolutum mulieris venesicium est, quod per leges non licuit; neque no^ns
damnata punitaque quae digna venia fuit.
Neither was the woman's fact justified, the Laws not allowing it, nor yet the
woman punished; because she was worthy to be pardoned. If wise Magistrates have
spared such Offenders as have been over-swayed with passions, which did but
incline, not determine them to their irregular actions; they would never have
punished any trespassers, if they had thought them to be such by invincible
necessity. Or, if offenders did think that their offenses were their
Destinies, and that when they Murder, steal, commit adultery, make
insurrections, plot treasons, or practice any outrageous villainies; they do
them by the necessity of Gods unalterable decree, and can do no otherwise:
they would (and might) complain of their punishments, as unjust; as Ze^oes
servant did. When he was beaten by his Master for a fault, he told him out of
his own grounds that he was unjustly beaten; because he was [fato coactus
peccare] constrained to make that fault by his undeclin^ b^e fate. The
Adrumetine Monks, misled by S. Austin, Epist. 105. ad Sixtum Presbyterum
(which he calls a Book, wherein he sets down his opinion concerning Gods
grace) did so teach grace, that they denied Free Will. And this S. Austin
confuted in his book De gratia and lib. arb. And thinking the grace of God (as
S. Aug. taught) to be such, as could not stand with freedom of will, they
thought that no man should be punished for his faults, but rather prayed for,
that God would give them grace to do better. Against this, S. Austin directed
his other Book, De Corr. and great. In which discourse though it be grace that
is still named, yet predestination is included. K^. in pra^ a^l. Luth. de ser^
^l^.
For as Kimedoncius says truly in his Preface to Luther, de servo arbitr.
Between Grace and Predestination, there is only this difference (as S. Aug.
teaches, l. de Praedest. Sanctoru^ cap. 10.) that Predestination is a
preparation of Grace, and Grace a bestowing of Predestination. As Zenoes
servant and these Monks did, so would all men judge; did they considerately
think that men could not choose but offend. And what would be the resultance of
such a persuasion, but an inundation of the greatest insolences, and a
dissolution of all good government!

2 Nor if this be true, can sin be punished eternally, or that tribunal be
just, on which the sentence of eternal fire shall be denounced against the
wicked at the last day. To this, I have the Fathers bearing witness generally
and plainly. Tertullian has these words, Tertul. lib. 2. Contr. Marcion.
Caete^um, nec boni nec mali merces ^re pe^sa^ ei, q^ aut b^nus aut malus
neccisitate suit inventus, non v^luntate.
The recompense of good or evil can with no justice be given to him, who is
good or evil, not freely but of necessity.

S. Hierom says, Liberi arbi^i nos condi^t Deus, acc^d v^tu es nec ad ^a
necessitate trahimur: alioquin ubi necessitas est, nec damnatio, nec corona est.
Where necessity domineers, there is no place for retribution. Epiphanius
says. Epiph. advers. her. l 1. haer 5. number. 3. Sane quidem justi^ a st^lis
quae necessitate^ private, pae^ae repetantu^, quam ab eo qui quod agit ((...))
necessitate adactus aggreditur.
The stars which impose upon men a necessity of sinning, may be punished
with better justice then the men themselves. Aug. l. 2 contr. Faust. c. 5. Et
nos quidem sub fato stellatum nullius hominis genesin ponimus, ut liberum
arbitrium voluntatis, quo been vel male vivitur, propter justum Dei judicium ab
omni necessitatis vinculo vindicemus.
We place men's nativities under no fatal constellations (says S. Aug.) that
we may free the will by which a man lives either well or ill, from all bands
of necessity, because of the righteous judgment of God. Prosper speaking of
the judgment of God, by which he decreed to render unto every man according to
his works, Prosp. ad Obj. 10. Vinc. Quod judicium futurum omnino non esser, si
homines Dei voluntate peccarent.
This judgment should never be, if men did sin by the will and determination
of God. Fulgentius also says the same Fulgent. l. 1. c. 2. ad Mont: cap. 22.
Nec justitia justa dicetur, si puniendum r^um non invenisse, sed fecisse
dicatur. Major vero erit injustitia, si lapso Deus retribuat paenam, quem
stantem praedestinasse dicitur ad ruinam.
It is great injustice in God to punish him whom he does not find, but make an
offender. This was St. Bernards opinion too, Ber. l. de gra^ and lib. arb p.
908. Sola voluntas, quoniam profui ingenita libe^tate aut dissentire sibi aut
praeter se in aliquo consentire, nulla vi, nulla cogitur necessitate, n^n
mimerito justum vel injustum beatitudine seu miseria digna^ ac capa^m creaturam
c^uit, prou^ scilicet justitiae, injustitiaene consense^.
It is only a will free from compulsion and necessity (says he) which makes
a creature capable of reward and punishment. Out of these testimonies laid
together may be collected 3 things;

1 That the Ancients did use to call a necessity of humane actions good and bad
by the name of destiny, from what external cause soever this necessity did
arise.

2 That they did use these two words [Necessity] and [Compulsion] pro^cuously:
and therefore thought that necessity as well as compulsion did take away the
wills liberty.

3 (Which is for our present purpose,) that they believed and contended, that
the judgments of God on sinners could not be just, if they were held by the
Adamantine chains of any absolute necessity under the power of their sins.

I will therefore conclude this argument with the words of Epiphanius writing
of the error of the Pharisees, who believed the immortality of the soul, and
the resurrection of the Dead, and yet held that all things come to pass by
necessity. Epiph. l. 1. adv. her 1^. p 35. nu 3. Est illud vero extremae
cujusdam imperitiae, ne dic^m amentiae, cum resurrectionem mortuorum ^sse
fateare, ac justissinau^ cujuisque f^cts ju^iu^o sti^utum f^ nihil ^u^ esse
^ullum, ^ss^re^e. Qui m^ ^st^ ^ve^ p^s^unt, jud^ atque fatum
It is (says he) a Point of extreme ignorance or madness rather, for him
that confesses the resurrection of the dead, and the great day appointed for
the revelation of Gods righteous judgment, to say, that there is any Destiny,
any necessity in men's actions. For how can the righteous judgment of God and
destiny comply and stand together? And (let me add) how can the belief of
this and true piety stand together? For where this persuasion that men's sins
are necessary, and that therefore there can be no righteous judgment, is rooted
in; religion will quickly be rooted out.

4 It tends to religions overthrow, because it makes the whole circle of a
man's life but a mere Destiny. By it all our doings are Gods ordinances, all
our imaginations branches of his Predestination; and all events in Kingdoms
and Commonweals the necessary issues of the divine decree. All things
whatsoever, though they seem to do somewhat,; yet (by this opinion) they do
indeed just nothing: the best laws restrain not one offender, the sweetest
rewards promote not one virtue, the powerfullest Sermons convert not one
sinner, the humblest devotions divert not one calamity, the strongest
endeavors in things of any nature whatsoever, effect no more then would be
done without them: but the necessitating, overruling decree of God does all.
And if laws do nothing, wherefore are they made? If rules of Religion do
nothing, why are they prescribed? If the wills of men do nothing, why are men
encouraged to one thing, scared from another? And if good endeavors and onsets
do nothing (being excited, continued, limited, controlled, and every way
governed by an active, absolute and almighty decree) to what purpose are they
used? Who sees not plainly whither these things tend? To nothing more, then
the subversion of piety and policy, religion and laws, society and government?
This did the Romans see full well:) and therefore, they banished [Mathematicos]
The teachers and aberters of destiny, out of Rome. These and the like
inconveniences which come from the upper way, did work so with Prosper, as
that he calls him no Catholic, who is of this opinion. Prosp. ad ^a. Gall. s^t
1. Quisquis ergo ex p^aedestinatione de^, velu^ fatali necessitate, homines in
peccata compulsos cogi dicit in mortem, non est Catholicus.
Whosoever says, that men are urged to sin and to be damned by the
predestination of God, as by a fatal (unavoydable) necessity, he is no
Catholic.

They did also make the Arausican council denounce a curse against such.
Council. Ar^s 2. Can, 2. Aliques ad malum divina potest^e praedest^tos esse, non
solum non (...) edimus, sed etiam si qui sint, qui tantum m^lum credere vel^nt,
cum onini detestatione illis Anathema dicimus.
That any are predestined by the divine power to sin, we do not only not
believe, but with the greatest detestation that we can, we denounce Anathema to
such (if there be any such) as will believe so great an evil.

Thus far of my reasons against the upper and most harsh and rigorous way.

THe Arguments by which for the present I stand convinced of the untruth, even
of the milder and lower way too, I will take from, These five following heads;
namely, from
1 Pregnant testimonies of Scripture, directly opposing it. 2 Some principal
attributes of God, not compatible with it. 3 The end of the word and Sacraments
with other excellent gifts of God to men, quite thwarted by it. 4 Holy
endeavors much hindered, if not wholly subverted by it. 5 Grounds of comfort
(by which the conscience in distress should be releeved) which are all removed
by it. It is 1 Repugnant to Scripture.



1 It is repugnant to plain and evident places of Scripture even in terminis,
as will appear by these instances. Ezekiel. 33.11.


As J live says the Lord, J have no pleasure in the death of a sinner; but
that the wicked turn from his ways and live.

And lest men should say, It is true, God wills not the death of a repenting
sinner; the Lord in another place of the same Prophet, Ezekiel. 18.32.
extends the proposition to them also that perish -- I have no pleasure in
the death of him that dies.

In this Scripture we may note three things.

1 Gods affection to men, set forth -- Negatively, I have no pleasure in his
death that dies.
Affirmatively, but that the wicked turn.


2 The persons in whose destruction God delights not: ( Wicked men) such as
for their rejecting of grace dye and are damned. If God have no pleasure in
their death, much less in the death of men, either altogether innocent or
taynted only with original sin.

3 The truth of his affection; Tertull. lib. de paen. c. 4.
As I live [Cupit credi sibi] God would f^ine have us believe him (says
Tertullian) when he says, J will not the death of him that dies: and
therefore he binds his speech with an oath. O beatos nos, quorum causa Deus
ju^at. O miserrimos, si nec juranti domino credimus.
Happy are we for whose take the Lord vouchsafes to swear; but most ^nhappy,
if we believe him not when he swears.

Now if God delight not in the destruction of wicked men, certainly he never
did out of his absolute pleasure seal up so many millions of men lying in the
fall under invincible damnation: for such a decreeing of men to eternal death,
is directly opposite to a delight in their repentance and everlasting life.

Romans 11.2.
God has shut up all in unbeleefe, that he might have mercy over all.

In these the Apostles words are two (Alls) of equal extent, the one standing
against the other.

An (All) of unbeleevers, and an (All) of objects of mercy: look how many
unbeleevers there be, on so many has God a will of showing mercy. And
therefore, if all men of all sorts and conditions, and every man in every sort
be an unbeleever; then is every man of every condition under mercy: and if
every man be under mercy, then there is no precise antecedent will of God, of
shutting up some and those the most from all possibility of obtaining mercy.
For these two are (...) and cannot stand together.

Ioh. 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, etc. God loved the world, says the Text,
that is, the whole lump of mankind: therefore he did not absolutely hate the
greatest part of men.

Again, God loved it fallen into a gulf of sin and misery. For he so loved
them, as to send his son to redeem them; and a Savior presupposes sin. He
did not therefore hate the most of them lying in the fall: for love and hatred
are contrary acts in God, and cannot be exercised about the same objects.

Many Expositers (I know) do take [world] here in a restrained sense, and
understand by it the company of the Elect, or the world of Believers only, but
they have little reason for it (in my opinion;) for,

1 I think there can be no place of Scripture alleged, wherein this word
[world] especially with the addition of [whole] as 1. Epist. of Joh. cap. 2. v.
2. (a place equivalent to this for the matter of it and a comment upon it.) I
say no place (I think) can be produced, where [world] does signify only the
Elect, or only believers; but it signifies, either all men, or at least the
most men living in some certain place, and at some certain time, but without
distinction of good and bad, or if it be used any where more restraynedly, it
is applied only to wicked and Reprobate men, who in their affections are
wedded to the world and its transitory delights: and therefore do most properly
deserve this name.

2 Suppose it be granted, that (World) in some Scriptures is restrained to the
Elect; yet it cannot bear this signification here; -- because,

1 The words then would have a senseless construction. For thus would they
run; God so loved the Elect that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, etc. and if they run thus, this would follow: -- There are two sorts of
the Elect, some that do believe and shall be saved, others that do not believe
and shall be damned: which is a division or distinction unknown in Divinity.

2 Believers and unbeleevers, damned and saved, comprehend all mankind: for
there is no man but he is one of these. Now (world) in this place includes
believers and unbeleevers, the saved and the damned, as appears most plainly
to him that lays the 16, 17. and 18. verses together. Therefore it signifies
here all mankind without exception of any.

Who would have all to be saved, ^. Tim. ^.4.
and to come to the knowledge of the truth.

In these words, the Apostle delivers two things:

1 That it is Gods will, that men should enjoy a happy end, and be saved.

2 That it is also his will, they should have the means and make a good use of
them in coming to the knowledge of the truth, that so they might be saved.
There is no let in God, but that all men may believe and be saved: and
therefore there is no absolute will, that many thousand men shall dye in
unbeleefe and be damned.

Two answers are usually returned, which I confess give me little satisfaction.

1 That by (All) here we are to understand all sorts, and not every particular
man in those sorts.

It is true, that (All) is sometimes so taken in Scripture; but (I believe) not
here: for the very context shows, that we are to understand by it the
individuals and not the kinds. In the first verse there is a duty enjoined. [J
will that prayers and supplications be made for all men;] and in this verse the
motive is annexed [God will have all to be saved:] As if he should have said --
Our charity must reach to all whom God extends his love to.

God out of his love will have all to be saved: and therefore in charity we
must pray for all. Now in the duty, (All) signifies every man for no man
though wicked and profane is to be included from our Prayers.

Pray for them (says our Savior) that persecute you: and pray (says the
Apostle here) for Kings and all that are in authority; men in those days,
though the greatest, yet the worst, the very Lions, Wolves and Bears of the
Church: Pray for them. And if for them, then for any other. Thus in the duty it
signifies every man: and therefore, it must have the same extent in the motive
too, or else the motive does not reach home, nor is strong enough to enforce
the duty.

The second answer is, that God will have all to be saved with his revealed
will, but millions to be damned with his secret will.

But if this answer stand, then (in my apprehension) these inconveniences will
follow.

1 That Gods words (which are his revealed will) are not interpretations of his
mind and meaning; and by consequence are not true: for the speech which is not
the signification of the mind, is a lie.

2 That there are two contrary wills in God, a secret will, that many sons of
Adam shall irrevocably be damned, and a revealed will, that all the sons of
Adam may be saved.

3 That one of Gods wills must needs be bad, either the secret or the revealed
will. For of contraries, if the one be good, the other is bad: and so of Gods
contrary wills, if one be good, the other must needs be bad. For, malum est
contrarium bono.

(...) 3.^.
Not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance,
etc.

This Scripture is not so liable to the exceptions against the former
testimony. For it is a negative proposition and must be taken distributively:
and therefore speaks that in plain terms, which is contrary to absolute
reprobatio^.

That which is usually replied, is that the persons here spoken of, are the
elect only, and such as truly believe: God is not willing that any of them
should perish.

But the contrary appears in the text. For the persons here mentioned are
those, toward whom God exercises much patience, and long suffering; as it is
in the words next going before. And who are they? Are they the elect, are they
believers only? No, but Reprobates rather, who die for their contempt of grace.
For it is apparent by Scriptures, that God does patiently expect the conversion
even of them that are never changed, but dye in their sins, as we may see, 1
Pet. 3. v. 19, 20. Where we read that the patience of God was exercised toward
those, who in the days of Noah despised it, and went to prison, that is, to
Hell for it. Yea of all men, Reprobates are the truest and most proper objects
of Gods patience, as we may see, Romans 2.4. where St. Paul speaking of such as
go on in sin, and treasure up wrath to themselves against the day of wrath,
says; that God uses patience toward them that he might lead them to
repentance. And Romans 9.22. He endures (says the text) with much long
suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, In the 5 of Esaias, v. 2.
and the 65 cap. v. 2. we may see the same thing. Reprobates therefore as well
as others, my rather then others, does Peter here speak of, and says, that
God would have none of them to perish: if they do perish, it is through their
own fault and folly, and not Gods absolute pleasure, who would have no man to
perish.

To these testimonies, I may add these conditional speeches.

I thou seek him, he will be found of thee: 2. Chron. 28.9.
but if thou forsake him he will ^ast thee off forever.

Jf you se^ke him, he will he found of you: 2 Chronicles. 15.^.
but if you forsake him, he will forsake you.

If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? Genesis ^.7.
and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door.

The just shall live by faith: Heb ^0.2^
but if any man wit^ (...) self, my soul [(...)] shall have no p^ (...) shall
not like him, he shall be a Reprobate.

By all these and many other places that speak conditionally (for ought that I
can see) it is clear, that God forsakes no man considered simply in the fall,
till by actual sins and continuance in them he forsake God. Now if God
reject no man from salvation in time and in deed, till he cast off God; then
surely he rejected no man in purpose and decree, but such a one as he foresaw,
would reject and cast off him. For Gods acts in time are regulated by his
decrees before time. Ephesians. 1.11. He works all things (says the Apostle)
according to the counsel of his own will: and therefore there must be an exact
conformity between them, as between [regulam] and [regulatum,] the rule and the
thing squared thereby. By whatsoever therefore God does in the world, we may
know what he purposed to do before the world; and by his actual casting men
off when they grow rebellious and impenitent, and not before, we may certainly
gather, that he decreed to cast them off, for their foreseen rebellion and
impenitency, and not before.

Besides, it is in substance all one, to cast a man off indeed and to
entertain a resolution to do it. Our velle and facere are all one in Gods
account: and the reason is, because where there is a deliberate and settled
will, the deed will follow, if nothing hinder. Much more is Gods will and deed
all one, seeing his will is omnipotent and irresistible: and whatsoever he
wills directly and absolutely, is certainly done, when the time comes.

Well: all these plain and express Scriptures, with the whole course and
tenor of Gods word, this opinion fla^ly contradicting; though it do (perhaps)
shroud it self in some dark and obscure speeches of holy writ, I take it to
be an untruth. For what S. Austin says in another case, I may safely say in
this. Nunquid ideo negandum quod aptum est, quia comprehendi non potest quod
occultum est.
Shall we contradict plain places, because we cannot comprehend the obscure?
Secundum plura pauciora sunt intelligenda, and ne unus sermo subvertat alide,
secundum omne^ potius qu^m adversus omnes intelligentus erit.
A few Testimonies (says Tertullian) must receive an exposition answerable to
the current of Scripture, not contrary to it*

This is my first reason.

SEcondly, it crosses some principal Attributes of God: 2 It is incompatible
with God Attributes.
therefore it cannot be true. For God uses not to make decrees contrary to his
own most glorious nature, and such as are incompatible with these excellent
Attributes, by which he has discovered part of himself to men. [Voluntas Dei
semper sequitur naturam suam] is a rule among Divines, Gods will always
follows his nature; the reason why, is given by the Apostle, 2. Tim. 2.13. God
cannot deny himself.

Two things are here to be premised.

1 That Gods chief attributes are those perfections, in the manifestation of
which by acts conformable to them, God is most glorified; which are Mercy,
Justice, Truth and Holiness. For God is more honored by the exercise of these
among men, then by the putting forth of his unlimited power and sovereignty; as
a King is more renowned among his Subjects for his equity, candor and clemency,
then for his dominion and authority, or any thing that is done only for the
manifestation thereof. And there is good reason for it. For,

(1) Power is no virtue; but Holiness, Mercy, Justice, and Truth are: acts of
power are not morally good in themselves, but are made good or evil by their
concomitants. If they be accompanied with Justice, Mercy, etc. they are good;
if otherwise, they are naught. For [justum oportet esse, quod laudem meretur]
Nothing deserves praise, unless it be just.

(2) Power and sovereignty may as well be showed in barbarous and unjust
actions, as in their contraries. Saul showed his authority and power to the
full in sleying the Lords Priests, and Nabuchadnezzar in casting the three
Children into the fiery furnace, and Daniel into the Lions Den; but no Mercy,
nor Justice, nor any thing else that was good.

2 The second thing to be preconsidered, is --

That Justice, Mercy, Truth, and Holiness in God are the same in nature with
these virtues in men, though infinitely differing in degree; (as light in the
air and the Sun, are the same in nature, not degree:) and that which is
just, upright and merciful in men, is so in God too: and by these virtues in
our selves with acts conformable to them [tanquam ex pede Herculem] we may
safely measure what are so in God. For otherwise these things will follow.

(1) The common and received distinction of divine Attributes into communicable
and incommunicable would fall to the ground. For against it this might be said,
that the holiness, mercy justice and sincerity with other virtues that are in
us, are not the perfections of God in a lower degree communicated to us, but
things of a different nature.

C^n. (...)
(2) Men cannot be truly said to be made according to Gods Image; nor when they
are regenerated to be renewed after the same image, and to be made partakers of
the divine nature That picture cannot be the picture of such a man, which does
not in his parts and lineaments truly resemble him: no more can we be truly
called the picture or image of God, if in our graces (in respect of which we
are principally so called) there be not a lively resemblance of Gods attributes.

(3) We may not safely imitate God, as we are commanded. Be ye perfect as your
heavenly Father is perfect: Math 5.48. 1. Pet. 1.16.
and Be ye holy, as J am holy. Nor when we show forth holiness, mercy,
justice and sincerity in our doings, can we be properly said to imitate God, if
these be one thing in God and in men another.

These two things being thus premised, viz. Gods holiness, mercy, justice and
truth, are four of his chief Attributes, in the exercise of which, he takes
himself to be much glorified; and that we are to measure these attributes by
the same virtues in our selves.

I come to the proof of my second reason, against absolute Reprobation stated
even in the mildest and most plausible way.

It opposes Gods principal Attributes; particularly his Holiness. Mercy.
Justice. Sincerity.


1. Repugnant to Gods Holiness.
FIrst, it sighteth with Gods Holiness, and makes him the principal cause of
sin in the greatest number of men. I know that the defenders of it do not
think so. For the maine reason which moved the Synod at Dort and some other
Divines before and since, to bring down Predestination thus low, and begin
their Reprobation after the fall; was, that they might maintain a fatal and
absolute Reprobation of men, and yet avoid this imputation, as Dr. Twisse his
vind. gra^. 1. par. 1. c. 4. initio.
Dr. Twisse has noted. But what they intended (for ought that I can see) they
have not compassed. For it follows evident enough, even from their
conclusions too, that of all the sins of Reprobates, which are the greatest
number by many degrees, God is the true and principal author.

Two things they say, which taken together (me thinks) infer it.

1 That God of his own will and pleasure has brought men into an estate, in
which they cannot avoid sin. 2 That he leaves the Reprobate irrecoverably in
it.
I. That God of his own will and pleasure has brought men into an estate in
which they cannot possibly avoid sin: that is, into the state of original
sin, which consists of two parts: 1 The guilt of Adams transgressions. 2 The
corruption of nature. In both these they say mankind is interessed, not
through the force and efficiencie of natural generation, because we all derive
our nature from Adam as our first principle; but by Gods free and voluntary
order and imputation. Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. ^3. Sect. 7 No^ eni^ factum est
natural^ter, ut a salute exciderent omnes un^us parenus culpa.
It came not to pass by any natural means (says Calvin) that all men fell
from salvation by the fault of our first parent. Cunctos mortales in unius ho^
persona morti ^eturnae mancipatos fu^: Scriptura clamat: hoc cum naturae
nequeat ascribi, ab admirabili dei consilio profectu^ esse minime obscu^u^ est.
That all men are held under the guilt of eternal death in the person in the
person of one man; it is the clear and constant voice of Scripture. Now this
cannot be ascribed to any natural cause: it must therefore came from the
wonderful counsel of God. A little after he has the same again with as great
an Emphasis,- Quomodo factu^ est, ut to^ gentes una cum liberi^ little
infantibus, ^ae m^ti^ prolvere lapsus Ad^ absque remedio, anis, quia d^o ita
(...) est.
How is it, that so many nations with their children should be involved in the
fall without remedy but because God would have it so? As roundly does Dr.
Twisse affirm the same. Twisse vind gr^. l. 1 par. 1 ^r. 4 viz. prope^ (...)
Or^ginalis p^ (...), non nisi imp^u^ ^ious; lu^ (...) propagatione ad no^
derivatur; quorum (...) que non nisi a libera Dei c^ s^tutione proficisc^tur.
The guilt of original sin is derived to us only by imputation; the silth
only by propagation: and both these only by Gods free constitution. A little
before he has these words -- Etenim naturae v^ium non est cu^que suum
voluntate prop^a contractum, sed sola imputatione aut propagatione detivatum;
quarum utraqu^ ut voluntate Dei, Deus enim nulla necessitate, sed pro me^a ma
voluntate nobis imputat peccatum Adae
The fault of nature comes from Gods free appointment: for he does not out of
any necessity, but of his mere will only impute the sin of Adam to us. To
this purpose he speaks a great deal more in the same place. -- To these
sayings S. Bernard has the like: speaking of Adams sin, he says. Bern.
Sermon. 1. ^ni. 1. p^st S. Epiph. Alien est, quia in Adam omn^ nescientes
p^ccavimus; noster, qui^ etsi in alio, nos t^men peccavimus and nobis justo Dei
consilio imputabatur, h^lto.
Adams sin is another, because we knew not of it; and yet ours, because it
was through the just, though secret judgment of God reputed ours.

And this that they say is agreeable to reason. For if we be fallen into the
guilt of the first sin and the corruption of nature, only because we were in
Adams loins when he sinned, and derive our being from him; then these two
things will follow.

1 That we stand guilty of all the sins which Adam committed from his fall to
his lives end. For we were virtually in his loins as well after his fall as
before, and in every passage and variation of his life he was still a principle
of mankind. But where do we read that we are guilty of any other of his
sins? To the first sin only does the Scripture entitle that sin and
misery, which entered into the world, and invaded all mankind, as we may see
Romans 5.15, 16, 17, etc.

2 That children are guilty of the sins of all their progenitors, especially
of their immediate Parents. For they were in their loins when they sinned, and
more immediately then in Adams. But children are not guilty of their parents
faults, nor obnoxious to their punishments, because they are their children, as
we may see, Exodus 20.5. where God saying, that he will visit the sins of the
Fathers upon the children to the third and fourth gener^on in them that [hate]
him; plainly implies, that children are not simply charged with their fathers
sins, but conditionally if they be haters of God as their fathers were; if by
imitating their wicked parents, they become partakers of their sins. In Ezekiel.
18.14. etc. The Lord signifies thus much in his Apology against the Cavil of
the Jews. For first he says, that if a wicked man beget a son that sees
his Fathers sins, and does not the like, he shall not dye for the iniquity of
his Father. This implies, that the derivation of being from the Parent does
not render the child obnoxious to the punishment of the fathers sin, nor
consequently to the sin. For the good child is not obnoxious, and yet the
good child is equally in the fathers loins with the bad, and equally
receives nature and being from him.

And then verse. 20. the Lord tells them expressly thus much, in two
propositions.

1 Affirmatively. The Soul that sins, it shall dye. And that it may be
known that he speaks exclusively, only the soul that sins, shall dye;
he delivers his mind.

2 Negatively, The Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, neither
shall the Father bear the iniquity of the Son, etc.

Our Savior in that woeful speech of his to the Pharisees, Math. 23.32, 34.
Fulfill ye also the measure of your Fathers. Behold J send unto you Prophets,
etc. them ye shall kill and crucify, that on you may come all the righteous
blood, etc. Intimates apparently, that the Pharisees were not inheritors of
their Fathers sins and punishments by birth; but by the commission and
imitation of their fathers sins, they came to inherit both their sins and
plagues. Miserable would our case be on whom the ends of the world are come,
if children should be guilty of all their Ancestors prevarications. What a
world of sins should we be to answer for, personal sins, parents,
progenitors sins, to a thousand past generations? A thing with no reason to be
imagined.

This is the first thing.

II. Secondly, they say that God has immutably decreed, to leave the far
greatest part of mankind in this impotent condition irrecoverably, and to
afford them no power and ability sufficient to make them rise out of sin to
newness of life; and this decree he executes in time; and both these he does
out of his only will and pleasure.

O this proposition there be three branches.

1 God decrees to leave them. 2 He does leave them. 3 He does both out of his
alone pleasure.
1 God (say they) has decreed to leave them without sufficient grace, and
consequently under an everlasting necessity of sinning. This is the very Helen
which they fight for, the maine act of that absolute Reprobation, which with
joint consent and endeavor they labor to maintain.

Most of them cast their Reprobation into two acts: a Negative, which is a
peremptory denial of grace and glory to some men lying in the fall: and a
Positive, which they say is a preordination of the men thus left, to the
eternal torments of Hell.

Others among them define Reprobation by an act merely negative, Suffr^g.
Brit. A^t. 1. de Repr. these 1.
and call it [Non Electioner, ^etm^ quo staruit non ^o usque miseri, etc.] Thus
our Divines in their s^ffrage ^fi^e it, and in their explication on the
definition when they give; they say, that the proper acts of Reprobation, as it
stands oppo^d to Election, are no other then a de^yall of that same glory and
grace, which are prepa^ed ^e decree of Election for the Sons of God. But in
this they all agree, that by the decree of Reprobation, g^ce necessary for the
avoiding of sin, is s^ly denied to Reprobates. And if at any time we hear
them say, that God has gratified R^probates with some grace; (for so says
Wa^ns, Reprobates are left Will. defens A^t ^rmin ^e Repr. In sta^u p^istino and
sub exercitio arbitrii sui, and administration m^munis provi^.
Under the common providence of God, and consequently under some common
end^wments: And our Divines in the Synod say, Suffe. Brit. these. ^e Reprob. Hos
etsi non ^s, peicipe^e t^ mul^ (...) ^neg^mus.
Reprobates though they are not elected, yet receive many of Gods graces: they
are to be understood, of such gifts and graces as are insufficient to make
them avoid sin, as we may see in these two cyted places and many more.

2 God does actually according to his eternal and unchangeable decree leave
the Reprobates in their several times and generations, without his grace,
under a necessity of final sin and impenitency.

This is the second branch, of that second proposition.

And this must they needs say. For Gods dec^ cannot be ^ustrated: what he
purposed before time, without a^le he does in time. I shall not need therefore
to prove, that they say so; Nevertheless, to let it be seen how positively
and categorically they say so, I will give an instinc or two. The Divines of
Geneva at the Synod among their Theses of Reprobation, have this for one --
Act. Syn. Suffr. Genev. de Reprob. Easdem personas in tempore, ex eodem placito
voluntatis vel non vocat, vel vocatos in Ecclesiam. Spiritu regenerationi^ non
renovat penitissime, non inserit Christo mystice, non justificat, etc.
Those whom God has reprobated, out of the same will by which he has
rejected them, either he calls not at all, or being called, he renews not
thoroughly by the spirit of regeneration, ingraffeth not into Christ mystically,
nor justifies, etc. Like to this is the speech of Lubbert, who speaking of
Reprobates, says; Act Syn. Suffr. Lubbert de Reprob. Iis vel non revelat viam
salutis, vel non donat cos fide, and cognitione Jesus Christi, non regigniteos,
non justificat, sed relinquit cos in peccato and miseria, etc.
To them either he reveals not the way of salvation, or gives not faith and
regeneration: but leaves them in sin and misery. The same Author, speaking
against the position of the Remonstrants, ( viz. that God does supply to all
men sufficient and necessary means of salvation, with an intention of saving
them;) sets down this Antithesis, -- Deus non subministrat omnibus
hominibus necessaria and sufficientia media ad salutem, idque cum intenti^ne
servandi.
God does not administer to all men means needful and sufficient to
salvation, and that with an intention of saving them. And to this his
Antithesis, Polyander, Walaeus, and Thyseus, 3 other professors of divinity in
the Low Countries did set their hands.

3 God both decrees and executes this leaving of men to themselves, of his
alone absolute will and pleasure.

This is the third branch.

That they say so, witness the suffrage of our English Divines. Suffr. Brit.
ar^ 1. de reprob. explic. these. 1. Orthodox. Hanc non-electionem in libertima
dei veluntate fundari dicimus.
We affirm, that this non-Election is founded in the most free pleasure of
God. And Ib these. 3. heterodox. Nominem post l^psum mera Dei voluntate
praeteritum osse.
that no man lying in the fall is past over by the mere will of God; is
numbered by the same Divines among the Heterodox positions. To this purpose also
speak the Ministers of the Palatinate, Act Syn. Iud. Palate these. 3. Causa
reprobationis est liberrima ac justissima Dei voluntas
The cause of Reprobation is the most free and just will of God, -- Ib these 4.
Quod Deus nonnullos praeterit grana praedicationis evan ^elii, ejus causa est
idem beneplacitum, sive eadem libera v^luntas.
That God passes over some and denies them the grace of the Gospel, the
cause is the same free pleasure of God.

Iudic. Theol. Hassiac Decrevit deus quosdam in lapsu and mis^ia relinquere pro
suo beneplacito
God decreed to leave some in the fall, of his own good pleasure. Thus the
Divines of H^ssen. The proof of this they fetch from the execution of this
decree in time, -- Deus in tempore quosdome genere humino de relinquit in
mise^a^sua, nec media ad fi^e^ and conversione^ ipsumque etiam salu^em
obtinendam necessaria eis confert etc idque pro libertinia sua voluntate.
God does in time leave some of mankind fallen and does not bestow upon them
means necessary to believe, etc. and this out of his most free pleasure. This
they jointly affirm, and prove it by this reason especially; All men were
looked on as sinners: If sin therefore were the cause that moved God to
reprobate, he should have reprobated or rejected all.

But he did not reprobate all; therefore for sin he reprobated none, but for
his own pleasure, in which we must rest without seeking any other cause.

Now from these two things laid together, viz. 1 That God did bring men into a
necessity of sinning. 2 That he has left the reprobates under this necessity:
it will follow that he is the author of the reprobates sins.


1 Because [Causa causae est causa causati,] The cause of a cause is the cause
of its effect, (if there be a necessary subordination between the causes and
the effect;) whether it be a cause by acts negative, or positive. But God is
the chief or sole cause (by their doctrine) of that which is the necessary and
immediate cause of the sins of Reprobates, namely their impotency and want of
supernatural grace; therefore he is (by the same doctrine) the true and proper
cause of their sins.

2 Because [Removens prohibens, etc.] that, which withdraws or withholdeth a
thing, which being present would hinder an event, is the cause of that event:
as for example, he that cutteth a string in which a stone hangs, is the cause
of the falling of that stone; and he that withdraws a pillar, which being put
to, would uphold a house; is the true cause in men's account of the falling of
that house. But God (by their opinion) withholdeth from Reprobates that power,
which being granted them, might keep them from falling into sin: therefore he
becomes a true moral cause of their sins, -- Ter^ul. l. 1 contr. Marcion.
c. 22. In cujus manu est quid ne fiat, ei deputatur, ^m jam fit.
In whose power it is that a thing be not done, to him it is imputed, when it
is done, says Tertullian.

It will not suffice to say, that God by withholding grace from Reprobates
becomes only an accidental, not a proper and direct cause of their sins.
For a cause is then only accidental in relation to the effect, when the
effect is beside the intention and expectation of the cause. For example:
digging in a field is then an accidental cause of the finding a bag of gold,
when that event is neither expected nor intended by the husbandman in digging,
But when the effect is looked for and aimed at, then the cause (though it be the
cause only by withholding the impediment) is not accidental; as a pilot who
withholdeth his care, and skill from a ship in a storm, foreseeing, that by
his neglect the Ship will be drowned, is not to be reputed an accidental, but
a direct and proper cause of the loss of this ship. This being so, it
follows, that God by this act and decree of removing and detayning grace
necessary to the avoiding of sin, from Reprobates, not as one ignorant and
careless what will or shall follow, but knowing infallably what mischief will
follow, and determining precisely that, which does follow; namely, their
impenitency and damnation, becomes the proper and direct cause of their
sins.

SEcondly, it opposes Gods Mercy.

God is merciful; a part it is of his title. Exodus 34.6. 2 Contrary to his
Mercy.
merciful and gracious. He is mercy in the abstract, 1 John 4.16. God is love,
a Father of mercies, and God of all consolations, 2 Cor. 1.3. a Savior of men,
1 Timothy 4.10. And thus the Church has always taken him to be. And therefore
has of old styled him in her liturgy, A God, whose nature and property is
always to have mercy and to forgive.

Two ways is Gods mercy spoken of in Scripture, absolutely and comparatively.

(1) Absolutely, and so it is set out in high and stately terms. It is called
rich mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. great kindness. Jonah. 4.2. Abundant mercy, 1 Pet. 1.2.
love without height or depth, length or breadth, or any dimensions, -- love
passing knowledge, Ephesians. 3.18. So great it is, that Jonah could not entreat him
to punish the little, infant, harmless Ninivites with temporal death for the
sins of their guilty parents Jonah 4.11.

(2) Comparatively: with two things it is compared.

1 His own justice. 2 The love that dwells in the creature: and is advanced
above both.
I. With his own Justice it is compared and advanced above it: not in its
essence (for all Gods excellencies are infinitely good; and one is not greater
then another) but in its expressions, and some things that have relation to it:
particularly in these;

(1) In its naturalnesse and dearness to God. It is said of mercy, it
pleases him, Micah. 7.18. but justice is called his strange work [ali^num a
natura sua] Esaias 28.21. He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children
of men. Lamentat. 3. 33.

(2) In the frequent exercise of it self. He is said to be slow of anger, but
abundant in goodness. Exodus 34.6. mercies are bestowed every day; judgments
inflicted but now and then, sparingly, and after a long time of forbearance,
when there is no remedy, 2 Chronicles. 36.15. All the day long have J stretched out
my hands to a gainsaying and rebellious people, Esaias, 65.2. That is, I have
been patient a long time, and in that time I have not been idle, but employed
in exhorting, promising and showing mercy, that so I might do you good. God
waits a great while for the conversion of sinners, as Mariners do for their
tide: and at last with much ado, if there be a necessity, he chideth and
fights.

(3) In its amplitude or objects, to whom it is extended; Visiting the
iniquities of the fathers upon the children to the third and fourth generation,
but showing mercy to thousands, Exodus 20.5. In these words God implies, that
his mercy reaches farther then his justice, and that, how much 3 or 4 come
short of a thousand; so much does his justice come short of his mercy in the
exercise of it.

(4) In the occasions that move God to exercise them. It is a great matter that
moves God to punish, as we may see, Genesis 6.5, 6, 7, 12, 13. when the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and all flesh had corrupted his way,
then God thinks of a flood. He would not destroy the Amorites, till their
wickedness was full. How often would I have gathered thee? says CHRIST to
Jerusalem, Matthew 23.37. that is, I have not taken advantages against thee, nor
upon the first, second, or third unkindnes, cast thee off: small matters have
not moved me to destroy thee, O Jerusalem. But how small an occasion does God
take to spare men? when he had examined Sodom, and found their sins to be
answerable to the cry, yet then, for ten righteous men's sakes would he have
spared Sodom, Genesis 18.32. Nay, he would have spared Jerusalem, if the Prophet
could by his searching have found one man who did execute judgment and seek the
truth. Jer. 5.1. What a slender humiliation made him to spare wicked Ahab and
his house a long time? 1. Kings, 21.29. And the repentance of Ninive, whose
wickedness cried to the Lord for vengeance, Jonah. 1.2. did easily procure her
a pardon.

Thus is Gods mercy advanced above his justice.

2 It is compared also with the affection of a father to his son, of a tender
mother to her child, and of the most affectionate bruits to their brood, and
set above them all. It goes beyond a fathers to his son, Mat. 7.11. If you
that are evil, can give good gifts to your children; how much more will your
heavenly Father give good things to them that ask him? What does this (quanto
magis) imply, but that Gods love out-strips a fathers! And so it does a mothers
too. Esaias, 49.15. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not
have compassion upon the Son of her womb? yea, they may forget; yet J will
not forget thee. Women are compassionate toward their children, because they
are the fruit of their wombes, and a part of themselves: but most indulgent are
they toward those children, to whom they are Nurses, as well as mothers, to
their sucking children. And yet mothers may forget even their sucking children:
but as for God, he can never forget his children.

Again, God compares himself with one of the most affectionate females among
unreasonable creatures, (the Hen) Math. 23.37. O ^erusalem, how often would I
have gathered thee, as a Hen gathers her chickens under her wings, etc. No Bird
(says S. Austin) expresses such tender love to her young ones, as the^en
does; Aug tract 15. in Ioh. page 46. Videmu^ nidi^are passeres quos^bet ante
oculos nostros: hirundines, ciconias, columbas, quotidit videmus nidificare;
quos nisi quando in nidis videmus, parents esse no^ agnoscimus. Gallina vero
sic infirmatur in pullis suis, ut etiamsi ipsi pulli non sequantur, filios non
videas, matrem tame^ intelligas. Ita fit alis demissis, plumis hispida, voce
rauca, omnibus membris demissa and abjecta; ut (quemadmodu^ dixi) etfi filios
non videas, matrem tamen intelligas.
No Fowls discover themselves to be mothers, so much as Hens do. Others, when
we see them in their Nests with their young, we know them to be mothers, but no
way else: but the Hen discovers her self to be so ev^ when her chickens do
not follow her; her feathers stand up, her wings hang down, she clocketh
mournfully and goes feebly; so that we may know her to be a mother, when yet
we cannot see her brood.

Such another speech he has in another place, and concludes it with these
words. Id. in Ps. 58. p. 212. B. C. Quare ergo Dominus, nisi propter hoc,
gallina esse voluit, in Sancta Scriptura dicens, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
quoties volui te congregare ut gallina, etc.
Our Lord did therefore compare himself to a Hen rather, then to any other
creature, because of her singular expressions of love to her young ones, even
when they are out of her sight.

By these things we see how highly the Scriptures speak of Gods mercy,
especially in its expressions to mankind, to whom he has borne a greater
love, and for whom he has declared himself to have done far greater
matters, then for the Angels; the wisdom of God delighting it self in the
children of men, before the world was. Prove. 8.31^ and gratifying them in the
fullness of time with the assumption of their nature. ( Heb. 2.16.) and the
redemption of their souls with his blood. 1. Pet. 1. etc.

Now with such a Mercy cannot stand such a decree: absolute Reprobation being
once granted, we may (me think) more properly call God a Father of cruelties,
then of mercies, and of [hatred] rather then of [love.] And the Devils names
[Satan, and (...)] an adversary, a destroyer may be fitter for him, then
[(...)] a Savior, which I tremble to think. Does mercy please him, when he
has made a decree which shows far more severity toward poor men then
mercy? Is he slow to anger, when he has taken such a small and speedy occasion
to punish the greater part of men for ever; and for one sin once committed,
has shut them up under invincible sin and damnation? Is his mercy abundant,
does it reach further then justice; when it is tuckt up so short, limited to a
very few selected ones, when a hundred for one at least (take in all parts of
the world) are unavoydably cast away out of his only will and pleasure? Or
does his love pass knowledge, when we see daily far greater love, then this
in men and other creatures? What Father and mother (that have not only cast off
father-hood and mother-hood, but humanity too) would determine their children
to certain death, nay to cruel torments worse then death for one only
offense, and that committed too, not by them in their own persons, but by some
other, and imputed only to them?

But to deliver things a little more closely. Four things (in my conceit)
being well and distinctly considered, do make it apparent, that this decree is
compatible with Gods mercy.

1 That Adams sin is the sin of man's nature only and no man's personal
transgression, but Adams: it was neither committed nor consented to, by any of
his posterity in their own persons.

2 That it was the sin of our nature, not by generation (as I have showed)
but by Gods own voluntary imputation.

3 That God did pardon it in Adam, (for so it is generally believed;) who did
actually and freely commit it in his own person.

4 That CHRIST came into the world to take away [Peccatum mundi] the sin of
the world. Joh. 1.29. That God either did or might have satisfied his wronged
justice, in the blood of the Covenant for all mankind, and without any
impeachment to justice, and have opened a way of salvation to all and every man.

These considerations (I think) being well digested, will make any man to
think, that either there is no decree of absolute Reprobation; or that God is
not merciful to men at all: much less more merciful to them then to other
creatures; but more sharp a great deal and severe then he is to 1 any
Creatures in the world. 2 the very Devils themselves.


1 Then to any other creatures. For they, even the basest among them, though
perhaps they have but a despicable being, yet they have such a being as is
far better then no being at all: Whereas men are determined by his omnipotent
decree to such a woeful being, as is a thousand times worse then no being at
all. What man would have accepted of life, when first he entered upon possession
of it, if he had known upon what lamentable conditions, it was to be tendered?
Or (did men firmly believe this decree) they would at a venture with Job curse
their birth day, be released willingly from the right of creatures, and desire
their immortal souls might vanish into nothing. Malunt extingui penitus,
Minut. Felix page 113.
quam ad supplicia reparari (as Minutius Felix speaks in another case) And
Parents out of mere compassion to their children, would wish that they might
be borne toads and serpents, rather then men; creatures whose beings at last
shall be resolved into nothing, rather then immortal spirits.

2 To the very Devils also (supposing this decree) is God more merciful, then
to men; and yet the Devils are set forth in Scripture for the greatest
spectacles of Gods irefull severity. In one thing, this decree makes most men
and Devils equal, [Vtrisque desperata salus,] they are both sure to be damned:
but in three things, men are in a far worse condition by it.

(1) In their appointment to hell, not for their own, proper, personal
sins, for which only the Devils are damned: but for the sin of another man,
that lived and sinned long before they were borne.

(2) In their unavoydable destination to endless misery, under a color of the
contrary. The Devils, as they are decreed to damnation, so they know it, they
expect it, they look for no other. But men, who are appointed to wrath, are
yet fed up with hopes of salvation and made to believe that the whole business
is put into their hands; so as if they perish, it is not [defectu
misericordiae] because God will have no mercy on them, but [defectu voluntatis
propriae,] because they will not be saved: when yet indeed there is no such
matter.

Now if it be worse to be deluded in misery, then simply to be miserable; then
is the condition of men in this respect (by this decree) much worse then the
state of Devils.

(3) In their obligation to believe, and the aggravation of their punishment by
not believing. The Devils, because they must be damned, are not commanded to
believe in CHRIST, nor is their punishment heightened by their not believing:
Senten. super. 8. c. Gall Qui dicit quod non omnes homines velit deus salvos
fieri, sed certum numerum praedestinatoru^; dutius loquitur, qua^ loquendum est
de altitudine infcrutabilis gra^ae Dei.
but miserable men, who by this decree have no more liberty to escape Hell,
the^ the Devils, must yet be tied to believe in CHRIST, and have their torments
increased, if they believe not. These things being so, (I think) I may conclude
with the words of Prosper. (x) He which says, that God would not have all men
to be saved, but a certain set number of predestinate persons only: he
speaks more harshly then he should of the height of Gods unsearchable grace.
Nay, he speaks that which cannot stand with his infinite grace and mercy,
especially to the sons of men.

Nor does that give me satisfaction, which is usually answered, namely, that
God by this absolute decree does fully manifest his justice and mercy too: his
justice toward Reprobates, his mercy toward the Elect; and that it is necessary
his decrees should so be ordered, as that both these may be clearly declared
by them. For,

1 Gods mercy is revealed to be rich mercy, abundant, long suffering,
surmounting justice, and beyond understanding. Now such a mercy set forth with
such titles, clothed with such properties, is no ways manifested by this
decree.

2 Neither is Gods pure and spotless Justice set forth by it, as I now come to
show: this being my third argument drawn from Gods attributes against absolute
Reprobation.

THirdly, this absolute Reprobation is incompatible with Gods Justice. 3
Against Gods Justice.


The Lord (says David) is righteous in all his ways, Psalm. 145. The Judgments
of the Lord (says Solomon) are weight and measure. Prove. 16.11. Exact and
without exception. So apparently just is God, that he offers the justice of
his decrees and ways to the trial of humane understanding. Esaias, 5.3. Judge I
pray you between me and my Vineyard. Those to whom the Vineyard was committed,
slew their masters heir being sent unto them: What will the Lord of the
Vineyard think ye (says CHRIST) do therefore when he comes, to those
husbandmen? Math. 21.40. In which words he appealeth to their judgment: nay,
he is content to prove himself and his dealings to be just by plain and
evident arguments, Ezekiel. 18.25. etc. Are not my ways equal, and yours
unequal, O ye house of Israel? And he permits Abraham when he was in his
greatest humility acknowledging himself to be but dust and ashes, yet to
reason with him about the equity of his doings. Will thou sley the righteous
with the wicked? Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Genesis 18.23, 25.
And Moses also is suffered to argue Gods justice in the same manner. Shall one
man sin, Numb. 16.22.
and will thou be wrath with all the Congregation! In a word, so evidently just
is God in all his proceedings, that many both good and bad, who have felt his
justice, have cleared God, and deeply charged themselves. Witness Ezra,
Nehemiah, and Daniel in their 9th. Chapters: and Adonibezek, Iud. 1.7. And the
Emperor Mauricius, who having seen his children butchered, and waiting every
minute for the bloody stroke of death, brake out into these words. Osiand.
Eccl. hist. Cent. S. page 261. Iustu^es domine and justum est ja^um tuu^.
Righteous art thou O Lord, and just is thy Judgment.

With this inviolable justice of God, cannot absolute Reprobation (of such
especially, as are commanded to believe and are called to salvation) be
reconciled.

My Reasons are these.

1 Because it makes God to punish the Righteous with the wicked.

The Sublapsarians say directly in plain terms, that God decreed to
destruction men considered without sin, and therefore yet righteous. And the
Sublapsarians say as much in effect; for they say two things.

(1) That God did lay a necessity upon every man of being borne in Original
sin (as I have noted before.)

(2) That he has determined for that sin to cast away the greatest part of
mankind for ever: and so they make God to do that by two acts, the one
accompanying the other, which the other say he did by one.

Calv. Instit. 3. cap. 23.. 23.
This is so clear a case, that Calvin with some others have not stickt to say,
that God may with as much justice determine men to Hell the first way, as the
latter. (See Jnstit. l. 3. c. 23.. 7.) Where against those who deny that Adam
fell by Gods decree, he reasons thus; All men are made guilty of Adams sin
by Gods absolute decree alone: Adam therefore sinned by this only decree. Quid
eos prohib^t fateri de uno homine, quod inviti de toto humano genere concedunt?
Quid enim tergiversando luderent operam?
What lets them to grant that of one man, which they must grant of all men? And
a little after he says: Bonos istos justitiae Dei patronos perplexos haerere
in fest^a, altas vero trabes superare, nimis absurdum est.
It is too absurd, that these kind Patrons of Gods Justice, should thus stumble
at a straw and leap over a block. God may with as much justice decree Adams
sin and men's damnation out of his only will and pleasure; as out of that
will and pleasure, the involving of men in the guilt of the first sin and
their damnation for it: that is, the substance of his reasoning. To the same
purpose, speaks Maccovius. From hence we may see (says he) what to judge of
that opinion of out adversaries: viz. That God, cannot justly ordain men to
destruction without the consideration of sin. Maccov disp. 18. p. 16. Nam
dicant (quaeso) nobis, quid majus sit, imputate alicui culpam alterius, and
propter ipsam, illum morte aeterna plectere; an vero ordinare ad interitum. At
hoc potest sine ulla laesione justitiae suae: ergo multo magis potest illud
posterius.
Let them tell me which is greater, to impute to one man the sin of another,
and punish him for it with eternal death, or to ordain simply, without
looking at sin to destruction: surely no man will deny the first of these to
be greater. But this God may do without any wrong to Justice, much more
therefore may he do the other. To these consents Dr. Twisse and says. Dr.
Twiss. Vind. gra. l. 2. digr. 1. page 15. Quod potest Deus intercedente libera
sua constitutione, illud etiam absolute poterit, vel sine aliqua constitutione
inter^dente.
If God may ordain men to Hell for Adams sin, which is derived unto them by
Gods only constitution, he may as well do it absolutely, without any such
constitution. And it is most true, it is all one in substance, simply to decree
the misery of an innocent man, and to involve him in a sin that he may be
brought to misery.

Neither of these decrees (I take it) are just.

2 The second reason, why it is against Gods justice, is, because it makes him
to require faith in CHRIST of those to whom he has precisely in his absolute
purpose denied both a power to believe, and a CHRIST to believe in.

That God binds Reprobates to believe as well as others, it is the constant
doctrine of Divines; among whom Zanchius delivers it for a Thesis, Zanch. l.
5. de nature, Dei, cap. 2. q. 1. de praed. Sanctorii. Quisque mandato Dei
tenetur credere se ad salutem aeternam in Christo fuisse electum; maxim autem
is qui fidem in Christum profitetur. Cum dicemus unumquemque teneri hoc credere
neminem, ne Reprobos quidem, qui neque unquam ciedent, nec credere in Christum
possunt, excipimus; and nisi credant gravissime omnium peccant.
Every man (especially he that professes CHRIST) is bound to believe, that he
is chosen in CHRIST to salvation; every man without exception (even the
Reprobate himself:) and if he believe it not, he commits a most grievous
sin above all others. This he proves by that speech of CHRIST, Ioh. 16.9.
The Spirit shall convince the world of sin, because they believe not in me.
Reprobates therefore are bound to believe. Mr. Perkins also says something to
the same purpose. Perk lib. de Praed. page 89. Obj. 3. Quisque in Ecclesia
mandato Dei [cicde Evangelio] tenetur credere, se redemptum esse per Christum,
etiam improbus, perinde ac Electus, sed alia tamen and alia ratione: Electus
tenetur credere, ut credendo particeps siat electionis; reprobus, ut non
credendo fiat inexcusabilis, etiam ex intention Dei.
Every one in the Church by virtue of this commandment [beleeve the Gospell]
is bound to believe that he is redeemed by CHRIST, as well the Reprobate as the
Elect, though for a different reason: the Elect, that by believing he may be
saved, the Reprobate, that by not believing he may be without excuse: and this
out of the very purpose of God.

But now they cannot in justice be bound to believe, if they be absolute
Reprobates, for three causes.

(1) Because they have no power to believe: they want it and must want it for
ever. God has decreed they shall never have any to their dying day. [Nemo
obligatur ad impossibilia] no man can be justly tied to impossible
performances. Because no man can fly like a bird, or reach heaven with the top
of his finger; therefore, God cannot with justice exact of any the performance
of these actions: nor can he of Reprobates the obedience of Faith, if it be not
possible to them.

(2) Because it is not Gods unfeyned will they shall believe. No man will say,
that it is Gods serious will, that such a man shall live, when it is his will,
that he shall never have the concourse of his providence and the act of
preservation. Nor can we say, that God does in good earnest will that those men
should believe, whom he will not furnish with necessary power to believe. It
may rather be said, it is Gods unfeyned will they shall not believe, because it
is his will they shall want power to believe. For it is a Maxim in Logique,
[Qui vult aliquid in causa, vult effectum ex ista causa profluentem.] He who
wills a thing in the cause, wills the effect that necessarily flows from
that cause. Now if it be the certain will of God, that Reprobates shall in no
wise believe, he cannot with reason and equity tie them to believe. For then
he tyeth them to an act contrary to his determinate will.

(3) Because they have no object of Faith, no Christ to believe in: [Credere
jubet, and fidei nullum obiectum ponit.] He commands to believe, and
affords no object to believe in: this sounds not well. The Devils have no
part in Christ or the new Covenant. We will not therefore say, that God can
justly bind them to believe, or punish them as transgressors of the Covenant;
because they believe not. How then can we say, that God can justly require
faith of Reprobates, or destroy them for not believing; if they have indeed no
more part in Christ or in the Covenant, then the Devils have? If a man should
command his servant to eat and punish him for not eating, and in the mean
time fully resolve, that he shall have no meat to eat; would any reasonable
man say, that such a man were just in the command or punishment? Change but the
name and the case is the same. Again, that Christ dyed for Reprobates (by the
Doctrine of absolute Reprobation) is a lie; and can God justly bind men to
believe a lie?

This is the second reason.

3 The third reason why the absolute decree infringeth Gods justice is, because
it will have him to punish men for omission of an act, which is made impossible
to them by his own decree: not by that decree alone, by which he determined to
give them no power to believe, having lost it; but by that decree also, by
which he purposed, that we should partake with Adam in his sin, and be
stripped of all that supernatural power, which we had by Gods free grant
bestowed upon us in Adam before he fell.

These are the reasons which move me to think, that this absolute decree is
repugnant to Gods Justice.

Three things are usually answered.

1 That Gods ways may be very just, and yet seem unjust to man's erring
understanding: and so is this decree, though flesh and blood will not yield it
to be so.

This answer I take to be false, and the contradictory to it to be true,
namely, that nothing is truly just, which humane understanding purged from
prejudice, corrupt affections and customs, has in all ages, places and
persons judged to be unjust. The reason is, because God has by the light of
nature, and those general impressions of good and evil, honest and dishonest,
just and unjust, made in the hearts of men, sufficiently instructed and enabled
them to judge what is just and what is not. When a thing is done, reason so
quallified is able to say, This is just, or this is unjust whether it be done
by God or man. For (virtues in men being but the image of those perfections
that dwell in God) Justice in men and God are for substance but one and the
same thing, though infinitely differing in degree, as the greater and lesser
light. That this power is ingraffed in men, God himself (who best knows with
what endowments he has beautified his creature,) has sufficiently signified
in those Scriptures, where he calls on men to be judges of the equity of his
ways. Judge J pray you between me and my vineyard, Esaias 5. Judge, O ye house
of Israel, are not my ways equal and your ways unequal? Ezekiel. 18.25. God
would never put them upon the trial of reason, if he had not made it able to
examine them. The incarnation of the son of God, his birth of a Virgin, his
dying, the resurrection of the body, and such mysteries, as are peculiar to the
Gospel, and the proper objects of the Christian faith; God has not offered to
the trial of our understandings, bu^ rather derideth those, that presume to
judge of them by reason. 1 Cor. 1.20. Where is the Scribe? where is the wise?
when is the disputer of this world? and the reason is, because, these things
being supernatural, and therefore not discernable by natural power; man is no
competent judge of them by his natural understanding, nor may adventure upon
the trial and judgment of them with less danger, then Vzzah look into the
Ark, for [Scrutator majestatis opprimetur a gloria] (...) that pryeth into Gods
majesty, will be overwhelmed of his glory. But of the justice of his decrees
and ways, he makes him a judge; because, the common notions of just and
unjust being imprinted in nature, he is able by natural reason to apprehend
what is just in divine acts, as well as in his own.

2 It is answered, that these decrees are set down is Scripture to be the will
of God: and therefore, they must needs be just. For Gods will is the rule of all
righteousness.

To this answer, I have these things to reply.

(1) This rule in Divinity is much abused by the mainteyners of absolute
Reprobation, and may not be admitted in their sense and meaning. For Gods will
is not a rule of justice to himself, as if things were therefore just, because
he wills them and works them: but his justice rather is a rule of his will
and works, which are the expressions of his will. He therefore makes decrees
and executes them, because they are agreeable to that justice which dwells in
the divine nature: as he makes nothing, which has not [potentiam objectivam,]
a power of being created without implying contradiction to himself or any thing
in him: so he wills and does nothing, but that which may be willed or done,
[salva justitia] without wrong to his justice. Hierom: Pro^m. in Hosea.
St. Hierom speaking of the Prophet Hoseas taking a wife of fornications, Hosea
1.2. says it was done [in typo] typically, not really, [quia si fia^
turpissimum est,] because if had been indeed done, it had been a most foul
thing. But thou will answer (says he) [Deo jubente nihil turpe est] God
commanding it, nothing is dishonest. Thus much we say, (says the Father,) that
God commands nothing but what is honest, but he does not by commanding
dishonest things, make those things honest which are abominable: plainly
giving us to see what he thought, viz. that God does not will a thing and so
make it good; but wills it, because it is in it self good antecedently and
before the act of Gods will about it.

And thus much does Zanchy (though a rigid mainteyner of absolute reprobation)
not obscurely confess in his Treatise, de nativ. Dei: where he lets fall
such speeches as make Gods justice antecedent to his will; and therefore the
rule of it, rather then a thing regulated by it. Zanch. l. 3. de not. Dei c. 4
q. 9. these. 2. Neque aliquid velle potest, quod justu^ non sit.
Neither can God will anything (says he) which is not just. And again, Quod
placet principi, legis habet vigorem.
The Princes pleasure has the strength of a Law; is a rule (says he) among
the Canonists: but Ibi maxim veru^ est, ubi rex justus est, and nihil vult
nisi justum. Quanto magis in regno Dei, etc.
this is true, where the King is just and wills nothing but what is just. In
which words, he plainly makes the justice of the King antecedent to that will
of his, which must be a law. Many more speeches he uses there to the same
purpose. Gods will therefore, is not a rule of Justice to himself. To whom then?

To us. For by it we are, (1) to square all our thoughts, words, and deeds. (2)
to examine them when they are spoken and done: [Primum in aliquo genere est
regula posteriorum, and supremum inferiorum.]

(2) I reply, that these absolute decrees of men's inevitable salvation and
damnation are no parts of Gods revealed will. The Scriptures teach us no such
matter.

And therefore to say they are, is but a mere begging of the question. It has
always been ordinary with false Teachers, to make Gods word a Father to their
false opinions, that they may stand the faster and win the greater credit.
The Papists ground their transubstantiation, and the Lutherans their
consubstantiation and ubiquity upon the Scripture, [Hoc est corpus meum] This
is my body, Math. 26. And the defenders of absolute Reprobation do so too: they
make their cause to be Gods, and entitle his word to it; because they see it is
the surest way to defend it: being herein like to some contentious people, who
being in law and having a bad cause which they are like to lose, they entitle
the King to it, that they may the better uphold it.

(3) Absolute Reprobation can be no part of Gods revealed will. The reason is,
because, it is odious to right reason, and begets absurdities. For [Nulla
veritas parit absurda] no truth begets absurdities. Diverse truths are
revealed in Scripture which are above, but not contrary to right reason,
whether they be matters of faith or life: faith and reason, nature and
scripture are both Gods excellent gifts: and therefore though there may be a
disproportion, yet there can be no repugnancy between them. The worship which
God requires, is [cultus (...)] a reasonable service. Romans 12.2. and the word
of God is [(...),] milk reasonable and without guile. 1 Pet. 2.2.

These things therefore being laid together, it will appear to be but a mere
shift and evasion, when absolute Reprobation is proved to be unjust; and
therefore unworthy of God; to say, Gods will is the rule of Justice: this is
part of Gods revealed will; and therefore most just, whatsoever reason may
cavil and say to the contrary.

3 Their third answer is, that God is not bound to restore men power to
believe, because they once had it and have lost it through their own fault, as
a master is not bound to renew his servants stock, if he have wasted it by bad
husbandry.

This answer does not satisfy me. For I grant, that God is simply and
absolutely bound to no man, because he is [agent liherrimum] a most free
dispenser of his own favors, where and what, and to whom he will, and no man
is aforehand with God: [Quis prior illi dedit ut retribuatur] Who has given
unto him and it shall be recompensed again? Romans 11.35.

But yet he is conditionally bound: for he has determined and tied himself 3
ways especially.

(1) Decernendo, by decreeing. The Almighty is eternally subject to his own
ordinances, or else he should be mutable. And therefore, what gifts soever he
has decreed to men, he is bound to give them by virtue of his own decree.

(2) Promittendo, by promising. We use to say promise is debt, it is Justice to
perform what it was free to promise: and whosoever he be that promises and
pays not, is guilty of a trespass (witness Ananias and Sapphira;) and
unworthy of the kingdom of heaven, Psalm. 15.4. If therefore God has made a
promise of any gift or grace to men; his promise binds him to performance,
Nam semell emissum volat irrevocabile verbum.

(3) Legem ferendo, by giving men a law to keep; which without supernatural
grace they can no more keep; then they can eat a rock. By such a law the
supreme Lawgiver binds himself to his people, to give them such power as may
enable them to keep that law, or else he becomes (as the evil servant in the
parable styled him) a hard master, reaping where he sowed not, and the very
true and proper cause of the transgression of that law. We shall find God
always giving strength when he gives a command. When he commands the
creatures, to increase and multiply; he gave them a multiplying virtue: when
CHRIST bade the lame man arise, take up his bed and walk; he put into his limbs
an ability of walking: when Adam had a spiritual law given him to obey, which
without spiritual strength he could not; God gave him strength answerable to
the law, as Divines agree, consenting to that noted speech of St. Austin, that
Adam had [posse non cadere] though he never had [non posse cadere] a power and
possibility, though no necessity of continuing in obedience.

That I may bring this home to my purpose, I say, that God is bound to restore
unto men power to believe, supposing these things that follow.

1 That he has vouchsafed to enter into a new Covenant of peace with men, when
he needed not. 2 That in that Covenant, he requires obedience at men's hands,
even at theirs that perish. 3 That he promises eternal life to every man, if
he obey and keep the Covenant. 4 That he punishes the disobedient with
everlasting death.
These particulars supposed, the most free God who is absolutely bound to none,
is engaged to give ability of believing unto men: nor can he justly without
this gift punish the disobedient any more then a Magistrate having put out a
man's eyes for an offense; can command this man with justice to read a book;
and because he reads not, put him to death: or then a Master (that I may
return the Simile in the answer) when he has taken away from his servant the
stock which he has misimployed, can afterward exact of him a just employment
of the same stock, and punish him, because he imployeth it not.

I conclude therefore, that the absolute and inevitable reprobation of such men
as are called to believe in CHRIST, and punished if they believe not; is
utterly repugnant to the Justice of God, and therefore can be no part of his
word.

4 Opposite to Gods Truth.
FOurthly, it oppugneth the truth and sincerity of God.

God is a God of truth, Deuteronomy. 32.4. Truth it self, Ioh. 14.6 so called, because
he is the fountain of truth; and the perfection of truth without the least
mixture of falsehood. The strength of Jsraell cannot lie, Romans 3.4.
1 Samuel 15.29. Let God be true and every man a liar (says the Apostle;) that
he might be justified in his sayings, and overcome when he is judged, that is,
men may lie, (for all men are liars:) but God can never lie. If any man would
go about to challenge him with untruth, his challenge would easily appear to
be a calumny: the truth of God like the glorious Sun will break through all
the clouds of false accusations, that seek to obscure it. [Simile gaudet
Simili] Like loves his like, God loves such, as are true of heart, Psalm.
51.6. and has an hypocrite in utter detestation: and therefore, he must needs
be true himself. No man (for ought I know) doubts of it. But by absolute
Reprobation God is made untrue and Hypocritical in his dealings with men, and
in all matters appertaining to their eternal state; particularly, 1 in his
commands, 2 in his offers of grace and glory, 3 in his threats, 4 passionate
wishes and desires of men's chief good, and 5 in his expostulations and
commiseration also.

1 In his commands. For by this doctrine God commands those men to repent and
believe, whom he secretly purposes shall not believe. Though God command
Reprobates to believe the Gospel, L. contr. schafm. pa. 60. Etsi reprobos
mandat Deus ut evangelio credant, non vult tamen ut credant.
yet he will not have them believe; says Piscator. Now whom God commands to
believe and repent, those he wills outwardly, should believe and repent, for
by his commandments he signifies his good will and pleasure: and he must
inwardly and heartily will it too, or else he dissembleth. For words if they be
true, are an interpretation of the mind: when they are not, they are mere
impostures and simulations.

2 In his offers of grace and glory, which he makes to such as refuse them and
perish for refusing them, as well as to those who do accept them to their
Salvation.

This is evident, Esaias, 65.2. J have spread out my hands all the day long. To
whom? to a rebellious people, and Math. 22. we read, that those men were
invited to the wedding, that came not: and Act. 3.26. there it is said to the
Jews who had denied Christ, as verse. 14. To you has God sent his Son JESUS
to bless you, in turning every one of you from your iniquities. How often (says
Christ) would J have gathered you? speaking of such as neglected their
visitation, and so lost their salvation. It is evident also by reason. For, as
many as are under the Commandment, are under the Promise too; as we may see,
Act. 2.38, 39. Repent and be Baptized every one of you, and ye shall receive
the gift of the holy Ghost: for to you and your children is the Promise made.

In which words, Peter makes the command and the promise of equal extent,
both universal. And there is cause why: for he makes the Promise his motive
to persuade obedience to the command: and it would not have reached home, if it
had not respected all those, to whom the command was given. No man, Reprobate
or other, thinks any less: every man that hears the Gospel preached;
takes himself to be under the gracious offer of eternal life; and upon these
thoughts has some desires, some hopes of it, and stirs up himself to
forsake some pleasing sins, which otherwise he would not part with, and do
some unwelcome duties, which otherwise he would not do.

But now Gods meaning is [by this doctrine] that the most of those to whom he
offers his grace and glory, shall have neither. And so Piscator says, -- l.
de praed. contr^ schaf. pa. 74. Gratia non ^ffertur a Deo singulis (licet
vocatis) animo communicandi came, sed solis Electis.
Grace is not offered by God even to those who are called, with a meaning to
give it, but to the Elect only. In the same Book he has such another speech.
Non vult Deus reprobos credere, licet lingua profiteatu^ se velle. page 143.
Though God in words protest he would have Reprobates to believe, yet indeed
he will not have them. They make God to deal with men in matters of Salvation,
as the Poets feign the Gods to have dealt with poor Tantalus. They placed him
in a clear and goodly river up to the very chin, and under a tree which bear
much sweet and pleasant fruit that did almost touch his lips: but this they did
with a purpose that he should taste of neither. For when he put his mouth to
the water to drink, it waved away from him: and when he reached his hand to
the fruit to have eaten of it, it withdrew it self presently out of his reach:
so as he could neither eat nor drink. Just so deals God with Reprobates (by
their Doctrine:) he places them under the plentiful means of Salvation,
offers it to them so plainly, that men would think they might have it when
they will; and yet intends fully they shall never have it, withholding from
them either the first grace that they cannot believe, or the second grace that
they cannot persevere. Did not those Gods delude Tantalus? yes doubtless. And
if God do so with Reprobates; what does he but delude them, and dissemble with
them in his fairest and likelyest offers of Salvation that he makes them? And
this do Zanchius and Bucer grant by evident consequence, as appears by a
speech or two of theirs, which cannot stand with their conclusion; and
therefore [I suppose] fell unwarily from them.

Zanch^us tells us roundly, that every man, who is called, is bound to think
that he is elected, otherwise he does offer great injury to God, and Zanch. l.
5. de not Dei c. 2. Perst inger^ Deum mondacii qui illi in verbo dicit, se
velle salurem ejus, and in hunc finem ad Ch^istum vocasse.
accuse him of lying, which says to him in his word, that he desires his
Salvation, and for this cause has called him. In which speech he plainly
implies, that if God call a man whom he has absolutely rejected, he does but
delude him when he calls him. The like speech has Bucer Bucer in c. 8 ad
Romans q. de praed. Primum quod Deo debes, est ut credas esse te ab eo
praedestinatum. Nam id ni credas, facis eum tibi, cum te ad salutem vocat per
Evangelium, illudere.
A man must believe that he is predestinate: or else he makes God to mock him,
when he calls him.

A man therefore that is not predestinate, but an absolute Reprobate; when he
is called to Salvation, is but deluded: it is the necessary resultance of their
speeches.

If a Creditor should resolve, upon no terms to forgive his Debtor one
farthing of his debt, and yet make him offers to remit the whole upon some
conditions, and bind his offers with a deep and solemn oath: would not we say,
that he were a rank dissembler and a mere deluder of his poor debtor? We can
say no less of God, if it be true, that he has irrevocably decreed at no hand
to save such particular men, and yet promises and swears that he will save
them, if they will believe his promises, and repent. What can such oaths and
promises be, but mere delusions of miserable men?

3 In his threats and comminations also (by this doctrine) is God made to be
hollow and deceitful. For against what sins are threats denounced? Always
against actual sins; we never read that they are thundered out against us for
Original sin: they intimate therefore that the sins for which men go to
Hell, are their actual transgressions. But if it be true that God decreed men
to Hell for original sin, that which those threats import and signify is
not true, and so God is not sincere in them. Besides, all threatenings imply
that the evil threatened may be avoided. For therefore are they denounced, that
men might by them be brought to repentance, and so escape the evils threatened.
But if some men be peremptorily ordained to destruction, then their destruction
cannot be prevented: and so the threatenings of damnation (in this respect also)
do signify an untruth, and God in them deals not plainly with men.

4 In all the other things before mentioned, is God full of guile too (by this
opinion;) namely, in his --

(1) Passionate wishes, that even those men might repent, that repent not, and
might be saved that through their impenitency are not saved. Of these we read,
Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were such a heart in them to fear me, that it might
go well with them. And, Psalm. 81.11. O, that my people had hearkened, and
Israel had walked in my ways, etc. And, Esaias. 48.18. O, that thou had
hearkened to my Commandments. etc.

(2) In his mournful Expostulations, Esaias. 5.3. Judge (J pray you) between me
and my Vineyard, what could I have done more for my Vineyard? And Jeremiah 2.
throughout the whole Chapter, especially ver. 31. Have I been a Wilderness to
Israel, or a land of darkness? And ver. 32. Can a Maid forget her Ornaments,
or a Bride her attire? Yet my people have forgotten me days without number.
Ezekiel. 33.11. Turn (...) turn ye: why will ye dye, O house of Israel?

(3) In his melting commiserations of the woeful condition of foolish men, who
would not be reclaymed. How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? How shall J
deliver thee O Israel? My repentings are kindled together, my heart is turned
within me. Hos. 11.8. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and
stonest them that are sent to thee, etc.

In all these there is but little sincerity, if there be a secret resolution
that the most of those, toward whom those wishes, chidings, and pitiful
bemoanings are used, shall be damned without remedy. Gods fairest offers, his
sweetest invitations, his greatest sympathies, and amplest courtesies, (if this
doctrine be true) come little short (I think) of Absolom^ feast, Ioabs congey,
the kiss of Judas, and the Hyaenaes tears. For in all these [aliud animo
vult, aliud verbis significat] he says one thing and means another, and
therefore dissembleth.

Nay, the whole Ministry (wherein God commands, offers, chideth,
entreats, lamenteth, etc.) if this be true, is but a mere imposture, a
giving of words without any meaning of answerable deeds; and an imposture so
much the greater, by how much the show of kindness is the heartier. For how
can a good thing be offered with stronger shows of a good meaning, then when
it is offered with exhortations and entreaties to accept it, with clear
demonstrations of the excellencies of it, with unfeyned wishes that the parties
to whom it is offered, would accept it, and bitter lamentations for their folly
in refusing it? With all these inforcements is Gods tender of Salvation to
Reprobates accompanied; and therefore in show most hearty and serious.

In a word, thus speaks God (by this doctrine) to Reprobates in the ministry.

O ye Reprobates, (once most dearly beloved of me in your father Adam, but now
extremely and implacably hated, and by mine eternal and uncontrollable order
Sealed up under invincible sin and misery:) amend your lives, and believe in
the name of mine only begotten Son. If you repent and believe not, there is
no remedy, you must be damned: but if you repent and believe, you shall be
saved; though your sins be as red as Scarlet, I will make them as white as
Wool. Think not that I would have you dye, for I swear as J live, J will not
the death of him that dies; I would have no man to perish, but all to come to
repentance. I beseech you therefore be reconciled. I have cried and called unto
you, I have a long time waited upon you, that you might repent, and still am I
knocking at the doors of your hearts for entrance. O, that there were a heart
in you to fear me, and keep my commandments that it might go well with you
for ever. What shall J do unto you? how shall J entreat you? Will you not be
made clean? When will it once be? Can God speak thus to Reprobates, who by
his own decree shall never repent, nor be saved, without the deepest
dissimulation?

That which is usually said to clear the absolute decree from this
crimination, is, That God wishes the Salvation of the Reprobate seriously, but
not absolutely; he would have those men saved who are not saved, but yet upon
condition they will repent and believe. And therefore, though they do perish,
God is candid and sincere in his offers of Salvation to them. For therefore do
they perish, because they perform not the condition, and not because God
offers not Salvation seriously unto them.

But this answer is too short: It is true indeed, God will have all men to be
saved upon condition only, that they will believe and repent, according to
that speech of S. Ambrose, [Deus vult omnes salvari, si and ipsi velint.] God
would have all to be saved, if they themselves would: For if he would
absolutely have it so, what can hinder it? who has resisted his will? and it
is true likewise, that a conditional promise may be serious as well as an
absolute: but then the condition must be possible to them, to whom the promise
is made; and the performance of the condition must be a part of Gods will, as
well as the Salvation promised: or else the promise cannot be candid and
sincere. [Conditio est oblata potestas aliquid eligendi] a condition is the
offer of a power of choice. Where there is no liberty of choice afforded, there
is no true condition appointed. In substance it is all one to offer a courtesy
under a condition not possible, and not to offer it at all; and in circumstance
it is much worse.

In substance all one; The Lawyers tell us that a Contract made [sub condition
impraestabili nullus aestimatur] under a condition not possible, is esteemed no
bargain. And the Logicians rule is, that Conditionalis propositio quae habet
annexam conditionem impossibilem, aequipollet simpliciter neganti.
A conditional proposition which has an impossible condition annexed to it,
is equivalent to a bare Negation. It is all one for me to offer a piece of money
to one blind man upon condition he will open his eyes and tell me what piece
of money it is, and what stamp it has; and to deny it flatly to another. For
the one has it no more then the other. And it is all one for a man that has a
daughter to bestow in marriage, to tell her Suitor; I will give you my
Daughter, if you will span the Earth, or touch the Heavens with your finger;
and to tell him plainly, set your heart at rest, I will never bestow her upon
you. For the Suitor speedeth both ways alike.

And it is in circumstance a great deal worse. For it is a denial under
color of the contrary, a denial joined with a scoff, a derision, as was that
of the Iebusites, 2. Sam. 5.6. Who told David, that he should not enter into
the Fort of Zion, except he took away the blind and the lame. Their meaning
was, they would never deliver it up unto him: and because they thought it
impossible for him to take away the blind and the lame, they told him if he
did so, then they would yield it up. It was an Ironicall and scoffing denial
of his demand. If the King should make an unrepealable Law, that no German
should be made a Citizen of London, or free Denizen of the Kingdom; and then
make a Decree to give some bountiful gratuities, but to the Citizens of
London, or to the Subjects of the Kingdom only, and to none but them; and yet
for all this should command it to be proclaimed, that he will give them to the
Germans upon condition they will be made Freemen of London, or be incorporated
into the Kingdom: would not any man say, that the King in this case did
dissemble and delude the poor Dutchmen? and if any should say, there would be
no dissembling in it; for if they would become Citizens or Subjects, they
should have the promised gratuities: a man might truly answer, that therefore
the King does counterfeit and cousin them, because he makes a tender of them
upon a condition not possible by his own decree. In like manner, if God have
made a decree, that such men shall never believe, and yet offer them Heaven on
condition they will believe; it may most truly be said, that God does not
only deny them Heaven, but deny it with a bitter derision, which is far from
that candor and goodness that dwells in him.

And thus have I showed the contrariety of this Opinion to four principal
attributes of God, which is my second general reason against it.

3 It is contrary to the use and end of Gods gifts to men.
THirdly, it is contrary to the use and end of Gods gifts bestowed upon men,
which gifts are of two sorts:

(1) Gifts of Nature, our Creation, Sustentation, Preservation, together with
Health, Strength, Beauty, Wisdom, etc.

(2) Gifts of Grace, which have a more immediate relation to everlasting life,
and are means either of purchasing Salvation or of applying it.

Means of purchasing it, are the coming of CHRIST into the world, and the
sacrificing himself on the Cross.

Means of applying it, are the ministry of the word and Sacraments, the long
suffering of God, the enlightening of men's understandings, the plantation of
many excellent virtues in their hearts, with many more of the like sort.

Now of these endowments of Nature and Grace, what the true use and end is, the
Scripture does plainly and particularly show us.

First, for gifts of Nature, we find them bestowed upon all that have them,
for the encouraging and enabling of them to serve God and save their Souls.
For, Act. 14.16, 17. The Apostle says, that God (even in those times in which
he suffered the Gentiles to walk in their own ways, and withheld from them
the light of his holy word) did give unto the people of the world, rain from
Heaven and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and gladness, and
in so doing he left not himself among them without witness. This implies,
that therefore he gave them these good things, that he might make himself
known unto them, and so might draw them to glorify him according to the
knowledge which they had of him.

Act. 17.26. The Apostle says directly, that therefore men are made and placed
in this world and appointed to their several times and dwellings, that they
might seek and find God: that is, that they might serve him and save their
Souls. For what is it to seek God, but to serve him? and what is it to find
God, but to enjoy his face and favor here and in Heaven? To this purpose
Prosper. Prosper. de voc. Gentium. l. 2. c. 4. p. 8^8. Coelum quippe and terra
and marc, omnisque creatura quae videri and intelligi potest, ad hanc praecipue
disposita est humani generis, utilitatem, ut natura rationalis de
contemplatione tot specierum, de experimentis tot bonorum, de perceptione tot
munerum, ad cultum and delactione^ sui imbueretur autho^is, implente omnia
spiritu Dei in quo vivimus, movemur and sumus.
Therefore (says he) is every creature made and ordained especially, that
Mankind which is endewed with knowledge and ability to discourse, might by the
sight of so many goodly sorts of Creatures, and the taste of so many blessings,
be drawn to the love and service of his and their maker.

And a little after he says, in the same Chapter.

Ibid. Quod ergo in Israel per constitutionem legis, and Prophetica eloquia
gerebatur, hoc in universis nationibus totius creaturae testimonia and
bonitatis Dei miracula semper egeru^^.
Look to what use the Law and Prophets were to the Jsraelites; of the same use
were the gifts of Creation and Providence to the Gentiles. God never intended
to deal with the Gentiles (as the foul-mouthed Manichees said, he dealt with
the Jews) to feed and fat them up with outward and more common blessings, as
so many Hogs and Swine with husks and akornes, but to draw them up by these to
an expectation of better things and a careful endeavor to please God, that so
they might obtain them.

The end of all Creatures and of all created gifts bestowed upon man, is
subordinate to the end of man. Man's end is to glorify God upon earth, and
enjoy perpetual society with him in heaven; and the end of those gifts is to
direct and encourage men to atchieve that high and excellent end, to which his
Creator had appointed him.

Now for the gifts of Grace, they likewise are given to all them that enjoy
them for the same use and end too.

For first, CHRIST came into the world, not that he might be a rock of offense,
at which the greater part of men should stumble and fall; but to shed his blood
and by that blood to purchase Salvation for all mankind, not only for those
who are saved, but for those also who through their wilful unbeleefe and
impenitency are not saved; as we may see, Joh. 3.17. God sent his Son (says
the Son) into the World, not to condemn the world, but that the World
through him might be saved. In which words the end of his coming is set down.

1 Negatively, [not to condemn the World.] 2 Affirmatively, [but that the
World through him might be saved:] and therefore very fully.
The like speech we have, Ioh. 12.47. I came not to judge the World, but to
save it. These Negations joined with affirmations, show, that the Salvation of
all men was the only end of CHRIST'S coming, the end exclusively, no other end
was properly intended by it but this. The Son of man came to seek and to
save what was lost. Luke, 19.10. Therefore he came to save every man, for every
man was lost. And Act. 3.26. To you (says S. Peter) has God sent his Son
JESUS to bless you in turning everyone of you from your iniquity; [every one
of you] you that reject him, as well as you that receive him. The end of
CHRIST'S coming into the world was the Salvation of all and every man therein.

2 The ministry of the word and Sacraments is given also and appointed for the
same end, and is in its own proper nature and use, an instrument of conveying
the Spirit of regeneration to those that live under it and to all those.

Better proofs for this I cannot have, then those which our reverend Divines at
Dort gathered to my hand. Esaias, 59.21. This is my Covenant with them (says the
Lord) my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which J have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor seeds
seed for ever. Hinc patet (say they) from these words it appears, that the
word and spirit are joined in the ministry of the word with an inseparable
band, by the promise of God. Hence it is, that the Ministers of the New
Testament are called, Ministers not of the letter but of the Spirit; not of the
letter that kills, but of the spirit that gives life. 2. Cor. 3.6. And the
ministry of the Gospel is called (...) the ministry of the Spirit, in the
same place, verse. 8. Hence also is the Gospel called (...), Grace bringing
Salvation. Tit. 2.11. And (...), the word of Reconciliation. 2. Cor. 5.19. To
these let me add, 1. Pet. 1.23. Where the word is called, the seed of the new
birth: and 2. Cor. 5.20. Where Ministers are called, Ambassadors for CHRIST, to
beseech men to be reconciled to God. They are so called, to show that the word
preached is by Gods appointment an instrument to make men new creatures, and
that the proper matter of Ministers errands is reconciliation with God, and the
natural fruit of it is in Gods intent, not the obduration and destruction, but
the conversion and salvation of men. The same Authors out of Joh. 15.22. [If J
had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have had sin] do say it is
evident, that CHRIST in his preaching did administer so much inward grace as
was sufficient to convince those that rejected the Gospel, of positive
unbeleefe, and render them obnoxious to just punishment: and by good
consequence (say I) so much as sufficed by their good husbandry, to have
converted and saved them: for that grace leaves none without excuse, which is
not sufficient to convert them. I will conclude what they say of this gracious
intention of God in the ministry of the word, with that speech of Prospers,
cyted by them in the same place. Prosper. ad cap Gal. resp. ad. Obj. (...) Non
omnes voca^ ad gratiam eos, qui^ bus omnibus evang^lium praedicatur (...) recte
dicitur; etiam si sint qui evangel^ non obaudiunt.
They that say, that all those to whom the Gospel is preached (even those that
obey not the Gospel) are not called to grace, they say an untruth. God looked
for Grapes (says the Text) Esaias, 5.2. What does this imply? but that it was
Gods principal aim in the husbandry which he bestowed upon the Church of
Israel, that it should bring forth good fruit, though in the event it did not?
How often would J have gathered you? says CHRIST to Jerusalem. Math. 23.37.
These things (says he) have I spoken to you, that ye might be saved: but ye
will not come to me, that ye might have life. Ioh. 5.34, 40. In those words
intimating no less then this, that it was his full intent by his preaching to
gather and to save those very particular men, that in the end were not gathered
nor saved, through the contempt or neglect of CHRIST'S Ministry.

Touching the Sacraments, this is also the use and end for which they were
ordained; as we may see, Luke, 7.30. Where we have these words; But the Scribes
and Pharisees and expounders of the Law despised the counsel of God against
themselves; and were not baptized of John. In which words thus much is
evidently included, that it was Gods counsel and purpose in John's Baptism to
bring them to CHRIST, and in him to Heaven. So much also is said of his
Baptism, Mark. 1.4. John did baptize in the Wilderness and preach the
baptism of Repentance, and remission of sins. If this were the end of John's,
much more is it the end of CHRIST'S baptism; it being more excellent then John's
was, not in substance, but in the fullness of grace administered and dispensed
by it. All that have been baptized into CHRIST (says the Apostle) have been
baptized into his death. Romans 6.3. All ye that have been baptized into CHRIST,
have put on CHRIST, Gal. 3.27. The very phrases there used, show that baptism
is in its original intention, an instrument of uniting men to CHRIST, and
giving them communion with him in the benefits of his death. Except a man be
borne again of water (says our Savior) and of the Spirit, he cannot, etc.
Joh. 3.5. In which words are these two things.

1 The necessity of regeneration. [Except a man be borne again.]

2 The working cause of it: Efficient, the Spirit; isntrumental the Sacrament
of Baptism, there called Water from the outward matter of it. Baptism
therefore is appointed to be a means of regeneration to all those that are
baptized, and does effect it in all, who do not put an obstacle in the way to
hinder it. So much does the Apostle ascribe to Baptism, Ephesians. 5.26. and for
this cause does dignifie it with this title, [The laver of regeneration.] Tit.
3.5.

I will shut up this with Act. 2.38. where Peter says, Repent and be baptized
every one of you for the remission of sins; plainly implying, that therefore
is baptism ordained to be received, that those who do receive it, might have
their sins remitted.

This is also Gods intent in the Lords Supper. This is my body (says CHRIST)
and this is my blood, Math. 26.26, 27. in those words teaching us, that in that
Sacrament there is an exhibition of CHRIST and his benefits intended on Gods
part, and received of those by whom no obstacle is interposed: and therefore
does the Apostle call it in express words, 1 Cor. 10.16. The communion of the
body and blood of Christ.

For this end also, is the patience of God (another singular dignation of God)
exercised among men, as we may see, Rom 2.4. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness and forbearance, not knowing that the bountifulness of God leads
thee to repentance? but thou after thy hardness and heart that cannot repent,
heapest up wrath to thy self, etc. In these words may be noted for our
purpose: (1) Gods intent in forbearing sinners, which is, the leading of them
to repentance, and so on to Salvation: (for repentance, is per se ordinata ad
salutem, by him ordained to Salvation as a means to the end.) (2) The persons,
to whom God intends this good by his forbearance: and they are, such as
despise the riches of his goodness, and have hard and impenitent hearts. (3)
The issue and event of this their contempt of Gods patience, and that is, a
treasuring up of wrath unto themselves against the day of wrath. Out of all
which laid together arises thus much, that God by sparing wicked men, who
have hard and impenitent hearts, intends their everlasting good, though they
by the abuse of his patience and refusal to repent, do treasure up unto
themselves wrath and misery everlasting. The like to this is delivered in 2
Pet. 3.9. God is not slack (says Peter) (as some men count slacknesse) but
patient toward us? that is us men. And why patient toward us? because he would
have none to perish. The end therefore of Gods patience, is man's Salvation and
Repentance.

In the last place those other gifts of God, by which men's understandings are
enlightened, and their souls beautified (namely knowledge, faith, repentance,
fortitude, liberality, temperance, humility and chastity, and such like) are
bestowed upon all that have them [among whom are many who prove Reprobates in
the end] that by the exercise of them and continuance in them they might come
to eternal life.

That Reprobates are adorned with many of these graces, appears by sundry
Scriptures, especially Heb. 6.4. where the Apostle says, That it is impossible
for them that have bin enlightened, tasted the heavenly gift, been made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, tasted the good word of God and the powers of the
world to come; if they fall away, should be renewed by repentance. (...) graces
which the Apostle here speaks of, are not ordinary and common, but special
and excellent graces; illumination, faith, a relish of Gods word and a taste of
Heaven; and the persons spoken of, are Apostates, such as are under a
possibility of falling away for ever (for upon a danger not possible cannot be
built a solid exhortation,) and consequently Reprobates: and the thing
intimated, is that upon Apostates and Reprobates are these excellent gifts many
times bestowed The like speech we have, Heb. 10.26. For, if we sin willingly
after we have received the knowledge of the truth; there remains no more
Sacrifice for sin, etc. From whence we may collect, that men who sin
willingly and unpardonably, may receive the knowledge of the truth; yea and be
sanctified by the blood of the Testament and the Spirit of grace, verse. 29.

In the 2 Pet. 2.20. They may (says Peter) escape the filthiness of the
world: that is, be washed from their former sins by repentance. The unclean
spirit may go out of them, Math. 12.43. They may receive the word with joy,
Math. 13.20. And many more excellent graces they may have besides. Now all
these virtues and graces are not therefore given then that they might abuse
them, and so purchase to themselves the greater damnation; or that they might
do good to others with them, but none to themselves: but rather, that (as by
the former gifts of nature, so) by these of grace they may obtain Salvation.
For if God aim at this in those gifts that are farther off, much more in
these, which make those that have them (like the young man in the Gospel) not
far from the kingdom of Heaven. My proof for this, I borrow of our Divines
at the Synod, who in their suffrage have these two positions.

1 Suffrag. Brit page 41. these. 2. and p. 43. these 3 Sunt quaedam effecta
interna ad conversione^ praevia, que virtute verbi, spiritusque in nondum
justificatorum cordibus excicantur; qualia sunt, notitia voluntatis divinae,
sensus peccati, timor paenae, cogitatio de liberatione, spes aliqua veniae.
There are certain internal works preparing a man for justification, which by
the power of the word and Spirit are wrought in the hearts of men not yet
justified; such as are the knowledge of Gods will, a sense of sin, fear of
punishment, etc. that is their first.

2 Their second position is this. Quos Deus (mediante verbo) per Spiritum suum
in hunc modum afficit, eos ad fidem, conversionem. que vere and serio vocat and
invitat.
Those whom God by his word and Spirit affects after this manner, those he
truly and seriously calls and inviteth to conversion.

Out of these two Theses thus much arises, that God works the knowledge of
his will, the sense of sin, fear of hell, hope of pardon, and consequently
many other excellent graces in the hearts of men, that by these, they may be
converted and so eternally saved.

We see by these things, what end God aymeth at in his gifts to men.

But there are some Scriptures, that seem to say the contrary, namely Romans
1.20. where God is said to reveal himself to the Gentiles by the creatures,
[(...)] that they might be without excuse. And Luke 2, 34. Simeon says of
CHRIST, that he is appointed for the falling and rising again of many in
Israel. And 1 Cor. 1.23. I preach Christ (says St. Paul) to the Jews a
stumbling block, 2 Cor. 2.16. We are the favor of death to death, etc. By
these places it seems, that God gives these things to some, to make them
stumble, and that they might be left without excuse. What shall we say
therefore to these places.

Of all these places in general, I may say this; that they are to be
understood of the end, which is many times effected by these gifts of God, and
not of the end which is primarily intended in them; and they show what CHRIST,
the word preached, and the gifts of nature and grace are [occasionally] to some
men, through their voluntary rebellion against God and his ordinances, and not
what they are [intentionally] in Gods first thoughts and resolutions: he
intends them for their good, though many times they receive them to their
hurt. It is with Gods ordinances and gifts (and that very often too,) as it is
sometimes with physic: it is given by the Physician for the patients good, but
many times through the distemper of his body, it does him hurt. And as it is
with the Sun. God intends by the shining of it the enlightening and clearing
of men and other creatures in this inferior world; and yet some men are hurt
by the light of it, others are scorched by the heat of it; [accidentally] by
reason of the climates wherein they live, or the ill affectednesse of their
eyes and bodies.

So the blessings of God, which out of his abundant goodness are bestowed on
men for their eternal good; through their ill frame and temper of heart do
effect their hurt, partly because lighting on naughty hearts, they lose their
edge; (for quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis:) and partly
because of the severity of God, who as he has an antecedent and gracious will
to do men good; so he has a consequent and judiciary will of giving up
obstinate men to their own hearts lusts, and of permitting them to dash against
CHRIST and other means of eternal life, and so to fall into endless misery
and mischief, as we may see, Psalm. 81.11, 12. and Rev. 22.11. which made
Prosper say, Prosp. resp. ad obj. 16. Vincent. Qui voluntatem Dei spreverunt
invitantem, voluntatem Dei sentient vindicantem.
They that have despised Gods inviting will, shall feel his revenging will.

Now if this be the meaning of these Scriptures, then do they not thwart that
which has bin said of Gods gracious intent of promoting the eternal good of
men by his blessings bestowed upon them. For, [argumentum ab eventu ad
intentionem Dei non valet:) because no sinful event is properly under Gods
decree, but his prescience only, or at most under a permissive decree: and many
things happen in the world which are beside the antecedent and principal
purpose of God; not because there is any want of power in God, but because his
will is oftentimes conditional, and therefore not effected; because the
condition is not performed.

But by the opinion of absolute Reprobation, the gifts both of Nature and Grace
have another end: either God does not mean them to those that perish (although
they do enjoy them, because they are mingled in the world with the Elect to
whom only they are directed:) or if he do, he means they shall have them,
and be lifted up by them above the common rank of men, [ut lapsu graviore
ruant,] that their fall may be the greater. And so much is said by the chief
defenders of it. Calv. Instit. l. 3. 6. 24. n. 13. Ecc^ vocem ad eos ditigit ut
magis obsurdes ^t; lucem accendit sed ut redantur caecicres; doctrinam profe^t,
sed qua magi^ obstup^scant; remedium ad^ibe^, sed n^sanentur.
God sends his word to Reprobates (says Calvin) that they might be made more
deaf; he sets up a light before them, to make them the blinder; he gives
them a remedy that they might not be healed. And Bez. praelud in c^ 9. ad Romans
p. 434 Absurdum videri no^ debit, deum reprob^ quibusdam, qui in E^clesia Dei
ve^santur gratiam suam in verbo suo, sive etiam pe^ Sacramenta sua eff^^e, non
eum in fine^ (...) per eam s^ventu^ sed contra, ut m^u ha^ cant excusationi^
quam reliqui, and tan^ ^e gravius pu^ian^ur^
it should not seem absurd unto us (says Beza) that God should offer his grace
in the word and Sacraments to some Reprobates in the Church, not to this end
that they might be saved by it, but that they might be less excusable then
others, and obnoxious to the sorer punishment. Speeches like to these has
Maccovius in his Disputations, Mac. disp 1^ page 11, 12. Pulsa Christus ad
ostiu^ reproborem, quod n^vit nec posse ne^ velle aperire; non u^ intret, sed
p^ u^ expr^ b^t^llis ^potentiam sua (...) ^u^ culpa contractu^; partim ut
conde^n^ in illis augeat, etc.
CHRIST (says he) knocks at the hearts of Reprobates, who he knows neither
can nor will open unto him; not that he may enter in, but partly that he
upbrayd them for their impotency, and partly that he may increase their
damnation. And immediately after to a place in John, c. 15. v. 22. he gives
this exposition. Nimi^um ide^ locutus est it is, ut ex contemp^ odi^ ^usi^
vnigeniti ^vio condemnatio es^e.
Therefore did God speak to them, that by the contempt and hatred of his Son
they might procure the greater damnation. In another place likewise of his
disputations he speaks the same thing four or 5 times over, very positively.
Disp. 2. p. 3. De^ reprobis verbum (...) proponit non ali^ fine, quam ut
inexcusabiles reddantur
God does propound his word to Reprobates for no other end, then that they
might be left without excuse.

p. 1^. Si Evangelu^ consideres ratione intentionis Dei, fine^ ejus esse per
se, and non per accidens, inexcusabilitate^ ratione reproborum.
If the Gospel be considered in respect of Gods intention, the proper end of
it, and not the accidental in reference to Reprobates is their
inexcusablenesse. And very consequently do these writers speak to their maine
conclusion. For, how can God intend the means or gifts of grace for the
Salvation of them, whom he has by his absolute eternal decree rejected
utterly from grace and glory?

More particularly by this Doctrine,

1 CHRIST came not into the world to procure the Salvation of them that perish,
because they were inevitably ordained to perish.

2 The word of grace is not sent to them: or if it be, it is sent, that they
might slight it, or contemn it; and so increase their damnation by contemning
of it, which being so, these inconveniences will arise;

(1) That God is a mere deluder of miserable men, whom he calls to
Salvation in the name of his Son by the preaching of the word. For what else
can he be that fairly pretends their good, whom he fully intends to ruin?

(2) That Ministers are but false witnesses, because in their ministry they
offer Salvation conditionally to many, whose damnation is determined absolutely.

(3) The Ministry of the word cannot leave men without excuse. For Reprobates
may have this just plea; Lord, do thou punish us for not believing in thy
Son, when thou did call us to believe by the preaching of thy word? why?
Thou did decree to leave us (woeful men) in Adams sin, to give us neither
power to believe, nor a CHRIST to believe in. How can thou justly charge us
with sin, or increase our punishment for not believing in him whom thou did
resolve before the world was, that we should never believe in? Certainly that
Neque enim ea fingi potest homines reddere inexcusabiles, per verbum and
Spiritu^ vocatio, quae eo tantum fine ex^betur ut reddat in excusabiles.
Suffrag. Brit. de 3 and 4. art. Antecedancis ad Convers these 3. page 43.
Ministry gives men a fair excuse, that is given for no other end, then to
leave them without excuse.

3 The Sacraments also (by this opinion) do signify nothing, seal up
nothing, confer nothing to such as are not saved; but are mere blanks and
empty ordinances at the best unto them; not through the fault of the men, but
by the primary and absolute will of God.

Lastly, Gods other gifts which he bestows upon men of what nature soever
they be, are to the most that receive them in Gods absolute intention,

(1) Unprofitable, such as shall never do them good in reference to their
eternal condition.

(2) Dangerous and hurtful, given them not out of love but extreme hatred; not
that they might use them well and be blessed in so doing, but that they might
use them ill, and by ill using of them procure to themselves the greater
damnation. God lifts them up (as the Devil did CHRIST) to the pynacle of the
Temple; that so they might fall: and loadeth them with knowledge and other
goodly endowments, that with the weight of them he might sink them down to
Hell.

And so by good consequence, Gods choysest gifts are intended and used as
snares to entrap men's souls. Men that have them, have little cause to be proud
of them, (for they are the more unhappy because they have them:) or small
reason to be thankful for them, or to love the giver of them, but to hate him
rather; because they are but giftlesse gifts, of the same nature with a griping
Usurers bounty, Iaels courtesy, Saul's marrying of Michal to David, or a bayt
for a poor fish which she swalloweth with a hook to boot: Munera magna quidem
misit, sed misit in hamo.
Number piscatorem piscis amare potest?


MY fourth general reason against this absolute Reprobation is, It is a
hinderance to Piety: 4th. Reason. It is prejudicial to Piety.
it is a Doctrine that serves greatly to discourage holiness and encourage
profaneness. It makes Ministers (by its natural importment) negligent in
their Preaching, praying, and other services, which are ordained of God for the
eternal good of their people. It makes people careless in hearing, reading,
praying, instructing their families, examining their consciences, fasting and
mourning for their sins, and all other godly exercises. In a word, it cutteth
a sunder the very sinews of religion, and pulls away the strongest
inducements to a holy life. Therefore it is no true and wholesome Doctrine.

That it does so, it will appear by these reasons that follow.

I. It takes away [Hope] and [Feare:] Hope of attayning any good by
godliness; fear of susteyning any hurt by wickedness: and so it takes away
two principal props of Religion.

This reason may be resolved into these two branches.

1 Hope and fear uphold godliness. Were it not for these, it would come to
ruin: by these, are men strongly led on to virtue, and withheld from vice.
Hope does [excitare] stir men up to begin, and [corroborare] strengthen them
in the doing of any good action begun. By this hope of Heaven did our Savior
stir up himself to endure the Cross, and despise the shame. Heb. 12.2. By
this he heartned his Disciples to do and to suffer for his sake. Mat. 5, 11.
Mat. 10.32. By this have all the godly in all ages encouraged themselves in
well doing, as we may see in general. Phil. 3.20. Col. 1.5. Tit. 2.12, 13: And
in particular, Heb. 11. Abraham left his Country and Kindred at Gods call,
because he looked for a City, whose builder and maker was God. ver. 8, 9, 10.
Moses left all the pleasures and treasures of Egypt, and endured afflictions
with the people of God, because he saw him that was invisible, and had respect
to the recompense of reward, ver. 25.27. The Martyrs endured racks, gibbets,
lions, sword, fire, with a world of other torments, because they looked for a
better resurrection, ver. 35. Paul indeavoureth always to keep a clear
conscience, through the hope which he had of a blessed resurrection, Act.
24.15. All the noble and heroicke acts of active and passive obedience, have
sprung from the hope of eternal glory. Soldiers, Merchants, Husbandmen, all
are whetted on by hope to diligence in their callings, as daily experience
shows us. Hope, says Aquinas [confert ad operationem] conduces to action:
Aquin. 1, 2, q. 40. art. S.
and he proves it: first by Scripture, 1. Cor. 9.10. He which eareth and
thresheth, must ear and thresh in hope. And then he proves it by a twofold
reason. 1 From the nature of Hopes object, which is [benum arduum, and
possibile haberi] some excellent good attainable by industry. [Existimatio
ardui excitat attentionem] hope to get that by pains, which is conceived to be
a thing of worth, stirs up to p^ines taking. 2 From the effect of hope,
which is, [detectat^o] an inward pleasure, which the party that lives under
hope, is affected with by his hope. There is not any man, which has an inward
contentment and satisfaction of heart in the work be has to do, but goes on
merrily. The hope of Heaven therefore is a great encouragement to piety.

The fear of Hell also is a strong curb to hold men in, from impiety, and
therefore (says one) God has planted in men a fear of vengeance, that by it
as the ship by the Rudder, the soul may be presently turned aside from any
rocks gulfes, or quicksands of sin, when it is near them, and may steer its
course another way. For this cause fear of God and abstaining from evil are
often joined together in Scripture, Job. 1.1. Exodus 1.17. And the want of this
fear is made the root of all licentiousness in sinning. Genesis 20.11. Nor does
fear only hinder a bad action, but it promoteth a good. It hinders a bad
action [directly] because it is [fuga mali] a flying from that evil of misery
which is annexed to the evil of sin: and it promoteth a good action
[accidentally,] because men think that they are never so safe from the
mischief which they fear, as when they are exercised in such employments as
tend to the getting of a contrary state. Work out your salvation (says the
Apostle) with fear and trembling; implying that the working out of salvation
goes not on handsomely, except the fear of mi^ling it be an ingredient into
the work.

The second branch of this reason is, That by the absolute decree, Hope and
fear are taken away. For hope is properly exercised about [bonum possibile
haberi] some good thing which may be obtained, not which must be obtained of
necessity: and the object of fear is [malum possibile vitari,] an evil that
may be escaped. For [metus est fuga mali] fear is a fleeing from evil: and
therefore supposes the evil to be avoydable. For no man will flee from an
evil that cannot be prevented, but will yield up himself to it, as Caesar did
his body to the murderers in the Senate house. Now (by this decree) Heaven and
Hell are not objects possible but necessary. Heaven shall unavoydably be
obtained by those that are elected, and Hell must as certainly be endured by
those that are reprobated. For men have no power to alter their eternal
states: all men by this decree are precisely determined ad unum, to one state,
to necessary salvation or necessary damnation without any power or liberty to
choose whether.

And from hence this conclusion is cle^e, that the absolute decree takes away
the chiefest inducements to holiness, and deterrements from wickedness, and
consequently hinders a godly life exceedingly.

The Injuriousnesse of this doctrine to a godly life may further appear by
these considerations that follow, one depending upon another.

1 Absolute and peremptory decrees are inevitable, whatsoever the things be
about which they are exercised: and men's everlasting states if they be
absolutely determined, are altogether undeclinable. [Stat fati lex
indeclinabius] the law of destiny is undeclinable. And the reason is, because
it has an inevitable cause, the Adamantine decrees of Almighty God, which are
indeclinable two ways.

(1) Jrreversible, liable to no repeal (as the Statutes are which are made in
our Parliaments:) but far more unalterable then the Laws of the Medes and
Persians. A^ have spoken, so will J bring it to pass: I have purposed, and I
will do it. Esaias. 46.11. Men do many times bite in their words again, because
they utter things rashly; and do repeal their statutes and ordinances, because
they see some inconvenience in them being made, which they could not foresee:
but God never calls in his decrees, because they are all made in great
Wisdom.

(2) Jrresistible. It lies not in the power of any creature to disanull them.
Who has resisted his will? Romans 9.19. Our God is in Heaven: he does
whatsoever he will. Psalm. 115.3. Whatsoever is once concluded by his absolute
will, is no ways alterable by the will of man. It is more possible for a man
to hinder the rising of the Sun, or to stay his course in the Heaven, to stop
the revolutions of the year, and overturne the whole course of nature, then to
make the least change in any of Gods absolute decrees.

2 Men's actions about ends and things determined by an absolute decree are
vain and fruitless; and the reason is, because they cannot make them
otherwise then they are determined to be. It is absolutely decreed, the Devils
shall be damned. Were it not a fruitless thing in them by prayers, tears, and
endeavors to seek to alter it? It is also simply decreed, that the Soul of
man shall be immortal. Is it not a labor in vain for any man to use means
that his Soul may be annihilated? It is ordained, that the Sun shall rule
the day and the Moon the night; that the one shall finish his proper course in
a year, the other in a Month. Would not a man's endeavor to make an
alteration in these things be unprofitable and ridiculous? Without doubt it
would. So likewise, in vain do men labor to obtain everlasting life, and
avoid eternal death; if there be no power and liberty in their hands to choose
life or death, but must of necessity take that which is assigned them, be it
life or death. For by their labor they effect just nothing: if they be
absolutely appointed to destruction; their hearing, reading, praying, alms
giving, and mourning for their sins cannot possibly procure their Salvation:
damned they must be. And if they be absolutely ordained to Salvation, their
neglect of holy duties, their ignorance, their love of pleasures, and
continuance in a course of ungodliness cannot bring them to damnation, they
must be saved. If so many Souls in a Parish, be in this manner decreed to
Heaven or Hell; the Minister preaches in vain, and the people hear in vain.
For there cannot one Soul be saved by all his or their pains, which is
ordained to Hell; nor one Soul be cast away by his or their negligence, which
is appointed to Heaven.

It is hard for thee (said CHRIST to Saul) to kick against pricks: that is,
Acts, 9 5.
to endeavor by thy Persecutions and slaughters to root out my Church out of
the world; because the preservation of it is absolutely decreed in Heaven:
Teaching us by that speech, that a man's labor in any thing whatsoever, is
never profitable, except it be exercised about an end, attaynable thereby, and
without which the end may be lost.

3 Men are not willing to be employed in fruitless actions, if they know it.

I so run (says S. Paul) not as uncertainly; so fight J, 1. Cor. 9.26.
not as one that beats the air: but I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection; lest that by any means, when J have preached to others, I my self
should be a castaway. The meaning is, I endeavor to keep Gods Commandments,
I fight with the temptations of the Devil, the allurements of the world, and
mine own corruptions; I keep my body low by watchings, and fastings, and other
severe exercises of holy discipline. But cui bono? Do I all this at random?
uncertain whether I shall obtain any good or prevent any mischief hereby?
No, but I do this, as one that is sure, that by so doing, I shall attain
everlasting life, and without so doing, I cannot avoid eternal death:
intimating in these words the common disposition of men, which is, to labor,
where some proportionable good is to be gotten, or evil prevented: otherwise
to spare their heads and hands too.

To be employed in fruitless affairs, is both a folly and a misery.

(1) A folly, for [de necessariis nemo saepiens deliberat.] No man uses
deliberation about things necessary, says the Philosopher. And our Savior
speaking of things above our power; Cur estis soliciti? says he to his
Disciples, Math. 6.27. Luke 12.25, 26. Why take ye thought about such things?
which is as much as if he had said, It is an argument of folly in you to
trouble your self about such things as lie not in your power.

(2) It is a misery in the opinions of all men, as the fable of Sisyphus
implies, who (as the Poets feign) is punished in Hell for his Robberies, with
the rolling of a great stone to the top of a steep hill, where it cannot rest,
but presently tumb down again.

The moral of that Fable is, that it is a torment, and a t^ment fit for Hell;
for a man to be set about any work that fruitless and in vain. Men will
rather be exercised in hi^ and hard employments that produce proportionable end
then pick strawes, play with feathers, or with Domitian spe^ their times in
flapping and killing of flies, or do any oth^ easy work, which ends in
nothing but air and emptin^ except they be fools or Selfe-tormentors. And
therefo^ when Balaam once saw that the Lord had fully determined bless Jsrael,
Numb. 24.1.
and that all his Sorceries could not effect the contrary; he presently gave
over and set no more Enchantment* And reason teaches every man to do the
like. If any m^ were fully possessed with a persuasion that his temporal esta^
were determined in Heaven, and that he should be wort^ just so much, neither
more nor less; he would conclude i^ his thoughts, that his care and pains
could nothing prof^ him, nor his idleness impoverish him: and so would quickly
be persuaded to take his ease. And were it evident tha^ every commonwealth had
[terminum magnitudinis] a condition appointed for it which could not be
altered, and a fatal^ period which could nor be avoided; then would the King
call no Parliaments, use no privy Counselors, make no laws and Ordinances
for the preventing of a Kingdoms ruin, o^ the procuring of its prosperity and
continuance. For it would be to little purpose (as once a famous privy
Counselor told our late Queen Elizabeth) but would follow the Poet^ counsel:
Manilius.
Solvite mortales animos, curisque levate,
Tot que super vacuis animum deplete querelis:
Fata regunt orbem, certa stant omnia lege.


From these three premises laid together it follows directly, that the
doctrine of an absolute decree, which determines men's ends precisely; is no
friend at all to a godly life. For if events absolutely decreed be unavoydable;
if men's actions about unavoydable ends be unprofitable; if in unprofitable
employments men will have no hand willingly: whosoever they be that believe and
consider this, will have nothing to do with the practice of godliness. For
their ends being absolutely pitched and therefore unavoydable; they will
conclude that their labor in religion will be unprofitable, and so will not
labor in it at all.

That which has been said, may be yet confirmed by two Witnesses. The one of
them is Mr. Calvin, who in his Institutions has these words; Instit. l. 3. c.
23.. 14. Si quis ita plebem compellet; Si non creditis, ideo fit, quia jam
divinitus exitio praedestinati estis; is non modo ignaviam fovet, sed etiam
indulget malitiae.
Jf any man (says he) should speak thus to the people; If there be any among
you that believe not, it is because ye are ordained to destruction; this man
would not only cherish slothfulness, but wickedness also. Which is as much
to say (me thinks) as this; If a man should set forth the doctrine of
Reprobation in its colors, and explain it to people in a clear and lively
fashion, he would hereby open a door to liberty and profaneness.

The other witness is a man of another stamp, the miserable Landgrave of
Thuring, of whom it is recorded by Heisterbachius, that being by his friends
admonished of his vicious conversation and dangerous condition, he made them
this answer; Heist. l. 1. de memor. hist. c. 27. pa. 38. Si praedestinatus sum,
nulla peccata proterunt mihi regnum coelorum auferre: Si praescitus, nulla
opera mihi illud valebunt confer.
Jf I be elected, no sins can bereave me of Heaven; if I be reprobated, no
good deeds can help me to Heaven.

I conclude therefore, that by this opinion (which is taught for one of Gods
principal truths;) Religion either is or may be made a very great looser,
which is my fourth general Reason against it.

But there are three things which are usually answered to vindicate this
opinion from this crimination.

First, that many of them which believe and defend this doctrine, are holy and
good men: and therefore of it self it opens no way for liberty of life, but
through the wickedness of men, who use to pervert the sweetest and surest
truths of Scripture to their own damnation. The like defense to this, did the
Epicures of old make in favor of their sensual and Swinish doctrine; which
was, that happiness consisted in pleasure. They said that many of their Sect
were honest men, and so much Tully grants to be true, but with exception
still against their doctrine. Cic. l. 2. de finibus bon. and mal page 117. Ac
mihi quidem videtur quod ipse vir bonus fuit: and multi Epicurei fuerunt, and
hodie sunt, and in amicitiis fideles, and in omni vita constantes and graves;
nec voluptate, sed officio consilia moderantes.
I take (says he) Epicurus himself to be an honest man, yea and many Epicures
have been and are faithful in friendship, square and constant men in all
conditions of life, ordering themselves and their lives, not by pleasure by
duty. But, (says he) Hoc videtur ma^s honestatis, minor voluptatis.
this proceeded not from the principles of their opinion, but from their own
virtuous inclination: and the force of honesty by their so doing, appeared to
be more prevailing in them, then the force of pleasure, which they pleaded for.
A little after he has other words to the same purpose; Atque ut caeteri
existimantur dicere mel^us, quam facere; sic hi mihi videntur melius facere
quam dicere.
As other men's doctrines are esteemed to be better then their deeds; so these
men's deeds seem to me to be better then their doctrines.

Like to this answer of Tully to the defenders of Epicurisme, will I shape mine.

It cannot (I confess) be denied, that many of this opinion are godly men; but
it is no thanks to their opinion, that they are so; (the true and natural
genius of which is to beget sloth, to drown men in security, and to
countenance carnal liberty:) but to something else, either to Gods providence,
(who will not suffer this doctrine for his own glories sake and the good of
men, to have any great stroke in their lives;) or to men's incogitancy, who
think not of reducing it [ad praxim] to practice, and drawing conclusions out
of it, but rest in the naked speculation of it, as they do of many others; or
lastly, to some good practical conclusions, which they meet with in the word
of God, and apply to their lives (as they do not the former deductions;) such
as these are for example; Be ye holy as I am holy. Without Holiness no man
shall see God. Jf ye consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the
land. Godliness has the promises of this life and of the life to come, etc.
And hence we may learn to measure this opinion, not by the lives of some few
of the men that hold it, but by the sequels, which the logic even of simple
men, if they should apply their brains to consider it, would fetch out of it.
No man that has thoroughly sucked it in, and understands the force of it, but
will either quite relinquish it, or live according to the natural importment
of it, that is, licentiously.

Secondly, it is said, that albeit this doctrine teach, That men are absolutely
elected, or absolutely reprobated: yet,

(1) It tells no man who in particular is elected, who rejected.

(2) It teaches that men must get the knowledge of their Election by good
works, and so by consequent, does rather encourage, then stifle holy and honest
endeavors:

For answer to the first of these; The ignorance of a man's particular state (in
my judgment) does not alter the case a ^ot. For he that believes in general,
that many and they the greatest company without comparison, are inevitably
ordained to destruction, and a few others to salvation; is able out of these
two general propositions, to make these particular conclusions, and to reason
thus with himself: Either I am absolutely chosen to grace and glory, or
absolutely cast off from both. If I be chosen, I must of necessity believe and
be saved; if I be cast off, I must as necessarily not believe, and be damned.

What need I therefore take thought either way about means or end? My end is
pitched in heaven and the means too; my final perseverance in Faith and my
Salvation, or my continuance in unbelief and my damnation. If I lie under this
necessity of believing and being saved, or of dying in unbelief and being
damned; in vain do I trouble my self about means or end, I have my
Supersedeas, I may take mine case and so I will: enough it is for me to sit
down and wait what God will do unto me. Thus (it is likely) did Tiberius
reason with himself. For Suetonius reports of him, that he was Suet. de vit.
Tib. c. 69. p. 180. Circa Deos and religiones negligentior, quippe addictus
Mathematicae, persuasionisque plenus omnia fato agi.
The more negiigent in religion, because he was fully persuaded, that all
things came to pass by destiny. And in this manner (it is to be feared) do
too many reason in their hearts, and by this very ground (though they will not
perhaps acknowledge it) encourage themselves in profaneness. Though men cannot
hide their wickedness, yet they will hide their grounds, which flesh them in it,
either through modesty, or to avoid some further ignominy: The fool has said
in his heart, there is no God. Psalm. 14.

To the 2d. I answer, that men ordinarily will not think the getting of the
knowledge of their election (if that be all) worth all those painful duties of
religion, that are to be performed, and all those sweet and pleasing sins
which are to be relinquished, they will rest contented without it for a while,
rather then pay so dearly for it: and the rather, because

1 When they have gotten it, it is in most but a weak and conjecturall
knowledge, obscured with many clouds and uncertainties.

2 It must be mainteyned with a great deal of pains and care, or else it will
be lost again. To the retaining of it is required a continual endeavor to
keep a clear conscience, which is irkesom and tedious. Men therefore had need
of a stronger motive to obedience then this is, or else they will do nothing.

Thirdly, they that defend and teach this absolute reprobatition (say they) do
earnestly exhort men to good works, and deny that any can be saved, except they
live honestly.

So much was also said in the behalf of Epicurus, viz. That he denied that any
man that lived not honestly, could live pleasantly. But Tully answers
roundly: Cic. offic. l. 3. prope finem. Quasi ego id curem quid ille ai at aut
neget? illud quaero, quid ei qui^n voluptate summum bonum putat, consentantum
sit dicere.
As if I cared what he affirms or denies: this I ask, what is meet for him
to say who places happiness in pleasure. And so it mattereth not what these
men teach, but what they should teach, if they will speak consequently to their
own conclusions.

5th Reason. It is an enemy to true Comfort.
I Come now to my last reason against it, drawn from the uncomfortablenesse of
it: it is a doctrine full of desperation, both to them which stand, and to
those that are fallen, to men out of temptation, and to men in temptation, It
leads into Temptation. leaves in Temptation.


And therefore can be no Doctrine of Gods word, for that is (...), good news
to men, a storehouse of sweet consolations for us in our [turbidu and lucidis
intervallis,] in our best and worse conditions and changes. Romans 15.4.
These things are written (says the Apostle) that by patience and comfort of
the Scriptures we might have hope: implying that therefore was the word
written, and left to the Church, that by the comforts comprised in it, those
poor souls that look toward Heaven, might never want in any changes or
chances of this mortal life, a sweet gale of hope to refresh them, and to
carry-on their Ship full merrily toward the Haven.

I. First, this Doctrine leads men into Temptation, and into such a one too,
as is as sharp and dangerous as any the Tempter has. The Devil can easily
persuade a man that makes absolute reprobation a part of his creed, that he is
one of those absolute Reprobates: because there are far more absolute
Reprobates (even a hundred for one,) then absolute chosen ones: and a man has
a great deal more reason to think that he is one of the most, then one of the
fewest, one of the huge multitude of inevitable castawayes, then one of that
little flock, for whom God has precisely prepared a kingdom. Such a man is not
only capable of, but framed and fashioned by his opinion for this suggestion.
Which is a very sore one, if we may believe Calvin, Bucer and Zanchius. Calvin
tells us, Calv. Iustit. l. 3. c 24. 4. Quod nulla tentatione vel gravius, vel
periculosius fideles percellit Satan.
that the Devil cannot assault a believer with a temptation more dangerous.

And a little after he says, that it is so much thedeadlyer, by how much
commoner it is then any other.

Rarissimus est cujus non interdum animus hac cogitatione feriatur, unde tibi
salus, nisi ex Dei electione? Electionis autem quae tibi revelatio? quae si
apud quempiam semel invaluit, aut diris tormentis miserum perpetuo excruciat,
aut reddit penitus attonitum.
So ordinary is this temptation, that he which is at all times free from it, is
a rare man (we are to conceive that he speaks of those who hold absolute
Reprobation:) and so dangerous it is that if it get strength, he which is under
it, is either miserably tormented, or mightily astonished. And a little after
he says again; Ergo si naufragium timemus, solicit cavendum ab hoc scopulo
in quem nunquam sine exitio impingitur.
He that will not wrack his soul, must avoid this rock. Bucer also has a
passage like to this. Bucer in 8. ad Romans q. de praed. Vt caput omnis noxiae
tentationis, repellenda est haec quaestio, Sumusue praedestinati. Nam qui de
hoc dubitat, nec vocatum se nec justificatum esse credere poterit, hoc est,
nequit esse Christianus.
This doubt whether we be predestinate or no; must be repelled as the head of
every pernicious temptation: for he that doubts of this, cannot believe that
he is called or justified: that is, he cannot be a Christian. Presumendum
igitur ut principium fidei, nos omnes esse adeo prescitos.
Every man therefore must presume upon it as a principle of his faith, that he
is elected. Zanch. l. 5. de not. Dei q. de praed.
This very speech of Bucers, Zanchy makes use of to the same purpose.

We see then by the testimonies of these worthy men, that this temptation is
very dangerous and ordinary too, to such as think there be absolute Reprobates.

The truth of both will further appear by the example of of Georg. major in 2
ad Tim. 2. fol. 1109^
Petrus Jlosuanus, a Schoolmaster in Hungary, who going to hang himself,
signified in a writing which he left in his Study for the satisfaction of his
friends and countrymen, the true cause of that his unnatural fact. In that
writing he delivered these three things.

(1) That he was of Calvin's and St. Austins opinion, that men are not dealt
withal [secundum bona aut mala opera] according to their works good or evil;
but that there are [occultiores causae] more hidden causes of men's eternal
conditions.

(2) That he was one of that woeful Company of absolute Reprobates; [Vas
formatum in ignominiam] a vessel prepared to dishonor: and that therefore
(though his life had been none of the worst) he could not possibly be saved.

(3) That being unable to bear those dreadful apprehensions of wrath, with
which he was affrighted, he hanged himself. For these are some of his last
words there recorded: Discedo igitur ad lacus infernales aeternum dedecus
patriae meae: Deo vos co^mendo, cujus misericordia mihi negata est:
I go to those infernal lakes, an eternal reproach to my Country. I commend
you to God, whose mercy is denied to me.

Out of this example, two things we may safely collect.

1 That men who think there are many whom God has utterly rejected out of his
only will and pleasure, may be easily brought to think by Satan's suggestion
that they are of that company.

2 That this Temptation is very dangerous.

I conclude therefore this first part of my last reason, which is; That
absolute Reprobation leads men into temptation.

II. It leaves men in Temptation: and this it does two ways; by, 1 Making the
tempted incapable of true comfort. 2 Making Ministers unable to give true
comfort.


1 It makes the Tempted incapable of true comfort: like a Gorgons head, it
does so trouble their fancies and amaze them, especially in their paroxysmes
and fits, that the strongest arguments of comfort, applied with as much art and
cunning as may be, will not fasten upon them. With David they say in their
fear, that all men are liars, namely all such as come to comfort them in their
temptation. The reason is, because it is an opinion incompatible with any word
of comfort, that can be ministered to the distressed Soul in this temptation.
Gods love to mankind, CHRIST'S death for all men, the calling of poor sinners
without exception, to repentance and salvation, with all other grounds of
consolation; the tempted will easily elude with the grounds of his opinion.

Which that we may the better see, let us imagine that we hear a Minister and
a Tempted Soul, reasoning in this or the like manner.

Tempted. WOE is me; I am a Castaway: I am absolutely rejected from Grace and
Glory.

Minister. Discourage not thy self thou poor afflicted soul: God has not
cast thee off. For he hates nothing that he has made, but bears a love to
all men, and to thee among the rest.

Tempt. God hates no man as he is his Creature, but he hates a great many as
they are sinners in Adam. And God has a twofold love (as I have learned) a
general love, which puts forth it self in outward and temporal blessings
only, and with this he loves all men: and a special love, by which he
provideth everlasting life for men; and with this he loves only a very few,
which out of his alone will and pleasure he singled from the rest. Under this
general love am I, but not under the special.

Min. Nay but God so loves all men, as that he desires their eternal good:
for the Apostle says, He would have all to be saved, and he would have no man
to perish, nor thee in particular.

Tempt. (All) is taken two ways: for all sorts and conditions of men, high and
low, rich and poor, bound and free, etc. and for all particular men in these
several sorts and ranks. God would have all men to be saved in the first
sense: that is, all sorts; but he would not have all to be saved in the second
sense, that is, all particular men of those sorts: some of my country, my
calling, my condition of life, but not all and every one, nor me in particular.
Or if it be true, that God would have all particular men to be saved; yet he
wills it only with a revealed will, not with a secret: for with that he will
have millions to be damned. Under this revealed will am I, not under the secret.

Min. Nay but CHRIST came into the world to seek and to save what was lost, and
is a propitiation not for our sins only, viz. the sins of a few particular
men, or the sins of all sorts of men, but for the [whole] world. Therefore he
came to save thee, and to be a propitiation for thy sins: for thou art one of
the whole world.

Tempt. The [world] as I have heard, is taken two ways in Scripture: largely
for all mankind, and strictly in a restrained signification, for the elect, or
for believers. In this latter sense, CHRIST dyed for the world, namely, for the
world of the Elect, for the world of Believers. Or if it be true, that he dyed
for all mankind, yet he dyed for them but after a sort: he dyed for them all
[dignitate pretii] he did enough to have redeemed all, if God would have had it
so; but he did not dye for all [voluntate propositi.] God never intended that
he should shed his blood for all and every man, but for a few selected ones
only, with whom it is my lot to be numbered.

Min. God has founded an universal Covenant of peace with men upon the
Mediators blood: and therefore he intended it should be shed for all men
universally. He has made a promise of salvation to every one that will
believe, and excludes none, that do not exclude themselves.

Tempt. God purposed that his Son should dye for all men, and that in his
name should be preached and offered remission of sins to every one; but yet
upon condition they will repent, believe, and do that which he means the
greatest part of men shall never do, nor me among the rest.

Min. God has a true meaning that all men who are called, should repent and
believe; that so they might be saved; as he would have all to be saved, so he
would have them come to the knowledge of the truth, and as he would have no man
to perish, so he would have all men to repent; and therefore he calls them in
the preaching of the word to the one, as well as to the other.

Tempt. God has a double call; an outward by the preaching of the word in men's
ears; an inward by the irresistible work of the Spirit in their hearts.

The outward call is a part of Gods outward will: with that he calls every
man to believe: the inward and effectual call is a part of his secret will;
and with that he calls not every man to believe, but a very few only, whom
he has inevitably ordained to eternal life. And therefore by the outward
call, which I enjoy among many others, I cannot be assured of Gods good will
and meaning, that I should believe, repent and be saved.

By this we may see, that no sound comfort can be fastened upon a poor soul
rooted in this opinion, when he lies under this horrible Temptation.

The example of Francis Spiera an Italian Lawyer, will give some further light
and proof to this. This Spiera about the year 1548. against his knowledge and
conscience, did openly abjure his Religion and subscribe to Popery, that thereby
he might preserve his life, and goods, and liberty. Not long after he fell into
a deep distress of conscience, out of which he could never wrestle, but ended
his woeful days in despair.

To comfort him came many Divines of worth and note, but against all the
comforts which they applied to him, he opposed two things especially.

(1) The greatness of his sin: it was a sin (said he) of a deep dye,
committed with many urging and aggravating circumstances: and therefore could
not be forgiven. This argument they quickly took from him, and convinced him by
the example of Peter, that there was nothing in his sin, that could make it
irremissible. Peter that committed the same sin, and with some more odious
circumstances, repented and was pardoned, and so (no doubt) might he.

(2) He apposed his absolute Reprobation, and with that he put off all their
comforts. Peter (says he) repented indeed and was pardoned, because he was
elected: as for me I was utterly rejected before I was borne; and therefore I
cannot possibly repent or be saved. If any man be elected, he shall be saved,
though he have committed sins, for number many, and heinous in degree: but if
he be [ex repudiatis] one of the Cast-awayes, [necessario condemnabitur] he
shall be inevitably condemned, though his sins be small and few. Nihil
interest an multa, an pauca, an magna, an parva sint, quando nec Dei
misericordia, nec. Christi sanguis, quicquam ad eos pertinet
A Reprobate must be damned, be his sins many or few, great or little,
because Gods mercy and CHRIST'S merits belong not to him.

In this Story (recorded by Coelius Secundus and Calvin with some others who
lived at that time and wrote of it to their friends;) as in a glass we may see
the disconsolate condition of a poor Soul, that is strongly conceited that
the greatest part of the world are absolute Reprobates, and that he is one of
them: he sticks so fast in the mire and clay, that he can very hardly be
drawn out.

2 It makes Ministers unable to afford true comfort to the Tempted; and this
it does, because it -- 1 Takes from them all solid grounds of comfort. 2
Leaves them only weak and insufficient grounds.


1 It bereaveth them of all solid arguments of comfort, which are these; The
universality of Gods love, of CHRIST'S death, and of the new Covenant of grace.
That Minister which does explain and apply these three things soundly and
wisely to him which is tempted in this kind, does that which is abundantly
enough for the releeving and releasing of him from this Temptation. And he that
does not apply these, leaves him as he found him, in the midst of the
Temptation still; whatsoever may be said to the contrary in the heat of
Disputation. Mel^nct. loc. com. p. 52 c. 1 Pred Etli male^ disputantur dum^us
^men necesse est in ve^o agone ad hanc arcem confugere, videlicet, quo i de
voluntate dei judica^dum sit ex presto verbo, and quod promissio sit
universalis, and quod sit mandatum Dei aeternum and immutabile, audire filiu^
and assentiri promissioni.
. Though (says Melancthon) there be many things disputed in this point more
harshly; yet when all is done, the universal promise of Grace and Salvation is
a Christians only Bulwark in this temptation and combat. Obtemperemus igitur
ne vagentur animi quaerentes electionem extra verbu^, and relicto Christo and
omisso mandato de amplectenda promissione; sed teneamus ce^a and indubitata
fide promitione^ gratiae non inanem esse fabulam; sed Deum vere patefecisse
voluntate^ suam in promissione, and vaere praestare quod promisit.
Let us not therefore (says he) leave CHRIST and seek for an Election out of
the word: but let us judge of Gods will of saving men by the promise and
commandment, which are both universal. And in another place of the same Book
he has these words. P. 230. de prom. Evang. Sicut est necesse scire Evangeliu^
esse promissione gratuitam; ita necesse est scire Evangelium promissionem
universale esse. Hanc universale^ tenere necesse est adversus periculosas
imaginationes deprae destinatione, ne disputemus hanc promissionem ad paucos
quosdam alios pertinere, non pertinere ad nos. Non enim dubi^m est, qum omnium
animos haec cogitatio exerceat.
As it is needful to know that the promise of Salvation is free: so it is
needful to know that it is universal, against some dangerous conceits of
Predestination.

By these speeches we see clearly what this learned man thought to be the true
balm of Gilead, whereby a wounded soul should be cured; viz. The universality
of the promise, and of Gods love and of CHRIST'S death; for they all hang
together, and cannot be dis-joyned.

The reason why those grounds are able to help a man in such a case, is
twofold.

1 Because they are directly contradictory to the temptation: a will to save
all, a giving of CHRIST to death for all, a serious offer of grace to all,
cannot possibly stand with an absolute antecedent will and intent of casting
away the greatest part of mankind, or to say the truth, of any one man in the
world. Upon this follows the second reason.

2 Because they serve to convince the Tempted, that he cannot be in that
condition, in which he supposes himself to be. For if two contradictories
cannot be true, he that evinceth the truth of the one, convinces the
understanding of the untruth of the other: and he that makes it appear that
this contradictory, [God would have all to be saved, redeemed and called, to
repent and beleeve] is true; puts it out of all doubt to the understanding,
that the other contradictory [God will have most men to be absolutely and
inevitably damned] must needs be false, and so rayseth up that poor soul
which was pressed down with an erroneous conceit and fear, that it was true.
In this manner did Iunius, (though not in the same temptation) releeve a woman
perplexed exceedingly with a strong persuasion, that she and all her children
should be damned; because she was busied about her children at a certain time
when she should have been at Mass. Junius makes short work with her, tells
her, that her employment about her children was a duty pleasing to God, but the
Mass was a mere will worship: and so (delivering her of her error upon which
the temptation was built,) gives her present ease and comfort. In like manner
tell a man who fears himself to be an absolute Reprobate, that there are no
such absolute Reprobates, and that his fear is but a mere fancy and his doubt
a dream; convince him once by contradictory grounds, that there is no man in
the world in that state in which he thinks himself to be, and you drive out
one nail by another, and expel the temptation. These are the sword of
Alexander, which will cut asunder this Gordion knot of absolute Reprobation;
and these are the true Nepenthes of a sick and sorrowful soul.

But now these true grounds of hope and comfort no Minister can make use of,
that holds absolute Reprobation: nor if he do usurp them, can he possibly
mainteyne them against the replies of the tempted, unless he relinquish his
opinion; because (as I have said) there is a plain contradiction between them,
and no man is able to maintain two propositions, which speak contrary things,
to be both true, any more then he can make it good, that the same thing may
have a being, and no being at the same time. For example, A minister comes to
comfort a man that thinks himself to be an absolute Reprobate, and how does
he set about it? He tells him, that God would have all to be saved, that
CHRIST dyed for all, etc.

But what right has he to these grounds of comfort seeing he holds the
contrary conclusions, viz. that God will have a great many to be damned, and to
have no part in CHRIST? Well: he usurpeth them notwithstanding; but is he able
to maintain them against the answers of the tempted? or can he make a good
reply. No certainly, for thus answers the tempted, God would have all to be
saved with a revealed, but not with a secret will: and CHRIST dyed for all men
sufficiently, but not intentionally, or if God did intend that he should dye
for all, yet he intended it upon a condition, which he purposed the most should
never perform.

What can the Minister reply to this? If he will make a direct reply, which
shall take away the answer, he must deny that God has two wills, the one
opposite to the other, a secret will that many shall unavoydably be damned, and
a revealed will that all men may be possibly saved. And he must also deny, that
God had an intent, that CHRIST should not dye for a great many, or that he
intended be should dye for all upon condition, they would believe or repent,
and yet purpose that the most should never believe or repent. But can he deny
these things? he cannot, except he deny his own conclusion, which is, that
there are many thousands eternally and unavoydably rejected in Gods absolute
purpose from grace and glory. For that conclusion is all one with the answers
of the Tempted, and contradictory to those arguments of comfort, which he is
glad to make use of.

Absolute Reprobation therefore bereaveth that Minister who believes it, of
all solid grounds of consolation, and so makes him unable to recover a poor
Soul wounded with this temptation.

Secondly, it leaves a Minister some weak grounds only and insufficient to
quiet the tempted: and therefore it makes him unable to comfort him.

The grounds which it leaves him, are insufficient, because they cannot
convince, and make it evident to the understanding of the Tempted, that he is
not that which he fears: that is, a Reprobate. Out of temptation
probabilities will uphold a man's hopes (as they did Manoahs wives. Judge.
13.22.23. Jf the Lord would kill us, he would not have received a burnt
offering at our hands, nor showed us all these things;) because men are not so
mistrustfull then: but in temptation men are usually very suspicious and
incredulous, like Jacob who would not be persuaded that Joseph was alive, and a
great man in Egypt; till he saw the Chariote that were sent to fetch him
thither. Genesis 45.25. And like Thomas, who would not believe that CHRIST was
risen, till he saw the print of the nails and spear. Joh. ^0.25. They will
not believe any thing that is spoken for their comfort, till it be made so
apparent, that they have nothing to say to the contrary.

My self have known some, who in their temptations have often put their
comforters to their proofs, to their protestations, nay to their oaths too,
before they would believe their words of comfort. And in this temptation (we
speak of) men are strongly possessed with the fear of eternal rejection from
the face of God, that they will not easily without manifest conviction believe
the contrary.

But grounds convincing and satisfying, a Minister that maintains absolute
Reprobation, has not in store: nothing can he say, that is able to make it
appear infallibly and undeniably to the understanding of the Tempted, that he
is no absolute Reprobate. All that he can say is, Be of good comfort: you are a
Believer, a truly repenting sinner: therefore no Reprobate. For faith and
repentance are infallible fruits of Election, and arguments of a state contrary
to what you fear. But this the Tempted will deny: he will say, that he is no
believer, etc. and how will the Minister convince him that he is? He must prove
to him by the outward acts of Faith and Repentance, (for they only are
apparent to him;) that he does repent and believe.

But this proof is not demonstrative, nor does convince, because [opera
virtutum simulari possunt] the external acts of Faith, Repentance, or any
other grace may be counterfeited. The Devil may seem to be an Angel of light,
Wolves may go in Sheep clothing, Judas may make the world believe by his
preaching and following of CHRIST, that he is a true Apostle; and Simon Magus
though he remain in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, may be
thought by his receiving of baptism, to be a true believer: and so may any
hypocrite by some exterior acts of Faith and Repentance delude the best
discerner of spirits among men, and gain the opinion and esteem of a true
penitent and believer. Actions externally good, or good in appearance, may be
evil indeed for want of a good rule, manner, end, or some other good
circumstances, with which an action that is good must be clothed. For [bonum
non oritur nisi ex integris:] and so by good consequence cannot certainly prove
the man who does them to be a good man, or to have the grace of Faith,
Repentance, or any other truly planted in his heart.

Which being so, I say, that a Minister cannot by the outward acts and fruits
of faith, and Repentance which he sees come from him, make it evident to the
Tempted (to the silencing of all replies;) that he is without doubt a true
believer and repenting sinner and consequently no Reprobate. For still the
Tempted may say, you may be deceived in me: for you cannot see any thing more
in me, then has been seen in many a Reprobate. And if this be all you can
say, to prove me to be none; I am not satisfied, I may be a Reprobate: nay I am
a Reprobate, and you are but a miserable comforter, a Physician of no value.

This that I say, Piscator does confess ingenuously in Disput. de Praed.
contra Schafmanu: these. 85. where he says,

1 That no comfort can be possibly instilled into the souls of Reprobates
afflicted with this horrible temptation: from whence it follows, that the
far greatest part of men, even an hundred for one must bear their burden,
(if they fall into this distemper and trouble,) as well as they can: the
Gospel is not able to afford them any solid comfort.

2 That the Elect being in this condition, may indeed be comforted, but it must
be by their sense of sin and their desire to be freed of it by CHRIST: which
proofs are but only probable to the best, and to a man in temptation no proofs
at all: and consequently either no comforts or very small ones.

In the end of the same Thesis also, where he says, that a man should reason
thus with himself; Grace is offered to some with a mind of communicating it
unto them: therefore it may be that I am one of those to whom it is so offered.
In this place (I say) he implies plainly, that the Doctrine of absolute
Reprobation, which teaches the communication of grace to a very few only,
affords but a [fieri potest] a peradventure I am Elected (and that a very
poor one too) for a poor soul to comfort himself withal.

FINIS.

