VIATICVM ANIMAE OR, Wholesome repast for the Soul in her Pilgrimage toward
Jerusalem which is above.

Prepared, and made ready, by the diligent search, and Pains of John Hodges,
Priest, M. of Arts and Vicar of Shakerstone in Leichestershire.

NON est in carendo difficultas nisi quum fuerit in habendo capiditas.

Aug. lib. Confess. If God will keep me in this journey which I go, and will
give me Bread to eat, and Clothes to put on; then shall the Lord be my God

Gen 28.20.21. Quisquis exit in Lucem, iussus est Lacte, et Panno esse
contentus.

Senec. Epist. 20. LONDON. Printed by J. N. for G.W. and are to be sold at the
Sign of the Spurr, under S. Mildreds Church in the Poultrey. 1638.

To the Worshipful JOHN HARBORNE of Tackley, in the County of Oxford Esquier.
Sir.
I NEVER wished my self great or rich, or if I did for a time entertain such
a thought, it was only then when I was musing how to be thankful. Ingratitude
I hate, and want ability for ample, and due performances; wherefore I held it
better to present a little of whatsoever came to hand, then (like churlish
Nabal) to give nothing at all.

Here is no banquet royal abundance of dainty dishes as though you were at
home, Dapes dapsies.
Pura and sine animalibus esca.
but a dish of Herbs (fit for the use of man) right Pilgrims fare a bit and
away: I dare not brag it savory for your taste, (as fit for your graver
judgment) this blessing therefore which your Servant has brought unto you let
it be given I pray you unto the young ones, 1 Samuel 15.27
that walk at your feet.

I was once minded (like the cruel pare^t) to have slain the issue of my brain
from the birth: (Medea^)
or (like an Idolatrous Israelite) have made it pass through the fire, till
calling to mind that saying of Pliny, The dregs cannot lie so thick in it,
but a man. may therout draw some clear liquor.
There is no book so bad, but may affourd some good; I resolved to preserve
that which was appointed to dye, and with it in the throng to press into the
World.

What entertainment it is like to find with most, I have a shrewd aim, and
therefore send it to your protection for shelter against a storm.

For my proceeding by way of application, that which is to others an
exhortation, is to you an pprobation, Qui moan ut facias quo diam facis ipse,
monendo
and aco^mendatio^; for Ad been faciendum incitator est benefacientis
encomiastes, Laudat et hortatu comprobat acta suo.
persuasion to do well is the weldoers encomium. More I would make mention of,
were it but to commend your example to posterity, but I know your modesty will
rather dislike, then allow of such praise And therefore I leave your own works
to praise you in the Gates, wishing all the blessings from above and beneath to
light upon your head, Psalm. 133. and 128.
yea like Aarons precious ointment let them run down to the beard, and
border of your garments; to the fruitful vine on the side of your house, and
the Olive Plants round about your Table.

This has bin, and shall be the prayer of him, who desires nothing more in this
life, the^ that he may be thought worthy to be your servant in Christ Jesus.

JOHN HODGES.
From my poor Vicarage of Shackerstone in Leicestershire November 7. 1637
A
PROVERBS 16.31. AGE is a Crown of Glory when it is found in the way of
Righteousness.


FIrst MAN is a venerable Creature, but then especially when antiquity
prescribes: what a shame then is it, when those Silver locks which God has
appointed to be the Emblemes of honor, are by his best Creatures made the
Pageants of contempt? We worthily honor old men for their temperance,
moderation, experience, etc. But when their tottering Tabernacles are stuffed
with drunkenness, lust, and boyish thoughts how shall we honor them then? It
is mere mockery for a boyish mind to be suited in the colors of Age; Chrysostom.
in Heb. Hom 7.
and whilst old men do (...) youth it; they become children of years, and
GOD makes their old Age most despised. Vere senectus illa vene^abilis, etc.


Would thou then have others honor thy graie hairs? do thou first honor
them by a godly life: Ambro: Epist. 60.
for those years only are truly honorable which good works, and not hoarie
hairs only do beautify and adorn. Desire not therefore so much to live
long, as to live well: wast not the time, which of it self hastes too fast,
least thou be constrained to confess, that though thou have reckoned many
years, yet thou have lived but a short time, which can no ways comfort a
wicked life, but this Testimony of a well spent life, is a Crown of dignity
and a most comfortable Possession.

ALL that thine hand shall find to do, do it with all thy power: for there
is neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave
whither thou go Eccles 9.10.

2 THIS life is a life for mercy, neither is there any crying, or calling for
mercy after it: and therefore our Savior Christ says, the night comes (to
wit of death) in which no man can work. John. 9 4.
John 9.4. Wherefore that thou may find the gate of Mercy open unto thee at
thy departure hence, show mercy and do good presently, and here; Eccles 11.3.
for as the Tree falls so it lies, and thou can neither imagine, nor do
any thing for thy salvation, and peace in the pit of darkness, and of death.

ASK not of the Lord pre-eminence, neither of the King the seat of honor.
Ecclus. 7.4.

3 EVERY estate is blessed to a good man, who does not so much consider what or
how much he enjoys, as whence, and from whom he receives it: whether he
abound, or want, he knows it is from the Lord, 1. Sam. 2.7. 1 Samuel 2 7
And he has learnt therewith to be content. But when we once begin to give
ambition feet to trample on the good we have, we are easily carried to a
seat as tickle and slipery as the seat of Eli. 1. Sam. 14.18. 1 Samuel 14 18.
Therefore if the Lord has granted thee the request of Agur, Pro. 30.8. Pro.
30, 8.
And settled thee in such an estate, as he knows best for thee, bless GOD for
the same, and seek not to climb those Pinnacles, of the Court where thou
can neither rest without fear, nor come down, without falling.

B.
PROVERBS 15.17. BETTER is a dinner of green Herbs where love is, then a
stalled Ox and hatred therewith.


1. THE Souls sweetest Music is that blessed close, where two hearts by an
unanimous consent meet in one body; whilst Man and Wife do thus (like clean
beasts) join in an equal yoke, they are (like the Philistims Kine to
Bethshemesh) in one path, and turn neither to the right hand, nor to the left,
till they arrive at Heaven. But when (like unclean beasts) they go one before
the other, though it breeds a discord, yet there is no good Music, Aarons
Bells do not then ring but jangle: and better is it to feed in the
wilderness upon green Herbs; then to feast it with contentious spirits in a
statly Palace.

Be not therefore like unto unclean but fashion thy self to the similitude of
clean beasts, strive not for priority, but join in that equal yoke of love,
which is the Music of a pleasant banquet, an Emerauld well trimmed with Gold.
Ecclus 32.6. Ecclus. 32 6.


BOAST not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring
forth. PRO. 27.1.

2 WE easily put off the work of our Repentance, and though God call us to it
every day, yet we say to him as the unmercifull Man to his neighbor, Come
again to morrow. Pro. 3.28.
Pro. 3.28. To morrow say we, we will repent, when GOD knows whether we shall
live till then: or if we do live til to morrow, yet we know not what the Day
may bring with it.

Walk therefore whilst thou have the light, and whilst thou may be saved
strive to salvation by the light of the Gospel, least when it is removed, the
darkness of error and despair does come, and then in the dark thou go thou
know not whether.

BIND not two sins together, for in one sin shall thou not be unpunished.
Ecclus 7.8.

3 ONE scarre may stain the beauty of the fairest face, one disease may be as
dangerous and deady as many; and one sin which a Man continues in without
Repentance, may be as damnable, as if there were a Legion.

Have thou therefore sinned? do so no more, but pray for thy foresinnes that
they may be forgiven thee. Ecclus. 21.
Ecclus 21.1. Say not thou of any sin, as Lot of Zoar, is it not a little
one? 1. Genesis 19.20
Genesis 19.20. I shall receive no damage by it: alas, alas, a little sin
embraced, a greater will solicit for entertainment, and no denial will
serve, till it find acceptance: cast a stone into the water, and presently a
circle arises, after that another, and another, greater, and greater, till at
length the whole water be full of circles: so admit of one sin, perhaps (in
thine account) a small one, and a greater will follow, till at length the whole
Man be full of sin.

C
ECCLES 11.1. CAST thy bread upon the waters, for after many days thou shall
find it.


1. THE poor Man's hand is Christ's treasury, Petr. Rave ^in quodam sermon.
and whatsoever is put into it that Christ receives, and keeps it safe for
thee against the evil day, that when need is it may comfort and refresh thy
loins.

Give therefore, but desire not witness to the bargain; trust God for
recompense upon his word, Sound not a trumpet when thou give thine alms.
Mat. 6.2. Mat. 6.2.
Least thou appear rather like an enemy then a charitable giver. Give earthly
trash that thou may have heavenly treasure; give a morsel, and receive a
whole loaf, nay as many as thou need. Luke 11.8
Luke 11.8. Give that it may be given unto thee for what thou give that thou
shall have, but what thou give not, Flores doct.
that another shall take from thee.

CHASTEN thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his
murmuring. Pro. 19.14.

2 CHILDREN are compared to arrows, and he is an happy Man that has his
quiver full of them. Psalm. 127.4. Psalm. 127.4
But if for want of Godly discipline, and wholesome instruction they chance to
prove arrows in their parents side, how dangerously do they wound and pierce
then?

Do not therefore out of an hurtful pity, withhold correction from thy
child, but smite him in affection with the rod, Pro. 23.23.
Pro. 23.13. And so shall he give thee rest, and minister blessing to thy
soul. Pro. 29.17
Pro. 29.17.

CONFIDENCE in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a broaken tooth,
and a sliding foot Pro. 25.19.

A FAITHFVLL friend is an inestimable jewel, he that finds him though he
sell all that he has for the purchase, yet shall he be no looser by the
bargain; for such an one sticks close to a Man, not being capable of change,
yea, closer then a brother. Pro. 18.24
Pro. 18.24. The heat of persecution scorches him not, the waves of troubles
dash him not away, but he loves at all times. Pro. 17.17. Pr.o. 17.17
there is indeed a friend which like the glow-Worme promises a sufficient
light, but when you think to lay hold on him, he slideth away like water
grasped with the hand, and deceives your trust.

Therefore have thou gained a faithful friend closet him in thine heart and
thin own friend and thy fathers friend forsake thou not. Pro. 27.10.
Pro. 27.10. For such an one is long sought, seldom found, and as hardly kept.
Preserve him therefore by love; for as fire is not better kindled then by fire,
so love is not better maintained then by love, and if thou labor by this
means to keep him, thou reservest a treasure that will never be spent, and
shall find a River that will never be dried up.

D
JOB 6.5. DOES the wild Ass bray when he has grass? or loweth the Ox when
he has fodder?


1. THE brute beasts though naturally wild, do not yet complain when they
have that which is sufficient for them: only man is of an unbounded desire,
and cannot content himself when his hands are full of Gods blessings; but
greedily hunting after more, he even loses that which already he has,
catching like Esops dog at a vain shadow.

Learn therefore in every estate to content thy self, and be ready with Jacob
to confess, that thou art less then the least of Gods mercies: Genesis 32.10.
Genesis 32.10.
And so shall thou with a great deal of ease weed out that vice, which to
others is death to pluck up, it is so firmly rooted in their hearts.

DID not I weep with him that was in trouble? was not my soul in heaviness
for the poor? Job. 30.25.

2 CHRIST Jesus is that good Shepherd. John 10.11
John. 10.11. And all Mankind elect and reprobate are sheep: but that good
Shepherd knows his own, and who are his. 2 Timothy 2.19. 2 Timothy 2.19.
he has set his mark upon them that they may be known. Revel. 7.3.
Reve. 7.3. And though sometime the scabbed may break into his good Pasture
and be blended among his sound sheep, yet he will feed them with judgment,
and by his brand judge between sheep and sheep. Ezekiel. 34.6.17.
Ezekiel. 34.16, 17. Now the only brand-marke I read of, by which Christ at the
great Audit will distinguish between the clean and unclean, sheep and
filthy Goats, is love which consists in affection; and action, in mercy and
compassion. The works of tender affection shall bear all the weight at the
last day, Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you,
for when I was an hungry ye gave me meet, when I was naked ye clothed me,
sick and in prison ye visited me. Mat. 25.34.36. Mat. 25.30.36.
There is no better means whereby to become gracious before GOD and good men.

Let not them then that mourn be without comfort, but weep with them that
weep. Romans 12.15. Romans 12.15 and Ecclus 7.34.
Hide not thy self from thine own flesh, then shall thy light break forth as
the morning, and thy health shall grow speedily. Esai. 58 78
Esaias 58.7.8.

DEPART from the foolish man when thou perceivest not in him the lips of
knowledge. Pro. 14.7.

3 AN UNWISE man is like a lazy travailer who beholding in his way the
pleasant fields, stands gazing upon them so long that he forgets whether he
is going.

Separate therefore from such an one, and go not with him, for he will be as
thorns in thy way, and as clogs to thy feet: with the Worlds vanities he
will so block up thy way, that hardly shall thou arive at Heaven, or so much
as think whither hou art going: But desire rather to hear all godly talk,
and let not the grave sentences of knowledge depart from thee. Ecclus 6.36.
Ecclus 6 36.


E.
PROVERBS 1.32. EASE slays the foolish, and the prosperity of fools
destroys them.


1. GOOD things perverted prove most hurtful, neither does a man offend more,
then in the abuse of Gods good Creatures: when Gods good blessings rock, the
foolish worldling presently nodds, and dreams of nothing else but mighty
barnes, which sudainely drop down, and destroy him laughing.

Desire not therefore so much a great estate as how to use it well, to Gods
glory, thine own comfort, and the benefit of thy brethren, especially those
who are of the household of faith. Galat 6.10
Gal. 6.10. And the rather considering thy self to be but a steward of what
thou calst thine own, who art bound to give a strict account. Luke 16.^.
Luke 16.2.

EVIL Men shall bow before the good, and the wicked at the gate of the
Rigteous. Pro. 14.19.

2 THE godly though poor shall have obeisance done unto them, and the wicked
Rich shall do it, and though by reason of the body of sin which the godly
bear about them, this comes not daily to pass: yet at last Such honor have
his Saints. Yea and many times in this life proud Haman shall honor despised
Mordecai. Hes. 6.10. Hest 9.10


See thou then a godly poor Man, despise (...) perhaps imagining their
torments will be the more tolerable, while they suffer not beyond comparison:
for this end (like the Devil their Father) their Table shall be their Snare,
and as he by an Apple, so they with their dainties will seek to seduce.

If then thou sit at their costly Tables open not thy mouth wide upon it, and
say not, behold much meat, Ecclus 31 12. and 16.
Eccl. 31.12. Eat modestly that which is set before thee, and devour not,
least thou be hated.16. For howsoever they pretend kindness, yet death is in
their potts, and like dessembling Iael, they feed where they intend to kill.
Judge 4.19
Judge. 4.19. Hold thee therefore contented with what thou have, be it little or
be it much, for it is a miserable thing to go from house to house, and the
poor man's life in his own lodge, Ecclus 29.24, 25, 26.
is better then delicate fare in another Man's.

F
JOB 18.15. FEAR shall dwell in the house of the wicked because it is not his,
and brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.


(...).
1. THE Poets faigne that when Plutos comes from Jupiter he is slow of foot,
but when Pluto sends him he comes running, giving us thereby to understand,
that when Men wax rich by honest means they are long a thriving, but when it
comes in the Devils name, an heritage is hastily gotten at the beginning.
Pro. 20.21. Pro. 20.21.
Which while men lust after, they err from the faith and pierce themselves
through with many sorrows. 1 Timothy 6.^0.
1 Timothy 6.10. And the end thereof shall not be blessed. Nay, though Men do by
right and wrong seek to increase their estates, hoping thereby to raise them
an enduring name, yet (vain hopes of worldly men) they do but foster a secret
theife, and coffer up that, which will canker, rust, and bring all to
confusion; thus gaping after eternity, they are cut off in the midst of their
days, and at their end they are fools. Ier. 17.11. Jer. 17.11


If then thou desire to have thine estate blessed unto thee, and to remain
with comfort to thy posterity, defraud no man, bring not home a penny which
thou have unjustly gotten; remember that the riches of vanity shall deminish,
and the house of the wicked shall be destroyed. Pro. 13.11 and 14.11.
Pro. 13.11. and 14.11. And as in the winnowing of Corn, whilst it is shaken
up and down, Chrysostom. in Mat. ex Busaei. (...)
we see the purer grain by little and little fall to the ground, whilst the
Chafe only remains in the seive: So while men shuffle, and cut in the World,
poasting up and down to increase, their estates by any means, that which they
have well gotten slides away, and nothing remains unto them but sin, and a
guilty conscience pursuing them with horror, for what they have unjustly
gotten.

FALSE balances are in abomination unto the Lord, but a perfect weight
pleases him. Pro. 11.1.

2 DECEIT is a sin, as ancient as the World, and with it took its
beginning. Genesis 3. Genesis 3.
It was first invented by the Devil, and by him exercised upon the woman: the
woman seduced the Man and so subverted him, whose comforter she should have
bin. Since it has so propagated, as that now nothing is more usual then for
the father to deceive the son, the child the Father, and for a crafty Lawyer
to deceive them both neither does the seed of the Serpent rest there only; but
for brother to deceive brother is ordinary, and for one man to deceive another,
is as common as trading; among whom the Ephah (that is the measure) shall be
small, but the Shekel (that is the price) shall be great, and the waights
shall be falsified by decept, Amos 8.5. Amos 8.5.
All which are an abomination unto the Lord: Dut. 25.16.
Deuteronomy. 25.16.

Let it therefore be thy daily care, to be true and just in all thy dealings,
this being the will of God, even your sanctification, That no man oppress or
defraude his brother in any matter: God being the avenger of all such things. 1
These. 4.6.
1 These. 4.6. Agreing whereunto is that of S. Austine. August. sermon. 215. de
^emp.
No Man makes an unjust gain without a just loss, where the one is, there
will the other be also; the gain in the Chest, the loss in the conscience,
which the whole Worlds profit cannot countervaile, nor make a Man a saver by
his bargain.

FAIR words are as an Honey comb sweetness to the soul, and health to the
bones. Pro. 16.24.

3 THE Horse, the Camel, the Elephant, the Lion, etc. Are not naturally tame,
but that they may become gentle, and serviceable, man's helping hand must be
laid too: yet when this little weeping-master of all Gods Creatures has thus
played the Man in subduing others, himself maintains an unruly Rebel within
himself, ready to overthrow the whole body of Man, the little Model of a Common
Wealth which as S. James speaks is The tongue, Jam. 3 7.8.
an unruly evil that no Man can tame. James 3.7.8. Blessed is the Man that
has not fallen by the word of his mouth. Ecclus 14.1. Ecclus 41.1.
For he that keeps his mouth and his tongue, keeps his soul from
afflictions. Pro. 21.23. Pro. 21.23.
But he that opens his lips unadvisedly destruction shall be to him. Pro.
13.3. Pro. 13.3


Do thou then find thy self addicted to swearing, and other abuses of the
tongue? why then betake thy self to God, implore his aid, for though the
preparation of the heart in Man, yet the answer of the tongue is of the Lord.
Pro. 16.1. Pro. 16.1.
Pray therefore with David, Set a watch, Psalm. 141 3
O Lord before my mouth, and keep the door of my lipes. Psalm. 141.3. Psalm.
141.3
O Lord Father and governor of all my whole life leave me not to their
counsel, and let me not fall by them Ecclus 23.1. Ecclus 23.1


Set a watch before my mouth, and a seal of Wisdom upon my lips, that I fall
not suddenly by them, and that my tongue destroy me not. Ecclus 22.26. Eccles
22.26.


G
JOB 32.9. GREAT men are not always wise, neither do the aged always
understand judgment.


1. AS sick Men convert wholesome meats into the nature of the disease they
labor off; So do evil Men subvert good, that it becomes exceedingly bad:
Wit, and Learning without grace; is worse then honist sottishness: the
greatest Clerks are not always the holiest Men. Seldom has their bin any
great error in Gods Church, which has not been the offspring of some great
wit: What has brought forth amongst us, our Separatists, or Pharisees, and
other troublers of our Church? but an overweening conceit of their own worth
and learning; all ages have proved, that there was never any that did so much
mischief in the Church of GOD, as those who for wit and learning have bin most
Eminent.

Have thou then knowledge, wit, learning, etc. Pray hard for a good spirit from
God to guide and direct thee in thy proceedings.

I read of a sweet answer which one William Times made to those bloody
butchers Winchester and Bonner, Acts and Monum:
being convented before them: Times said the Bishops thou have a good fresh
spirit, it were well, if thou had learning to thy spirit, yea my Lord said
Times, and it were well also, that you are learned so you had good spirits to
your learning.

To the Serpent join the Dove, both together will do excellent: but if they
be severed, let the World say what it will, a dram of holiness is better then
a pound of wit; for it is not policy, but piety, not wit, but wisdom that
escaps damnation.

GOD will lay up the sorrows of the Father for the children; when he rewards
him he shall know it. Job. 21.29.

2 THE soul that sins it shall die; does Joh 8 3.
that the sins of the Fathers should be visited upon the children, Exodus 20.5
and that the sower Grapes which they have eaten should set their childrens
Jer. 31.29.
teeth or edge? Surely no, but it is commonly seen that wicked fathers have
children like themselves, who make their fathers sins their own by imitation;
and therefore as Princes do with equity disinherit the posterity of Traitors;
so wicked children having their fathers sins, and their own upon their
heads, they are Traitors themselves to God; and so are much more justly
punished of the Lord.

Go not then about to charge God falsely, neither do thou cavil at him, or
find fault at his just proceedings; The Law allows the heir, or executor to
be sued for the fathers debt, and what injustice is it in God, to proceed in
like manner? Psalm. 101.2
Walk therefore in the uprightness of thine heart in the midst of thine
house, that thou may neither hearten thy family in evil, nor hinder them in
that which is good.

GIVE admonition to the wise, and he will be the wiser; teach a righteous Man,
and he will increase in learning. Pro. 9. verse. 9.

Psalm. 133.
3 AS the costly ointment on Aarons head, so is admonition to a good Man, it
breaks not his head but as that ran down to his beard and so to the border
of his garment so does this distill into all the paths and faculties of soul
and body, suppling and softning the heart, that grace may work upon it to
salvation.

Submit therefore to reproof, whether it be by gentle admonition from thy
friend, or by open reviling from thine enemy: for howsoever it proceed from
malice in him, and be done with a desire of revenge, yet thou may make good
use of it: for admit thou be not guilty of the particular things he charge
thee with, yet it may be thou art faulty in some other things, which God would
chastise in thee by this means. Seneca de moribus
Be not thou like the dull beast who can hardly be put forward with Spur or
Switch, whereas the more noble Steed is ruled by the shadow of the rod only;
regard correction, Pro. 13.18
and so shall thou be honored; 2 Samuel 16.10.
Thus was it with David when Shimei railed on him, whom before he reviled, he
presently after honored, and so shall it be with thee, 2 Samuel 19.18.
and with every one that receives instruction.

H.
PROVERBS 10. Verse. 5. HE that gathers in Summer is the son of wisdom:
but he that sleeps in harvest; is the son of confusion.


1. THERE are a sort of people in the World, who are conceipted that it is not
according to their Birth, and breeding, to spend their time in labor; and that
there is no better way to manifest their gentility, then with the Nagros (noble
Men amongst the Malabars in the East Indies) by wearing long nails on their
hands, to show they are no workers; but whilst they thus follow the idle, Pro.
28.19
who sees not how suddenly they are filled with poverty; which comes upon them
like an armed man, Pro 6.11.
Pro 12.11.
and cannot be resisted: whereas he that labors, and tilleth his Land shall
be filled with bread; Ecclus 20.27.
and shall increase his heap. Let this therefore exhort thee to thrift, which
has both a watchful eye, and diligent hand for the saving of what we have
from perishing. Diligence is requisite for getting, and providence for saving:
Remember that it is the commendations of Salomons virtuous Woman (among many
other) that she overseeth the ways of her household. Pro 31.27.
Therefore she has a double portion, to wit, The fruit of her hands, Verse. 31.
and praise in the gates, whereas such as think it a disparagment to their
worth to be their own servants; do take a ready way to become other Men's
slaves in drudgery and beggary.

HE that passes by, and medleth with the strife that belongs not unto him,
is as one that takes a Dog by the ears. Pro. 26. verse. 27. Pro. 20.3


2 IT is a Man's honor (says Solomon) to cease from strife, but every fool
will be meddling, And as a wise Man will labor as much as in him lies to
appease a quarrel, or else depart, before it grow to too great a height: so
he that is void of understanding sides in contentions, till at length it fall
heavy upon his own head. Therefore when thou see the fire of contention
beginning to break forth, either labor to suppress it by gentle and friendly
admonitions; or (when thou perceivest that they may not take place) withdraw
thy self, least meddling too far, and stirring the fire too much, the sparks
fly into thy face, and at length the flame thereof catch hold of thee, and so
thou perish together in the same combustion. When Lentulus in a beastly and
filthy manner did spit in Cato's face as he was pleading at the bar; he only
wiping his face, returned him this answer, Well Lentulus well, I will
henceforth affirm it among all Men, that they are wonderfully deceived, who
say thou have no Mouth; thus whilst with the tender Plant thou yeeldest to the
violent blast, thou shall recover, and keep thy station, whilst the busy, and
violent medler, needlessly thrusting his hand into every fire, shall hardly
return unscorcht, if not utterly consumed.

HE that commits adultery with a woman, is destitute of understanding; he
that does it destroys is own soul. Pro. 6. verse. 32.

3 MARRIAGE is honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled, Heb. 13.4
but whoremongers, and adulterers God shall judge; and that with shame and
poverty, (as Solomon speaks) Pro. 6.26
because of the whorish woman a Man is brought to a morsel of bread, shame,
and dishonor; or if he escape these, yet rottenness sends, like Ioab after
Abner, and smites him to the death; or suppose he live free from all these,
so that none of them overtake him in this life, yet Gods judgments shall surely
find him in the World to come. So that he who wantons it in the Chamber, or
plays the beast in the field here, he shall howl it in Hell, and fry in
torments there; as he burned in lust on Earth, so he shall broile in woe there,
and as he coveted darkness rather then light, so darkness shall be his
covering, and that without end. Keep thee therefore from the wicked, Pro. 31.3.
and strange woman, give not thy strength unto her; neither desire her beauty
in thine heart, neither let her take thee with wylies, go not into thy
neighbors wife, nor climb up to his bed; Pro 5.19.
But let thine own wife be as the loving hind, and pleasant Roe, let her
breasts satisfy thee at all times, and delight in her love continually.

I.
PROVERBS 1. verse. 10. and 15. IF sinners do entise thee consent thou not,
walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy foot from their path.


1. AS it is with sin, so is it also with sinners, they cannot endure to go
alone, they hold the old rule, the more the merrier: and being bad themselves,
they have a desire to make the good bad also, that they may be bad like
themselves. If therefore thou be called out of the good way wherein thou
go, by such as may say unto thee, come do as we do, and thou shall be rich
as we are, consent thou not at any hand; for howsoever it may delight thee for
a time, yet the end will be with woe and anguish. What got Balaam by those
wages of sin which he loved? was he not cast away by them? Judge. 11.
so whilst thou sidest with ungodly ones, in the pursuit of unlawful gain
thou take a ready course to split thy self against a dangerous and
inevitable Rock, whereon thou must needs make Ship-wracke of thy precious
soul: Psalm. 37 38
For the transgressors shall perish together, and the end of the ungodly is,
they shall be rooted out at the last. Though it be fair sunshine with them for
a season, yet ere long a storm will arise, which will dash them with this
heavy Memento, Psalm. 50.18
when thou saw a Theife thou wentst with him. Psalm. 37 37
Keep thou therefore innocence, and take heed to the thing that is right, and
that shall bring thee peace at the last, though it seem no thriving trade at
the first, but a ready road to poverty, yet at length it will cause thee to
inherit the land, Psalm. 37.29
and to dwell therein for ever.

IS there not an appointed time to man upon Earth, and are not his days as the
days of an hierling? Job. 7. verse. 1.

2. MAN is not unfitly compared to a Lamp which may have some violent blast,
or puffed to put it out, or if it escape these, yet there is but a proportioned
measure of oil which will be soon extinguished; so, though neither untimly
death, nor hart-kiling care do consume, yet is there but an appointed time for
Man to walk in, which he speedily traces over and then as the hireling (with
his penny in his hand, when the Sun is set) returns to his own home, so Man
when the Sun of life set over him (after all his toil) with his wages about
him returns to his house, Job. 17.13
the Grave. Let this then teach thee christian wisdom, not to stand ideling
all day long in the Market place, but to labor and do the thing that good is,
that Men seeing thy good works may glorifiie thy Father which is in Heaven:
thus shall thou have praise of the Master of the Vineyard, in the great Audit,
and receive thy wagis with comfort, even an immortal Crown of glory.

IN Many words there cannot want iniquity, but he that refraineth his lips is
wise Pro. 10. verse. 19.

Ecclus 7.3.
3 THERE is a time to speak, and a time to keep silence, and happy is the Man
that knows the season; Pro. 17 18
for as a fool when he holds his peace is counted wise, so a wise Man
sealing up his lips, when his wisdom should be manifested, may well bear
the badge of a fool, and among many go for such. Therefore count silence a
virtue, and seasonable talk no less; let thy words be rather good then many:
set a diligent watch before the door of thy mouth, that nothing may come out
thence but what thou have seriously pondered between thy self and thee, and
then keep not back counsel, Ecclus 4.
when it may do good, neither hide thy wisdom when it may be famous, this
shall bring joy to thy self and others, for a word in due season, Pro. 15.23.
how good is it? it is then like a goad, and like a Nail fastened by the master
of the assembly, Ecclus 12.11.
pricking forward, and stirring up the good to a ready embracing of it, and
taking such deep root in them, that it cannot at any time be removed, or
forgotten.

K.
PROVERBS 4.23. KEEP thine heart with all diligence, for thereout comes life.


1. THE Rudder is but a small thing, yet it guides the whole Ship, the heart
is far less, yet it rules the whole man: Now as the Mariner though he
know all the dangerous shelves in the Sea, yet many times for want of present
heed, he rushes upon them and suffers Shipwreck; so though Man knows many
things to be evil, yet the heart being neglected he falls upon them, and so
makes havocke of all. Therefore set watch and ward over thine heart that it
depart not from the living Lord: watch to pray, and pray to watch, that thou
enter not into temptation the devil thine adversary is always watching, and if
he catch thee napping, he will take thee as he finds thee, if the guarde of
thine heart (grace, faith, etc) be fallen asleep within thee, look not to be
awaked by thine enemies warning-peece, but make account (as those who are stung
with the Aspis) that thou art fallen into a deadly sleep, and shall be gone
in (a trance) a trice the Lord knows whither.

KEEP thy way far from the strange woman, and come not near the door of
her house. Pro. 5.8.

2 THERE is a way which seems good in a Man's eyes and void of danger, which
notwithstanding if he travail in, it brings him either with the Ox to the
slaughter, Pro. 7 22.
or with the fool to the stocks: though it be decked with ornaments, carpets,
and laces, and seem all smooth way, yet are there many dangerous Pit-fals
wherein many fall down the best end of it, is woe, sorrow, and certain
destruction for it goes down to the chambers of death: and this is the way of
a Man with a Maid. Though the strange women speak praceable, and her words be
softer then butter, yet are they very swords pricking to the heart, and killing
the Soul; though she have a Virgins face, yet has she a ravenous tail, and
though she tune most Sweet lullabies to the ear, yet if we stop them not and
lend her a deaf one, when all both flesh and blood, Pro. 5.11.
is consumed, we shall mourn at the end. Come not therefore near unto the
strange woman for it is ill jesting with her, thou may as safely preserve
thine health among infectious people, or venomous Serpents, as thy goodness
among harlots: wherefore avoid them and go not by them, turn from them and
pass by.

KEEP not company with drunkards, nor with gluttons, for the drunkard and the
glutton shall be poor. Pro. 23. verse. 20. and 21.

3. THERE are two Nations of sin, eternal enemies to the people of God,
(like Moab and Ammon begotten of those two base daughters of health in their
fathers forgetfulness) Drunkenness, and Gluttony, of either of which may be
said that of Ambrose concerning dancing, How many faults are in that one
wickedness. Intemperance in meat and drink (like the witch Circe)
transformeth Men into several sorts of beasts, in which Metamorphosis, they
think themselves borne only to power down strong drink, and to devour the
good creatures of God: but as the Moth secretly fretteth the garment, so
poverty comes upon them unawares, and they end in rags. Become thou not
therefore a pledge with such, neither be thou of that ragged regiment; If thou
chance to sit at their costly table streatch Ecclus 31 12.
and thrust it not with it into the dish, Remember Ecclus 19.1.
and that a man that is given to drunkenness shall not be rich.

L.
PROVERBS 12. Verse. 28. LIFE is in the way of righteousness, and in that
pathway there is no death.


1. WHO so believes in the Lord keeps his commandments, and he that
trusts in the Lord shall take no hurt, for the eyes of the Lord have respect
unto them that love him to deliver their souls from death, to cover them under
his wings, and to keep them sure, under his feathers: so that though a
thousand fall at their side, Psalm. 91.7.
and ten thousand at their right hand, yet none evil shall come nigh them.
Whilist Israel walked in the way of the Lord, neither Man, nor beast, Earth nor
water, nothing could annoy them, Exodus 14.^.
The Sea shall part to make them an easy passage; the earth in forty years
travail shall not make their foot to swell, Deuteronomy. 8.4.
the noisome, and pestilent beast shall not come nigh to hurt them, Ezekiel. 34.28
ibid.
neither shall Men though Anakims prevail against them: But when they once
forsook the Kings highway, to wander in by paths, who then were they not a
prey unto? If then thou desire to live long, and to see good days, eschew
evil and do good; Psalm 1.1.
Walk not in the counsel of the wicked, neither stand thou in the way of
sinners, for he that follows evil, Pro. 11.19.
seeks his own death, and becomes his own murderer, but righteousness
delivers from death, Pro. 10.2
and leads unto life Pro. 11.19.

2 LET another Man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger and not
thine own lips. Pro. 27. Verse. 11.

2 THERE are a sort of People in the World, who do not so much talk of their
good deeds because they have done them, as do them that they may talk of
them, but what do such Men else, then with a great deal of cost, and no less
pains purchase hatred to themselves? For (...). Suidas.
(i: e:) Many will hate thee if thou love thy self. Let not then thy mouth be
the Herald to proclaim thine own worth: rather let that be the office of some
other Man, only let it be thy chiefest care to do all things well that others
may profit thereby, in imitating that themselves, which they commend in thee;
It is, I grant, a good thing to be praised, but it is a better to be
prayse-worthy: desire not so much the acclamation of many, as of those that are
good; account it as great a misery to be commended of bad Men; as if thou were
well spoken-of for doing ill: let it be thy joy when the evil are displeased
at thy well-doing and judge it a commendations beyond compare, when thou art
traduced, and evil spoke^-of for thy goodness.

LOOK not thou upon the Wine when it is red, and when it shows his color in
the cup, ^or goes down pleasantly. Pro. 23. verse. 31.

3 THE sight as it is the most noble and excellent sense, so is it also the
most delectable, and can hardly be removed from what it has once entertained;
what a sin, and shame then is it, to puddle that Crystalline Spring by
presenting a Basiliske to infect, Pro. 23.32.
and poison it? Such is Wine and strong drink, which whilst some have
immoderatelie hunted after, and with too eager a desire gazed upon, they have
found death in their potts. Genesis 1.
God in the beginning made all things good, and shall Man the best of those
good creatures pervert the first institution? shall that which God ordained to
make glad the heart contristate and sade the same? Psalm. 104.15.
God forbid, yet this is done by an excessive use, and superabundant lusting
after the same. Let therefore the counsel of Paul to Timothy; 1 Timothy 5.23.
be thy doctrine: use Wine or strong drink, but let it be little, such as may
conduce to health, and not put nature to too heavy a task, in easing of the
burden which has unmeasureablie bin laid upon it. Remember that Wine is a
mocker, Pr. 20.1.
and strong drink is raging, desire it not therefore over much lest it make
thee unwise.

M.
JOB 17. verse. 1. MY breath is corrupt, my days are cut off, and the Grave is
ready for me.


Psalm. 58.3.
1. BIRTH begets sin, (the wicked from the belly have erred, and speak lies)
sin sickness, sickness death, and so all die forasmuch as all do sin: Romans
5.12.
had not Man sinned, he should have drawn out his life to a comfortable
maturity, or if his life like some long-kindled Lamp must have consumed it
should have bin without all pain, for without sin there could have bin no
punishment. But sins generation became Man's corruption, and no sooner was it
borne but Man began to die. August. de lib. arbit lib. 3. c. 8.
Which is not the nature of Man thereto ordained, but the punishment of him
condemned, because he willingly died in spirit, he must though against his
will die in body; Job 17.13.
The grave must be his House, And Here he must rest, Mr. Austine in^d^t in
fine.
and

Where else should he rest? Is not a man's own house (to sleep in) best?

Seeing then this is the condition of all Men, let it be thy care to furnish
this house; that thou may be rich and happy in it. Here lay up the precious
Ointment of a good name, here lay up the well kept books of a good
conscience, here lay up the works of mercy, here lay up thy bills of exchange
of convay, thy treasure to Heaven, where neither theife, nor Moth, nor rust
shall annoy it, and having thus decked, and garnished the same, lay thee down
in the sweet bed of faith, and assurance of mercy, and looking for a glorious
Resurrection, say, Now farewell World,
here in my house i will rest,
Sepulchrum enim domus
mea est.


MANY devises are in a man's heart, but the counsel of the Lord shall stand.
Proverbs 19. verse. 21.

2 THE way of man is not in himself, ^er 10.23.
neither is it in man to walk and direst his steps, he proposes, but God
disposes; Man determines, but GODS decree must stand. To morrow says Man, I
will go to such, or such a place, or do this or that whereas he ought to say
if the Lord will, and if I live I will do this or that. James 4.13.15.
Vain Man may think to get him a lasting name, by erecting his cloudy
peircing Tower, but God determines to make it Babel a confusion, so vain are
the devices of Man. Do not thou therefore peremptorily determine of any
thing, either in the Service of God, or thine own affairs: but desire of the
Lord to bow thine heart unto him, 1 King. 8.58.
that thou may walk in his ways, and begin all thy works in his name, and
fear; and so shall thou be sure to end them in his favor.

MANY Men will boast every one of his own goodness but who can find a
faithful Man? Pro. 20. verse. 6.

3 IT is bad for a Man to sin, it is worse to delight in it, but it is worst of
all to extenuate, and lessen it. Whilst Man seeks to shrowde his faults under
virtues habit, and boasts himself to be a very good Man, because he is not
an incarnate Devil, what else does he but pass on to the second death, like
the offender to the first, with merry company? whereby the way may seem
somewhat shortened but the punishment nothing lessened. It is a block which
Satan casts in the Christian Man's way (and whereat many stumble) when he makes
a Man to compare himself with others, and to think himself a very holy
Saint, if he be not worse then the very worst, and more notoriously wicked,
then the most profligate wretch. But alas! this is no sure fence, it is no
better then Adams thicket; which cannot shelter a Man from Gods inquisition,
who will find him out in his deepest Hypocrysie.

Pro. 20 9.
Therefore say not thou I have made my heart clean, I am clean from my sin;
but rather acknowledge thy self to be an unprofitable Servant, a miserable
sinner, and in the publicans tone implore Gods favor, Luke 18.2 13
O God be merciful to me a sinner.

N.
JOB 1. verse. 21. NAKED came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I
return thither the Lord has given and the Lord has taken it.


1. Job. 5.6.
MISERY comes not forth of the dust, neither does afflicton spring out of the
Earth; but a supreme hand rules over all, 1 Samuel 2 7
and it is the Lord only that makes poor and makes rich. Notwithstanding
Man, who is of a dogged nature, and currish disposition (like the dog that bits
the stone that is thrown at him but regards not him that threw it) is ever
wrestling and striving with the Cross, and affliction that is laid upon him,
but he never looks to the hand that sent it; Psalm. 14 1.
and with David's fool he can hardly be brought to think on God, Exodus 8.19
till with Pharoahs enchanters he be compelled to confess it to be his finger
and handy-worke. Man has nothing but what he has received from God in trust,
who when he sees good, will call for what is his own: and then Man as he
came naked into the World, shrouded only in blood; so he shall return as
naked wrapped up peradventure in a sorry cloute. In his pilgrimage here he
vainly affected what he must leave behind him, and like a foolish traveller,
burdens himself with more then is needful.

Let this then teach thee, so to use this World, as though thou usedst it not.
1 Timothy 9.8
Have thou food and raiment, be therewith content, for it is not much that
nature wants, it is less that she requires: Take up therefore the care of
riches, only to serve thy turn in this life, and as thou find thy self
drawing nearer home, the more disburthen thy self of them, knowing that he is
but a foolish traveller that will furnish himself for a little way, as if his
journey were of many Miles: and if in thy journey thou meet with any cross or
affliction (which the good are most subject unto, being here from home in a
strange place) in body, goods, or good name, first look back to thy self,
what thou have deserved, and then looking up to heaven, 1 Samuel 3.18.
say with Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.

No man that warreth, entangleth himself with the affairs of this life,
because he would please him that has chosen him to be a Soldier 2. Tim. 2.
ver. 4.

2 IT ill becomes a Soldier that is upon service for his King and Country,
when he should be bending both wit and force for the annoying of the enemy,
then to be contriving, or making Merchandise with him: and as ill, or rather
worse, it becomes a Christian, when he has given up his name to become the
Soldier of Christ Jesus, then to be traffiqueing and trading with the Devil,
dealing with him about worldly affairs.

Thou therefore that have by Baptism put on Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.27.
proclaming him to be thy King, and vowing thy self to be his Soldier; stand
to thy tackling, be strong and quite thee like a Man, fear none but God, and
yield to nothing but godliness, which has the promise of this life, and of
that which is to come. Turn thine eyes from the things of this World, and fix
them upon heavenly, consider it is a Crown thou runnest for, a kingdom thou
fightest for, fight therefore manfully, and so at last having fought that good
fight of faith, thou shall inherit the Kingdom, and rain regally without
opposition or annoyance for ever, for thou shall please him whose Soldier thou
art, 1 Samuel 2.30.
and who has thus honored thee.

NOW will I arise says the Lord, now will I be exalted now will I lift up my
self. Esaias. 33. ver. 10.

3 AS the nource to weane her child from the too earnest desire after her
breast, lays some bitter thing thereupon, which having prevailed, she either
wipes it off, or throws it away: So deals God, with the bitter enemies which
he stirs up against his peopl to weane them from sin, and the love of the
World; he at the last turns their rage and fury upon themselves: though they
be for the present Thorns in his Churches side, Numb. 33.55.
and Pricks in their eyes, and vex them in the land wherein they dwell; yet
having executed, and brought to effect his purpose, he at the last sweepes
them away with the besome of Esaias 14.23
and kills their root with famine. For their actions proceeding from an hatred
against Gods people, and not from obedience, they are at the last justly
punished of God, for that they have in such cruel manner made havocke of his
people.

Let this then arm thee with patience when the Hand of God is upon thee, Job
13.15
To trust in him though he slay thee, or when he does exercise thy faith by
wicked instruments, yet still to rely upon him for deliverance, for he will in
his due time deliver thee: he will arise and be exalted, so that thou shall see
thy desire upon thine enemies.

O.
JOB 21. verse, 23.25. ONE dies in his full strength, being in all ease, and
prosperity. And another dies in the bitterness of his soul and never eats
with pleasure.


1. WHAT is the life of man, but a journey, or pilgrimage through the desert
of Sin, toward the land of Promise, the heavenly Jerusalem? Esaias 33.24
where no inhabitant shall say, I am sick. In which progress some parents see
their children consumed for presumption, like Nadab and Abihu. Leut. 10.2.
Some both parents and children are devoured for rebellion, like Corah and his
company. Numb. 16.31.
but most children see their parents interred in the Wilderness, for their
manifold transgressions, and disobedience. Man is borne with a condition to
die: and not only old men must, but the youngest and lustiest may die. Nay our
whole life is a continual death, Infancy dies in childhood, childhood in
youth, youth in strong age, that in old age, and old age is our Nebo, from
whence having taken a veiw of the holy Land, we die according to the word of
the Lord; for it was Satan's language; he first spoke the word, ye shall not
die at all. Deuteronomy. 34.5.
Some depart out of this World like a guest out of his Inn, willingly, others
leave it like a Man plucked out of his house, Genesis 3.4.
against their will, one dies like a Lamp, or Candle wasted, and consumed, so
dies the old man: the other like fire quenched with water, violently, so ends
the young man, so that will they, nill they, yet all return to Golgotha. The
works of God are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out, wherefore the
godly, and the wicked are many times deceived in the end God aims at. The
wicked do many times so flourish, and end in such pomp, and the godly are so
afflicted, and die so despisedly in the eye of the World, that the one thinks
the godly man's life to be but madness, Wisd. 5.4.
and the other, that he has cleansed his heart in vain: but the time will come
when the wicked shall be scattered away like chafe, Psalm. 1.5.
and the righteous shall stand in great boldness before the face of such as have
tormented him. Wisd. 5.1.


Therefore judge not thou thy self hated of God because thou art poor, and
endest thy days without pleasure, neither judge thy self beloved because thou
art rich, and departest in prosperity; but labor in both estates to die the
Servant of the Lord, and so be thou low, Wis. 5.5.
or high; rich, or poor; thou shall have thy Portion among the Saints.

ONLY by Pride does Man make contention. Pro. 13, 10.

2. PRIDE is a disease of the mind, whose efficient cause is the good gift of
God abused, to wit, a wealthy estate: yea so easily does prosperity infect,
that hardly can a Man be rich, and not tainted with this disease. While the
families of Abraham and Lot were not great, there was peace and quiet, but
as soon as they were increased, peace was excluded, and debate admitted into
the room: then began the hearts to be possessed with that contentious
rhetorique of Mine and Thine, which parted those, whom neither adversity, nor
peril's in famine, or exile, could sever, or part assunder. It is commonly
said, that poverty parts good company, but it is, more often seen, that those
have bin severed by prosperity, whom a meaner estate had lovingly knit in a
firmer bond: for wealth inflameth the heart, with a desire of priority, so that
he now scorns to budge a foot, who a little before would have bin content to
have licked up the very dust of thy feet. Hinc Rixae, I this is it. Wealth
begets pride, which dies not issuelesse, but brings forth contention.

Art thou rich, be not high minded, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18.9.
trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living Lord, (which gives us
abundantly all things to enjoy) do good, and be rich in good works, be ready
to distribute, and communicate, laying up in store for your self a good
foundation against the time to come, that you may obtain eternal life.

OPEN thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all the children of destruction.
Pro. 31. ver. 8.

3 THERE is a dumb orator who by his silent thetorique implores our aid, The
poor and helpless wretch, whom God or none cares for: We say to our lazers,
God help you, but God says to them that are godly and want help, I will
help where Man will not: If no man else will plead their cause, God will out
of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings ordain help for his.

Oh, therefore join in Commission with God, Pro 31.9.
open thy mouth, judge righteously, and judge the afflicted, and the poor;
defend their cause, who are not able to help themselves. Pro. 3.8.
So health shall be to thy navell, and marrow to thy bones, and when time has
consumed it self, and wasted these, when time shall be no more time, then
shall thou inherit an eternal life.

P.
PROVERBS 4. Verse. 26. PONDER the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be
ordered aright.


1. THE Devil perceiving that man by humble obedience may ascend thither, from
whence he by his pride is fallen, envieth him, and is become a Satan, that is,
an adversary unto him, and that a malicious one, a strong one, and a politic
one: he has set infinite snares before our feet, and filled all our ways
with traps to catch our souls, he puts into our hearts evil thoughts, into
our Mouths lewd speeches, into our members sinful actions, when we are awake
he stirs us up to unlawful deeds, in our sleep to filthy dreams, if we
be merry he maks us dissolute, if we be sad he labors to drive us to
desperation. Nay, he does not only labor to lead us out of the way by manifest
error, but where he sees us walking by good works, there he seeks to
ensnare us.

Seeing then thou art beset with so many temptations, thou had need to have
Argus eyes, and the faces of Ianus, that thou may look round about on every
side for fear of danger. Wherefore as they that know they have enemies lying
in wait for them, will not go abroad without their weapons. So thou knowing
that the devil continually lies in wait for thee seeking to devour thee,
should have a care to thy paths, that he may never take thee at advantage,
for as he finds thee he will take thee. Ephesians. 6.11
Stand therefore always compleately furnished with the whole armor of God,
that so thou may be able to withstand the assaults of the Devil, and (as a
piece most necessary and bee-hovefull) take unto thee prayer, which the
righteous runs to it and is exalted. Pro. 18 18.


PRIDE goes before destruction, and an high mind before the fall. Pro. 16.18.

2 IT is Gods ordinary proceeding against proud persons, to subdue, and bring
under their pride by vile, and base means: and then to bring them to shame
when their hearts are puffed up with a fond conceit of their own worth: when
Herod was lifted up, and swelled in pride at the acclamations of those
flatterers who told him he spoke more like a God then a man, Acts 12.22
then was he suddenly smitten by the Angel of the Lord, and

Therefore labor thou for humility, think basely of thy self, and be lowly
in thine own eyes, and so shall thou be exalted in the sight of God: The Sun
the higher he is in the firmament, the shorter shadow he makes, and the
nearer he comes to the Earth, the shadows of all things are the longer: So
virtue the higher, and the more eminent it is, the less ostentation it makes,
whereas, where virtue is wanting, there is nothing but pride and arrogance;
even as the ears of Corn that have nothing in them but light stuff, stand
perching up above all the rest, but those that are laden with full grains,
hang down their heads. The deeper the Well is the sweeter is the Water, so the
more humble any man is in his own conceit, the more acceptable he is to God,
and when the other in their high conceits imagining they stand fast come
tottering down, this man stands fast indeed and at the length shall be
exalted with glory.

PREPARE thy work without, and make ready the things in the field; and after
build thine house. Pro. 24.27.

3 IN Worldly affairs deliberation is very necessary, and it is held a great
point of policy for a man to deliberate long before he determine any thing:
for want of this wise forecast, many men worthily undergo the censure of
inconsiderate, and receive nothing else but a mock for what they take in hand.
When Israel without the Commandment of the Lord, Numb 14.40.41.42.
nay, contrary to his appointment would be so forward, as to go up, and fight
against the Amalekites, what was the issue? presuming obstinately, and rashly
to go up to the top of the Mountain, they became a prey to their enemies the
Amalekits and Canaanites, Number. 14.45.
who smote them and consumed them unto Hormah.

In all thy affairs therefore whether spiritual, or temporal, be not too
forward either with tongue or hand, but take hands with advice, in worldly
business, be sure of means how to compass it, before thou take any enterprise
in hand: and in Spiritual matters, when thou purposest to give up thy Name to
Christ, first sit down, and cast thine accounts, what it will cost thee to
become a Christian: least not being able to undergo the troubles that shall
accompany that profession, thou be found unworthy to be his Disciple.

Q.
PSALM. 30. verse. 18. QVICKEN us, and we will call upon thy Name.


1. NITIMVR in vetitum is not more old then true, the forbidden Fruit still
hangs in our eyes, and we long to be tasting: and whereas we are dead, Colos.
3.3.
and therefore should mind worldly things no more then dead men do: yet
nevertheless, we are sprightly, and lively in worldly affairs, but heavy,
and lumpish, nay dead in spiritual matters: So that unless Christ say to us,
Mark 4 41.
as sometime to the Maiden, I say unto you arise, There could not be the least
endeavor in any of us, to further the work of grace in himself by calling
upon God: for as the Apostle says, It is not in him that wills, Romans 9.16.
nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. He both prepares the
good will of man, August. Enchir: cap. 3 1. Repent. Peter fol. 117.
that it may be fit to be helped by grace, and also aydeth it being prepared.
He preventeth him that is unwilling that he may be willing, and follows
him that is willing, that he may not will in vain. Blasphemous then is it to
hold, that the will of man should work with Gods Grace in any thing that is
good. Indeed as they are works and actions, so they proceed from the will of
man; but as they are good works they are only the works of grace, as our
Savior Christ told his Disciples, John 15.5
Without me ye can do nothing. Yet in the very act of conversion, the will of
man is not idle, nor without all motion, and sense, as a dead image, but it
follows the Spirit of God, that draws it, not by any violent necessity,
but by sweetning and softning our hearts by his holy Spirit. For in one and the
same moment, God moves and boweth the will, Non violenta necessi^ate, sed
infandendo suavitatem ^er spiritum sanctum bid.
and causes us to be willing indeed: but yet so, as all the efficacy of the
work is from the Spirit of God, who of unwilling makes obedient, and of slow
and dull makes us run.

Let this then teach thee himiliation: for if there be no goodness nor any
aptness to that which is good in us, why should we be lift up with any
conceit of our selves? rather glorify God with acknowledgment of thy poverty,
and by earnest Prayer crave the assistance of Gods grace to quicken thee, and
effect the work of thy conversion; that so thou may perform those duties,
which God requires of thee. Thus does the Church of God in diverse places:
Convert thou me, Jer. 31.18
and I shall be converted. And again, Turn thou us unto thee O Lord, Lam. 5.21.
and we shall be turned. Yea, Da Domine quod jubes, and jube quod vis Soliloq.
cap. 18.
St. Augustine had that sweet Prayer often in his Mouth, Lord give grace to do
what thou commaundest, and then command what thou will. Otherwise there can be
no good looked for in any of us. And therefore Moses makes this the cause,
why the people were no more moved to repentance, by all the gracious
proceedings, and administrations of God toward them in the wilderness; namely,
That the Lord had not given them an heart to perceive, Deuteronomy. 29.4.
nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear unto this day.

QVENCH not the spirit. 1 These. 5.19.

2 THE graces of the holy Spirit in this life, are like sparks of fire, which
may soon be quenced with a little water; as often as we sin we cast water upon
the Spirit of God, and as much as in us lies, we put out the same.

Therefore let it be thy special care to avoyde, and make conscience of every
thing wherein thou may offend, and grieve the holy Spirit of God. He is a
Spirit most pure, and will have an undefiled Temple to dwell in; keep
therefore thy Vessel clean, thy body pure, which is his Temple, do nothing
that may disquiet, or molest him, least by abusing thy self by sin thou
cause the Holy Ghost with grief to depart from thee.

QVEENE Esther also being in danger of death resorted unto the Lord Esther 14.1.

3 THERE be two things that fill the heart full of endless grief, outward
calamities, and a wounded conscience which (as Solomon speaks) none can bear;
Pro. 18 14
and the only comfort in distress is to have recourse to GOD by earnest
Prayer: and although he seem not to hear presently, Job 13.15.
yet to trust in him with Job, even unto the death.

Roll thy self therefore upon the Lord, and cast all thy care upon him, who
cares for thee, and though GOD or wicked men afflict, and vex thee, yet let it
not drive thee from this Rock of comfort, to vain and sorry shifts. The Lord
has comforts for his children that will quiet and support them in any fears
and dangers, his consolation will make a man sleep without a Bed, live almost
without a Soul; they will make a man bold in danger, quiet in trouble, and live
in the jaws of death. Rejoice therefore in all thy troubles, but let it be in
the Lord, and he will give thee strength to withstand the^, for the joy of the
Lord is our Strength.

R.
PROVERBS 11. Verse. 4. RICHES avail not in the day of wrath, but
righteousness delivers from death.


1. RICHES of themselves are not simply evil, but as they are corrupted by
abuse; it is possible (though hard) for a Man to be rich, and yet to be a
good Man: neither does the Prophet advise us to have no riches, Psalm. 62 10.
but that we should not set our hearts upon them. But alas; so easily does a
prosperous estate make a corrupted mind, that poverty were much better for
many. There is a fond imagination possesses the heart of most men, that
wealth brings some happiness, and that if they have abundance, they are then
in safety, and in an happy case; This is evident, by a common speech, that
such, or such a man cannot do amiss, for he is wealthy and has the World at
will; as if they should say, he is free from danger, no hurt can come unto
him. But wealth is a very weak defendant against the LORDS assaults, it shall
not stand them in any stead, neither deliver them in the day of the wrath of
the Lord. Ezeck 7.19.


Trust not therefore to thy riches, Ecclus 5.1
and say not I have enough for my life, for thou know not how soon they may
be taken from thee, or thou thy self plucked from them: Ecclus 1 1^ 19.
the time draws near, that thou must leave all such things unto others, and
then whose shall those things be that thou have provided.

RIGHTEOUS lips are the delight of Kings, and the King loves him that speaks
right things. Pro. 16. ver. 13.

Ecclus 10.17.
2 BLESSED is the Land when the King is the son of Nobles, virtuously trained
up, and delighting in the grave advice of his Sage counselors; then does he
(like the Sun in the Firmament) shine gloriously, and as it, so he
comfort, and rejoices the hearts of all that are under his rule. But when
his ears are stopped to honest and wholesome Counsel, and tied only to the
tongues of flatterers, and Thrasonicall Sycopha^ts, a woe it is to the land,
Pro. 11.14.
for the people must needs fall. 2 Chronicles. 12.1.
When foolish Rehoboam the Son of wise Solomon forsook the Law of the Lord,
all Israel went with him. Look what manner of Man the ruler of the City is
such, Ecclus 10.2.
are all they that dwell therein: his very example is a secret kind of Law,
and whatsoever he does himself, he seems to command it to others.

Which may be a warning not only to Princes themselves but to all that be in
authority, to have a care that they become not public and notorious offenders.

Let me counsel you in particular, as S. Barnard did Eugenius the Pope; It
makes much to thy perfection, to avoid both evil, and the show of evil in
the one thou shall provide for thy conscience, in the other for thy credit.

REMEMBER thy Creator in the days of thy youth, whiles the evil days come
not, nor the years approach, wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in
them. Ecclus 12. ver. 1.

3 THERE are many enemies to grace, but none more to be feared, then those
that fight within us against us: and though all Ages be fruitful in evil,
yet none more then Youth, which, besides all other enemies, has it self the
greatest enemy to it self, being destitute of its own, and scorning the good
advise of others. That which Solomon spoke in jest and derision, the Young man
takes in good earnest. Eccles 11.9.
Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days
of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the light of thine
eyes, etc. And therefore takes his swinge in pleasures, presuming that old age
is the only fit time to turn to God. So that many times by continuance and
longer custom in sin, he makes his sins of a double die, even Crimson
sins: yea, his sins, Esaias 1.18.
become like a Disease in the bones, whereof if one recover many do rot away.

Oh therefore harden not thy heart, but to day hear Gods voice calling thee to
repentance, remember the evil days will come; Ecclus 12.1.
wherein if thou presume to do great matters, (to frequent the Church, to
hear the Word, etc.) thou may peradventure be deceived. It is reported of
Alexander that great Conqueror, that when his Master Aristotle persuaded him
to forbear the Wars till he were grown to a full and perfect age; that he
answered, I fear that if I tarry till I come to that age, I shall loose much
of the heat and vigor of my youth: So do thou answer all temptations
whatsoever, which shall persuade thee to put off thy repentance till thou be
old: Old Age has enough to do with its own griefs, there are so many Aches
in thy bones, so many Crampes in thy joints, and so many pains in all parts of
thy body, that thou shall have little leisure to think on any thing that is good.

Would not all Men condemn him for a fool, or a madman that should lay the
heaviest burden upon the weakest beast, who has enough to do to bear up it
self? and should let a stronger go empty by? So remember, that it is no less
folly, to exempt thy youth which is strong and lusty, from the task of
repentance, and to impose the same upon thy decrepit old age, already sinking
under it is own burden.

And that it is the greatest injury unto the Lord that can be, for a man to
consecrate the prime day of his youth to the service of the Devil, in the
pursuit of sinful pleasures, and to serve God with the rotten bones of his
doting old age; herein men deal with God like the Israelites, who if they had
ever a Lame, a Scabhed, Mat. 1.8.
or a sick beast, that they would bring to the Altar: as if any thing had bin
good enough for the LORD, but all the fat and well-liking they kept to them
selves: and as to the Israelites, so will God say to such men as these, I have
no pleasure in you, neither will I accept your offerings at your hands. Mal 1.10


O therefore let it be thy care to turn unto the Lord betimes, And to seek him
while he may be found: Esaias 55.6. Eccles 12.3.
before the keepers of the house do tremble, and the strong men bow
themselves, and the grinders cease, because they are few, and they wax dark
that look out by the windows So shall thou be an happy old man in thy Youth;
as too too many (by deferring the work of their Repentance) are unhappily young
in their Age.

S.
JOB 2. verse. 4. SKIN for skin, and all that ever^d man has will he give
for his life.


1. We are easily glewed to the things of this life, and do quickly fasten
our minds upon each small contentment we find here; and hence it is that we
are so hardly drawn from them, being is loath to part from them as from our
dearest lives, and only in this case we sing loath to depart: yea with an eye
in Sodom, and an hoof in Egypt with much auckwardnesse, and backwardness we
forsake the one, to save the other; how dearly soever we prise these wordlie
commodities, yet we set life at an higher rate, and gladly fell all that we
have to purchase this Jewel.

Do not thou then stain the glorious Splendour of this precious jem by vicious
living; much more take heed thou prove not a Rebel against GOD, by a wilful
destroying of his workeman-ship, do not thou either for the avoiding of evil,
or procuring of good, lay violent hands upon thy self, least seeking to shun
a temporal calamity, thou fall into an eternal misery: like the fish that
leapeth out of the broyling Pan, into the burning flame.

The Crocadiles of Nilus pursue such only as fly from them, but fly such as
stand to them, so does the Devil, if he be resisted he turns his back;
and only preasseth upon such as give him ground: Give not place therefore to
the Devil, Ephel. 4.27.
nor to such horrible motions as he will be ready to suggest, ^ohn 5.39
but have recourse to the Scriptures, search them for the sweet and gracious
comforts which they afford, arm thy self with a constant faith in them,
Ephesians. 6.16.
and so shall thou be able to quench all the fiery Darts of Satan, do thou
stoutly, and valiantly resist him, Iam. 4.7.
and he will fly from thee: but if thou yield unto him, thou must needs fall
into his fearful Snares, and offer violence to that, which should be most
charily preserved, and wilfully perish by thine own hand.

SHALL we receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil. Job 11. ver.
10.

2 GOD alone knows best When to wound and when to heal, Deu 32.39
when to kill, and when to make alive, when to afflict with sorrow, and when to
send comfort, thus does he many times deal with his dear Children, putting
into all their Cups of comfort, and contentment, the bitter drams of sorrow and
grief. And all this to teach us, not to expect any perpetuity of felicity
here: we are all subject to vicissitude, change, and alteration, and what we
are to day, we cannot say with warrant, and make it good, that we shall be
the same to morrow.

Do thou therefore from hence learn how to entertain comforts when GOD sends
them, to use them like the World, as though thou usest the^ not, so to resolve
of them to day, as if to morrow thou were to take thy leave of them. And as for
Crosses, and afflictions, when thou, find thy self eased from them, yet
think that they have left thee (as the devil did Christ) only for a little
season; and therefore so take thy leave of them to day, as to morrow to expect
their return.

SVCH are the ways of everyone that is greedy of gain; he would take away
the life of the owners thereof. Pro. 1 ver. 19.

3 COVETOVSNESSE is called (by the Apostle S. Paul) The root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10.
and not without cause, for a covetous man may easily be drawn to commit any
sin, be it never so heinous: nothing is too hot, nor too heavy for him,
whosoever stands in his way between him and his Profits he says of him (as
the husbandmen in the Gospel concerning the heir) Come let us kill him, Mat.
21.38.
that the inheritance may be ours. If Naboths vineyard lie commodiously for
Ahab, 1 King. 21.2.13.
he must have it, though it cost the poor man his life.

Yea, Covetousness many times makes men so unnatural, that they do not
spare the lives of their own Parents: or if they proceed not so far, yet
they are as sick of the Father as may be, and wish him fairly laid in his
Grave, that they may enjoy his living.

Hate thou this corrupt tree which brings forth such evil and accursed
Fruit; Mat 7.17.
Luke 12.15.
Take heed and beware of covetousness, and because it is an hereditary evil,
bred in the bones, and will hardly out of the flesh, therefore as much as in
you lies let your conversation be free from it, Col. 3.5.
which will be when thy heart shall be continually fenced about with this
Prayer of David, Incline mine heart unto thy Testimonies, Psa. 119.36
and not unto covetousness.

T.
JOB 4. verse. 8. THEY that Plow iniquity, and Sow wickedness, Reap the same.


1. EVIL words and deeds are like Arrows shot on high, which lighting on the
Shooters head, do wound his Look what measure men meet to others, Mat 7.2
the same shall be measured to them again, He that does evil, must needs
receive evil, Gal. 6.7.
for what a man sows that he shall reap. Mat. 18.24 28, 30, and 34
That merciless Servant, who was forgiven the debt of 10000. Talents, and
would not bear with his fellow in an hundred Pence, had the like cruelty
showed to him, being cast into Prison till he should pay the whole Debt, which
he was never able to do. If a man's heart be set upon mischeife, mischeife
shall light upon his own pate; self do, self have; Breach for breach,
Leuit. 24 10.
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, Such a blemish as he has made in any, such
shall be repayd to him: If Adonibezek cut off the Thumes of the Hands and
Feet of other kings, Judge. 1.6.
his own, though a King, shall be cut off.

Mat 7.12.
Do that therefore to others, which thou would have done to thy self,
Remember how Iesabel that fed on blood, 2 Kin. 9.35
fed Dogs with her blood; therefore do no evil though thou might, and when
thou art tempted to do an evil work, think that Satan is where his business
is, and therefore say thus to thy self, What shall I answer Christ at the Day
of Audit? if contrary to my knowledge, and conscience I shall do this
wickedness.

TEACH a child in the trade of his way, and when he is old he shall not
depart from it. Pro. 22. ver. 6.

2 NATVRE truly is very powerful, and can hardly be changed, only education
can alter natures property, and mould a man a new. Themistocles seeing men
wondering at a young man, whose lewd behavior was changed into good, said, A
ragged Coalt may make a good Horse, if he be well ordered, and skilfullie
broaken. The young man's mind is like Wax heated, apt to receive any form; and
what is therein imprinted, it retains when it is cold. The Pot must be
fashioned while the Clay is soft; the Vessel seasoned with good liquor, while
it is new; the Tree straightned while it is a Twigge; otherways if they be
suffered to continue, they may soon (...) be broaken and spoiled, then
bettered, and mended. The same must be done in the institution of youth, and
what we hope to have him in age, we must fashion him to in his tender bud.

Let it be thy chiefest care therefore in this business, to banish from his
eyes, and ears, all obsceane and filthy talk, and actions, for these little
pitchers have ears, and do derive there liberty of sinning from what they
hear, and see done by others. Let the chiefest of his time be taken up in the
repetion of godly and wholesome instructions, and he shall continue in the
same, and so shall thou deliver his soul from Hell (i: e.) from destruction.
Pro. 23.24


THOUGH Hand join in Hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished Pro. 11. ver.
21.

3 PHYSICIANS when they meet with a body hard to work upon, they double their
dosses and use more violent means: and so deals God with sinners when he
finds them obstinate; if his lesser punishments cannot prevail to bring them
home, then he will lay his loins upon them, They must not think to run
away with their sins without check, because God in the love of a Father with a
great deal of patience expects their return, No, though God be slow yet is he
sure, and however he paces with leaden feet, yet will he fall upon them with
iron hands. In vain then do the wicked bandy against GOD, and fortify
themselves against him: though he defer his punishments for a time, and do
not presently execute his judgments upon them, yet at length he will bend his
bow, Psalm. 7.
and destroy with his prepared Arrows, he will draw his whetted Sword, and
smite his enemies upon the cheek bone, and will not give over till his Sword
have eaten their flesh, and his Arrows are drunk in their blood.

Have thou then sinned? do so no more, but confessing thy sin get thee to
the Lord right humbly, abuse not his patience and long sufferance by making
them no better then bawds to thy sin, least he come upon thee suddenly and
spoil thee of thine, arrmour wherein thou trustedst, and so give thee a
shameful overthrow.

V.
ECCLVS 1. verse. 2. VANITY of vanitys, says the Preacher; vanity of vanities,
all is vain.


1. TERRENE things are like to Bridlime and the delight Man takes in them does
so clog the wings of his mind, that whereas he thinks to take God for his
comfort, by soaring a loft unto him; he flags in his flight, falling short of
Heavenly things, and lights upon honors, pleasures, profits, or the like,
which he then begins to doat upon, and adore as his only healpe and succor.
But alas; how does he disquiet himself in vain, and how weaklie does he
fortify himself against Gods assaults, who in the turning of an Hand, makes
all his days sorrows, Eccles 2.23.
and his travail grief.

1 John 2.15
Therefore love not the World, nor the things of the World, for they will bring
thee nothing but vexation of spirit: But delight thy self in the Lord, Psalm.
37.4.
and he shall give thee the desires of thy heart.

Others may make a goodly show, and promise thee all the Kingdoms of the
World, and the glory thereof; but trust them not: Mundus deficit.
for though the World promise ease, comfort, and contentment, yet her Motto is
Deficiam, I will fail you: though the flesh promise as fair as the World,
Caro infic^t
yet his Word is Inficiam, Daemod inte^ficit,
I will infect you; though the devil come not short of either in his promises,
yet his word is Interficiam, I will destroy you, so that vain is all comfort
that can be expected from them.

Deus reficit.
But what God promises thou may build upon, his Motto is Reficiam, Mat. 11.28
I will refresh you.

Say therefore unto him as Peter did to Christ, Master unto whom shall we go.
etc. I have no other comfort but thee, I delight in none but thee, for all
other delights shall fail, but With thee there is pleasure for evermore. Psalm.
16.11


UPON the Land of my people shall grow Thorns and Briars: yea, upon all the
houses of joy in the City of rejoicing Esaias 30. ver. 13.

Psalm 107.34.
2 GOD makes a fruitful Land barren for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein; the Briars and Brambles which it brings forth, Genesis 3.18.
do still catch at the heels of us the woeful inhabitants, and by their silent
rhetorique seem to bid us to behold the fruits of our Rebellion. Yea, Esaias
32.14
the City of Gods delight shall be made an heap of desolation, the delight of
wild Asses: yea his holy Temple shall be destroyed, and defiled by profane
wretches, rather then wickedness shall go unpunished though in his own
people.

Let this stir up in thee an hearty hatred against sin, which brings forth
such fearful effects, let it Spur thee forwards to holiness of life;
though wicked worldlings mock thee for the same, yet thou shall find that
thou art highly in Gods esteem: for the Heaven over thee shall not be Iron,
Levit. 26 19.
nor the Earth under thee as Brass, the Lord will not turn our Land into a
standing Poole, nor cause Thorns and Briars to grow upon the same: Psalm. 67.6.
but the Earth shall bring forth her increase, and God even our God shall
bless us.

AS VINEGAR is to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is the sloathfull to
them that send him. Pro. 10. ver. 26. Pro. 15.19


3. THE way of the sloathfull man, is as an hedge of Thorns, When he should
go about his employments he forecasteth a thousand fears: a Lion is without,
he shall be slain in the street, Pro. 22.13.
a Bear will meet him, Amos 5.19.
or a Serpent out of the wall will bite him onething or other is a continual
rub in his way, so that he is but a trouble, and a grief to him that imployeth
him about any business.

Have no fellowship therefore with the sloathful man that makes poor, but
deliver thy self from him, Pro. 10 4.
as a Do from the hand of the Hunter, and as a Bird, Pro 6.5.
from the hand of the Fowler, so shall thou find comfort, and abundance of
precious Treasures.

W.
PRO. 2. Verse. 10.11. WHEN wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge
delights thy soul, then shall counsel preserve thee, and, understanging
shall keep thee.


1. 2 Chronicles. 1.7.
SOLOMON being bidden of God to ask what he would, desired not silver nor any
such earthly trash, but give me wisdom (says he) to go in, 2 Chronicles. 1 10.
and out, to govern this people. If he who was a governor of men's bodies
only, made this choice: then how much more wary ought evry one to be in his
election, when body, and soul are under his charge?

The Word of God is called a Lantern, Psa 119.105.
and a Light: now as a man who has a Lantern and a Candle carried before him
keeps himself from falling in the darkest night; so he that suffers himself
to be guided by Gods Word, placing it always before him, and letting it shine to
his heart, he shall by the light thereof keep himself from falling, Psalm.
119.11.
so that he shall not sin against the Lord, or if he do fall through
infirmity, (as who sins not) yet he shall not lie along impenitently, for
he has the seed of Gods Word abiding in him, 1 John 3 9
which will reduce, and bring him into the way again.

Pro. 6.21
Bind therefore the thy neck, have them always in remembrance and before
thine eyes, and then like a Lantern, and a light they shall preserve thee
from falling into sinful ways, Psalm. 141.4
with men that work iniquity.

WINE is a mocker, and strong drink is raging; and whosoever is deceived
thereby is not wise. Pro. 20. verse. 1.

2 THE Vine brings forth three sorts of Grapes, the first of plesantnesse,
the second of drunkenness, and the third of shame, when men are so taken with
the color, or plesantnesse of the Wine in going down, that they tarry by it
till night, till the Wine inflame them: Esaias 9.21.
Then (besides other woes, and sorrows which attend thereupon) Pro. 23.29.
shame follows, and leaves them not, till she has made them ridiculous: so
when it has stripped them as bare as Noah, then it exposes them like Noah to
Cham, and all that see them do mock them.

It is recorded of a Bird which has the face of a Man, but is so feirce of
nature, that sometimes for hunger she will set upon a man, and slay him:
afterward coming for thirst unto the water, and seeing a face in the water
like the face of him whom she had devoured, for grief that she had killed one
like her self, takes such sorrow, that she never eats, nor drinks after,
but frets, beats, and pines, her self to death. What then shall they do who
have not slain one like themselves, but themselves their very selves with a
Cup of Wine?

As Christ therefore said remember Lots wife; Luke 17.32.
so say I, Remember Lot: one nights drunkenness did him more hurt then all his
enemies in Sodom. Genesis 19.33.
Remember Noah, one hours drunkenness exposed him to shame, and the contempt
of his own child, by discovering the nakedness of those things, which he had
concealed, Genesis 19 21.22.
and kept hid, six hundred years together. Ephesians. 5.18.
Be not then drunken with wine, or strong drink, wherein is excess, and all
kind of riot, joined with all kind of filthiness, and shamefulnesse of
living. 1 These. 5.8
But thou which art of the day, be sober, and trust perfectly on that grace
that is brought unto you, 1 Pet. 1.13
in the Revelation of Jesus Christ, as he which has called you, is holy so be
thou holy in all manner of conversation. 1. Peter. 1.13, 14, 15.

WHO ever perished being an innocent? or where were the upright destroyed? Job
4. ver. 7.

3 MAN'S extremity is Gods oppertunity, and many times he suffers his children
to sink so low, that all means of help seems to fail in so much that they
many times become a byword to wicked and profane worldlings; Lo these are
the men that trusted in God; these are they that took him for their comfort:
Psalm. 37.24
Yet then in mercy he puts under his hand, not suffering them to perish, or
to be cast off.

Do thou then who have an heart spiritually afflicted stay thy self here.
Fear not any affliction, whether immediately from God, or from his instruments
happening unto thee, for God has comforts for thee in all, and will send
comfort above all tribulation. Though he suffer thee to be evil entreated of
Tyrants and cruel oppressors, yet despise not the chastening of the Lord,
neither faint when thou art rebuked of him, Heb. 12.5 10
knowing that he does it for thy profit, that thou may be partaker of his
holiness.

Y.
PROVERBS 27. verse. 17. IRON sharpeneth iron, so does man sharpen the face of
his friend.


1. THERE is no speedier conjunction of Fire and Gunpowder, Fire and Towe,
Tinder, or of any other such combustable matter, then there is of words: for no
sooner is an hasty word sent from the mouth of an angry man, but it catches,
and kindles, burning on till it have enflamed him who is of the like humor:
then as if it reached some concave it is repercussed, and Echoed into the
throat of the speaker. Hence many times it comes to pass, that even between
most loving friends, for trifles, and matters of no moment, most bitter
discords, and unnatural bloudsheads have arisen, for (says Solomon) grieveous
words stir up anger, Pro. 1 1.
which ends not in the teeth or tongue, nor dies till it come to blading, or
handing at the best.

Therefore let it be thy commendation that thou can put up an angry words,
and pass by an injury offered, or done unto thee: howsoever the World befoole
thee for it, yet art thou Gods wiseman, Pro. 14 29
for he that is slow to wrath is of great wisdom, whereas he that is an angry
man never lacks woe, and a man of much anger shall suffer punishment. Pro 19.19.


YE are all the children of light, and the children of the day. 1 These. 5.
verse. 5.

2 TRVTH however it may sometimes be blamed, yet it can never be shamed, but
with a constant, and settled countenance it dares behold the Sun: whereas
sin, though it be a bold audacious brood, yet it seeks to shrowde it self
in obscure places, not daring to behold the light. Pro. 7 9.
The whoremaster seeks out whore-howses in the twilight, in the evening, when
the night begins to be black and dark. Job 24 15
The eye of the Adulterer waits for the twilight, and says no eye shall see
me, and disguiseth his face. And they that be drunk, are drunk in the night:
in which security whilst they are deep buried, singing sweet lullabies to
their souls, yea are ensnared in an evil hour, and sudden destruction
comes upon them, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
that they cannot escape.

Whereas the child of God standing in awe of, and yet joyfully expecting that
day, prevents the bitterness thereof by walking soberlie as in the Daytime,
not fearing who sees, or scanneth his actions.

Thou therefore who art of the day, be sober and watch, do such things as do
belong, and appertain to the light, not walking in the ways, nor doing the
works of vanity that when thy Master comes, and finds thee doing such
things as are pleasing in his eyesight, thou may partake of that comfortable
invitation, It is well done good servant, Mat. 25.13.
and faithful, enter into thy masters joy.

YES, ye are our glory and joy. 1. These. 2.20.

3 AS in all other professions, so likewise in the Ministry; perfection and a
good effect is the thing principally intended, and the salvation of souls
cheifely aimed at a good success is that which every one exspects upon his
labors, 1 These. 2.19.
and the Ministers Crown of rejoicing is, when the word of God, which is by
him sown in the hearts of his people, takes root downwards, Esaias 55.^1.
and bears fruit upwards, prospering in the things whereunto it is sent.

Let it therefore be your care (as it is his) when you come to the hearing of
the holy word of GOD, to come with a desire to profit by it, and to grow in
grace, through the powerful operation of the same: and to this end pray unto
God, to open your heart, as he did the heart of Lydia, Acts 16 12.
that you may diligently attend to that which shall be taught; that so GOD by
his holy Spirit working with the Ministry of his messenger, they may in the
great harvest of souls stand before the Lord with great comfort, and bouldnes,
and joyful say, Behold here are we, Heb. 2.13.
and the children, which God has given us. which is their joy and glory.

Z.
PSALM. 69. verse. 9. The ZEAL of thine house has eaten me up.


1. COVETOVSNESSE is a Leaprie, which did not only infect the common sort of
people, but appeared also in the Priests skin; yea it had spread, to their
hearts and rather then any one should think to be excused (by reason of his
long journey) from his sacrifice at the Pasover, the House of God shall be made
an House of Merchandise for such necessaries as were then required. Christ
seeing this, winkes not at it, but was so enflamed, that he whipped the^ all
forth; fulfilling that Scripture, The zeal of thine house has eaten me.up

And because every action of Christ, ought to be a pattern for us, to do the
like, though not the same, Therefore let it be thy care to be eaten up with
the zeal of Gods house, (i: e) to be zealously affected always in good
things; Gal. 4.18
think it not enough to save one, by caring only for thine own self, but
labor to reduce others, when thou see them straying from the good way.
Reprove sin wheresoever, and in whomsoever thou espiest it. Remember, that
servant was condemned, not for loosing, but because he had not made advantage
of his Talent: Mat. 25.27
So will it be with thee, if (as much as in thee lies) thou seek not to win
souls unto Christ. Be zealous therefore and amend, repent, and in all things be
a means to bring others to Repentance.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Tho. Wykes
March 27. 1637.

