THE SOVLES POSSESSION OF CHRIST: Showing how a Christian should put on Christ,
and be able to do all things through his strength.

Whereunto is annexed A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of that worthy Divine
Mr. Wilmott, late Minister of Clare, in Suffolk.

By T. H.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Francis Eglesfield, at the sign of the Marigold
in Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

Imprimatur.

THO: WYKES.
November. 11. 1637.
THE SOULS POSSESSION OF CHRIST.
Romans 13.4. The Text.
Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought, or make no provision for
the flesh to fulfill the lusts of it.


THE intendment of these words is to suggest into the hearts of the Romans,
The intent of the words.
a saving means, whereby they might be cheared up to the performance of such
duties, as were required at their hands; and this the Apostle does from the
eleventh Verse to the end of the Chapter: He had told them before, that they
ought to put off the old man, and that they should no longer walk in rioting
and wantonness; but that they should put on the armor, and walk as Children
of the light.

Now because the matter was difficult, either to get more grace, or to perform
the duties required of them, oh, might some say, we know we should labor to
subdue this sin, and it becomes Christians to walk comely, holily, agreeable
to Gods will; but it is a hard matter to get grace to do the same.

For answer hereunto the holy Apostle in this Verse suggests a double means,
saying; 1. A double means to subdue sin.
Put on Christ; 2. Put off all base occasions, and provide not for pride, and
lust, and malice; by these you shall be strengthened to perform whasoever
duty the Lord requires at your hands, and to overcome any corruption.

In the first means there is, 1. The description of the party that must be put
on, The Lord Jesus Christ. 2. The application of this party.

Now if any man ask what is meant by putting on the Lord Jesus Christ; What is
meant by putting on Christ.
I answer, to put on Christ, is to be conceived in a double sense.

1. We must put on Christ by faith, 1
in justification, when we believe in Christ, that our debts are laid upon his
score, and his merits are applied to us; but this is not meant here.

The Reason is, because this had been spoken of long before, and it is
presumed that these Romans to whom he wrote, had believed in Christ already.

2. To put on Christ is spoken in regard of sanctification, 2
as when we find both many weaknesses, and much want of grace in us, and
unfitness for duties, then we put on Christ to overcome our corruptions, and
to quicken up our hearts for the performance of such services as God requires
of us. This is plain, for St. Paul having enjoined them to lay aside all sin,
as pride, malice, riotous living, and all the works of the old man: he exhorts
them to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, that they may the better overcome these
sins and corruptions, and be quickened up to every needful duty. Hence I
observe this Doctrine.

They that have received Christ, and are near to salvation, and that have good
proof from Gods word, that the night is past, and the day has dawned in their
hearts, even these I say, have daily need to fetch succor from Christ, and
grace for the performance of every spiritual service which God requires at
their hands.

Our Savior Christ must be put on; Doct.
he is to be conceived of, as of a garment, and that in two respects; as when
a man puts on a garment, 1. he must have it fitted for him, and, 2. put it on
and apply it to his body, so it is in this place. Note.
The Lord Jesus Christ takes measure of all the infirmities of his children,
and applies suitable grace, according to every man's several necessities, as in
Psa. 21.5. Psa. 21.5.
our Translation has it, Glory and comely honor have thou laid upon him; or,
as it is in the Original, Glory and honor thou have fitted for him.

And again, Christ not only takes measure of our infirmities, but also he
gives suitable grace fitting for our conditions; as in time of injury, he gives
patience, in time of persecution he gives courage to stand for his truth, and
wisdom to carry themselves aright; yea, he shapes out mercy and seasonable
help for every estate. The Lord gives not only a fit grace to his children,
but also he gives a present aid and strength to apply that grace; as a man not
only makes his garment fit, but he puts it on close to his body, and then he
is ready for any employment: So it is here, when the grace is applied, then a
Christian is fit to walk with God in a holy course; as Luke 24.40. Luke 24.40.
Acts 2.3, 4. verses.
compared with the second of the Acts 3, 4. we shall see that the Lord gives a
supply of seasonable grace according to our necessities: In Luke the Text
says, Stay you in Jerusalem till you be clad with the Spirit from above; and
in the Acts, the Evangelist gives the meaning of the former place, and says,
The Spirit sat upon each of them; that is, GOD gave them abundance of grace to
fit them for their works; the Spirit spoke in them, and they spoke as the
Spirit gave them utterance. The Apostles had need of much wisdom and courage,
and therefore GOD gave them abundance of spiritual assistance, as in that
place is plain.

The issue of the point is this, Those that are in the Lord Jesus Christ, have
need every day to receive grace and quickening power from him, to enable them
to discharge such duties as the Lord requires of them.

1. God is the Author of all grace, Reas. 1.
and we have it not of our selves.

2. None of us can maintain that grace which we have, Reas. 2.
further than God will enable us.

3. Neither can any man put forth his grace further than GOD will stand by him:
Reas. 3.
So then, if the grace be Gods gift, and if none can maintain and keep his
grace when he has it, further than God enables him, nor can exercise or put
forth and use his grace aright without divine assistance, then it is needful
that we depend upon God for what we have or do: And if grace and aid to
perform any duty, comes only from the Lord Jesus, then it is very necessary,
that we have daily recourses to him for the same.

The Use is, Use.
to show us how humble we ought to be in our own eyes, and with what fear
and dread we should walk before God. Can we do nothing without Christ? then
walk tremblingly before him, lest he take away his Spirit from thee, and
withdraw the comfort of his grace from thy soul; for the Lord has scourges
enough for thee. The Apostle says, Phil. 2.12, 13.
Phil. 2.12, 13 Let us work out our salvation with fear and trembling, for it
is God that works in us the will and the deed even of his own good pleasure;
how ought we daily to fear, lest he that now offers mercy, never will offer
it more, and least he that now persuades the heart, will never persuade the
heart more. If all depends upon the Lord, and we have no grace except he give
it; and if we cannot maintain our grace, nor have any use of it, except he
enable us; then let us be willing to stoop to him in all obedience and
submission.

Is it so, Use. 2.
that we have daily need of strength and quickening from Christ, then you see
the fountain opened, oh look up toward heaven upon all occasions, and have
resort to the Lord Jesus for the having and continuing of whatsoever grace may
be profitable and comfortable for you. I would not have a Christian only lay
hold upon Christ to be justified by him, no, no, you must have your quickening
grace from Christ for the performance of every action. This is the excellency
of a Christian to be all in all in Christ, here in grace, as he would be
hereafter in glory. This is the reason why many Christians lay open their
nakedness, and why they have so many weaknesses. The ground is from hence; we
have not recourse to Christ for grace; as it is with a scanty garment, a great
part of the body is naked, because the garment is not able to cover all: so
grace in our selves is mavelous scanty; we have little patience, and are
therefore peevish at every turn; a little wisdom, and little humility, and
therefore pride ever and anon lifts up the heart: thus the mouths of the
wicked are opened, and the Name of God is dishonored by us, and the reason is,
because we do not resort to Christ to increase our spiritual growth, and to
receive new strength and ability from him to help us in all duties, that no
offense may be seen in our lives and conversations: as a man that has a long
garment, is covered over from head to foot; and as our Savior counsels the
Church of Laodicea, saying, Thou art wretched, poor, miserable, blind, and
naked, and therefore come buy of me gold tried in the fire, Rev. 3.17, 18.
that thou may be rich, and white raiment that thou may be clothed, etc.
So if we would go to Christ to have our garments lengthened, how chearely and
sweetly might we walk, beyond all exception of the devil himself?

Now it may be, Quest.
some poor soul will be ready to say, oh, it is true indeed, I confess there
is grace and power enough in the Lord Jesus to be had; and I have daily need to
go to Christ for succor and strength, but how may I get this grace from
Christ?

For answer hereof consider two things: Ans.
First, in what regard we must put on Christ. What it is to put on Christ.
Secondly, by what means we may put on Christ, and fetch virtue from him: If
we can apply this, we may walk cheerfully for ever after. Now we must put on
Christ in three respects, or three ways.

1. Put him on as a Savior, 1
that our sins may be pardoned, and that joy and peace may be continued to
us; for there is no pardon of sin, no assurance of Gods love, no peace of
conscience, no joy in the holy Ghost, but only from Christ. Luke 1.47. Luke
1.47
Elizabeth says, My soul rejoices in God my Savior; so though we be
guilty in our lives of the breach of Gods Commandments, and liable to all his
judgments threatened for the same, yet let us put on the Lord Jesus Christ to
save us; and when we are at odds with God, by reason of our sins, let us put
on Christ, as a peacemaker between him and us.

2. We must put on Christ as a Prophet to teach us, and as a Lord to cover all
our sins and corruptions for us; for he comes not only to save us from
sin, but to give us power to overcome all our sins; as David says, Ps.
51.12.
Uphold me with thy free Spirit; or, as the word is in the Original, Lord
stablish me with thy Kingly spirit. He calls it free, because Kings give great
gifts freely: as if he had said, My heart is very weak, and my affections out
of order, and marvellously overcome, good Lord give me that Kingly Spirit of
thine; and though I cannot command my heart, Lord command thou it; and though I
cannot conquer these mighty lusts of mine, Lord do thou conquer them for me:
Thanks be to God who has given us victory, 1 Cor. 15.57.
through our Lord Jesus Christ, says the Apostle; Romans 8.37
for we are more than conquerours, through him that loved us: only here is
the difference, men conquer not without loss, but we do; Again, they are not
sure of victory, though they do fight, but we are through Christ; Heb. 2.14.
For as much as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, Christ himself
also took part with them, that he might destroy through death him which had
the power of death, which is the Devil. See how the Lord Jesus did conquer all
our enemies by his death, and by his satisfying the justice of GOD, and
domineering over the power and malice of sin and Hell for us; Put on Christ
dying.
therefore put ye on Christ a dying Savior, that by virtue of his death Satan
may be subdued and brought under.

3. Put on Christ as an anointed Priest, 3
that you may be fitted for every duty which GOD requires at your hands. We
are made Priests to God the Father, through Christ; Romans 1.8.
I thank my God through Jesus Christ: It is a strange phrase, as though the
prayers and thanks of the Apostle were given up to GOD the Father, in the
virtue and power of Christ; By whom you also as lively stones be made a
spiritual house, 1 Pet. 2.4. A spiritual house.
and holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God in
Christ. The Lord Jesus is the head stone of the corner, and if we would come
to him as a living stone, Verse. 3.
Verse 3. then we shall be made a royal Priesthood. Only thus much, see how
Christ did triumph over sin and hell, it was by the power of his
resurrection; therefore as before we put on Christ dying, Put on Christ rising.
so now we must put on Christ rising: it is he that has the keys of Hell and
death; therefore let our souls be enlarged to rise from the grave of sin,
and to walk for ever in newness of life.

Some will object and say, Quest.
We know there is comfort enough in the Lord Christ, and he can conquer all our
sins for us, and we ought to put him on daily, but how may we do this?

The means whereby we must put on Christ, Answ.
The means to put on Christ.
they are three especially.

1. We must put off something, 1
and be uncloathed, before we can be clothed upon. Now there are two things to
be put off; First, put off all thy bosom abominations, Put off all sins.
and all those menstrous clothes, which Esaias speaks of, we must not listen
after our own lusts, nor be carried away by the power of corruption: though
temptation within comes, and occasions without arise, be not overswayed to any
sin; For by these means you withdraw your selves from the assistance of the
Lord Jesus, and his Spirit cannot take any place in your hearts, his grace will
not work, because you set sin on work.

Therefore let us put off all our darling lusts and corruptions, and when we
have casheered them, we shall be fit to receive grace. The Angel spoke to
Joshua, Zach 3.3, 4.
Put off thy filthy garments, and I will give thee change of raime^t; that is,
abundance of grace to carry thee on in a good course: If we live in the
spirit, Gal. 5.25, 26.
let us walk in the spirit. How is that? Let us not be desirous of vain glory,
provoking one another, and envying one another: As if he had said, If you
listen to pride and vainglory, you cannot walk in the spirit. Christ Jesus
must be next the heart; he will not give you outward honors, and the like,
that you may keep your secret lusts; No, no, grace and Christ must be nearest
the soul of all.

The second thing that must be put off is this, 2
We must deny our selves.
we must renounce our selves. What is that? We must renounce all sufficiency
and ability that is in us, that we may be under the power and assistance of
the Spirit: He that will trust to himself and his own ability, never can nor
shall receive any such supply of grace from Christ to strengthen him, as
otherwise God would give, and he might enjoy; therefore the Apostle wishes,
Oh that I might be found in him, Phil. 3.9.
not having mine own righteousness.

Before, Paul boasted, that he was a Pharisee; If any man (says he) has
whereof he might rejoice, much more I, circumcised the eight day of the
kindred of Israel, and the like: He had a gay coat, and he was marvellously
proud of it, but when the Lord Christ came to save him, he rent it all in
pieces; he counted his former garments, and all his furniture as nothing, and
cast all under his feet. No soldier puts two Helmets on his head at once, and
no man wears two shoes on one foot.

It is pretty to consider it even in nature; as it is with a boat that stands
partly upon the stream, and partly upon the ground; so long as it is thus the
stream cannot carry it; but commit the boat wholly to the stream, and then it
glides along easily: So it is with our souls, while we rest partly upon
Christ, and partly upon our own strength, and what our parts and wit can do;
the power of our Lord Jesus Christ will never carry us, nor enable us so
chearefully to go on in a Christian course, as otherwise we might do. It is
true, the Lord has given us power to do what he requires, but the first
moving of grace is not in our selves; the Fountain is in Christ, and to him we
must first go, and from him have our graces supplied and strengthened.

Here is the cause why many a Christian finding himself weak, and his
corruptions strong, is much daunted, because he looks only to himself; and
when any temptation stirs, and his lusts move, presently he begins to
quarrel with his own heart, and says, Never any man had such a heart as I
have; by which means he is more troubled than before, and pores only upon his
sins, whereas he should go to Christ for grace. Sin in our souls is too
hard and strong for the power that is in our selves, but it is not too hard for
the grace that is in Christ; he is the fountain of holiness, and if we look
to our selves we go to a wrong place; as a child though he have life in him,
yet he cannot walk except his father lead him; so we are all such children even
the best of Gods people, though we have some grace, yet Christ must quicken us
by his Spirit, and raise us up, and support us by his grace, and then we can
walk cheerfully.

This is the reason why many a poor weak Christian walks comfortably and
sweetly, when many an old stander falls often; because when an old Christian
has gotten a little wisdom and grace, he thinks then he can go of
himself, and then his peace is forgotten; and therefore many times the Lord
withdraws his Spirit, and here he falls into this sin, and that sin gets the
upper hand of him; whereas a poor soul that sees his own weakness, and
mournes under it, seeks earnestly to Christ that he would raise up his heart,
and that he would strengthen him with his grace, and this man walks
cheerfully. While little children are under the Nurse, they never fall, but are
safe enough; but when they are gone from the Nurse, then here they fall, and
there they fall; sometime into the fire, sometime into the water: So it is with
us, while we go into the hands of Christ, and look for grace from him, all
this while, though never so feeble in our selves, we receive much strength and
succor from above; but when we begin to trust to our selves, and say, What
need we look up to Christ now? God has enlightened us, and pardoned our
sins, and given us grace, now we can go of our selves; then we fall most
shamefully, then we are much distempered, and lose all our peace, and all our
assistance from Christ.

Suppose a child and old man be swimming, the child that knows how to do
it, he commits himself to the Stream, and so he swims easily; but the strong
man thinks he can do it of himself, and so he strikes with his foot, and
will not suffer the water to carry him, he stands with one foot on the ground,
and strikes the water with the other; (this is not swimming, but going) till at
last he sinkes, and is drowned: So it is with a poor soul, when he commits
himself to the stream of Gods grace, he goes on comfortably in a Christian
course; but when we rest upon our own ability, and on what we can do, the
Spirit of grace does not carry us, nor the promise ever assist us, and how can
we then subsist, Ier. 10.23.
for it is not in man to direct his own ways?

S. Paul says, I live, and yet not I, but Christ lives in me: That is, I
must first be (as) dead in my self before I can live in Christ; so should
every child of God say, It is not I that have zeal, and quickening of my
self, it must be given me from above.

The second means whereby Christ may be put on, 2
is this, when the soul is once made naked, then Faith takes the Robe, this
glorious Robe of Gods grace, and brings it home to the heart; for faith is not
only a hand that lays hold on Christ for justification, but it is a shield
also that receives virtue from Christ, for our farther sanctification.

Christ is the fountain of all grace, and faith is the Conduit which conveyes
grace from Christ to the soul. How faith puts on Christ.
Now faith helps us in these three particular actions.

First, 1
it is Faith that closes with the spirit of grace; in every promise of God there
is the spirit of grace truly and constantly, accompanying the same; My Word and
my Spirit both go together; as our Savior said, The words that I speak are
spirit and life. Now when the soul of a Christian can close with the promise,
it closes also with the grace in the promise; They that are in Christ are one
spirit with him. Romans 8.10
If the Spirit of Christ be in you, the body is dead, because of sin, but the
Spirit is life for righteousness sake, says the Apostle, We have most great
and precious promises given to us, that by them we should be partakers of the
Divine nature. Where we see, that the Spirit of Christ accompanies the
promises; and therefore laying hold upon the promises, we close with the
Spirit; and hereby come to be partakers of the Divine nature. I compare the
Spirit of grace to the Seal, and the soul to the Wax, and Faith is the hand
which sets on this Seal. By faith we cause the spirit to work and fit its
particular aid and relief, for the leaving of any impression of grace upon
the soul.

The next work of Faith is this, 2
it not only closes with Gods Spirit in the promise, but it looks at that
particular grace in Christ which we stand in need of, that it may be wrought
in our hearts; as if a man want patience, or love, wisdom, humility, or the
like, Faith closes with the promise, and brings the same stamp into the
soul, which is in the promise, as in those two places; John 1.16. Of his
fullness have we all received grace for grace; Ioh. 1.16.
that is, whatsoever grace is in Christ, we do receive the same from him; As
he was patient, he makes us so; as he was wise, and meek, and holy, he makes
us so: as in a Seal, look how many letters be upon the Seal, so many stampes
will be left upon the wax. Faith looks at all the particular graces that are
in Christ. As the same power that is in the head, is also in the ear, and eye,
and hand: So the same Holy GHOST which wrought grace in the humanity of Christ,
works patience in adversity, and courage to bear persecution; and in
ignorance, it enlightens a man's eyes, and makes him look to Heaven.

That is a notable place, 2 Cor. 3. where the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 3.18.
We all behold as in a mirror the glory of the Lord with open face, and are
changed into the same Image; from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord.
The glory of the Lord is nothing else but the glorious grace of God; and
beholding it, is, when we see the glorious grace given to Christ: and again,
the same Spirit that made Christ meek, and wise, and holy, the same Spirit
makes us poor in spirit, and meeke-hearted, like to him. Therefore look not
only on Christ for grace in general, but for particular strength and
assistance in every performance.

3. The last act of Faith is, 3
it not only closes with the promise, and the Spirit in the same; it not only
looks at that particular grace which is in Christ: but faith draws virtue
from the Lord Jesus, that so grace may be imprinted in, and conveyed into the
soul; therefore says the Prophet, With joy shall ye draw water from the Well
of salvation. Esaias 12.3.
He does not only say, there is water therein, but we may draw water from
thence, and faith does it thus; when a sinner with full persuasion settles
himself with what God has promised, it shall be done to the soul for the good
thereof, as in Ezech. 36. A new heart will I give you, Ezech. 36.26, 27.
and I will put my Spirit into your hearts, and cause you to walk in my ways.
He does not only give grace, but quickens that grace, and causes men to walk
holily and sweetly.

Nay further, if Faith finds the heart dejected, and unfit to pray, see how it
gripes and lays hold on the promises, saying, Lord, I find my soul dead in
the performance of duty, and mavelous untoward, and awke to a holy life.
Lord, thou have said thou will cause thy people to walk boldly in thy way, oh
give me courage, and life, and quickening. As that poor woman by touching the
Hemme of Christ's garment, drew virtue from him; so faith lays hold upon the
hemme of Christ's garment, and gains refreshment.

3. The third and last means to put on Christ, 3
is this, having thus denied our selves, our own lusts and sufficiency, and
having closed with the promise, and the spirit of grace in the same, the last
means is meditation, that is, when the soul turned it self wholly to that
grace which is in Christ it pores not altogether upon sin and corruption, for
then you go of from Christ. This meditation keeps the soul upon the stream,
as faith casts it upon the stream. As the branch cannot bring forth any fruit,
Ioh. 15.4.
except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me. Now we
abide in Christ, when the eye is set upon Christ, when the tongue talks of
Christ, and the mind museth of him, and the affections are settled toward him;
but when the mind is taken off the promise, and the comforts that are therein,
and wholly puzzels it self, by thinking of temptations or inward corruptions,
then men are soon prevailed against, and overcome. If the Devil can pluck
your minds from the promise, and cast your thoughts wholly upon your
corruptions, he has enough. Suppose there be two fountains, the one full of
puddle water, and the other full of clear water, and there are two cocks for
these fountains; if a man be always turning the cock that comes from the
puddle fountain, can he look for any other than foul water? So there is a
fountain of grace in Christ, and in the promise, and there is a fountain of
corruption in our selves, and meditations is as the cocks coming from these:
Now if we be ever meditating what we are, and what we have, and what we do,
and what we deserve, there is nothing but fear, and horror, and
discouragement, and the puddle water comes amain.

The nature of meditation is excellent in this kind, and it shows it self in
these three particulars.

First, hereby we bring Christ and grace near unto us, and we put on our
communion upon every occasion; 1
it makes the promise to be within a man's reach (as I may say.) David says,
Psalm. 119.98, 99.
Thou through thy Commandments have made me wiser than mine enemies, for they
are ever with me; and I have more understanding than all my teachers, for thy
testimonies are my meditation. Meditation makes the Commandments to be ever
with a man, when troubles and temptation come, Meditation brings Christ near,
and the promise close to the soul. If pride be near us, then meditation
brings near the humility of Christ, and makes that to be ever with a man. If
covetousness be near, then meditation brings near the heavenly mindedness
of Christ, and that is ever with a man to aid him; and so in all other things.
You poor people of God, of whatsoever condition you are, hold fast a constant
meditation of the promise, and at last you shall see that grace will come from
heaven into your souls.

Secondly, meditation gathers up all the power that is in the promise, and
daily finds a great deal of sweetness and power to come from the same, as
Heb. 13. He has said, Heb. 13.6.
I will not fail thee nor forsake thee. Now Meditation works thus; Has God
said so? there is infinite mercy and wisdom, compassion and goodness in him.
Will the Lord never leave me, will he never forsake me? It is enough, it is a
free, gracious, constant and faithful promise, I may safely rest upon it. Thus
the soul is fully contented and quieted, though all other comforts in the
world fail. This is the reason, why we are taken aside so much, and
discouraged with every little cross and trouble, because we consider not the
freedom, and excellency of the promise; if we ask a poor soul, whether this
be his promise, or no; and will you part with this promise, in this cold
blood? he can say, Yes, I thank God it is mine, and I would not be without it
for any thing; it is far more sweet than any riches, pleasures, or profits
whatsoever. Oh brethren, why should this trash delude us? and why are we so
much dismayed at the loss of these things here below? Sure it is because we
weigh not the excellency of the promise, and the things are above. When the
devil says, Thou will be poor, and the times are hard, and thou and thine
will come to great misery, then Meditation goes to the promise, and seeing the
excellency of it, says, If I be poor, Christ is rich, and he is mine; if I
be a wretched creature in my self, Christ is blessed and beloved of his Father,
he is mine. The earth is all the Lords, and the fullness thereof, and he has
said, he will deny me nothing that is good: If GOD be mine, in conclusion, all
is mine.

Look as it is with a garment, the more full it is, the more comely it is; so
when Meditation brings all the promises home, it is full. I want power (says
the soul;) there is abundance of power in the Lord Jesus, says Meditation; I
want mercy (says the soul;) then Meditation steps in, and says, There is
mercy enough in Christ, and all his goodness from everlasting to everlasting
is thine; hereupon the soul goes away wonderfully contented and cheared. See
how comfortably the Martyrs passed through the very flames, in consideration
hereof: Ps. 16.8,
I have set God ever before my eyes, and because he is at my right hand, I
cannot be moved. That is, God will give me sufficient aid, and assistance in
all extremities. When a man continually sets God before his eyes, and thinks
and talks of nothing but Christ, how joyous may such a one be? but when the
heart of a man is dazzled, and his mind either looking for some sufficiency
from within, or some glory from without, this withdrawes the power of the
promise from him; as if a Preacher did see nothing but the Lord, and aim at
him only, and give himself wholly to his disposal, and receive all his
strength only for him, what need he care what men think or say of him? If
you would do thus, you should find a bundance of peace and comfort from the
Almighty.

The third work of Meditation is this, 3
It fastens the promise more strongly upon the soul, and, as it were, rivets
the soul to the promise, and even fastens the promise into the heart; as if a
man do always meditate of some injury done to him, and says, thus and thus
he has wronged me, but I will requite him; and as he has done to me, so I
will deal by him again; such a man is even drowned in his misery; he cannot
sleep or speak, eat or drink, nor do any thing, but his mind is ever upon
his injury.

This spiritual Meditation will (as it were) drown a man in the promise, so
that at last he thinks and talks of nothing but the promise, still the Lord
Jesus Christ is near him, and he is so fastened to him, that he walks on
chearily in all estates; if any misery or temptation comes, the promise is so
cheer full to him, that he regards them not. That is the phrase of the
Wiseman, Pro. 4.14.
Take hold fast of instruction, let her not go, for she is thy life. The
devil, the world, and our sins would pluck away Christ and grace from us,
but let not the promise go, think, and talk still of it, pray and strive for
the continuance of the same.

Now to work this a little into your hearts, Use.
the Apostle says, Col. 2.6.
that as you have received Christ, so walk you in him. I beseech you, walk in
the power and spirit of Christ, and let the virtue received from him, appear
in your lives and conversations. It is a strange passage in the 2 Corinthians. 2
Cor. 13.3
13. If any man require a Testimony of Christ speaking in me, etc. The Lord
Jesus indicted all the words of S. Paul, and Christ himself spoke by all his
faithful servants; Oh what a comfort would this be to a poor child of GOD,
that (it may be) has not a ragge to cover his body withal, yet he is clothed
with the robe of Jesus Christ! Oh how holy our conversation would be, if
Christ would speak in us, and for us, that when any temptation comes, we may
have recourse to the Lord for succor! If the soul be troubled with pride,
and the heart begins to bubble up with revenge and malice against a man that
has done him wrong, and men lie against all sense and reason, and this begins
to stir a man: how will you help your selves: Thus, look up to heaven, and
say, Now I see the thing I must labor for is a humble soul; Truth Lord, it is
not in me to pull down and tame mine own heart; Lord, do thou work this
grace in me.

It is a shame to pride our selves, and say, These are my parts and gifts, I
will know my place, and seek for respect in the world.

No, no, this is the next way to be overcome of corruption; rather say, Lord,
it is not in this sinful heart of mine to be humble, it is not in my power to
put up an injury, but Lord, there is an infinite power in thee; Oh blessed
Redeemer, let that good Spirit that wought humility in thee, work the same in
me, and give me a meek and heavenly heart.

And if the promise come not suddenly, yet look up once again, and say, Lord,
thou have said thou will make thy servant to walk humbly before thee, is it not
a free, constant, and faithful promise? Hold here thy holy meditation, and at
last grace and aid will come to make us humble. You must not put on Christ as
your holy day clothes, a man must put on Christ, not only in the morning in
prayer time, as he confesses and bewaileth his sins, and then leave Christ
in his house or closet; no, no, you have as much need of your garments abroad,
as in the house, therefore wear Christ all the day long, and go clad with him
continually, and be able to converse and trade in Christ. Put on Christ in
every thing; in buying and in selling, in eating and in drinking, and in all
things. When you have any duty to be done, consider what grace is most
needful, and repair to him for the same.

Would you put on Christ in eating and drinking, then say thus; O Lord, it is
not in my soul to be thankful and sober, therefore give me that Spirit of
thine which wrought secretly upon others: Oh blessed Redeemer, let that good
Spirit work also in me, that I may take all from thy hand, and receive
strength from all, and honor thee by all. If this were once in us, how
comfortably should we live? As S. Paul says, It is the Lord Jesus that lives
in me; so we should say, It is the Lord Christ that does all things in me.

Little children, 1 Ioh. 2.28.
dwell in GOD, (as the Apostle says:) Do you desire any grace? go to the
Lord Christ then, and put him on; he will take measure of al your wants, he
will enable you to do whatsoever is commanded: He that thus walks with Christ
here, shall live with him for ever hereafter. Many a man in his death knows
what he has in the world, and knows how to dispose them, but he knows not
what shall become of himself, when he is gone from hence; oh what a comfort
will this be, that as he has ever conversed with Christ here, so he shall
enjoy everlasting society with him in heaven; he shall go to his Savior that
has been in him, and has walked with him; he had communion with CHRIST
here, and shall have fullness of joy at his right hand for ever. Thus much of
the first means.

The second is this, 2
we must not give any advantage to Satan, or our own flesh. By flesh is meant
original corruption, or that unframeablenesse of the body and soul, which has
taken possession of the whole man. By the lusts of the flesh is meant, that
inclination which it has to any evil, and that which with-draws a man from
any good: These are lustings of pride, and malice, and worldliness, putting
forward the soul to the commission of evil. By fulfilling the lusts of the
flesh is meant, when we bring these inward lustings of the heart forth into
outward practice, as when pride says, we must do this or that presently, we
do it; and when covetousness says, Do this, and straight we do it; and so
in other things.

Make no provision for the flesh. From this later clause of the Verse we may
observe these four points.

1 The best of GODS children (though they are spiritual and holy) have flesh
and corruptions in them.

2 This corruption stirs up many inclinations to sin, it has many
provocations to draw us to commit evil, and hinders us from much good. These I
shall pass over, and pitch only upon the two last.

3. The third doctrine is this, we must not be provident for our corruptions,
as a good husband will do for his outward estate; or thus, we must not give
way to the practice of these sins which we are prone to by reason of corrupt
nature: This is plainly laid down by the Spirit of God in many places; as
Deuter. 12.28. and Prove. 23.27. Look not thou upon the Wine when it is red,
when it gives the color in the cup. He does not only say, Thou shall not
drink too much, but thou must not look upon the redness of the Wine, thou
must withdraw thy self from the inticements of any sin. God is so careful
this way, when he would fence thy soul against any sin, as that he will
not give way to the least enticement to it, specially in the point of Idolatry;
You shall not marry with them, nor live amongst them, but break down their
Images, and burn down their Groves; Nay, thou shall not make mention of
Idolatry in thy mouth. We must not maintain the monuments of Idolatry, Nor
name them giving them any honor.

But here the question will be asked, Quest.
What it is then to make provision for the flesh, that we may know whether we
do make provision for it or no?

This implies three particulars especially. Ans.


1. When a man bestows his meditation upon those sinful corruptions that
stir within him, and is always poreing upon them by meditation, we warm
our wicked hearts. As the Adulterer thinks of his dalliances, and the
occasions of them, and even sucks out the sweetness of those sins by
meditation; so the wrathful man blows up his impatience, and increases it by
meditation; Oh (says he) he has bin beholding to me, and yet he has
wronged me thus and thus: so the heart is all in a light flame with anger.

When the heart settles its thoughts upon a man's lusts, he has never done; as
a poor man poares upon this and that misery, and of the dangerous hazard he
and his may come to: So meditations fastens upon some sin, and this breeds
consent, delight, and desire, and at last he resolves he will have it; as in a
family, if the master do provide for it, he sets his meditation upon what he
will have, so much of this, and so much of that; this is one part of provision
for his house, his meditation.

2 The second work of provision lies in Consultation, as when the soul has
resolved to have his lusts, as to do an injury, and to vent his malice; it
sits (as it were) at Counsel Table, how to contrive that which the soul longs
after.

He consults of the time when, the place where, and the means by which his
lusts may be attained, as may appear in some passages that way, 1 Kings 21.9.
Ahab was sick for Naboths Vineyard, and Iezabel would provide it for him; Ahab
had the first part of provision, his heart was set upon it, and he went home
sick of covetousness; and his wife comes to him, and said, Oh fool, art thou
a King in Israel, and stand sweating here for the Vineyard of a base slave
thy subject? Arise, eat bread, and lot thy heart be merry, I will devise such
a course, that it shall be thine: See what provision this whorish woman makes,
as all such people are mavelous cunning that way: She writes letters in
Ahabs name, and sends them to the Rulers of the City, and bids them proclaim a
fast, and set Naboth on high among the people, and then Knights of the post
must be suborned to bear false witness against him, and to say that he did
blaspheme God and the King; thus the poor man lost his life.

3 The last work of provision is, the putting in practice those cursed means
which the heart has plotted and attained unto; this is that which I observe,
Pro. 7. by that adulterous woman, verse 16. I have decked my bed with Coverings
and Tapestry, come therefore let us take our fill with love; the good man is
not at home, he is gone a long journey: he has taken a bag of money with
him, and will not come again until the time appointed. Thus she beguiles the
innocent, carrying him on, not knowing that he is going to the chamber of
destruction; therefore we must not bestow our thoughts on our corruptions, nor
advise with them. We use to say, Such a one is very painful, but he is not
provident, he never thinks on his business, how then can he effect it? so
when we do not meditate upon our lusts, when we consult not of them, and
practice no means to fulfill the same, it cannot be said that we make
provision for the flesh.

1 This does condemn, Use.
first, them whose care, pains and diligence is wholly spent to give their
carnal cursed hearts content. Some there be, of whom the Wiseman speaks,
Pro. 4.15, 16.
Enter not into the path of the wicked, for they sleep not except they have
done mischief. As if he had said, They are in commons with the devil, they
cannot be content to be drunken themselves, and unclean, themselves, but they
must draw others to it: thus they make provision for the devil, nay, they keep
house with him, and sit at the same Table, and their hands are in the same dish
with him; it is their meat and drink to practice whatsoever may give Satan
and their own cursed hearts content. Ier. 4.22.
My people is foolish, says the Lord, they have not known me; they are
sottish children, they are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no
understanding at all. A man that knows nothing of his peace, that after many
instructions is not informed, and his mind is not enlightened, and knows
nothing of God, or Christ, yet mavelous witty he is to do evil; he will
undermine any man's practice, and many secret fetches he has to procure his
carnal will; what is this but to provide for the flesh?

Secondly, such are here reproved also, who, howsoever they can curb their
tongues and their hands, and refrain some gross sins, yet they make no
bones of bad thoughts, and their provision is within; they think thought is
free, and if a man can bridle himself in some outward evils, he may muse of his
injuries, and of his lusts, and he may give his wild heart liberty to think
what he will: the case is clear, meditation is the hold of Satan, and it is
(as it were) the sinews of all corruptions; the mind is (as I may so say) the
very Shopp and Warehouse of all wickedness, and from hence comes
drunkenness, adultery, and every work of darkness; yea, this meditation is
as the Anvile, where all base speeches and sinful actions are forged: all our
sinful devises are first framed here inwardly, and then we bring them forth
into practice outwardly. It is suspicious whether there is not a greater power
of corruption to be seen by Meditation, than by any means of the world
besides?

I compare Meditation to the distilling of waters: The cunning Alchymists will
fetch a spirit out of any thing almost. Meditation is as it were a distillation
of our corruptions, and draws out the heart and life of them; as a man may
eat a thing, and get no hurt by it, but if he takes the Oil that comes from
it, it is present death: so we play the Alchymists, and suck out the very life
of our corruptions. Thus a base adulterer commits a thousand abominations in
his mind, when as in regard of the weakness of his body, and want of
opportunity, he cannot do one. See how a man distills covetousness, and draws
the life and power of it, every thing that he sees, is his own, and he
wishes all his friends dead that he might enjoy all their goods. Ier, 4.14.
GOD complains marvellously of Jerusalem in this very particular, not only
for the sins of their lives, but of their hearts; he does not say, How long
shall your adulteries or drunkennesses remain? but, How long shall thy vain
thoughts lodge within thee? wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may
be saved.

Some will say, What if a man cannot get power against them, what danger is
there?

The Lord tells me what danger there is: Oh Jerusalem, says he, Wash thy heart
from wickedness: Not only wipe thy mouth (as the Harlot does,) no, wash thy
heart that thou may be saved. As if he had said, This heart and thought of
wickedness will deprive thee of Heaven: So the Lord says to you, Oh wash your
hearts you adulterous, and wash your hearts you drunkards, and you covetous
wretches; its as much as your souls are worth, if you continue in it;
howsoever I confess the best of Gods children are taken aside by this sinful
distemper, yet it is the greatest burden of their souls, and they are never
quiet till they get victory over it in some good measure; but when a man's
meditations are wholly carried away in this kind, and he is content with it,
this is a manifest brand of one that never had the power of grace in his heart.
The Lord by the Wiseman, Prove. 12.2.
says, A man of wicked devices will he condemn; he has enough to sink his
soul for ever. He does not say, A man that has practiced wickedness
outwardly, but he that is a man of wicked meditations, and is always thinking
of his lusts, and of his corruptions, the Lord says, he will condemn him for
it; it is a brand of one that is yet in the gall of bitterness. I beseech you
brethren, for Christ his sake take notice of it, and not only make conscience
of sin outwardly, but even of every sinful imagination, and the
contemplative wickedness of your soul; and let me say to you as the Lord said
to this people, How long shall your wicked thoughts lodge within you?

Secondly, Use.
here is a point of instruction; whence we may know, how to judge of such as
are daily devising and consulting how to draw others from a good course.
Sometimes a carnal friend, and sometime a cursed neighbor labors either by
vile counsel, or by discouragements of some devilish devices to draw a man
from a holy course, and from the power of godliness; whatsoever he is, judge
him a Factor for the devil, and as one that makes provision for his lusts. I
may fitly compare such wicked counselors to the devils purveyors; they bring
all their provision to his Storehouses. These vile wretches would stuff our
hearts with these cursed devices, and carnal reasons, to withdraw us from
godliness; oh tumble them all out, and let not the purveyors of hell lay their
lodging here, nor take place in our hearts.

When our Savior Christ told Peter, Mat. 16.22, 23.
that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders, and
Highpriests, and be slain; Peter took him aside, and began to rebuke him,
saying, Master, pity or favor thy self, these things shall not be unto thee;
here was the counsel of Peter, or rather the devil in him: But see how Christ
shakes him off; Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense to me, because
thou understandest not the things that are of God, but of man: So when carnal
friends say, Oh, away with this too much praying, and what needs all this
strictness in sanctifying the Lords day, and the like; beware of such: these
are impes of darkness, and the devils Purveyors, they would lay up their
provision in your hearts, that you may give entertainment to Satan; and
therefore shake them off, as Christ did Peter, and say, Get thee behind me
Satan. As you tender your own happiness, get your hearts fenced against all
these cursed persuasions.

The fourth and last point from these words, Doct. 4.
is this, He that makes provision for his corruptions, shall certainly be
overcome by them; he that provides for sin, shall certainly be drawn to
yield obedience to sin.

The Doctrine is raised from the connection of the words; Make no provision for
the flesh, (says the Apostle,) for if you do provide for them, you will
fulfill the lusts of the flesh: In conclusion, a provider for lust will be a
fulfiller of lust; he that gives way to occasions of sin, will be overtaken
with occasions. Can any man touch pitch, and not be defiled? No surely,
touching and defiling go both together; so it was from the beginning, and so it
will be to the end of the world.

See this in Eve, Genesis 3.
the only way for the devil to come upon her, was to parley with her: First,
he labors to make way for thought and meditation, and therefore he does not
speak any thing affirmatively, but makes a question to fish out an occasion
that he might take advantage: Yea, (says he) has God said, ye shall not
eat of every tree in the garden? and she said to him, Of the fruit of the
tree which is in the midst of the Garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat,
lest ye die. When the devil saw that she was (as it were) discontented,
because she might not eat of it, he was glad of that, and said, Is the wind
in that do ore, then I have enough; I tell thee, says he, Ye shall not die at
all, but when ye eat thereof you shall be as Gods. Thus she took in from
Satan provision of his, and so was overcome.

Another proof is, Iam. 1.15. Iam. 1.15.
When lust has conceived, it brings sin, and when sin is finished, it
brings forth death. Look as it is with a fish when the fisherman throws in
his bait; first, the fish looks upon it, then she follows it, and afterward
she feeds upon it: so the soul begins to look after a lust, and fixes his
meditations upon it, and when lust has conceived, then it brings forth
sin. In the conception of lust, sin is generated in the heart, as it is
with corn that is sown in a field, if the ground be fit for bearing, first
the earth warmes the seed; secondly, it conveyes a kind of moisture into it,
and at last it brings forth a blade, and so grows up till it come to the Ear:
so it is with the soul, the spawne of corruption is original sin, but
Meditation that warmes it, and Consultation provides moisture to feed this
distemper, and this brings forth sin presently in practice, and that brings
forth death and damnation.

Our Savior says, that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks;
and, Psalm. 7. Behold, he travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived
mischief, and brought forth falsehood. A man conceives a corruption thus: When
his own vile heart is stirred up to sin, then his mind is settled upon that
thing, and straight way he grows big of it, as it is with a traveling
woman, at last it comes to the birth. Meditation warmes sin, and Consultation
makes the soul grow bigg of sin, and so men bring forth a cursed brood of
abominations into the world.

It is notable in that of Samson; first, he comes to the Harlot, then he
parlies with her, he sets his heart upon her, he fell asleep in her lap, and
at last he loses his hair, and his strength, though he had his pleasure for
the while. Though a man were as strong as Samson in grace, if he will needs
come as he did, and dally with occasions, my life for his, he shall lose his
comfort, and be overthrown by his abominations.

But how comes this to pass, that if a man will provide for his flesh, he
shall be a slave to his lusts?

The Reasons are two: How men become slaves to their lusts.


First, in regard of sin it self, because thereby we give great advantage to
sin.

Secondly, in regard of Grace; we do exceedingly hinder the work of Grace,
which otherwise might be helpful to us, for the avoiding or sin.

1. By making provision for the flesh, as I have showed, we give much
advantage to sin and Satan, who lies at catch to foil us in a Christian
course; by this means we put a kind of life into the lusts of the flesh, we
do (what lies in us) put strength into the hands of sin, that it may wound
us by those occasions we meddle withal. We use to say in the phrase of
Scripture, that the Saints of God should blow up and kindle in their hearts the
graces that are in them, and there is a way whereby they may do it as S. Paul
tells his scholars, 2 Timothy 1.6. so there is way whereby corruption may be
quickened and set on a light flame, and that is done by Meditation, which as it
stirs up the soul marvellously to seek to God for more grace, so on the
contrary, it inflames corruption; it is called the old man, because it has
possession of all the whole frame of body and soul.

As it is with an old weak man, naturally, he faints and falls into a heavy
sound, and seems to be clean gone; but now how will you help this man, and
bring him to himself again? the only way is this, we use to chafe his body,
and put in some Aquavitae into his mouth, and so at last he gathers heat,
looks up, and speaks, and in the end he walks; thus a weak body may be
strong for a time: Just so it is with our old man, which we have all in us.

Suppose a man before his conversion were given to drunkenness or
uncleanness, and howsoever God has been pleased to draw him to himself, and
one would think he should never be unclean or drunk more; yet
notwithstanding the old man is not wholly dead; he is almost going away, he
lies even a dying, and it were a blessed thing for that person, if the old man
were utterly dead in him. But woe unto us, what pains do we daily take that
this old man may live within us? we chafe him, and keep him warm; we quicken
up that cursed disposition that is in us, by Meditation, we stir up that
wickedness that is in our hearts, and bestow our minds upon it.

As the drunkard often thinks of his wonted daliances how sweet and pleasant they
have been unto him, and so he that has been an adulterer; by means whereof
the old man begins to gather life again, he stands up and walks; in so much
that the poor soul begins to fear, and is forced to say, Good Lord, was I
ever truly wrought upon, was my heart ever thoroughly broken for these sins?

Alas brethren, it is no wonder; you make too much of the old man, you power
life into him, and are still contriving for him, and ever thinking how pleasing
this way, these fleshly means, and sinful courses were: the ground is here,
you give strength and ability to corruption to prevail against you. As it is
with fire, if a man have plenty of wood, though there were but a little coal
of fire, every man would say, that by blowing, it will be a great flame in the
end: So there is still a coal of corruption in us all, there is a coal of
pride and peevishness, idleness and untowardnesse, a cursed body of death
remaining in the best of us, and will be whilst we carry these houses of clay
about us. But a man by Meditation and Consultation kindles this coal, they
bring the wood, and blow up the fire, and make a man fall in love with his
parts and his place, and if he be not regarded, then he is all on a flame with
anger, and the fire burns abundantly, and then he cries out of his misery. Why
do you blow the fire then?

When an enemy lies in the field to besiege a City, if he have neither meat
nor any munition, he will not tarry long; but if the people within send him
provision, it is no wonder though they be overthrown by him: so this
Meditation makes provision, and Consultation sends it to the enemy.

The second part of this Reason is this, as we add strength to our
corruptions, so meditation is as an invitation of the devil to come and tempt
us; thereby we give money to the devil, and subject our selves, and our souls
to the powers of temptations, as occasions are offered to us; so that we must
either be captivated or overtaken by them.

When we conceive highly of our own abilities, we wish pride to come and
exalt us, and Consultation of the means to accomplish our lusts, is (as it
were) the setting open the doors for the devil to come and welcome. Look
what ever the Meditations are set upon, the heart is under the power and
strength of that sin; and look how far a man meditates on it, so far it
prevails with him, and domineers over him.

As it is with a pair of floodgates, when they are set open, it lets in the
Stream amain, that carries all before it; so Meditation upon any base
occasion sets open the flood-gate, that it carries the soul amain to the
practice of any sin; he (as it were) invites the devil to come and supp
with him. Judas, that covetous wretch, when he saw the box of ointment
broken, said, What need all this waste? But alas, he did it not because he
cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and had the bag.

Where we may observe this by the way, He that is a covetous man indeed, that
is under the power of that lust, give him opportunity, and he will theeve more
or less. The devil full well saw Judas his covetous heart, (oh, thought he,
if I had this hundred pence in my pocket, I were made for ever,) therefore in
another place the Text says, The devil entered into Judas: How is that? The
devil cast into the mind of Judas to betray his Master; Go thy ways, says
he, betray thy Master, and thou may have so much money, and thy Master will
escape well enough. Thus Satan took possession of him, and prevailed with him
to do that for which he had formerly consulted about: And he went out and
betrayed his Master. By giving way to the devil, at last he was overcome by
him.

The Reason is this, If by Meditation and Consultation of our corruptions, we
give strength to corruption, and yield to the flesh, then the devil will
overcome us; but so it is, that by this provision we give force, and put more
power into our lusts, and make way for them, and submit our selves to them, and
therefore shall be overcome by them.

The second Reason is Reas. 2.
taken from the hinderance of the work of grace, whereby we might be
fortified against our corruptions: and that we do, these two ways.

1. By daily musing of our sins and corruptions we dead the work of grace
in our hearts; in so much, that it is either dead, and will not work, or else
it is crowded that it cannot work. This Meditation and Consultation so take up
the soul, that the heart has no liberty to work, there is no room for faith,
and patience, and heavenly mindedness.

As it is in some great places when there is some great provision to be made,
then every man is busied; one man is sent one way, and another man another, and
the Nobleman is without attendance, and he wonders what is become of all his
men, when as they are all gone to make provision for his guests: so it is with
the soul, when a man lets out all his mind and thoughts, his reason,
affections, and desires after his lusts, it is no wonder such a one cannot
believe; why, what is become of faith, and hope, and patience in him? They are
all making provision for the flesh, and there is no attendance for faith, that
sits alone in the soul, because all the whole stream of the heart and mind
is employed in hunting after vanities.

Now in this extremity ask the poor soul if he have any assurance of Gods
love, or any stirrings of grace, he will answer no, no; the reason is, they
have spent all their thoughts upon fear, and doubting, and discouragement, and
were all making provision for them, and in the mean time faith lay as dead in
the soul. This is very considerable in reason; though faith work in the soul,
yet it must use the soul, and all the affections of it, as the memory,
understanding, and desires; and cannot work without these. The soul of a man
being a finite creature, cannot settle its affections upon many objects at
once; if he bestow his mind upon sin, and the occasions thereof, he cannot
meditate upon Christ and the promise, he cannot have a Stream running fully in
two Channels all at once: when a man lets out the stream of his desire,
judgment and endeavor, wholly for the flesh and the world, there is nothing
left for Christ, and grace, and the cause of God.

David was a wise man, and yet when Nabal had wronged him, 1 Samuel 25.21, 22.
see what wronged him, see what provision he made for his anger; Surely in
vain have I kept this fellow, and all that he had in the wilderness, says
he; So and more also do God unto the enemies of David; if I leave of all that
pertaines to him by the Mornings light any that pisseth against the wall: I
will requite the old churl, and slay him, and all his. Well, Abigal meets him,
and says, Let not my Lord I pray thee, regard this man of Belial, even Nabal,
for as his name is, so is he; Nabal is his name, and folly is with him. And
thus she pacified the King, in so much that David said to her, Blessed be God,
and blessed be thou, and blessed be thy counsel to me.

Why, may some say, Object.
was not David as able to counsel himself as she was to do it?

I answer, yes, Answ.
he was a mavelous wise man, and understood the law of God, and the Law of
Nations, but he had so given over his heart to wrath, that he had no room
for any work of wisdom, or patience to take place, and therefore now stood in
need of a counselor.

And as the work of grace is dead in the soul, because the strength of all is
employed another way; 2
so secondly, we deprive our selves of the comfort and virtue of the promise
that were might enjoy. The Spirit and promise of God is that, which must help
a Christian in all his straights: Now the work of the Spirit of grace dies in
the heart by meditation of sin; our forgetting of Gods promise, stops the
stream of his goodness, so as we receive not that grace that we might do for
the strengthening of us.

In common reason we know this; GOD does communicate grace to us from his
promise, but we must look up to it, and turn our mind and thoughts toward
it. Now when a man has turned his meditations upon the world, and the
occasions thereof, he is gone clean off from the promise; and not meditating
upon the promise, and the means of grace, he can receive no strength nor
comfort from the same.

Heb. 12.3. the Text says, Consider him that endured such contradictions of
sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds. Here are
two passages observeable.

First, the Lord Jesus Christ is able to make us strong and resolute in mind,
that we shall not faint at the opposition of sinners.

Secondly, we must consider him, that is, set our hearts and our affections
upon him; as if he had said, You are unable to be patient, and to put up
injuries, but consider him that did it, and then you shall receive strength and
power to suffer patiently. Thus much of the proof and reasons of the point,
now I come to the Uses, which are of great weight, and therefore read them
carefully.

It is a point of mavelous use, Use.
and of great power and excellency to reform us in things that are amiss, to
guide us in the way to happiness. Is it so, that whosoever makes provision for
the flesh, shall certainly be overcome by it? The^ this is a ground of
direction, whereby a man may perceive what his own and the practices of other
men are, and what will become of himself, and others; judge it thus, see what
provisio^ they make, and what course commonly they undertake. If a man use
means that tend to his lusts, it is a heavy suspicion he will be overtaken by
his lusts: If we see a man eat ill meats excessively, we use to say,
questionless he will surfeit; would any man have done so, except he did provide
for sickness? So if our meditations do run upon any sinful courses, or
base lusts, a man may almost conclude, we will surfeit upon the same: If a man
will provide for the world, the world will overtake him; and if he provide for
his pleasures, they will certainly ensnare him.

Do you find a man that has a secret kind of dislike, at the pureness and
truth of God, and that does despise good counsel, and the spirit of grace? his
provision will tell you what guests will come to his house. If we see what
provision is in a man's house, we may easily conjecture what his guests will be.

As it is in housekeeping, just so it is in heart-keeping; when we see what
provision a man makes for his lusts, we may know what his course will be.
Romans 12, 8
The Apostle says, When men did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God
gave them to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are good in their own
eyes. That soul that sets it self against the spirit of grace, would (if he
could) pluck God from heaven. Oh wretched man, what do thou despite the
Spirit? if thou have no spirit, then thou art a damned man, and as thou do
not like to approve of God in thy knowledge, God will ere-long give thee up to
a reprobate sense. It is a sign that a man is devoted to destruction, and even
sealed unto condemnation, that undervalues the knowledge and ways of God, and
has no delight in Jesus Christ, but despights the Spirit, and the means of
grace; it is just that thou should be rid of this holiness, and blessed
presence, for ever; and therefore God gave them up, says the Text: As if he
should say, take him, a mind that shall never know God, that shall never taste
grace and goodness, harden that man's heart, he shall never receive virtue,
nor comfort thereby; provision was made before hand, and therefore the Guests
come accordingly.

And so it is, Heb. 10.28. If he that despised Moses Law, dyed without mercy,
of how much sorer punishment is he worthy, which treads under foot the Son
of God?

There are two things to be noted in these words:

1. He that knows Gods Law, and breaks the same wilfully, dies without mercy.

2. What will become of him, says the Apostle, that opposes the mercy of
Jesus Christ, and tramples his blood under his feet, and makes a mock at
sanctification? Brethren, for the Lord Christ's sake, take notice of it; you
account the blood of Christ as an unholy thing, and make a mock at
sanctification; you care not though you be never sanctified; I tell thee then,
thou shall receive judgment without mercy; nay, you do despite the Spirit,
the Spirit (says the Apostle) makes request for us, with groans that cannot
be uttered, and it teaches the Saints to pray, and wretch that thou art, thou will never pray at all.

If you have any of these bublings in your hearts, then you may conclude what
your course will be: You would not know the Lord, nay, you despited the Spirit
of grace, when you saw him praying in the Saints, certainly you shall perish;
this is the next step to the sin against the Holy Ghost. Do you see a man
that is not able to endure the power of the Gospel in the plainness and
efficacy of it, but still he is snarling and catching against the truth, and
carping against the man that delivers it, and if he can hear any false tale
of the Minister, he will be sure to blaze it. Does this man now provide for
the love of the truth, or for the profession of the Gospel; no, no, he
provideth for persecution, he has a malicious and envious heart, and is full
of venom and violence against God, and his grace; and if opportunity come, he
will prove a fierce and devilish persecutor.

Do you see a lightheaded and a wanton-hearted woman wandering out of he own
house at nine or ten a clock at night, using unseasonable hours, like
Toades that always crawle from their holes when it is dark; what does this
woman provide for? does she provide for holiness, modesty and mercy? Nay,
that would make her stay at home in her own house; if it were for Religion,
she would not be abroad at that time; she provides for nothing else but
whoredom and drunkenness, for a profane light heart, and therefore these
guests will come afterward.

If there be any such here, the God of heaven speak to their hearts. Shall
people hate holiness, and scoff at the exactness of a blessed course, and
scarre such as fear God; and labor to draw weak beginners from grace? What
say they, will you turn a tame fool? Will you be ruled by these precise
fellows, and have your head under their girdle? Well, I hope your guests are
come by this time; the case is clear, he that does thus provide for sin,
will surely be overcome of sin. You that are the Saints of God do not
wonder though you be despised and hated by these wicked worldlings; let these
dogs bark, and the Lions roar, and let these wretches hate you still, they
provided not for you, but for their lusts and corruptions, and malice, and
therefore they are overcome by them.

Thus you see the danger of hearkening to fleshly inticements, how it
inthralled us in Satan's bondage, and hinders the work of grace in our hearts;
nothing more.

How then might I get my heart divorced from sin, Object.
so as to abhor every deed of darkness.

Labor for a teachable spirit: Ans.
1
An honest heart gladly embraces the least notice of any evil, it hearkens to
any information of what is amiss in him, by any person or means whatsoever.
It is a sign a man begins to dislike his courses, when he is ready to hear
any thing against them. A gracious heart desires to be freed not only from the
dominion of sin, but from the presence of it, and is ready to take the least
inckling from any occasion or speech of the meanest Saint of GOD to that
purpose: when any one tells him, such a course is sinful, such a practice is
unlawful; he is very careful to attend thereunto, and be advised thereof.

Nay, if an enemy out of malice and spleen, shall cast any thing as a matter
of scandal upon him, that will make his heart shake within him, and he begins
to consider, whether such an action be warrantable, yea or no; and he thinks
with himself, Such a man dares not do it; if it be sin, why should not I
reform it as well as another? and if it be not sin, why should he abridge
himself of that liberty which is lawful? and the soul is never quieted till
it is thoroughly informed what is good and may be performed, and what is evil
and must be abandoned.

What I know not, Job 6.24.
teach thou me, (says Job) and I will hold my tongue. He does not quarrel
with the man that counsels him, or wrangle with the man that advises him; but
teach thou me, and I will hear readily: If I have done iniquity I will do so
no more. He is willing to understand of any failing, and will not put off a
godly reproof with matter of scorn, saying, I know as well as you, let every
tubbe stand upon his own bottom, and the like.

A gracious heart is suspicious of himself, and seeks direction from God,
that he may more clearly perceive his miscariages, and avoid them. He looks
up to heaven, and says, Lord, thou know the secrets of my heart, let me
know it too; thou know the winding of the soul of man, let me understand
the frame of my own spirit, that I may not sin against thee.

2 In the second place thou must beg of God a submissive mind to his will,
so as to sit down convinced, and yield quietly to the authority of the power
of the truth. A gracious heart will not invent tricks to defeat the Word of
Life, when it is evidently and plainly brought home to the conscience: Happily
it may a little quarrel at the first, but when he sees the Reasons are sound,
and Scriptures undeniable; when it sees that it cannot answer the argument, it
will be content to be framed thereunto.

When the Lord came to school Job, Job 40, 4.
and had informed him of his own Majesty and excellency, together with his
vileness and misery; he presently yield up the Bucklers, saying, Once have I
spoken, but I will hold my peace; yea, twice, but I will proceed no further. As
who should say, I have spoken foolishly, but I will say it no more.

Famous is that example of the Canaanitish woman: when Christ was hot upon her,
and said, she was a dog; Truth Lord, says she, but the dogs may eat of
the crummes that fall from their Masters table: As who should say, I confess I
am as bad as thou speak; I deny not what I am, I am a dog, I yield it, yet
the dogs may lie under the table; that is all I crave and ask, that I may
but lie under the table, for a crumme of mercy.

You know how it was with Peter, when he denied our Savior, he wrangles it
out, and thinks to color the matter, but the very look of Christ made him go
out and weep bitterly: So a gracious soul rejects no light to discover his
ways, he does not wink with the eye, and stop the ear, or gainsay the
truth, but easily submits to every good word of God.

Thirdly, 3
address thy self to reform what ever is amiss; do thy uttermost endeavor
to amend the evil committed, and perform this good duties thou have formerly
omitted; do what thou can in the particular, and labor for ability from
Christ, to do that, which of thy self thou art not able. It was a hard task
which God enjoined Abraham, to sacrifice his beloved and darling Isaac, yet
when the thing appeared plain to be Gods command, though it were never so
hard; there is no resisting it: Abraham therefore rose betimes in the morning,
and he and the child went immediately to discharge his duty; he prevents all
occasions that might hinder him, his wife was not acquainted with it, and his
servants knew nothing of the matter.

So if a man be the son of faithful Abraham, whatsoever the Lord enjoynes,
though it be the killing of a darling secret beloved lust, if the Lord say it
must be done, this sin must be avoided, this course must be amended, be it
never so profitable and full of content; the soul of a gracious man will rise
early in the morning; that is, he will forthwith set upon the means to
accomplish the same. As for instance.

Let this be the case that comes to the scanning of a poor ignorant Christian:
Imagine the Lord informs him, and his conscience persuades him, that he must
pray in his Family: Now happily a poor soul at the first is not able to pray,
his understanding is weak, and his abilities mean, he cannot of himself
frame a prayer to God; yet he will set upon the duty, he will take the book,
and read a prayer, though he cannot conceive a prayer, being a novice and a
young Christian; yet he will use the stilts till he get his legs; follow him
home to his closet, and you shall find him bemoane his baseness, and he
prays that he may pray, he beseeches the Lord he may know what to ask,
that he may see his sins and confess them; he will beg for the Spirit, that
he may be able to cry Abba, Father.

I beseech you remember this one thing; it is a mavelous distemper in many
people, that say, I confess such courses ought to be avoided, the Word forbids
it, and my conscience goes against it; but what shall I do, I cannot set to
the work, I shall never overcome it; why then lay all religion aside, for how
can it stand with sincerity of heart, that I should be informed and convinced,
that the Lord requires a service at my hands, and I yet never set upon the
performance thereof. I deny not, but a good Christian may be unable to do as
he ought, but he will strive to do what God requires.

Alas, Object.
says the Gallant, I confess the fashions are fooleries, and it is a madness
to follow every vanity; but what should I do, a man had as good be out of the
world, as out of the fashion?

Fashion not your selves after the world, Ans.
says the Text. But I know not how to get out of it, says the gallant, The
custom is so usual, that I cannot leave it. Do thou know a duty, and is
thy heart persuaded of it, and yet will thou not submit to it? Where is grace
now? in thy soul? Certainly thou art still in the gall of bitterness; even
reason and common civility will make a man reform some things; me thinks grace
should prevail much more. If a man will not part with a lock, with a feather,
a fashion, a foolery for Christ, how will he lose his credit, liberty, and
life for him? how can he leave all sin, that will not part with the shadow
and appearance, the hair and nail of sin?

Fourthly, a gracious heart is content to take up the hardest means, the
sharpest medicines that God has appointed for the killing and slaying of his
corruptions. If there be any weapon in the world more keen than other for
wounding of his lusts, the soul gladly embraces the same, that reformation may
be made.

Take an arm or a leg that has the Gangrene, (the nature of which disease
is to infect and spread over the whole man,) when the Surgeon comes and tells
the patient, Either you must lose your leg, or your life; you must have your
arm cut off, or else be cut off your self; one of the two must speedily be
done: If the patient say, I will rather abide the worst, than part with a
limb, every man will conclude he cannot live long: If he did purpose to
maintain life, sure he he would part with that which takes away life?

So is it here with some kind of baser sins, I mean gross and notorious
crimes, which are scandalously vile, there is no way to be ridd of these,
without some corrosive be applied; the soul will never be separated from
them, unless some bitter Pill be taken, which if a man refuse to use, it is an
evident sign, he has no purpose to part with his sin.

Suppose a man has got an estate by theevery, and cozenage, and the like, when
the Word of God comes home to his conscience, and tells him, he must make
satisfaction, or be damned: This man may be dejected in spirit, and bemoan
himself with tears, but that will not serve the turn; nothing will cure but
satisfaction; peace will not be attained without restitution: this is the
Gangrene that must be cut off.

Happily he will say, most of his estate has come in this way, and if I
should restore all that I have unjustly gained, I should die a beggar. Let me
ask thee but this question, What will it profit a man to get the whole world
and lose his own soul? Is it not better to die in a poor estate, than in a
sinful estate? To depart a good man, than a rich man?

Again, suppose a man lives in the bosom of the Church, and be a great
Professor, and yet has been seen openly drunk, or is known to have committed
adultery; there is no cure for this man now, but he must satisfy the
congregation, (the Church of God) which has been dishonored and discredited
by his sin: let him fast and pray, and weep in secret never so much, I
cannot see how this man's conscience can be quieted, unless he make public
satisfaction, as his offense was public. But to proceed.

5. A sincere Christian wishes and welcomes those truths that are most
powerful to prevail with his sins, 5
and most likely for the subduing of his corruptions; when he cannot do what
he would, and master his sins as he desires, he wishes, Oh that the Lord
would send some truth, that might pluck these corruptions out of my heart? and
that word is most pleasing to him, that is most effectual this way. The soul
makes its moan to God, and complains as David did, Ye are too hard for me
ye sons of Zerviah. O Lord, these corruptions stick so close, they are too
mighty for me, I am not able to master them; take thou away the inquity of thy
servant, free my soul from the dominion of these lusts, tear them from me,
do what thou will with me, only slay this corruption in thy servant.

Thus a gracious heart seeks nothing so much as the death of sin, that there
might be a new nature, and through-change wrought in him; therefore he argues
thus, Lord, thou have said that thou will take away the heart of stone, thou
have promised to subdue a stubborn spirit, and master a malicious vain mind,
I beseech thee let it be according to thy good Word; take away these
distempers; as thou art faithful, say Amen to the desires of thy servant, and
help me against my strong corruptions.

When the truth of Christ lays battery against a good man's heart, the soul
willingly lies under the blow, and closes with the rebuke, saying more of the
Lord, there again good Lord. A man that is troubled with the toothache, when
the Tooth-drawer comes to apply his Instrument, and he finds he has hold of
him, he says, that is it, pull it out, leave nothing behind: So when the
soul is under the power of some violent lust, when the Word comes home to the
conscience, and meets with that distemper, the soul says, Lord, pull it out
all, that I may never see that pride more, nor that covetousness more; leave
not a stumpe remaining Lord, but free me wholly from this vile accursed
condition.

It is a fine passage, Zach. 13. one meets him, and asks him, Zach. 13.6.
Where had thou that wound? It was wounded in the house of my friend, says
he; the messenger of God spoke friendly to me, he wounded my heart fully, I
saw the coare coming out; and this is a special means of divorcing the heart
from sin, when it closes with such truths as tend to the awaking of it. But
this is not all.

6. For as the soul wishes and welcomes such powerful truths, 6
so is it restless till GOD be pleased to work this, till it see every
corruption, and the frame of every sin tottered. It is restlesly looking and
waiting upon God, Oh when shall this once be? Such a man's heart is broken, such
a wretched liver is reclaimed, and such a proud spirit is brought low; Lord,
will nothing prevail with me?

The Irishman being malicious and fearful, never thinks his enemy killed,
till he has cut off his head, he will be sure to leave him past all hope of
recovery: So a gracious heart never thinks sin mastered, till it see the
very life and blood of his corruptions removed, till it see the strength and
power of sin subdued more or less within him.

Therefore it is, that the Apostle cries out, O wretchedma^ that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death? Mark the weight of his complaint; he
does not say, who shall deliver me from this action of sin, but who shall
deliver me from this body of sin? There is a body of pride, there is a body
covetousness, and a body of anger, which cleaves unto us. Now a gracious heart
is not content to be delivered from a tongue of pride, haughty speeches, and
the like, but Lord free me from the body of pride and self-love, from the
frame and bent of this distempered spirit.

7. Lastly, 7
as the soul welcomes the truth that it may work, and is restless before it
do work; so it is content that the Lord should be pleased to work upon
sin, and subdue it, upon the hardest terms in the world. I remember the
speech of a wise man, having a cause in law, that was like to be out-bidden;
he comes to his Lawyer, and asks, May such a thing be done? who answered, the
thing may be accomplished, it is possible; why then said he, let me have it
done, what ever it costs me: So say thou, Lord, though I had as much pride as
the devil, I may be humbled; though I be over-spred with sin, as with a
leprosy, I may be purged from my filthiness. It may be done, Lord, let it be
done, what ever it cost me.

If a man be covetous, and if nothing but beggary will loose his heart from the
world; he ought to pray for a low estate, and contentedness with his
condition. If a man be unable to subdue the pride of his spirit; there is no
other way (sometime) to cure a man of this Timpany, but with a desperate
extremity; there is no way to cure a proud heart, but to blow upon its
excellencies, and lay all its honor in the dust. This is harsh, yet a gracious
heart is content, though it be never so sharp, and cost never so dear;
though I be the offscouring of the world, slighted and trampled upon by every
one, though I lie in the dust all my days, and go to the bottomless pit for
the while; I care not, any thing rather than a proud heart. Though I lose my
parts and abilities, and am never so much laden with disgraces, free me from a
lofty spirit, and I care not. This man now means in good earnest to part with
his corruptions.

But what shall we think of those, that are content rather to part with their
blood and lives, than with their base corruptions? I mean the profane wretches
of this age, that are so sarre from being divorced from their sins, that they
are not willing to hear thereof, or to have the Minister meddle therewith;
they will not endure the least reproof to come near them, or touch them; no
means can prevail to tear their distempers from their souls; to pluck the
cup from the drunkard, or the pleasure from the Adulterer, or greediness of
gain, from the covetous worldling, but upon the opposition to their lusts,
they are up in arms presently.

A man must beware how he meddles with these things, they will take away a
man's credit, and his life many times, rather than they will suffer their
corruptions to be removed by the power of the Word. John Baptist must rather
lose his head, than Herod his incestuous adultery; Nay, the league between
these men and their lusts, is so firm, that they will not hear of any breach.

When the Prophet came early and late admonishing the people, This is the good
way, Ier. 18.12.
walk in it; mark how they resolve, We will walk in our own ways, and
follow our own devices; and as they resolved so they did; for when he informed
them of their wicked courses, and would have plucked away their beloved
corruptions, They took hold upon their deceits, says the Text; the phrase is
strange. Here is all the quarrel in the world between Gods faithful
Ministers and the people; we come to pluck away your sins, we would pull
down a proud heart, and subdue an unclean lascivious spirit, but you take hold
of your lusts, you cling unto pride, and will not part with it; you nourish
malice and hypocrisic in your souls, in despite of God and his Ministers, and
all admonitions and directions whatsoever.

Look as the Philistines dealt with the Arc, so these carnal wretches deal
with the Word of God, when it comes to take away their distempers. When the
people of Israel brought the Ark of GOD into the Camp, 1 Samuel 4.8
they began to be amazed, and said, There was never such a thing heard of;
therefore streng then your hands, Oh Philistines, lest we become servants to
the Hebrews.

The Arc was a type of Christ; if they would have been ruled by Christ, and
received him, they might have been happy creatures; but when the Arc comes to
take away their sins, presently they rebel and join hand in hand against
him.

So it is with naughty deceitful persons, they crowd all together when the
Word of God comes close, and the Ministry of of the Gospel is keen, and
searches; when a man does not hover in generals, supposing one may be a
Christian, and a profane swearing lying person, but pluckes away every
corruption, and cries down every lust, then they arm themselves, and
Philistine-like, bend their heads and hands together to overthrow that Word
which crosses their wickedness.

The resolution of these men is that of Ruth, and Naomi, nothing but death
shall part us. The contentious man will part with his estate rather than with
his brangling; so the covetous person bids adieu to conscience, that he may
keep his gold; there is no dividing of them and their lusts. Well, if you will
live in your sins here, expect to be damned with them hereafter.

Some indeed will speak against their sins, and confess they do evil, and
resolve to reform all, but how cold and faint are they in the work, ever and
anon hankering after their distempers; they have some secret haunts of heart,
which they still nourish; they will desist a little, but will not leave their
corruptions; they cannot endure to hear of an everlasting devorce between
sin and their souls.

Though sometimes the Word overpower him, and Conscience aweth him, that he
dare not be with his lusts; yet he will meet them as occasion serves, and
maintain the old league and friendship still. As it is with servants in a
family, that intend marriage privately, though their master separate them, and
put them out of the house, that they cannot dwell together, yet they will meet
and confer one with another sometimes. So many that are tender over some old
darling lust, as privy pride, secret self-love, earthly mindedness, or the
like; he is not able to part wholly with these, but if reason force him, and
conscience press him, and of necessity he must part with his profit and
pleasure; then with a sad heart he lays them awhile aside, and says, Away
you must, I must cozen no more, nor overreach no more: but though he frowns
thus, and puts them from under his wings for the present, yet he will not
endure them long out of his sight, they shall not go far, but he must hear
of them now and then, and see them again, whatever comes of it.

When Pharaoh was battered by the hand of God, and one judgment after another
pursued him, in so much that he could not bear it out; he was content at last
to let the Children of Israel go, but go not far, says he: so say many in
the world, Sin, you and I must part, pleasure and liberty I must needs leave
you, but go not far; in the mean time let me hear from you as occasion
serves. Thus miserably do men beguile their own souls.

They will not deal thoroughly, they will not deal keenly with their
corruptions, they do but dally, never intending that a total separation
should be made, but only some moderation, or some connivence at sin, though
he lays some kind of punishment upon it, and snibb his corruption, yet he
will not kill it; he threatens his evils, and strikes them in some measure, but
labors not to abandon them utterly, so as never to have more society with them.

You shall commonly hear these men complain of too hot preaching, there is a
reason in all things; Oh, they are afraid lest sin should be smitten too
hard, and the devil tormented too much; you shall hardly hear of a good
heart, that is sensible of sin, and his soul is tired with it, but he says,
More of that, Lord, and yet more sharply; I am afraid the Word will not come
home, and the Minister will not meet with my lusts, nor pluck away my
corruptions.

When Absalom rebelled against David, he gave this charge, Deal kindly with
the young man for my sake; as who should say, He must be suppressed I grant
it, he must be subdued I deny not; but slay him not, do not kill him by any
means: so men deal with their pride and covetousness, loath they are to
destroy them quite, because they cannot live without them; I hope a man may
dally, though not commit adultery; I hope a man may pot it, though not be
drunk.

I beseech you take notice what God commands; If thy brother or thy friend,
which thou love as thy own soul, shall entice thee to Idolatry, thou shall
not pity him, but kill him. This is the frame of a gracious heart indeed, he is
not content to have his corruptions only touched at, a word or two and away,
but he will show no mercy to them; he will not spare his pride or earthly
mindedness, but desires to see the death of all sin.

Brethren, dwell in your meditations a while upon these things, and knock at
one another doors: Ask your own hearts, whether sin be a burden to you.
Am I content to part with my bosom delight, my darling corruption; am I
content to yield up my whole man to GOD, to serve him cheerfully, singly, and
constantly throughout my course? If so, go home in peace, and the GOD of
heaven go with thee; if there be a Saint in heaven, thou art one.

But if I leave my sins, Object.
what shall become of my riches and honors? all pleasure and contentment must
then depart from me. Answ.


Oh no, you shall not lose your comforts, but exchange them for better, what
profit is it to be proud and dogged, and snarling at Gods truth? what
advantageth it to cheat, and use indirect courses? these are all but lying
vanities, we catch at the shadow and lose the substance: What are riches
without grace? there is a woe in all that wealth, and poison in all that
prosperity; the best things here are but temporary and mutable; who would part
with an eternal inheritance, that fades not away, for them?

What is it to enjoy the creature for a season, and be deprived of the Creator
for ever? You lose nothing by embracing Christ, but rubbish and filth that
defiles and oppresses you: He that leaves father, or mother, or houses, or
lands for my sake (says Christ) shall have a hundred fold here, and
everlasting happiness hereafter. The purchase you see is propounded, therefore
bring out every sin and iniquity, produce every lust and wickedness that
lodges within you, and lay them down at Christ's feet; be content to part with
all, that you may enjoy him that is more than all; who would not leave a sin
for a Savior, exchange darkness for light, or part with an empty contentment
to be satisfied with the true never-fading good? But if profit cannot prevail
with you, let danger force you hereunto, know, there is a great misery in the
neglect hereof; if you will not have GOD take away your sins, the truth is,
God will take away his grace and holy Spirit from you, if you ever had it: Nay,
you shall never have it upon these terms.

Was there ever a man such a baby in nature, that he would not part with the
wound that will kill him? Was ever any man so foolish, that he would not let
the Physician purge him, when he was sure to recover upon it? Consider it
seriously, you must either take part with sin, or with your souls; either
suffer God to deprive you of your lusts, or deprive you of heaven: Psalm. 5.3.
Thou art a God that love not wickedness (says David:) If you will have sin
dwell in your hearts, God will not dwell with you, nor you with him. If you
will harbor and hold your sins, you must hold fast shame and sorrow too: A
stranger to grace, and a stranger to God: Gratify your lusts, and you gratify
the devil: Without holiness, no happiness: Heaven is too pure a place for
any unclean thing to have admission into. Consider what I say, and the Lord
give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.
Spiritual MUNITION: A FUNERAL SERMON.

Psalm. 20.7. Some put their trust in Chariots, and some in horses: but we will
remember the Name of the Lord our God.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Dawlman, at the Sign of the Brazen Serpent in
Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

Spiritual MUNITION.
2 KINGS 2.12. And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My Father, my Father, the
Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof.


WHen the Lord had revealed that he would take away Eliah in a whirlewinde,
(as appears in the first verse of this Chapter) you shall observe that Elisha,
one that lived with him, and was trained up by him, did two things: 1. He
followed him mavelous closely while he lived: And 2. he mourned for him at
his death. The Lord sent post-haste for Eliah to heaven, and in a fiery Chariot
suddenly transports him thither: Now when Elisha could see him no more, nor
enjoy him any longer, then he cries out, O my Father, my father. As though he
had said, Eliah is now gone, he is past all recovery, yet though he be a
gainer, we are all losers, having lost a maine prop and support unto us,
therefore I cannot but breath and pant after him, O my Father, my Father.

In the verse I have read, you may observe two things: 1. The affection of
Elisha to his Master. 2. The commendation or description of Elijah. The words
repeated imply his passion, as that of David, O Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.33.
my son, my son, would God I had dyed for thee, O Absalom, my son, my
son.

1. The affection of this holy man appears in three things. 1.
1. His honorable esteem of him, Father. 2. His humble subjection to him, My
Father. 3. His lamentation and mourning for him, O my Father: wherein the great
grief and passion of his soul appears, by rending and tearing his clothes
apieces, as you may see in the Chapter. I begin with the first.

The word [ Father] is sometimes taken for a word of nature, as a natural
father: sometimes it signifies a term of time, discovering Antiquity; as
Fathers in Israel, (that is) such as are aged, of long continuance, and
standing in the Church.

The point hence is this: Doct. 2 King. 6.21.


The Ministers of God, should be as Fathers to the people.

And this appears in three things.

1
1 They should have a stayednesse, and gravity both of spirit and life. 1 Timothy
4.12.
Let no man despise thy youth, (says Paul to Timothy) but be an example in
life and doctrine. If thou live holily, without exception, and yet men will
speak against thee, thine heart tells them they lie, let them rail their fill.

2
2 In regard of the power, and authority committed unto them by God. Paul had a
rod, as well as meek words. Ministers must be Fathers, not cockerers, nor
flatterers of men.

3.
3 In regard of the instruction that they give unto the people, which must be
according as their necessity and ability requires. They must be eyes to the
blind, ears to the deaf, Isa. 40.11.
and feet to the lame.

First, Use. 1.
this should teach the Lords watchmen, to shine as burning lamps, to be
examples of piety, and strict obedience in their several places. Alas, what is
it to have the highest place, and the basest practice, the best calling, and
the worst kind of living.

Secondly, Use. 2.
it should instruct you that are hearers, to deal with the Ministers of Gods
word, as with Fathers; you must not despise them, in a captious, censorious
manner, undervaluing the Lords Worthies, 1 Timothy 5.1.
as many do. Rebuke not an Elder, says S. Paul, but entreat him as a Father.
It is not for a child to call the father to his tribunal. Do we see any
thing in the Minister that is faulty? we should mourn for it, and wisely
suggest it to him. Say to Archippus, says S. Paul, he does not bid you
control Archippus. But here mistake me not. It is a point of Popery to
believe and do in all things as the Minister says or does; but we must
search the Scriptures, and try men's doctrines, whether they be according to
God or not. This is one passage.

My father.

Here is further set down the dear and respectfull carriage of Elisha unto
Eliah: whence observe, 2


That loving subjection is that which all people ought to give unto those that
are in the place of the Ministry. Doct. 2.
Heb. 13.17
Submit yourselves.

What Elisha himself did, all the sons of Elisha will likewise do. Now this
appears in three things.

1
1 They must have a reverend esteem of them and the places unto which God has
called them; they must entertain them as Ambassadors, Gal. 4.14.
as Co-workers with the Son for their salvation, 1 These. 5.13.
to bring the poor creature, and his Creator together, that they may be one.
Men are apt to say, Ministers are weak, and passionate, and full of failings.
Why (brethren) who is not so? It is our happiness that we have this heavenly
treasure in earthen vessels. Should God speak to us face to face, who were
able to abide him?

Secondly, 2.
submitting and subjecting, of our selves to the truths delivered. Tell not me
of intertaining a Minister, or bidding him to your Table. Thou must subject thy
soul to the word, and labor to be under the power of divine truths revealed.
Otherwise thou do but despise the Minister, all the while thou slightest, and
disobeyest his Ministry; you should say, as Samuel did, Speak Lord, thy
servant hears: and as S. Paul, Lord what will thou have me to do? If a
Command come, the soul should readily perform it; If a Reproof, the soul
should willingly bear it, and not repine, in a fretting manner, saying, he
aimed at me, and I care not if I never hear him more. Brethren this is not
subjection, but pride and rebellion, against God and his truth. This ought not
to be amongst Christians. If any man seem to quarrel, and take up Arms
against the word of the Almighty, let that man know, that his doom sleeps not,
for God will certainly slay all such stubborn and stiff-necked rebels, that
refuse to have him rule over them. Strive therefore for a yielding submissive
spirit, get a frame of soul, willing to be taught of God, to be disposed of
by him in everything, to receive any impression which he shall stamp upon
thee. When thou art to hear the Word, beg a teachable mind, and say; Good
Lord, let thy servant now hear a seasonable word, quicken these dead bones
here before thee: Speak home to my conscience, wound my corruptions, slay
these sins that are too hard for me, let no iniquity prevail over thy poor
servant, but let Jesus Christ be all in all to and in me; take this heart of
mine, and frame it, and alter it, and mould it, and melt it. Work thine own
will in me, fashion me to thy kingdom of grace here, that I may partake of
thy kingdom of glory hereafter.

A good heart will not fume, and vex to see his pollutions ripped open, but lay
things close to his conscience, and bless God for this light, and say; Blessed
be his good word, and his poor servant that met this day with my sins. I
never observed that pride, I never discovered that fraud and guile of spirit, I
never took notice of such swarms of lusts lurking in my soul as now I find.
What became of Christ, I cared not; what became of his Ministers, I valued not;
what became of the Name, and honor, and Gospel of the Lord Jesus, I regarded
not; but now I see the evil of my ways: and blessed be God for that good
work which has been communicated to my soul by his servant.

It is a fearful thing, when men deal with their sins, 2 Sa^. 18.5.
as David did with Absalon, Do not kill him, but deal kindly with the young
man for my sake. Such men's spirits are as yet very little in subjection to God,
and they may well be ranked amongst the opposers of him and his Ministers.

Thirdly, 3.
this further appears, by a free, willing serviceablenesse unto those that are
faithful in the work of the Lord for our good. Gal. 4.15.
The Galathians would have pulled out their eyes to have done S. Paul good, and
would have parted with their dearest friends, and best commodities, to be
partakers of his Ministry.

Thus you see, 1 that Christians ought to have a due respect of Gods
Messengers. 2 They ought to submit themselves, to the Embassage they deliver. 3
They ought to be serviceable unto them in all things.

The use of this is for instruction, Use. 1.
to teach us to depend and wait upon God, in the use of the Ministry. These
are the Conduit-pipes of grace. Children they go still to their fathers house
to be fed or clothed. So it should be with us.

This likewise may reprove two sorts of people: Use. 2.
First, those that in stead of doing good unto a faithful Minister, labor
what they can to root him out, and in stead of subjection to the word by him
delivered, they set up and maintain rebellion against it. If your wounds once
be launced, your corruptions discovered, and the punishment due unto them flung
upon your faces, so as you can have no quiet in a sinful course, then
presently all the Town is in an uproare, and cry, Away with this fellow, he
shall not tarry here long. Brethren, Is he a dutiful son, that would cast
his father out of doors? A son; no, a slave to the Devil, and a rebel
against the Lord Almighty, fitter for a prison to torment him, then a house to
harbor him. It is a certain sign that the soul never had grace, which
opposes the Ministers of grace. This is a fearful symptom of an unsound
heart, and where ever it is, clearly evidences that GOD has forsaken that
soul. For alas, it is not a poor weak man, which they oppose, but the Great
God himself, who shines forth in them, as they shall one day woefully find and
feel with sorrow.

This falls heavy upon all close hearted hypocrites, 2.
those whited walls, that run with the Hare, and hold with the Hound; who
though they give way unto the Minister sometimes, yet it is but to serve their
own turns, to effect their own ends. They make the Minister their stalking
horse, to procure their own profit, or credit by. And if their aims fall not
out, but their expectation is crossed, and their desires frustrated, then (for
shame of the world they dare not persecute a good Minister openly, yet) they
secretly revile, and speak against him, saying; Would I had never known such a
man, Mat. 10.11
he is able to make one run mad.

If any man now have such a stubborn heart, and distempered soul, that he
will not subject to the word of God, he cannot have any true peace; happily he
may have peace in the world, but he shall have gall enough in his conscience.

Some will say, Object.
I like such a man very well, and I could love and respect one Minister
dearly, but not another.

Hold thy tongue for shame; Answ.
Is not the truth alike in all? why then do thou discover such gross
hypocrisy, as to be a respecter of persons? If he be a faithful Minister, and
thou can not find in thy heart to receive him, and highly esteem of him, it
is a sign that thou have no grace.

O but he has wronged me in this or that matter. Object.


But the word of God did never wrong you. Answ.
This argues a desperate disposition, that thou art rotten, and unsound at
heart, when thou respectest thine own private ends of profit, pleasure,
credit, or the like, above the word of God, this plainly demonstrates that thy
eye is not single, and that thou love not God for himself.

This therefore should mind the messengers of God, Use. 3
chiefly to respect and tender those that yield subjection to the message which
they deliver. O brethren, let us that are of the Ministry, most esteem of
them, most prize them, that love God and his word. The rich man it may be,
sits highest at the Table: but they that love the Lord should be most
respected by us, loved of us. It is true, happily they have weaknesses and
frailties, yet if you delight in God, affect and cleave to these; Let the rout
of drunkards and all graceless miscreants, encourage one another in their base
courses, and extol those that work most mischief among them; Never let thy
soul enter into these men's secrets, but beg of GOD, that the Saints which
excel, may be the only excellent ones in thy thoughts, and esteem: As this
blessed man here did, O my father my father. Wherein we might further observe,
That the loss of a faithful Minister, is a matter of great mourning and
lamentation: But I leave that, and come now to the commendation of Elijah.

The Charrets of Israel and the horsemen thereof.

These words, Charrets and horsemen, are spoken by way of similitude, and do
figuratively demonstrate the defense and protection of Israel. For in ancient
times, they went to war with iron Charrets, and those were counted most
strong, that had most of these; therefore the hearts of the children of Israel
were daunted, when they perceived that the Canaanits had iron Charrets. Horses
are warlike creatures, of great strength, as both our own and former times
have experienced. Some trust in Charrets, and some in horsemen, says David.
The like we may read, Judge. 4.3.

The point that I would commend from hence is, Doct. 3.
That faithful Ministers are the defenders of States, Churches, and
Commonwealths.

God bids Elijah, 2 Kings 19. 2 King. 19.16.
to anoint Iehu King over Israel, and Elisha to be Prophet in his room; and
it is observable, that when the sword of Iehu and his Army did not hit, then
the sword of Elisha prevailed, his prayers wrought a greater slaughter among
the enemies, then all their weapons of war could do.

The Reasons hereof are four.

Faithful Ministers, Reas. 1.
by their fervent prayers, and supplications, stop the wrath and indignation of
the Lord, and so keep back judgment from us, Numb. 16.48.
as Moses stood in the gappe. Nay they do not only turn away Gods anger, and
displeasure from a land, or people; but are a means oftentimes of bringing it
upon the adversaries of goodness. 2 King. 1.10.
Take heed therefore of wronging a praying Minister. You know David besought
the Lord that he would confound the policy of Achitophel, 2 Samuel 15.31.
and his request was granted. Prayer is of great force; It will bring
punishment upon a man, and he shall not know who hurt him.

Again, 2.
Faithful Ministers reveal the sins of the people with whom they live, and
labor to work them to humiliation, and godly repentance, that they may turn
unto the Lord, which is the ready course to turn away judgments. O brethren,
we fear the sword, we may justly do so; But let me tell you, It is not the
weakness of our Land, nor the power of the enemy, that can so much hurt us, as
our treacherous hearts at home: These swarms of unruly lusts and corruptions,
which we carry about in our breasts, and harbor in our bosoms daily, do us
more hurt then all the world besides. Our sins are they which lay us open to
Gods judgments more than any thing else. Now a faithful Minister endeavors
to turn away sin, and so by consequence the wrath of God incensed thereby,
from a place. It is a great deal of good that a Samuel may do. 1 Samuel 7.3


By this the hearts of men are made willing to yield obedience to the
Governors that are set over them; 3.
it makes men studious of Gods honor, faithful to their Religion and
Country, industrious in doing good in their places, and strict with their GOD
in all conditions and relations whatsoever. This brings men to be blessings in
the Stations wherein GOD has set them, to live desired, and die lamented. 2 Chronicles. 20.20.
Whilst Iehoiada lived, we read how all things prospered, the Gospel that
flourished, and piety was advanced thorowout the Kingdom, but when he died,
his son fell quickly to abominable and wicked courses; and the Lord soon
overthrew him, his Kingdom, and all. So that, that which makes men loyal and
true hearted, and hinders the overflowing scourge from seazing upon a Nation,
that must needs be the defense of that Nation; for it is a certain truth, he
that is disloyal to the King of heaven, can never be loyal to the king of
earth.

This puts courage into the hearts of people: 4.
sinful and base courses fill a man with continual fears and
discouragements. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
The Lord is with us whilst we cleave to him; but if we forsake him, he will
for sake us. It is wonderful to see what a good Minister can do in a good
war, how he can fight against Principalities, and powers, and spiritual
wickednesses in high places, not fearing the face of man. The clear knowledge
of this, that the battle he fights is the Lords, assures him that the Lord
will fight for him. Any coward will fight when he is assured of victory
beforehand. A good cause will make men spend their dearest blood. When a man
has God to go before him, and the word to warrant him in what he does, he
goes through thick and thin: we see with what joy and cheerfulness the
Martyrs sacrificed their lives to the flames.

This shows, Use. 1.
that those which are enemies to Gods faithful Ministers, are the greatest
adversaries that the Church or State has; for they spoil the Munition of the
Land. If a man should take away all the Munition of England, and transport it
into Spain, every man will say he is a Traitor. So if thou have set thy self
to oppose, and secretly undermine any that is a true faithful Minister of
Jesus Christ, know thou art a Traitor to thy King and Country, because thou
persecutest him, who labors in his place, to keep back wrath from seazing
upon the Land. Be humbled therefore, take notice of this crying sin, and let
it not be once named amongst you, as becomes Christians. So much for the
Text, now a word or two Of the Occasion.

If I should say no more, nay if I had said nothing at all, the Example here
present, would be a visible interpretation of this Text, the very Carcass
standing before you, makes good the truth that I have now delivered. He is
dead, we shall be so; let us live as he did, that we may enjoy the end of our
hope, as no doubt he fully does. Brethren, while he lived here, he was a
Father in our Israel, not for years, but for grace. It is not continuance of
time, but ripenes of parts, that makes a man Ancient. And though he be
departed, yet that dead trunck speaks unto us, and the dead body says,
Though the inhabitant be gone, it once carried about it a holy life, a sincere
heart, an unspotted conversation.

Nay, I may add further, he was a Charret and Horseman of Israel. He was in
the forefront of the battle, a maine defender of the faith of Christ: Witness
brethren, the heartbreaking sighs, and earnest prayers that he put up to the
Lord in the days of his humiliation. If any sins were stirring, or any
iniquity abounding, he labored by fasting, and prayer to oppose the same. I
knew him sometimes in Cambridge in his younger days, at which time the Lord
had wonderfully enriched him with spiritual gifts; In the exercise whereof, he
was so industrious, that he did weary himself, and even consume his spirits,
by reason of his constancy in holy duties. He was so taken with love of the
Lord Jesus, and his blessed truths, that he was feign to be checked, and by
many good friends to be hindered in his pious service and endeavors. How often
has he stood in the gap, and labored by fervent prayers to avert Gods wrath,
and remove his heavy judgments? Witness his strong cries and intercessions to
the Almighty, in the time of common calamity, when the pestilence raged so
violently amongst us. Witness also those painful employments, that he took
up in season, and out of season; exhorting, rebuking with all long-suffring and
patience. Some times alluring the heart with sweet promises, otherwhile
denouncing vengeance, and threatening judgment against obstinate sinners.
Preaching ordinarily every Lords day, and extraordinarily upon the week (as
occasion was offered) for the good of his people. Witness also (and I pray
brethren, think of that) the many sweet comforts, and heavenly consolations,
wherewith he refreshed, and supported many a fainting soul.

Thus this blessed Saint, weakened his body, and wasted his spirits, out of love
to Christ's little flock, which now he enjoyes the fruit and comfort of. For
though our grief cannot be expressed, having sustained so great a loss, yet
it cheereth my heart me thinks, how now he rests from all his labors. Oh the
sweet repose that he enjoyes. Now his eyes that were full of tears, and his
tongue that did almost cleave to the roof of his mouth, for the good of the
Church, do all cease and lie still. We leave his precious soul in the hands
of his Maker, and his body to be laid in the dust, there to sleep in a bed of
down, until the Trump shall awake both him and us all, at the great day of
appearing.

Again, Use. 2.
Are faithful Ministers, the help and fortress of a Nation? then the loss
of an able, true hearted Minister is to be greatly mourned for. O my Father,
my Father, says good Elisha: So though we must leave this our dear brother,
yet let us look after him, as he did: He looked wishly on him, had his eye
fixed constantly toward him; and when he could see him no more, he cries
out, O my father, my father.

Why should not we bewail this great loss of ours in like manner? Me thinks
every one of us should take up this sorrowful complaint; me thinks your
spirits should relent, and mourn at such an object. Yea I am persuaded, many
here present do so. Me thinks I hear one say, O my father, by whom I was
converted; and another, O my father, by whom I was directed; a third, O my
father, by whom my soul was comforted: and the little children that are left
fatherless, they cry, O my father, by whom I was begotten, maintained, and
nourished in spiritual things.

Brethren, let us look after him, though we must now part with him, yet let
us call to mind all his prayers, and humiliation, and fasting, and
supplications to the throne of Grace. All his tears are now dried up; all his
complaints are now finished; all his pains and labors, are now accomplished,
and he to receive a plentiful reward of them. Let us mourn for our neglect
of the means of salvation whiles he lived amongst us. O his labor, and tears,
and painful studying, are now all gone, they are now in heaven, whither he
himself is gone before us. The Lord give us to follow his steps, that we
finishing our course as he did, our latter end may be like unto his.

To conclude briefly; Use. 3
Is one of the Horsemen of Israel gone? Are the Charrets of Israel taken away?
What must we then do? Certainly we should double our forces now, and make a
new press, because a General is slain. The Lord has brought us hither at
this time; O let us lay this doleful spectacle to heart, and be affected
therewith as we ought. I should speak, as if I were never to speak more; You
should hear, as if you were never to hear more.

Men, Fathers, and Brethren, what has befallen this Saint before you, may be
any of our portions ere long, we know not how soon Death may knock at our
doors. Our times are in Gods hand, who can take us to himself when he
pleases. Happily this day may be thy last day, and this very season, the last
opportunity that ever thou may have to meet GOD in his Ordinances. Oh
therefore be encouraged to add one prayer more.

Go home, I beseech you, and consider, with the departure of this our dear
Friend, how many prayers and tears are departed with him. How did he
importune the Lord for the good of the whole Land in general, and for the
Country and place wherein he lived in particular? Think you, all his earnest
striving with God was in vain? Or seems it a small thing in your eyes to
lose so many fervent effectual supplications? I beseech you lay it to heart,
and every man in his place, put to his helping hand for repairing of so great a
loss. Now make a press of prayers, raise up armies of petitions. Go your
ways home, be humbled, pray one prayer more, that the Army may be increased
still.

You that were of his Parish, and enjoyed the work of his Ministry; Oh you
have lost a good Pastor, a faithful Labourer in Gods harvest, one that had a
longing desire after your salvation. But know this, how ever your provocations
are increased, yet the Lord (who for your sins has made this breach among you)
has further blessings in store, if you seek to him. He can supply your place
again with a faithful able Minister, and with a courageous General.

Therefore brethren, if ever you pray, pray now, if ever you fast, now fast; if
ever you humble your selves, now be humbled in dust and ashes before the Lord,
never more need, never greater want. By this means the Land will be
strengthened, and our peace and safety continued. What though our enemies are
many, and our sins great, fervent prayer has to do with a God, stronger and
mightier then they all; This will undermine the most subtle underminers of
Gods truth, and children, therefore set your selves seriously upon the work,
however the flesh is awkward, yet stir up and provoke your spirits hereunto.
It will never repent you upon your death beds, of your prayers and tears, put
up unto God. It will be a great refreshment to your drooping soul at that
day, if you can say in truth as Hezekiah did; Good Lord remember how I have
walked uprightly before thee. This is that which will continue a man's comfort,
and support his soul in the greatest extremity. An unpraying heart is a
dismal thing. Therefore be encouraged to the duty: Pray, pray, pray.

FINIS.

