Certain Sermons appointed by the Queen's Majesty, to be declared and read, by
all Persons, Vycars, and Curates, every Sunday and holy day, in their
Churches: And by her Graces advise perused and ouersene, for the better
understanding of the simple people.

Newly Imprynted in parts, according as is mentioned in the book of Commune
prayers.

Anno. M.D.L.ix.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

woodcut title page OMNIA DESVPER R.I.



A ta^^e of the Sermons contained in this present volume
i A Fruitful exhortacion to the readyng of holy scripture. ii Of the misery
of al mankind iii Of the salvation of all mankind. iiii Of the true and lively
faith. v Of good works. vi Of Christian love and charity. vii Against
swearyng and perjury. viii Of the declynyng from god. ix An exhortacion against
the fear of death. x An exhortacion to obedience. xi Against whordome and
adulterye. xii Against strife and contention.
Finis tabulae.
COnsydering how necessary it is, that the word of GOD, which is the only
food of the soul, and that most excellent light that we must walk by, in
this our most dangerous pilgrimage, should at all convenient times be
preached unto the people, that thereby they may both learn their duty
toward God, their Prince, and their neighbors, according to the mind of the
holy ghost, expressed in the scriptures: And also to avoid the manifold
enormities, which hearetofore by false doctrine, have crepte into the Church
of God: and how that all they which are appointed ministers, have not the
gift of prechyng, sufficiently to instruct the people, which is committed unto
them, whereof great inconveniences might rise, and ignorance still be
mayntayned, if some honest remedy be not speedely found and provided. The
Queen's most excellent. Majesty, tenderynge the foul health of her loving
subjects, and the quietynge of their consciences, in the chief and pryncypall
points of Christian Religion, and wyllyng also by the true setting forth, and
pure declaryng of Gods word, which is the principal guide and leader unto all
godliness and virtue, to expel and drive aware, as well all corrupt, vicious,
and ungodly lyuyn^, as also erroneous and poisoned doctrines, t^^^dyng to
superfficion and Idolatry: has by th^^uyse of her most honorable comis^^^
(...) her discharge in this behalf, caused a (...) ^^melies, which heretofore
was set (...) most loving Brother, a Prince of most worthy memory Edward
the syxt, to be prynted a new, wherein are contained certain wholesome and
godly exhortacions, to move the people to honor and worship almighty God,
and diligently to serve him, every one according to their degree, state, and
vocation. All which Homelies her Majesty commands and strayghtly charge
all persons, vycars, curates, and all other having spiritual cure, every
Sunday and holy day in the year, at the ministryng of the holy communion, or if
there be no Communion ministered that day, yet after the Gospel and Creed, in
such order and place as is appointed in the book of Common prayers, to read
and declare to their paryshyoners plainly and distinctly one of the said
Homelies in such order as they stand in the book, except there be a Sermon
according as it is enjoined in the book of her highness Injunctions, and then
for that cause only, and for none other, the readyng of the said Homelye to
be differred unto the next Sunday or holy day following. And when the foresaid
book of Homelies is read over, her Majesty's pleasure is, that the same be
repeated and read again, in such like sort, as was before prescrybed.
Furthermore, her highness commands, that notwithstanding this order, the
said Ecclesiastical persons shall read her Majesty's Injunctions at such
times and in such order as is in the book thereof appointed. And that the
Lords prayer, the Articles of the faith, and the ten commandments, be
openly readde unto the people, as in the said Injunctions is specified, that
all her people of what degree or condition so ever they be, may learn how to
Invoke and call upon the name of Godde, know what duty they owe both to
God and man: So that they may pray, believe, and work according to knowledge
while they shall live hear, and after this life be with him that with his
blood has bought us all. To whom with the Father and the holy ghost, be al
honor and glory for ever. AMEN.

(...) the ^eadyng and knowledge of holy Scripture.
The prais of holy scripture.
Unto a Christian man there can be nothing either more necessary or profitable,
then the knowledge of holy scripture: forasmuch as in it is contained Gods true
word, setting forth his glory, and also man's duty. And there is no truth
nor doctrine necessary for our justification, The perfiction of holy scripture.
and everlasting salvation but that is (or may be) drawn out of that fountain
and well of truth. Therefore as many as be desirous to enter into the right and
perfect way unto God, The knowledge of holy scripture is necessary.
must apply their minds to know holy scripture, without the which: they can
neither sufficiently know God and his will, To whom the knowledge of holy
scripture is sweet and pleasant Who be enemies to holy scripture.
neither their office and duty. And as drink is pleasant to them that be
dry, and meat to them that be hungry: so is the readyng, hearing, searchyng,
and studying of holy scripture, to them that be desirous to know God, or them
selves, and to do his will. And their stomachs only, do loath and abhor the
heavenly knowledge and food of Gods word, that be so drowned in worldly
vanities, that they neither favor God, nor any godliness: For that is the
cause why they desire such vanities, In apt similitude, declarin^, of whom the
scripture is o^horrid.
rather then the true knowledge of God. As they that are sick of an ague,
whatsoever they eat or drink (though it be never so pleasant) yet it is as
bitter to them as wormwood, not for the bytternesse of the meat, but for the
corrupt (...) ^ytter humor that is in their own tongue ^^^nduth than so is
the sweetness of Gods word, bitter not of it self, but only unto the^ that
have their minds corrupted with long custom of sin, and love of this
world. Therefore, An ^^^^tucion unto the diligent red^^dyng and sc^rch^ng ^f
the holy (...).
forsaking the corrupt judgment of fleshely men, which care not but for their
carhasse, let us reverently hear and read holy scriptures, which is the
food of the soul. Let us diligently search for the well of life, in the books
of the new and old Testament, and not run to the stynkyng puddels of men's
tradicions, devised by man's imaginacion, for our justification and salvation.
The holy scripture is a suffi^^ent doctr^ne for ou^ salvation. What things we
may learn (...) the holy script^^^.
For in holy scripture is fully contained, what we ought to do, and what to
eschew, what to believe, what to love, and what to look for at Gods hands at
length. In those books we shall find the father from whom, the son, by
whom, and the holy ghost, in whom, all things have their being and keeping
up, and these three persons to be but one God, and one substance. In these
books we may learn to know our selves, how byle and miserable we be, and
also to know God, how good he is of him self, and how he makes us and all
creatures parttakers of his goodness. We may learn also in these books to know
Gods will and pleasure, as much as (for this present time) is convenient for us
to know: And (as the great clerk and godly preacher saint John Chrysostom
says) what so ever is required to salvation of man, is fully contained in the
scripture of God. He that is ignorant may there learn and have knowledge: he
that is hard hearted. (...) an obstinate sinner, shall there find ever (...)
torments (prepared of Gods justice) to make^ (...) afraid, and to molyfye or
soften him. He that (...) oppressed with misery in this world, shall there
find relief in the promises of everlasting life, to his great consolacion and
comfort. He that is wounded by the devil) unto death, shall find there
medicine, whereby he may be restored again unto health. If it shall require
to teach any truth, or reprove false doctrine, to rebuke any vice, to commend
any virtue, to give good counsel, to comfort or to exhort, or to do any other
thing requisite for our salvation, al those things (says S. Chrysostom) we
may learn ple^tifully of the scripture. There is (says Fulgentius)
abundantly enough, both for men to eat, and children to suck. There is,
whatsoever is mete for all ages, Holy scripture ministers sufficient doctrine
for all degres and ages. Math. iiii Luke.iii. John. xvii Psalm.xix.
and for all degrees and sorts of men. These books therefore ought to be much
in our hands, in our eyes, in our ears, in our mouths, but most of al in our
hearts. For the scripture of God is the heavenly, meat of our souls, the
hearing and keeping of it, makes us blessed, sanctifies us, and makes us
holy, it turns our souls, it is a light lantarne to our feet, it is a sure,
steadfast, and everlasting instrument of salvation: it gives wisdom to the
humble and lowely hearts: What commodities and profits, the knowle^e of holy
scripture brings.
it comfort, makes glad, chereth, and cherishes our conscience: it is a
more excellent jewel or treasure, then any gold or precious stone it is more
sweet then honey or honey comb, it is called the best part, which Marye did
chose, for it has in it everlasting comfort. Luke.x.
The words of holy scripture be called words of everlasting life: John.vi.
for they be Gods instrument, ordained for the same purpose. Colloss. vi
They have power to turn thorough Gods promise, and they be effectual,
through Gods (...) and (being received in^ a faith (...) heart) they have
ever an heavenly spiritual working in them: they are lively, quick, ^^bre.
(...)
and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two edged sword, and enters
through, even unto the deuydyng a sonder of the soul, and the spirit, of the
joints, and the mary, Christ calls him a wise buylder, Math. v^ John.xii.
that builds upon his word, upon his sure and substanciall foundation. By
this word of God, we shall be judged: for the word that I speak, (says
Christ) is it, that shall judge in the last day. Ioh.xiiii.
He that keeps the word of Christ, is promised the love and favor of God,
and that he shall be the dwelling place or temple of the blessed Trinity. This
word, whosoever is diligent to read, and in his heart to print that he
reads, the great affection to the transitorye things of this world, shall be
minished in him, and the great desire of heavenly things (that be therein
promised of God) shall increase in him. And there is nothing that so much
strengthens our faith, and trust in God, that so much keeps up innocencye,
and pureness of the heart, and also of outward godly life and conversation, as
continual reading and recordyng of Gods word. For that thing, which (by
continual use of reading of holy scripture, and diligent searchyng of the same)
is depely printed, and graven in the heart, at length turns almost into
nature. And moreover, the effects and virtue of Gods word is, to illuminate
the ignorant, and to give more light unto them, that faithfully and diligently
read it, to comfort their hearts, and to (...) age them to perform that,
which of God (...) commanded. It teaches patienc^ (...) aduersi^^^ in
prosperity humblenes: what ^onoure is due unto God, what mercy and charity to
our neighbor. It gives good counsel in all doubtful things. i. Re. xiiii.
ii. Par. x^ 1, Cor. xv. 1. John. v.
It shows of whom we shall look for aid and help in all perilles, and that
God is the only geuer of victory, in all battayles, and temptacions of our
enemies, Who profit most in readyng gods word.
bodily and ghostely. And in reading of Gods word, he most profits not
always, that is most ready in turning of the book, or in saying of it without
the book, but he that is most turned into it, that is most inspired with the
holy ghost, most in his heart and life altered and changed into that thing,
which he reads: he that is daily less and less proud, less wrathful,
less covetous, and less desirous of worldely and vain pleasures: he that
daily (forsaking his old vicious life) increases in virtue more and more. And
to be short, there is nothing that more maintains godlynes of the mind, and
drives away ungodliness, then does the continual readyng or hearing of Gods
word, if it be joined with a godly mind, and a good affection, to know and
follow Gods will. For without a single eye, pure intent, and good mind,
nothing is allowed for good before God. Esai. v. Mat. xxii. 1. Cor. xiiii What
incommodities, the ignorance of gods word b^in^eth.
And on the other side, nothing more darkeneth Christ and the glory of God,
nor brings in more blyndenesse and all kinds of vices, then does the
ignorance of Gods word.

The second part of the (...) of the holy Scripture.
IN the first part of this Sermon, which exhorts to the knowledge of holy
scriptur, was declared wherefore the knoweledge of the same is necessary and
profitable to al men. And that by the true knowledge and understanding of
scripture, the most necessary points of our duty toward God and our
neighbors, are also known. Now as concerning the same matter, you shall
hear what follows. It we profess Christ: why be we not ashamed to be
ignorant in his doctrine? Seeing that every man is ash^med to be ignorant in
that lerning, which he professes. That man is ashamed to be called a
Philosopher, which reads not the books of Philosophy: and to be called a
lawyer, and Astronomer, or a phisitio^, that is ignorant in the books of law.
Astronomy and Physic. How can any man the^ say that he professes Christ and
his religion, The will not apply him self (as far forth as he can or may
conveniently) to read and hear, and so to know the books of Christ's gospel
and doctrine. Although other sciences be good, and to be learned, gods (...)
excels (...) sciences.
yet no man can deny, but this is the chief, and passes all other
inco^parably. What excuse shall we therefore make (at the last day before
Christ) that delight to read or hear men's fantasies and inuen^ions, more
then his most holy gospel: and will find no time to do that, which chiefly
(above all ^^^^ges) we should do, and will rather read other (...) their that,
for the which we ought rather (...) ^^^ding of all other things. Let us
therefore apply our selves, as far fourth as we can have time and leisure,
to know Gods word, ^aine exenses diss^abynge from the knowledge of gods
word^. The first.
by diligent hearing and readyng thereof, as many as profess God and have faith
and trust in him. But they that have no good affection to Gods word (to color
this there fault) allege commonly, two vain and sayned excuses. Some go about
to excuse them by their own frailenes and fearefulnes, saying that they dare
not read holy scripture* leaft through their ignorasice they should fall into
any error. The soe^^^
Other pretend that the difficulty to understand it, and the hardness thereof is
so great, that it is meet to be read only of clerks and learned men. As
touching the first: ignorance of Gods word, is the cause of all error; as
Christ him self affirmed to the Saduceis, saying that they erred, because they
knew not the scripture. (...) xxii.
How should they then eschew error that will be still ignorant? And how should
they come out of ignorance, that will not read nor hear that thing, which
should give the^ knowledge? He that now has most knowledge, was at the first
ignorant, yet he forbear not to read, for fear he should sal into error: but
he diligently read, least he should remain in ignorance, and through
ignorance, in error. And if you will not know the truth of God (a thing most
necessary for you) least you fall into error: by the same reason you may then
lie still, and never go, least (if you go) you fall in the mire: nor eat any
good meat, least you take a surfeit, nor sow your come, nor labor in your
occupacion, nor use your merchau^dize, for fear you lose your sede, your
labor, your sto^ke, and so by that reason, it should be best for you to live
^oe^^y, and never to take in hand to do any manner of good thing, least
pereraduenture some evil thing may chance thereof. And yt you be afraid to fall
into error, by readyng of holy scripture: (...) c^^^^^^ ^usty (...) without
(...) peril, the holy scripeture is (...) be read*
I shall she we you how you may read it without danger of error. Read it
humbly with a meke and a lowly heart, to the intent you may gloryfye God, and not
your self, with the knowledge of it: and read it not without daily praging to
God, that he would direct your readyng to good effect: and take upon you to
expound it no further, then you can plainly understand it. For (as S.
Augustine says) the knowledge of holy scripture, is a great, large and a high
palace, but the door is very low: so that the high and arrogant man, can not
run in but he must stowpe low, and humble him self, that shall enter into it.
Presumption and arrogance, is the mother of all error: and humility needs to
fear no error. For humility will only search to know the truth, it will
search, and will bring together one place with an other: and where it ca^ not
find out the meaning, it will pray, it will ask of other that know, and will not
prestriupteously and rashely define any thing, which it knows not. Therefore
the humble man may search any truth boldly in the scripture, without any
danger of error. And if he be ignorant, he ought the more to read and to
search holy scripture, to bring him out of ignorance. I say not nay, but a man
may prosper with only hearing, but he mai^^^^^ more prosper, with both hearing,
and reading. This have I said, as touching the fear to ^^ade, th^^ough
ignorance of the person. And ^onu^ the hardenesse of Scripture, ^^r^yture in
some ^laces is ^asy, and (...) some ^laces (...) to be ^^der^^a^d
he that is so weak that he is not able to broke strong meat: yet he may
suck the sweet and tender mil^e, and di^^erre the rest, until he wax
stronger, and come to more knowledge. For god receaueth the learned and
unlearned, and casts away none, but is indifferent unto all. And the
scripture is full, as well of low valleys, plain ways, and easy for every
man to use, and to walk in: as also of high hills and mountains, god leueth
no man untaught yt has a good will to kno^e his word.
which few men can clymbe unto. And whosoever gives his mind to holy
scriptures, with diligent study and burning desire, it can not be (says S.
John Chrisostom) that he should be left without help. For either God almighty
will send him some godly doctor, to teach him, as he did to instruct
Eunuchus, a noble man of Eth^ope, and treasorer unto Queen Candace, who having
a great affection to read the scripture (although he understood it not) yet
for the desire that he had unto Gods word, God sent his Apostle Philip to
declare unto him the true sense of the scripture, that he read: or else, it we
lack a learned man to instruct and teach us, yet God him self from above,
will give light unto our wyndes, and teach us those things which are necessary
for us, and wherein we be ignorant. ^^ow^ the knowledge of scriptur may be
at^^^ed vn^^.
And in an other place, Chrysostom says, that man's human and worldly
wisdom, or science, needs not to the understanding of scripture, but the
reuelacion of the holy ghost, who inspireth the true meaning unto them, that
with humility and diligence do search therefore. He that asks shall have,
Math. vii.
and he that seeks shan find, and he that knocks, shall have the door open.
If we read once, twice, or thrice, and understand not, let us not sease so,
but still continue reading, praying, askyng of other, and so by still knockyng
(at the last) the door shall be opened (as S. Augustine says. a good rule for
ye vnderst^^dyng of scripture*
) Although many things in the scripture be spoken in obscure mysteries, yet
there is nothing spoken under dark mysteries in one place, but the self same
thing in other places, is spoken more familiarely and plainly, to the
capacity both of learned and vnl^^^ned. And those things in the scripture
that be plain to understand, No (...) excepted from the knowledge of godd^^
w^ll.
and necessary for salvation, every man's duerie is to learn them, to prynt them
in memory, and effectuallye to exercise them. And as for the dark mysteries,
to be contented to be ignorant in them, until such time as it shall please
God to open those things unto him. In the mean season, if he lack either
aptnes or opportunity. God will not impute it to his folly: but yet it behooves
not, that such as be apt, should set aside readyng, because some other be
unapt to read: nevertheless* for the hardenes of such places, What persons
would have ignorance to continue.
the reading of the whole ought not to be set aparte. And briefly to conclude,
(as S. Augustine says) by the scripture, all men be amended, weak men be
strengthened, and strong men be comforted. So that surely, none be enemies to
the reading of Gods word, but such as either be so ignorant, that they know
not how wholesome a thing it is: or else be so sick. The holy Scripture is one
of ^od^ chief benefit^^.
that they hate the most comfortable medicine, that should heal them: or so
ungodly, that they would wish the people, still to continue in blyndenesse and
ignorance of God.

Thus we ^aue briefly ^^^^ded some part of the commoditie^ of Gods ho^y word,
w^^ch is one of Gods chief, and principal benefits, ^euen (...) declared to
mankind, here in earth. Let us th^n^e God heartely, for this his great and
special (...), beneficial ^auour, and fatherly providence. Let us be glad to
revive this precious gift of our heavenly father. Let us hear, read, and
know, these holy rules, The right re^dynge, use, and fruit full studi^ng in
holy scripture. Psalm. 1.
injunctions, and st^^^utes of our Christen religion, and upon that we have
made profession to God at our baptism. Let us with fear and reverence lay up
(in the chest of our hearts) these necessary and fruitful l^ssons. Let us
night and day muse, and have meditacion, and contemplacion in them. Let us
ruminate, and (as it were) chew the ^udde, that we may have the ^wete ^e^se,
spiritual effect, mary, honey, kyrnell, taste, comfort, and consolation of
them. Let us stay, quiet, and certify our consciences, with the most
infallyble certainty, truth, and perpetual assurance of them. Let us pray to
God (the only a^^cthour of these heavenly studies) that we may speak, think,
believe, live and depart hence, according to the wholesome doctrine, and verities
of them. And by that means, in this world we shall have Gods defense, favor,
and grace, with the unspeakable solace of peace, and ^u^etnes of conscience*
and after this miserable lif^^ we shall enjoy the endless bliss, and glory of
he^uen* which he grant us all, that dyed for, us all Jesus Christ* to whom
with the father, and the holy ghost be all honor and glory, ^^th now and
euerlastyngly. Ame^.

(...) kind, and of his conde^^^^^t^ to death everlasting, by his own sin.
THe holy Ghost, in writing the holy scripture, is in nothing more dilygent,
then to put down man's vain glory and pride which of all vices is most
universally grafted in all mankind, even from the first infectio^ of our first
father Adam. And therefore we read in many places of scripture, many notable
lessons against this old roted vice, to teach us the most commendable virtue
of humility, how to know our selves, and to remember what we be of our
selves. In the book of Genesis, Gene. (...)
almighty god gives us all a title and name in our great graunde father Adam,
which ought to warn us all, to consider what we be, whereof we be, from whence
we came and whether we shall, saying thus: in the sweat of thy face, shall
thou eat thy bread, til thou be turned again into the ground, for out of it
wast thou taken, in as much as thou art dust, and into dust shall thou be turned
again. Here (as it were in a glass) we may learn to know our selves, to
be but grossd, earth and ashes, and that to earth and ashes, we shall
return.

Also the holy patriarche Abraham, did well remember this name and title, dust,
earth, and ashes appointed and assigned by God, to all (...) and therefore he
calls himself by tha^ (...) when he makes his earnest prayer for (...)
^om^^re. And we read, (...).
that Judith (...) Hie^^^is with other holy (...), did use sack (...) and
(...) upon their (...) led their sinful living. They called and tried to God
for help and mercy, with such a ceremony of sack cloth, dust, and ashes,
that thereby they might declare to the whole world, what an humble and lowely
estimacion they had of them selves, and how well they remembered their name and
tylle aforesaid, their vile corrupt frail nature, dust, earth, and ashes.
The book of wisdom also wylling to pull down our proud stomakes, ^ay. vii.
moves us diligently to remember our mortal and earthly generation, which we
have all of him that was first made: and that all men, as well kings as
subjects come into this world, and go out of the same in like sort: that is,
as of our selves full miserable, as we may daily see. And almighty God
commanded his Prophet Esai, Esai. xl.
to make a proclamacion, and cry to the whole world: and Esai asking, what
shall I cry? The Lord answered: cry, that all flesh is grass, and that all
the glory thereof, is but as the flower of the field: when the grass is
withered, the flower falls away, when the wynd of the Lord blows upon it.
The people surely is grass, ye which dries vy, and the flower fades away.
And the holy Prophet Job, having in him self great experience of the miserable
and sinful estate of man, does open the same to the world, in these words:
Man (says he) that is borne of a woman, living but a short time, Job. xiiii.
is full of manifold miseries: he springs up like a flower, and fades
again, vanyshyng away as it were a shadow, and never continu^^^ (...) one
state. And do thou judge it meet (O (...) thine eyes upon such a one, and
to bring (...) ^^^^ment with the? Who can make him clean, that is conceived
o^^n unclean (...) and (...) men of their euilnes and natural prones be so
universally given to sin, that (as the scripture says) God repeted that ever
he made man. Ge. v. v^^
And by sin his indignac^^ was so much provoked against the world, that he
drowned all the world with Noes flud (except Noe him self and his little
household.) It is not without great cause, that the scripture of God, does so
many times call all men here in this world by this word, earth. O thou earth,
earth, earth, says Jeremy, hear the word of the Lord, Iere. xiiii.
This our right name, calling, and title, earth, earth, earth, pronounced by
the Prophet, shows what we be in deed, by whatsoever other style, title or
dignity, men do call us. Thus he plainly named us, who knows best, both
what we be, and what we ought of right to be called. And thus he sets us
forth, speking by his faithful Apostle S. Paul: Romans ii^^.
al men, Jews and Gentiles, are under sin: there is none righteous, no not
one: there is none that understands, there is none that seeks after god, they
are al gone out of the way, they are all unprofitable: there is none that does
good, no, not one: their throat is an open sepulcher, with their to^ges they
have used craft and deceit, the poison of serpents is under their lyppes,
their mouth is full of cursyng and bytternes, their fete are swift to shed blud,
destruction and wretchedness are in their ways, and the way of peace, have they
not known: their is no fere of god before their eyes. And in another place S.
Paul writes thus: God has wray (...) ^^^cio^s in unbelief, (...)
that he might have (...) The scripture shuts up al (...) promise by the
faith of Jesus Christ, Would be given unto the^ that believe. S. Paul in many
places painteth us out in our colors, calling us the children of the wrath of
god, when we be borne: saying also that we cannot think a good thought of our
selves, much less can we say well, or do well of our selves. And the wise man
says in the book of Proverbs, Pro. xxiiii
the just man falls seven times a day. The most tried and approved man Job,
feared al his works. Luke. i.
S. John ye Baptist, being sanctified in his mothers womb, and praised before
he was borne, being called an Angel, and great before ye lord, filled even
from his birth with the holy ghost, ye preparer of the way for our savior
Christ, and commended of our savior Christ, to be more then a prophet, and the
greatest that ever was borne of a woman: yet he plainly grants that he had
need to be washed of Christ, he worthily extolleth and glorifieth his lord and
master Christ, and humbles himself, as unworthy to unbuckle his shoes, and
gives al honor and glory to god. So does. S. Paul both often and evidently
confess himself, Math. iii.
what he was of himself, ever giving (as a most faithful servant) al praise to
his master and savior. So does blessed. S. John the Evangelist, 1. John.i. ^ud.
ii.
in ye name of himself, and of al other holy men (be they never so just) make
this open confession: if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us: If we knowledge our sins God is faithful and just, to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness: if we say, we
have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us. Wherefore the
wise man in ye book, Eccle. vii.
called Ecclesiastes, makes this true and general (...) There is (...) earth:
that does good, and sins not. And. S. David is ashamed of his sin,
Psalm.ii.
but not to confess his sin. How often, how earnestly, and lamentably both he
desire gods great mercy, for his great offenses, and that god should not enter
into judgment with him? And again, Psalm. cx^^^
how well weighs this holy man his sins, when he confesses that they he so
many in number, and so hid, and hard to understand, that it is in manner
impossible to know, utter, or number them? Wherefore he having a true, earnest,
and deep contemplacion and consideracion of his sins and yet not coming to
the bottom of them, Psalm. xix.
he makes supplicacion to God, to forgive him his prieuy, secret, hid sins:
to the knowledge of yt which he cannot attain unto. He weighs ryghtly his
sins from the original root, and spring head, perceiving inclinacions,
prouocacio^s, stirringes, stinginges, buddes, brau^ces, dregs, infectio^s,
tastes, felynges, and sentes of them, to continue in him still. Wherefore he
says: mark and behold, Psalm.ii.
I was conceived in sins: he says not sin, but in the plural number,
sins, forasmuch as out of one (as fountain) springs all the rest. Our
savior Christ says: there is none good, but god: Mark^. x. Luke xvii^
John.xv. Luke. xvi^
and that we can do nothing that is good, without him, nor no man can come to
the father but by him. He commands us all to say, that we be unprofitable
servants, when we have don all that we can do. He prefers the penytent
Publycan, before the proud, holy, and glorious Pharisey. Luke xvii^ Math. i^.
He calls himself a phisicyon, but not to them that be whole, but to them
that be sick, and have need of his s^^ue (...) prayer^, (...) knowledge our
selves sinners, and to ask righteousness and deliverance from al euyls, at our
heavenly fathers hand. He declares that the sins of our own hearts, do
defyle our own selves. He teaches that an evil word or thought, Mat. xii.
deserves condemnacion, affirminge that we shall give an accoumpt for every
idle word. Mat. xv.
He says he came not to save, but the sheep that were utterly lost, and cast
away. Therefore few of the proud, just, learned, wise, perfect, and holy
Pharise is, were saved by him, because they justified them selves, by their
counterfeit holiness, before men. Wherefore (good people) let us be ware of
such hypocrisy, vaineglory, and justifying of our selves.

The second part of the Sermon of the misery of man.
FOr as much as the true knowledge of our selves, is very necessary to come to
the right knowledge of God, ye have heard in the last reading, how humbly
all godly me^, always have thought of them selves: and so to think and judge
of them selves, are taught of God their creator, by his holy word. For of our
selves, we be crabtrees, that can bring forth no apples. We be of our selves
of such earth, as can bring forth but weeds, nettles, brambles, briars,
cockle and darnell. Our fruits be declared in the.v. Chapter to the
Galathians. We have neither faith, (...) v.
charity, hope, patience, chastity, nor any thing else that good is, but of
(...). and th^^ (...) these virtues be called there, the scuites of the h^ly
ghost, and not the fruits of man. Let us therefore acknowledge our selves
before God (as we be in deed) miserable and wretched sinners. And let us
ernestly repent, and humble our selves heartely, and cry to God for mercy.
Let us all confess with mouth and heart, that we be full of imperfections.
Let us know our own works, of what imperfection they be, and then we shall
not stand foolyshely, and arrogantly in our own conceits, nor challenge any
part of Justification, by our merits or works. For truly, there be
imperfections in our best works: we do not love God so much as we are bound
to do, with all our heart, mind, and power: we do not fear God so much as we
ought to do: we do not pray to Godde, but with great and many imperfections:
we give, forgive, believe, live, and hope vnperfectlye: we speak, think, and
do vnperfectlye: we fight against the devil, the world, and the flesh,
imperfectly. Let us therefore not be ashamed to confess plainly, our state of
imperfection: yea, let us not be ashamed to confess imperfection, even in all
our own best works. Let none of us be ashamed to say with holy S. Peter: I
am a sinful man. Luke. v^. Psalm. ^v^
Let us al say with the holy Prophet David: we have sinned with our fathers,
we have done anrisse* and dealt wickedly. Let us al make open confession with
the prodigal son, to our father. and say with him, we have sinned against*
^auen and before the (O father) we are not worthy to de called this^^^s. Let us
al say, with holy Baru^^ O lord (...) to us (...)
is worth^^y (...) confusyon, and to thee, righteousness: We have sinned, we
have doe^ wickedly, we have behaved our selfs ungodly, in all thy righteousness.
Let us all say with the holy Prophet Danyel: Daniel. is
O lord, righteousness belongs to thee, unto us belongs confusion. We have
sinned, we have been naughty, we have offended, we have fled from thee, we
have gone back from all thy precepts and judgments. So we learn of al good
men in holy scripture, to humble our selves: and to exalte, extol, praise,
magnify, and glorify God.

Thus we have heard, how evil we be of our selves: how, of our selfs, and
by our selfs, we have no goodness, help nor salvation: but contrary wise,
sin, dampnacion, and death everlasting: which, if we depely weigh and
considre, we s^al the better understand the great mercy of God, and how our
salvation comes only by Christ. For in our selves (as of our selves) we
find nothing, (...) Cor. iii
whereby we may be delivered from this miserable captivity, into the which we
were cast, through the envy of the devil, by breakinge of gods commandment,
^^salu^. i.
in our first parente Adam. We are all become unclean, but we all are not able
to cleanse our selves, nor to make one another of us but we are not able to make
our selves the children clean. ^phe. ii.
We are by nature, the children of gods wrath and inherytours of gods glory. We
are sheep that run astraye, ^. Pet. ii.
but we cannot of our own power, come again to the shepfold, so great is our
imperfection and weakene^^. In our selves therefore may not we glory, which
(of our selves) are nothing but sinful Neither we may rejoice in any works
that we do, which all be so imperfect and vnpure, that they are not able to
stand before the righteous judgment seat of God, as the holy prophet David
says: Psa.cxi^^.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant (O lord) for no man that lives
shall be found righteous in thy sight. ii. Cor. i.
To God therefore must we flee, or else shall we never find peace, rest, and
quietness of conscience in our hearts. For he is the father of mercies, and God
of all consolation. He is the lord with who^ is plenteous redemption. He is the
God which of his own mercy saves us, Psalm. cxxi
and sets out his charity and exceading love toward us, in that of his
own voluntarye goodness, when we were perished, he saved us, and provided an
everlasting kingdom for us. And all these heavenly treasures, are given us,
not for our own deserts, merits or good deeds (which of our selves we have
none) but of his mere mercy freely. And for whose sake: Truly for Jesus
Christ's sake, that pure and undefiled lamb of God, He is that dearly beloved
son, for whose sake god is fully pacified, satisfied, John.i. 1. Pet. ii.
and set at one with man He is the lamb of God, which takes away the sins
of the world: of whom only it may be truly spoken, that he did all things
well, and in his mouth was found no craft nor subtlety. John.i.
None but he alone may say the Prince of the world came, and in me he has
nothing. And he alone may say also: John. viii Hebr.viii.
which of you shall reprove me of any fault? He is that high and everlasting
priest, which has offered him self an^ for all, upon the altar of the cross,
and with that one oblacion, has made perfect for evermore: th^^ that are
sanctified. John. ^.
He is the alone medi^^^ (...) twene God and man, which paid our ransom to
God, with his own blood, and with that has he cleansed us all from sin. He
is the Physician which heals all our diseases. Math. i.
He is that savior. which saves his people from all their sins. To be
short, he is that flowyng, and most plenteous fountain, of whose fullness all
we have received. For in him alone, are all the treasures of the wisdom and
knowledge of God hydden. And in him, and by him, have we from God the father
all good things perteynyng either to the body or to the soul. O how much are
we bound to this our heavenly father, for his great mercies, which he has so
plenteously declared unto us, in Christ Jesus our Lord and savior? What
thanks worthy and sufficient can we give to him? Let us all with one accord,
burste our with joyful voices. ever praysyng and magnifying this lord of
mercy, for his tender kindness she wed to us in his dearly beloved son,
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Hitherto have we heard what we are of our selves verily sinful, (...).
wretched and damnable: again we have heard, how that of our selves, and by
our selves, we are not able, either to think a good thought, or work a good
deed, so that we can find in our selves no hope of salvation, but rather
whatsoever makes unto our destruction. Again we have heard the tender
kindness and great mercy of God the father toward us, (...).
and how beneficial he is to us, for Christ's sake, without our merits or
deserts, even of his own mere mercyr and tender goodness. Now, how there
exceadyng great mercies of God, (...).
set abroad in Christ Jesus for us, be obtained: and how we be delivered from
the captivity of sin, death, and hell, it shall more at large (with Gods
help) be declared in the next Sermon. In the mean season, yea and at al
times, let us learn to know our selves, our frailty and weakness, without
any crakyng or bostyng of our own good deeds and merits. Let us also
knowledge the exceading mercy of God toward us, and confess, that as of our
selves comes all evil and damnacione so likewise of him, comes all
goodness and salvation, as God him self says, by the Prophet Oze: O Israel,
Oze. xii^
thy destruction comes of thy self, but in me only is thy help and
comfort. If we thus humbly submit our selves in the sight of Go^ we may be
sure, that in the time of hi^ disitacion, he will lift us up unto the kingdom
of his dearly beloved son Christ Jesus our Lord: to whom with the father and
the holy ghost, be all honor and glory for ever. AMEN.

(...) of mankind, by only Christ ha^^ Sa^^^r, from sin and death
euerlassyng.
BEcause all men be sinners, and offenders against God, and breakers of his
law and commandments, therefore can no man by his own acts, works, and
deeds, (seem they never so good) be justified, and made righteous before God:
but every man of necessity is constrained to seek for an other righteousness,
or justification, to be received at Gods own hands, that is to say, the
forgeuenes of his sins and trespasses, in such things as he has offended.
And this justification or righteousness, which ^^so receive by Gods mercy, and
Christ's m^^ides, embrased by faith, is taken, accepted, and allowed of God,
for our perfect and full justification. For the more full understanding
hereof, it is our parts and duty, (...) ^^mber the great mercy of God,
how tha^ al^ the world being wrapped in sin, by breakyng of the law) God
sent his only son, our savior Christ, into this world, to fufyll the law
for us: and by shedynge of his most precious bloudde, to make a sacrifice and
satisfaction, or (as it may be called) amends to his father for our sins: to
assuage his wrath and indignation conceived against us for the same. In so much
that infantes being baptized, and dying in their infansye, The efficatie of
Christ's ^^ssion and oblation.
are by this sacrifice: washed from their sins, brought to Gods favor, and
made his children, and inheritours of his kyngedome of heaven. And they which
in act or deed do sin after their baptism, when they turn again to God
vnsaignedly, they are likewise washed by this sacrifice, from their sins, in
such sort, that there remains not any, spot of sin, that shall be imputed
to their damnation. This is that justification or righteousness, which S. Pain
speaks of when he says: no man is justified by the works of the law, but
freely by faith in Jesus Christ. And again he says: Gale. ii.
we believe in Jesus Christ, that we be justified freely by the faith of Christ,
and not by the works of the law, because that no man shall be justified by
the works of the law. And although this justification be free unto us, yet it
comes not so freelye unto us, that there is no ransom paid therefore at
all. An (...) ^^sider^
This reason is satisfied vt the great wisdom of God, in this mystery of our
redemption, who has so tempered his justice and mercy together, that he would
neither by his suffice condemn us unto the everlasting captivity of the
devil, and his person of hell remediless for ever without mercy nor by his
mercy delyue^ ^s clearly, without ^^^ice, or payment of a just ^aunsome: but
with his endless mercy he joined his most upright and (...) great mercy he
showed unto us, in (...) from out former captivity, (...) any ransom to be
paid, or amends to be made upon our parts: which thing, by us had been
impossible to be done. And where as it lay not in us. that to do, he proinded a
ransom for us: that was, the most precious body and blood of his own most
dear and best beloved son Jesus Christ (who besides this ransom, fulfilled
the law for us perfectly. And so the justice of God, and his mercy did embrace
together, and fulfilled the mystery of our redemption. And of this justice and
mercy of God, knit together, speaks saint Paul, in the.iii. Chapt. to the
Romans: Romans iii.
al have offended and have need of ye glory of god, but are justified freely by
his grace, by redemption, which is in Jesus Christ, who^ God has set forth to
us, for a reconciler and peace maket, thorough faith in his blood, to show his
righteousness. Rome. i.
And in the.x. Chapt. Christ is the end of the law, unto righteousness, to
every man that believes. Romans viii.
And in the.viii. Chapt. that which was impossible by the law, in as much as it
was weak by the flesh, God sending his own son in the strailitude of
sinful flesh, by sin damned sin in the flesh, yt the righteousness of the
law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit. The things must go together in our justification.
In these foresaid places, the Apostle touches specially three things which
must go together in our justification, Upon gods part, his great mercy and
grace, upon Christ's part, justice: yt is, the satisfaction of Gods justice, or
the price of our redemption, by the offering of his body, (...) sheddyng of his
blood, with fulfyllyng of ye law, perfectly and throughty: and v^^^ our part
true and ^^^ely ^^ith in the mer^tes of I^^u Christ, which yet is tho^ ours,
but by gods working in us. So that in our justification, is not only gods
mercy and grace, but also his justice, which the Apostle calls the justice
of God, and it consists in paying our ransom, and fulfyllyng of the law,
and so the grace of God, does not shut out the justice of god in our
justification, but only shuts out the justice of man, yt is to say, ye
justice of our works, as to be merits of deserving our justification. And
therefore saint Paul declares here nothing upon the behalf of man, concerning
his justification, but only a true and lively faith, which nevertheless is ye
gift of god, and not man's only work without god. How it is to be understand
that faith iustyfyeth without works.
And yet ye faith does not shut out repentance, hope, love, dread, and the
fear of god, to be joined with faith in every man yt is justified: but it
shuts them out from the office of justifying. So that although they be al
present together in him yt is lustifyed, yet they justify not altogether. Nor
ye faith also does not shut out the justice of our good works, necessarily to
be done afterward of duty toward god, (for we are most bounden to serve
god, in doing good deeds, commanded by him in his holy scripture, all the days
of our life:) But it excludes the^ so, that we may not do the^ to this intent,
to be made good by doing of the^. For all the good works that we can do be
imperfect, and therefore not able to di^^^ (...) our justification: but our
justification does come freely, by ye mere mercy of god: and of so great and
^^ee merci, yt whereas all the world was not a^^e of be it selves, to pay any
part to wards their (...) i^ pleased our heavenly father, of his infin^^ (...)
out any our desert. or deseruynge, to prepa^e so (...) the most precious is
wells of Christ's body and blood, whereby our ransom might be fully paid, the
law fulfilled, and his justice fully fatisfied. So that Christ is now the
righteousness of all them that truly do believe in him. He for them paid their
ransom by his death. He for them fulfilled the law in his life. So that
now, in him, and by him, every true Christian man may be called a fulfiller of
the law, forasmuch as that, which their infirmity lacks, Christ's justice
has supplied.

The second part of the Sermon of Salvation.
YE have heard of whom all men ought to seek their justification and
righteousness, and how also this righteousness comes unto men by Christ's
death and merits, ye heard also how that three things are required to the
obtaynyng of our righteousness: that is, Gods mercy, Christ's Justice, and a
true and a lively faith, out of the which faith spryngeth good works. Also
before was declared at large, that no man can be iustyfyed by his own good
works, that no man fulfylleth the law, according to the full request of the
law. And saint Paul in his Epistle to the Galathians proves the same, Galat.
iii.
saying thus: If there had been any law given, which could have justified,
verily, righteousness should have been by the law. And again he says: if
righteousness be by the law, then Christ dyed in vain. And again he says:
you that are justified by the law, are fallen awase from grace. And
furthermore, he writes to the Ephesias, on this wise: by grace are ye saved
through faith, Ephe. ii.
and that not of your selves: for it is the gift of God, and not of works,
lest any man should glory. And to be short, the sum of all Paul's
disputacion, is this: that if justice come of works, then it comes not of
grace: And if it come of grace, then it comes not of works. And to this
end, tends all the Prophets, as S. Peter says, in the tenth of the Acts:
Acts. v.
of Christ all the Prophets (says saint Peter) do witness, that through
his name, al they that believe in him, shall receive the remission of sins.
And after this wise, Faith only justifies, (...) the doctrine of old docto^^
to be justified only by this true and lively faith in Christ, speaks all
the old and aunciente aucthours, both Greeks, and Latins. Of whom I will
specially rehearse three: Hillarie, Basil, and Ambrose. S. Hillarie says
these words plainly in the.ix. Canon, upon Matthew: Faith only justifies.
And saint Basil, a Greek aucthour, writes thus: This is a perfect and a
whole reioysyng in God, when a man auaunceth not himself for his own
righteousness, but knowledgeth himself, to lack true justice and
righteousness, and to be instified by the only faith in Christ. And P^ule
(says he) does glory in the contempt of his own righteousness, Phil^. iii.
and that he looks for the righteousness of God, by faith.

These be the very words of saint Basil. And Saint Ambrose, a Latin
aucthour, says these words: This is the ordinance of GOD (...) which
believe in Christ, should be ^aued without works, by faith only, freely
receiuyng re^^^^^n of his sins. Consider diligently these words: without
works, by faith only, freely, we receive remission of our sins. What can
be spoken more plainlye, then to say: that freely, without works, by faith
only, we obtain remission of our sins: These and other like sentences,
that we be justified by faith only, freely, and without works, we do
read of times in the most best and ancient writers. As beside Hillary,
Basil, and saint Ambroise, before rehearsed: we read the same in Origene,
saint Chrysostom, saint Cypriane, saint Augustine, Prosper, Decomenius,
Phocius, Bernardus, Ansehne, and many other auctours: Greek and Latin.
Nevertheless, this sentence: that we be justified by faith only: is not so
meante of them, that the said iustifiynge faith is alone in man, without true
repentance, hope, charity, dread and the fear of God, at any time and
season. Faith alone how it is to be understand.
Nor when they say: that we be justified freely: they mean not, that we should
or might afterward be idle, and that nothing should be required on our parts
afterward. Neither they mean not so to be justified without our good
works, that we should do no good works at all, like as shall be more expressed
at large, hereafter. But this saying, that we he justified by faithonly, freely,
and without works: is spoken for to take away clearly all merit of our
works, as being unable to deserve our justification at Gods hands, and
thereby most plainly to express the weakness of man, and the goodness of God:
the great infirmity of our selves, and the might and power of God: the
imperfectnes of our own works, and the most aboundaunt grace of our savior
Christ. And therefore wholly to ascribe the merit and deserving of our
justification, unto Christ only, and his (...) precious blood shedyng. This
faith the holy ^^^ure teaches: this is the strong rock and foundation of
Christian religion: this doctrine all old and ancient auctours of Christ's
church do approve: The profit (...) the doctrine of faith on^^ justifies.
this doctrine, auaunceth and sets furthe the true glory of Christ, and
beats down the vain glory of man: this, whosoever denies, is not to be
coumpted for a Christian manne: not for a setter furthe of Christ's glory,
What they (...) that impug^^ the doctrin^^ of faith ou^ justifies.
but for an adversary to Christ and his Gospel, and for a setter furthe of
men's vain glory. And although this doctrine be never so true, (as it is
most true in deed) that we be justified freely, A declarati^^ of this doctrine:
faith without works justifies.
without al merit of our own good works (as saint Paul does express it)
and freely, by this lively and perfect faith in Christ only (as thauncie^t
aucthors use to speak it:) yet this true doctrine must be also truly
understand, and most plainly declared, lest carnal men should take unjustly
occasion thereby, to live carnally after the appetite and will of the world,
the flesh, and the devil. And because no man should err: by mistakyng of
this doctrine, I shall plainlye and shortly so declare the right understanding
of the same, that no man shall justly think, that he may thereby take any
occasion of carnal liberty, to follow the desires of the flesh, or that thereby,
any kind of sin shall be committed, or any ungodly living the more used.

First, you shall understand, that in our justification by Christ, it is not
all one thing, the office of God unto man, and the office of man unto God.
Iustificacion is not the office of man, but of God: for man can not, making
himself righteous by his own works, neither in part, nor in the whole, for
that were the greatest arrogancy a^^ presumpcion of man, that Antichrist
could set up against God: to affirm, that a man might by his own works,
take away and pourge his own sins, and so justify himself. Iustificacion
is the office of God only.
But in iustificacion is the office of God only, and is not a thing, which we
render unto him, but which we receive of him: not which we give to him, but
which we take of him, by his free mercy, and by the only merits of his
most derely beloved son, our only redemer, Savior and iustifier, Jesus
Christ. So that the true understanding of this doctrine: we be justified freely
by faith, without works: or that we be justified by faith in Christ only:
is not, that this our own act, to believe in Christ, or this our faith in
Christ, which is within us, does justify us, and deserve our iustificacion
unto us (for that were to coumpte our selves, to be justified by some act or
virtue, that is within our selves:) but the true understanding and meaning
thereof, is, that although we hear Gods word, and believe it, although we have
faith, hope, charitee, repentance, dread; and fear of GOD within us, and do
never so many good works thereunto: yet we must renounce the merit of all our
said virtues, of faith, hope, charity, and all our other virtues, and good
deeds: which we either have done, shall do, or can do, as things that be
far to weak, and insufficient and imperfect, to deserite remission of our
sins, and our iustificacion, and therefore we must trust only in Gods
mercy, and that sacrifice which our high priest, and savior Christ Jesus the
son of God, ones offered for us upon the cross, to obtain thereby Gods
grace, and remission, as well of our original sin, in Baptism, as of all
actual sin committed by us after our Baptism, if we truly repent and
turn unfeignedly to him again. So that as saint Ihon Baptist, although he
were never so virtuous and Godly a man, yet in this matter of forgiuyng of
sin, he did put the people from him, and appoincted them unto Christ,
saying thus unto them: Behold, Ihon. i.
yonder is the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world: even
so, as great and as godly a virtue as the lively faith is, yet it puts us
from it self, and remitteth or appoincteth us unto Christ, for to have only by
him remission of our sins, or iustificacion. So that our faith in Christ (as
it were) says unto us thus: it is not I* that take a way your sins, but it
is Christ only, and to him only* I send you for that purpose, forsaking
therein al your good virtues, words, thoughts, and works, and only puttyng
your trust in Christ.

(...) Sa^uation.
IT has been manifestly declared unto you* that no man can fulfill the law of
God, and therefore by the la^^^ ^^^enne are condemned: whereupon it followed
necessarylye, that some other thing should be required for our salvation, than
the law: and tha^ is a true and a lively faith in Christ, bringynge forth
good works, and a life according to Gods commandments. And also you heard
the ancient aucthours minds of this saying, faith in Christ only justifies
man, so plainly declared: that you s^ that the very true meaning of this
propostcio^ or sa^yng: We be justified by faith in Christ only: (according to
the meaning of the old ancient auctours) is this: we put our faith in
Christ, that we be justified by him only, that we be justified by Gods free
mercy, and the merits of our savior Christ only, and by no virtue or good
work of our own, that is in us, or that we (...) be able to have, or to do,
for to deserve the same: Christ himself only, being the cause meritorious
thereof.

Here you perceive many words to be used, to avoid contention in words with
them that delyght to braule about words* and also to show the true meaning
to avoid evil taking and misvnderstandinge: and yet peradventure al will not
serve with them, that the contencious: but conten^^^s will ever for^e ma^^er ^f
con^ention, even when they have no^e (...) thereto. Not withstanding forty
nyghtes, without me^^t and drink, that he wrought al kind of miracles,
declaryng himself very god: They believe also, that Christ for our sakes
suffered most painful death, to redene us from everlasting death, and that
he rose again from death the third day: they believe that he ascen^^d into
heaven, and that he sits on the right hand of the father, and at the last
end of this world, shall come again and judge both the quick and the dead.
These articles of our faith, the deiuils believe, and so they believe all
things that be written in the new and old Testament to be true: and yet for
all this faith, they be but devils, remaining still in their damnable estate,
Iackynge ^^e very true Christian faith. What is the tru^e ^us^^ (...) syu^g
faith.
For the right and true Christian faith is: not only to believe that holy
scripture, and all the foresaid articles of our faith are true, but also to
have a sure trust and confidence in gods merciful promises, to be saved from
everlasting damnation by Christ: whereof does follow a loving heart, to obey
his commandments. And this true Christian faith neither any devil has,
(...)
nor yet any man which, in the outward profession of his mouth, and in his
outward receiving of the sacraments* in cumming to the church, and in all other
outward appearaunces, seems to be a Christ (...) manne, and yet in his living
and deeds, shows (...) contrary. For how can a man have this (...) faith,
this sure trust and con^idence (...) by the merit^s of Christ his sins be^^
(...) and he reco^^^^d to the f^uo^^^ (...) pa^^ak^^ of the kingdom of (...) he
lives ungodly, and denies (...) deeds? Surely, no such ungodly maune, can
have this says and trust in god. For as they know Christ to be the only
savior of the world: so they know also, that wicked men, shall not enjoy the
kingdom of god. They know, that god hates unrighteousness, Psalm.v.
that he will destroy all those that speak v^truelye, that those that have
done good woorke^ (which can not be done without a lively faith in Christ)
shall come forth into the resurrection of life, and those that have done evil,
shall come unto resurrection of judgment: very well they know also, that to
them that be co^tencious, and to them that will not be obedient unto the truth,
but will obey unrighteousness, shall come indignation, wrath, and affliction.
etc. Therefore, to conclude, considering the infinite benefits of God, showed
and given unto us, mercifullye without our deserts, who has not only created
us of nothing, and from a piece of vile clay, of his infinite goodness, has
exalted us (as touching our soul) unto his own similitude and likeness: but
also, whereas we were condemned to hell, and death everlasting, has given his
own natural son, being god eternal, immortal, and equal unto himself in
power and glory, to be incarnated, and to take our mortal nature upon him, with
the infirmities of the same: and in the same nature, to suffer most shamful and
painful death for our offenses, to the intent to iustifye us, and to restore us
to life everlasting: so making us also his dear beloved children, brethren
unto his only son our savior Christ, and inheritors for ever with him, of
his eternal kingdom of heaven.

These great and merciful benefits of God) if they be well considered) do
neither minister unto us occasion to be idle, and to live without doing any
good works, neither yet ^^yrreth us, by any means, to do evil things: but
contrary wise, it we be not desperate persons, and our hearts har^er then
stones, they move us to render our selves unto god wholly with all our will,
hearts, might and power, to serve him in all good deeds, obeying his
commandments, during our lives, to seek in all things his glory and
honor, not our sensual pleasures and vainglory, evermore dreadyng willyngly
to offend such a merciful God a^^ loving redemer, in word, thought or deed.
And (...) said benefits of God depely considered, move us* for his sake also,
to be ever ready to give our selves to our neighbors, and as much as lies in
us* to study with all our endeavor, to do good to every man. These be the
fruits of the true says, to do good (as much as lies in us) to every
man. And above al things, and in all things to auaunce the glory of God, of
whom only we have our sanctification, justification, salvation, and
redemption. To whom be ever glory, praise, and honor, world without end.
Amen.

(...) true liue^y, and Christian faith.
THe first coming unto god, (good Christian people) is through faith: Faith.
whereby, (as it is declared in the last Sermon) we ^e justified before god.
And lest ^^ny man should be deceived, for lack of ^^^ht understanding thereof,
(...) ^^diligently to be noted, that faith is taken in the scripture, two manner
of ways. There is one faith, which in scripture is called a dead faith: (...)
dead. faith.
which bringet forth no good works, but is idle, barrain, and unfruitful. And
this faith, James.ii.
by the holy Apostle, S. James, is compared to the faith of devils, which
believe god to be true, and just, and tremble for fear, yet they do nothing
well, ^^^ius.i.
but al evil. And such a manner of faith, have the wicked and naughty christian
people, which confess god (as.S. Paul says) in their mouth, but deny him
in their deeds. being abominable* and without the right faith, and to al
good works reprouable. And this faith is a persuasion and belief in man's
heart: whereby he knows that there is a god, and agrees unto all truth of
gods most holy word contained in holy Scripture. So that it consists only,
in belieuyng in the word of god, that it is true. And this is not properlye
called faith: But as he that reads Ceasars Commentaries believing the same
to be true, has thereby a knowledge of Ceasars life, and not able acts,
because he believes the history (...) ta^^^: yet it is not properlye said that
he believes in Ceasar, of whom he looks for no help, nor benefit: Even so,
he that believes that all that is spoken of god in the Bible, is true, and yet
lives so ungodly, that he can not look to enjoy the promises and benefits of
god: although it may be said, that such a man has a faith and belief to the
words of god, yet it is not properlye said, that he belieueth in god, or
has such a faith and trust i^ god, whereby he may surely look for grace,
mercy and everlasting li^^ at gods hand, but rather for indignacion and
punishment, according to the merits of his wicked life. For as it is written
in a book, entitled to be of Didimus Alexandrinus: for as much as faith
without works is dead, it is not now faith: as a dead man is not a man. This
dead faith therefore is not the sure and substantial faith* which saves
sinners. A lively faith.
Another faith there is in scripture, which is not (as the foresaid faith)
idle, unfruitful, and dead but works by charity (as S. Paul declares) Gala
v. which, as the other vain faith, Ga^^. ^^
is called (...) dead faith, so may this be called a quick or lively fa^^^.
And this is not only the common belief of the Articles of our faith, but i^
is also a sure (...) and confidence of the mercy of God* (...) Lord Jesus
Christ, and a steadfast hope of (...) things to be received at gods hand
(...) though we, through infirmity, or ter^^ (...) of our gostly enemy, do
fall from him by (...) we return a^^ine unto him by ^rue^^ (...) his sons
sake our Savior Ie^^^ (...) will made us ^^herito^ir^ (...) lasting
kingdom, and that in the mean time, until that kingdom come, he will be our
protector and defendor in all perils and dangers, whatsoever do chance: and
that, though sometime he does send us sharp adversity, yet that evermore he
will be a louinge father unto us, correctynge us, for our sin, but not
withdrawing his mercy fina^^ye from us, if we trust in him, and commit o^^
selves wholly unto him, hang only upon him, and call upon him, ready to obey and
serve him. This is the true, lively, and unfeigned Christian says, and is not
in the mouth and outward profession only: but it lives, and stirs
inwardely in the heart. And this faith is not without hope and trust in God,
nor without the love of GOD and of our neighbors, nor without the fear of
God, nor without the desire to hear Gods word, and of follow the same in
esche wynge evil, and doing gladlye all good works.

This faith, ^ebr^. xi
(as saint Paul describes it) is the sure ground and foundation of the
benefits: which we ought to look for and trust to receive of God, a
certificat and sure lookynge for them, although they yet sensibly appear not
unto us. And after he says he that comes to god, must believe, both that he
is, and that he is a merciful rewarder of well doers. And nothing co^me^deth
good men unto god so much, as this assured faith, and trust in him. Of this
faith.iii. things are specially to be noted.

First, Three things are to be noted of ^^^the.
that this faith does not lie dead in the heart, but is lively and fruitful in
bringing forth good works.

Second, that without it, can no good works be done, that shall be acceptable
and pleasant to God.

Chyrd, what manner of good works they be, that this faith does bring forth.

For the first, as the light cannot be hyd, Faith is full of good works.
but will show forth it self, at one place or other: So a true faith cannot be
kept secret, but when occasion is offered it will break out, and show it
self by good works. And as the lyuinge body of a man ever exercises such
things, as belongs to a natural and living body, for nourishment and
preservation of the same, as it has need, opportunity and occasion: even so
the soul, that has a lively faith in it, will be doing always some good work,
which shall declare that it is living, and will not be unoccupied. Therefore, when
men hear in the scriptures, so high commendacions of faith, that it makes us
to please god, to live with god, and to us the children of god: if then they
phantasy, that they be set at liberty from doing al good works, and may live
as they lust, they trifle with god and deceive themselves. And it is a manifest
token that they be far from having the true and lively faith, and also far
from knowledge what true faith means. For the very sure and lively christian
faith is, not only to believe al things of God which are contained in holy
scripture: but also, is an earnest trust, and confidence in God, that he does
regard us: and that he is careful over us, as the father is over the child,
whom he does love: and that he will be merciful unto us, for his only sons
sa^e: and that we have our savior Christ, our perpetual aduocat and priest,
in whose only merits, oblation and sufferynge, we do trust that our offenses
be cont^nually washed, and purged, whenever we, (repentyng truly) do teturne
to him, with our whole heart, stedfastlye determinynge with our selfs,
through his grace, to obey and serve him, in hepinge his commandments, and
never to turn back again to sin. Such is the true faith that the
scripture does so much commend, the which when it sees and considers
what god has done for us, is also moved through continual assistence of the
spirit of god, to serve and please him, to keep his favor, to fear his
displeasure, to continue his obedient children, she winge thankefulnes again,
by observing or keeping his commandments, and that freely, for true love
chieflye, and not for dread of punisheme^t, or love of temporal reward:
considering how clearly, without our deseruinges. we have received his mercy
and pardon freely.

This true faith will she we forth it self, Ab^^^^. ii.
and can not long be idle. For as it is written: The just man does live by his
faith. He neither slepeth, nor is idle, when he should wake and be well
occupied, And god by his Prophet Jeremy says: that he is a happy and blessed
man, Iere. xvii.
which has faith and confidence in God. For he is like a tree, set by the
waterside, that spredeth his roots abroad toward the moisture, and fears not
heat when it comes: his leaf will be grene, and will not cease, to bring
forth his fruit: Even so, faithful men (putting away all fear of
adversity) will show forth the fruit of their good works, as occasion is
offered to do them.

The second (...) of Faith.
YE have heard in the first part of this sermon, that there be two kinds of
faith: a dead and an unfruitful faith, and a faith lively that works by
charity. The first to be unprofitable, the second necessary for the obtaining
of our salvation: the which faith has charity always joined unto it, and
is fruitful, bringyng forth all good works. Now as concerning the same
matter, you shall hear what follows. The wise man says: he that believes in
God, will hearken unto his commandments. For if we do not show our selves
faithful in our conversation, Eccle. xxxi^
the faith which we pretend to have, is but a fained faith: because the true
Christian faith, is manifestly showed by good living, Libro de fi^^et operibu^
Cap. ii.
and not by words only, as saint Augustine says: good living cannot be
separated from true faith, which works by love. And Saint Chrysostom says:
Sermo delege et fide,
faith of it self is full of good works, as soon as a man does believe, he
shall be garnished with them. How plentyful this faith is of good works, and
how it makes the work of one man more acceptable to god then of another: S.
Paul teaches at large in the.xi. chap. to the Hebr. Hebre. xi. Gene. iiii.
Gene. vi. Eccle. xliiii. Gene. xi.
saying that faith made the oblacion of Abel better, then the oblacion of Cain.
This made Noe to build the arcke. This made Abraham to forsake his country,
and al his friends, and to go into a far country, there to dwell among
strangers. So did also Isaac and Jacob: depending or hanging only of the help
and trust, that they had in God. And when they came to the country, which god
promised the^, they would build no cities, towns, nor houses, but lived like
strangers in Tents, that might every day be removed. Their trust was so much
in god, that they set but little by any worldly thing, for that god had prepared
for the^, better dwelling places in heaven, of his own foundacio^ and building.
^ene. xii. ^ccle. xiiii.
This faith made Abraham ready at gods commandment: to offer his own son
and heir Isaac: whom he loved so well, and by whom he was promised to have
innumerable issue: among the which, one should be borne, in whom all nations
should be blessed: trusting so much in god, that though he were slain, yet
that god was able by his omnipotent power, to raise him from death, and
perform his promise. He mistrusted not the promise of god, although unto his
reason, Exodus ii.
every thing seemed contrary. He believed verily, yt god would not forsake him in
dearth, and famine, that was in the country. And in all other dangers that he
was brought unto, he trusted ever yt god would be his god, and his protector,
and defendour, whatsoever he saw to the contrary. This faith wrought so in the
heart of Moses, that he refused to be taken for king Pharao his daughters
son, and to have great inheritance in Egypt: thinking it better with the
people of god, to have affliction and sorrow, then with naughty me^, in sin
to live pleasauntly for a time. By faith, he cared not for ye threatening of
king Pharao, for his trust was so in God, that he passed not of the felicity
of this world, but looked for the reward to come, in heaven, settinge his heart
upon the invisible god, as if he had seen him ever present before his eyes. By
faith the children of Israel passed through the red sea. Exodus xi^^. Iosu^. vi.
By says, the walls of Hierito, seldoune without stroke, and many other
wonderful miracles have been wrought. In all good men, that heretofore have
been, faith has brought forth their good works, and obtained the promises of
God.

Faith has stopped the Lio^s mouths: Daniel.vi. Daniel.iii.
faith has quenched the force of fire: faith has escaped the swords edges:
Faith has given weak me^ strength: victory in battle, overthrown the
armies of infideles, raised the dead to life: faith has made good men to take
adversity in good part: some have been mocked and whipped, bound and cast in
prison: some have lost all their goods and lived in great pou^rtie: Some have
wandered in mountains, hills, and wilderness: some have been racked, some
slain, some stoned, some sawen, some rent in pieces, some headed, some burnt
without mercy, and would not be delivered, because they looked to rise again to
a better state.

All these fathers, martyrs, and other holy men, (whom. S. Paul spoke of) had
their faith surely sixed (...) God. when all the world was against them. They
did not only know god to be the Lord, maker and governor of al men in the
world: but also they had a special confidence and trust, that he was and would
be their God, their co^forter, ^ider, helper, mainteiner, and defendour. This
is (...) ^^ristian faith, which these holy men had, and also ought to have.
And altough they were (...) named Christian men yet was it a Christian ^aten
(...) they had, for they looked for all benefytes of (...) father, through the
merits of his son (...) we now do. This difference is between them and us,
for they looked when Christ should come, and w^^^^ in the time when he is come.
(...) John (...). xiv.
Therefore says. s. Augustine: the time is altered and changed, but not the
faith. For we have both one faith in one Christ. The same holy ghost also that
we have, had they, says. S. Paul. ^. Cor. iiii.
For as the holy Ghost does teach us to trust in God, and to call upon him as
our father: so did he teach them to say, (as it is written:) Thou lord, art
our father and redemer, ^say. xiiii.
and thy name (...) without beginning, and everlasting. God gave them then
grace to be his children, as he does us ^^we. But now by the coming of our
savior Christ, we have received more abundantly the spirit of god in our
hearts, whereby we may conceive a greater faith and a surer trust, then many
of them had. But in effect they and we be al one: we have the same faith, that
they had in god, and they the same, that we have. And S. Paul so much
extolleth their faith, because we should no less, but rather more, give our
selfs wholly unto Christ, does in profession and living: now when Christ is
come, then the old fathers did before his coming: And by all the declaration of
S. Paul, it is evident: that the true, lively, and christian faith, is no dead,
vain, or unfruitful thing, but a thing of perfect virtue, of wonderful
operacion or working and strength, bringyng forth all good mocions and good
works.

Al holy scripture agreably bears witness, that a true lively faith in Christ,
does bring forth good works, and therefore every man must examine and try^
himself diligently, to know, whether he have the same true lively faith in
his heart unfeignedly, or not, which he shall know by the fruits thereof.
^^^nt that professed the faith of christ: were in this error: that they thought
they knew god and beloved in him, when in their life they declared the
contrary: which error, saint John in his first Epistle co^futing, i. John.ii.
writes in this wise: herby we are certified that we know God, if we observe
his commandments: He that says he knows God, and observes not his
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. And again he says: i.
John.iii.
whosoever sins, does not see god, nor know him: not no man deceive you,
well beloved children. And moreover he says: hereby we know that we be of the
truth, i. John.iii.
and so we shall persuade our hearts before him: For if our own hearts
reprove us, God is above our hearts, and knows al things. Well beloved: if
our hearts reprove us not, then have we confidence in god: and shall have of
him whatsoever we ask, because we keep his command mendes and do those
things that please him. And yet further he faith: i. John.v.
Every man that believes that Jesus is Christ, is borne of god: and we know
that whatsoever is borne of god, does not sin: but the generation of God,
purges him, and the devil does not touch him. And finally he concludes:
and showing the cause: i. John.v.
why he wrote this Epistle, says: for this cause have I thus writ unto you,
that you may know, that ye have everlasting life, which do believe in the
son of God. And in his third Epistle, iii. John.i.
he confirms the whole matter of faith and works, in few words, saying:
the that does well, is of god: and he that does evil, knows not god. And
(...) ^ainct John says: that as the lively knowledge, (...) of god, bri^geth
forth good work (...) says he likewise of hope and charity, that the^ cannot
stand with evil living. i. John iii.
Of hope he w^^teth thus: we know that when god shall appear ^^e shall be like
unto him, for we shall see him, even as he is. And whosoever has this hope in
him, does purify himself, i. John.ii.
like as God is pure. And of charity he says these words: he that does keep
gods word, or commandment, in him is truly the perfect love of god. i.
John.v.
And again he says, this is the love of god, that we should keep his
commandments. And. s. John wrote not this, as a subtle saying devised of
his own phantasye: but as a most certain and necessary truth, taught unto
him by Christ himself: the eternal and infallible verity, who in many places
does most clearly affirm, that faith, hope, and charity, cannot consyst or
stand without good and godly works. John.iii. i. John.v.
Of says, he says: He that believes in the son has everlasting life: but
he that believes not in the son: shall not se that life, but the wrath of god
remains upon him. John.vi.
And ye same he confirms with a double oath saying: forsothe and forsorth, I
say unto you he yt beliueth in me, has everlasting life. Now, forasmuch as he
yt believes in Christ, has everlasting life, it must needs co^seque^tly follow,
yt he that has this faith, must have also good works, and be studious to
observe Gods commandementes obediently. For to them that have evil works, (...)
and lead their life in disobedience and transgression or breakyng of Gods
commands mentes, without repentance pertains not even lastyng life, but
everlasting death as Christ him self says* Matt. xxv.
They that do well, shall go into life eternal, but they that do evil, shall go
into the everlasting fire. And again he says: Apoca. xxi.
I am the first letter and the last, the beginning and the endinge, to him that
is a thirst, I will give of the well of the water of life freely: he that has the
victory, shall have al things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son,
but they that be fearful, mistrusting god, and lackyng faith, they that be
cursed people and murderers: and fornicatours, and forcerers, and Idolaters,
and all liers, shall have their portion in the lake, that burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death. And as Christ undoubtedly affirms,
Charit^ brings forth good works. John.xiiii.
that true faith brings forth good works* so does he say likewise of
charity. Whosoever has my commandments and keeps them, that is he that
loves me: And after he says: he that loves me will keep my word, and he that
loves me not, John.xiiii.
keeps not my words. And as the love of God is tried by good works, so is
the fear of god also, as the wise manne says: the dread of god puts away
sin. And also he says: Eccle. i. Eccle. xv.
he that fears god will do good works.

The third part of the Sermon of Faith.
YOu have heard in the second part of this sermon, that no man should think yt
he has that lively says which scripture commands, when he lives not
obedie^tly to gods laws. For all good works fyringe out of that faith. And
also it has been declared unto you by examples, that faith mak^^ (...) quiet,
and patient in all affliction. Now as concerning the saint matter, you shall
hear what follows. A man may soon deceive himself; and think in his own
fantasy, that he by faith knows god, loves him, fears him, and belongs
to him, when in very deed he does nothing less. For the trial of al these
things is a very godly and christian life. He that feleth his heart set to
seek gods honor, and studieth to know the will and commandments of God, and
to frame himself thereunto, and leads not his life after the desire of his
own flesh to serve ye devil by sin, but sets his mind to serve god, for
gods own sake, and for his sake also to love al his neighbors, whether they
be friends or adversaries, doing good to every man (as opportunity serves) and
wyllingly hurting no man: such a man may well rejoice in God, perceiuinge by
the trade of his life, that he unfeignedly has the right knowledge of god, a
lively faith, a steadfast hope, a true and unfeigned love and fear of god. But
he that casts a way the yoke of gods commandments from his neck, and
gives himself to live without true repentance, after his own sensual mind
and pleasure, not regarding to know gods word, and much less to live
according thereunto: such a man clearly deceives himself, and sees not his own
heart, if he thinks that he either knows god, loves him, fears him or
trusts in him. Some peradventure pha^tasy in them selfs, that they belong to
god, although they live in sin, and so they come to the church and show
themselfes as gods dear children. But. s. John says plainly: 1. John. 1.
if we say yt we have any company with god, and walk in darkness, we do lie.
Other do vainelye think that they know and love god, although they pass not
of the commandments. But S. John says clearly: 1. Ioh. 1.
he that says I know God, and keeps not his commaundeme^ts, he is a liar.
Some falselye persuade themselves, yt they love God, when they hate their
neighbors. But S. John says manifestly: if any man sai, I love god, 1 Ioh. 4.
1. Iho, 2.
and yet hates his brother, he is a lier. He that says yt he is in the light,
and hates his brother, he is still in darkness. He that loves his brother,
dwells in the light, but he that hates his brother, is in darkness, and
walks in darkness, and knows not whether he goes: 1. Iho, 3.
For darkness has blinded his eyes. And moreover he says: hereby we
manifestly know ye children of GOD, from ye children of the devil: he yt does
not righteously, is not ye child of GOD, nor he yt hates his brother.

Deceive not your selfs therefore, thinkyng that you have faith in GOD or that
you love GOD, or do trust in him, or do fear him, when you live in sin:
for then your ungodly and sinful life. declares the contrary, whatsoever ye
say or think. It pertains to a christen man, to have this true christen
faith, and to try himself, whether he has it or no, and to know what
belongs to it, and how it does work in him. It is not the world that we can
trust to: the world and all that is therein is but vanity. It is GOD that must
be our defense and proteccion against al temptation of wickedness and sin
errors, superstycyon. Idolatry, and al evil. If all the world were on our
side, and GOD against us, what could the would avail us. Therefore let us set
our whole faith (...) trust in GOD, and neither the world, the devil, nor al^^^
power of the^, shall prevail against us. Let us therefore (good christian
people) try and examine our faith what it is: let us not flatter our selfs,
but look upon our works, and so judge of our faith, what it is.

CHRIST him self speaks of this matter and says: Mat. 24
the tree is known by ye fruit. Therefore let us do good works, and thereby
declare our faith, to be the lively christian faith. Let us by such virtues
as ought to spring out of faith, show our eleccion to be sure and stable, as
S. Peter teaches. Endeavor your selfs to make your calling and chosyng
certain by good works. 1 Pet. 3
And also he says: mynyster or declare in your faith, virtue, in virtue,
knowledge, in knowledge, te^peraunce, in te^perau^ce, patience, again in
patience godliness, in godliness, brotherlye charity, in brotherly charity,
love. So shall we show in deed, that we have ye very lively christen faith: and
may so both certify our conscience the better, yt we be in the right faith,
and also by these means confirm other men. If these fruits do not follow, we
do but morke with GOD, deceive our selves and also other men. Well may we beat
the name of christen me^ but we do lack the true faith, that does belong
thereunto. For true faith does ever bring forth good works; I^mes. 2
as Saint James says: show me thy faith by thy deeds. Thy bedes and works
must be an open testymony all of thy faith: otherwise, thy faith, being without
good works, is but the devils faith, ye faith of the wicked a phantasy of
faith, and not a true christen faith. And like as the devils and evil people
be nothing the better; or their counterfeit faith, but it is unto the^ the
more cause of damnacyon: so they yt be christened, and have received knowledge
of GOD and of CHRIST'S merits, and yet of a set purpose do live idlelye,
without good works, thinking the name of a naked faith, to be either sufficient
for them, or else setting their minds upon vain pleasures of this world,
do live in sin without repentance, not vtterynge the fruytes that do
belong to such an high professyon: upon such presumpteous persons and wylfull
sinners, must needs remain the great vengeance of GOD, and eternal
punishment in hell prepared for the devil and wicked livers. Therefore, as you
profess the name of CHRIST, (good christyan people) let no such phantasy and
imagination of faith, at any time begyle you: but be sure of your faith, try
it by your living, look upon the fruits that comes of it, mark the
increase of love and charity by it toward GOD and your neighbor, and so shall
you perceive it to be a true lively faith. If you feel and perceive such a
faith in you, rejoice in it, and be dilligent to maintain it and keep it still
in you: let it be daily increasyng, and more and more, by well working, and so
shall you be sure, that you shall please GOD by this faith: and at the length (as
other faithful men have done before) so shall you (when his will is) come to
him, and receive thend and fynal reward of your faith (as S. Peter names it)
ye salvation of your souls: 1 Peter. 1
the which GOD grant us, that has promised the same unto his faithful. To
whom, be all honor and glory, world without end. AMEN.

A Sermon of good works annexed unto faith.
IN the last sermon was declared unto you, what the lively and true faith of a
christian man is: that it causes not a man to be idle, but to be occupied in
bringinge forth good works as occasyon serves.

No good work ca^ be dooen without faith.
Now by GODS grace shall be declared ye second thing that before was noted of
faith, yt without it can no good work be done acceptable and pleasant unto
GOD. For as a branch cannot bear fruit of it self (says our savior
Christ) except it abide in ye vine so cannot you except you abide in me: Ihon.
15
I am the vine and you be ye branches: he that abides in me, and I in him, he
brings forth much fruit: for without me, you ca^ do nothing. Hebr. 11
And S. Paul proves yt Enoch had faith, because he pleased GOD. For without
faith (says he) it is not possible to please GOD. And again to the Roma. he
says: Romans 14
whatsoever work is done with out faith it is sin. Faith gives life to ye
soul: and they be as much dead to GOD that lack faith, as they be to the
world: whose bodies lack souls. Without faith al yt work seem never so gaye
and glorious before man. 1 (...)
Even as yt picture graven or painted is but a dead representation of the
thing it self, and is without life or any manner of moving: so be the works of
al unfaithful persons before GOD. They do appear to be liuelye works, and
in deed they be but ^ead, not a^ailing to ye everlasting life, They be but
shadows and shows of liuelye and good things, and not good and lively
things in deed. For true faith does give life to the works, and out of such
faith come good works, that be very good works in deed, and without, no work
is good before GOD: as says. In pre^^ii Psalm. 31
S. Augustine: We must set no good works before faith, nor think that before
says a man may do any good work: for such works, although they seem unto
me^ to be praise worthy, yet in deed they be but vain, and not allowed before
GOD. They be as the course of a horse, yt runs out of the way, which takes
great labor, but to no purpose. Let no man therefore (says he) rekon upon his
good works before his faith. Whereas faith was not, good works were not: The
intent (says he) makes the good works, but faith must gyde and order
thintente of man. Mat. 6.
And CHRIST says: if thine eye be naught, thy whole body is full of darkness.
The eye does sygnyfye the intent (says S. Augustine) wherewith a man does a
thing. So that he, In pres^ti Psalm. 31
which does not his good works with a godly intent and a true faith, that
works by love, the whole body beside, (that is to sai) al ye whole number of
his works, is dark, and there is no light in them. For good deeds, be not
measured by ye factes themselves, and so descerned from vices, but by the ends
and intentes, for the which they be done. If a Heathen man clothe the naked,
feed the hungrye, and do such other like works: yet because he bodeth them
not in faith, for the honor and love of god, they be but dead, vain and
fruitles works to him.

Faith is it, that does commend the word to GOD: (for as S. Augustine says)
whether thou will or no, that work that comes not of faith, is naught where
the faith of CHRIST is not ye foundation, thee is no good work, what building
soever we make. There is one work, in the which be al good works, yt is faith,
which works by charity: if thou have it, thou have ye ground of algood
works. For the virtues of strength, wisdom, temperau^ce, and justice be al
referred unto this same faith. Without this faith we have not the^, but only
the names and shadows of them, (as. S. Augustine says.) All the life of them
yt lack the true faith is sin: and nothing is good without him, that is the
auctor of goodness: where he is not, there is but feyned virtue, although it be
in the best works. And S. Augustine declaring this vearse of the psalm, the
Turtie has found a nest, where she may keep her young birds: says, that
Jews, heritiques, and pagans, do good works: they cloth the naked, feed the
pore, and do other works of mercy, but because they be not done in ye true
faith, therefore the birds be lost. But if they remain in faith, then faith is
the nest and sauegard of their birds, that is to say, sauegard of their good
works that the reward of them be not utterly lost. And this matter (which.
Deuocati Gentium li. 1. cap. 3
S. Augustine at large in many books disputes) Saint Ambrose concludes in
few words, saying: he that by nature would wtstand vice, either by natural
will or reason, he does in vain garnishe the time of this life, and atteyneth
not the very true virtues: In sermo^e de side, lege, et spiritu sa^cto
for without the worshipping of the true GOD, that which seems to be virtue is
vice. And yet most plainly to this purpose writes. S. John Chrysostom in this
wise: You shall find many, which have not ye true faith, and be not of ye
flock of CHRIST and yet (as it appears) they floryshe in good works of
mercy. You shall find them full of piety, compassion, and given to justice: and
yet for all that, they have no fruit of their works, because the chief work
lacks. For when ye Jews asked of CHRIST, John. 9,
what they should do to work good works, he answered: this is the work of
GOD, to believe in him whom he sent: So that he called faith the work of GOD.
And assoue as a man has faith, anon he shall floryshe in good works: for
faith of it self is full of good works, and nothing is good without faith.
And for a symylitude, he says that they which glitter and shine in good
works, without faith in GOD, be like dead men, which have goodly and precious
tombs, and yet it avails them nothing. Faith may not be naked without good
works, for then it is no true faith: and when it is adjoined to works. yet it
is above the works. For as me^ that be very men in deed, first have life, and
after be noryshed, so must our faith in CHRIST go before, and after be
norished with good works. And life may be without norishment, but norishment
cannot be without life. A man must needs be norished by good works, but first
he must have faith, he that does good deeds, yet without faith, he has no
life. I can show a man that by faith without works lived, and came to heaven,
but without faith, never man had life. The these that was hanged when CHRIST
suffered, did believe only, and the most merciful GOD did iustifi him. And
because no man shall say again that he lacked time to do good works, for else
he would^ have done them, truth it is, and I will not co^end ther^ in: but this
I will surely affirm, that faith only saved him. If he had lived and not
regarded faith, and the works thereof, he should have lost his salvation
again. But this is the effect that I say that faith by it self saved him,
but works by them selves never justified any man. Here ye have hard the mind
of S. Chrysostom, whereby you may perceive, that neither faith is without
works (having opportunity thereto) nor works can avail to everlasting life
without faith.

The second part of the Sermon of good works.
OF three things which were in ye former sermon specially noted of lively
faith, two be declared unto you: the first was, that faith is never idle
without good works when occasion serves. The second, that good works
acceptable to GOD cannot be done without faith. Now to go forth to the third
part, What works they are that spri^g of faith.
that is what manner of works they be, which spring out of true faith and lead
faithful men unto everlasting life: This can not be known so well, as by our
sayuoure CHRIST him self, who was asked of a certain great man the same
question: Mat. 19.
What works shall I do (said a Prince) to come to everlasting life? To
whom Jesus answered: Mat, 19.
If thou will come to ye everlasting life, keep the commandments. But the
Prince not satisfied here with, asked farther: which commandments. The
Scrybes and Pharise is had made (...) many of their own laws and tradicions
to bring men to heaven besides GODS commandments, that this man was in
doubt, whether he should come to heaven by those ^^wes and traditions, or by
the laws of God: and therefore he asked Christ which commandments he meante.
Whereunto Christ made him a plain answer, Mat. 19
^hersing the commandments of God saying: Thou shall not kill, thou shall
not commit adulterr, thou shall not steal, thou shall not bear false
witness, honor thy father and mother and love thy neighbor as thy self: The
works that lead to heaven, be ye works of gods commandments.
By which words. Christ declared that ye laws of God be the very way that
does lead to everlasting life, and not the traditions, and laws of men. So
that this is to be taken for a most true lesson taught by Christ's own mouth,
yt the works of the moral comau^dementes of God, be the very true works of
faith, which lead to the blessed life to come. Man from his first fallinge
from gods commandments, has ever ben redye to do the like, and to devise
works of his a (...) phan^^sy to please GOD withal.
But the blindness and malice of man, even from the beginning, has ever been
ready ^o fall from Gods commandments. As Adam the first man, having but one
commandment that he should not eat of the fruit forbidden, notwithstanding
gods commandment, he gave credit unto the woman, seduced by the subtyle
persuasion of ye serpent, and so followed his own will, and left gods
commandment. And ever since that time, all that cain of him has been so
blinded through original sin yt they have been ever ready to fall from GOD
and his law, and to invent a new way unto salvation, by works of their own
devise: so much that a^most all the world forsaking ye true honor of the ouely
eternal living GOD wandered about they ^^wne fantasies, worshipping some ye
S^ne, the ^oone ye Sterres: some Jupiter, Juno, Dia^^, S^^^ (...) Apollo, The
devises and I dolatry of the gentiles.
Neptumus, Ceres, Bacchus, and other dead men and women. Some therewith not
satisfied, worshipped diverse kinds of be ast^s, birds, fish, foul, and
serpents, every country, town, and house, in manner being divided, and
setting up Images of such things as they lyked, and worshyppinge the same.

Such was the rudenes of the people, after they fell to their own fantasies,
and left the eternal living God and his commandments, that they devised
innumerable Images, and gods. In which error and blindness they did remain,
until such time as almighty God pitiyng the blindness of man, sent his true
prophet Moses into the world, to reprove and rebuke this extreme madness, and
to teach the people to know the only living God, and his true honor and
worship. But the corrupt inclination of man, was so much given to follow his
own fantasies (and as you would say) to favor his own bird that he brought
up him self, that all the admonitions, exhortations, benefits, and
threatninges of God, could not keep him from such his inventions. For
notwithstanding all the benefits of God, The deutses and I dolatry of the
Israelites.
showed unto the people of Israel, yet when Moses went up into the mountain,
to speak with almightye God: he had tarried there but a few days, when the
people began to invent new Gods. And as it came in their heads they made a
calfe of gold, and kneled down and worshipped it. Exodus 22
And after that, they followed ye Moabites, and worshipped Beelphegor the
Moabytes GOD. Read the book of Judges, the books of the kings, and the
Prophets, and there shall you find, how unsteadfast the people were, how full of
inventions, and more ready to run after their own fantasies the^ Gods most
holy commandments. There shall you read of Baal, Moloch, Chamos, Mechom,
Baalpe or, Astaroth, Beel the Dragon, Priapus, the brazen serpent, the twelve
signs, and many other, unto whose images the people with great devotion
invented Pilgrimages, pretiously decking and ce^sing them, kneling down and
offering to them, thinking that an high merit before god, and to be esteemed
above the precepts and commandments of God. And where at that time God
commanded no sacryfyce to be made but in Jerusalem only, they did clean
contrary, making alters and sacrifices every where in hills, in woods, and in
houses, not regarding Gods commandments, but esteming their own fantasies
and devotion, to be better then they. And the error hereof was so spread abroad,
that not only the unlearned people, but also the Priests and teachers of the
people partly by glory and coueteousnes were corrupted, and partly by
ignorance blindly deceived with the same abhominatio^s: So much that king
Achad, having but only Helias a true teacher and minister of God, there were
eight hundred and fyftye priests, that persuaded him to honor Baal, and to do
sacrifice in the wodes or groves. And so continued that horrible error, until
the three noble kings, as Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias, gods chosen
ministers, destroyed the same clearelye, and brought again the people from
such there feigned inventions, unto the very commandments of God: for the
which thing, their immortal reward and glory does and shall remain with God
for ever.

^e^^gi^ns and sects among the Jews.
And beside the foresaid inventions, the inclination of man to have his own
holy devotions, devised new sects* and religions, called Phariseis, Sadduceis
and Scribes, with many holy and godly traditions, and ordinances (as it seemed
by the outward apparaunce and goodly glisteryng of the works,) but in very
deed all tending to Idolatrye, Superstition and Hypocrisy: their hearts
within, being full of malice, pride, covetousness, and al wickedness. Against^
which sects, and their pretensed holiness, Christ cried out more vehemently,
then he did against any other persons, saying and often rehersyng these
words: Woe be to you Scribes and Phariseis* ye Hipocrites, for you make clean
the vessel without, Mat. 23.
but within you be full of rauine and fylthines: thou blind Pharysee, and
Hipocrite, first make the inward part clean. For notwithstanding all the
goodly traditions, and out ward shows of good works* devised of their own
imagination, whereby they appeared to the world, most religious and holy of all
men: yet Christ, (who saw their hearts) know that they were inwardly in the
syghte of God, most unholy, most abominable, and farthest from GOD of almen.
Therefore said he unto them: Hypocrites, the Prophet Esaias spoke full truly of
you, when he said: This people honor me with their lyppe^, Mat. 15. Esai. 19,
but their heart is far from me: they worship me in vain, that teach
doctrines and commandments of men: For you leave the commandments of
GOD, to keep your own traditions.

And though Christ said, they worshipped God in vain that teach doctryne^
and commandments of men^ yet he mean^^ no^ thereby to o^^rthrow al men's
commandments, Man^^^ laws must^ ^e obs^r^^^ and kept, but n^^'^ (...) ^^^s
^^w^^.
for he himself was ever obediente to the Princes and their laws, made for
good order and governance of the people but he reproved the laws and
traditions, made by the Scribes and Pharise is, which were not made only for
good order of the people (as the Civil laws were) but they were set up so
high, that they were made to be a right and pure worshipping of God, as they
had ^eue equal with gods laws* or above them: for many of gods laws could
not be kept. but were feign togeue place unto them. This arrogancy God
detested, that man should so advance his laws, to make them equal with gods
laws* wherein the true hon^ryng and right worshyppyng of God stands. and to
make his laws for them to be left of. God has appointed his laws, whereby
his pleasure is to be honored. His pleasure is also, that all men's laws
being not contrary to his laws, shall be obeyed and kept, as good and necessary
for every common weal, but not as things wherein pryncipallye his honor
rests. And al Civil and man's laws, either be, or should be, made to bring in
men ye better to keep gods laws: that consequently, or folowingly God should
be the better honored by them. Howebeit the Scribes and Pharise is were not
content* that their laws should be no higher esteemed, the^ other positiu^ and
ciuiss laws. nor would not have them ^^lled by the name of other temporal
laws, but called (...) not only for a right and true worshippinge (...) God
(as Gods laws be in deed:) but also to (...) the mo^^e high honoring of God,
H^ly tra^itions (...) ^^^e med, (...) G^ddes law^s.
to the which, the commandments of God should give place. And for this
cause did Christ so vehemently speak against them, saying: your traditions,
which men esteem so high, ^^linesse of man's devise, is commonly occasion that
God ^s offended
be abomination before God. For commonly of such traditions follows the
^^ansgression or breaking of Gods commandments, and a more devotion in the
keeping of such things and a greater conscience in breaking of them, then of
the commandments of God. Math 12
As the Scribes and Phariseis so supersticiously, and scrupulo^slye kept the
Sabbath, that they were offended with Christ, because he healed sick men: and
with his Apostles, because they being sore hungrye, gathered the eats of corn
to eat upon that day. And because his disciples was^hed not their hands so
often as the traditions required, the Scribes and Phariseis quereled with
Christ, saying: Mat. 15.
why do thy disciples break the traditions of the seniours? But Christ laid to
their charge, that they for to keep their own traditions. did teach men to
break the berye commandments of GOD. For they taught the people such a
devotion, that they offered their goods into the treasure house of the temple,
under the pretense of Gods honor, leaving their fathees and mothers (to whom
they were chiefly bound) vnholpen: and so they brake the commaudemetes of GOD,
to keep their own traditions. They esteemed more an oath made by the gold or
oblation in the temple, then an oath made in the name of God himself or the
temple. They were more studious to pay their fithes of small things, then to
do ^he greater things commanded of God, as works of mercy, or to do justice,
or to deal syncerely, uprightly, and faythfullye beith God and man: Mat. 23,
(these says Christ ought to be done, and the other not l^fte undone) And to
be short, they were of so blind judgment, that they stombled at a straw* and
leaped over a block. They would (as it were) nicely take ^ily^ out of their
cup, and drink down a whole C^nnel. And therefore Christ called them blind
guides, warninge his disciples from time to time, to eschew their doctrine. For
although they seemed to the world to be most perfect men, both in living and
teachinge yet was their life but Hypocrisy, and their doctrine but so wre
leaven, myngled with superstition, Idolatrye, and ouertwart judgment: setting
up the traditions and ordinances of man, in the stead of Gods
commandments.

The third part of the Sermon of good works.
THat all men might ryghtely judge of good works, it has been declared in
the second part of this sermon, what kind of good works they be, that god
would have his people to walk in, namelye such as he has commanded in his
holy scripture, and not such works as men have studied out of their own
brain, of a blind zeal and deu^tion, without the word of God And by
mista^ing the nature of good works, man has most hyghi^^ displeased GOD, and
has goen from his will and commandment. So that thus you have heard*
how mache the world, from the beginning until Christ s^ime, was ever ready
to fall from the commandments of GOD, and to seek other means to honor and
serve him, after a devotion found out of their own heads: and how they did
set up their own traditions, as high or above Gods commandments, which
has happened also in our times (the more it is to be lamented) no less then
it did among the Jews: and that by the corruption, or at the least by the
negligence of the^, that chiefly ought to have preferred gods commandments,
and to have preserved the pure and heavenly doctrine left by Christ. What man
having any judgment or learning, joined with a true zeal unto GOD, both not
se, and lamente, to have entered into Christ's relygion, such false doctrine,
Superstition, Idolatrye, Hipocrisye, and other enormities and abuses, so as by
little and little, through the sour leaven thereof, the sweet bread of Gods holy
word has been much hyndered and laid a part. Never had the Jews in their
most blyndnesse, so many Pilgrimages unto Images, nor used so much knelyng
kissinge, and censynge of them, as has been used in our time.

Sects and religion among Christian ^en.
Sects and feined religions were neither the forty part so many among the
Jews, nor more supersticiouslye and ungodly abused, then of late days they
have been among us. Which sects and relygions, had so many Hipocritical or
feined works in their state of religion (as they arrogantly named it) (...)
their lamps (as they said) ra^ne always over, able to fatissye, not only for
their own sins, but also for all other their benefacto^s, brothers and
sisters of religion, as most ungodly and craftily they had persuaded the
multitude of ignorant people: keeping in diverse places (as it were) martes or
markettes of merits, being full of their holy relics, images, shrynes, and
works of ouerflowing abundance, ready to be sold. And all things which they
had were called holy: holy Coules, holy gyrdelles, holy Pardons. Beads, holy
Shoes, holy Rules, and al full of holiness. And what thing can be more
foolyshe, more superstitious, or ungodly, then that men, women and children,
should wear a Friars coat, to deliver them from agues or pestilence or when
they dye, or when they be buried, cause it to be cast upon them in hope
thereby to be saved? Which superstition, although (thanks be to God) it has
been little used in this Realm yet in diuer^e other realms, it has been, and
yet is used, both among many, both learned and unlearned. But to pass over
the innumerable supersticionsenes that has been in strange apparel, in
scilence, in dor^itory, in cloister, in chapter, in choice of meats and in
drinks, and in such like things, let us consider, what enormities and abuses
have been, in the three chief pryncipal points, which they called the three
essencialles, or three chief foundations of religion, that is to say,
obedience, chastity, and wilful poverty.

The th^^ chief b^wes of religion.
First under pretense or color of obedience to their father in religion (which
obedience they made them selves) they were made free by their rules and canons
from the obedience of their natural father and ^^ther and from the obedience
of Emperor and king, and al temporal power, whom of very duty by gods laws.
they were bound to obey. And so the profession of their obedience not due, was
a forsaking of their due obedience. And how their profession of chastity was
kept, it is more honesty to pass over in scilence, and let the world judge of
that, which is well known then with unchaste words, by expressing of their
unchaste life, to offend chaste and godly ears. And as for their wilful
poverty, it was such, that when in possessions, jewels, plate and riches,
they were equal or above merchants, gentlemen, Barons, Earls, and Dukes: yet
by this subtle sophistical term Propriu^ in communi, that is to say: proper
in common, they mocked the world, persuading, that notwithstanding all their
possessions and riches, yet they kept their vow and were in wylfull poverty.
But for all their riches, they might nether help father nor mother, nor other
that were in deed very nedie and poor, without the license of their father
Abbot. Prior, or Warden. And yet they might take of every man, but they might
not give ought to any man, no, not to them whom the laws of God bound them
to help. And so through their traditions and rules, the laws of God could
bear no rule with them. And therefore of the^ might be most truly said, Mat.
15
that which Christ spoke unto the Phariseis: you break the commandments of
God by your traditions: you honor God with your lips, but your hearts be far
from him. And the longer prayer they used by day and by night under pretense or
color of such holiness, to get the favor of widows and other simple folks,
that they might singe Trentals and service for their husbands and friends, and
admit or receive the^ into their prayers: the more truly is verified of them
the saying of Christ: Woe be to you scribes and Phariseis, Hipocrites, for you
devour Widows houses, under color of long prayers: therefore your damnation
shall be the greater. Woe be to you Scribes and Phariseis, Mat. 25,
Hipocrites, for you go about by sea and by land* to make more Nouices and new
brethren, and when they be let in or received of your sect, you make the^ the
children of hell, worse then your selves be. Honor be to God, who did put
light in the heart of his faithful and true minister of most famous memory,
King Henry the.viij. and gave him the knowledge of his word, and an earnest
affection to seek his glory, and to put away al such superstitions and
Pharisaicall sects by Antichrist invented, and set up against the true word
of God, and glory of his most blessed name: as he gave the like spyryte unto
the most noble and famous princes, Iosaphat, Josias, and Ezechias. God grant
all us the kings highness faithful and true subjects, to feed of the sweet
and sauory bread of Gods own word, and (as Christ commanded) to eschew all
our pharisaicall and papysticall leaven of man's feyned religion. Which,
although it were before God most abominable and contrary to Gods
commandments, and Christ's pure religion, yet it was praised to be a most
godly life, and highest state of perfection. As though a man might be more
godly and more perfect by keeping the rules, traditions and professions of
men, then by kepinge the holy commandments of God. And briefly to pass
over the ungodly and counterfeite religions, let us rehearse some other kinds
of papisticall superstitions and abuses, as of Beads, of Lady psalters and
Rosaries, Other deui^es and superstitions.
of.xv. Dos, of i. Bernardes vearses, of S. Agathes letters, of Purgatory, of
Masses satisfactorye, of Stacions and Iubilies, of feined Relics, of hallowed
Beads. Belles, Bred, Water, Palm^s, Candels, Fire, and such other, of
Superstitious fastinges, of fraternities or brother heads, of Pardons, with
such like marchaundyse: which were so esteemed and abused to the great
prejudice of gods glory and commandments, that they were made most high and
most holy things, whereby to attain to the everlasting life, or remission of
sin. Yea also, vain inventions, unfruitful ceremonies, and ungodly laws,
decrees and counsels of Rome, Decrees, and Decretalies.
were in such wise advanced, that nothing was thought comparable in
authority, wisdom, lerninge and godliness unto them. So that the laws of Rome
(as they said) were to be received of all men, as the four Eua^gelistes: to ye
which al laws of princes must give place. And the laws of God also partly
were left of and less esteemed, that the said laws decrees and counsels, with
their traditions and ceremonies, might be more duelye kept and had in
greater reverence. Thus was the people, through ignorance so blinded, with the
goodly show and apparaunce of those things, that they thought the keeping of
them to be a more holiness, a more perfect service and honoring of God, and
more pleasinge to God, then the keeping of gods commandments. Such has been
the corrupt inclination of man, ever superstitiously given to make new
honorynge of God of his own head, and then to have more affection and devotion
to keep that, then to search out Gods holy commandments and to keep
them. And furthermore, to take Gods commandments for men's commandments,
and men's commandments for Gods commandments, yea, and for the highest,
and most perfect and holy of all Gods commandments. And so was all confused,
that scante well learned men, and but a small number of them, knew, or at the
least would know, and durst affirm the truth, to separate or severe Gods
commandments from the commandments of men: whereupon did grow much error,
Superstition, ydolatry vain religion, ouertwart judgment, great contention,
with all ungodly living.

An exhortation to the (...) of Gods co^man^dementes.
Wherefore, as you have any zeal to the right and pure honoring of God: as you
have any regard to your own souls, and to the life yt is to come, which is
both without pain, and without end: apply your selves chieflye above all
thing, to read and to hear Gods word: mark diligently therein, what his will
is you shall do, and with all your endeavor apply your selves to follow the
same. First you must have an assured faith in god, A brief rehersall of Gods
co^man^dementes.
and give your selves wholly unto him, love him in prosperity and adversity,
and dread to offend him evermore. Then, for his sake love all men friends and
foes, because they be his creation and image, and redeemed by Christ, as ye are.
Cast in your minds how you may do good unto al men, unto your powers, and
hurt no man. Obey al your superiors and governors, serve your masters
faithfully and diligently, as well in their absence as in their presence, not
for dread of punishment only, but for conscience sake, knowing that you are
bound ^o to do by Gods commandments. Disobey not your fathers and mothers,
but honor them, help the^ and please them to your power. Oppress not, kill
not, beat not, neither slau^dre nor hate any man: But love al men, speak well
of al men, help and succoure every man, as you may, yea eue^ your enemies that
hate you, that speak evil of you, and that do hurt you. Take no man's goods,
nor covet your neighbors goods wrongfully, but content your selves with that
which ye get truly, and also bestow your own goods charitably, as need and
case requires. Flee all ydolatry, witchcraft, and perjury: commit no manner
of adultery* fornication, nor other unchasteness, in wilnor in deed, with any
other man's wy^e, widow, maid, or other wise. And travailing continually
during your life, thus in the keeping the commandments of God (wherein
stands the pure principal, and right honor of God, and which wrought in
faith. God has ordained to be the right trade and path way unto heaven:) you
shall not fail, as Christ has promised, to come to that blessed and
everlasting life, where you shall live in glory and joy with God for ever. To
whom be praise, honor and impery, for ever and ever. Amen.

A Sermon of christian (...) and Charity.
OF all things that be good to be taught unto christen people, there is
nothing more necessary to be spoken of, and daily called upon, then
charity: as well, for that all manner of works of ryghteousnes be contained
in it, as also, that the decay thereof is the ruin or fall of the world, the
banishment of virtue, and the cause of al vice. And for so much as almost
every man makes and frames to him self charity after his own appetite, and
how detestable soever his life be, both unto God and man, yet he persuades him
self still that he has charity: therefore you shall hear now a true and
plain description or setting forth of charity, not of men's imagination, but
of the very words and example of our savior. Jesus Christ. In which
description or setting forth every man (as it were in a glass) may consider
him self, and se plainly without error, What ^^^rytye (...)
whether he be in the true charity or not.

Charity is to love God with all our heart, al our life, and al our powers and
strength: With all our heart, that is to say, that our hearts, mind, The
(...) of god
and study * be set to believe his word, to trust in him, and to love him above
all other things that we love best, in heaven or in earth. With all our
life, that is to say, that our chief joy and delight be set upon him and his
honor, and our whole life given unto the service of him above al things, with
him to live and dye, and to forsake all other things, rather then him* For he
that loue^ ^his father or mother, Mat. 10.
son or daughter, house or land, more then me (says Christ) is not worthy
to have me. Withal our powers yt is to say, that with our hands and feet,
with our eyes and ears, our mouths and tongues, and with all other parts and
powers, both of body and soul, we should be given to the keeping and fulfilling
of his commandments. This is the first and principal part of charity, but
it is not the whole: for Charity is also, to love every man, The love of thy
neighbor
good and evil, friend and foe, and whatsoever cause be given to ye contrary,
yet nevertheless to bear good will and heart unto every man, to use our selves
well unto them, as well in words and countenance, as in all our outward acts
and deeds: For so Christ himself taught, and so also he performed in deed. Of
the love of God he taught in this wise unto a doctor of ye law, that asked
him, which was the great and chief commandment in the law: Lone thy Lord God
(sa^ed Christ) with all thy heart with all thy life, Mat. 11.
and with all thy mind. And of the love that we ought to have among our
selves each to other, he teaches us thus: You have heard it taught in times
past, thou shall love thy friend, and hate thy foe, Math. 5.
but I tell you: love your enemies, speak well of them that diffame you, and
speak evil of you, do well to them that hate you, pray for them that vex
and persecute you, that you may be the children of your father that is in
heaven. Math. 5
For he makes his ^imne to ^yse both upon the evil and good, and sends
rain to just and unjust. For if you love them that love you what reward
shall you have? Do not the Publi^ anos likewise? And if you speak well
only of them that be your brethren and dear beloved fre^des, what great
matter is that? Do not the Heathen the same also? These be ye very words of
our Savior CHRIST himself, touching the love of our neighbor. And forasmuch
as the Pharisees (with their most pestilent tradicions, and false
interpretations and gloses) had corrupted, and almost clearly stopped up this
pure well of GODS lyuelye word, teaching, that this love and charity
pertayned only to a man's friends, and that it was suffycyent for a man to love
them, which do love him, and to hate his fooes: therefore CHRIST opened this
well again, pourged it, and scoured it by giving unto his godly law of
charity, a true and clear interpretation, which is this: that we ought to love
every man, both friend and fooe, adding thereto, what commodity we shall have
thereby, and what incommoditie by doing the contrary. What thing can we wyshe
so good for us, as the eternal heavenly father to rekenne and take us, for his
children? And this shall we be sure of (says CHRIST) if we love every manne
without exception. And if we do otherwise (says he) we be no better then
the Phariseis Publicans and Heathen and shall have our reward with them: that
is, to be shut out from the number of GODS chosen children, and from his
everlasting inheritance in heaven.

Thus of true Charity CHRIST taught, that every man is bound to love GOD above
all things, and to love every man, friend and fooe. And thus likewise he did
use himself, exhorting his adversaries, rebukynge the faults of his
adversaries, and when he could not amend them, yet he prayed for them. First
he loved GOD his father above althynges: so much that he sought not his own
glory and will, but the glory and will of his father. I seek not (said he) mine
own will, but the will of him that sent me. Nor he refused not to die, Ihon. 5.
to satisfy his fathers will, saying: Mat. 29
if it may be, let this cup of death go from me: if not, thy will be done,
and not mine. He loved not only his friends, but also his enemies, which (in
their hertes) bare exceeding great hatred against him, and in their tounges
spoke aleuyll of him, and in their acts and deeds pursued him with all their
might and power, even unto death. Yet all this not withstandyng, he withdre we
not his sauoure from them, but still loved the^, preached unto them, of love
rebuked their false doctrine, their wicked living, and did good unto them,
patiently taking whatsoever they spoke or did a gaynste him. When they gave
him evil words, he gas^e none evil again: when they did stryke him, he did
not smite again: and when he suffered death, he did not slay them, nor threaten
them, but prayed for them, and did put all things to his fathers will. Esai.
53. Acts, 8,
And as a sheep yt is led unto the shambles to be slain, and as a lamb that:
is shorn of his fleese, makes no noise nor resistance even so went he unto
his death, without any repugnaunce, or openyng of his mouth to say any evil.

Thus have I set forth unto you, what charytye is, as well by the doctrine, as
by the example of Christ himself. Whereby also every man may, without error,
know himself, what state and condition he stands in, whether he be in
charity, (and so the child of the father in heaven) or not. For although
almooste every man persuades himself to be in charity, yet let him examine
none other man, but his own heart, his life and conversation, and he shall not
be deceived, but truly decerne and judge, whether he be in perfect charity or
not. For he that follows not his own appetite and will, but gives himself
earnestly to GOD. to do al his will and commandments, he may be sure that he
loves GOD: above al things, and else, surely he loves him not, whatsoever he
pretend: as Christ said: if ye love me, John. 13
keep my commaundeme^ts For he that knows my commandments, and keeps
the^, he it is (said Christ) yt loves me. And again he says: he that loves
me, will keep my word, and my father will love him, and we will both come to
him, and dwell with him. And he that loves me not, will not keep my words. And
likewise, he that bears good heart and mind, and uses well his tongue and
deeds unto every man friend and foe; he may know thereby, that he has charity.
And then he is sure also that almighty GOD takes him for his dear beloved
son, as S. John says: 1, Ioh, 4
hereby manyfestly are known the children of God, from the children of the
devil: for whosoever does not love his brother, belongs not unto GOD.

The second part of the Sermon of Charytie.
YOu have heard a plain and a fruitful setting forth of Charity, and how
profitable and necessary a thing charity is. How charity stretches it
self, both to GOD and man, friend and foe, and that by the doctrine and example
of CHRIST. And also who may certifye himself whether he be in perfect charity
or not: now as concerning the same matter it follows. The perverse nature of
man corrupt with sin and destitute of GODS word and grace, thinks it
against al reason; that a man should love his enemy, and has many
persuasions, Against carnal me^ that will not forgive there enemies.
which bring him to the contrary. Against al which reasons, we ought as well to
set the teaching, as the living of our Sauyoure Christ, who loving us (when
we were his enemies) does teach us to love our enemies. He did patiently take
for us, many reproaches, suffered beatyng, and most cruel death. Therefore we
be no members of him, if we will not follow him. Christ (says. S. Peter)
suffered for us, leauyng an example that we should follow him. 1. Pet. 2.


Furthermore, we must consydre, that to love our friends, is no more but that,
which thieues, adulterers, homicides, and al wicked persons do: in so much that
Jews, Turks, Infideles, and all brute beasts, do love them that be their
friends, of whom they have their living, or any other benesites. But to love
enemies, is the proper condition only of them, that be the children of GOD,
the disciples and folowers of Christ. Notwithstanding, man's froward and
corrupt nature weighs over depely many times, the offense and displeasure
done unto him by enemies, and thinks it a burden intolerable to be bound to
love them, that hate him. But the burden should be easy enough, if (on ye
other side) every man would consider, what displeasure he has done to his
enemy again, and what pleasure he has received of his enemy. And if we find
no equal or even recompense neither in receiving pleasures of our enemy, nor
in requytting displeasures unto him again: then let us pondre the displesures
which we have done against almighty GOD: how often, and how grievously we have
offended him. Whereof, if we will have of GOD forgeuenes, there is none other
remedy, but to forgive the offenses done unto us, which be very small in
comparyson of our offenses done against GOD.

And it we consydre that he, which has offended us deserves not to be
forgeuen of us, let us consider again that we much less deserve to be
forgiven of GOD. And although our enemy deserve not to be forgeuen for his own
sake, yet we ought to forgive him for GOD'S love, considering how great and
many benefytes we have received of him, without out deserts, and that Christ
has deserved of us, that for his sake we should forgive the^ their trespasses
committed against us. A Questyon.
But here may rise a necessary question to be dissolved: if charity require to
think, speak and do well unto every man, both good and evil: how ran magistrates
execute justice upon malefactors or evil doers with charity? How can they
cast evil (...) in prison, take away their goods, and sometime their life's,
according to laws, if charity will not suffer the^ so to do? An Answer.
Hereunto is a plain and a brief answer: that plagues and punishme^tes be not
evil of themselves, if they be well taken of ye harmless. And to an evil man
they are both good and necessary, and may be executed, according to charity,
Charity has two offices.
and with charity should be executed. For declaration whereof, you shall
understand, yt charity has.ii. offices: the one contrary to ye other, and yet
both necessary to be used upon men of contrary sort, and disposition. The one
office of charity is, to cherishe good and harmless men, not to oppress
them with false accusatio^s, but to encourage the^ with rewards to do well and to
continue in well doing, defe^ding them with ye sweord, from their adversaries.
And the office of Bishopes and pastores is, to praise good me^ for well doing,
that they may continue therein, and to rebuke and correct by the word of GOD,
the offenses and crimes of all evil dysposed persons. For the other office
of charity is, to rebuke, correct, and punyshe vice, without regard of
persons, and this to be used against them only, that be evil men and
malefactors or evil doers. And that it is as well the office of charity, to
rebuke, punysh, and correct them yt be evil, as it is to cherish, and reward
the^ that be good and harmless. S. Paul declares, (writing to ye To.)
saying, Romans 13
that the high powers are ordained of GOD, not to be dreadful to them that do
well, but unto malefactors: to draw the sword, to take ve^geaunce of him that
commits the sin. And S. Paul bids Timothy, stoutelye and earnestlye
to rebuke sin, 1, Tim, 1
by the word of God. So that both offices should be dilygently executed, to
fight against the kingdom of ye devil the preacher with the word, (...) the
governor with ye sweord: Else they love neither GOD, nor them whom they
govern, if (for lack of correction) they wilfully suffer GOD to be offended,
and the^ whom they govern, to perish. For as every loving father corrects
his natural son, when he does amysse, or else he loves him not: so all
governors of realms, countries, towns, and houses, should lovingly correct
them, which be offenders under their governance, and cherish them which live
innocently, if they have any respect, either unto god and their office, or love
unto the^, of whom they have governance. And such rebukes and punishments of
them that offend, must be done in due time, lest by delay, ye offenders fall
hedlonges into all manner of mischeife, and not only be evil the^ selves, but
also do hurt unto many me^, drawing other by their evil example, to sin and
outrage after the^. As one thief may both rob many men and also make mani
thieves: and one sedicious person may alure many, and noy a whole town or
country. And such evil persons that be so great offenders of God, and the
common weal, charity requires to be cut of from the body of the common
weal, lest they corrupt other good and honest persons like as a good surgion
cutteth away a rotten and festred membre, for love he has to the whole body,
lest it infect other me^bres adjoining to it. Thus it is declared unto you,
what true charytie or christian love is, so plainly that no man need to be
deceived. Which love, whosoever keeps not only toward God (who^ he is bound
to love above althinges) but also toward his neighbor, as well friend as for,
it shall surely keep him from all offense of GOD, and just offense of man.
Therefore bear well away this one short lesson, that by true christian
charity. GOD ought to be loved above all things, and all men ought to be
loved, good and evil, friend and foe, and to al such, we ought (as we may) to
do good: those that be good, of love to encourage and cherish, because they be
good: and those that be evil, of love to procure and seek their correction and
due punishment, that they may thereby, either be brought to goodness or at the
least, that GOD and the common wealth may be the less hurt and offended. And
if we thus direct our life, by christyan love and Charytye, then Christ does
promise and assure us that he loves us, that we be the children of our
heavenly father, reconciled to his favor, very members of Christ: and that
after this short time of this present and mortal life. we shall have with him
everlasting life, in his everlasting kingdom of heaven: Therefore to him with
the father and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory, now and ever. AMEN.

Against swearynge and Periurye.
ALmighty God, to the intent his most holy name should be had in honor and
evermore be magnified of the people, commands that no man should take his
name vainly in his mouth, threateninge punishmente unto him yt irreverently
abuses it, by swearynge, forswearyng, and blasphemye. To the intent therefore
that this commandment may be the better known and kept: it shall be declared
unto you both how it is lawefull for Christian people to swear, and also what
peril and danger it is, vainelye to swear, How and in what causes it is
lauful to swear
or to be forsworn. First when judges require oaths of the people, for
declaration or opening of ye truth, or for execution of justice, this ma^er of
sweringe is lawful. Also when men make faithful promises with calling to witness
of the name of GOD, to keep couenauntes, honest promyses, statutes, laws, and
good customs: as christian princes do in their conclusyons of peace, for
conservation of common wealths, and private persons, promise their fidelity
in Matrimonye, or one to another in honesty and true frendeshyp: and al men,
when they do swear to keep common laws, or ^ocall statutes and good customs,
for due order to be had and continued emonge men, when subjects do swear to
be true and faithful to their king and soueraygne Lord, and when judges
Magystrates, and offices swear, truly to execute their offices, and when a man would affirm the truth to the setting forth of Gods glory (for the
saluatyon of the people) in open ^^^ching of the gospel, or in geuinge of good
counsel priuatelye for their souls health. Al these manner of swearinges, for
causes necessary and honest, be lawful. But when men do swear of custom, in
reasonyng, bying and felling, or other daily communicatio^ (as many be common
and great swearers) such kind of swearing is ungodly, unlawful, and
forbidden by the commandment of God. For such swering is nothing else, but
taking of Gods holy name in vain. And here is to be noted, that laweful
sweryng is not forbidden, but commanded of almighty God. For we have examples
of Christ, and godly men in holy scripture, that did swear themselves, and
required oaths of other likewise. Deuteronomy, 9,
And Gods commandment is: Thou shalt dread thy Lord God, Psalm. lxii
and shall swear by his name. And almightye GOD by his Prophet Dauyd says:
al men shall be praised that swear by him.

Thus did our Savior Christ swear diverse times, John, 3, 2, Cor, 1, Gc, 24,
saying: verily verily. And S. Paul swereth thus: I call God to wytnes. And
Abraham (waxing old) required an oath of his servant, that he should
procure a wife for his son Isaac which should come of his own ky^^red: and
the servant did swear that he would perform his masters will. Gen, 22,
Abraham also being required, did swear unto Abimelech, the king of Geraris,
that he should not hurt him nor his posterity. And so likewise did Abimelech
swear unto Abraham. And David did swear to be and continue a faithful friend
to Ionathas: and Ionathas did swear to become a faithful friend unto Dauyd.

Also, GOD once commanded, that if a thing were laid to pledge to any man,
or left with him to keep, if the same thing were stolen, or lost, that the
keeper thereof should be sworn before Judges, that he did not convey it away,
nor used any deceit, in causing the same to be conveyed away, Hebre, 6,
by his consent or knowledge. And S. Paul says: yt in all matters of
controuersye between two persons, whereas one says yea, and the otheruaye, so
as no due proof can be had of the truth, the end of every such controuersye
must be an oath mynystred by a Judge. And moreover, GOD by the prophet
Jeremy says: thou shall swear ye lord lives, in truth, in judgment, in
righteousness. So yt whosoever swears when he is required of a judge, let him
be sure in his conscience, that his oath have these three condycyons, and he
shall never need to be afraid of periurye. First he that swears, must swear
truly: What conditions (...) lawefulloth ought to have. The first The second.
that is, he must (setting a part al favor and affectyon to the parties) have
the truth only before his eyes, and for love thereof, say and speak that which
he knows to be truth, and no further. The second is he that takes an oath,
must do it with judgment, not rashely and unadvisedly, but soberlye,
consideringe what an oath is. The third is: The.iii.
he that swears, must swear in ryghteousnes: that is for the very zeal and
love, which he bears to the defense of innocence, to the maintenance of the
truth, and to ye righteousness of the matter or cause: all profyt, disprofite,
all love and favor unto the person, for frendeshippe or kynred, laid a part.
Thus an oath (if it have with it these three conditions) is a part of GODS
glory, which we are bound by his commandment, Why we ^e willed in
scripture to swear by the name of GOD
to give unto him. For he wills that we shall swear only by his name: not
that he has pleasure in our oaths, but like as he commanded the Jews to
offer sacrifices unto him, not for any delight that he had in them, but to
keep the Jews from committyng of Idolatry: so he commanding us to swear by
his holy name, does not teach us that he delyghteth in swearyng, but he
thereby forbids al men to give his glory to any creature in heaven, Esa. 42
Psalm 15
earth, or water. Hitherto you se, that oaths lawful, are commanded of GOD,
used of Patryarches and Prophets, of CHRIST himself, and of his Apostle
Paul. Therefore christian people must think laweful oaths, both godly and
necessary. For by lawful promises and couenauntes confyrmed by oaths.
Co^mo^^^s had by lawful oaths made and observed.
Princes and their countreies are confyrmed in common tranquillity and peace.
By holy promyses, with calling the name of GOD to witness, we be made lively
members of CHRIST, when we profess his relygyon, receiuyng the sacrament of
baptism. By like holy promise, the sacrament of matrimonye knitteth man and
wife in perpetual love, that they desire not to be separated, for any
dyspleasure or adversity that shall after happen.

By laweful oaths, which kings, Princes, Judges, and Magistrates do swear,
common laws are kept inuiolate, Justice is indifferentlye mynystred,
harmless persons, fatherless children, wyddowes and poor men are defended
from murderers, oppressors and thieves, that they suffer no wrong nor take any
harm. By lawful oaths, mutual society, amity, and good order is kept
continuallye in all commonalties, as boroughes, cities, towns and villages.
And by laweful oaths, malefactors ar searched out, wrong doers are punished,
and they which sustein wrong, are restored to their right. Therefore, laweful
swearyng cannot be evil, which brings unto us, so many godly, good, and
necessary commodities. Wherefore, Vain swerige is forbidden.
when CHRIST so earnestly forbad swearyng, it may not so be understood, as
though he did forbid al manner of oaths: but he forbyddeth al wayne sweryng, and
for swerynge, both by GOD and by his creatures: as the common use of sweryng,
in bying, selling, and in our daily communication, to the intent every
christian man's word, should be as well regarded in such matters, as if he
should confyrme his communicacyon with an oath. For every christian man's
word (says Saint Hierome) should be so true, that it should be regarded as
an oath. And Chrysostom wytnessyng the same, says: It is not conueniente to
swear, for what needs us to swear, when it is not lawefull for one of us to
make a lie unto another? Peradventure some will say: I am compelled to swear,
An objection.
for else men that do common with me, or do bye and sell with me, will not believe
me. An answer.
To this answers S. Chrysostom, that he that thus says, shows himself
to be an unjust, and a deceitful person: for if he were a trusty man, and
his deeds taken to agree with his words, he should not need to swear at al.
For he that uses truth and playnes in his bargaynyng and communication, he
shall have no^ ^e^^ by such vain swearing, to bring himself in crede^ce with
his neighbors, nor his neighbors will not mistrust his sayings. And if his
credence be so much lost in deed, yt he thinks no man will believe him
without he swear, then he may well think his credence is clean gone. For
truth it is (as Theophilactus writes, yt no man is less trusted, then he that
uses much to swear. And almighty GOD by the wiseman says: Eccl, 33
That manne which swears much, shall be full of sin, and the scourge of GOD
shall not depart from his house.

Another objection
But here some men will say, for excusing of their many oaths in their daily
talk: why should I not swear, when I swear truly? To such men it may be
said, that though they swear truly, yet in swearing often, An Answer.
unadvisedly for trifles, without necessity, and when they should not swear,
they be not without fault, but do take Gods most holy name in vain. Much more
ungodly and unwise men are they, that abuse Gods most holy name, not only in
bying and selling of small things daily in all places, but also eating,
drinking, playing, commoning, and reasoning. As if none of these things might
be done, except in doing of them, the most (...) holy name of GOD be commonly
used and abused, ^aynely, and irreverently talked of, sworn by and for sworn,
to the breakyng of Gods commandment, and procurement of his indygnatyon.

The second part of the Sermon. of swearyng.
YOu have been taught in the first part of this sermon against swering and
perjury what great danger it is to use the name of GOD in vain. And that al
kind of swearinge is not unlawful, neither against GODS commandment, and
that there be three things required in a lawful oath. First, that it be made
for the maintenance of the truth. Second that it be made with judgment, not
rashlye and unadvisedly. Thirdly, for the zeal and love of justice. Ye heard
also what commodities comes of lawful oaths: And what danger comes of
rash and unlawful oaths. Now as concerning the rest of the same matter, ye
shall understand yt as well they use ye name of god in vain, that by an oath make
laweful promises of good and honest things, Lawful oaths and promyses would
be better regarded.
and perform them not: as they, which do promise evil and unlawful things,
and do perform the same. Of such men that regard not their godly promyses
bound by an oath, but wittinglye and wilfully breaks them, we do read in
holy scripture two notable punyshme^^s. First, Iosue 9,
Iosue and the people of Israel made a league and faithful promise of perpetual
amytye and friendship with the Gabaonites: notwithstanding, afterward in the
days of wicked Saul, many of these Gabaonites were murdered, contrary to yt
said faithful promise made. Wherewith almyghtye GOD was so sore dyspleased, that
he sent an universal hunger, upon the whole country, which continued by the
space of three years. And god would not with draw his punishment, until the
said offense was revenged by the death of.vii. sons, or next kinsmen of
King Saul. 2. Re. xi
Also, where as Sedechias, king of Jerusalem, had promised fidelytye, to the
king of Chaldea: afterward, when Sedechias, contrary to his oath and
allegeaunce, did rebel against king Nabugodonozor: this Heathen king, by GODS
permission and suffraunce inuadinge the land of Iewry, and besieging the city
of Jerusalem, compelled the said king Sebechias to flee, and in fleeing took
him priesoner, slew his sons be fore his face, and put out both his eyes,
and bynding him with chains, led him priesoner miserably into Babylon.

Unlawful oths and promyses are not to be kept.
Thus does GOD show plainly, how much he abhors breakers of honest
promises, bound by an oath made in his name. And of them that make wicked
promises by an oath, and will perform the same: we have exaumple in the
scripture, chyetly of Herod, Ma. 14
of ye wicked Jews, and of Iephthath. Herod promised by an oath unto the
damosel which daunsed before him, to give unto her whatsoever she should
ask: when she was instructed before of her wicked mother, to ask the hoade
of saint John Baptyste. Herod as he took a wicked oath so he more wyckedly
perform the same, and cruellye slew the most holy Prophet. Lykwise did ye
malytious Jews make an oath, Act, 23.
cursyng themselves if they did either eat or drink, until they had slain S.
Paul. And Iephthath, Iudie^^ 11.
when GOD had given to him victory of the chyldrn of Ammon promised of a
foolyshe devotion unto God, to offer for a sacrifice unto him. that person,
which of his own house should first meet with him, after his return home.
By force of which fond and unadvised oath, he did slay his own and only
daughter, which came out of his house, with mirth and joy, to welcome him
home. Thus the promise which he made most foolyshlye to God, against Gods
everlasting will, and the law of nature, most cruelly he performed, so
committing against GOD double offense. Therefore, whosoever makes any promise,
bynding him self thereunto by an oath, let him foresee, that the thing which he
promises be good, honest, and not against the commandment of GOD, and
that it be in his own power to perfour me it instely. And such good promyses,
must all men keep, evermore assuredly. But if a man at any time shall, either
of ignorance, or of malice, promise and swear to do any thing, which is
either against the law of almighty GOD, or not in his power to perform: let
him take it for an unlawful and ungodly oath.

Against and periurye.
Now something to speak of perjury, to the intent you should know, how great
and grievous an offense against God this wilful perjury is? I will show you,
what it is to take an oath before a Judge upon a book. First, An oath before and
judge.
when they layinge their hands upon the gospel book, do swear truly to
inquyre and to make a true presentment of things, wherewith they be charged,
and not to let from saying the truth, and doing truly, for favor, love,
bread, or malice of any person, as GOD may help them, and the holy
contents of that book: They must considre, that in that book is contained,
Gods ever lasting truth, his most holy and eternal word, whereby we have
forgiveness of our sins, and be made inheritoures of Heaven, to live for
ener, with gods Angelies and his saints, in joy and gladness. In the
gospel book is contained also. Gods terrible threats to obstinate sinners,
that will not amend their lives, nor believe the truth of God his holy word:
and the everlasting pain prepared in hell, for Idolaters, Hypoerites, for
false and vain swearers, for perjured men, for false witness bearers for false
condemners of innocent and gylteles men, and for them, which for favor hide
the crimes of evil doers, that they should not be punyshed. So that whosoever
wilfully forsweareth himself upon Christ's holy Euangely, they utterly forsake
Gods mercy, goodness and truth, the merits of our savior Christ's
nativity, life, passion, death, resurrection, and assention. They refuse the
forgiveness of sins, promised to all penitente sinners, the joys of heaven,
the company with Angels and saints for ever. All which benefits and
comfortes, are promised unto true christian persons in the gospel.

And they, so being for sworn upon the gospel, do be take them selfs to the
deuilles service, the master of all lies, falshod, deceit, and periurye,
provoking the great indignation, and curse of God, against the^ in this life,
and the terrible wrath and judgment of our savior Christ, at ye great day of
the last judgment, when he shall justly judge both the quick and the dead,
according to their works. For whosoever forsakes the truth, for love or
displeasure of any man, or for lucre and profit to him self, does forsake
Christ, and with Judas betrayeth him.

Though pe^iury^ do escape here unespied and unpunished, it shall not do so
ever.
And although such perjured men's falshod be now kept secret, yet it shall be
opened at the last day when the secrets of all men's hearts, shall be manifest
to all the world. And then the truth shall appear, and accuse them: and
their own conscience, with all the blessed company of heaven, shall bear
witness truly against them. And Christ the righteous judge, shall then justly
condemn them to everlasting shame and death. This sin of periurye, almighty
God by the prophet Malachy, does threaten to punyshe sore, saying unto the
Jews: Malac. (...)
I will come to you in judgment, and I will be a swift witness, and a sharp
judge, upon sorcerers, adulterers, and perjured persons. Which thing to the
Prophet Zachary God declares in a vision, zachar. (...).
wherein the prophet saw a book fliyng, which was twentye cubits long, and
ten cubits broad, God saying then unto him: this is the curse, that shall
go furthe upon the face of the earth, for falshoode, false swearynge, and
periurye. And this curse shall enter into the house of the false man, and into
the house of the perjured man, and it shall remain in the middeste of his
house, and consume him, the tymbre and stones of his house. Thus you see, how
much God does hate periurye, and what punishment God has prepared for false
swearers, and perjured persons.

Thus you have heard, how, and in what causes it is lawful for a Christian man
to swear: ye have heard, what properties, and conditions, a lawefull oath must
have, and also how such lawefull oaths are both godly, and necessary to be
observed: ye have heard, that it is not lawful to swear vaynly, (that is)
other ways then in such causes, and after such sort, as is declared: and
finally, ye have heard how damnable a thing it is, either to forswear our
selves, or to keep an unlawful and an unadvised oath. Wherefore let us
earnestly call for grace, that al vain swearing and perjury set a part, we may
only use such oaths, as be lawful and godly, and that we may truly,
without all fraud, keep the same, according to Gods will and pleasure. To
whom with the son and holy ghost, be all honor and glory.

AMEN.

A Sermon, how dangerous a thing it is, to sall from God.
OF our going from God, Eu^^. ^.
the wyseman says, that pride was the first beginning: for by it man's
heart was turned from God his maker.

For pride (says he) is the fountain of all sin, he that has it, shall be
full of cursinges, and at the end it shall overthrow him. And as by pride and
sin we go from God: so shall God and al goodness with him, go from us. Ozee. 5.
And the prophet Ozee does plainly affirm, yt they which go away still from
God by vicious living, and yet would go about to pacyfye him otherwise, by
sacrifice, and entertayne him thereby, they labor in vain. For,
notwithstanding all their sacrifice, yet he goes still away from them. For so
much (says the prophet) as they do not apply their minds to return to
God, although they goo about with whole flocks and heardes to seek the
Lord: yet they shall not find him, for he is gone away from them. But as
touching our turninge to God, or from God: you shall understand, that it may be
done diverse ways. Sometimes directlye by ydolatrye, as Israel and Judah then
did: sometimes men go from GOD, by lack of faith, and mistrusting of God,
whereof Esaias speaks in this wise: Woe to them that go down into Egypt, to
seek for help, trusting in Horses, ^hauing confidence in the number of
chariots, Esai. ^^.
and ^^^saunce or power of Horsemen. They have n^ (...)dence in the holy god of
Israel nor seek for the Lord, But what follows? The Lord shall let his hand
fall upon them, and down shall come, both the helper, and he that is helped.
They shall be destroyed altogether.

Sometime men go from God, by the neglecting of his commandments conceining
their neighbors, which commands them to express hearty love toward ^uery
man: ^^her. 7.
as Zacharye said unto the people in Gods behalf: Give true judgment. show
mercy and compassion every one to his brother: Imagine no deceit toward
widows, or children fatherles and motherles, toward stranger, or the poor,
let no man forge evil in his heart against his brother. But these things they
passed not of, they turned their backs, and went their way, they stopped their
ears, that they might not hear, they hardened their hearts, as an Adamante
stone, that they might not listen to the law and the words, that the Lord
had sent through his holy spirit, by his aunciente Prophets. Wherefore the
Lord showed his great indignation upon them. It came to pass (says the
Prophet) even as I told them, as they would not hear, (...), 7,
so when they cried they were not heard, but were scattered into al kingdoms,
which they never knew, and their land was made, desolate. And to be short al
they, that may not abide ye word of God, but following the persuasions, and
stubber ne^ of their own hearts, go backward and not forward (as it is said
in Jeremy) they go and turn away from ^od. (...). 7.
Insomuche that Origene says. He that with mind to study, with deeds, with
thought and care ^pplieth and gives himself to gods word, and thinks upon
his laws, day and night, gives himself wholly to God, and in his precepts
and commandments is exercised: this is he that is turned to God. And
onthother part (he says:) Whosoever is occupied with fables and tales when the
word of God is re^^rsed, he is turned from God. Whosoever in time of readyng
Gods word, is careful in his mind, of worldly vnsines, of money, or of
lucre: he is turned from God. Whosoever is entangled with ye ears of
possessions filled with couetousenes of riches whosoeuee studieth for the glory
and honor of this world, he is turned from God. So that after his mind,
whosoeue^ has not a special mind to that thing that is commanded or taught
of God: be that does not listen unto it, embrace and print it in his heart, to
the intent that he may duly fashion his life thereafter, he is plainly turned
from GOD; although he do other things of his own devotion and mind, which
to him seem better. and more to gods honor. Which thing to be true, we be
taught and admonished in the holy scripture, by the example of King Saul, 1,
Re, 1^.
who being commanded of God by Samuel, that he should kill all the
Amalechites, and destroy them clearly wa^ their goods and cattels: yet he,
being moved, partly with pity, and partly (as he thought) with devotion unto
God, saved Agag the king, and all the chief of their cattayle, therewith to
make sacryfyce unto God. Wherwithall God being dyspleased hyghely, said unto
the Prophet Samuel. I repent that ever I made Saul a king, for he has
fors^ke^^ns, and not followed my words, and so be (...) Samuel to show him.
And when Samuel as^^^ wherefore (contrary to Gods word) he had saved the
catell: he excused the matter, partelye by fear, saying he durst do none
other, for that the people would have it so: partly, for that they were
goodly beasts, he thought GOD would be content, seeing it was done of a good
intent and devotion, to honor God with the sacrysyce of them.

But Samuel, reproving al such intentes and devotions (seem they never so much
to Gods honor, if they stand not with his word, whereby we may be assured of
his pleasure) said in this wise: would God have sacrifices and offeringes? Or
rather that his word should be obeyed? To obey him, is better then
offerynges, and to listen to him, is better the to offer the fat of Rams:
yea, to repugne againsts his voice, is as euel as the sin of south saying,
and not to agree to it, is like abominable Idolatrye. And now, forasmuch as
thou have cast away the word of the lord, he has cast away thee, that thou
should not be king.

The t^r^i^^e of God from (...).
By all these examples of holy Scripture, we may know, that as we forsake God:
so shall he ever forsake us. And what miserable state does consequently and
necessarely follow thereupon, a man may easily considre by the terrible
thretninges of God. And although he considre not all the said miserye, to the
utter most, being so great, that it passes any man's capecitie* in this life
sufficiently to consider the same: yet he shall sone perceine so much thereof,
that if his heart (...) not more then stony, or harder then the Adamant, he
shall fear, tremble and quake, to call the same to his remembrance.

First the displ^sure of GOD toward us, is commonly expressed in the
scripture, by these two things: by showing his fearful coun^^^^^ce upon us,
and by t^^nyng his face, or ^y^yng i^ from (...). By showing his dreadful
coun^^^^^ince, is signi^^ed his great wrath: but by tu^nying his lace or hiding
thereof, is many times more signified, th^^ is (...) say: that he clear lie
forsakes us* and ge^^th us over. The which signify mions be taken of the
properties of men's manners: For men to words them whom they favor, commonly
bear a good, a the^eful, and a loving countenance: s^o that by the fac^ or
countenance of a man, it does commonsye appear, what will or mind he bears
to w^^des other* So, when GOD does thew his dr^adful ^o^n ^e^^ free toward
us, that is to say, does ^end d^^dfull plagues; of sweord, famine, or
pestil^^^ce upon bs, it appears that he is greatly wroth with us. But when he
withdraws from us his word, the right doc^^^^e of CHRIST, his gracious a
flystonce and aid, (which is ever joined to his word) ^^d leaves us to our
own wit, our own will and strength he declares then* that he begins to
forsake us. For where as GOD has showed to al them that truly believe his
gospel, his shoe of mercy in IESVS^CARE^^. which does so lighten their
hearts, that they (...) they behold it, as they ought to do ^be te^^^so^^lied
whis Image, be made partakers of the hea^^^ilye light, and of his holy
spirit, and be sasbyoned to him, in all goodness requisite to the children of
clo^^ so, if they after do neglecte the same, if the (...) ^^^nkefull unto
him, if they order not they, (...) according to his example and doctrine, and
to the set^inge lurth of his glory, he will take away from them his kingd^e,
his holy word, whereby he should reign in the^* because they bring not furthe
ye fruit thereof, that he love (...) for. Nevertheless, he is so merciful, and
of so long s^^eraunce, that he does not show upon us, that great wrath
suddenly. But when we begin ^o shrink from his word, not believing it, or not
expressing it in our liuinges first he does send his messengers that truepr
eachers of his word* to admonish us of our du^tie that as he for his part.
for the great love he bare unto us, delivered his own son to suffer death,
that we by his death might be delivered from death, and be restored to yt life
(...) evermore to dwell with him, and to be partake^s and inheritours with him,
of his everlasting glory and kingdom of heaven: so again, that w^for our
parts, should walk in a godly life, as becammeth his children to do. And if
this will not serve, but still we remain disobediente to his word, and will,
not knowing him, not loving him, not fearing him, not putting our whole trust
and confidence in him, and on the other side, to our neighbors* behauing us
uncharitably, by disdain, envy, malice, or by committing murder, robbery,
adultery glutteny, deceit lying, swearing, or other like detestable works* and
ungodly behavior: then he threatens us by terrible comminacions, swerynge in
great anger, Hob^. 4. Psa. 25.
that whosoever does these works, shall ^^^er enter into his rest, which is the
kingdom (...).

The second part of the Sermon of falling from GOD.
IN the former part of this sermon, ye have learned how many mau^^ of ways
men (...) from GOD so^^^s by Idola^^y, so (...) lack of faith some by the
negl^^^ynge of their neyghbors, some by n^^ heatynge of Gods word, some by the
(...) they take in the vanities of wordly things. M^h^^e also lea^tied in what
mise^peth at man is, which (...) gone from God. And how that God yet of his
infynite goodness to call again man from that his mysery uses first tentle
admonitions by his pr^^chor^) after he lays on terrible th^eat^ynges (...)
owe if this gentle menye you and commynation to gether do not secu^, than GOD
will show his (...) ^^^^tenannce upon us, he will power in^ollerable plagues
upon our heads, and after he will take away from us, all his aid and
^ssyste^^^, wherewyth before he did defen^^ us, from all se^ he manner of
^alamitie: As the Euan gelycal Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 5.
agreing with CHRIST'S pata^^^, does teathe us, saying: Mat. 21.
That GOD had made a goodly viney ar^^ for his belourd children: he hedged it,
he w^lse^ i^ found about, he planted it with chosen vynes, and made a turret in
the mids thereof, and therein (...) wine press. And when he ^o^ied that i^
^ould (...) him forth good grapes it brought forth w^l^^ (...) ^^pes and after
it follows: Now shall I she (...) (says GOD) what I will do with my vine
(...) shil p^nck down ye hedges, that it tha^ yet (...) break down the
walls, that it may be trodden under foot: I will let it lie wast, it shall not
be cut, it shall not ^^^igged, put briers and thorns shall o^^^gue we it,
and I shall command the clouds that they shall (...) main upon it.

My these that arminges ho^ are monyshed, that if we which are thechosen
vineyarde of GOD, bring not forth good grapes; that is to say, good works
that may be de^ot^bl^ and pleas^unt in his sight, when he ^^heath for the^^
when he sends his ^^essengers to c^l upon us for them but rather bring forth
wild grapes, that is to say, sower works, vnswete, unsavory, and vns^^^
ful^the^ will he pluck away al defense, ^suffre grievous plages of famine and
bartayll, dearth and death, to light upon us Finally, if these do not yet
serve, he will let us lie wast, he will give us over, he will turn away from us,
he will dig and delue no more about us, he will let us alone, and suffer us to
bring forth, even such fruit as we will: to bring forth bra^bles, h^ers and
thorns, al naughtynes, al vice, and that so abou^dantly, that they shall clean
over grow us suffocate, strangle, and utterly destroy us. But they that in
this w^^ld, live not after GOD (but after the^ own carnal liberty) perceive not
this great wrath of God to wards them, yt he will not dig, nor delue any more
about them, yt he does let them alone eue^ to themselves. But they take this
for a great benef^^ (...) GOD to have al their own, liberty and so they like
as carnal liberty were the true liberty of ye gospel. But GOD forbid (good
people) that ever we shulddesyre such liberty. For although GOD suffer so^^^
(...) the wicked to have their pleasure in this world: yet the end of ungodly
living is at length eternal destruction. Mu. 11.
The murmuring Israelites had that they longed for, they had quayles enough,
yea, till they were weary of them. But what was the end thereof. Their sweet
meat had sour sauce: even whiles the meat was in their mouths, the plage of
GOD lighted upon them, and suddenly they dyed. So, if we live ungodly, and GOD
suffers us to follow our own wills, to have our own delights and
pleasures, and corrects us not with some plage: it is no doubt, but he is
almost utterly dyspleased with us. And although it be long or he stryke, yet
many times, when he stryketh such persons, he strikes them at once, for
ever. So yt when he does not strike us, when he cease to afflict us to punish
or beat^ us, and suffers us to run headlonges into all ungodliness, and
pleasures of this world that we delight in, wout punishmente and adversity, it
is a dredful token yt he loves us no le^ger, that he cares no le^ger for us,
but has given us over, to our own selves. As long as a man does proyne his
vines, does dig at the roots, and does lay fresh earth to them, he has a
mind to them, he percepueth some token of fruitfulnes that may be recovered in
the^: but when he will bestow no more such cost and labor about them, then it
is a sign that he thinks they will never be good. And the father, as long as
be loves his child, he looks angerly, he corrects him when he does amysse:
but when that serves not, and upon that he cease from correccion of him, and
suffers him to do what he list himself, it is a sign that he intends to
disinherite him, and to cast him a way for ever. So surely, nothing should
perce our heart so sore, and put us in such horrible fear, as when we know
in our conscience, that we have grievously offended GOD, and do so continue,
and that yet he strikes not, but quietlye suffers us in the naughtines that
we have delight in. Then specially it is time to cry, and to cry again, as
David did: Cast me not away from thy face, Psalm. 51 Psalm. 29
and take not a way thy holy spirit from me. LORD turn not away thy face
fcomme, cast not thy servant away in displeasure. Hide not thy face from me,
Psalm. 1.42.
least I be like unto the^ that go down to hell. The which lamentable prayers of
him, as they do certify us, what hor^ible danger they be in, from whom GOD
turns his face (for ye time, and as long as he so does:) so should they move
us to cry upon GOD with all our heart, that we m^^ not be brought into that
state, which doubtless is so sorrowful, so miserable, and so dreadful, as no
tongue can sufficiently express, or any heart can think.

For what deadly grief may a man suppose it is to be under the wrath of GOD to
be forsaken of him to have his holy spirit the authoure of all goodness, to be
taken from him, to be brought to so vile a condytion, that he shall be left mete
for no better purpose, then to be for ever condemned to hell. For not only
such places of David do show, that upon the turnyng of GODS face from anyr
persons, they shall be left bare from al goodness; and far from hope of remedy:
but also the place recited last before of Esaias, does mean the same, which she
weth, yt GOD at length does so forsake his unfruitful vineyard, yt he will not
only suffer it to bring forth wedes, briers, and thorns, but also, further to
punyshe the unfruitfulness of it, he faith he will not cut it, he will not delue
it, and he will command the clouds, that they shall not rain upon it, whereby
is signified, the teachinge of his holy word: which S. Paul, after a like
manner, expresses by planting and watering, meaning that he wylcake that away
from the^. So that they shall be no longer of his kingdom, they shall be no leiger
governed by his holy spirits they shall be frustrated of the grace and benefits
that they had, and tuer might have enjoyed through Christ. They shall be
deprived of the heavenly light, and life which they had in Christ, whiles they
abode in him. They shall be, (as they were once) as men without GOD in this
world, or rather in worse taking. And to be short, they shall be given into the
power of the devil, which bears the rule in all the^, that be cast away from
GOD, as be did in Saul, and Judas, and generally in all such, as work after
their own wylles, 1. Re 25.
the children of diffidence and infidelity.

Let us beware therefore (good christyan people) lest that we, rejecting GODS
word, (by the which we obtain and retain true faith in GOD) be not at
length cast of so far, that we become as ye children of infidelity, which be
of two sorts, far diverse, yea almost clean contrary, and yet both be
very far from returning to GOD. The one forte, only waying their sinful
and detestable living, with ye right judgment and straightnes of GODS
righteousenes, be so destitute of counsel, and be so comfortles, (as all they
must needs be, from whom the spirit of counsayl and comfort is gone) that they
will not be persuaded in their hertes, but that either GOD cannot or else that
he will not take them again to his favor and mercy. The other. hearing the
loving and large promises of GODS mercy, and so not concei^^nge a right faith
thereof, make those promises larger, then ever GOD did: trusting that although
they continue in their sinful and detestable living never so long, yet that
GOD at the end of their lyte, will show his mercy upon them, and that then,
they will return. And does these two fortes of men, Eze. 18. and. 33.
de in a dawnable state: and yet never thelesse, GOD (who wills not the death
of the wicked) has showed means, whereby both the same (if they take heed in
season may escape. A gaynst desperation.
The first, as they do dread GODS rightefull justice in punishing sinners:
(whereby they should be dismayed and should despair indeoe, as touching any hope
that may be in themselves) so if they would constantly believe, that GODS
mercy is the remedy appointed against such despair and distrust, not only
for them but generally for all that be forye and truly repentant, and will
therwithall stick to GODS mercy, they may be sure they shall obtein mercy, and
enter into the port or haven of sauegarde, into the which whosoever does come,
be they defore time never so wicked, they shall be out of danger of everlasting
damnation, Eze. 33.
as GOD by Ezechiel says: what time soever the wicked does return, and take
earnest and true repentance. I will forget al his wickedness.

Against presumptyon.
The other, as they be ready to believe GODS promises so they should be as ready
to believe the threatninges of GOD: as well they should believe the law as the
gospel: as well that there is an bell and everlasting fire, as that there is an
heaven, and everlasting joy, as well they should believe damnation to be
threatened to the wicked and evil doers, as salvation to be promised to the
faithful in word and works: as well they should believe God to be true, in the
one, as in the other. And the sinners that continue in their wicked living,
ought to think* that the promises of Gods mercy and the Gospel, perteyne not
unto them, being in that state: but only the law, and those scriptures,
which contain the wrath, and indignation of GOD, and his threateninges,
which should certify them, that as they do over boldly presume of GODS
mercy, and live dissolutely: so does GOD ^tyl more and more withdraw his
mercy from them, and he is so provoked thereby to wrath at length, that he
destroieth such presumers many times soday^lye. For of such Saynct Paul
said thus: when they shall say it is peace, 1. Cess. 5
there is no danger* then shall sudden destruction come upon them. Let us
beware therefore, of such naughtye boldness to sin: for GOD, which has
promised his mercy to them that be truly repentaunte, (although it be at the
latter end) has not promised to the presumtuous sinner, either that he shall
have long life, or that he shall have true repentance at the last end. But
for that purpose has he made every man's death uncertain, that he should
not put his hope in the end, and in the mean season (to GODS high displeasure)
live ungodly. Wherefore, let us follow the counsel of the Wyseman: let us
make no tarying to turn unto the lord: let us not put of, from day to day,
for so daynly shall his wrath come* and in time of veng^^nce he will destroy
the wicked. Let us therefore turn betymes: and when we turn, ^se. 14,
let us pray to GOD, as Dze^ teaches, saying: Forgive us al our sines*
receive us graciouslye. And if we turn to him, with an humble and a very
penitent heart, he will receive us to his favor and grace, for his holy names
sake, for his promise sake, for his truth and mercyes sake, promised to all
faithful beleuers in Jesus Christ, his only natural son. To whom the only
savior of the world, with the father and the holy ghost, be all honor,
glory, and power, world without end. Amen.

An exhortation against the fear of death.
IT is not to be merueiled, that worldly men do fear to dye: For death
depryueth them of all worldly honors, riches, and possessions, in the
fruition whereof, the worldely man counts him self happy, so long as he may
enjoy them at his own pleasure, and otherwise, if he be dispossessed of the
same, without hope of recou^rye, then he can none other think of him self,
but that he is unhappy* because he has lost his worldly joy and pleasure.
Alas thinks this carnal man, shall I now depart for ever, from al my
honors, al my treasure, from my country, friends, riches, possessions, and
worldly pleasures, which are my joy and hearts delyghte? Alas that ever
that day shall come, when all these I must bydd^ fare well at once, and never
to enjoy any of them after. Wherefore it is not without great cause spoken
of the Wise man: O death, how bitter and sower is the remembrance of thee, to
a man that lives in peace, and prosperytie in his substance, Ecct. 41.
to a man living at ease, leadyng his lyse after his own mind without
trouble, and is there withal well pampered and fed? There be other men,
whom this world does not so greatly^ laugh upon* but rather bear and oppress
with poverty, syckenesse, or some other adversity, yet they do fear death,
partely^ because the flesh abhors naturally his own sorrowful dissolution,
which death does threaten unto them, and partelye, by reason of such ^^^sses,
and payneful diseases, which be most strong panges and agonies in the flesh,
and use commonly to come to sick men before death, or at the least, accompany
death, whenever it comes.

Although these two causes seem great and weighty to a worldly man, whereupon he
is moved to fear death, yet there is another cause much greater then any of
these before rehearsed, for which in deed, he has just cause to fear death, and
that is, the state and condition whereunto at the last end, death brings al
them that have their hearts fixed upon this world, without repentance and
amendment. This state and condition, is called the second death, which unto al
such, shall ensue after this bodily death. And this is that death, which in
deed ought to be dred and feared: for it is an everlasting loss without
remedy, of the grate and favor of GOD, and of everlasting joy, pleasure, and
felicity. And it is not only the loss for ever of all these eternal
pleasures, but also it is the condemnation, both of body and soul, (without
either appellation, or hope of redemption) unto everlasting pains in hell.
Unto this state death sent the unmerciful and ungodly rich man (that Luke
speaks of in his gospel, Luk, 16,
) who living in all wealth and pleasure in this world, and cheryshing himself
daily with dayntye fare, and gorgeous apparel, despised poor Lazarus, that
lay pitifullye at his gate, myserably plagued, and full of soores, and also
grievously pyned with hunger.

Both these two were arrested of death, which sent Lazarus the poor miserable
man, by angels anon unto Abraham's bosom: a place of rest, pleasure and
consolation. But the unmerciful rich man descended down into hell, and being
in torments, he cried for comfort, complaininge of the intolerable pain
that he suffered in ye flame of fire, but it was to late. So unto this place,
bodily death sends all them, that in this world have their joy and
felycitie: al the^, that in this world be unfaithful unto GOD, and
uncharitable unto their neighbors, so dyinge without repentance, and hope of
GODS mercy. Wherefore it is no marvel, that the worldly man fears death,
for he has much more cause so to do, then he him self does consydre.

The first
Thus we se three causes, why worldly men fear ^eathe. One, because they shall
lose thereby their worldely honors, riches, possessions, and all their
hearts desires: Another, Second
because of the paynefull diseases, and bitter pangues, which commonly men
suffer, either before, or at the time of death: but the chief cause, above al
other, Third.
is the dread of the miserable state, of eternal damnation both of body and
soul, which they fear shall follow, after their departing out of ye worldly
pleasures of this present life.

For these causes be al mortal men, (which be given to the love of this world)
both in fear, and state of death, through sin (as the holy Apostle says) so
long as they live here in this world. He^^^. (...)
But (everlasting thanks be to almyghtye God for ever) there is never one of
al these causes, no nor yet they altogether that can make a true Christian man
altayde to dye (which is ye very membre of CHRIST, 1 Co^. (...)
the (...) of the holy ghost, the son of God, and the very inherit ours of the
everlasting kingdom of heaven:) but play^^^ contrary, be conceiueth great and
many causes, undoubtedly grounded upon the infallible and everlasting truth
of the word of GOD, which move him, not only to put away the fear of bodily
death, but also for the manyfolde benefyttes and synguler commodities, which
ensue unto every faithful person, by reason of the same, to wyshe, desire, and
long heartely for it. For death shall be to him no death at al, but a very
deliverance from death, from al pains cares, and sorrows, myseries, and
wretchedness of this world, and the very entry into rest, and a beginning of
everlasting joy, a tastyng of heavenly pleasures, so great, that neither
toungue is able to express, neither eye to see, nor ear to hear them: no nor
for any earthly man's heart to conceive them. So exceeding great benefits
they be, which God our heavenly father by his mere mercy, and for the love of
his son JESUS CHRIST, has laid up in store, and prepared for them, that
humbly submytte them selves to Gods will, and ever more unfeignedly love him,
from the botome of their hearts. And we ought to believe, that death being
slain by CHRIST cannot keep any manne, that stedfastlye trusts in CHRIST,
under his perpetual tyranny and subjection, but that he shall rise from death
again unto glory at the last day, appointed by almighty God: like as CHRIST
our head, did rise again, according to Gods appointement the third day. For
saynete Augustine says: The head going before, the members trust to follow,
and come after. And S. Paul's says: if Christ be risen from the dead, we
shall rise also from the same. And to comfort all Christen persons herein,
holy Scripture calls this bodily death a sleep, wherein man's senses be (as it
were) taken from him for a season, and yet when he awaketh, he is more fresh,
then he was when he went to bed: So, although we have our souls separated
from our bodies for a season, yet at the general resurrection, we shall be more
fresh, beautiful and perfect, then we be now. For now we be mortal, the^ we
shall be immortal, now infecte with diverse infirmities, then clearly void of
all mortal infyrmities: now we be subject to al carnal desires, then we
shall be all spiritual, desyring nothing but Gods glory, and things eternal.
Thus is this bodily death, a door or entering unto life, and therefore not so
much dreadful, (if it be rightly considered) as it is comfortable, not a
mischief, but a remedy of al mischief, no enemy but a friend, not a cruel
tyraunte, but a gentle guide, leadinge us, not to mortality but to
immortalytye, not to sorrow and pain, but to joy and pleasure, and that to
endure for ever, if it be thankfully taken and accepted, as gods messenger, and
patiently borne of us, for Christ's love, that suffered most payneful death,
for our love, to redeem us from death eternal. According herunto, Sayncte
Paul says, our life is hid with Christ in God, Rom, ^
but when our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory.
Why then shall we fear to die? considering the manifold, and comfortable
promises of the gospel, and of holy scriptures. John. 6
God the father has given us everlasting life, (says S. John) and this life
is in his son, he that has the son, has life, and he that has not ye
son, has not life. And t^^ I wr^^^ (says S. John) to you, John. 6
that believe in the name of the son of God, that you may know that you have
everlasting life, and that you do believe upon the name of the son of God.
And our savior CHRIST says: he that believes in me, has life everlasting,
and I will raise him from death to life, John, 6
at the last day. 1, Cor. 1,
S. Paul also says, that CHRIST is ordained and made of God, our
righteousness, our holiness and redemption, to the intent that he which will
glory, should glory in the LORD. S. Paul did contemn, and set little by all
other things, esteming them as dunge which before he had in very great
price, that he might be found in CHRIST, to have everlasting life, true
holiness, righteousness and redemption. Finallye S. Paul makes a plain
argument in this wise: Cellos, 3
If our heavenly father would not spare his own natural son, but did give
him to death for us: how can it be, that with him he should not give us all
things? Therefore if we have CHRIST, then have we with him, and by him, all
good things whatsoever we can in our hearts wysh or desire: as victory
over death, sin and hell: we have the favor of God, peace with him,
holiness, wisdom, justice, power, life and redemption: we have by him
perpetual health, wealth joy and bliss everlasting.

The second part of the (...) of the fear of death.
IT has been heretofore she wed you, that there be three causes wherefore men do
commonly fear death. First, the sorrowful departing from worldly goods and
pleasure. The second, the fear of the panges and pains that come with death.
Last and principal cause is, the horrible fear of extreme misery, and
perpetual damnacion in time to come. And yet none of these three causes
troubles good men, because they stay the^ selves by true faith, perfect
charity, and sure hope of the endelesse joy and bliss everlasting.

Al those therefore, have great cause to be full of joy that be joined to Christ
with true faith, steadfast hope, and perfect charity, and not to fere death
nor ever lasting damnation. For death cannot deprive the^ of Jesus Christ, nor
any sin can condemn the^ that are graffed surely in him, which is their only
joy, treasure, and life. Let us repent our sins, amend our lives, trust in
his mercy and satisfaction, and death can neither take him from us, nor us from
him. For the^ (as s. Paul says) whether we live or dye, we be the lords
own. And again he says: Romans xiiii
Christ did die and rose again, because he should be lord, both of the dead and
quick. The^ if we be the lords own when we be dead, it must needs follow that
such te^porall death, not only cannot harm us, but also, yt it shall much be to
our profit, and join us unto god more perfectly. And thereof the Christian
heart may surely be certified by the infallible or vnde^^^^^ble truth of holy
scripture. It is God (...) Paul) which has prepared us unto (...) and the same
is he which has given us an earnesse of the spirit. Therefore let us be
always of good comfort, for we know: that so long as we be in the body, we be
(as it were) far from god in a strange country, subject to many perilles,
walking with out perfect sight, and knowledge of almighty God, only seeing him
by faith in holy scriptures. But we have a courage and desire rather to be at
home with God and our savior Christ, far from the body, where we may behold
his God head, as he is, face to face, to our everlasting comfort. These be S.
Paul's words in effect, Pebre. xiii
whereby we may perceive, that the life in this world, is rese^bled and lykened
to a pilgrimage, in a strange country, far from god: and that death
delivering us from our bodies, does send us straight home into our own
country, and makes us to dwell presently with god for ever, in everlasting
rest and quietness. So that to dye is no loss, but profit and winninge to all
true christen people. What lost the thief yt hanged on ye cross with Christ,
by his bodily death? yea, how much did he gain by it? Luke xxiii
Did not our savior say unto him: this day thou shall be with me in Para dise?
And Lazarus that pitiful person, that lay before the rich man's gate,
Luke.xvi.
payned with sores, and pyned with hunger? did not death hyghly prosite and
promote him? Which by the ministry of Angels, sent him unto Abraham's bosom, a
place of rest, joy and heavenly consolation. Let us think none other (good
Christen people) but Christ has prepared and made ready before the same joy
and felicity for us, that he prepared for Lazarus and the thief. Wherefore,
let us stick unto his salvation and gracious redemption: and believe his word,
serve him from our hearts, love and obey him, and whatsoever we have done
heretofore contrary to his most holy Will, now let us repent in time, and
heareafter study to correct our life: and doubt not, but we shall find him as
merciful unto us, as he was either to Lazarus, or to the thief whose examples
ar written in holy seripture, for the comfort of the^ that be sinners, and
subject to sorrows, miseries, and calamities in this world, that they should not
despair in gods mercy, but ever trust thereby to have forgeuenes of their
sins and life euerl ^sting, as Lazarus and the thief had. Thus I trust
every christen ma^perceiueth by the infaflible or vndeceauable word of God, yt
bodily death cannot harm nor hinder the^ that truly believe in Christ, but
contrary shall profit and promote the christen souls, which being truly
penitent for their offenses, depart hence in perfect charity, and in sure
trust, that God is merciful to the^, forgeuing their sins, for the merits
of Jesus Christ his only natural son.

The second cause why some do fear death, The second cause why some do fere
death
is fore sickness, and grievous pains, which partly come before death, and
partly acco^panieth or comes with death whenever it comes. This fear, is
the fear of the frail flesh, and a natural passion, belongyng unto the
nature of a mortal man. But true faith in Gods promises, and regard of the
pains and panges, which Christ upon the cross suffered for us miserable
sinners, with consideracion of the joy and everlasting life to come in
heaven, will mitigate and assuage less those pains, and moderate or bring into
a mean this fear, yt it shall never be able to overthrow the heartye desire,
and gladness, ye the Christian soul has to be separated from this corrupt
body, that it may come to the gracious presence of our savior Jesus Christ. If
we believe steadfastly the word of god, we shall perceive that such bodily
sickness, panges of death, or what soever dolorous pains we suffer, either
before or with death, be nothing else in christen men but the rod of our
heavenly and loving father, wherewith he mercifully corrects us, either to
try and declare the faith of his pacient children, yt they may be found
laudable, glorious, and honorable in his sight, when Jesus Christ shall be openly
showed, to be the judge of all the world: or else to chastise and amend in
the^, whatsoever offends his fatherly and gracious goodness, least they should
perish everlastingly. And this his correcting rod, is common to all them that
be truly his. Therefore let us cast away the burden of sin, yt lies to
heavy in our necks, and return unto God by true penance, and amendment of
our lives. Let us with patience run this course that is appointed,
suffering (for his sake that dyed for our salvation) all sorrows and panges of
death, and death it self joyfully, when God sends it to us, having our eyes
fyred and set fast ever upon the head and captain of our faith, Jesus Christ:
Who (considering the joy that he should come unto) cared neither for the shame,
nor pain of death, but wyllyngly conforming and framyng his will to his
fathers will, most patiently suffered the most shameful and paynefull death of
the cross, Phil. ii.
being innocent and harmless. And now therefore he is exalted in heaven, and
euerlastynglye sits on the right hand of the throne of God the father. Let
us call to our remembrance therefore, the life and joys of heaven, that are
kept for all them that patiently do suffer here with Christ: and consydre that
Christ suffered all his paynefull passion by sinners, and for sinners: and then
we shall with patience, and the more easelye, suffer such sorrows and pains,
when they come. Let us not set at light the chastysynge of the Lord, nor
grudge at him, nor fall from him, when of him we be corrected: for the Lord
loves them whom he does correct, and beats every one whom he takes to be
his child. What child is that (says Saint Paul) whom the father loves,
Hebr^. xii.
and does not chastise? If ye be without Gods correction, (which al his
well-beloved and true children have) then be you but bastardes smally regarged of
god, and not his true children.

Therefore, seeing that when we have in earth our carnal fathers to be our
correctours, we do fear them, and reuerentlye take their correction, shall we
not much more be in subjection to God our spiritual father, by whom we shall
have everlasting life? And our carnal fathers sometime correct us, even as
pleases them without cause: but this father iustelye corrects us, either for
our sin, to the intent we should amend, or for our commodity and wealth,
to make us thereby parttakers of his holiness. Furthermore, all correction
which God sends us in this present time, seems to have no joy and comfort,
but sorrow and pain: yet it brings with it a taste of Gods mercy and
goodness toward them that be so corrected, and a sure hope of gods
everlasting consolation in heaven. If then these sorrows, diseases and
sickenesses, and also death it self, be nothing else but our heavenly fathers
rod, whereby he certitieth us of his love and gracious favor, whereby he tries
and purifieth us, whereby he gives unto us holiness, and certifieth us that we
be his children, and he our merciful father: shall not we then, withal
humility, as obedient and loving children, joyfully kiss our heavenly
fathers rod, and ever say in our heart, with our savior Jesus Christ? Father,
if this anguishe and sorrow which I feel, and death which I se approach, Mat.
xxvi
may not pass, but that thy will is that I must suffer them, thy will be done.

The third part of the Sermon of the fear of death.
IN this Sermon against the fear of death, two causes were declared, which
commonly move worldly men to be in much fear to dye, and yet the same do
nothing trouble the faithful and good lyuers, when death comes, but rather
gives them occasion greatly to rejoice, considering that they shall be delivered
from the sorrow and misery of this world, and be brought to the great joy and
felicity of the life to come. The third cause why death is to be feared.
Now the third and special cause, why death in deed is to be feared, is the
miserable state of the worldly and ungodly people, after their death. But this
is no cause at all, why the Godly and faithful people should fear death: but
rather contrarywyse, their Godly conversation in this life and belief in
Christ, cleauyng continually to his merits, should make the^ to long sore
after that life, that remains for them undoubtedly after this bodily death.
Of this immortal state, after this transitory life where we shall live
evermore, in the presens of God, in joy and rest, after victory over all
sickness, sorrows, sin, and death: there be many, both plain places of
holy scripture, which confirm the weak conscience against the fear of al
such dolours, sickenesses, sin, and bodily death, to assuage such tremblyng
and ungodly fear, and to encorage us with comfort and hope of a blessed ^ate
after this life. Ephe. i.
Saint Paul wishes unto the Ephesians, that God the father of glory would
give unto them the spirit of wisdom and revelation, that the eyes of their
hearts might give light to know him, and to perceive how great things he
had called them unto, and how rich inheritance he has prepared after this
life, for them that perteyne unto him. Philip. i.
And Saint Paul him self declares the defyre of his heart, which was to be
dissolved and loosed from his body, and to be with Christ: which (as he said)
was much better for him, although to them it was more necessary, that he
should live, which he refused not, for their sakes. Even like as saint Martin
said: Good Lord, if I be necessary for thy people to do good unto them, I
will refuse no labor: but else for mine own self, I beseech thee to take my
soul.

Now, the holy fathers of the old law, and all faithful and righteous men,
which departed before our savior Christ's ascension into heaven, did by death
depart from troubles unto rest, from the hands of their enemies into the
hands of God, from sorrows and sickenesses unto joyful refreshing into
Abraham's bosom, a place of all comfort and consolation, Sapi. iii.
as scriptures do plainly by manifest words testify. The book of wisdom
says: that the righteous men's souls be in the hand of god, and no torment
shall touch them. They seemed to the eyes of folishe men to dye, and their
death was counted miserable, and their departing out of this world wretched,
but they be in rest. And an other place says: that the righteous shall live
for ever, and their reward is with the lord, and their minds be with god who
is above all. Therefore they shall receive a glorious kingdom, and a beawtiful
crown, Sapi. iiii.
at the Lords hand. And in an other place the same book says: the righteous,
thought he be prevented with sudden death, nevertheless he shall be there,
where he shall be refreshed. Of Abraham's bosom, Christ's words be so plain,
that a christian man needs no more proof of it. Now then, if this were the
state of the holy fathers and righteous men, before the coming of our
savior, and before he was glorified: how much more then ought all we to have a
steadfast faith, and a sure hope of this blessed state and condition, after our
death? Seeing that our savior now has performed the whole work of our
redemption, and is gloriouslye ascended into heaven, to prepare our dwelling
places with him, Ioh. xvii.
and said unto his father: Father, I will that where I am, my servants shall be
with me. And we know that whatsoever Christ will, his father will the same
wherefore it cannot be, but if we be his faithful sernauntes, our souls
shall be with him, after our departing out of this present life. Saint Stephin,
when he was stoned to death, even in the midst of his torments, what was his
mind most upon? When he was full of the holy ghost, Ac^^^. v^^
(says holy scripture) having his eyes lifted up into heaven, he saw the
glory of god, and Jesus standinge on the right hand of god. The which
truth, after he had confessed boldly before the enemies of Christ, they drew
him out of the city, and there they stoned him, who cried unto God, saying:
Lord Jesus Christ, take my spirit. And does not our savior say plainly in
S. John's gospel? Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and cummeth not into
judgment, John.v.
but shall pass from death to life. Shall we not then think that death to be
precious, by the which we pass unto life?

Therefore it is a true saying of the Prophet: the death of the holy and
righteous men, (...) cxvi
is precious in the lords sight. Holy Simeon, after that he had his hearts
desire in seeing our savior that he ever longed for all his life, he embraced or
took him in his arms, and said: Now lord let me depart in peace, Luke. ^^.
for mine eyes have beholden that savior, which thou have prepared for all
nations.

It is truth therefore, that the death of the righteous is called peace, and
the benefit of the Lord, Psalm. cxiiii.
as the church says in the name of the righteous departed out of this world:
my soul turn thee to chyreste, for the Lord has been good to thee, and
rewarded thee. And we see by holy scripture, and other ancient Histories of
Martirs, that the holy, faithful, and righteous, ever sins Christ's ascencion,
or going up in their death did not doubt, but that they went to be with Christ
in spirit, which is our life, health, wealth, and salvation. John in his holy
reuelacion, saw an. C. xl. and.iiii. M. virgins and innocents of whom he said:
Epo. xiiii
these follow the la^be Jesus Christ, whersoeuer he goes. And shortly after
in the same place he says: I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me: write
happy and blessed ar the dead, which die in the lord: from henceforth (surely
says the spirit) they shall rest from their pains and labors, for their
works do follow them. So that then they shall reap with joy and comfort, that
which they sowed with labors and pains.

They that sow in the spirit, of ye spirit shall reap everlasting life. Let
us therefore never be werye of well doing, for when the time of reaping, or
reward comes, we shall reap without any werines everlasting joy. ^ola. vi.
Math. vi.
Therefore while we have time (as S. Paul, exhorts us) let us do good to
all men, and nor lay up our treasures in earth, where ruste and mothes corrupt
it, James.v.
which rust (as S. James says) shall bear witness against us at the great
day, co^demie us, and shall (like most brenninge fire) tormente our flesh.
Let us beware therefore (as we tender our own wealth) that we be not in the
number of those miserable couetousse and wretched men, which S. James
byddeth mourn and lament, for their gredye gatherynge and ungodly keeping of
goods. Let us be wife in time, and learn to follow the wise example of the
wicked stewach. Let us so wisely order our goods and possessions, committed
unto us here by god for a season, that we may truly hear and obey this
commandment of our savior Christ: I say unto you, (says he) make you
friends of the wicked Mammon, Luke. xvi
that they may receive you into everlasting tabernacles, or dwellynges.
Richesse he calls wicked, because the world abuses them unto al wickedness,
which at otherwise the good gift of God, and the instruments whereby gods
seruauantes do truly serve him, in using of the same. He commanded the^ not,
to make them rich friends, to get high dignities, and worldly promotions,
to give great gifts to rich men that have no need thereof, but to make them
fre^des of poor and miserable men: unto whom, whatsoever they give, Christ
takes it, as given to himself. And to these fre^des Christ in the gospel
gives so great honor and preeminence, that he says: they shall receive them
that do good unto them, into everlasting houses: not that me^ shall be
ourrewarders for our well doing, but that Christ will reward us, and take it to
be done unto himself, whatsoever is done to such friends.

Thus making poor wretches our friends, we make our savior Christ our
friend, whose members they are, whose miserye, as he takes for his own
myserye: so their relyefe, succoure and help, he takes for his succoure,
relyefe, and help, and will as much thank us and reward us for our goodness
showed to them, as if he himself had received like benefyte at our hands, as
be witnesses in the gospel, (...) xxv
saying: whatsoeuerye have doe^ to any of these simple persons, which do
believe in me, that have ye done to my self. Therefore let us diligently foresee,
that our faith and hope, which we have conceived in almighty god, and in our
savior Christ, wax not fainte, nor that the love which we bear in hand to
bear to him, wax not cold: but let us study daily and diligently to show
our selves to be the true honourers and lovers of god, by kepinge of his
commandments, by doing of good deeds unto our nedy neighbors releuing by
all means that we can, their poverty with our abundance, and plenty, their
ignorance with our wisdom and learning, and comfort their v eakenes, with
our strength and authority: calling all men back from evil doing by godly
counsel and good example, perseuering still in well doing so long as we live.
So shall we not need to fear death, for any of those three causes, before
me^cioned, nor yet for any other cause that can be imagined. But contrary,
considering the manifold sickenesses, troubles and sorrows of this present
life, the dangers of this perilous pilgrimage, and the great encombraunce,
which our spirit has by this sinful flesh and frail body subject to death:
considering also the manifold sorrows and dangerous deceites of this world on
every side, ye intolerable pride, covetousness and lechery, in time of
prosperity: the impaciente murmuring of them that be worldly, in time of
adversity, which cease not to withdraw and pluck us from God, our savior
Christ, from our life, wealth, or everlasting joy and salvation:
considering also the innumerable assoultes, of our gostly enemy the devil
with all his fiery darts of ambicion, pride, lechecie, vain glory envy,
malice, detraccion or backebiting, with other his innumerable deceites, engynes
and snares, whereby he goes busely about to catch all men under his
dominion, ever like a roringe Lion, by all means searchynge whom he may
devour: 1. Pete. v.
the faithful Christian manne, which considers all these miseries,
perilles, and incommodities, (whereunto he is subiecie so long as he here
lives upon earth and on the other part, consydereth that blessed and
comfortable state of the heavenly life to come, and the sweet condition of
them that depart in the Lord, how they are delivered from the continual
encoumbraunces of their mortal and sinful body from all the malice, crafts
and deceytes of this world, from all the assaults of their ghostelye enemy
the devil, to live in peace, rest and endelesse quietness, to live in the
felowshyppe of innumerable Angels, and with the congregation of perfect just
men, as Patriarchs, Prophets, Martires and confessors: and finallye, unto
presence of almighty GOD, and our savior Jesus Christ. He that does
consider all these things and beeleueth them assuredly as they are to be
believed, even from the bottom of his heart, being established in GOD, in
this true faith, having a quiet conscience in Christ, a syrme hope, and
assured trust in Gods mercy, through the merits of Jesus Christ to
obtain this quietness, rest, and everlasting joy: shall not only be without
fear of bodily death, when it comes, but certainly (as Saint Paul did)
so shall he gladly (according to gods will, (...) sp. i.
and when it pleases god to call him out of this life) greatly desire in his
heart, that he may be rid fromal these occasions of evil, and live ever to gods
pleasure, in perfect obedience of his will, with our savior Jesus Christ:
to whose gracious presence the Lord of his infinite mercy and grace, bring us
to reign with him, in life everlasting. To whom, with our heavenly father,
and the holy ghost, be glory in worlds without end. Amen.

An exhortacion, conc^^^^ng good ord^^ and obedience, to rulers and Magistrates.
ALmighty god has created and appointed all things, in heaven, earth, and
waters, in a most excellent and perfect order. In heaven, he has appointed
distinct or several orders and states of Archangels and Angels. In earth he
has assigned and appointed kings, princes, with other governors under them,
all in good and necessary order. The water above is kept and reigns down in
due time and season. The sun Moan, Sterres, rainbow, thu^dre, lightning, clouds
and all birds of the air, do keep their order. The earth, trees, seeds
plants, herbs, corn, grass, and al manner of beasts, keep themselves in
their order. All the parts of the whole year, as Winter, Summer, months,
nyghtes and days, continue in their order. All kinds of fyshes in the sea,
ryuers and waters, with all fountaynes, sprynges, yea, the seas themselves,
keep their comely course and order. And manne himself also has all his
parts, both within and without, as soul, heart, mind, memory,
understanding, reason, speech, with all and synguler corporal members of his
badye, in a profitable, necessary and pleasaunce or^^^. Every degree of
people, in their vocacion, calling, and (...) has appointed to the^, their
duty and order. Some are in high degree, some in low, some ^ynges and
princes, some i^^eriors and subjects, priests, and laymenne, masters and
servants, fathers, and children, husbands, and wives, rich and poor, and
every one have need of other: so yt in all things is to be lauded and praised
the goodly order of god without the which, no house, no city, no common
wealth can continue and endure or last. For where there is no right order,
there reigns (...) abuse, carnal liberty, enorinitie, sin, and Babilonycal
confusion. Take away kings, princes, rulers, magistrates judges, and such
estates of gods order, no man shall ride or go by the high way vnrobbed, no
man shall sleep in his own house or bed vnkilled, no man shall keep his wife,
children and possessions in quietness: all things shall be common, and there must
needs follow al myschyefe and utter destruction, both of fowls bodies, goods
and common wealths. But blessed be god, that we in this realm of England feel
not the horible calamities, miseryes and wretch dues, which al they
undoubtedly feel and suffer, yt lack this godly order. And praised be god that
we know the great excellent benefyte of god showed toward us in this behalf.
God has sent us his high gift, our most dear sovereign Lady Queen
Elizabeth, with godly, wise and honorable counsel, with other superiors and
inferiors in a beautiful order and goodly. Wherefore let us subjects do our
bounden duties, geuyng hearty thanks to god, and praying for the preseruacion
of this godly order. Let us al obey eue^ from the boto^e of our hearts, all
their godly procedinges laws, statutes proclamacions, and iniunccions, with
all other godly orders. Let us consider the scriptures of the holy ghost,
which perswede and command us all obediently to be subject: first and
chieflye, to the kings queen's majesty, supreme head over al: and next, to her
honorable counsel, and to al other noble men, magistrates and officers, which
by Gods goodness be placed and ordered: for almighty god is the only author
and prouider of this forenamed state and order, as it is written of god, Prou.
viii
in the book of the Proverbs: through me kings do reign: through me
counsailours make just laws: through me do princes bear rule, and all judges
of the earth execute judgment: I am loving to them, that love me.

Here let us mark well, and remember, that the high power and authority of
kings, with their making of laws, judgments, and officers, are the
ordinances, not of man but of god: and therefore is this word (through me) so
many times repeted. Here is also well to be considered and remembered, that
this good order is appointed of gods wisdom, favor and love, specially for
them that love god, and therefore he says: I love them yt love me. Sap. vi.
Also in the book of wisdom we may evidently learn, that a kings power,
authority and strength, is a great benefit of god given of his great mercy,
to the comfort of our great misery. For thus we read there spoken to kings.
Sapi. vi.
Hear Oye kings and understand: learn ye that be judges of the^des of the
earth: give eaxe, ye that rule the multitudes: for the power is given you of
the lord and the strength from ye highest. Let us learn also here by ye
i^fallible and vndeceauable word of god, yt kings and other supreme and higher
officers, are ordained of god, who is most highest, and therefore they are here
diligently taught to apply and give themselves, to knowledge and wisdom,
necessary for the ordringe of gods people, to their governance committed or
whom to govern they are charged of god. And they be here also taught by
almighty god, that they should reknowledge themselves, to have all their power
and strength, not from Rome, but imediatly of god most highest We read i^ the
book of Deuteronomi, Deu. xxxii.
that al punishment pertains to god by this sentence: Ve^geau^ce is mine, and
I will reward. But this sentence we must understand, to perteine also unto the
magistrates, which do exercise gods room in judgment and punishing by good
and godly laws, here in earth. And the places of scripture which seem to
remove from among al christian men, judgment, punishment, or killing, ought to
be understand, that no man (of his own private aucihoritie) may be judge over
other, may punish, or may kill. But we must refer al judgment to god, to
kings and rulers, and judges under the^, which be gods officers to execute
justice, and by plain words of scripture, have their authority and use of
ye sweord, granted from god, as we are taught by S. Paul ye dear and choisen
Apostle^ of our fauior Christ, who^ we ought diligensly to obey, even as we
would obey our savior Christ if he were present. Romans xiii.
Thus. s. Paul writes to the Roma. Let every soul submit himself unto the
authority of the higher powers: for there is no power but of god: ye powers yt
be, be ordained of god: whosoever therefore whithstandeth ye power,
whithsta^deth ye ordinance of god, but they yt resist or are against shall
receive to themselves da^nacio^: for rulers are not fearful to the^ that do
good, but to the^ that do evil. Will thou be without fear of the power? Do
well then, and so shall thou be praised of the same: for he is the minister of
God, for thy welthe. But and if thou do that which is evil, then fear, for
he bears not the sweorde for naught, for he is the minister of God, to take
vengeance on him that does evil. Wherefore ye must needs obey, not only for
fear of vengeance, but also, because of conscience: and even for this cause
pay ye tribute, for they are Gods ministers, serving for the same purpose.

Hear let us all learn of S. Paul the chosen vessel of god, that al
persons having souls (he excepteth none, nor exe^pteth none, neither priest,
Apostle, nor prophet, says. s. Chriso.) do owe of bounden duty and even in
conscience, obedience, submission and subieccion, too the high powers, which
be set in authority by god, for as much as they be gods liuetenauntes, Gods
presidentes, Gods officers, gods commissioners, gods judges, ordained of god
himself, of whom only they have al their power, and al their authority. And
the same. s. Paul threatens no less pain the^ euelasting damnacion, to al
disobedient persons, to al resisters against this general and common
authority, forasmuch as they resist not manne but god: not man's devise and
inuencion, but gods wisdom, gods order, power and authority.

The second part of the Sermon of Obedience.
Forasmuch as god has created and disposed all things in a comely order, we
have been taught in the first part of this sermon, concerning good order and
obedience, yt we also ought in all common welthes, to observe and keep a dew
order, and to be obedient to the powers, their ordinances and laws, and that
all rulers are appointed of god, for a godly order to be kept in the world.
And also how the Magistrates ought to learn how to rule and govern
according to gods laws. And that al subjects are bounden to obey them as gods
ministers: yea although they be evil, not only for fear, but also for
conscience sake. And here (good people) let al mark diligently, that it is not
lawful for inferiors and subjects, i^ any case to resist or stand against ye
superior powers: for.s. Paul's words be plain, yt whosoever withsta^deth, shall
get to themselves da^nacio^: for whosoever withsta^deth wtsta^deth ye ordinance
of god. Our savior Christ himself and his Apostles, received many and diverse
injuries of the vnfaithefull and wicked men in authority: yet we never
read, that they, ^ranye of them, caused any sedicion or rebellion against
authority. We read often, that they patiently suffered all troubles, veracions,
slau^ders, pangues and pains, and death it self obedientlye, without tumulte
or resistance. They committed their cause to him that judges righteouslye, and
prayed for their enemies heartely and earnestly. They knew that the authority
of the powers, was gods ordinance, and therefore both i^ their words and
deeds, they taught ever obedience to it, and never taught nor did the contrary.
John.xix.
The wicked judge Pilate said to Christ: know thou not that I have power
to crucify the, and have power also to loce the? Jesus answered: Thou
could have no power at all against me, except it were given the from above.
Whereby Christ taught us plainly, that even the wicked rulers have their power
and authority from god.

And therefore it is not lawful for their subjects, by force to wtsta^de the^,
although they abuse their power much less then, it is lawful for subjects to
wtstande their godly and christian princes, which do not abuse their
authority, but use the same to gods glory, and to the profit and commodity
of Gods people. i. Peter.ii.
The holy Apostle.s. Peter, commands servants to be obedient to their
masters, not only if they be good and gentle, but also if they be evil and
froward: affirming that the vocacion and calling of gods people, is to be
pacient, and of the suffering side. And there he brings in the patience of
our savior Christ, to persuade obedience to governors, yea although they be
wicked and wrong doers. i. Peter.ii.
But let us now hear.s. Peter himself speak, for his own words certify
best our conscience. Thus he utters them in his first Epistle: Servants
obey your Maistres with fear, not only if they be good and ientle, but also
if they be froward: For it is thankewoorthy, if a man for conscience toward
god, suffers grief, and suffers wrong undeserved: i. Peter.ii.
for what praise is it, when ye be beaten for your faults, if ye take it
pacie^tly* but when ye do well, if you then suffer wrong and take it patiently,
i. Re.xvi^^. xix. and.xx.
then is there cause to have thank of god, for herunto verily were ye called:
For so did Christ suffer for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow
his steps. Al these be the very words of.s. Peter. S. David also teaches
us a good lesson I this behalf, who was many times most cruelly and wrong
fullye persecuted of King Saul, and many times also put in ieoperdie and
danger of his life by king Saul and his people: yet he never withstode,
neither used any force or violence against king Saul his mortal or deadly
enemy, but did ever to his liege lord and master king Saul, most true, most
diligent, and most faithful service.

In so much, that when the lord god had given king Saul into David's hands in
his own cave, he would not hurt him, when he might without al bodily peril
easily have slain hi^: no, he would not suffer any of his servants, once to
lay their hands upon king Saul, but prayed to god in this wise: lord keep me
from doing that thing unto my master, the lords anointed: keep me that I
lay not my hand upon him, seeing he is the anoi^ted of ye lord: for as truly
as the lord lives, (except the lord smite him, or except his day come, or
that he go down to war and in battle perish) the lord be merciful unto
me, that I lay not my hand upon the lords anointed. And that David might have
killed his enemy king Saul, it is evidently proved, in the first book of the
kings, both by the cutting of the lap of Saules garment, and also by the
plain confession of king Saul. Also an other time (as it is me^cioned in the
same book) when the most unmerciful, and most unkind king Saul did
persecute poor David, god did again give king Saul into Dauides hands, by
castinge of king Saul and his whole army, into a dead sleep: so that David
and one Abisai with him, came in the night into Saules host, where Saul lay
sleepinge, and his spear stacke in the ground at his head. Then sa^de Abisai
unto David: god has delivered thine enemy into thy hands at this time, now
therefore let me smite him once with my spear to the earth, and I will not
smite him again the second time: meaning thereby to have killed him with one
stroke, and to have made him sure forever. And David answered and said to
Abisai: destroy him not, for who can lay his hands on the lords anointed and
be giltles? And David said furthermore: as sure as the lord lives, the lord
shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend or go down
into bataill, and there perish. The lord keep me from laying my hands upon
the Lords anointed. But take thou now the spear that is at his head, and the
cruse of water, and let us go: and so he did.

Here is evidently proved, that we may not wtstand nor in any ways hurt an
anointed king, which is gods liuetenaunt, vice gerent, and highest minister in
that country where he is king. Therefore he prays so often, and so eanestlye,
that he lay not his hands upon the lords anointed. ^sal.lxxx. ^^d.^^^.
And by these.ii. examples.s. David (being named in scripture a man after gods
own heart) gives a general rule and lesson to al subjects in the world, not
to withstand their liege lord and king, not to take a sweord by their private
authority against their king, gods anointed, who only bears the sword by
gods authority for the maintenance of the good, and for the punishment of the
evil: who only by gods law, has the use of the sweord at his commandment,
and also has al power, iurisdiccio^, regiment coercio^ and punisheme^t, as
supreme governor of all his realms and dominions, and that even by the
auc^oritie of God, and by gods ordinances. Yet an other notable story and
doctrine is in the secund book of the kings, that makes also for this
purpose. When an Amale^chite, by king Saules own consent and commandment,
had killed king Saul, he went to David, supposing to have had great thank
for his message, (...).
yt he had killed David's deadli enemy, and therefore he made great haste to
tell to David the chance: bringing with him king Saules Croun that was upon
his head, and his bracelet that was upon his arm, to persuade his tidinges to
be true. But godly David was so far from reioising at these news, that
immediately and forthwt he re^t his clothes of his back, he mourned and wept,
and said to the messenger: how is it that thou wast not afraid, to lay thy
hands on the lords anointed to destroy him? And by and by David made one of
his servants to kill ye messe^ger, saying: thy blood be on thine own head,
for thy own mouth has testified and wittenessed against the, grau^ting that
thou have slain the lords anointed. These examples being so manifest and
evident, it is an intolerable ignorance, madness, and wickedness, for subjects
to make any murmuring, rebellion, resistance or wtsta^ding, co^mocio^, or
insurrectio^ against their most dear and most dread souereinge Lord and
king, ordained and appointed of Gods goodness, for their commodity, peace and
quietness. Yet let us believe vndoubtedli, (good christian people) that we may
not obey Kings, Magistrates, or any other, (though they be our own fathers)
if they would command us to do any thing, contrary to gods commandments.
In such a case, we ought to say with ye Apostles: Acts.
we must rather obey God then man. But nevertheless in yt case, we may not in
any wise withstand violently, or rebel against rulers, or make any
insurreccio^, sedicio^, or tumultes, either by force of arms, (or other ways)
against the anointed of the lord, or any of his appointed officers. But we
must in such case, patiently suffer al wrongs and injuries, referring the
judgment of our cause only to god: Let us fear ye terrible punishment of
almighty God, against traitors, or rebellious persons, by ye example of Chore,
Dathan, and Abiron, which repugned and grudged against gods Magistrates, and
officers, and therefore the earth opened, and swallowed the^ up alive. Other
for their wicked murmuring and rebellion, were by a sudden fire sent of god,
utterly consumed. Other for their froward behauioure to their rulers and
gouerners, Gods ministers, were suddenly strycken, with a foul leprosy. Other
were stinged to death with wonderful strange fiery serpents. Other were sore
plagued, so that there was killed in one day, the number of fourtene thousand
and seven hundred, for rebellion against them; whom god had appointed to be in
authority. Absalon also, ^^^e. ^ii.
rebelling against his father King David was punished with a strange and
notable death.

The third part of the Sermon of Obedience.
YE have heard before in this sermon of good order and obedience, manifestly
proved both by scriptures and examples, that al subjects are bounde^ to obey
their magistrates, and for no cause to resist or withstand, rebel, or make any
sedicion against them, yea although they be wicked men. And let no man think
yt he can escape unpunished, yt commits treason, conspiracy, or rebellion,
against his sovereign Lord the King, though he commit ye same never so
secretly; either in thought, word or deed: never so preuelye, in his prieuye
chamber, by himself, or openly communicating, and consultyng with other. For
treason will not be hid: treason will out at the length. God will have ye most
detestable vice, both opened and punished, for that it is so directly against
his ordeynaunce, and against his high principal judge, and anointed in earth.
The violence and imury, yt is committed against authority, is committed
against God, the common weal, and thee whole realm, which god will have
known, and condingly or woorthelye punished, one way or other. For it is
notably written of the Wise man in Scripture, in ye book called Ecclesiastes:
Eccle. x.
wish the King no evil in thy thought, nor speak no hurt of him in thy
privy chamber: for a bird of the air shall betraye thy voice, and with her
feathers, shall bewraye thy words. These lessons and exaumples are written for
our learning. Therefore let us al fear the most detestable vice of rebellion,
ever knowing and remembering, that he yt resists or with stands common
authority, resists or with stands god and his ordinance, as it may be
proved by many other mo places of holy Scripture. And here let us take here yt
we understand not these or such other like places (which so straightly
command Obedience to superiors, and so straightly punishes rebellion, and
disobedience to ye same) to be meant in any co^ditio^ of ye pretensed or
colored power of ye Bishop of Rome. For truly ye scripture of god allows no
such usurped power, full of enormitties, abusio^s and blasphemies. But ye true
meaning of these, and such places, be to extol and set forth gods true
ordinance, and ye authority of gods anointed kings, and of their officers
appointed under the^. And concerning ye usurped power of the Bishop of Rome,
which he most wrongfully challe^geth, as ye successor of Christ and Peter: we
may cafily perceive how falls, seemed, and forged it is, not only in yt it has
no sufficient ground in holy scripture, but also by ye fruits and doctrine
thereof. For our savior Christ, and S. Peter, teaches most earnestly and
agreably obedinece to kings, as to the chief, and supreme rulers in this
world, next under god: but ye bishop of R^me teaches yt they yt are under
him, ^r fre from al burde^s and charges of ye commonwealth and obedience
toward their prince, most clearly against Christ's doctrine an d. s. Peter's.
He ought there fore rather to be called Antichrist, and the successor of the
Scribes and Pharysies, then Christ's vicar, or s. Peter's successor: seeing, yt
not only in this point, but also in other weighty matters of Christian
religion, in matters of remission and forgeuenes of sins, and of salvation,
he teaches so directli against, both s. Peter and against our savior Christ:
who not only taught obedience to kings, but also practiced obedience in their
co^uersacio^ and living. ^ath. ^i.
For we read, yt they both paid tribute to ye king. And also we read, yt the
holy virgin Mary, mother to our savior Christ, and Joseph, who was taken for
his father, at ye Emperors commandment, went to the city of David, named
Bethleem, ^^^e. ii.
to be taxed among other, and to declare their obedience to the magistrates,
for gods ordinances sake. And here let us not forgette the blessed virgin
Mary's obedience: for although she was highlye in gods favor, and Christ's
natural mother, and was also great with child that same time, and so nighe
her travail, that she was delivered in her iourneye: yet she gladly without
any excuse or grudging (for conscience sake) did take that cold and foul
winter journey, being in ye mean season so pore, yt she lay in ye stable, and
there she was delivered of Christ. And according to ye same, Peter. (...)
lo, how s. Peter agrees, writig by express words, in his first Epistle:
submit your selves or be subject (says he) unto kings, as unto ye chief
heads, or unto rulers, as unto them that are sent of him, for the punishmente
of evil doers, and for the praise of them yt do well, for so is the will of
God. I need not to expound these words, they be so plain of them selfs. S.
Peter does not say: submit your selfs unto me, as supreme head of the Church:
neither he says, submit your selves from time to time, to my successors in
Rome: but he says, submit your selfs unto your king, your supreme head, and
unto those that he appoynteth in authoritte under him. For that ye shall so
show your obedience, it is the will of God. God will that you be in subjection
to your head and king. That is gods ordinance, gods commandment, and gods
holy will, that the whole body of every realm, and all the members and parts of
the same, shall be subject to their head, their king, and that (as S. Peter
writes) for ye lords sake: i. Peter^ ii. Romans xi^
and (as S. Paul writes) for conscience sake, and not for fear only. Thus
we learn by the word of god, to yield to our king, that is dew to our king,
that is honor, obedience, paimentes of dew taxes, customs, tributes,
subsidies, love and fear. Ma. xxi^^ Romans xii
Thus we know partly our bounden duties to commen authority, now let us
learn to accomplish the same. And let us most instauntly and heartilye pray
to God, the only author of all authority, for all them that be in
authority, according as S. Paul wills, writing thus to Timothy, in his
first epistle: I exhort therefore, that above all things, prayers, i. Timo. ii.
supplicacions, intercessions, and giving of thanks be done for all men: for
kings, and for all that he in authority, that we may live a quiet and a
peaceable life, with all godliness and honesty: for yt is good, and accepted or
alowable in the sight of god our savior. Here S. Paul makes an earnest, and
an especial exhortacion, concerning geuyng of thanks, and prayer for kings
and rulers, saying: above all things, as he might say, in any wise
principally and chiefly, let prayer be made for kings. Let us heartely
thank god for his great and excellent benefit and providence, concerning the
state of kings. Let us pray for the^, that they may have gods favor, and
gods protection. Let us pray, that they may ever in all things have God
before their eyes. Let us pray, that they may have wisdom, strength, justice,
clemency, zeal to gods glory, to gods verytie, to Christian souls, and to
the common wealth. Let us pray, that they may rightly use their sweorde and
authority, for the maintenance and defense of the catholic faith couteyned
in holy Scripture, and of their good and honest subjects, and for the fear
and punishmente of the evil, and vitions people. Let us pray, that they may
faithfully follow the most faithful kings and Capitaynes in the Bible, David,
Ezechias, Josias, and Moses, Judith. v
with such other. And let us pray for our selves, yt we may live godly, in
holy and christian conversation: so we shall have God of our side: And then let
us not fear what man can do against us. So we shall live in true obedience,
both to our most merciful king in heaven, and to our most Christian
Queen in earth: so shall we please God, and have the exceeding benefit, peace
of conscience, rest and quietness here in the world, and after this life, we
shall enjoy a better life, rest, peace, and the everlasting bless of heaven,
which he grant us all, yt was obedient for us al, eue^ to the death of the
cross, Jesus Christ: to whom with the father, and the holy ghost, be all
honor and glory, both now and ever. Amen.

A Sermon against whoredom and uncleanness.
ALthough there want not (good christian people) great swarms of vices worthy
to be rebuked (unto such decay is true godlynes and virtuous living now
come:) yet above other vices, ye outragions seas of adultery or breaking of
wedlock) whoredom, fornication, and uncleanness, have not only braste in,
but also ouerflowed almost ye whole world, unto ye great dishonor of God, ye
exceeding infamye of ye name of Christ, ye notable decaie of true religion,
and ye utter destruccio^ of ye public wealth: and that so abundantly, yt
through the customable use thereof, this vice is grown unto such an height;
that in a manner emonge many, it is coumpted no sin at all, but rather a
pastime, a daliaunce, and but a touch of youth: not rebuked, but wynked at:
not punished, but laughed at: wherefore it is necessary at this present, to
entreat of the sin of whoredom, and fornicacion, declaring unto you, the
greatness of this sin, and how odyous, hateful, and abominable it is, and
has always been reputed, before god and all good men, and how grenouslyeit
has been punished, both by the law of God, and the laws of diverse
princes. Again, to show you certain remedies, whereby ye may (through the
grace of god) eschew this most detestable sin of whoredom and fornication,
and lead your lives in all honesty a^^ cleanness. And that ye may perceive,
that fornication and whoredom are (in the sight of god) most abominable
sins, ye shall call to remembrance this commandment of god: Exodus xx
you shall not commit adultery, by ye which word adultery, although it be
proprely understand, of ye un laweful co^mirtion or joining together of a
married man with any woman beside his wife, or of a wife with any man beside her
husband, yet thereby is signyfyed also, all unlawful use of those parts,
which be ordained for generation. And this one commau^demente (forbidding
adulterye) does sufficientlye paynt, and set out before our eyes, the
greatness of this sin of whoredom, and manifestly declares, how greatly it
ought to be abhorred of al honest and faithful persons. And that none of us
all shall think himself excepted from this commandment whether we be old
or young married, or unmarried man, or woman, hear what God the father sayethe,
by his most excellent Prophet Moses: There shall be no whore emonge the
daughters of Israel, Deuteronomy. xxiii.
nor no whoremongers, emonge the sons of Israel.

Here is whoredom, fornication, and all uncleanness forbidden, to al kinds
of people, all degrees, and al ages, without exception. And yt we shall not
doubt. but yt this precept or commau^demente pertains to us in deed, hear
what Christ (ye perfect teacher of al truth) says in the new testament: ye
have heard (says Christ) that it was said to them of the old time, Mat. v.
thou shall not commit adultery: but I say unto you: whosoever sees a
woman, to have his lust of her, has committed adultery with her already in
his heart. Here our sauiore Christ, does not only confyrme and stablishe the
law against adulterye, given in the old Testamente of God the father, by his
servant Moses, and make it of full strength, continually to remain emonge
the professors of his name in the new law: But he also (condemning the gross
interpretacyon of the Scribes and Phariseis, which taught that the aforesaid
commandment only required to abstain from the outward adultery, and not
from the filthye desires and vnpure lusts,) teaches us an exact and full
perfection of purity and clennes of life, both to keep our bodies
undefiled, and our hertes pure and fre from all evil thoughts, carnal
desires, and fleshlye consentes. How cane we then be free from this
commandment, where so great charge is laid upon us: May a servant do what
he will in any thing, having a commandment of his master to the contrary?
Is not Christ our master? Are not we his servants? How then may we neglect
our masters will and pleasure, and follow our own will and phantasy? Ye are my
friends (says Christ) if you keep those things that I command you. Ihon.
^^.


Now has Christ our master commanded us that we should fortake all
uncleanness and lecherye both in body and spirit: this therefore must we do,
if we look to please god. Mat. x^
In the gospel of Saint Matthewe, we read that the Scribes and Pharisees
were grievously offended with Christ, because his disciples did not keep the
tradicions of the forefathers, for they washed not their hands when they went
to diner or supper, and among other things, Christ answered and said: hear
and understand: (...).
not that thing which enters into the mouth, Math. ^v.
defyleth the man, but that which cummeth out of the mouth defyleth the man.
For those things which proceed out of the mouth, come furthe from the heart,
and they defyle the man. For out of the heart, proceed evil thoughts, murders,
breaking of wedlock, whoredom, theftes, false witness, blasphemies: these are
the things, which defyle a man. Here may we se, that not only murder,
theft, false witness and blasphemy, defile men, but also evil thoughts,
breaking of wedlock, fornication, and whoredom.

Who is now of so little wit, Ihon xiiii. Titus.i.
that he will esteem whoredom and fornicacion, to be things of small
importance, and of no weight before God? Christ (which is the truth and
cannot lie) says, that evil thoughts, breaking of wedlock, whoredom, and
fornicacion, defyle a man, that is to say, corrupt both the body and
soul of man, and make them, of the temples of the holy Ghost, the filthy
dunghill, or dungeon of all unclean spirits: of the house of God, the
dwelling place of Satan.

Again in the gospel of Saint John, Iho^. viii
when the womanne taken in adulterye, was brought unto Christ, said not he
unto her? Go thy way and sin no more. Does not he here call whoredom
sin? Romans vi.
And what is the reward of sin, but everlasting death? If whoredom be
sin, then is it not lawful for us to commit it. 1. Iho^. iii.
For S. John says: he that commits sin, is of the devil. And our
savior says: every one that co^mytteth sin, is ye servant of sin. John.
viii Romans vi
If whordom had not been sin, surely s. John Baptist would never have rebuked
king Herod, for taking his brothers wife, but he told him plainly, that it
was not lawful for him to take his brothers wife. He winked not at the
whoredom of Herod, although he were a king of great power, but boldlye
reproved him, for his wicked and abominable living, although for the same he
lost his head. But he would rather suffer death (then see God so
dishonored, by the breakinge of his holy precept or commandment) the^ to
suffer whoredom to be unrebuked, eue^ in a king. If whordom had been but a
pastime, a daliau^ce, and a thing not to be passed of (as many coumpt it now a
days,) truly John had been more then twice mad, if he would have had the
displeasure of a king, if he would have been cast in to prieson, and lost his
head, for a trifle. But John knew right well, how filthy, stinkinge, and
abominable, the sin of whoredom is in the sight of god, therefore would not
he leave it unrebuked, no not in a king. If whoredom be not lawefull in a
king, neither is it lawefull in a subject. If whoredom be not lawful in a
public or common officer, neither is it lawful in a private person. If it be
not lawful, neither in king, nor subject, neither in common officer, nor
private person, truly, the^ is it lawefull in no man, nor woman, of whatsouer
degree, or age they be. Furthermore, Acts. ^^^
in the acts of the Apostles we read that when the Apostles and elders, with
the whole congregation, were gathered together to pacyfye ye hertes of the
faithful dwelling at Antioche, (which were disquieted through the false doctrine
of certain Jewish preachers) they sent word to the brethren, that it seemed
good to the holy ghost, and to them. to charge them with no more, then with
necessary things: emonge other, they willed them to abstain from Idolatry
and fornicacion, from which (said they) if ye keep your selves, ye shall do
well.

Note here, how these holy and blessed fathers of Christ's church, would
charge the congregacyon with no mo things then were necessary. Mark also,
how among those things, from the which they commanded the brethren of
Antioche to abstain, fornication and whoredom is numbered. It is therefore
necessary, by the determination and consent of the holy ghost, and the
apostles and elders, with the whole congregation, that as from Idolatrye and
superstytion, so likewise we must absteyne from fornication and whoredom. Is
it necessary unto salvation to abstain from Idolatry? So is it, to abstain
from whoredom. Is there any nygher way to lead into damnation, then to be an
Idolater? No: even so, neither is there a nerer way to damnacyon then to be a
fornicatour and an whoremonger.

Now where are those people, which so lightly esteem breaking of wedlock,
whoredom, fornication and adultery? It is necessary, says the holy ghost,
the blessed apostles, the elders, with the whole congregation of Christ: it is
necessary to salvation (say they) to absteyne from whoredom. If it be
necessary unto salvation, then woe be to them, which neglecting their
salvation, give their minds to so fylthy, and stinking sin, to so wicked
vice, to such detestable abomination.

The second part of the Sermon against Adultery.
YOu have been taught in the first part of this sermon against adultery, how
that vice at this day reigns most above all other vices. And what is me^t by
this word (adultery) and how holy scripture disswadeth or discou^seyled from
doing yt filthy sin: and finally what corruption cu^meth to man's soul
through ye sin of adultery. Now to proceed further, let us hear what ye
blessed apostle S. Paul says to this matter. Writing to ye Romans, he has
these words: Romans iiii.
Let us cast away ye works of darkness, and put on ye armours of light. Let us
walk honestly, as it were in ye day time, not in eating and drynking, neither
in chaumbringes and wantonness, neither in strife and envying, but put ye on ye
lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts
of it. Here the holy apostle exhorts us to cast away the works of
darkness, which (emonge other) he calls gluttonous eating, drynking,
chaumberinge and wantonness, which are all ministers unto that vice and
preparacyons to induce and bring in the filthy sin of the flesh. He
calls them the deeds and works of darkness, not only because they are
customablye done in darkness, Ihon. iii.
or in the night time, (for every one that does evil hates the light, neither
cummeth he to the light, lest his works should be reproved) but that they
lead ye right way unto that utter darkness, Mathe. xiii.
where weeping and gnashinge of teeth shall be. And he says in an other place
of the same Epistle: They that are in the flesh, can not please god. We are
detters not to the flesh, that we should live after the flesh, for if ye
live after the flesh, ^o. viii.
ye shall dye. Again he says, fly from whoredom, for every sin that a man commits, is without his body: but whosoever commits whoredom,
sins against his own body. Do ye not know, that your members are the
temple of the holy ghost which is in you, whom also ye have of god, Cor. vi.
and ye are not your own? For ye are derely boughte: glorify GOD in your
bodies. etc. And a little before he says: Do ye not know that your bodies
are the members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make
them the members of an whore? God forbid. Do ye not know that he which cleueth
to an whore, is made one body with her? There shall be two in one flesh (says
he) but he yt cleueth to ye lord, is one spirit. What godly reaso^ns does ye
blessed Apostle S. Paul bring forth here, to dissuade or discounseylle us from
whoredom and all uncleanness? your members (says he) are the temple of the
holy ghost: which, whosoever does defile, god will destroy him, as sayethe
Saint Paul. If we be the temple of the holy ghost, how unsitting then is
it, to drive that holy spirit from us, through whoredom, and in his place to
set the wicked spirits of uncleanness and fornication, and to be joined, and
do service to them? 1. Cor. vi. 1. Peter. i
Ye are derelye boughte (says he) therefore gloryfye God in your bodies.
Christ that innocent ^ain^e of god, has bought us from the servitude of the
devil, not with corruptible gold and silver, but with his most precious and
dear heart blood. To what intent? That we should fall again unto our old
uncleanness, and abominable living? Nay verily: But that we should serve him,
all ye days of our life, in holiness and righteousenesse: Es^^ xxxv^ Luk^
yt we should glorify him in our bodies, by purity and clennesse of life. He
declares also yt our bodies are the members of Christ. How unseemly a thing is
it then, to cease to be incorporate or imbodyed and one with Christ, and
through whoredom to be joined, and made al one with an whore? What greater
dishonor or injury can we do to Christ, then to take away from him, the
members of his body, and to join the^ two whores, devils, and wicked spirits?
And what more dishonor can we do to our selves, the^ through uncleanness, to
loose so excellent a dignity and fredome, and to become bond flanes, and
miserable captives, to the spirits of darkness? Let us therefore consider,
first the glory of Christ, and then our state, our dignity and fredom
wherein god has set us, by geuinge us his holy spyrite: and let us valeantly
defend the same against Satan, and all his crafty assaults: that Christ
may be honored, and that we loose not our liberty or freedom, but still
remain in one spirit with him.

Moreover, in his Epistle to the Ephesians, the blessed Apostle wills us, to
be so pure, Ephe. v^
and free from adulterye, fornication, and all uncleanness, that we not once
name them emonge us (as it becomes saints) nor filthiness, nor foolyshe
talking, nor jesting, which are not comely, but rather geuynge of thanks. For
this ye know (says he) that no whoremonger, either unclean person, ^^t. v.
(...) vi
or covetous person, (which is an ydolater) has any inheritance in the
kingdom of Christ and god. And that we should remember to be holy, pure, and
free from al uncleanness: The holy Apostle calls us Saints, because we are
sanctified and made holy in the blood of Christ through the holy Ghost.

Now if we be saints, what have we to do with the manners of the Heathen?
Saint Peter says: As he which called you is holy, ^eter
even so be ye holy also, in all your conversation, because it is written: Be
ye holy, for I am holy. Hitherto have we heard how grievous a sin
fornication and whoredom is, ^eui. xi ^^d. xix.
and how greatly god does abhore it. throughout the whole scripture. How cane
it any otherwise be, then a sin of most abhominacion, seeing it once may not
be named among the Christians, much less it may in any point be committed.
And surely, if we would weigh the greatness of this sin, and consider it in
the right kind, we should find the sin of whoredom, to be that most
filthy lake, foul puddle, and stinking sink, whereinto all kinds of sins
and evils flow: where also, they have their resting place and abiding.

For has not the aduiterer a pride in his whroedome? as the Wiseman says:
They are glad when they have done evil, and rejoice in things that are stark
naught. Is not the adulterer also idle, and delights in no godly exercise,
but only in that his most filthy and beastly pleasure? Is not his mind
pluckte, and utterly drawn away, from all virtuous studies, and fruiteful
labors, and only given to carnal and fleshly imaginacio^s? Does not ye
whoremonger gene his mind to gluttony, that he may be the more apt to serve
his lusts, and carnal pleasures? Does not the adulterer gene his mind to
covetousness, and to polling and pillinge of other, that he may be the more able
to maintain his harlottes and whores, and to continue in his filthy, and
unlawful love? Swells he not also with envy, against other, fearing that
his pray should be allured and taken away from him? Again, is he not yrefull
and replenished with wrath and displeasure, even against his best beloved, if
at any time, his beastly and diuelishe request be let. What sin, or kind
of sin is it, that is not joined with fornication and whoredom It is a
monster of many heads: It receives all kinds of vices, and refuses all
kinds of virtues. If one several sin brings da^nacion, what is to be
thought of that sin, which is accompanied with all evils, and has waiting on
it, whatsoever is hateful to god, damnable to man, and pleasant to Satan?

Great is the damnacion, that hangs over the heads of fornicatours, and
adulterers. What shall I speak of other incommodities, which issue, and flow
out of this stinkynge puddell of whoredom? Is not that treasure, which before
al other is most regarded of honest persons, the good fame and name of man
and woman, lost through whoredom? what patrimony or liuelehode, what
substance, what goods, what riches, does whoredom shortly consume and bring
to naught? What valiau^tnes and strength is many times made weak, and
destroyed with whoredom? What wit is so fine, yt is not doted and defa^ed
through whoredom? What beauty (although it were never so excellent) is not
diffigured through whoredom?

Is not whoredom an enemy to the pleasant flower of youth and brings it
not gray hears, and old age, before ye time? What gift of nature (although
it were never so precious) is not corrupted with wordome? Come not ye french
pockes, with other diverse diseases, of whoredom? From whence come so many
bastardes and misbegotten children, to the high displeasure of god, and
dishonor of holy we block, but of whoredom? How many confirm all their
substance and goods, and at ye last fall into such extreme poverty, yt
afterward they steal, and so are hanged, through whoredom What comencion and
manslaughter comes of whordome. Now many maidens be defloured, how many
wives corrupted, how many wydowes defiled, through whoredom? How much is ye
public and common v^eale impouerished, and troubled through whoredom? How
much is gods word co^te^ned and depraved by whoredom and whoremongers? Of this
vice comes a great part of the divorces* which (now a days) be so commonly
accustomed and used, by men's private auethoritie, to the great displeasure of
God, and the breach of the most holy knotte and bond of matrimony. For when
this most detestable sin is once crept into the breast of the adulterer. so
that he is entangled with unlawful and unchaste love. straighte ways, his
true and lawefull wife is despised, her presence is abhorred, her company
stinketh, and is lothesome, what soever she does, is dispraised, there is no
quietness in the house. so long as the is in sight: Therefore to make short
tale, must she away, for her housbande can broke her no longer. Thus through
whoredom, is the honest and harmless wife put away, and an harlot received
in her stead: and in like sort, it happens many times in the wife, toward
her housbande O abhominacion: Christ our savior, very god and man, coming to
restore the law of his heavenly father unto the right sense, understanding,
and meaning, (Among other things) reformed ye abuse of this law of god: For
where as ye Jews used of a long sufferaunce, Mat. xix.
by custom, to put away their wives at their pleasure, for every cause:
Christ correcting that evil custom, did teach, yt if any man put away his
wife, and marieth an other for any cause, except only for adultery, (which
then was death by the law) he was an adulterer, and forced also his wife so
divorced, to commit adultery, if the were joined to any other man: and the man
also, so joined with her, to commit adultery.

In what case then are those adulterers, which for the love of an whore, put
away their true and lawful wife, against all law, right, reason, and
conscience* O damnable is the state wherein they stand. Swiste destruction shall
fall on them, if they repe^te not and amend not: for GOD will not ever suffer
holy wedlock thus to be dishonored, hated, and despised, He will once punish
this fleshly and licentious manner of living, and cause that his holy
ordinance, shall be had in reverence, and honor.

For surely, wedloke (as the Apostle says) is honorable emonge al men,
^^chic. iii
and the bed undefiled: But whoremongers and fornicatours, God will judge: that
is to say, punish and condemn. But to what purpose is this labor taken, to
describe, and set forth the greatness of the sin of whoredom, and the
incommodities that issue and flow out of it, seeing that breath and tongue shall
sooner fail any man, then he shall, or may be hable to set it out, according
to the abhominacion and hainousnes thereof? Notwithstanding this is spoken to
the intent, that al men should flee whordome, and live in the fear of god:
God grant that it may not be spoken in vain.

The third part of the sermon against Adulterye.
IN the second part of this sermon against adulteri, that was last read, you
have learned how earnestly ye scripture warns us to avoid the sin of
adultery, and to embrace clennes of life: and that through adultery we fall
into al kinds of sins, and are made bond slaves to the devil. Through
cleannes of life we are made me^bres of Christ. And finally how far adultery
bri^geth a man from al goodness, and drives him headlong into al vices,
mischief, and misery. Now will I declare unto you in order, with what grievous
punishme^tes god in times past, plagued adultery: and how certain worldly
Princes also, did punish it: that ye may perceive, that whoredom and
fornicacion be sins, no less detestable in the sight of god, and of all good
men, then I have hitherto uttered. In the first book of Moses we re^de,
that when mankind beegan to be multiplied upon the earth, ^e^^. vi.
the men and w^omenne gave their minds so greatly to fleshely delight, and
filthy pleasure, that (...) without all fear of god. God seei^g this the^^
^^^stly and abominable living, and per^^^uin^e that they amended not, but
rather increased daily more and more, in their sinful and unclean manners,
repented that he ever had made manne: and too show how greatly be abhorced
adultery, whoredom, fornicacion, and all uncleanness, he made all the fou^taines
of the deep earth, to burste out, and the sluices of heaven to be opened, so
that the rain came down upon the earth, by the space of forty days, and
forty nights, and by this means, destroyed the whole world, and all
mankind, eight persons only excepted: that is to say, Noe: the preacher of
righteousness (as Saint Peter calls him) and his wife, his three sons,
and their wives.

O what a grievous plague did God cast here upon all living creatures, for the
sin of whordome?

For the which God took vengeance, not only of man, but also of beasts,
fowls, and all living creatures. Manslaughter was committed before, Ge^e.
iiii.
yet was not ye world destroyed for that: but for whoredom, all ye world (few
only except) was over flowe^ with waters, and so perished: An example worthy to
be remembered, that ye may learn to fear god.

We read again, that for the filthy sin of uncleanness, Sodom and Gomor.
and the other cities nighe unto them, Gene. ^ix.
were destroyed with fire and brimstone from heaven: so that there was neither
manne, woman, child, nor beast, nor yet any thing that grew upon the
earth, there left vndestroied. Whose heart tremb^eth not (...) the he^ting
of this history? Who is so drouned in whordom and uncleanness, yt will not now
for ever after, leave this abominable living, seeing that god so grievously
punishes uncleanness to rain fire and brymstone from heaven, to destroy
whole cities, to kill manne, woman and child, and all other living creatures
there abiding, to consume with fire, all yt ever grew? what can be more
manifest tokens of gods wrath and vengeance against uncleanness, and impuritie
of lif? Mark this history, (good people) and fear ye vengeance of god. Do
we not read also, that god did smite Pharao, Gene. xiii.
and his house, with great plagues, because that he ungodly desired Sara, the
wife of Abraham? Likewise read we of Abimelech King of Gerat, although he
touched her not by carnal knowledge. Gene. xx.
These plages and punishementes did god cast upon filthy and unclean persons,
before the law was given, (the law of nature only reigninge in the hearts of
men) to declare how great love he had to Matrimony or wedlock: and again,
how much he abhorred adultery, fornicacion, and all uncleanness. And when the
law that for badde whoredom, was given by Moses to the Jews did not GOD
command, Leut. xx.
that the breakers thereof, should be put to death? The words of the law be
these: Whosoever committed adulterye with any man's wife, shall dye the death, both
the manne and the womanne, because he has broken wedlock with his neighbors
wife. In the law also it was commanded, that a damosel and a man taken
together in whoredom, should be both stoned to death. In an other place we
also read, that God commanded Moses to take all the head rulers, ^u^. xx
and Princes of the people, and to hang them upon gibbetes openly, that every
manne might see them, because they either committed, or did not punish
whoredom. Again, did not god send such a plague among the people, for
fornicacion and uncleanness that they dyed in one day, three and twentye
thousand? I pass over for lack of true, many other histories of the holy
Bible, which declare the grievous vengeauncee, and heavy disp^easure of GOD,
against whoremongers, and adulterers. Certes, this extreme punishment
appointed of god, shiweth euidentelye, how greatly god hates whoredo^: And
let us not double. but that god at this present, abhors all manner of
uncleanness, no less then he did in the old law: and will undoubtedly
punish it, both in this world, and in the world to come. ^^ful. v.
For he is a God, that can abide none wickedness? therefore ought it to be
eschewed of all that tender the glory of God, and the salvation of their own
souls.

Saint Paul says: i Cor. x.
al these things are wri^ten for our example, and to teach us the fear of
god, and the obedience to his holy law. For if god spared not the natural
branches, neither will he spare us, that be but graftes, if we commit like
offense. If god destroyed many thousands of peop^^, many cities, yea the whole
world, for whoredom, let us not flatter our selves, and think we shall escape
fre, and without punishment. For he has promised in his holy law, to send
most grievous plagues upon them that transgress or break his holy
commandments. Thus have we heard, how God ^unisheth the sin of adultery:
let us now hear ^ertaine l^^es, which the civil Magistrates devised in
diverse cou^treyes, for the punishment thereof, that we may learn, how
uncleanness has ever been detested in all well ordered cities and commen
wealths, and emonge all honest persons. The law among the Lepreians was
this, that when any were taken in adultery, Laws de^^sed for ^unishment ^f
whordo^.
they were bound and carried three days through the city, and afterward, as
long as they lived, were they despised, and with shame and confusion coumpted
as persons void of all honestye. Emonge the Locrensians, the adulteres have
both their eyes thruste out. The Romans in times paste, punished whoredom,
sometime by fire, sometime by sweorde. If a man emonge the Egipcians had
been taken in adultery, the law was that he should openly in the presence of
all the people be scourged naked with whippes, unto the number of a thousand
stripes. The woman that was taken with him, had heart nose cut of, whereby she
was known ever after, to be an whore, and therefore to be abhorred of all men.
Among the Arabians, they that were taken in adultery, had their heads stricken
from their bodies. The Athenia^s punished whoredom by death in like manner. So
likewise did the Barbarous Tartarians. Emonge the Turks even at this day, they
that be taken in adultery, both man and woman, are stoned streightwaies to
death, without mercy. Thus see we, what godly acts were devised in times past,
of the high powers, for the putting away of whoredom, and for the maintaining
of holy matrimony or wedlock, and pure co^uersacion. And the auctors of these
acts, were no Christians. but heathen: yet were they so enflamed with the love
of honestye and pureness of life, that for the maintenance and conseruacio^ or
keeping up of that they made godly statutes, suffering nether fornicacion, nor
adultery, to reign in their realms unpunished. Christ said to the people: the
Ninevites shall rise at ye judgment, Luke. xi.
with this nation, (meaning the unfaithful Jews) and shall condemn the^. For
they repented at ye preaching of Jonas, but behold (says he) a greater than
Jonas is here, (meaning himself,) and yet they repent not. Shall not (think
you) likewise the Locrensians, Arabians, Athenians, with such other, rise up
at the judgment, and condemn us, forasmuch as they seaced from whoredom, at
the commandment of man, and we have the law and manifest precepts and
commandments of god, and yet forsake we not our filthy conversation?
Truly, truly, it shall be easier at ye day of judgment to these heathen, the^
to us, except we repent and amend. For although death of body, seems to us a
grievous punishment in this world for whoredom: yet is that pain nothing, in
co^pariso^ of the grievous torments which adulters, fornicatours, and al
unclean persons shall suffer after this life. For all such shall be excluded,
and shut out of the kingdom of heaven, as Saint Paul says: be not
deceived, 1. Cor. vi. Gol^. v. Ephe. v.
for neither whoremo^gers, nor worshippers of Images, nor adulterers, nor
softlynges, nor sodomites, nor threues, nor couetousse persons, nor dronkardes,
nor cursed speakers, nor pyllers, shall inherit the kingdom of God. And S.
John in his reuelacion says: Epo. xxi.
that whoremongers shall have their part, with murderers, sorcerers,
enchaunters, liars, idolaters, and such other, in the lake which burns with
fire and brymstone, which is the second death. The punishmente of the body
although it be death, has an end, but the punishment of the soul, which. S.
John calls the second death, is everlasting: there shall be fire and
brimstone: Mat xui. Luke.iii.
there shall be weping and gnashing of teeth: the worm that shall there gnaw the
conscience of the damned, shall never dye. O whose heart distylleth not even
drops of blood, to hear and consider these things? If we tremble and shake
at the hearing and naming of these pains, oh, what shall they do that shall
feel them, that shall suffer them: yea and ever shall suffer, worlds without
end: God have mercy upon us. Who is now so drowned in sin and paste all
Godliness, that he will set more by a filthy and stynkyng pleasure, (which
soon passes away) then by the loss of everlasting glory: Again, who will
so give himself to the lusts of the flesh, that he fears nothing at all the
pains of hell fire? But let us hear how we may eschew the sin of whordome
and adulcery, that we may walk in the fear of god, and be free from those
most grievous, and in tolerable torments, which abide al unclean persons.
To avoid fornicacion, adulterye, and all uncleanness, let us provide, Remecies
whereby to avoid fornicacion and adulterye.
that above all things, we may keep our hearts pure and clean, from al evil
thoughts, and carnal lusts. For if that be once infected and corrupt, we
fall headlong into al kind of ungodliness. This shall we easelye do, if when
we feel inwardlye, that Satan our old enemy tempts us unto whoredom, we
by no means co^sente to his craftye suggestions, but valyauntly resyste and
withstand him, by strong faith in the word of God, aleadgynge a gaynste him
always in our heart, this commandment of god: Scriptum est, non mae
chaberis. It is written, thou shall not commit whoredom. It shall be good also
for us, ever to live in the fear of god, and to set before our eyes: the
grievous threatenings of god, against all ungodly sinners, and to consider in
our mind, how filthy beastely, and short that pleasure is, whereunto Satan
moves us.

And again, how the pain appointed for that sin, is intolerable and
everlasting. Moreover, to use a temperaunce and sobriety in eating and
drynkyng, to eschew unclean communicacion, to a noyde all filthy company, to
flee idleness, to delighte in readyng holy scripture, to watch in godly prayers
and virtuous meditacions: and at al times, to exercise some godly trauayles,
shall help greatly unto the esche wing of whoredom.

And here are all degrees to be monished, whether they be married or unmarried,
to love chastity and clennes of life. For the married are bound by the law
of God so purely to love one an other, that nether of them seek any strange
love. The man must only cleave to his wife, and the wife again only to her
husband: they must so delight one in an others company, that none of them
couete any other. And as they are bound, thus to live together in all
godliness and honeslye, so likewise is their duty, vertuouslye to bring up
their children, and to provide that they fall not into Satan's snare, nor into
any uncleanness, but that they come pure and honest unto holy wedlock, when time
requires. So likewise ought all masters and rulers to provide, that no
whoredom, nor any point of uncleanness, be used among their servants. And
again, they yt are single, and feel in themselves, that they cannot live
without the company of a woman, let them get wives of their own, and so live
godli together. For it is better to marry, then to burn.

And to avoid fornicacion, i. Cor. vii.
says the Apostle, let every man have his own wife, and every woman her own
husband. Finally, al such as feel in themselves, a sufficiencye and ability
(through the workynge of gods spirit) to lead a sole and continent life, let
the^ praise god for his gift, and seek al means possible to maintain the same:
as by reading of holy scriptures by godly meditacions, by continual prayers,
and such other virtuous exercises. If we all on this wise will endeavor our
selves to eschew fornicacion, adultery, and all uncleanness, and lead our lives
in all godlynes and honestye, seruinge God with a pure and clean heart, and
glorifying him in our bodies, by leadyng an innocente and harmless life, we
may be sure to be in the number of those, of whom our savior Christ
speaks in the gospel on this manner: A^^th. v.
blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God: to whom alone, be all
glory, honor, rule, and power, worlds withoure end. Amen.

A Sermon against Contencion and brawling.
THis day (good Christen people) shall be declared unto you, the
unprofitableness, and shameful vnhonestye of contencion, strife and debate: to
thintente, that when you shall see (as it were in a table painted before your
eyes) the evil fauourednes, and deformity of this moan detestable vice, your
stomachs mat be moved to rise against it, and to deteste and abhore that
sin, which is so much to be hated, and so pernicious and hurteful to al men.
But among all kinds of contention, none is more hurteful, then is contencion
in matters of religion. Eschew (says S. Paul) folishe and unlearned
questions, i. Timo. ^. 1. Tim. ii.
knowing that they bread strife. It becomes not the servant of god, to
fight or strive, but to be meke toward all men. This contencion and strife
was in Saint Paul's time, among the Corinthians, and is at this time, emonge
us English men: For to many there be, which upon the Ale benches or other
places, delight to set forth certain questyons, not so much pertaynyng to
edificacion, as to vain glory and showing forth of their conning: and so
vnsoberly to reason and dispute, that when neither part will give place to
other, they fall to chiding and contencyon, (...)
and sometime from hot words to further inconuemence. Saint Paul could not
abide to hear among the Corinthians, these words of discord or dissencyon:
I hold of Paul, I of Cephas, and I of Apollo. What would he then say, i.
Cor. iii.
if he heard these words of contencion (which be now almost in eueri man's
mouth:) he is a Pharisei, he is a gospeller, he is of the new sort, he is of
the old faith, he is a new broched brother he is a good catholic father, he
is a papist, he is an heretic. Oh how the church is divided. Oh how the
cities be cut and mangled. Oh how the cote of Christ, that was without seame,
is all to rent and torn. Oh body mistieal of Christ: where is that holy and
happy unity, out of ye which whosoever is, he is not in Christ: If one
member be pulled from another, where is the body? If the body be drawn from
the head, where is the life of the body, We cannot be joined to Christ our
head, except we be glued with co^corde and charity, one to an other. For he
yt is not in this unity, is not of the church of Christ, 1. Cor.iii.
which is a congregation or unity together, and not a division. S. Paul
says: that as long as emulacion or enuyinge, contencion, and faccions or
seetes, be among us, we be carnal, and walk according to the fleshly man. And.
S. James says: If you have bitter emulacion or envying and contencion in your
hearts, glory not of it: for whereas contencion is, James. iii
there is unsteadfastness, and all evil deeds. And why do we not hear. S.
Paul which prays us, whereas he might command us, saying. I beeseche you,
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you will speak all one thing, 1.
Cor. i.
and that there be no dissencion emonge you, but that you will be one whole
body, of one mind, and of one opinion in ye truth. If his desire be reasonable
and honest, why do we not grasit it ^if his request be for our profit, why do
we refuse it? And if we list not to hear his peticion of prayer, yet let us
hear his exhortacio^, where he says: I exhort you, that you walk, Ephe. iiii.
as it becomes the vocacion in the which you be called, with all submission
and meekness, with lenity and softness of mind bearyng one another by
charity, studying to keep the unity of the spirit, by the bond of peace.
For there is one body, one spirit, one faith, one baptism There is (he says)
but one body, of the which he ca^ be no lively member, yt is at variau^ce with
the other members. There is one spirit, which joins and knitteth all
things in one. And how can this one spirit reign in us, when we among our
selves be divided? There is but one faith, and how can we then say the is of
the old faith, and he is of the new faith. There is but one baptism, and then
shall not all they, which be baptized, be one? Contencion causes division,
wherefore it ought not to be emonge Christians, whom one faith, and baptism
joins in an unity. But if we contemn. S. Pauses: request and exhortacion,
yet at the least, let us regard his earnest entreating, in the which he does
very earnestly charge us, and (as I may so speak) conjure us in this form
and manner: If there be any consolacion in Christ, if there be any comfort of
love, if you have any fellowship of the spirit, if you have any bowels of pity
and compassion, fulfill my joy, being all like affected, having one
charity, being of one mind, of one opinion, that nothing be done by
comencion, or vayneglorye. Who is he, that has any bowels of pity, that will
not be moved with these words so pithye: Whose heart is so stony the sweorde
of these words (which be more sharp then any two edged sweorde) may not
Phili. iii.
^ut and break a sonder; Wherefore, let us endeavor our selves to fulfill. S.
Paul's joy, here in this place which shall be at length to our great joy in an
other place. ^ow we ^houlde ^cade the ^cripture
Let us so read the scripture, that by readyng thereof, we may be made the
better lyuers, rather the^ tue more contencious disputers. If any thing is
necessary to be taught, reasoned, or disputed, let us do it with all
meekness, softness, and lenity. If any thing shall chance to be spoken
uncomely, let one bear an others frailty. He that is faultye, let him
rather amend, then defend that which he has spoken amiss, lest he fall by
contencyon from a folish error, into an obstinate heresye: for it is better
to give place mekely then to win the victory, with the breach of charity:
which chau^seth, where every man will defend his opinion obstinately. If we be
Christen me^, why do we not follow Christ, which says: ^ath. x.
learn of me, for I am meek and lowelye in heart. A disciple must learn the
lesson of his scoolemaster, and a servant must obey the commandment of his
master. He that is wise and learned (says S. James) let him show his goodness
by his good conversation and sobrenes of his wisdom. For where there is envy
and contencion, that wisdom comes not from God, but is worldly wisdom,
man's wisdom, and deuillishe wisdom. For the wisdom that comes from
above, from ye spirit of god, is chaste and pure, corrupted with no evil
affe^^ions: it is quiet, meke and peaceable, abhorring all desire of
contencyon: I^^^. ii^
it is tractable, obedyeme, not grudging to learn, and to give place to them
that ^eache better for their reformacyon. For there shall never be an end of
striving and contencion, if we contend, who in contencion shall be master, and
have the over hand: if we shall heap error upon error, if we continue to
defend yt obstinatly, which was spoken unadvisedly. For truth it is, that
stifnes in mainteining an opinion, bredeth contencio^, brauling and chiding,
which is a vice among all other, most pernicious and pestilent to common peace
and quietness. And as it stands betwixt two persons and parties, (for no man
commonly does chide with himself (so it comprehends two most detestable
vices: the one is picking of querels, with sharp and contencious words: the
other stands in froward answering, and multiplying evil words again. i.
Cor v.
The first is so abominable, that saint Paul says: if any that is called
a brother, be a worshipper of ydols, a brauler, or picker of querels, a thief,
or an extorcioner, with him that is such a man, see that ye eat not. Now
here considre that saint Paul numbreth a scolder, a brauler, or a picker of
querels, among thiefes, and idolaters: Ag^ist. querell pickig.
and many times comes less hurt of a thief, then of a railinge tongue: for
the one takes away a man's good name, the other takes but his riches,
which is of much less value and estimacio^, the^ is his good name. And a
thief hurts but him, from whom he steals: but he that has an evil tongue,
troubles all the town where he dwells, and sometime the whole country. And
a ca^ling tongue is a pestilence so full of co^tagiousnes, i. Cor. ^i.
y^ saint Paul wills christian men to forbear the company of such, and
neither to eat nor drink with them. And whereas he will not, that a thris^ia
woman should forsake her husband, although he be an infidele, nor that a
christian servant should depart from his master, which is an infidele and
Heathen, and so suffer a christian man to keep company with an infidele: yet
he forbids us to eat or drike with a scolder, or a quarrel picker. And also
in the.vi. chap. to the. Cor. he says thus: Be not deceived, for neither
fornicators, ^. Corin. vi.
neither worshippers of ydols, neither thieues, nor dru^kerds, neither cursed
speakers, shall dwell in the kingdom of heaven. It must needs be a great fault,
that does move and cause the father to disherite his natural son. And how can
it otherwise be, but that this cursed speakinge must needs be a most damnable
sin, the which does cause god our most merciful and loving father, Against
fro ^aro ounswering.
to deprive us of his most blessed kingdom of heaven. Against the other sin
that stands in requiting taunte for taunte, speaks Christ himself: I say
unto you, (says our savior Christ) resist not evil, ^at. v.
but love your enemies, and say well by them, that say evil by you: do well
unto them, that do evil to you, and pray for them, that do hurt and
persecute you: yt you may be the children of your father, which is in
heaven, who suffers his sun too rise, both upon good and evil, and sends
his rain both to the just and unjust. To this doctrine of Christ, agrees
very well the teaching of saint Paul, Roma. xi^
that chosen vessel of God, who cease not to exhort and call upon us, saying:
bless them that curse you, bless (I say) and curse not: recompense to no man
evil for evil: if it be possible (as much as lies in you) li^e peaceably with
all men.

(...) against contencion.
IT has been declared unto you in this sermon against strife and braulinge,
what great inconvenience comes thereby, specially of such contencion as
grows in matters of religion. And how, when as no man will give place to an
other, there is none end of contencion and discord. And that unity, which
God requires of christians, is utterly thereby neglected and broken. And that
this contencion stands chiefly in two points, as in picking of quarelles,
and making froward aunswers. Now ye shall hear Saint Paul's words, saying:
Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath, for
it is written: vengeance is mine, I will revenge, says the lord. Therefore
if thine enemy hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him drink: be not
overcome with evil, Deu. xxxii.
but overcome evil with goodness. All these be the words of saint Paul. But
they that be so full of stomach, and set so much by themselves, that they
may not abide so much as one evil word to be spoken of them. ^eraduenture
will say: if I be evil reviled, shall I stand still like a goose, or a
fool, with my finger in my mouth? Shall I be such an ydiote and diserd,
softnes. I shall both i^crease mine enemies frowardness, and provoke other to
do like. Such reasons make they that can suffer nothing,

And he that cannot temper ne rule his own anger is but weak and feeble, and
rather more like a woman or a child, then a strong manne. For the true
strength and manliness, is to overcome wrath, and to despise injury, and
other men's foolisshenesse. And besides this, he that shall despise the wrong
done unto him by his enemy, every mane shall perceive, that it was spoken or
done without cause: where as contrary, he that does fume and chafe at it,
shall help the cause of his adversary, geuinge suspicion that the thing is
true. And so in going about to revenge eu^l we show our selves to be evil, and
while we will punish, and revenge an other man's folly, we double and augement
our own folly. But many pretenses find they, that be wilful, to color their
impacience. Mine enemy (say they) is not worthy to have gentle words or
deeds, being so full of malice, or frowardnes. The less he is worthy the more
art thou allowed of GOD: the more art thou commended of Christ, for whose sake
thou should render good for evil, because he has commanded thee, and also
deserved that thou should so do. Thy neighbor has peradventure with a
word offended the: call thou to thy remembrance, with how many words and
deeds, how grieuous^y thou have offended thy lord god. What was man, when
Christ died for him? was he not his enemy, and unworthy to have his favor
and mercy? Even so, with what gentleness and patience does he forbear and
tolerate and suffer thee, although he is daiely offended by thee? Forgive
therefore a ligt ^repasse to thy neighbor, that Christ may forgive thee, many
thousands of trespasses, which art every day an offender. For if thou
forgive thy brother, being to thee a trespasser, then have thou a sure sign
and toke^, that god will forgive thee, to whom al men be debtors or trespassers.
How would thou have god merciful to ye, if thou will be cruel unto thy
brother? Can thou not find in thine heart to do yt toward an other, that
is thy fellow, which god has done to thee, that art but his servant? Ought
not one sinner to forgive another, seeing that Christ, which was no sinner, did
pray to his father for them, that without mercy and dispitfully put him to
death? Who, when he was reviled, i. Pet. ii.
did not use reuiling words again, and when he suffered wrongfully, he did not
threaten, but gave all vengeance to the judgment of his father, which
judges rightfully. And what crakest thou of thy head, if thou labor not to
be in the body? Thou can be no membre of Christ, if thou follow not the
steps of Christ: who (as the Prophet says) was led to death like a lamb,
^soi. iiii.
not openinge his mouth to reuiling, but opening his mouth too praying for
them that crucified him, saying: Father, forgive them, Luke.xxiii.
for they cannot tell what they do.

The which example, a none after Christ, saint Stephin did follow, Act. vii.
and after saint Paul: We be evil spoken of (says he) and speak well, we
suffer persecucion and take it patiently: (...) Cor. iiii.
Men curse us, and we gently entreat. Thus. s. Paul taught that he did, and
he did that he taught: Bless you (says he) the^ that persecute you: bless
you, and curse not. Is it a great thing to speak well to thine adversary, to
whom Christ does command the to do well? David when Semei did call him all to
naught, did not chide again, but said patiently: suffer him to speak evil, if
perchance ye lord will have mercy on me. Histories be full of examples of
Heathen men, that took very mekely, both opprobrious and reprocheful words and
i^iurious or wro^gful deeds. And shall those Heathen excel in patience, us, yt
profess Christ, ye teacher and example of all patience? Lisander, when one did
rage against him, in reuili^g of him, he was nothing moved, but said: go to,
go to, speak against me as much, and as often as thou will, and leave out
nothing, if perchance by this means thou may discharge the of those
naughty things, with the which it seems, that thou art full laden. Many men
speak evil of al men, because they ca^ speak well of no man. After this
sort, this wise man avoided from him, the reprocheful words spoken unto him:
imputing and laying them to the natural sickness of his adversary.

Pericles, when a certain scoulder, or a railing fellow did revile him, he
answered not a word again, but went into a galery: and after toward night,
when he went home, this scoulder followed him, rageing still more and more,
because he saw the other so set nothing by him. And after that he came to his
gate, (being darcke night) Pericles commanded one of his servants to light
a torche, and to bring the scolder home to his own house. He did not only
with quietness suffer this brawler pacientely, but also recompensed an evil
turn with a good turn, and that to his enemy. Is it not a shame for us that
profess Christ, to be worse then Heathen people, in a thing chiefly
pertaining to Christ's religion? shall philosophy persuade them more, then
gods word shall persuade us? Shall natural reason prevail more with the^,
then religion shall do with us? Shall man's wisdom lead them to that thing,
whereunto the heavenly doctrine cannot lead us? What blindenes, wilfulnes, or
rather madness is this?

Pericles being provoked to anger with many vilainous words, answered not a
word. But we stirred but with one little word, what foul work do we make? How
do we sin, rage, stamp, and stare like mad men? Many men of every trifle,
will make a great matter, and of the spark of a little word, will kindle a
great fire, taking all things in the worste part. But how much better is it,
and more like to the example and doctrine of Christ, to make rather of a great
fault in our neighbor, a small fault, reasoning with our selfs after this
sort. He spoke these words, but it was in a sudden heat, or the drink spoke
them, and not he, or he spoke them at the mocio^ of some other, or he spoke
them, being ignorant of the truth: he spoke them not against me, but against
him whom he thought me to be. But as touching evil speaking, Reasons to ^noue
men from querel ^ickinge.
he that is ready to speak evil against other men: first let him examine
himself, whether he be faultlesse and clear of the fault, which he finds
in an another. For it is a shame when he that blames an other for any fault, is
guilty himself either in the same fault, either in a greater. It is a shame
for him that is blind, to call another manne blind: and it is more shame for
him that is whole blind, to call him blinkarde, that is but pore blind. For
this is to see a straw in another man's eye, when a man has a block in his
own eye. Then let him consider, that he that uses to speak evil, shall
commonly be evil spoken of again. And he that speaks what he will for his
pleasure, shall be compelled to hear that he would not, to his displeasure.
Moreover let him remember that saying: that we shall give an accoumpte for
every idle word. Mat. xii.
How much more then shall we make a reconinge for our sharp, bitter,
brauling, and chiding words, which provoke our brother to be angry, and so
to the breach of his charity, And as touching evil answearinge, al though we
^ee never somuche provoked by other men's evil speaking, yet we shall not
follow their frowardnes by evil aunsweryng, if we consider, that anger is a
kind of madness, and that he which is angry, is (as it were for the time) in a
phrensy. Reason (...) to move men from frowarde^ aunswerynge.
Wherefore let him beware, lest in his fury he speak any thing, whereof
afterward he may have just cause to be sorry. And he that will defend that
anger is no fury, but that he has reason, eue^ when he is most angry, then let
him reason thus with himself, when he is angrye. Now I am so moved and
chafed, that within a little while after, I shall be otherways minded: wherefore
then should I now speak any thing in mine anger, which hereafter, when I
would faynest, cannot be changed? Wherefore shall I do any thing now, being
(as it were) out of my wit, for the which, when I shall come to my self
again, I shall be very sad? Why does not reason? Why does not godliness?
Yea, why does not Christ obtein ye thing now of me, which hereafter time shall
obtain of me? If a man be called an adulterer, usurer, drunkarde, or by any
other shameful name, let him consider earnestly, whether he be so called truly
or falsely: if truly, let him amend his fault, that his adversary may not
after worthily charge him with such offenses: if these things be laid against
him falsely, yet let him consider. whether he has given any occasion to be
suspected of such things, and so he may both cut of that suspicion whereof
this slander did arise, and in other things shall live more warelye. And thus
using our selves, we may take no hurt, but rather much good, by the rebukes
and slanders of our enemy. For the reproach of an enemy, may be to many
men a quicker spur to the amendeme^te of their life, then the gentle monicion
of a friend. Phillippus the king of Macedonye, when he was euilspoken of by the
chyefe rulers of the city of Arthens he did thank them hertely, because by
them he was made better, both in his words and deeds: for I study (said he)
both by my sayings and doings, to prove them liars.

The third part of the Sermon ^gaynst contencion.
YE heard in the last lesson of the sermon against ^^fe and braulynge, how we
may answer them which maintain their froward saying^s in co^tencion, and
that will revenge with words such evil as other men do to them. And finally
how we may according to gods will, order our selves: and what to consider
toward them, when we are provoked to contencio^ and strife with raylyng
words. Now to proceed in the same matter, you shall know the right way how
to disprove and overcome your adversary and enemy.

This is the best way to improve a man's adversary so to live, that all which
shall know his honestye, may bear wytnes, that he is slaundered unworthily.
If the fault whereof he is slaundered, be such, that for the defense of his
honeslye, he must needs make answer* yet let him answer quietly and softely,
on this fashyon: that those faults be laid against him falslye. For it is
truth, that the wise man says: P^^.xv.
a soft answer asswageth anger, and a heard and sharp answer does stir
up rage and furye. The sharp answer of Nabal, did provoke David to cruel
vengeance: i. res. xx^.
but the gentle words of Abigail, quenched the fire again, that was all in a
flame. And a special remedy against malycyous ionges, is to arm our selves
with patience, mekenes, and silence, lest with multiplying words wc the enemy,
we be made as evil as he. An obie^cyon.
But they that cannot bear one evil word, peradventure for their own excuse,
will allege that which is written: he that despyseth his good name is cruel.
Also we read: answer a fool according to his fooly s^^es. Pro. xxvi
And our lord Jesus did hold his peace at certain evil sayings but to some, he
answered diligen^^^* He heard men call him a Samaritaine, a carpent^^s son, a
wine drinker, and he held his pe^^e: but when he heard them say, thou have a
Devil within the, John. xix
he answered to that earnestly. Truth it is in deed, that there is a time, An
nu^^swere: ^
when it is convenient to answer a fool according to his folishnes, lest he
should seem in his own conceit to be wise. And sometime it is not profitable
to answer a fool, according to his folishnes, lest the wise man be made like
to the fool. When our infamye or the reproach that is done unto us is joined
with the peril of many, then is it necessary in aunswering to be quick and
ready. For we read that many holy men of good zeales, have sharpelye and
fiercely, both spoken and answered tirau^tes and evil men: which sharp words
came not of anger, rancor or malice, or desyer of vengeance, but of a fervent
desyer to bring them to she true knowledge of God, and from ungodly living, by
an earneste and sharp rebuke and chydyng. Mat. i^i.
In this zeal Saint John Baptist called the Phariseis, Adders broobe: and.
(...) iii.
S. Paul called the Galathyans soles: and the men of Crete, he called liars,
evil beasts, and sluggishe bellies: ^im^. i. ^ba^li. iii.
and the false Apostles, he called dogs and craftye workmen. And this zele
is godly and to be allowed, as it is plainly proved by the example of Christ,
who although he were the fountain and spryng of all mekenes* genilenes and
softnes: yet he calls the obstinate Scribes and Phariseis, (...). xxiii.
blind guides, fools, painted graves, Hipocrites, serpe^tes adders broad; a
corrupt and wicked generation. Also he rebukes Peter egerly, (...). xvi.
saying: go behind me Satan. Likewise. S. Paul reproves Elimas, saying:
^^te. xiii
O thou full of all craft and guyle, enemy to all justice, thou ceaseste not
to destroy the right ways of god: and now lo, the hand of the lord is upon
thee, and thou shall be blind, and not see for a time. (...). v.
And. S. Peter reprehendeth Ananias very sharpeli, saying: Ananias, how is it
that Satan has filled thy heart, that thou should lie unto the holy ghost?
This zeal has been so feruente in many good men, that it has stirred the^,
not only to speak bitter and eger words: but also to do things, which
might seem to some, to be cruel, but in deed the be very just, charitable and
godly, because they were not done of ire, malice, or contencyous mind, but of
a fervent mind to the glory of god, and the correccion of sin, executed by
men, called to that office. For in this zeal, our Lord Jesus Christ did drive
with a whippe, John. ii. Exo. xxxii
the biers and sellers out of the temple. In this zeal Moses brake the two
tables, which he had received at gods hand, when he saw the Israelites
^^unsyng about a calse: and caused to be killed.xxiii. M. of his own people.
^um. x^ But the^^ example^ are not (...) be fol^^ ^^wed of (...) very b^^ but
as (...) be called to o^^p^^ and set (...) aucthouty Iame. iiii. Pro. xx.
In this zeal Phinees the son of Eleasar, did thrust through with his sword,
zambry and Cosby, whom he found together joined in the act of Lecherye.
Wherefore, now to return again to contencious words, and specially in matters
of religion, and gods word, (which would be used with all modesty, sobernes
and charity) the words of. S. James ought to be well marked, and borne in
memory* where he says: that of contencion rises all evil. And the wise king
Solomon says: honor is due to a man that keeps himself from contencion,
and all that mingle themselves therewith be foles. And because this vice is so
much hurtefull to the society of a common wealth, in all well ordered cities,
these common braulers and sholders, be punished with a notable kind of pain:
as to be set on the coking stole, pillery, or such like. And they be unworthy
to live in a common wealth, the which d^ as much as lies in them, with brauling
and skolding to disturb the quietness and peace of the same. And whereof comes
this contencion, strife, and varyaunce, but of pride and vayneglory? Let us
therefore humble our selves under the myghtie hand of god, i Pet. ^. Luke. ^.
which has promised to rest upon them, that be humble and low in spirit.
If we be good and quiet Christian men, let it appear in our speech and
tongues. If we have forsaken the devil, let us use no more deuelyshe tongues.
He that has been a ras^^ing sholder, now let him be a sober counsayloure.
He that has been a malicious siaund erer, now let him be a loving comforter.
He that has been a* vain railer, now let him be a gostly teacher. He that has
abused his tongue in cursing, now let him use it in blessyng. He that has abused
his tongue in evil speaking, now let him use it in speaking well. Al bitterness,
anger, raylyng, and blasphemye, let it be avoided from you. If you may, and it
pe possible, in no wise be angry. But if you may not be clean void of this
passion, then yet so temper and bridle it, that it stir you not to contencion
and braulyng. If you be provoked with evil speaking, arm your self with
patience, lenity and silence, either speaking nothing, or else being very soft,
meke and gentle in answeryng. Overcome thine adversaries with benefytes and
gentleness. And above all things, keep peace and unity: be no peace breakers,
but peace makers. And then there is no doubt, but that god, the aucthor of
comfort and peace, will grant us pence of conscience and, such concord and
agremente, that with one mouth and mind, we may gloryfye god the father of our
Lord Jesus Christ: to whom be al glory now and ever. Amen.

HEreafter shall follow sermons, of fasting, praying, Almese deeds: of the
^atiuitie, Passion, Resurrecyon and Ascencion of our Savior Ch^^ste: of the
due recey^^^^ of his blessed body and blood, under the form of bread and
wine: against Idleness, against Gluttonye and drunke^nes, against covetousness,
against envy, I^^ and malice, with many other matters, of well fruitful as
necessary to the ^^^^sying of Christen people, and the increase of godly
living Amen.

God save the Queen.

