CERTAIN GODLY, AND MOST necessary Annotations: upon the thirteenth Chapter
to the Romans: set forth by the right vigilant Pastor: John Hoper, by Gods
calling, Bishop of Gloucester.

printer's or publisher's device GOD IS MY HELP
GOD IS MY HELP. Psalm. 7.11.

AT LONDN; Printed by Robert Walde-graue, dwelling without Temple-barre, near
unto Sommer-set House. 1583.

To my very loving, and dear beloved sellowlaborers in the word of God, and
brethren in Christ, WILLIAM IENINS, Dean of the Cathedral Church in
Gloucester, JOHN WILLIAMS, Doctor of the law, and chancellor, and to the rest
of all the church appointed there to serve the living God, with all other,
Archdeacons, Officials, Deanes, Persons Vicars and Curates, within this the
Kings Majesty's diocese of Gloucester, grace, and mercy from the Lord ever
living, in the blood of Jesus Christ, our only Savior.
IF THE DANGERS AND perils of S. Paul's time, dearly beloved, ministered and
gave occasion unto him, for to fear of the loss of such people as then were
converted unto the knowledge and understanding of Gods holy word, least by
negligence or corrupt doctrine of the Bishops and pastors, they might be
seduced and brought into errous doubtless the dangers of this our time, that
be not only to be feared, least such as know the truth, be by error seduced
and brought from the truth, or else by continuance in ungodly life, continue in
the truth in vain: But also that the most part of people be yet ignorant and
not converted unto the truth, should minister and give occasion unto us a great
deal more to be vigilant and circumspect: not only to keep those in truth,
to whom God has revealed it: But also to win and convert with all prayer,
diligence, preching, and other instruction, such as yet be ignorant and out of
the way, unto the truth and knowledge of Gods word. And so much the rather
because we see by experience, and also feel it in our selves, that the just
God is offended and angry with our sins, and will not be contented with
these troubles, miseries and crosses, that already he lays upon us, but does
doubtless prepare and make ready many more and more greenous. Our office
therefore is to be diligent and circumspect for the people of God, and now the
hand of God being stretched forth, to admonish the flock committed unto our
charges in time, least they dye, and their blood required at our hands.
Certain I am, that our sins be the only cause, wherefore this most just God
is offended, and certain we be, that the only way and means to please and
quiet him again, is to leave and wash away our sins. What the sins of
the people be where vvithall God is thus offended, you that have the oversight
of them, know or ye ought to know. I mean not to descend particularly to any
sin, least peradventure I might seem to be timereous and over hardy, to
judge more then I perfectly know: or else in naming such sins, as many good
simple people have not heard of, might rather learn to augment the evil they
know, then to learn the good they know not. It is the duty of every good
pastor and curate, diligently to search and know what virtue is most meet to
be commended, and what vice most to be reprehended in the Church that he
serves. I will leave therefore the unknown evils unto metro the shepherd
of every parish, requiring him to mark the sins of the people after, and by
the estimation of Gods word, and thereby to pender the condition of his people
least that he cause them and do the same him self, swallow a Camel, and be
chooked with a flee: leap over a block, and stumble at a straw. Before all
things, see that the people know their commandments, and the works thereof,
apertaining unto God, in the first table, that they honor no vvrong not false
God, nor yet the true God, a vvrong way: but as he has commanded him self,
in the old Testament, and the new. And also that they avoid all such
sins, faults, and disobedience, as be contrary to the commandments of
God, in the second table. And for a help unto you, and also to the people in
this behalf, I have set forth here the 13. Chapter of S. Paul to the
Romans, which entreats of all the second table, and duty of a Christian
man, how he should use him self with, and toward all sorts of people.
Most heartily praying you, and also in Gods name, and the kings majesty's name
command you, that as many as serves any cure within this Diocese, that can
not for lack of learning or exercise, teach or preach him self to the people
the like doctrine, that they do every day, read unto the people this 13.
Chapter, as I have here set it forth: that the people may learn to know,
love, and fear the better the Kings majesty, and other such Maiestrates as
be by him appointed over the people. And all such as God has given grace of
preaching unto, in their Sermons, shall oftentimes inculcate and persuade this
argument and rule of obedience unto the people. And the cause why, I have
written in this chapter, more then an other, and think it very expedient to
be now taught unto the people, is the great and dangerous offenses and sins
of the richer sort of people, and also of the poor, both in this shier, and
also other the kings majesty's, in this realm. And certain I am that both of
them shall dye eternally, if they amend not. Wherefore to deliver my soul I
give such as be commended by God and chokin^es majesty unto my charge,
warning of the judgment and damnation to come before. The rich man so
incrocheth, gathers together, and obtayneth so much into his own hands,
that he alone possesses the earth, lives thereby, and his poor neighbors
ready to dye for lack, so that he is brought into Tantalus pain, meat and
drink, cattle and corn enough of every side of him, yet shall rather dye for
laeke then that insatiable and never contented, covetous persons will price
their goods so as poor men, their wives and their children may be able to bye
reasonable penyworthes of Gods abundant plenty, and riches that he brings
out of the earth. These men except they repent, cannot be saved, nor be
partakers of the merits of Christ's passion. For God would the rich to give
unto the poor, but our men that care neither for God nor the Kings laws,
will neither give nor sell what soever necessity do require. If they would not
care for Gods word, yet should they have respect to nature and to their
country, though the poor man be not a rich man, yet is he a Christian, and
thy country man, of whom nature and countryship requires thee to have
compassion. The poor man partly provoked by necessity and need, and partly of
unchristian hatred and disdain he has at his neighbors wealth and
prosperity, conspireth, works, provoke, and desires by all means to
oppress and rob his richer neighbor, and will by force, strength, treason;
sedition, commotion, assemblance, and gathering together of such as he is him
self, against Gods laws, Gods ordinances, Magistrates, and superior powers,
take away and usurp every man's goods, he cares not how. Not remembering the
judgment and terrible damnation of God, for his so doing, and that it is his
bounden duty to suffer and bear such needs and necessities, as God lays
upon us for our sins And that upon pain of hell fire* no man should
revenge his own wrongs, but commend him self to God, who can and will
hear the prayers of the poor in their troubles and needs. And that they
should offer their supplications to the kings majesty, and to such other as
be appointed for the redress of such oppression and wrongs: and not to take
weapons, armor and force against God and his ordinances. In case the Kings
majesty and the rest appointed to see poor men's causes redressed, will not
hearken to their clamor, doubtless the ire and vengeance of God will punish
them, and so much the rather, if the people quietly and obediently commend
their causes unto him, the which it they do not, they perish eternally. For
there is no traitor nor seditious man can be saved, but obedient and quiet men
shall inherit the kingdom of heaven, and such as suffer wrong, and not such
as do wrong, or intend to revenge by strength, their own wrongs. Therefore to
keep the people of this Diocese from the displeasure of God and their King,
and my self from everlasting damnation. I require you most diligently to teach
them this chapter every week, one part of it, the Saturday at euensong: the
other, the Sunday at the morning prayer, and the third part, the Sunday at
euensong. Thus fare ye all well, and God give us grace al, well to discharge our
offices commended unto us.

Yours with all my heart, Brother and fellow-preacher John Gloucester.

To the Christian Reader.
He office and duty of a christian man, is contained in two parts. The first,
that be use himself aright and reverently with God. The second, that he use
him comely and honestly with man. In the Epistle to the Romans from the
beginning S. Paul has fully and sufficiently declared the duty and office of
man, toward God: toward the end, he declares how we may honestly do our
duties toward men. Both these offices must diligently be known and exercised.
And because a civil and outward life, seem it never so honest, is mere and
very hypocrisy, and can not please God, except the mind and soul inwardly be
well affected toward him: I think it convenient briefly to declare wherein S,
Paul in this epistle does put the religion of the heart of man, toward God:
and then we shall the better descend unto such duties and offices, as
appertains to all manner of persons as well public as private.

First, S. Paul perceives that the grace and promises of God cannot be known
of man, until such time as he be brought to acknowledge and displeasure of his
sins. The Physician and Physic be unprofitable unto such as know not that
they be sick, as Christ said, Math. 9.
I came not to call the i^st, but sinners to repentance. Therefore we must know
the wound of our souls, and the sickness of sin, before we can get any
profit by the grace of God. We must confess that all men and women, except
Christ, are borne the children of ire and of Gods displeasure, and that we
bear about in us sin, that always repugneth the spirit, whereby we are
acertayned that we be always subject unto synn as S. Romans 11.
Paul says, be concludes al men under sin, because he might have mercy upon
al. Seeing we are all sinners and the reward of sin, Romans 6. Ephe. 2.
S. Paul's conclusion where be says, we are borne all the children of Gods
displeasure, is true. How then may we be delivered from this great ire and
displeasure? 1. Ioh. 4. Romans 5.
By the mercy of God the father toward us, that first loved us, or we loved
him, whiles we were yet his enemies But what is that, wherewith all we may be
annexed and reconciled unto God by his mercy, when there is no good thing in
(...), but all filthy and sinful? It is Jesus Christ, the son of God, most dear
beloved, in whom the father is contented, and by who^ he is reco^ ciled unto al
sinners that repent and believe his promises, Mat. 3.17. Ephe. 12. Col. 1.2.
Romans 8. Phil. 2.
for the merits and sheding of Christ's blood, his dear beloved son. After
that, we see and perceive so great a mercy and pity of our heavenly father,
that would not favor nor spare his only son, to dye for our redempio, but
gave him to the most cruel and vile death of the cross forvs, how should not
we trust to so merciful a father in all our troubles and aduersityes, whether
they be of body or soul? Why should we not call only upon so merciful a God.
Mat 11.
If we do thus amend our lives, believe his promises and study a better life,
Luke ^.
we shall not only be saved by his mercy, but also glad to serve him, and
walk before him in innocence and pureness of life: and also obediently and
quietly in the world, give reverence and love to all persons accordingly to
whom? honor, honor: to whom love, love: to whom? justice, iustce: to whom
mercy, mercy. Unto this christian ^uietnes, reverence, love and fear, does at
the scripture exhort us, and chiefly this present 13. chap. to the To. For the
understanding whereof the better I note at the beginning a certain diversity
and difference of persons. There be, and ever has been some public persons
and some private persons. Public persons, be those that bear any office,
rule, re giment or dominion, in a common wealth: as a king with all his
justices, Majors, Sheriffs, Baliffes, Constables, and other. Private persons,
be such as be subjects, and under these officers. These two persons must be
diversely used, and the duty that is due unto the one is not due unto the other
in civil respects. And seeing we must live with both these persons and states
appointed to be in the world by almighty God. S. Paul in this Chapter is very
diligent to teach and instruct us how we should live accordingly in truth and
honesty toward them both.

The division of the Chapter.
Parts. 1 Why the superior powers should be obeyed. Parts. 2 How we be
debtors of love to the public person and Magistrate, and to the private
person that is a subject, indifferently. Parts. 3 Contains an exhortation to
innocence and honesty of life, that the truth being once known and received,
every man should abstain and keep him self from filthiness and unclean
life.
The first part, concerning the obedience of the Magistrates.

The Text.
Let every soul submit himself unto the aucthority of the higher powers.
SAint Paul pronounces generally, that every soul: that is to say, every
man should be obedient unto the higher power, in a kingdom and monarchy,
where one is appointed to rule all the subjects of the same realm, are bound
to obey the King appointed by God, of what condition, state or degree, soever
they be, as the king himself, is bound to be obedient unto the law, and
unto God, where as the laws be not contrary to the law of God and the law of
nature. And here is no exception to be made. No man in a kingdom is or ought
to be privileged or exempt from the obedience of the king, which is the
higher power. And the ecclesiastical laws, that do exempt and privilege any
spiritual (as they be called) or temporal person from this general rule.
Every man be obedient to the higher power, is damnable and heretical:
manifestly condemned by the word of God. For Christ and his Apostles paid
tribute, Mat. 17.22. Romans 13.
and other duties vnso the Higher powers of the earth.

And the powers that here S. Paul speaks of, be not only Kings and
emperors, but also such as be appointed to any public office and common
regiment, either for a King, where as is a Kingdom, or in the place of a King,
where as the state of the common wealth is no monarchy, but a rule and
dominion, commended to many. To all these S. Paul commands obedience, honor,
reverence, and love to be borne. And this is specially to be noted in S Paul,
that he says simply and plainly, we should obey the higher powers to confute,
argue, and reprehend those that cloak and excuse their inobedience, cyther for
the age of the rulers, or else for conditions and manners of the rulers. And that
age discharges no man for inobedience, the word of God declares, how that
he was present to help young kings, 2. Chro. (...).
and to defend them in their under age, as it is to be seen by king Ios^as.
Also God punishes young Kings as often as they walk not after his word, as
it is to be seen by Iehoiacim, 1. Chro. 36.
that was crowned in the eight year of his age, and within three months and
Ten days, for the Sins he committed before God: he was taken prisoner by
Nabuchadnezer. Even so was Manasses being of 12. years of age. Neither does
the manners and condition of the Magistrates excuse our inobedience though they
be naught For Paul bids us look upon the power and ancthoritie of the
higher powers: and not upon their manners. 1. Pet. 2.
* And S. Peter commands the servants to obey their Masters though they be
evil. So Joseph obeid Pharaoh, and Christ our savior Pilate, S. Paul, the
emperors of Rome, Caligula and Nero. And when S. Paul commands us to be
obedient, he means not only we should speak reverently and honorably of
the higher power, or make courtesy unto him, but to obey the laws set forth
by the powers, except they command things against gods laws: Act. 5.
then must * we obey more God then men, and yet not to strive and fight with
the Magistrates: but suffer patiently death rather then to offend God: or else
our obedience is no thing but hypocrisy and dissimulation. Who would accept his
own child's making of courtesy, when all his facts be contrary to his
commandment? What master would be content, or think his servant did his
duty in putting of his Cap, and in his doing contemns all his masters laws
and commandments? The laws of a Magistrate be of two conditions and sorts:
either they concern God or man. If they concern or appertain to God, either
they be according to the word of God, or contrary to the word of God. If they
be according to the word of God, of necessity and bondage, upon pain of
damnation, they must be obeyed. If they be repugnant to the word of God, they
should not be obeyed. Yet rather should a man suffer death, then to defend
him self by force and violent resisting of the superior powers, as Christ,
his Apostles, and the Prophets did.

If the laws concern and appertain unto man, and unto things Civil, they
must simply without exception be obeyed, except they repugne, and be contrary
to the law of nature. Exodus 1.
As Pharaohs laws and commandments was to the Midwiues, that they should
have killed all the men children, that the women of Isralites brought forth.
Seeing Saint Paul commands us to give obedience unto the higher powers, how
much be these men worthy hell fire, that resist them both with hand, heart, and
tongue. Exodus 22.
In ye book of Exodus the people is commanded not too speak evil of ye higher
powers, read yt place, and learn to detest and abhor those runagats that every
i^ tauern and taphouse, spew out their blasphemous and traitorous talks, Exodus
23.22.
against the magistrates, when they should rather look upon their own fa^^ts and
study to amend them. And also pray God to do the same in the Magistrates, that
it might please him of his great mercy, to amend and redress all things
that be amiss.

After that S. Paul has generally co^mmanded al men to be obedient to the
higher powers, he shows the causes wherefore they should be obeyed,

The text
For there is no power (says he) but of God The powers that be, are ordained
of God. Whosoever therefore resists power, resists the ordinances of God.
BEcause that naturally there is in every man a certain desire of liberty,
and to live without subjection, and all manner of laws, except such as please
him self, Saint Paul is not content generally to exhort and command all men
to obedience of the higher powers, but gives many great and weighty causes,
wherefore men should be obedient and in subjection unto them.

The first is, because the office of a Magistrate, is the ordinance of God:
and seeing all the ordinances and powers of God, are to be obeyed, necessarely
it follows, that with out al tergiuersation, hypocrisy, and collusion, the
Magistrate must be obeyed, except we will say in some respects, God is is not
to be obeyed, And of this reason of Saint Paul, we must uote, First the
dignity and honor of a public person, that his office and place is the
ordinance and appointment of God. And therefore the Magistrates be called Gods
in the holy scripture. Exodus 22. Psalm. 82.
For no man can come to the office of a Magistrate, but by the permission and
sufferance of God. Many times some persons come unto the place of a ruler, by
false and preposserous means, as those do that for a private lucre, or
private hatred to other, put up them selves, and pull down those that God has
appointed But such ungodly coming to honor, God suffers and appoints for
the sins of the people, such evil and dissembling hiporrites to reign. But
let the King and Magistrate be as wicked as can be devised and thought, yet is
his office and place the ordinance and appointment of God, and therefore to be
obeyed. And as it is the subjects duty to obey them, so is it their duty to
watch and be circumspect, that they trouble nor unquiet any thing in their
offices contrary to the word of God, whose officers they be. In case they do,
although the subjects may not, nor upon pain of eternal damnation, oughtnot by
force nor violence to resist ye officer in his high power, yet he should, and
is bound to think him self, that God can and will as well revenge the abuse of
his office in him, as punish the subject for the disobedience of his
ordinances toward the higher power.

If it be true yt S. Paul says, the higher power to be the ordinance of God,
it is very damnable iniquity, that for any private affection, or other unjust
oppressions, for any man to depose the Magistrates from their places and honor
appointed by God, or else privily or openly, craftily, or violently, to go
about to change or alter the state and ordinance of God: and there withal God
is sore offended, as it does apear by the grudging and murmuring of the people
against Moses, in ye desert, Sam. 8.
the which thoughts and conspiracies of the people, against their Magistrate
and governor, the Lord punished with Death, Number. 14.
and killed them all before they came to the land of Canaan. For even as Kings
and Magistrates be appointed and ordained of God, even so be they also defended
by him, as it appears by David, Iosaphat, 2. Sam. 17.18.
and other. And the sedition and treason redounded always to the destruction
of the people at length, as is to be seen in Absolon, Architophell, Catlime
Brutus, Casius, and other that destroyed not only them selves, but also the
people by such treason and disobedience against the ordinance and appointment
of God: as ye may see here by the text of S. Paul that follows, which is his
second cause why the higher powers should be obeyed. And as he said first, they
should be obeyed, because their place and authority is the ordinance of God:
so now in his second cause he shows, what great danger and peril it is, to
resist and disobey Gods ordinances.

The text.
And they that resist shall receive to them selves damnation.
A^ though he had said, least ye should think it a light thing, but a
trifling matter to withstand and disobey the Magistrates, understand ye that in
your so doing ye withstand and fight against God, and therefore ye provoke
judgment and vengeance against your selves, and be culpable and gyltie of
Gods everlasting displeasure, if ye repent not, and give over your obstinate
and disobedient rebellion. Here Saint Paul has set forth the end and
success of sedicion, Treason, conspiracy, and rebellion, to say, destruction
both of body and soul. Who is able to contend and fight with God, and overcome
him? Is not he only almighty; and only strength?

Absolon with a thousand traitors against one true subject, prevailed not
against his father David, but dyed the death of a traitor. Even so did those
whom before I named. And as saint Paul speaks here, Mat. 26.
so speaks Christ to Peter. He that stryketh with the swoorde, shall
perish by the swoorde, if Gods word be true (as it can not be falls) al such
as do by thought, word or deed, intend to trouble unquiet change, altar, move
or resist the ordinauce of God, which is the Magistrates and higher powers,
must needs of necessity perish, as well in this world as in the world to
come, except they repent, and cease from doing of evil. Now goes S. Paul
fourth with the text.

The Text.
For rulers be not to be feared of such as do well, but of such as do evil.
BY these words S. Paul declares two things. First he warns the Magistrate
of his office, least when he shall perceive it to be the ordinance of God, and
that no man should more resist and contrary it, then to resist and contrary
God should wax arrogant and proud, and begin to favor and flatter himself
to much under the tittle and pretense of Gods power. But God forbid (says
saint Paul) that the Magistrate should think any such thing, he should
remember rather that he is appointed to his place to defend, help, and
preserve such as be good, and punish such as be naught and evil. This
commandment did God command to ye higher powers in the common wealth of the
Israelites, and that they should not lift up their hearts above their
brothers, Exodus 18. Number. 27. Deu. 1.16. and 17. 2. Par. 39. Psalm. 72.82.101.
but to use indifferency and justice, with all indifferently, without
exception of persons: as ye may read in the holy scripture.

The second part of S. Paul's words commends the Magistrates for their
utility and commodity in the common wealth because that by their authority
evil doers among the people are punished and corrected: that honest and true
men may live in rest and quietness. And for this commodity and necessary use
we be bound to obey them. For through their diligence, labor and pains under
God, we eat, hear the word of God, labor, bring up youth, househouldes be
in quietness, the goods thereof, with Cities, Towns, and Villages of the
realm. These commodities be great, and worthy of thanks, especially to God,
and then to the higher power, Saint Paul follows his purpose with these
words,

The Text.
Will thou be without fear of the higher power? Do well then, and so shall
thou be praised of them,
WHere as before he said the high power was a fear to evil doers, in these
words he shows, how men may be without fear of the Magistrates, to say, if
men do well, for well doing pleases Gods order, and Gods order being pleased,
fears not, nor punishes the well doer. And whereas Saint Paul speaks of
fear to the higher power, we must understand, that fear is of two sorts,
one is if love and good will anexed, and knit with reverence and love, and this
fear is only in godly and virtuous men that delight to be ordered and ruled
after the order and appointment of God.

The other fear is annexed we spite, hatred, envy, and disdain, ye wishes
there were no order, law, nor Magistrates, and those that be to destroy them,
o^ to bring them out of credit and estimation among the people. This fear is
wicked and damnable, and a testimony of an evil and cursed conscience, and
forbidden here in this place by S. Paul. Saint Paul continues in the
commendation of the Magistrates, saying,

The Text.
For he is the Minister of God, for thy wealth.
HEre Saint Paul adds an other commendation of the higher power, the which
consists in two members, wherefore he should be obeyed, The first is,
because he is the Minister of God. The second, because he was instituted and
appointed by God for the wealth and commodity of the subject. In this, that
Saint Paul calls him the Minister of God, he puts the subject in mind
again, that who so ever contemn or disobey the higher power, Lu. c. 10.
contemns and disobeyeth God. And so says Christ, who so contemns such as
I appoint and send, contemns me. And the same said God unto Moses. They have
not cast of thee, but me. Also the magistrate there is warned to take heed,
he do nothing but as the minister of God, to rule and govern after his word.
Deu 17. ^. Cor. 4.
For this God requires of him that he be a faithful minister. And whenever
he begin to wax lofty, hauty, arrogant and proud, let him remember S. Paul's
words, that he is but a minister.

And where as S. Paul says, the magistrate is ordained for the wealth of the
people: he must take heed of the end where unto he is appointed, and be in need
as God would him to be, a wealth and salvation of the people, to defend just
causes and to condemn such as be unjust, to remove false and supersticious
religion, and to plant true and godly religion, to maintain such as profit
the Church and flock of Christ, and to remove such as hinder and deceive
them. S. Paul now prosecutetd his matter, and shows who should fear the
higher powers, with these words.

The Text.
If thou do evil, then fear, for he bears not a sword for naught: but he
is the minister of God, to take punishment of them that do evil.
Even as S. Paul says here, that the cause of fear to an evil man, is that
the Magistrate bears a sword: Even so does he declare that it is not enough
for the Magistrate to bear a sword, but to use and execute the sword, as the
sins of the people require, to punish and kill them, if the law so find them
gyltie: and for fear of the use of the sword, which is not in vain, they
should keep evil doers in obedience and fear, and so much the more, because
he is the minister of God, and his punishment is the very hand and will of
God, when he punishes evil doers. And it is not he that kills, but God,
whose place he occupies, being a Magistrate and higher power. For God
commands him to punish, Exodus 23.22. Liuit. 19.20. Deu. 19.
and not to favor such evil and naughty persons.

It is very diuilishnes to accuse the Magistrates of evil doings, when they
punish or put to death evil doers seeing in their thie doing, they be none other
but Gods Ministers. And where as the scripture forbids punishment and
revenging, it means that no private man should revenge his own cause, nor
fight at his pleasure, but rather suffer wrongs, if the law will not redress
it. And if the judge and Magistrate in a cause of the law, for lucre, fear,
love, friendship, or any other respect, kill any man that is not worthy by the
law to die, the judge and Magistrate is a very murderer. And so he is, if he
save any man that the law condemns. For he is as saint Paul says, a
Minister of God, who never saves one, and condemns the other in like causes.
Saint Paul when he has sufficiently deelared the dignity and honor of the
higher power, gathers by two necessary causes more, yt the Magistrate is to
be obeyed with these words.

The Text.
Wherefore ye must needs obey, not for fear of vengeance only, but also
because of conscience.
THe one cause wherefore we must obey, is the fear of pain and punishment, the
which the Magistrate must minister by the commaandement of God, unto all such
as disobey and contemn the ordinance of God. The other is conscience, for
although the magistrate do not see nor know, how thou do disobey and break
the order of God or else if thou could by power and strength, overcome the
magistrates, yet thy conscience is bound to obey, and that for many causes.
First because the magistrate is the ordinance of God, then because
disobedience and breaking of Gods law, troubles the public and common peace,
and gives other stomach and encouraging to disobey. Al these evils follows
disobedience, ye which of conscience we are bound to eschew and avoid. There be
some so indurates past grace, ye think themselves not bound to obey this order
and higher power, appointed and commanded of God: but doubtless those shall
perish with their captains, as A^chi^^phel did with his Absolon.

If the higher power command any thing contrary unto Gods word, they should
not be obeyed. Notwithstanding, there should be such modesty and soberness
used, as should be without all violence, force and rebellion. As Peter and John
used, saying. God is more to be obeyed then man. And so in saying of truth,
they continued in the truth, without moving of sedition and suffered death for
the truth, as Fabian and Ciprian, holy martyrs, and records of God, suffered
in Africa, under Decius the Emperor of Rome. How we are bound in conscience to
obey them. S. Paul declares further, saying.

The Text.
And even for this cause pay ye tribute, for they are Gods ministers appointed
to the same purpose.
IF we were not bound in conscience to obey them, we should not need to pay
tribute unto them, but seeing we ought to pay tribute, Taxes and subsidies we
know they do defend us against al force, violence, and wrongs of our
ennemies. Therefore tribute is a note and knowledge of our obedience, which we
must pay willingly (...) gladly of duty as Christ says, give unto God, ye
which is Gods, and to the emperor, that which is the emperors.

S. Paul shows the cause why tribute ought to be paid unto the higher
powers, because says he, they be ordained of God, to preserve and defend the
common wealth, in peace and quietness: to punish the evil and to defend the
good. And without the magistrates help this can not be done, as ye may read,
in the book of ye Judges, how the people fell into al mischief, when they
wanted a lawful Magistrate and superior power, and every man did as it seemed
best in his own eyes. And in the Prophet Esaias, Esaias. 3.
the Lord threatens the wicked Jerusalem, because there was none in it,
worthy to bear rule. Eue^ as subjects be bound to obey this higher power, so
must the higher power always take heed that virtue and good men be commended,
and evil men with sin and disobedience punished. Now follows the second part
of the Chapter.

The text
Give to every man therefore his duty, tribute, to whom tribute belongs,
Custom, to whom custom is due: fear, to whom fear belongs: honor, to
whom honor pertayneth.
WHen S. Paul has sufficiently told us our duties to the higher power, he
descends from that particularity, and one sort of persons to a generallitie,
how we should do our duties to al manner of persons. First generally he says,
we should give every man his due. Then numbreth he certain kinds and
particulers of duties. Tribute we owe to kings and Magistrates, yt must we
faithfully pay, or else the with holders commit theft, and therefore Christ paid
tribute.

Custom is the revenues or profits that comes by land, or trade of
Merchandise, and in this point, faith must be kept to all men, according to
the laws appointed by the higher power.

Fear is due unto God, the King, to parents, and to all other of whom we be
help in body or Soul, and so is honor due likewise. Therefore says the
law, fear God, honor the King, honor Father and Mother. etc. 1. Pet. 2.
Exodus 20.
Arise to a hoare head. Saint Paul breketh his disputation of duetyes, and will
tarry no longer in the enumeration and numbering of the parts and particulars of
duetyes, but prefereth altogether so charity in this wise.

The Text.
Owe nothing to any man, but to love one the other.
AS though he had said, what needs it to write much of duties, contractes,
of buyinge, lendings, and such other like things? Let charity be ye rule of
all these things, unto ye which, if the subject submit himself, he will use
his higher power none otherwise than he would be used himself if he were an
higher power: the higher power, the subject none otherwise then though he were
a subject him self, what so ever thing agrees with charity is good. What so
ever agrees not with Charity, is evil. But many men can not tell what
charity is. And therefore it is no marnaile though al their doings be against
charity. Charity is a fervent desire and earnest study to do well unto al men,
yea, even with the hurt of him yt does it, if necessity so requires, as S,
Paul teaches. And S, Ihon says, christ gave his life for us, and we ought to
give ours, for our brothers. The effects, properties, Phil. 2.
and conditions of this charity S, Paul shows, and says, Charity
suffers, 1. Ioh. 3.
will not do evil for evil, looks not her own profit, charity will not
conspire nor work traitorously, but pray for them that persecute her. Thus S,
Paul declares yt we be debttours to keep peace and quietness among our
neighbors, and to do al me^ good as long as we live. Faith makes us free
before God in Christ Jesus, charity makes us servants to our neighbors for
the love of Christ. S. Paul proves by examples, that charity should be the
rule of all our doings with these words that follow.

The Text.
For he that loves another, fulfilleth the law. For these commandments,
thou shall not commit adultrie, thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal,
thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall not desire and so forth, (if
there be any other commandment) they are all comprehended in this saying,
love thy neighbor as thy self.
A Wonderful commendation of charity, that who so observes her, fulfilleth
the whole law, meaning the law that appertains for the duty and offices to
be done between man, and man. And not that any man can satisfy the law before
God, saving only Christ: no, nor all parts toward man: for no man loves his
neighbor so fervently, as the law of God requires. Yet S, Paul says we
fulfill ye law when we give our selves earnestly and holy, as much as lies in
us to work ye law. And then our lack and imperfection, shall be profited and
accounted full and sufficient for Christ's sake: he adds yet an other
commendation of charity.

The Text.
Love hurts not his neighbor.
THat is to say: he that has a Christian love can not hurt his neighbor. By
this rule men may know whither they have charity, or not: for in case we
deminish ye goods of our neighbors, whether they be of his body or his soul,
or else of his possessions, honor, place, or dignity. Or if we increse not
these goods toward all me^ if we may, there is no charity in us. Or else, if we
diminish not their evils and troubles, as we may, either if we do the evils in
any sort by our selves, or by other, we have no charity in us. By this rule we
may now know, whether we love our brothers, or not: and duly examining our
selves, we shall see how far we be from charity, and that it is an easy
thing to speak and talk of charity, and a very hard matter, to practice and
lead our lives according to charity.

For if we had as much charity as we profess to hane, we should satisfy all the law, as S. Paul says.

The text.
Therefore is love the fulfilling of the law.
MEaning by the law, the seco^^ table of the ten Commandments, in the which
is contained the duetye and office of every man, to all manner of persons, of
what condition soever they be. As for the law of the first table, which
contains the religion of God, fear, faith, love, prayer, obedience,
patience, right use of Sacraments, with such other as appertains only unto
God, and be the fountain and original of all good works. For here his
argument and state is to tell what men should do to men, and in the first
table is declared what man should do to God, fully and sufficiently, these two
former parts, sufficiently declared by Saint Paul, he follows with the third
part of the chapter, which contains an exhortation unto innocence and
honesty of life.

The Text.
Because we know the season, how that it is time we should awake now out of
sleep.
HItherto S. Paul has taught how christian men should behave the^ selves, not
only toward ye publik person the King and Magistrate, whom they be bound to
honor and obey: but also toward private persons, that bear no office who^
they be bound to love. And that the same obedience, to the higher power and
love toward al men, may the better preserve and continue, he adds now an
exhortation to honest living, and Godly conversation, which he takes
metaphorically, or by similitude of the time: saying, it is meet we should
live honestly now, for it is time, meaning by the time the season and time,
wherein the grace of God in Christ Jesus, is preached and opened to the world, ye
which should not give us occasion of wickedness and sin: but rather wake us out
of our sleep, and to rear us out of sin.

Here mark what the Apostle calls sleep, and what to rise and wake out of
sleep. Sleep is a stupor and deadnes of the mind that rests, and is a
sleep in evil and mischief, and cares not for ye law, nor will of God, but
will follow religion of will, fantasies, idolatry, superstition, ignorance,
and al ungodly conversation, without al fear, feeling, or remorse of Gods
displeasure. In this sleep rests al idolaters obstinate, dronken, covetous,
envious sedicious, traitorous, adulterous, scla^derous, proud, and negligent
persons, that feel not, nor repent not, though they be sunk down even to
bottom and very dregs of these evils. From this sleep the gospel of Christ
provoke, exeitateth and stirs, if obstinacy have not endured and made hard
our hearts And would have us to correct and amend our self, and idolatrical
judgment in religion from our wills, to honesty and obedience, and to a new
life, that we might be new creatures in the Lord, and to be ready to all
service and obedience, both of God and his word, that we might have a true
old and Patriarchall, Prophetical, and Apostolical faith, like fear, like
love, like obedience of the Magistrates, and like charity, toward all men.
For all they that walk not in these virtues, sleep yet in their sins, and
never felt yet the light of the Gospel, whose meruaylouse nature and
condition, S. Paul shows in the words that follow.

The Text.
For now is our salvation, nearer then when we believed.
AS though he had said of congruence and decentnesse, it is meet that we
should now live honestly and Godly in all love and obedience, for our salvation
is now nearer unto us by the preaching of the Gospel, which saves us by
Christ, then it was before time by preaching of the law or philosophy, when
we thought to be saved by the ceremonies and works of them. Of this text of
S. Paul, we see what is the nature and condition of al men, Romans 1.
that then they must trust and hope whiles they be in a false religion, so did
the Jews seek to be saved, and required justice of the Law. So did the
Pharisees, and exalte themselves above Christ and his Apostles. Therefore,
Saint Paul says here, then when we believed, to say by the works of the Law
and the doctrine of men, we should be saved. But this faith was an error and
lie, for we know our salvation to be by the preaching of the gospel.

The second, we learn of these words is, that only the gospel shows and
opens unto us our salvation, and does not deceive us, Luke 24. Romans 1.
and therefore it is called the power of God, to all that believe. Let us
therefore embrace and receive this only gospel obediently and thankefully,
which the Lord willed his apostles to teach unto all the world and willed that
their successors should do the same, as they do never almost, the more pity.
S. Paul tarrieth, and goes forth with his metaphore and figure, saying.

The text.
The night is passed, and the dai is come nie.
The night is called the time of false doctrine and ignorancie, in which men
live naughtily unpunished, where as the true light, Christ and his word is not
preached, there ye gretest virtue is acompted vice, and vice accounted for
virtue, and sins rebuked, are excused and extenuated. So is al true judgment
taken from the world, for in the night no man can judge colors. In papistry ye
see matrimony judged to be incest, the use of Gods creatures flesh and such
like, to be heresy. Again, manifest idolatry taken for the honoring of god:
Monkery, for perfect life: Whoredom, for mockery, and not worthy a half penny
pardon, etc. The day yt S. Paul speaks here of, is the time wherein the gospel
of Christ is opened to ye world, the which brings not only true doctrine,
but also life everlasting. For Christ is the light of the world. If the^ Christ
the very son and brightness of God, has illuminated us, we must says S.
Paul diligently walk in him, and live, an honest and virtuous life, as he
exhorts earnestly in ye words that follows.

The Text.
Let us therefore cast away the deeds of darkness, and let us put on the
armor of light, as men walking honestly in the day light: not in eating and
drinking, neither in chambring and wantonness, neither in strife and envying.
THis exhortation of S. Paul, consists in two parts, in the one, he shows
what we should not do, in the other, what we should do.

The first, what we should not, exhorting us to cast of the works of darkness.
These works be the sins, we should be ashamed to do openly, and in the sight
of the world: and so they be called ye sins of darkness, because they love
darkness, therefore Christ says, this is the condemnation, ye light is come
into the world, and men loves darkness, beter then light: their works were
evil: every man that does evil, hates the light, and comes not to ye light,
least his works should be rebuked. Such works pleasant unto darkness, S. Paul
here wills us to cast away. And ye thing that we cast away we have not. As
many therefore as tarry in these sins, as long as he taryeth, he is no Christian
man.

The first thing that he exhorts us to do, is to put on the armor of light,
that is to say, to work good works, of the which we should not be ashamed,
neither before God, neither man: but boldly and honestly to walk in them. S.
Paul calls the first works of a christian man armor, by the name of war,
because a christian man's life, is a perpetual and a continual fight, and
battle against the Devil, the world, the flesh and sin: the crafts of the
devil be maruailous subtle, and dangerous, in case our hearts be not well
fenced with fruits in Christ Jesus, and with fear we should be overcome. And
if he so do no remedy, except we repent, we shall be the everlasting enemies of
God, If in Christ we resist and overcome, we shall have in him all the glory and
honor that he has won in heaven for us,

S. Paul anexeth three capital and dangerous evils, that we must eschew, The
first that we beware of inordinat eating and drinking, Here is the abuse of
meats and drinks forbidden, and not the meat and drink it self. From the
which vices Christ himself exhorts us, Luke 22. Elai. 3.28. Pro. 23.
and Esaias the Prophet, and Solomon in his Proverbs.

The other Capital evil, is incontinent and unchaste living, by the which words,
he condemns al schortation, adultry, and whooredome, 1. Cor. 6. Ephe. 5.
and al vncleanlines. And in remoouing of these incontinences he commends
chaste and pure matrimony between man and wife

The third capital evil that we must avoid, is strife and contention: against
the which writes S. James, Cap. 3.
the which rises many times of the bitter zeal of him yt is admonished for
his faults, against him that admonishes. How much this vice is contrary unto
charity, S. Paul shows, when he says, if ye one of you bite the other,
take heed one consume not ye other. Where such co^tentions and strifs be,
there is no charity, S. Paul after these evils returns again to that we
should do, saying.

The Text.
But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ.
TO put on a thing figuratively taken, is exactly and studiously to follow and
to pursue a thing. So he does on Hercules person, that expresses and shows
forth the facts of Hercules. So to put on Christ, is to acco^modate and apply
our faith and works to ye example of his life and doctrine, as he byddeth us to
believe, so to believe: as he bids us to work, even so to work: and not to
follow our own imagination. S, Paul concludes the Chapter, with a lesson
which we should avoid and eschew.

The Text.
And do not the cares of the flesh, to fulfill them.
THat is to say, do not the thing that the flesh swadeth and would have thee
to do, neither live not after the affection of the flesh. This is the sum and
conclusion of a Christian life, that we follow not the lusts and desires of
our corrupt nature. The necessities of our flesh, we must help, that it may
serve us, and not we it, as the Lord give us grace to do.

Amen.

