THE POOR Doubting CHRISTIAN Drawn to CHRIST.

Wherein the maine letts and hindrances which keep men from coming to Christ
are discovered.

With special helps to recover Gods favor.

Ho, every one that thirsts, drink of the waters of life, and he that has
no money, come buy and eat freely

The Third Edition.

LONDON Printed for R. Dawlman and L. Fawn at the Brazen Serpent in
Pauls-Churchyard. 1636.



THE POOR DOVBTING CHRISTIAN drawn unto Christ.
JOHN 6.45. Every man therefore that has heard and has learned of the Father,
comes unto me.


THere are diverse lets and impediments which hinder poor Christians from
coming unto Christ, all which I desire to reduce to these following heads.

First, such hindrances as really keep men from coming to take hold of
Christ at all, which are briefly these.

Lets which hinder me^ from coming to Christ.
1. Blind carelessness, or presumptuous security, whereby men content
themselves in their present condition, presuming all is well with them, when
there is no such matter.

2. Being convinced of this, they bethink how to save themselves by their own
strength, and thereupon set upon a reformation of life, thinking to make God
amends by reforming some sins which they hear themselves reproved of by the
Ministers.

3. The sinner being convinced of his utter inability to please God in
himself, at length gets up a stayre higher, and sees all his performances, and
prayers, and duties to be of no power in themselves, but that he must leave
all, and cleave only unto Christ by faith; and this he thinks he can do well
enough, and so thrusts himself upon Christ, thinking all the work is then
done, and no more to be looked after.

4. If he sees this fails him too, then he goes yet further, and confesses
he cannot come to Christ except Christ give him his hand, and help him up:
therefore now he will attend upon the ordinances, and labor and bestirre
himself hard in the use of all good means, conceiving thereby to hammer out
at last, a faith of his own to make him happy. And here he rests, hanging as
it were upon the outside of the Arc, so long till at last the waves and winds
growing fierce and violent, he is beaten off from his hold, and so sinkes for
ever.

Besides these, there are other kinds of hindrances which do not indeed
deprive a man of title and interest to eternal happiness, but make the way
tedious and uncomfortable, so that he cannot come to Christ so readily, as he
desires and longs to do; the ground whereof, is this, when men out of carnal
reason contrive another way to come unto Christ, then ever he ordained or
revealed, when we set up a standard by Gods Standard, and out of our own
imagination make another condition of believing then ever Christ required or
ordained. Thus we make bars in the way, and manacle our hands, and fetter
our feet, and then we complain we cannot go: thus it is with you poor
Christians, and the fault is your own. Now amongst many there be three
hindrances which are chiefly to be observed, Three main hindrances which
keep man from Christ.
by which many gracious hearts are marvellously hindered from coming to, and
from receiving that comfort from Christ, which they might, and he is willing
to bestow.

these, begins thus to reason with himself, and says, Surely if I were so
holy and so gracious, then I might have hope to receive the pardon of my
sins; for were my heart so enlarged to duties, and could my heart be so
carried with power against my corruptions to master them, then there were some
hope; but when I have no power against sin, nor any heart to seek so
importunatly for a Christ, how dare I think that any mercy belongs to me,
having so many wants? thus they dare not come to the promise, and they will not
venture upon it, because they have not that enlargement to duties, and that
power against corruption which sometimes the Saints of God have.

But we must know this does not hinder, we make it a hinderance, when in truth
it is none; for observe it, we must not think to bring enlargement and hope to
the promise, but we must go to the promise for them; hope must be stirred,
and desire quickened, and love and joy kindled by the promise; who made this a
condition of the covenant, that a man must have so much enlargement before he
come to the promise? our Savior requires no portion, but mere poverty and
emptiness: if thou have nothing he will have thee, provided that thou will
have him; Luke 1.53.
The rich he sends empty away, but the poor is satisfied, and the thirsty
refreshed: there is nothing required on our side, but only to receive him as a
husband: Esaias 55.1.
Buy without money, says the text; you must not think to come and buy a
husband; the Lord looks for no power or sufficiency of our selves, no power
against corruption, nor enlargement to duties, if you will be content that
Christ shall take all from you, and dispose of you, then, take a Savior and
have him.

Quest. But the poor soul says, If I go thus hudwinked, how shall I know
that I do not presume, and how shall I know that I have a true title to the
promise.

Answ.I answer, there is no better argument in the world that thou have an
interest in Christ, then this, thy taking of the Lord Christ as a Savior
wholly, and as a husband. John 1.12. As many as received him, to them he gave
power to be the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. He does
not say, to as many as had such enlargement in duties, and such power against
corruptions; but if thou will take Christ upon those terms which he offers
himself, there is no better argument under heaven, that thou have a title to
the promise. There is a desperate despair that often seazeth upon the hearts
of distressed sinners.

Therefore in the second abominations coming in amain upon his soul, and
Satan helps him forwards hereto; for this is the policy of the Devil, that,
if he can, he will make a man that he shall never see his sin, but say,
there is mercy enough in a Savior, and therefore I may live as I list: but
when the sinner will needs see his sin, then he will let him see nothing but
sin; the one that he may presume, and the other that he may despair.

Now the poor sinner stays here; tell him of the mercy of God, and of the
plenteous redemption in Christ, and of the riches of the freeness of Gods
grace, What, says he, should I think that there is any mercy for me, and
that I have any interest in Christ; that were strange? And thus the soul is
here poring, and fastened, and settled upon his corruption, and is ever stirring
the wound, and never goes to the Physician: For a man is as well kept from
looking to Christ by despair, as by presumption; before he sees his sin, he
thinks his condition is good, and he has a sufficiency of his own, and
needs not go to Christ; and when he sees his sin, then he beholds so much
vileness in himself that he dares not go to Christ, lest when he goes before
him, he send him down to the pit. Herein the devil is very subtle; but this
does not hinder our title to Christ, neither ought it to discourage our hearts
from laying hold on salvation.

For first, (observe it) for whom did Christ come into the world, and for whom
did he die when he was come? it was not for the righteous, that needed him
not, but for the poor sinner that condemns himself, and knows he cannot
save himself. Paul says, Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.
of whom I am the chief: and Zach. 13.1. There is a fountain opened for
sin, and for uncleanness, that is, for all sorts of sins, and for all kind
of sinners: be their iniquities never so great, and never so vile, there is a
fountain set open, come who will; there was never any saved but a Rebel, and
never any man received to mercy, but he that opposed the mercy of God, and his
grace in Christ. The fiery Serpents did sting the people in the wilderness,
but there was a brazen Serpent to heal them.

Observe the folly of this plea: what Scripture ever said that the greatness
of man's sin could hinder the greatness of Gods mercy? no Scripture reveals
this, we see David prays the contrary, Have mercy upon me O Lord, Psalm. 25.11
and pardon my sins, for they are great: Nay, God himself does the quite
contrary, Isa. 43.24, 25. Thou have made me serve with thy sins, and wearied
me with thine iniquities, yet I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
for my names sake. When the Jews did tire GOD with their distempers, and
burdened him with their sinful courses, then the Lord for his own name sake
would not so much a^ remember their iniquitie^ against them.

Again observe, tha^ sins though they be never so heinous of themselves, yet
if the soul can see them, and the heart be burdened with them, they are so
far from hindering the work of faith, and from making thee incapable of
mercy, that they fit thee to go to Christ: The truth is, (which I pray you
take notice of) it is not properly our unworthiness, but our pride and
haughtiness that hinders us from coming to Christ; for we would have
something in our selves, and not have all from Christ. Take the distressed
soul that sees the vileness of his sins: suppose thy sins were fewer,
nevertheless even then thou go not to Christ, because thou art persuaded of
the freeness of his grace, but because thou have a worthiness in thy self,
and would bring something to Christ, and not receive all from him: Therefore
it is thy pride, and thy selfe-conceitednesse that hinders thee, thou must have
thus much grace and holiness, and Christ must not justify the ungodly, but
the godly man; I tell thee, then he will never justify a man while the world
stands.

Object. But the soul replies again, My sins are worse, not only because
they are many, but because of the mercy and salvation that I have rejected,
which has been offered me from day to day.

Answ. This hinders not, provided that thou can see those evils of thine:
though thou have cast away the kindness of the Lord, yet the Lord will not cast
away thee, if thou will come and seek him earnestly again: Esa. 57.17, 18.
For the iniquity of his covetousness I was wroth (says God) and I smote him,
I hid my self, and he went on frowardly in the way of his own heart. If this
could have hindered, Judah should never have received mercy; but the text says,
I have seen his ways, and will heal him; Ier. 3.1.
Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet turn again to me, says
the Lord. There is no time past if a man have but a heart to return; there is
no limitation of the riches of Gods free grace, except the sin against the holy
Ghost, Rev. 3.20. I stand at the door and knock; though he cry til he be
hoarse, and stand till he be weary, yet he stands still: if any adulterous or
deceitful wretch will open, the Lord will come in, and bring comfort, and sup
with him.

Object. Oh, that is true, says the poor soul, had I but a heart to mourn
for my baseness; see my sins I do, but this is my misery, I cannot be
burdened with them, I have a heart that cannot break and mourn for
dishonouring of God.

Answ. This hinders not neither, provided that thy heart is weary of it self,
that it cannot be weary of sin: Mich. 7.18.
The Lord shows mercy because he will show mercy, it is not because thou
can please him, but because mercy pleases him. When did the Lord show mercy
to Paul, even then when Paul did express most malice against him; Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? he persecutes Christ, and yet Christ pities him, and
shows him mercy; and so the churlish Iaylor, Acts.
when he was most opposite against the means of grace, the Lord showed then
most compassion upon him; he that before resisted the means of grace, was now
brought home by those means.

Object. But woe, faith the poor soul, you are now come to the quick; this
very word is like a Millstone about my neck, to sink my soul for ever; for
this is the depth of that baseness that lies on me, that all the means do
not better me. Why, though Paul and the Jailer were bad enough, yet they were
made better by the means; but this is my hopeless condition, that the means
of grace prevail not on me. Is there such a heart in hell as I; how ill must
I needs be, when all the means in the world will do me no, good? but, me
thinks, I feel my heart more hard and stubborn under all Gods Ordinances; my
condition is certainly hopeless, when the means that should soften me, do
but harden me, and make me worse.

Answ. This is the last plea whereby the devil holds down the heart of a poor
sinner; but let me answer thee, this hinders not neither, but that at least
thou may have hope of mercy, therefore observe three passages by way of
answer.

First, the Word and means of grace do work good, if it make thee more
sensible of thy hardness and deadness, though happily it work not that good,
and after the same manner that thou desire, yet if it make thee see thy
baseness, and hardness of heart, and dullness, in regard of that body of
death which hangs upon thee; then the word works in the best manner, because
it is after Gods manner, howsoever not after thine: That Physic works most
kindly, that makes the party sick before it works; so it is with the Word; thou
have a proud heart, and liftest up thy self in thine own abilities, and
trustest in thine own strength, and think that thy care and improvement of
the means would work wonders; but now the Word works sweetly, when it makes
thee apprehensive, that a wounded soul is the gift of God, not of man, nor of
the means; and therefore the Word makes thee look to God for it, and to prize
it when thou have it; and the Word makes thee look to God to continue it; to
feel deadness is life, and to feel hardness is softness; only remember
this one Caution, Caution.
except there be some lust or distemper that thy heart hankers after, for then
the Word will harden thee, because thou hardenest thy self.

give thee grace this year, Wait for mercy.
nor the next, nor all thy life, if at the last gasp he will drop in a little
favor, it is more then he owes thee, therefore hear to day, and wait to
morrow, and continue so doing, because thou know not when God may bless his
own Ordinances; and complain not of delays, but wait, for God has waited
for you long, and therefore if he make you wait for peace of conscience, and
assurance of his love, the Lord deals equally with you, and as shall be best
for you; God gives what, and when, and how he will, therefore wait for it.

Thirdly, know and consider that thou have rested upon thine own duties and
endeavors, Rest not upon duties.
and thou do not go to God, that blesses both the means and endeavors;
the fault is thine own, (I say) because thou restest in thine own
performances, and in the power of the means that thou apprehendest, and do
not go to God, that would have wrought more then all these: for did a man
depend upon Gods power and mercy in his Ordinances, he should always find
some proportionable succor, as well when he finds no success, as when he
finds any; for God sometimes gives, and sometimes delays, but Gods love is as
constant when he gives not, as when he gives. Therefore labor to get out from
all carnal confidence in holy duties, and rest not in thy performances, but
look beyond all duties to God, and desire him to give thee success above them.

Many a man makes his services, his Saviors. He makes them the bottom to
bear up his conscience, the ground whereof is this: Happily he finds and
feels by woeful experience, what the fruits of sin are. He sees the venom
of his corruptions, and the lamentable effects of all his sinful practices. He
thought it before a fine thing to swear, and lie, and drink, and follow base
company, but now they are gravel to his heart, and gall to his soul. His
conscience flies in his face, and he is ready to sink down to hell.
Conscience says, these be thy sins, and these will be thy damnation, they
have been thy delight, but they will prove thy shame and confusion in the end,
thou shall shortly find the smart of them. To hell; away be packing.

Now this man has no cure for his conscience but this, he entreates
Conscience to be quiet, he confesses he has lived in base courses, and his
condition is very miserable, but now he will reform all; he has neglected
prayer heretofore, but now he will pray; he has hated Gods servants, but now
he will love them, his ways have been exceeding evil, but now he will
reform them, he begins to turn a new leaf now, and thinks that will serve
the turn. Thus many poor souls use the means as Mediators, and so fall short
of Christ. A gracious heart does not only pray, and hear, and receive, and
use all possible means to obtain Christ, but he is restless and unsatisfied
till he enjoy and possess Christ in the means. He rests not upon the bare
performance of any duty, neither thinks by virtue of any of his endeavors, to
obtain a part in Christ.

I will express this particular more fully in this manner. A rich Usurer that
is sick of some disease, tell him such a Physician can cure him, but he
stands upon state, he will not come without a great deal of charge: Charge
(says he) I do not stand upon that. I have money enough by me, that will
fetch him hither. Such a man now places all his confidence in his money. So
when the soul sees, the guilt of sin is not removed, and conscience is still
snarling, and the law condemning him, and Christ is the only Savior, that can
satisfy and cure all. But how shall Christ be procured? Why his prayer, and
fasting, and performances will command him, by the power and merit of the work
done, though he has no promise for it, and so by resting on his own
performances, falls short of Christ and salvation.

Object. Oh, says a poor sinner, I would go out of my self, and I see I
rest upon my duties, but I cannot get out of my self.

Answ. I answer, it is Satan's subtilty to keep us in our selves here too, by
endeavoring to make us go out of our selves by our own strength; and this is
a marvailous depth of malice and cunning in the devil, when he makes us
believe (and we out of ignorance are deluded) that we have power in our own
hands to go out of our selves; no, it is a supernatural work, and the same
hand must bring us out of our selves, that must bring us to Christ: Self-denial
what it is.
This is in truth self-denial, when the soul knows it h^ nothing, and
therefore is over powered with the mighty hand of God, and the work of his
Spirit, so that the poor sinner does not so much as expect any power or
ability in himself, or from the creature, in the doing of any duty; he knows
he is dead, and therefore cannot help himself, much less can the creature do
him good, and therefore he looks to heaven, and seeks all sufficiency from
God alone. For (observe it) whiles that I thus think with my self, that I
have ability to go out of my self, I do not then say, that I have a
principle within me to de^^ my self, which is quite contrary, for to deny a
man's self, is to know that he has no power in himself to do any spiritual
duty, therefore we must look only to the voice of Christ, and know, that he
that calls us from the ways of darkness, and from our selves, must also bring
us to Christ; therefore expect power from Christ to pluck thee out of thy
self, and to make thee believe, for the same hand does work both.

I would not have a poor creature think thus with himself, If this means
and these Ordinances will do me no good, and will not work upon my heart, I
shall never have it; but speak thus unto God, and say, In truth Lord I expect
no power from my self, nor from the means, but my resolution is, to look up
to him that has hid his face from Jacob I will not look inward here for
power, to receive it from within my self, nor to the Minister, nor to the
means, but I will wait upon thee Lord, and look up to thy power to work by
the means. Who is amongst you that fears the Lord, Esaias 50.10.
and obeys the voice of his servants, that walks in darkness, and has no
light of comfort, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay himself upon
his God. When all other things in the world fail, let the soul then look up
to the Lord, and look out from it self; this is the fittest time of all to
meet with God; I would have a Christian choose this time above all times to
meet his Savior in, and this is the only time to disappoint Satan; for, as
I said before, it is the last refuge that the devil has, and if he miss
this opportunity, he is for ever conquered. Thus the sinner partly seeing the
beauty of grace, will not, and partly seeing the baseness of his own heart,
dares not come to Christ.

Object. Then in the next place it is want of sense and feeling, which he would
have and cannot find; therefore the distressed soul says, Alas, I never knew
what it was to have the assurance of Gods love, I never received any evidence
of Gods favor, and shall I think that I have faith? they that believe have
their hearts filled with joy unspeakable and glorious, the Word reveals this,
but I am a stranger to that joy, how can I then think that I have any work of
faith wrought in me.

Answ. I answer, this does not hinder either that thou have not faith, or that
thou may not come to God by believing, therefore remember these three
particulars.

First, thou must not joy and refreshing before thou go to the promise, but
thou must look for it, when thou do chew and feed upon the promise: thou
would have the Lord to give thee all the bargain before thou make the
match: This joy is a fruit that proceeds from faith after much wrestling; it
does not follow from faith at the first; first believe, and then joy; the heart
is never filled with joy before believing; but afterward when thou have had
the sweet dew of the comfort of the promise many a day, then look for this joy.

which he longs after. A man may want his desirings, and yet want neither life
nor heat: A tree may want leaves and fruit, and yet want neither sapp nor
moisture: A man's faith may be somewhat strong, when his feeling is nothing at
all: David was justified and sanctified, and yet wanted this joy; and so Job
rested upon GOD when he had but little feeling, as when he says, Thou make
me a Butt to shoot at; Job 3.15.
yet I will trust in thee though thou kill me. Therefore build not your
comfort upon sense and feeling, but go to the promise.

Thirdly, the Saints of God many times are deprived of comfort, not because God
withholds it, but because they put it from themselves, and will not have it,
though he offer it, Psalm. 77.
as David, My soul refused comfort, like a sullen child that will not eat his
Milk, because he has it not in the golden dish; so because God does not for
you what you would, you will have nothing at all. These are the maine
hindrances: I might add many more, for carnal reason is very fruitful this
way, and we through our own folly and the devils subtilty, are apt to abuse
things, and make them hindrances in our way to eternal happiness. I come now
to the cures of all our impediments, for if we had the wisdom and care we
should have, we might break through them all and come to Christ. The means
are especially four, whereby we may be inwardly fortified against them, and
at last be able to overcome them.

The first cure and help is this, Helps to come to Christ.
We must not look too long, nor pore too much or unwarrantably upon our own
corruptions, so far as to be feared or disheartened from coming to the
riches of Gods grace; for this is an everlasting truth, that whatsoeversight of
sin unfits a man for mercy, when he may take it, and it is offered to him,
that sight of sin is ever sinful, though it have never so fair a pretense of
sorrow and deep humiliation: as we think many times, Had I a soul so
thoroughly humbled and bruised, True godly sorrow what it is.
and so forth. The devil often keeps us in sin, by poring upon our sins, when
we think hereby to be carried from our sins; that course thus is a sinful
course. Tell not me of sorrow, and repentance, and humiliation, all that sorrow
and humiliation is naught that keeps a man from receiving mercy, when it is
offered; see this in Abraham, he had this promise, that he should have a
son in his old age; He being not weak in faith regarded not his old age or
deadness, Romans 4.19.
nor the barrenness of Sarahs womb, but believed in him who had promised it,
and there he rests and stays; he saw his body was dead, yet there was a
living promise; and what though Sarahs womb was barren, yet the promise was
fruitful; he knew his own deadness and her barrenness, but he considered
them not: so we must see our sins, and consider our many weaknesses, but
never so settle our selves with, or consider of them so, as to be hindered from
coming to God for mercy, which he freely offers us, and we stand in need of,
for while the soul of a man is daily plodding upon his own misery, and
distempers, these two things follow.



get out of his corruption? he can have no more thereof then is there to be
had; it is vain to look for comfort where it is not to be had, it may
dishearten us, but never encourage us. See the humility and wisdom of the
woman of Canaan, Mat. 15.27.
she follows Christ, but he listens not to her, but gives her the repulse,
and calls her dog, and says, you Gentiles are dogs; and the Gospel of
Grace and salvation is the Childrens bread. Now if she had on^y considered the
words of Christ, and only looked into her own baseness, she had never come
to receive mercy and comfort, but she says, Truth Lord, I am a dog, yet the
dogs eat of the crummes that fall from their Masters table. There are two
things here which do express the frame of a gracious heart that is truly
wise to attend to its own baseness, her humility and wisdom; as if she had
said, Thou say I am a Gentile, and a Dog, I confess it, yet though I am a
Dog, I will not go out of the doors but lie under the table for mercy; so we
must and ought, when our corruptions come in upon us, and we see our selves
damned creatures, let us then say, In truth, Lord, I am as bad as thy word can
speak, yet let us not fly away from mercy, but lie at the feet of our Savior.

It is fit, and we ought to see our sins, but stay not too long here; see
thy sins thou must, but not be settled thereon, so as to be kept from Christ;
that sight of sin which does not drive a man to Christ for mercy, is ever
sinful. Labor therefore to see thy sins, thus:

First, How to see sin aright.
see thy sins till thou see them odious and loathsome.

Secondly, till thou see an utter insufficiency in thy self to satisfy for
them.

Thirdly, till thou have seen an absolute necessity of Christ to succor thee;
and then away speedily to the throne of Grace, and dwell no longer on thy
sins, for there is pardon enough to remove the guilt that sin has brought
upon thy soul, there is power enough to make thee master thy corruptions.
Indeed every soul should say thus, It is true Lord, my sins are many and
great, for I have departed from thee the fountain of bliss: But shall I go
on yet further from thee, and persist in evil? God forbid. All this while I
speak to brokenhearted Christians. You profane ones, you have your por^ion
already, and shall have more afterward, therefore a while stand you by, and
let the Children come to their share.

The Lord looks to him that is of an humble and contrite heart, Esaias 66.2.
Opened.
and that trembles before him. A poor creature cannot but observe every word,
and tremble at every truth. Here is salvation indeed (says he) but it is not
mine, here is mercy, but I have no part in it; and so he shakes at the
apprehension, concluding certainly I shall never enjoy it. Now mark what the
text says, The Lord looks at such a trembling soul, that is, he casts sweet
intimations of his goodness and kindness upon him, and says, Thou poor
trembling sinner, to thee be it spoken, I have an eye toward thee in the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Esaias 40.2.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people (says the Lord) speak comfortably to
Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her warfare is accomplished, and her iniquity
is pardoned, tell Jerusalem she is accepted, tell her what my mind is. So the
Lord says to his Ministers, Speak to the heart of such an humbled penitent
sinner, tell him from ME, tell him from Heaven, tell him from the Lord Jesus
Christ, tell him from under the hand of the Spirit, his person is accepted, and
his sins are done away, and he shall be looked upon in mercy.

Ephraim is the picture of a soul truly humbled, in whom we may see the
behavior of a true penitent toward God, and Gods dealing toward him. The
Text says, Ierem. 31.18, 19, 20.
Surely I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself (there is the heart broken and
thirsting) thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, turn thou to me, and
I shall be turned: thou art the Lord my GOD, Surely after that I was turned I
repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I was
ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. As
if the sinner should say, I am the wretch that have seen all the means of
grace in abundant measure, and yet never profited under the same. The Lord has
corrected me, but I would not be tamed; He has instructed me, but I would not
learn. Lord turn me, Thou art my God; I have nothing in my self; Nay, now I
see the evils which before I never perceived; And I observe the baseness of
my course now which before I never considered; And I am ashamed of my abuse of
grace revealed, I am even confounded in the sense of those abominations which
my soul has harbored. This is the mourning of a poor sinner; Now mark Gods
answer: Ephraim is my son, he is a pleasant child, for since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still, therefore my bowels are
troubled for him, I will sure have mercy upon him. As who should say, I
observed all those secret sighs, I considered all those tears, I heard all
those prayers, and took notice of all those complaints, and my bowels earne
toward this poor sinner, that seeks to me for mercy. And the truth is, I
will embrace him with my loving kindness.

Now the second means of cure is this, 2. Help.
take heed of judging thy estate by carnal reason without the rule, as thus it
is the fashion of poor distressed spirits, to pass fearful sentence upon
themselves upon groundless arguments, and to say, I never found it, I feel no
such thing, and I fear it is not so. Thus we hear those carnal pleas which
Satan helps us to invent, and we judge our selves by them: The danger of
judging our selves rashly.
Now, I say, take heed of this, and make conscience of this same, as of any
other sin of swearing, stealing, whoring, or murder, for this is as truly a
sin as those, though not so great; nay; it is a far greater sin than you
imagine. Consider this you humble-hearted Christians, for to you I speak; for
when upon these grounds thou concludest thy case and estate is naught: see
against how many Commandments thou sinnest. First, thou dishonourest God and
the work of his grace; in denying that which GOD has done for thee, and
speak unreverently against God; thou art a murderer, and woundest thy own
soul; thou robbest thy self of comfort, and art a thief; and thou bear
false witness against thine own heart, yea against Christ, and his Spirit,
and the work of grace wrought in thee, and joynest with the devil against the
Lord Christ.

But thou will say, I speak as I think. That hinders not, but that thou
bear false witness: as we see, if a man affirm such a one is a drunkard,
and knows it not, this man bears false witness, because though the man be a
drunkard, yet he knows it not: so thou say thou do nothing, when as thou
do only fear it, and suspect it, and the like: I speak this the rather,
because of the sinful distemper that creepes in upon the hearts of many broken
hearted Christians, that out of a selfewilld rode of carnal reason, and a vile
haunt that they have got, their hearts are persuaded that they do well to do
so, and they are never well except they do thus.

But such as these (mark it) when reason is plain, and the Scriptures are
evidently against them, they do not so much attend what the Minister says,
but they stand and invent how they may answer the Minister, and so put away
their own comforts. Let the fear of God fall upon every soul that hears
this, and know that howsoever you have taken leave to you selves, and have
taken up pleas against the truth, yet now go your ways, and mourn for it,
and wonder that the Lord has not taken away all the comfort of his grace, and
all the motions of his Spirit from you. The Prophet David prays the Lord to
turn away his eyes from beholding vanity: Psalm. 119.37.
now if God must do that, then much more must he turn away our hearts from
attending to vanities: I must attend to God, and the voice of his Spirit, but
to listen to those carnal pleas which I have no warrant to do, I sin
deeply, and hurt my own soul dangerously thereby. No man would deal with a
cheator; carnal reason is a cheator, therefore let us not attend thereto,
unless we resolve to be cozened; and if the danger of the sin cannot make
us do this, then let the sorrow that will come by it constrain us: Isa. 50.11.
Behold all you that kindle a fire, and that compass your selves about with
the sparkles that ye have kindled, this shall you have at my hand, ye shall
lie down in sorrow. I will show what is meant by sparkles, and what by fire;
in the old Law you know there was heavenly fire continually in the Sanctuary,
that shadowed out to us the will and wisdom of God in his word: but there was
also strange fire, that is, there were diverse sparkles of their own
imaginations, and conceits; every poor creature caries his tinder-boxe about
him, and he is ever kindling of it; which the Lord does not allow of: In that
text are two things: first, that the heart of man will naturally invent carnal
reasons and pleas against it self, and be settled upon them: secondly, the
issue that follows thereupon, This shall ye have of mine hand, you shall lie
down in your own sorrow. When the Scriptures are clear, and reasons are
evident, and yet you will have your own devices, thus much I tell you, you
shall lie down in sorrow at last, and you may thank your selves for it; away
with your tinder-boxes therefore, abase your selves before the throne of grace
and be at length wise to salvation.

Ho every one that thirsts (says God by his Prophet) come and buy without
money, take of the well of the water of life, and live for ever freely. Many a
poor Minister would feign leave his commodity behind him, and says, You must
have it, and you shall have it; it is your portion, and belongs of right unto
you; we are even feign to force Gods favors upon the soul. We beseech you to
believe, and we entreat you for the Lord JESUS sake to receive mercy and
humble your hearts.

But will any man take these favors?

No beloved, many sweet promises, and many admirable precious things of grace
and salvation are revealed, but men neither pass nor care to receive benefit
by them. Some carnal plea or other evades all. This argues plainly your small
estimation of CHRIST. A poor hungry sinner that is apprehensive of his own
weakness and feebleness, longs till the feast day comes, that he may
partake of these delicates. Oh how carefully will he listen, and how diligently
will he attend what the Minister says; and if the Word comes home to his
conscience inlightning his heart, and reproving him of his secret corruption,
he cries out, I am in great trouble, good Lord comfort me: I am full of doubts,
good Lord resolve me: I am ignorant in spiritual things, good Lord teach me: I
have a proud, stout, stubborn heart, good Lord humble me. Take this for a
general rule, A good heart is always at best ease, when the Word works most.
But a wicked graceless person is then best, when the Word works least upon
him. Therefore when he thinks the Minister will come close to his soul, he
will not be at home that day, he will be sure to be out of Town, he knows
the Word would awaken him, and affright him, and he cannot bear the blow,
therefore he keeps away, and shunnes the hearing of Gods Word, which would
work upon him.

3. Help.
But thirdly, let us be marvellously wary and watchful that we enter not into
the lists of dispute with Satan, upon those points which are beyond the reach
of man; as thus to say, I am not elected, therefore GOD will not do me good,
it is vain for me to use the means; my time of mercy is gone, oh the day of
grace that I have seen, the Lord knocked sweetly, and was pleased to reveal
my sins at such a time: but then hard-hearted wretch that I was, I shut the
door of my heart against the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and now it is gone and past,
now there is no hope for ever of receiving mercy again: If the devil get thee
here, all thy comfort is gone, for upon this ground a man shall never receive
rest to his heart, while the world stands; for if no man can ever know the
thing, how shall I be able to give, or any man to take comfort? Look as it is
with a poor traveling man that lights among thieves, who come and promise
to carry him a nearer way, and at last they bring him into a wood where no
passengers come, and there they do what they will with him: so it is with a
poor soul, when the devil gets him into these secret disputes of Gods
eternal counsel, there are no passengers come this way, therefore thou art
void of succor, and Satan may exercise his pleasure in terrifying thy poor
soul. Therefore for your direction in this case, observe three rules.

case stay it self upon the al-mightinesse of the power of God, Genesis 17.1.
I am God all-sufficient: if thou art persuaded of the al-sufficiency of GOD,
this will help thee: God can do more tha^ thou can think. He is able, and
will do thee good, though thou know it not; and therefore observe thus much,
the soul never doubts of Gods will, but it doubts of his power also in some
measure.

Secondly, check thine dive into this mystery. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
Secret things belong to God, but revealed things belong to us: 1 Cor. 1.2.16.
and Who has known the mind of God? says Paul. Mark this, you that will be
going up into the skies to know what Gods secret mind is, keep your stations
wisely, for the devil and all the devils in hell never knew the mind of the
Lord. Jonas 4.19.
When Jonas cried against Niniveh, saying, Within forty days all you
drunkards, and adulterers shall be destroyed: Mark there how the King stays
himself, saying, Who can tell if the Lord will repent and stay his fierce
wrath that we perish not. When the devil tells thee thus, and says, God has
appointed a way to salvation, and you have had the means, and did not profit
by them, therefore God will never show you mercy, nor give you grace: how can
the devil tell that? nay, all the devils in hell cannot tell: let me walk
in that course which God has appointed and commanded, and do that which I
ought, and let me say, who knows but God may break the heart of a proud
rebellious sinner, none but God knows it.

Thirdly, Measure not think that because you cannot conceive it, therefore God
will not do it: Let the wicked forsake his ways, Esaias 55.7, 8, 9.
and the unrighteous man his thoughts, says the Prophet: that is, All you
wicked ones, and you that have lived leudly, return from your wicked ways,
and from your vain imaginations, for he will abundantly pardon.

Object. But will the Lord pardon all my sins, says the soul, I cannot
think it, If I were a God, I should never pass by such intolerable things.

Answ. And because you cannot, you think God cannot: Yes, says the Lord, I
can abundantly pardon, for my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor my ways as
your ways. A poor creature thinks his sins are unpardonable, and he shall
never get assurance of Gods love. You are men, says the Lord, and have finite
thoughts, but I am God, and have mercy infinitely, when you think I have no
mercy.

Object. But there were never any such received to mercy, says the soul, and
therefore why should I be the man?

Answ. When CHRIST had wrought many strange miracles, the people said, there
were never any such things done in Israel; and therefore it is plain, God can
do things that never were done the like: He does great things past finding
out, Job 9.10.
and wondrous without number, says Job: therefore judge not Gods power and
love by what thou can conceive.

The best Christians are most suspicious of themselves, and none fuller of
doubts and fears, then those that have least cause to fear their estates are
bad. Satan makes it his chief work to grieve and terrify these? And their
own distrustful hearts are always raising false surmises, and putting mercy
from them, as if they were hired by the devil, to take his part in pleading
against themselves. Therefore it is worth our observing what David says, Psalm.
42. Psalm. 42.18
The Lord shall command his loving kindness in the morning. It is a phrase
taken from Princes and great Co^manders, whose words are a law. So God will
send forth his loving kindness to a truly humbled Christian with a command. As
if he should say, Go love and everlasting mercy, take thy Commission, and I
charge thee go to that poor brokenhearted sinner, go to that poor, hungry,
and thirsty soul: go and prosper and prevail, and settle my love upon his
heart, whether he will or no. Thus the Lord charges his loving kindness to
do good to poor sinners, and by his own Almightinesse stays the soul,
when it is ready to sink under the burden of its transgressions.

Object. What, shall I have mercy? No, No, (says the doubting heart:) Will the
Lord Jesus accept me? No surely. Could I pray so, and had I these parts, and
could I perform duties after this and this manner, then there were some hope,
but alas there is no mercy for me.

Answ. Let me tell thee who ever thou art, God invites thee in particular, and
all the sweetness in Christ, and his precious promises, appertain to thy
soul, and thou have as great an interest in them, as any servant of God in the
world whatsoever.

Object. No, No, says the trembling soul, I cannot believe it, such a wretch
as I go to heaven, It cannot be; heaven shall rather fall then I come there.
Thus the discouraged sinner knocks off mercy, and shuts the door against
himself.

Now when all carnal reasonings, and high imaginations, (as Paul calls them)
have raised up strong holds against mercy and comfort; when the word cannot for
the present settle peace in the soul, God is feign at last to command loving
kindness, and send him with a Commission from heaven, saying, I charge you,
break open the door of the heart of such a sinner, rend that veil of
ignorance that is before his eyes, silence all his doubts and fears; And I
charge you go home to that soul, and cheer it, refresh it with the sense of
my favor, and fill it with the assurance of my love.

Romans 5.8.
Whilst we were enemies, says the Apostle, Christ died for us. The Lord sends
from heaven to a poor miserable creature, Commend my love, commend my mercy to
such a distressed soul, and tell him though he has been an enemy to me,
yet I am a friend to him. Tell him though he has been a Traitor to me, I
have been a good King to him. He has been a rebel to me, but tell him I
have been a loving GOD to him. Tell him his sins are pardoned, his person
accepted, and his soul shall be saved. Tell him his sighs and groans are
heard, and his prayers observed in heaven; let him know that the Lord Jesus
died for sinners when they were sinners. Make this good to his soul I charge
you before you come back.

Therefore the fourth cure is this, Help.
and it is specially to be observed above all in thy proceeding with thy self
in judgment; that is, Pass no sentence against thy soul, but according to
the evidence of the Word: if thou art to be approved, let the word of GOD
approve thee, and let his word examine thee, if thou art to be examined; if the
Word speak for thee, it is no matter though all men and Angels speak against
thee; and if the word condemn thee, it is no matter who speaks for thee: what
though some wrangling rayler step in, and will be determining the causes before
the Judge comes; yet a wise man will stay till the Judge comes, and wait his
leisure. Deal thou so with thine own soul, put not the case to be tried by a
company of peevish carnal reasons, but stay till the word come, and judge thy
self by that, and hold to that for ever. Ephesians. 5.13.
The light is that which manifests all things; the meaning is this, the light
of the word, and the evidences of Gods truth manifested to the souls of Gods
people; all sense and feeling of carnal reasoning, are like fogges and mists
which make a man that he cannot see the way; but bring him to the light, and
then his state and condition will be manifested what it is. Mat. 11.29
Learn of me (says our Savior) and you shall find rest to your souls: And
the Psalmist says, I will enquire what the Lord will say: so say thou, I will
not hearken what carnal reason will say. The want of this is the cause why we
have so many distractions and disquietments, and are still in doubtings,
because he that teaches us is a deluder.

For the poor soul says, What, shall I have an interest in Christ, shall I
have title to the promises? nay, this belongs to those that are brokenhearted:
indeed if I had such power against corruption, such heavenly mindednes, and
this and that, there were some hopes, but I am so full of weakness, and many
times led captive by my rebellious heart; that it is too apparent I never had
saving grace, nay, I fear I never shall have it truly wrought in my soul.

But who told you so, and where learned you this Religion? I am sure you never
learned it of Christ. Who, or what word tells you, If I have such corruptions,
I shall never have grace? not the word of Christ, I am sure: wherefore I charge
you bold to the truth of the word; Learn of me, says Christ, and put not your
cause to be decided by carnal reason, nor hearken what it tells you; for if
you take that course, you shall never come to Christ whilst the world stands:
Learn of the Lord Christ, for his word is faithful, and his promise sure, and
there you shall find rest as strong as Mount Sion; it is that word whereby
thou shall be judged at the great day, when sense and feeling shall be cast out
for wranglers, and never come into Court. Thus much of the four cures: I will
now propound four rules how a man may order himself aright in this course, so
that he may repair to the word at all times, as he ought to do, and gain
evidence there for establishing his heart in peace and tranquillity.

Rules to direct a Christian how to use the Word of God for the evidence of his
assurance.
First, Rule 1.
to use the word of God aright: as thou must in all conditions that concern
thy soul repair to the Word, so thou must consider thine own uprightness,
and what work of grace is in thy soul, that will answer the word, and testify
that the work of grace is true: be sure to take thy soul at the best; do not
always consider what is the worst part in thee, nor thy failings that may
accuse thee only, but if there be any uprightness that may speak for thee,
hear that also; It is injustice for any Court to hear one side and not
another: the Lord does not lie at catch with his children, but he takes them at
the best: as Romans 4.22. it is said that Abraham believed the promise, and it
was imputed to him for righteousness: yet in the 12. of Genesis we see he had
some doubtings, but God took him at the best, 1 Pet. 3.6. Gen 18.12
and so records this of his faith. So we see that Sarah is spoken of as a
gracious woman, and a pattern for women in calling her husband Lord, which was
a sign of an humble heart; but yet we read that she derided the message of
the Lord by the Angel; yet notwithstanding the Lord buries that, and only
mentions the other in the commendations of her. Now as the Lord deals with his
servants, so must we deal with our selves, whatsoever is found sincere and
upright, observe that as well as the other, nay rather before the other. If a
man should have his cause handled in any Court after this fashion, and they
should only observe the failings in his cause, the best cause may happily go
against a man, therefore the Court will hear all read; as if any Bond or Bill
come in, or any matter of agreement, they will hear all: If a man have an
Indenture, and the Lawer only opens and reads the failings in it, and that
which seems to make against the party, if the Judge only hear that, it must
needs go against him, and therefore the man says, Good my Lord hear all: and
when they find it written that such a debt is paid, and the party satisfied,
then the cause goes well; whereas if they had heard only the first part, and
not the second, he had lost all. So, many bring in great inditements against
themselves, and say, Oh what pride and stubbornness is in my heart, oh how
weak am I, and dull, and dead, and backward to holy duties? How careless of
enjoying communion with GOD? How negligent in sifting and trying my own heart,
in watching over my senses, and mourning in secret for my daily failings? It is
true; but art thou not troubled with these, and is it not the greatest grief
of thy soul that lies upon thee? yea, says the poor soul, I confess my
heart is weary of these, and I could be content to be any thing, that I could
not be thus: now take thy soul on this side, and hear the best part: as it
is with a man's hand and the staff, I compare the promise to a staff, you know
the back of a man's hand cannot take hold of the staff, but let him turn the
palm of his hand to the staff, and then he can take it: so turn thou the
right side of thy soul to the promise, and then thou may take it; but we
turn the backside of our hearts to the promise, when the soul says, Oh my
stubbornness is great, and mine inabilities and corruptions are many; this is
the wrong side of thine heart, and this will ever hinder thee from taking hold
of the promise: But thy soul hates these, and is weary of them; this is the
right side of the heart, turn that to the promise.

Secondly, Rule 2.
Labor to have thy conscience settled and established in that truth which now
out of the Word thou have gotten, to bear witness of the work of grace in
thee; for if there be any want of the assurance of Gods love, and if the
evidence of the work of grace come not powerfully in upon thy heart, but there
is some guilt of sin still remaining, then conscience will breed new broiles,
and continually nip and disquiet the heart; therefore as we must have our
judgment informed by the Word that there is some good in us, so we must get
conscience persuaded of it, that conscience may speak for us: as the debtor,
if he be indebted to many creditors, he must agree with all; for if he agree
with all save one, that one may imprison him as well as all the rest: So it is
with the poor distressed soul that lies at the mercy of the Lord, and is so
deep in arerages that he cannot help himself, he must labor to still
conscience, that it do not accuse him, but be on his side.

The want of this is the cause why new suits and new bills are daily put up
against us, only because conscience is not pacified; take a poor sinner that
has all his doubts and objections answered, come to him, and say, Are all
these all your doubts and objections? yes: and are they all answered? yes: and
have you now any thing to say against that which has been made known unto
you: no not now: Say to him again, Did your conscience say to you, it is a
sin to say you have no grace? Now here he demurres and stays, and says, No
I dare not say so, but I rather say the contrary. Mark this, all the books
are crossed, and all objections answered, and yet conscience puts in a new plea,
because it was not satisfied.

Now come to him again, and say, You are sometimes captived by sin, but you
are willing to be at Gods disposing, and that he should pluck away all those
corruptions, are you not?

Oh says the poor sinner, I must needs yield to that; then I affirm to thy
soul this is a work of true grace: therefore let conscience be fully
satisfied, and cancel all selfe-accusations; this will clear the heart, and
cast out all cavill^^^^^^ (...) love was made sure to us.

Thirdly, Rule 3.
we should strive mightily to have our hearts over-powred with the evidence
which reason and conscience makes good to us, that so we may quietly receive
it, and calmly welcome it, and yield and subject our hearts to the truth. But
here we all stick, for there are three things in the soul of a man which
maintain these quarrels and oppositions against the evidence of the Word: 1.
Reason objects: 2. Conscience accuses: 3. The Will of man will not submit: and
we find it in experience that when a man has stilled conscience, and
answered all reasons, yet the stubbornness of the heart maintains a
gaine-saying against the truth, and keeps the old quarrel that has been
answered long ago, and that a man would think had been buried long since. It
is in this case with a poor sinner, as it is with a man that has a
contentious adversary; happily the cause that they two have in hand has been
tried in all the Courts of England, and at last comes to Chancery, and there it
is concluded against him, so that all things are settled and ended, as a man
would think, and an honest man would sit down and be quiet: but the other
being a quarrelsome fellow will not yield yet, but to the old law he will
again, and he will sell all he has but he will have his will; till at the
last the Judge comes to take notice of this man, and casts out the cause, and
puts him in prison, and says, These things were all answered, and the cause
ended long ago.

Just so for all the world is it with the heart of a gracious man that is
humbled in some measure, and could be content to yield to the credit of Gods
word, and to the witness of his conscience, and says My condition is better
then I thought it was, but there is an old proud selfe-willed heart that will
not be quiet, but still is quarrelsome, and maintains the old quarrel;
Though reasons are all confuted, and conscience bears witness against him,
and every Minister casts out the cause; yet observe it, a poor distressed
sinner will keep the old objections, and though they were answered the night
before, yet he will have them fresh the next morning, and the next month,
even when a man would think he should not dare to come in Court; and the
mischief lies even here, in a proud selfe-willed heart that will not yield.
Therefore labor to get thy heart so far over-powred with the authority of
the truth, whatsoever it is that God reveals to thee for thy good, and do not
reject the evidence which God makes known and passes upon thy soul for thy
everlasting welfare, do not (I say) reject it: and because thou have not
that comfort that thou would, therefore thou will have none at all: it is
not properly because thou can not, but because thou will not receive the
promise, that so wracks and torments thy spirit: this is it which breeds the
quarrel: and hence it is that when reason is satisfied, and conscience
convinced, ask the soul this question, and say, Are you persuaded that the
Lord has done you good, and will show everlasting mercy to your soul? no
(says he) all the world shall not persuade me of that; Ministers are
merciful, and Christians are charitable, and are loath to discourage me, as I
should do to them, but did they know me indeed they would never think thus of
me, certainly I shall never find it so: What I grace? all the world shall
never persuade me to it. Mark what I say, this is merely thy pride and
selfe-wildnesse that will not receive that good which God is willing to give
thee; this hellish and devilish pride of thine will cost thee dear one day.

Object. But will some say, How is it pride? we are ever complaining and
condemning our selves, this cannot be pride.

Answ. Yes I say it is abominable pride, against the Majesty of heaven; and
that, I will show these two ways: First for a man to follow his own conceits
and selfe-wildnesse against the truth, and the force of reason, and the
witness of the servants of GOD, and his own conscience, is not this pride?

Secondly, thy pride appears in this, namely, because thou have not what thou
would, and in that manner and measure thou desire, and have not that
sweetness of grace and conquest over corruption that thou would have,
therefore thou flingest away all Gods kindness; this is infinite pride: That
measure of mercy which God has already showed thy soul, is incomprehensible,
and yet because you cannot have what you would, you will have nothing at all.
As a man that has the Law on his side, and his estate settled on him, yet
because his evidences are not written in great huge letters, and in large
paper, he throws them all away: so you have no grace, because you have not so
much as you would have; you have no humility, because you have not so much
humility: Oh pride, pride, in the highest degree.

Labor therefore to bring thy heart to this blessed subjection to the truth of
God, and make it thy duty as well to receive comfort when God offers it upon
good grounds, as to do a duty commanded, and know that it is a sin to reject
mercy when God offers it, as to kill a man which God has forbidden; and
therefore you Saints of God that have been pestered thus, and have been
enemies to your selves, when your hearts begin to slide away thus, take your
hearts and reason thus with your souls, and say, Good Lord, this is the proud
stubborn distemper of this vile heart of mine; what would I have? is not Gods
word clear, and my conscience satisfied? do not the Ministers of God affirm
my state to be good? and shall I thus dishonor God?

Object. But what says the poor soul again, Must I eat mine own words, and
say I have grace, when before I said I had none?

Answ. Yes, and be thankful to God that thou may say so too; it is better
for you to cross your own humors, than cross Gods Spirit: take notice of
it, and fear for ever, lest that proud and stubborn soul of thine, which now
refuses consolation when God offers it, be forced to eat thy flesh, and come
upon thy knees, and never get comfort to thy dying day; and though God save
thee in the end, yet thou shall be as it were in hell upon earth.

One would have thought it had been humility in Peter to refuse to let Christ
wash his feet, but it was nothing but pride, and therefore Christ takes him up
for it sharply, (which is indeed the only way to cure this distemper) If I
wash thee not thou have no part in me: Ioh. 13.8, 9
if you will needs have your own humors, and will not be persuaded, you may
get you down to hell with them: Peter paused with himself a while, but at
last when his stomach came down, then, Lord, not only my feet, but my hands
and heart and all. It is humility of heart to take what God offers. Most
Christians think they are humble-hearted, but they are so far proud, as they
give leave to this distemper: therefore labor to overmaster this gaine-saying
heart of thine, with the authority of the word of God, and learn to receive
mercy when God offers it, lest he take away the comfort of his Spirit from you,
and make you go howling and roaring to your graves. Though he bring you to
heaven in the end, yet you may have a hell before you come thither.

The last Rule is this, Rule 4.
Maintain the good word which thy heart has submitted to, and keep it as the
best treasure under heaven; and when thou have obtained certain evidence that
thy estate is good, hear nothing against it, but stick fast to the same,
regard nothing but out of the word of God, against that comfort and evidence of
thy salvation, which thou have been persuaded of by the word; if Satan or
carnal reason have any thing to say against thee, let them bring Scripture,
and then yield to it, but without the word hear nothing. Look as it is with a
man that is at law for lands, if he have his adversary on the hip, and have
gotten some advantage against him, he will keep him there, and hold him to
the point. If a man will follow every wrangling Lawyer at every impertinent
out-straying, he will never have any good success; it is the fashion of many
Atturnies rather to breed quarrels, than to end them; and therefore hold to
the maine point. Deal with Satan as with a subtle adversary that is full of
wiles and fetches. It is the cunning of the enemy to lead you out, and he will
have many vagaries, but be sure to hold to that truth which you have received
from the evidence of the word, and the witness of conscience. When a man has
gotten some comfort, then the devil begins to play the Lawyer in this manner.

Satan. Do thou not see how weak and poor thou art? how destitute of all
saving grace, and how contrary thou walk to God?


How the soul being tempted may answer Satan's accusations.
Sinner. It is true (says the soul) yet it is as true that he that confesses
and forsakes his sin, shall have mercy.


Satan. But (says the devil) do thou not see that thou art full of pride
and weakness, and secretly unwilling to come to duties?


Sinner. It is true (says the soul) I am so, yet I hate and desire to forsake
this, therefore shall find mercy, the word says so.


Satan. But (says the devil) are you of Gods counsel, secret things belong
to God?


Sinner. Indeed (says the soul) I know not what Gods secret will is, yet this
I know,that the word says, He has no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but
invites such daily to come unto him.


Satan. But (says the devil) many cozen themselves, mercy is a great thing,
and few obtain it, and why may not you be cozened as well as others?

But (says the soul) the Lord will not cozen me, Sinner.
and the Lord knows my heart, and the word knows what the Lord knows.


Satan. But (says the devil) may not you be deceived in the word; the word
is true indeed, but how know you that you rightly apply it, and that the word
and your heart does suit together?


Sinner. Why (says the soul:) I desire as earnestly to have my sin purged,
as I do to have it pardoned. I know my heart by the word, and to the word I
repair, and the Lord knows that I hate all sin inwardly, and reform it
outwardly, and therefore I know I shall find mercy: show me a place of
Scripture that says I do not rightly apply the word, and I will believe it;
but I will not believe thee, for thou art a deluder and a liar.


Thus hold to the word, and the devil will be tired, and go away: keep you
here, for if he catch you a wandering after sense and feeling, you are gone.
Psalm. 119.98.
Thou through thy Commandments have made me wiser than mine enemies, says
David, for they are ever with me. Satan is wise; and the flesh, and carnal
reason, and the world are wise, but blessed be our God that makes every poor
ignorant servant of his wiser then all these: but how? the word must be ever
with them; you must keep the word with you daily, and that will make you not
know only what is amiss, but get ground against whatsoever hinders your peace.

Satan deals in this with the soul, as the enemy deals in war: when
Joshua defeated the men of Ai, Josh. 8.19.
he got them out of the City, and then they that lay in ambush went and took
it in, and burnt it with fire: so the devil does: Our Castle or City is the
promises, and the word, and ordinances of God: now if the devil can but get
you out of this Castle, he has you where he would; if you will look after
every bird that flies, and listen after every carnal reason and temptation,
you are gone; if he once get you from the pro^^^^

Means to obtain an interest in the Promises.
Now I will show you some means whereby a man may so improve his time, that at
last he may obtain this blessed estate; which are four; but before I do
begin with them, you must be advertised of thus much, that we may use the
means, but there is no means under heaven alone will do it, yet you must
wait upon God in the use of the means, for it is not the means that will
work faith, but the Spirit of God in the use of the means; and therefore the
Text says, To you it is given to believe, for faith is the free gift of God;
it is God that must do it, and yet he will not do it without us, because we
are reasonable men and women. The Lord affords us means, and therefore we are
to wait upon him in the use of those means; let the Lord do what he will,
and let us do what we should: we must not think when we have the means
then we can get faith presently, for as Paul says, The same power that raised
up Jesus from the dead must make us able to believe, Ephesians. 1.20.
or else all the Angels in heaven, and all the Ministers on earth, and all the
help that men and means can do thee, will do thee no good: the means are
diverse, as hearing and prayer, which are the Conduits whereby God communicates
faith; but I let those pass, and only fasten upon those which are needful
for feeble Christians to bring them into this blessed state, and those are
these.

First, we must, 1. Means.
as much as in us lies, labor to pluck away all those props that the soul
leanes upon, and all those outward succors, and whatsoever outward contentment
it is, which a poor sinner does repair and betake himself to for relief and
help, that when all these are taken from us, we may be forced to go for
succor there where it is to be had. It is that which remains in the nature of
man, and that which is natural to us all even from our first Parents, that we
would have the staff in our own hands, and support our own souls, and
supply all those necessities that lie upon us.

Now the way to make the soul lean upon CHRIST, is, to pluck away all other
props; for the last thing that we come to is the promise, and if we could
find good any where else, we would never go to Christ; God hears last of us,
and therefore we should do with our selves as the enemy does with a City
besieged, when he would make them yield, the only way is to famish them, cut
off all provision, and stop all passages that none may come to relieve them,
and then they will be forced to yield themselves to the mercy of the enemy; so
it is with our nature, we are still trusting to our own strength, and relying
upon something of our own; therefore famish thy heart, and cut off all the
means and comfort whereby thy heart may be succored, and thy conscience
quieted, and when thy heart is famished, it will then seek out to a Savior,
and lie there, because there is no other thing to support it.

Mar. 5.26, 27.
The poor woman in the Gospel had spent all her goods upon the Physicians, and
if she had had but a little means left, yea, but one farthing token, for any
thing I know she would never have gone to Christ; but when all these failed,
then she was forced to seek to Christ, that was ready and willing to do any
thing for her distressed nature: so our souls must have something to support
themselves upon, for they cannot live without some support. Now therefore when
all our carnal hopes are taken away, we must needs stay upon the promise,
because we have nothing else. It is not required that a man should cast away
those outward comforts that GOD affords him, but only this, that though you
have all, yet labor to get your heart to see and acknowledge the emptiness of
all these, and let not the heart seek too much content in them, for these are
all but lying vanities, and broken staves, which will not only cozen a man,
but pierce him too.

Now when the soul sees these things cannot succor him, but lay him in the
dust, then he will be content to have his heart severed from them. It is with
the soul as it was with Noah's Dove, when the Arc began to rest upon the
Mountain of Arraret, Noah sent out the Dove, but the Dove found no rest for
the sole of her foot: No question there were many dead carkases, but the dove,
found no rest till she came to the Arc again; so when a man finds no rest in
any thing the creature affords, and can get no footing for the soul to stay it
self upon them, then it betakes it self to Christ, and goes home to the
promise, and rests there, and expects from thence what is needful; as in the
Art of swimming, he that will swim must pluck his feet from the bottom,
and commit himself to the stream to bear him up; so we must pluck our
hearts from these things, and them from us; and though we have honor and
preferments, yet we must not put any confidence in them, but learn by our
believing to commit our selves wholly to the power of the promise, and receive
comfort from thence only.

Let not the gods of this world, honor, and profit, and pleasure deceive thee;
did the pride of Pharaohs heart deliver him? did the riches of Dives save him?
did Herod's applause that he had, deliver him? did these gods secure them? nay,
have they not left them in the lurch? therefore let us take our hearts off from
these things, and have a base esteem of them, and see a vanity, and
emptiness, and insufficiency in them, that we may be forced to seek to
Christ, and say as David said, Help Lord, for vain is the help of man.
Labor therefore to see the privy pranks of thine own heart, and hunt out all
those mazes, and turnings and windings of thy spirit, for it is wonderful to
see how the soul is ready to hang her comforts upon every hedge, and shift and
shark in every by-corner for comfort: Now when thou see thy heart thus
seeking to settle it self, pluck away that prop, and see the emptiness of it,
and then thy heart will be fit and ready to go unto Christ.

Now when this is done there is a little way made that the promise may come to
the soul, 2. Means.
therefore labor in the second place to have your hearts possessed thoroughly,
and persuaded effectually of the fullness of that good which is in the promise,
and of that satisfactory mercy and freeness of the grace of God in Christ,
that so the soul may be established with that full content which is to be had
in the riches of the promise. But mark what I say, persuade your heart of it,
and content not your selves that you are able to dispute somewhat fully of the
excellency of the promise and of the riches of Gods free grace; What is this to
the purpose that the heart knows this, and yet is fore-stalled that it comes
not to the promise? therefore leave not thy heart till it come to make that
account of the promise, that the word says it is worth; I say leave not thy
heart till thou see the promise of grace most beautiful in thy eye, and that
thy heart may gain some earnest touching the goodness of God, and the riches
of his grace toward thee; and bring thy heart to know and see, that the
promise is better than all the riches and honors that thou can have, or the
world can bestow, Psalm. 9.10.
They that know thee will trust in thee, for thou Lord have never failed them
that seek thee: This kind of knowledge ever breeds confidence and resolution,
and persuades the heart; We dare trust a friend whose faithfulness we have
tried; and rest upon that which we know by experience. The promises are of a
tried truth; seek from one end of the heavens to the other, turn all the Bible
over, and see if ever any man leaned on the promise, and the Lord did not
perform that which he had promised for the good of his soul? Psalm. 119.92.
Except the Lord had been my delight, I should have perished in my troubles
(says David.) My flesh fails and my heart also, Psa. 73.26.
but thou art the strength of my heart and my portion for ever. Here lies a
great weight, and it is a work of mavelous difficulty and great necessity,
and therefore that thy heart may sit down satisfied in the sufficiency of the
promise, I will propound three rules how you may improve the promise for your
uttermost benefit.

First, How to improve the promises for our benefit.
labor daily to present to thy soul a greater good in the promise than thou
can see any where else: It is a man's skill, and it should be his endeavor
daily to dog his heart, and to look what it is that the heart desires most,
and present a greater good to thy soul therein, than in all things thou can
have elsewhere. We should deal with our hearts as a man would do with a
corrupt Justice, when he would have him to be on his side, the only way is to
bribe him; (though that is sinful) yet it is good to bribe the corrupt heart
with the goodness of the promise, that the heart may cleave to it, and long
after it. Do honors, or riches, or the applause of men, or any earthly
pleasures offer thee content and satisfaction? then persuade thy heart there is
a greater worth and excellency in the promise then can be had in all the
world. Here is an exceeding weight of glory, he that has this promise shall
be made a King, and shall have glory that will never vanish: does thy heart
hanker after earthly joy and mirth? thou shall find a great (...) promise,
then in (...) ^^^ing of these thorns, (...) so I may say of any thing else)
Does thy heart hanker after riches? then tell thy heart that there are
unsearchable riches in Christ, and through him we have title to all the
promises of this life and a better; we know he that offers most for the
bargain has it: therefore we should observe the goings out of our hearts,
and what offers it self to give us most content, and present our souls with a
greater good in God then in all things else.

Oh the height, and depth, and length, and breadth of the (...) passes (...)
consideration of (...) as it works a longing after Christ, and the promises, so
it should fill our faces with shame and confusion, that ever we should set
light by such riches of mercy, and walk unworthy of so great salvation. Could
we comprehend the unmeasurable dimensions of Gods love and goodness revealed
in his word, how would our hearts be enflamed toward him? When the sinner
thinks thus with himself, I that have done all that I could against so good a
God, that my heart even bleeds to think of it, there (...) under heaven (...)
in pieces but Gods (...) his wounds, and life, a^^ heart-blood I have rent and
torn a thousand times. Nay, there was no command in the world that my soul so
much despised, as the command of the Lord Jesus. There was no spirit that ever
spoke to me, which I so much resisted as the Spirit of the Lord. Oh how many
sweet motions has the Lord let into my soul, thereby to pluck me from my
base courses and sinful practices! By how many mercies has he allured me, by
how many gracious promises has he invited me, to forsake (...) turn (...) but
I have (...) the face of his ^ers and blessed spirit, and rejected all terms
of reconciliation. If I had lain in a dungeon, and been plagued with torments
all my life time, yea, though I had another world full of misery to live in, I
should count it infinite mercy, so the Lord would pass by my sinful
miscarriages, and pardon these inward rebellions.

But that God should send his dearest Son to love me, and that so
incomparably, so inconceivably, that I could not possibly hate him, so much as
he loves and affects me, I could not so exceed in unkindnesse toward him,
as he has exceeded in tender compassion toward me? Were it not righteous
with God, never to speak comfort more to my soul, that have so lightly
esteemed his promise and word of comfort? Had it not been just with GOD to
take advantage against me? Was it not just that I which lived in sin, should
have perished in my sin? Had it not been just that I who have so much loved
corruption, should have reaped the bitter fruit of it long ere this? But that
the Lord should find an enemy, and not slay him; nay, that he should give his
beloved Son out of his bosom to save him; is love not to be expressed. Oh
the height of this mercy beyond my desire. Oh the breadth of this mercy without
all bounds. Oh the length of this mercy beyond all times. Oh the depth of this
mercy beyond all sin and misery!

Labor therefore to have access to the promise with thy soul, and speak a
good word for it, and say, Stand by profits, and pleasures, and preferments,
room for the Lord Jesus Christ, and put a wonderful price upon the promise;
this is an everlasting rule, whatsoever the soul does account as best, that it
will choose and leave all others for it. I would have the soul outbid the
world, and labor to out-shoot the devil in his own bow, and those things
which the devil casts in thy way, for hindering thy soul from coming to the
promise, let those things be as means to usher-in the promise. As thus, when
thou see thy heart look after friends, let those friends usher the way to
think on the infinite love and favor of God in Christ; and when thy heart
would feign hunt after wealth, let this usher a way to the promise, and say, If
the heart find such content in riches, what would it find in the riches of
Gods grace in Christ? thus present a greater good in the promise then in any
thing else.

Heb. 11.1.
Faith is the substance of things hoped for, it gives a kind of being and
substance to all; there is no substance in honor and riches if they be not in
faith; they are clogges and snares to a man, except says give a title
thereunto and a blessing therewith; all our prayers have no substance in them,
but are poor and empty words without faith in the promise to have what we
pray for: the most broken and mean prayer, when a poor creature can scarce
utter four words with any sense, yet if it be mingled with faith, is a very
powerful prayer; and the substance of all your hearing, and my preaching lies
in faith, otherwise they are but lost labor, for faith is it that gives a
kind of being to whatsoever we speak or do.

The third rule in this second means, is this, Labor to acquaint thy heart
with the goodness of the promise, before carnal reason comes and possesses
thy heart, how that the promise is most sure, and will come when it is most
seasonable, and is best for thee, and when God sees it most fit we shall
certainly have it; Heb. 4.16.
Let us therefore come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may receive
comfort and mercy in time of need; not when I see it fit, but when God sees it
fit, this is it which carries away many poor sinful hearts from resting upon
the promise of God; sometimes the heart is a little affected with the
excellency of the riches of Gods grace, and sees what great things the Lord
has done for his soul, and says, Oh that I were such a one, and let me die
the death of the righteous; but when it comes to pass that he has not present
ease and comfort, then he casts away the good promise of the Lord, and the
devil prevails wonderfully with these poor creatures: Therefore says the
Prophet, When the fig tree shall not blossom, Hab. 3.17.
neither shall the fruit be on the Vines, when the labor of the Olive shall
fail and yield no fruit, then will I rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of
my salvation. Says the Prophet, Comfort from the promise, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ is then seasonable, when I have most need and may receive most
good thereby; then shall I be sure to have the promise so to surprise my
heart, that it may be possessed with the al-sufficiency of it.

3. Means.
In the third place see that thou expectest all the good which thou need and
can desire from that sufficiency of the promise; do not think to bring any
good with thee to the promise, but go to the promise for all good; there are
all the cords of mercy that must draw thee, and there is the al-sufficiency
that can supply all thy wants, look for all from thence, and expect power from
the promise to enable thee to do whatsoever thou would, and to make thee
able to believe the promise.

Object. It is a weak plea for a man to say, I dare not look to the promise, I
cannot believe, if I could then I might expect some good.

Answ. Thou shall never believe upon these terms, thou must not first have
faith and then go to the promise, but thou must first go to the promise, and
from thence receive power to make thee able to believe the promise, O Lord
remember thy word to thy servant, Psalm. 119.49.
wherein thou have caused me to trust. When men are enlarged in love to a man,
and make fair promises, this persuades the heart to trust to them, and to rely
upon them for good; therefore a man does use to say, I durst not have thought
it, nor expected, if you had not promised it; so the promise of God made to the
soul, makes the soul to rest upon it.

To expect faith without a promise, is all one as if a man should expect a crop
without seed, for the promise is the immortal seed of Gods Word, whereby the
Spirit breeds this faith in the hearts of all that are his. Ioh. 5.25.
The hour is coming and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear it shall live: It is spoken of raising of a
dead man from the grave of sin. First, there is the voice of Christ to the
soul, before there can be an Echo again of the soul to Christ; so the power
of the promise must come to the soul, and we must hear the voice of God in
the promise before we can return an Echo again to the Lord; The Lord says,
Come to me, and the soul says, I come Lord. When thou see much deadness
and unfitness of heart, do not thou go away, and look off from the promise,
and say, Thus I am, and so it is with me; but rather go to the promise, and
say, Whatsoever frailties I find in my self, yet I will look to the Lord,
and to his promise, for if I want faith, the promise must settle me more and
more therein, I must not bring faith to the promise, but receive faith from
thence, and therefore I will wait till the Lord please to work it.

4. Means.
Lastly, labor to yield to the equal condition of the promise, and make no
more conditions then God makes; now the promise requires no more of a man, but
that he should come and lay hold on mercy; therefore do thou require no more
then God in the promise requires; there is enough in the promise to do thee
good, therefore expect all good from it, and be content to go to the promise,
and take of God whatsoever he has therein offered. Buy without money; Esaias
55.12
This is the condition that God offers mercy upon, buy wine and Milk, that is,
grace and salvation without money, that is, without sufficiency of your own;
if a man should go running up and down to borrow money before he come to buy,
he may famish before he come; so the Lord offers Christ's mercy and salvation,
and says, Come take it without money, and we run up and down to borrow
money of prayer, and duties, and power against corruption, but you may be
starved before you buy, if you go this way to work.

Therefore make Gods commodities no dearer then God himself makes them, for
this is the cause why many a poor soul is kept from coming to the promise:
Oh, says one, if I were able to master my sins and distempers as such a one
can do, then I would believe; this is to bring money; but art thou content to
have Christ, and that Christ may have thee, and rule thee, and supply thy
wants, and reveal thy sins, and heal thy corruptions; then go to the
promise, and the Lord thereby will supply thy wants, and master all thy sins
and corruptions; but that must come afterward; Ezekiel. 16 8, 9.
When I passed by thee, and saw thee in thy blood, (says the Lord) and behold
the time was as the time of love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered
thy nakedness; yea, I entered into a covenant with thee, and thou becamest
mine; (that is, you were content that GOD should marry you in all your rags)
and washed thee with water, yea, I thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee,
and anointed thee with oil, I clothed thee also with broydered work. First,
he marries the Church to himself, and then he gives grace, and passes over
his estate to his Spouse. Were it not a wonderful great folly if some great
King should make love to a poor Milkmaid, and she should put it off, and
refuse the match till she were a Queen, whereas, if she will match with the
King, he will make her a Queen afterward; so we must not look for
sanctification, till we come to the Lord in vocation; for this is all the Lord
requires of thee, to see thy sins, and be weary of them, and be content
that the Lord Jesus shall reveal what is amiss, and take it away, and that
the Lord should give thee grace, then the Lord will bring thee to himself, and
thou shall receive mercy from him, and then all thy corruptions shall fall to
the ground. To sum up the point briefly thus:

First, when we have plucked away all carnal props, there is way made for the
promise to come to us.

Secondly, when our hearts are possessed thoroughly of the sufficiency of Gods
promise and grace, then the promise draws near to the soul.

Thirdly, when we expect all from the promise, even power to come to the
promise, then the promise lays hold upon us.

Fourthly, when we are content to yield to the equal conditions of the
promise, then the promise carries us quite away.

Thus we have seen the hindrances removed, and the means propounded, and
now, that we may be moved and persuaded importunately to seek after this
blessed grace of God, let us consider thus much; if you once get this grace,
you get all other graces with it; it is a ground of comfort to set a man a
^^^ke, when in the doing of one work he may do another, nay, all works; so
it is in the work of faith, it should encourage us to labor for faith,
because if we get this we get all: men that are wise to provide for
themselves, and to lay out their money in a purchase for the best advantage, if
they see it well wooded and watered, especially if there be some golden Mines,
all their mind will be upon that, because if they have that they have all with
it; so it is here, get grace and get all, strengthen this and all is strong,
want this and want all, once get this, and you need not seek for (...)
^^^^dome, Faith to be labored for above all graces.
for faith will m^^^ you wise to salvation, and you need not labor for
patience, for faith will make you patient, and faith will bring holiness wit^
it to purge you, for faith brings all grace. Now the Saints of God endeavor
with much pains to get grace, and to subdue their corruptions; but yet they
are feeble and weak therein, because they take not the right way.

Many a poor soul mournes and cries to heaven for mercy, and prays against a
stubborn hard heart, and he is weary of his life because his vile heart
remains, and yet ^ wou^^ (...) you go the (...) for if you would (...) grace
you must first of all get faith, and that will bring all the rest; buy the
field, and the Pearl is yours; you must not stand struggling and striving with
your own hearts, and think to master a proud heart, that will not do it, but
let says go to Christ, and there is meekness patience, humility and
wisdom, and faith will fetch all these to the soul. Brethren, if you set
such a price upon any of those graces, then labo^ (...) ^aith, get that (...)
(...) glass, the (...) ^^rd, are changed into the same Image from glory to
glory. The Lord Christ is the glass, and the glorious grace of God in Christ,
is compared to the glory of the Lord; therefore first we must behold the grace
in Christ by faith, before we can receive grace; first, see humility in Christ,
and then fetch it there; first see strength and courage to enable thy weak
heart, and then fetch it. Would not you be content to have a meek, gracious
and (...) heart? dare un^^^^ (...) of you, (...) think it (...) that ever you
(...) you say, Oh the (...)once see that day, (...) this proud heart of mine
might be humbled. If I could see the blood of my sins, I should think my
self happy, and desire to live no longer; then get faith, and so buy the
whole, for they go all together; you must not think to have patience and
meekness, without faith, but buy faith and you shall have all together: Would
you have the glory of God, and be more heavenl^ minded, then look (...) (...)
^^en you shall (...) hold you there (...) this will increase all your graces,
to your everlasting peace and comfort. When men use to make a purchase, they
will reckon up all, and say, There is so much wood worth so much, and so much
stock, worth so much, and then they offer for the whole, answerable to all the
parcels: so there is Item for an heavenly mind, that is worth thousands and
Item for an humble heart, that is worth millions. And are these graces (...)so
much? what is faith (...)


