Despicit at cocsum sic tainen Issa videt.
Upon the ground this Weeper casts her eyes
So cunningly that Heaven she there espies:
No word she spoke, yet granted was her suit,
Her tears were Vocal, though her tongue was mute.


THE HOLY SINNER, A Tractate meditated on some Passages of the Story of the
Penitent woman in the Pharisees house.

-- Quid melius desidiosus agam? by W. H.

Printed for Andrew Crook in Paul's Church yard 1639.

W Marshall sculp.


A proeme to the Reader.
AS no beauty, so no book has all voices: even in the worst some eyes see
features that please; in the best, some others see lines that they like not:
Pro captu lectoris habent sua fata libelli.
Mart.
Some out of affection may plat a laurel for that head, on which others, in
their opinion, would bestow the thistle. This little tractate has already
passed through private hands, and found (but what allay is friendship unto
censure?) a candid interpretation. And diverse copies were presented to me, to
usher forth my book But I am not ambition to hang the ivy garland at my door:
I have purposely reserved them for a close, lest I should seem, like an Italian
host, to meet my guest upon the way, and to promise beforehand a fair and ample
entertainment. Let it please you rather to see and allow your cheer; and then
according to your own palate, you may disgust, or relish the cookerie.

W. H.

Sancta Peccatrix.
SECT. I.
SAint Luke is styled by Saint Paul, the man whose praise is in the Gospel, 2.
Cor. 8.18. And the gospel of Saint Luke dictated by Saint Paul (as some of the
Greek Fathers are of opinion) is called in one place Saint Paul's own gospel;
Romans 2.16.
there being such an harmony of expressions between the one and the other.
This elegant penneman, Compend. Theol. page 66.
plenus Evangelii commentator, (as Alstedius terms him) this beloved
Physician, Coloss. 4.14. imo and medicus and Theologus (as Eusebius said of
Theodotus bishop of Laodicea) was not (as some think) Christ's immediate
disciple, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 31.
but only sectator and condiscipulus Apostolorum, a follower and disciple of
the Apostles. And this he himself in the proem of his evangelicall history
testifies of himself; Luke 1.2.
Prout tradiderunt nobis; As they have delivered unto us, which from the
beginning saw themselves: intimating, that he wrote his Gospel, according as he
received relation from others; but the tract of the Acts of the Apostles
according to that which he had seen himself. Which two treatises, howsoever
dedicated to one man, to Which name if we take for a common appellative, we
must understand that the Gospel is only written to them who are lovers of God.
Bois.
Theophilus, are notwithstanding parted into two volumes, ut distinctio
perspicuitatem afferret, brevitas taedium eximeret, varietas voluptate
afficeret, says Lorinus, Praefat. in Act.

In the seventh chapter of his Gospel is the story on which I have now pitched
my meditations, breviter and aperte, briefly, yet fully with each weighty
circumstance described. No doubt but many an accurate quill on the wing of
contemplation has already taken an high flight, meditating on this very
subject: My only plea shall be, Ambros.
Qui non potest volare ut aquila, volet ut passer. The Scripture is every where
full of variety, like a garment of several colors; in vest unitas, in
color varietas. From the same woof of holy Writ may diverse workmen, according
to their several fancies, draw out most curious threads of observation; and
that brain is very unhappy that meets not with some traverse of discourse more
then it has borrowed from another pen. Yet will I not, with Rehoboam, contemn
the judgment of the wise; nor deny to take a good lesson out of any school. I
never read but of a foolish cock, that refused a pearl, though found on a
dunghill.

Barlaeus.
Men's assueta operi, per mill volumina solers
Ambulat, atque suos aliquid seponit in usus.
The laborious be is the emblem of a working brain: which creature, ever set
before us for a copy of industry, is not still droning upon one flower, but
throws her little airy body upon a second, so to a third, till her thighs be
laden with a pretty spoil. Nature. hist. lib. 11 cap. 5.
Prope ex umbra minimi animalis incomparabile quiddam, says Pliny; It is no
less then a wonder, that almost of the shadow rather then substance of a very
small living creature, nature has made an incomparable thing. I had rather
imitate this Hyblean bird, then altogether challenge to my self Arachne's
motto, Mihi soli debeo; I had rather knit up in this little posie (...), some
rare and choice flowers, which I have here and there sucked and culled from the
gardens of several authors; then boast with that little Arabian, that I have
eviscerated my self, and spun a web out of mine own bowels. What can Archimedes
do without his sphere? what can an artizan perform without his instruments? To
aim at knowledge without books, is with the Danaides, to draw water into a
sive. Titus 4.13.
Saint Paul himself, although so inspired, found as much want of his books, as
his cloak in winter. Having therefore imposed this task upon my self, I will
first of all visit my little library, and accost it with the poets salutation;
Musarum thalamus, divinae Zevecotius.

Pallados aula,
Deliciae domini, Bibliotheca, tui!
Into which having entered, and setting my self down with the best contentment
that I know, I may, without all offense of Necromancie, call up some of the
ancient worthies of learning; where being alone I am least alone, and can with
ease attein to that height of happiness, which Saint Hierome so much commends
in one of his devout women, Hier. de laudibus Asellae, epist. 15.
quae unius cellulae clausa angustiis, latitudine coeli fruebatur, though
cloystered within the compass of a narrow cell, can by divine contemplation
expatiate through the whole latitude of heaven.

To wave all other prefaces, I fall directly to the matter in hand; and,
according to my poor abilities, intend to write something of this woman that
was a sinner.

SECT. II.
WHo this woman was, is much controverted by interpreters; and it is sooner
questioned, then answered. I know such problematicall disquisitions, quae plus
habent subtilitatis quam utilitatis (as Erasmus on this very Quaere) are
superfluous: and of them we may pass the censure which the philosopher did of
the Athenian shops, How many things are here which we need not?

Whether the thrice anointing of our Savior was performed by three several
women; Orig. tract. 35. in Matthew.
as Origin (which Roffensis the beauclerk of his time confuteth in three
books:) or whether the same Marie which anointed him here as a sinner, was she
which afterward anointed him as a Saint; as Aquinas on the twelfth of John:
or, if we yield it to be Marie, whether Marie Magdalene; or, if Marie
Magdalene, who this Magdalene was: Again, whether there were three Marie
Magdalenes, as Theophylact, Stapulensis, and others avouch; or whether two,
Amb. lib. 10. in Luc. 24. Alb. in Luc. cap. 7.
as Ambrose; or whether only one, as Albertus: or whether this Magdalene was
sister to Lazarus and Martha, which three divided the inheritance of their
father betwixt them: (all the possessions in Jerusalem falling to Lazarus,
Bethanie to Martha, Magdalum castrum to Marie, from whence she was called Marie
Magdalene) All these as impertinent circuitions I omit; for in the silence of
the holy Ghost I will not be curious. Whosoever she was, she still carries the
name of what sometimes she was, Peccatrix mulier, A woman that was a sinner.

Have you not seen some artificial pictures drawn by the pencill of a skillful
optic, in the same part of the frame or table, according to diverse sights and
aspects, represent diverse things? Such an admirable piece with a double
resemblance has Saint Luke (an excellent limner, as the ancients write) here
delineated in the most lively colors. Look on the one side, you shall see a
lascivious wanton setting her self to sale in the most tempting fashion; step
on the other side, you may behold an admirable convert attended by a retinue of
graces: view it which way you will, here is an Ecce like a curtain hung before
some exact and rare workmanship, which likewise has a double reference; to the
mercy, and to the power of Christ: to his power, that thus drew this sinner; to
his mercy, that received her.

In this noble history are diverse weighty circumstances, like so many wedges
of gold in a rich mineral. I shall dig for some. And one ingot I light on at
the very head of the mine; Ecce mulier, etc. Behold is a word of emphasis and
energie: and (as one pithily says) if this star stands over the house, a
Jesus is within. Here, like Janus, it looks both backward and forward: and so
will I treat of this woman; first, as a sinner; secondly, as a penitent. On
these two staves, put into their several rings, shall the ark of my discourse
be carried.

If it shall seem distasteful unto any, that I insist, perhaps too long, on the
particular sin for which this woman was publicly noted; let me put him in
mind of an answer which the Comicall poet gave; who, when one accused him that
he brought a lewd debauched ruffian on the stage, and so gave bad example to
young men; True (quoth he) I brought such a man on, but I hanged him before he
went off; and so I gave them a good example. Here is a better lesson to be
learned. All women may accept this woman as a pattern to imitate; that even
they that can teach the finest stitches, may themselves take new works out of
this sampler. For how sinful soever she may appear at first, let us suspend
our censure of her till the last act: then shall we find, how she became a
lebete phiala, of a caldron seething and boiling in lust, a crystal vial of
pure chastity; how she that at first was running apace into the dead sea, did
speedily turn her course into the streams of paradise. But I must take my rise
at this woman's fall; and make it my first task to consider her as she was a
Sinner.

SECT. III.
A Sinner? Who is not? Had she not been a sinner, it had been (...), beyond all
admiration. He that knows himself to be a man, knows himself to be a
sinner; for in the loins of our first parents we all sinned, and are deprived,
[or, Romans 3.23.
come short] of the glory of God: So that it is a sin, to suppose a
separation of sin from man's nature. Original sin.
In our conceptions, through that original pollution we were all warmed in
unclean blood; and still we do ponere Adam super Adam, as the Fathers say. This
hereditary poison, virus paternum (as Paulinus calls it) is inbred in every
man; and that (...), the sullage of his clay cleaves fast unto us. Adam
sinning, all his seed are become sinful, and all his offspring, tanquam serie
continuata, as in a continued line, do like corrupted branches of a rotten tree
bring forth still corrupted fruits. The greatest and most perfect light in the
world is the sun in the firmament; yet has he his (...), his parallax, his
variation: And what son of Adam was ever found, through the zodiac of whose
life an ecliptic line could not be drawn? Ambr.
Da mihi aliquem sine prolapsione delicti, says a Father. Such an one is like
the mountain of gold, or the philosophers stone, or the second intentions in
logic, which have no real absolute existence, and indeed are nothing save in
the theorie and operation of the understanding. In scholasticall speculations
you may hear the noise of such a one, but you may look for him under the same
roof with Quintilians Orator, Xenophons Cyrus; and you shall no sooner find
him then the echo in the poet; -- quem non invenis usquam, esse putas nusquam.
Such Vtopicall perfection (as one has it in a pretty expression) is but a
dream of the idle Donatists of Amsterdam. In multis -- (it is the voice of an
Apostle) In many things we offend all. James 3.2
Certum est Jebusaeos habitare cum filiis Judae in Jerusalem, says that
allegorical Father. Nothing more certain then the deep remainders of
corruption even in Gods peculiar Israel. Even their best works (and they too,
like Solomon's sculpture, 1. Kings 7.19.
a lilie upon a pillar, a lilie upon a pillar, rare and few) will but weigh
light in the scales of the sanctuary. As the courtizan Lais said, that
Philosophers did sometimes knock at her gates as well as others: so the
best-natured men are often taken with humane frailties. Let the best do their
best, they are but like the ark of the covenant, a cubit and an half high,
imperfectly perfect. It is with the most righteous man, as it was with David;
1. Kings 15.5.
who did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, save only in the
matter of Vriah: in some matter or other they step aside from Gods
commandments. In remiss degrees all contraries may be lodged together under
one roof: Saint Paul swears that he dies daily, yet he lives; 1. Cor. 15.31.
so the best man sins hourly, even while he obeys.

Who cannot easily play the orator in so copious a theme? who cannot easily
declaim at large against sin, against which it is a sin not to declaim? But
absoluta sententia expositore non indiget: and it is a truth as clear, as if it
were Solis radio scriptum (in the proverb of Tertullian) written with a
sunne-beam on the wall of a glass, that which Solomon precisely affirms in
the dedication of his Temple; God has concluded all under sin. 1. Kings 8.46.


Yet we must note, that the word Sinner is oftentimes taken in Scripture
antonomastice, in a more special sense. In the Old Testament, The Amalekites
those sinners, 1. Sam. 15.18. In the New Testament the Gentiles are also called
sinners, as likewise publicanes and harlots; not so much because they had sin
in them, as that they were (...), transcendent sinners, out of measure sinful.
The seeds of all sins are in all men; the seeds, not the practice: there is
not in all the same eruption, there is in all the same corruption: Some be not
kites, others hawks, and the rest eagles from one and the same eyrie. He that
bears man about him, he that is apparelled with flesh and blood, cannot but
(...), though he do not (...). Though wickedness cannot be kept from me
because of the tentation, yet may I be kept from it because of the repulse. And
here must I take up a distinction; Aliud est concupiscere, aliud post
concupiscentias ire, It is one thing to dart and glance a wanton desire;
another thing, to court and plead it. Though the motions of the flesh be alike
in the carnal and spiritual man, yet the humouring of those motions is not.

Again, aliud est peccare, aliud peccatum facere, as the Fathers distinguish:
It is one thing for a man to sin; another thing, to give himself over to the
commission of sin: And the distinction is no idle one; for it is not only
grounded upon S. John's phrase, John 3.9.
but also upon S. James his gradation; James 1.14, 15.
Men are enticed by their lust; then lust conceives, and brings forth sin;
and sin being perfected, brings forth death. And this perfection of sin
is properly the doing of sin. And this doing of sin, this perfection of
sin, this continuance in any notorious sin, is not only a grave to bury
the soul, but a great stone rolled to the mouth thereof, to keep it down. That
which Erasmus says of Paris, that after a man has acquainted himself with the
odious sent of it, hospitibus magis ac magis adlubescit, Of custom in sin.
it grows into his liking more and more; is too true of sin, which by long
entertainment becomes customary, and not easy of dismission. We know that ^n
Vrinator, an expert swimmer, being under water feels not the weight of a
full-fraughted ship of a thousand tons riding perpendicularly over his head:
So while miserable men swim in the custom of any pleasing sin, they are
insensible of the burden of it. That which our Canonists say in another kind,
is too true here, Custom can give a jurisdiction; neither is there any
stronger law then it. The continuance of any known sin gives a strong
habituation, as Gerson phraseth it, and works an utter senselessness in brawnie
hearts: for frequency of sinning does flesh us in immodesty; assiduity, in
impudence: and that sin is almost incurable which is steeled by custom. In
this compass of my discourse the needle points right at this woman: for the
Evangelist says not, Behold a woman that had sinned; but, a woman that was a
sinner. It is not a transient but a permanent condition that gives the
denomination. Her long continuance in her trade had branded her with this
title, Peccatrix mulier, A woman that was a sinner.

SECT. IIII.
THis woman (as it is generally received) was noted for a luxurious and
^ncontinent life; (...) habet emphasim quasi admirationis de excellentia scu
enormitate, Chemnitius.
so that Sinons words might here take place, (...); Quae and qualis est haec
mulier? She was, as they conjecture, of a noble stock: and in those ^oose
days, wherein Herod erected his theaters and his amphitheatres, a gap was set
open to much impiety and wantonness; Virorum exemplo mulieres and copiosae and
honest is familiis natae impudice vivebant, non ut quaestum corpori facerent,
sed insania libidinis, says my Cardinal Conzen. in locum.
Author.

However wantons may flatter themselves with the devils dispensation, a detur
aliquid aetati; however they take that for true doctrine, which the unwise
Tutour sometimes spoke in the Comedy; Non est, creed mihi, adolescenti, It is
no such fault in a young man to follow harlots; yet shall their souls need no
other conveyance to hell then this: For it is such a sin as commonly drives
two to the devil at once; Lust.
a sin which yielded unto, becomes a pleasant madness. Aug. de civit. Dei,
lib. 21. cap.
I read in S. Augustine, of a certain well in Epirus, that when firebrands are
put into it, it will quench them; and yet when they are quenched, it will
presently set them on fire again: Such a bewitching water is a lascivious
woman; when she quenches the lust of the body for a season, she sets it on
fire afterward a great deal more. Fonseca.
Wittily therefore have some emblem'd forth this vice by the phoenix, which does
revive and renew her self by the fire which she kindles by the motion of her
wings. Thou mournest perhaps, and bewailest, and repentest thee of the
dishonest sin thou have committed, and desire to give it over that it may
die in thee: but with the wings of thy thoughts thou blowest those coals
afresh, and make them flame more then before. Thus in the midst of thy tears
thou becomest like the self-enamoured boy in the poet, Narcissus.
Ipse sibi mediis qui fuit ignis aquis.
For the wicked in circuitu ambulant, still walk the round: first they act a
sin, because the thought has pleased them; then they think that sin over
again, because the act has pleased them: Thus by a damned arithmetic do they
multiply one sin into a thousand.

Among such a deal of variety of sins (for sin is like a continued
quantity that admits of infinite sections) there is no one more plausible, more
pleasing to nature, then wantonness. How many set their souls burning in the
flames thereof, as Nero set Rome on fire, and behold them with affectation? How
many a silly wretch, like the foolish lark while it plays with the feather,
and stoupeth to the glass, is caught in the fowlers net? For an harlot (to
give a short but true character of her) is the devils pitfall, The character of
an harlot.
a trap to catch our souls. Her eyes, like free-booters, live upon the spoil of
stragglers: she baits her desires with a million of prostituted countenances:
her displayed breasts, and loose dangling locks wantonly erring over her
shoulders, her artificial complexion (the counterfeit of the great seal of
nature) her curled and crisped hairs (the circles and sophistries of that old
cunning serpent) her high washes, calamistrations, cerussations, and nescio
quot pudenda mysteria, are so many lures to bring the adulterer to the fist.
Chaste thoughts will check and never stoup to such enticements: Where fire falls
upon wet wood, it soon goes out.

When Potiphars wife, one of the greatest Ladies in Egypt, The admirable
chastity of Joseph.
did inordinately affect, impudently solicit and importune, and in a manner
force the modesty of her good servant Joseph, how much rather did he leave his
cloak then his virtue? Nor did he rescue himself from adultery and danger by
violence to her person, nor fail in other duties requisite; but with hazard of
his name, life, and liberty, he made an innocent escape, cum meliore pallio
castitatis, Aug.
to preserve his better garment of chastity.

The Arabians proverb is elegant, Obstrue quinque fenestras, ut luceat domus,
Shut the five windows, that the house may be lightsome; cleanse the limbeck of
the senses, lest thence some pollution drop into the soul: If at once we would
overcome both the tentation and the tempter, we must resolve with Alipius, to
shut our eyes when we come amongst vanities: for the eye is the first part that
is overcome in any battle; upon the first assault it yields up our strongest
fort. The vanity of the eye.
The eye besides is the vainest of all the senses; it takes extreme delight to
be coozened; one of the pleasures of the eye is the deceit of it: How easily is
that sense tempted, which delights to be deceived.

The ancient Philosophers before Aristotle, that held the sight to be by
sending out of beams, imagined the eye to be of a fiery nature: wherein they
were the rather confirmed, for that they found, if the eye take a blow, fire
seems to sparkle out of it. But certainly (it is the elegant observation of a
learned Prelate) how waterish soever better experience has found the substance
of the eye, Episcop. Exon.
it is spiritually fiery; fiery both actively, and passively: passively, so as
that it is enflamed by every wanton beam; actively, so as that it sets the
whole heart on fire with the inordinate flames of concupiscence. Genesis 34.2.
Thus Shechem saw Dinah, and defiled her: Viderunt oculi, rapuerunt pectora
flammae.
Thus Amnon fell sick for Tamars sake, 2. Sam. 13.2.
-- videt hanc, visamque cupit.
Thus when David walked upon the roof of the kings palace, 2. Sam. 11.2.
and espied from thence a beautiful woman washing her self, Mulier long,
libido prope.
his petulant eye recoyled upon his heart, and smote him with sinful desire.

Yet it is not the eye of it self, (for what is that but the beauty of the
face, the bright star of that orb it moves in?) but the viciousness of the
eye, that I so condemn; quando cum oculis fabulamur, as the Fathers speak.

I might easily here enlarge my self: But to avoid that which was a noted fault
in Marcellus the rhetorician, Sueton.
that lighting on a figure, he would pursue it so far, till he forgot the
matter in hand; I fall back again to treat more particularly of this woman,
most sinful for her life, most hateful for her lust, (...), a woman given
over to incontinency (as the word used by the Evangelist implies) commune
scandalum, a general plague, a common scandal: For by her bad example she made
the city so infamous, that she might more fitly be called peccatum
Hierosolymae, quam peccatrix, says Petrus Chrysologus, because of that evil
report that went of her; the whole city did suffer therein. Which brings me to
another circumstance of the story, the Vbi, the place where she set up her
trade; which adds much to the heinousness of her sin: Behold a woman in the
city which was a Sinner.

SECT. V.
Sin is sin wheresoever committed, whether before a multitude of beholders,
or in a desert, -- pecces quocunque sub axe,
Sub Jove semper eris --
Yet the more public the fact is, the greater is the scandal; and this woman's
offense was the more notorious, in that she was a City-sinner.

It Is true, I confess, Tentations.
that no place is a sanctuary from tentations, which come too swiftly and
unbidden, like rough winds from every corner of the sky, and in that
numberless number, as if each minute were computed by them. We are apt to
fall, because we are mutable; but we do not commonly fall except some occasion
be given: and how full is the world of a world of such occasions. Our common
adversary the devil, -- cui nomina mill,
Mill nocendi arts, --
finds how prone we are to our (...), Gal. 6.1.
to stumble at something or other that lies in our way; he knows whither our
corrupt nature bends; he sifteth out what will work our affections and
dispositions, and with that he plieth and wooeth our consent to sin; like an
expert mariner, he marks the wind, and accordingly hoiseth up, or strikes
sail; like a cunning poet, he fits every actour with a part agreeable, and
makes perpetual use of the bent of our nature. Thus has he a wedge of gold
for covetous Achan, a crown for ambitious Absalom, a Dinah for Shechem, etc.

And if those two, the concurrence of Time and Place, are his principal
engines, which serve to give aim to such faults as our nature is too perfect in
without a prompter; then surely in a spacious city are more invitations to
sin, then in private cells. The concourse of much people affords many
brokers of villainy, which live upon the spoil of young hopes. Where many pots
are boiling, there must needs be much scum; and where multitude of strangers
meet, where variety of delights and pastime daily take the eye, it is more
difficult to avoid them. For our nature herein is like unto fire, which, if
there be any infection in the room, draws it straight to it self; or like unto
jeat, which omitting all precious objects, gathers up straw and dust.

It was in a city where this woman lived, where by her lewd example she drew on
others to offend. Her example was the more hurtful, because ('it is thought) she
was of good parentage. Satan's infections shoot many times through some great
star the influence of damnation into lesser bodies. Examples.
For an Example is like a stone thrown into a pond, that makes circle to beget
circle till it spread to the banks; or like a plague sore, that infects the
standers by, and lookers on.

I do not find the name of the city set down; yet many are bold to affirm that
it was Naim; others, Jerusalem. Simon de Cassia.
They that have traveled in the search of the latter, Jerusalem
style it the glory of the world, the theater of mysteries and miracles, the
navil of the earth, being seated amidst the nations, like a diadem crowning
the heads of the heads of the mountains. Honorificentissima praedicantur de te,
o civitas Dei sum honorifica; Very excellent things are spoken of thee, thou
city of God: Psalm. 87.2.
At ignominiosa facta sunt in te, But very heinous crimes have been committed
in thee, says a Father. Whether she lived there or no, I enquire not; where
ever it was, she was too well known in her time. What her offense was, has
been already showed: I will not lay my finger again on that blot.

Thus far has the black line of her life been drawn. Now look we on the
other hemispere; now come we to consider her as she has put off the Harlot, as
she is a Penitent, Behold a woman that WAS a Sinner.

SECT. VI.
QVi in aurifodinis laborant, they who dig in the veins of the earth, parvum
inveniunt in magno, find a little gold in a great deal of ore: But they who
search into the mines of holy Writ, magnum inveniunt in parvo, within the
compass of a ^ittle ground find a great deal of gold. Adoro plenitudinem
Scripturae, with Tertullian: where the least particle truly weighed has
mountains of matter, as the Rabbines phrase it; wherein every tittle, every
iota is dogmatically full, and not to be passed over without a registring eye.
In these words, (...), quae erat peccatrix, the verb erat, little in the
sentence, but large in the sense, is like that (...) in S. James, James 3.4.
which though it be small, yet it turns about the whole ship. We have already
taken it in the worse sense: now let us consider it as it argues a change, as
it points to the best, which is behind.

Scipio (as Livie writes) never looked so fresh, nor seemed so lovely in the
eyes of his soldiers, as after his recoverie from a dangerous sickness which
he took in the camp: Nor does the soul ever seem more beautiful, then when she
is restored to health after some desperate malady. The Palladium was in
highest esteem both with the Trojans and Grecians, not so much for the matter
or workmanship, as because it was catched out of the fire when Troy was burnt:
And certainly no soul is more precious in the sight of God and his angels, then
that which is snatched out of the fire of hell, and jaws of death: For hereby
it becomes like the wood, which Seneca pronounces to be eo pretiosius, Sen.
lib. 7. de Benef. cap. 9.
quo illud in plures nodos arboris infelicitas torsit.

And here justly may I take up an Ecce, and lead this woman in with a note of
wonder. To see men perverted from God to the world, from piety to profaneness,
is as common as lamentable; every night such stars fall: But to see a convert
come home to God, is both happy and wondrous to men and angels. O res novas and
inauditas! Behold, the first fruits of them that come to Christ, are such as
were most desperately enthralled to Satan; Magi, Publicani, Meretrices, Latro,
Blasphemus. O the depth, or rather no depth of the goodness of Christ's
unspeakable mercies, who of the knottiest and crookedst timber can make rafts
and cielings for his own house! Thus can he call a Zaccheus from the toll-booth
to be a Disciple, and Matthew to be an Apostle.

The penitent thief on the cross.
But, O blessed Jesu! how shall I enough magnify, among other demonstrations
of thy mercy, thy goodness and power in the conversion of the dying thief!
Wander, my soul, in amazement, while I think hereon! The offender came to die;
nothing was in his thoughts but his guilt and torment; while he was yet in his
blood, thou said, This soul shall live. That good Spirit of thine so breathed
upon him, that his last hour was his first hour wherein he knew his Savior
to be God. In ipso crucis candelabro sol resplenduit, The sun did shine unto
him upon the candlestick of the cross; the light whereof was so powerful,
that it awaked this drowsy and sleepie thief, snorting in the security of his
sin, leaving him so well instructed, ut corripit, confitetur, praedicat,
precatur: corripit socium, Luke 23.40, etc.
Do not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? confitetur
peccata, We receive the due reward of our deeds; praedicat innocentiam Christi,
But this man has done nothing amiss; postremo, crescente lumine gratiae
precatur; Lord, remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. He that before
had in his eye nothing but present death, is now lifted up above his cross in
a blessed ambition, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. Is
this the voice of a thief, or a disciple? Dic, o latro, ubi thronus ex
sapphiro? ubi cherubim, and exercitus coeli? ubi corona, sceptrum and purpura,
ut eum dicas Regem? Say, O thief, Why should thou style him King? where is
his throne of sapphire? where are the cherubims, and the whole host of heaven?
where is his crown, his scepter, and his purple? See thou any other crown
then that of thorns? any other scepter then strong iron nails, which were
driven up to the head through the palms of those blessed hands? any other
purple but his blood? any other throne but his cross? What do thou see that
thou should style him King? O faith greater then death, that can look beyond
the cross, at a crown; beyond dissolution, at a remembrance of life and glory!
As no Disciple could be more faithful, so no Saint could be more happy. For,
as Justin Martyr says, juxta fluenta plenissima gratiam simul accepit and
gloriam; grace and glory with a full tide both at once came flowing in upon
him. Ambr.
Magis velox erat praemium quam petitio, and uberior gratia quam precatio, The
reward every way outvied the request. It was a great favor from Christ, says
Leo, to put this so discreet and so humble a petition into this thiefs heart;
but a greater favor, to give him so good and so quick a dispatch. Quid tu
Domine, says S. Cyprian, amplius Stephano contulisti? O Lord, what could that
protomartyr S. Stephen enjoy more? or that beloved Disciple that leaned on thy
bosom? and (as Cyrill of Jerusalem says) what could the long services of
those that endured the heat of the day, obtain more at thy hands? But God
gives them this answer; I do thee no wrong, did not thou agree with me for a
penny? Some laborers were working hard at the vineyard from the first hour;
others, from the third; others began at the ninth when the sun was setting.
First came Adam, then Noah, after him Abraham, and the rest of the holy
prophets: But this thief came at the sunne-setting: and he that in the morning
was posting toward hell, is in the evening with his Lord in paradise: for no
sooner had he cried, Lord, remember me, but Christ answers him immediately, I
say unto thee; and promises, thou shall; and seals up his promise, verily; and
promises more then is asked, paradise; and promises presently, being asked
indefinitely, This day: Verily I say unto thee, This day shall thou be with me
in paradise.

The conversion of S. Paul.
In the list of these admirable Converts I cannot omit the blessed Apostle S.
Paul. When Saul wasted the church, dispersed the Disciples, destroyed the
Christians, following them from the synagogues into the streets, from the
streets into their houses, when he breathed out threatenings and slaughter, Acts
9.
when he was journeying with a commission toward Damascus; the Lord might
without any expostulating have poured down vengeance upon him, he might have
summoned some punishment or other to have served the execution of wrath against
him: But if ever mercy and judgment met together, there was judicium
misericordiae, and misericordia judicii: a voice, and a stroke; the one
striking down to earth, the other lifting up to heaven: a light shining from
heaven, and a light shining to direct him to heaven; a light shining to him
that was in darkness and in the shadow of death, to bring him from the snare
of darkness unto the glorious liberty of the sons of God. He that was the
Way, met him in the way; He that was the Light, met him with a light; He that
was the Word, met him with the voice of a word, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? It was a gracious favor of the Lord, to vouchsafe to question with
him; but to call him by his name, and to ingeminate that name, Lorinus.
hoc indicat affectum commiserationis, it was a sign of his great affection
and commiseration. It was a voice indeed, Psalm. 29.4, 5.
the voice of the Lord mighty in operation; the voice of the Lord is a glorious
voice; the voice of the Lord breaks the cedartrees; yea, the Lord breaks
the cedars of Libanus. This voice struck him to the earth, struck him from
horse, struck him from his presumption, Persecutest thou Me? Maximam emphasin
habet illud Me: Yet the voice was not more powerful then merciful: it was
suaviter fortis, and fortiter suavis. It was the heaviest fall, and yet the
happiest fall that ever any had; it was his fall, and his rising. Thus as
dumbness unto Zachary was not a dumb instructour; it taught him faith against
another time: so blindness sent unto Paul, took away his blindness, making
him to see more in the ways of life, then all his learning gathered at the
feet of Gamaliel could have revealed unto him.

Here, I confess, I have hunted a little wide; and una fidelia duos parietes
dealbavi. Which the rather I was led unto, because I intended to have writ a
treatise on the conversion of S. Paul; as likewise to have spent some oil on
the penitentiary thief. But second thoughts have taken place.

SECT. VII.
TO join issue with my former meditations, I will imitate the most curious
gravers, who look sometimes upon green flies to recollect their scattered sight
again: I will fix my eyes through the glass of contemplation on the picture of
this penitent woman.

Repentance, Repentance.
say the Fathers out of Numb. 35.11. is a city of refuge to fly unto: which
again, out of Acts 27. they call secundam tabulam post naufragium, the happy
plank which has saved many a soul from the gulf of despair, the board that
after shipwreck will carry us safe unto land, and bring us to those (...), the
fair havens, as the Apostle speaks in the same chapter, in his voyage toward
Rome.

Others do compare it to a Phenix-nest, A Phenix-nest.
wherein the old Adam is consumed to ashes, and out of those ashes arises the
new man of God. For conversion is a sacred riddle, a divine aenigma: A divine
riddle.
wherein when we are born, we are buried; and when we are quickened, we are
killed; and when we are mortified, we are raised. Thus Ninive was overthrown,
and yet not overthrown; Aug. de civit. Dei, lib. 21. cap 24.
Eversa est Ninive quae mala erat, and aedificata bona quae non erat: it was
overthrown by sin, but builded again by repentance.

He that is a skillful Penitent, does cunningly play this after-game: and a
sinner after his recovery, for the most part, seeks God more fervently. For
the Saints come out of the bed of their sins, as Hezekiah out of his sick
bed, more humble, more holy, more pious, more penitent; as the Eagle that is
wearied, comes out of the water into which she dips her wing, with a more
surging ascent toward heaven then ever.

Dum peteret Regem --
Mart. lib. 1 epig. 22.
When Mutius Scevola missed of his aim, and in stead of killing Porsenna, slew
one of his scribes being as richly apparelled as his prince, he presently
offered that hand which gave the stroke, as a willing sacrifice unto the flame:
In admiration of whose great spirit, the poet gives this acclamation, Major
deceptae fama est and gloria dextrae:
Si non errasset, fecerat illa minus.
Without any inversio^ I may apply it to this woman's conversion; Si non
peccasset, fecerat illa minus.
Nor let this be taken for a paradox: For what an enemy would upbraid by way
of reproach, is the greatest praise that can be, Faults that were. Their very
sins do honor some: as the very devils that Mary Magdalene had, are
mentioned for her glory, since we do not hear of them but when they are cast
out: for repentance is a supersedeas that discharges sin, making God to be
merciful, angels to be joyful, man to be acceptable.

But because I have almost every where fair occasion given to treat of this
divine grace of Repentance, which like Miriam leads the dance before the
daughters of Israel, I will not stand to gather the fruit in this orchyard as
clean as I might: I now only give the shaking of a tree, two or three berries
from the upper branches. I now come with speed to this woman's good speed; to
her access, and to her success: For, ut cognovit, venit; when she knew where
Jesus was, she came.

SECT. VIII.
NOn cervus fluvios sic avet algidos, Buchan. in psalm. 42.

Cervus, turba canum quem premit, etc.
The noble beast of chase, the subtle cerffage, the wind-footed Heart, hearing
the deep-mouthed hounds to vent his secret leyr, and listening to the loud and
deep yellings wherewith the forest rings, lifts up his high-palmed head,
rusheth out rouzing, drives the brakes, trusts his speed, and gets
ground, the kennel cast arere; at length imbost with heat, he beats the
brooks and ponds for sweet refreshing soil. Without stretching the metaphor,
the Sic does here punctually answer the Sicut. This woman now touched with
repentance for her former vanities, like the thirsty and panting Heart in the
extremity of drought, desiderat ad fontes aquarum, does eagerly long for the
cooling springs. Infixa erat in cord ejus sagitta, says Salmeron, her soul
was deeply wounded with the arrow of her sins, -- and haerebat lateri letalis
arundo, it stuck so fast, she could not shake it out: therefore with the
stricken Deer she comes to the sovereign dittanie to expel it. Turbata erat
piscina conscientiae, says that same Author sweetly; The pool of her
conscience was troubled with that descending angel, and instantly she steps in
for a cure: for -- ut cognovit, venit; when she knew where Jesus was, without
standing upon terms of circumstance, she makes a speedy recourse unto him.

And here may we stand a while, as at a pillar or monument in the
high-way-side, viewing with admiration the zeal of her access. Christ was now
at dinner in a Pharisee's house; Where by the way I will take up an
observation, Christ many times frequented feasts.
That many times he frequented feasts. And I do not find, that he was ever bid
to any table and refused it: if a Pharisee, if a Publicane invited him, he made
not dainty to go; not for the pleasure of the dishes, but for the benefit of so
winning a conversation, (...), non propter micas, sed ut animas Deo faceret
amicas; not to eat, but to gain souls to God: For which end he was sent from
the bosom of his Father. And at whose board did he ever sit, and left not the
host a gainer? When Zaccheus entertained him, Episcop. Exon.
salvation came that day to his house with the Author of it: when the poor
bridegroom entertained him, his water-pots were filled with wine: and when this
Simon the Pharisee entertained him, his table was honored with the public
remission of a penitent sinner. It was our Saviors trade to do good; therefore
he changed one station of earth for another; therefore he came down from heaven
to earth. And now, O blessed Savior, now thou art lifted up, thou drawest all
men unto thee. There are now no lists, no limits of thy gracious visitations;
but as the whole earth is equidistant from heaven, so all the nations of the
world be equally open to thy bounty. At haec obiter.

Into this Pharisee's house does this woman thrust her self. Pet. Chrysol.
Et quid est quod haec mulier ignota, imo male nota, quid est quod ibi quaerit
non vocata? O woman, me thinks I see this austere sectarie (though of the
better mould of Pharisees) looking overly on thee, darting from his eyes
disdain and scorn, espying so noted, so notorious a strumpet, to come to the
upper chamber where he kept his feast, especially to come into Christ's
presence; who well knew her wicked life, and (as it might be supposed) offended
at her action.

O woman, great was thy faith! No disadvantage could affright thee from coming
unto Jesus; not the frowns, not the censure of a rigid host; not the
inconveniency of the place (an unlikely place it might have seemed in a
Pharisees house to find a Savior;) not the unfitness of the time (an unproper
time to serve in tears at a banquet.) Certainly the Spirit moved on those
waters: Doubtless this woman had often heard from our Saviors lips (in those
heavenly sermons) many gracious invitations of all distressed and
sinne-burdened souls; and now at length was entangled in the net of his
heavenly doctrine, For our Savior (says that Oracle of the Greek Church) has
a twofold net, Chrysoft. in Luc. 22.
(...): the net of wonders, and of words; by the first he caught those many who
believed on his name: John 2.23
by the second he enclosed his very enemies, those officers who were sent to
apprehend him, John 7.46
and bring him before the high priests. And still does our blessed Savior thus
spinne out the thread of his love to an unmeasurable length, to try whether we
will lay hold on it: he does angle for us, he sits in heaven, lets down the
line of his love, and baits it with his mercy, to prove whether we will swallow
it, that he may catch our souls. With such an hook was this woman taken: she
had treasured up his sayings in her memory; she had observed that he not only
pardoned sinners, but entertained them into his presence; she had noted the
passages of his power and mercy; and now deep remorse wrought on her for her
misspent life. And surely had not the Spirit of God wrought upon her e're she
came, and wrought her to come, she had neither sought nor found Christ. For
those good graces which God finds in us, are like the silver which Joseph found
in Benjamins sack, of his own putting in. If his hand do not move the golden
cymbal, it will yield no pleasant sound: For our will herein is like a
lowersphere, -- quae -- non nisi mota movet. In the 20. of S. John's gospel it
is observable, that there was first a flavit Spiritus, then a flevit Maria: the
Spirit first breathed, and then that blast begat the shower; Marie mourned:
Rabboni there called Marie, before Marie was able to cry, Rabboni. And this
woman being first moved by the Spirit of God, now comes in and finds that
Savior whom she sought.

SECT. IX.
SHe comes in, but how? Not empty-handed, but having got a precious confection
of ointment, of Nardus, the chief of all ointments; which was for the making
true, (...), and for the value, costly: that she intends to bestow. The
ointment was choice, and the choice of her ointment is commendable. Every
Evangelist has a several attribute to honor this ointment: nay, Judas
himself gives the ointment praise enough, though he condemns the act, though
he casts in his dead fly, and murmures out, Vt quid perditio haec? To what
purpose is this waste? yet Judas did praise this ointment, nay praise it more
then any other; yea, he esteemed it far more worthy then he esteemed his
Master: for he sold his Master for thirty poor silverlings; Matthew. 26.15. John
15.12.
but he valued this ointment at three hundred pence.

This delicate odoriferous perfume she brings in as rich a vessel, a box of
alabaster: which was a solid, hard, pure, clear marble.

But note we here this woman's good decorum: She does not presently pour out
her ointment on the feet of Jesus, but (observing a comely order in her
repentance, and this laudable action) first she gives the sacrifice of a broken
heart, then she breaks her box of spikenard.

In the manner of her repentance are many circumstances, all which like the
shafts of the holy candlestick, every one bear sundry knops of flowers.

To take up the story as it lies in order, ever treading in the steps of the
Evangelist; in this part of the story I find six things observable: four
whereof belong to the bitter of Repentance; two, to the sweetness and comfort
thereof. To the bitterness; 1, Shame, She stood behind him; 2, Fear, At his
feet; 3, Sorrow, She wept; 4, An abjection or neglect of her self, She wiped
Christ's feet with the hairs of her head. To the sweet, two things: 1, Her love,
She kissed them; 2, Her bounty, and anointed them with the ointment.

Through these heads, all of them being of high and singular importance, my
discourse shall pass.

It is not here, as in the 68 psalm; where the singers go before, and the
minstrels follow after. Here the mourners go first, like the captives in their
ancient triumphs; as Shame, and Fear, and Sorrow, and her Neglect of her self:
then come the Minstrels and Singers; her grateful Devotion toward our
Savior, our Saviors Mercy toward her. Shame and Fear.


First, Shame and Fear go hand in hand; Shame goes before as the needle, and
Fear follows after as the thread. Shame is a little Fear, and Fear is a great
Shame. Fear is (...), (as it is well called) of the nature of a bridle to our
nature, to hold us in to refrain from evil, if it may be; if not, to check and
turn us about, and make us turn from it. Therefore, fear God, Prove. 3.7.
and depart from evil, commonly go together, as the cause and the effect; we
seldom find them parted.

This fear is called, and truly, (for truly so it is) the beginning of our
wisdom, when we begin to be truly wise. And Shame, albeit the daughter of
sin, becomes sometimes the mother of conversion. Of which we may say, as the
Romans did of Pompey the Great, Plut. in vit. Pomp.
(...), that it is a fair and happy daughter brought forth by an ougly and
odious mother: Sin indeed, objective works Shame, and Shame effective
causes Repentance. Young Ephraim smote his thigh in detestation of his sin,
Jer. 31.19.
I was ashamed and even confounded. This was his inducement to repentance. For
sin makes the sinner to be to God, like Absalom to David; he may not dare to
see the kings face, 2. Sam. 14.24. Philo the most famous philosopher that ever
that Jewish nation bred (of whom it is said, Philo was a Jewish Plato, Philo,
de profugis.
or Plato an Athenian Philo) sets down three principal causes for which
usually one flees from another; Hatred, Shame, and Fear. Thus Jacob hating
Labans injustice and idolatry, forsook him; For fear Jacob conveyed himself
from Esau; For shame and fear Adam skulked in the grove of paradise: And here
both fear and shame set this woman in this deportment.

Stetit retro, She stood behind. A wonderful and strange kind of change! When
this woman did cast her sins behind her back, God did set them before his
eyes: but when she set them before her eyes, and grew fearful and timorous to
look him in the face, and had not the heart to press into his presence, who
was to be her souls best physician, God did then cast her sins behind his
back. S. Augustine touches upon this string, upon those words of David, Psalm.
51.9.
Averte faciem tuam, Domine, a peccatis meis; O thou sinner (says the Father)
I will give thee a good remedy for this; Tu inde non avertas, Do not thou turn
thine eyes from off thy sins, and God will turn away his. When God is moved
in pity toward any, whom he is not ignorant to be sinners, he is said to turn
away his face; Non advertit, quia non animadvertit, says S. Augustine: His
indisposition to punish it, is meant by hiding his face from it. So likewise
his blotting out, is not Gods having no record of our sins; but not to use it
as an indictment against us in judgment; according to that rule in law, Idem
est and non esse, and non apparere: that whereof no use is made, is properly
said to be blotted out. So that the words in that place are not to be
understood absolutely, but metonymically: and Ruffinus does well qualify them
with a quasi, Quasi abscondit faciem suam, and quasi delet; God so deals with
a penitent, as if his face were hid, and as if his book were razed in regard of
the sinfulness of his person.

But I must turn back to this woman; and in the next place consider her Sorrow:
She stood behind him weeping.

SECT. X.
SUch is Gods goodness to man, that he has placed in the eye both the
malady, and the remedy; visum, and fletum; the faculty of seeing, and the
sluice of tears: that they who offend by seeing, may be recovered by weeping.
Such a sorrow seasoned and sanctified with grace and faith, is not that sorrow
in moral philosophy, which is affectus destructivus subjecti, an affection or
passion destroying the subject; Godly sorrow.
but affectus perfectivus, and salvativus subjecti (as the School speaks) an
affection perfecting, or preserving the subject; or rather, to speak in the
phrase of the Apostle, a godly sorrow, which causes repentance unto salvation;
a sorrow not to be repented of.

Tears be the favorites that have the ear of the King of heaven: Tears.
They are our bills of Exchange which he allows, and returns them with what
sums of blessings we desire. They are our quit-rents, our homage, our
suit-fines; by this service we do hold our estates in his favor. So long as we
pay him these rents of devotion, so long is our tenure safe, and our title to
his goodness unquestionable. So precious is this liquour distilled from
penitent eyes, that while we stay here, God keeps all our tears in a bottle;
Psalm. 56.8.
and because he will be sure not to fail, he notes how many drops there be in
his register. This sovereign water will fetch a sinner again to the life of
grace, though never so far gone. These coelestes pluviae, these heavenly
showers are the streams of Jordan to cure our leprosy; the Siloam to cure our
blindness; the Bethesda to cure all our lamenesse and defects of obedience.
Never was the poison of any sin so cold, but the hand of repentance could
thaw it; never was the flame of any sin so hot, but the tears of repentance
could cool it. The bleeding heart, Magis frugiferae lacrymantes vineae. Bern.
like the dropping vine, is for the most part most fruitful.

I cannot here express my thoughts in a better strain, then by applying that
which the poet has in his epigram De lacrymis Magdalenae. I will therefore
take her picture as it is exquisitely drawn by him, and set it in my own frame;
I will be bold to borrow some characters from his press, the better to imprint
them in my own and my readers memory.

Zevecotius, epig. 2.
Magdala, dum tristi vitiorum compede vincta,
Solvendam Domini te jacis ante pedes:
Quam dulces fundis lacrymas! quam nobile flumen
Nascitur ex oculi divite font tui!
Pactolus tali se vellet origin nasci,
Vellet and auriferi nobilis unda Tagi.
Illi etenim solum volvunt sub fluctibus aurum:
At fluit ex oculis plurima gemma tuis.
It was a precious ointment wherewith she anointed the feet of Christ: but her
tears wherewith she washed them, were more worth then her spikenard. Her tears
were her best advocates to plead for mercy at the throne of grace; Interdum
lacrymae pondera vocis habent.
Never a word she spoke; for she knew it was unto the Word, who knew her speech
that was retired into her inner cabinet, the private withdrawing-chamber of her
heart. What need her tongue speak, says one, when her eyes spoke, her hands
spoke, her gesture, her countenance, her whole carriage was vocal? Her eyes
sufficiently testified her godly sorrow, which dropped down tears as fast as
the Arabian trees their medicinable gummes. She wept, and in that abundance, as
that with those streams of penitence she now began to wash his feet with her
tears. She began, as if she durst not go on, but did often retract and pull
back her hands. She began to wash the lowest part of his body, his feet, with
her tears; though the water of the brook had been humanity enough: and did wipe
them, not with the lap of her coat, but with the hairs of her head. Which
brings in the next link, her abjection, or neglect of her self.

SECT. XI.
ANd here behold one strange circumstance in this act of her anointing, never
done to any but our Savior, and never to our Savior but by this woman; She
wiped his feet with the hairs of her head. The greatest humility that might be.
As if her shame, her fears, her godly sorrow were not enough, she still seeks
farther to make her self yet more vile, and of no price before Christ. She her
self is the servant that waits on him; from her self do fall the dews of
water that wash his feet; and (as one pithily says) as her eyes were the ewer,
so her hairs were the towel to wipe them. But what? was her ointment so
precious, and she so poor, that she could not bring a napkin, a cloth, or
handkerchief? Certainly she wanted not fine linen to have dried them: but to
approve her humble homage, her hearty devotion, and sincere humility, she
bestows the chiefest ornament of her head on the meanest office to our Saviors
feet.

And here (as every where) behold a wonderful alteration! S. Bernard says,
that she climbed up to heaven by the same rounds, by which she went down to
hell. Hugo, lib. De Anima.
Superbia in coelo nata est; sed velut immemor qua via inde cecidit, illuc
redire non potuit: Pride (as Hugo prettily speaks) was bred in heaven; Pride.
but having forgotten which way it fell, could never afterward find the way
thither again. Humility.
Whereas humility wrastleth and striveth with God, according to the policy of
Jacob, that is, wins by yielding; and the lower it stoupeth toward the
ground, the more advantage it gets to obtain a blessing. Thus cunningly in
abasement of her self, does this humble penitent like the Syrophenician woman;
tanquam canis lambit vestigia Domini. And at the feet of her Savior she makes
a general sacrifice of all those things wherewith she had offended him; Greg.
Quot habuit in se oblectamenta, tot de se fecit holocausta. Her eyes, her
lips, her hair, her ointment, all the instruments of her death were turned at
her conversion into the means of life.

The Philistines being plagued 1. Sam. 6.
with emerods, offered emerods unto the Ark. The Israelites being stung with
serpents, erected a serpent in the wilderness; Numb. 21
Serpens momordit, serpens curavit. They that gave their jewels to the making
of a calf, did afterward bestow them upon the Lords tabernacle. And such was
this woman's practice; who having now given a bill of divorce to her former
vanities, and disrobed her self of all sumptuous weeds and alluring
paludaments, does, like an expert apothecarie that knows how to mix and
temper his triacles, make a most sovereign antidote of a most deadly poison.
She had wont to send forth her alluring beams into the eyes of her lascivious
paramours: therefore now she weepeth a deluge of tears, which is little enough
to bear the ark of her sorrow. She had made her lips the weapons of lust, and
gates of vanity; but now they sanctify themselves with her dear respect unto
the Son of God. Her hair, which she had so gently kembed and braided
cunningly against the glass, does now serve in stead of naperie to dry his
feet. Her odoriferous perfume, wherewith she was wont to make her self pleasing
to her amorous companions, she now bestows on those hallowed feet, which her
eyes had watered, her hair had wiped, her mouth had kissed. Which brings me to
the two last circumstances of this part of the Story: First, her Love;
Secondly, her Bounty and devotion. Which two shall seal up her repentance, and
my discourse.

SECT. XII.
AMong other things observable in the greater and more solemn feasts of the
Jews, we are here to take notice of some ceremonies used by them as preparative
to the feast; which I find in our English Josephus to be three: 1, salutation;
2, washing the feet; 3, pouring oil on them.

First, their Salutations were testified either by words, or some humble
gesture of the body: as sometimes by prostrating the whole body; sometimes by
kissing the feet, as in this passage of the story; commonly by an ordinary
kiss: This S. Paul calls an holy kiss, 1. Cor. 16.2. S. Peter, a kiss of
charity, 1. Pet. 5.14. The kiss of the cheek was a pledge of their welcome to
their guests, ut ostenderent ingressum pacificum, says Stella.

The second ceremony was Lotio pedum ante discubitum: Of which we read Genesis
43.24. and 1. Sam. 25.41.

The third complement was their pouring out of oil upon the head: Of which the
prophet David gives an hint, Psalm. 23.5. In all which meet rituall
observances, Simon (though of the formal sect of the Pharisees) was defective,
insomuch that our Savior gives him an Item, and challenges him of his
neglected office in his entertainment; Oleo caput meum non unxisti.

And well might the Pharisee read his own taxation in the praise which Christ
gave of this Jewesse, so well seen in the customs of her country.

In her redoubling her kisses of an humble thankfulness on those sacred feet,
is implied an inclination wherewith she was affected, a desire wherewith she
was ravished, a joy wherewith she was quieted.

To repent, is to kiss the feet of Jesus Christ; and it is all one to be sorry
for our sins, and to love him. This truth I gather from our Saviors words,
who denominates this whole action from love: He says not, She wept much, She
sorrowed much; but, She loved much, verse. 47. And by all means she sought to
express her multam dilectionem propter multam remissionem: For, (...) nothing
she had was too dear. With her most precious and fragrant ointment she
anointed our Saviors feet: that rich and costly testimony of her love she
bestowed freely; for (as we gather from this and the other Evangelists) she did
not drop, but pour; not a dram or two, but a whole pound; not reserving any,
but breaking box and all, and that three several times one after another. All
that went before was the sacrifice of a broken heart: now she breaks her box of
spikenard. With that first sacrifice of her heart she adored the Divinity of
Christ; this last she tendereth to his Humanity. The first shower of her tears,
were tears of sorrow and repentance; the latter shower which overtook the
first, were tears of joy and love.

Thus like the Spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 4.9.
did she wound Christ with one of her eyes, and with the chain (a chain of
graces) about her neck. For so pleasing unto him were all the actions of this
perfect Penitent, of this grateful Convert, that he not only made her
apology against the Pharisee, in preferring her kindness before the
entertainment of his house; but against Satan and the powers of hell, in
forgiving her many sins, without any enumeration of them.

I cannot leave my Reader better then in the contemplation of so gracious a
dismission. And thus at length I take my work out of the loom.

FINIS.
Imprimatur Cantabrigiae.

R. Brownrigg, procan. Tho. Bainbrigg. Jo. Cousin. Chey. Row.


In Sanctam Peccatricem.
INgenious Sir, you had a piercing eye,
From hence as far as Bethany to spy
Such a rich gemme, as unregarded lay
Upon the ground, at noon-time of the day,
Before a multitude. There was but one
That prized this jewel then: 'twas he alone,
The Jeweller that made her, knew her worth,
And told it thee, when first he sent it forth
Into thy heart inspired; and thou have took
This precious gemme, and put it in a book,
In leaves of gold; so that each eye may gaze
At that, which did the God of heaven amaze.
I know thou have searched the oriental mines
For the choice accents of thy sacred lines,
And from the center of the earth have flown
In holy raptures to the Empyriall throne;
And there have taken from a Cherubs wing
The quill thou wrot'st with, who did gladly bring
With it this message, That they hoped to see
Thy pen make others penitent as She.
Guil. Moffet, Cantab. Vicarius Edmonton.


I Write not to thy book, nor once begin
To censure that which has approved been
By the best wits; my lines no worth can raise,
Nor add to thee, my liking is no praise;
Nor court I fame for thee, since thine own pen
Extracts thus much, but it is from knowing men.
I speak my thoughts, I do rejoice to see
This subject worthy praise thus writ by thee;
And in that I have found for to commend
A woman for her goodness, (and God send
We may find many more;) I wish them well,
That they with her in grace might all excel.
Let your bold critic judge, condemn, reprieve,
Or what he will; thy Magdalene must live:
Christ did foretell it should be so, and we
Find it exactly now performed by thee
In this thy tractate so acute, polite,
Pleasing both understanding and Alluding to the frontispice.
the sight.
And what thou giv'st to her, does but redound
To make the glory of thy name resound.
Simon Jackman, Oxon. in Art. Mag.

To my learned friend W. H. Esquier, on his Sancta Peccatrix.
THe fragrant ointment smelt not half so sweet
As did the tears wherewith she bathed the feet
Of her dear Savior; yet they both had lost
Part of their smell, had not thy pains and cost
Renewed their sweetness: for never yet was sinner
So deep a loser, and so great a winner;
Despairing, helpless, yet so full assured;
So strongly poisoned, yet so strangely cured;
Abas'd, dejected, and so humbled low,
And yet exalted up to heaven. This thou
Have drawn from sacred beams of holy Writ,
Which though no specious gloss can better it,
Yet thou even to those glorious lamps so bright
Have added luster, whence thou borrowedst light:
That while this Gospel through the world shall fly,
Thou with thy Sainted sinner never shall die.
Reuben Bourn, olim Cantab.

To his noble friend, and worthy parishioner, W. H. writing on Mary Magdalene,
washing the feet of our Savior with her tears.
IN softly showers the heavens do court the earth,
And make her pregnant in a fruitful birth:
But now, a sinful woman (to make even)
With earthly showers does wash the King of heaven;
Her grateful diligence so well has sped,
For washing of his feet he crowns her head.
To the last sand of time shall live her glory,
While such an herald does display her story.
Guil. Wimpew, Oxon. in Art. Mag.

Cui titulus, Credo resurrectionem Carnis.
THy former tractate did the body raise,
But this the soul from sin; both worthy praise.
Herein an heptarch harlot I do see
Turned to a Saint by thy rare Alchymie.
Hers was a mite to thine, a Dose too small;
Thine's a Seplasium Aromaticall.
Thom. Draper, Oxon. in Art. Mag.

In Sanctam Peccatricem.
A Sinner turned a Saint! what change is this?
It Is none of Ovid's Metamorphosis:
No, it is a sacred Sinner, who thinks meet
By thee to do her penance in a sheet.
Now is she bound for heaven, and by thy dress
Thou make her well deserve both praise and press:
And now she lives a Saint who was a whore,
O never was she thus in print before.
She did embalm her Saviors head; but this,
Except her Savior, all did think amiss.
So that pleased God alone, but thy sweet pen
Crowned with applause contents both God and men:
Whose offering sents as much (I dare presume)
Of incense, as her oil of sweet persume.
Thus it is made good, that Sacrifice divine
Of hers should live, and so it does in thine.
Jo. Wimpew, Cantab. Coll. Jes. in Art. Mag.

Amicissimo candidissimoque pectori, GUIL. HODSON, Art. Mag. (...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...);
(...);
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...);
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
ALEXAND. GIL, S. Theol. Doct.


