THE DOCTRINE OF THE BEGINNING of Christ.

Short for memory, plain for capacity, delivered almost in the express words
of the Text, for the more Authority.

By Samuel Hieron, Minister of the Gospel.

1 Co^. 14, 20. Brethren, be not children in understanding, but as concerning
maliciousness be children, but in understanding be of ripe age.

Imprinted at London for Samuel Macham, and Mat. Cook, and are to be sold at
their shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Tigers head, 1606

An Advertisement to the Reader.
I Offer here unto thee, good Reader, this short catechism, neither preferring
it before other the like briefs of Religion, neither yet equalling it to any;
but I willinglye submit it to thy judgment, to place it in what rank thou will. Only this; if thou are disposed, after thou have viewed the title, to
look further into the thing it self: then I pray thee by the way, to take
notice of this mine acquainting thee with the order and manner of that which
follows.

For order, it shows thee first, what was the excellency of thy first
making, by the eternal Trinitye: Secondly, it discovers the depth of
misery, into which thou have plunged thy self by communicating with Adams
Disobedience, together with thy utter disability, so much as by a thought to
desire, or to deserve thine own recovery. Thirdly, it points out Christ unto
thee, whom God the Father had sealed, to save his people from their sins.
Fourthly, Mat 1.21 John 6.2
it makes known unto thee, the sufficiency of his sacrifice, and the means of
applying it to thy own soul.

Fifthly, it teaches thee whence to expect faith, what means to use for the
attainment of it, and how to be assured that it is unfeigned. Sixthly, because
the end of the appearing of grace is, that we should deny ungodliness, therefore
it urges upon thee the necessity of good works, that so thou may be neither
idle nor unfruitful in the knoledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Seventhly,
forasmuch as the way of the righteous shines, as the light that shines more
and more unto the perfect day, therefore also it calls upon thee to grow in
grace, and informs thee by what helps thou may be led forward unto
perfection. Eighthly, least in this good course, being encountered with
unexpected tribulations, thou should be wearied and faint in thy mind, it
fore-aduiseth thee of the certainety of diverse afflictions, and teaches thee
both how to frame thy self to the taking up of thy cross, and withal what
quiet fruit of righteousness to expect, by being exercised thereby; in the
midst of all, still looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory
of the mighty GOD, and of our Savior Jesus Christ. Ninthly, and lastly, the
general direction for Holiness and Righteousness, it applies to
particulars, both to thy daily carriage in the use of things indifferent, as
apparel, meat, recreation, rest, and to thine age, quality and calling, that
so in every respect, thy conversation may be such as becomes the Gospel.
This is the course and sum of this form of Holy Doctrine, whereunto my
desire is to deliver thee, and in which I persuade my self I have comprised
the full some of True Religion.

Now for the manner of it: I have as near as I could possibly, in each answer
kept my self to the words of the holy Text: thou shall find me to have
failed in a very few; and yet in those, if thou confer with that Place to
which I refer thee, thou shalt find me not to have erred from the meaning
of the Spirit of GOD therein. The reason of this course is, First to acquaint
thee with the Language of the Scripture. Secondly, that each point may have the
more credit, when thy conscience shall see and hear, as it were, God himself
speaking in every Answer.

Thirdly, that thou may acknowledge that (which many in their ignorance will
not believe) the Scripture is a rich Storehouse, affoording directions for
every particular.

Now, where I have supposed, some word, or speeches to be such as might breed
thee some trouble, not being rightly understood, I have in the margin, as it
were, reached thee a light for the cleereing of all such darker places, that
thou might both know the sense, and acknowledge the certainty of those
things wherein my desire is thou may be instructed. This is all, whereof I
have to admonish thee: ^ke 1.4.
proceed now on Gods name, to the pervsing of the thing it self, and the lord
give thee understanding in all things. All that I desire of thee by the way of
recompense for my endeavor to do thee good, Tim. 2.7.
is, that thou would strive with me by prayers to God for me, that I may
fulfill the Ministry, which I have received in the Lord: And so I commend thee
to him, ^m. 15, 30. ^l. 4, 17. ^. 20.32.
and to the word of his grace, wishing thee an Inherytance among them that are
sanctified.

Modbury in Deuon, the fourth of August. 1604. Thine in the Lord, SAM. HIERON.

THE DOCTRINE OF the beginning of Christ.
Question. Who made man?

A. The Lord God. Genesis 2.7.

Q. What is God.

A. The almighty, To this agrees God name, I am Exodus 3, 14
which is, which was, and which is to come, Reu. 1.8.

Q. How many persons be there in the Godhead?

A. Three, the father, the The Son, called Io. 1 because he the express^ image
of h^ father, eue^ as a word of the spek^ mind.
word, and the holy Ghost. 1. Ioh. 5.7.

Q. Are there then three Gods;

A. To us there is but one God. 1. Cor. 8.6.

Q. Wherefore did God make man?

A. For his own sake, That is f^ his own ri^es sake.
, Pro. 16.4.

Q. Whereof was man made;

A. Of the dust of the ground, That tea^eth humil^
, Genesis 2.7,

Q. After what fashion did God make man:

A. In his own Image. Gen, 1.27.

Q. What was this Image especially?

A. Righteousness and holiness of truth, Ephesians. 4.24.

Q. Does this Image of God abide still in our nature?

A. We all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory Of that rious esta^ which
sta^eth in hau^ fellowship with God
of God. Romans 3.23.

Q. What is sin?

A The transgression of gods law, 1 Io. 3, 4

Q What was the first sin by which came one spiritual nakedness?

A Adams eating the forbidden fruit, The nakedness which ^am the^ saw
himself, ^s of the ^le especi^, which ^ought the ^me of bo^y nakedness ^oth of
bo^ and soul.
Genesis 3, 7*

Q Who drew Adam to that sin?

A The old Serpent the Devil, he was the murderer from the beginning. Reu.
12.9. Gen, 3, 1. John 8, 44

Q What entered into the world hereby?

A Death We were all Adams.
came over all men, Romans 5, 1 2.

Q Why? there was but one man sinned.

A Yet by the offense of one, the guilt came upon all That is, turn ^m all our
^nes unto ^od.
, Romans 5, 18

Q In what estate are we then of our selves?

A Borne in iniquity and the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3 Psalm. 51, 5

Q And what is belonging to us?

Except we repent Cause or ^anes or his birth first becam ^an, yet was ^r God,
o^r al blessed ^r ever.
we shall all perish, Luk, 13, 3.

Q Can we by no means remedy this?

A No: for what can a man give for recompense of his soul? Mat, 16, 26.

Q What is then the only name ^m. 9 5
given under heaven, whereby we must be saved?

A Jesus Christ, Act. 4, 12.

Qu What is Jesus Christ.

A A holy thing f borne of a woman, and called the Son of God, Luke 1.35,

Q What has he done for us.

A He has given himself for us To be a sacrifice for ou^ sins, which shows
bot^ his love, and the sufficiency o^ his sacrifice.
Ep 5, 2.

Q Wherefore has God sent him to do this for us.

A That we should not perish, but have life everlasting, Ioh, 3, 16.

Q How does he bring this to pass for us?

A By being our Redemption That sauer us from per^shing.
, and our righteousness, Thereby we have life eue^lasting.
1 Cor 1, 30

Q How is he our redemption.

A Because he has bought us with the price of his own blood, 1 Cor. 6.20.1.
Pet. 1, 19.

Q How is he our righteousness.

A Because he does present us without fault in Gods sight, Col. 1.22.

Q How are we made righteous through Christ.

A As he was made sin for Our sin (...) imputed to him, and so his
righteou^nesse to us.
us, 2 Cor. 5 21.

Q How come we to the knowledge of all this.

A By the word of Truth, which is the Gospel, Coloss. 1.5.

Q What is the Gospel.

A Glad tidings to all Gods people So much i^ meant by t^ people.

The is a wo^ of distinction compare m^ 1, 21


, Luke 2.10

Q. To whom do these benefits of Christ appertain?

A. Even to those that believe in his name, ^ith is the condition of ^e new
Co^nant.
Ioh. 1.12.

Q. What is Faith?

A. To know By proof of scripture by comforable experience in a ^ans own ^ule.
that Jesus is Besides who^ ^ere is no ^ther to be ^oked for That is be^ue in
christ ^oh 6, 35.
the Christ the son of the living God. Ioh. 6.69.

Q. Is it in our power to believe?

A. No man can come to Christ, That is be^ in christ ^oh 6, 35.
, except God the father draw him, Endued with gifts for ^at purpose.
, Ioh. 6.44.

Q. What is the outward means by which Faith comes.

A The hearing of a Preacher which is sent, ^work faith (...) him by his spirit.
Romans 10.14.15,

Q. What is the inward means?

A. The opening of the heart, Endued with gifts for that purpose. (...) to
listen and (...) be able to take goodness of this ^ght.
, Act. 16.14.

Q. When does the word preached work best, with the hearers?

A. When it is received not as the word of man, but as it is indeed, the word
of God. 1. These. 2.13.

Q. What is specially to be cared for by those which think they have faith?

A. To prove Because it is (...) easy and dangerous thing herein to be
received.
themselves whether they are in the says or no, 2, Cor. 13.5.

Q What is the principal fruit of faith, by which it is known?

A. The purifying of the heart. Act. 15.9.

Q. What is the surest note of a purified heart?

A A desire in all things to live honestly a Making conscience of every sin.
Heb. 13.18.

Q. What is chiefly to be urged upon those which believe?

A That they be careful to show forth good works. Tit. 3.8.

Q. What works be good?

A. Such as God requires, The will of God is the rule of all good.
, Mic. 6.8.

Q When are our works called good?

A. When we have respect to Not seking dispensation for any one sin.
Gods commandments, Psalm. 119.6.

Q How many be the commandments of God?

A Ten. Exo. 34.28.

Q What is the brief sum of them all?

A Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self. Math. 22.37.39.

Q Are we of our selves suffient to do good works?

A No our sufficiency is of God. 2. cor. 3.5.

Q Are we then saved by our works?

A. No: but by grace. For even our righteo^nes is as ^il^ clouts.
, Ephe, 2, 8, 9.

Q Is not our salvation partly by works, partly by grace The papi^ divide our
^uation betwixt these
?

A Then Grace were no grace. To. 11.6.

Q What is fruther required of a christian?

A. To increase more and more Not to go forward, is to go backward, and he
which thinks he has grace enough ^ath none at (...).
, 1, Th. 4.1.

Q How many means be there to further our increasing?

A Three especially?

Q What is the first?

A The sincere milk of Gods word, 1. Pet. 2.2.

Q How many ways be there of using the word?

A Four?

Q What is the first?

A Public hearing with an honest and good heart A heart inwardly seasoned and
send ^g forth fruit outwardly.
, Luke 8.15.

Q What is the second?

A Daily searching the Scriptures, whether those things which we hear are so,
With sobri^ty, reverence, and humility
Acts 17, 11.

Q What is the third?

A To let it be our meditation By the direc^on of Gods spirit.
Ps. 119.97

Q What is the fourth?

A To talk of it, Deu, 6, 7.

Q What is the second means to edify us in our holy faith?

A Praying in the holy Ghost, Lu, 20.

Q What is Prayer?

A A pouring out of the very soul before the Lord Therefore prayer must be with
humility feling and says
, 1. Sam. 15 Psalm, 62.10.

Q Who is the only Mediator by whom we must pray?

A There is one But one, as there is but one God
Mediator Jesus Christ 1. Tim. 2, 5.

Q Know we what to pray as we ought?

A No: yet Gods spirit helps oue infirmities Shows us our wants, and
teaches us to behave our selves as we ought.
Rom, 8.26.

Q What is the best rule of Prayer?

A That which Christ taught, Mat. 6, 9.

Q What is the third means for our spiritual increase?

A The use of the seals Therefore they confirm faith.
of righteousness, the two Sacraments. Romans 4, 11

Q What be they?

A Baptism and the Lords Supper, Mat. 28, 19

Q How does Baptism strengthenthen our faith, and further our obedience?

A When we duly consider the nature and end of Baptism.

Q What is the nature of Baptism?

A It is the washing That incre^seth our comfort in Christ
of a new birth. Tit. 3, 5

Q Can the washing of the flesh save us?

A Baptism is but a figure the outward sign does no^ of it self bestow grace.
, it is the blood of Christ which purges the conscience. 1. Pet, 3, 21, Heb,
9, 14,

Q What is the end of our washing in Baptism?

A That we should be holy and without blame, zealous of good works, That serus
to stir up our obedience
Ephesians. 5, 27, Tit, 2.14,

Q How does the Sacrament of the Lords Supper increase our faith?

A Because it shows us the Lords death until he come Christ's death is the
ground of our faith.
, 1, Cor. 11, 26,

Q How must this Sacrament be used?

A Every man must examine Touching his faith and repentance.
himself, and so let him eat of the bread, and drink of the cup, 1, Cor, 11,
28.

Q What must every christian make account of, that holds this eourse?

A That he must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God, Acts
14, 22,

Q Is it good for us to be afflicted?

A Yea, in sundry respects. Psalm. 71,

Q What is the first?

A Before we be afflicted, we go astray Affliction is a mean to reclaim us,
and so to fre us from the condemnation that shall come upon ^he world. ^en. 11,
32.
Psalm. 1, 1967.

Q What is the second,

A In our affliction we will seek God diligently. Hos, 5, 15;

Q What is the third,

A Affliction makes our faith much more precious then gold the strengt^ of our
faith is tried, and our feeling^ gods love in creased by affliction.
, 1, Pet. 17,

Q How many sorts of afflictions be there?

A. Two: Inward and outward.

Q What be inward afflictions?

A Satan's buffetings, and the drawing by our own concupiscence The coruption
and sin^ that dwelet^ in us.
2, Cor 12.7, Iam. 1, 14.

Q How does Satan deal with Gods children?

A He does winuow them as Wheat. Luke 22, 31.

Q What is our duty therefore?

A To be sober Sift them b^ sundry tentations.
and watching, For the preventing of a saults.
, 1, Pe. 5, 8,

Q What is our comfort herein?

A Christ has prayed that our faith do not fail the prayer for his disciples
is for all believers, Ioh. 17.20.
, Luke 22, 32,

Q Yea, but the Devil is a roaring Lion.

A Greater is he which is in us Christ by h^ Spirit.
, then he which is in the world, Satan the prince of the world.
, 1, John, 44,

Q How does our in ward concupiscence afflict us?

A When it leads us captive, that we cannot do the good which we would,
Hence arises the co^bate betwixt the flesh and the spirit in gods children
Gal. 5.17.
, Romans 7, 19, 23,

Q What is our duty hereupon?

A To keep our hearts with all diligence, Prou. 4, 23

Q What is our comfort in this case

A The power of God is made perfyt that evil motions may either not arise or
may soon be suppressed.
by our weakness, 2 Cor 12,9,

Q But alas we come far short of our duties.

A The Lord will spare us Is made mor manifest
, as a man spares his own Son that serves him, By acepting the will forth
deed. 2 Cor. 8 12.
Mal. iii. 17.

Q Put case the Child of God fall into some foul evil.

A Though he fall, yet he shall not be cut off: for the Lord puts under his
hand, Psalm. 37, 24.

Qu What be outward afflictions. God performs the good work he has once
begun. Philip. 1, 6.


A In good name, in goods, in person.

Q What is afflictyon in good name.

A When all manner of evil is spoken against us for Christ sake, falsely,
Matthew. 5, 11.

Q What must our care be in such cases.

A To have our conversation honest, that those which speak evil, may be
either converted or ashamed, 1 Pet. 2.12. Tit. 2.8

Q What is our comfort in this cross?

A The reward is great in heaven: This v^ Christ's ow^ comfort in the like ca^
Heb. 12, 2
Mat. 5.12.

Q What is affliction in goods?

A Losses of diverse kinds.

Q What is chiefly to be thought upon in such an affliction?

A That we open not our mouth To murm^or to repin^
, because it is the Lord that has done it To murm^or to repin^
, Psalm. 39.9.

Q What is our comfort here?

A The Lord is able to give us more. 2. It is compass by his providence
Chro. 25.9.

Q But how if he still keep us low?

A Yet a good which assures a man (...) gods favor i^ Christ, and o^ his care
to live honestl^
Conscience is a continual A continua^ matter of rejoicing.
feast. Pro. 15, 15.

Q What is affliction in a man's person?

A Sickness and death.

Q What is the first thing to be done in Sickness?

A We must confess against our selves our wickedness to the Lord. Psalm. 32.5.

Q What is our comfort in sickness?

A That the Lord will turn all our bed in our sickness as we did before our
sickness, for God does not visi^ in vain.
, Psalm. 41, 3.

Q How if the Lord recover us?

A We must sin no more g, least a worse thing come unto us. John. 5, 14.

Q Is it lawful to use charms for the curing of diseases?

A Let there be no charmer amongst you, says God, This is the ^ommon pre^ence
of the ^norant.
, Deuteronomy, 18.10, 11.

Q But yet many have binne helped by such means.

A We may not do evil, that good may come thereby, Romans 3.8.

Q What is our principal duty in respect of death?

A To die daily Still loking ^or death, and ^reparing for (...).
, 1. Cor. 15.31,

Q What is the best comfort, when the time of departing is at hand?

A That we have kept the faith Have been ^tedfastin the ^rofession of ^he truth.
, 2, Tim. 4.7.

Q What besides?

A That Christ has plucked out the sting of Death, which is sin. 1, Cor.
15.55, 56.

Q When will GOD wipe away all tears from the eyes of his Children?

A At that time of refreshing That is, the ^me of full re^emption. ^om. 8, 23.
, Reu. 21, 4, Acts, 3, 19.

Q What time is that?

A When that same Jesus Christ, which is now preached unto us, shall come to
judgment, Acts 3.20.

Q Is that time near?

A The Judge stands before the door, Iam. 5.9.

Q In what manner will he come?

A In his glory, and all his holy Angels with him. Mat. 25.31.

Q What will he do when he comes? He makes way to this separation daily by
the preaching (...) the Gospel Matthew. 3, 12.


A He will separate the Sheep from the Goats. Mat 25, 32.

Q Who be his Sheep?

A They which hear and know his voice. John 10, 4.27.

Q Who be the Goats?

A They which believe not. John 10, 26

Q What will he say to the Sheep?

A Come ye blessed, inherit a kingdom. Mat. 25.34.

Q What will he say to the Goats?

A Depart from me, ye cursed, Mat. 25.41.

Q What shall then become of the Sheep?

A Where Christ is, there shall they be also, John 14, 3.

Q What shall happen to the Goats?

A Everlasting perdition, 2. These. 1, 9.

Q What must we do till that day comes? By prepar^tlon.


A Look for it, and hasten to it. b 2. Pet. 3.12.

Q What else?

A Pray daily, even so, Come Lord Jesus, Revel. Which he ^hewes in our
^ontinual pre^eruation
22.20.

A Direction for a man's daily carriage.
Q What must our first work be in the morning?

A To let our Prayer come before the L. and to praise his mercy Sober, mo^est,
and such (...) agrees to ^r abillity and ^lling.
, Psalm. 88.13. Psalm. 59.16.

Q What must our apparel be?

A Such as becomes those which profess the fear of God Every man ^ight to
hau calling.
, 1. Tim. 2 10.

Qu What is the next to be done?

A We must follow our own business to remember ^s al-seeing ^esence, and
(...) seek to ap^oue our sel^s before him such as may (...) a witness of ^e grace
of (...) heart.
with quietness. 1, These. 4.11.

Q What must be chiefly cared for in our business?

A To walk with God d Genesis 5.22.

Q What must our speech be?

A Gracious always e Col. 4.6.

Q What things must chiefly be avoided in speaking?

A Lying, swearing, filthiness, foolish talking, jesting, railing. Ephesians.
4.15.5, 4. Iam. 5 12, 1, Cor, 5, 11,

Q What company must we keep?

A All our delight must be to the Saints which mak^ conscience o^ a holy life.
in earth. Psalm. 16, 3,

Q What must we do when we come to our meat?

A We must look up to Heaven and give thanks. Mat. 14, 19.

Q How many things must chiefly be looked unto in our diet?

A Three.

Q What is the first?

A That our hearts be not oppressed with surfeting and drunkenness. Luke 21.34.

Q What is the second?

A That we forget not the work the end wh^ the Lord gives us food
of the Lord. Is. 5, 12,

Q What is the third?

A That of that which remains, nothing be lost. John. 6, 12.

Q Ought not some time of every day be set apart for spiritual uses?

A We must redeem Make the best use of o^ time.
the time, because the days are evil. Ephesians. 5.16.

Q May not recreation be sometime used?

A Yes: there is a time to laugh. Eccl. 3, 4,

Q What kinds of disports may we use?

A Such as be of good report Such are a^ such sportes which either are or beget
lightness an^ impudency or stand on upon hazard being no exercise eyth^ of wit
or body.
, Phil. 4, 8.

Q How many things must be looked unto in the use of our delights?

A Two.

Q What is the first?

A That our reioicing hinder not beter duties. Paul ioy^eth reioi^ng with
pra^er, to teach ^at mirth is ^il, when it ^ndereth ^rayer
, 1 These. 5, 16, 17,

Q What is the second?

A That we cause not our commodity As though were the round of Li^entiousnesse
to be evil spoken of What has ^een our be^auiour that ^ay.
, Rom, 14, 16.

Q What is the Evening duty?

A To examine our selves ^n the duties ^f a man's law ^l calling.
upon our Bed, and to say every man to himself: what have I done? Psalm. 4.4.

Q What must we do else?

A Pray Psalm. 55.17.

Q How many things make sleep comfortable?

A Two.

Q What is the one?

A Honest labor. Read the ^lace.
. Eccl. 5 11.

Q What is the other?

A A godly care to thrive in Religion, Pro. 3.13, 21, 24. f,

Q How must sleep be used?

A Love it not, least thou come to poverty. Pro 20, 13.

The Magistrates duty
Q What is the principal duty of the Magistrate? Personal duties.


A To beautify the house of God To advance Religion
Ezra, 7.27

Q How must he carry himself among the people?

A He is the minister of God, for the peoples wealth. Rom, 13 4,

Q How shall he procure the peoples wealth?

A If he be for the praise of them that do well, and the punshment of evil
doers. 1 Pet. 2, 14,

Q What kind of men are fit to be Magistrates?

A Men of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, and hating covetousness, Exo,
18 21.

The Subjects duty.
Q What is the Subjects duty?

A To be subject for Conscience sake Knowin^ Magistracy to be Gods ordinance.
To, 13 5,

Q What else?

A To pray for them that are in Authoryty If they be good, that they may (...)
strengthne^ if evil, that they may (...) reformed.
, 1, Tim, 2, 2.

Q What besides?

A Not to curse ye Magistrate, not so much as in a thought. Eccl. 10, 20.

Q Is there any other duty?

A We must not join with them that are seditious, Pro. 24, 21.

The Ministers duty.
Q What is the Ministers duty?

A To take heed to his Ministry which he has received, that he fulfill it,
Col, 4. 17.

Q How is that done?

A 1, By watching continually over the Flock For Satan ^ks conti^ally to
de^ure.
, Is, 62, 6, Act. 20, 28,

2 By being diligent to know the estate of his flock That rule of ^lomo^ may
^y be appil^ to this mat^, seeing e^ry minister (...) shepherd.
, Pro, 27.23,

3 By giving attendance to reading Namely, in (...) private ^dy.
, 1. Tim. 4, 13,

4 By not being entangled with the affairs of this life. 2. Tim 2, 4.

5 By being instante in Preaching the word. 2, Tim. 2.4,

6 By Catechizing The word the greek ^nifieth so ^ch.
, Gal, 6, 6,

7 By being an example to them which believe. 1. Tim, 4, 12,

Q What is the punishment of a negligent Minister?

A God will require the peoples blood at his hand. Ezekiel, 33.8.

Q How many things are chiefly necessary for him that is to be a Minister?

A Two.

Q What is the one?

A That he hold fast the Faithful, word He must I^ a man of sou^^ judgment
. Tit. 2, 9.

Q What is the other?

A That he be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and improoue them which
say against it He must have the gif^ of teaching
, Tit. 1, 9.

The peoples duty.
Q What is the peoples duty in regard of such a Minister?

A The peoples duty has five branches.

Q What is the first?

A To obey and submit themselves To sound^nes of doctrine.
. Heb. 13.17.

Q What is the second?

A To have him in singular love, and to know him To reverence him.
1 These. 5.13.

Q What is the third.

A To make him partaker of al their goods Gal 6.6.

Q What is the fourth?

A To pray for him, that utterance may be given him. Ephesians. 6, 19.

Q What is the fifth?

A To receive no accusation suddenly against him was a dire^on given ^cially
to ^urch-Ru^s, but may applied to ^uate men.
1, Tim. 5, 19.

Q Why must the people thus carry themselves to their Minister?

A For three causes.

Q What is the first?

A Because he works the Lords work, 1. Cor. 16.10.

Q What is the second?

A Because he watches for their souls, and must give account thereof. Heb
13.17

Q What is the third?

A Because otherwise he shall do his duty with grief, which is unprofitable
for the people, Heb. 13, 17

Household duties.
Q What is the duty of the Master of the family for matters of religion?

A To command his Household, that they keep the way of the Lord Therefore must
have ^ligious ex^cises in his ^use, as prai ^catechi^g, reading ^e scriptures
^d must also ^ing them the congre^tion.
Genesis 18, 19

Q What is his duty for outward things?

A To make provision for those of his own household. 1, Tim, 5, 8.

Q What is the wives duty in these things?

A To be a help to her husband. Both in m^ters of relig^on and outward thing
Gen, 2, 18

Qu What is the man's duty in regard of his wife?

A To dwell with her, and to love her as his own body. 1 Pet, 3.7. Ephesians. 5.28.

Q What is the Woman's duty to her Husband?

A To be subject to him as unto the Lord. Ephesians. 5.22

Q What is his duty whom God has made a father?

A To bring up his children in Religion, in good manners, and in an honest
calling. In true re^gion and in some hone^ calling
Ephesians. 6.4.

Q What is the Mothers duty?

A To nourish her children, and to instruct them. 1. Tim. 5.10.

Q What is the Masters duty in respect of his servants By seruan^ are meant,
those that employed us in our b^nes wheth^ they dwel^ with us, o^ otherwise
?

A To do to them that that is just and equal. Which t^ honest ser^uice dese^
Col, 4.1.

Q What is childrens duty to their parents?

A To obey them in the Lord. For piet^ sake, and w^^out bread piety.
Ephesians. 6.1.

Q What is childrens duty each to other?

A Not to fall out. Genesis 45, 24

Q What is servants duty?

A In singlenes of heart, and al good faithfulness, to please their Masters,
yea, though they be froward, Ephesians. 6, 5, Tit. 2, 10. 1, Pet, 2, 18.

The duty of single persons.
Q What is required of persons unmarried?

A If they cannot abstain, they must marry is a com^ndment ^erall, aper^ing to
al ^tes of men ^ith con^t of parents with care of Reli^n.
, 1, Cor, 7, 9.

Q How must they marrye?

A Only in the Lord b, 1, Cor, 7, 39.

The duty of Neighbors each to other.
Q What is required of Neighbors that live and converse together?

A To consider one another, to provoke unto love, and to good works Heb, 10, 24

Q How must we be affected in respect of those things which happen to our
neighbors?

A We must rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep ready to ^or and re^^e
their mi^^s, as we ^able, and ^ome cases ^ue ability ^or. 3, 3.
with them that weep Rom, 12, 15.

Q What is the benefit of a good neighbor?

A He is better than a brother a far off. Pro. 27.10.

Q What is the best means to preserve a good neighbor?

A He that has friends, must show himself friendly. Pro, 18, 24.

Q But how if there be iarring sometimes?

A Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, 4, 26.

Q Put case a man be daily provoked?

A Be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with goodness, Rom, 12, 21.

Q When a man has many enemies, what is the best way to have peace?

A If a man's ways please GOD, he will make also his enemies be at peace with
him Or at le^ their malli^shal not hu^ him.
, Pro. 16, 7,

Q How if a man live in a place so Wicked, that it is not safe for him almost
to be familiar with any?

A He must strive to shine as a light in a naughty and crooked generation,
Phil. 2.15.

A direction for mattees of contract.
Q How must we carry our selves in our dealings among men?

A We must neither oppress By hard extreme d^^ling.
nor defraude, By cunning and subtle ourses, as ^alse wait, etc
any man in any thing. 1, Th. 4.6

Q What is the rule, by which all our matters of contract must be guided?

A Whatsouer we would that men should do to us, we must do so to them. Mat, 7.
12.

The Rich man's duty.
Q What is the Rich man's duty?

A To honor God with his Riches. Pro. 3.9.

Q How is that done principally?

A If he be rich in good works, and be ready distribute By giving lending ^eely,
Deuteronomy. 5 and sometime (...) forgiving ^bts. Neh. 5. etc.
, 1. Tim, 6, 18.

Q How many things must a Richman chiefly take heed of?

A Two: High mindednes, and confidence in his wealth. 1 Timothy 6, 17,

Q What must be the Rich man's joy?

A That he is made low ^y seeing (...) vanity and ^nger of Ri^es.
, Iam 1.10.

The poor man's duty.
Q What is the poor man's duty?

A To learn to know how to be abased, and to have want, Phil. 4.12.

Q What is the best means by which a man may be assured, while he lives,
never to fall into extremity?

A To seek first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, Math, 6, 33.

Q What must be the poor man's joy?

A That he is exalted To be the child of G^ by Grace.
, Iam, 1.9.

The Aged persons duty.
Q What is the duty of the aged man?

A To be sober, honest, discreet, sound in faith, in love and patience These
du^ties are re^^red of al, b^ chiefly of (...) aged.
, Tit, 2.2.

Q When is Age a Crown of glory?

A When it is found in the way of righteousness. Pro, 16.31.

Q What is required of Elder women?

A To be of such behavior as becomes Holiness, and to instructs the younger
women. Tit 2, 3, 4.

The young men's duty.
Q How many be the duties of young folk?

A Three especially.

Q What is the first?

A To remember their Creator To cons^crate their fresh year^ the knole^ and
service of God
, Eccle.

Q What is the second?

A To be sober minded, and to flee the lusts of youth. Tit. 2.6.2, Tim. 2, 22.

Q What is the third?

A To honor the person of the Aged. Leuit, 19.32,

Q Wherewithal shall a Young man redress his way:

A In taking heed thereto according to Gods word. Psalm. 119, 9,

The Sum of all.
Q What is the brief Sum of the whole duty of Man;

A To fear God To be care ^l not to of^nd God.
, and keep his commandments. Eccle, 12, 13.

Q What is the reward of all?

A He that does these things, shall never be moved. Psalm. 15.5.

Let God alone have the glory.
FINIS.

