Keep within Compass: OR, The worthy Legacy of a wise Father to his beloved
Son; teaching him how to live richly in this world and eternally happy in the
world to come. Meet for all sorts of people whatsoever.

depiction of a well-dressed man framed by a pair of compasses (dividers) and
the word "VERTVE" Atheism. Pray in thy Chamber. In Religion. VERTVE Luxury.
Converse with good Men: Conversation. Gluttony. Eat thine own Labors: Diet.
Prodigality. Suite thine own Calling: Apparel.



Printed at London for I. Trundle dwelling in Barbican.

TO THE WORTHY Gentleman, and his best respected Friend, Mr. Roger Tailor, all
those good wishes his own heart desires.
Worthy SIR:
THE frequent custom of this Age to challenge Patrons, and to trouble their
brains with bestowing upon those Patrons Mountebancke Encomiums, has no whit
at all taken up my mind, since no folly can be greedy thereof but shall
purchase wit enough for that purpose.

Suffice it is my true knowledge of you, and my truer love unto you, which
makes me send this poor infant of my brain, and slender Collections to kiss
your hand: which in as much as the root or center is Virtue, the circumference
that happy list or bound, out of which no good man will willingly stray, and in
which I know the goodness of your inclination makes you delight to live: on
whom can I better bestow it, both in respect of the thing, which only looks
upon Virtue; and in respect of your self, who is not only a lover, but a
supporter of the virtuous. So that to conclude, if your acceptance shall say I
have done well, I will believe all which are good (like you) will agree with
you; who does the contrary I will laugh at, for he loves not Goodness.

Yours John T.

To the Reader.
PEruse this Dial every day,
Wherein no hour shall pass away,
But by it thou shall learn to find
Some Jewel to enrich thy mind.
Count one the first hour of thy breath.
And all the rest to lead to death.
Count twelve thy doleful passing Bell,
And so my Dyall shall go well.
depiction of a clockface The Dyall.


The Hours.
I
ONe God, one Baptism, and one Faith,
One Truth there is, the Scripture says.
II
Two Testaments, the Old and New,
We must acknowledge to be true.
III
Three Persons in the Trinity
Do make one God in Unity.
IIII
Four holy Evangelists there are,
Which Christ's birth, life and death declare.
V
Five wounds the Jews our Savior gave,
Whence flowed the blood that all men save.
VI
Six days to labor is no wrong:
For God himself did work so long.
VII
Seven deadly Sins in man do rest,
Which once expelled, man's soul is blessed.
VIII
Eight in Noah's Arc alone were found,
When in a word the world lay drowned.
IX
Nine Hyrarchies of Angels raise
Both day and night Iehouahs praise.
X
Ten Statutes God to Moses gave,
Which broke or kept, do spill or save.
XI
Eleauen above with God do dwell,
The twelfth burns in perpetual hell.
XII
Twelve attended on Gods Son,
Twelve made the Creed: my Dyall's done.
Keep within Compass: OR A Direction for good life.
In Religion.
FIrst, my son understand, that Religion is a Justice of men toward God, or
a divine honoring of him in the perfect and true knowledge of his word,
peculiar only to man: It is the ground of all other virtues, and the only
means to unite and reconcile man unto God for his salvation: And whosoever
breaks out of this list or circumference, strayeth through Atheism, into
eternal damnation.

True Religion is the soul of Innocence, moving in an uspotted conscience.

To be doubtful in Religion, is to be certain of the greatest punishment.

True Religion has three virtues to be known by: first, it serves the true
God: next, limiteth every action by the word: and lastly, reconciles man to his
Maker if he do pursue it.

The first precept from the wisest Philosopher was to fear God: and the first
Law amongst good men to increase Religion.

It is Faith and not Reason which teachethmen Religion.

Religion is the stay of the weak, the master of the ignorant, the philosophy
of the simple. As he that hears without ears, can interpret our prayers
without our tongues: so a religious man may pray and never open his lips.

Religion is the oratory of the devout, the remedy of sin, the counsel of
the just, and the comfort of them in tribulation.

Religion is that absolute clean Beast which both chaweth the cud, and diuides
the hoof: for it makes a man ruminate and chaw holy meditations till they give
divine nourishment: and the one claw poynteth man to the fear of God, the
other to the love of his neighbor.

He is happily religious, whom no fear troubles, no sorrow consumes, no
fleshly lust tormenteth, no desire of worldly wealth afflicts, nor any
foolishness moves unto mirth.

Religion teaches* men to pray: and no man is so happy, as he whose life is a
continual prayer.

Religion is the wings that bear the soul up to heaven, and meditation the
eye which only can see God living.

Religious devotion is a continual discourse or conference with God: for when
thou read, God speaks to thee, when thou praiest thou talkst with God.

True Religion makes prayer ascend, that Grace may descend.

In thy devotions fix thy judgment on thy faith, not on thine experience: for
faith is truth, experience but deceitful.

To desire sufficient things is needless, for God will give them vndemanded:
but desire to be contented with such things as he bestows, for therein will
consist thy happiness.

Except true religion make us understand God in his word, our sight is but
blindness, our understanding ignorance, our wisdom foolishness, and our
devotion diuellishnesse.

Religion will teach thee to know that God is a most bright Sun which arises
upon those that fear him and goes down from them that are careless and
profane.

God sits in the highest heavens, if thou will lift up thy self unto him, he
will fly from thee: but if thou humbless thy self before him, he will come
down unto thee.

True Religion brings a man up to heaven, which is the seat of glory, the
habitation of Angels, the resting place of the faithful, far beyond thought,
and glorious beyond report.

He that bites of every weed must needs taste poison, and he that is of
diverse religions must needs meet with damnation.

Religion will make thee know well and do well: and they are the only two
points belonging to Virtue.

As plants measurably watered grow the better, but being watered too much, are
drowned and dye: so opinions in religion mixed with moderation are made sound
and refreshed, but accompanied with too severe curiosity often turn and convert
to heresy.

As a ship with a sure Anchor may lie any where: so, the mind ruled by
religious reason, is quiet at all seasons.

Since holy Writ shows us Gods holy power,
With pure heart adore him every hour.
Begin thy days work when the day begins,
First blessing Gods thrice blessed name devout:
And then at evening, when thy labor ends,
Praise him again: so bring the day about.
Not voice but vow, not lip, not tongue, but heart:
Not sound but soul, that God takes in good part.
What Gods high hidden counsels are,
wast not thy wits to learn:
But being mortal, mind the things
which mortal men concern.
The Serpents sting, the beasts sharp tooth we shun.
But from profane men only see thou run.
Learn of the learned, and instruct thy friends.
Knowledge concealed both God and man offends
Shame not in ignorance to show
thy willingness to learn:
The shame is theirs, that nothing know,
nor no good will decerne.
Against a just religious man,
contend not wickedly:
For God in rigor will revenge
his wrong and injury.
Nature impart thee all that she can teach,
And God supply where nature cannot reach.
Out of Compass, In Religion, is Atheism.
Who doubts of God with Pythagoras is an Infidel, who denies God with
Diagoras is a Devil.

Vice is the habitude of sin, sin the act of the habytude, but want of
Religion the ground of both.

Lust brings short life, prodigality wretched life, but want of Religion
assured and eternal damnation.

The sickness of age is Avarice, the errors of Youth prophannesse.

Craft puts on him the habit of policy, malice the shape of Courage,
rashness the title of valor, lewdness the image of pleasure, but want of
religion has no cloak but Curses.

If youth want religion, old age can never know honesty.

Deceit is too familiar with wisdom, austerity with temperance; pride with
great minds, prodigality with liberality, rashness with fortitude, and
superstition with religion.

There is no greater sign of wickedness then open heresy.

Sermons guilt with words, and not matter, are like images that painted seem
fair, but looked into are found earth.

Who can be more unfortunate then he that of necessity will needs be
irreligious.

As sin blinds the eyes of the profane man, so punishments opens them. When
profane men are in the height of their iollity, mischeife it ever knocking at
the door.

A profane man never seems more ougly then when he would dissemble or appear
religious.

A profane man is the true shadow of the Devil, and at the end comes to his
substance.

An irreligious man trampleth goodness under foot like the grass of the
field, and preserves vice as the flowers of the season, when all good men
know, the first does keep fresh and flowrisheth, the latter does suddenly
decay and withers.

To make jests of Religion, of Charity or chastity, are the perfect notes of
most profane impudency.

Who thinks to thrive by what God has accursed, lives upon miserable gains
which are purchased by the loss of his soul, for there is no true gain but
from a good conscience.

Hypocrisy is the first sin that falls into a reprobate sense, for in all
the bundell of sinners was never read of an Hipocrites repentance.

Be fearful to commit sin especially exemplar sin; and of them above all,
the sin of heresy and new sect, making a way to other men's practice, least
they perishing therein, it be reckond in thine account: every man has enough
of his own, woe to him which bears that, and others, since every small sin
like a millstone is able to press thee down to the pit of hell.

Affect not popularity for self-love of knowledge for the end never proves
good; and though attained by desert, yet it is as dangerous as contempt: for
states keep down those whom they contemn, but cut away all those whom they
envy, and therefore not to a^^e^t nor to neglect, is the best discretion.

Fear God, honor thy parents, reverence thy friends, obey the laws, and all
from the rule of upright religion.

Let every irreligious and profane man take to his consideration, his time
past, his time present, and his time to come: what God has done for him, what
he does and what he will do, what God would have done, what man does, and what
he should do and let him weigh the good omitted with the evil committed, and
to them put the punishment deserved, and then think how long God has
deferred, how justly he will punish and how surely he will come: he shall then
find a short life, a sure death, and a most certain heauey judgment.

Profane men must remember that as death leaves them, judgment finds them,
and justice rewards them: so that there is nothing but infinite misery in his
life, in his death and after death.

He that shows more religious at one time then another, either has already or
very shortly intends to deceive thee.

He that has too quick a belief has ever too rash a judgment.

Who fears not God, fears every thing else he sees*

He that minds least good, ever affects the worst mischief.

Knew'st thou one Month should end thy days,
it would give cause of sorrow:
And yet perhaps thou laughes to day,
when thou must dye to morrow.
Men trample grass, and praise the flowers of May,
Yet grass is green when flowers fade away.
Profane men look what conscience you have:
For conscience both must damn you, and must save.
By new sects to raise up new names,
is but a losing gain:
Evils on good men's ruins built,
to ruin turn again.
Who is a false Judge, one day must appear
So to be judged as he has judged here.
Build thy house nere so high,
All delight in pleasure take:
In the dust thou must lie,
Till the last Trumpe thee awake:
Therefore all is lost and spended,
That to Virtue is not intended.
If thou will back into thy Compass get,
These six fair Rules near to thy conscienceset.
Beat down the evil: raise the just:
Learn best thy self to know:
Hold holy Writ: and counsel peace:
Be Patient in thy woe.
Keep within Compass, In Conversation.
Conversation is the maine body of honesty, whose greatest branches are
familiarity and friendship with good men, drawing the community of a perpetual
will to the fellowship of life: all which is founded and built by the profit of
a long continued love, and furnished with more pleasure then desire.

Let thy conversation carry a perfect consent of all things appertaining as
well unto God as man, with benevolence and charity.

The love of men to women is a thing common and of course: but the friendship
of man to man infinite and immortal.

The fellowship and conversation of a true friend in misery is always sweet,
and his counsels in prosperity are ever fortunate.

Let thy conversation with friendship have a three fold luster: the first in
neighborhood: the second in hospitality: and the last in thy particular love.

If thy conversation win thee love, either by bounty, or the study of virtue,
it goes from a passion to an habit, and so leaves the name of love, and is
called friendship, the which no time can violate.

Forget not in thy conversation, that to beg any thing of thy friend, is most
dearly to buy it.

It is a most grievous thing to try thy friends, yet must they be touched, lest
shining like the Carbunkle, as if they had fire, they be found by the Test, to
be without faith.

Strive to be in love with Virtue out of the inclination of thine own virtue:
for it is but a flanish good which Laws and extremity does keep from
committing of evil.

Let wisdom propound discreet ends to thine affairs, and do nothing rashly:
for an honest survey of things to come preuents ensuing repentance.

Let not the Sun go down on thy wrath, but whether iniuring or injured,
offer reconciliation: for the peacemaker is blessed. If thy enemy do it before
thee, he conquers thee, and thou losest that blessing.

Let thine own breast be the Cabanet for thine own secret counsels, and do
not bele^ue that it is too hard for one, but that it is enough for two, and a
great deal too much for three.

Let never any malice make thee reneale what the least friendship has shut in
thy bosom.

Let the choice of thy friend be a journey into the Indies, long in doing, but
once chosen keep him to the end: for to want a friend is to want virtue, and
to change often shows incertaine honesty.

Let thy speech be like Moses his, slow, but advised, and fore-thinke the
fitness of thy speech before thine utterance: affirm nothing but truth within
thine own knowledge, and rather be silent then speak to evil purpose.

In praising be discreet without envy: in saluting courteous: in admonishing
friendly: in forgiving merciful: in promising faithful: in recompensing
bountiful: and make not the reward of Virtue the gift of favor.

Give every man the reverence due to his place, but respect his goodness
before his greatness.

Avoid pride in thy youth, disdain it in thine age, and fear and suspect it
at all seasons.

Pride has two steps to climb by, allow blood, and a great envy.

Keep thy foot from the door of the harlot, thy hand from the book of the
lender, thy tongue from the slander of thy neighbor, thy society from the
drunkard and Epicure: for poverty shall be their portion: And the sleeper shall
be clothed with rags.

Beware of Suretiship: it is the birdlime of the time, and locks up men in
bolted cages.

Be not unthrifty to spend too much love on thy self: nor yet so extreme
frugall, not to spend good wit and words together. And howsoever thou studiest
the highest things, let thy modesty look for no rent from thy self, but
strangers. Say with the Wiseman, thou know nothing, but that thou know
nothing.

Rule those that live under thee rather with love then fear: the first is
safe, the latter dangerous.

In hearing controversies, cleanse thine ears from the wax of other men's
reports, and lend the one to the accuser, the other to the accused: and let the
cause of the poor and needy come in equal balance with the rich and mighty:
and if by aduantagious wealth any mountains be raised to obscure the poor
valley, pull down the first, and raise up the latter, till both come to an
even level.

Make not recreation an occupation, for the too much use thereof conuerts to
poison, and like a surfeit of honey, cannot be cured without digesting of
wormwood.

If thou survey the lives of men,
and manners of the time:
While each reproues another fault,
look who is void of crime.
Love not vilde things how fair so ere they seem,
It Is Virtue and not Wealth wisemen esteem.
Be constant: but if cause require
unstable seem to be.
Wise men their conuersations change,
and yet from faults are free.
Argue not with a man is naught but words,
Speech, but not wisdom, Nature us affords.
So love thy friend, as to thy self
a loving friend thou be:
So bound thy bounty to the best,
that harm pursue not thee.
The better to supply thy want,
spare what thy hand has got.
And that thou may thy penny save,
suppose thou have it not.
Without Compass In Conversation is Luxury.
THe smyle of a Foe that proceeds of envy is worse then the tear of a friend
proceeding of pity.

There can be no amity, where there is no virtue, and that friendship is most
hateful and accursed, where some become friends to do unto others mischief.

A false friend is like quicksilver unto gould, it cleanes unto it and seems
as if it would never forsake it, but if it once come into the fire, it
presently flies away in fume, and though the gould remain, yet is the silver
never more to be decerned, and such is a feigned friend in the time of
tribulation.

He that is immoderate in his laughter or too audacious in his speech, in the
one expresses his folly, in the other his pride.

He whose sad countenance is ever void of alacrity, has a proud heart empty
of all humility.

A man of ill conversation may slander his neighbor four several ways,
first, in his silence, when he says nothing, and yet can truly clear an
imputation falsely affirmed: secondly, in writing, casting out lybells that are
false and unjustifiable: thirdly, in doubts, by drawing away the good opinions
of other men: and lastly, in his authority, by making such as trust him believe
untruths and falsehoods.

Who swears for lucre or gain of money, goes but a hairs breadth from
perjury (though his oath be just) for the sin of covetousness will confound
him.

Those which have no care but to heap up riches, and are not able to employ
them, are like those men which have goodly Horses, but know not how to ride
them.

He that does good to the wicked, is like him that gives meat to another man's
dog, for they bark at him as well as at others.

Luxury, is a pleasure bought with pain, a delight hatched with disquiet; a
content passed with fear, and a sin finished with sorrow.

Luxury is an enemy to the purse, a foe to the person, a canker to the mind, a
corasiue to the conscience, a weakner of the wit, a besotter of the senses, and
lastly a mortal bane to the whole body: so that who so lives out of compass
in this wilderness, shall find pleasure the path way to perdition, and
Luxury the loadstone to utter ruin.

The Jealous man living dies, and dying prolongs out his life in passions worse
then death, he sees none but with suspicion; hears no man knock but with
amazement, nor interprets any discourse but to dishonest purpose: if his wife
frown she hates him; if she smile she has had success in adultery: modesty
is dissimulation, favor is a decree of false dealing, and in conclusion
nothing can he see but doubts and frenzy.

Envy shoots at others, but for the most part evermore wounds her self.

Envy, is the filthy slime and impostume of the soul, a perpetual torment to
him in whom it abides, a venom, or quicksiluer which consumes the flesh and
dries up the marrow of the bones.

Dissimulation is an evil humor of the mind, and contrary to honesty: it is a
countenance ever disagreeing from the hearts imaginations, and a notorious
liar in whatsoever it suggesteth.

The flattery of an enemy is like the song of the Siren, it both inchaunts,
deceiues and brings to destruction.

He that is vainly carried away with all things, is never delighted with any
one thing.

It is a common imperfection to commit folly, but an extraordinary perfection
to a mend it.

As no Uermyne will breed where they find no warmth, no vultures sleep where
they find no pray, no flies swarm where they see no flesh, no Pilgrim creep
where there is no cross, so there is no flattering parasit will lurk where
he finds no gain.

He that mistrusts without cause is evermore credulous without proof.

Causlesse suspicion is the next way to make him do evil, which otherwise
would carry a constant resolution to honesty.

Ignorance is that defect which causes a man to judge evil of things, to
deliberate worse, not to know how to take present advantage of good things, but
to conceive ill of whatsoever is good in man's life.

Cruelty is extreme wrong, the rigorous effect of an evil disposed will and
the fruit which is reapt from injustice.

Fear and Cowardice is destitute of reason, always attended on with two
perturbations of the soul, Baseness and Sadness: it is also the defect of
the virtue of fortitude.

Quyps or scoffs are deprauings from the actions of other men, they are the
ouerflowings of wit and the superfluous skums of conceits.

Careless men are evermore near neighbors to their own harms.

He that does promise all and naught does give,
Dies with men's hate, with flattery does live.
If friends to whom thou have been kind,
thy kindness naught regard:
Accuse not Fate, but blame thy fault,
be wiser afterward.
If wedded thou have children store,
and little weath to give,
To bring them up in Idleness,
most wretched shall they live.
What is thy due, thou may require,
or what seems honest crave,
But Fools do evermore desire,
the things they should not have.
Who fears to die does ever hold
all follies foul effect,
For such fond fear, all joy of life,
does utterly reject.
Keep within Compass. In Apparel.
LEt the furniture and ornaments of thy person be fit and suitable for thy place
or honor, but not too curyous: for the one becomes a man of wisdom, the other
appertains to persons effeminate or such as delight in ostentation

Think the best apparel thou can get from God is true felicity, and the
richest cloth of thine own spinning to be good counsel.

It is better to be poor and honest then rich and wicked, for justice is
better then riches: the one dies with the body, but the other lives as long as
memory.

Whatsoever thou spendest in earthly vanities, they either die before thee or
shortly follow after thee.

Pass not by the poor as no part of thy care, least God in thy wants so turn
away his face from thee.

Let the Covetous man fill his bag never so full, the Voluptuous man take his
pleasure never so long, the Ambitious Courtier build his house like his
thoughts never so high, the proud Lady paint never so thick, the young Man
defer repentance never so long; yet all must die, all give an account, all be
judged.

Shun painted bravery, for it is a riotous excess either in apparel or other
ornaments, it is also a part of pride and contrary to decency and comeliness.

Spend not beyond thy power, nor hope on others promise, for both are guides to
beggary.

Be not careless in spending thine own wealth, that thou may be esteemed
careful to preserve another man's substance.

How vain a thing is bravery which is borrowed from the worms, labored by the
hands, bought with much charge, and defaced with every spot.

All outward ornaments are toys of vanity, but an humble spirit is a token of
piety.

As the weed cannot be esteemed precious for the fair flower which it bears,
so hold no man virtuous for the gay garments he wears.

Never be proud of thine apparel, since the color cannot compare with
flowers, the fine thrids with the Spiders web, nor the sweet perfume with the
Muskcats excrements.

The only commendable end of music is to praise God.

Music used moderatly like sleep, is the bodies best recreation.

Nothing rauisheth the mind sooner then Music, and no Music is more sweet
then man's voice.

Patience exceeds knowledge and Music begets patience.

Use dancing for recreation or for grave solemnities, yet ever with
moderation: for at such times a chaste mind knows not how to be corrupted.

By all means shun pride in every part of thee: for it is an unreasonable
desire to enjoy honors, estates and great places, it is a vice of excess, and
contrary to modesty which is a part of temperance.

Game for recreation not lucre; for so the blemished may recover some beauty,
and let thy game taste of wit and schollership; more then of slight or fortune.

Be temperat in all thine actions: for temperance is that light which dryueth
away the darkness of all passions, it is of all virtues most wholesome: for it
preserves both publicly and privately humane society, it lifts up the soul
most miserably thrown down in vice, and restores her again into her place:
it is also a mutual consent of the parts of the soul, causing all disorder
and unbridled affections to take reason for a rule and direction.

Constancy and temperance in thine actions makes virtue strong.

Frugality is the badge of discretion.

He that is not puffed up with praise, nor afflicted with adversities, nor
moved by slanders, nor corrupted by benefits, is fortunately most temperate.

There is nothing in the world better then moderation: for by it the assaults
of the flesh are subdued and the fruits of good life retained.

Temperance has eight handmaids, Modesty, Shamefastness, Abstinence,
Continency, Honesty, Moderation, Sparing and Sobriety.

If thou will be just thou must be temperate: for it is the office of justice
to have his soul free from perturbations.

Be valiant but cool in doing injuries, a coward wears but the disguisd mask
of temperance; and is inwardly most reuengefull.

He is worthy to be called a moderate person which firmly governs and
bridleth (with reason) the vice of sensuality, and all other gross affections
of the mind.

Be as far from ambition as from deiection, the one is his own slave, the
other all the worlds.

Preserve thy name, for that comes from thine ancestors, but thy good
reputation from thy virtues.

When greatness cannot bear it self with virtue nor ancestry, it overthrows
it self only with the weight of it self.

Spare for no cost in thine attire,
if cause require the same,
Apenny better spent then spared,
adds to an honest name.
Abandon superfluities,
let comely things content,
Safe is the bark on calmer seas,
to the wished haven bent.
Eschew by over nice attire,
foul Enuies hateful sting:
Which though it hurt not; to endure,
is yet an irksome thing.
Fly wanton Riot and withal,
eschew the common Fame,
Of Avarice; both which extremes,
impair a man's good name.
Of wished health have chiefest care,
warm clothing do provide,
Light and unwholesome garments are
true Emblems of man's pride.
Out of Compass, In Apparel, is Prodigality.
Who falls into Prodigality is drowned in the excess of liberality, which
coming to extremity proves most vicious, wasting virtues faster then
substance, and substance faster then any virtue can get it.

Prodigality is the fire of the mind, whose heat is so violent, that it
cease not, whilst any matter combustible is present to burn necessary things
into dust and cinders.

To spend much without getting, to lay out all without reckoning, and to give
all without considering, are the true effects of prodigality.

He that is sumptuous in his apparel, lavish of his tongue, and superfluous in
his diet; is the Cooks hope, the Tailors thrift, and the true son of
repentance.

Riches lauishly spent, brings grief to thy heart, discontent to thy friends,
and misery to thine heirs.

A proud eye, an open purse, and a light wife, bring mischief to the first,
care to the next, and horns to the last.

An unthrift is known like a horse by his marks, as by the company he
keeps, the Tauerns he haunteth, the whores he maintains, and the expense he
uses.

Excessive or covetous gaming at cards or dice is a smooth slight, and
theeuish legerdemaine, whereby many rob with justification.

How much the more cunning a man is in Dyce play, so much the more he is
corrupt in life and manners.

The Devil was the first inuenter of gaming.

Dycing neither beseems the gravity of a Magistrate, nor the honor of a
gentleman, because the gain is laden with dishonest practices, and the loss
with unquiet passions.

When pride is in the sadle, mischeife and shame sits on the crooper.

Husbandmen esteem more of those ears of corn that hang down then of those
that stand up straight, for in them is much grain in the other chafe.

The spring of pride is lying, and the fountain of truth is humility.

Immoderate dancing is the chiefest instrument of Riot and excess.

Hunting is the exercise of a man, dancing of a woman. Yet one said, that a
Dauncer differs nothing from a mad man, but only in length of time, the one
being mad so long as he lives, the other whilst he daunceth.

They which love dancing too much seems to have more draines in their feet
then in their head, and think to play the fools with reason.

Disagreeing music and vain pastimes are the hindrances of delight.

One day takes from us the credit of another and the excess of sundry sounds
take away all pleasure and delight in the sounds.

Those that seek rather to deck their bodies then their souls, seem men
rather created for their bodies, then their souls.

Excess in vanity has never end.

Theft and the gallows ever attend at the heels of excess.

He that imployeth his substance in bravery, is the Mercers friend, the
Tailors fool, and his own enemy.

As you would judge one to be ill at ease that wears a plaster upon his face,
or one that has been scourged, to be punished by the law, so you may know
that a painted face betokens a diseased soul marked with adultery.

Those which are curious in decking of the body, do despise the care of their
soul.

A young man intemperate and full of carnal affections, brings the body to
old age much sooner with disease then time.

He cannot be a friend to temperance that delights in pleasure, nor love
government that likes Riot.

Trim not thy house with tables and pictures, but paint it and guild it with
temperance, the one vainly feeds the eyes, the other is an eternal ornament
which cannot be defaced.

Where sundry flies bite, the gall is great, and where every hand fleeceth the
sheep go naked.

He that goes a borrowing, evermore goes a sorrowing.

It is an ancient custom amongst the masters of good clothes and shallow
wits, not to honor him that to the commonwealth is most profitable, but him
that to their company is most acceptable.

He that makes himself a sheep shall ever be eaten of the wolf.

He that loses favor on land to seek out fortune at sea, is like him that
stareth so long at a star till he fall into a ditch.

Loose wits do never keep a mean,
but spend their wealth too fast:
Goods long in gathering, often are seen
in little time to waste.
Who spends his dead friends honest gift,
or wastes his fortunes lot:
At best is but a prodigal,
at worst a lavish sot.
Of riches if thy latter age
a larger portion find,
To grow more greedy by such gain,
shows a base Misers mind.
Who does elect a wife alone
for wealth and worldly store,
Often finds a thriftlesse Steward, and
most commonly a whore.
Use what thou have to do thee good,
but see thou make no waste:
Who vainly spend their own and want,
seek other men's at last.
One blessed note of blessedness
is riches to deny:
Which who so couets to ingrosse,
lives always beggarly.
Keep within Compass In Diet.
SUffice Nature but surfeit not, supply the bodies need, but offend not.

Haunt not tauernes, brothels, or Alehouses, but beware the danger and expense,
the bane of body, soul, and substance.

Mark the fearful end of notorious evil men, to abhor their wickedness: mark the
life of the godly, that thou may imitate it: observe thy betters, respect the
wise, accompany the honest, and love ye religious.

Govern thy self with moderation and modesty in drink, but if it happen thou
into company, arise and depart rather then be overcome with drinking: for the
spirit overcome with wine is like a coach-horse, who having overthrown his
ruler, runs here and there without order, having no guide to direct him: so the
soul is very much offended, when the understanding is distempered.

Moderate diet is the wise man's cognizance: but surfeit and banqueting a fools
paradise.

To live well and frugally is to live temperately: for there is great
difference between living well and living sumptuously: the one proceeds from
discipline and moderation of the soul contented with her own riches: the
other from lust and contempt of all order and mediocrity, but at last the one
is followed with shame, the other with eternal praise and commendation.

Continence in meat and drink is the beginning and foundation of skill.

Sobriety retains that in a wise man's thought, which a fool without
discretion has evermore in his mouth.

Make not thy belly the commanding part of thy body.

Remember as meat and drink is food to preserve the body, so is Gods word the
nourishment of thy soul.

The first draught thou drinkest should be for thirst, the second for
nourishment, the third for pleasure, but the fourth is for madness.

Refrain from Surfeit, because it is the parent of Sloth, which is a vice
fearing labor to ensue, and a desisting from the necessary actions both of body
and mind: it is the sink which receives all the filthy channels of vice, and
with that poisonous air infecteth the soul.

Refuse not labor: for he that is idle can never excel in any Art.

Make thine industry thy best companion: for surfeit and idleness dulleth
understanding, nourishes humors, choaketh the brain, hinders thrift and
displeases God.

In thy cups beware of presumption: for it is a violent passion of the will,
and an utter foe to prudence: it is that affection which thrusts and exposes
the body to dangers, presuming only on vain hope and imagination, without
either ground or reason.

Vaunt not of victory before conquest, lest thy folly exceed thy valor.

Fly not from that thou should follow, lest thou pursue thine own
destruction.

Take heed of rashness in resolution, and cruelty in conquest: for the one is
wilful, and the other wicked: and as the first wants wit, the latter wants
grace.

To strain further then thy sleeue will stretch, is to leave thine arm naked,
and to skip beyond thy skill, is to leap, but not to know where to light.

If thou will surfeit on pleasure, let it be in rejoicing at that day wherein
thy tongue has not missaid, and thy heart has earnestly repented thy finnes.

Take no pleasure to feed on thine enemies afflictions: for he that sits
surest may in a moment be over thrown.

Since joys are short, modestly embrace and feed on them when they come, for
sorrows headlong follow one another.

A wise man ought not to be puffed up with pleasure, for it is the food of
filthiness: it kills the body, weakneth the judgment, and takes away
understanding.

He is not worthy the name of man that spends a whole day in pleasure.

Thy sin of surfeit pardon not,
Do penance for the same:
Not Wine, but those abuse the gift,
Are they deserve the blame.
Sometimes for health spare diet use:
For though of dainties store
Dame Nature crave, yet to thy health
Thou art indebted more.
Be watchful, and not unto sleep inclinde:
For drowsy Sloth feeds but a vicious mind.
Be thine own best Physician,
Prefer thy health fore all:
If evil diet make thee sick,
Blame neither Spring nor Fall.
Fly Banqueting the bane of life:
Some honest business do:
An idle mind decays it self,
And wastes the body to.
At Feasts and Banquets busy not
Thy tongue with too much chat:
Lest whilst thou would be pleasant thought
Thy talk be laughed at.
To Venus damned pleasures prone
If thou thy self mistrust,
Forbear to feed on costly cates,
as motives unto lust.
Out of Compass In Diet, is Gluttony.
GLutteny or surfeting is the sworn enemy to Temperance, daughter to excess
and immoderate appetite: she is healths bane, and humanities blemish, life's
Cockatrice, and the souls hell, except Mercy wipe out the remembrance of so
great a guilt.

Nothing can be more abject and hurtful, then to live as a slave to the
pleasures of the mouth and belly.

Diseases gather together in man's body, and proceed no less of being too full
then being too empty, and oftentimes a man has more trouble to digest meat
then to get meat.

Gluttony dries the bones, and more dye by it then perish by the sword.

Gluttony stirs up lust, anger and love in extremity, extinguisheth
understanding, opinion and memory.

Wine has as much force as fire: for as soon as it ouertaketh one, if
dispatcheth him, it discloseth the secrets of the soul, and troubles the
whole mind.

Men are sick of those things whereby they live: for there is no proper or
peculiar seed of diseases but the corruption of those things within them which
they eat, and the faults and errors they commit against them.

It is an old proverb (and most true) Much meat, much malady.

Excess came from Asia to Rome, and Ambition from Rome to all the world.

Sensual vice has these three companions: first, blindness of understanding:
then, hardness of heart: and the last, want of grace.

Wine bringes forth three grapes: the first of pleasure: the second of
drunkenness, and the third of sorrow.

Steel is the glass of beauty, and wine is the glass of the mind.

Drunkenness is nothing else but a voluntary madness.

Wine has drowned more men then the sea has devoured.

Wine is the blood of the earth, and the shame of such as abuse it.

Surfeit breeds idleness, and idleness is the only nurse and nourisher of
sensual appetites, and the sole maintainer of wanton affections.

That Epicure that passes his life sloathfully without profit, ought to lose
it without pity.

Idleness and disguised clothes makes men women, women beasts, and beasts
monsters.

Idleness and feasts are the root of desperation, and desperation is a
sorrowfulness without all hope of better fortune: a vice which falsely
throwdeth it self under the title of fortitude and valor, and tickling the
vain humors of the vainglorious, carries them to ignoble and indiscreet
actions, to the utter loss both of souls and bodies.

To make both mind and body strong,
no labor do refuse:
They Are wanton feasts which do forbid
men recreation use.
When feasts and riot have consumed,
and brought thee unto grief.
Then live content with what the time
shall yield for thy relief.
Exile all Sloth, and Cupid has no might,
His Bow lies broke, his Torch has lost all light:
But wallow still, and thou reuiu'st that flame
Shall honor him, but bury thee in shame.
Who does attempt things past his strength,
and not regards the pain,
Pulls danger on: but unto good
all is labor is in vain.
Who in his cups disdaines to hear
what profit may procure:
Shall dye accursed, since for his wealth
he would not words endure.
The wealth of this world none can want,
that curbs his vain desires,
And measures his expense with what
necessity requires.
FINIS.

