View this glass, aduisedlye, and waygh the same effectuallye.

skull and crossbones A Lokinge glass for each estate, Wherm to weue the
fickle fate.

As I am so must thou be

Dici beatus ante obitu^ nenio. Post funera virtus viuit.

As thou art so was I

Thou wast but dust, and thereto return thou must.



No Blemish than, Upon thy face? But by the same: thou may disgrace.

Death unto careless youth
YE Careless youths look well on me
for as I am so shall you be:
I am the wight at length that musse
lay all your honor in the duste.
I am the wight that must at length,
confound both might, and manlye strenghe
It Is I that states of high degree,
do cause to fali, and follow me:
Yea kings, and Queens, and others more,
both Lords and Ladies hye and low.
The priest, the prelate, clarke and all,
of force must yield when I do call.
The youthful bloods as well as these,
must unto death come pay there fees.
No wealth no strength, no pollecye,
can make resistance unto me.
Wherefore let this be still your song:
Dead shall I be or it be long.
But when, or how, god he does know,
where forelets well our time bestow.
Death to the gallante daintye Dames.
YOu gallante dames, behold me here,
for as I am, you m^ste appear:
Though you be gay you ar^ but duste,
Though you be loathe, yet hence you must
Your looks so coye, your fined talk,
your frisled hair away mu^ walk:
Your bewtye, fair must turn to duste,
and louinge mates where on you trust.
I care not for your ^okes so hye,
your daintye mouths to death shall fly:
Alluringe gestures where with all,
you many thowsandes brought to thrall,
And all things else must you depart,
when death does stinge, with cruel darte.
Your ringes, your chains, your rich array,
yea life and a^l I take away,
Let this therefore, be eke your song,
Dead shall I be, or it be long,
But when, or how, god he does know:
your time see then you well bestow.
Death to Crookedage
COme hoarye hears, and dance with me,
your state in sequence may you see:
Though long this world you have at will,
yet death at last will have his fill:
For gold and welthe, death does not care,
old crooked age, death will not spare.
When they have scrachd all that they can,
needs must they leave it to an other man.
No tears nor treatye, wealth nor friend,
from painful death, may man defend
Let this therefore, be eke your song,
dead shall I be or it be long:
But when or how god he does know,
wherefore lets well our time be slow.
The Author to the reader
LEt every man if he be wise,
(respectinge not this worldly fame)
With judgment deep, and grave advice,
mark well this glass, for in the same,
A perfect picture (as I ween)
of man's frail nature may be seen.
And sith its sure, that all shall dye,
^u when, or how, god only knows,
Chrise happy then, is ^e save I
That godly here, his time bestows:
But w^ to him and woe again,
whose death does turn to endlese pain.
Repent repent, and eke amend,
what is an ille:
That with the sheep? our savior Christ?
may c^l^ us his?
To reign with him, in heavens bliss,
for ever and a day:
That god would grant this, to us all,
let every Christian pra^e Amen.
Tho. Johnson.

FINIS.
Imprinted at london by Abel Ieffs. and are to be soulde by William Barley
dwelling in gracious street near leaden haule. (1595.)


