A proper new Ballad, showing a merry jest of one Ieamie of Woodicock Hill,
and his wife, how he espied through a door, one making of him Cuckold, and how
that for lucre of money, he was well contented therewith.
To be sung to a new tune, called Woodicocks Hill.
ONe Iemie there was that dwelt in a town,
as proper a man as proper might be:
A wife he had would scold and frown,
and evermore call him noddie noddie.
A wife he had would scold and frown,
and evermore calt him noddie, noddie.
This Iemie did rise betime in the morn,
and forth of his doors he hasted truly:
But before he came home he was crowned with a horn
for his wife did use her hei nonnie nonnie.
But before he came, etc.
Iemie did put his lambs to field,
thinking good sheep that they would be,
But all his lambs were turned to rams,
and the horns they fell to Iemie, Iemie.
But all his, etc.
Iemie he hied to woodicock hill,
for there his business lay truly:
In which time an other did work his will,
and tickled his wives hei nonnie nonnie.
In which, etc.
Now god a mercy said Iemies wife,
evermore welcome shall thou be:
I Will love thee (...)
because thou have p^a^^ (...). etc.
I Will love thee, etc.
Iemie at length came home with speed,
and stepped to the door so closely:
And through the key hole he spied indeed,
how one there did tickle his, etc.
And through the, etc
Zounds quoth Iemie, and then he swears,
is this possible for to be?
Come open the door, I Will have him by the ears,
for playing the rogue with my, etc.
Come, etc.
Thou knave (quoth Iemie) I Will make thee rue,
that ever thou did come here truly:
I Will send for the Constable, I Will tell thee true,
and have thee plagued most mightily.
I Will send, etc.
I Will cause you both be whipped sure,
throughout the town most shamefully:
Repent it you shall while your lives endure,
for playing the knave and the whore truly.
Repent, etc.
Then said the man this Iemie too:
I pray you now contented be:
I Will give you five pounds, make no more adoo,
because I have tickled your, etc,
I Will give you, etc.
Will thou (quoth. Iemie) this match then I Will make,
if that five pound thou will give me:
My wife for ever thou shall forsake,
and never more meddle with her, etc.
My wife, etc.
But when shall I this money receive,
the which you promised have to me?
At Michelmas next I will it thee give,
if that thou so contented be.
At etc.
Then (quoth Iemie) for that which is past,
upon thy fair promise I will thee forgive:
Then I Will not come near thy wife by two stones cast,
so long as we both together shall live.
Then, etc.
Now friends, what think you this Iemie of?
that for lucre of money contented was he,
To put up Cuckold? it made me to laugh:
so I took up my pen, and wr^t noddie noddie.
To put up, etc.
And evermore after this Iemie he,
grew up to promotion every day:
Knight of the Forked Order truly:
from that time forth was counted always.
Knight, etc.
Farewell friend Iemie, look well to thy charge,
thy name shall never be known for me:
Look well to thy wife, let her not run at large,
but let it always be a warning to thee.
Look, etc.
Would I were as sure of an hundred pounds,
as this same Iemie does think truly:
How some other besides himself in the town,
sometimes will meddle with his hey, etc.
How some, etc.
And so to conclude, I am loath to be long,
I pray thee Iemie take it not heavily:
I pray give me some beer for singing this song,
and so I pray God make you all merry, merry.
I pray, etc.
FINIS.

