TWO TREATISES, One of the Latter day of Judgment: The other of the Joys of
Heaven.

1. Cor. 15.52. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, shall the Trumpet
blow, and the dead shall be raised, and we shall be changed that are found alive.

Mat. 24.22. Except those days should be shortened, no flesh should be saved:
but for the elects sake, those days shall be shortened.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Creed, and are to be sold at his house in the
Old Change, at the sign of the Eagle and Child. 1600.

The Epistle to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, my desire has been of a long time, to set down unto thee, the
Excellent, the Decayed, and the Restored Estate of man; if by Gods grace, I
might, or may as yet in good time perform it. Whereof I have finished a great
part, the which if God give good success, in due time, shall be added to that
which is already published: wherein I have set down the Excellent Estate of
man: by declaring how God created him after his Image.

The thing that I have aimed at, both in that, and this, or any thing else,
that hereafter I shall do, is only to profit and to do good. And therefore at
this time, and according to this time, and troublesome and dangerous days of
this world; prognosticating the utter ruin and decay thereof, I have thought
good by this Treatise of the Latter Judgment, to put you in remembrance, that
you may be ready and prepared, when the Trumpet shall blow, and when we shall
be called to our account. That every one of us in the mean time, may have this
in our mind, and in our mouth; Good Lord prepare us to thy kingdom, and
shorten the days of sin. Ezekias desired to have his days prolonged. And
unto Josias, it was pronounced for a blessing, that his time should be
shortened. Which of these two was the better choice, that I leave to thy
resolution: persuading thee to that, which I take to be best.

Suprema cogita; Cor sit in aethere:
Foelix qui potuit mundum contemnere.
Thine to his power, S. I.

A TREATISE OF the latter day of judgment.
Act. 10.36. to 43. Ye know the word which God has sent to the children of
Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, which is Lord of all. Even the word
which came through all Judea, beginning in Galile, after the Baptism which
John preached. To wit, how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth, with the holy
Ghost, and with power: who went about doing good, and healing all that were
oppressed of the devil: for God was with him. And we are witnesses of all
things which he did, both in the land of the Jews, and in Jerusalem: whom
they slew, hanging him on a tree. Him God raised up the third day, and caused
that he was showed openly; not to all the people, but unto the witnesses,
chosen before of God, even to us, which did eat and drink with him, after he
arose from the dead.

And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify, that it is
he, that is ordained of God, a Judge of quick and dead.


EVery one no doubt is desirous to know, what shall be done at the latter day,
at the day of doom and judgment. A doctrine very necessary to them that have
any care of themselves, and of their own salvation; and very profitable also
to provoke us to the love, knowledge, and fear of God. And so much the more
profitable and necessary it is, by how much the nearer that day is at hand, and
approaches, being as our Savior Christ says, hard at the doors.

Concerning these words which I have read unto you, I shall require you to have
regard unto these principal matters. First what is the cause why this general
judgment shall be. Division.
Secondly, the declaration of this judgment. Thirdly, who shall be the judge.
Lastly, how it pertains to the wicked and to the godly; whereunto I have
thought good to ad an exhortation, the better to be prepared.

The cause wherefore Christ shall come to judgment, principally is no other, but
that which procured death unto us, and the last and general judgment, shall
make that matter more certain; not only that this bodily death, which is a
separation of our soul and body for a time, shall not serve the turn, and be
enough to satisfy that punishment which we have deserved: but also that some
shall be delivered to eternal death, both of body and soul, as indeed we
should be all in that estate, were it not for the benefit of Christ his death.
The sin and transgression of Adam, as also the sins and transgressions of us
al, was and is the cause, why God is displeased with us, and why his wrath is
upon us, and why we are subject unto death, and why we shall appear before
the judgment seat of God. Psalm: 90.9. For when thou art angry, says the
Prophet, All our days are gone* we bring our years to an end, as it were a
tale that is told; we consume away in thy displeasure. Thou will set our
misdeeds before thee, and our secret sins in the sight of thy countenance.
Our misdeeds have procured death, had not Christ died for us, and rose again
from death, to deliver us from fear. They were the cause, why we were shut out
from heaven; had not Christ ascended up into heaven, to procure us an entrance,
they had brought us to the fearful judgment of God, and to the heavy and
woeful sentence of everlasting condemnation and endless destruction, if by the
means of our Savior Christ, we might not be delivered from it. For when we
were at hell gates, and appointed to destruction, he came with this joyful
message: Come again ye children of men. As indeed his first coming here on
earth, was to save and not to destroy, and to call sinners to repentance, that
they might be received into the favor of God, and have their sins forgiven
them; but this his second coming, at the latter end of the world, shall be to
judge, to tender vengeance, and to destroy those sinners, who in this life were
against his glory, and their own salvation; to call them now to account, whom
when time was he called to repentance, and who now shall be punished by the
extremity of the wrath of God. Who if they had well regarded it in their life
time, might have been received into favor, their sins being forgiven: so
that at the day of judgment, they should not have been put to any hazard for
them, nor ventured the danger of loss of body and soul for them. Here in
this life they might have escaped that, which in that day they shall not be
able to avoid. We see in all well ordered Realms, that if it were not for
offenses committed, and for the manifold outrages, of robbers, thieves and
murderers, the Judges needed not ride their circuit, neither should there be any
judgment heard of. But as before that man had disobeied God, this sentence was
given out; If thou do eat, thou shall die the death: so seeing he has
diversely, and most notoriously offended, therefore has God appointed a day to
sit in judgment, to make this sentence more sure and known, and to put it in
full execution. We read of Enoch that holy man, Wisd. 4.10.14. that he walked
with God, that is, that he pleased him, and was beloved of him: so that whereas
he lived among sinners, God translated him, and took him up into heaven, least
wickedness should alter his understanding. For his soul pleased God, and
therefore God hasted to take him away from wickedness, least he should give
his consent unto sinners, and fall into the selfsame condemnation with them. But
because we have grievously offended his majesty, therefore shall we be brought
before his judgment seat. For righteousness is immortal, but unrighteousness
brings death. Thus then through the bane of sin, we are subject unto Gods
wrath and heavy judgment, which in the end of the world, and at the second
coming of Christ, shall be pronounced against us. According to that we read,
Eccle. 11.9. Rejoice o young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in
the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of
thine eyes. But know, that for all these things, God will bring thee to
judgment. But here many of us follow the course of the stream, with all other
Atheists and ungodly persons, who because they see, that God delayeth the time
of his coming to judgment, therefore they think there shall be no judgment at
all. Of whom the holy Apostle S. Peter, does thus prophecy in his 2. Epistle,
Chap. 3.3. Some mock at ye judgment day, as though it should not be.
This first understand says he, that there shall come in the last days
mockers, which will walk after their lusts: And say, where is the promise of
his coming? For since the fathers died, all things continue alike from the
beginning of the creation. Seed time and harvest, summer and winter, one
generation decays, and an other comes in place thereof. And because they
see the same course of the world to continue, that was from the beginning, they
are ready to say as those of whom I made mention, when I opened unto you the
doctrine of resurrection; Our life say they is but a breath, and so forth; and
when we are dead, there shall be no more remembrance of us: and therefore we
will do thus and thus, even what we list. Which is a token of Gods judgment
upon the^, who sometime suffers the obstinate offender, to do in a manner what
he list, as we read, Ps. 81. v. 11.12. So I gave them up to the hardness of
their heart, and they have walked in their own counsels. Where we must not
imagine, that they can do any thing against Gods will, who does so bridle and
restrain them, that they shall do no more, then that which he will suffer
them. God does not only restrain and bridle them, but furthermore, sends his
fearful judgments vp-them oftentimes, to overtake them, that they may know
there is a God that judges the earth, Gods judgments in this world.
and that such malefactors, are further reserved unto the day of judgment. And
therefore we see so many strange and wonderful examples of Gods wrath daily
before our eyes. Which strange examples, we cannot say are wrought by me^ or by
chance, because they pass the compass of man's reason, how they should be
wrought, and how they should come to pass: but that we may say as Pharaohs
enchaunters said, This is the finger of God: that is to say, this is the work
and punishment of God, when he brings upon men and women, sore plagues,
sudden death, and strange ends; so that we cannot otherwise choose, but confess
it to be so. These punishments God does send, not only to fear us from the
like offenses that they have committed, upon whom God has exercised and
executed his just judgment: but also that we may be put in mind, that there
is a judgment to come, and that he has begun the anger and wrath of his
fierce judgment here upon earth. Which plagues and punishments, are
fore-tokens, and as it were manifest signs of the judgment to come. The
feeling of this judgment, engraffed in us by nature.
Yea there is an inward feeling of this judgment, engraffed in us by nature.
For they that commit any sin, as murder, fornication, adultery, blasphemy,
and many other the like; albeit they can so conceal the matter, that none
alive do know it, or be privy unto it, yet oftentimes they have a griping in
their conscience, and they feel as it were the very flashings of hell fire
within them. Which is a strong reason to show that there is a God, before
whose judgment seat, they must answer for their sins, offenses and
misdeeds.

Some suppress the knowledge of the latter judgment.
Yet such there are, who being possessed with an evil humor, and overcome of
their naughty and wicked desires, that the consideration of Gods heavy
judgment to come, cannot prevail to move them to rel^nt, or to have any
remorse of their evil life, but rather they endeavor to suppress the feeling
of that which by nature, and by the light of reason is engraffed within the^,
and are desirous willingly to forget it. As S. Peter speaks of them, 2. Pet.
3.5. This says he they willingly know not, that the heavens and earth are
reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment, and of the destruction of
ungodly men, they willingly know not. So when it comes into men's consciences,
that there is a judgment to come, and when they feel an inward fear within
them, for their misdeeds, they do not take profit by this inward feeling of
Gods judgment; whereby it pleases God to call them to the knowledge of
themselves, to be humbled in his sight, to call for mercy and forgiveness of
sins, to turn to God in newness of life, that so they might prevent Gods
judgment and be saved. But they are so mightily overcome of sin, and of
their evil desires, which rule and reign within them, that they turn this
inward feeling, and this inward calling of God, to their own hurt. And as the
fashion of the world is, they desire to put away such sad thoughts, and betake
themselves to merry company, and pleasant conceits, or else to other pastimes,
of carding, dicing, bowling, and such like. So that the devil through their
own consent, holds him still in his chains, whereas they might seek means
to be delivered from the subjection, whereby the devil retains them in his
service, and keeps them within his power, if they themselves were any thing
willing to be delivered and set free. By a sad look says the wise man, Eccle.
7.4.5. the heart is made the better. And it is better to be in the house of
mourning, the^ in the house of laughter. When the holy Apostle S. Paul, Act.
24.26. in the presence of Felix the governor, disputed of righteousness, and
temperance, and of the judgment to come. Felix trembled; and therwithall did
suppress this matter, by betaking himself to other business. Go thy way
says he for this time, and when I have convenient time, I will call for thee.
He used not this inward feeling of the knowledge of Gods judgment to the
best, that is to repent and to turn to God, but as a worldly minded man, he
would have no such dumps to daunt his mind, and to hinder him from his vain
pleasures, although then and at that time, he were full deeply touched in
conscience.

Well, although some do mock at the judgment day, as though it should not
come, or else suppress the knowledge thereof within themselves, that they may
follow their lusts, eat, and drink, and rise up to play; that they may enjoy
the vanities and pleasures of this transitory world, so long as they live in
the world; yet they, and we together with them, may learn two profitable
lessons. First because as we think it is long before God do come to
judgment (although oftentimes he begins his judgment here upon earth, by
strange examples, which as I have said, are the forerunners of his last
judgment) we may learn I say, that with God, a thousand years, which we
count a whole world, is but as yesterday that is past; and therefore that it is
not long, though it seem so unto us. Secondly, that God hereby shows his
patience and long suffering, his great compassion and mercy, in that he would
not the death of a sinner, but waits for our repentance and amendment; and
thinks that in good time, we will hate and avoid our wicked and shameful
life, and turn to him, that we may be saved; for he would have all men to
come to repentance. And therefore the holy Apostle S. Paul. To. 2.4. does
greatly rebuke and speak against them, who either make little account, or
despise the riches of Gods bountifulness, and patience, and long suffering,
not knowing that the bountifulness of God, leads to repentance. But we after
our hardness, and hearts, which either cannot or will not repent, heap unto our
selves wrath against the day of wrath; and of the declaration of the just
judgment of God. For indeed it is like to be with us as it was in the days
of Noah, they cared not for Noah's warning and preaching unto them, and rather
made a mock of it, they followed their own hearts desire, and did whatsoever,
seemed good in their own eyes. So shall not we in this last Iron age of the
world, regard any warning, nor respect the counsel of the^ that wish us good:
neither think of judgment, nor what shall befall us, being greatly doted upon
the pleasure of sin, which at the last shall vanish, and in time to come, shall
have a bitter reward. Whereas if we forethink with our selves, of these heavy
matters, and of the wrath of God, which shall be perceived by his judgment,
which we must of force endure, if we repent not; I say, if we should forethink
these matters, we should learn truly to fear God, and to forgo our selves, that
is, deny our naughty desires and sins, and pleasures, that so Gods wrath might
be diminished toward us, and that he might not enter into judgment with us.
As says the Prophet, Ps. 90.11. Who regards the power of thy wrath? for even
as a man fears, so is thy displeasure.

How ye godly ought to be affected, seeing the sin, and the flourishing estate
of the wicked.
Here also the minds of the faithful and godly, are to be prepared to
patience, that although they see many ungodly minded men, to make a mock of
the judgment to come, and so to continue in their sinful lives, and do what
they list, and that they are not punished in this world, by Gods judgments,
plagues and punishments; yet let us persuade our selves, that they shall not
escape, though God suffer long, and though we in our weak minds think it too
long. For although the wicked may say within themselves vauntingly and yet full
vainly, as the Prophet Esaias. Chap. 28.15. recites their speeches; We have
made a covenant say they, with death: and with hell, are we at agreement:
though a scourge run over and pass through, it shall not come at us. Yet
their covenant with death shall be disanulled: and their agreement with hell,
shall not stand. And when a scourge runs over and passes through, are they
not sometime trod down by it, and taken away, when they make little or no
reckoning of any such matter? The holy Apostle does give the reason, of the
certainty of their punishment, if not in this world, yet in an other. 2. Pet.
2.4. For if god spared not the Angels that had sinned, but cast them down into
hell: Nay if Gods judgment begin at his own house, and if God do punish his
own people; And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly
and sinner appear* 1. Pet. 4.17.18. Wherefore let us not be as they were of
whom the Prophet Malachy speaks, Chap. 3.15. We count the proud blessed;
even they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God, yea they
are delivered from all dangers. So that it is in vain to serve God, and what
profit is it that we have kept his commandments, and that we walked humbly
before the Lord of hosts? These are the speeches, of many weak and
discontented and decayed minds, because they see the flourishing estate of the
wicked. But as it is said in the Reave. Chap. 22.11. They that be filthy, and
will so continue without amendment, let them see what shall be the end, and let
them be filthy still; He that is unjust, let him be unjust still. So also it
is said on the contrary part, They that are just and righteous, let them be
righteous still; and they that are holy, let them be holy still; let them not
faint in the course that they have taken in hand, but remember what is written
in the selfsame Chapter. The coming of the Lord to judgment is at hand;
Surely says he, I come quickly, and let us wish, Even so come Lord Jesus. And
as for the rest, let us persuade our selves thus, as we read, 2. Pet. 2.9. The
Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation; and to reserve the
unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished. The Lord knows his best
time, and when it is most expedient that we should be delivered: In the mean
time, let us not faint, and utterly cast away our hope, if God do not
presently punish the wicked. For God does so order his punishments and his
judgments, that although he suffer the wicked for a time (which indeed if we
do rightly consider, is but a moment of time) yet he will not leave them
unpunished at the last; as we use to say, It is never too late that comes once.
Again, seeing that God has appointed a day of judgment, they shall not
escape, though his judgment do not presently take hold on them. They cannot
slip from God, or avoid him, but are bound as it were with secret chains, so
that in time to come they shall be drawn do judgment; who are kept until
that time to be punished, even as the ox which is fed and fatted to the
slaughter. So that, it behooves us to wayt upon the time of the last judgment,
which God has appointed, and so to continue in hope and patience, unto the
end of our lives: and not to be offended, though the wicked be not punished.
But every one of us, ought to have respect to our own ways, to keep our
selves within the compass of Gods fear, least that fall upon us, which we
think and look should fall upon other, and wonder with our selves why it is
not so.

Again, as the word of God does instruct us, let us consider these two
principal causes, why God delayeth this day of judgment. One is, that the day
of judgment shall not come, until the number of the elect be fulfilled: as we
may read, Reu. 7.2. And I saw another Angel come up from the East, which had
the seal of the living God, and he cried with a loud voice, to the four
Angels, to whom power was given, to hurt the earth and the sea, saying: Hurt ye
not the earth, neither the sea, neither the trees, till we have sealed the
servants of our God in their foreheade. And then shall the judgment be, as we
read, Math. 24.22. Except those days should be shortened, there should no
flesh be saved, but for the elects sake those days shall be shortened.

Secondly, this Judgment is delaied, that the stubborn and ungodly may be
thereby without excuse. For they have warning enough, exhortations and
threatenings at all times, what their sins deserve, and what they are to look
for, so that they cannot be ignorant of the judgment day, neither can they
say, that they are oppressed at unawares.

And this may suffice to prove, not only that sin and our offenses is and
shall be the cause of judgment: but also they that sin of set purpose, and in
scoffing and mocking sort, think that there shall be no judgment, or rather do
suppress and bury within themselves, if it might be, the inward feeling and
knowledge of the same, and that to their great hurt, shall not escape yt heavy
vengeance of God, though yet they be forborne. Also that the minds of the godly
be not troubled, although they do not presently see that god does exercise his
judgments and punishments upon them: and that they faint not in well doing, but
still hold on their course, remembering that God has appointed a day of
judgment, upon the which they must stay and depend, and unto the which they
must refer all matters, and then shall all their causes be heard, and all
their griefs eased.

Notorious sins, procure notorious punishments in this world: but especially
at the judgment day, shall the full measure of all plagues and punishments be
fulfilled. And so much the more, because that in this world, many rule and
reign in their wickedness, and are as it were scotfree: and as the Prophet
says, They come in no misfortune like other men, neither are they plagued
according to their deserts. But the latter day, the day of doom and judgment,
is and shall be their day of assizes, and of their perpetual execution.
Wherefore let none of us all suppress and banish the inward feeling and
knowledge of this judgment day, seeing that by nature, it is engraffed into
our hearts and secret knowledge: but rather let in have that effect in us, that
of right it ought to have. We see it true in worldly matters, and I would to
God, it were as true in heavenly matters. For questionless, the forethought of
the assizes, and of the execution, does fear many from their wicked purposes,
and makes them take an other course. And so no doubt, would the remembrance of
the judgment day prevail with us, but that we are carelessly persuaded, that
it is far hence, and that we shall never see it: nay more then that, many
think it shall never be. Well, how far off the judgment day is, God knows,
and we may every day look for: but by the way, take this for thy learning,
that thy dying day, is and shall be thy judgment day: and assure thy self,
that thou shall so find it. For when thy soul is parted from thy body, then
shall thou presently appear before Gods judgment seat, to give thy account,
and pray that it may be to thy comfort, and not to thy destruction. Heb. 9.27.

2 Now for the description and declaration of this general judgment, which is
the second principal matter in this text, that both they which either mock or
doubt of the judgment to come, and they also which are well near persuaded
thereof, might be thoroughly, perfectly, and certainly informed: therefore the
order and manner of this judgment is set down, in the scriptures and word of
God, principally and especially in the 25. Chap. of Mat. verse. 31. and so
forth, in these words. And when the Son of man comes in his glory, and all
the holy Angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory. And
before him shall be gathered all Nations; and he shall separate them one from
an other, as a shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats. And he shall
set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left. Then shall the
King say to them on his right hand; Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you, from the foundations of the world. Unto them on the
left hand he shall say: Depart fro me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which
is prepared for the devil and his Angels. And these shall go into everlasting
pain, and the righteous into life eternal.

Which description and declaration, cannot be more plainly, evidently, and
briefly set down, setting forth unto us; First the coming of the Judge, with
his company, that is, all the holy Angels: Secondly, the general appearance of
all the people of the world: Thirdly, the office of the Judge, in separating
the good from the bad. And lastly, the pronouncing of judgment, by definitive
sentence without all reuocatio^. Al which matters, God willing shall be
handled, when I come to entreat of the Judge; so that I need not to stand upon
this point, but to refer you thither, where in a more fit place it may be
considered.

And as here the order of the judgment is expressed, so in other places of
scripture, other matters are specified, which are very necessary, to give us
further understanding herein. As first concerning the day when this judgment
shall be; the signs that shall go before this day; as also how suddenly it
shall come upon the world. Concerning the day the Prophets do foretell, how
terrible it is likely to be. The day.
The day of the Lord say they, is a day of blacknes and darkness; the earth shall
tremble before him; the heavens shall shake; the Sun and the Moon shall be dark,
and the stars shall withdraw their shining.

This day is great and very terrible, and who can abide it? it comes cruelly
with wrath as fierce anger, and he shall destroy the sinners out of the earth.
And because the world should have some time to forethink themselves, our
Savior Christ has given some warning, by the signs that shall come before
this judgment day. As that there shall be false reachers abroad in the world,
who shall deceive, if it were possible, the very elect and chose children of
God, Math. 24.24. Wars and seditions: Nation shall rise against Nation, and
Kingdom against Kingdom: the father in matters of religion shall be against the
son, and the son against the father: the mother against the daughter: one
friend against an other: great earthquakes in diverse places: hunger,
pestilence: bitter persecution of them that shall profess Christ and his
Gospel: Charity shall wax cold among men: men shall lead a leaud and
sinful life, altogether careless of the Judgment to come: The Gospel shall
be published, and few shall regard it: it shall be preached through the whole
world, for a witness unto all Nations, to make them without all excuse, and
then shall the end come. Fearful things shall be seen: the sea and the waters
shall roar, and men's hearts shall fail them for fear, and for looking after
those things which shall come on the world. The Sun shall be darkened, and the
Moon shall not give her light: the stars shall fall from heaven, and the
powers of heaven shall be shaken, whereby the horrible trembling of the world is
meant, together with the alteration and ouerturning of the whole course of
nature. And after all these things, then shall appear the sign of the Sun
of man in heaven.

What effects the signs of the latter day, shall work in ye minds of men.
The consideration of which signs, shall work diversely both in the godly and
in the wicked. For the hearts of the wicked shall be hardened and made worse by
these signs, as King Pharaohs heart, by Gods strange punishments, was more and
more hardened, until the time of his destruction, and that he was utterly
overthrown in the red sea. These signs, as they shall move the godly minded,
partly to repentance, in consideration of their sins, and partly to comfort,
in respect of joys to come: so the wicked contrariwise, shall be given to
despair, and to curse the hour that ever they were borne. And this is a
secret judgment upon them, that they shall be blinded even until the very
hour of their destruction, so that when they would seek for remedy, there
shall be none.

The godly they wish for the coming of the Lord: Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly: for they know that his coming shall end their miseries, and begin
their joys, as Christ himself does comfort them. Luke 21.28. And when these
things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads: for your
redemption (that is the full accomplishment of the same) draws near. For
then, as says the Apostle, 1. These. 4.17. Shall we be caught in the clouds,
to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we be ever with the Lord.

The last circumstance of this judgment is, Sudden.
that it shall come upon the sudden, and that most fearfully to the wicked. 1.
These. 5.3. For when they shall say peace, peace, and all in safety, then shall
come upon them sudden destruction, as the travel upon a woman with child: and
they shall not escape. As it fell out to the rich man in the Gospel. Luke
12.20. Soul says he, take thy ease, eat and drink and take thy pastime, for
thou have much good laid up for many years. But he heard doleful words: O
fool this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee. Or as when
Nabuchadnezer, vaunted himself of his stately buildings, a fearful voice
came suddenly unto him: O King Nabuchadnezer, to thee be it spoken, thy
kingdom is departed from thee: Or as when his son King Belshasar, Dan. 5.6.
feasting and hanquetting among his Concubines, suddenly there appeared a hand
writing upon a wall, declaring the end of his Kingdom and his death. This
sudden destruction shall worthily fall upon them, who have made a mock of this
judgment: who then shall feel the dint of Gods revenging sword: and they that
imboldned themselves in all wicked ways, and evil naughty practices, shall
then know how far they went a stray. The wicked whom no law could refrain
from their licentious life, and who have died to the sight of men in peace;
after they have long enjoyed their lusts and diverse pleasures, after much
violence and wrong which they have offered; after many misdeeds which man's
laws should have corrected and yet let pass; although they have escaped the
judgment of man, yet then shall they receive according to their deeds. But to
the good and well disposed, it is a watchword, when they hear that the
Judgment day shall be upon a sudden. Let us therefore with the five wise
virgins, have oil in our Lamps, remembering Christ his forewarning, That which
I say unto you, I say unto all men, watch. And so much briefly for the second
part of the division of this Text, namely of the description and declaration of
the latter Judgment.

Who shall be ye Judge.
The third general matter which I proposed unto you, was concerning the Judge,
and who it should be. And as it was said of the Judgment, that it should be
sudden; so also shall the coming of the Judge be. Mat. 24.27. For as the
lightning comes out of the East, and shines into the West, so shall also the
coming of the son of man be. He that was equal with God, and took upon him
the shape of a servant, he that was abased, despised, and persecuted of
sinful men: he shall come in power and great glory to judge the world, and to
be revenged of his enemies. He whom God has placed at his right hand, far
above all principallitie, power, might, domination, and every name that is
named, not in this world only, but also in that that is to come: he it is
that is ordained of God, a Judge of quick and dead. Whose coming shall not be
as at the first, poorly, and basely, but with great majesty, and after a most
glorious, wonderful, and most dreadful manner. He shall descend from heaven,
not to come down on the earth, but to sit on the clouds, as his tribunal
seat and throne of Judgment, he shall come with a shout, and a marvelous
great noise, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the sound of the last
Trumpet. For the Trumpet shall blow, and the dead shall be raised (1. Cor.
15.) and he shall show himself with thousands of his mighty Angels, and that
in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that do not know God, and which
obey not unto the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Which shall be punished
with everlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power. When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made
marvelous in all them that believe. 2. These. 1.7.

Which glorious appearance of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, this heavenly
Judge that shall come in the latter end of the world, shall be of the more
majesty, if we shall compare it to the delivery of the law, which then was
both fearful and terrible; whereof we read, Exodus 9.16. And the third day,
when it was morning, there was thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud
upon the mount, and the sound of the trumpet louder and louder, even exceeding
loud, so that all the people that was in the camp was affraied. Then Moses
brought the people out of the tents, to meet with God, and they stood in the
nether part of the mount. And mount Sinay was all on a smoke, because the Lord
came down upon it in fire, and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a
furnace, and all the mount trembled exceedingly. This appearing of the delivery
of the law, was to denounce a sharp punishment and curse for sin: but this
second appearing at the end of the world, shall be with greater majesty and
more terrible, by reason of the full execution of this curse and punishment. And
as Moses was admitted into Gods presence, but the people trembled and would not
come near: so shall this second appearing, be joyful to the godly, who shall
meet with the Lord in the clouds; but as for the rest they shall mourn; and
as the Prophet says, who shall be able to abide it?

Then was but the mount on fire, but now shall the whole world be on a flame:
then only the people of Israel were called and assembled together: now shall
all people, nations, and languages be gathered: then was there a curse only
denounced, if they, and we by them also being understood, should transgress
and break Gods law and commandments, but no present punishment followed: now
shall there be no delay, but they shall in the same moment of time, receive the
sentence of condemnation, and shall forthwith be thrown into hell fire, to be
tormented for ever. Therefore shall this appearing be of greater glory, of
greater majesty, and more terrible.

The Son of man, as ye have heard, he shall be the Judge of the whole world
at the latter day: indeed no earthly man, but he that took upon him the
nature of man. Who also elsewhere, is called the son of God, and is the
second person in the reverent and most holy trinity: whom God has not only
ordained to this office, but also has commanded the Apostles, to preach and
to publish it throughout the whole world, that it might be as surely grafted
into the minds of men, as it is certainly decreed by the determinate purpose
of God. As we read, John. 5.22. For the father judges no man, but has
committed all judgment unto the son. Whereof the holy Apostle S. Paul also
gives witness, Acts 17.32. God says he, admonishes all men euerywhere to
repent: Because he has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world
in righteousness, by that man whom he has appointed, whereof he has given an
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. By the force
of which certain persuasion, he charge Timothy to be earnest and careful
in his duty, 2. Tim. 4.1. I charge thee therefore before God and before the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and dead at his appearing preach
the word, be instant in season and out of season, improve, rebuke, exhort, with
all long suffering and doctrine. Also the holy Apostle S. Peter, 2. Ep. 4.5.
does testify the selfsame thing, when as he exhorted those whom he writ unto,
to desist and leave off their ungodly life, and to depart from the company of
the wicked, and not to be daunted in mind, though they should be scoffed and
mocked at their hands for so doing Encouraging them with a most forceable
reason, that might thoroughly persuade them: which is, that the wicked shall be
judged: which judgment they shall escape, that go from them, and turn to God
in time, forsaking the ways and counsels of the wicked. And because the place
of scripture is notable, and worthy of great regard, I think good to set it
down. It is sufficient for us says he, that we have spent the time past of
the life, after the lust of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness, lusts,
drunkenness, in gluttony, and in abominable idolatries. Wherein it seems
to them strange, that ye run not with them unto the same excess of riot,
and continue in so doing, therefore speak they evil of you; which shall give
accounts, to him that is ready to judge quick and dead; who is no other, but
Jesus Christ the Just; as is manifect by those places of Scripture, which I
have before alleged.

Which proofs being so substanciall, that Christ shall be the Judge, and the
matter so manifest, as I think there is no man but does so believe, it shall
suffice only to have touched it. And so let us go forward, that we may
understand how Christ shall perform his Judgment. Which especially is laid
down in these three points. First, that all the Nations and people of the
world that ever have been, shall be gathered into his presence, and the reason
why they shall appear is, All people shall appear.
that they shall be called to their account: Secondly, after trial of their
cause, how he shall separate the one from the other, the just from the unjust,
and the godly from the wicked. Thirdly, the execution of this Judgment in
pronouncing of sentence. All nations and people shall be gathered into his
presence: For he shall send forth his Angels, with a great sound of trumpet, and
they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, and from the one end
of the heaven to the other; Math. 24.31. In the Parrable of the seed, it is
set down, Math. 13.30. that when harvest comes, the reapers shall gather the
tares, and bind them in sheaues to burn them, and so forth. Which Parable
Christ enterpreting to his Disciples, says that the harvest is the end of the
world, and the reapers be the Angels, whom the son of man shall send forth,
and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them
which do iniquity. Whereby may be perceived, that both the good and the bad
shall be gathered into the presence of the Judge, because the Text has these
words in the same place. Then shall the just men shine as the Sun. For we
must all appear says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 5.10. before the Judgment seat of
Christ; that every man may receive the things which are done in his body,
according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil. Whereof S. John
had a manifest demonstration, as we read in his Revelation, Chap. 20.11.12.
And I saw says he, a great white throne, and one that sat on it, from whose
face fled away both the earth and the heaven, and there place was no more
found. And I saw the dead both great and small stand before God; who shall
judge both the quick and the dead, even all that ever have been, are and shall
be to the end of the world; as well those that are dead and rotten in the
earth, as those which shall be found alive at his coming, who shall be changed
in a moment, which change shall be in stead of death.

In judgments that are practiced among men, there are diverse conueiances used,
not to appear in judgment: and for favor, fear, bribes, and such like
matters, malefactors are bayled out of prison, and bonds forfeyted, and they
kept from the bar, and from the presence of the Judge, and quitte by
Proclamation. But here the ministers of this heavenly judgment, to wit, the
Angels, shall not be blinded by any earthly considerations. There shall be no
entreaty no way to avoid, no other remedy, but that they shall and must
appear. It is a strange matter, and not to be seen, that any Emperor, King,
Prince, or any such mighty Potentate, should be called to judgment, or should
be subject unto the sentence of the Judge. For why? as they say the Prince is
above his law, and not to be censured by any. Subjects are under the penalty of
laws, and judgment may pass upon them: but as for the Prince and the highest
in a Realm, who dare control him if he do ill? But from this judgment of
this mighty and heavenly Judge, whom no power can resist, shall neither
Emperor, King, Prince, nor mighty Potentate be exempted, neither can they be
dispensed withal, but that of force and necessity, they must make their
personnall appearance. There shall be no respect of persons, high and and low,
rich and poor: all shall appear. Yea then it shall be far better with the
poorest beggar, that has lived in the fear of God, then with the mightiest
Emperor, that in his life time has had little or no regard to serve God. For
true it is, that the mighty shall be mightily punished.

All profane persons, leaud livers, Atheists, persecutors, which have been
enemies to God, to his word, and to his ministers, who have wished in their
hearts, there were no God, nor any judgment, who have made a scoff and
contempt of all goodness, and of the professors and Ministers thereof, they
shall of force be brought to this Judgment. But what? To speak in their own
behalf? No, they shall not be able. For at that time and there, they shall
confess their faults and heinous offenses, and make bitter lamentation, but
all too late, and there shall they weight in trembling sort, to hear their
judgment.

And who is it amongst us, No excuses shall serve.
that knows himself guilty, that will declare the truth, being called before
a Judge? but rather our minds run upon devices and excuses; how we may
blind the Judge, and defend our selves, and avoid that which is toward us. And
so long as we have to deal with mortal men, it may so fall out, that our
excuses may serve the turn, and set us clear.

But when our cause comes to be tried before GOD, from whom nothing is or can
be hid, and unto whom nothing can be secret: then no excuses can prevail,
neither shall any devices help us or blind the Judge. Our first parents, when
God called them to their trial, for transgressing his commandment, and when
the fled from God and his themselves, (although they were still in Gods
presence, but foolishly they thought otherwise) how did they answer for
themselves, but by excuses* Adam he speaks for himself, Gene. 3.12. and
says, The Woman which thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and
I did eat. The woman likewise she thinks to escape by that means; Eve,
says, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. When King Saul had disobeied
Gods commandment, running after the pray, being called to an account, he
deuiseth a current excuse, and says, Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the Lord,
and have gone the way which the Lord sent me, and have brought Agag the King of
Amelek, and have destroyed the Amalekites. But the people took of the spoil,
sheep and oxen, and the chiefest of the things, which should have been
destroyed, to offer unto the Lord.

Amongst these, may Pilat be reckoned, who against his own conscience,
condemned Christ to death, and yet would excuse himself, as though he were
innocent in the cause Math. 27.24. When Pilat saw that he auailed nothing,
but that more tumult was made, he took water and washed his hands, shaying? I
am innocent of the blood of this just mum In the description of the latter
judgment, Math, 25.44. we read that some began to excuse themselves, saying:
Lord when saw we thee an hungered, or a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or
sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee. Nevertheless all this
served not, but unto them it was said: Depart from me ye cursed into ever
lasting fire. And such part is Pilat like to receive, for all his excuse. King
Saul his excuse was not taken, our first parents escaped not for all their
excuses, but dyed the death: and shall we think our case to be better then
theirse howsoever we think, we shall not so find it. There shall we appear,
when as no friend, nor and body shall be suffered to speak for us, and in our
defense, and when a fair glosing tale shall not be heard, for the plain and
naked truth must then come in place, and we shall be enforced to give our
account, every one of us by our selves.

This is the principal matter that must be done before the Judge, We must give
account
that we must give account of our selves, and of our deeds done in this life.
And most shall have sorrowful hearts, because they shall be called to their
accounts. As it was said to the evil steward, Come give account of thy
stewarship: so shall every one of us be called to our account, have used those
benefits, gifts and graces which God has endued us withal; whether to Gods
glory, and to the benefit of other, or after our own pleasures, and to the
hurt of others. In the Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 14.10.12 We shall all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ; and then every one of us, shall
give accounts of himself to God. The wicked which lightly cannot be brought to
any accounts, they shall give accounts to him that is ready to judge quick and
dead. 1. Pet. 4.5. Not only most notorious and wicked deeds shall be called to
account, but we shall give a reckoning for every idle word. So we read, Math.
12.36. Out of the good treasure of the heart, we bring forth good. But I say
unto you says Christ, that of every idle word, that men shall speak, they
stall give account thereof, at the day of Judgment. When as we shall answer
for our selves, being altogether unable to answer one for a thousand. Yea so
much the more grievous it shall be, because we shall open all the secrets of
our heart, and be enforced to confess our misdeeds, and to keep back
nothing, all must be manifest.

And not as it is in this world, when upon the humble confession of our sins
to God, we may cry for pardon; and hope to be forgiven; but then shall but
confession be; to our open shame, confusion, and endless destruction.
Wherefore this day of judgment, may well be called the day of Revelation,
when as all things that are now hid, shall then be revealed and made known.
Secrets opened.
Here on earth, many things are kept close, hid and hudled up But God shall
tighten faith the Apostle, things that are hid in darkness: 1. Cor. 4.5. and
make the counsels of the heart manifest. And at that day; To. 2.16. God shall
judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ. In this life, many great and sinful
deeds are not punished, but remain hid and unknown, and the parties pass as
guilolesse, and without all fault, who think themselves clear enough, so
long as they can keep their own counsel. But our Savior Christ, Luke. 8.17.
shows the matter to be clean contrary. Nothing is secret that shall not be
evident; neither any thing hid, that shall not be known and come to light. The
which in Eccle. 12.14. is more manifest* God will bring every work unto
judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil. Which is not
set down to drive us to despair: although no doubt we are privy to many
heinous sins the which we would not for all the worlds good, should be
known abroad, and in every man's mouth: yea and such sin that are forcible
enough, to drive us to despair yet seeing at the judgment day, they shall be
revealed, be they never so secret, we are moved hereby, to call for mercy,
while God does grant us life; and to pray with the Prophet: O Lord deliver me
from my secret faults, from my secret sins, from my secret offenses. This
therefore that our secret hidden faults, shall come to light and judgment, is
a very profitable lesson for us, whereby we may learn to fear what we do,
although we may keep it close from men: as also that we may bethink our
selves of that which is past, and pray for forgiveness, and be more wary and
circumspect in time to come: so that it keeps us in the fear of God, so long
as we live: and let this be unto us, in stead of Auricular confession, in
remembrance whereof, in every time and place, we may fly and avoid all sin,
whether it be secret or open, whereof if we take not heed, we may incur the
danger of Gods wrath and heavy judgment. And at the day of judgment, shall
God bring all matters to light, as we may read, Reave. 20.12. And I saw the
dead both great and small stand before God: and the books were opened, (that
is their conscience) and another book was opened, which is the book of life.
And the dead were judged of those things which were written in the books,
according to their works.

It is not only God, Conscience
that shall bring our secret sins to light, but even our own consciences
shall bewray us, as the last place of Scripture alleged. Reave. 20.12. does
testify, where by the books that were opened, our own consciences are
understood, which shall be most ready to reveal all things. According to that
in the Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 2.15. Which show the effect of the law
written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their
thoughts accusing one another, or excusing, at that day, when God shall judge
the secrets of men by Jesus Christ. And full truly is it spoken, that a man's
conscience is in steed of a thousand witnesses. For when time shall serve,
there shall not need many accusers, or store of evidences to be given up
against us, seeing that our conscience which is our secret storehoue, shall
declare all, although it be never so much against our will; and that without
any co^straint or comparison. Whereof we have a sufficient and manifest trial,
even in this life.

For tell me, who is it among us, but must of force confess, and does
perceive so much in himself, that he cannot, no nor may not forget his sins
and misdeedes, for our conscience will not suffer it; and especially the more
notorious, bad and wicked, our deeds have been, the more fresh and fresh they
are, and will be in our remembrance. They will come into our minds, when we
little think of any such matter: and if we would never so feign, we cannot
put them away from us, and when they come into our minds and remembrance, they
bring dumps and sorrow enough. Which is a token and a most apparent sign and
proof, of the judgment day, unto the which time all our sins are reserved
to be judged. Before we commit any wicked or notorious deed, our conscience
within us does grudge against it, and would full feign bridle and restrain us
from it, if it were possible: but after we have done the deed, it is a torment
unto us, and that more grievous inwardly to our minds, then any whip or
scourge to the body can be, because the one is but for a time, the other
lasts long and shall endure. By which inward grief conceived, and sorrow of
conscience, many are driven to despair, and do think so bad of themselves,
for their wicked, unlawful, and ungodly deeds, that they are desirous to
revenge the matter upon themselves, and to be their own tormenters, before the
judgment day come. But if there be any that can say, their conscience is
clear, let the^ rejoice, and give God the praise and thanks, who has
prevented them with his grace, and preserved them from evil. And as a guilty
conscience is his own tormenter, so a good conscience is a continual feast.
He or she that is not charged, or rather ouercharged by their own conscience,
they have a continual joy within them: so if our own hearts condemn us, God
is greater then our hearts, and knows all things. And what misery trow we,
do the wicked of the world live in? For the Lord has said, There is no peace
unto the wicked; when in all their life, is fear and terror; carrying in their
breasts tormenting furies, to hold them day and night, in fear of endless
destruction. And what should those heavy dumps and inward fears signify, but
that there is a judgment, and that there is a hell, as well as a heaven. Their
hearts do droope, and their consciences are affrighted, and God by his secret
power does work this fear: and no doubt they feel that there is given to
them a spirit of bondage and fear, through which they tremble at their own
estate. They are in mount Sinay: where is the burning fire, blackness,
darkness, tempest, and the sound of a Trumpet, in consideration whereof, they
tremble and are inwardly tormented.

But thou will say, the wicked prosper, and rejoice in their days, they are
bound in no such bondage, nor fear no such fear. Thou can not tell, neither
do thou know, the heart of wicked man, howsoever he boast in his substance
and outward prosperity, and seems to have peace, peradventure there is a
bitter remembrance within him, of the judgment to come. He may delight and
sport himself, but in that laughing the heart is sorrowful, and that mirth
does end in heaviness. And albeit they strive maruellously, to cast out this
fear, yet if they could cast it out from them, as out of a cannon and
fieldpeece, yet would it evermore return unto them again, and vex their
heart, that so flies from it. If they would full feign sear up their
consciences, as with a hot and glowing Iron, yet sometime it will awake them,
as out of a sleep, so ^aht upon a sudden, they shall see a fearful sight of
death and judgment. And as we read, Romans 8.19. That the fervent desire of the
creature wayteth, when the sons of God shall be revealed: so also we may well
say, that the consciences of men, do groan as it were, under the burden of
sin, and earnestly desire to be di^burthened, and yet they shall not. For at
the judgment day, when all the creatures of the earth shall have their desire,
then shall the consciences of the wicked torment them a fresh, and that more
fiercely then ever they did before. For then shall the time be, that we shall
give account, and God shall bring all our secret sins to light, our
consciences bearing witness against us.

The devil shall accuse
And yet there remains an other accuser, beside God and our own conscience,
and that is the devil, who always sought our destruction, and brought us unto
it, by diverse temptations and sugered baytes. The devil shall be at hand to
accuse us, to call for judgment against us, who after our judgment is given,
and the sentence past, shall be ready most terribly to torment us, world without
end. And to bring this to pass, then shall he lay deeply to our charge, and
call for judgment against us, rejoicing and triumphing that he has so good a
cause before so righteous a Judge, earnestly craving that he will judge
uprightly, because justice and judgment is the preparation of his seat, and
his throne is established by it. I pray thee therefore, will this accuser say,
give sentence with me, and judge him to be mine, which while he lived would
be none of thine: mine he or she whosoever is by right, and they have
dese^erued to suffer torments with me: and seeing they have followed my ways
in their lives, now let them be partakers of my punishments. And shall not the
Judge of the world do right says Abraham, and minister righteous judgment?
yea doubtless, as the Apostle S. Jude verse. 14. has set it down. Behold the
Lord comes with thousands of Saints, to give judgment against all men, and
to rebuke all the ungodly among them, of all their wicked deeds which they have
ungodly committed, and of all their cruel speakings, which wicked sinners have
spoken against him.

When all matters are thus made manifest, all shall be judged, partly according
to the confession of their own guilty conscience, and partly by the word of
God, which they have hard, and which they have either neglected or despised:
even by the selfsame word shall they be judged. For by that shall they be made
without excuse, and the more culpable before Gods judgment seat. As we may
read in the Gospel of S. John, Word.
Chap. 12.48. He that refuses me, and receives not my words, has one that
judges him: the word that I have spoken, it shall judge him in the last day.
Where by the way we are taught, to have the more regard of the word of God, and
with reverence to hear it, with remembrance to keep it in our hearts, and
with care to express it in our lives and conversation, that it may be a help
to our salvation, whereas otherwise it is like to be our Judge to our
condemnation. Which is further declared by that which is set down; Acts
13.40.41. Beware therefore least that come upon you, which is spoken of in the
Prophets: Behold the despisers and wonder, and vanish away: For I work a work
in their days, a work which ye shall not believe, if a man would declare it
unto you. Which work by the interpretation of the learned, is the unspeakable
vengeance of God, upon those that contemn his word.

Thus then being in his presence, and after the general trial of our cause,
and after we have given our account, shall Jesus Christ, who is appointed to be
the Judge of quick and dead, proceed to Judgment; in seperating the just from
the unjust, the good from the bad, the wheat from the chafe, the sheep from
the goats. For in this world they are mingled together, the good with bad, and
God suffers his rain to fall, as well upon the unjust as the just; neither
is he hasty to separat them, the one from the other in this life: To the end
that he may show his patience toward the wicked, in giving them time and space
to repent; as also by their means, he exercises his Church and people, to
teach them patience, and to try whether they will stand steadfast unto him, or
fall away from him, with the rest of the world. And as he rebuked his
Disciples, because they desired that fire should come down from heaven to
consume the Samaritanes; so also he finds fault with them, that would have a
separation before the just time come. According as we read in the Epistle to
the Romans, Chap. 12.19. Vengeance is mine, I will repay it says the Lord. God
knows his just time: and his appointed time, is the end of the world. Which
matter is very effectually set down in a Parable, Mat. 13.12. For after the
good feed was sown, and the blade sproong up and brought forth fruit, then
appeared also tares. Then came the servants of the householder, and said unto
the master: Master, sowedst not thou good seed in thy field? from whence then
has it tares? And he said to them, the envious man has done this. Then the
servants said unto him; Will thou then, that we go and gather them up? But he
said nay; least while ye go about to gather the tares, ye pluck up also with
them the wheat. Let both grow together, until the harvest, and in time of
harvest, I will say to the reapers, gather ye first the tares, and bind them in
sheaues to burn them, but gather the wheat into my barn. The godly therefore
may comfort themselves with this, that in time to come, though not presently
and out of hand, there shall be a separation. The kingdom of heaven is likened
unto a draw net, cast into the sea, that gathers of all kinds of things:
which when it is full, men draw to land, and sit and gather the good into
vessels, and cast the bad away: So shall it be at the end of the world; the
good and the bad shall be parted: after that the trumpet has blown, and the
dead be raised. Again the seed sown, is the word of God preached: The field
wherein it is sown, is the world; the good seed are they which with an honest
heart, hear the word and keep it, and bring forth fruit, and these be the
children of the Kingdom: and the tares are the children of the wicked, and the
enemy that sows them, is the devil: and the harvest is the end of the
world, and the reapers be the Angels. As then the tares are gathered and brent
in the fire, so shall it be in the end of the world. The son of man shall
send forth his Angels, and they shall gather, and they shall separate. Math.
13.39. When the regions and parts of the earth are white, then is the time of
harvest. As we read in the Reave. 14.15. That the Angel cried with a loud voice
to him that sat on the cloud; Thrust in thy sickle and reap, for the time is
come to reap, for the harvest of the earth is ripe. As though he saw the time
when the number of Gods elect and chosen children, should be fulfilled, and
the sins of the ungodly and wicked, come to a full measure. And the Angel
thrust in his sharp sickle on the earth, and cut down the vines of the
vineyard of the earth, and cast them into the great Wine Press of the wrath of
God. So shall the bad be separated from the good, as a shepherd seperateth
the sheep from the goats: and the Judge, who is meant by the shepherd, shall
command the sheep to be set on his right hand, and the goats on the left,
the good and the bad. And then will he address himself to give sententence,
and to take order for the execution of his judgment.

And who shall stay or hinder this judgment? Sentence.
or who shall avoid the fierceness and furiousness of his wrath? Shall the
king be delivered by the multitude of an host? No, he shall be but as one man,
naked and unarmed, and without help; and he that shall come to judge him,
comes with infinite thousands of Angels. The strength of the strong man shall
then stand him in no stead, but in stead of strength, he shall be resolved
into fear and weakness. The wealth of the rich man shall not ransom him: for
riches shall not prevail in the day of wrath. Before so wise, so upright, such
a Judge, of that courage thou shall stand, whom neither fear shall daunt, nor
favor shall move, nor gold shall bribe and corrupt him, neither any entreaty or
prayer, then at that time shall persuade him. There shall be no respect of
persons, no falsifying of the cause, no colors nor excuse to blind him; no
learning, no men of law shall defend thee: no wit nor policy shall go beyond
this Judge: no speech nor flattery shall prevail with him: in a word, what
shall worldly helps do, when the world it self shall vanish away Nothing that
shall be devised shall turn his mind, nothing shall alter or reuerse his
judgment, it shall pass without denial, and without all reuocation. For then
shall he come to judge the world righteously, and to minister true judgment
unto the people.

And thus after that the sheep be separated from the goats, shall judgment
be executed, and sentence shall be given, in such sort and order, as we read it
set down, Mat. 25.34. Then shall the king, that is the Judge say to the^ on his
right hand; Come ye blessed of my father inherit ye the kingdom prepared for
you from the fou^datio^s the world But to the^ on his left hand, he shall say;
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
devil and his angels. And these shall go into everlasting pain, and the
righteous into life eternal. By reason of which fearful sentence, the wicked
shall have good cause to say to the mountains, and to the Rocks, Reave. 6.15.
Fall on us, and hide us from the presence of him that sits on the throne,
and from the wrath of the lamb. For the great day of his wrath is come, and
who can stand? They shall desire to hide themselves in dens, and among the
Rocks and mou^tains, but yet shall they not avoid his presence: they shall desire
death, and shall not find it; and seek after it, and yet shall death fly from
them. And as the devils (as we read in the Gospel) besought Christ that he
would not torment them before their time, so now shall the time of ye terrible
wrath of God be, when the devils, together with all the people, yt have either
forgotten, or not regarded, and highly displeased God, to ye utter hazard of
their souls, shall be cast into hell, and thrown into endless torments. And
therefore shall his coming be in flaming fire, to render vengeance against the
sinners of the earth: who not only shall be deprived from the presence of God,
and from the glory of his power, and from the company of the blessed Angels,
and redeemed souls; but that which is far worse, and more grievous and
lamentable, they shall be punished with everlasting perdition and destruction.
And the Angels that seperat the good from the bad, shall then gather out of his
kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity, and shall cast
them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. When
as the just and godly shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their father:
and when the accursed sort shall go down by a by way. a back way and a
black, with many a sigh and sob from God, from the Angel, from the Saints,
from joy, from glory, from bliss: with the fiends of Hell, to suppe in the
palace of darkness with the princes of horror, at the table of vengeance, in
the chair of calamity, with the crown of death upon their head, having
nothing before their eyes, but infinite torments prepared for them.

4. By the sentence pronounced and last judgment given, How this judgment
pertains to the godly and to the wicked.
an entrance is laid open unto me, to declare unto you, how this judgment
pertains to the wicked and unto the godly, which was the last thing, in this
treatise of the latter judgment, that I purposed to speak unto you of. Unto
the which, I have thought good to add an exhortation, that we may be prepared
against the time, having oil in our lamps, with the five wise virgins, that
waited for the coming of the bridegroom.

It is an article of our belief, and surely not without singular comfort and
commodity, that he that vouchsafed to take our nature upon him, and to be
clothed with our flesh; that suffered and endured the spiteful dealing of the
wicked, and an accursed death for our sakes: that he that rose from death to
bring us to life; that he that ascended into heaven to procure us an entrance
into his fathers Kingdom, and to make us fellow heirs with himself: that he
I say, would not forsake us, even in the most dreadful time and greatest
necessity, when we had deserved the heavy sentence of judgment, and woeful
condemnation. That he would set us free from all fear, and to have that
comfortable and most gracious regard of us, as though we had never offended
him, and to use this cheerful and joyful speech unto us, Come ye blessed. I
say this article is not without singular comfort, From thence shall be come to
judge both the quick and the dead. Which is not spoken to the wicked, to whom
nothing is comfortable, but only the vanities and pleasures of this
transitory life, which shall have an end, and a sudden end, and a final and
heavy recompense: but to the comfort of the godly, and to encourage them, which
have sighed and groaned under the burden of their sins, and who have fled
unto the throne of the grace of God, and holding out a godly course, have
through hope and patience, looked for this deliverance, which shall be at the
day of doom and judgment. Which coming of Christ unto judgment, shall be unto
them, as the appearing of the Angel was, after Christ his resurrection unto the
women, that is mild and gentle, Be not ye afraid, let not your hearts be
troubled. But unto the rest, his countenance shall be like lightning, and he
shall come in flaming fire, re^dring vengeance. So that they shall not be only
astonished, and become as dead men, as were the soldiers, that were set to keep
our Savior Christ in the grave: but furthermore, they shall be in horrible
fear and trembling. And happy were they, if they might be partakers of their
desire so far, as not to be, and to become as though they had never been borne.
But as the godly do pass to joys, so the other of force must live in eternal
torments. In consideration of which judgment, and torments to come, they lead
a life continually in fear, and tremble at the remembrance of their woeful
estate, which hereafter shall be.

The godly also have good cause to fear the selfsame fear of the last
judgment and eternal torments, in respect of their manifold sins and
offenses, whereby they have provoked the heavy wrath of God against them. But
that they might be raised up again and comforted, it pleased our Savior
Christ to receive the sentence of condemnation himself, and against his own
person (he being altogether innocent and guiltless) in the presence, and
from the mouth of an earthly Judge, Pontius Pilat by name; that we might be
acquitted and set free, at the terrible and fearful day of judgment, which
in the end of the world shall come upon all flesh; that we I say, might be
acquitted which are altogether full of sins, and altogether guilty.
According to that we read. To. 8.1. Now then there is no co^de^natio^ to them
that are in Christ Jesus. And what shall we then say? If God be on our side,
who ca^ be against us? who spared not his own son, but gave him for us al to
death: how shall he not with him give us all things also? who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that justifies, who shall
condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which is risen again, who
is also at the right hand of God, and makes requ^est also for us. So that I
may boldly say to them, who feel the inward comfort of Gods spirit within
their hearts, by the forgiveness of their sins through Christ his death:
Fear not this fear, nor tremble as the wicked do at this judgment. For
seeing ye are led by the good spirit of God, it is a token that ye are the
children of God, and that ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear
again; but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, which
is as much as to say father, even our father which art in heaven. And the same
spirit of God bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
God: and if we be children, we are also heirs, even the heirs of God, and
fellow heirs with Christ our elder brother. Wherefore there is no cause why
the godly should fear this judgment, as the wicked fear it. For as the one
sort shall at that day receive the judgment of condemnation, whereof they have
an inward feeling in this life, which makes them fear; so the other shall
receive the sentence of absolution, and shall be quit as it were by
proclamation, when Christ shall say, Come ye blessed. Which is the cause that
moves the holy Apostle S. John, 1. Ep. 4.17. to break forth into these words:
Herein is the love of God perfect toward us, that we should have boldness at
the day of judgment. Therefore the godly make their prayers, and wish that
this day might come shortly, Reave. 22. Come Lord Jesus come quickly. The wicked
would not have it come as yet: nay, if it were possible, they could wish it
should never be, and that it would never come to pass. Torment us not, say the
devils to Christ, before our time: Oh say the wicked, that this time might
never be, or that after death, we might vanish away and come to nothing. How
greatly available shall it be to the godly, when he that is their Savior,
and has shead his most precious blood for their redemption: he that is their
elder brother, and has purchased unto them this liberty, as to be called the
sons of God; when he that is their head, and has made the^ his members,
shall be their Judge to justify them, and to declare them righteous; and when at
that day he shall deliver them from all sin, fear of death, the devil,
hell, and all other miseries, wherewith other shall not only be overtaken but
overwhelmed. For who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods children? and
who shall procure their destruction, whose salvation God has wrought? But to
the great terror of the godless and wicked, who fear not God, nor love
either Christ or his Gospel, he shall be their Judge, to their fearful and
that most just destruction.

This also shall not only be an inward refreshing, among great miseries,
wrongs, and persecutions, while we live here on the earth, but also a great
joy in time to come, that al unrighteous judgment shall be called to account,
and that there shall be a general and most absolute reformation. For on earth,
for the most part, there is no true judgment, as though the judgment seat
were appointed for the defense and maintenance of them, not that are oppressed,
but that do oppress: not for the relief and succor of them that are wronged,
but to countenance and bolster them out, who as the Propher says, devise
mischief upon their beds, and practice it when they come abroad. Therefore
Solomon, Eccle. 5.7. gives instruction to the godly, that they be not moved,
and that they may be confirmed in patience, looking for a day of hea^ing. If in
a country says he, thou see the oppression of the poor, and the defrauding
of judgment and justice, be not astonished at the matter, and marvel not; for
he that is higher then the highest regards, and there be higher then they.
Whereby they are put in mind, both of a more upright Judge, then is no earth to
be seen; and of a more righteous judgment, by the virtue and force whereof,
they shall be both righted and relieved. Concerning which matter, Esdras has
spoken very well, 2. Esd. 7.32. The earth shall restore those that have slept
in her, and the most high shall appear upon the seat of judgment; and
miseries shall vanish away, and long suffering shall have an end: justice only
shall continue; the truth shall remain, and unrighteousness shall bear no more
rule. For the wicked thinks not on the judgment to come; nay the are
inwardly blinded, and that by Gods secret appointment, being so far given up
to their own lusts, that they care not what villainy or violence they put in
practice. But the godly are willed to have regard to this rightful day, when
true judgment shall only have the upper hand: again they must take heed, that
when they suffer, they suffer not as evil doers and malefactors; for then they
cannot look for redress an other day, and then this earthly judgment does
lawfully take place against them. But in all well doing, let every one commend
this soul to God, and commit his cause to that righteous Judge. This last
judgment therefore is for the benefit of the godly, that it may go well with
them, whose cause in this life could not be heard, nor any justice done them.
Again, that not only they may be righted in their cause, but also that they
may be delivered from that infamy, and from those spiteful and approbrious
speeches, which the world has given out against them: doing them more hurt
and wrong, and inward grief thereby, then by false judgment which has passed
against them, and whereby they have had their wills of them, and have
prevailed. And as the restoring of their righteous cause, and of their credit
and good name, which the world has labored to deprive them of, shall be an
occasion of Christ his coming to judgment, so also is the condemnation of the
wicked. For in this life their condemnation is begun, their conscience
witnessing against them, which then, and at the judgment day, shall fully and
perfectly be declared; which is not spoken, that the godly are clear from
judgment by their desert: for they are sinners and offenders, as others,
though not perhaps in the same degree. Who through repentance and a lively
faith, taking hold of the mercies of God, have no need to fear this judgment,
because God does not impute their sins unto them; and also their consciences
do in this sort declare them free: although in respect of themselves, they are
greatly guilty. So that Christ shall stand on their side, and their conscience
shall witness unto them, the exceeding love of God and his gracious meercies,
which shall be the breath of life unto the^, and an assurance of heavenly joys.
But the wicked because they have their consciences accusing and conde^ning
the^; the fierce countenance of the Judge to daunt them, and fearfully to
dismay them; the devil pleading against them, and calling for judgment to be
done upon the^: therefore are they to look for nothing else, but even the
severity of judgment, and the fearful sentence of condemnation: which shall
make them as it were to fall in pieces, through quaking and trembling, and to
be resolved to nothing: but that by Gods appointment they are reserved to
everlasting punishment, together with the devil and his angels. Who also I
mean the devil and his angels shall be condemned by the sentence of Gods severe
judgment, not only because they have highly offended god, but also because
they have been the authors of the ruin and downfall of all mankind, in
provoking and tempting them to all disobedience, sin and mischief. When as the
righteous shall live for ever, and shall receive a glorious kingdom, and a
bewtifull crown at the Lords hand. Christ shall come again the second time, as
it is John. 14.3. and shall receive us unto himself, that where he is, there may
we be also. And as it is said of our Savior Christ, to the manifestation of
his great glory, that they shall then see him, whom they have pierced through:
whose presence, shall be to the greater confusion of the wicked and his
enemies, who shall be constrained to behold him to be their judge, and to abide
his judgment, whom they have in this life so greatly despised, and so cruelly
handled: so also shall Christ make his members the godly, repentant, and
faithful partakers of this his glory, as he himself has promised. Mat. 19.28.
That they shall sit upon twelve thrones, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel:
not that they shall be Judges, but that they shall approve his judgment. A shadow
whereof, we have in these our earthly judgments, whereas you see the justices
and men of account, sit with the Judge, not that they have to do with
pronouncing sentence, or with the judgment, but that amongst the rest, it is a
token unto them, of honor and dignity, in the sight of the people. According
to the which meaning, we read, Luke 13.28. That there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth, when the ungodly shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:
(meaning thereby, they godly and faithful) and all the prophets in the
kingdom of God, and themselves thrust out at doors, and heaven gates shut
against them: being in that taking as the rich man was, spoken of in the
Gospel, who being in hell, beheld Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, himself crying
out but for one drop of cold water, to allay that burning and unquenchable
heat, which he found himself to be in, and could not have it. Then shall they
begin to say with themselves, when they shall see the righteous stand in great
boldness, so that they shall be vexed with horrible fear, and wonderfully
amazed, then shall they change their minds, and sigh with inward gitefe, and
say within themselves; Wisd. 5. These are they, whom sometime we had in
derision, (as indeed who are more derided and contemned in the world, then
they that be well disposed, and to their power live after the fear of God)
These are they, whom we had in derision, and in a parable of reproach. We
fools thought their lives madness, and their end without honor. But now how
is it, that they are counted among the children of God, and that their
provision is among the the Saints: and that they are so highly in Gods favor?
Therefore we have erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness
has not shined unto us: and the Sun of understanding rose not upon us. We
have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction, and we have
gone through dangerous ways, but we have not known the way of the Lord, nor
lived in his fear.

And now having heard the chiefest matters concerning the day of doom, and the
general and last day of judgment; that we may the better be prepared unto
it, let us hear what counsel is given us, in holy scriptures. And first, that
of the Apostle S. Paul, may take place, and seems greatly to tend to this
purpose. Which counsel we read, 1. Cor. 11.13. in this sort. If we would
judge our selves, we should not be judged: and this profit we should reap
thereby, that in time to come, we should not be condemned with the world. But
as a matter full of terror and pensiveness, we will not enter into so deep a
consideration, nor trouble our consciences so far; as to judge our selves, or
to fall into examination of our own ways. Whereas no doubt if we should so
do, it would fall out most happily on our side. For if upon due try all and
examination, without all partiallitie and affection, we should pronounce
sentence of judgment against our selves, according to our deserts, it would
be no otherwise, nor no better then condemnation. And yet not that
condemnation which woorketh despair, but such a condemnation whereby we might
be acquitted from everlasting condemnation. As the same Apostle writing to the
Corinthians, 2. Cor. 7.9. I now rejoice says he, not that ye were sorry, but
that ye sorrowed to repentance. For ye sorrowed godly, so that in nothing ye
were hurt by us. For godly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation, not to
be repented of; but the worldly sorrow, causes death. So verily, if we
would enter into judgment with our selves, it would procure a grief and
sorrow; but such a sorrow (especially if it came from a well meaning mind)
that should not be unto death. For by judging of our selves, we should take a
view of that death, and of those torments, which by reason of our sins we
deserve. And by this mean, we should be driven to repentance, and to seek
after God; to be reconciled unto God, and to return into his favor: that our
consciences might be disburthened of so great fear, which the severity of the
last judgment of god, might work within us, and that we might have boldness
and comfort in that day. But if we walk on securely and carelessly, and will not
once vouchsafe to enter into judgment with our selves, then may we a while be
merry in this world, but our mirth shall hereafter be turned into mourning. As
the wise man does put such careless persons in remembrance, that in their
iollitie, they might not too much forget themselves.

Rejoice says he, if so be, it seem good in thine eyes, but remember
therewithal, that thou shall be called to account and to judgment. Eccle.
11.9. and 12.14. And therefore he gives this counsel, Chap. 7.14. It is
better to go to the house of mourning, then to the house of feasting. Anger is
better then laughter; for by a sad look the heart is made the better. Better
it is to be in the house of mourning, and to weep for our sins, whereby we
are in danger of Gods judgment, then to be in the house of feasting and
forgetfulness, to enjoy some pleasure with the world for a small time, seeing
our life is but as a span long, and that here only, and in this life, is the
time of forgiveness, that we may be pardoned. Better it is to be angry with
our selves, then to please our selves in such sort: and a sad mind is a mean
and a great help to further our repentance. And how shall we obtain so godly a
purpose as to be set free from Gods heavy anger, which we have most justly
deserved, if we do not use the means which tend thereunto? Commonly where
judgment is, there follows condemnation: but hear how sweet and
comfortable it is, that in judging of our selves after this order, which I have
set down unto you, we shall find a way to be quit from everlasting
condemnation. Which we can no way escape, if in this life we do not judge our
selves and condemn our selves, by true repentance; calling for mercy and
forgiveness, that we may be received into Gods favor, and not in time to
come, to be condemned with the world. For in so judging of our selves, it is
not a means to cause us to despair, but to have a better hope, and an
enduring, and a rejoicing comfort: which comfort, shall never be taken from
us, if still we be mindful to call our selves to judgment, and have an eye
to our ways, that we do not offend God.

Wherefore let every one of us pray, that our hearts may be so prepared
against this judgment day, that we may be most willing to call our selves to
account, and to judgment. So that having thus humbled our selves, after a
while all fear shall pass away from us, and our hearts shall be filled with
joy; and whereas heretofore we have wished that this day should not be, now
we shall desire in heart to have it come to pass. And so much the more,
because our consciences shall assure us, (our sins being forgiven) that we
shall not be among the number of them, that shall be condemned, but among them
to whom it shall be said, Come ye blessed, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you. Which comfortable words, God grant we may then hear, to our everlasting
comfort.

Spend the time in an honest vocation.
An other remedy to avoid the severity of this punishment is, to seek to
please God in this world, in an honest vocation and trade of life. For as
idleness is the cause of many sins and vices, so godly painfulnesse is the
mother of all virtues: and which does breed a great comfort to our
consciences, against the time when we shall be called to our account, how we
have spent our time, and employed those good gifts, wherewith God has enabled
us.

Therefore in the Gospel, before the declaration of the latter day of
judgment, there is mention made of the talents that were bestowed, and they
that received them, were called to the reckoning, how they employed them: the
slothful being bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, and the
painful highly advanced. So that there is a way offered to avoid judgment,
and they that are therein negligent and careless, shall be guilty of
judgment: and shall fall into diverse mischiefs and sins, which shall make them
more faulty, and worthy of greater condemnation. The life of man somewhere is
compared to a warfare, because we ought to fight with it, and to resist all
evil tentations. So also is it well compared to merchandise, because we ought
always to be painful, according as God has appointed. The merchant
increases the wealth and honor of the co^mon-weale, and has wherwithal he may
be liberal unto others, and rich unto himself. In like sort, has God created
us to his honor, and that by that vocation, whereunto he has called us, we
should set forth his glory: and as we are borne to the benefit one of an other,
so in our vocation, ought we to do good to al, as much as lies in our power.

And by the performance of our duty, according to Gods commandment, we shall
be able to assure our selves of Gods favor and blessing toward us. Let us
redeem the time says the Apostle, for no dout we have spent much of our time
euilly. And so redeeming the time, that is granted us in honest, virtuous, and
godly affairs and exercises, we shall be kept from wicked rhoughts, idle words,
and shameful deeds, whereby we are made guilty of Gods wrath and heavy
judgment.

A wonder it is to see, that many to whom God has given excellent gifts, do
least use them, either to Geds glory, or the benefit of their country. Yea
rather they are given to abuse them, turning them to the dishonor of God, and
to the hurt of others, and to the shame of themselves. And I would to God, this
might come into their minds, that unto whom, and upon whom, God has bestowed
much, much also of them shall be required. Many I say, withdraw themselves from
doing good, and suppress the good gifts of GOD within them, and consume their
years in idleness, and vanity, as though it should never be said: Stand
forth, and give account of thy Stewardship. And as there is no kind of life,
more commendable in the sight of GOD and men, then that which does show forth
in practice, the goood graces that God has bestowed, to the comfort,
encouragement, and furtherance of others: so is there nothing more to be
dispraised, then to suffer Gods gifts to lie hid, and as it were to be buried
within us, and to wrap up that talent in a napkin, as the Gospel speaks,
which was put into our hands to use, to great commodity and advantage. The
more our time is idly spent, the more we have to answer: and the more that we
have spent the time in good endeavors, the less we have to fear. Nay when the
latter day of judgment shall come, happy shall they be, of what degree or
calling soever; happy shall that servant be, that is found to be so
painful. For unto him it shall be given, and from him that had a a talent
and used it not well, it shall be taken. And this shall be their glory and crown
of rejoicing, when it shall be said in the presence of all the people of the
world, then assembled; It is well done good servant and faithful, thou have
been faithful in a little, I will make thee ruler over much, enter in, into
thy masters joy. It is well done good servant and faithful. As I would the
contrary sentence might fear them, that are unmindful and careless, to spend
the time well, which shall be pronounced then, and at that day against them. Cast
that unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth; Cast that unprofitable servant into utter darkness.

Now most fitly to this warning, Watch.
to spend our time well, is this counsel given us to watch. For this judgment
shall come as a snare upon the whole earth, and shall come at unawares, to the
idle, wicked, and careless. And better watching there cannot be, then to spend
the time well. For so we shall be sure, that whether we sleep or wake, we
be the Lords: come death, come life, it cannot fall out amiss unto us. It is
said, that the last judgment shall come as a thief in the night: and also,
that the inhabitants of the world, shall for the most part, if not all of them,
be given to their pleasures, and all licenciousnesse, and looseness of living;
as it was in the days of Lot, when Sodom and Gomorra were burnt with fire and
brimstone from heaven: and as it was in the days of Noah, when the windows of
heaven were opened, and when the flood came and overwhelmed them all. That so
judgment may proceed most justly against them, that shall then be overtaken in
such filthy and ungodly kind of living. Well are we counfelled by the
Evangelists, and by the Apostles, if at leastwise we can suffer their counsel
to take deep root in our hearts. Now the end of all things says the Apostle
S. Peter, is at hand, be ye therefore sober and watching in prayer. Likewise
also his fellow Apostle, Let us not sleep as do other (where sleep is taken
for a careless and lewd life) but in all godly and virtuous exercises, let us
watch and be sober. For God says he, has not appointed us unto wrath, but
to obtain salvation, by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, which dyed for
us: that whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him. Take
heed therefore says the Evangelist S. Luke. 21.34. unto your selves, least at
any time, your hearts be oppressed, with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares
of this life, (which matters, the Apostle means by sleeping) and least that
day come on you at unawares. Watch and pray continually, that ye may be
counted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and that ye
may stand before the son of man. And because we know not when this judgment
shall be, neither as the Evangelist, Mar. 13. says, Do we know when the
master of the house will come, to call his servants to their reckoning,
whether it will be at even, or at midnight; at the cock-crowning, or in the
dawning; least if he come suddenly, he should find us sleeping and ill
occupied: therefore let us also harken to the counsel of our Savior Christ,
which does iumpe and agree with the former. Take heed says he, watch and
pray, for ye know not when the time is, or shall be, when the trumpet shall
blow, to call you to judgment. And these things which I say unto you, I say
unto all: Watch.

Not to be curious.
Because we know not when this general and last judgment shall be, we are
willed to watch, and to be in a readiness against that time: but not to be
curious to search Gods secrets. It is not for you, says our Savior Christ to
his Disciples, to know the times and the seasons, of this weighty matter which
God has kept in his own knowledge; and this is a misery of all miseries. But
the nature of man, as it is wholly desirous of news, so is it wholly given to
know those things which are hidden, and must be hidden: and yet are we so
presumptuous, as to creep and clime into Gods unsearchable counsel, although
it be denied us. Wherefore let us be content, to keep our selves within the
bounds of modesty, and not to be curious, and desirous to know more then the
Angels, who are altogether ignorant hereof; and much less shall we be able to
reach unto it: but the more we desire to know it, the further off shall we be
from it.

Some have been so bold, as to set down the time, and have fained heavenly
revelations, for the certainty and assurance of their speeches: yet their
vanity has been disprooued, when the time has been expired. How much
better shall it be for us, to lay aside all such vanity, which stands upon
uncertainty, and give our selves to such a careful meditation, that we may
not be unprepared, when we shall be called. Curious searching can nothing
profit us, but a wise and godly foresight and forecast, may stand us greatly in
stead; whereby we shall not be taken at unawares, as the ungodly are like to
be, who forecasting no danger, shall suddenly fall into destruction.

If we cannot sufficiently make answer unto the Judge, Prayer.
before whose judgment seat we shall stand, as doubtless we shall not be
able to answer one for a thousand, let us prepare our hearts by confession of
our sins, and by prayer for forgiveness of them, and let us say with the
Prophet; Enter not into judgment with us O Lord, for in thy sight shall no
flesh be justified. O Lord forgive us our sins, and let not thy wrathful
displeasure light upon us. Who would be unprepared against the time, that shall
come, and yet it is uncertain, to teach us to have the more care: seeing that
after death has arrested us, we shall be brought into the court of Gods
judgment, and then no other issue, and no other way, but either heaven or
hell. And who would not have a great regard to this matter? For the trial of
this judgment shall be seen in the anguish of death, and as it were at the last
gasp, when our consciences shall bring heavy things to our remembrance; and
the devil by his accusations shall put us in great fear, and drive us
well-neare to despair. And the nearer we begin to approach, to the tribunal
seat of Gods judgment, the greater shall be our fear, and more grievous
unto us, then the bitter pangs of death it self. Watch therefore and pray,
that thou may be prepared against this time, and against this judgment.

Wherefore the Lord in mercy, Conclusion.
grant us a godly and a peaceable passage, and that through his desert that
dyed for us, it would please him to mittigate and assuage all these terrorus
and fears: and let us with all speed, approach, to the throne of grace, to
find help in time of need. Whereas the wicked which are careless in their
lifetime, at the point of death, and at their last passage out of the world,
shall be so assaulted on every side, by their own conscience condemning them;
and the devil accusing them; and the horror of everlasting torments to come,
ouerwhelming them; that they shall be driven to cry out against that
judgment, that hangs over their heads, and wayteth for them at the door.

Such shall the day of judgment be to us, as is the last day of our life, and
look what the course of our life is, when we are called unto judgment, (for
after our death, immediately comes judgment) and so shall our judgment be.
Neither are we therefore to think, that our last deeds only shall come to
examination: but we ought to be prepared every moment, least death do take us
unprovided. For they which in the anguish of death, and in the vpshot of their
lives, shall be found unready, it is hardly to be thought, that their
resurrection shall be happy.

And therefore our Savior Christ has said: He that perseuereth, Persevere.
and holds out well to the end, he shall be saved. The which that we may do,
let us be prudent Noah's, to build the Arc of a good conscience, before the
flood of judgment do ouerflowe: provident Joseph's, to lay up the grain of
golinesse, in the barns of our hearts, before the dearth of mercy shall be: like
unto painful ants, to provide the food of the soul, before the winter of
justice do approach: tractable patients, to take the preparatiue of repentance,
before the pangs of death do come: wise virgins, to have ready the lamp of
faith, and the oil of virtue, before the Bridgrome Christ Jesus shut up the
doors: good stewards to provide for the tabernacle of heaven, before we loose
the office of this life. And let us not strain courtesy, to see who will go
first: but let us remember, that every one is to answer for himself; and God
has many messengers. For either sickness will come, or age will come: nay
death will come suddenly and speedily; and after a while we shall rise again,
and the Judge will come; who will neither be led by favor or request; nor
blinded and stopped from proceeding, with bribes and money; nor then will
allow of too late repentance; because then shall be the time of execution of
his justice. The day of judgment shall come, in the which, pure hearts shall
more prevail then fair words; and a good conscience, then great treasure. And
though some may think, that that day is far off: yet let them be sure, their
last time will come on apace, and we know not how soon that hour shall be,
and when God will appoint the time. Good it were, and most happy for us, if
every one of us were so affected and so prepared, as it is reported of a holy
father S. Jerome, whose words were these (even the declaration of his heart:
For out of the heart, and out of the abundance thereof, the mouth speaks)
Whether I eat sath he, or drink, or whatsoever I do, me think I hear this
sound always in my ears: Arise ye dead and come to judgment: Arise ye dead
and come to judgment.

Let us follow his example, confirmed by the Apostles counsel: Watch and pray
withal perseverance, that we may keep the garment of innocence, and labor
the work of God, in the day of this life.

Wherefore seeing that day shall be comfortable to the godly, which shall be
fearful to the wicked: let us endeavor before this judgment come, to be
among the godly and the righteous: and that our consciences may clear us so
well, that we may feel within our selves, a desire of this second coming of
Christ, rather then any tre^bling at the remembrance of it. The which let it
not be done by any fained flattery of our selves, but in sincerity and truth:
knowing this assuredly, that whosoever shall not be found written in the book
of life, shall be cast into the lake of fire: where their portion shall be nothing
else but weeping and gnashing of teeth. That we may not be caught in the
flaming fire, rendering vengeance: but that we may be placed in the heavenly
Jerusalem, and reckoned among the saints of God: that the day of judgment may
not be a day of eternal condemnation unto us, but even the perfection of our
salvation and redemption, and the beginning of all joy and comfort. While we
live here in this world, let us be always ready, by spending the time well.
For as we sow, so shall we reap. As the holy Apostle does put us in mind.
Gal. 6.7.8. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. For he that sows to the
flesh, by practicing the works of the flesh, shall therefore reap corruption:
or rather as if he had said, condemnation. But he that sows to the spirit, by
mortifying the deeds of the flesh, by the good motions of Gods spirit, shall
there hence reap everlasting life. Which sentence I pray God print in all our
hearts, and so graciously prepare us unto the day of judgment. Now the very
God of peace keep us in all well doing, and in all good works, to do his
will, working in us, that which is pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ,
to whom be praise for evermore. Amen.

2. Pet. 36. The world that then was, perished, ouerflowed with water.

2. Pet. 3.7. But the heavens and earth which are now, are kept by the same
word in store, and reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment, and of the
destruction of ungodly men. verse. 9. The Lord is not slack but patient, verse.
10. Howbeit the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the
which, the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt
with heat, and the earth with the works therein, shall be burnt up. Seeing
therefore that all these things must be dissolved, what manner persons ought ye
to be, in holy conversation and godliness: Looking for, and hasting unto the
coming of the day of God, by the which, the heavens being on fire, shall be
dissolved? But we look for new heavens, and a new earth, according to his
promise, wherein dwells righteousness. Wherefore beloved, since ye look for
such things, be diligent, that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot,
and blameless. And suppose, that the long suffering of our Lord, is salvation.

1. Pet. 4.7. Now the end of all things is at hand. Be ye therefore sober and
watching in prayer.

Luke 21.34. Take heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts be
oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life: and least
that day come on you at unawares. For as a snare shall it come on all them,
that dwell on the face of the whole earth. Watch therefore and pray
continually, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things that
shall come to pass, and that ye may stand before the Son of man.

Arise ye dead, and come to judgment.

The end of the first Treatise.
A TREATISE OF the Joys of Heaven.
1. Cor. 2.9. But as it is written. The things which eye has not seen,
neither ear has heard, neither came into man's heart, are; which God has
prepared for them that love him.


IF the holy Apostle S. Paul, being taken up into Paradise, heard such words
which cannot be spoken, and are not possible for man to utter, as he
testifies of himself, 2. Cor. 12.3. How should I take upon me, to show you
those Joys, which neither eye has scene, nor ear has heard, nor ever entered
into the heart of man.

Herein I know men's minds will run upon needless curiosities, which is no part
of my duty to satisfy: as also to show you mine own devices and
imaginations, were a thing to set forth my own folly. But so far forth as man's
reason may search, but there we must stay, for man's reason in spiritual
affairs, is altogether foolishness: nay rather so far forth as Gods word does
instruct us, we may be desirous to learn; as also to be content, although many
things be hid from us. Let it therefore be sufficient unto us, if we may have
but a taste of those Joys, and that it pleases God in a measure to grant us
some knowledge of them. Adam being in the earthly paradise, knew not all the
secrets and commodities thereof: and how shall we think to attain to the
full knowledge of heavenly Paradise? But seeing God does grant us the
understanding of these matters but after a sort, he does it for our good; that
seeing those joys that we can conceive, are surpassing excellent, and yet the
heavenly joys do surmount our co^ceits, by many degrees further, we might the
more be drawn in love with God himself, who has ordained such rare,
unspeakable, incomprehensible, and endless excellencies, for them that love
him, and live in his obedience. As also considering our own great
unworthiness, we might with the Prophet David break forth into the praises
of God, 14.4.3. and say; Lord what is man that thou have such respect unto him:
or the son of man, that thou so regardest him? Now as the Prophets do stir
up the peoples minds, to serve and honor God, by setting before them the
temporal blessings of this life; and thereby giving them an earnest of greater
blessings to come: so is the happy estate of everlasting life, described unto
us, by such earthly comparisons, as our natural capacity can conceive. That we
beholding in mind and contemplation, those wonderful Joys, which we can
conceive, we may grow into admiration of those heavenly and incredible
excellencies, which are altogether past our conceit, and far beyond our reach
and understanding. For as spiritual blessings do far surpass corporal
blessings, so heavenly joys do far exceed al earthly glory. Yea and these
stately secrets of an other life, are so much hidden from flesh and blood, that
all the learning of the wise men of the world, can come nothing near them.
That in this case they may truly say with the Astrologers of King
Nabuchadnezzer, Dan. 2. It is a rare thing, and there is no other that can
declare them but God himself, whose dwelling is not with flesh.

The Turkish Paradise.
But let us a little behold what flesh and blood has set down, concerning
these joys of heaven. In the Turkish Alcoran, that is a book which they use
in stead of a Bible, which Book Mahomet their Prophet left unto them, as the
learned have searched out: thus the joys of heaven are set down. Their
Prophet promises them, garments of silk, of all sorts of colors; bracelets
of gold and amber: parlours and banqueting houses upon floods and rivers;
vessels of gold and silver, Angels serving the^; bringing in gold, milk; in
silver, wine; lodgings furnished, cushens, pillows and down beds: most
bewtifull women to accompany them: gardens and orchards, with harbors,
fountains, springs, and all manner of pleasant fruits: rivers of milk, honey,
and spiced wine: all manner of sweet odours, perfumes, and fragrant sents: and
to be short, whatsoever the flesh shall desire to eat. Thus fleshly people,
have a fleshly religion, and a fleshly paradise to inhabit: and sensual men,
have imagined the joys the heaven, according to their sensual delights: and
yet to them that have any sense and reason, it cannot choose, but seem to end
all in a fable. These joys are seen in Princes courts: these joys are seen
in the Turkissh kingdom: but the joys of heaven are such, that no eye has
ever seen them.

But to leave these deceived Turks, to their false and fained joys, let us
consider what other have imagined, not much unlike to this. Which is expressed
by way of comparison, of a poor man's miserable estate, suddenly changed, into
most unlooked for happiness; whereby the joys of an other life may appear,
by the miseries of this life. As if a poor man that were out of his way,
wandering alone upon the mountains, in the midst of a dark and tempestuous
night, far from company, destitute of money, beaten with rain, terrified
with thunder, stiff with cold, wearied out with labor, almost famished with
hunger and thirst, and near brought unto despair, with multitude of miseries;
should upon the sudden, and in the twinkling of an eye, This change is sudden
and unlooked for.
be placed in a goodly large, and rich palace, furnished with all kind of
clear lights, warm fire, sweet smells, dainty meats, soft beds, pleasant
music, fine apparel, and honorable company, all prepared for him, and
atte^ding his coming, to serve him, to honor him, and to annoint and crown him
a king for ever. Behold yt miseries of this life, and the Joys of an other;
yet is this but an imagination, and the wit and wisdom of man, can device a
great deal more: and yet all are far inferior in degree, to those true
joys, that hereafter shall be found. See how the inue^tio^s of me^, blinded
with their natural conceits, run all upon outward comforts, and sensual
joys, all for the body, and as for the soul, that is not once remembered. Now
from the deuice^, inventions, and imaginations of men, all which come nothing
near, to the effect of this matter, let us now come to the Revelation of the
Scripture, and if any where this blessed estate be to be found, we shall read
it in the Book of the Revelation. Wherein although many things be hard and
intricate, and passing man's understanding, yet is this matter lively described
after a measure, and in a sort, under the name of the city of God, and the
heavenly Jerusalem. And strange it is, that those matters, that neither eye
has seen, nor ear has heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man, should
so much be opened and revealed, as there we may read. Reave. 21.

First the^ let us speak concerning the place, The description of the place
where these joys are to be found, under the name of Jerusalem.
then concerning the commodities thereto appertaining. The place is heavenly
Jerusalem: the city of God, the land of the elect: which the Apostle
describes after this sort. And I John says he, saw the holy city, new
Jerusalem, come down from God, out of heaven, prepared as a bride, trimmed for
her husband. Whereof the Prophet Isay speaks in the person of God, Chap.
65.17. For lo* I will create new heavens, and a new earth, and the former
shall not be remembered, nor come into mind. But be you glad and rejoice for
ever, in the things that I shall create. For I, behold, I will create
Jerusalem, as a rejoicing, and her people as a joy. And I will rejoice in
Jerusalem, and joy in my people, and the voice of weeping shall be no more
heard in her, nor the voice of crying. Likewise in the Epistle to the Heb.
12.22. we may behold the blessed estate of those that shall enjoy the life to
come. Ye are come to the mount Sion, and to the City of the living God, the
celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels: and to the
congregation of the first borne, which are written in heaven, and to God the
Judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect men, and to Jesus the
mediator of the new testament. And how this heavenly City, and new Jerusalem
is described, we may read it notably set down in the Reave. 21. Where by diverse
earthly similitudes, the glory thereof is shadowed: setting forth the same by
those things, which make earthly Cities famous and admirable: as the compass
and height of the walls, and stately building: the gorgious furniture thereof,
Jewels, and precious stones, pleasant rivers, and the tree of life in the midst
thereof: no night in the City. But let us behold the order and frame of this
city, as we may read in the aforesaid 21. chap. of the Revelation, whither
still I refer you. The matter declared is as follows, beginning at the 12.
verse of the Chapter. This City Jerusalem had a great wall, and a high, and
had twelve gates, The Church disperced through the wordld. Therefore the gates,
East, West, North, South.
and at the gates twelve Angels, and the names written, which are the twelve
Tribes of the children of Israel. On the East part, there were three gates: and
on the North side, three gates: and on the South side, three gates: and on the
West side, three gates. And the wall of the City had twelve foundations, and
in them, the names of the lambs, 12. Apostles. And the city lay four square,
and the length is as large as the breadth of it: and the length and the breadth
and the height of it, are equal. And the building of the wall of it, was of
Jasper: and the foundations of the wall of the City, were garnished with all
manner of precious stones. And the twelve gates were 12. pearls, and every gate
is of one pearl, and the street of the city is pure gold, as shining glass.
The names of the precious stones are further there recited.

You see in these words, how glorious this city of God is: the walls of
Jasper: the foundations, of precious stones: the gates of Pearls: the pauement
of pure gold. And if the walls, streets, and gates be such, how much more
joyful, comfortable, and incredible, are those things within the city? for
we must persuade our selves, that there are many hidden treasures, and matters
of far more account. Many things spoken of the outward place, but those
things which are within are unsearchable. According to that we read, Reave.
2.17. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the Manna that is hid,
and will give him a white stone, and in the stone, a new name written: which no
man knows, saving he that receives it. So secret and hidden are the things
within the city.

This Jerusalem is also called a kingdom, Luke 22.29. Therefore says Christ,
I appoint to you a kingdom, as my father has appointed unto me, that ye may
eat and drink at my table, in my kingdom, and sit on seats, and judge the
12. Tribes of Israel. And to comfort the godly in all wants, distresses, and
necessities in this world, Christ says unto them, Luke 12.31. Fear not little
flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom, and what
greater preferment can they look for? Yea, which is more, that which but one
can have in a Realm, here every one shall be as a king. Else how should it be
true, which we read, Reave. 3.11. Behold, I come shortly, hold that which thou
have, that no man take thy crown. And that which the Apostle speaks of
himself, 2. Tim. 4.7. I have fought a good fight, and have finished my course.
For henceforth is laid up for me, the crown of righteousness. And the 24.
Elders cast down their crowns before the throne of God. Reave. 4.10. Earthly
Princes want no worldly joys: and they that wear crowns in heaven, shall far
more abound in all happiness. Those ioies which are highest on earth, are of
least account in heaven, for all shall be crowned. According to the speech of
the Apostle. 2. Tim. 4. Henceforth is laid up for me the crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give, not to me
only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.

The place of Jerusalem, where God would be worshipped, which was in king
Salomons time, is now there, which we do call the holy land, which in times
past, was so famous, that all nations had recourse thither. And because of Gods
worship and service, and his manifold gracious blessings, powered upon that
place, therefore is the kingdom of heaven compared to this, and called the new
Jerusalem.

Likewise also Canaan, that plentiful land, which flowed with milk and honey,
which was the land that was promised to the people of Israel, is compared to
this heavenly habitation. But as many dyed short of it, and never entered into
the land of Canaan, some for murmuring, some for whoredom, some for idolatry,
some for one offense, some for an other: So although we hear of the joys of
heaven, and of this new City, and many would enter therein, yet for their
manifold offenses in this time of our life, in this time of our trial, many
are debarred from thence, and few there are, that are made the citizens of
heaven. Thus much for the place: now for the commodities.

The heavenly joys of the soul.
The commodities which belong to this heavenly Jerusalem, are first concerning
the soul, being the principal part of man. Secondarily, as touching the
body: for the body being joined unto the soul, shall be partaker of this
inestimable happiness: that both in body and in soul, the whole man may
receive his full perfection. And whereas it is the chiefest delight of a godly
mind, to serve GOD, especially in the Church, and in the congregation, in this
celestial Jerusalem, there shall be no Temple, no Church. And I saw no
Temple therein. How then? why the presence of GOD himself, shall be unto them
in stead of a Temple and Church. For the Lord God Almighty, and the lamb, are
the Temple of it.

Thus in the presence of God shall be all happiness, and at his right hand there
are pleasures for evermore. And as it is said, that the 24. Elders fell down
before him, that fate on the throne, and worshipped him that lives for
evermore, and cast their crowns before the throne, so shall the Saints in
heaven, continually sing forth Gods praises, Reave. 4.10. and 14.1. The hundred
forty and four thousand, which had the name of God in their foreheads, did
sing a new song before the throne, and no man could learn that song, but the
hundred forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. Reave. 7.
And there were that were clothed in long white garments, having palms in
their hands, which cried with a loud^ voice, saying: Salvation be ascribed to
him, that fitteth upon the seat of our God. And all the Angels stood in the
compass of the seat, which fell before the seat on their faces, and
worshipped God, saying Amen. Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks,
and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God for evermore. Now shall the
mind, heart, thought, and imagination, of those that are thus blessed, be
filled with all abundance of spiritual comfort. For now we see as it were,
through a glass, but then shall we see face to face, Reave. 22.4 Then shall
all error and darkness of ignorance, be utterly taken away: then shall we
not desire as now we do in this life, to see God, as the Prophet David
speaks. My soul thirsts after thee. Like (...) Heart desires the water
brooks, so (...) my soul after thee O God. My soul (...) athirst for God,
yea even for the living God: when shall I come to appear before the presence
of God? At that time shall all our desires be fully satisfied. And that which
was denied the Prophet Moses, to see the glory of God in this life, Exo. 33.20.
shall then be granted to every one, that there shall be placed.

The grief of mind, and sorrow of heart, shall then be utterly removed: no
weeping, no mourning, no lamentation to be heard, throghout that holy
mountain. Behold says the Prophet Esaias, in the person of God, Chap. 65.13. My
servants shall rejoice, and sing for joy of heart: I will joy in my people, and
the voice of weeping shall be no more heard, nor the voice of crying. Reave.
21.4. For God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no
sorrow, nor any more pain, for the first things are past: that is, those
things which we suffered in this life, shall not molest any more. Then shall
sorrow be never felt: complaint shall never be heard: matter of sadness shall
never be seen: neither shall evil success at any time be feared. No cause of
fear, no cause of grief, for that they shall possess thee O Lord, which art
the perfection of their felicity. In him shall we find all knowledge, all
wisdom, all beauty, all riches, all nobility, all goodness, all delight,
and whasoeuer besides, either deserves love and admiration, or works
pleasure and contentation. All the powers of the mind, shall be filled with
the sight and presence, and fruition of GOD: all the senses of our body shall
be satisfied. GOD shall be the universal felicity of all his Saints,
containing in himself all particular felicities, without end, number, or
measure. He shall be a glass to our eyes, music to our ears, honey to our
mouths, most sweet and pleasant balm to our smell: he shall be light to our
understanding, contentation to our will, continuation of eternity to our
memory. In him shall we enjoy all the variety of times, that delight us here,
and all the pleasures and joys that content us here. Finally, the soul shall
be restored to the Image of of God, in full measure: and be throghly adorned,
with all righteousness and holiness, all heavenly and spiritual graces.

The heavenly joys of the body.
The commodities and privileges of the body also, thus united to the soul,
shall be many. And first to begin with that which I find set down in the
Text. And the city has no need of the Sun or the Moon to shine in it: that
is, there shall be seen no earthly wants. For what a great temporal blessing,
is the benefit of the Sun, most comfortable to man and beast, which brings
forth the fruits of the earth, for man's food, and without the which, al
things seem to be sad and lowering. But the^ shall we not need this benefit,
for the presence of God shall be more comfortable, and the glory of God shall
supply the want of Sun and Moon.

All things then shall be ministered unto us so abundantly, that we shall not
so much as once think of any want, whether it be food, or clothing, or any
comfort of this life whatsoever. As the Prophet Isay does worthily express it,
Chap. 49.10. They shall not be hungry, neither shall they be thirsty, neither
shall the heat smite them, nor the Sun. For he that has compassion on them,
shall lead them even to the springs of waters. Here the body has need of rest,
but there shall be no night, neither shall there be any need of rest: here for
fear of thieves and enemies, our houses and the gates of our cities are shut,
but there the gates shall not be shut, but always open, because there shall be
no fear of enemies, no fear of future hurts and dangers. They that are
oppressed here, had need of defense, of help, and comfort, and hardly it is to
be had in this world. Eccles. 5.7. Psalm. 10. But there shall violence no more
be heard of. Esaias. 60.18. There shall every ones cause be heard, and every
wrong shall be righted. For there shall be no curse; for not only the course
of sin shall be cut off, but all ocasions of sin shall far be removed from
us, and we shall be thoroughly reconciled unto our God, and we shall enjoy
perfect peace. As no grief of mind, so no disease of body shall molest us,
neither shall there be any use or need of Physic. All infirmities shall be
turned into perfections, and all deformity shall have an end. That which is
now the mighty conqueror of mankind, that is death, shall then be trod under
foot: for death shall be swallowed up into victory, that with comfort we may
say: O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? 1. Cor. 15. And
that which our first parents could not taste of, nor so much as touch, that is
of the tree of life, (for though they tasted of the tree of knowledge of good
and evil, yet they were soon cast out of Paradise, least they should put
forth their hand, and take of the tree of life also, and eat and live for
ever, Gene. 3.22.) in this Jerusalem, even in the midst of the street of it,
shall be the tree of life, and a common passage unto it, Reave. 22.2. For this
corruptible, shall put on incorruption; and this mortal, shall put on
immortality. Thus shall there be mirth without sadness, health without
sickness, strength without weakness, life without labor, light without
darkness, felicity without abatement, al goodness without any evil. Where
youth flourishes, that never waxes old: life that knows no end, beauty
that never fades, love that never cools, health that never diminishes, joy
that never cease: there shall be pleasure without pain, and all happiness
without any change, and life without the reach and gunshot of death. The godly
in this life, are as wares, then shall they come to their own possession: now
they are in the skirmish, then shall they be crowned co^querors: now they are in
the te^pestuous sea, then shall they be in the quiet haven: now in the heat of
the day, the^ shall they be in the rest of the evening. Now in place they are
absent from Christ, though in affection they be present with him: then shall they
follow him, whither soever he goes: now they suffer trouble with Christ,
though their life be hid in Christ: but when Christ shall appear, they also
shall appear with him in glory, Col. 3.3. and then also shall they receive an
incorruptible crown of glory. According to that warrant which was pronounced
by a voice from heaven. Re. 14.13. Write, Blessed are the dead, which hereafter
die in the Lord. Even so says the spirit, for they rest from their labors, and
their works follow the^. And what joy will thy soul receive at that day, when
she shall be presented before so honorable and infirnite a multitude, before the
seat and majesty of the blessed Trinity, with recital and declaration of all
thy good works and travels, suffered for the love and service of God, when there
shall be laid down in that honorable co^sistory, all thy virtuous deeds, all
the laborys yt thou have taken in thy calling, all thy alms, all thy prayers,
all thy fasting, all thy innoce^cie of life, all thy patience in injuries all
thy constancy in adversities? And for their further comfort, and in a manner,
woonderful astonishment: as the wicked shall be vexed with horrible fear, when
they shall see the righteous stand in great blodnes, and they shall curse their
foolishnes and madness, for tormenting such unjustly, whom they thought
nothing worthy of honor, and yet now see them among the Saints of God. Wisd.
5. So shall the righteous in their place, go forth and look upon the carcasses
of the men, that have transgressed Gods will and holy law, Esaias. 66.24. And
looking back upon the dangers which they have passed, and wherein other men
are yet in hazard, their joy shall so much the more be increased. For they
shall evidently see, how infinite times they were to perish in this their
mortal life, if God had not held his special hand over them. They shall see
and behold the dangers wherein other men are plunged, and the death and
damnation whereinto many of their friends and acquaintance have fallen: the
eternal pains of hell incurred, by many that used to laugh and be merry with
them in the world: when as they shall shine as stars, which have converted many
unto God. Dan. 12. As contrariwise, they that by their evil example, and
manifold offenses, have been the cause of the downfall of many, shall suffer
intolerable grief.

In earth, no joy, pleasure, or comfort, so surpassing, so strange, and so
wonderful, but will breed a sacietie, and we shall after a while wax aweary
thereof, either desiring greater, or else longing after variety; as man's
nature is given to nothing so much, as to newness and novelty: but behold,
the joys of this new Jerusalem, shall be so diverse, so strange, and so
incredible, that we shall never be satisfied therewith. Which in the Reave. 21.2.
is expressed in these words: that the tree of life bare 12. manner of fruits,
and gave fruit every month. Twelve manner of fruits: there is the
diversities of their joys. Giving fruit every month: there is the continual
change. Still pleasing thy mind with variety, and rauishing thy senses with
infinite delight.

And this may make us more eager after those joys, because we shall not be
long without them. For the time of this life is but short: and the time of this
thy trial in this world, is but in a manner a moment. If our time here should
be a thousand years, what is it to one day in the world, which has no night:
which be it, that it has a sunrising, yet shall it never have a sunsetting:
an entrance and beginning there is into these joys, but the terms and date
thereof cannot be told. And as the torments of hell, whereof I have heretofore
spoken, are endless, so are the joys of heaven beyond all time: as they are
remediless, for out of hell there is no redemption, so are these joys without
all change and alteration: as they are co^fortlesse, so these exceed in all
manner of co^forts, al without reach, without number, without measure.

Thus have I showed you the joys of the kingdom of heaven, and yet have I not
showed them: for neither can I utter them, nor yet can you conceive them. But
that which I have already spoken is sufficient, though not for the worthiness of
the cause: or for the satisfying of our infinite desires: yet for edifying,
comfort, and instruction. And if I should lead you alo^g with my own devices
and imaginatio^s, it were but a matter to delude you: again neither be you
desirous to know more then is fit and convenient. For when we have spoken all,
or the learned in the world expressed al, yet al must fall short of this
mark, to utter the truth of those joys. For if no eye has ever seen them,
not heart of man can conceive them, how is it possible, I say not for me to
declare them, but for any tongue to utter them? But that which we do know, let
us gather to our good, and to our necessary instruction, leaving off to search,
where god will give no understanding. Hidden they are and unknown, that we
might the more earnestly desire them. For known things grow out of love. The
consideration of these joys already recited, may be sufficient to establish
us, and to confirm us, that there be not in any of us an unfaithful heart, to
depart way from the living God. And who would deprive himself of those joys, if
they were no other, but such as even our own minds might imagine, or our own
hearts conceive. In this case let us be content, there to make a stop, where
Gods word has set a full point. And blessed be God, who to encourage us in the
way of godliness, has granted us thus to behold these incredible joys,
though it be but in a shadow, and as it were under a veil.

Howbeit to show you all these joys, Application
and not to apply them, seems altogether without use, and without life. The
profitable instructions therefore that herehence may arise, are more then I can
utter: yet give me leave to recite some. And think not hardly, though I stay
you a little longer. For to hear the discourse of those things which pertain
to the kingdom of heaven, I my self which have searched more then any of you,
should in this respect forsake my diet, and forget to hear how the Clock
goes, or the day passes. Suppose we are now busy in the field at harvest,
unmindful to come even to our own houses, and surely this is a far better
harvest, and a better grain and commodity, then we can gather in. When it
pleased God I should devise this for your good, it was with comfort: and now I
utter it, it is with comfort: and therefore I doubt not, but that you that
hear it, hear it also with comfort.

To grow out of love with the world.
The first instruction for our use, may be this, to learn to grow out of love
with this present world, and with the transitory pleasures and profits of the
same: that so we may prepare our journey to our long home, and to our wished
home, and to those houses and heavenly habitations, whose leases shall never be
expired: to our heavenly Canaan, and to his new and most bewtifull Jerusalem.
Howbeit for the most part, we are so doted and bewitched with the glistring
joys of this present fading world, that no exhortation or persuasion shall
lightly prevail, to withdraw our minds from thence. Which thing may lively
be set forth to your view, by reciting of a Parable of the custom of a
certain Commonwealth, people, and Nation, which were wont to choose their
king from among the poorest sort of the people, to advance him to great honor,
wealth, and pleasures for a time. But after a while, when they were aweary of
him, their fashion was to rise against him, and to despoyle him of all his
felicity: yea the very clothes off his back, and so to banish him naked into
an Island of a far country, where bringing nothing with him, he should live in
great misery, and be put to great slavery for ever. Which practice, one King
at a certain time considering by good advice, (for all the other, though they
knew that fashion, yet through negligence, and pleasures of their present
felicity, cared not for it) took resolute order with himself, how to prevent
this misery. Which was by this means; he saved every day great sums of money
from his superfluities and idle expenses: and so secretly made over beforehand,
a great treasure into that Island, whereinto he was in danger daily to be sent.
And when the time came, that indeed they deposed him from his kingdom, and
turned him away naked, as they had done the other before: he went to that Island
with joy and confidence, where his treasure lay, and was received there with
exceeding great triumph, and placed presently in greater glory then ever he was
before.

This city, or commonwealth, is this present world, which aduanceth to
authority poor men; that is, such as come naked into this life, and upon the
sudden when they look best for it, does it pull them down again, and turns
them naked into their graves, and so sends them into an other world, where
bringing no treasure with them, they are like to find little favor, and rather
eternal misery. The wise King that preuenteth this calamity, is every one
which in this life, according to the counsel of Christ, does seek to lay up
treasure in heaven, against the day of their death, when they must be banished
hence naked, as all the Princes of that City were. At which time, if their
good deeds do follow them, as God promises, then shall they be happy men,
and placed in much more glory, then ever this world was able to give them. But
if they come without Oil in their Lamps, then is there nothing for them to
exspect but this, I know you not.

This sum of money, is not so much our good deeds, as the forgiveness of our
manifold offenses, the ame^dme^t of our sinful lives, yt godly and religious
care of the life to come. That which we are so greatly in love withal, the
Apostle gives us counsel to the quite contrary. Love not the world, neither the
things that are in the world, 1. Ioh. 2, he adds the reason: because the
world passes away. But he that fulfilleth the will of God, abides for ever.
Heaven is not in this life, and we must look to be weaned from this world, if
ever we will look to be in heaven.

The joys of heaven, and the desires of the world are quite contrary: for they
are too heavy a burden, and do hinder us from mounting up so high. And herein
for the most part, we may be resembled unto the Grasshopper, which is borne and
bred, lives and dies in the same ground.

The Grasshopper has wings and hoppeth up a little, but presently falls down
again. So many of us have often good motions unto godliness, and the life to
come: and again all is gone in a moment, and we return to our old affections
in this world, as though all our portion were only in this life.

Those fowls that feed grossly, never fly high: and they which feed their
hearts with things below, cannot have their affections in heaven. The joys of
heaven being so rare and excellent, and so surpassing wonderful, that they
might remove these heavy, lumpish, and grouelling desires of this world. The
careless, earthly, and worldly mind, has no sight, nor sense, nor feeling of
these joys. But as the ox is fatted in the pasture, and the byrd sings
sweetly, and feeds without fear: and suddenly the one is driven to the
slaughter, and the other is taken in the snare: So they that are given to the
world, are lulled a sleep in security, until the time that death strikes with
his dart, and endless destruction ouerwhelmeth the^. But where is that man or
woman, which can say with the Apostle, I desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ which is best of all? Phil. 1. For they that say such things,
declare plainly, that they seek a country, Heb. 11.14. Desiring a better
counttey then is to be found in this world; that is, a heavenly: and for them
has God prepared a City. Heb. 13.14. For here we have no continuing City, no
continuing habitation: let us therefore seek a better habitation to come,
which is of longer continuance, and free from all miseries.

The next fruit is, that the remembrance of these joys, These joys teach us
patience.
teaches us patience in affictions, in troubles and didistresses. For how
troublesome soever this life is here, yet there shall al troubles, miseries and
wrongs, be abundantly recompensed. And the Apostle speaks truly. Romans 8.18.
The afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the glory, which shall
be showed unto us. In the 126. Psalm. They that sow in tears says the
Prophet, shall reap in joy. And he that now goes on his way weeping, and
bears forth good seed, shall doubtless come again with joy, and bring his
sheaues with him. Woe be to you says Christ, that now laugh, for you shall
wail and weep. Luke. 6.25. And therefore happy shall they be in an other
world, who have in good causes suffered wrongs, committing themselves unto God.

This time of heavenly joys, Heavenly joys compared to a harvest.
is compared unto harvest, and what care does every one take to provide good
and choice seed, that their harvest may fall out accordingly. Thy seed, is
thy thoughts, thy words, thy deeds, and conversation. Therefore let me exhort
you as the Apostle does, Galla. 6.7. Be not deceived, GOD is not mocked; for
whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. For he that sows to his
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the spirit,
shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. Look how we sow, so shall we
reap: such as our seed is, such also shall be our harvest. The date of this
our life, is but short, but the remembrance of a life well led, shall be
comfortable for ever; and this shall for ever and ever be our endless
harvest: still gathering, still increasing, and never payring.

The last thing in the aforesaid 21. Holiness.
Chapter, of the Revelation is, that there shall enter into this heavenly
Jerusalem, no unclean thing. And as it is in the Prophecy of Zechariah, Chap.
14.21. In that day, there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the
Lord of Hosts.

The Canaanites were a lewd people, and for the same, were driven out of the
land: and if they were not worthy to dwell on earth, much less shall they be
worthy to be received in heaven. Dearly beloved says the Apostle S. Peter. 1.
Epist. 2.11. Abstain from fleshly lusts, bridle them, keep them under, for
they fight against the soul. Collo. 3.1. If ye be risen with Christ, seek
those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.
Set your affections on things which are above, and not on things which are on
earth: and mortify your immoderate affection, and evil concupiscence.
Remember this peremptory word: No unclean thing shall enter there. Mat. 5.8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Heb. 12.14. Follow
holiness, without the which, no man can see God.

And God grant us this wedding garment of holiness, that we may go in with
the bridegroom: for we know what befell to him that wanted it, Mat. 22.11. Let
us work our own salvation with fear and trembling: being desirous to receive
a kingdom, which cannot be shaken: let us pray for grace, whereby we may so
serve God, that we may please him with reverence and fear. And seeing we have
precious promises, 2. Cor. 7.1.2. Pet. 1.4. and that more surer, then the
heaven and the earth, Heb. 6.13.18. let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and grow up into full holiness in the fear
of God. For as they that thus do his will, shall enter in through the gates into
the City, and their right shall be in the tree of life: So without, shall be
dogs, and all unclean persons. Reu. 22.14. Let not my last exhortation be
forgotten among you. Enter in at the strait gate: for it is the wide gate and
broad way, that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat.
Because the gate is straight and the way narrow, that leads unto life, few
there be that find it.

To add unto these, Gods mercy, one of the greatest joys.
one of the greatest joys among all, is Gods mercy: whereof we have a sweet
taste in this life. For were it not for that, none of us all should enter into
that place, where thosse joys are to be found. For as our first parents, by
Gods just anger according to their due desert, were cast out of Paradise, and
an Angel set with a sword drawn, to keep the way, that no flesh should return
thither; so the only gate to let us in again, is Gods mercy. Whereof, as the
godly and most righteous that are, stand in great need, so let none of us all,
either abuse Gods mercy, or presume of his mercy, least we miss of the same.
This mercy, is called the rich mercy of God, for no treasure is comparable unto
it: and as it passes all understanding, so cannot the deepest reach of man,
conceive any part of the depth or height thereof: the compass, the largeness,
the wideness and breadth of it is such, that it cannot be measured: and
therefore may it well be called, as it is indeed, both infinite, and
incomprehensible. And because no tongue of man can speak it, let Angels bring
the message. As we read Luke 2.14. Glory be to God in the high heavens, and
peace in earth, and toward men good will. The Lord of his goodness, direct
our steps to this throne of mercy, and cloth us with the garment of mercy.
And the Lord this day set his print and seal upon you.

Thus I persuade my self, I have now won some, and whom I have won, the
Lord in mercy keep: and so I discharge my self. For we are all by our own
disposition, like unto tottering walls, still ready to slide, still ready to
fall. And therefore I would I might say, as it was said to him that suffered
with Christ; This day shall ye be in Paradise. And if this day your hatts be
thoroughly converted, surely this day you are in Paradise. It was no comfort to
Adam and Eve, to remember they were in Paradise, seeing themselves now cast out.
And if we be once placed in Paradise, then let us look to our standing, that
we fall not. For as we are mortal, so are we mutable: and nothing so familiar
with us, as to change. Deu. 5.29. Unconstant God knows we are, the Lord make
us steadfast. And the remembrance of these heavenly joys, which we have now
heard, let that make us steadfast even to the end.

Deo soli omnis laus fit and gloria
Et gratia in seculum.
FINIS.

