A PITHTHY NOTE to Papists all and some that joy in Feltons Martyrdom.
Desiring them to read this and to judge and not in spite at simple truth to
grudge.

Set forth by one that knew his life, and was with him at the hour of his
death, which was the viii. of August. Anno. 1570, at the West end of Paul's
Church over against the Bishops gate, where he set up the Bull.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON at the long Shop adioining unto Saint Mildreds Church in
the Pultrie the xxiii. of August by John Allde.

LOng leuitie abusde, at length does lend deserved hire:
when mercy over moved with vice gins ki^dle Justice ire.
As now may well discerned be Unto the smart of such
As heaped by unfruitful hope and pity proou'd to much.
But so it is when follyes flud makes wisdom low at eb:
And where for hearty love such do wind up foul Treasons web.
As Felton fond has surely felt for fault of treason hye:
So all will vouch whose hearts (with God and Prince) are not awrie
And as ye Nortons twain did taste of late for like offense:
Whom Iustcie paid by portion just a righteous recompense.
Yet Felton past, when wilful deed of his was well descryed:
For why? he never blushe for shame, nor much the same denied,
The Bull bewitch this caluish brain And Pius his deer god:
Made him to bold for his behoof, to taste of such a rod.
He durst presume good Catholic, t'erect up foreign power:
And Subjects faithful hearts now well by flattery to devour.
As though at once all England would have shru^k at Pius curse:
And that the Child at strangers beck would leave his painful nurse.
Theblessing of the Pope he thought would sure have take such place:
That English men with Cap and knee would straight the same embrace.
What meant be else to fix the Bull on Bishops Pallaice gate:
But that he thought by somes return to mend his own estate.
But English men God have ye praise wish rather his curse still:
Then with his blessing to receive both soul and bodies il.
Gods curse does light where he does bless as Malachi does rel:
As Felton and and the rest have tried which served the Pope full well.
But Papists say they are most blessed for dying in his cause:
Because he will their souls redeem from hell and Satan's claws.
And Felton chee fly they commend For his coragious mind:
Which unto Pope and holy Church didshew him self so kind,
Wherefore a blessed Martyr they do rightly him confess:
Which mooues me most for virtues sake to prove him nothing less.
For every kind of death does not deserve a Martyrs name:
But many sundry deaths do bring the dyers endless shame
All Thieves and Murderers that dye all Fellons cast by law:
All Traitors and all Heretics which GOD nor man do (...).
Are not by death of theirs in count of Martyrs which do dye:
Though Papists brag that he is one but give them leave to lie.
The death does not the Martyr make but sure the righteous cause: When Tirants
force, the righteous heart to violate Gods laws.
When Infidelles deprave the truth and Christians it maintain:
In giving of their bloods for it, they win the Martyrs gain.
Ignatius wan the noble crown of martirdom y tho
Cassianus and Laurence they did win the same also.
Saint Stephen and Saint Peter they wan Martyrs gain by right:
So did Maturus and the rest that suffered for the light.
whose lives by truth were sou^dly led whose ends did show no less:
whose ma^ers were upright, whose faith did perfect love express.
But Feltons life did show in fine he did no Martyrs fact:
For exitus acta probat the exit tries the act.
A roisting shifting Prodigal so he his time did spend:
Which sought of every one to have that able was to lend.
The Psalmist in his Psalms does pai^t out Felton very plain:
The wicked man borowes (says he) and pays not again.
Of modesty in manners he was seen to be full scant:
And of Religious mind no dout he had a daily want,
As for deuoutnes in his days yea, after his own sort:
He never moild his sprites with prayer, his heart was set on sport.
A Papists heart he had not sure for Papists are devout:
Although their zele do knowledge lack in that they go about.
For he ne zele ne knowledge had, but drove to spend the time:
He past not with what kind of men nor of what kind of crime.
So he by flattering might obtain to live by others sweat:
Ne Lands he had ne hands did seek to get the bread he eat.
But here and there with Thrasoes brood the simple to deride:
But cheef a scoffer of Gods word as often he was tried.
A Pleseme^ right which served ye time though fed with Romish hope:
And now behold the Saint he served has blessed him with a Rope.
A fool bewitched he was of some who watched the falling Skies.
And looked for Larkes but purpose mist his flesh must feed the Flies.
An irreligious Traitor was this Felton, trust me true:
A fit resembler in our time of Eleazar the Jew.
Companion with Ichocanan nay Schimions equal mate:
Which sought Iherusalem to spoils by their discentious bate.
And as for any sign that was in him of godly fear:
His most licencious life did show his heart came never there.
That his very end whereas he saw it would not be:
But that he must as Traitor rank go scale the Gallow tree.
Then fear of death began prick his flesh which wicked men does touch:
When their sleause, their co^scse^ce pricks and burdens them comuch.
As Cain and Judas over fraid with Gods eternal ire:
Yet some will say that Felton did Gods mercy then desire.
In deed in Popish sort he showed him self then to telent:
But who can say he showed such faith as made him right repent?
Of wandering faith he showed so^e taffe as Papists use to hold:
That Christ their savior is in part, but faith was not (be bold)
In him that made him then to say Christ is my savior:
Ne that he trusted only sure salvation by his power.
Ne called he back his sclandero' words, he spoke against Gods truth:
Ne did gainsay his traitorous blast before both age and youth.
Which he had spoke against our Queen before in Judgment hall:
But only for this fact here done, her mercy I do call.
(said he) for this offense of mine here done that she forgive:
But from the rest against her power and Throne he did not meene.
He had before denide her grace our lawful Queen to be:
And of her Supreme power (he said) she ought not have it she.
Oh traitorous heart, oh Martyr vile, such Martyrs now a days:
Would fain be made to Mortar thin to stop the hollow ways.
He never once relented this not once before his death:
But as malicious Traitor, he on Gallows gave his breath.
Whereas he said in midst Guilde Hall, before the Judgment seat:
That they might well his body take, but more they could not get.
For why? his soul he had commit unto his hollow hope:
To Jesus Christ? to him think ye? nay to his dad the Pope.
Oh Traitor bold to Christ God oh proud blasphemou^ ^ung:
That ever popish ignorance should rest in old or yung.
when Christ has shed his dearest blood when Christ's heart was rent:
When Christ has paid the price for us his Father to content.
Shall we once dare alas to say, when other name is none:
But Jesus Christ to save our souls by his deer death alone?
That Pius Pope our souls can save which can not save him self:
But yield his power to mortal death oh blinded Romish elf.
Was Paul for us once crucified? was Mary, Mark or John?
No, no, it was our Jesus Christ to whom be praise alone.
But Papists make of him least count, which took the greatest pain:
And all their trust is still in them that give the smallest gain.
If Felton had those words denied, though even at the last end:
I would have said and many mo, he had been Christ's friend.
His death was nothing Martyr like, he died a Papist blind:
An Enemy to Christ and Queen, a Monster out of kinds.
A new stert by Herostratus, to get himself a name:
Though that his deed and end shall be ay to his endless shame.
For as the fame of Godly men shall ouerliue the grave:
So Fame does yield to wicked men the right that they should have.
So long as Guilde Hall does remain, there shall remain like wise:
A memory of Feltons facts, before all peoples eyes.
John Felton Traitor which denied the Queen our supreme head:
John Felton Traitor which advanced the Pope his Bull of lead.
John Felton Traitor which did seek a foreign power to place:
Against our Queen Elizabeth, high Treason to her grace.
John Felton Traitor which so raild against the Judges grave:
John Felton Traitor, which denied his Judgment for to have.
Yea if that men do want to read the Livelles that are writ:
The pauing stones will witness bear his Treason to requit.
His Blasphemies. his raging spite, his brainles wilful talk,
Dame Fame with Echo shall refound in every cave to walk.
John Felton Papist here was raignd, that Traitorous rebelmeer:
That faithles man, that Hypocrite received Judgment here.
So long as Newgate stands in sight, his memory shall last:
And witness bear what blasphemies out of his mouth he cast.
When learned men and Preachers grave be stowd their learned pain:
To win his Soul to Jesus Christ how he did them disdain.
How obstinatly he did rest in his unskillful mind:
That none could him persuade to see he was so wilful blind.
That shall the Stones of Newgate tell, if Papists would deny:
And how he did advance the Pope which made him sense so hye.
Refusing council of Gods Book none could persuade his heart:
In any point to trust the truth whereby he should convert.
The stayers there in morn can tell how Preachers did exhort:
That he would change his foolish mind (...) Christ the strongest Fort.
But still he said, I am right well persuaded sure I:
And as I am persuaded, so I mean in that to dye.
In Christ if his persuasion were no dout there was no shame:
But that unto the Church of GOD he might have cold the same.
For (Cord creditur) says Paul with heart to think makes just:
But (Ore fit) Confession is salvation sure to trust.
But his Confession there did tell, what faith was in his mind:
Anto his savior Jesus Christ truly but small to find
But to the Pope that horned beast his heart was fixed full sure:
And it to leave while life did last none could him once procure.
The Draile whereon he lay fast bound in midst old baily street:
Shall tell that Preachers words for ay which then there did him meet.
Oh Felton (said he) now relent now does approach the time:
When it wild to late for qree for too repent thy crime.
Now yield to Christ, trust in his blood ^e^y the Pope and all:
Defy his Bulls and Pardons vile, which have begun thy thrall.
GOD yet does offer thee his grace, Christ Jesus spredes his arms:
Yet to receive thy soul to grace and to prevent thy harms.
But he as graceles heeld on still in latin Prayers tho:
And gave no ear unto the man that did exhort him so.
At last the Preacher said again, oh Felton yet forsake
Thine errors blind, by Jesus Christ a perfect end to make.
As though (said he) most stoutly then, ye would the People blase:
And make them think I died not well this said he without maze.
So may they think (quod he again) except thou do repent:
Because against both Christ and Queen, thy Treason thou have bent.
Oh judge me not (quod Felton then) I Will judge (quod the other) thee:
For Christ has taught me by the frutees always to judge the Tree.
While thou art here I judge thy deed but GOD shall judge thee ay:
And if thou do not now repent, Hell fire shall be thy pay.
All this benignity of GOD, this Felton did despise:
And gave no ear til as he saw the Gallows with his eyes.
Which Gallow treein Paul's Church yard shall tell the endless shame:
Of Felton there for Treason hanged to peril of his name.
And eke the Ground shall witness bear how Conscience his was urged:
By Preachers, which by truth did hope his heart then to have purged.
But GOD (I think) had the^ shut up the bowelles of his grace:
To him, whose stubburn heart before refusde truth to embrace.
For Miserere on his knees all trembling he did say:
But softly to him self that few could hear what he did pray.
Belike he thought as Papists do, the Latin to excel:
And so he thought his prayer said therein to be full well.
For he did never once desire Gods people to assist
Him in his prayers he then made, but did even as he list.
Much les then to repent his fall and turn to GOD by grace:
On Ladder he began spoke alowd, maintaining of his case.
And purged his heart of Treason quite that ever it was clear:
Which when the worthy Sherif heard, he said that all might hear.
Felton, a more malicious feat of Treason never was:
Then thou a Traitor ra^k have wrought and falsely brought to pass.
Then was he hanged up a while, in what a case GOD knows:
Such as have judgment in the act, I leave the end to those.
Cut down he was and lived again, but after spoke not much:
For why? the Executioner served him but a Traitors tuch.
So no good sign in life or death of any Christian mind:
But as he lived (I say) he died a paruerst Papist blind.
But this may make the Papists joy, that they had one so stout:
For their Relgion and their love, to pass such torments out:
But let them stay, Religion was no cause why he so died:
But sure because the English laws a Traitor rank him fried.
He would have made Religion his plea when he was brought
To his examination, but that preuaild him naught.
For his Religion hey had not to dele with him at all:
But for high Treason he was judged, in midst of the GuiIde Hall.
And when he saw Religious scuse could not his torment stay:
But that he must by force of Law to Traitors death obey.
Such Sprite him led as in him was most wilfully to stand
Against Gods truth which now is preached throughout this Britain La^d.
So, so mtime GOD for sinners sakes does give the Devil power:
To hold men's minds in error fast, that he should them devour.
And Satan is so false him self that he can soon infect
All such with vile Hypocrisy whom GOD will so reject.
But sure I think if Treason has not brought him to his death:
Religion never was so deer to him as t'end his breath.
For never yet was heard or seen for such Religions sake:
That any only have been brought to dye at Block or Stake.
Full many of that godles sect have been attainted sure:
And have for Treason suffered smarts as Law does right procure.
And have in judgment and in death as destitute of grace:
Continewd as this Felton did which makes me rue his case.
For sure his bodies death I naught at all did then lament:
But death of body and of souls does make my heart relent.
Beware ye papists all take heed I read you yet beware:
And cast all Popery from your hearts take heed of hellish rore.
And if you will not, yet be true to GOD and our good Queen:
I pray to GOD that all your ends as Feltons may be seen.
And GOD save Queen Elizabeth from Papists will and power:
That sharpened sword by Gospelles force may all her Foes devour.
Amen.
quod T. Knel. Iuni.


