THE WORKS OF BENJAMIN JONSON.

The second Volume.

CONTAINING THESE PLAYS, Viz. 1 Bartholomew Fair. 2 The Staple of News. 3
The Devil is an Ass.


LONDON, Printed for RICHARD MEIGHEN, 1640.

BARTHOLMEW FAIR: A COMEDY, ACTED IN THE YEAR, 1614.

By the Lady ELIZABETH'S SERVANTS.

And then dedicated to King JAMES, of most Blessed Memory;

By the Author, BENJAMIN JOHNSON.

Si foret in terris, rideret Democritus: nam
Spectaret populum ludis attentius ipsis,
Vt sibi praebentem, mimo spectacula plura.
Scriptores autem narrare putaret assello
Fabellam surdo.
Hor. lib. 2. Epist. 1.

LONDON, Printed by I. B. for ROBERT ALLOT, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Bear, in Paul's Churchyard. 1631.

THE PROLOGVE TO THE KINGS MAJESTY.
YOur Majesty is welcome to a Fair;
Such place, such men, such language and such ware,
You must expect: with these, the zealous noise
Of your lands Faction, scandalized at toys,
As Babies, Hobby-horses, Puppet-playes,
And such like rage, whereof the petulant ways
Your self have known, and have bin vexed with long.
These for your sport, without particular wrong,
Or just complaint of any private man,
(Who of himself, or shall think well or can)
The Maker does present: and hopes, to night
To give you for a Fayring, true delight.
THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY.
JOHN LITTLE WIT. A Proctor. WIN LITTLE-WIT. His wife. DAME PVRECRAFT. Her
mother and a widow. ZEAL-OF-THE-LAND BVSY. Her Suitor, a Banbury man.
WIN-WIFE. His Riuail, a Gentleman. QVARLOVS. His companion, a Gamester.
BARTHOLMEW COKES. An Esquire of Harrow. HVMPHREY WASPE. His man. ADAM OVER-DOO.
A Justice of Peace. DAME OVER DO. His wife. GRACE WELBORNE. His Ward. LANT.
LEATHERHEAD. A Hobbi-horse seller. IOANE TRASH. A Ginger-bread woman. EZECHIEL
EDGWORTH. A Cutpurse. NIGHTINGALE. A Ballad-singer. VRSLA. A Pigge-woman.
MOON-CALFE. Her Tapster. JORDAN KNOCK-HVM. A Horse-courser, and ranger of
Turnbull. VAL. CVTTING. A Roarer. CAPTAIN WHIT. A Bawd. PVNQVE ALICE.
Mistress of the Game. TROVBLE-ALL. A Madman. WHTCHMEN, three. COSTARD. monger.
MOVSETRAP. man. CLOTHIER. WRESTLER. PORTERS. DOORE-KEEPERS. PVPPETS.
THE INDVCTION. ON THE STAGE.
STAGE-KEEPER.
GEntlemen, have a little patience, they are even upon coming, instantly. He
that should begin the Play, Master Littlewit, the Proctor, has a stitch new
fallen in his black silk stocking; 'twill be drawn up ere you can tell twenty.
He plays one of the Arches, that dwells about the Hospital, and he has a very
pretty part. But for the whole Play, will you ha'the truth on it? (I am looking,
lest the Poet hear me, or his man, Master Broom, behind the Arras) it is like
to be a very conceited scuruy one, in plain English. When It comes to the
Fair, once: you were even as good go to Virginia, for any thing there is of
Smith-field. He has not hit the humors, he does not know 'hem; he has not
conuers'd with the Bartholmew-birds, as they say; he has never a Sword, and
Buckler man in his Fair, nor a little Dauy, to take toll of the Bawds there, as
in my time, nor a Kind-heart, if any bodies teeth should chance to ache in his
Play. Nor a Iugler with a wel-educated Ape to come over the chain, for the
King of England, and back again for the Prince, and sit still on his arse for
the Pope, and the King of Spain! None o'these fine sights! Nor has he the
Canuas-cut 'ithe night, for a Hobby-horse-man to creep into his she-neighbour,
and take his leap there! Nothing! No, and some writer (that I know) had had but
the penning of this matter, he would have made you such a Iig-ajogge in the
boothes, you should have thought an earthquake had been in the Fair! But these
Master- Poets, they will have their own absurd courses; they will be informed
of nothing! He has (sirreuerence) kicked me three, or four times about the
Tyring-house, I thank him, for but offering to putt in, with my experience.
I Will be judged by you, Gentlemen, now, but for one conceit of mine! would not a
fine Pumpe upon the Stage have done well, for a property now? and a Punque set
under upon her head, with her Stern upward, and have been sous'd by my wity
young masters of the Innes of Court? what think you of this for a show, now? he
will not hear of this! I am an Ass! I! and yet I kept the Stage in Master
Tarletons time, I thank my stars. Ho! and that man had lived to have played
in Bartholmew Fair, you should have seen him have come in, and have been
coozened in the Cloath-quarter, so finely! And Adams, the Rogue, ha leaped and
caper'd upon him, and have dealt his vermin about, as though they had cost him
nothing. And then a substantial watch to have stolen in upon 'hem, and taken
'hem away, with mistaking words, as the fashion is, in the Stage-practice.

Booke-holder: Scriuener. To him.
Book. How now? what rare discourse are you fallen upon? ha? have you found any
familiars here, that you are so free? what is the business?


Sta. Nothing, but the understanding Gentlemen of the ground here, asked my
judgment.


Book. Your judgment, Rascal? for what? sweeping the Stage? or gathering up
the broken Apples for the bears within? Away Rogue, it is come to a fine degree
in these spectacles when such a youth as you pretend to a judgment. And yet
he may, in the most of this matter in faith: For the Author has writ it just to
his Meridian, and the Scale of the grounded Judgments here, his Play-fellowes
in wit. Gentlemen; not for want of a Prologue, but by way of a new one, I am
sent out to you here, with a Scriuener, and certain Articles drawn out in
have between our Author, and you; which if you please to hear, and as they
appear reasonable, to approve of; the Play will follow presently. Read,
Scribe, gi'me the Counterpaine.


Scr. ARTICLES of Agreement, indented, between the Spectators or Hearers, at
the Hope on the Bankeside, in the County of Surrey on the one party; And the
Author of Bartholmew Fair in the said place, and County on the other party:
the one and thirtieth day of October. 1614. and in the twelfth year of the
Reign of our Soueragine Lord, JAMES by the grace of God King of England,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the faith. And of Scotland the seven and
fortieth.

INPRIMIS, It is couenanted and agreed, by and between the parties above said,
and the said Spectators, and Hearers, as well the curious and envious, as the
favoring and judicious, as also the grounded Judgments and understandings,
do for themselves severally Covenant, and agree to remain in the places,
their money or friends have put them in, with patience, for the space of two
hours and an half, and somewhat more. In which time the Author promises to
present them by us, with a new sufficient Play called BARTHOLMEW FAIR, merry,
and as full of noise, as sport: made to delight all, and to offend none.
Provided they have either, the wit or the honesty to think well of themselves.

It is further agreed that every person here, have his or their free will of
censure, to like or dislike at their own charge, the Author having now
departed with his right: It shall be lawful for any man to judge his six
pen'orth his twelve pen'orth, so to hiseighteene pence, 2. shillings, half a
crown, to the value of his place: Provided always his place get not above his
wit. And if he pay for half a dozen, he may censure for all them too, so that
he will undertake that they shall be silent. He shall put in for Censures
here, as they do for lots at the lottery: mary if he drop but six pence at
the door, and will censure a crowns worth, it is thought there is no
conscience, or justice in that.

It is also agreed, that every man here, exercise his own Judgment, and not
censure by Contagion, or upon trust, from another voice, or face, that sits by
him, be he never so first, in the Commission of Wit: As also, that he be fixed
and settled in his censure, that what he approues, or not approues to day, he
will do the same to morrow, and if to morrow, the next day, and so the next
week (if need be:) and not to be brought about by any that sits on the Bench
with him, though they indite, and arraigne Plays daily. He that will swear,
Ieronimo, or Andronicus are the best plays, yet, shall pass vnexcepted at,
here, as a man whose Judgment shows it is constant, and has stood still,
these five and twenty, or thirty years. Though it be an Ignorance, it is a
virtuous and stayed ignorance; and next to truth, a confirmed error does well;
such a one the Author knows where to find him.

It is further couenanted, concluded and agreed, that how great soever the
expectation be, no person here, is to expect more then he knows, or better
ware then a Fair will afford: neither to look back to the sword and
buckler-age of Smithfield, but content himself with the present. In stead of a
little Dauy, to take toll of the Bawds, the Author does promise a strutting
Horse-courser, with a leerc-Drunkard, two or three to attend him, in as good
Equipage as you would wish. And then for Kinde-heart, the Tooth-drawer, a fine
oily Pig-woman with her Tapster, to bid you welcome, and a consort of Roarers
for music. A wise Justice of Peace meditant, in stead of a Iugler, with an
Ape. A civil Cutpurse searchant. A sweet Singer of new Ballads allurant: and
as fresh an Hypocrite, as ever was broached rampant. If there be never a
Seruant-monster in the Fair; who can help it? he fayes; nor a nest of
Antiques? He is loath to make Nature afraid in his Plays, like those that be
get Tales, Tempests, and such like Drolleries, to mix his head with other men's
heels; let the concupisence of Iigges and Dances, reign as strong as it will
amongst you: yet if the Puppets will please any body, they shall be entreated
to come in.

In consideration of which, it is finally agreed, by the foresaid hearers, and
spectators, that they neither in themselves conceal, nor suffer by them to be
concealed any State-decipherer, or politic Picklocke of the Scene, so
solemnly ridiculous, as to search out, who was meant by the Ginger-bread-woman,
who by the Hobby-horse-man, who by the Costard-monger, nay, who by their Wares.
Or that will pretend to affirm (on his own inspired ignorance) what Mirror of
Magistrates is meant by the Justice, what great Lady by the Pigge-woman, what
concealed Statesman, by the Seller of Mouse-trappes, and so of the rest. But
that such person, or persons so found, be left discovered to the mercy of the
Author, as a forfeiture to the Stage, and your laughter, aforesaid. As also,
such as shall so desperately, or ambitiously, play the fool by his place
aforesaid, to challenge the Author of scurrilitie, because the language some
where savors of Smithfield, the Booth, and the Pig-broath, or of
profaneness, because a Madman cries, God quit you, or bless you. In
witness whereof, as you have preposterously put to your Seals already (which
is your money) you will now add the other part of suffrage, your hands, The
Play shall presently begin. And though the Fair be not kept in the same
Region, that some here, perhaps, would have it, yet think, that therein the
Author has observed a special Decorum, the place being as durty as
Smithfield, and as stinking every whit.

Howsoever, he prays you to believe, his Ware is still the same, else you
will make him justly suspect that he that is so loath to look on a Baby, or an
Hobbyhorse, here, would be glad to take up a Commodity of them, at any
laughter, or loss, in another place.


BARTHOLMEVV FAIR.
ACT. I.
SCENE. I.
LITTLE-VVIT. To him VVIN.
A Pretty conceit, and worth the finding! I have such luck to spinne out these
fine things still, and like a Silke-worme, out of my self. Here Is Master
Bartholomew Cokes, of Harrow o'th hill, in the County of Middlesex, Esquire,
takes forth his License, to marry Mistress Grace Wel-borne of the said place
and County: and when does he take it forth? to day! the four and twentieth
of August! Bartholmew day! Bartholmew upon Bartholmew! there is the device! who
would have marked such a leap-frogge chance now? A very less then Ames-ace, on
two Dice! well, go thy ways John Little-wit, Proctor John Little-wit: One
of the pretty wits of Paul's, the Little wit of London (so thou art called) and
some thing beside. When a quirk, or a quiblin does escape thee, and thou do
not watch, and apprehend it, and bring it before the Constable of conceit:
(there now, I speak quib too) let'hem carry thee out of the Archdeacons Court,
into his Kitchen, and make a Jack of thee, in stead of a John. (There I am
again la!) Win, Good morrow, Win. I marry Win! Now you look finely indeed,
Win! this Cap does convince! youl'd not have worn it, VVin, nor have had it
velvet, but a rough country Beauer, with a copper-band, like the Conney-skinne
woman of Budge-row? Sweet VVin, let me kiss it! And. her fine high shoes,
like the Spanish Lady! Good VVin, go a little I would feign see thee pace,
pretty VVin! By this fine Cap, I could never leave kissing on it.


WIN. Come, indeed la, you are such a fool, still!


LITT. No, but half a one, Win, you are the the other half: man and wife make
one fool, Win. (Good!) Is there the Proctor, or Doctor indeed, in the Diocese,
that ever had the fortune to win him such a Win! (There I am again!) I do
feel conceits coming upon me, more then I am able to turn tongue too. A
pox of these pretenders, to wit! your Three Cranes, Miter, and Mermaid men!
Not a corn of true salt, nor a grain of right mustard amongst them all. They
may stand for places or so, again the next Wit fall, and pay two pence in a
quart more for their Canary, then other men. But gi' me the man, can start up
a Justice of Wit out of six-shillings bear, and give the law to all the Poets,
and Poet-suckers in Town, because they are the Players Gossips? 'Slid, other
men have wives as fine as the Players, and as well dressed. Come hither, Win.


ACT. I.
SCENE. IJ.
WIN-WIFE. LITTLE WIT. WIN.
Why, how now Master Little-wit! measuring of lips? or molding of kisses?
which is it?


LITT. Troth I am a little taken with my Wins dressing here! Do not fine
Master Win-wife? How do you apprehend, Sir? She would not have worn this
habit. I challenge all Cheapside, to show such another: Morefields, Pimlico
path, or the Exchange, in a summer evening, with a Lace to boot as this has.
Dear Win, let Master Win-wife kiss you. He comes a wooing to our mother Win,
and may be our father perhaps, Win. There Is no harm in him, Win.


WIN-W. None in the earth, Master Little-wit.


LITT. ^enuy no man, my delicates, Sir.


WIN-W. Alas, you have the garden where they grow still! A wife here with a
Strawbery-breath, Chery-lips, Apricot-cheekes, and a soft velvet head, like a
Melicotton.


LITT. Good y' faith! now dullness upon me, that I had not that before him,
that I should not light on it, as well as he! Velvet head!


WIN-W. But my taste, Master Little-wit, tends to fruict of a later kind: the
sober Matron, your wives mother.


LITT. I! we know you are a Suitor, Sir. Win, and I both, wish you well: by
this Licencc here, would you had her, that your two names were as fast in it,
as here are a couple. Win would feign have a fine young father in law, with a
fether: that her mother might hood it, and chain it, with Mistress Ouer-doo.
But, you do not take the right course, Master Win-wife.


WIN-W. No? Master Litle-wit, why?


LIT. You are not mad enough.


WIN-W. How? Is madness a right course?


LIT. I say nothing, but I wink upon Win. You have a friend, one (Master-
Quarlous) comes here some times?


WIN-W. Why? he makes no love to her, does he?


LIT. Not a token worth that ever I saw, I assure you, But --


WIN-W. What?


LIT. He is the more Mad-cap of the two. You do not apprehend me.


WIN. You have a hot coal in your mouth, now, you cannot hold.


LIT. Let me out with it, dear Win.


WIN. I Will tell him my self.


LIT. Do, and take all the thanks, and much do good thy pretty heart, Win.


WIN. Sir, my mother has had her natiuity-water cast lately by the Cunning men
in Cow-lane, and they have told her her fortune, and do ensure her, shce shall
never have happy hour; unless she marry within this sen'night, and when it
is, it must be a Madde-man, they say.


LIT. I, but it must be a Gentleman Madman.


WIN. Yes, so the the other man of More-fields says.


WIN-W. But does she believe 'hem?


LIT. Yes, and has been at Bedlem twice since, every day, to enquire if any
Gentleman be there, or to come there, mad!


WIN-W. Why, this is a confederacy, a mere piece of practice upon her, by
these Impostors?


LIT. I tell her so; or else say I, that they mean some young-Madcap-Gentleman
(for the devil can equivocate, as well as a Shopkeeper) and therefore would I
advise you, to be a little madder, then Master Quarlous, hereafter.


WIN. Where is she? stirring yet?


LIT. Stirring! Yes, and studying an old Elder, come from Banbury, a Suitor
that puts in here at meale-tyde, to praise the painful brethren, or pray
that the sweet singers may be restored; Says a grace as long as his breath
lasts him! Some time the spirit is so strong with him, it gets quite out of
him, and then my mother, or Win, are feign to fetch it again with Malmesey, or
Aqua coelestis.


WIN. Yes indeed, we have such a tedious life with him for his diet, and his
clothes too, he breaks his buttons, and cracks seames at every saying he sobs
out.


IOH. He cannot abide my Vocation, he says.


WIN. No, he told my mother, a Proctor was a claw of the Beast, and that she
had little less then committed abomination in marrying me so as she has done.


IOH. Every line (he says) that a Proctor writes, when it comes to be read in
the Bishops Court, is a long black hair, kemb'd out of the tail of
Antichrist.


WIN-W. When came this Proselyte?


IOH. Some three days since.


ACT. I.
SCENE. IIJ.
QVARLOVS, JOHN, WIN, WIN-VVIFE.
O Sir, have you taken soil, here? it is well, a man may reach you, after 3.
hours running, yet! what an unmerciful companion art thou, to quit thy
lodging, at such ungentle manly hours? None but a scatterd couey of Fiddlers,
or one of these Rag-rakers in dung-hills, or some Marrow-bone man at most,
would have been up, when thou were gone abroad, by all description. I pray
thee what aylest thou, thou can not sleep? have thou Thorns i'thy eyelids,
or Thistles i'thy bed.


WIN-W. I cannot tell: It seems you had neither in your feet; that took this
pain to find me.


QVAR. No, and I had, all the Lime-hounds of the City should have drawn after
you, by the sent rather, Mr, John Little-wit! God save you, Sir. 'Twas a hot
night with some of us, last night, John: shall we pluck a hair of the same
Wolf, to day, Proctor John?


IOH. Do you remember Master Quarlous, what we discourst on, last night?


QVAR. Not I, John: nothing that I either discourse or do, at those times I
forfeit all to forgetfulness.


IOH. No? not concerning Win, look you: there she is, and dressed as I told you
she should be: hark you Sir, had you forgot?


QVAR. By this head, I Will beware how I keep you company, John, when I drunk,
and you have this dangerous memory! that is certain.


IOH. Why Sir?


QVAR. Why? we were all a little stained last night, sprinkled with a cup or
two, and I agreed with Proctor John here, to come and do somewhat with Win (I
know not what 'twas) to day; and he puts me in mind on it, now; he says he
was coming to fetch me: before Truth, if you have that fearful quality,
John, to remember, when you are sober, John, what you promise drunk, John; I
shall take heed of you, John. For this once, I am content to wink at you,
where is your wife? come hither Win. He kisseth her.


WIN. Why, John! do you see this, John? look you! help me, John.


IOH. O Win, fie, what do you mean, Win! Be womanly, Win; make an outcry to
your mother, Win? Master Quarlous is an honest Gentleman, and our worshipful
good friend, Win: and he is Master Winwifes friends, too: And Master Win-wife
comes a Suitor to your mother Win; as I told you before, Win, and may perhaps,
be our Father, Win, they will do you no harm, Win, they are both our worshipful
good friends. Master Quarlous! you must know Mr. Quarlous, Win; you must not
quarrel with Master Quarlous, VVin.


QVAR. No, we will kiss again and fall in.


IOH. Yes, do good Win.


WIN. In Faith you are a fool, John.


IOH. A Foole-Iohn she calls me, do you mark that, Gentlemen? pretty
littlewit of velvet! a fool- John!


QVAR. She may call you an Apple- John, if you use this.


WIN-W. Pray thee forbear, for my respect somewhat.


QVAR. Hoy-day! how respective you are become of the sudden! I fear this family
will turn you reformed too, pray you come about again. Because she is in
possibility to be your daughter in law, and may ask you blessing hereafter,
when she courts it to Totnam to eat cream. Well, I will forbear, Sir, but
in faith, would thou would leave thy exercise of widdow-hunting once! this
drawing after an old reverend Smock by the splay-foote: There cannot be an
ancient Tripe or Trillibub in the Town, but thou art straight nosing it, and
it is a fine occupation thou wilt confine thy self to, when thou have got one;
scrubbing a piece of Buffe, as if thou had the perpetuity of Pannyer-alley to
stink in; or perhaps, worse, currying a carcass, that thou have bound thy
self to alive. I Will besworne, some of them, (that thou art, or have been a
Suitor to) are so old, as no chaste or married pleasure can ever become 'hem:
the honest Instrument of procreation, has (forty years since) left to belong
to 'hem, thou must visit 'hem, as thou would do a Tomb, with a Torch, or
three hand-fulls of Lincke, flaming hot, and so thou may hap to make 'hem
feel thee, and after, come to inherit according to thy inches. A sweet course
for a man to waste the brand of life for, to be still raking himself a fortune
in an old woman's embers; we shall have thee after thou have been but a month
married to one of 'hem, look like the quartane ague, and the black Iaundise
met in a face, and walk as if thou had borrowed legs of a Spinner, and
voice of a Cricket. I would endure to hear fifteen Sermons aweeke for her,
and such course, and loud one's, as some of 'hem must be; I would even desire of
Fate, I might dwell in a drum, and take in my sustenance, with an old broken
Tobacco-pipe and a Straw. Do thou ever think to bring thine ears or
stomach, to the patience of a dry grace, as long as thy Tablecloth? and
droan'd out by thy son, here, (that might be thy father;) till all the meat
o'thy board has forgot, it was that day in the Kitchen? Or to brook the noise
made, in a question of Predestination, by the good laborers and painful
eaters, assembled together, put to 'hem by the Matron, your Spouse; who
moderates with a cup of wine, ever and anon, and a Sentence out of Knoxe
between? or the perpetual spitting, before, and after a sober drawn
exhortation of six hours, whose better part was the hune-hahum? Or to hear
prayers groaned out, over thy iron-chests, as if they were charms to break
'hem? And all this for the hope of two Apostle-spoones, to suffer! and a cup to
eat a cawdle in! For that will be thy legacy. She Will have conuey'd her state,
safe enough from thee, an' she be a right widow.


WIN. Alas, I am quite off that sent now.


QVAR. How so?


WIN W. Put off by a Brother of Banbury, one, that, they say, is come here,
and gouernes all, already.


QVAR. What do you call him? I knew diverse of those Banburians when I was in
Oxford.


WIN-W. Master Little-wit can tell us.


IOH. Sir! good VVin, go in, and if Master Bartholmew Cokes- his man come for
the License: (the little old fellow) let him speak with me; what say you,
Gentlemen?


WIN-W. What call you the Reverend Elder? you told me of? your Banbury-man.


IOH. Rabbi Busy, Sir, he is more then an Elder, he is a Prophet, Sir.


QVAR. O, I know him! a Baker, is he not?


IOH. He was a Baker, Sir, but he does dream now, and see visions, he has
given over his Trade.


QVAR. I remember that too: out of a scruple he took, that (in spic'd
conscience) those Cakes he made, were served to Bridales, May-poles,
Morrisses, and such profane feasts and meetings; his Christen-name is
Zeale-of-the-land.


IOH. Yes, Sir, Zeale-of-the-land Busye.


WIN-W. How, what a name's there!


IOH. O, they have all such names, Sir; he was Witness, for Win, here, (they
will not be called Godfathers) and named her VVinne-the-fight, you thought her
name had been VVinnifred, did you not?


WIN-W. I did indeed.


IOH. He would have thought himself a stark Reprobate, if it had.


QVAR. I, for there was a Blew-starch-woman of the name, at the same time.
Anotable hypocritical vermin it is; I know him. One that stands upon his
face, more then his faith, at all times; Ever in seditious motion, and
reproving for vainglory: of a most lunatique conscience, and spleen, and
affects the violence of Singularity in all he does: (He has undone a Grocer
here, in New-gate-market, that broke with him, trusted him with Currants, as
errant a Zeal as he, that is by the way: by his profession, he will ever be
in the state of Innocence, though; and childhood; derides all Antiquity; defies
any other Learning, then Inspiration; and what discretion soever, years should
afford him, it is all prevented in his Original ignorance; have not to do with
him: for he is a fellow of a most arrogant, and invincible dullness, I assure
you; who is this?


ACT. I.
SCEENE. IIIJ.
WASPE. JOHN. WIN-WIFE. QVARLOVS.
BY your leave, Gentlemen, with all my heart to you: and god you good morrow;
Mr Little-wit, my business is to you. Is this License ready?


IOH. Here, I have it for you, in my hand, Master Humphrey.


WAS. That Is well, nay, never open, or read it to me, it is labor in vain, you
know. I am no Clearke, I scorn to be saved by my book, in faith I Will hang
first; fold it up o'your word and gi' it me; what must you have for it?


IOH. We'll talk of that anon, Master Humphrey.


WAS. Now, or not at all, good Mr Proctor, I am for no anon's, I assure you.


IOH. Sweet VVin, bid Solomon send me the little black box within, in my
study.


WAS. I, quickly, good Mistress, I pray you: for I have both eggs of the Spit,
and iron in the fire, say, what you must have, good Mr Little-wit.


IOH. Why, you know the price, Mr Numps.


WAS. I know? I know nothing. I, what tell you me of knowing? (now I am in
have) Sir, I do not know, and I will not know, and I scorn to know, and yet,
(now I think on it) I will, and do know, as well as another; you must have a
Mark for your thing here, and eight pence for the box; I could have saved two
pence i'that, an' I had bought it my self, but here is fourteen shillings
for you. Good Lord! how long your little wife stays! pray God, Solomon, your
Clerk, be not looking in the wrong box, Mr Proctor.


IOH. Good in faith! no, I warrant you, Solomon is wiser then so, Sir.


WAS. Fie, fie, fie, by your leave Master Little-wit, this is scuruy, idle,
foolish and abominable, with all my heart; I do not like it.


WIN-W. Do you hear? Jack Little-wit, what business does thy pretty head
think, this fellow may have, that he keeps such a coil with?


QVAR. More then buying of ginger-bread in the Cloister, here, (for that we
allow him) or a guilt pouch in the Fair?


IOH. Master Quarlous, do not mistake him: he is his Masters both-hands, I
assure you.


QVAR. What? to pull on his boots, a mornings, or his stockings, does he?


IOH. Sir, if you have a mind to mock him, mock him softly, and look
to'ther way: for if he apprehend you flout him, once, he will fly at you
presently. A terrible testie old fellow, and his name is Waspe too.


QVAR. Pretty Insect! make much on him.


WAS. A plague of this box, and the pox too, and on him that made it, and her
that went for it, and all that should have sought it, sent it, or brought it! do
you see, Sir?


IOH. Nay, good Mr Waspe.


WAS. Good Master Hornet, turd in your teeth, hold you your tongue; do not I
know you? your father was a Pothecary, and sold glisters, more then he gave, I
wusse: and turd in your little wives teeth too (here she come) 'twill make her
spit as fine as she is, for all her veluet-custerd on her head, Sir.


IOH. O! be civil Master Numpes.


WAS. Why, say I have a humor not to be civil; how then? who shall compel
me? you?


IOH. Here is the box, now.


WAS. Why a pox o'your box, once again: let your little wife stale in it, and
she will. Sir, I would have you to understand, and these Gentlemen too, if they
please --


WIN-W. With all our hearts. Sir.


WAS. That I have a charge. Gentlemen.


IOH. They do apprehend, Sir.


WAS. Pardon me, Sir, neither they nor you, can apprehend me, yet. (you are an
Ass) I have a young Master, he is now upon his making and marring; the whole
care of his well doing, is now mine. His foolish scholemasters have done
nothing, but run up and down the Country with him, to beg puddings, and
cake-bread, of his tennants, and almost spoiled him, he has learned nothing,
but to sing catches, and repeat rattle bladder rattle, and O, Madge. I dare not
let him walk alone, for fear of learning of vise tunes, which he will sing
at supper, and in the sermon-times! if he meet but a Carman in the street,
and I find him not talk to keep him off on him, he will whistle him, and
all his tunes over, at night in his sleep! he has a head full of Bees! I am
feign now (for this little time I am absent) to leave him in charge with a
Gentlewoman; It Is true, she is A Justice of Peace his wife, and a Gentlewoman
of the hood, and his natural sister: But what may happen, under a woman's
government, there is the doubt. Gentlemen, you do not know him: he is another
manner of piece then you think for! but nineteen year old, and yet he is
taller then either of you, by the head, God bless him.


QVAR. Well, me thinks, this is a fine fellow!


WIN-W. He has made his Master a finer by this description, I should think.


QVAR. 'Faith, much about one, it is cross and pile, whether for a new farthing.


WAS. I Will tell you Gentlemen --


IOH. Will It please you drink, Master VVaspe?


WAS. Why, I have not talk 't so long to be dry, Sir, you see no dust or
cobwebs come out of my mouth: do you? you would have me gone, would you?


IOH. No, but you were in have even now, Mr Numpes.


WAS. What an' I were? so I am still, and yet I will stay too; meddle you with
your match, your Win, there, she has as little wit, as her husband it seems: I
have others to talk to.


IOH. She Is my match indeed, and as little wit as I, Good!


WAS. We have bin but a day and a half in town, Gentlemen, it is true; and
yester day in the afternoon, we walked London, to show the City to the
Gentlewoman, he shall marry, Mistress Grace; but, before I will endure such
another half day, with him, I Will be drawn with a good Gib-cat, through the
great pond at home, as his uncle Hodge was! why, we could not meet that heathen
thing, all day, but stayed him: he would name you all the Signs over, as he
went, aloud: and where he spied a Parrat, or a Monkey, there he was pitched,
with all the littl-long-coats about him, male and female; no getting him away!
I thought he would have run mad of the black boy in Bucklers-bury, that
takes the scury, roguy tobacco, there.


IOH. You say true, Master Numpes: there is such a one indeed.


WAS. It Is no matter, whether there be, or no, what is that to you?


QVAR. He will not allow of John's reading at any hand,


ACT. I.
SCENE. V.
COKES. Mistress OVER-DOO. WASPE. GRACE. QVARLOVS. WIN-WIFE. JOHN. WIN.
O Numpes! are you here Numpes? look where I am, Numpes! and Mistress Grace,
too! nay, do not look angerly, Numpes: my Sister is here, and all, I do not
come without her.


WAS. What, the mischief, do you come with her? or she with you?


COK. We came all to seek you, Numpes.


WAS. To seek me? why, did you all think I was lost? or run away with your
fourteen shillings worth of small ware, here? or that I had changed it in the
Fair, for hobby-horses? S'pretious -- to seek me!


OVER. Nay, good Mr Numpes, do you show discretion, though he be exorbitant,
(as Mr Over do says,) and't be but for conservation of the peace.


WAS. Mary gip, goody she- Justice, Mistress French-hood! turd in your teeth; and
turd in your French-hoods teeth, too, to do you service, do you see? must you
quote your Adam to me! you think, you are Madam Regent still, Mistress
Ouer-doo; when I am in place? no such matter, I assure you, your reign is out,
when I am in, Dame.


OVER. I am content to be in abeyance, Sir, and be governed by you; so should
he too, if he did well; but 'twill be expected, you should also govern your
passions.


WAS. Will It so forsooth? good Lord! how sharp you are! with being at Bet'lem
yesterday? VVhetston has set an edge upon you, has he?


OVER. Nay, if you know not what belongs to your dignity: I do, yet, to mine.


WAS. Very well, then.


COK. Is this the License, Numpes? for Loves sake, let me see it. I never saw a
License.


WAS. Did you not so? why, you shall not see it, then.


COK. An' you love me, good Numpes.


WAS. Sir, I love you, and yet I do not love you, i'these fooleries, set your
heart at rest; there is nothing in it, but hard words: and what would you see it
for?


COK. I would see the length and the breadth on it, that is all; and I will see it
now, so I will.


WAS. You sha' not see it, here.


COK. Then I Will see it at home, and I Will look vpo' the case here.


WAS. Why, do so, a man must give way to him a little in trifles: Gentlemen.
These are errors, diseases of youth: which he will mend, when he comes to
judgment, and knowledge of matters. I pray you conceive so, and I thank you.
And I play you pardon him, and I thank you again.


QVAR. Well, this dry-nurse, I say still, is a delicate man.


WIN-W. And I, am, for the Cosset, his charge! Did you ever see a fellows face
more accuse him for an Ass?


QVAR. Accuse him? it confesses him one without accusing. What pity it is
yonder wench should marry such a Cokes?


WIN-W. It Is true.


QVAR. She seems to be discreet, and as sober as she is handsome.


WIN-W. I, and if you mark her, what a restrained scorn she casts upon all
his behavior, and speeches?


COK. Well, Numpes, I am now for another piece of business more, the Fair,
Numpes, and then --


WAS. Bless me! deliver me, help, hold me! the Fair!


COK. Nay, never fidge up and down, Numpes, and vex it self. I am resolute
Bartholmew, in this; I Will make no suite on it to you; 'twas all the end of my
journey, indeed, to show Mistress Grace my Fair: I called my Fair, because of
Bartholmew: you know my name is Bartholmew, and Bartholmew Fair.


IOH. That was mine before, Gentlemen: this morning. I had that in faith, upon
his License, believe me, there he comes, after me.


QVAR. Come, John, this ambitious wit of yours, (I am afraid) will do you no
good in the end.


IOH. No? why Sir?


QVAR. You grow so insolent with it, and ouerdoing, John: that if you look not
to it, and tie it up, it will bring you to some obscure place in time, and
there 'twill leave you.


WIN-W. Do not trust it too much, John, be more sparing, and use it, but now
and then; a wit is a dangerous thing, in this age; do not over buy it.


IOH. Think you so, Gentlemen? I Will take heed on it, hereafter.


WIN. Yes, do John.


COK. A pretty little soul, this same Mistress Little-wit! would I might marry
her.


GRA. So would I, or any body else, so I might escape you,


COK. Numps, I will see it, Numpes, it is decreed: never be melancholy for the
matter.


WAS. Why, see it, Sir, see it, do see it! who hinders you? why do you not
go see it? 'Slid see it.


COK. The Fair, Numps, the Fair.


WAS. World the Fair and all the Drums, and Rattles in it, were in your belly
for me: they are already in your brain: he that had the means to travel you
head, now, should meet finer sights then any are in the Fair; and make a finer
voyage on it; to see it all hung with cockle-shels, pebbles, fine wheat-strawes,
and here and there a chicken's feather, and a cob-web.


QVAR. Good faith, he looks, me thinks an' you mark him, like one that were
made to catch flies, with his Sir Cranion-legs.


WIN-W. And his Numpes, to flap 'hem away.


WAS. God, bew' you, Sir, there is your Be in a box, and much good do it, you.


COK. Why, your friend, and Bartholmew; an' you be so contumacious.


QVAR. What mean you, Numpes?


WAS. I Will not be guilty, I, Gentlemen.


OVER. You will not let him go, Brother, and loose him?


COK. Who can hold that will away? I had rather loose him then the Fair, I
wusse.


WAS. You do not know the inconvenience, Gentlemen, you persuade to: nor what
trouble I have with him in these humors. If he go to the Fair, he will buy
of every thing, to a Baby there; and household stuff for that too. If a leg
or an arm on him did not grow on, he would lose it in the press. Pray heaven
I bring him off with one stone! And then he is such a Rauener after fruit! you
will not believe what a coil I had, the other day, to compound a business
between a Katerne-peare-woman, and him, about snatching! it is intolerable,
Gentlemen.


WIN-W. O! but you must not leave him, now, to these hazards, Numpes.


WAS. Nay, he knows too well, I will not leave him, and that makes him
presume: well, Sir, will you go now? if you have such an itch in your feet, to
foot it to the Fair, why do you stop, am I your Tarriars? go, will you go?
Sir, why do you not go?


COK. O Numps! have I brought you about? come Mistress Grace, and Sister, I am
resolute Batt, in faith, still.


GRA. Truly, I have no such fancy to the Fair; nor ambition to see it;
there is none goes thither of any quality or fashion.


COK. O Lord, Sir! you shall pardon me, Mistress Grace, we are inow of our
selves to make it a fashion: and for qualities, let Numps alone, he will find
qualities.


QVAR. What a Rogue in apprehension is this! to understand her language no
better.


WIN-W. I, and offer to marry to her? well, I will leave the chase of my
widow, for to day, and directly to the Fair. These flies cannot, this hot
season, but engender us excellent creeping sport.


QVAR. A man that has but a spoone full of brain, would think so. Farewell,
John.


IOH. Win, you see, it is in fashion, to go to the Fair, Win: we must to the
Fair too, you, and I, Win. I have an affair in the Fair, Win, a Puppet-play
of mine own making, say nothing, that I writ for the motion man, which you
must see, Win.


WIN. I would I might John, but my mother will never consent to such a profane
motion: she will call it.


IOH. Tut, we'll have a device, a dainty one; (Now, Wit, help at a pinch, good
Wit come, come, good Wit, and 't be thy will.) I have it, Win, I have it
'ifaith, and it is a fine one. Win, long to eat of a Pigge, sweet Win, in the
Fair; do you see? in the heart of the Fair; not at Pye-Corner. Your mother
will do any thing, Win, to satisfy your longing, you know, pray thee long,
presently, and be sick of the sudden, good Win. I Will go in and tell her, cut
thy lace in the mean time, and play the Hypocrite, sweet Win.


WIN. No, I Will not make me unready for it. I can be Hypocrite enough, though I
were never so straight laced.


IOH. You say true, you have bin bred in the family, and brought up to it. Our
mother is a most elect Hypocrite, and has maintained us all this seven year
with it, like Gentle-folkes.


WIN. I, Let her alone, John, she is not a wise wilful widow for nothing, nor
a sanctified sister for a song. And let me alone too, I have somewhat of the
mother in me, you shall see, fetch her, fetch her, ah, ah.


ACT. I.
SCENE. VI.
PVRECRAFT. VVIN. JOHN. BVSY. SOLOMON.
NOw, the blaze of the beauteous discipline, fright away this evil from our
house! how now Win-the-fight, Child: how do you? Sweet child, speak to me.


WIN. Yes, forsooth.


PVR. Look up, sweet Win-the-fight, and suffer not the enemy to enter you at
this door, remember that your education has bin with the purest, what polluted
one was it, that named first the unclean beast, Pigge, to you, Child?


WIN. (Vh, vh.)


IOH. Not I, of my sincerity, mother: she longed above three hours, ere she
would let me know it; who was it Win?


WIN. A profane black thing with a beard, John.


PVR. O! resist it, Win-the-fight, it is the Tempter, the wicked Tempter, you
may know it by the fleshly motion of Pig, be strong against it, and it is foul
temptations, in these assaults, whereby it broacheth flesh and blood, as it
were, on the weaker side, and pray against it is carnal prouocations, good
child, sweet child, pray.


IOH. Good mother, I pray you; that she may eat some Pigge, and her belly
full, too; and do not you cast away your own child, and perhaps one of mine,
with your tale of the Tempter: how do you, Win? Are you not sick?


WIN. Yes, a great deal, John, (vh, vh.)


PVR. What shall we do? call our zealous brother Busy hither, for his
faithful fortification in this charge of the adversary; child, my dear
child, you shall eat Pigge, be comforted, my sweet child.


WIN. I, but in the Fair, mother.


PVR. I mean in the Fair, if it can be any way made, or found lawful; where
is our brother Busy? Will he not come? look up, child.


IOH. Presently, mother, as soon as he has cleans'd his beard. I found him,
fast by the teeth, in the cold Turkey-pye, in the cupbord, with a great white
loaf on his left hand, and a glass of Malmesey on his right.


PVR. Slander not the Brethren, wicked one.


IOH. Here he is, DO^, purified, Mother.


PVR. O brother Busy^ your help here to edify, and raise us up in a scruple;
my daughter Win-the-fight is visited with a natural disease of women; called,
A longing to eat Pigge.


IOH. I Sir, a Bartholmew-pigge: and in the Fair.


PVR. And I would be satisfied from you, Religiously-wise, whether a widow of
the sanctified assembly, or a widows daughter, may commit the act, without
offense to the weaker sisters.


BVS. Verily, for the disease of longing, it is a disease, a carnal disease,
or appetite, incident to women: and as it is carnal, and incident, it is
natural, very natural: Now Pigge, it is a meat, and a meat that is
nourishing, and may be longed for, and so consequently eaten; it may be eaten;
very exceeding well eaten: but in the Fair, and as a Bartholmew-pig, it cannot
be eaten, for the very calling it a Bartholmew-pigge, and to eat it so, is a
spice of Idolatry, and you make the Fair, no better then one of the high
Places. This I take it, is the state of the question. A high place.


IOH. I, but in state of necessity: Place should give place, Mr Busy, (I have a
conceit left, yet.)


PVR. Good Brother, Zeale-of-the-land, think to make it as lawful as you can.


IOH. Yes Sir, and as soon as you can: for it must be Sir; you see the danger
my little wife is in, Sir.


PVR. Truly, I do love my child dearly, and I would not have her miscarry,
or hazard her first fruits, if it might be otherwise.


BVS. Surely, it may be otherwise, but it is subject, to construction, subject,
and has a face of offense, with the weak, a great face, a foul face, but
that face may have a veil put over it, and be shaddowed, as it were, it may be
eaten, and in the Fair, I take it, in a Booth, the tents of the wicked: the
place is not much, not very much, we may be religious in midst of the profane,
so it be eaten with a reformed mouth, with sobriety, and humbleness; not
gorged in with gluttony, or greediness; there is the fear: for, should she go
there, as taking pride in the place, or delight in the unclean dressing, to
feed the vanity of the eye, or the lust of the palate, it were not well, it were
not fit, it were abominable, and not good.


IOH. Nay, I knew that before, and told her on it, but courage, Win, we'll be
humble enough; we'll seek out the homeliest Booth in the Fair, that is
certain, rather then fail, we will eat it of the ground.


PVR. I, and I Will go with you my self, Win-the-fight, and my brother,
Zeale-of-the-land, shall go with us too, for our better consolation.


WIN. Vh, vh.


IOH. I, and Solomon too, Win, (the more the merrier) Win, we'll leave Rabby
Busy in a Booth. Solomon, my cloak.


SAL. Here, Sir.


BVS. In the way of comfort to the weak, I will go, and eat. I will eat
exceedingly, and prophecy; there may be a good use made of it, too, now I
think on it: by the public eating of Swines flesh, to profess our hate, and
loathing of Iudaisme, whereof the brethren stand taxed. I will therefore eat,
yea, I will eat exceedingly.


IOH. Good, in faith, I will eat heartily too, because I will be no Jew, I
could never away with that stiffenecked generation: and truly, I hope my
little one will be like me, that cries for Pigge so, in the mothers belly.


BVS. Very likely, exceeding likely, very exceeding likely.


ACT. II.
SCENE. I.
JUSTICE OVER DO.
WEll, in Justice name, and the Kings; and for the commonwealth! defy all the
world, Adam Ouerdoo, for a disguise, and all story; for thou have fitted thy
self, I swear; feign would I meet the Linceus now, that Eagles eye, that
peircing Epidaurian serpent (as my Quint. Horace cal's him) that could discover
a Justice of Peace, (and lately of the Quorum) under this covering. They may
have seen many a fool in the habit of a Justice; but never till now, a
Justice in the habit of a fool. Thus must we do, though, that wake for the
public good: and thus has the wise Magistrate done in all ages. There is a
doing of right out of wrong, if the way be found. Never shall I enough commend
a worthy worshipful man, sometime a capital member of this City, for his high
wisdom, in this point, who would take you, now the habit of a Porter; now of a
Carman; now of the Dog-killer, in this month of August; and in the winter, of
a Seller of tinder-boxes; and what would he do in all these shapes? mary go
you into every Alehouse, and down into every Celler; measure the length of
puddings, take the gage of black pots, and cannes, I, and custards with a
stick; and their circumference, with a third; weigh the loaves of bread on his
middle-finger; then would he send for 'hem, home; give the puddings to the
poor, the bread to the hungry, the custards to his children; break the pots,
and burn the cannes, himself; he Would not trust his corrupt officers; he
would do it himself. would all men in authority would follow this worthy
president! For (alas) as we are public persons, what do we know? nay, what
can we know? we hear with other men's ears; we see with other men's eyes? a
foolish Constable, or a sleepy Watchman, is all our information, he slanders a
Gentleman, by the virtue of his place, (as he calls it) and we by the vice of
ours, must believe him. As a while agone, they made me, yea me, to mistake an
honest zealous Pursiuant, for a Seminary: and a proper young Batcheler of
Music, for a Bawd. This we are subject to, that live in high place, all our
intelligence is idle, and most of our intelligencers, knaves: and by your
leave, ourselves, thought little better, if not errant fools, for believing
'hem. I Adam Ouerdoo, am resolved therefore, to spare spy-money hereafter, and
make mine own discoueries. Many are the yearly enormities of of this Fair,
in whose courts of Pye-pouldres I have had the honor during the three days
sometimes to sit as Judge. But this is the special day for detection of those
foresaid enormities. Here is my black book, for the purpose; this the cloud
that hides me: under this covert I shall see, and not be seen. On Iunius
Brutus. And as I began, so I Will end: in Justice name, and the Kings; and for
the Commonwealth.

ACT. II.
SCENE. II.
LEATHERHEAD. TRASH. JUSTICE. VRS'LA. MOONE-CALFE. NIGHTINGALE. Costermonger.
Passengers.
THe Fayre's pestlence dead, me thinks; people come not abroad, to day, what
ever the matter is. Do you hear, Sister Trash, Lady of the Basket? sit farther
with your ginger-bread-progeny there, and hinder not the prospect of my shop,
or I Will have it proclaimed in the Fair, what stuff they are made on.


TRA. Why, what stuff are they made on, Brother Leatherhead? nothing but
what is wholesome, I assure you.


LEA. Yes, stale bread, rotten eggs, musty ginger, and dead honey, you know.


IVS. I! have I met with enormity, so soon?


LEA. I shall mar your market, old Ione.


TRA. Mar my market, thou too-proud Peddler? do thy worst; I defy thee, I,
and thy stable of hobby-horses. I pay for my ground, as well as thou do, and
thou wrong'st me for all thou art parcell-poet, and an Inginer. I Will find a
friend shall right me, and make a ballad of thee, and thy cattle all over. Are
you pust up with the pride of your wares? your Arsedine?


LEA. Go to, old Ione, I Will talk with you anon* and take you down too,
before Justice Ouerdoo, he is the man must charm you, I Will have you in the
Piepouldres.


TRA. Charm me? I Will meet thee face to face, before his worship, when thou
dare: and though I be a little crooked of my body, I Will be found as upright
in my dealing, as any woman in Smithfield, I, charm me?


IVS. I am glad, to hear, my name is their terror, yet, this is doing of
Justice.


LEA. What do you lack? what is it you buy? what do you lack? Rattles, Drums,
Halberts, Horses, Babies of the best? Fiddles o'th finest? Enter Cost.


COS. Buy any pears, pears, fine, very fine pears.


TRA. Buy any ginger-bread, guilt ginger-bread!


NIG. Hey, now the Fayre's a filling!
O, for a Tune to startle
The Birds of the Booths here billing;
Yearly with old Saint Barthle!
The Drunkards they are wading,
The Punques, and Chapmen trading;
Who'ld see the Fair without his lading? Buy any ballads; new ballads?


VRS. Fie upon it: who would wear out their youth, and prime thus, in roasting
of pigges, that had any cooler vocation? Hell's a kind of cold cellar to it, a
very fine vault, of my conscience! what Moone-calfe.


MOO. Here. Mistress.


NIG. How now Vrsla? in a heat, in a heat?


VRS. My chair, you false faucet you; and my mornings draught, quickly, a
botle of Ale, to quench me, Rascal. I am all fire, and fat, Nightingale, I
shall even melt away to the first woman, a ribbe again, I am afraid. I do
water the ground in knots, as I go, like a great Garden-pot, you may follow me
by the S.S.s. I make.


NIG. Alas, good Vr's; was Zekiel here this morning?


VRS. Zekiel? what Zekiel?


NIG. Zekiel Edgeworth, the civil cutpurse, you know him well enough; he
that talks bawdy to you still: I call him my Secretary.


VRS. He promised to be here this morning. I remember.


NIG. When he comes, bid him stay: I Will be back again presently.


VRS. Moon-calfe brings in the Chair. Best take your mornings dew in your
belly, Nightingale, come, Sir, set it here, did not I bid you should get this
chair let out of the sides, for me, that my hips might play? you will never
think of any thing, till your dame be rumpgall'd; it is well, Changeling:
because it can take in your Grasse-hoppers thighs, you care for no more. Now,
you look as you had been in the corner of the Booth, fleaing your breech, with
a candles end, and set fire of the Fair. Fill, Stote: fill.


IVS. This Pig-woman do I know, and I will put her in, for my second enormity,
she has been before me, Punke, Pinnace and Bawd, any time these two and
twenty years, upon record in the Pie-poudres.


VRS. Fill again, you unlucky vermin.


MOO. 'Pray you be not angry, Mistress, I Will have it widen'd anon.


VRS. No, no, I shall even dwindle away to 't, ere the Fair be done, you
think, now you have heated me? A poor vexed thing I am, I feel my self
dropping already, as fast as I can: two stone a sewet aday is my proportion: I
can but hold life and soul together, with this (here is to you, Nightingale)
and a whiffe of tobacco, at most. Where Is my pipe now? not filled? thou errant
Incubee.


NIG. Nay, Vrsla, thou wilt gall between the tongue and the teeth, with
fretting, now.


VRS. How can I hope, that ever he will discharge his place of trust, Tapster, a
man of reckoning under me, that remembers nothing I say to him? but look
to it, sirrah, you were best, three pence a pipe full, I will have made, of all
my whole half pound of tobacco, and a quarter of a pound of Coltsfoot, mixed
with it too, to itch it out. I that have dealt so long in the fire, will not be
to seek in smoke, now. Then 6. and 20. shillings a barrel I will advance of my
Beer; and fifty shillings a hundred of my bottle-ale, I have told you the ways
how to raise it. Froth your cannes well in the filling, at length Rogue, and
iogge your bottles of the buttocke, Sirrah, then skinke out the first glass,
ever, and drink with all companies, though you be sure to be drunk; you will
mis-reckon the better, and be less ashamed on it. But your true trick,
Rascal, must be, to be ever busy, and mis-take away the bottles and cannes,
in have, before they be half drunk off, and never hear any body call, (if
they should chance to mark you) till you have brought fresh, and be able to for
swear 'hem. Give me a drink of Ale.


IVS. This is the very womb, and bed of enormitie! gross, as her self!
this must all down for enormity, all, every whit on it.


VRS. Look, who is there, Sirrah? One knocks. five shillings a Pigge is my
price, at least; if it be a sow-pig, six pence more: if she be a great bellied
wife, and long for it, six pence more for that.


IVS. O Tempora! O mores! I would not have lost my discovery of this one
grieuance, for my place, and worship of the Bench, how is the poor subject
abused, here! well, I will fall in with her, and with her Moone-calfe, and
win out wonders of enormity. By thy leave, goodly woman, and the fatnessc of
the Fair: oily as the Kings constables Lamp, and shining as his
Shooing-horne! has thy Ale virtue, or thy Beer strength? that the tongue of
man may be tickled? and his palate pleased in the morning? let thy pretty Nephew
here, go search and see.


VRS. What new Roarer is this?


MOO. O Lord! do you not know him, Mistress, it is mad Arthur of Bradley, that
makes the Orations. Brave Master, old Arthur of Bradley, how do you? welcome
to the Fair, when shall we hear you again, to handle your matters? with
your back again a Booth, ha? I have bin one o'your little disciples, i'my
days!


IVS. Let me drink, boy, with my love, thy Aunt, here; that I may be eloquent:
but of thy best, lest it be bitter in my mouth, and my words fall foul on the
Fair.


VRS. Why do thou not fetch him drink? and offer him to sit?


MOO. Is It Ale, or Beer? Master Arthur?


IVS. Thy best, pretty stripling, thy best; the same thy Dove drinks, and
thou drawest on holy days.


VRS. Bring him a six penny bottle of Ale; they say, a fools handsell is
lucky.


IVS. Bring both, child. Ale for Arthur, and Beer for Bradley. Ale for thine
Aunt, boy. My disguise takes to the very wish, and reach of it. I shall by the
benefit of this, discover enough, and more: and yet get off with the reputation
of what I would be. A certain midling thing, between a fool and a madman.


ACT. II.
SCENE. III.
KNOCKHVM. to them.
What! my little lean Vrsla! my shee-Beare! art thou alive yet? with thy
litter of pigges, to grunt out another Bartholmew Fair? ha!


VRS. Yes, and to amble a foot, when the Fair is done, to hear you groan
out of a cart, up the heavy hill.


KNO. Of Holbourne, Vrsla, meanst thou so? for what? for what, pretty Vrs?


VRS. For cutting halfe-penny purses: or stealing little penny dogs, out
of the Fair.


KNO. O! good words, good words Vrs.


IVS. Another special enormitie. A cutpurse of the sword! the boot, and the
feather! those are his marks.


VRS. You are one of those horsleaches, that gave out I was dead, in Turne-bull
street, of a surfeit of botle ale, and tripes?


KNO. No, 'twas better meat Vrs: cowes vdders; cowes vdders!


VRS. Well, I shall be meet with your mumbling mouth one day.


KNO. What? thou wilt poison me with a neuft in a bottle of Ale, will it thou? or
a spider in a tobacco-pipe, Vrs? Come, there is no malice in these fat folks, I
never fear thee, and I can escape thy lean Moonecalfe here. Let Us drink it
out, good Vrs, and no vapors!


IVS. Do thou hear, boy? (there is for thy Ale, and the remnant for thee)
speak in thy faith of a faucet, now; is this goodly person before us here,
this vapors, a knight of the knife?


MOO. What mean you by that, Master Arthur?


IVS. I mean a child of the horne-thumb, a babe of booty, boy; a cutpurse.


MOO. O Lord, Sir! far from it. This is Master Dan. Knockhum: Iordane the
Ranger of Turnebull. He is a horse-courser, Sir.


IVS. Thy dainty dame, though, called him cutpurse.


MOO. Like enough, Sir, she will do forty such things in an hour (an you
listen to her) for her recreation, if the toy take her in the greasy kerchiefe:
it makes her fat you see. She battens with it.


IVS. Here might I have been deceived, now: and have put a fools blot upon my
self, if I had not played an after game of discretion.


KNO. Alas poor Vrs, this's an ill season for thee. Vrsla comes in again
dropping.


VRS. Hang your self, Hacney-man.


KNO. How? how? Vrs, vapors! motion breed vapors?


VRS. Vapors? Never tuske, nor twirle your dibble, good Iordane, I know what
you will take to a very drop. Though you be Captain of the Roarers, and fight
well at the case of pis-pots, you shall not fright me with your Lyon-chap, Sir,
nor your tuskes, you angry? you are hungry: come, a pigs head will stop your
mouth, and stay your stomach, at all times.


KNO. Thou art such another mad merry Vrs still! Troth I do make conscience of
vexing thee, now in the dog-daies, this hot weather, for fear of foundring thee
in the body; and melting down a Pillar of the Fair. Pray thee take thy chair
again, and keep state; and let us have a fresh bottle of Ale, and a pipe of
tobacco; and no vapors. I Will have this belly o'thine taken up, and thy grass
scoured, wench; look! here is EZechiel Edgworth; a fine boy of his inches, as
any is in the Fair! has still money in his purse, and will pay all, with a kind
heart; and good vapors.


ACT. II.
SCENE. IIII.
To them EDGVVORTH. NIGHTINGALE. Corne-cutter. Tinder-box-man. Passengers.
THat I will, indeed, willingly, Master Knockhum, fetch some Ale, and Tobacco.


LEA. What do you lack, Gentlemen? Maid: see a fine hobby horse for your
young Master; cost you but a token a week his prouander.


COR. Have you any corns 'iyour feet, and toes?


TIN. Buy a Mouse-trap, a Mouse-trap, or a Tormentor for a Flea.


TRA. Buy some Ginger-bread.


NIG. Ballads, Ballads! fine new ballads:
Hear for your love, and buy for your money.
A delicate ballad of the Ferret and the Coney.
A preservative again' the Punques evil.
Another of Goose-greene-starch, and the Devil.
A dozen of divine points, and the Godly garters.
The Fairing of good council, of an ell and three quarters. What is it you buy?
The Windmill blown down by the witches fart!
Or Saint George, that O! did break the Dragons heart!

EDG. Master Nightingale, come hither, leave your mart a little.


NIG. O my Secretary! what says my Secretary?


IVS. Child of the bottles, what is he? what he?


MOO. A civil young Gentleman, Master Arthur, that keeps company with the
Roarers, and disburses all, still. He has ever money in his purse; He pays for
them; and they roar for him: one does good offices for another. They call him
the Secretary, but he serves no body. A great friend of the Ballad-mans they
are never asunder.


IVS. What pity it is, so civil a young man should haunt this debaucht
company? here is the bane of the youth of our time apparent. A proper penman, I
see it in his countenance, he has a good Clerks look with him, and I warrant
him a quick hand.


MOO. A very quick hand, Sir.


EDG. All the purses, and purchase, I give you to day by conueyance, bring
hither to Vrsla's presently. This they whisper, that Ouerdoo hears it not.
Here we will meet at night in her lodge, and share. Look you choose good
places, for your standing in the Fair, when you sing Nightingale.


VRS. I, near the fullest passages; and shift 'hem often.


EDG. And in your singing, you must use your hawks eye nimbly, and fly the
purse to a mark, still, where it is worn, and of which side; that you may gi'
me the sign with your beak, or hang your head that way in the tune.


VRS. Enough, talk no more on it: your friendship (Masters) is not now to
begin. Drink your draught of Indenture, your sup of Covenant, and away, the
Fair fills apace, company begins to come in, and I have never a Pigge ready, yet.


KNO. Well said! fill the cups, and light the tobacco: let us give fire in the
works, and noble vapors.


EDG. And shall we have smockes Vrsla, and good whimsies, ha?


VRS. Come, you are in your bawdy vain! the best the Fair will afford, Zekiel,
if Bawd Whit keep his word; how do the Pigges, Moone-calfe?


MOO. Very passionate, Mistress, on on 'hem has wept out an eye. Master Arthur
of Bradley is melancholy, here, no body talks to him. Will you any tobacco
Master Arthur?


IVS. No, boy, let my meditations alone.


MOO. He Is studying for an Oration, now.


IVS. If I can, with this days travel; and all my policy, but rescue this
youth, here out of the hands of the lewd man, and the strange woman. I will sit
down at night; and say with my friend Ovid, Iamque opus exegi, quod nec Pouis
ira, nec ignis, etc.


KNO. Here Zekiel; here is a health to Vrsla, and a kind vapor, thou have money
i'thy purse still; and store! how do thou come by it? Pray thee vapor thy
friends some in a courteous vapor.


EDG. Half I have, Master Dan. Knockhum, is always at your service,


IVS. Ha, sweet nature! what Goshawke would prey upon such a Lamb?


KNO. Let Us see, what it is, Zekiel! count it, come, fill him to pledge me.


ACT. II.
SCENE. V.
VVIN-WIFE. QVARLOVS. to them.
We are here before 'hem, me thinks.


QVAR. All the better, we shall see 'hem come in now.


LEA. What do you lack, Gentlemen, what is it you lack? a fine Horse? a Lion?
a Bull? a Bear? a Dog, or a Cat? an excellent fine Bartholmew-bird? or an
Instrument? what is it you lack?


QVAR. S'lid! here is Orpheus among the beasts, with his Fiddle, and all!


TRA. Will you buy any comfortable bread, Gentlemen?


QVAR. And Ceres selling her daughters picture, in Ginger-worke!


WIN. That these people should be so ignorant to think us chapmen for 'hem!
do we look as if we would buy Ginger-bread? or Hobby-horses?


QVAR. Why, they know no better ware then they have, nor better customers then
come. And our very being here makes us fit to be demanded, as well as others.
Would Cokes would come! there were a true customer for 'hem.


KNO. How much is it? thirty shillings? who is yonder! Ned Winwife? and Tom
Quarlous, I think! yes, (gi' me it all) (gi' me it all) Master Win-wife!
Master Quarlous! will you take a pipe of tobacco with us? do not discredit me
now, Zekiel.


WIN. Do not see him! he is the roaring horse-courser, pray thee let us avoid
him: turn down this way.


QVAR. S'lud, I Will see him, and roar with him, too, and he roared as loud as
Neptune, pray thee go with me.


WIN. You may draw me to as likely an inconvenience, when you please, as this.


QVAR. Go to then, come along, we have nothing to do, man, but to see sights,
now.


KNO. Welcome Master Quarlous, and Master Winwife! will you take any froth, and
smoke with us?


QVAR. Yes, Sir, but you will pardon us, if we knew not of so much familiarity
between us before.


KNO. As what, Sir?


QVAR. To be so lightly invited to smoke, and froth.


KNO. A good vapor! will you sit down, Sir? this is old Vrsla's mansion, how
like you her bower? here you may have your Punque, and your Pigge in state,
Sir, both piping hot.


QVAR. I had rather have my Punque, cold, Sir.


IVS. There Is for me, Punque! and Pigge!


VRS. What Moonecalfe? you Rogue. She calls within.


MOO. By and by, the bottle is almost off Mistress, here Master Arthur.


VRS. I Will part you, and your play-fellow there, in the guarded coat, an' you
sunder not the sooner.


KNO. Master Win-wife, you are proud (me thinks) you do not talk, nor
drink, are you proud?


WIN. Not of the company I am in, Sir, nor the place, I assure you.


KNO. You do not except at the company! do you? are you in vapors, Sir?


MOO. Nay, good Master Dan: Knockhum, respect my Mistress Bower, as you call it;
for the honor of our Booth, none o'your vapors, here.


VRS. Why, you thin lean Polcat you, and they have a mind to be i'their
vapors, must you hinder 'hem? what did you know Vermin, if they would have
lost a cloak, or such a triflle? She comes out with a firebrand. must you be
drawing the air of pacification here? while I am tormented, within, in the
fire, you Weasell?


MOO. Good Mistress, 'twas in the behalf of your Booth's credit, that I spoke.


VRS, Why? would my Booth have broake, if they had fal'ne out in it? Sir? or
would their heat have fired it? in, you Rogue, and wipe the pigges, and mend
the fire, that they fall not, or I Will both baste and roast you, till your eyes
drop out, like 'hem. (Leave the bottle behind you, and be cursed a while.)


QVAR. Body of the Fair! what is this? mother of the Bawds?


KNO. No, she is mother of the Pigs, Sir, mother of the Pigs!


WIN. Mother of the Furies, I think, by her firebrand.


QVAR. Nay, she is too fat to be a Fury, sure, some walking Sow of tallow!


WIN. An inspired vessel of Kitchin-stuffe!


QVAR. She Will make excellent geere for the Coach-makers, She drinks this
while. here in Smithfield, to anoint wheels and axell trees with.


VRS. I, I, Gamesters, mock a plain plumpe soft wench of the Suburbs, do,
because she is iuicy and wholesome: you must have your thin pinched ware, pent
up in the compass of a dogge-collar, (or 'twill not do) that looks like a long
laced Conger, set upright, and a green feather, like fennel in the Ioll on it.


KNO. Well said Vrs, my good Vrs; to 'hem Vrs.


QVAR. Is she your quagmire, Dan: Knockhum? is this your Bogge?


NIG. We shall have a quarrel presently.


KNO. How? Bog? Quagmire? foul vapors! hum'h!


QVAR. Yes, he that would venture for it, I assure him, might sink into her,
and be drowned a week, ere any friend he had, could find where he were.


WIN. And then he would be a fort' night weighing up again.


QVAR. 'Twere like falling into a whole Shire of butter: they had need be a
teeme of Dutchmen, should draw him out.


KNO. Answer 'hem, Vrs, where is thy Bartholmew-wit, now? Vrs, thy
Bartholmew-wit?


VRS. Hang 'hem, rotten, roguy Cheaters, I hope to see 'hem plagued one day
(pox'd they are already, I am sure) with lean playhouse poultry, that has the
boany rumpe, sticking out like the Ace of Spades, or the point of a Partizan,
that every rib of hem is like the tooth of a Saw: and will so grate 'hem with
their hips, and shoulders, as (take 'hem altogether) they were as good lie with
a hurdle.


QVAR. Out upon her, how she drips! she is able to give a man the sweating
Sickness, with looking on her.


VRS. Mary look off, with a patch o'your face; and a dosen in your breech,
though they be o'scarlet, Sir. I have seen as fine outsides, as either o'yours,
bring lousy linings to the Brokers, ere now, twice a week?


QVAR. Do you think there may be a fine new Cuckingstoole in the Fair, to be
purchased? one large enough, I mean. I know there is a pond of capacity, for
her.


VRS. For your mother, you Rascal, out you Rogue, you hedge bird, you Pimpe,
you pannier-mans bastard, you.


QVAR. Ha, ha, ha.


VRS. Do you sneerc, you dogs-head, you Trendle tail! you look as you were
begotten a'top of a Cart in haruest-time, when the whelp was hot and eager. Go,
snuff after your brothers bitch, Mrs Commodity, that is the Liuory you wear,
'twill be out at the elbows, shortly. It Is time you went to it, for the to'ther
remnant.


KNO. Peace, Vrs, peace, Vrs, they will kill the poor Whale, and make oil of
her. Pray thee go in.


VRS. I Will see 'hem pox'd first, and pil'd, and double pil'd.


WIN. Let Us away, her language grows greasier then her Pigs.


VRS. Dos't so, snotty nose? good Lord! are you sniueling? you were engendered
on a she-begger, in a barn, when the bald Thrasher, your Sire, was scarce
warm.


WIN. Pray thee, let us go.


QVAR. No, faith: I Will stay the end of her, now: I know she cannot last long;
I find by her similes, she wanes a pace.


VRS. Does she so? I Will set you gone. Gi' me my Pig-pan hither a little. I Will
scald you hence, and you will not go.


KNO. Gentlemen, these are very strange vapors! and very idle vapors! I
assure you.


QVAR. You are a very serious ass, we assure you.


KNO. Humh! Ass? and serious? nay, then pardon me my vapor. I have a foolish
vapor, Gentlemen: any man that does vapor me, the Ass, Master Quarlous --


QVAR. What then, Master Jordan?


KNO. I do vapor him the lie.


QVAR. Faith, and to any man that vapors me the lie, I do vapor that.


KNO. Nay, then, vapors upon vapors.


EDG. NIG. 'Ware the pan, the pan, the pan, Vrsla comes in, with the
scalding-pan. They fight. She falls with it. she comes with the pan,
Gentlemen. God bless the woman.


VRS. Oh.


ERA. What Is the matter?


IVS. Goodly woman!


MOO. Mistress!


VRS. Curse of hell, that ever I saw these Feinds, oh! I have scalded my leg, my
leg, my leg, my leg. I have lost a limb in the service! run for some cream and
sallad oil, quickly. Are you vnder-peering, you Baboun? rip off my hose, an'
you be men, men, men.


MOO. Run you for some cream, good mother Ione. I Will look to your basket.


LEA. Best sit up in your chair, Vrsla. Help, Gentlemen.


KNO. Be of good cheer, Vrs, thou have hindered me the currying of a couple of
Stallions, here, that abused the good race- Bawd o'Smithfield; 'twas time for
'hem to go.


NIG. I faith, when the pan came, they had made you run else. (this had
been a fine time for purchase, if you had ventured.)


EDG. Not a whit, these fellows were too fine to carry money.


KNO. Nightingale, get some help to carry her leg out of the air; take off
her shoes; body of me, she has the Mallanders, the scratches, the crown
scabbe, and the quitter bone, in the the other leg.


VRS. Oh! the pox, why do you put me in mind of my leg, thus, to make it
prick, and shoot? would you have me in the Hospital, before my time?


KNO. Patience, Vrs, take a good heart, it is but a blister, as big as a
Windgall; I Will take it away with the white of an egg, a little honey, and hogs
grease, have thy pasternes well rol'd, and thou shall't pase again by to
morrow. I Will tend thy Booth, and look to thy affairs, the while: thou shall
sit i'thy chair, and give directions, and shine Vrsa mayor.


ACT. II.
SCENE. VI.
JUSTICE. EDGEWORTH. NIGHTINGALE. COKES. WASPE. Mistress OVERDOO. GRACE.
THese are the fruits of bottle-ale, and tobacco! the foam of the one, and the
fumes of the other! Stay young man, and despise not the wisdom of these few
hayres, that are grown gray in care of thee.


EDG. Nightingale, stay a little. Indeed I Will hear some of this!


COK. Come, Numps, come, where are you? welcome into the Fair, Mistress Grace.


EDG. S'light, he will call company, you shall see, and put us into doings
presently.


IVS. Thirst not after that frothy liquor, Ale: for, who knows, when he
opens the stopple, what may be in the bottle? has not a Snaile, a Spider,
yea, a Neuft bin found there? thirst not after it, youth: thirst not after it.


COK. This is a brave fellow, Numps, let us hear him.


WAS. S'blood, how brave is he? in a guarded coat? you were best trucke with
him, even strip, and trucke presently, it will become you, why will you hear
him, because he is an Ass, and may be a kinnne to the Cokeses?


COK. O, good Numps!


IVS. Neither do thou lust after that tawney weed, tobacco.


COK. Brave words!


IVS. Whose complexion is like the Indians that vents it!


COK. Are they not brave words, Sister?


IVS. And who can tell, if, before the gathering, and making up thereof, the
Alligarta has not pissed thereon?


WAS. 'Heart let 'hem be brave words, as brave as they will! and they were all
the brave words in a Country, how then? will you away yet? have you enough on
him? Mistress Grace, come you away, I pray you, be not you accessory. If you do
lose your License, or somewhat else, Sir, with listening to his fables: say,
Numps, is a witch, with all my heart, do, say so.


COK. Avoid in your satin doublet, Numps.


IVS. The creeping venom of which subtle serpent, as some late writers
affirm; neither the cutting of the perrillous plant, nor the drying of it, nor
the lighting, or burning, can any way perssway or, assuage.


COK. Good, in faith! is it not Sister?


IVS. Hence it is, that the lungs of the Tabacconist are rotted, the Liver
spotted, the brain smoked like the backside of the Pig-womans Booth, here,
and the whole body within, black, as her Pan, you saw even now, without.


COK. A fine similitude, that, Sir! did you see the pan?


EDG. Yes, Sir.


IVS. Nay, the hole in the nose here, of some tabacco-takers, or the third
nostrill, (if I may so call it) which makes, that they can vent the tobacco
out, like the Ace of clubs, or rather the Flower-de-lice, is caused from the
tobacco, the mere tobacco! when the poor innocent pox, having nothing to do
there, is miserably, and most unconscionably slandered.


COK. Who would have mist this, Sister?


OVER. Not any body, but Numps.


COK. He does not understand.


EDG. Nor you feel.


COK. What would you have, Sister, He picketh his purse. of a fellow that
knows nothing but a basket-hilt, and an old Fox in it? the best music in the
Fair, will not move a logge.


EDG. In, to Vrsla, Nightingale, and carry her comfort: see it told. This
fellow was sent to us by fortune, for our first fairing.


IVS. But what speak I of the diseases of the body, children of the Fair?


COK. That Is to us, Sister. Brave in faith!


IVS. Hark, O, you sons and daughters of Smithfield! and hear what mallady
it does the mind: It causes swearing, it causes swaggering, it causes
snuffling, and snarling, and now and then a hurt.


OVE. He has something of Master Ouerdoo, me thinks, brother.


COK. So me thought, Sister, very much of my brother Ouerdoo: And it is, when
he speaks.


IVS. Look into any Angle of the town, (the Streights, or the Bermuda's) where
the quarrelling lesson is read, and how do they entertain the time, but with
bottle-ale, and tobacco? The Lecturer is o'one side, and his Pupils of the
other; But the seconds are still bottle-ale, and tobacco, for which the
Lecturer reads, and the Nouices pay. Thirty pound a week in bottle-ale! forty
in tobacco! and ten more in Ale again. Then for a suit to drink in, so much,
and (that being slauer'd) so much for another suit, and then a third suit, and
a fourth suit! and still the bottle-ale slauereth, and the tobacco stinketh!


WAS. Heart of a madman! are you rooted here? well you never away? what can
any man find out in this bawling fellow, to grow here for? he is a full
handful higher, sin'he heard him, will you fix here? and set up a Booth? Sir?


IVS. I will conclude briefly --


WAS. Hold your peace, you roaring Rascal, I Will run my head in your chaps
else. You were best build a Booth, and entertain him, make your Will, and you
say the word, and him your heir! heart, I never knew one taken with a mouth of
a pecke, before. He gets him up on pick-packe. By this light, I Will carry you
away of my back, and you will not come.


COK. Stay Numpes, stay, set me down: I have lost my purse, Numps, O my purse!
one of my fine purses is gone.


OVER. Is It indeed, brother?


COK. I, as I am an honest man, would I were an errant Rogue, else! a plague of
all roguy, damned cut-purses for me.


WAS. Bless 'hem with all my heart, with all my heart, do you see! Now, as I
am no Infidel, that I know of, I am glad on it. I I am, (here is my witness!)
do you see, Sir? I did not tell you of his fables, I? no, no, I am a dull
malt-horse, I, I know nothing. Are you not justly served in your conscience now?
speak in your conscience. Much good do you with all my heart, and his good
heart that has it, with all my heart again.


EDG. This fellow is very charitable, would he had a purse too! but, I must not
be too bold, all at a time.


COK. Nay, Numps, it is not my best purse.


WAS. Not your best! death! why should it be your worst? why should it be any,
indeed, at all? answer me to that, gi' me a reason from you, why it should be
any?


COK. Nor my gold, Numps; I have that yet, look here else, Sister.


WAS. Why so, there is all the feeling he has!


OVER. I pray you, have a better care of that, brother.


COK. Nay, so I will, I warrant you; let him catch this, that catch can. I
would feign see him get this, look you here.


WAS. So, so, so, so, so, so, so, so! Very good.


COK. I would have him come again, now, and but offer at it. Sister, will you
take notice of a good jest? I will put it just where the other was, and if we
have good luck, you shall see a delicate fine trap to catch the cutpurse,
nibling.


EDG. Faith, and he will try ere you be out of the Fair.


COK. Come, Mistress Grace, prithee be not melancholy for my mis-chance;
sorrow wi'not keep it, Sweet heart.


GRA. I do not think on it, Sir.


COOK. 'Twas but a little scuruy white money, hang it: it may hang the
cutpurse, one day. I have gold left to gi'thee a fayring, yet, as hard as the
world goes: nothing angers me, but that no body here, looked like a cutpurse,
unless 'twere Numps.


WAS How? I? I look like a cutpurse? death! your Sister's a cutpurse! and your
mother and father, and all your kin were cutpurses! And here is a Rogue is
the baud of the cutpurses, whom I will beat to begin with.


COK. Numps, Numps.


OVER. Good Mr Humphrey.


WAS. You are the Patrico! are you? the Patriarch of the cutpurses? you share,
Sir, they say, let them share, this with you. Are you in your hot fit of
preaching again? I Will cool you.


IVS. Hold thy hand, child of wrath, and heir of anger, They speak all
together: and Waspe beats the Justice. make it not Childermasse day in thy
fury, or the feast of the French Bartholmew, Parent of the of the Massacre.


IVS. Murder, murder, murder.


ACT. III.
SCENE. I.
WHIT. HAGGISE. BRISTLE. LEATHERHEAD. TRASH.
NAy, tish all gone, now! dish tish, phen tou vilt not be phitin call, Master
Offisher, phat ish a man te better to lishen out noyshes for tee, and tou art
in an oder 'orld, being very shuffishient noyshes and gallantsh too, one
o'their brabblesh would have fed vsh all dish fortnight, but tou art so bushy
about beggersh still, tou have no leshure to intend shentlemen, and't be.


HAG. Why, I told you, Dauy Bristle.


BRI. Come, come, you told me a pudding, Toby Haggise; A matter of nothing; I
am sure it came to nothing! you said, let us go to Vrsla's, indeed; but then
you met the man with the monsters, and I could not get you from him. An old
fool, not leave seeing yet?


HAG. Why, who would have thought any body would have quarreled so early? or
that the ale of the. Fair would have been up so soon.


WHI. Phy? phat a clock toest tou tinke it ish, man?


HAG. I cannot tell.


WHI. Tou art a vishe vatchman, i'te mean teeme.


HAG. Why? should the watch go by the clock, or the clock by the watch, I
pray?


BRI. One should go by another, if they did well.


WHI. Tou art right now! phen did tou ever know, or hear of a shuffishient
vatchman, but he did tell the clock, phat bushinesse soever he had?


BRI. Nay, that is most true, a sufficient watchman knows what a clock it is.


WHI. Shleeping, or vaking! ash well as te clock himshelfe, or te lack dat
shtrikes him!


BRI. Let Us enquire of Master Leatherhead, or Ione Trash here. Master
Leatherhead, do you hear, Master Leatherhead?


WHI. If it be a Ledderhead, tish a very tick Ledderhead, tat sho mush noish
vill not peirsh him.


LEA. I have a little business now, good friends do not trouble me.


WHI. Phat? because o'ty wrought neet cap, and ty pheluet sherkin, Man? phy? I
have sheene tee in ty Ledder sherkin, ere now, Mashter o'de hobby-Horses, as
bushy and as stately as tou sheem'st to be.


TRA. Why, what an' you have, Captain Whit? he has his choice of Ierkins, you
may see by that, and his caps too, I assure you, when he pleases to be either
sick, or employed.


LEA. God a mercy Ione, answer for me.


WHI. Away, be not sheen i'my company, here be shentlemen, and men of vorship.


ACT. III.
SCENE. II.
QVARLOVS. WHIT. WIN-VVIFE. BVSY. JOHN. PVRE-CRAFT. WIN. KNOK-HVM. MOON-CALFE.
VRSLA.
We had wonderful ill luck, to miss this prologue of the purse, but the
best is, we shall have five Acts of him ere night: he will be spectacle enough!
I Will answer for it.


WHI. O Creesh! Duke Quarlous, how dosht tou? tou dosht not know me, I fear? I
am te vishesht man, but Iustish Ouerdoo, in all Bartholmew Fair, now. Gi' me
tweluepence from tee, I will help tee to a vife vorth forty marks for it, and't
be.


QVAR. Away, Rogue, Pimpe away.


WHI. And she shall show tee as fine cut o'rke fort't in her shmock too, as
tou cansht vishe in faith; vilt tou have her, vorshipfull Vin vife? I will help
tee to her, here, be an't be, in te pig-quarter, gi'me ty twelpence from tee,


WIN-W. Why, there is twelpence, pray thee will thou be gone.


WHI, Tou art a vorthy man, and a vorshipfull man still.


QVAR. Get you gone, Rascal.


WHI. I do mean it, man. Prinsh Quarlous if tou hasht need on me, tou shall
find me here, at Vrsla's, I will see phat ale, and punque ish i'te pig shty,
for tee, bless ty good vorship.


QVAR. Look! who comes here! John Little-wit!


WIN-W. And his wife, and my widow, her mother: the whole family.


QVAR. 'Slight, you must gi'hem all fairings, now!


WIN-W. Not I, I Will not see 'hem,


QVAR. They are going a feasting. What Schole-master's that is with 'hem?


WIN-W. That Is my Rival, I believe, the Baker!


BVS. So, walk on in the middle way, fore-right, turn neither to the right
hand, nor to the left: let not your eyes be drawn aside with vanity, nor your
ear with noyses.


QVAR. O, I know him by that start!


LEA. What do you lack? what do you buy, pretty Mistress! a fine Hobbyhorse, to
make your son a Tilter? a Drum to make him a Soldier? a Fiddle, to make him
a Reueller? What is it you lack? Little Dogs for your Daughters! or Babies,
male, or female?


BVS. Look not toward them, harken not: the place is Smithfield, or the field
of Smiths, the Grove of Hobbi-horses and trinkets, the wares are the wares of
devils. And the whole Fair is the shop of Satan! They are hooks, and baits,
very baits, that are hung out on every side, to catch you, and to hold you as
it were, by the gills; and by the nostrills, as the Fisher does: therefore, you
must not look, nor turn toward them -- The Heathen man could stop his ears
with wax, against the harlot of the sea: Do you the like, with your fingers
against the bells of the Beast.


WIN-W. What flashes comes from him!


QVAR. O, he has those of his oven! a notable hot Baker 'twas, when he plied
the peele: he is leading his flock into the Fair, now.


WIN-W. Rather driving 'hem to the Pens: for he will let 'hem look upon
nothing.


KNO. Gentlewomen, the weather's hot! whither walk you? Have a care o'your
fine velvet caps, Little-wit is gazing at the sign; which is the Pigs-head
with a large writing under it. the Fair is dusty. Take a sweet delicate Booth,
with boughs, here, in the way, and cool your selves in the shade: you and your
friends. The best pig and bottle-ale in the Fair, Sir. Old Vrsla is Cook,
there you may read: the pigges head speaks it. Poor soul, she has had a
Sringhalt, the Maryhinchco: but she is prettily amended.


WHI. A delicate show-pig, little Mistress, with shweet sauce, and crackling,
like de bay-leafe i would fire, la! Tou shall ha'de clean side o'de table-clot
and di glass vash'd with phatersh of Dame Annessh Clear.


IOH. This's sine, verily, here be the best pigs: and she does roast 'hem as
well as ever she did; the Pigs head says.


KNO. Excellent, excellent, Mistress, with fire of Juniper and Rose-mary
branches! The Oracle of the Pigs head, that, Sir.


PVR. Son, were you not warned of the vanity of the eye? have you forgot the
wholesome admonition, so soon?


IOH. Good mother, how shall we find a pigge, if we do not look about for it?
will it run off of the spit, into our mouths think you? as in Lubberland? and
cry, we, we?


BVS. No, but your mother, religiously wise, conceiueth it may offer it self,
by other means, to the sense, as by way of steeme, which I think it does,
Busy sents after it like a Hound. here in this place (Huh, huh) yes, it does.
and it were a sin of obstinacy, great obstinacy, high and horrible obstinacy,
to decline, or resist the good titillation of the famelick sense, which is the
smell. Therefore be bold (huh, huh, huh) follow the sent. Enter the Tents of
the unclean, for once, and satisfy your wives frailty. Let your frail wife
be satisfied: your zealous mother, and my suffering self, will also be
satisfied.


IOH. Come, Win, as good winny here, as go farther, and see nothing.


BVS. We escape so much of the other vanities, by our early entering.


PVR. It is an aedifying consideration.


WIN. This is scuruy, that we must come into the Fair, and not look on it.


IOH. Win, have patience, Win, I Will tell you more anon.


KNO. Moone-calfe; entertain within there, the best pig in the Booth; a
Porklike pig. These are Banbury-bloods, of the sincere stud, come a
pigge-hunting. Whit, wait Whit, look to your charge.


BVS. A pigge prepare, presently, let a pigge be prepared to us.


MOO. S'light, who be these?


VRS. Is this the good service, Jordan, you would do me?


KNO. Why, Vrs? why, Vrs? thou wilt have vapors i'thy leg again presently,
pray thee go in, 't may turn to the scratches else.


VRS. Hang your vapors, they are stale, and stink like you, are these the
guests of the game, you promised to fill my pit withal, to day?


KNO. I^ what aile they Vrs?


VRS. Aile they? they are all sippers, sippers of the City, they look as they
would not drink off two penn'orth of bottle-ale amongst 'hem.


MOO. A body may read that i'their small printed ruffes.


KNO. Away, thou art a fool, Vrs, and thy Moone-calfe too, in your ignorant
vapors, now? hence, good guests, I say right hypocrites, good gluttons. In,
and set a couple o'pigs of the board, and half a dozen of the biggest bottles
before 'hem, and call Whit, I do not love to hear Innocents abused: Fine
ambling hypocrites! and a stone-puritane, with a sorrel head, and beard, good
mouthed gluttons: two to a pigge, away.


VRS. Are you sure they are such?


KNO. Of The right breed, thou shall try 'hem by the teeth, Vrs, where is this
Whit?


WHI. Behold, man and see, what a worthy man am ee!
With the fury of my sword, and the shaking of my beard,
I will make ten thousand men afeard.

KNO. Well said, brave Whit, in, and fear the ale out of the bottles, into the
bellies of the brethren, and the sisters drink to the cause, and pure vapors.


QVAR. My Roarer is turned Tapster, me thinks. Now were a fine time for thee,
Win-wife, to lay aboard thy widow, thou wilt never be Master of a better season,
or place; she that will venture her self into the Fair, and a pig-boxe, will
admit any assault, be assured of that.


WIN. I love not enterprises of that suddenness, though.


QVAR. I Will warrant thee, then, no wife out of the widows Hundred: if I had
but as much Title to her, as to have breathed once on that straight stomacher
of hers, I would now assure my felfe to carrry her, yet, ere shewent out of
Smithfield. Or she should carry me, which were the fitter sight, I confess.
But you are a modest undertaker, by circumstances, and degrees; come, it is
Disease in thee, not Judgment, I should offer at all together. Look, here is
the poor fool, again, that was stung by the waspe, ere while.


ACT. III.
SCENE. III.
JUSTICE. WIN-WIFE. QVARLOVS.
I will make no more orations, shall draw on these tragical conclusions. And I
begin now to think, that by a spice of collateral Justice, Adam Ouerdoo,
deserved this beating; for I the said Adam, was one cause (a by-cause) why the
purse was lost: and my wives brothers purse too, which they know not of yet.
But I shall make very good mirth with it, at supper, (that will be the sport)
and put my little friend, Mr Humphrey Wasp's choler quite out of countenance.
When, sitting at the upper end of my Table, as I use, and drinking to my brother
Cokes, and Mrs. Alice Ouerdoo, as I will, my wife, for their good affection to
old Bradley, I deliver to'hem, it was I, that was cudgelled, and show 'hem the
marks. To see what bad events may peep out of the tail of good purposes! the
care I had of that civil young man, I took fancy to this morning, (and have not
left it yet) drew me to that exhortation, which drew the company, indeeede,
which drew the cutpurse; which drew the money; which drew my brother Cokes his
loss; which drew on Wasp's anger; which drew on my beating: a pretty
gradation! And they shall have it i'their dish, in faith, at night for fruit: I
love to be merry at my Table. I had thought once, at one special blow he
ga'me, to have revealed my self? but then (I thank thee fortitude) I remembered
that a wise man (and who is ever so great a part, of the Commonwealth in
himself) for no particular disaster ought to abandon a public good design.
The husbandman ought not for one unthankful year, to forsake the plough; The
Shepherd ought not, for one scabb'd sheep, to throw by his tar-boxe; The Pilot
ought not for one leake in the poope, to quit the Helm; Nor the Alderman ought
not for one custerd more, at a meal, to give up his cloak; The Constable
ought not to break his staff, and forswear the watch, for one roaring night;
Nor the Piper of the Parish (Vt paruis componere magna solebam) to put up his
pipes, for one rainy Sunday. These are certain knocking conclusions; out of
which, I am resolved, come what come can, come beating, come imprisonment, come
infamy, come banishment, nay, come the rack, come the hurdle, (welcome all) I
will not discover who I am, till my due time; and yet still, all shall be, as I
said ever, in Justice name, and the King's, and for the Commonwealth.


WIN. What does he talk to himself, and act so seriously? poor fool!


QVAR. No matter what. Here Is fresher argument, intend that.


ACT. III.
SCENE. IIIJ.
COKES. LEATHERHEAD. VVASPE. Mistress OVER DO. WIN-VVIFE. QVARLOVS. TRASH.
GRACE.
COme, Mistress Grace, come Sister, here is more fine sights, yet in faith.
Gods'lid where is Numps?


LEA. What do you lack, Gentlemen? what is it you buy? fine Rattles! Drums?
Babies? little Dogs? and Birds for Ladies? What do you lack?


COK. Good honest Numpes, keep before, I am so afraid thou wilt lose somewhat: my
heart was at my mouth, when I mist thee.


WAS. You were best buy a whip in your hand to drive me.


COK. Nay, do not mistake, Numps, thou art so apt to mistake: I would but
watch the goods. Look you now, the treble fiddle, was even almost like to be
lost.


WAS. Pray you take heed you lose not your self: your best way, were even get
up, and ride for more surety. Buy a tokens worth of great pinnes, to fasten
your self to my shoulder.


LEA. What do you lack, Gentlemen? fine purses, pouches, pincases, pipes?
What is it you lack? a pair o'smithes to wake you in the morning? or a fine
whistling bird?


COK. Numps, here be finer things then any we have bought by odds! and more
delicate horses, a great deal! good Numpes, stay, and come hither.


WAS. Will you scourse with him? you are in Smithfield, you may fit your self
with a fine easy-going street-nag, for your saddle again' Michaelmasse-terme,
do, has he never a little odd cart for you, to make a Carroch on, in the
country, with four pyed hobby horses? why the meazills, should you stand
here, with your train, cheaping of Dogs, Birds, and Babies? you have no
children to bestow 'hem on? have you?


COK. No, but again' I have children, Numps, that is all one.


WAS. Do, do, do, do; how many shall you have, think you? an' I were as you,
I Would buy for all my Tenants, too, they are a kind o'ciuill Savages, that will
part with their children for rattles, pipes, and knives. You were best buy a
hatchet, or two, and truck with 'hem.


COK. Good Numps, hold that little tongue o'thine, and faue it a labor. I am
resolute Bat, thou know'ft.


WAS. A resolute fool, you are, I know, and a very sufficient Coxcombe; with
all my heart; nay you have it, Sir, and you be angry, turd in your teeth, twice:
(if I said it not once before) and much good do you.


WIN. Was there ever such a selfe-affliction? and so impertinent?


QVAR. Alas! his care will go near to crack him, let us in, and comfort him.


WAS. Would I had been set in the ground, all but the head on me, and had my
brains bowl'd at, or thresh'd out, when first I underwent this plague of a
charge!


QVAR. How now, Numps! almost tired in your Protectorship? ouerparted?
ouerparted?


WAS. Why, I cannot tell, Sir, it may be I am, dos't grieve you?


QVAR. No, I swear dos't not, Numps: to satisfy you.


WAS. Numps? S'blood, you are fine and familiar! how long have we bin
acquainted, I pray you?


QVAR. I think it may be remembered, Numps, that? 'twas since morning sure.


WAS. Why, I hope I know it well enough, Sir, I did not ask to be told.


QVAR. No? why then?


WAS. It Is no matter why, you see with your eyes, now, what I said to you to
day? you will believe me another time?


QVAR. Are you removing the Fair, Numps?


WAS. A pretty question! and a very civil one! yes faith, I have my lading you
see; or shall have anon, you may know whose beast I am, by my burden. If the
pannier-mans Jack were ever better known by his loins of mutton, I Will be
flead, and feed dogs for him, when his time comes.


WIN. How melancholi' Mistress Grace is yonder! pray thee let us go enter our
selves in Grace, with her.


COK. Those six horses, friend I Will have --


WAS. How!


COK. And the three Jews trumps; and half a dozen o'Birds, and that Drum, (I
have one Drum already) and your Smiths; I like that device o'your smiths,
very pretty well, and four Halberts -- and (le'me see) that fine painted great
Lady, and her three women for state, I Will have.


WAS. No, the shop; buy the whole shop, it will be best, the shop, the shop!


LEA. If his worship please.


WAS. Yes, and keep it during the Fair, Bobchin.


COK. Peace, Numps, friend, do not meddle with him, an' you be wise, and would
show your head above board: he will sting through your wrought nightcap,
believe me. A set of these Violines, I would buy too, for a delicate young
noise I have in the country, that are every one a size less then another, just
like your fiddles. I would feign have a fine young Masque at my marriage, now I
think on it: but I do want such a number o'things. And Numps will not help me
now, and I dare not speak to him.


TRA. Will your worship buy any ginger-bread, very good bread, comfortable
bread?


COK. Ginger-bread! yes, let us see. He runs to her shop.


WAS. There Is the the other sprindge?


LEA. Is this well, goody Ione? to interrupt my market? in the midst? and call
away my customers? can you answer this, at the Piepouldres?


TRA. Why? if his Master-ship have a mind to buy, I hope my ware lies as open
as another's; I may show my ware, as well as you yours.


COK. Hold your peace; I Will content you both: I Will buy up his shop, and thy
basket.


WAS. Will you in faith?


LEA. Why should you put him from it, friend?


WAS. Cry you mercy! you would be sold too, would you? what is the price on you?
Ierkin, and all as you stand? have you any qualities?


TRA. Yes, good man angry-man, you shall find he has qualities, if you cheapen
him.


WAS. Gods so, you have the selling of him! what are they? will they be bought
for love, or money?


TRA. No indeed, Sir.


WAS. For what then? victuals?


TRA. He scorns victuals, Sir, he has bread and butter at home, thanks be to
God! and yet he will do more for a good meal, if the toy take him in the belly,
mary then they must not set him at lower end; if they do, he will go away,
though he fast. But put him a top of the Table, where his place is, and he will
do you forty fine things. He has not been sent for, and sought out for
nothing, at your great citty-suppers, to put down Coriat, and Cokeley, and bin
laughed at for his labor; he will play you all the Puppets in the town over, and
the Players, every company, and his own company too; he spares no body!


COK. In Faith?


TRA. He was the first, Sir, that ever baited the fellow in the beare's skin,
an't like your worship: no dog ever came near him, since. And for fine motions!


COK. Is he good at those too? can he set out a Masque trow?


TRA. O Lord, Master! sought to far, and near, for his inventions: and he
engrosses all, he makes all the Puppets in the Fair.


COK. Do thou (in noth) old velvet Ierkin? give me thy hand.


TRA. Nay, Sir, you shall see him in his velvet Ierkin, and a scarf, too, at
night, when you hear him interpret Master Little-wit's Motion.


COK. Speak no more, but shut up shop presently, friend. I Will buy both it, and
thee too, to carry down with me, and her hamper, beside. Thy shop shall
furnish out the Masque, and hers the Banquet: I cannot go less, to set out
any thing with credit. what is the price, at a word, o'thy whole shop, case, and
all as it stands?


LEA. Sir, it stands me in six and twenty shillings seven pence, halfe-peny,
besides three shillings for my ground.


COK. Well, thirty shillings will do all, then! And what comes yours too?


TRA. Four shillings, and eleauen pence, Sir, ground, and all, an't like your
worship.


COK. Yes, it does like my worship very well, poor woman, that is five
shillings more, what a Masque shall I furnish out, for forty shillings? (twenty
pound scotsh) and a Banquet of Ginger-bread? there is a stately thing! Numps?
Sister? and my wedding gloves too? (that I never thought on before.) All my
wedding gloves, Ginger-bread? O me! what a device will there be? to make 'hem
eat their fingers ends! and delicate Brooches for the Bride-men! and all! and
then I Will have this poesy put to 'hem: For the best grace, meaning Mistress
Grace, my wedding poesy.


GRA. I am beholden to you, Sir, and to your Bartholmew-wit.


WAS. You do not mean this, do you? is this your first purchase?


COK. Yes faith, and I do not think, Numpes, but thou wilt say, it was the
wisest Act, that ever I did in my wardship.


WAS. Like enough! I shall say any thing, I!


ACT. III.
SCENE. V.
JUSTICE. EDGVVORTH. NIGHTINGALE.
I Cannot beget a Project, with all my political brain, yet; my Project is
how to fetch off this proper young man, from his debaucht company: I have
followed him all the Fair over, and still I find him with this songster: And
I begin shrewdly to suspect their familiarity; and the young man of a terrible
taint, Poetry! ^^ith which idle disease, if he be infected, there is no hope of
him, in a state-course. Actum est, of him for a common-wealths-man: if he go
to it in Rhyme, once.


EDG. Yonder he is buying o'Ginger-bread: set in quickly, before he part with
too much on his money.


NIG. My masters and friends, and good people, draw near, etc.


COK. Ballads! hark, hark! pray thee, fellow, stay a little, He ruun's to the
Ballad man. good Numpes, look to the goods. What Ballads have thou? let me
see, let me see my self.


WAS. Why so! he is flowne'to another lime-bush, there he will flutter as long
more; till he have never a feather left. Is there a vexation like this,
Gentlemen? will you believe me now, hereafter? shall I have credit with you?


QVAR. Yes faith, shall thou, Numps, and thou art worthy on it, for thou
sweatest for it. I never saw a young Pimpe errant, and his Squire better matched.


WIN-W. Faith, the sister comes after 'hem, well, too.


GRA. Nay, if you saw the Justice her husband, my Guardian, you were fitted for
the Mess, he is such a wise one his way --


WIN-W. I wonder, we see him not here.


GRA. O! he is too serious for this place, and yet better sport then then the
other three, I assure you, Gentlemen: where ere he is, though it be of the Bench.


COK. How do thou call it! A caveat against cutpurses! a good jest, in faith,
I would feign see that Demon, your Cutpurse, He show's his purse boastingly.
you talk of, that delicate handed Devil; they say he walks hereabout; I
would see him walk, now. Look you sister, here, here, let him come, sister,
and welcome. Ballad-man, does any cutpurses haunt hereabout? pray thee raise me
one or two: begin and show me one.


NIG. Sir, this is a spell against 'hem, spicke and span new; and it is made as
'twere in mine own person, and I sing it in mine own defense. But 'twill cost
a penny alone, if you buy it.


COK. No matter for the price, thou do not know me, I see, I am an odd
Bartholmew.


OVE. Have a fine picture, Brother?


COK. O Sister, do you remember the ballads over the Nursery-chimney at home
of my own pasting up, there be brave pictures. Other manner of pictures, than
these, friend.


WAS. Yet these will serve to pick the pictures out of your pockets, you shall
see.


COK. So, I heard 'hem say. Pray thee-mind him not, fellow: he will have an oar
in every thing.


NIG. It was intended Sir, as if a purse should chance to be cut in my
presence, now, I may be blameless, though: as by the sequel, will more
plainly appear.


COK. We shall find that in the matter. Pray thee begin.


NIG. To the tune of Paggingtons Pound, Sir.


COK. Fa, la la la, la la la, fa la la la. Nay, I Will put thee in tune, and all!
mine own country dance! Pray thee begin.


NIG. It is a gentle admonition, you must know, Sir, both to the purse-cutter,
and the purse-bearer.


COK. Not a word more, out of the tune, an' thou love me: Fa, la la la, la la
la, fa la la la. Come, when?


NIG. My masters and friends, and good people draw near,
And look to your purses, for that I do say;

COK. Ha, ha, this chimes! good counsel at first dash.


NIG. And though little money, in them you do bear.
It cost more to get, then to lose in a day.
You often have been told,
Both the young and the old;
And bidden beware of the cutpurse so bold:
Then if you take heed not, free me from the curse,
Who both give you warning, for and, the cutpurse.
Youth, youth, thou had better bin starved by thy Nurse,
Then live to be hanged for cutting a purse.

COK. Good!


COK. Well said! he were to blame that would not in faith.


COK. Good in faith, how say you, Numps? Is there any harm i'this?


NIG. It has bin vpbrayded to men of my trade,
That often times we are the cause of this crime.
Alack and for pity, why should it be said?
As if they regarded or places, or time.
Examples have been
Of some that were seen,
In Westminster Hall, yea the pleaders between,
Then why should the Judges be free from this curse,
More then my poor self, for cutting the purse?
Youth, youth, thou had better bin starved by thy Nurse,
Then live to be hanged for cutting a purse.

COK. The more coxco^bes they that did it, I wusse.


COK. God a mercy for that! why should they be more free indeed?


COK. That again, good Ballad-man, that again. O rare! He sings the burden
with him. I would feign rub mine elbow now, but I dare not pull out my hand.
On, I pray thee, he that made this ballad, shall be Poet to my Masque.


NIG. At Worc'ter'tis known well, and even in the layle,
A Knight of good worship did there show his face,
Against the foul sinners, in zeal for to rail,
And lost (ipso facto) his purse in the place.
Nay, once from the Seat
Of Judgment so great,
A Judge there did lose a fair pouch of veluete.
O Lord for thy mercy, how wicked or worse,
Are those that so venture their necks for a purse! Youth, youth, etc.

COK. Is it possible?


COK. In Faith?


COK. Youth, youth, etc? pray thee stay a little, friend, yet o'thy conscience,
Numps, speak, is there any harm i'this?


WAS. To tell you true, it is too good for you, less you had grace to follow it.


IVS. It does discover enormitie, I Will mark it more: I have not liked a paltry
piece of poetry, so well a good while.


COK. Youth, youth, etc! where is this youth, now? A man must call upon him, for
his own good, and yet he will not appear: look here, here is for him;
handy-dandy, He shows his purse. which hand will he have? On, I pray thee,
with the rest, I do hear of him, but I cannot see him, this Master Youth, the
cutpurse.


NIG. At Plays and at Sermons, and at the Sessions,
It Is daily their practice such booty to make:
Yea, under the Gallows, at Executions,
They stick not the Stare-abouts purses to take.
Nay one without grace,
at a better place,
At Court, and in Christmas, before the Kings face,
Alack then for pity must I bear the curse,
That only belongs to the cunning cutpurse?

COK. That was a fine fellow! I would have him, now.


COK. But where is their cunning, now, when they should use it? they are all
chained now, I warrant you. Youth, youth, thou had better, etc. The
Rat-catchers charm, are all fools and Asses to this! A pox on 'hem, that
they will not come! that a man should have such a desire to a thing, and want
it.


QVAR. Before God, I Would give half the Fair, and 'twere mine, for a cutpurse
for him, to save his longing. He shows his purse again.


COK. Look you Sister, here, here, where is it now? which pocket is it in? for
a wager?


WAS. I beseech you leave your wagers, and let him end his matter, an't may be.


COK. O, are you aedified Numps?


IVS. Indeed he does interrupt him, too much: There Numps spoke to purpose.


COK. again. Sister, I am an Ass, I cannot keep my purse: on, on; I pray
thee, friend.


NIG. But O, you vile nation of cutpurses all,
Relent and repent, Edgworth gets up to him, and ^i^^es him in the ear with a
straw twice to draw his hand out of his pocket. and amend and be sound,
And know that you ought not, by honest men's fall,
Advance your own fortunes, to die above ground,
And though you go gay,
In silks as you may,
It is not the high way to heaven, (as they say)
Repent then, repent you, for better, for worse:
And kiss not the Gallows for cutting a purse.
Youth, youth, thou had better bin steru'd by thy Nurse,
Then live to be hanged for cutting a purse.

WIN W. Will you see sport? look, there is a fellow gathers up to him, mark.


QVA. Good, 'i faith ^ome has lighted on the wrong pocket.


WIN W. He has it, before God he is a brave fellow; pity he should be
detected.


ALL An excellent ballad! an excellent ballad!


EDG. Friend, let me have the first, let me have the first, I pray you.


COK. Pardon me, Sir. First come, first served; and I Will buy the whole bundle
too.


WIN. That conueyance was better then all, did you see it? he has given the
purse to the ballad-singer.


QVAR. Has he?


EDG. Sir, I cry you mercy; I Will not hinder the poor man's profit: pray you
mistake me not.


COK. Sir, I take you for an honest Gentleman; if that be mistaking, I met you
to day before: ha! humh! O God! my purse is gone, my purse, my purse, etc.


WAS. Come, do not make a stir, and cry your self an Ass, through the Fair
before your time.


COK. Why, have thou it, Numpes? good Numpes, how came you by it? I mar'le!


WAS. I pray you seek foam other gamster, to play the fool with: you may lose
it time enough, for all your Fayre-wit.


COK. By this good hand, glove and all, I have lost it already, if thou have it
not: feel else, and Mistress Grace's handkercher, too, out of the the other pocket.


WAS. Why, it is well; very well, exceeding pretty, and well.


EDG. Are you sure you have lost it, Sir?


COK. O God! yes; as I am an honest man, I had it but even now, at youth, youth.


NIG. I hope you suspect not me, Sir.


EDG. Thee? that were a jest indeed! Do thou think the Gentleman is
foolish? where had thou hands, I pray thee? Away Ass, away.


IVS. I shall be beaten again, if I be spied.


EDG. Sir, I suspect an odd fellow, yonder, is stealing away.


OVE. Brother, it is the preaching fellow! you shall suspect him. He was at
your the other purse, you know! Nay, stay, Sir, and view the work you have done,
an' you be beneficed at the Gallows, and preach there, thank your own
handy-worke.


COK. Sir, you shall take no pride in your preferment: you shall be silenced
quickly.


IVS. What do you mean? sweet buds of gentility.


COK. To have my peneworths out on you: Bud. No less then two purses a day,
serve you? I thought you a simple fellow, when my man Numpes beat you, in the
morning, and pitied you --


OVE. So did I, I Will besworne, brother; but now I see he is a lewd, and
pernicious Enormity: (as Master Ouerdoo calls him.)


IVS. Mine own words turned upon me, like swords.


COK. Cannot a man's purse be at quiet for you, in the Masters pocket, but you
must entice it forth, and debauch it?


WAS. Sir, Sir, keep your debauch, and your fine Bartholmew-termes to your
self; and make as much on'hem as you please. But gi'me this from you, in the
mean time: I beseech you, see if I can look to this. Wasp takes the License
from him.


COK. Why, Numps?


WAS. Why? because you are an Ass, Sir, there is a reason the shortest way, and
you will needs have it; now you have got the trick of losing, you would lose your
breech, an't 'twere loofe. I know you, Sir, come, deliver, you will go and
crack the vermin, you breed now, will you? it is very fine, will you have the
truth on it? they are such retchlesse flies as you are, that blow cutpurses
abroad in every corner; your foolish having of money, makes 'hem. An' there
were no wiser then I, Sir, the trade shoud lie open for you, Sir, it should
in faith, Sir. I would teach your wit to come to your head, Sir, as well as your
land to come into your hand, I assure you, Sir.


WIN. Alack, good Numps.


WAS. Nay, Gentlemen, never pity me, I am not worth it: Lord send me at home
once, to Harrow of the Hill again, if I travel any more, call me Coriat;
withal my heart.


QVAR. Stay, Sir, I must have a word with you in private. Do you hear?


EDG. With me, Sir? what is your pleasure? good Sir.


QVAR. Do not deny it. You are a cutpurse, Sir, this Gentleman here, and I,
saw you, nor do we mean to detect you (though we can sufficiently inform our
selves, toward the danger of concealing you) but you must do us a piece of
service.


EDG. Good Gentlemen; do not undo me; I am a civil young man, and but a
beginner, indeed.


QVAR. Sir, your beginning shall bring on your ending, for us. We are no
Catchpoles nor Constables. That you are to undertake, is this; you saw the old
fellow, with the black box, here?


EDG. The little old Governor, Sir?


QVAR. That same: I see, you have flowne him to a mark already. I would have
you get away that box from him, and bring it us.


EDG. Would you have the box and all, Sir? or only that, that is in it? I Will
get you that, and leave him the box, to play with still: (which will be the
harder of the two) because I would gain your worships good opinion of me.


WIN-W. He says well, it is the greater Mastry, and 'twill make the more sport
when it is mist.


EDG. I, and 'twill be the longer a missing, to draw on the sport.


QVAR. But look you do it now, sirrah, and keep your word: or --


EDG. Sir, if ever I break my word, with a Gentleman, may I never read word at
my need. Where shall I find you?


QVAR. Some-where in the Fair, heereabouts. Dispatch it quickly. I would feign
see the careful fool deluded! of all Beasts, I love the serious Ass. He that
takes pains to be one, and plays the fool, with the greatest diligence that
can be.


GRA. Then you would not chose, Sir, but love my Guardian, Justice Ouerdoo, who
is answerable to that description, in every hair of him.


QVAR. So I have heard. But how came you, Mistis Welborne, to be his Ward? or
have relation to him, at first?


GRA. Faith, through a common calamity, he bought me, Sir; and now he will
marry me to his wives brother, this wise Gentleman, that you see, or else I
must pay value of my land


QVAR. S'lid, is there no device of disparagement? or so? talk with some
crafty fellow, some pick lock of the Law! Would I had studied a year longer
in the Innes of Court, and't had been but in your case.


WIN-W. I Master Quarlous, are you proffering?


GRA. You Would bring but little aid, Sir.


WIN-W. (I Will look to you 'ifaith, Gamster.) An unfortunate foolish Tribe you
are fallen into, Lady, I wonder you can endure 'hem.


GRA. Sir, they that cannot work their fetters off; must wear 'hem.


WIN W. You see what care they have on you, to leave you thus.


GRA. Faith the same they have of themselves, Sir. I cannot greatly complain,
if this were all the plea I had against 'hem.


WIN. It Is true! but will you please to withdraw with us, a little, and make
them think, they have lost you. I hope our manners have been such hitherto,
and our language, as will give you no cause, to doubt your self, in our
company.


GRA. Sir, I will give my self, no cause; I am so secure of mine own manners,
as I suspect not yours.


QVAR. Look where John Little-wit comes.


WIN-W. Away, I Will not be seen, by him.


QVAR. No, you were not best, hee'ld tell his mother, the widow.


WIN-W. Heatt, what do you mean?


QVAR. Cry you mercy, is the wind there? must not the widow be named?


ACT. III
SCENE. VI.
JOHN. WIN. TRASH. LEATHERHEAD. KNOCKHVM. BVSY. PVRECRAFT.
Do you hear Win, Win?


WIN. What say you, John?


IOH. While they are paying the reckoning, Win, I Will tell you a thing Win, we
shall never see any sights in the Fair, Win, except you long still, Win, good
Win, sweet Win, long to see some Hobby-horses, and some Drums, and Rattles,
and Dogs, and fine devices, Win. The Bull with the five legs, Win; and the
great Hog: now you have begun with Pigge, you may long for any thing, Win, and
so for my Motion, Win.


WIN. But we shall not eat of the Bull, and the Hog, John, how shall I long then?


IOH. O yes! Win: you may long to see, as well as to taste, Win: how did the
Pothecarie's wife, Win, that longed to see the Anatomy, Win? or the Lady, Win,
that desired to spit in the great Lawyers mouth, after an eloquent pleading? I
assure you they longed, VVin, good Win, go in, and long.


TRA. I think we are rid of our new customer, brother Leatherhead, we shall
hear no more of him. They plot to be gone.


LEA. All the better, let us pack up all, and be gone, before he find us.


TRA. Stay a little, yonder comes a company: it may be we may take some more
money.


KNO, Sir, I will take your counsel, and cut my hair, and leave vapors: I
see, that Tobacco, and Bottle-Ale, and Pig, and Whit, and very Vrsla, her
self, is all vanity.


BVS. Only Pigge was not comprehended in my admonition, the rest were. For
long hair, it is an Ensign of pride, a banner, and the world is full of those
banners, very full of Banners. And, bottle-ale is a drink of Sathan's, a
diet-drinke of Satan's, devised to puff us up, and make us swell in this
latter age of vanity, as the smoke of tobacco, to keep us in mist and error:
But the fleshly woman, (which you call Vrsla) is above all to be avoided,
having the marks upon her, of the three enemies of Man, the World, as being in
the Fair; the Devil, as being in the fire; and and the Flesh, as being her
self.


PVR. Brother Zeale-of-the-land! what shall we do? my daughter Win-the-fight,
is fallen into her fit of longing again.


BVS. For more pig? there is no more, is there?


PVR. To see some sights, in the Fair.


BVS. Sister, let her fly the impurity of the place, swiftly, lest she partake
of the pitch thereof. Thou art the seat of the Beast, O Smithfield, and I will
leave thee. Idolatry peepeth out on every side of thee.


KNO. An excellent right Hypocrite! now his belly is full, he falls a railing
and kicking, the Jade. A very good vapor! I Will in, and joy Vrsla, with
telling, how her pigge works, two and a half he eat to his share. And he has
drunk a pailefull. He eats with his eyes, as well as his teeth.


LEA. What do you lack, Gentlemen? What is it you buy? Rattles, Drumms, Babies.
--


BVS. Peace, with thy Apocryphal wares, thou profane Publican: thy Bells, thy
Dragons, and thy Tobie's Dogs. Thy Hobbyhorse is an Idol, a very Idol, a
feirce and rank Idol: And thou, the Nabuchadnezzar, the proud Nabuchadnezzar
of the Fair, that set'st it up, for children to fall down to, and worship.


LEA. Cry you mercy, Sir, will you buy a fiddle to fill up your noise.


IOH. Look Win. do, look a Gods name, and save your longing. Here be fine
sights.


PVR. I child, so you hate 'hem, as our Brother Zeal does, you may look on
'hem.


LEA. Or what do you say, to a Drum. Sir?


BVS. It is the broken belly of the Beast, and thy Bellows there are his
lungs, and these Pipes are his throat, those Feathers are of his tail, and
thy Rattles, the gnashing of his teeth.


TRA. And what is my ginger-bread? I pray you.


BVS. The prouander that pricks him up. Hence with thy basket of Popery, thy
nest of Images: and whole legend of ginger-worke.


LEA. Sir if you be not quiet, the quicklier, I Will have you clapped fairly by
the heels, for disturbing the Fair.


BVS. The sin of the Fair prouokes me, I cannot be silent.


PVR. Good brother Zeal!


LEA. Sir, I Will make you silent, believe it.


IOH. Il'd give a shilling, you could in faith, friend.


LEA. Sir, give me your shilling, I Will give you my shop, if I do not, and I Will
leave it in pawn with you, in the mean time.


IOH. A match in faith, but do it quickly, then.


BVS. Hinder me not, woman. I was moved in spirit, He speaks to the widow. to
be here, this day, in this Fair, this wicked, and foul Fair; and fitter may
it be a called a foul, then a Fair: To protest against the abuses of it, the
foul abuses of it, in regard of the afflicted Saints, that are troubled, very
much troubled, exceedingly troubled, with the opening of the merchandise of
Babylon again, and the peeping of Popery upon the stals, here, here, in the
high places. See you not Goldylocks, the purple strumpet, there? in her yellow
gown, and green sleeves? the profane pipes, the tinckling timbrells? A shop
of relics!


IOH. Pray you forbear, I am put in trust with 'hem.


BVS. And this Idolatrous Grove of Images, this flasket of Idols! Ouerthrows
the ginger-bread. which I will pull down --


TRA. O my ware, my ware, God bless it.)


BVS. In my zeal, and glory to be thus exercised.


LEA. Here he is, pray you lay hold on his zeal, we cannot sell a whistle,
for him, in tune. Stop his noise, first!


BVS. Thou can not: it is a sanctified noise. Leatherhead enters with officers
I will make a loud and most strong noise, till I have daunted the profane
enemy. And for this cause. --


LEA. Sir, here is no man afraid of you, or your cause. You shall swear it,
in the stocks, Sir.


BVS. I will thrust my self into the stocks, upon the pikes of the Land.


LEA. Carry him away.


PVR. What do you mean, wicked men?


BVS. Let them alone; I fear them not.


IOH. Was not this shilling well ventured, Win? for our liberty? Now we may go
play, and see over the Fair, where we list our selves; my mother is gone after
him, and let her even go, and loose us.


WIN. Yes John, but I know not what to do.


IOH. For what, Win?


WIN. For a thing, I am ashamed to tell you, in faith, and it is too far to go
home.


IOH. I pray thee be not ashamed, VVin. Come, in faith thou shall not be
ashamed, is it any thing about the Hobby-horse-man? an't be, speak freely.


WIN. Hang him, base Bobehin, I scorn him; no, I have very great, what
sha'call'um, John.


IOH. o! Is that all, Win? we will go back to Captain Jordan; to the
pig-womans, Win. he will help us, or she with a dripping pan, or an old kettle,
or something. The poor greasy soul loves you, Win, and after we'll visit the
Fair all over, Win, and, see my Puppet play, Win, you know it is a fine matter,
Win.


LEA. Let Us away, I counseled you to pack up before, Ione.


TRA. A pox of his Bedlem purity. He has spoiled half my ware: but the best
is, we lose nothing, if we miss our first Merchant.


LEA. It shall be hard for him to find, or know us, when we are translated,
Ione.


ACT. IIII.
SCENE. I.
TROVBLE-ALL. BRISTLE. HAGGISE, COKES. JUSTICE. POCHER. BVSY. PVRECRAFT.
MY Masters, I do make no doubt, but you are officers.


BRI. What then, Sir?


TRO. And the Kings loving, and obedient subjects.


BRI. Obedient, friend? take heed what you speak, I advise you: Oliver
Bristle aduises you. His loving subjects, we grant you: but not his obedient,
at this time, by your leave, we know our selves, a little better then so, we
are to command, Sr. and such as you are to be obedient. Here Is one of his
obedient subjects, going to the stocks, and we will make you such another, if
you talk.


TRO. You are all wise enough in your places, I know.


BRI. If you know it, Sir, why do you bring it in question?


TRO. I question nothing, pardon me. I do only hope you have warrant, He goes
away again. for what you do, and so, quit you, and so, multiply you.


HAG. What Is he? bring him up to the stocks there. Why bring you him not up?


TRO. If you have Justice Ouerdoo's warrant, it is well: comes again. you are
safe; that is the warrant of warrants. I Will not give this button, for any man's
warrant else.


BRI. Like enough, Sir, but let me tell you, an' you play away your buttons,
thus, you will want 'hem ere night, goes away. for any store I see about you:
you might keep 'hem, and save pinnes, I wusse.


IVS. What should he be, that does so esteem, and advance my warrant? he
seems a sober and discreet person! it is a comfort to a good conscience, to be
followed with a good fame, in his sufferings. The world will have a pretty taste
by this, how I can bear adversity: and it will beget a kind of reverence,
toward me, hereafter, even from mine enemies, when they shall see I carry my
calamity nobly, and that it does neither break me, nor bend me.


HAG. Come, Sir, here is a place for you to preach in. They put him in the
stocks. Will you put in your leg?


IVS. That I will, cheerfully.


BRI. OF my conscience a Seminary!

he kisses the stocks.
COK. Well my Masters, I Will leave him with you; now I see him bestowed, I Will
go look for my goods, and Numps.


HAG. You may, Sir, I warrant you; where is the the other Bawler? fetch him too,
you shall find 'hem both fast enough.


IVS. In the midst of this tumult, I will yet be the Author of mine own rest,
and not minding their fury, sit in the stocks, in that calm, as shall be able
to trouble a Triumph. comes again,


TRO. Do you assure me upon your words? may I undertake for you, if I be asked
the question; that you have this warrant?


HAG. What Is this fellow, for Gods sake?


TRO. Do but show me Adam Ouerdoo, and I am satisfied. goes out.


BRI. He is a fellow that is distracted, they say; one Trouble-all: he was an
officer in the Court of Pie-poulders, here last year, and put out on his place
by Justice Ouerdoo.


IVS. Ha!


BRI. Upon which, he took an idle conceit, and's run mad upon it. So that
ever since, he will do nothing, but by Justice Ouerdoo's warrant, he will not
eat a crust, nor drink a little, nor make him in his apparel, ready. His
wife, Sirreuerence, cannot get him make his water, or shift his shirt, without
his warrant.


IVS. If this be true, this is my greatest disaster! how am I bound to satisfy
this poor man, that is of so good a nature to me, out of his wits! where
there is no room left for dissembling. comes in.


TRO. If you cannot show me Adam Ouerdoo, I am in doubt of you: I am afraid you
cannot answer it. goes again.


HAG. Before me, Neighbor Bristle (and now I think on it better) Justice
Ouerdoo, is a very parantory person.


BRI. O! are you advised of that? and a severe Iusticer, by your leave.


IVS. Do I hear ill o'that side, too?


BRI. He will sit as upright of the bench, an' you mark him, as a candle in the
socket, and give light to the whole Court in every business.


HAG. But he will burn blew, and swell like a bile (God bless us) an' he be
angry.


BRI. I, and he will be angry too, when his list, that is more: and when he is
angry, be it right or wrong; he has the Law on's side, ever. I mark that too.


IVS. I will be more tender hereafter. I see compassion may become a Justice,
though it be a weakness, I confess; and nearer a vice, then a virtue.


HAG. They take the Justice out. Well, take him out of the stocks again,
we will go a sure way to work, we will have the Ace of hearts of our side, if we
can.


POC. Come, bring him away to his fellow, there. Master Busy, we shall rule
your legs, I hope, though we cannot rule your tongue.


BVS. No, Minister of darkness, no, thou can not rule my tongue, my tongue
it is mine own, and with it I will both knock, and mock down your
Bartholmew-abhominations, till you be made a hissing to the neighbor Parishes,
round about.


HAG. Let him alone, we have devised better upon it.


PVR. And shall he not into the stocks then?


BRI. No, Mistress, we will have 'hem both to Justice Ouerdoo, and let him do
over 'hem as is fitting. Then I, and my gossip Haggis, and my beadle Pocher are
discharged.


PVR. O, I thank you, blessed, honest men!


BRI. Nay, never thank us, but thank this madman that comes here, he put it
in our heads.


PVR. Is he mad? Now heaven increase his madness, and bless it, Comes
again. and thank it, Sir, your poor hand-maide thanks you.


TRO. Have you a warrant? an' you have a warrant, show it.


PVR. Yes, I have a warrant out of the word, to give thanks for removing any
scorn intended to the brethren.


TRO. It is Justice Ouerdoo's warrant, that I look for, if you have not that,
keep your word, I Will keep mine. Quit ye, and multiply ye.


ACT. IIII.
SCENE. II.
EDGVVORTH. TROVBLE-ALL. NIGHTINGALE. COKES. COSTARDMONGER.
COme away Nightingale, I pray thee.


TRO. Whither go you? where is your warrant?


EDG. Warrant, for what, Sir?


TRO. For what you go about, you know how fit it is, an' you have no warrant,
bless you, I Will pray for you, Goes out. that is all I can do.


EDG. What means he?


NIG. A madman that haunts the Fair, do you not know him? it is marvel he
has not more followers, after his ragged heels.


EDG. Beshrew him, he startled me: I thought he had known of our plot. Guilt's
a terrible thing! have you prepared the Costardmonger?


NIG. Yes, and agreed for his basket of pears; he is at the corner here,
ready. And your Prise, he comes down, sailing, that way, all alone; without
his Protector: he is rid of him, it seems.


EDG. I, I know; I should have followed his Protector-ship for a feat I am to
do upon him: But this offered it self, so in the way, I could not let it
escape: here he comes, whistle, Nightingale whistles be this sport called
Dorring the Dottrell.


NIG. Wh, wh, wh, wh, etc.


COK. By this light, I cannot find my ginger-bread-Wife, nor my
Hobby-horse-man in all the Fair, now; to have my money again. And I do not
know the way out on it, to go home for more, do you hear, friend, you that
whistle; what tune is that, you whistle?


NIG. A new tune, I am practicing, Sir.


COK. Do thou know where I dwell, I pray thee? nay, on with thy tune, I have
no such have, for an answer: I Will practice with thee. Nightingale sets his
foots before him, and he falls with his basket.


COS. Buy any pears, very fine pears, pears fine.


COK. Gods so! a musse, a musse, a musse, a musse.


COS. Good Gentleman, my ware, my ware, I am a poor man. Good Sir, my ware.


NIG. Cokes falls ascrambling whilst they run away with his things. Let me
hold your sword, Sir, it troubles you.


COK. Do, and my cloak, an'thou wilt; and my hat, too.


EDG. A delicate great boy! me thinks, he out-scrambles 'hem all. I cannot
persuade my self, but he goes to grammer-schole yet; and plays the trewant,
to day.


NIG. Would he had another purse to cut, Zekiel.


EDG. Purse? a man might cut out his kidneys, I think; and he never feel
'hem, he is so earnest at the sport.


NIG. His soul is half way out on's body, at the game.


EDG. Away, Nightingale: that way.


COK. I think I am furnished for Catherne pears, for one vnder-meale: gi'me
my cloak.


COS. Good Gentleman, give me my ware.


COK. Where Is the fellow, I ga' my cloak to? my cloak? and my hat? He runs
out. ha! Gods'lid, is he gone? thieues, thieues, help me to cry, Gentlemen.


EDG. Away, Costermonger, come to us to Vrsla's. Talk of him to have a soul?
'heart, if he have any more then a thing given him in stead of salt, only to
keep him from stinking, I Will be hanged before my time, presently, where should
it be trow? in his blood? he has not so much to'ard it in his whole body, as
will maintain a good Flea; And if he take this course, he will not have so
much land left, as to rear a Calfe within this twelve mouth. Was there ever
green Plouer so pulled! That his little Ouerseer had been here now, and
been but tall enough, to see him steal pears, in exchange, for his
beauer-hat, and his cloak thus? I must go find him out, next, for his black
box, and his Patent (it feemes) he has of his place; which I think the
Gentleman would have a reuersion of; that spoke to me for it so earnestly.


COK. He comes again. Would I might lose my doublet, and hose, too; as I am an
honest man, and never stir, if I think there be any thing, but thieuing, and
cooz'ning, i'this whole Fair, Bartholmew-fayre, quoth he; an' ever any
Bartholmew had that luck in it, that I have had, I Will be martyred for him,
throws away his pears. and in Smithfield, too. I have paid for my pears, a rot
on 'hem, I Will keep 'hem no longer; you were choake-peares to me; I had bin
better have gone to mum chance for you, I wusse. Me thinks the Fair should not
have used me thus, and 'twere but for my names sake, I would nor have used a dog
of the name, so. O, Numps will triumph, now! Friend, do you know who I am? or
where I lie? I do not my self, I Will besworne. Do but carry me home, and I Will
please thee, I have money enough there, I have lost my self, and my cloak and
my hat; and my fine sword, and my sister, and Numps, and Mistress Grace, (a
Gentlewoman that I should have married) and a cut-worke handkercher, she ga'
me, and two purses to day. And my bargain. o'Hobby-horses and Ginger-bread,
Trouble-all comes again. which grieves me worst of all.


TRO. By whose warrant, Sir, have you done all this?


COK. Warrant? thou art a wise fellow, indeed, as if a man need a warrant to
lose any thing, with.


TRO. Yes, Justice Ouerdo's warrant, a man may get, and lose with, I Will stand
to it.


COK. Justice Ouerdoo? Do thou know him? I lie there, he is my brother in
Law, he married my sister: pray thee show me the way, do thou know the house?


TRO. Sir, show me your warrant, I know nothing without a warrant, pardon me.


COK. Why, I warrant thee, come along: thou shall see, I have wrought pillowes
there, and cambricke sheets, and sweet bags, too. Pray thee guide me to the
house.


TRO. Sir, I Will tell you; go you thither your self, first, alone; tell your
worshipful brother your mind; and but bring me three lines of his hand, or
his Clerks, with Adam Ouerdoo, underneath; here I Will stay you, I Will obey you,
and I Will guide you presently.


COK. S'lid, this is an Ass, I have found him, pox upon me, what do I
talking to such a dull fool; farewell, you are a very Coxcomb, do you hear?


TRO. I think, I am, if Justice Ouerdoo sign to it, I am, and so we are all,
he will quit us all, multiply us all.


ACT. IIII.
SCENE. IIJ.
GRACE. QVARLOVS. VVIN-WIFE. They enter with their swords drawn. TROVBLE-ALL.
EDGVVORTH.
GEntlemen, this is no way that you take: you do but breed one another trouble,
and offense, and give me no contentment at all. I am no she, that affects to be
quarell'd for, or have my name or fortune made the question of men's swords.


QVA. S'lood, we love you.


GRA. If you both love me, as you pretend, your own reason will tell you, but
one can enjoy me; and to that point, there leads a directer line, then by my
infamy, which must follow, if you fight. It Is true, I have professed it to you
ingenuously, that rather then to be yoked with this Bridegroom is appointed
me, I would take up any husband, almost upon any trust. Though Subtilty would
say to me, (I know) he is a fool, and has an estate, and I might govern him,
and enjoy a friend, beside. But these are not my aims, I must have a husband I
must love, or I cannot live with him. I shall ill make one of these politic
wives!


WIN-W. Why, if you can like either of us, Lady, say, which is he, and the
other shall swear instantly to desist.


QVA. Content, I accord to that willingly.


GRA. Sure you think me a woman of an extreme leuity, Gentlemen, or a strange
fancy, that (meeting you by chance in such a place, as this, both at one
instant, and not yet of two hours acquaintance, neither of you deserving before
the other, of me) I should so forsake my modesty (though I might affect one
more particularly) as to say, This is be, and name him.


QVA. Why, wherefore should you not? What should hinder you?


GRA. If you would not give it to my modesty, allow it yet to my wit; give me
so much of woman, and cunning, as not to betray my self impertinently. How can
I judge of you, so far as to a choice, without knowing you more? you are both
equal, and alike to me, yet: and so indifferently affected by me, as each of
you might be the man, if the other were away. For you are reasonable creatures,
you have understanding, and discourse. And if fate send me an understanding
husband, I have no fear at all, but mine own manners shall make him a good
one.


QVAR. Would I were put forth to making for you, then.


GRA. It may be you are, you know not what is toward you: will you consent to a
motion of mine, Gentlemen?


WIN W. What ever it be, we'll presume reasonableness, coming from you.


QVAR. And fitness, too.


GRA. I saw one of you buy a pair of tables, even now.


WIN-W. Yes, here they be, and maiden ones too, unwritten in.


GRA. The fitter for what they may be employed in. You shall write either of
you, here, a word, or a name, what you like best; but of two, or three
syllables at most: and the next person that comes this way (because Destiny has
a high hand in business of this nature) I Will demand, which of the two words,
he, or she does approve; and according to that sentence, fix my resolution,
and affection, without change.


QVAR. Agreed, my word is conceived already.


WIN-W. And mine shall not be long creating after.


GRA. But you shall promise, Gentlemen, not to be curious to know, which of you
it is, taken; but give me leave to conceal that till you have brought me,
either home, or where I may safely tender my self.


WIN-W Why that is but equal.


QVAR. We are pleased.


GRA. Because I will bind both your endeavors to work together, friendly, and
jointly, each to the others fortune, and have my self sitted with some means,
to make him that is forsaken, a part of amends.


QVAR. These conditions are very courteous. Well my word is out of the Arcadia,
then: Argalus.


WIN-W. And mine out of the play, Palemon.


TRO. Have you any warrant for this, Gentlemen? Trouble-all comes again.


QVAR. WIN-W. Ha!


TRO. There must be a warrant had, believe it.


WIN-W. For what?


TRO. Fot whatsoever it is, any thing indeed, no matter what.


QVA. S'light, here is a fine ragged Prophet, dropped down 'ithe nicke!


TRO. Heaven quit you, Gentlemen.


QVA. Nay, stay a little, good Lady, put him to the question.


GRA. You are content, then?


WIN-W. QVAR. Yes yes.


GRA. Sir, here are two names written --


TRO. Is Iudice Ouerdoo, one?


GRA. How, Sir? I pray you read 'hem to your self, it is for a wager between
these Gentlemen, and with a stroke or any difference, mark which you approve
best.


TRO. They may be both worshipful names for ought I know, Mistress, but Adam
Ouerdoo had been worth three of 'hem, I assure you, in this place, that is in
plain english.


GRA. This man amazes me! I pray you, like one of 'hem, Sir.


TRO. I do like him there, that has the best warrant, Mistress, to save your
longing, and (multiply him) It may be this. But I am I still for Justice
Ouerdoo, that is my conscience. And quit you.


WIN-W. Is It done, Lady?


GRA. I, and strangely, as ever I saw! What fellow is this trow?


QVA. No matter what, a Fortune Tellers we have made him. Which is it, which is it.


GRA. Nay, did you not promise, not to enquire?


QVA. S'lid, I forgot that, pray you pardon me. Look, here is our Mercury
come: The License arriues in the finest time, too! it is but scraping out Cokes
his name, and it is done.


WIN-W. How now lime-twig? have thou touched.


EDG. Not yet, Sir, except you would go with me, and see it, it is not worth
speaking on. The act is nothing, without a witness. Yonder he is, your man
with the box fallen into the finest company, and so transported with vapors,
they have got in a Northren Clothier, and one Puppy, a Western man, that is come
to wrestle before my Lord Mayor, anon, and Captain Whit, and one Val Cutting,
that helps Captain Jordan to roar, a circling boy: with whom your Numps, is
so taken, that you may strip him of his clothes, if you will. I Will undertake
to geld him for you; if you had but a Surgeon, ready, to sear him. And
Mistress Justice, there, is the goodest woman! she does so love 'hem all
over, in terms of Justice, and the Style of authority, with her hood upright
-- that I beseech you come away Gentlemen, and see it.


QVAR. S light, I would not lose it for the Fair, what'll you do, Ned?


WIN W. Why, stay here about for you, Mistress Welborne must not be seen.


QVA. Do so, and find out a Priest in the mean time, I Will bring the License.
Lead, which way is it?


EDG. Here, Sir, you are of the backeside of the Booth already, you may hear the
noise.


ACT. IIIJ.
SCENE. IV.
KNOCKHVM. NORDERN. PVPPY. CVTTING. WHIT. EDGVVORTH. QVARLOVS. OVER DO. WASPE.
BRISTLE.
Whit, bid Vall Cutting continue the vapors for a lift, Whit, for a lift.


NOR. I Will ne mare, I Will ne mare, the eale's too meeghty.


KNO. How now! my Galloway Nag, the staggers? ha! Whit, gi'him a slit in the
forehead. Cheer up, man, a needle, and thread to stitch his ears. I Would cure
him now an' I had it, with a little butter, and garlike, long-pepper, and
grains. Where Is my horn? I Will gi'him a mash, presently, shall take away this
dizzinesse.


PVP. Why, where are you zurs? do you vlinch, and leave us in the zuds, now?


NOR. I Will ne mare, I'is even as vull as a Paipers bag, by my troth, I.


PVP. Do my Northern cloth zhrinke in the wetting? ha?


KNO. Why, well said, old Flea-bitten, thou wilt never tire, I see.


CVT. They fall to their vapors, again. No, Sir, but he may tire, if it
please him.


WHI. Who told dee sho? that he vuld never teer, man?


CVT. No matter who told him so, so long as he knows.


KNO. Nay, I know nothing, Sir, pardon me there.


EDG. They are at it still, Sir, this they call vapors.


WHI. He shall not pardon dee, Captain, dou shall not be pardoned. Pre'de
shweete heart do not pardon him.


CVT. S'light, I Will pardon him, an'I list, whosoever says nay to it.


QVAR. Where Is Numps? I miss him. Here they continue their game of vapors,
which is non sense. Every man to oppose the last man that spoke: whethe it
concerned him, or no.


WAS. Why, I say nay to it.


QVAR. O there he is!


KNO. To what do you say nay, Sir?


WAS. To any thing, whatsoever it is, so long as I do not like it.


WHI. Pardon me, little man, dou musht like it a little.


CVT. No, he must not like it at all, Sir, there you are in the wrong.


WHI. I tinke I be, he musht not like it, indeed.


CVT. Nay, then he both must, and will like it, Sir, for all you.


KNO. If he have reason, he may like it, Sir.


WHI. By no meansh Captain, upon reason, he may like nothing upon reason.


WAS. I have no reason, nor I will hear of no reason, nor I will look for no
reason, and he is an Ass, that either knows any, or looks for it from me.


CVT. Yes, in some sense you may have reason, Sir.


WAS. I, in some sense, I care not if I grant you.


WHI. Pardon me, thou ougsht to grant him nothing, in no shensh, if dou do
love die shelfe, angry man.


WAS. Why then, I do grant him nothing; and I have no sense.


CVT. It Is true, thou have no sense indeed.


WAS. S'lid, but I have sense, now I think on it better, and I will grant him
any thing, do you see?


KNO. He is in the right, and does utter a sufficient vapor.


CVT. Nay, it is no sufficient vapor, neither, I deny that.


KNO. Then it is a sweet vapor.


CVT. It may be a sweet vapor.


WAS. Nay, it is no sweet vapor, neither, Sir, it stinkes, and I Will stand to it.


WHI. Yes, I tinke it dosh shtinke, Captain. All vapor dosh shtinke.


WAS. Nay, then it does not stink, Sir, and it shall not stink.


CVT. By your leave, it may, Sir.


WAS. I, by my leave, it may stink, I know that.


WHI. Pardon me, thou knowesht nothing, it cannot by thy leave, angry man.


WAS. How can it not?


KNO. Nay, never question him, for he is in the right.


WHI. Yesh, I am i would right, I confesh it, so ish de little man too.


WAS. I Will have nothing confessed, that concerns me. I am not in the right, nor
never was in the right, nor never will be in the right, while I am in my right
mind,


CVT. Mind? why, here is no man minds you, Sir, They drink again. nor any
thing else.


PVP. Vreind, will you mind this that we do?


QVA. Call you this vapors? this is such beltching of quarrel, as I never
heard. Will you mind your business, Sir?


EDG. You shall see, Sir.


NOR. I Will ne maire, my waimb warkes too mickle with this auready.


EDG. Will you take that, Master Waspe, that no body should mind you?


WAS. Why? what have you to do? is it any matter to you?


EDG. No, but me thinks you should not be vnminded, though,


WAS. Nor, I wu'not be, now I think on it, do you hear, new acquaintance,
does no man mind me, say you?


CVT. Yes, Sir, every man here minds you, but how?


WAS. Nay, I care as little how, as you do, that was not my question.


WHI. No, noting was ty question, tou art a learned man, and I am a valiant
man, in faith la, tou shall speak for me, and I will fight for tee.


KNO. Fight for him, Whit? A gross vapor, he can fight for himself.


WAS. It may be I can, but it may be, I wu' not, how then?


CVT. Why, then you may choose.


WAS. Why, and I Will choose whether I Will choose or no.


KNO. I think you may, and it is true; and I allow it for a resolute vapor.


WAS. Nay, then, I do think you do not think, and it is no resolute vapor.


CVT. Yes, in some sort he may allow you.


KNO. In no sort, Sir, pardon me, I can allow him nothing. You mistake the
vapor.


WAS. He mistakes nothing, Sir, in no sort.


WHI. Yes, I pre dee now, let him mistake.


WAS. A turd in your teeth, never pre dee me, for I will have nothing mistaken.


KNO. They fall by the ears. Turd, ha turd? a noisome vapor, strike Whit.


OVE. Why, Gentlemen, why Gentlemen, I charge you upon my authority, conserve
the peace. In the Kings name, and my Husbands, put up your weapons, I shall be
driven to commit you my self, else:


QVA. Ha, ha, ha.


WAS. Why do you laugh, Sir?


QVA. Sir, you will allow me my christian liberty. I may laugh, I hope.


CVT. In some sort you may, and in some sort you may not, Sir.


KNO. Nay in some sort, Sir, he may neither laugh, nor hope, in this company.


WAS. Yes, then he may both laugh, and hope in any sort, an't please him.


QVA. Faith, and I will then, for it does please me exceedingly.


WAS. No exceeding neither, Sir.


KNO. No, that vapor is too lofty.


QVA. Gentlemen, I do not play well at your game of vapors, I am not very
good at it, but --


CVT. Do you hear, Sir? I would speak with you in circle? He draws a
circle on the ground.


QVA. In circle, Sir? what would you with me in circle?


CVT. Can you lend me a Piece, a Iacobus? in circle?


QVA. S'lid, your circle will prove more costly then your vapors, then. Sir,
no, I lend you none.


CVT. Your beard's not well turned up, Sir.


QVA. How Rascal? are you playing with my beard? They draw all, and fight.
I Will break circle with you.


PVP. NOR. Gentlemen, Gentlemen!


KNO. Gather up, Whit, gather up, Whit, good vapors.


OVE. What mean you? are you Rebels? Gentlemen? shall I send out a Serieant
at Arms, or a Writ o'Rebellion, against you? I Will commit you upon my
woman-hood, for a Riot, upon my Iustice-hood, if you persist.


WAS. Upon your Iustice-hood? Mary shite o'your hood, you will commit? Spoke like
a true Justice of peace's wife, indeed, and a fine female Lawyer! turd in your
teeth for a fee, now.


OVER. Why, Numps, in Master Ouerdoo's name, I charge you.


WAS. Good Mistress Vnderdoo hold your tongue.


OVER. Alas! poor Numps.


WAS. Alas! and why alas from you, I beseech you? or why poor Numps, goody
Rich? am I come to be pitied by your tuft taffata now? why Mistress, I knew
Adam, the Clerk, your husband, when he was Adam Scriuener, and writ for two
pence a sheet, as high as he bears his head now, or you your hood, Dame. What
are you, Sir? The watch comes in.


BRI. We be men, and no Infidells; what is the matter, here, and the noyses?
can you tell?


WAS. Heart, what have you to do? cannot a man quarrel in quietness? but he
must be put out on it by you? what are you?


BRI. Why, we be his Majesty's Watch, Sir.


WAS. Watch? S'blood, you are a sweet watch, indeed. A body would think, and
you watched well a nights, you should be contented to sleep at this time a
day. Get you to your fleas, and your flocke-beds, you Rogues, your kennells,
and lie down close.


BRI. Down? yes, we will down, I warrant you, down with him in his Majesty's
name, down, down with him, and carry him away, to the pigeon-holes.


OVE. I thank you honest friends, in the behalf of the Crown, and the peace,
and in Master Ouerdoo's name, for suppressing enormities.


WHI. Stay, Bristle, here ish a noder brash o'drunkards, but very quiet,
special drunkards, will pay dee, five shillings very well. Take 'hem to dee,
in de graish of God* one of hem does change cloth, for Ale in the Fair, here,
te toder ish a strong man, a mighty man, my Lord Mayors man, and a wrastler.
He has wrashled so long with the bottle, here, that the man with the beard,
hash almosht streeke up hish heelsh.


BRI. S'lid, the Clerk of the Market, has been to cry him all the Fair over,
here, for my Lords service.


WHI. Tere he ish, pre de taik him hensh, and make ty best on him. How now
woman of shilke, vat ailsh ty shweet faish? art tou melancholy?


OVE. A little distempered with these enormities; shall I entreat a courtesy of
you, Captain?


WHI. Entreat a hundred, velvet voman, I will do it, shpeake out.


OVE. I cannot with modesty speak it out, but --


WHI. I will do it, and more, and more, for dee. What Vrsla, and't be bitch,
and't be baud and't be!


VRS. How now Rascal? what roar you for? old Pimpe.


WHI. Here, put up de cloakes Vrsh; de purchase, pre dee now, shweet Vrsh,
help dis good brave voman, to a Jordan, and't be.


VRS. S'lid call your Captain Jordan to her, can you not?


WHI. Nay, pre dee leave die consheits, and bring the velvet woman to de --


VRS. I bring her, hang her: heart must I find a common pot for every punque
in your purlews?


WHI. O good voordsh, Vrsh, it ish a guest o'veluet, i'fait la.


VRS. Let her sell her hood, and buy a sponge, with a pox to her, my vessel,
employed Sir. I have but one, and it is the bottom of an old bottle. An honest
Proctor, and his wife, are at it, within, if she will stay her time, so.


WHI. As soon ash tou cansht shwet Vrsh. Of a valiant man I tinke I am the
patientsh man in the world, or in all Smithfield.


KNO. How now Whit? close vapors, stealing your leaps? covering in corners, ha?


WHI. No fait, Captain, dough tou beesht a vishe man, die vit is a mile hence,
now. I vas procuring a shmall courtesy, for a woman of fashion here.


OVE. Yes, Captain, though I am Justice of peace's wife, I do love Men of
war, and the Sons of the sword, when they come before my husband.


KNO. Say thou so Filly? thou shall have a leap presently, I Will horse thee
my self, else.


VRS. Come, will you bring her in now? and let her talk her turn?


WHI. Gramercy good Vrsh, I tanke dee.


OVER. Master Ouerdoo shall thank her.


ACT. IIII.
SCENE. V.
JOHN. WIN. VRSLA. KNOCKHVM. WHIT. OVERDOO. ALES.
Good Ga'mere Vrs; Win, and I, are exceedingly beholden to you, and to Captain
Jordan, and Captain Whit. Win, I Will be bold to leave you, i'this good company,
Win: for half an hour, or so Win, while I go, and see how my matter goes
forward, and if the Puppets be perfect: and then I Will come and fetch you, Win.


WIN. Will you leave me alone with two men, John?


IOH. I, they are honest Gentlmen Win, Captain Jordan, and Captain Whit,
they will use you very ciuilly, Win, God b'w'you, Win.


VRS. What Is her husband gone?


KNO. On his false, gallop, Vrs, away.


VRS. An' you be right Bartholmew-birds, now show your selves so: we are undone
for want of foul in the Fair, here. Here will be Zekiell Edgworth, and three
or four gallants, with him at night, and I have neither Plouer nor Quail for
'hem: persuade this between you two, to become a Bird of the game, while I
work the velvet woman, within, (as you call her.)


KNO. I conceive thee, Vrs! go thy ways, do thou hear, Whit? is it not
pity, my delicate dark chestnut here, with the fine lean head, large
forehead, round eyes, even mouth, sharp ears, long neck, thin cr^st,
close withers, plain back, deep sides, short fillets, and full flanks: with
a round belly, a plumpe buttocke, large thighs, knit knees, straight legs,
short pa^^ernes, smooth hoofes, and short heels; should lead a dull honest
woman's life, that might live the life of a Lady?


WHI. Yes, by my fait, and trot, it is, Captain: de honesht woman's life is a
scuruy dull life, indeed, la.


WIN. How, Sir? is an honest woman's life a scuruy life?


WHI. Yes fait, shweet heart, believe him, de leefe of a Bondwoman! but if dou
vilt harken to me, I will make tee a freewoman, and a Lady: dou shall live
like a Lady, as te Captain saish.


KNO. I, and be honest too sometimes: have her wiers, and her tires, her green
gowns, and velvet petticoates.


WHI. I, and ride to Ware and Rumford i'dy Coash, sheede Players, be in love
vit 'hem; sup vit gallantsh, be drunk, and cost de noting.


KNO. Brave vapors!


WHI. And lie by twenty on'hem, if dou pleash shweet heart.


WIN. What, and be honest still, that were fine sport.


WHI. Tish common, shweet heart, tou may do it by my hand: it shall be
justified to ty husbands faish, now: tou shall be as honesht as the skin
between his hornsh, la!


KNO. Yes, and wear a dressing, top, and top-gallant, to compare with ere a
husband on 'hem all, for a fore-top: it is the vapor of spirit in the wife, to
cuckold, now adays; as it is the vapor of fashion, in the husband, not to
suspect. Your prying cat-eyed-citizen, is an abominable vapor.


WIN. Lord, what a fool have I been!


WHI. Mend then, and do every ting like a Lady, hereafter, never know ty
husband, from another man.


KNO. Nor any one man from another, but in the dark.


WHI. I, and then it ish no dishgrash to know any man.


VRS. Help, help here.


KNO. How now? what vapour's there?


VRS. O, you are a sweet Ranger! and look well to your walks. Yonder is your
Punque of Turnbull, Ramping Ales, has fallen upon the poor Gentlewoman within,
and pulled her hood over her ears, Alice eners, beating he Iustice's wife. and
her hair through it.


OVE. Help, help, in the Kings name.


ALE. A mischief on you, they are such as you are, that undo us, and take our
trade from us, with your tuft-taffata hanches.


KNO. How now Alice!


ALE. The poor common whores can have no traffic, for the privy rich ones;
your caps and hoods of velvet, call away our customers, and lick the fat from
us.


VRS. Peace you foul ramping Jade, you --


ALE. Od's foot, you Bawd in grease, are you talking?


KNO. Why, Alice, I say.


ALE. Thou Sow of Smithfield, thou.


VRS. Thou tripe of Turnebull.


KNO. Cat-a-mountaine-vapours! ha!


VRS. You know where you were taw'd lately, both lashed, and slashed you were
in Bridewell.


ALE. I, by the same token, you rid that week, and broake out the bottom
of the Cart, Night-tub.


KNO. Why, Lion face! ha! do you know who I am? shall I tear ruff, slit
wastcoat, make rags of petticoat? ha! go to, vanish, for fear of vapors.
Whit, a kick, Whit, in the parting vapor. Come brave woman, take a good heart,
thou shall be a Lady, too.


WHI. Yes fait, dey shall all both be Ladies, and write Madame. I will do it my
self for them. Do, is the vord, and D is the middle letter of Madame, D D, put
'hem together, and make deeds, without which, all words are alike, la.


KNO. It Is true, Vrsla, take 'hem in, open thy wardrope, and fit 'hem to their
calling. Greene-gownes, Crimson-petticoats, green women! my Lord Majors green
women! guests of the Game, true bred. I Will provide you a Coach, to take the
air, in.


VVIN. But do you think you can get one?


KNO. O, they are as common as wheelebarrowes, where there are great dunghills.
Every Pettifoggers wife, has 'hem, for first he buys a Coach, that he may
marry, and then he marries that he may be made Cuckold in it: For if their
wives ride not to their Cuckolding, they do 'hem no credit. Hide, and be
hidden; ride, and be ridden, says the vapor of experience.


ACT. IIIJ.
SCENE. VI.
TROBLE-ALL. KNOCKHVM. WHIT. QVARLOVS. EDGVVORTH. BRISTLE. WASPE. HAGGISE.
JUSTICE. BVSY. PVRE-CRAFT.
BY what warrant does it say so?


KNO. Ha! mad child of the Pye-pouldres, art thou there? fill us a fresh kan,
Vrs, we may drink together.


TRO. I may not drink without a warrant, Captain.


KNO. S'lood, thou'll not stale without a warant, shortly. Whit, Give me pen,
ink and paper. I Will draw him a warrant presently.


TRO. It must be Justice Ouerdoo's?


KNO. I know, man, Fetch the drink, Whit.


WHI. I pre dee now, be very brief, Captain; for de new Ladies stay for dee.


KNO. O, as brief as can be, here it is already. Adam Ouerdoo.


TRO. Why, now, I Will pledge you, Captain.


KNO. Drink it off. I Will come to thee, anon, again.


QVA. Well, Sir. You are now discharged: Quarlous to the Cutpurse. beware of
being spied, hereafter.


EDG. Sir, will it please you, enter in here, at Vrsla's; and take part of a
silken gown, a velvet petticoate, or a wrought smock; I am promised such: and
I can spare any Gentleman a moity.


QVA. Keep it for your companions in beastliness, I am none of'hem, Sir. If I
had not already forgiven you a greater trespass, or thought you yet worth my
beating, I would instruct your manners, to whom you made your offers. But go
your ways, talk not to me, the hangman is only fit to discourse with you;
the hand of Beadle is too merciful a punishment for your Trade of life. I am
sorry I employed this fellow; for he thinks me such: Facinus quos inquinat,
aequat. But, it was for sport. And would I make it serious, the getting of this
License is nothing to me, without other circumstances concur. I do think how
impertinently I labor, if the word be not mine, that the ragged fellow
marked: And what advantage I have given Ned Win-wife in this time now, of
working her, though it be mine. He Will go near to form to her what a
debauched Rascal I am, and fright her out of all good conceit of me: I should
do so by him, I am sure, if I had the opportunity. But my hope is in her
temper, yet; and it must needs be next to despair, that is grounded on any
part of a woman's discretion. I would give by my troth, now, all I could spare
(to my clothes, and my sword) to meet my tattered sooth-sayer again, who was
my judge i'rhe question, to know certainly whose word he has damned or saved.
For, till then, I live but under a Repreiue. I must seek him. Who be these?


WAS. Ent Waspe with the officers. Sir, you are a welsh Cuckold, and a prating
Runt, and no Constable.


BRI. You say very well. Come put in his leg in the middle roundell, and let
him hole there.


WAS. You stink of leeks, Metheglyn, and cheese. You Rogue.


BRI. Why, what is that to you, if you sit sweetly in the stocks in the mean
time? if you have a mind to stink too, your breeches sit close enough to your
bumm. Sit you merry, Sir.


QVA How now, Numps?


WAS. It is no matter, how; pray you look off.


QVA. Nay I Will not offend you, Numps. I thought you had sat there to be seen.


WAS. And to be sold, did you not? pray you mind your business, an' you have
any.


QVA. Cry you mercy, Numps. Does your leg lie high enough?


BRI. How now, neighbor Haggise, what says Justice Ouerdo's worship, to the
other offenders?


HAG. Why, he says just nothing, what should he say? Or where should he say?
He is not to be found, Man. He have not been seen in the Fair, here, all this
liue-long day, never since seven a clock in the morning. His Clearks know not
what to think on it. There is no Court of Pie-poulders yet. Here they be
returned.


BRI. What shall be done with 'hem, then? in your discretion?


HAG. I think we were best put 'hem in the stocks, in discretion (there they
will be safe in discretion) for the valor of an hour, or such a thing, till
his worship come. As they open the stocks, Waspe puts his shoe on his hand,
and slips it in for his leg.


BRI It is but a hole matter, if we do, Neighbor Haggise, come, Sir, here
is company for you, heave up the stocks.


WAS. I shall put a trick upon your welsh diligence, perhaps.


BRI. Put in your leg, Sir.


QVA. What, Rabby Busy! is he come?


BVS. I do obey thee, the Lion may roar, but he cannot bite. They bring Busy,
and put him in. I am glad to be thus separated from the heathen of the land,
and put a part in the stocks, for the holy cause.


WAS. What are you, Sir?


BVS. One that rejoices in his affliction, and sits here to prophecy, the
destruction of Fayres and May-games, Wakes, and Whitson-ales, and does sigh and
groan for the reformation, of these abuses.


WAS. And do you sigh, and groan too, or rejoice in your affliction?


IVS. I do not feel it, I do not think of it, it is a thing without me:
Adam, thou art above these battries, these contumelies. In te manca ruit
fortuna, as thy friend Horace says; thou art one, Quem neque pauperies, neque
mors, neque vincula terrent,. And therefore as another friend of thine says,
(I think it be thy friend Persius) Non te quaesiueris extra.


QVA. What Is here! a Stoic in the stocks? the Fool is turned Philosopher.


BVS. Friend, I will leave to communicate my spirit with you, if I hear any
more of those superstitious relics, those lists of Latin, the very tags of
Rome* and patches of Popery.


WAS. Nay, an' you begin to quarrel, Gentlemen, I Will leave you. I have paid for
quarrelling too lately: look you, a device, He get^ out. but shifting in a
hand for a foot. God b'w'you.


BVS. Will thou then leave thy brethren in tribulation?


WAS. For this once, Sir.


BVS. Thou art a halting Neutrall stay him there, stop him: that will not
endure the heat of persecution.


BRI. How now, what is the matter?


BVS. He is fled, he is fled, and dares not sit it out.


BRI. What, has he made an escape, which way? follow, neighbor Haggise.


PVR. O me! in the stocks! have the wicked prevailed?


BVS. Peace religious sister, it is my calling, comfort your self, an
extraordinary calling, and done for my better standing, my surer standing,
hereafter.


TRO. By whose warrant, by whose warrant, this? The madman enters.


QVA. O, here is my man! dropped in, I looked for.


IVS. Ha!


PVR. O good Sir, they have set the faithful, here to be wondered at; and
provided holes, for the holy of the land.


TRO. Had they warrant for it? showed they Iusticce Ouerdoo's hand? if they had
no warrant, they shall answer it.


BRI. Sure you did not lock the stocks sufficiently, neighbor Toby!


HAG. No! see if you can lock 'hem better.


BRI. They are very sufficiently locked, and truly, yet some thing is in the
matter.


TRO. True, your warrant is the matter that is in question, by what warrant?


BRI. Mad man, hold your peace, I will put you in his room else, in the very
same hole, do you see?


QVA. How! is he a madman!


TRO. Show me Justice Ouerdoo's warrant. I obey you.


HAG. You are a mad fool, hold your tongue.


TRO. Shows his Kanne. In Justice Ouerdoo's name, I drink to you, and here is
my warrant.


IVS. Alas poor wretch! how it earnes my heart for him!


QVA. If he be mad, it is in vain to question him. I Will try though, friend:
there was a Gentlewoman, showed you two names, some hour since, Argalus and
Palemon, to mark in a book, which of 'hem was it you marked?


TRO. I mark no name, but Adam Ouerdoo, that is the name of names, he only
is the sufficient Magistrate; and that name I reverence, show it me.


QVA. This fellows mad indeed: I am further off, now, then before.


IVS. I shall not breath in peace, till I have made him some amends.


QVA. Well, I will make another use of him, is come in my head: I have a nest
of beards in my Truncke, one some thing like his.


BRI. The watchmen come back again. The madman fights with 'hem, and they
leave open the stocks. This mad fool has made me that I know not whether I I
have locked the stocks or no, I think I locked 'hem.


TRO. Take Adam Ouerdoo in your mind, and fear nothing.


BRI. S'lid, madness it self, hold thy peace, and take that.


TRO. Strikest thou without a warrant? take thou that.


BVS. We are delivered by miracle; fellow in fetters, let us not refuse the
means, this madness was of the spirit: The malice of the enemy has mocked it
self.


PVR. Mad do they call him! the world is mad in error, but he is mad in
truth: I love him of the sudden, (the cunning man said all true) and shall love
him more, and more. How well it becomes a man to be mad in truth! O, that I
might be his yoake-fellow, and be mad with him, what a many should we draw to
madness in truth, with us!


BRI. How now! all escaped? where is the woman? it is witchcraft! The watch
missing them are affrighted. Her velvet hat is a witch, of my conscience, or my
key! the one. The madman was a Devil, and I am an Ass; so bless me, my place,
and mine office.


ACT. V.
SCENE. I.
LANTERN. FILCHER. SHARKVVEL.
WEll, Luck and Saint Bartholmew; out with the sign of our invention, in the
name of Wit, and do you beat the Drum, the while; All the foul in the Fair, I
mean, all the dirt in Smithfield, (that is one of Master Littlewit's
Carwhitchets now) will be thrown at our Banner to day, if the matter does not
please the people. O the Motions, that I Lantern Leatherhead have given light
to, in my time, since my Master Pod dyed! Jerusalem was a stately thing; and so
was Niniue, and the city of Norwich, and Sodom and Gomorrah; Pod was a Master
of motions before him. with the rising of the prentises; and pulling down the
bawdy houses there, upon Shroue-Tuesday; but the Gunpowder-plot, there was a
get-penny! I have presented that to an eighteen, or twenty pence audience,
nine times in an afternoon. Your home-borne proiects prove ever the best, they
are so easy, and familiar, they put too much learning i'their things now
o'dayes: and that I fear will be the spoil of this. Little-wit? I say,
Mickle-wit! if not too mickle! look to your gathering there, good man Filcher.


FILL. I warrant you, Sir.


LAN. And there come any Gentlefolks, take two pence a piece, Sharkwell.


SHA. I warrant you, Sir, three pence, an'we can.


ACT. V.
SCENE. II.
JUSTICE. WIN-WIFE. GRACE. QVARLOVS. PVRE-CRAFT.
The Justice comes in like a Porter. THis later disguise, I have borrowed of a
Porter, shall carry me out to all my great and good ends; which how ever
interrupted, were never destroyed in me: neither is the hour of my severity
yet come, to reveal my self, wherein cloud-like, I will break out in rain,
and hail, lightning, and thunder, upon the head of enormity. Two maine works I
have to prosecute: first, one is to invent some satisfaction for the poor,
kind wretch, who is out of his wits for my sake, and yonder I see him coming,
I will walk aside, and project for it.


WIN. I wonder where Tom Quarlous is, that he returns not, it may be he is
struck in here to seek us.


GRA. See, here is our madman again.


QVA. I have made my self as like him, as his gown, and cap will give me
leave. Quarlous in the habit of the madman is mistaken by Mrs Pure-craft.


PVR. Sir, I love you, and would be glad to be mad with you in truth.


WIN-W. How! my widow in love with a madman?


PVR. Verily, I can be as mad in spirit, as you.


QVA. By whose warrant? leave your canting. Gentlewoman, have I found you?
(save ye, quit ye, and multiply ye) where is your book? He desires to see
the book of Mistress Grace. 'twas a sufficient name I marked, let me see it,
be not afraid to shew't me.


GRA. What would you with it, Sir?


QVA. Mark it again, and again, at your service.


GRA. Here it is, Sir, this was it you marked.


QVA. Palemon? fare you well, fare you well.


WIN-W. How, Palemon!


GRA. Yes faith, he has discovered it to you, now, and therefore 'twere vain
to disguise it longer, I am yours, Sir, by the benefit of your fortune.


WIN-W. And you have him Mistress, believe it, that shall never give you cause
to repent her benefit, but make you rather to think that in this choice, she
had both her eyes.


GRA. I desire to put it to no danger of protestation.


QVA. Palemon, the word, and Win-wife the man?


PVR. Good Sir, vouchsafe a yoakefellow in your madness, shun not one of the
sanctified sisters, that would draw with you, in truth.


QVA. Away, you are a heard of hypocritical proud Ignorants, rather wild,
then mad. Fitter for woods, and the society of beasts th^n houses, and the
congregation of men. You are the second part of the society of Canters,
Outlawes to order and Discipline, and the only priuiledg'd Church-robbers of
Christendom. Let me alone. Palemon, the word, and Winwife the man?


PVR. I must uncover my self unto him, or I shall never enjoy him, for all the
cunning men's promises. Good Sir, hear me, I am worth six thousand pound, my
love to you, is become my rack, I Will tell you all, and the truth: since you
hate the hyporisie of the party-colored brotherhood. These seven years, I
have been a wilful holy widow, only to draw feasts, and gifts from my
entangled suitors: I am also by office, an assisting sister of the Deacons, and
a deuourer, in stead of a distributer of the alms. I am a special maker of
marriages for our decayed Brethren, with our rich widows; for a third part of
their wealth, when they are married, for the relief of the poor elect: as
also our poor handsome young Virgins, with our wealthy Batchelors, or
Widdowers; to make them steal from their husbands, when I have confirmed them
in the faith; and got all put into their custodies. And if I have not my
bargain, they may sooner turn a scolding drab, in to a silent Minister, then
make me leave pronouncing reprobation, and damnation unto them. Our elder,
Zeale-of-the-land, would have had me, but I know him to be the capital Knave
of the land, making himself rich, by being made Feoffee in trust to deceased
Brethren, and coozning their heirs, by swearing the absolute gift of their
inheritance. And thus having eased my conscience, and vtter'd my heart, with
the tongue of my love: enjoy all my deceits together. I beseech you. I should
not have revealed this to you, but that in time I think you are mad, and I
hope you will think me so too, Sir?


QVA. Stand aside, I Will answer you, presently. He consider with himself of it.
Why should not I marry this six thousand pound, now I think on it? and a good
trade too, that she has beside, ha? The the other wench, Winwife, is sure of;
there is no expectation for me there! here I may make my self some sauer, yet,
if she continue mad, there is the question. It is money that I want, why should
I not marry the money, when it is offered me? I have a License and all, it is
but razing out one name, and putting in another. There Is no playing with a
man's fortune! I am resolved! I were truly mad, an' I would not! well, come
your ways, follow me, an' you will be mad, He takes her along with him. I Will
show you a warrant!


PVR. Most zealously, it is that I zealously desire.


IVS. Sir, let me speak with you. The Justice calls him.


QVA. By whose warrant?


IVS. The warrant that you tender, and respect so; Justice Ouerdoo's! I am the
man, friend Trouble-all, though thus disguised (as the careful Magistrate
ought) for the good of the Republique, in the Fair, and the weeding out of
enormity. Do you want a house or meat, or drink, or clothes? speak
whatsoever it is, it shall be supplied you, what want you?


QVA. Nothing but your warrant.


IVS. My warrant? for what?


QVA. To be gone, Sir.


IVS. Nay, I pray thee stay, I am serious, and have not many words, nor much
time to exchange with thee; think what may do thee good.


QVA. Your hand and seal, will do me a great deal of good; nothing else in
the whole Fair, that I know.


IVS. If it were to any end, thou should have it willingly.


QVA. Why, it will satisfy me, that is end enough, to look on; an' you will
not gi' it me, let me go.


IVS. Alas! thou shall have it presently* I Will but step into the Scriueners, The
Justice goes out. hereby, and bring it. Do not go away.


QVA. Why, this mad man's shape, will prove a very fortunate one, I think! can
a ragged robe produce these effects? if this be the wise Justice, and he bring
me his hand, I shall go near to make some use on it. and returns. He is come
already!


IVS. Look thee! here is my hand and seal, Adam Ouerdoo, if there be any
thing to be written, above in the paper, that thou want now, or at any time
hereafter; think on it; it is my deed, I deliver it so, can your friend write?


QVA. He urges Mistress Purecraft. Her hand for a witness, and all is well.


IVS. With all my heart.


QVA. Why should not I have the conscience, to make this a bond of a thousand
pound? now, or what I would else?


IVS. Look you, there it is; and I deliver it as my deed again.


QVA. Let us now proceed in madness.


IVS. He takes her in with him. Well, my conscience is much eased; I have done
my part, though it does him no good, yet Adam has offered satisfaction! The
sting is removed from hence: poor man, he is much altered with his affliction,
it has brought him low! Now, for my other work, reducing the young man (I have
followed so long in love) from the brinke of his bane, to the center of safety.
Here, or in some such like vain place, I shall be sure to find him. I will
wait the good time.


ACT. V.
SCENE. IIJ.
COKES. SHAKRVVEL. JUSTICE. FILCHER. JOHN. LANTERN.
HOw now? what is here to do? friend, art thou the Master of the Monuments?


SHA. It Is a Motion, an't please your worship,


IVS. My fantastical brother in Law, Master Bartholmew Cokes!


COK. A Motion, what is that? He reads the Bill. The ancient modern history of
Hero, and Leander, otherwise called The Touchstone of true Love, with as true a
trial of friendship, between Damon, and Pithias, two faithful friends of the
Bankside? pretty in faith, what is the meaning on it? is it an Interlude? or what
is it?


FILL. Yes Sir, please you come near, we will take your money within.


COK. Back with these children; The boys of the Fair follow him. they do so
follow me up and down.


IOH. By your leave, friend.


FILL. You must pay, Sir, an' you go in.


IOH. Who, I? I perceive thou know not me: call the Master of the Motion.


SHA What, do you not know the Author, fellow Filcher? you must take no money
of him; he must come in gratis: Mr. Littlewit is a voluntary; he is the Author.


IOH. Peace, speak not too loud, I would not have any notice taken, that I am
the Author, till we see how it passes.


COK. Master Littlewit, how do thou?


IOH. Master Cokes! you are exceeding well met: what, in your doublet, and
hose, without a cloak, or a hat?


COK. I would I might never stir, as I am an honest man, and by that fire; I
have lost all in the Fair, and all my acquaintance too; did thou meet any
body that I know, Master Littlewit? my man Numps, or my sister Ouerdoo, or
Mistress Grace? pray thee Master Littlewit, lend me some money to see the
Interlude, here. I Will pay thee again, as I am a Gentleman. If thou wilt but
carry me home, I have money enough there.


IOH. O, Sir, you shall command it, what, will a crown serve you?


COK. I think it well, what do we pay for coming in, fellows?


FILL. Two pence, Sir.


COK. Two pence? there is twelve pence, friend; Nay, I am a Gallant, as simple
as I look now; if you see me with my man about me, and my Artillery, again.


IOH. Your man was in the Stocks, even now, Sir.


COK. Who, Numps?


IOH. Yes faith.


COK. For what in faith, I am glad of that; remember to tell me on it anon; I
have enough, now! What manner of matter is this, Mr. Littlewit? What kind of
Actors have you? Are they good Actors?


IOH. Pretty youths, Sir, all children both old and young, here is the Master
of'hem --


(LAN. Leatherhead whispers to Littlwit. Call me not Leatherhead, but Lantern.)


IOH. Master Lantern, that gives light to the business,


COK. In good time, Sir, I would feign see 'hem, I would be glad drink with
the young company; which is the Tiring-house?


LAN. Troth, Sir, our Tiring-house is somewhat little, we are but beginners,
yet, pray pardon us; you cannot go upright in it.


COK. No? not now my hat is off? what would you have done with me, if you had
had me, feather, and all, as I was once to day? Have you none of your pretty
impudent boys, now; to bring stools, fill Tobacco, fetch Ale, and beg money,
as they have at other houses? let me see some o'your Actors.


ION. Show him 'hem, show him 'hem. Master Lantern, this is a Gentleman, that
is a fauorer of the quality.


IVS. I, the favoring of this licencious quality, is the consumption of many a
young Gentleman; a pernicious enormity.


COK. What, do they live in baskets?


LEA. He brings them out in a basket. They do lie in a basket, Sir, they are
of the small Players.


COK. These be Players minors, indeed. Do you call these Players?


LAN. They are Actors, Sir, and as good as any, none disprais'd, for dumb
shows: indeed, I am the mouth of'hem all!


COK. Thy mouth will hold 'hem all. I think, one Tailor, would go near to
beat all this company, with a hand bound behind him.


IOH. I, and eat 'hem all, too, an' they were in cake-bread.


COK. I thank you for that, Master Littlewit, a good jest! which is your
Burbage now?


LAN. What mean you by that, Sir?


COK. Your best Actor. Your Field?


IOH. Good in faith! you are even with me, Sir.


LAN. This is he, that acts young Leander, Sir. He is extremely beloved of the
womenkind, they do so affect his action, the green gamesters, that come here,
and this is lovely Hero; this with the beard, Damon; and this pretty Pythias:
this is the ghost of King Dionysius in the habit of a scriuener: as you shall
see anon, at large.


COK. Well they are a civil company, I like 'hem for that; they offer not to
fleere, nor geere, nor break jests, as the great Players do: And then, there
goes not so much charge to the feasting of'hem, or making 'hem drunk, as to
the other, by reason of their littleness. Do they use to play perfect? Are
they never fluster'd?


LAN. No, Sir, I thank my industry, and policy for it; they are as well
governed a company, though I say it -- And here is young Leander, is as proper
an Actor of his inches; and shakes his head like an hostler^


COK But do you play it according to the printed book? I have read that.


LAN. By no means, Sir.


COK. No? How then?


LAN. A better way, Sir, that is too learned, and poetical for our audience;
what do they know what Hellespont is? Guilty of true loves blood? or what
Abidos is? or the other Sestos height?


COK. Thou Art in the right, I do not know my self.


LAN. No, I have entreated Master Littlewit, to take a little pains to reduce
it to a more familiar strain for our people.


COK. How, I pray thee, good Mr Littlewit.


IOH. It pleases him to make a matter of it, Sir. But there is no such matter I
assure you: I have only made it a little easy, and modern for the times,
Sir, that is all; As, for the Hellespont I imagine our Thames here; and then
Leander, I make a Diers son, about Puddle-wharfe: and Hero a wench of the
Banke-side, who going over one morning, to old fish-street; Leander spies her
land at Trigsstayres, and falls in love with her: Now do I introduce Cupid,
having Metamorphos'd himself into a Drawer, and he strikes Hero in love with a
pint of Sherry, and other pretty passages there are, of the friendship, that
will delight you, Sir, and please you of Judgment.


COK. I Will be sworn they shall; I am in love with the Actors already, and I Will
be allied to them presently. (They respect gentlemen, these fellows) Hero
shall be my fayring: But, which of my fayrin^s? (Le' me see) in faith, my
fiddle! and Leander my fiddle-sticke: Then Damon, my Drum; and Pythias, my Pipe
and the ghost of Dionysius, my hobbyhorse. All fitted.


ACT. V.
SCENE. IV.
To them WIN-WIFE. GRACE. KNOCKHVM. WHITT. EDGVVORTH. VVIN. Mistress OVERDOO.
And to them VVASPE.
Look yonder is your Cokes gotten in among his play-fellowes; I thought we
could not miss him, at such a Spectacle.


GRA. Let him alone, he is so busy, he will never spy us.


LEA. Nay, good Sir.


COK. Cokes is handling the Puppets. I warrant thee, I will not hurt her,
fellow; what do think me uncivil? I pray thee be not jealous: I am toward a
wife.


IOH. Well good Master Lantern, make ready to begin, that I may fetch my wife,
and look you be perfect, you undo me else, i'my reputation.


LAN. I warrant you Sir, do not you breed too great an expectation of it,
among your friends: that is the only hurter of these things.


IOH. No, no, no.


COK. I Will stay here, and see; pray thee let me see.


WIN-VV. How diligent and troublesome he is!


GRA. The place becomes him, me thinks.


IVS. My ward, Mistress Grace in the company of a stranger? I doubt I shall be
compelled to discover my self, before my time!


FILL. The doorekeepers speak. Two pence a piece Gentlemen, an excellent Motion.


KNO. Shall we have fine fireworks, and good vapors!


SHA. Yes Captain, and waterworks, too.


WHI. I pree dee, take a care o'dy shmall Lady, there, Edgworth; I will look
to dish tall Lady my self.


LAN. Welcome Gentlemen, welcome Gentlemen.


WHI. Predee, Mashter o'de Monshtersh, help a very sick Lady, here, to a
chair, to shit in.


LAN. Presently, Sir.


WHI. They bring Mistress Ouerdoo a chair. Good fait now, Vrsla's Ale, and
Aqua-vitae ish to blame for it; shit down shweet heart, shit down, and shleep
a little.


EDG. Madame, you are very welcome hither.


KNO. Yes, and you shall see very good vapors.


IVS. Here is my care come! I like to see him in so good company; By Edgeworth.
and yet I wonder that persons of such fashion, should resort hither!


EDG. This is a very private house, Madame. The Cutpurse courts Mistress
Littlewit.


LAN. Will it please your Ladyship sit, Madame?


WIN. Yes good man. They do so all to be Madame me, I think they think me a
very Lady!


EDG. What else Madame?


WIN. Must I put off my masque to him?


EDG. O, by no means.


WIN. How should my husband know me, then?


KNO. Husband? an idle vapor; he must not know you, nor you him; there is the
true vapor.


IVS Yea, I will observe more of this: is this a Lady, friend?


WHI. I, and dat is anoder Lady, shweet heart; if dou hasht a mind to 'hem
give me twelve pence from tee, and dou shall have oder-oder on 'hem!


IVS. I? This will prove my chiefest enormity: I will follow this.


EDG, Is not this a finer life, Lady, then to be clogged with a husband?


WIN. Yes, a great deal. When will they begin, trow? in the name of the
Motion?


EDG. By and by Madame, they stay but for company.


KNO. Do you hear, Puppet. Master, these are tedious vapors; when begin you?


LAN. We stay but for Master Littlewit, the Author, who is gone for his wife;
and we begin presently.


WIN. That Is I, that is I.


EDG. That was you, Lady; but now you are no such poor thing.


KNO. Hang the Authors wife, a running vapor! here be Ladies, will stay for
nere a Delia o'hem all.


WHI. But hear me now, here ish one o'de Ladish, a shleep, stay till she
but vake man.


WAS. How now friends? what is here to do?


FILL. Two pence a piece, Sir, the best Motion, in the Fair. The doorekeepers
again.


WAS. I believe you lie; if you do, I Will have my money again, and beat you.


WIN. Numps is come!


WAS. Did you see a Master of mine, come in here, a tall young Squire of Harrow
of the Hill; Master Bartholmew Cokes?


FILL. I think there be such a one, within.


WAS. Look he be, you were best: but it is very likely: I wonder I found him
not at all the rest. I have been at the Eagle, and the black Wolf, and the
Bull with the five legs, and two pizzles; (he was a Calfe at Vxbridge Fair,
two years agone) And at the dogs that dance the Morris, and the Hare of
the Taber; and mist him at all these! Sure this must needs be some fine sight,
that holds him so, if it have him.


COK. Come, come, are you ready now?


LAN. Presently, Sir.


WAS. Hoyday, he is at work in his Dublet, and hose; do you hear, Sir? are
you employed? that you are bare-headed, and so busy?


COK. Hold your peace, Numpes; you have been in the stocks, I hear.


WAS. Does he know that? nay, then the date of my Authority is out; I must
think no longer to reign, my government is at an end. He that will correct
another, must want fault himself.


WIN-W. Sententious Numpes! I never heard so much from him, before.


LAN. Sure, Master Littlewit will not come; please you take your place, Sir,
we will begin.


COK. I pray thee do, mine ears long to be at it; and my eyes too. O Numpes,
in the stocks, Numps? where is your sword, Numps?


WAS. I pray intend your game, Sir, let me alone.


COK. Well, then we are quit for all. Come, sit down, Numps; I Will interpret to
thee: did you see Mistress Grace? it is no matter, neither, now, I think on it,
tell me anon.


WIN-VV. A great deal of love, and care he expresses.


GRA. Alas! would you have him express more then he has? that were tyranny.


COK. Peace, ho; now, now.


LAN. Gentles, that no longer your expectations may wander,
Behold our chief Actor, amorous Leander.
With a great deal of cloth lap'd about him like a Scarf,
For he yet serves his father, a Dyer at Puddle wharfe,
Which place we will make bold with, to call our Abidus,
As the Banke-side is our Sestos, and let it not be denied us.
Now, as he is beating, to make the Dye take the fuller,
Who chances to come by, but fair Hero, in a Sculler;
And seeing Leanders naked leg, and goodly calfe,
Cast at him, from the boat, a Sheep eye, and a half.
Now she is landed, and the Sculler come back;
By and by, you shall see what Leander does lack.

PVP. L. Cole, Cole, old Cole.


LAN. That Is the Scullers name without control:


PVP. L. Cole, Cole, I say, Cole.


LAN. We do hear you.


PVP. L. Old Cole.


LAN. Old Cole? is the Dyer turned Collier? how do you sell?


PVP. L. A pox of you manners, kiss my hole here and smell.


LAN. Kiss your hole and smell? there is manners indeed.


PVP. L. Why, Cole, I say Cole.


LAN. It Is the Sculler you need!


PVP. L. I, and be hanged.


LAN. Be hanged; look you yonder,
Old Cole, you must go hang with Master Leander.

PVP. C. Where is he?


PVP. L. Here, Cole, what fayerest of Fayers,
was that fare, that thou landedst but now a Trigsstayres?

COK. What was that, fellow? Pray thee tell me, I scarce understand 'hem.


LAN. Leander does ask, Sir, what fairest of Fayers,
Was the fare thhe landed, but now, at Trigsstayers?

PVP. C. It is lo^ely Hero.


PVP. L. Nero?


PVP. C. No, Hero.


LAN. It is Hero.
Of the Bankside, he says, to tell you truthwith out erring,
Is come over into Fish-street to eat some fresh herring.
Leander says no more, but as fast as he can,
Gets on all his best clothes; and will after to the Swan.

COK. Most admirable good, is it not?


LAN. Stay, Sculler.


PVP. C. What say you?


LAN. You must stay for Leander,
and carry him to the wench.

PVP. C. You Rogue, I am no Pandar.


COK. He says he is no Pandar. It Is a fine language; I understand it, now.


LAN. Are you no Pandar, Goodman Cole? here is no man says you are,
You Will grow a hot Cole, it seems, pray you stay for your fare.

PVP. C. Will he come away?


LAN. What do you say?


PVP. C. I Would have him come away.


LEA. Would you have Leander come away? why 'pray' Sir, stay.
You are angry, Goodman Cole; I believe the fair Maid
Came over w' you a' trust: tell us Sculler, are you paid.

PVP. C. Yes Goodman Hogrubber, of Pickt-hatch.


LAV: How, Hogrubber, of Pickt-hatch?


PVP. C. I Hogrubber of Pickt-hatch. Take you that.


LAN. O, my head! The Puppet strikes him over the pate


PVP. C. Harm watch, harm catch.


COK. Harm watch, harm catch, he says: verygood in faith, the Sculler had
like to have knocked you, sirrah.


LAN. Yes, but that his fare called him away.


PVP. L. Row apace, row apace, row, row, row, row, row.


LAN. You are knauishly laden, Sculler, take heed where you go.


PVP. C. Knave in your face, Goodman Rogue.


PVP. L. Row, row, row, row, row, row.


COK. He said knave in your face, friend.


LAN. I Sir, I heard him. But there is no talking to these watermen, they will
have the last word


COK. God's my life! I am not allied to the Sculler, yet; he shall be Dauphin
my boy. But my Fiddle-sticke does fiddle in and out too much; I pray thee
speak to him, on it: tell him, I would have him tarry in my sight, more.


LAN. I Pray you be content; you will have enough on him, Sir. Now gentles, I
take it, here is none of you so stupid,
but that you have heard of a little god of love, called Cupid.
Who out of kindness to Leander, hearing he but saw her,
this present day and hour, does turn himself to a Drawer.
And because, he would have their first meeting to be merry,
he strikes Hero in love to him, with a pint of Sherry.
PVP. Leander goes into Mistress Hero's room Which he tells her, from amorous
Leander is sent her,
who after him, into the room of Hero, does venture.



PVP. Io: A pint of sack, score a pint of sack, in the Conney.


COK. Sack? you said but even now it should be Sherry.


PVP. Io: Why so it is; sherry, sherry, sherry.


COK. Sherry, sherry, sherry. By my troth he makes me merry. I must have a name
for Cupid, too. Let me see, thou might help me now, an' thou would,
Numps, at a dead lift, but thou art dreaming of the stocks, still! Do not
think on it, I have forgot it: it is but a nine days wonder, man; let it not
trouble thee.


WAS. I would the stocks were about your neck, Sir; condition I hung by the
heels in them, till the wonder were off from you, with all my heart.


COK. Well said resolute Numps: but hark you friend, where is the friendship,
all this while, between my Drum, Damon; and my Pipe, Pythias?


LAN. You shall see by and by, Sir?


COK. You think my Hobbyhorse is forgotten, too; no, I Will see 'hem all enact
before I go; I shall not know which to love best, else


KNO. This Gallant has interrupting vapors, troublesome vapors, Whitt, puff
with him.


WHIT. No, I pre dee, Captain, let him alone. He is a Child in faith, la'.


LAN. Now gentles, to the friends, who in number, are two,
and lodged in that Alehouse, in which fair Hero does do.
Damon ('for some kindness done him the last week)
is come fair Hero, in Fish-streete, this morning to seek:
Pythias does smell the knavery of the meeting,
and now you shall see their true friendly greeting.

PVP. Pi. You whore-masterly Slave, you^


COK. Whore-masterly slave, you? very friendly, and familiar, that.


PVP. Da. Whore-master in thy face,
Thou have lien with her thy self, I Will proue't in this place.

COK. Damon says Pythias has lien with her, himself, he will prooue't in this
place.


LAN. They are Whore-masters both, Sir, that is a plain case.


PVP. Pi. You lie, like a Rogue.


LAN. Do I ly, like a Rogue?


PVP. Pi. A Pimpe, and a Scabbe.


LAN. A Pimpe, and a Scabbe?
I say between you, you have both but one Drabbe.

PVP. Da. You lie again.


LAN. Do I lie again?


PVP. Da. Like a Rogue again.


LAN. Like a Rogue again?


PVP. Pi. And you are a Pimpe, again.


COK. And you are a Pimpe again, he says.


PVP. Da. And a Scabbe, again.


COK. And a Scabbe again, he says.


LAN. And I say again, you are both whore-masters again, They fight.
and you have both but one Drabbe again.

PVP. Da. Pi. Do thou, do thou, do thou?


^AN. What, both at once?


PVP. P. Down with him, Damon


PVP. D. Pinke his guts, Pythias:


LAN. What, so malicious?
will ye murder me, Masters both, in mine own house?

COK. Ho! well acted my Drum, well acted my Pipe, well acted still.


WAS. Well acted, with all my heart.


LAN. Hld, hold your hands


COK. I, both your hands, for my sake! for you have both donewell.


PVP. D. Gramercy pure Pythias.


PVP. P. Gramercy, Dear Damon.


COK. Gramercy to you both, my Pipe, and my drum.


PVP. P. D. Come now we will together to breakfast to Hero.


LAN. It Is well, you can now go to breakfast to Hero,
you have given mmy breakfast, with a hone and honero.

COK. How is it friend, have they hurt thee?


LAN. O no!

Between you and I Sir, we do but make show.

Thus Gentles you perceive, without any denial,
'twixt Damon and Pythias here, friendships true trial.
Though hourly they quarrel thus, and roar each with other,
they fight you no more, then does brother with brother.
But friendly together, at the next man they meet,
they let fly their anger as here you might see it.

COK. Well, we have seen't, and thou have felt it, whatsoever thou say,
what is next? what is next?


LEA. This while young Leander, with fair Hero is drinking,
and Hero grown drunk, to any man's thinking!
Yet was it not three pints of Sherry could flaw her.
till Cupid distinguished like Jonas the Drawer,
From under his apron, where his lechery lurkes,
put love in her Sack. Now mark how it works.

PVP. H. O Leander Leander, my dear my dear Leander,
I Will for ever be thy goose, so thou wilt be my gander*

COK. Excellently well said, Fiddle, she will ever be his goose, so he will be
her gander: was it not so?


LAN. Yes, Sir, but mark his answer, now:


PVP. L. And sweetest of geese, before I go to bed,
I Will swim over the Thames, my goose, thee to tread.

COK. Brave! he will swim over the Thames, and tread his goose, too night, he
says.


LAN. I, peace, Sir, the'll be angry, if they hear you eaues-dropping, now
they are setting their match.


PVP. L. But lest the Thames should be dark, my goose, my dear friend,
let thy window be provided of a candles end.

PVP. H. Fear not my gander, I protest, I should handle
my matters very ill, if I had not a whole candle.

PVP. L. Well then, look to it, and kiss me to boot.


LAN. Now, here come the friends again, Pythias, aend Damon,
Damon and Pythias enter. and under their clokes, they have of Bacon, a gammon.

PVP. P. Drawer, fill some wine here.


LAN. How, some wine there?
there is company already, Sir, pray forbear!

PVP. D. It Is Hero.


LAN. Yes, but she will not be taken,
after ^acke, and fresh herring, with your Dunmow- bacon.

PVP. P You lie, it is Westfabian.


LAN. Westphalian you should say.


PVP. D. Leander and Hero are kissing. If you hold not your peace, you are a
Coxcombe, I would say.


PVP. What Is here? what is here? kiss, kiss, upon kiss.


LAN. I, Wherefore should they not? what harm is in this? it is Mistress Hero.


PVP. D. Mistress Hero's a whore.


LAN. Is she a whore? keep you quiet, or Sir Knave out of door.


PVP. D. Knave out of door?


PVP. H. Yes, Knave, out of door.


PVP. D. Here the Puppets quarrel and fall together by the ears. Whore out
of door.


PVP. H. I say, Knave, out of door.


PVP. D. I say, whore, out of door.


PVP. P. Yea, so say I too.


PVP. H. Kiss the whore of the arse.


LAN. Now you have something to do:
you must kiss her of the arse she says:

PVP. D. P. So we will, so we will.


PVP. H. O my hanches, O my hanches, hold, hold.


LAN. Stand'st thou still?
Leander, where art thou? stand'st thou still like a sot,
and not offer'st to break both their heads with a pot?
See who is at thine elbow, there! Puppet Jonas and Cupid.

PVP. I. Vpon'hem Leander, be not so stupid. They fight.


PVP^ L. You Goat-bearded slave!


PVP. D. You whore-master Knave.


PVP. L. Thou art a whore-master.


PVP. I. Whore-masters all.


LAN. See, Cupid with a word has taken up the brawle.


KNO. These be fine vapors!


COK. By this good day they fight bravely! do they not, Numps?


WAS. Yes, they lacked but you to be their second, all this while.


LAN. This tragical encounter, falling out thus to busy us,
It raises up the ghost of their friend Dionysius:
Not like a Monarch, but the Master of a School,
in a Scriueners furred gown, which shows he is no fool.
for therein he has wit enough to keep himself warm.
O Damon he cries, and Pythias; what harm,
Has poor Dionysius done you in his grave,
That after his death, you should fall out thus, and rave,
And call amorous Leander whore-master Knave?

PVP. D. I cannot, I will not, I promise you endure it.


ACT. V.
SCENE. V.
To them BVSY.
BVS. Down with Dagon, down with Dagon; it is I, will no longer endure your
prophanations.


LAN. What mean you, Sir?


BVS. I will remove Dagon there, I say, that Idol, that heathenish Idol, that
remains (as I may say) a beam, a very beam, not a beam of the Sun, nor a
beam of the Moon, nor a beam of a balance, neither a house-beame, nor a
Weauers beam, but a beam in the eye, in the eye of the brethren; a very great
beam, an exceeding great beam; such as are your Stage Players, Rimers, and
Morrise-dancers, who have walked hand in hand, in contempt of the Brethren, and
the Cause; and been borne out by instruments, of no mean countenance.


LAN. Sir, I present nothing, but what is licensed by authority.


BAS. Thou art all license, even licentiousness it self, Shimei!


LAN. I have the Master of the Reuell's haud for it, Sir.


BVS. The Master of Rebels hand, thou have; Satan's! hold thy peace, thy
scurrility shut up thy mouth, thy profession is damnable, and in pleading for
it, thou do plead for Baal. I have long opened my mouth wide, and gaped, I
have gaped as the oyster for the tide, after thy destruction: but cannot
compass it by suit, or dispute; so that I look for a bickering, ere long, and
then a battle.


KNO. Good Banbury-vapours.


COK. Friend, you would have an ill match on it, if you bicker with him here,
though he be no man of the fist, he has friends that will go to cuffes for
him, Numps, will not you take our side?


EDG. Sir, it shall not need, in my mind, he offers him a fairer course, to
end it by disputation! have thou nothing to say for thy self, in defense of
thy quality?


LAN. Faith, Sir, I am not well studied in these controversies, between the
hypocrites and us. But here is one of my Motion, Puppet Donisius shall undertake
him, and I Will venture the cause on it.


COK. Who? my Hobbyhorse? will he dispute with him?


LAN. Yes, Sir, and make a Hobby-Asse of him, I hope.


COK. That Is excellent! indeed he looks like the best scholar of'hem all.
Come, Sir, you must be as good as your word, now.


BVS. I will not fear to make my spirit, and gifts known! assist me zeal,
fill me, fill me, hat is, make me full.


WIN-W. What a desperate, profane wretch is this! is there any Ignorance, or
impudence like his? to call his zeal to fill him against a Puppet?


QVA. I know no fitter match, then a Puppet to commit with an Hypocrite!


BVS. First, I say unto thee, Idol, thou have no Calling.


PVP. D. You lie, I am called Dionisius.


LAN. The Motion says you lie, he is called Dionisius ithe matter, and to that
calling he answers.


BVS. I mean no vocation, Idol, no present lawful Calling.


PVP. D. Is yours a lawful Calling?


LAN. The Motion asks, if yours be a lawful Calling?


BVS. Yes, mine is of the Spirit.


PVP. D. Then Idol is a lawful Calling.


LAN. He says, then Idol is a lawful Calling! for you called him Idol, and
your Calling is of the spirit.


COK. Well disputed, Hobbyhorse!


BVS. Take not part with the wicked young Gallant. He neygheth and hinneyeth,
all is but hinnying Sophistry. I call him Idol again. Yet, I say, his
Calling, his Profession is profane, it is profane, Idol.


PVP. D. It is not profane!


LAN. It is not profane, he says*


BVS. It is profane.


PVP. It is not profane.


BVS. It is profane.


PVP. It is not profane.


LAN Well said, confute him with not, still. You cannot bear him down with
your base noise, Sir.


BVS. Nor he me, with his treble creeking, though he creek like the chariot
wheels of Satan; I am zealous for the Cause --


LAN. As a dog for a bone.


BVS. And I say, it is profane, as being the Page of Pride, and the waiting
woman of vanity.


PVP. D. Yea? what say you to your Tire-women, then?


LAN. Good.


PVP. Or feather-makers in the Friars, that are of your faction of faith? Are
not they with their perrukes, and their puffes, their fannes, and their huffes,
as much Pages of Pride, and waiters upon vanity? what say you? what say you?
what say you?


BVS. I will not answer for them.


PVP. Because you cannot, because you cannot. Is a Bugle-maker a lawful
Calling? or the Confect-makers? such you have there: or your French Fashioner?
you would have all the sin within your selves, would you not? would you not?


BVS. No, Dagon.


PVS. What then, Dagonet? is a Puppet worse then these?


BVS. Yes, and my maine argument against you, is, that you are an abomination:
for the Male, among you, puts on the apparel of the Female, and the Female
of the Male.


PVP. You lie, you lie, you lie abominably.


COK. Good, by my troth, he has given him the lie thrice.


PVP. It is your old stale argument against the Players, but it will not hold
against the Puppets; for we have neither Male nor Female amongst us. And that
thou may see, if thou will, The Puppet takes up his garment. like a
malicious purblinde zeal as thou art!


EDG. By my faith, there he has answered you, friend; by plain demonstration.


PVP. Nay, I Will prove, against ere a Rabbin of'hem all, that my standing is as
lawful as his; that I speak by inspiration, as well as he; that I have as
little to do with learning as he; and do scorn her helps as much as he.


BVS, I am confuted, the Cause has failed me.


PVS. Then be converted, be converted.


LAN. Be converted, I pray you, and let the Play go on!


BVS. Let it go on. For I am changed, and will become a beholder with you!


COK. That Is brave in faith, thou have carried it away, Hobbyhorse, on with the
Play!


IVS. Stay, now do I forbid, I Adam Ouerdoo! sit still, I charge you. The
Justice discouers himself.


COK. What, my Brother i'law!


GRA. My wise Guardian!


EDG. Justice Ouerdoo!


IVS. It is time, to take Enormity by the fore head, and brand it; for, I have
discovered enough.


ACT. V.
SCENE. VI.
To them, QVARLOVS. (like the Madman) PVRECRAFT. (a while after) JOHN. to them
TROVBLE-ALL. VRSLA. NIGHTIGALE.
QVAR. Nay, come Mistress Bride. You must do as I do, now. You must be mad
with me, in truth. I have here Justice Ouerdoo for it.


IVS. Peace good Trouble-all; come hither, and you shall trouble none. To the
Cutpurse, and Mistress Litwit. I will take the charge of you, and your friend
too, you also, young man shall be my care, stand there.


EDG. Now, mercy upon me.


KNO. Would we were away, Whit, these are dangerous vapors, The rest are
stealing away. best fall off with our birds, for fear of the Cage.


IVS. Stay, is not my name your terror?


WHI. Yesh faith man, and it ish fot tat, we would be gone man.


IOH. O Gentlemen! did you not see a wife of mine? I have lost my little wife,
as I shall be trusted: my little pretty Win, I left her at the great woman's
house in trust yonder, the Pig-womans, with Captain Jordan, and Captain Whit,
very good men, and I cannot hear of her. Poor fool, I fear she is stepped
aside. Mother, did you not see Win?


IVS. If this grave Matron be your mother, Sir, stand by her, Et digito
compesce labellum, I may perhaps spring a wife for you, anon. Brother
Bartholmew, I am sadly sorry, to see you so lightly given, and such a Disciple
of enormity: with your grave Governor Humphrey: but stand you both there, in
the middle place; I will reprehend you in your course. Mistress Grace, let me
rescue you out of the hands of the stranger.


WIN-W. Pardon me, Sir, I am a kinsman of hers.


IVS. Are you so? of what name, Sir?


WIN-W. Winwife, Sir:


IVS. Master Winwife? I hope you have won no wife of her, Sir. If you have, I
will examine the possibility of it, at fit leisure. Now, to my enormities:
look upon me, O London! and see me, O Smithfield; The example of Justice,
and Mirror of Magistrates: the true top of formality, and scourge of enormity.
Harken unto my labors, and but observe my discoueries; and compare Hercules
with me, if thou dare, of old; or Columbus; Magellan; or our country man
Drake of later times: stand forth you weeds of enormity, and spread. First,
Rabbi Busy, thou superlunaticall hypocrite, next, To Busy, To Lantern, To the
horse courser, and Cutpurse. Then Cap. Whit, and Mistress Littlewit. thou
other extremity, thou profane professor of Puppetry, little better then
Poetry: then thou strong Debaucher, and Seducer of youth; witness this easy
and honest young man: now thou Esquire of Dames, Madams, and twelue-penny
Ladies: now my green Madame her self, of the price. Let me vnmasque your
Ladyship.


IOH. O my wife, my wife, my wife!


IVS. Is she your wife? Read te Harpocratem!


TRO. By your leave, stand by my Masters, be vncouer'd.


VRS. O stay him, stay him, help to cry, Nightingale; my pan, Enter
Trouble-all. my pan.


IVS. What Is the matter?


NIG. He has stolen gammar Vrsla's pan.


TRO. Yes, and I fear no man but Justice Ouerdoo.


IVS. Vrsla? where is she? O the Sow of enormity, this! To Vrsla, and
Nightingale. welcome, stand you there, you Songster, there.


VRS. An' please your worship, I Am in no fault: A Gentleman stripped him in my
Booth, and borrowed his gown, and his hat; and he ran away with my goods,
here, for it.


IVS^ Then this is the true madman, and you are the enormity! To Quarlous.


QVA. You are in the right, I am mad, but from the gown outward.


IVS. Stand you there.


QVA. Where you please, Sir.


OVER O lend me a basin, I am sick, I am sick; Mistress Ouerdoo is sick:
and her husband is silenced. where is Mr. Ouerdoo? Bridget, call hither my Adam.


IVS. How?


WHI. Die very own wife, i'fait, worshipful Adam.


OVER. Will not my Adam come at me? shall I see him no more then?


QVA. Sir, why do you not go on with the enormity? are you oppressed with it?
I Will help you: hark you Sir, in your ear, your Innocent young man, you have
taken such care of, all this day, is a Cutpurse; that has got all your brother
Cokes his things, and helped you to your beating, and the stocks; if you have a
mind to hang him now, and show him your Magistrates wit, you may: but I should
think it were better, recovering the goods, and to save your estimation in him.
I thank you Sr. for the gift of your Ward, Mrs. Grace: look you, here is your
hand and seal, by the way. Mr. Win-wife give you joy, you are Palemon, you are
possessed of the Gentlewoman, but she must pay me value, here is warrant for it.
And honest madman, there is thy gown, and cap again; I thank thee for my
wife. To the widow. Nay, I can be mad, sweet heart, when I please, still;
never fear me: And careful Numps, where is he? I thank him for my license.


WAS. Waspe misseth the License. How!


QVA. It Is true, Numps.


WAS. I Will be hanged then.


QVA. Look in your box, Numps, nay, Sir, stand not you fixed here, like a stake
in Finsbury to be shot at, or the whipping post in the Fair, but get your wife
out of the air, it will make her worse else; and remember you are but Adam,
Flesh, and blood! you have your frailty, forget your other name of Ouerdoo, and
inuit us all to supper. There you and I will compare our discoueries; and
drown the memory of all enormity in your bigg'st bowl at home.


COK. How now, Numps, have you lost it? I warrant, 'twas when thou were in the
stocks: why do not speak?


WAS. I will never speak while I live, again, for ought I know.


IVS. Nay, Humphrey, if I be patient, you must be so too; this pleasant
conceited Gentleman has wrought upon my judgment, and prevailed: I pray you
take care of your sick friend, Mistress Alice, and my good friends all --


QVA. And no enormities.


IVS. I inuit you home, with me to my house, to supper: I will have none
fear to go along, for my intents are Ad correctionem, non ad destructionem; Ad
aedificandum, non ad diruendum: so lead on.


COK. Yes, and bring the Actors along, we will ha'the rest of the Play at home.


The end.
The EPILOGVE.
YOur Majesty has seen the Play, and you
can best allow it from your ear, and view.
You know the scope of Writers, and what store,
of leave is given them, if they take not more,
And turn it into license: you can tell
if we have used that leave you gave us, well:
Or whether we to rage, or license break,
or be profane, or make profane men speak?
This is your power to judge (great Sir) and not
the envy of a few. Which if we have got,
We value less what their dislike can bring,
if it so happy be, to have pleased the King.
THE STAPLE OF NEWS.

A COMEDY ACTED IN THE YEAR, 1625.

BY HIS MAJESTY'S SERVANTS.

The Author BEN: IONSON.

HOR. in ART. POET. Aut prodesse volunt, aut delectare poetae:
Aut simul and iucunda, and idonea dicere vitae


LONDON, Printed by I. B. for ROBERT ALLOT, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Bear, in Paul's Churchyard. 1631.

THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY.
PENI-BOY. the Son, the heir and Suitor. PENI-BOY. the Father. the Canter.
PENI-BOY. the Uncle. The Usurer. CYMBAL. Master of the Staple, and prime
Ieerer. FITTON. Emissary Court, and Ieerer. ALMANACH Doctor in Physic, and
Ieerer. SHVN-FIELD. Sea-captaine, and Ieerer. MADRIGAL. Poetaster, and Ieerer.
PICKLOCK. Man of law, and Emissary Westminster. PYED-MANTLE. Pursiuant at
arms, and Heraldet. REGISTER. Of the Staple, or Office. NATHANEEL. First
Clerk of the Office. THO: BARBR. Second Clerk of the Office. PECVNIA. Infanta
of the Mines. MORTGAGE. Her Nurse. STATVTE. First Woman. BAND. Second Woman.
WAX. Chambermaid.
BROKER. Secretary, and Gentleman usher to her Grace. LICK-FINGER. A Master
Cook, and parcel Poet. FASHIONER. The Tailor of the times. LINENER.
HABERDASHER. SHOEMAKER. SPVRRIER.
CVSTOMERS. {Male and Female. PORTER* DOGS. II.
The SCENE. London.

THE INDVCTION.
The PROLOGVE enters. After him, Gossip MIRTH. Gos. TATLE. Gos. EXPECTATION.
and Gossip CENSVRE. 4. Gentlewomen LADY-like attyred. PROLOGVE. FOr your own
sake, not ours --


MIRTH. Come Gossip, be not ashamed. The Play is the Staple of News, and you
are the Mistress, and Lady of Tatle, let us have your opinion of it: Do you
hear Gentleman? what are you? Gentleman-usher to the Play? pray you help us
to some stools here.


PROLOGVE. Where? of the Stage, Ladies?


MIRTH. Yes, of the Stage; we are persons of quality, I assure you, and women
of fashion; and come to see, and to be seen: My Gossip Tatle here, and Gossip
Expectation, and my Gossip Censure, and I am Mirth, the daughter of Christmas,
and spirit of Shrouetide. They say, It Is merry when Gossips meet, I hope your
Play will be a merry one!


PROLOGVE* Or you will make it such, Ladies. Bring a form here, but what will
the Noblemen think, or the grave Wits here, to see you seated on the bench
thus?


MIRTH. Why, what should they think? but that they had Mothers, as we had, and
those Mothers had Gossips (if their children were christened) as we are, and
such as had a longing to see Plays, and sit upon them, as we do, and
arraigne both them, and their Poets.


PROLOGVE. O! Is that your purpose? Why, Mrs. Mirth, and Madame Tatle, enjoy
your delights freely.


TATLE. Look your News be new, and fresh, Mr. Prologue, and untainted, I
shall find them else, if they be stale, or flye-blowne, quickly!


PROLOGVE. We ask no favor from you, only we would entreat of Madame
Expectation --


EXPECTATION. What, Mr. Prologue?


PROLOGVE. That your Ladi-ship would expect no more then you understand.


EXPECTATION. Sir, I can expect enough!


PROLOGVE. I fear too much, Lady, and teach others to do the like?


EXPECTATION. I can do that too, if I have cause.


PROLOGVE. Cry you mercy, you never did wrong, but with just cause. What Is
this, Lady?


MIRTH. Curiosity, my Lady Censure.


PROLOGVE. O Curiosity! you come to see, who wears the new suit to day? whose
clothes are best penned, what ever the part be? which Actor has the best leg
and foot? what King plays without cuffes? and his Queen without gloves? who
rides post in stockings? and daunces in boots?


CENSVRE. Yes, and which amorous Prince makes love in drink, or does ouer-act
prodigiously in beaten satin* and, having got the trick on it, will be
monstrous still, in despite of Counsel!


BOOK-HOLDER. The Tire-men enter to mend the lights. Mend your lights,
Gentlemen. Master Prologue, begin.


TATLE. Ay me!


EXPECTATION, Who Is that?


PROLOGVE. Nay, start not Ladies, these carry no fire-workes to fright you, but
a Torch in their hands, to give light to the business. The truth is, there are
a set of gamesters within, in travel of a thing called a Play, and would feign
be delivered of it: and they have entreated me to be their Man- Midwife, the
Prologue; for they are like to have a hard labor on it.


TATLE. Then the Poet has abused himself, like an Ass, as he is.


MIRTH. No, his Actors will abuse him enough, or I am deceived. Yonder he is
within (I was in the Tiring-house a while to see the Actors dressed) rolling
himself up and down like a tun, in the midst of 'hem, and spurges, never did
vessel of wort, or wine work so! His sweating put me in mind of a good
Shrouing dish (and I believe would be taken up for a service of state
somewhere, an't were known) a stewed Poet! He does sit like an vnbrac'd Drum
with one of his heads beaten out: For, that you must note, a Poet has two
heads, as a Drum has, one for making, the other repeating, and his repeating
head is all to pieces: they may gather it up in the tiring-house; for he has
torn the book in a Poetical fury, and put himself to silence in dead Sack,
which, were there no other vexation, were sufficient to make him the most
miserable Emblem of patience.


CENSVRE. The Prologue, peace.


THE PROLOGVE FOR THE STAGE.
FOr your own sakes, not his, he bad me say,
Would you were come to hear, not see a Play.
Though we his Actors must provide for those,
Who are our guests, here, in the way of shows,
The maker has not so; he would have you wise,
Much rather by your ears, then by your eyes:
And prays you will not preiudge his Play for ill,
Because you mark it not, and sit not still;
But have a longing to salute, or talk
With such a female, and from her to walk
With your discourse, to what is done, and where,
How, and by whom, in all the town; but here.
Alas! what is it to his Scene, to know
How many Coaches in Hide-parke did show
Last spring, what fare to day at Medleyes was,
If Dunstan, or the Phoenix best wine has?
They are things -- But yet, the Stage might stand as well,
If it did neither hear these things, nor tell.
Great noble wits, be good unto your selves,
And make a difference 'twixt Poetique elues,
And Poets: All that dable in the ink,
And defile quills, are not those few, can think,
Conceive, express, and steer the souls of men,
As with a rudder, round thus, with their pen.
He must be one that can instruct your youth,
And keep your Acme in the state of truth,
Must enterprise this work, mark but his ways,
What flight he makes, how new; And then he says,
If that not like you, that he sends to night,
It Is you have left to judge, not he to write.
THE PROLOGVE FOR THE COURT.
A Work not smelling of the Lamp, to night,
But fitted for your Majesty's disport,
And writ to the Meridian of your Court,
We bring; and hope it may produce delight:
The rather, being offered, as a Rite
To Scholars, that can judge, and fair report
The sense they hear, above the vulgar sort
Of Nut-crackers, that only come for sight.
Wherein, although our Title, Sir, be News.
We yet adventure, here, to tell you none;
But show you common follies, and so known,
That though they are not truths, the innocent Muse
Has made so like, as Phant'sie could them state,
Or Poetry, without scandal, imitate.
THE STAPLE OF NEWS.
ACT. I.
SCENE. I.
PENI-BOY. IV. LETHER-LEGGE.
GRamercie Letherleg: Get me the Spurrier, His Shooemaker has pulled on a new
pair of boots; and he walks in his Gown, wastcoate, and trouses, expecting
his Tailor.

And thou have fitted me.

LET. I Will do it presently.

P. IV. Look to me, wit, and look to my wit, Land,
That is, look on me, and with all thine eyes,
Male, Female, yea, Hermaphroditicke eyes,
And those bring all your helps, and perspicills,
To see me at best advantage, and augment
My form as I come forth, for I do feel
I will be one, worth looking after, shortly.
Now, by and by, that is shortly. He draws forth his watch, and sets it on the
Table. 't strikes! One, two,
Three, four, five, six. Enough, enough, dear watch,
Thy pulse has beat enough. Now sleep, and rest;
Would thou could make the time to do so too:
I Will wind thee up no more. The hour is come
So long expected! There, there, He throws off his gown drop my wardship,
My pupil age, and vassalage together.
And Liberty, come throw thy self about me,
In a rich suite, cloak, hat, and band, for now
I Will sue out no man's Livery, but miny own,
I stand on my own feet, so much a year,
Right, round, and sound, the Lord of mine own ground,
And (to ryme to it) threescore thousand Pound!
He goes to the door, and looks. Not come? Not yet? Tailor thou art a vermin,
Worse then the same thou prosecut'st, and prick'st
In subtle seame -- (Go too, I say no more)
Thus to retard my longings: on the day
I do write man, to beat thee. One and twenty,
Since the clock struck, complete! and thou will feel it
Thou foolish Animal! I could pity him,
(An' I were not heartily angry with him now)
For this one piece of folly he bears about him,
To dare to tempt the Fury of an heir,
TO above two thousand a year; yet hope his custom!
Well, Mr. Fashioner, there is some must break --
A head, for this your breaking. Are you come, Sir,

ACT. II.
SCENE. IJ.
FASHIONER. PENIBOY. THOMAS BARBER. HABERDASHER.
GOd give your worship joy.

P.IV. What? of your staying?
And leaving me to stalk here in my trowses,
Like a tame Her'n-few for you?

FAS. I but waited
Below, till the clock struck.

P.IV. Why, if you had come
Before a quarter, would it so have hurt you,
In reputation, to have waited here?

FAS. No, but your worship might have pleaded nonage,
If you had got 'hem on, ere I could make
Just Affidauit of the time.

P. IV. That jest
Has gained thy pardon, thou had lived, condemned
To thine own hell else, never to have wrought
Stitch more for me, or any Peniboy,
I could have hindered thee: but now thou art mine.
For one and twenty years, or for three lives,
Choose which thou will, I Will make thee a Copyholder,
He says his suit. And thy first Bill vnquestion'd. Help me on.

FAS. Presently, Sir, I am bound unto your worship.

P. IV. Thou shall be, when I have sealed thee a Lease of my Custom.

FAS. Your worps. Barbar is without.

P.IN. Who? Thom?
Come in Thom: set thy things upon the Board
And spread thy clothes, lay all forth in procinctu,
And tell's what news?

THO. O Sir, a staple of news!
Or the New Staple, which you please.

P. IV. What Is that?

FAS. An Office, Sir, a brave young Office set up.
I had forgot to tell your worship.

P.IV. For what?

THO. To enter all the News, Sir, of the time,

FAS. And vent it as occasion serves! A place
Of huge commerce it will be!

P.IV. Pray thee peace,
I cannot abide a talking Tailor: let Thom
(He Is a Barber) by his place relate it,
What is it, an Office, Thom?

THO. Newly erected
Here in the house, almost on the same floor,
Where all the news of all sorts shall be brought,
And there be examined, and then registered,
And so be issued under the Seal of the Office,
As Staple News; no other news be current.

P.IV. Before me, thou speak of a brave business, Thom.

FAS. Nay, if you knew the brain that hatched it Sr --

P.IV. I know thee well enough: give him a loaf, Thom --
Quiet his mouth, that Oven will be venting else.
Proceed --

THO. He tells you true Sr. Mr Cymbal,
Is Master of the Office, he proiected it,
He lies here in the house: and the great rooms
He has taken for the Office, and set up
His Deskes and Classes, Tables and his Shelues,

FAS. He Is my Customer, and a Wit Sir, too.
But, h'has brave wits under him --

THO. Yes, four Emissaries,

P.IV. Emissaries? stay, there is a fine new word, Thom!
'Pray God it signify any thing, what are Emissaries?

THO. Men employed outward, that are sent abroad
To fetch in the commodity.

FAS. From all regions
Where the best news are made.

THO. Or vented forth.

FAS. By way of exchange, or trade.

P.IV. Nay, thou will speak --

FAS. My share Sr. there is enough for both.

P.IV. Go on then, He gives the Tailor leave to talk.
Speak all thou can: me thinks, the ordinaries
Should help them much.

FAS. Sir, they have ordinaries,
And extraordinaries, as many changes,
And variations, as there are points in the compass.

THO. But the 4. Cardinal Quarters --

P.IV. I, those Thom --

THO. The Court, Sir, Paul's, Exchange, and Westminster Hall.

P.IV. Who is the Chief? which has preceedencie?

THO. The governor of the Staple, Master Cymball.
He is the Chief; and after him the Emissaries:
First Emissary Court, one Master Fitton,
He Is a Ieerer too.

P.IV. What Is that?

FAS. A Wit.

THO. Or half a Wit, some of them are Halfe-wits,
Two to a Wit, there are a set of 'hem.
Then Master Ambler, Emissary Paul's,
A fine paced gentleman, as you shall see, walk
The middle I Will: And then my Froy Hans Buz,
A Dutchman; he is Emissary Exhange.

FAS. I had thought Mr. Burst the Merchant had had it.

THO. No,
He has a rupture, he has sprung a leake,
Emissarie Westminster's vndispos'd of yet;
Then the Examiner, Register, and two Clerks,
They manage all at home, and sort, and file,
And seal the news, and issue them.

P. IV. Thom, dear Thom.
What may my means do for thee, ask, and have it,
I Would feign be doing some good. It is my birthday.
And I Would do it betimes, I feel a grudging
Of bounty, and I would not long lie fallow.
I pray thee think, and speak, or wish for something.

THO. I would I had but one of the Clerks places,
I'this News Office,.

P.IV. Thou shall have it, Thom,
If silver, or gold will fetch it; what is the rate?
At what is it set in the Market?

THO. Fifty pound, Sir.

P.IV. An't were a hundred, Thom, thou shall not want it.

FAS. The Tailor leapes, and embraces him. O Noble Master!

P.IV. How now Aesops Ass!
Because I play with Thom, must I needs run
Into your rude embraces? stand you still, Sir;
Clownes fawnings, are a horses salutations.
How do thou like my suite, Thom?

THO. Mr Fashioner
Has hit your measures, Sir, h'has molded you,
And made you, as they say.

FAS. No, no, not I,
I am an Ass, old Aesops Ass.

P. IV. Nay, Fashioner,
I can do thee a good turn too, be not musty,
Though thou have molded me, as little Thom says,
He draws out his pockets.(I think thou have put me in moldy pockets.)

FAS. As good,
Right Spanish perfume, the Lady Estifania's,
They cost twelve pound a pair.

P. IV. Thy bill will say so.
I pray thee tell me, Fashioner, what Authors
Thou read'st to help thy invention? Italian prints?
Or Arras hangings? They are Tailors Libraries.

FAS. I scorn such helps.

P.IV. O, though thou art a silk-worme!
And deal'st in sattins and veluets, and rich plushes,
Thou can not spin all forms out of thy self;
They are quite other things: I think this suite
Has made me wittier, then I was.

FAS. Believe it Sir,
That clothes do much upon the wit, as weather
Does on the brain; and thence comes your proverb;
The Tailor makes the man: I speak by experience
Of my own Customers. I have had Gallants,
Both Court and Country, would have fooled you up
In a new suite, with the best wits, in being,
And kept their speed, as long as their clothes lasted
Han'some, and neat; but then as they grew out
At the elbowes again, or had a stain, or spot,
They have sunk most wretchedly.

P. IV. What thou reportst,
Is but the common calamity, and seen daily;
And therefore you 'haue another answering proverb:
A broken sleeue keeps the arm back,

FAS. It Is true, Sir.
And thence we say, that such a one plays at peepe-arme.

P.IV. Do you so? it is wittily said. I wonder, Gentlemen,
And men of means will not maintain themselves
Fresher in wit, I mean in clothes, to the highest.
For he that is out of clothes, is out o'fashion,
And out of fashion, is out of countenance,
And out of countenance, is out of Wit.
Is not Rogue Haberdasher come?

HAB. Yes, here, Sir. They are all about him, busy.
I have been without this half hour.

P.IV. Give me my hat.
Put on my Girdle. Rascal, sits my Ruff well?

LIN. In print.

P.IV. Slave.

LIN. See your self.

P.IV. Is this same hat
Of The block passant? Do not answer me,
I cannot stay for an answer. I do feel
The powers of one and twenty, like a Tide
Flow in upon me, and perceive an Heir,
Can Conjure up all spirits in all circles,
Rogue, Rascal, Slave, give tradesmen their true names,
And they appear to 'hem presently.

LIN. For profit.

P.IV. Come, cast my cloak about me, I Will go see,
This Office Thom, and be trimmed afterward.
I Will put thee in possession, my prime work!
Gods so: my Spurrier! put 'hem on boy, quickly, His Spurrier comes in.
I'had like to ha lost my Spurs with too much speed.

ACT. I.
SCENE. IIJ.
PENI-BOY, Canter,
to them singing. Good morning to my Joy, My jolly Peni-boy!
The Lord, and the Prince of plenty!
I come to see what riches, Thou bear in thy breeches,
The first of thy one and twenty:
What, do thy pockets gingle? Or shall we need to mingle
Our strength both of foot, and horses!
These fellows look so eager, As if they would beleaguer
An Heir in the midst of his forces!
I hope they be no Serieants! That hang upon thy margents.
This Rogue has the Ioule of a Iaylor!

P.IV. O Founder, no such matter, My Spurrier, and my Hatter, The young
Peny-bo^ answ^
My Linen man, and my Tailor.
Thou should have been brought in too, Shoemaker,
If the time had been longer, and Thom Barber.
How do thou like my company, old Canter?
Do I not muster a brave troop? all Bill-men?
Present your Arms, before my Founder here,
This is my Founder, this same learned Canter!
He brought me the first news of my fathers death,
He tales the bills, and puts them up in his pockets. I thank him, and ever
since, I call him Founder,
Worship him, boys, I Will read only the sums.
And pass 'hem straight.

SHO. Now Ale.

REST. And strong Ale bless him.

P. IV. Gods so, some Ale, and Sugar for my Founder!
Good Bills, sufficient Bills, these Bills may pass.

P. CA. I do not like those paper-squibs, good Master.
They may undo your store, I mean, of Credit,
And fire your Arsenall, if case you do not
In time make good those outerworkes, your pockets,
And take a Garrison in of some two hundred,
To beat these Pyoners off, that carry a Mine
Would blow you up, at last. Secure your Casamates,
Here Master Picklocke, Sir, your man of Law,
And learned Attorney, has sent you a Bag of munition.

P.IV. What is it?

P.CA. Three hundred pieces.

P.IV. I Will dispatch 'hem.

P.CA. Do, I would have your strengths lined, and perfumed
With Gold, as well as Amber.

P.IV. God a mercy,
Come, Ad soluendum, boys! there, there, and there, etc.
He pays all. I look on nothing but Totalis.

P. CA. See!
The difference 'twixt the covetous, and the prodigal!
"The Covetous man never has money! and
"The Prodigal will have none shortly!

P. IV. Ha,
What says my Founder? I thank you, I thank you Sirs.

ALL. God bless your worship, and your worships Chanter.

P CA. I say 't is nobly done, to cherish Shopkeepers,
And pay their Bills, without examining thus.

P. IV. Alas! they have had a pitiful hard time on it,
A long vacation, from their coozening.
Poor Rascals, I do do it out of charity.
I would advance their trade again, and have them
Haste to be rich, swear, and forswear wealthily,
What do you stay for, Sirrah?

SPV. To my box Sir,

P.IV. Your box, why, there is an angel, if my Spurs
He gives the Spurrier, to his box. Be not right Rippon.

SPV. Give me never a penny
If I strike not through your bounty with the Rowells.

P. IV. Do thou want any money Founder?

P.CA. Who, Sr. I,
Did I not tell you I was bred in the Mines,
Under Sir Beuis Bullion.

P.IV. That is true,
I quite forgot, you Myne-men want no money,
Your streets are pau'd with 't: there, the molten silver
Runns out like cream, on cakes of gold.

P. CA. And Rubies
Do grow like Strawberries.

P. IV. 'Twere brave being there!
Come Thom, we'll go to the Office now.

P.CA. What Office?

P. IV. News Office, the New Staple; thou shall go too,
It Is here in the house, on the same floor, Thom. says,
Come, Founder, let us trade in Ale, and nutmegges.

ACT. I.
SCENE. IIII.
REGISTER. CLERK. WOMAN.
WHat, are those Desks fit now? set forth the Table,
The Carpet and the Chair: where are the News
That were examined last? have you filled them up?

CLE. Not yet, I had no time.

REG. Are those news registered,
That Emissary Buz sent in last night?
Of Spinola, and his Eggs?

CLE. Yes Sir, and filled.

REG. What are you now upon?

CLE. That our new Emissary
Westminster, gave us, of the Golden Heir.

REG. Dispatch, that is news indeed, and of importance.
What would you have good woman?

WOE. I would have Sir, A countrey-woman waits ther^
A groatsworth of any News, I care not what,
To carry down this Saturday, to our Vicar.

REG. O! You are a Butterwoman, ask Nathaniel
The Clerk, there.

CLE. Sir, I tell her, she must stay
Till Emissary Exchange, or Paul's send in,
And then I Will fit her.

REG. Do good woman, have patience,
It is not now, as when the Captain lived.

CLE. You Will blast the reputation of the Office,
Now in the Bud, if you dispatch these Groats,
So soon: let them attend in name of policy.

ACT. I.
SCENE. V.
PENIBOY. CYMBAL. FITTON. THO: BARBER. CANTER.
IN troth they are dainty rooms; what place is this?

CYM. This is the outer room, where my Clerks sit,
And keep their sides, the Register in the midst,
The Examiner, he sits private there, within,
And here I have my several Rowles, and Fyles
Of News by the Alphabet, and all put up
Under their heads.

P.IV. But those, too, subdivided?

CYM. Into Authentical, and Apocryphal.

FIT. Or News of doubtful credit, as Barbers news.

CYM. And Tailors News, Porters, and Watermens news,

FIT. Whereto, beside the Coranti, and Gazetti.

CYM. I have the News of the season.

FIT. As vacation news,
Terme-nerves, and Christmas-newes.

CIM. And news OF the faction.

FIT. As the Reformed news, Protestant news,

CYM. And Pontificiall news, of all which several,
The Day-bookes, Characters, Precedents are kept.
Together with the names of special friends --

FIT. And men of Correspondence in the Country --

CYM. Yes, of all ranks, and all Religions. --

FIT. Factors, and Agents --

CYM. Liegers, that lie out
Through all the Shires of the kingdom.

P.IV. This is fine!
And bears a brave relation! but what says
Mercurius Britannicus to this?

CYM. O Sir, he gains by it half in half.

FIT. Nay more
I Will stand to it. For, where he was wont to get
In, hungry Captains, obscure Statesmen.

CYM. Fellows
To drink with him in a dark room in a Tavern,
And eat a Sawsage.

FIT. We have seen't,

CYM. As feign,
To keep so many politic pens
Going, to feed the press.

FIT. And dish our news,
Were It true, or false.

CYM. Now all that charge is saved
The public Chronicler.

FIT. How, do you call him there?

CYM. And gentle Reader.

FIT. He that has the maidenhead
Of all the books.

CYM. Yes, dedicated to him,

FIT. Or rather prostituted.

P. IV. You are right, Sir.

CYM. No more shall be abused, nor country- Parsons
OF the Inquisition, nor busy Justices,
Trouble the peace, and both torment themselves,
And their poor ign'rant Neighbors with enquiries
After the many, and most innocent Monsters,
That never came in the Counties they were charged with.

P. IV. Why, me thinks Sir, if the honest common people
Will be abused, why should not they have their pleasure,
In the believing Lies, are made for them;
As you in the Office, making them your selves?

FIT. O Sir! it is the printing we oppose.

CYM. We not forbid that any News, be made,
But that 't be printed; for when News is printed,
It leaves Sir to be News. while it is but written --

FIT. Though it be never so false, it runs News still.

P. IV. See diverse men's opinions! unto some,
The very printing of them, makes them News;
That have not the heart to believe any thing,
But what they see in print.

FIT. I, that is an Error
Has abused many; but we shall reform it,
As many things beside (we have a hope)
Are crept among the popular abuses.

CYM. Nor shall the Stationer cheat upon the Time,
By buttering over again --

FIT. once, in Seven Years,
As the age doates --

CYM. And grows forgetful o'them,
His antiquated Pamphlets, with new dates.
But all shall come from the Mint.

FIT. Fresh and new stamped,

CYM. With the Office-Seale, Staple Commodity.

FIT. And if a man will assure his News, he may:
Twopence a Sheet he shall be warranted,
And have a policy for it.

P. IV. Sir, I admire
The method of your place; all things within't
Are so digested, fitted, and composed,
As it shows Wit had married Order.

FIT. Sir.

CYM. The best we could to inuit the Times.

FIT. It has
Cost sweat, and freesing.

CYM. And some broken sleeps
Before it came to this.

P.IV. I easily think it.

FIT. But now it has the shape --

CYM. And is come forth.

P. IV. A most polite neat thing! with all the limbs,
As sense can taste!

CYM. It is Sir, though I say it,
As well-begotten a business, and as fairly
Helped to the World.

P. IV. You must be a Midwife Sir!
Or else the son of a Midwife! (pray you pardon me)
Have helped it forth so happily! what News have you?
News of this morning? I would feign hear some
Fresh, from the forge (as new as day, as they say.)

CYM. And such we have Sir.

REG. Show him the last Roll,
Of Emissary West-minster's, The Heir.

P. IV. Come nearer, Thom:

CLA. There is a brave young Heir
Penny rejoices, that he i^ in. Is come of age this morning, Mr. Peny-boy.

P. IV. That Is I!

CLA. His Father died on this day seuenth-night.

P. IV. True!

CLA. At six of the Clock in the morning, just a week
Tells Thom: of it. Ere he was One and Twenty.

P. IV. I am here, Thom!
Proceed, I pray thee.

CLA. An old Canting Beggar
Brought him first News, whom he has entertained,
Call in the Canter. He gives the Clerk. To follow him, since.

P. IV. Why, you shall see him! Founder,
Come in; no Follower, but Companion,
I pray thee put him in, Friend. There Is an Angel --
Thou do not know, he is a wise old Fellow,
Though he seem patched thus, and made up of pieces.
Founder, we are in, here, in, in the Newes-Office!
In this days Roll, already! I do muse
How you came by us Sir's!

CYM. One Master Pick-locke
A Lawyer, that has purchased here a place,
This morning, of an Emissary under me.

FIT. Emissarie Westminster.

CYM. Gave it into the Office,

FIT. For his Essay, his piece.

P. IV. My man of Law!
He Is my Attorney, and Sollicitour too!
A fine pragmaticke! what is his place worth?

CYM. A Nemo-scit, Sir.

FIT. It Is as News come, in,

CYM. And as they are issued. I have the just meoytie
For my part: then the other moeytie
Is parted into seven. The four Emissaries;
Whereof my Cozen Fitton here is for Court,
Ambler for Paul's, and Buz for the Exchange,
Picklocke, for Westminster, with the Examiner,
And Register, they have full parts: and then one part
Is vnder-parted to a couple of Clerks;
And there is the just division of the profits!

P.IV. Have you those Clarks Sir.

CYM. There is one Desk empty,
But it has many Suitors.

P. IV. Sir, may I
Present one more and carry it, if his parts
Or Gifts, (which you will, call'hem)

CYM. Be sufficient Sir.

P. IV. What are your present Clerks habilities?
How is he qualified?

CYM. A decayed Stationer
He was, but knows News well, can sort and rank 'hem.

FIT. And for a need can make 'hem.

CYM. True Paul's bred,
In The Churchyard.

P. IV. And this at the West-dore,
O'th other side, he is my Barber Thom,
A pretty Scholar, and a Master of Arts,
Was made, or went out Master of Arts in a throng,
At the University; as before, one Christmas,
He got into a Masque at Court, by his wit,
And the good means of his Cythern, holding up thus
For one of the Music, He Is a nimble Fellow*
And alike skilled in every liberal Science,
As having certain snaps of all, a neat,
Quick-vaine, in forging News too. I do love him,
And promised him a good turn, and I would do it.
What Is your price? the value?

CYM. Fifty pounds, Sr.

P. IV. Get in Thom, take possession, I install thee;
Here, tell your money; give thee joy, good Thom; He buys Thom a Clerks
place.
And let me hear from thee every minute of News,
While the New Staple stands, or the Office lasts,
Which I do wish, may never be less for thy sake.

CLA. The Emissaries, Sir, would speak with you,
And Master Fitton, they have brought in News,
Three Bale together.

CYM. Sr, you are welcome, here. They take leave of Peny-boy, and Canter.

FIT. So is your creature.

CYM. Business calls us off, Sir,
That may concern the Office.

P.IV. Keep me fair, Sir,
Still in your Staple, I am here your friend,
On the same flooer.

FIT. We shall be your servants.

P. IV. How do thou like it, Founder?

P.CA. All is well,
But that your man of law me thinks appears not
In his due time. O! Here comes Masters worship.

ACT. I.
SCENE. VI.
PICKLOCK. PENI-BOY. IV. P. CANTER.
HOw does the Heir, bright Master Peniboy?
Is he awake yet in his One and Twenty?
Why, this is better far, then to wear Cypress,
Dull smutting gloves, or melancholy blacks,
And have a pair of twelue-peny broad ribbands
Laid out like Labells.

P.IV. I should have made shift
To have laughed as heartily in my mourners hood,
As in this Suite, if it had pleased my father
To have been buried, with the Trumpeters.

PIC. The Heralds of Arms, you mean.

P.IV. I mean,
All noise, that is superfluous!

PIC. All that idle pomp,
And vanity of a Tombe-stone, your wise father
Did, by his will, prevent. Your worship had --

P. IV. A loving and obedient father of him,
I know it: a right, kinde-natur'd man,
To dye so opportunely.

PIC. And to settle
All things so well, compounded for your ward ship
The week before, and left your state entyre
Without any charge upon it.

P. IV. I must needs say,
I lost an Officer of him, a good Bayliffe,
And I shall want him; but all peace be with him,
I will not wish him alive, again; not I,
For all my Fortune; give your worship joy
O'your new place, your Emissary-ship,
In The News Office.

PIC. Know you, why I bought it Sr?

P. IV. Not I.

PIC. To work for you, and carry a mine
Against the Master of it, Master Cymball;
Who has a plot upon a Gentlewoman,
Was once designed for you, Sir.

P. IV. Me?

PIC. Your father,
Old Master Peni-boy, of happy memory,
And wisdom too, as any in the County,
Careful to find out a fit match for you,
In his own life time (but he was prevented)
Left it in writing in a Schedule here,
To be annexed to his Will; that you,
His only Son, upon his charge, and blessing,
Should take due notice of a Gentlewoman,
Soiourning with your uncle, Rieher Peni-boy.

P.IV. A Cornish Gentlewoman, I do know her,
Mistress, Pecunia doe-all.

PIC. A great Lady,
Indeed she is, and not of mortal race,
Infanta of the Mines; her Graces Grandfather,
Was Duke, and Cousin to the King of Ophyr,
The Subterranean, let that pass. Her name is,
Or rather, her three names are (for such she is)
Aurelia Clara Pecunia, A great Princess,
Of mighty power, though she live in private
With a contracted family! Her Secretary --

P.CA. Who is her Gentleman-usher too.

PIC. One Broker,
And then two Gentlewomen; Mistress Statute,
And Mistress Band, with Wax the Chambermaide,
And Mother Mortgage, the old Nurse, two Grooms,
Pawn, and his fellow; you have not many to bribe, Sir.
The work is feizible, and th'approches easy,
By your own kindred. Now, Sir, Cymball thinks,
The Master here, and governor of the Staple,
By his fine arts, and pomp of his great place
To draw her! He concludes, she is a woman!
And that so soon as sh' hears of the New Office,
She Will come to visit it, as they all have longings
After new sights, and motions! But your bounty,
Person, and bravery must atchieue her.

P. CA. She is
The talk of the time! th'aduenture of the age!

PIC. You cannot put your self upon an action
Of more importance.

P.CA. All the world are suitors to her.

PIC. All sorts of men, and all professions!

P.CA. You shall have stall-fed Doctors, crammed Divines
Make love to her, and with those studied
And perfumed flatteries, as no rome can stink
More elegant, then where they are.

PIC. Well chanted
Old Canter thou singst true.

P. CA. And (by your leave)
Good Masters worship, some of your velvet coat
Make corpulent curt'sies to her, till they crack for it.

PIC. There Is Doctor Almanac wooes her, one of the Ieerers,
A fine Physician.

P. CA. Your Sea-captaine, Shun-field,
Gives out he will go upon the Cannon for her.

PIC. Though his loud mouthing get him little credit,

P. CA. Young Master Pyed-mantle, the fine Herrald
Professes to deriuer her through all ages,
From all the Kings, and Queens, that ever were.

PIC. And Master Madrigall, the crowned Poet
Of these our times, does offer at her praises
As fair as any, when it shall please Apollo,
That wit and rhyme may meet both in one subject.

P. CA. And you to bear her from all these, it will be --

PIC. A work of fame.

P. CA. Of honor.

PIC. Celebration.

P. CA. Worthy your name.

PIC. The Peni-boyes to live in it,

P. CA. It is an action you were built for, Sir,

PIC. And none but you can do it.

P. IV. I Will undertake it,

P. CA. And carry it.

P.IV. Fear me not, for since I came
Of mature age, I have had a certain itch
In my right eye, this corner, here, do you see?
To do some work, and worthy of a Chronicle.

The first Intermeane after the first Act.
MIRTH. How now Gossip! how does the Play please you?


CENSVRE. Very scuruily, me thinks, and sufficiently naught.


EXPECTATION. As a body would wish: here is nothing but a young Prodigal, come
of age, who makes much of the Barber, buys him a place in a new Office, in the
air, I know not where, and his man of Law to follow him, with the Beggar to
boot, and they two help him to a wise.


MIRTH. I, she is a proper piece! that such creatures can broke for.


TATLE. I cannot abide that nasty fellow, the Beggar, if he had been a
Court-Begger in good clothes; a Beggar in velvet, as they say, I could have
endured him.


MIRTH. Or a begging scholar in black, or one of these beggarly Poets,
gossip, that would hang upon a young heir like a horseleech.


EXPEC. Or a threadbare Doctor of Physic, a poor Quackesaluer.


CENSVRE. Or a Sea-captaine, half steru'd.


MIRTH. I, these were tolerable Beggars, Beggars of fashion! you shall see some
such anon!


TATLE. I would feign see the Fool, gossip, the Fool is the finest man in the
company, they say, and has all the wit: He is the very Justice of Peace of the
Play, and can cemmit whom he will, and what he will, error, absurdity, as
the toy takes him, and no man say, black is his eye, but laugh at him.


MIRTH. But they have no Fool in this Play, I am afraid, gossip.


TATLE. It Is a wise Play, then.


EXPECTATION. They are all fools, the rather, in that.


CENSVRE. Like enough.


TATLE. My husband, ( Timothy Tatle, God rest his poor soul) was wont to say,
there was no Play without a Fool, and a Devil in it; he was for the Devil
still, God bless him. The Devil for his money, would he say, I would feign
see the Devil. And why would you so feign see the Devil? would I say. Because
he has horns, wife, and may be a cuckold, as well as a Devil, he would
answer: You are even such another, husband, quoth I. Was the Devil ever
married? where do you read, the Devil was ever so honorable to commit
Matrimony; The Play will tell us, that, says he, we will go see it to morrow,
the Devil is an Ass. He is an errant learned man, that made it, and can
write, they say, and I am foully deceived, but he can read too.


MIRTH. I remember it gossip, I went with you, by the same token, Mrs. Trouble
Truth diswaded us, and told us, he was a profane Poet, and all his Plays had
Devils in them. That he kept schole vpo' the Stage, could conjure there, above
the Schole of Westminster, and Doctor Lamb too: not a Play he made, but had a
Devil in it. And that he would learn us all to make our husbands Cuckolds at
Plays: by another token, that a young married wife in the company, said, she
could find in her heart to steal thither, and see a little of the vanity
through her masque, and come practice at home.


TATLE. O, it was, Mistress --


MIRTH. Nay, Gossip, I name no body. It may be 'twas my self.


EXPECTATION. But was the Devil a proper man, Gossip?


MIRTH. As fine a gentleman, of his inches, as ever I saw trusted to the Stage,
or any where else: and loved the common wealth, well as ere a Patriot of 'hem
all: he would carry away the Vice on his back, quick to Hell, in every Play
where he came, and reform abuses.


EXPECTATION. There was the Devil of Edmonton, no such man, I warrant you.


CENSVRE. The Coniurer coosen'd him with a candles end, he was an Ass.


MIRTH. But there was one Smug, a Smith, would have made a horse laugh, and
broke his halter, as they say.


TATLE. O, but the poor man had got a shrewd mischance, one day.


EXPECTATION. How, Gossip?


TATLE. He had dressed a Rogue Jade in the morning, that had the Staggers, and
had got such a spice of 'hem himself, by noone, as they would not away all the
Play time, do what he could, for his heart.


MIRTH. 'Twas his part, Gossip, he was to be drunk, by his part.


TATLE. Say you so, I understood not so much.


EXPECTA. Would we had such an other part, and such a man in this play, I
fear 'twill be an excellent dull thing.


CENSVRE. Expect, intend it.


ACT. II.
SCENE. I.
PENI-BOY. Sen. PECVNIA. MORTGAGE. STATVTE. BAND. BROKER.
YOur Grace is sad me thinks, and melancholy!
You do not look upon me with that face,
As you were wont, my Goddess, bright Pecunia:
Although your Grace be fallen, of two in the hundred,
In vulgar estimation; yet am I,
You Graces servant still: and teach this body,
To bend, and these my aged knees to buckle,
In adoration, and just worship of you.
Indeed, I do confess, I have no shape
To make a minion of, but I Am your Martyr,
Your Graces Martyr. I can hear the Rogues,
As I do walk the streets, whisper, and point,
There goes old Peni-boy, the slave of money,
Rich Peni-boy, Lady Pecunia's drudge,
A sordid Rascal, one that never made
Good meal in his sleep, but sells the acates are sent him,
Fish, Foul, and venison, and preserues himself,
Like an old hoary Rat, with moldy pye-crust.
This I do hear, rejoicing, I can suffer
This, and much more, for your good Graces sake.

PEC. Why do you so my Guardian? I not bid you,
Cannot my Grace be gotten, and held too,
Without your selfe-tormentings, and your watches,
Your macerating of your body thus
With cares, and scantings of your diet, and rest?

P. SE. O, no, your services, my Princely Lady,
Cannot with too much zeal of rites be done,
They are so sacred.

PEC. But my Reputation.
May suffer, and the worship of my family,
When by so servile means they both are sought.

P. SE. You are a noble, young, free, gracious Lady,
And would be every body, in your bounty,
But you must not be so. They are a few
That know your merit, Lady, and can valew't.
Your self scarce understands your proper powers.
They are all-mighty, and that we your servants,
That have the honor here to stand so near you,
Know; and can use too. All this Nether-world
Is yours, you command it, and do sway it,
The honor of it, and the honesty,
The reputation, I, and the religion,
(I was about to say, and had not erred)
Is Queen Pecunia's. For that style is yours,
If mortals knew your Grace, or their own good.

MOR. Please your Grace to retire.

BAN. I fear your Grace
Has taken too much of the sharp air.

PEC. O no!
I could endure to take a great deal more
(And with my constitution, were it left)
Unto my choice, what think you of it, Statute?

STA. A little now and then does well, and keeps
Your Grace in your complexion.

BAN. And true temper.

MOR. But too much Madame, may increase cold rheumes,
Nourish catarrhes, green sicknesses, and agues,
And put you in consumption.

P. SE. Best to take
Advice of your grave women, Noble Madame,
They know the state o'your body, and ha'studied
Your Graces health.

BAN. And honor. Here'll be visitants,
Or Suitors by and by; and it is not fit
They find you here.

STA. 'Twill make your Grace too cheap
To give them audience presently.

MOR. Leave your Secretary,
To answer them.

PEC. Wait you here, Broker.

BRO. I shall Madame.
And do your Graces trusts with diligence.

ACT. II.
SCENE. II.
PYED-MANTLE. BROKER. PENI-BOY. SEN.
WHat luck's this? I am come an inch too late,
Do you hear Sir? Is your worship of the family
Unto the Lady Pecunia?

BRO. I serve her Grace, Sir,
Aurelia Clara Pecunia, the Infanta.

PIE. Has she all those Titles, and her Grace besides,
I must correct that ignorance and ouer-sight,
Before I do present. Sir, I have drawn
A Pedigree for her Grace, though yet a Nouice
In that so noble study.

BRO. A Herald at Arms?

PIE. No Sir, a Pursiuant, my name is Pyed-mantle.

BRO. Good Master Pyed-mantle.

PIE. I have deduced her. --

BRO. From all the Spanish Mines in the West-Indi'es,
I hope: for she comes that way by her mother,
But, by her Grandmother, she is Duchess of Mines.

PIE. From man's creation I have brought her.

BRO. No further?
Before Sr, long before, you have done nothing else,
Your Mines were before Adam, search your Office,
Roll five and twenty, you will find it so,
I see you are but a Nouice, Master Pyed-mantle.
If you had not told me so.

PIE. Sir, an apprentise
In armoiry. I have read the Elements,
And Accidence, and all the leading books,
And I have, now, upon me a great ambition,
How to be brought to her Grace, to kiss her hands.

BRO. Why, if you have acquaintance with Mistress Statute,
Or Mistress Band, my Ladies Gentlewomen,
They can induce you. One is a Judges Daughter,
But somewhat stately; the other Mistress Band,
Her father's but a Scriuener, but she can
Almost as much with my Lady, as the other,
Especially, if Rose Wax the Chambermaid
Be willing. Do you not know her, Sir, neither?

PIE. No in troth Sir.

BRO. She Is a good plyant wench,
And easy to be wrought, Sir, but the Nurse
Old mother Mortgage, if you have a Tenement,
Or such a morsel? though she have no teeth,
She loves a sweet meat, any thing that melts
In her warm gummes, she could command it for you
On such a trifle, a toy. Sir, you may see,
How for your love, and this so pure complexion,
(A perfect Sanguine) I have ventured thus,
The straining of a ward, opening a door
Into the secrets of our family:

PIE. I pray you let me know, Sir, unto whom
I am so much beholden; but your name.

BRO. My name is Broker, I am Secretary,
And Usher, to her Grace.

PIE. Good Master Broker!

BRO. Good Mr. Pyed-mantle.

PIE. Why? you could do me,
If you would, now, this favor of your self.

BRO. Truly, I think I could: but if I would,
I hardly should, without, or Mistress Band,
Or Mistress Statute, please to appear in it.
Or the good Nurse I told you of, Mistress Mortgage.
We know our places here, we mingle not
One in another sphere, but all move orderly,
In our own orbs; yet we are all Concentricks.

PIE. Well, Sir, I Will wait a better season.

BRO. Do,
And study the right means, get Mistress Band
Broker makes a mouth at him. He ieeres him again. Old Peny-boy leaps To urge
on your behalf, or little Wax.

PIE. I have a hope, Sir, that I may, by chance,
Light on her Grace, as she is taking the air:

BRO. That air of hope, has blasted many an ayrie
Of Castrills like your self: Good Master Pyed-mantle,

P.SE. Well said, Master Secretary, I stood behind
And heard thee all. I honor thy dispatches.
If they be rude, untrained it our method
And have not studied the rule, dismiss 'hem quickly,
Where Is Lickfinger my Cook? that unctuous rascal?
He Will never keep his hour, that vessel of kitchinstuffe!

ACT. II.
SCENE. IIJ.
BROKER. PENY-BOY. SE. LICK-FINGER.
Here he is come, Sir.

P. SE. Pox upon him kidney,
Always too late!

LIC. To wish 'hem you, I confess,
That ha'them already.

P. SE. What?

LIC. The pox!

P.SE. The piles,
The plague, and all diseases light on him,
Knows not to keep his word. I Would keep my word sure!
I hate that man that will not keep his word,
When did I break my word?

LIC. Or I, till now?
And it is but half an hour.

P. SE. Half a year:
To me that stands upon a minute of time.
I am a just man, I love still to be just.

LIC. Why? you think I can run like light-foot Ralph,
Or keep a wheele-barrow, with a sail in town here,
To whirle me to you: I have lost two stone
Of suet in the service posting hither,
You might have followed me like a watering pot,
And seen the knots I made along the street;
My face dropped like the skimmer in a fritter pan,
And my whole body, is yet (to say the truth)
A roasted pound of butter, with grated bread in it! He sweepes his face.

P. SE. Believe you, he that list. You stayed of purpose,
To have my venison stink, and my foul mortified,
That you might have 'hem --

LIc. A shilling or two cheaper,
That Is your jealousy.

P.SE. Perhaps it is.
Will you go in, and view, and value all?
Yonder is venison sent me! foul! and fish!
In such abundance! I am sick to see it!
I wonder what they mean! I have told 'hem of it!
To burden a weak stomach! and provoke
A dying appetite! thrust a sin upon me
I never was guilty of! nothing but gluttony!
Gross gluttony! that will undo this Land!

LIC. And bating two in the hundred.

P.SE. I, that same's
A crying sin, a fearful damned device,
Eats up the poor, deuoures 'hem --

LIC. Sir, take heed
What you give out.

P. SE. Against your grave great Solons?
Numae Pompilij, they that made that Law?
To take away the poore's inheritance?
It was their portion: I will stand to it.
And they have robbed 'hem of it, plainly robbed 'hem,
I still am a just man, I tell the truth.
When moneies went at Ten in the hundred, I,
And such as I, the servants of Pecunia,
Could spare the poor two out of ten, and did it,
How say you, Broker?

(LIC. Ask your Echo)

BRO. You did it.

P. SE. I am for Justice, when did I leave Justice?
We knew 'twas theirs, they'had right and Title to it.
Now --

LIC. You can spare 'hem nothing.

P. SE. Very little,

LIC. As good as nothing.

P. SE. They have bound our hands
With their wise solemn act, shortened our arms.

LIC. Beware those worshipful ears, Sir, be not shortened,
And you play Crop i the fleet, if you use this license.

P.SE. What license, Knave? Informer?

LIC. I am Lickfinger,
Your Cook.

P. SE. A saucy Jack you are, that is once;
What said I, Broker?

BRO. Nothing that I heard, Sir.

LIC. I know his gift, he can be deaf when he list.

P. SE. Have you provided me my bushel of eggs?
I did bespeake? I do not care how stale,
Or stinking that they be; let 'hem be rotten:
For ammunition here to pelt the boys,
That break my windows?

LIC. Yes Sir, I have spared 'hem
Out of the custard politic for you, the Majors.

P. SE. It Is well, go in, take hence all that excess,
Make what you can of it, your best: and when
I have friends, that I inuit at home, provide me
Such, such, and such a dish, as I bespeake;
One a^ a time, no superfluity.
Or if you have it not, return me money;
You know my ways.

LIC. They are a little crooked.

P. SE. How knave?

LIC. Because you do indent.

P. SE. It Is true, Sir,
I do indent you shall return me money.

LIC. Rather then meat, I know it: you are just still.

P. SE. I love it still. And therefore if you spend
The red-Deere pyes in your house, or sell'hem forth, Sir,
Cast so, that I may have their coffins all,
Returned here, and pil'd up: I would be thought
To keep some kind of house.

LIC. By the mouldie signs?

P. SE. And then remember meat for my two dogs:
Fat flaps of mutton; kidneyes; rumps of veale;
Good plentious scraps; my maid shall eat the relics.

LIC. When you and your dogs have dined. A sweet reuersion.

P. SE. Who's here? my Courtier? and my little Doctor?
My Muster-Master? and what Plouer's that
They have brought to pull?

BRO. I know not, some green Plouer.
I Will find him out.

P. SE. Do, for I know the rest,
They are the Ieerers, mocking, flouting Iackes.

ACT. II.
SCENE. IV.
FITTON. PENI-BOY. SE. ALMANACH. SHVNFIELD. MADRIGAL. LICK-FINGER. BROKER.
HOw now old Money-Bawd? we are come --

P. IV. To ieere me,
As you were wont, I know you.

ALM. No, to give thee
Some good security, and see Pecunia.

P. SE. What is it?

FIT. Our selves.

ALM. Wee^l be one bound for another.

FIT. This noble Doctor here.

ALM. This worthy Courtier.

FIT. This Man of war, he was our Muster-Master.

ALM. But a Sea-Captaine now, brave Captain Shun-field. He holds up his nose.

SHVN. You snuff the air now, as the scent displeased you?

FIT. Thou needst not fear him man, his credit is sound,

ALM. And season^d too, since he took salt at Sea.

P. SE. I do not love pickl^d security,
Would I had one good Fresh-man in for all;
For truth is, you three stink.

SHV. You are a Rogue,

P. SE. I think I am, but I will lend no money
On that security, Captain.

ALM. Here Is a Gentleman,
A Fresh-man in the world, one Master Madrigall.

FIT. Of an untainted credit; what say you to him?

SHV. He Is gone me thinks, where is he? Madrigall? Madrigall steps aside with
Broker.

P. SE. H^ has an odd singing name, is he an Heir?

FIT. An Heir to a fair fortune,

ALM. And full hopes:
A dainty Scholar, and a pretty Poet!

P. SE. You Have said enough. I have no money, Gentlemen,
An' he go to it in ryme once, not a penny.

SHV. Why, he is of years, though he have little beard. He snuffes again.

P. SE. His beard has time to grow. I have no money:
Let him still dable in Poetry. No Pecunia
Is to be seen.

ALM. Come, thou love to be costiue
Still in thy curt'sie; but I have a pill,
A golden pill to purge away this melancholy.

SHV. It Is nothing but his keeping of the house here,
With his two drowsy dogs.

FIT. A drench of sack
At a good tavern, and a fine fresh pullet,
Would cure him.

LIC. Nothing but a young Hair in white-broth,
I know his diet better then the Doctor.

SHV. What Lick-finger? mine old host of Ram-Alley?
You have some mereat here.

ALM. Some dosser of Fish
Or Foul to fetch of.

FIT. An odd bargain of Venison,
To drive.

P. SE. Will you go in, knave?

LIC. I must needs,
You see who drives me, gentlemen.

ALM. Not the devil.

FIT, He may be in time, he is his Agent, now.

P. SE. You are all cogging Iacks, a Couy of wits,
The Ieerers, that still call together at meals:
Or rather an Airy, for you are birds of prey:
Peny-boy thrusts him in. And fly at all, nothing's too big or high for you.
And are so truly feared, but not beloved
One of another: as no one dares break
Company from the rest, lest they should fall,
Upon him absent.

ALM. O! the only Oracle
That ever peept, or spoke out of a dublet.

SHV. How the rogue stinks, worse then a Fishmonger sleeves!

FIT. Or Curriers hands!

SHV. And such a perboil'd visage!

FIT. His face looks like a Diers apron, just!

ALM. A sodden head, and his whole brain a possit curd!

P. SE. I, now you ieere, ieere on; I have no money.

ALM. I wonder what religion he is of!

FIT. No certain species sure, A kind of mule!
That Is half an Ethnicke, half a Christian!

P. Se. I have no money, gentlemen.

SHV. This stock.
He has no sense of any virtue, honor,
Gentry or merit.

P. Se. You say very right,
My meritorious Captain, (as I take it!)
Merit will keep no house, nor pay no house rent.
Will Mistress Merit go to market, think you?
Set on the pot, or feed the family?
Will Gentry clear with the Butcher? or the Baker?
Fetch in a Phessant, or a brace of Partridges,
From good-wife Poulter, for my Ladies supper.

FIT. See! this pure rogue!

P. Se. This rogue has money though,
My worshipful brave Courtier has no money.
No, nor my valiant Captain.

SHV. Hang you rascal.

P. Se. Nor you, my learned Doctor. I loved you
Whil you did hold your practice, and kill tripe wives.
And kept you to your vrinall; but since your thombes
Have greased the Ephemerides, casting figures,
And turning over for your Candle-rents,
And your twelve houses in the Zodiac:
With your Almutens, Alma cantaras,
Troth you shall cant alone for Peny-boy.

SHV. I told you what we should find him, a mere Bawd.

FIT. A rogue, a cheater.

P.Se. What you please, gentlemen,
I am of that humble nature and condition,
Never to mind your worships, or take notice
Of what you throw away, thus. I keep house here
Like a lame Cobbler, never out of doors,
With my two dogs, my friends; and (as you say)
Drive a quick pretty trade, still. I get money:
And as for Titles, be they Rogue, or Rascal,
Or what your worships fancy, let 'hem pass
As transitory things; they are mine to day,
And yours to morrow.

ALM. Hang thee dog.

SHV. Thou curre.

P. Se. You see how I do blush, and am ashamed
Of these large attributes? yet you have no money.

ALM. Well wolf, Hyaena, you old pockie rascal,
You will have the Hernia fall down again
Into your Scrotum, and I shall be sent for.
I will remember then, that; and your Fistula
In ano, I cured you of.

P. Se. Thank your dog-leech craft.
They were 'holesome piles, before you meddl'd with'hem.

ALM. What an ungrateful wretch is this?

SHV. He minds
A courtesy no more, then London Bridge,
What Arch was mended last.

FIT. He never thinks.
More then a logge, of any grace at Court,
A man may do him: or that such a Lord
Reached him his hand.

P. Se. O yes! if grace would strike
The brewers Tally, or my good Lords hand,
Would quit the scores. But Sir, they will not do it.
Here Is a piece, my good Lord piece, does all. He shows a piece.
Goes to the Butehers. fetches in a muton,
Then to the Bakers, brings in bread, makes fires,
Gets wine, and does more real Courtesies,
Then all my Lords, I know: My sweet Lord piece!
You are my Lord, the rest are cogging Iacks,
Under the Rose.

SHV. Rogue, I could beat you now,

P. Se. True Captain, if you durst beat any other.
I should believe you, but indeed you are hungry;
You are not angry Captain, if I know you
Aright; good Captain. No, Pecunia,
Is to be seen, though Mistress Band would speak,
Or little Blushet- Wax, be never so easy,
I Will stop mine ears with her, against the Sirens,
Court, and Philosophy. God be wi^ you, Gentlemen,
Provide you better names. Pecunia is for you.

FIT. What a damned Harpy it is? where is Madrigall?
Is he sneek'd hence.

SHV. Here he comes with Broker, Madrigall returns.
Pecunia's Secretary.

ALM. He may do some good
With him perhaps. Where ha you been Madrigall?

MAD. Above with my Ladies women, reading verses.

FIT. That was a favor. Good morrow, Master Secretary.

SHV. Good morrow, Master Usher.

ALM. Sir, by both
Your worshipful Titles, and your name Mas Broker.
Good morrow.

MAD. I did ask him if he were
Amphibion Broker.

SHV. Why?

ALM. A creature of two natures,
Because he has two Offices.

BRO. You may ieere,
You have the wits, young Gentlemen. But your hope
Of Helicon, will never carry it, here,
With our fat family; we have the dullest,
Most unboar'd Ears for verse amongst our females.
I grieved you read so long, Sir, old Nurse Mortgage,
She snoar'd in the Chair, and Statute (if you marked her)
Fell fast a sleep, and Mistress Band, she nodded,
But not with any consent to what you read.
They must have somewhat else to chinke, then rymes.
If you could make an Epitaph on your Land,
(Imagine it on departure) such a Poem
Would wake 'hem, and bring Wax to her true temper.

MAD. I faith Sir, and I will try.

BRO. It Is but earth,
Fit to make brickes and tyles of.

SHV. Pocks upon it
It Is but for pots, or pipkins at the best.
If it would keep us in good tobacco pipes,

BRO. 'Twere worth keeping.

FIT. Or in porc'lane dishes
There were some hope.

ALM. But this is a hungry soil,
And must be helped.

FIT. Who would hold any Land
To have the trouble to marle it.

SHV. Not a gentleman.

BRO. Let clownes and hyndes affect it, that love ploughes,
And carts, and harrowes, and are busy still,
In vexing the dull element.

ALM. Our sweet Songster
Shall rarifie t into air.

FIT. And you Mas. Broker
Shall have a feeling.

BRO. So it supple, Sir,
The nerves.

MAD. O! it shall be palpable,
Make thee run through a hoope, or a thombe-ring,
The nose of a tobacco pipe, and draw
Thy ductile bones out, like a knitting needle,
To serve my subtle turns.

BRO. I shall obey Sir,
And run a thread, like an houre-glasse.

P. SE. Where is Broker?
Are not these flies gone yet? pray quit my house,
I Will smoke you out else.

FIT. O! the Prodigal!
Will you be at so much charge with us, and loss?

MAD. I have heard you have offered Sir, to lock up smoke,
And cauke your windores, spar up all your doors,
Thinking to keep it a close prisoner wi'you,
And wept, when it went out, Sir, at your chimney.

FIT. And yet his eyes were dryer then a pummise.

SHV. A wretched rascal, that will bind about
The nose of his bellows, lest the wind get out
When he is abroad.

ALM. Sweepes down no cobwebs here,
But sells 'hem for cut-fingers. And the spiders,
As creatures reared of dust, and cost him nothing,
To fat old Ladies monkeyes.

FIT. He has offer^d
To gather up spilt water, and preserve
Each hair falls from him to stop balls with all.

SHV. A slave, and an Idolater to Pecunia!

P.SE. You all have happy memories, Gentlemen,
In rocking my poor cradle. I remember too,
When you had lands, and credit, worship, friends,
I, and could give security: now, you have none,
Or will have none right shortly. This can time,
And the vicissitude of things. I have
All these* and money too, and do possess 'hem,
And am right heartily glad of all our memories,
And both the changes.

FIT. Let us leave the viper.

P.SE. He Is glad he is rid of his torture, and so soon.
Broker, come hither, up, and tell your Lady,
She must be ready presently, and Statute,
Band, Mortgage, Wax. My prodigal young kinsman
Will straight be here to see her; 'top of our house,
The flourishing, and flanting Peny-boy.
We were but three of us in all the world,
My brother Francis, whom they called Franck Peny-boy,
Father to this: he is dead. This Peny-boy,
Is now the heir! I, Richer Peny-boy,
Not Richard, but old Harry Peny-boy,
And (to make rhyme) close, wary Peny-boy
I shall have all at last, my hopes do tell me.
Go, see all ready; and where my dogs have falted,
Remove it with a broom, and sweeten all
With a slice of juniper, not too much, but sparing,
We may be faulty our selves else, and turn prodigal,
In entertaining of the Prodigal.
Here he is! and with him -- what! a Clapper Dudgeon!
That Is a good sign; to have the beggar follow him,
So near at his first entry into fortune.

ACT. II.
SCENE. V.
PENY-BOY. IV. PENI-BOY. SEN. PICLOCK. CANTER.) BROKER. PECVNIA. STATVTE. BAND.
WAX. MORTGAGE. hid in the study.
HOw now old Uncle? I am come to see thee.
And the brave Lady, here, the daughter of Ophir,
They say thou keepst.

P.SE. Sweet Nephew, if she were
The daughter of the Sun, she is at your service,
And so am I, and the whole family,
Worshipful Nephew.

P. IV. Sai'st thou so, dear Uncle?
Welcome my friends then: Here is, Domine Picklocke:
My man of Law, sollicits all my causes.
Follows my business, makes, and compounds my quarrels,
Between my tenants and me, sowes all my strifes,
And reapes them too, troubles the country for me,
And vexes any neighbor, that I please.

P.SE. But with commission?

P.IV. Under my hand and seal.

P.Se. A worshipful place!

PIC. I thank his worship for it.

P. SE. But what is this old Gentleman?

P.CA. A Rogue,
A very Canter, I Sir, one that maunds
Upon the Pad, we should be brothers though:
For you are near as wretched as my self,
You dare not use your money, and I have none.

P. SE. Not use my money, cogging Jack, who uses it
At better rates? lets it for more in the hundred,
Then I do, Sirrah?

P.IV. Be not angry uncle.

P. SE. What? to disgrace me, with my Queen? as if
I did not know her value.

P. CA. Sir, I meant
Young Peny-boy is angyry. You durst not to enjoy it.

P.SE. Hold your peace,
You are a Jack.

P. SE. Uncle, he shall be a John,
And, you go to that, as good a man as you are.
An' I can make him so, a better man,
Perhaps I will too. Come, let us go.

P. SE. Nay, kinsman,
My worshipful kinsman; and the top of our house;
Do not your penitent uncle that affront,
For a rash word, to leave his joyful threshold,
Before you see the Lady that you long for.
The Venus of the time, and state, Pecunia!
I do perceive, your bounty loves the man,
For some concealed virtue, that he hides
Under those rags.

P.CA. I owe my happiness to him,
The waiting on his worship, since I brought him
The happy News, welcome to all young heirs.

P. IV. Thou did indeed, for which I thank thee yet,
Your Fortunate Princess, Uncle, is long a coming.

P. CA. She is not rigged, Sir, setting forth some Lady,
Will cost as much as furnishing a Fleet,
Here she is come at last, The study is opened where she sit in state.

She kisseth him.

and like a Galley
Guilt in the prow.

P. IV. Is this Pecunia?

P. SE. Vouchsafe my toward kinsman, gracious Madame,
The favor of your hand.

PEC. Nay, of my lips, Sir,
To him.

P. IV. She kisses like a mortal creature,
Almighty Madame, I have longed to see you.

PEC. And I have my desire, Sir, to behold
That youth, and shape, which in my dreams and wakes,
I have so often contemplated, and felt
Warm in my veins, and native as my blood.
When I was told of your arrival here,
I felt my heart beat, as it would leap out,
In speech; and all my face it was a flame,
But how it came to pass I do not know.

P. IV. O! beauty loves to be more proud then nature,
That made you blush. I cannot satisfy
My curious eyes, by which alone I Am happy,
In my beholding you.

P. CA. They pass the complement
Prettily well.

PIC. I, he does kiss her, I like him. He kisseth her.

P. IV. My passion was clear contrary, and doubtful,
I shook for fear, and yet I danced for joy,
I had such motions as the Sunne-beames make
Against a wall, or playing on a water,
Or trembling vapor of a boiling pot --

P. SE. That Is not so good, it should ha'bin a Crucible,
With molten metal, she had understood it.

P. IV. I cannot talk, but I can love you, Madame.
Are these your Gentlewomen? I love them too.
And which is mistress Statute? Mistress Band?
They all kiss close, the last stuck to my lips.

BRO. It was my Ladies Chambermaid, soft- Wax.

P. IV. Soft lips she has, I am sure on it. Mother Mortgage,
I Will owe a kiss, till she be younger, Statute, He doubles the complement to
them all.
Sweet Mistress Band, and honey, little Wax,
We must be better acquainted.

STA. We are but servants, Sir.

BAND. But whom her Grace is so content to grace,
We shall observe.

WAX. Aand with all fit respect.

MOR. In our poor places.

WAX. Being her Graces shadows.

P. IV. A fine well-spoken family. What Is thy name?

BRO. Broker.

P.IV. Me thinks my uncle should not need thee;
Who is a crafty Knave, enough, believe it.
Art thou her Graces Steward?

BRO. No, her Usher, Sir.

P. IV. What, of the Hall? thou have a sweeping face,
Thy beard is like a broom.

BRO. No barren chin, Sir,
I am no Eunuch, though a Gentleman-usher.

P. IV. Thou shall go with us. Uncle, I must have
My Princess forth to day.

P. SE. Whither you please, Sir,
You shall command her.

PEC. I will do all grace
To my new servant.

P. SE. Thanks unto your bounty;
Old Peny-boy thanks her, but makes his condition. He is my Nephew, and my
Chief, the Point,
Tip, Top, and Tuft of all our family!
But, Sir, conditioned always, you return
Statute, and Band home, with my sweet, soft Wax,
And my good Nurse, here, Mortgage.

P. IV. O! what else?

P.SE. By Broker.

P.IV. Do not fear.

P.SE. She shall go wi' you,
Whither you please, Sir, any where.

P. CA. I see
A Money-Bawd, is lightly a Flesh-Bawd, too.

PIC. Are you advised? Now of my faith, this Canter
Would make a good grave Burgess in some Barn.

P.IV. Come, thou shall go with us, uncle.

P.CA. By no means, Sir.

P.IV. We'll have both Sack, and Fiddlers.

P.SE. I Will not draw
That charge upon your worship.

P.CA. He speaks modestly,
And like an Uncle,

P. SE. But Mas Broker, here,
He shall attend you, Nephew; her Graces Usher,
And what you fancy to bestow on him,
Be not too lavish, use a temperate bounty,
I Will take it to my self.

P. IV. I will be princely,
While I possess my Princess, my Pecunia.

P. SE. Where is it you eat?

P. IV. Hard by, at Picklocks lodging.
Old Lickfinger's the Cook, here in Ram-Alley.

P. SE. He has good cheer; perhaps I Will come and see you.

P. CAN. O, fie! an Alley, and a Cooks-shop, gross,
The Canter takes him aside, and persuades him,'T will savor, Sir, most rankly
of 'hem both.
Let your meat rather follow you, to a tavern.

PIC. A tauern's as unfit too, for a Princess.

P. CA. No, I have known a Princess, and a great one,
Come forth of a tavern.

PIC. Not go in, Sir, though.

P. CA. She must go in, if she came forth: the blessed
Pokahontas (as the Historian calls her
And great Kings daughters of Virginia)
Has bin in womb of a tavern; and besides,
Your nasty Uncle will spoil all your mirth,
And be as noisome.

PIC. That Is true.

P. CA. No 'faith,
Dine in Apollo with Pecunia,
At brave Duke Wadloos, have your friends about you,
And make a day on it.

P. IV. Content 'ifaith:
Our meat shall be brought thither. Simon the King,
Will bid us welcome.

PIC. Patron, I have a suite.

P. IV. What Is that?

PIC. That you will carry the Infanta,
To see the Staple', her Grace will be a grace,
To all the members of it.

P. IV. I will do it:
And have her Arms set up there, with her Titles,
Aurelia Clara Pecunia, the Infanta.
And in Apollo. Come (sweet Princess) go.

P. SE. Broker, be careful of your charge.

BRO. I warrant you.

The second Intermeane after the second Act.
CENSVRE. Why, this is duller and duller! intolerable! scuruy! neither Devil
nor Fool in this Play! pray God, some on us be not a witch, Gossip, to
forespeake the matter thus.


MIRTH. I fear we are all such, and we were old enough: But we are not all old
enough to make one witch. How like you the Vice in the Play.


EXPECTATION. Which is he?


MIR. Three or four: old Covetousness, the sordid Peny-boy, the Money-bawd,
who is a flesh-bawd too, they say.


TATLE. But here is never a Fiend to carry him away. Besides, he has never a
wooden dagger! I Would not give a rush for a Vice, that has not a wooden dagger to
snap at every body he meets.


MIRTH. That was the old way, Gossip, when Iniquity came in like Hokos Pokos,
in a Iuglers ierkin, with false skirts, like the Knave of Clubs! but now they
are attired like men and women of the time, the Vices, male and female!
Prodigality like a young heir, and his Mistress Money (whose favors he
scatters like counters) prank't up like a prime Lady, the Infanta of the Mines.


CEN. I, therein they abuse an honorable Princess, it is thought.


MIRTH. By whom is it so thought? or where lies the abuse?


CEN. Plain in the stiling her Infanta, and giving her three names.


MIRTH. Take heed, it lie not in the vice of your interpretation: what have
Aurelia, Clara, Pecunia to do with any person? do they any more, but express
the property of Money, which is the daughter of earth, and drawn out of the
Mines? Is there nothing to be called Infanta, but what is subject to exception?
Why not the Infanta of the Beggars? or Infanta of the Gypsies? as well as King
of Beggars, and King of Gypsies?


CEN. Well, and there were no wiser then I, I would sow him in a sack, and send
him by sea to his Princess.


MIRT. Faith, and he heard you Censure, he would go near to stick the Asses
ears to your high dressing, and perhaps to all ours for harkening to you.


TATLE. By'r Lady but he should not to mine, I would harken, and harken, and
censure, if I saw cause, for the other Princess sake Pokahontas, surnamed the
blessed, whom he has abused indeed (and I do censure him, and will censure
him) to say she came forth of a Tavern, was said like a paltry Poet.


MIRTH. That Is but one Gossips opinion, and my Gossip Tatle's too! but what
says Expectation, here, she sits sullen and silent.


EXP. Troth I expect their Office, their great Office! the Staple, what it will
be! they have talked on it, but we see it not open yet; would Butter would come
in, and spread it-selfe a little to us.


MIRTH. Or the butter-box, Buz, the Emissary.


TATLE. When it is churn'd, and dish't, we shall hear of it.


EXP. If it be fresh and sweet butter; but say it be sower and wheyish.


MIR. Then it is worth nothing, mere pot- butter, fit to be spent in
suppositories, or greasing coach-wheeles, stale stinking butter, and such I
fear it is, by the being barrell'd up so long.


EXPECTATION. Or rank Irish butter.


CEN. Have patience Gossips, say that contrary to our expectations it prove
right, seasonable, salt butter.


MIR. Or to the time of year, in Lent, delicate Almond butter! I have a sweet
tooth yet, and I will hope the best; and sit down as quiet, and calm as
butter, look as smooth, and soft as butter; be merry, and melt like butter;
laugh and be fat like butter: so butter answer my expectation, and be not mad
butter; If it be: It shall both July and December see.

I say no more, But -- Dixi.


TO THE READERS.
IN this following Act, the Office is opened, and shown to the Prodigal, and
his Princess Pecunia, wherein the allegory, and purpose of the Author has
hitherto been wholly mistaken, and so sinister an interpretation been made,
as if the souls of most of the Spectators had lived in the eyes and ears of
these ridiculous Gossips that tattle between the Acts. But he prays you thus
to mend it. To consider the News here vented, to be none of his News, or any
reasonable man's; but News made like the times News, (a weekly cheat to draw
money) and could not be fitter reprehended, then in raising this ridiculous
Office of the Staple, wherein the age may see her own folly, or hunger and
thirst after publish^d pamphlets of News, set out every Saturday, but made all
at home, and no syllable of truth in them: then which there cannot be a greater
disease in nature, or a fouler scorn put upon the times. And so apprehending
it, you shall do the Author, and your own judgment a courtesy, and perceive
the trick of alluring money to the Office, and there cooz'ning the people. If
you have the truth, rest quiet, and consider that

Ficta, voluptatis causa, sint proxima veris.
ACT. III.
SCENE. I.
FITTON. CYMBAL, to them PICKLOCKE. REGISTER. CLERK. THO: BARBER.
YOu hunt upon a wrong scent still, and think
The air of things will carry 'hem, but it must
Be reason and proportion, not fine sounds,
My cousin Cymball, must get you this Lady.
You have entertained a petty-fogger here,
Picklocke, with trust of an Emissaries place,
And he is, all, for the young Prodigal,
You see he has left us.

CYM. Come, you do not know him,
That speak thus of him. He will have a trick,
To open us a gap, by a trap-doore,
When they least dream on it. Here he comes. What news?

PICK. Where is my brother Buz? my brother Ambler?
The Register, Examiner, and the Clerks?
Appear, and let us muster all in pomp,
For here will be the rich Infanta, presently,
To make her visit. Peny-boy the heir,
My Patron, has got leave for her to play
With all her train, of the old churl, her Guardian.
Now is your time to make all court unto her;
That she may first but know, then love the place,
And show it by her frequent visits here:
And afterward, get her to soiourne with you.
She will be weary of the Prodigal, quickly.

CYM. Excellent news!

FIT. And counsel of an Oracle!

CYM. How say you cousin Fitton?

FIT. brother Picklock,
I shall adore thee, for this parcel of tidings,
It will cry up the credit of our Office,
Eternally, and make our Staple immortal!

PICK. Look your addresses, then, be fair and fit,
And entertain her, and her creatures, too,
With all the migniardise, and quaint Caresses,
You can put on 'hem.

FIT. Thou seem, by thy language,
No less a Courtier, then a man of Law.
I must embrace thee.

PIC. Tut, I am Vertumnus,
On every change, or chance, upon occasion,
A true Chamaelion, I can color for it.
I move upon my axell, like a turne-pike.
Fit my face to the parties, and become
Straight, one of them.

CYM. Sirs, up, into your Desks,
And spread the rolls upon the Table, so.
Is the Examiner set?

REG. Yes, Sir.

CYM. Ambler, and Buz,
Are both abroad, now.

PIC. We Will sustain their parts.
No matter, let them ply the affairs without,
Fitton puts on the office cloak, and Cymbal the gown. Let us alone within, I
like that well.
On with the cloak, and you with the Staple gown,
And keep your state, stoop only to the Infanta;
We'll have a flight at Mortgage, Statute, Band,
And hard, but we'll bring Wax unto the retriue:
Each know his several province, and discharge it.

FIT. Fitton is brought about. I do admire this nimble ingine, Picklock.

CYM. Cuz,
What did I say?

FIT. You have rectified my error!

ACT. III.
SCENE. II.
PENI-BOY. IV. P. CANTER. PECVNIA. STATVTE. BAND. MORTGAGE. WAX. BROKER.
CVSTOMERS.
BY your leave, Gentlemen, what news? good, good still?
IN your new Office? Princess, here is the Staple!
This is the Governor, kiss him, noble Princess,
For my sake. Thom, how is it honest Thom?
He tells Pecunia of Thom. How does thy place, and thou? my Creature,
Princess?
This is my Creature, give him your hand to kiss,
He was my Barber, now he writes Clericus!
I bought this place for him, and gave it him.

P. CA. He should have spoke of that, Sir, and not you:
Two do not do one Office well.

P. IV. It Is true,
But I am loath to lose my courtesies.

P. CA. So are all they, that do them, to vain ends,
And yet you do lose, when you pay you selves.

P. IV. No more of your sentences, Canter, they are stale,
We come for news, remember where you are.
I pray thee let my Princess hear some news,
Good Master Cymbal.

CYM. What news would she hear?
Or of what kind, Sir?

P. IV. Any, any kind.
So it be news, the newest that thou have,
Some news of State, for a Princess.

CYM. Read from Rome, there. News from Rome.

THO. They write, the King of Spain is chosen Pope.

P. IV. How?

THO. And Emperor too, the thirtieth of February.

P. IV. Is the Emperor dead?

CYM. No, but he has resigned, News of the Emperor, and Tilly.
And trailes a pike now, under Tilly.

FIT. For penance.

P. IV. These will beget strange turns in Christendom!

THO. And Spinola is made General of the Jesuits. News of Spinola. The fifth
Monarchy, uniting the Ecclesiasticke and Secular power.

A plot of the house of Austria.

More of Spinola.




P. IV. Stranger!

FIT. Sir, all are alike true, and certain.

CYM. All the pretense to the fifth Monarchy,
Was held but vain, until the ecclesiastique,
And secular powers, were united, thus,
Both in one person.

FIT. 'T has bin long the aim
Of the house of Austria.

CYM. See but Maximilian.
His letters to the Baron of Bouttersheim,
Or Scheiter-huyssen.

FIT. No, of Liechtenstein,
Lord Paul, I think.

P. IV. I have heard of some such thing.
Don Spinola made General of the Jesuits!
A Priest!

CYM. O, no, he is dispensed with all,
And the whole society, who do now appear
The only Enginers of Christendom.

P. IV. They have bin thought so long, and rightly too.

FIT. Witness the Engine, that they have presented him,
To wind himself with, up, into the Moon:
And thence make all his discoueries!

CYM. Read on.

THO. And Vittellesco, he that was last General,
Being now turned Cook to the society,
Has dressed his excellence, His Eggs. such a dish of eggs --

P. IV. What potch'd?

THO. No, powdered.

CYM. All the yolke is wild fire,
As he shall need beleaguer no more towns,
But throw his Egg in.

FIT. It shall clear consume,
Palace, and place; demolish and bear down,
All strengths before it!

CYM. Never be extinguished!
Till all become one ruin!

FI. And from Florence,

THO. They write was found in Galileos study, Galilaeo's study.
A burning Glass (which they have sent him too)
To fire any Fleet that is out at Sea --

CYM. By Mooneshine, is it not so?

THO. Yes, Sir, in the water. The burning glass, by Moonshine.

P. IV. His strengths will be irresistable, if this hold!
Ha'you no News against him, on the contrary?

CLA. The Holanders Ecle. Yes, Sit, they write here, one Cornelius-Son,
Has made the Hollanders an invisible Eele,
To swim the haven at Dunkirke, and sink all
The shipping there.

P. IV. Why have not you this, Thom?

CYM. Peny-boy will have him change sides: Because he keeps the Pontificiall
side.

P. IV. How, change sides, Thom. 'Twas never in my thought
To put thee up against our selves. Come down,
Quickly.

CYM. Why, Sir?

P. IV. I venter'd not my money
Upon those terms: If he may change; why so.
I Will ha him keep his own side, sure.

FIT, Why, let him,
It Is but writing so much over again.

P.IV. For that I Will bear the charge: There Is two Pieces,

FIT. Come, do not stick with the gentleman.

CYM. I Will take none Sir.
And yet he shall ha'the place.

P.IV. They shall be ten, then,
though he pay for it. Up, Thom: and the Office shall take 'hem. Keep your
side, Thom.
Know your own side, do not forsake your side, Thom.

CYM. Read.

THO. They write here one Cornelius-Son,
Has made the Hollanders an invisible Eele,
To swim the Haven at Dunkirke, and sink all
The shipping there.

P. IV. But how is it done?

CYM. I Will show you Sit.
It is an Automa, runs vnderwater,
With a snug nose, and has a nimble tail
Made like an auger, with which tail she wrigles
Betwixt the coasts of a Ship, and sinkes it straight.

P.IV. Whence ha'you this news.

FIT. From a right hand I assure you,
The Eele-boats here, that lie before Queen-Hyth,
Came out of Holland.

P.IV. A most brave device,
To murder their flat bottomes.

FIT. I do grant you:
Spinola's new project: an army in cork-shooes. But what if Spinola have a new
Project:
To bring an army over in corke-shooes,
And land them, here, at Harwich? all his horse
Are shod with cork, and fourscore pieces of ordinance,
Mounted upon cork-carriages, with bladders,
In stead of wheels to run the passage over
At a springtide.

P.IV. Is It true?

FIT. As true as the rest.

P.IV. He Will never leave his engines: I would hear now
Some curious news.

CYM. As what?

P.IV. Magic, or Alchimy
Or flying in the air, I care not what.

CLA. They write from Libtzig (reverence to your ears)
Extraction of farts The Art of drawing farts out of dead bodies,
Is by the Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross,
Produced unto perfection, in so sweet
And rich a tincture --

FIT. As there is no Princess,
But may perfume her chamber with the extraction.

P.IV. There Is for you. Princess.

P. CA. What, a fart for her?

P. IV. The perpetual Motion. I mean the spirit.

P. CA. Beware how she resents it.

P.IV. And what have thou, Thom?

THO. The perpetual Motion,
Is here found out by an Alewife in Saint Katherines,
At the sign of the dancing Bears.

P.IV. What, from her tap?
I Will go see that, or else I Will send old Canter.
He can make that discovery.

P. CA. Yes, in Ale.

P. IV. Let me have all this News, made up, and sealed.

REG. The people press upon us, please you, Sir, The Register offers him a
room.
Withdraw with your fair Princess. There Is a room
Within, Sir, to retire too.

P. IV. No, good Register,
We'll stand it out here, and observe your Office; The Office called the house
of fame.
What News it issues.

REG. It Is the house of fame, Sir,
Where both the curious, and the negligent;
The scrupulous, and careless; wild, and stayed;
The idle, and laborious; all do meet,
To taste the Cornu copiae of her rumors,
Which she, the mother of sport, pleases to scatter
Among the vulgar: Baits, Sir, for the people!
And they will bite like fishes.

P. IV. Let Us see it.

DOP. Have you in your profane Shop, any News 1. Cu^ A shest. baptist.
Of The Saints at Amsterdam?

REG. Yes, how much would you?

DOP. Six penny worth.

REG. Lay your money down, read, Thomas.

THO. The Saints do write, they expect a Prophet. shortly, Prophet Baal
expected in Holland.
The Prophet Baal, to be sent over to them,
To calculate a time, and half a time,
And the whole time, according to Naometry.

P.IV. What Is that?

THO. The measuring of the Temple: a Cabal
Found out but lately, and set out by Archie,
Or some such head, of whose long coat they have heard, Archie mourned then.
And being black, desire it.

DOP. Peace be with them!

REG. So there had need, for they are still by the ears
One with another.

DOP. It is their zeal.

REG. Most likely.

DOP. Have you no other of that species?

REG. Yes,
But dearer, it will cost you a shilling.

DOP. Verily,
There is a' nine-pence, I will shed no more.

REG. Not; to the good of the Saints?

DOP. I am not sure,
Tha^ man is good.

REG. Read, from Constantinople,
(...) penny'orth.

THO. They give out here, the grand Signior The great Turk turned Christian.
Is ^^^tainely turned Christian, and to clear
The controversy 'twixt the Pope and him,
Which is the Antichrist; he means to visit
The Church at Amsterdam, this very Summer,
And quit all marks of the beast.

DOP. Now joyful tidings.
Who brought in this? Which Emissary?

REG. Buz.
Your countryman.

DOP. Now, blessed be the man,
And his whole Family, with the Nation.

REG. Yes, for Amboyna, and the Justice there!
This is a Doper, a she Anabaptist!
Seal and deliver her her news, dispatch.

C. 2. 2. Cust. Ha'you any news from the Indies? any mirac
Done in Iapan, by the Jesuits? or in China?

CLA. A Coloney o^ Cooks sent over to convert the Canniballs. No, but we hear
of a Colony of cooks
To be set a shore of the coast of America,
For the conversion of the Caniballs,
And making them good, eating Cbristians.
Here comes the Colonel that undertakes it.

C. 2. Who? captain Lickfinger?

LIC. 3. Cust. By Colonel Lickfinger. News, news my boys!
I am to furnish a great feast to day,
And I would have what news the Office affords.

CLA. We were venting some of you, of your new project,

REG. Before 'twas paid for, you were somewhat too hasty.

P. IV. What Lickfinger! will thou convert the Caniballs,
With spit and pan Divinity?

LIC. Sir, for that
I will not urge, but for the fire and zeal
To the true cause; thus I have undertaken:
With two Lay-brethren, to my self, no more,
O^eo the broach, the other of the boyler,
In one six months, and by plain cookery,
No magic to it, but old Iaphets physic,
The father of the Europaean Arts,
To make such sauces for the Savages,
And cooks their meats, with those enticing steemes,
As it would make our Caniball-Christians,
Forbear the mutual eating one another,
Which they do do, more cunningly, then the wild
Anthropophagi; that snatch only strangers,
Like my old Patrons dogs, there.

P. IV. O, my Uncles!
Is dinner ready, Lickfinger?

LIC. When you please, Sir.
I was bespeaking but a parcel of news,
To strew out the long meal withal, but 't seems
You are furnished here already.

P. IV. O, not half!

LIC. What Court-newes is there? any Proclamations,
Or Edicts to come forth.

THO. Yes, there is one.
That the Kings Barber has got, for aid of our trade:
Whereof there is a manifest decay.
T^ let long hair run to ^^ed, to sow bald pates. A Precept for the wearing
of long hair,
To run to seed, to sow bald pates withal,
And the preserving fruitful heads, and chins,
To help a mystery, almost antiquated.
Such as are bald and barren beyond hope,
Are to be separated, and set by
For Vshers, to old Countesses.

LIC. And Coachmen.
To mount their boxes, reverently, and drive,
Like Lapwings, with a shell vpo' their heads.
Through the streets. Have you no News of the Stage?
They Will ask me abou new Plays, at dinner time.
And I should be as dumb as a fish.

THO. O! yes.
There is a Legacy left to the Kings Players, Spalato's Legacy to the Players.
Both for their various shifting of their Scene,
And dext'rous change o'their persons to all shapes,
And all disguises: by the right reverend
Archbishop of Spalato.

LIC. He is dead,
That played him!

THO. Then, h'has lost his share of the Legacy.

LIC. What news of Gundomar?

THO. A second Fistula,
Or an excoriation (at the least)
For putting the poor English-play, was writ of him, Gundomar's use of the
game at Chesse, or Play so called.
To such a sordid use, as (is said) he did,
Of cleansing his posterior's.

LIC. Justice! Justice!

THO. Since when, he lives condemned to his share, at Bruxels.
And there sits filing certain politic hinges,
To hang the States on, h'has heau'd off the hooks.

LIC. What must you have for these?

P. IV. Thou shall pay nothing,
But reckon 'hem in in the bill. There Is twenty pieces, He gives 20. pieces, to
the Office. Doubles it.
Her Grace bestows upon the Office, Thom,
Write thou that down for News.

REG. We may well do it,
We have not many such.

P. IV. There Is twenty more,
If you say so; my Princess is a Prinecesse!
And put that too, under the Office Seal.

CYM. If it will please your Grace to soiourne here, Cymbal takes Pecunia
aside, courts and wooes her, to the Office.
And take my roof for covert, you shall know
The rites belonging to your blood, and birth,
Which few can apprehend: these sordid servants,
Which rather are your keepers, then attendants,
Should not come near your presence. I would have
You waited on by Ladies, and your train
Borne up by persons of quality, and honor,
Your meat should be served in with curious dances,
And set upon the board, with virgin hands,
Tun^d to their voices; not a dish removed,
But to the Music, nor a drop of wine,
Mixed, with his water, without Harmony,

PEC. You are a Courtier, Sir, or somewhat more;
That have this tempting language!

CYM. I Am your servant,
Exellent Princess, and would have you appear
That, which you are. Come forth State, and wonder,
Of these our times, dazzle the vulgar eyes.
And strike the people blind with admiration.

P.CAN. Why, that is the end of wealth! thrust riches outward,
And remain beggars within: contemplate nothing
But the vile sordid things of time, place, money,
And let the noble, and the precious go,
Virtue and honesty; hang 'hem; poor thin membranes
Of honor; who respects them? O, the Fates!
How has all just, true reputation fallen,
Fitton has been courting the waiting-women, this whole, and is ieered by
them. Since money, this base money 'gan to have any!

BAN. Pity, the Gentleman is not immortal.

WAX. As he gives out, the place is, by description.

FIT. A very Paradise, if you saw all, Lady.

WAX. I am the Chambermaid, Sir, you mistake,
My Lady may see all.

FIT. Sweet Mistress Statute, gentle Mistress Band,
And Mother Mortgage, do but get her Grace
To soiourne here. --

PIC. I thank you gentle Wax,

MOR. If it were a Chattell, I would try my credit.

PIC. So it is, for term of life, we count it so.

STA. She means, Inheritance to him, and his heirs:
Or that he could assure a State, of years:
I Will be his Statute-Staple, Statute-Merchant,
Or what he please.

PIC. He can expect no more.

BAN. His cousin Alderman Security,
That he did talk of so, even now --

STA. Who, is
The very broch of the bench, gem of the City.

BAN. He and his Deputy, but assure his life
For one seven years.

STA. And see what we'll do for him,
Upon his scarlet motion.

BAN. And old Chain,
That draws the city-eares.

WAX. When he says nothing,
But twirles it thus.

STA. A moving Oratory!

BAN. Dumb Rethoricke, and silent eloquence!
As the fine Poet says!

FIT. Come, they all scorn us,
Do you not see it? the family of scorn!

BRO. Do not believe him! gentle Master Picklocke,
They understood you not: the Gentlewomen,
They thought you would have my Lady soiourne, with you,
And you desire but now and then, a visit?

PIC. Yes, if she pleased, Sir, it would much advance
Unto the Office, her continual residence!
(I speak but as a member)

BRO. It Is enough.
I apprehend you. And it shall go hard,
But I Will so work, as some body shall work her!

PIC. 'pray you change with our Master, but a word about it.

P. IV. Well, Lickfinger, see that our meat be ready,
Thou have News enough.

LIC. Something of Bethlem Gabor,
And then I Am gone.

THO. We hear he has devised
Bethlem Gabors Drum. A Drum, to fill all Christendom with the sound:
But that he cannot draw his forces near it,
To march yet, for the violence of the noise.
And therefore he is feign by a design,
To carry 'hem in the air, and at some distance,
Till he be married, then they shall appear.

LIC. Or never; well, God b'w'you (stay, who is here?)
A little of the Duke of Bauier, and then -- The Duke of Bauier.

CLA. H'has taken a gray habit, and is turned
The Churches Millar, grinds the catholic grist
With every wind: and Tilly takes the toll.

CVS. 4. Ha'you any news of the Pageants to send down? 4. Cust. The Pageants.
Into the several Counties. All the country
Expected from the city most brave speeches,
Now, at the Coronation.

LIC. It expected
More then it understood: for, they stand mute,
Poor innocent dumb things; they are but wood.
As is the bench and blocks, they were wrought on, yet
If May Day come, and the Sun shine, perhaps,
They Will sing like Memnons Statue, and be vocal.

CVS. 5. Ha'you any Forest-newes?

THO. None very wild, Sir, 5. Cust. The new Park in the Forest of Fools.
Some tame there is, out of the Forest of fools,
A new Park is a making there, to sever
Cuckolds of Antler, from the Rascals. Such,
Whose wives are dead, and have since cast their heads,
Shall remain Cuckolds-pollard.

LIC. I Will have that news.

CVS. 1. And I. 2. And I. 3. And I. 4. And I. 5. And I.

CYM. Sir, I desire to be excused; and, Madame: Peny-boy would inuit the
Master of the Office
I cannot leave my Office, the first day.
My Cousin Fitton here, shall wait upon you.
And Emissary Picklocke.

P. IV. And Thom: Clericus?

CYM. I cannot spare him yet, but he shall follow you,
When they have ordered the Rolls. Shut up the Office,
When you have done, till two a clock.

ACT. III.
SCENE. III.
SHVNFIELD. ALMANAC. MADRIGAL. CLERKS.
BY your leave, Clerks,
Where shall we dine to day? do you know? the Ieerers.

ALM. Where Is my fellow Fitton?

THO. New gone forth.

SHV. Cannot your Office tell us, what brave fellows
Do eat together to day, in town, and where?

THO. Yes, there is a Gentleman, the brave heir, young Peny-boy.
Dines in Apollo.

MAD. Come, let us thither then,
I have supt in Apollo!

ALM. With the Muses?

MAD. No, Sir.
But with two Gentlewomen, called, the Graces.

ALM. They' were ever three in Poetry.

MAD. This was truth,

THO. Sir, Master Fitton's there too!

SHV. All the better!

ALM. We may have a ieere, perhaps.

SHV. Yes, you will drink, Doctor.
(If there be any good meat) as much good wine now,
As would lay up a Dutch Ambassador.

THO. If he dine there, he is sure to have good meat,
For, Lickfinger prouides the dinner.

ALM. Who?
The glory of the Kitchen? that holds Cookery,
A trade from Adam? quotes his broths, and sallads?
And swears he is not dead yet, but translated
In some immortal crust, the past of Almonds?

MAD. The same. He holds no man can be a Poet,
That is not a good Cook, to know the palats,
And several tastes of the time. He draws all Arts
Out of the Kitchen, but the Art of Poetry,
which he concludes the same with Cookery.

SHV. Tut, he maintains more heresies then that.
He Will draw the Magisterium from a minc'd-pye,
And prefer Iellies, to your Iulips, Doctor.

ALM. I was at an Olla Podrida of his making,
Was a brave piece of cookery! at a funeral!
But opening the pot-lid, he made us laugh,
who'had wept all day! and sent us such a tickling
Into our nostrills, as the funeral feast
Had bin a wedding-dinner.

SHV. Gi'him allowance,
And that but moderate, he will make a Siren
Sing in the Kettle, send in an Arion,
In a brave broth, and of a watery green,
Just the Sea-colour, mounted on the back
Of a grown Cunger, but, in such a posture,
As all the world would take him for a Dolphin.

MAD. He Is a rare fellow, without question! but
He holds some Paradoxes.

ALM. I, and Pseudodoxes.
Mary, for most, he is Orthodox in the Kitchen.

MAD. And knows the Clergies taste!

ALM. I, and the Layties!

SHV. You think not o'your time, we'll come too late,
If we go not presently.

MAD. Away then.

SHV. Sirs,
You must get of this news, to store your Office,
Who dines and sups in the town? where, and with whom?
'Twill be beneficial: when you are stored;
And as we like our fare, we shall reward you.

CLA. A hungry trade, 'twill be.

THO. Much like D. Humphries,
But, now and then, as th'holesome proverb says,
'Twill obsonare famem ambulando.

CLA. Shut up the Office: gentle brother Thomas.

THO. Brother, Nathaniel, I ha'the wine for you.
I hope to see us, one day, Emissaries.

CLA. Why not? S'lid, I despair not to be Master!

ACT. III.
SCENE. IV.
PENI-BOY. SE. BROKER. CYMBAL.
HOw now? I think I was borne under Hercules star! He is started with
Broker's coming back.
Nothing but trouble and tumult to oppress me?
Why come you back? where is your charge?

BRO. I have brought
A Gentleman to speak with you?

P. SE. To speak with me?
You know it is death for me to speak with any man.
What is he? set me a chair.

BRO. He Is the Master
Of the great Office.

P. SE. What?

BRO. The Staple of News,
A mighty thing, they talk Six thousand a year.

P. SE. Well bring your six in. Where have you left Pecunia?

BRO. Sir, in Apollo, they are scarce set.

P. SE. Bring six.

BRO. Here is the Gentleman.

P. SE. He must pardon me,
I cannot rise, a diseased man.

CYM. By no means, Sir,
Respect your health, and ease.

P.SE. It is no pride in me!
But pain, pain; what is your errand, Sir, to me? He sends Broker back.
Broker, return to your charge, be Argus-eyed,
Awake, to the affair you have in hand,
Serve in Apollo, but take heed of Bacchus.
Go on, Sir.

CYM. I am come to speak with you.

P. SE. It Is pain for me to speak, a very death,
But I will hear you!

CYM. Sir, you have a Lady,
That soiournes with you.

P. SE. Ha? I am somewhat short He pretends infirmity.
In my sense too --

CYM. Pecunia.

P. SE. OF that side,
Very imperfect, on --

CYM. Whom I would draw
Oftener to a poor Office, I am Master of --

P. SE. My hearing is very dead, you must speak quicker.

CYM. Or, if it please you, Sir, to let her soiourne
In part with me; I have a moiety
We will divide, half of the profits.

P. SE. Ha?
I hear you better now, how come they in?
Is it a certain business, or a casual?
For I am loath to seek out doubtful courses,
Run any hazardous paths, I love straight ways,
A just, and upright man! now all trade totters.
The trade of money, is fallen, two in the hundred.
That was a certain trade, while the age was thrifty,
And men good husbands, looked unto their stocks,
Had their minds bounded; now the public Riot
Prostitutes all, scatters away in coaches,
In foot-mens coats, and waiting women's gowns,
They must have velvet hanches (with a pox)
He talks vehemently and aloud. Now taken up, and yet not pay the use;
Bate of the use? I am mad with this times manners.

CYM. You said even now, it was death for you to speak.

P. SE. I, but an anger, a just anger, (as this is)
Puts life in man. Who can endure to see
The fury of men's gullets, and their groines?
Is moved more and more. What fires, what cooks, what kitckins might be spared?
What Stews, Ponds, Parks, Coupes, Garners, Magazines?
What veluets, tissues, scarfes, embroyderies?
And laces they might lack? They covet things --
Superfluous still; when it were much more honor
They could want necessary! What need has Nature
Of silver dishes? or gold chamber-pots?
Of perfumed napkins? or a numerous family,
To see her eat? Poor, and wise she, requires
Meat only; Hunger is not ambitious:
Say, that you were the Emperor of pleasures,
The great Dictator of fashions, for all Europe,
And had the pomp of all the Courts, and Kingdoms,
Laid forth unto the show? to make your self
Gazed, and admired at? You must go to bed,
And take your natural rest: then, all this vanishes.
Your bravery was but showen; 'twas not possessed:
While it did boast it self, it was then perishing.

CYM. This man has healthful lungs.

P. SE. All that excess
Appeared as little yours, as the Spectators.
It scarce fills up the expectation
Of a few hours, that entertaines men's lives.

CYM. He has the monopoly of sole-speaking.
He is angry. Why, good Sir? you talk all.

P. SE. Why should I not?
Is it not under mine own roof? my feeling?

CYM. But I came hete to talk with you.

P. S. Why, an'I will not
Talk with you, Sir? you are answered, who sent for you?

CYM. Bids him get out of his house. No body sent for me --

P. SE. But you came, why then
Go, as you came, here is no man holds you, There,
There lies your way, you see the door.

CYM. This's strange!

P. SE. It Is my ciuility, when I do not relish
The party, or his business. Pray you be gone, Sir.
I Will have no venture in your Ship, the Office
Your Bark of Six, if'twere sixteen, good, Sir,

CYM. Cymbal railes at him. He ieeres him. You are a rogue.

P. SE. I think I am Sir, truly.

CYM. A Rascal, and a money-bawd.

P. SE. My surnames:

CYM. A wretched Rascal!

P. S. You will ouerflow --
And spill all.

CYM. Caterpiller, moath,
Horse-leach, and dung-worme --

P. SE. Still you lose your labor.
I am a broken vessel, all runs out:
A shrunk old Dryfat. Fare you well, good Six.

The third Intermeane after the third Act.
CENSVRE. A notable tough Rascal! this old Peny-boy! right City-bred!


MIRTH. In Siluer-streete, the Region of money, a good seat for a Usurer.


TATLE. He has rich ingredients in him, I warrant you, if they were extracted,
a true receipt to make an Alderman, an' he were well wrought upon, according to
Art.


EXP. I would feign see an Alderman in chimia! that is a treatise of
Aldermanity truly written.


CEN. To show how much it differs from Vrbanity.


MIRTH. I, or humanity. Either would appear in this Penny boy, an' he were
rightly distilled. But how like you the news? you are gone from that.


CEN. O, they are monstrous! scuruy! and stale! and too exotic! ill cooked!
and ill dish'd!


EXP. They were as good, yet, as butter could make them!


TAT. In a word, they were beastly buttered! he shall never come of my bread
more, nor my in mouth, if I can help it. I have had better news from the
bake-house, by ten thousand parts, in a morning: or the conduicts in
Westminster! all the news of Tutle-street, and both the Alm'ries! the two
Sanctuaries long, and round Wool-staple! with Kings-street, and Chanon-row to
boot!


MIRTH. I, my Gossip Tatle knew what fine slips grew in Gardiners-lane; who
kissed the Butchers wife with the Cowes-breath; what matches were made in the
bowling-Alley, and what bettes won and lost; how much grieft went to the Mill
and what besides: who coniur'd in Tutle-fields, and how many? when they never
came there. And which Boy rode upon Doctor Lamb, in the likeness of a roaring
Lion, that run away with him in his teeth, and has not devoured him yet.


TAT. Why, I had it from my maid Ioane Hearsay: and she had it from a limb
of the school, she says, a little limb of nine year old; who told her, the
Master left out his coniuring book one day, and he found it, and so the Fable
came about. But whether it were true, or no, we Gossips are bound to believe
it, an't be once out, and a foot: how should we entertain the time else, or
find our selves in fashionable discourse, for all companies, if we do not
credit all, and make more of it, in the reporting?


CEN. For my part, I believe it: and there were no wiser then I, I would have
never a cunning Schoolmasters in England. I mean a Cunning-Man, a
Schoolmasters; that is a Coniurour, or a Poet, or that had any acquaintance
with a Poet. They make all their scholars Play-boyes! Is It not a fine sight,
to see all our children made Enterluders? Do we pay our money for this? we
send them to learn their Grammar, and their Terence, and they learn their
play-books? well, they talk, we shall have no more Parliaments (God bless us)
but an'wee have, I hope, Zeale-of-the-land Buzy, and my Gossip, Rabby
Trouble-truth will start up, and see we shall have painful good Ministers to
keep School, and Catechize our youth, and not teach 'hem to speak Plays,
and Act Fables of false news, in this manner, to the super-^exation of Town
and Country, with a wanion.


ACT. IIII.
SCENE. I.
PENY-BOY. IV. FITTON. SHVNFIELD. ALMANAC. MADRIGAL. CANTER. PICKLOCKE.
Ome, Gentlemen, let us breath from healths a while.
This Lickfinger has made us a good dinner,
For our Pecunia: what shal's do with our selves,
While the women water? and the Fiddlers eat?

FIT. Let Us ieere a little.

P. IV. Ieere? what is that?

SHV. Expect, Sr.

ALM. We first begin with our selves, and then at you,

SHV. A game we use.

MAD. We ieere all kind of persons
We meet withal, of any rank or quality,
And if we cannot ieere them, we ieere our selves.

P. CA. A pretty sweet society! and a grateful!

PIC. 'Pray let us see some.

SHV. Have at you, then Lawyer.
They say, there was one of your coat in Bet'lem, lately,

ALM. I wonder all his Clients were not there.

MAD. They were the madder sort.

PIC. Except, Sir, one
Like you, and he made verses.

FIT. Madrigall,
A ieere.

MAD. I know.

SHV. But what did you do, Lawyer?
When you made love to Mistress Band, at dinner.

MAD. Why? of an Advocate, he grew the Clyent.

P. IV. Well played, my Poet.

MAD. And showed the Law of nature
Was there above the Common Law.

SHV. Quit, quit,

P. IV. Call you this ieering? I can play at this,
It Is like a Ball at Tennis.

FIT. Very like,
But we were not well in.

ALM. It Is indeed, Sir.
When we do speak at volley, all the ill
We can one of another.

SHV. As this morning,
(I would you had heard us) of the Rogue your Uncle.

ALM That Mony-bawd.

MAD. We called him a Coat-card
Of The last order.

P. IV. What Is that? a Knave?

MAD. Some readings have it so, my manuscript
Does speak it, ^arlet.

P. CA. And your self a Fool
Of The first rank, and one shall have the leading
Of The right hand file, under this brave Commander.

P. IV. What say thou, Canter?

P. CA. Sir, I say this is
A very wholesome exercise, and comely.
Like Lepers, showing one another their scabs.
Or flies feeding on ulcers.

P. IV. What News Gentlemen?
Have you any news for after dinner? me thinks
We should not spend our time unprofitably.

P. CA. They never lie, Sir, between meals, against supper
You may have a Bale or two brought in.

FIT. This Canter,
Is an old envious Knave!

ALM. A very Rascal!

FIT. I have marked him all this meal, he has done nothing
But mock, with scuruy faces, all we said.

ALM. A supercilious Rogue! he looks as if
He were the Patrico --

MAD. Or Archpriest of Canters,

SHV. He Is some primate metropolitan Rascal,
Our shot-clog makes so much of him.

ALM The Law,
And he does govern him

P. IV. What say you, Gentlemen?

FIT. We say, we wonder not, your man of Law,
Should be so gracious wi'you; but how it comes,
This Rogue, this Canter!

P. IV. O, good words.

FIT. A fellow
That speaks no language --

ALM. But what gingling Gypsies,
And Pedlers trade in --

FIT. And no honest Christian
Can understand --

P. CA. Why? by that argument,
You all are Canters, you, and you, and you, He speaks to all the Ieerers.
All the whole world are Canters, I will prove it
In your professions.

P. IV. I would feign hear this,
But stay, my Princess comes, provide the while,
I Will call for it anon. How fares your Grace?

ACT. IIII.
SCENE. II.
LICKFINGER. PECVNIA. STATVTE. BAND. WAX. to them.
I hope the fare was good.

PEC. Yes, Lickfinger, Lickfinger is challenged by Madrigal of an argument.
And we shall thank you for it and reward you.

MAD. Nay, I Will not lose my argument, Lickfinger;
Before these Gentlemen, I affirm,
The perfect, and true strain of poetry,
Is rather to be given the quick Celler,
Then the fat Kitchen.

LIC. Heretic, I see
Thou art for the vain Oracle of the Botle.
The hogshead, Trismegistus, is thy Pegasus.
Thence flows thy Muses spring, from that hard hoof*
Seduced Poet, I do say to thee,
A Boyler, Range, and Dresser were the Fountains,
Of all the knowledge in the universe.
And they 'are the Kitchins, where the Master-Cooke --
(Thou do not know the man, nor can thou know him,
Till thou have served some years in that deep school,
That Is both the Nurse and Mother of the Arts,
And hear'st him read, interpret, and demonstrate!)
A Master-Cooke! Why, he is the man of men,
For a Professor! he designs, he draws,
He paints, he carues, he builds, he fortifies,
Makes Citadels of curious foul and fish,
Some he dri-dishes, some motes round with broths.
Mounts marrowbones, cuts fifty angled custards,
Reares bulwark pies, and for his outerworkes
He raises Ramparts of immortal crust;
And teaches all the Tacticks, at one dinner:
What Ranks, what Files, to put his dishes in;
The whole Art Military. Then he knows,
The influence of the Stars upon his meats,
And all their seasons, tempers, qualities,
And so to fit his relishes, and sauces,
He has Nature in a pot, above all the Chemists,
Or airy brethren of the Rosie-crosse.
He is an Architect, an Inginer,
A Soldier, a Physician, a Philosopher,
A general Mathematician.

MAD. It is granted.

LIC. And that you may not doubt him, for a Poet --

ALM. This fury shows, if there were nothing else!
And it is divine! I shall for ever hereafter,
Admire the wisdom of a Cook!

BAN. And we, Sir!

P. IV. O, how my Princess draws me, Peny-boy is courting his Princess all
the while. with her looks,
And hales me in, as eddies draw in boats,
Or strong Charybdis ships, that sail too near
The shelues of Love! The tides of your two eyes!
Wind of your breath, are such as suck in all,
That do approach you!

PEC. Who has changed my servant?

P. IV. Your self, who drink my blood up with your beams,
As does the Sun, the Sea! Pecunia shines
More in the world then he: and makes it Spring
Where ever she favors! 'please her but to show
Her melting wrests, or bare her yuorie hands,
She catches still! her smiles they are Love's fetters!
Her breasts his apples! her teats Stawberries!
Where Cupid (were he present now) would cry
Fare well my mothers milk, here is sweeter Nectar!
Help me to praise Pecunia, Gentlemen:
She Is your Princess, lend your wits, They all begin the encomium of Pecunia.

FIT. A Lady,
The Graces taught to move!

ALM. The Hours did nurse!

FIT. Whose lips are the instructions of all Lovers!

ALM. Her eyes their lights, and riualls to the Stars!

FIT. A voice, as if that Harmony still spoke!

ALM. And polished skin, whiter then Venus foot!

FIT. Young Hebes neck, or Iunoe's arms!

ALM. A hair,
Large as the Mornings, and her breath as sweet,
As meddowes after rain, and but new mowne!

FIT. Laeda might yield unto her, for a face!

ALM. Hermione for breasts!

FIT. Flora, for cheeks!

ALM. And Helen for a mouth!

P. IV. Kiss, kiss 'hem, Princess. She kisseth them.

FIT. The pearl does strive in whiteness, with her neck,

ALM. But loses by it: here the Snow thawes Snow;
One frost resolves another!

FIT. O, she has
A front too slippery to be looked upon!

ALM. And glances that beguile the seers eyes!

P. IV. Kiss, kiss again, Again. what says my man of war?

SHV. I say, she is more, then Fame can promise of her.
A Theme, that is overcome with her own matter!
Praise is struck blind, and deaf, and dumb with her!
She does astonish Commendation!

P. IV. Well pumpt in faith old Sailor: She kisseth Captain Shunfield. kiss
him too:
Though he be a slugge. What says my Poet-sucker!
He Is chewing his Muses cudde, I do see by him.

MAD. I have almost done, I want but e'ne to finish.

FIT. That Is the 'ill luck of all his works still.

P. IV. What?

FIT. To begin many works, but finish none;

P. IV. How does he do his Mistress work?

FIT. Imperfect.

ALM. I cannot think he finisheth that.

P. IV. Let Us hear*

MAD. It is a Madrigall, I affect that kind
Of Poem, much.

P. IV. And thence you have the name.

FIT. It is his Rose. He can make nothing else

MAD. I made it to the tune the Fiddlers played,
That we all liked so well.

P. IV. Good, read it, read it.

MAD. The Sun is father of all mettalls, you know,
Silver, and gold.

P. IV. I, leave your Prologues, say!

SONG.
MADRIGAL.
As bright as is the Sun her Sire,
Or Earth her mother, in her best atyre,
Or Mint, the Midwife, with her fire,
Comes forth her Grace!
The splendor of the wealthiest Mines!
The stamp, and strength of all imperial lines,
Both majesty and beauty shines,
In her sweet face!
Look how a Torch, of Taper light,
Or of that Torches flame, a Beacon bright;

P. IV. That Mint the Midwife does well.

FIT. That Is fairly said of Money.

P. IV. Good!

MAD. Now there, I want a line to finish, Sir.

P. IV. Or of that Beacons fire, Moone-light:

MAD. So takes she place!
And then I have a Saraband --
She makes good cheer, she keeps full boards,
She holds a Fair of Knights, and Lords,
A Market of all Offices,
And Shops of honor, more or less.
According to Pecunia's Grace,
The Bride has beauty, blood, and place,
The Bridegroom virtue, valor, wit,
And wisdom, as he stands for it.

FIT. It Is good.

PIC. He urges her to kiss them all. Call in the Fiddlers. Nicke, the boy
shall sing it,
Sweet Princess, kiss him, kiss 'hem all, dear Madame,
And at the close, vouchsafe to call them Cousins.

PEC. Sweet Cousin Madrigall, and Cousin Fitton,
My Cousin Shunfield, and my learned Cousin.

P. CA. Al-manach, though they call him Almanac.

P. IV. Why, here is the Prodigal prostitutes his Mistress!

P. IV. And Picklocke, he must be a kinsman too.
My man of Law will teach us all to win,
And keep our own. Old Founder.

P. CA. Nothing, I Sir?
I am a wretch, a beggar. She the fortunate.
Can want no kindred, we, the poor know none.

FIT. Nor none shall know, by my consent.

ALM. Nor mine,

P. IV. Sing, boy, The boy sings the song. stand here.

P. CA. Look, look, how all their eyes
Dance i'their heads (observe) scattered with lust!
At sight of their brave Idol! how they are tickled,
With a light air! the bawdy Saruband!
They are a kind of dancing engines all!
And set, by nature, thus, to run alone
To every sound! All things within, withou them,
Move, but their brain, and that stands still! mere monsters
Here, in a chamber, of most subtle feet!
And make their legs in tune, passing the streets!
These are the gallant spirits of the age!
The miracles of the time! that can cry up
And down men's wits! and set what rate on things
Their half-brain'd fancies please! Now pox upon 'hem.
See how solicitously he learnes the Iigge,
As if it were a mystery of his faith!

SHV. A dainty ditty!

FIT. O, he is a dainty Poet!
When he sets to it!

P. IV. And a dainty Scholar! They are all struck with admiration.

ALM. No, no great scholar, he writes like a Gentleman.

SHV. Pox o'your Scholar.

P. CA. Pox o'your distinction!
As if a Scholar were no Gentleman.
With these, to write like a Gentleman, will in time
Become, all one, as to write like an Ass,
These Gentlemen? these Rascals! I am sick
Of indignation at 'hem.

P. IV. How do you liked, Sir?

FIT. It Is excellent!

ALM. 'Twas excellently sung!

FIT. A dainty Air!

P. IV. What says my Lickfinger?

LIC. I am telling Mistress Band, and Mistress Statute,
What a brave Gentleman you are, and Wax, here!
How much 'twere better, that my Ladies Grace,
Would here take up Sir, and keep house with you.

P. IV. What say they?

STA. We could consent, Sr, willingly.

BAND. I, if we knew her Grace had the least liking.

WAX. We must obey her Graces will, and pleasure.

P. IV. I thank you, Gentlewomen, ply 'hem, Lickfinger.
Give mother Mortgage, there --

LIC. Her doze of Sack.
I have it for her, and her distance of Hum.

PEC. Indeed therein, I must confess, dear Cousin, The Gallants are all
about Pecunia.
I am a most unfortunate Princess.

ALM. And
You still will be so, when your Grace may help it.

MAD. Who'ld lie in a room, with a close-stoole, and garlic?
And kennell with his dogs? that had a Prince
Like this young Peny-boy, to soiourne with?

SHV. He Will let you have your liberty --

ALM. Go forth,
Whither you please, and to what company --

MAD. Scatter your self amongst us --

P. IV. Hope of Pernassus!
Thy Iuy shall not wither, nor thy Bays,
Thou shall be had into her Graces Cellar,
And there know Sack, and Claret, all December,
Thy vein is rich, and we must cherish it.
Poets and Bees swarm now adays, but yet
There are not those good Tauernes, for the one sort,
As there are Flowrie fields to feed the other.
Though Bees be pleased with dew, ask little Wax
That brings the honey to her Ladies hiue:
The Poet must have wine. And he shall have it.

ACT. IIII.
SCENE. IIJ.
PENI-BOY. SE. PENY-BOY. IV. LICKFINGER. etc.
BRoker? what Broker?

P. IV. Who Is that? my Uncle!

P. SE. I am abused, where is my Knave? my Broker?

LIC. Your Broker is laid out upon a bench, yonder,
Sack has seaz'd on him, in the shape of sleep.

PIC. He has been dead to us almost this hour.

P. SE. This hour?

P. CA. Why sigh you Sr? 'cause he is at rest?

P. SE. It breeds my unrest.

LIC. Will you take a cup
And try if you can sleep?

P. SE. No, cogging Jack,
Thou and thy cups too, perish.

SHV. O, the Sack! He strikes the Sack out of his hand.

MAD. The sack, the sack!

P. CA. A Madrigall on Sack!

PIC. Or rather an Elegy, for the Sack is gone.

PEC. Why do you this, Sir? spill the wine, and rave?
For Brokers sleeping?

P. SE. What through sleep, and Sack,
My trust is wronged: but I am still awake,
He would have Pecunia home. But she refuses. And her Train. To wait upon
your Grace, please you to quit
This strange lewd company, they are not for you.

PEC. No Guardian, I do like them very well.

P. SE Your Graces pleasure be observed, but you
Statute, and Band, and Wax, will go with me.

SAT. Truly we will not.

BAN. We will stay, and wait here
Upon her Grace, and this your Noble Kinsman.

P. SE. Noble? how noble! who has made him noble?

P. IV. Why, my most noble money has, or shall*
My Princess, here. She that had you but kept,
And treated kindly, would have made you noble,
And wise, too: nay, perhaps have done that for you,
An Act of Parliament could not, made you honest.
The truth is, Uncle, that her Grace dislikes
Her entertainment: specially her lodging.

PEC. Nay, say her iaile. Never unfortunate Princess,
Was used so by a Iaylor. Ask my women,
Band, you can tell, and Statute, how he has used me,
Kept me close prisoner, under twenty bolts --

STA. And forty padlocks --

BAN. All malicious ingines
A wicked Smith could forge out of his iron:
As locks, and keys, shacles, and manacles,
To torture a great Lady.

STA. H'has abused
Your Graces body.

PEC. No, he would have done,
That lay not in his power: he had the use
Of our bodies, Band, and Wax, and sometimes Statutes:
But once he would ha'smother'd me in a chest,
And strangled me in leather, but that you
Came to my rescue, then, and gave me air.

STA. For which he cramb'd us up in a close box,
All three together, where we saw no Sun
In one six months.

WAX. A cruel man he is!

BAN. H'has left my fellow Wax out, in the cold,

STA. Till she was stiff, as any frost, and crumbl'd
Away to dust, and almost lost her form.

WAX. Much ado to recover me.

P. SE. Women Ieerers!
Have you learned too, the subtle faculty?
Come, I Will show you the way home, if drink,
Or, too full diet have disguised you.

BAN. Troth,
We have not any mind, Sir, of return --

STA. To be bound back to back --

BAN. And have our legs
Turned in, or writhed about --

WAX. Or else displayed --

STA. Be lodged with dust and fleas, as we were wont --

BAN. And dyeted with dogs dung.

P. SE. Why? you whores,
My bawds, my instruments, what should I call you,
Man may think base enough for you?

P. IV. Hear you, uncle.
I must not hear this of my Princess servants,
And in Apollo, in Pecunia's room,
Go, get you down the stairs: Home, to your Kennell,
As swiftly as you can. Consult your dogs,
The Lares of your family; or believe it,
The fury of a foote-man, and a drawer
Hangs over you.

SHV. Cudgel, and pot do threaten
A kind of vengeance.

MAD. Barbers are at hand.

ALM. Washing and shauing will ensue. They all threaten,

FIT. The Pumpe
Is not far off; If It were, the sink is near:
Or a good Jordan.

MAD. You have now no money,

SHV. But are a Rascal.

P. SE. I am cheated, robbed
Ieer'd by confederacy.

FIT. No, you are kicked
And used kindly, as you should be.

SHV. Spurned, And spurn him.
Kick him, out. He exclaimes. From all commerce of men, who are a curre.

ALM. A stinking dog, in a dublet, with foul linen.

MAD. A snarling Rascal, hence.

SHV. Out.

P. SE. Well, remember,
I am coozen'd by my Cousin, and his whore!
Bane o'these meetings in Apollo!

LIC. Go, Sir,
One of his Dogs. You will be tossed like Block, in a blanket else.

P. IV. Down with him, Lickfinger.

P. SE. Saucy Jack away,
Pecunia is a whore.

P. IV. Play him down, Fiddlers,
And drown his noise. Who Is this!

FIT. O Master Pyed-mantle!

ACT. IIIJ.
SCENE. IV.
PYED-MANTLE. to them.
Pyed-mantle brings the Lady Pecunia her pedigree. BY your leave, Gentlemen.

FIT. Her Graces Herald,

ALM. No Herald yet, a Heraldet.

P. IV. What Is that?

P. CA. A Canter.

P. IV. O, thou said thou would sproue us all so!

P. CA. Sir, here is one will prove himself so, straight,
So shall the rest, in time.

PEC. My Pedigree?
I tell you, friend, he must be a good Scholar,
Can my descent. I am of Princely race,
And as good blood, as any is in the mines,
Runs through my veins. I am, every limb, a Princess!
Duchess OF mines, was my great Grandmother.
And by the Fathers side, I come from Sol.
My Grandfather was Duke of Or, and matched
In the blood-royall of Ophyr.

PIE. Here Is his Coat.

PEC. I know it, if I hear the Blazon.

PIE. He bears
In a field Azure, a Sun proper, beamy,
Twelve of the second.

P. CA. How farr's this from canting?

P. IV. Her Grace does understand ti.

P. CA. She can cant, Sr*

PEC. What be these? Besants?

PIE. Yes, an't please your Grace.

PEC. That is our Coat too, as we come from Or.
What line's this?

PIE. The rich mines of Potosi.
The Spanish mines in the West Indies.

PEC. This?

PIE. The mines of Hungary, this of Barbary.

PEC. But this, this little branch.

PEC. The Welsh-myne that.

PEC. I have Welsh-blood in me too, blaze, Sir, that Coat.

PIE. She bears (an't please you) Argent, three leekes vert
In Canton Or, and tassel'd of the first.

P. CA. Is not this canting? do you understand him?

P. IV. Not I, but it sounds well, and the whole thing*
Is rarely painted, I will have such a scrowle,
What ere it cost me.

PEC. Well, at better leisure,
We'll take a view of it, and so reward you.

P. IV. Kiss him, sweet Princess, She kisseth. and style him a Cousin.

PEC. I will, if you will have it. Cousin Pyed-mantle.

P. IV. I love all men of virtue, from my Princess,
Unto my beggar, here, old Canter, on,
On to thy proof, whom prove you the next Canter?

P. CA. The Doctor here, I will proceed with the learned.
When he discourses of dissection,
Or any point of Anatomy: that he tells you,
Of Vena caua, and of vena porta,
The Meseraicks, and the Mesenterium.
What does he else but cant? Or if he run
To his Judicial Astrology,
And trowle the Trine, the Quartile and the Sextile,
Platicke aspect, and Partile, with his Hyleg
Or Alchochoden, Cuspes, and Horroscope.
Does not he cant? Who here does understand him?

ALM. This is no Canter, tho!

P. CA. Or when my Master-Master
Talks of his Tacticks, and his Ranks, and Files;
His Bringers up, his Leaders on, and cries,
Faces about to the right hand, the left,
Now, as you were: then tells you of Redoubts,
Of Cats, and Cortines. Does not he cant?

P. IV. Yes, 'faith.

P. CA. My Eg-chind Laureat, here, when he comes forth
With Dimeters, and Trimeters, Tetrameters,
Pentameters, Hexameters, Catalecticks,
His Hyper, and his Brachy-Catalecticks,
His Pyrrhichs, Epitrites, and Choriambicks.
What is all this, but canting?

MAD. A rare fellow!

SHV. Some begging Scholar!

FIT. A decayed Doctor at least!

P. IV. Nay, I do cherish virtue, though in rags.

P. CA. And you, Mas Courtier.

P. IV. Now he treats of you,
Stand forth to him, fair.

P. CA. With all your fly-blowne proiects,
And looks out of the politics, your shut-faces,
And reserved Questions, and Answers that you game with, As
Is It a Clear business? will it manage well?
My name must not be used else. Here, 'twill dash.
Your business has received a taint, give off,
I may not prostitute my self. Tut, tut,
That little dust I can blow off, at pleasure.
Here Is no such mountain, yet, in the whole work!
But a light purse may level. I will tide
This affayre for you; give it freight, and passage.
And such mynt-phrase, as it is the worst of canting,
By how much it affects the sense, it has not.

FIT. This is some other then he seems!

P. IV. How like you him?

FIT. This cannot be a Canter!

P. IV. But he is, Sir,
And shall be still, and so shall you be too:
We'll all be Canters. Now, I think of it,
A noble Whimsie's come into my brain!
I Will build a College, Canters-Colledge, begun to be erected. I, and my
Pecunia,
And call it Canters College, sounds it well?

ALM. Excellent!

P. IV. And here stands my Father Rector,
And you Professors, you shall all profess
Something, and live there, with her Grace and me,
Your Founders: I Will endow't with lands, and means,
And Lickfinger shall be my Master-Cooke.
What? is he gone?

P. CA. And a Professor.

P. IV. Yes.

P. CA. And read Apicius de reculinaria
To your brave Doxi^, and you!

P. IV. You, Cousin Fitton,
Shall (as a Courtier) read the politics;
Doctor Al-manack, he shall read Astrology,
Shunfield shall read the Military Arts.

P. CA. That Is Madrigall. As caruing, and assaulting the cold custard.

P. IV. And Horace here, the Art of Poetry.
His Lyricks, and his Madrigalls, fine Songs,
Which we will have at dinner, steept in claret,
And against supper, sowc't in sack.

MAD. In troth
A divine Whimsey!

SHV. And a worthy work,
Fit for a Chronicle!

P. IV. Is It not?

SHV. To all ages.

P. IV. And Pyed-mantle, shall give us all our Arms,
But Picklocke, what would thou be? Thou can cant too.

PIC. In all the languages in Westminster Hall,
Pleas, Bench, or Chancery. Fee-Farme, Fee-Tayle,
Tennant in dower, At will, For Term of life,
By Copy of Court Roll, Knights service, Homage,
Fealty, Escuage, Soccage, or Frank almoigne,
Grand Sergeanty, or Burgage.

P. IV. Thou appear'st,
(...) a Canter. Thou shall read
All Littletons tenures to me, and indeed
All my Conueyances.

PIC. And make 'hem too, Sir?
Keep all your Courts, be Steward o'your lands,
Let all your Leases, keep your Evidences,
But first, I must procure, and pass your mort-maine
You must have license from above, Sir.

P. IV. Fear not,
Pecunia's friends shall do it.

P. CA. But I shall stop it.
Your worships loving, and obedient father,
Your painful Steward, and lost Officer! Here his father discouers himself.
Who have done this, to try how you would use
Pecunia, when you had her: which since I see,
I will take home the Lady, to my charge,
And these her servants, and leave you my Cloak,
To travel in to Beggars Bush! A Seat,
Is built already, furnished too, worth twenty
Of your imagined structures, Canters College.

FIT. It Is his Father!

MAD. He Is alive, me thinks.

ALM. I knew he was no Rogue!

P. CA. Thou, Prodigal,
Was I so careful for thee, to procure,
And plot wi' my learned Counsel, Master Picklocke,
This noble match for thee, and do thou prostitute,
Scatter thy Mistress favors, throw away
Her bounties, as they were red-burning coals,
Too hot for thee to handle, on such rascals?
Who are the scumme, and excrements of men?
If thou had fought out good, and virtuous persons
Of these professions: I'had loved thee, and them,
For these shall never have that plea against me,
Or color of advantage, that I hate
Their callings, but their manners, and their vices.
A worthy Courtier, is the ornament
Of a Kings Palace, his great Masters honor.
This is a moth, a rascal, a Court-rat,
That gnawes the commonwealth with broking suits,
And eating grieuances! So, a true Soldier,
He is his Countries strength, his Sovereigns safety,
And to secure his peace, he makes himself.
The heir of danger, nay the subject of it,
And runs those virtuous hazards, that this Scarre-crow
Cannot endure to hear of.

SHV. You are pleasant, Sir.

P. CA. With you I dare be! Here is Pyed-mantle,
'Cause he is an Ass, do not I love a Herald?
Who is the pure preserver of descents,
The keeper fair of all Nobility,
Without which all would run into confusion?
Were he a learned Herald, I would tell him
He can give Arms, and marks, he cannot honor,
No more then money can make Noble: It may
Give place, and rank, but it can give no Virtue.
And he would thank me, for this truth. This dog-Leach,
You style him Doctor, 'cause he can compile
An Almanac; perhaps erect a Scheme
For my great Madams monkey: when 't has taken
A glister, and bewrai'd the Ephemerides.
Do I despise a learned Physician?
In calling him a Quack-Saluer? or blast
The everliving ghirlond, always green
Of a good Poet? when I say his wreath
Is piec'd and patched of dirty witherd flowers?
Away, I am impatient of these ulcers,
(That I not call you worse) There is no sore,
Or Plague but you to infect the times. I abhor
Your very scent. Come, Lady, since my Prodigal
Knew not to entertain you to your worth,
I Will see if I have learned, how to receive you,
He points him to his patched cloak thrown off. With more respect to you,
and your fair train here.
Farewell my Beggar in velvet, for to day,
To morrow you may put on that grave Robe,
And enter your great work of Canters College,
Your work and worthy of a Chronicle,

The fourth Intermeane after the fourth Act.
TATLE. Why? This was the worst of all! the Catastrophe!


CEN. The matter began to be good, but now: and he has spoiled it all, with his
Beggar there!


MIRT. A beggarly Jack it is, I warrant him, and a kin to the Poet.


TAT. Like enough, for he had the chiefest part in his play, if you mark it.


EXP. Absurdity on him, for a huge ouergrowne Play-maker! why should he make
him live again, when they, and we all thought him dead? If he had left him to
his rags, there had been an end of him.


TAT. I, but set a beggar on horseback, he will never linne till he be a
gallop.


CEN. The young heir grew a fine Gentleman, in this last Act!


EXP. So he did, Gossip: and kept the best company.


CEN. And feasted 'hem, and his Mistress!


TAT. And showed her to 'hem all! was not jealous!


MIRTH. But very communicatiue, and liberal, and began to be magnificent, if
the churl his father would have let him alone.


CEN. It was spitefully done of the Poet, to make the Chuffe take him off in
his height, when he was going to do all his brave deeds!


EXP. To found an Academy!


TAT. Erect a College!


EXP. Plant his Professors, and water his Lectures.


MIRTH. With wine, gossips, as he meant to do, and then to defraud his
purposes?


EXP. Kill the hopes of so many towardly young spirits?


TAT. As the Doctors?


CEN. And the Courtiers! I protest, I was in love with Master Fitton. He did
wear all he had, from the hat-band, to the sho^e-tye, so politically, and
would stoop, and leere?


MIRTH. And lie so, in wait for a piece of wit, like a Mouse-trap?


EXP. Indeed Gossip, so would the little Doctor, all his behavior was mere
glister! OF my conscience, he would make any parties physic in the world
work, with his discourse.


MIR. I wonder they would suffer it, a foolish old fornicating Father, to
ravish away his sons Mistress.


CEN. And all her women, at once, as he did!


TAT. I would have flyen in his gypsies face in faith.


MIRTH. It was a plain piece of political incest, and worthy to be brought
before the high Commission of wit. Suppose we were to censure him, you are the
youngest voice, Gossip Tatle, begin.


TATLE. Mary, I would have the old conicatcher coozen'd of all he has, in the
young heirs defense, by his learned Counsel, Mr Picklocke!


CENSVRE. I would rather the Courtier had found out some trick to beg him,
from his estate!


EXP. Or the Captain had courage enough to beat him.


CEN. Or the fine Madrigall-man, in rhyme, to have run him out of the
Country, like an Irish rat.


TAT. No, I would have Master Pyed-mantle, her Graces Herald, to pluck down
his hatchments, reuerse his coat armor, and nullify him for no Gentleman.


EXP. Nay, then let Master Doctor dissect him, have him opened, and his tripes
translated to Lickfinger, to make a probation dish of.


CEN. TAT. Agreed! Agreed!


MIRTH. Faith I would have him flat disinherited, by a decree of Court, bound
to make restitution of the Lady Pecunia, and the use of her body to his son.


EXP. And her train, to the Gentlemen.


CEN. And both the Poet, and himself, to ask them all forgiveness!


TAT. And us too.


CEN. In two large sheets of paper --


EXP. Or to stand in a skin of parchment, (which the Court please)


CEN. And those filled with news!


MIRTH. And dedicated to the sustaining of the Staple!


EXP. Which their Poet has let fall, most abruptly?


MIRTH. Banckruptly, indeed!


CEN. You say wittily, Gossip, and therefore let a protest go out against him.


MIR. A mourniuall of protests; or a gleeke at least!


EXP. In all our names*


CEN. For a decayed wit --


EXP. Broken --


TAT. Non-soluent --


CENSVRE. And, for ever, forfet --


MIRTH. To scorn, of Mirth?


CEN. Censure!


EXP. Expectation!


TAT. Subsign'd. Tatle, Stay, they come again.


ACT. V.
SCENE. I.
PENY-BOY. IV. to him THO. BARBER. after, PICKLOCKE.
He comes out in the patchd cloak his father left him.NAy, they are fit, as
they had been made for me,
And I am now a thing, worth looking at!
The same, I said I would be in the morning.
No Rogue, at a Comitia of the Canters,
Did ever there become his Parents Robes
Better, then I do these: great fool! and beggar!
Why do not all that are of those societies,
Come forth, and gratulate me one of theirs?
Me thinks, I should be, on every side, saluted,
Dauphin of beggars! Prince of Prodigalls!
That have so fallen under the ears, and eyes,
And tongues of all, the fable of the time,
Matter of scorn, and mark of reprehension!
I now begin to see my vanity,
Shine in this Glass, reflected by the foil!
Where is my Fashioner? my Feather-man?
My Linnener? Perfumer? Barber? all?
That tail of Riot, followed me this morning?
Not one! but a dark solitude about me,
Worthy my cloak, and patches; as I had
The epidemicall disease upon me:
And I Will sit down with it.

THO. My Master! Maker!
How do you? Why do you sit thus of the ground, Sir?
Hear you the news?

P. IV. No, nor I care to hear none.
Would I could here sit still, and slip away
The other one and twenty, to have this
Forgotten, and the day rac'd out, expunged,
In every Ephemerides, or Almanac.
Or if it must be in, that Time and Nature
Have decreed; still, let it be a day
Of tickling Prodigalls, about the gills;
Deluding gaping heirs, loosing their loves,
And their discretions; falling from the favors
Of their best friends, and parents; their own hopes;
And entering the society of Canters.

THO. A doleful day it is, and dismal times
Are come upon us: I am clear undone.

P. IV. How, Thom?

THO. Why? broke! broke! wretchedly broke!

P. IV. Ha!

THO. Our Staple is all to pieces, quite dissolved!

P. IV. Ha!

THO. Shiuer'd, as in an earthquake! heard you not
The crack and ruins? we are all blown up!
Soon as they heard the Infanta was got from them,
Whom they had so devoured i'their hopes,
To be their Patroness, and soiourne with 'hem;
Our Emissaries, Register, Examiner,
Flew into vapor: our grave Governor
Into a subt'let air; and is returned
(As we do hear) grand- Captain of the Ieerers.
I, and my fellow melted into butter,
And spoiled our Ink, and so the Office vanished.
The last hum that it made, was, that your Father,
And Picklocke are fallen out, the man of Law. He starts up at thi^.

P. IV. How? this awakes me from my lethargy.

THO. And a great suite, is like to be between 'hem,
Picklocke denies the Feofement, and the Trust,
(Your Father says) he made of the whole estate,
Unto him, as respecting his mortality,
When he first laid this late device, to try you.

P. IV. Has Picklock then a trust?

THO. I cannot tell,
Here comes the worshipful --

PIC. What? my velvet- heir, Picklocke enters.
Turned beggar in mind, as robes?

P. IV. You see what case,
Your, and my Fathers plots have brought me to.

PIC. Your Fathers, you may say, indeed, not mine.
He Is a hard hearted Gentleman! I am sorry
To see his rigid resolution!
That any man should so put off affection,
And humane nature, to destroy his own!
And triumph in a victory so cruel!
He Is fallen out with me, for being yours,
And calls me Knave, and Traitors to his Trust,
Says he will have me thrown over the Bar --

P. IV. Ha'you deserved it?

PIC. O, good heaven knows
My conscience, and the silly latitude of it!
A narrow minded man! my thoughts do dwell
All in a Lane, or line indeed; No turning,
Nor scarce obliquitie in them. I still look
Right forward to the intent, and scope of that
Which he would go from now.

P. IV. Had you a Trust, then?

PIC. Sir, I had somewhat, will keep you still Lord
Of all the estate, (if I be honest) as
I hope I shall. My tender scrupulous breast
Will not permit me see the heir defrauded,
And like an Alyen, thrust out of the blood,
The Laws forbid that I should give consent,
To such a civil slaughter of a Son.

P. IV. Where is the deed? have thou it with thee?

PIC. No,
It is a thing of greater consequence,
Then to be borne about in a black box,
Like a Low Country vorloffe, or Welsh-briefe.
It is at Lickfingers, under lock and key.

P. IV. O, fetch it hither.

PIC. I have bid him bring it,
That you might see it.

P. IV. Knows he what brings?

PIC. No more then a Gardiners Ass, what roots he carries,

P. IV. I was a sending my Father, like an Ass,
A penitent Epistle, but I am glad
I did not, now.

PIC. Hang him, an austere grape,
That has no juice, but what is veriuice in him.

P. IV. Peny-boy runs out to fetch his letter. I Will show you my letter!

PIC. Show me a defiance!
If I can now commit Father, and Son,
And make my profits out of both. Commence
A suite with the oldman, for his whole state,
And go to Law with the Sons credit, undo
Both, both with their own money, it were a piece
Worthy my nightcap, and the Gown I wear,
A Picklockes name in Law. Where are you Sir?
What do you do so long?

P. IV. I cannot find
Where I have laid it, but I have laid it safe.

PIC No matter, Sir, trust you unto my Trust,
It Is that that shall secure you, an absolute deed!
And I confess, it was in Trust, for you,
Lest any thing might have happened mortal to him:
But there must be a gratitude thought on,
And aid, Sir, for the charges of the suite,
Which will be great, against such a mighty man,
As is our Father, and a man possessed
Of so much Land, Pecunia and her friends.
I am not able to wage Law with him,
Yet must maintain the thing, as mine own right,
Still for your good, and therefore must be bold
To use your credit for moneys.

P. IV. What thou will,
So we be safe, and the Trust bear it.

PIC. Fear not,
It Is he must pay arrerages in the end.
We Will milk him, and Pecunia, draw their cream down,
Before he get the deed into his hands.
My name is Picklocke, but he will find me a Padlocke.

ACT. V.
SCENE. II.
PENY-BOY. CAN. PENY-BOY. IV. PICKLOCK. THO. BARBAR.
HOw now? conferring wi'your learned Counsel,
Vpo' the Cheat? Are you of the plot to coozen me?

P. IV. What plot?

P. SE. Your Counsel knows there, Mr Picklock,
Will you restore the Trust yet?

PIC. Sir, take patience.
And memory unto you, and bethink you,
What Trust? where do appear? I have your Deed,
Does your Deed specify any Trust? Is It not
A perfect Act? and absolute in Law?
Sealed and delivered before witnesses?
The day and date, emergent.

P. CA. But what conference?
What oaths, and vows preceded?

PIC. I will tell you, Sir,
Since I am urged of those, as I remember,
You told me you had got a grown estate,
By griping means, sinisterly. (P. CA. How!)

PIC. And were
Even weary of it; if the parties lived,
From whom you had wrested it -- (P. CA. Ha!)

PIC. You could be glad,
To part with all, for satisfaction:
But since they had yielded to humanity,
And that just heaven had sent you, for a punishment
(You did acknowledge it) this riotous heir,
That would bring all to beggary in the end,
And daily sowed consumption, where he went --

P. CA. You'old coozen both, then? your Confederate, too?

PIC. After a long, mature deliberation,
You could not think, where, better, how to place it --

P. CA. Then on you, Rascal?

PIC. What you please in your passion,
But with your reason, you will come about
And think a faithful, and a frugall friend
To be preferred.

P. CA. Before a Son?

PIC. A Prodigal,
A tubbe without a bottom, as you termed him;
For which, I might return you a vow, or two,
And seal it with an oath of thankfulness,
I not repent it, neither have I cause, Yet --

P. CA. Forehead of steel, and mouth of brass! has impudence
Polished so gross a lie, and dare thou vent it?
Engine, composed of all mixed mettalls! hence,
I will not change a syllab, with thee, more,
Till I may meet thee, at a Bar in Court,
Before thy Judges.

PIC. Thither it must come,
His Son entreats him. Before I part with it, to you, or you, Sir.

P. CA. I will not hear thee.

P. IV. Sir, your ear to me, though.
Not that I see through his perplexed plots,
And hidden ends, nor that my parts depend
Upon the vnwinding this so knotted skeane,
Do I beseech your patience. Unto me
He has confessed the trust.

PIC. How? I confess it?

P. IV. I thou, false man.

P. SE. Stand up to him, and confront him.

PIC. Where? when? to whom?

P. IV. To me, even now, and here,
Can thou deny it?

PIC. Can I eat, or drink?
Sleep, wake, or dream? arise, sit, go, or stand?
Do any thing that is natural?

P. IV. Yes, lie:
It seems thou can, and periure: that is natural!

PIC. O me! what times are these! of frontlesse carriage!
An Egg of the same nest! the Fathers Bird!
It runs in a blood, I see!

P. IV. I Will stop your mouth.

PIC. With what?

P. IV. With truth.

PIC. With noise, I must have witness.
Where is your witness? you can produce witness?

P. IV. As if my testimony were not twenty,
Balanced with thine?

PIC. So say all Prodigalls,
Sick of self-love, but that is not Law, young Scatter-good.
I live by Law.

P. IV. Why? if thou have a conscience,
That is a thoussnd witnesses.

PIC. No, Court,
Grants out a Writ of Summons, for the Conscience,
That I know, nor Sub-paena, nor Attachment.
I must have witness, and of your producing,
Ere this can come to hearing, and it must
Be heard on oath, and witness.

P. IV. Come forth, He produces Thom. Thom,
Speak what thou heard'st, the truth, and the whole truth,
And nothing but the truth. What said this varlet?

PIC. A rat behind the hangings!

THO. Sir, he said
It was a Trust! an Act, the which your Father
Had will to alter: but his tender breast
Would not permit to see the heir defrauded;
And like an alyen, thrust out of the blood.
The Laws forbid that he should give consent
To such a civil slaughter of a Son --

P. IV. And talked of a gratuitie to be given,
And aid unto the charges of the suite;
Which he was to maintain, in his own name,
But for my use, he said.

P. CA. It is enough.

THO. And he would milk Pecunia, and draw down
Her cream, before you got the Trust, again.

P. CA. Your ears are in my pocket, Knave, go shake 'hem,
The little while you have them.

PIC. You do trust
To your great purse.

P. CA. I have you in a purse-net,
Good Master Picklocke, wi'your worming brain,
And wrigling ingine-head of maintenance,
Which I shall see you hole with, very shortly.
A fine round head, when those two lugs are off,
To trundle through a Pillory. You are sure
You heard him speak this?

P. IV. I, and more.

THO. Much more!

PIC. I Will prove yours maintenance, and combination,
And sue you all.

P. CA. Do, do, my gowned Vulture,
Crop in Reuersion: I shall see you coyted
Over the Bar, as Barge-men do their billets.

PIC. This it is, when men repent of their good deeds,
And would ha'hem in again -- They are almost mad!
But I forgive their Lucida Interualla.
O, Lickfinger? Pick-lock spies Lickfinger, and asks him aside for the
writing. come hither. Where Is my writing?

ACT. V.
SCENE. III.
LICKFINGER. to them.
I sent it you, together with your keys,

PIC. How?

LIC. By the Porter, that came for it, from you,
And by the token, you had given me the keys,
And bad me bring it.

PIC. And why did you not?

LIC. Why did you send a counter-mand?

PIC. Who, I?

LIC. You, or some other you, you put in trust.

PIC. In trust?

LIC. Your Trust's another self, you know,
And without Trust, and your Trust, how should he
Take notice of your keys, or of my charge.

PIC. Know you the man?

LIC. I know he was a Porter,
And a sealed Porter for he bore the badge
On breast, I am sure.

PIC. I am lost! a plot! I sent it!

LIC. Why! and I sent it by the man you sent
Whom else, I had not trusted.

PIC. Plague o'your trust. Picklocke goes out.
I am trussed up among you.

P. IV. Or you may be.

PIC. In mine own halter, I have made the Noose. Young Peny-boy discouers it,
to his Father to be his plot of sending for it by the Porter, and that he is
in possession of the Deed.

P. IV. What was it, Lickfinger?

LIC. A writing, Sir,
He sent for it by a token, I was bringing it:
But that he sent a Porter, and he seemed
A man of decent carriage.

P. CA. 'Twas good fortune!
To cheat the Cheater, was no cheat, but justice,
Put off your rags, and be your self again,
This Act of piety, and good affection,
Has partly reconciled me to you.

P. IV. Sir.

P.C. No vows, no promises: too much protestation
Makes that suspected often, we would persuade.

LIC. Hear you the News? Elder Peny-boy startles at the news.

P. IV. The Office is down, how should we?

LIC. But of your uncle?

P. IV. No.

LIC. He Is run mad, Sir.

P. CA. How, Lickfinger?

LIC. Stark staring mad, your brother,
H'has almost killed his maid.

P. CA. Now, heaven forbid.

LIC. But that she is Cat-liu'd, and Squirrill-limb'd,
With throwing bed-staues at her: h'has set wide
His outer doors, and now keeps open house,
For all the passers by to see his justice:
First, he has apprehended his two dogs,
As being of the plot to coozen him:
And there he sits like an old worm of the peace,
Wrapped up in furs at a square table, screwing,
Examining, and committing the poor curres,
To two old cases of close stools, as prisons;
The one of which, he calls his Lollard's tower,
The Other his Blocke-house, 'cause his two dogs names
Are Block, and Lollard.

P. IV. This would be brave matter
Unto the Ieerers.

P. CA. I, If so the subject
Were not so wretched.

LIC. Sure, I met them all,
I think, upon that quest.

P. CA. 'Faith, like enough:
The vicious still are swift to show their natures.
I Will thither too, but with another aim,
If all succeed well, and my simples take.

ACT. V.
SCENE. IIIJ.
He is seen sitting at his Table with papers before him. PENI-BOY. SEN. PORTER.
WHere are the prisoners?

POR. They are forth-comming, S^,
Or coming forth at least.

P. SE. The Rogue is drunk,
Since I committed them to his charge. Come hither,
He smells him. Near me, yet nearer; breath upon me. Wine!
Wine, of my worship! sack! Canary sack!
Could not your Badge ha'bin drunk with fulsome Ale?
Or Beer? the Porters element? but sack!

POR. I am not drunk, we had, Sir, but one pynt,
An honest carrier, and my self.

P. SE. Who paid for it?

POR. Sir, I did give it him.

P. SE. What? and spend sixpence!
A Frocke spend sixpence! sixpence!

POR. Once in a year, Sir,

P. SE. In seven years, varlet! Know thou what thou have done?
What a consumption thou have made of a State?
It might please heaven, (a lusty Knave and young)
To let thee live some seventy years longer.
Till thou art fourscore, and ten; perhaps, a hundred.
Say seventy years; how many times seven in seventy?
Why, seven times ten, is ten times seven, mark me,
I will demonstrate to thee on my fingers,
Sixpence in seven year (use upon use)
Grows in that first seven year, to be a twelue-pence.
That, in the next, two-shillings; the third foure-shillings;
The fourth seven year, eight-shillings; the fifth, sixteen:
The sixth, two and thirty; the seventh, three-pound four,
The eighth, six pound, and eight; the ninth, twelve pound sixteen;
And the tenth seven, five and twenty pound,
Twelve Shillings. This thou art fallen from, by thy riot!
Should thou live seventy years, by spending sixpence,
Once in the seven: but in a day to wast it!
There is a Sum that number cannot reach!
Out of my house, thou pest of prodigality!
Seed o'consumption! hence, a wicked keeper
Is often worse then the prisoners. There Is thy penny,
Four tokens for thee. Out, away. My dogs,
May yet be innocent, and honest. If not,
I have an entrapping question, or two more,
To put unto 'hem, a cross Intergatory,
And I shall catch 'hem; Lollard? He calls forth Lollard, and examines him.
Peace,
What whispring was that you had with Mortgage,
When you last licked her feet? The truth now. Ha?
Did you smell she was going? Put down that. And not,
Not to return? You are silent. good. And, when
Leaped you on Statute? As she went forth? Consent.
There was Consent, as she was going forth.
'Twould have been fitter at her coming home, He commits him again.
But you knew that she would not? To your Tower,
You are cunning, are you? I will meet your craft.
Block, Calls forth Block, and examines him. show your face, leave your
caresses, tell me,
And tell me truly, what affronts do you know
Were done Pecunia? that she left my house?
None, say you so? not that you know? or will know?
I fear me, I shall find you an obstinate Curre.
Why, did your fellow Lollard cry this morning?
'Cause Broker kicked him? why did Broker kick him?
Because he pist against my Ladies Gown?
Why, that was no affront? no? no distaste?
You knew of none. Yo'are a dissembling Tyke, Commits him.
To your hole, again, your Blocke-house. Lollard, arise,
Where did you lift your leg up, last? against what? Lollard is called again.
Are you struck Dummerer now? and whine for mercy?
Whose Kirtle was it, you gnawed too? Mistress Bands?
And Waxe's stockings? who did? Block bescumber
Statutes white suite? wi' the parchment lace there?
And Brokers Satin dublet? all will out.
They had offense, offense enough to quit me.
Block is su^mon'd the second time. Appear Block, fough, it is manifest. He
shows it,
Should he for-sweare't, make all the Affadauits,
Against it, that he could before the Bench,
And twenty Iuries; he would be conuinc'd.
He is remanded. He bears an air about him, does confess it!
To prison again, close prison. Not you Lollard,
Lollard has the liberty of the house. You may enjoy the liberty of the house,
And yet there is a quirke come in my head,
For which I must commit you too, and close,
Do not repine, it will be better for you. Enter the Ieerers.

ACT. V.
SCENE. II.
CYMBAL. FITTON. SHVNFIELD. ALMANACH. MADRIGAL. PENY-BOY. SEN. LICKFINGER.
THis is enough to make the dogs mad too,
Let Us in upon him.

P. SE. How now? what is the matter?
Come you to force the prisoners? make a rescue?

FIT. We come to bail your dogs.

P. SE. They are not baileable,
They stand committed without bail, or mainprise,
Your bail cannot be taken.

SHV. Then the truth is,
We come to vex you.

ALM. Ieere you.

MAD. Bate you rather.

CYM. A bated vserer will be good flesh.

FIT. And tender, we are told.

P. SE. Who is the Butcher,
Amongst you, that is come to cut my throat?

SHV. You would dye a calves death feign: but it is an Oxes,
Is meant you.

FIT. To be fairly knocked of the head.

SHV. With a good Ieere or two.

P. SE. And from your iawbone,
Don Assinigo?

CYM. Shunfield, a Ieere, you have it.

SHV. I do confess a washing blow? but Snarle,
You that might play the third dog, for your teeth,
You have no money now?

FIT. No, nor no Mortgage.

ALM. Nor Band.

MAD. Nor Statute.

CYM. No, nor blushet Wax.

P. SE. Nor you no Office, as I take it.

SHV. Cymbal,
A mighty Ieere.

FIT. Pox o'these true ieasts, I say.

MAD. He will turn the better ieerer.

ALM. Let Us upon him,
And if we cannot ieere him down in wit,

MAD. Let Us do it in noise.

SHV. Content.

MAD. Charge, man of war.

ALM. Lay him, abord.

SHV. We'll gi' him a broad side, first.

FIT. Where Is your venison, now?

CYM. Your red-Deer-pyes?

SHV. Wi' your baked Turkyes?

ALM. and your Partridges?

MAD. Your Phessants, and fat Swans?

P. SE. Like you, turned Geese.

MAD. But such as will not keep your Capitol?

SHV. You were wont to have your Breams --

ALM. And Trouts sent in?

CYM. Fat Carps, and Salmons?

FIT. I, and now, and then,
An Emblem, o'your self, an o're-growne Pyke?

P. SE. You are a Jack, Sir.

FIT. You have made a shift
To swallow twenty such poor Iacks ere now.

ALM. If he should come to feed upon poor- John?

MAD. Or turn pure Iack-a-Lent after all this?

FIT. Tut, he will live like a Gras-hopper --

MAD. On dew.

SHV. Or like a Bear, with licking his own claws.

CYM. I, If his dogs were away.

ALM. He Will eat them, first,
While they are fat.

FIT, Faith, and when they are gone,
Here Is nothing to be seen beyond.

CYM. Except
His kindred, Spiders, natives of the soil.

ALM. Dust, he will have enough here, to breed fleas.

MAD. But, by that time, he will have no blood to rear 'hem.

SHV. He will be as thin as a lantern, we shall see through him,

ALM. And his gut colon, tell his Intestina --

P. SE. Rogues, Rascals ( His dogs bark. baw waw)

FIT. He calls his dogs to his aid.

ALM. O! they but rise at mention of his tripes.

CYM. Let them alone, they do it not for him.

MAD. They bark, se defendendo.

SHV. Or for custom,
As commonly currres do, one for another.

LIC. Arm, arm you, Gentlemen Ieerers, the old Canter
Is coming in upon you, with his forces,
The Gentleman, that was the Canter.

SHV. Hence.

FIT. Away.

CYM. What is he?

ALM. stay not to ask questions.

FIT. He Is a flame.

SHV. A furnace.

ALM. A consumption, They all run away.
Kills where he goes.

LIC. See! the whole Couy is scattered,
'Ware, 'ware the Hawks. I love to see him fly.

ACT. V.
SCENE. VI.
PENY-BOY. CA. PENY-BOY. SE. PENI-BOY. IV. PECVNIA. TRAIN.
YOu see by this amazement, and distraction,
What your companions were, a poor, affrighted,
And guilty race of men, that dare to stand
No breath of truth: but conscious to themselves
Of their no-wit, or honesty, ran routed
At every Pannicke terror themselves bred.
Where else, as confident as sounding brass,
Their tinckling Captain, Cymbal, and the rest,
Dare put on any visor, to deride
The wretched: or with buffon license, jest
At whatsoever is serious, if not sacred.

P. SE. Peny-boy Se. acknowledges his elder brother. Who Is this? my brother!
and restored to life!

P. CA Yes, and sent hither to restore your wits:
If your short madness, be not more then anger,
Conceived for your loss! which I return you.
See here, your Mortgage, Statute, Band, and Wax,
Without your Broker, come to abide with you:
And vindicate the Prodigal, from stealing
Away the Lady. Nay, Pecunia herself,
Is come to free him fairly, and discharge
All ties, but those of Love, unto her person,
To use her like a friend, not like a slave,
Or like an Idol. Superstition
Does violate the Deity it worships:
No less then scorn does. And believe it, brother
The use of things is all, and not the Store;
Surfeit, and fullness, have killed more then famine.
The Sparrow, with his little plumage, flies,
While the proud Peacocke, ouer-charg'd with pens,
Is feign to sweep the ground, with his grown train,
And load of feathers.

P. SE. Wise, and honored brother!
None but a Brother, and sent from the dead,
As you are to me, could have altered me:
I thank my Destiny, that is so gracious.
Are there no pains, no Penalties decreed
From whence you come, to us that smother money,
In chests, and strangle her in bags.

P. CA. O, mighty,
Intolerable fines, and mulcts impo'sd!
(Of which I come to warn you) forfeitures
Of whole estates, if they be known, and taken!

P. SE. I thank you Brother for the light you have given me,
I will prevent 'hem all. First free my dogs,
Lest what I have done to them (and against Law)
Be a Premuniri, for by Magna Charta
They could not be committed, as close prisoners,
My learned Counsel tells me here, my Cook.
And yet he showed me, the way, first.

LIC. Who did? I?
I trench the liberty of the subjects?

P. CA. Peace,
Picklocke, your Ghest, that Stentor, has infected you,
Whom I have safe enough in a wooden collar.

P. SE. Next, I restore these servants to their Lady,
With freedom, heart of cheer, and countenance;
It is their year, and day of Iubilee.

TRA. We thank you, Sir. Her Train thanks him.

P. SE. And lastly, to my Nephew,
I give my house, goods, lands, all but my vices,
And those I go to cleanse; kissing this Lady
Whom I do give him too, and join their hands.

P. CA. If the Spectators will join theirs, we thank 'hem.

P. IV. And wish they may, as I, enjoy Pecunia.

PEC. And so Pecunia her self does wish,
That she may still be aid unto their uses,
Not slave unto their pleasures, or a Tyrant
Over their fair desires; but teach them all
The golden mean: the Prodigal how to live,
The sordid, and the covetous, how to dye,
That with sound mind; this safe frugality.

THE END.
The Epilogue.
THus have you seen the Makers double scope,
To profit, and delight; wherein our hope
Is, though the clout we do not always hit,
It will not be imputed to his wit:
A Tree so tried, and bent, as 'twill not start.
Nor does he often crack a string of Art,
Though there may other accidents as strange
Happen, the weather of your looks may change,
Or some high wind of mis-conceit arise,
To cause an alteration in our Skies;
If so, we'are sorry that have so misspent
Our Time and Tackle, yet he'is confident,
And vow's the next fair day, he will have us shoot
The same match over for him, if you will come to it.
THE DEVIL IS AN ASS: A COMEDY ACTED IN THE YEAR, 1616.

BY HIS MAJESTY'S SERVANTS.

The Author BEN: IONSON.

HOR. de ART. POET. Ficta voluptatis Causa, sint proxima veris.

LONDON, Printed by I. B. for ROBERT ALLOT, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Bear, in Paul's Churchyard. 1631.

THE PERSONS OF THE PLAY.
SATAN. The great devil. PVG. The less devil. INIQVITY. The Vice.
FITZ-DOTTRELL. A Squire of Norfolk. Mistress FRANCES. His wife. MEERE-CRAFT.
The Proiector. EVERILL. His Champion. WITTIPOL. A young Gallant. MANLY. His
friend. INGINE. A Broaker. TRAINS. The Proiectors man. GVILT-HEAD. A
Goldsmiths. PLVTARCHVS. His son. Sir POVLE EITHER-SIDE. A Lawyer, and
Justice. Lady EITHER-SIDE. His wife. Lady TAILE-BVSH. The Lady Proiectresse.
PIT-FALL. Her woman. AMBLER. Her Gentlemanvsher. SLEDGE. A Smith, the
Constable. SHACKLES. Keeper of Newgate. SERIEANTS.
The Scene, LONDON.

The Prologue.
THe DEVIL is an Ass. That is, to day,
The name of what you are met for, a new Play.
Yet, Grandee's, would you were not come to grace
Our matter, with allowing us no place.
Though you presume SATAN a subtle thing,
And may have heard he is worn in a thumbe-ring;
Do not on these presumptions, force us act,
In compass of a cheese-trencher. This tract
Will never admit our vice, because of yours.
Anon, who, worse then you, the fault endures
That your selves make? when you will thrust and spurn,
And knock us of the elbowes, and bid, turn;
As if, when we had spoke, we must be gone,
Or, till we speak, must all run in, to one,
Like the young adders, at the old ones mouth?
Would we could stand due North; or had no South,
If that offend: or were Muscouy glass,
That you might look our Scenes through as they pass.
We know not how to affect you. If you will come
To see new Plays, pray you afford us room,
And show this, but the same face you have done
Your dear delight, the Devil of Edmunton.
Or, if, for want of room it must mis-carry,
'Twill be but Justice, that your censure tarry,
Till you give some. And when six times you have seen't,
If this Play do not like, the Devil is in it.
THE DEVIL IS AN ASS.
ACT. I.
SCENE. I.
DEVIL. PVG. INIQVITY.
HOh, hoh, hoh, hoh, hoh, hoh, hoh, hoh, etc.
To earth? and, why to earth, thou fooolish Spirit?
What wold'st thou do on earth?

PVG. For that, great Chief!
As time shall work. I do but ask my mon'th.
Which every petty pui'nee Devil has;
Within that term, the Court of Hell will hear
Some thing, may gain a longer grant, perhaps.

SAT. For what? the laming a poor Cow, or two?
Entering a Sow, to make her cast her farrow?
Or crossing of a Mercat-womans Mare,
Twixt this, and Totnam? these were wont to be
Your maine atchieuements, Pug, You have some plot, now,
Upon a tonning of Ale, to stale the yest,
Or keep the churne so, that the buttter come not;
Spite of the housewiues cord, or her hot spit?
Or some good Ribibe, about Kentish Town,
Or Hogsden, you would hang now, for a witch,
Because she will not let you play round Robbin:
And you will go sour the Citizens Cream against Sunday?
That she may be accused for it, and condemned,
By a Middlesex Jury, to the satisfaction
Of their offended friends, the Londiners wives
Whose teeth were set on edge with it? Foolish feind,
Stay ^' your place, know your own strengths, and put not
Beyond the sphere of your actiuity.
You are too dull a Devil to be trusted
Forth in those parts, Pug, upon any affayre
That may concern our name, on earth. It is not
Every ones work. The state of Hell must care
Whom it imployes, in point of reputation,
Here about London. You would make, I think
An Agent, to be sent, for Lancashire,
Proper enough; or some parts of Northumberland,
So yo' had good instructions, Pug.

PVG. O Chief!
You do not know, dear Chief, what there is in me.
Prove me but for a fortnight, for a week,
And lend me but a Vice, to carry with me,
To practice therewith any play-fellow,
And, you will see, there will come more upon it,
Then you will imagine, precious Chief.

SAT. What Vice?
What kind would th'haue it of?

PVG. Why, any Frand;
Or Covetousness; or Lady Vanity;
Or old Iniquity: I Will call him hither.

INI. What is he, calls upon me, and would seem to lack a Vice?
Ere his words be half spoken, I am with him in a trice;
Here, there, and every where, as the Cat is with the mice:
True vetus Iniquitas. Lack'st thou Cards, friend, or Dice?
I will teach thee cheat, Child, to cog, lie, and swagger,
And ever and anon, to be drawing forth thy dagger:
To swear by Gogs-nownes, like a lusty Iuuentus,
In a cloak to thy heel, and a hat like a pent-house.
Thy breeches of three fingers, and thy doublet all belly,
With a Wench that shall feed thee, with cock-stones and gelly.

PVG. Is it not excellent, Chief? how nimble he is!

INI. Child of hell, this is nothing! I will fetch thee a leap
From the top of Pauls-steeple, to the Standard in Cheepe:
And lead thee a dance, through the streets without fail,
Like a needle of Spain, with a thread at my tail.
We will suruay the Suburbs, and make forth our sallyes,
Down Petticoate-lane, and up the Smock-allies,
To Shoreditch, Whitechappell, and so to Saint Kathernes.
To drink with the Dutch there, and take forth their patterns:
From thence, we will put in at Custom House key there,
And see, how the Factors, and Prentizes play there,
False with their Masters; and gueld many a full pack,
To spend it in pies, at the Dagger, and the Wool-sacke.

PVG. Brave, brave, Iniquity! will not this do, Chief?

INI. Nay, boy, I will bring thee to the Bawds, and the Roysters,
At Belins-gate, feasting with claret wine, and oysters,
From thence shoot the Bridge, child, to the Cranes in the Vintry,
And see, there the gimblets, how they make their entry*
Or, if thou had rather, to the Strand down to fall,
Against the Lawyers come dabled from Westminster Hall
And mark how they cling, with their clyents together,
Like Iuie to Oak; so Velvet to Leather:
Ha, boy, I would show thee.

PVG. Rare, rare!

DIV. Peace, dotard,
And thou more ignorant thing, that so admir'st.
Art thou the spirit thou seem? so poor? to choose
This, for a Vice, t'aduance the cause of Hell,
Now? as Vice stands this present year? Remember,
What number it is. Six hundred and sixteen.
Had it but been five hundred, though some sixty
Above; that is fifty years agone, and six,
(When every great man had his Vice stand by him,
In his long coat, shaking his wooden dagger)
I could consent, that, then this your grave choice
Might have done that, with his Lord Chief, the which
Most of his chamber can do now. But Pug,
As the times are, who is it, will receive you?
What company will you go to? or whom mix with?
Where can thou carry him? except to Tauernes?
To mount up ona joynt-stoole, with a Iewes-trumpe,
To put down Cokeley, and that must be to Citizens?
He never will be admitted, there, where Vennor comes.
He may perchance, in tail of a Sheriffs dinner,
Skip with a rhyme of the Table, from New-nothing,
And take his Almaine-leape into a custard,
Shall make my Lad Maioresse, and her sisters,
Laugh all their hoods over their shoulders. But,
This is not that will do, they are other things
That are received now upon earth, for Vices;
Stranger, and newer: and changed every hour.
They ride 'hem like their horses off their legs,
And here they come to Hell, whole legions of 'hem,
Every week tired. We, still strive to breed,
And rear 'hem up new ones; but they do not stand,
When they come there: they turn 'hem on our hands.
And it is feared they have a stud o'their own
Will put down ours. Both our breed, and trade
Will suddenly decay, if we prevent not.
Unless it be a Vice of quality,
Or fashion, now, they take none from us. Car-men
Are got into the yellow starch, and Chimney-sweepers
To their tobacco, and strong water, Hum,
Mead, and Obarni. We must therefore aim
At extraordinary subtle ones, now,
When we do send to keep us up in credit.
Not old Iniquities. Get you e'ne back, Sir,
To making of your rope of sand again.
You are not for the manners, nor the times:
They have their Vices, there, most like to Virtues;
You cannnot know 'hem, apart, by any difference:
They wear the same clothes, eat the same meat,
Sleep in the selfsame beds, ride in those coaches.
Or very like, four horses in a coach,
As the best men and women. Tissue gowns,
Garters and roses, fourscore pound a pair,
Embroydred stockings, cut-worke smocks, and shirts,
More certain marks of lechery, now, and pride,
Then ere they were of true nobility!
But Pug, since you do burn with such desire
To do the Commonwealth of Hell some service;
I am content, assuming of a body,
You go to earth, and visit men, a day.
But you must take a body ready made, Pug,
I can create you none: nor shall you form
Your self an aerie one, but become subject
To all impression of the flesh, you take,
So far as humane frailty. So, this morning,
There is a handsome Cutpurse hanged at Tiborne,
Whose spirit departed, you may enter his body:
For clothes employ your credit, with the Hangman,
Or let our tribe of Brokers furnish you.
And, look, how far your subtilty can work
Through those organs, with that body, spy
Amongst mankind, (you cannot there want vices,
And therefore the less need to carry 'hem wi'you)
But as you make your soon at nights relation,
And we shall find, it merits from the State,
You shall have both trust from us, and employment.

PVG. Most gracious Chief!

DIV. Only, thus more I bind you,
He shows Fitz-dottrel to him, coming forth. To serve the first man that you
meet; and him
I Will show you, now: Observe him. Yon' is he,
You shall see, first, after your clothing. Follow him:
But once engaged, there you must stay and fix;
Not shift, until the midnights cock do crow.

PVG. Any conditions to be gone.

DIV. Away, then.

ACT. I. SCENE. II.
FITZ-DOTTRELL.
I, they do, now, name Bretnor, as before,
They talked of Gresham, and of Doctor Foreman,
Francklin, and Fiske, and Sauory (he was in too)
But there is not one of these, that ever could
Yet show a man the Devil, in true sort.
They have their christalls, I do know, and rings,
And virgin parchment, and their dead-mens sculls
Their ravens wings, their lights, and pentacles,
With characters; I have seen all these. But --
Would I might see the Devil. I would give
A hundred of these pictures, to see him
Once out of picture. May I prove a cuckold,
(And that is the one maine mortal thing I fear)
If I begin not, now, to think, the Painters
Have only made him. 'Slight, he would be seen,
One time or other else. He would not let
An ancient gentleman, of a good house,
As most are now in England, the Fitz-dottrel's,
Run wild, and call upon him thus in vain,
As I have done this twelve mone'th. If he be not,
At all, why, are there Coniurers? If they be not,
Why, are there laws against 'hem? The best artists
Of Cambridge, Oxford, Middlesex, and London,
Essex, and Kent, I have had in pay to raise him,
These fifty weeks, and yet h'appeares not. 'S death,
I shall suspect, they, can make circles only
Shortly, and know but his hard names. They do say,
H' will meet a man (of himself) that has a mind to him.
If he would so, I have a mind and a half for him:
He should not be long absent. Pray thee, come
I long for thee. An' I were with child by him, He expresses a longing to see
the Devil.
And my wife, too; I could not more. Come, yet,
Good Beelezebub. Were he a kind devil,
And had humanity in him, he would come, but
To save ones longing. I should use him well,
I swear, and with respect (would he would try me)
Not, as the Conjurers do, when they have raised him.
Get him in bonds, and send him post, on errands.
A thousand miles, it is preposterous, that:
And I believe, is the true cause becomes not.
And he has reason. Who would be engaged,
That might live freely, as he may do? I swear,
They are wrong all. The burned child dreads the fire.
They do not know to entertain the Devil.
I would so welcome him, observe his diet,
Get him his chamber hung with arras, two of 'hem,
IN my own house; lend him my wives wrought pillowes:
And as I am an honest man, I think,
If he had a mind to her, too; I should grant him,
To make our friend-ship perfect. So I would nor
To every man. If he but hear me, now?
And should come to me in a brave young shape,
And take me at my word? ha! Who is this?

ACT. I. SCENE. IIJ.
PVG. FITZ-DOTTRELL.
SIR, your good pardon, that I thus presume
Upon your priuacy. I am borne a Gentleman,
A younger brother; but, in some disgrace,
Now, with my friends: and want some little means,
To keep me upright, while things be reconciled.
Please you, to let my service be of use to you, Sir.

FIT. Service? before hell, my heart was at my mouth,
He looks and suruay's his fear: over and over. Till I had viewed his shoes
well: for, those roses
Were big enough to hide a cloven foot.
No, friend, my number's full. I have one servant,
Who is my all, indeed; and, from the broom
Unto the brush: for, just so far, I trust him.
He is my Wardrobe man, my Cater, Cook,
Butler, and Steward; looks unto my horse:
And helps to watch my wife. H' has all the places,
That I can think on, from the garret downward,
Even to the manger, and the curry-combe.

PVG. Sir, I shall put your worship to no charge,
More then my meat, and that bu^ very little,
I Will serve you for your love.

FIT. Ha? without wages?
I Will harken of that ear, were I at leisure.
But now, I Am busy. 'Pr'y the, friend forbear me,
And 'thou had been a Devil, I should say
Somewhat more to thee. Thou do hinder, now,
My meditations.

PVG. Sir, I am a Devil.

FIT. How!

PVG. A true Devil, Sr.

FIT. Nay, now, you ly:
Under your favor, friend, for, I Will not quarrel.
I looked of your feet, before, you cannot coozen me,
Your shoo's not cloven, Sir, you are whole hoof'd. He viewes his feet again.

PVG. Sir, that is a popular error, deceiues many:
But I am that, I tell you.

FIT. What Is your name?

PVG. My name is Devil, Sr.

FIT. Sai'st thou true.

PVG. Indeed, Sr.

FIT. 'Slid! there is some omen in this! what countryman?

PVG. Of Derby-shire, Sr. about the Peake.

FIT. That Hole
Belonged to your Ancestors?

PVG. Yes, Devils arse, Sr.

FIT. I Will entertain him for the name sake. Ha?
And turn away my the other man? and save
Four pound a year by that? there is luck, and thrift too!
The very Devil may come, hereafter, as well.
Friend, I receive you: but (withal) I acquaint you,
Aforehand, if yo' offend me, I must beat you.
It is a kind of exercise, I use.
And cannot be without.

PVG. Yes, if I do not
Offend, you can, sure.

FIT. Faith, Devil, very hardly:
I Will call you by your surname, 'cause I love it.

ACT. I. SCENE. IIII.
INGINE. VVITTIPOL. MANLY. FITZDOTTRELL. PVG.
YOnder he walks, Sir, I Will go lift him for you.

WIT. To him, good Ingine, raise him up by degrees,
Gently, and hold him there too, you can do it.
Show your self now, a Mathematical broker.

ING. I Will warrant you for half a piece.

WIT. It Is done, Sr.

MAN. Is It possible there should be such a man?

WIT. You shall be your own witness, I Will not labor
To tempt you past your faith.

MAN. And is his wife
So very handsome, say you?

WIT. I have not seen her,
Since I came home from travel: and they say,
She is not altered. Then, before I went,
I saw her once; but so, as she has stuck
Still in my view, no object has removed her.

MAN. It Is a fair guest, Friend, beauty: and once lodged
Deep in the eyes, she hardly leaves the Inn.
How does he keep her?

WIT. Very brave. Howeuer,
Himself be sordide, he is sensual that way.
In every dressing, he does study her.

MAN. And furnish forth himself so from the Brokers?

WIT. Yes, that is a hyr'd suite, he now has one,
To see the Devil is an Ass, to day, in*
(This Ingine gets three or four pound a week by him)
He dares not miss a new Play, or a Feast,
What rate soever clothes be at; and thinks
Himself still new, in other men's old.

MAN. But stay,
Does he love meat so?

WIT. Faith he does not hate it.
But that is not it. His belly and his palate
Would be compounded with for reason Mary,
A wit he has, of that strange credit with him,
Against all mankind; as it does make him do
Just what it list: it rauishes him forth,
Whither it please, to any assembly or place,
And would conclude him ruined, should he escape
One public meeting, out of the belief
Ingine has won Fitz-dottrel, to say on the cloak. He has of his own great,
and Catholic strengths,
In arguing, and discourse. It takes, I see:
H' has got the cloak upon him.

FIT. A fair garment,
By my faith, Ingine!

ING. It was never made, Sir,
For three score pound, I assure you: 'T will yield thirty.
The plush, Sir, cost three pound, ten shillings a yard!
And then the lace, and velvet.

FIT. I shall, Ingine,
Be looked at, pretitly, in it! Art thou sure
The Play is played to day?

ING. o here is the bill, Sr.
He gives him the Play-bill. IN, had forgot to gi't you.

FIT. Ha? the Devil!
I will not lose you, Sirah! But, Ingine, think you,
The Gallant is so furious in his folly?
So mad upon the matter, that he will part
With His cloak vpo' these terms?

ING. Trust not your Ingine,
Break me to pieces else, as you would do
A rotten Crane, or an old rusty Jack,
That has not one true wheel in him. Do but talk with him.

FIT. I shall do that, to satisfy you, Ingine,
He turns to Wittipol. And my self too. With your leave, Gentlemen.
Which of you is it, is so mere Idolater
To my wives beauty, and so very prodigal
Unto my patience, that, for the short parlee?
Of one swift hours quarter, with my wife,
He will depart with (let me see) this cloak here
The price of folly? Sir, are you the man?

WIT. I am that vent'rer, Sir.

FIT. Good time! your name
Is Witty-pol?

WIT. The same, Sr.

FIT. And it is told me,
Yo' have trauell'd lately?

WIT. That I have, Sr.

FIT. Truly,
Your trauells may have altered your complexion;
But sure, your wit stood still.

WIT. It may well be, Sir.
All heads have not like growth.

FIT. The good man's gravity,
That left you land, your father, never taught you
These pleasant matches?

WIT. No, nor can his mirth,
With whom I make 'hem, put me off.

FIT. You are
Resolved then?

WIT. Yes, Sr.

FIT. Beauty is the Saint,
You Will sacrifice your self, into the shirt too?

WIT. So I may still cloth, and keep warm your wisdom?

FIT. You lade me Sr!

WIT. I know what you will bear, Sr.

FIT. Well, to the point. It Is only, Sir, you say,
To speak unto my wife?

WIT. Only, to speak to her.

FIT. And in my presence?

WIT. In your very presence.

FIT. And in my hearing?

WIT. In your hearing: so,
You interrupt us not.

FIT. For the short space
You do demand, the fourth part of an hour,
I think I shall, with some convenient study, He shrugs himself up in the
cloak.
And this good help to boot, bring my self to it.

WIT. I ask no more.

FIT. Please you, walk to'ard my house,
Speak what you list; that time is yours: My right
I have departed with. But, not beyond,
A minute, or a second, look for. Length,
And drawing out, ma'aduance much, to these matches.
And I except all kissing. Kisses are
Silent petitions still with willing Lovers.

WIT. Lovers? How falls that o'your phantsie?

FIT. Sir.
I do know somewhat, I forbid all lip-worke.

WIT. I am not eager at forbidden dainties.
Who couets unfit things, denies him self.

FIT. You say well, Sir, 'Twas prettily said, that same,
He does, indeed. I Will have no touches, therefore,
Nor takings by the arms, nor tender circles
Cast 'bout the wast, but all be done at distance.
Love is brought up with those soft migniard handlings;
His pulse lies in his palm: and I defend
All melting joints, and fingers, (that is my bargain)
I do defend 'hem; any thing like action.
But talk, Sir, what you will. Use all the Tropes
And Schemes, that Prince Quintilian can afford you:
And much good do your Rhetoriques heart. You are welcome, Sir.
Ingine, God b' w' you.

WIT. Sir, I must condition
To have this Gentleman by, a witness.

FIT. Well,
I am content, so he be silent.

MAN. Yes, Sir.

FIT. Come Devil, I Will make you room, straight. But I Will show you
First, to your Mistress, who is no common one,
You must conceive, that brings this gain to see her.
I hope thou'st brought me good luck.

PVG. I shall do it. Sir.

ACT. I. SCENE. V.
VVITTIPOL. MANLY.
Wittipol knocks his friend of the breast. INgine, you hope o'your half piece?
It Is there, Sir.
Be gone. Friend Manly, who is within here? fixed?

MAN. I am directly in a fit of wonder
What'll be the issue of this conference!

WIT. For that, never vex your self, till the event.
How like yo' him?

MAN. I would feign see more of him.

WIT. What think you of this?

MAN. I am past degrees of thinking.
Old Africa, and the new America,
With all their fruit of Monsters cannot show
So just a prodigy.

WIT. Could you have believed,
Without your sight, a mind so sordide inward,
Should be so specious, and laid forth abroad,
To all the show, that ever shop, or ware was?

MAN. I believe any thing now, though I confess
His Vices are the most extremities
I ever knew in nature. But, why loves he
The Devil so?

WIT. O Sr! for hidden treasure,
He hopes to find: and has proposed himself
So infinite a Mass, as to recover,
He cares not what he parts with, of the present,
To his men of Art, who are the race, may coin him.
Promise gold mountains, and the covetous
Are still most prodigal.

MAN. But have you faith,
That he will hold his bargain?

WIT. O dear, Sir!
He will not off on it. Fear him not. I know him.
One baseness still accompanies another.
See! he is here already, and his wife too.

MAN. A wondrous handsome creature, as I live!

ACT. I. SCENE. VI.
FITZ-DOTTRELL. Mistress FITZ-DOTTREL. WITTIPOL. MANLY.
COme wife, this is the Gentleman. Nay, blush not.

Mrs. FI. Why, what do you mean Sir? have you your reason?

FIT. Wife,
I do not know, that I have lent it forth
To any one; at least, without a pawn, wife:
Or that I'haue eat or drunk the thing, of late,
That should corrupt it. Wherefore gentle wife,
Obey, it is thy virtue: hold no acts
Of disputation.

Mrs. FI. Are you not enough
The talk, of feasts, and meetingy, but you will still
Make argument for fresh?

FIT. Why, careful wedlock,
If I have have a longing to have one tale more
Go of me, what is that to thee, dear heart?
Why should thou envy my delight? or cross it?
By being solicitous, when it not concerns thee?

Mrs. FI. Yes, I have share in this The scorn will fall
As bittterly on me, where both are laughed at.

FIT. Laughed at, sweet bird? is that the scruple? Come, come,
Thou art a Niaise. Which of your great houses, A Niaise is a young Hawke, taken
crying out of the nest.
(I will not mean at home, here, but abroad)
Your families in France, wife, send not forth
Something, within the seven year, may be laughed at?
I do not say seven months, nor seven weeks,
Nor seven days, nor hours: but seven year wife.
I give 'hem time. Once, within seven year,
I think they may do something may be laughed at.
In France, I keep me there, still. Wherefore, wife,
Let them that list, laugh still, rather then weep
For me; Here is a cloak cost fifty pound, wife,
Which I can sell for thirty, when I have seen
All London in it, and London has seen me.
To day, I go to the Black friars Playhouse,
Sit it he view, salute all my acquaintance,
Rise up between the Acts, let fall my cloak,
Publish a handsome man, and a rich suite
(As that is a special end, why we go thither,
All that pretend, to stand for 't of the Stage)
The Ladies ask who is that? (For, they do come
To see us, Love, as we do to see them)
Now, I shall lose all this, for the false fear
Of being laughed at? Yes, wusse. Let 'hem laugh, wife,
Let me have such another cloak to morrow.
And let 'hem laugh again, wife, and again,
And then grow fat with laughing, and then fatter,
All my young Gallants, let 'hem bring their friends too:
Shall I forbid 'hem? No, let heaven forbid 'hem:
Or wit, if it have any charge on 'hem. Come, thy ear, wife,
Is all, I Will borrow of thee. Set your watch, Sir,
Thou, only art to hear, not speak a word, Dove,
To ought he says. That I do gi' you in precept,
No less then council, on your wiue-hood, wife,
Not though he flatter you, or make court, or Love,
(As you must look for these) or say, he rail;
What ere his arts be, wife, I will have thee
Delude 'hem with a trick, thy obstinate silence;
I know advantages; and I love to hit
These pragmaticke young men, at their own weapons.
He disposes his wife to his place, and sets his watch. Is your watch ready?
Here my sail bears, for you:
Tack toward him, sweet Pinnace, where is your watch?

WIT. I Will set it, Sir, with yours.

Mrs. FI. I must obey.

MAN. Her modesty seems to suffer with her beauty,
And so, as if his folly were away,
It were worth pity.

FIT. Now, the are right, begin, Sir.
But first, let me repeat the contract, briefly,
I am, Sir, to enjoy this cloak, I stand in,
Freely, and as your gift; upon condition
He repeats his contract again. You may as freely, speak here to my spouse,
Your quarter of an hour always keeping
The measured distance of your yard, or more,
From my said Spouse: and in my sight and hearing.
This is your covenant?

WIT. Yes, but you will allow
For this time spent, now?

FIT. Set 'hem so much back.

WIT. I think, I shall not need it.

FIT. Well, begin, Sir,
There is your bound, Sir. Not beyond that rush.

WIT. If you interrupt me, Sir, I shall discloake you.
Wittipol begins. The time I have purchased, Lady, is but short;
And, therefore, if I employ it thriftily,
I hope I stand the nearer to my pardon.
I am not here, to tell you, you are fair,
Or lovely, or how well you dress you, Lady,
I Will save my self that eloquence of your glass,
Which can speak these things better to you then I.
And it is a knowledge, wherein fools may be
As wise as a Court Parliament. Nor come I,
With any prejudice, or doubt, that you
Should, to the notice of your own worth, need
Least revelation. She Is a simple woman,
Know's not her good: (who ever knows her ill)
And at all caracts. That you are the wife,
To so much blasted flesh, as scarce has soul,
In stead of salt, to keep it sweet; I think,
Will ask no witnesses, to prove. The cold
Sheets that you lie in, with the watching candle,
That sees, how dull to any thaw of beauty,
Pieces, and quarters, half, and whole nights, sometimes,
The Diuell-giuen Elfine Squire, your husband,
Does leave you, quitting here his proper circle,
For a much-worse in the walks of Lincolnes Inn,
Under the Elmes, to expect the feind in vain, there
Will confess for you.

FIT. I did look for this geere.

WIT. And what a daughter of darkness, he does make you,
Locked up from all society, or object;
Your eye not let to look upon a face,
Under a Conjurers (or some mould for one,
Hollow, and lean like his) but, by great means,
As I now make; your own too sensible sufferings,
Without the extraordinary aids,
Of spells, or spirits, may assure you, Lady.
For my part, I protest against all such practice,
I work by no false arts, medicines, or charms
To be said forward and backward.

FIT. No, I except:

WIT. Sir I shall ease you.

FIT. Mum.

WIT. Nor have I ends, Lady, He offers to discloake him.
Upon you, more then this: to tell you how Love
Beauties good Angel, he that waits upon her
At all occasions, and no less then Fortune,
Helps the aduenturous, in me makes that proffer,
Which never fair one was so fond, to lose;
Who could but reach a hand forth to her freedom;
On the first sight, I loved you: since which time,
Though I have trauell'd, I have been in travel
More for this second blessing of your eyes
Which now IN have purchased, then for all aims else.
Think of it, Lady, be your mind as active,
As is your beauty: view your object well.
Examine both my fashion, and my years
Things, that are like, are soon familiar:
And Nature joys, still in equality.
Let not the sign of the husband fright you, Lady.
But ere your spring be gone, enjoy it. Flowers,
Though fair, are often but of one morning. Think,
All beauty does not last until the autumn.
You grow old, while I tell you this. And such,
As cannot use the present, are not wise.
If Love and Fortune will take care of us,
Why ^ should our will be wanting? This is all.
Wha^ do you answer, Lady?

FIT. Now, the sport comes.
She stands mute. Let him still wait, wait, wait: while the watch goes,
And the time runs. Wife!

WIT. How! not any word?
Nay, then, I taste a trick in it. Worthy Lady,
I cannot be so false to mine own thoughts
Of your presumed goodness, to conceive
This, as your rudeness, which I see's imposed.
Yet, since your cautelous Iaylor, here stands by you,
And yo' are denied the liberty of the house,
Let me take warrant, Lady, from your silence,
(Which ever is interpreted consent)
To make your answer for you: which shall be
To as good purpose, as I can imagine,
And what I think you would speak.

FIT. No, no, no, no.

WIT. He sets Mr. Manly, his friend in her place. I shall resume, Sr.

MAN. Sir, what do you mean?

WIT. One interruption more, Sir, and you go
Into your hose and doublet, nothing saues you.
And therefore harken. This is for your wife.

MAN. You must play fair, Sr.

WIT. Stand for me, good friend.
And speaks for her. Troth, Sir, it is more then true, that you have vttred
Of my unequal, and so sordide match here,
With all the circumstances of my bondage.
I have a husband, and a two-legg'd one,
But such a moon-ling, as no wit of man
Or roses can redeem from being an Ass.
H' is grown too much, the story of men's mouths
To escape his lading: should I make it my study,
And lay all ways, yea, call mankind to help,
To take his burden off, why, this one act
Of his, to let his wife out to be courted,
And, at a price, proclaims his asinine nature
So loud, as I am weary of my title to him.
But Sir, you seem a Gentleman of virtue,
No less then blood; and one that every way
Looks as he were of too good quality,
To entrap a credulous woman, or betray her:
Since you have paid thus dear, Sir, for a visit,
And made such venture, on your wit, and charge
Merely to see me, or at most to speak to me,
I were too stupid; or (what is worse) ingrate
Not to return your venture. Think, but how,
I may with safety do it; I shall trust
My love and honor to you, and presume;
You Will ever husband both, against this husband;
Who, if we chance to change his liberal ears,
To other ensigns, and with labor make
A new beast of him, as he shall deserve,
Cannot complain, he is unkindly dealth with.
This day he is to go to a new play, Sir.
From whence no fear, no, nor authority,
Scarcely the Kings command, Sir, will restrain him,
Now you have fitted him with a Stage-garment,
For the mere names sake, were there nothings else,
And many more such iourneyes, he will make.
Which, if they now, or, any time hereafter,
Offer us opportunity, you hear, Sir,
Who Will be as glad, and forward to embrace,
Meet, and enjoy it chearefully as you.
I humbly thank you, Lady.

FIT. Keep your ground Sir.

WIT. Will you be lightened?

FIT. Mum.

WIT. And but I am,
By the sad contract, thus to take my leave of you
At this so envious distance, I had taught
Our lips ere this, to seal the happy mixture
Made of our souls. But we must both, now, yield
To the necessity. Do not think yet, Lady,
But I can kiss, and touch, and laugh, and whisper,
And do those crowning court-ships too, for which
Day, and the public have allowed no name
But, now, my bargain binds me. 'T were rude injury,
TO importune more, or urge a noble nature,
To what of it is own bounty it is prone to:
Else, I should speak -- But, Lady, I love so well,
As I will hope, you will do so to. I have done, Sir.

FIT. Well, then, I have won?

WIT. Sir, And I may win, too.

FIT. O yes! no doubt on it. I Will take careful order,
That she shall hang forth ensigns at the window,
To tell you when I am absent. Or I Will keep
Three or four foote-men, ready still of purpose,
To run and fetch you at her longings, Sir.
I Will go bespeake me straight a guilt caroch,
For her and you to take the air in: yes,
Into Hide-parke, and thence into Blackfriars,
Visit the painters, where you may see pictures,
And note the properest limbs, and how to make 'hem.
Or what do you say unto a middling Gossip?
To bring you aye together, at her lodging?
Under pretext of teaching of my wife
Some rare receipt of drawing almond milk? ha?
It shall be a part of my care. Good Sir, God b' w' you.
I have kept the contract, and the cloak is mine own.

WIT. Why, much good do it you Sr; it may fall out,
That you have bought it dear, though I have not sold it.

FIT. A pretty riddle! Fare you well, good Sir.
He turns his wife about. Wife, your face this way, look on me: and think
Yo' have had a wicked dream, wife, and forget it.

MAN. This is the strangest motion I ere saw.

FIT. Now, wife, sits this fair cloak the worse upon me,
For my great sufferings, or your little patience? ha?
They laugh, you think?

Mrs. FI Why Sr. and you might see 't.
What thought, they have of you, may be soon collected
By the young Genlemans speech.

FIT. Young Gentleman?
Death! you are in love with him, are you? could he not
Be named the Gentleman, without the young?
Up to your Cabin again.

Mrs. FI My cage, yo' were best
To call it?

FIT. Yes, sing there. You Would feign be making
Blanck Manger with him at your mothers! I know you.
Go get you up. How now! what say you, Devil?

ACT. I. SCENE. VII.
PVG. FITZDOTTREL. INGINE.
Here is one Ingine, Sir, desires to speak with you.

FIT. I thought he brought some news, of a broker! Well,
Let him come in, good Devil: fetch him else.
O, my fine Ingine! what is the affair? more cheats?

ING. No Sir, the Wit, the Brain, the great Proiector,
I told you of, is newly come to town.

FIT. Where, Ingine?

ING. I have brought him (H' is without)
Ere he pulled off his boots, Sir, but so followed,
For businesses:

FIT. But what is a Proiector?
I would conceive.

ING. Why, one Sir, that proiects
Ways to enrich men, or to make 'hem great,
By suites, by marriages, by undertakings:
According as he sees they humor it.

FIT. Can he not conjure at all?

ING. I think he can, Sir.
(To tell you true) but, you do know, of late,
The State has taken such note of 'hem, and compelled 'hem,
To enter such great bonds, they dare not practice.

FIT. It Is true, and I lie fallow for 't, the while!

ING. O, Sir! you will grow the richer for the rest.

FIT. I hope I shall: but Ingine, you do talk
Somewhat too much, of my courses. My Cloake-customer
Could tell me strange particulars.

ING. By my means?

FIT. How should he have 'hem else?

ING. You do not know, Sr,
What he has: and by what arts! A monei'd man, Sir,
And is as great with your Almanack-Men, as you are!

FIT. That Gallant?

ING. You make the other wait too long, here:
And he is extreme punctual.

FIT. Is he a gallant?

ING. Sir, you shall see: He' is in his riding suit,
As he comes now from Court. But here him speak:
Minister matter to him, and then tell me.

ACT. IJ.
SCENE. I.
MEER-CRAFT. FITZ-DOTTREL. INGINE. TRAINS. PVG.
SIr, money's a whore, a bawd, a drudge;
Fit to run out on errands: Let her go.
Via pecunia! when she is run and gone,
And fled and dead; then will I fetch her, again,
With Aqua-vitae, out of an old Hogs-head!
While there are lees of wine, or dregs of beer,
I Will never want her! Coin her out of cobwebs,
Dust, but I Will have her! Raise wool upon egge-shells,
Sir, and make grass grow out of marro-bones.
To make her come. (Commend me to your Mistress, To a waiter.
Say, let the thousand pound but be had ready,
And it is done) I would but see the creature
(Of flesh, and blood) the man, the prince, indeed,
That could employ so many millions
As I would help him to.
FIT. How, talks he? millions?

MER. (I Will give you an account of this to morrow. To another.)
Yes, I will talk no less, and do it too;
If they were Myriades: and without the Devil,
By direct means, it shall be good in law.

ING. Sir.

MER. Tell Mr. Wood-cock, I Will not fail to meet him
Upon the Exchange at night. Pray him to have
The writings there, and we will dispatch it: Sir,
You are a Gentleman of a good presence,
A handsome man (I have considered you)
As a fit stock to graft honors upon:
I have a Project to make you a Duke, now.
That you must be one, within so many months,
As I set down, out of true reason of state,
You sha' not avoid it. But you must harken, then.

ING. Harken? why Sr, do you doubt his ears? Alas!
You do not know Master Fitz-dottrel.

FIT. He does not know me indeed. I thank you, Ingine,
Fot rectifying him.

MER. Good! Why, Ingine, then
I Will tell it you. (I see you have credit, here,
And, that you can keep counsel, I Will not question.)
He shall but be an undertaker with me,
In a most feasible business. It shall cost him
Nothing.

ING. Good, Sr.

MER. Except he please, but's countenance;
(That I will have) to appear in 't, to great men,
For which I Will make him one. He shall not draw
A string of's purse. I Will drive his pattent for him.
We'll take in Citizens, Commoners, and Aldermen,
To bear the charge, and blow 'hem off again,
Like so many dead flies, when it is carried.
The thing is for recovery of drowned Land,
Whereof the Crown's to have a moiety,
If it be owner; Else, the Crown and Owners
To share that moiety: and the recouerers
TO enjoy the the other moiety, for their charge.

ING. Throughout England?

MER. Yes, which will arise
To eyghteene millions, seven the first year:
I have computed all, and made my suruay
Unto an acre, I Will begin at the Pan,
Not, at the skirts: as some have done, and lost,
All that they wrought, their timber-worke, their trench,
Their banks all borne away, or else filled up
By the next winter. Tut, they never went
The way: I Will have it all.

ING. A Gallant tract
Of land it is!

MER. 'T will yield a pound an acre.
We must let cheap, ever, at first. But Sir,
This looks too large for you, I see. Come hither,
We'll have a less. Here Is a plain fellow, you see him,
Has his black bag of papers, there, in Buckram,
Wi' not be sold for the Earldom of Pancridge: Draw,
Gi' me out one, by chance. Project; four dogs skins?
Twelve thousand pound! the very worst, at first.

FIT. Pray you let us see 't Sir.

MER. It Is a toy, a trifle!

FIT. Trifle! 12. thousand pound for dogs-skins?

MER. Yes,
But, by my way of dressing, you must know, Sir,
And med'cining the leather, to a height
Of improu'd ware, like your Borachio
Of Spain, Sir. I can fetch nine thousand for 't --

ING. Of the Kings glouer?

MER. Yes, how heard you that?

ING Sir, I do know you can.

MER. Within this hour:
And reserve half my secret. Pluck another; He pluckes out the 2. Bottle-ale.
See if thou have a happier hand: I thought so.
The very next worse to it ^ Bottle-ale.
Yet, this is two and twenty thousand! Pr'y thee
Pull out another, two or three.

FIT. Good, stay, friend,
By bottle-ale, two and twenty thousand pound?

MER. Yes, Sir, it is cast to penny-hal' penny-farthing,
OF the backside, there you may see it, read,
I will not bate a Harrington of the sum.
I Will win it in my water, and my malt,
My furnaces, and hanging of my coppers,
The tonning, and the subtilty of my yest;
And, then the earth of my bottles, which I dig,
Turn up, and steep, and work, and neale, my self,
To a degree of Porc'lane. You will wonder,
At my proportions, what I will put up
In seven years! for so long time, I ask
For my invention. I will save in cork,
In my mere stop'ling, above three thousand pound,
Within that term: by googing of 'hem out
Just to the size of my bottles, and not slicing.
There Is infinite loss in that. What have thou there? He draws out another.
Raisines.
OF making wine of raisins: this is in hand, now,

ING. Is not that strange, Sr, to make wine of raisins?

MER. Yes, and as true a wine, as the wines of France,
Or Spain, or Italy, Look of what grape
My raisin is, that wine I Will render perfect,
As of the muscatell grape, I Will render muscatell;
Of the Canary, his; the Claret, his;
So of all kinds: and bate you of the prices,
Of wine, throughout the kingdom, half in half.

ING. But, how, Sr, if you raise the other commodity,
Raysins?

MER. Why, then I Will make it out of black-berries:
And it shall do the same. It Is but more art,
And the charge less. Take out another.

FIT. No, good Sir.
Save you the trouble, I Will not look, nor hear
Of any, but your first, there; the Drowned land:
If 't will do, as you say.

MER. Sir, there is not place,
To gi' you demonstration of these things.
They are a little to subtle. But, I could show you
Such a necessity in it, as you must be
But what you please: against the received heresy,
That England bears no Dukes. Keep you the land, Sr,
The greatness of the estate shall throw 't upon you.
If you like better turning it to money,
What may not you, Sr, purchase with that wealth?
Say, you should part with two of your millions,
To be the thing you would, who would not do 't?
As I protest, I will, out of my diuident,
Lay, for some pretty principality,
In Italy, from the Church: Now, you perhaps,
Fancy the smoke of England, rather? But --
Have you no private room, Sir, to draw to,
TO enlarge our selves more upon.

FIT. O yes, Devil!

MER. These, Sir, are bus'nesses, ask to be carried
With caution, and in cloud.

FIT. I apprehend,
They do so, Sr. Devil, which way is your Mistress?

PVG. Above, Sr. in her chamber.

FIT. O that is well.
Then, this way, good, Sir.

MER. I shall follow you; Trains,
Gi' me the bag, and go you presently,
Commend my service to my Lady Tail-bush.
Tell her I am come from Court this morning; say,
IN have got our business moved, and well: Entreat her,
That she give you the four-score Angels, and see 'hem
Disposed of to my Council, Sir Poul Eytherside.
Sometime, to day, I Will wait upon her Ladyship,
With the relation.

ING. Sir, of what dispatch,
He is! Do you mark?

MER. Ingine, when did you see
My cousin Euer-ill? keeps he still your quarter?
IN the Bermudas?

ING. Yes, Sir, he was writing
This morning, very hard.

MER. Be not you known to him,
That I am come to Town: I have effected
A business for him, but I would have it take him,
Before he thinks for 't.

ING. Is it past?

MER. Not yet.
It Is well of the way.

ING. O Sir! your worship takes
Infinite pains.

MER. I love Friends, to be active:
A sluggish nature puts off man, and kind.

ING. And such a blessing follows it.

MER. I thank
My fate. Pray you let us be private, Sir?

FIT. In, here.

MER. Where none may interrupt us.

FIT. You hear, Devil,
Lock the streete-doores fast, and let no one in
(Except they be this Gentleman's followers)
To trouble me. Do you mark? Yo' have heard and seen
Something, to day; and, by it, you may gather
Your Mistress is a fruit, that is worth the stealing
And therefore worth the watching. Be you sure, now,
Yo' have all your eyes about you; and let in
No lace-woman; nor bawd, that brings French-masques,
And cut-works. See you? Nor old croanes, with wafers,
To convey letters. Nor no youths, disguised
Like country-wiues, with cream, and marrow-puddings.
Much knavery may be vented in a pudding,
Much bawdy intelligence: They' are shrewd ciphers.
Nor turn the key to any neighbors need;
Be It but to kindle fire, or beg a little,
Put it out, rather: all out, to an ash,
That they may see no smoke. Or water, spill it:
Knock of the empty tubs, that by the sound,
They may be forbid entry. Say, we are robbed,
If any come to borrow a spoone, or so.
I wi' not have good fortune, or gods blessing
Let in, while I am busy.

PVG. I Will take care, Sir:
They sha' not trouble you, if they would.

FIT. Well, do so.

ACT. II. SCENE. II.
PVG. Mistress FITZDOTTRELL.
I have no singular service of this, now?
Nor no superlatiue Master? I shall wish
To be in hell again, at leisure? Bring,
A Vice from thence? That had bin such a subtilty,
As to bring broad-clothes hither: or transport
Fresh oranges into Spain. I find it, now;
My Chief was in the right. Can any feind
Boast of a better Vice, then here by nature,
And art, the are owners of? Hell never own me,
But I am taken! the fine tract of it
Pulls me along! To hear men such professors
Grown in our subtlest Sciences! My first Act, now,
Shall be, to make this Master of mine cuckold:
The primitive work of darkness, I will practice!
I will deserve so well of my fair Mistress,
By my discoueries, first; my counsels after;
And keeping counsel, after that: as who,
So ever, is one, I Will be another, sure,
I Will have my share. Most delicate damned flesh!
Slice will be! O! that I could stay time, now,
Midnight will come too fast upon me, I fear,
She sends Devil out. To cut my pleasure --
Mrs. FI. Look at the back-doore,
One knocks, see who it is.

PVG. Dainty she-Diuell!

Mrs. FI. I cannot get this venture of the cloak,
Out of my fancy; nor the Gentleman's way,
He took, which though 'twere strange, yet 'twas handsome,
And had a grace withal, beyond the newness.
Sure he will think me that dull stupid creature,
He said, and may conclude it; if I find not
Some thought to thank the attemp. He did presume,
By all the carriage of it, on my brain,
For answer; and will swear it is very barren,
Devil returns. If it can yield him no return Who is it?

PVG. Mistress, it is, but first, let me assure
The excellence, of Mistresses, I am,
Although my Masters man, my Mistress slave,
The servant of her secrets, and sweet turns,
And know, what fitly will conduce to either.

Mrs. FI. What Is this? I pray you come to your self and think
What your part is: to make an answer. Tell,
Who is it at the door?

PVG. The Gentleman, Mrs,
Who was at the cloake-charge to speak with you,
This morning, who expects only to take
Some small command'ments from you, what you please,
Worthy your form, he says, and gentlest manners.

Mrs. FI. O! you will anon prove his hyr'd man, I fear,
What has he given you, for this message? Sir,
Bid him put off his hopes of straw, and leave
To spread his nets, in view, thus. Though they take
Master Fitz-dottrel, I am no such foul,
Nor fair one, tell him, will be had with stalking.
And wish him to for-beare his acting to me,
At the Gentleman's chamber-window in Lincolnes-Inne there,
That opens to my gallery: else, I swear
TO acquaint my husband with his folly, and leave him
To the just rage of his offended jealousy.
Or if your Masters sense be not so quick
To right me, tell him, I shall find a friend
That will repair me. Say, I will be quiet.
In mine own house? Pray you, in those words give it him.

PVG. He goes out. This is some fool turned!

Mrs. FI. If he be the Master,
Now, of that state and wit, which I allow him;
Sure, he will understand me: I durst not
Be more direct. For this officious fellow,
My husbands new groom, is a spy upon me,
I find already. Yet, if he but tell him
This in my words, he cannot but conceive
Himself both apprehended, and requited.
I would not have him think he met a statue:
Or spoke to one, not there, though I were silent.
How now? have you told him?

PVG. Yes.

Mrs. FI. And what says he?

PVG. Says he? That which my self would say to you, if I durst.
That you are proud, sweet Mistress? and with-all,
A little ignorant, to entertain
The good that is proffered; and (by your beauties leave)
Not all so wise, as some true politic wife
Would be: who having matched with such a Nupson
(I speak it with my Masters peace) whose face
Has left to accuse him, now, for 't does confess him,
What you can make him; will yet (out of scruple,
And a spic'd conscience) defraud the poor Gentleman,
At least delay him in the thing he longs for,
And makes it hs whole study, how to compass,
Only a title. Could but he write Cuckold,
He had his ends. For, look you --

Mrs. FI. This can be
None but my husbands wit.

PVG. My precious Mrs.

M. FI. It creaks his Ingine: The groom never durst
Be, else, so saucy --

PVG. If it were not clearly,
His worshipful ambition; and the top of it;
The very forked top too: why should he
Keep you, thus mur'd up in a back-roome, Mistress,
Allow you never a casement to the street,
Fear of engendering by the eyes, with gallants,
Forbid you paper, pen and ink, like Rats-bane.
Search your half pint of muscatell, lest a letter
Be suncke in the pot: and hold your new-laid egg
Against the fire, lest any charm be writ there?
Will you make benefit of truth, dear Mistress,
If I do tell it you: I do it not often?
I am set over you, employed, indeed,
To watch your steps, your looks, your very breathings,
And to report them to him. Now, if you
Will be a true, right, delicate sweet Mistress,
Why, we will make a Cokes of this Wise Master,
We will, my Mistress, an absolute fine Cokes,
And mock, to air, all the deep diligences
Of such a solemn, and effectual Ass,
An Ass to so good purpose, as we will use him.
I will contriue it so, that you shall go
To Plays, to Masks, to Meetings, and to Feasts.
For, why is all this Rigging, and fine Tackle, Mistress,
If you neat handsome vessels, of good sail,
Put not forth ever, and anon, with your nets
Abroad into the world. It is your fishing.
There, you shall choose your friends, your servants, Lady,
Your squires of honor; I Will convey your letters,
Fetch answers, do you all the offices,
That can belong to your blood, and beauty. And,
For the variety, at my times, although
I am not in due symmetrie, the man
Of that proportion; or in rule
Of physic, of the just complexion;
Or of that truth of Picardill, in clothes,
To boast a sovereignty over Ladies: yet
I know, to do my turns, sweet Mistress. Come, kiss --

Mrs. FI. How now!

PVG. Dear delicate Mist. I am your slave,
Your little worm, that loves you: your fine Monkey;
Your Dog, your Jack, your Pug, that longs to be
Styled, o'your pleasures.

Mrs. FIT. Hear you all this? Sir, Pray you,
She thinks her husband watches. Come from your standing, do, a little, spare
Your self, Sir, from your watch, t'applaud your Squire,
That so well follows your instructions!

ACT. II. SCENE. III.
FITZ-DOTTRELL. Mistress FITZ-DOTTREL. PVG.
HOw now, sweet heart? what is the matter?
Mrs. FI. Good!
You are a stranger to the plot! you set not
Your saucy Devil, here, to tempt your wife,
With all the insolent uncivil language,
Or action, he could vent?

FIT. Did you so, Devil?

Mrs. FIT. Not you? you were not planted in your hole to hear him,
Vpo' the stayres? or here, behind the hangings?
I do not know your qualities? he durst do it,
And you not give directions?

FIT. You shall see, wife,
Her husband goes out, and enters presently with a cudgel upon him, Whether he
durst, or no: and what it was,
I did direct.

PVG. Sweet Mistress, are you mad?

FIT. You most mere Rogue! you open manifest Villain!
You Feind apparent you! you declared Hel-hound!

PVG. Good Sr.

FIT. Good Knave good Rascal, and good Traitor.
Now, I do find you parcel- Devil, indeed.
Vpo' the point of trust? IN your first charge?
The very day of your probation?
To tempt your Mistress? You do see, good wedlock,
How I directed him.

Mrs. FIT. Why, where Sr, were you?

FIT. Nay, there is one blow more, for exercise: After a pause. He strikes him
again
I told you, I should do it.

PVG. Would you had done, Sir.

FIT. O wife, the rarest man! yet there is another
To put you in mind of the last. such a brave man, wife!
Within, he has his proiects, and does vent 'hem, and again.
The gallantest! where you tentiginous? ha?
Would you be acting of the Incubus?
Did her silks rustling move you?

PVG. Gentle Sir.

FIT. Out of my sight. If thy name were not Devil,
Thou should not stay a minute with me. In,
Go, yet stay: yet go too. I am resolved,
What I will do: and you shall know it aforehand.
Soon as the Gentleman is gone, do you hear?
I Will help your lisping. Wife, such a man, wife! Devil goes out.
He has such plots! He will make me a Duke!
No less, by heaven! six Mares, to your coach, wife!
That Is your proportion! And your coachman bald!
Because he shall be bare, enough. Do not you laugh,
We are looking for a place, and all, in the map
What to be of. Have faith, be not an Infidel.
You know, I am not easy to be gulled.
I swear, when I have my millions, else, I Will make
Another Duchess; if you have not faith.

Mrs. FI. You Will have too much, I fear, in these false spirits,

FIT. Spirits? O, no such thing! wife! wit, mere wit!
This man defies the Devil, and all his works!
He dos't by Ingine, and devises, he!
He has his winged ploughes, that go with sails,
Will plough you forty acres, at once! and mills,
Will spout you water, ten miles off! All Crowland
Is ours, wife; and the fens, from us, in Norfolk,
To the utmost bound of Lincolnshire! we have viewed it,
And measured it within all; by the scale!
The richest tract of land, Love, in the kingdom!
There will be made seventeen, or eighteen millions;
Or more, as't may be handled! wherefore, think,
Sweet heart, if the have a fancy to one place,
More then another, to be Duchess of;
Now, name it: I will have it, what ere it cost,
(If 't will be had for money) either here,
Or 'n France, or Italy.

Mrs. FI. You have strange fantasies!

ACT. II. SCENE. IV.
MERE-CRAFT. FITZ-DOTTRELL. INGINE.
WHere are you, Sir?
FIT. I see thou have no talent
This way, wife. Up to thy gallery; do, Chuck,
Leave us to talk of it, who understand it.

MER. I think we have found a place to fit you, now, Sir.
Gloc'ster.

FIT. O, no, I Will none!

MER. Why, Sr?

FIT. It Is fatal.

MER: That you say right in. Spenser, I think, the younger,
Had his last honor thence. But, he was but Earl.

FIT I know not that, Sir. But Thomas of Woodstocke,
I Am sure, was Duke, and he was made away,
At Calice; as Duke Humphrey was at Bury:
And Richard the third, you know what end he came too.

MER. By m'faith you are cunning in the Chronicle, Sir.

FIT. No, I confess I have it from the Play-bookes,
And think they'are more authentic.

ING. That Is sure, Sir.

MER. He whispers him of a place. What say you (to this then)

FIT. No, a noble house.
Pretends to that. I will do no man wrong.

MER. Then take one proposition more, and hear it
As past exception.

FIT. What Is that?

MER. To be
Duke of those lands, you shall recover: take
Your title, thence, Sir, Duke of the Drown'd-lands,
Or Drown'd-land.

FIT. Ha? that last has a good sound!
I like it well. The Duke of Drown'd-land?

ING. Yes;
It goes like Groen-land, Sir, if you mark it.

MER: I,
And drawing thus your honor from the work,
You make the reputation of that, greater;
And stay't the longer in your name.

FIT. It Is true.
Drown'd-lands will live in Drown'd-land!

MER. Yes, when you
Have no foot left; as that must be, Sir, one day.
And, though it tarry in your heirs, some forty,
Fifty descents, the longer liver, at last, yet,
Must thrust 'hem out on it: if no quirk in law,
Or odd Vice of their own not do' it first.
We see those changes, daily: the fair lands,
That were the Clyents, are the Lawyers, now:
And those rich Manors, there, of good man Tailors,
Had once more wood upon 'hem, then the yard,
By which the were measured out for the last purchase.
Nature has these vicissitudes. She makes
No man a state of perpetuety, Sir.

FIT. Yo' are in the right. Let Us in then, and conclude. He spies Devil.
I my sight, again? I Will talk with you, anon.

ACT. II. SCENE. V.
PVG.
SVre he will geld me, if I stay: or worse,
Pluck out my tongue, one of the two. This Fool,
There is no trusting of him: and to quit him,
Were a contempt against my Chief, past pardon.
It was a shrewd disheartning this, at first!
Who would have thought a woman so well harnessed,
Or rather well-caparison'd, indeed,
That wears such petticoates, and lace to her smocks,
Broad seaming laces (as I see 'hem hang there)
And garters which are lost, if she can show 'hem,
Could have done this? Hell! why is she so brave?
It cannot be to please Duke Dottrel, sure,
Nor the dull pictures, in her gallery,
Nor her own dear reflection, in her glass;
Yet that may be: I have known many of 'hem,
Begin their pleasure, but none end it, there:
(That I consider, as I go a long with it)
They may, for want of better company,
Or that they think the better, spend an hour;
Two, three, or four, discoursing with their shadow:
But sure they have a farther speculation.
No woman dressed with so much care, and study,
Does dress her self in vain. I Will vex this problem,
A little more, before I leave it, sure.
ACT. IJ. SCENE. VI.
VVITTIPOL. MANLY. Mistress FITZ-DOTTREL. PVG.
THis was a fortune, happy above thought,
That this should prove thy chamber; which I feared
Would be my greatest trouble! this must be
The very window, and that the room.
MAN. It is.
I now remember, I have often seen there
A woman, but I never marked her much.

WIT. Where was your soul, friend?

MAN. Faith, but now, and then,
Awake unto those objects.

WIT. You pretend so.
Let me not live, if I am not in love
More with her wit, for this direction, now,
Then with her form, though I have praised that prettily,
Since I saw her, and you, to day. Read those.
He gives him a paper, wherein is the copy of a Song. They Will go unto the
air you love so well.
Try 'hem unto the note, may be the music
Will call her sooner; light, she is here! Sing quickly.

Mrs. FIT. Either he understood him not: or else,
The fellow was not faithful in delivery,
Of what I bad. And, I am justly paid,
That might have made my profit of his service,
But, by mis-taking, have drawn on his envy,
And done the worse defeat upon my self.
Manly sings, Pug enters perceiues it. How! Music? then he may be there: and
is sure.

PVG. O! Is it so? Is there the enter-view?
Have I drawn to you, at last, my cunning Lady?
The Devil is an Ass! fooled off! and beaten!
Nay, made an instrument! and could not sent it!
Well, since yo' have shown the malice of a woman,
No less then her true wit, and learning, Mistress,
I Will try, if little Pug have the malignity
To recompense it, and so save his danger.
It Is not the pain, but the discredit of it,
The Devil should not keep a body entire.

WIT. Away, fall back, she comes.

MAN. I Will leave you, Sir,
The Master of my chamber. I have business.

WIT. Mrs!

Mrs. FI. You make me paint, Sr.

WIT. The' are fair colors,
Lady, and natural! I did receive
Some commands from you, lately, gentle Lady, This Scene is acted at two
windo's, as out of two contiguous buildings,
But so perplexed, and wrapped in the delivery,
As I may fear to have mis-interpreted:
But must make suit still, to be near your grace.

Mrs. FI. Who is there with you, Sr?

WIT. None, but my self.
It falls out, Lady, to be a dear friends lodging.
Wherein there is some conspiracy of fortune
With your poor servants blessed affections.

Mrs. FI. Who was it sung?

WIT. He, Lady, but he is gone,
Upon my entreaty of him, seeing you
Approach the window. Neither need you doubt him,
If he were here. He is too much a gentleman.

Mrs. FI. Sir, if you judge me by this simple action,
And by the outward habit, and complexion
Of easiness, it has, to your design;
You may with Justice, say, I am a woman:
And a strange woman. But when you shall please,
To bring but that concurrence of my fortune,
To memory, which to day your self did urge:
It may beget some favor like excuse,
Though none like reason.

WIT. No, my tune-full Mistress?
Then, surely, Love has none; nor Beauty any;
Nor Nature violenced, in both these:
With all whose gentle tongues you speak, at once.
I thought I had enough removed, already,
That scruple from your breast, and left yo' all reason;
When, through my mornings perspectiue I showed you
A man so above excuse, as he is the cause,
Why any thing is to be done upon him:
And nothing called an injury, mis-plac'd.
IN rather, now had hope, to show you how Love
By his accesses, grows more natural:
And, what was done, this morning, with such force
Was but devised to serve the present, then.
That since Love has the honor to approach
These sister-swelling breasts; and touch this soft, He grows more familiar in
his Court-ship.
And rosy hand; he has the skill to draw
Their Nectar forth, with kissing; and could make
More wanton salts, from this brave promontory, plays with her paps, kisseth
her hands, etc.
Down to this valley, then the nimble Roe;
Could play the hopping Sparrow, 'bout these nets;
And sporting Squirell in these crisped groves;
Bury himself in every Silke-wormes kell,
Is here vnrauell'd; run into the snare,
Which every hair is, cast into a curle,
To catch a Cupid flying: Bath himself
In milk, and roses, here, and dry him, there;
Warm his cold hands, to play with this smooth, round,
And well torn'd chin, as with the Billyard ball;
Roll on these lips, the banks of love, and there
At once both plant, and gather kisses. Lady,
Shall I, with what I have made to day here, call
All sense to wonder, and all faith to sign
The mysteries revealed in your form?
And will Love pardon me the blasphemy
I vtter'd, when I said, a glass could speak
This beauty, or that fools had power to judge it?
Do but look, on her eyes! They do light --
All that Love's world comprizeth!
Do but look on her hair! it is bright,
As Love's star, when it rises!
Do but mark, her fore-head's smoother,
Then words that sooth her!
And from her arched brows, such a grace
Sheds it self through the face;
As alone, there triumphs to the life,
All the gain, all the good, of the elements strife!
Have you seen but a bright Lilly grow,
Before rude hands have touched it?
Have you marked but the fall of the Snow,
Before the soil has smuch'd it?
Have you felt the wool of the Beuer?
Or Swans down, ever?
Or, have smelt of the bud of the Bryer?
Or the Nard in the fire?
Or, have tasted the bag of the Be?
O, so white! O, so soft! O, so sweet is she!

ACT. II. SCENE. VII.
FITZ-DOTTRELL. WITTIPOL. PVG.
Her husband appears at her back. IS she so, Sir? and, I will keep her so.
If I know how, or can: that wit of man
Will do it, I Will go no farther. At this windo'
She shall no more be buz'd at. Take your leave on it.
If you be sweet meats, wedlock, or sweet flesh,
All Is one: I do not love this hum about you.
A flye-blowne wife is not so proper, In: He speaks out of his wives window.
For you, Sr, look to hear from me.
WIT. So, I do, Sir.

FIT. No, but in other terms. There Is no man offers
This to my wife, but paies for it.

WIT. That have I, Sir.

FIT. Nay, then, I tell you, you are.

WIT. What am I, Sir?

FIT. Why, that I Will think on, when I have cut your throat.

WIT. Go, you are an Ass.

FIT. I am resolved on it, Sir.

WIT. I think you are.

FIT. To call you to a reckoning.

WIT. Away, you brokers block, you property.

FIT. S'light, if you strike me, I Will strike your Mistress, He strikes his
wife.

WIT. O! I could shoot mine eyes at him, for that, now;
Or leave my teeth in him, were they cuckolds bane,
Enough to kill him. What prodigious,
Blind, and most wicked change of fortune's this?
I have no air of patience: all my veins
Swell, and my sinews start at iniquity of it.
I shall break, break.

PVG. This for the malice of it, The Devil speaks below.
And my revenge may pass! But, now, my conscience
Tells me, I have profited the cause of Hell
But little, in the breaking-off their loves.
Which, if some other act of mine repair not,
I shall hear ill of in my account.

FIT. O, Bird!
Could you do this? against me? and at this time, now? Fitz-dottrel enters with
his wife as come down.
When I was so employed, wholly for you,
Drowned in my care (more, then the land, I swear,
IN have hope to win) to make you peere-lesse? studying,
For footmen for you, fine paced huishers, pages,
To serve you of the knee; with what Knights wife,
To bear your train, and sit with your four women
In council, and receive intelligences,
From foreign parts, to dress you at all pieces!
Y' have (a' most) turned my good affection, to you;
Sowr'd my sweet thoughts; all my pure purposes:
I could now find (in my very heart) to make
Another, Lady Duchess; and depose you.
Well, go your ways in. Devil, you have redeemed all.
I do forgive you. And I Will do you good.

ACT. II. SCENE. VIIJ.
MERE-CRAFT. FITZ-DOTTREL. INGINE. TRAINS.
WHy ha you these excursions? where have you been, Sir?
FIT. Where I have been vexed a little, with a toy!

MER. O Sir! no toys must trouble your grave head,
Now it is growing to be great. You must
Be above all those things.

FIT. Nay, nay, so I will.

MER. Now you are to'ard the Lord, you must put off
The man, Sir.

ING. He says true.

MER. You must do nothing
As you have done it heretofore; not know,
Or salute any man.

ING. That was your bedfellow,
The other month.

MER. The other month? the week.
Thou do not know the privileges, Ingine,
Follow that Title; nor how swift: To day,
When he has put on his Lords face once, then --

FIT. Sir, for these things I shall do well enough,
There is no fear of me. But then, my wife is
Such an untoward thing! she will never learn
How to comport with it! I am out of all
Conceit, on her behalf.

MER. Best have her taught, Sir.

FIT. Where? Are there any Schools for Ladies? Is there
An Academy for women? I do know,
For men, there was: I learned in it, my self,
Ingine whispers Merecraft, Merecraft turns to Fitz-dottrel. To make my
legs, and do my postures.

ING. Sir.
Do you remember the conceit you had --
OF the Spanish gown, at home?

MER. Ha! I do thank thee,
With all my heart, dear Ingine. Sir, there is
A certain Lady, here about the Town,
An English widow, who has lately trauell'd,
But she is called the Spaniard; cause she came
Latest from thence: and keeps the Spanish habit.
Such a rare woman! all our women here,
That are of spirit, and fashion flock, unto her,
As to their President; their Law; their Canon;
More then they ever did, to Oracle-Foreman.
Such rare receipts she has, Sir, for the face;
Such oils; such tinctures; such pomatumn's;
Such perfumes; medicines; quintessences, etc.
And such a Mistress of behavior;
She knows, from the Dukes daughter, to the Doxey,
What is their due just: and no more!

FIT. O Sir!
You please me in this, more then mine own greatness.
Where is she? Let us have her.

MER. By your patience,
We must use means; cast how to be acquainted --

FIT. Good, Sr, about it.

MER. We must think how, first.

FIT. O!
I do not love to tarry for a thing,
When I have a mind to 't. You do not know me.
If you do offer it.

MER. Your wife must send
Some pretty token to her, with a complement,
And pray to be received in her good graces,
All the great Ladies do it,

FIT. She shall, she shall,
What were it best to be?

MER. Some little toy,
I would not have it any great matter, Sir:
A Diamant ring, of forty or fifty pound,
Would do it handsomely: and be a gift
Fit for your wife to send, and her to take.

FIT. I Will go, and tell my wife on it, straight. Fitz-dottrel goes out.

MER. Why this
Is well! The clothes we have now: But, where is this Lady?
If we could get a witty boy, now, Ingine;
That were an excellent crack. I could instruct him,
To the true height. For any thing takes this dottrel.

ING. Why, Sir your best will be one of the players!

MER. No, there is no trusting them. They Will talk on it,
And tell their Poets.

ING. What if they do? the jest
will brook the Stage. But, there be some of 'hem
Are very honest Lads. There Is Dicke Robinson
A very pretty fellow, and comes often
To a Gentleman's chamber, a friends of mine. We had
The merriest supper of it there, one night,
The Gentleman's Land-lady invited him
To'a Gossips feast, Now, he Sir brought Dick Robinson,
Dressed like a Lawyers wife, amongst 'hem all;
(I lent him clothes) but, to see him behave it;
And lay the law; and carue; and drink unto 'hem;
And then talk baudy: and send frolicks! o!
It would have burst your buttons, or not left you
A seame.

MER. They say he is an ingenious youth!

ING. O Sir! and dresses himself, the best! beyond
Forty of your very Ladies! did you never see him?

MER. No, I do seldom see those toys. But think you,
That we may have him?

ING. Sir, the young Gentleman
I tell you of, can command him. Shall I attempt it? Enters again.

MER. Yes, do it.

FIT. S'light, I cannot get my wife
To part with a ring, on any terms: and yet,
The sollen Monkey has two.

MER. It were against reason,
That you should urge it; Sir, send to a Goldsmiths,
Let not her lose by 't.

FIT. How does she lose by 't?
Is 't not for her?

MER. Make it your own bounty,
It will have the better success; what is a matter
Of fifty pound to you, Sr.

FIT. IN have but a hundred
Pieces, to show here; that I would not break --

MER. You shall have credit, Sir. I Will send a ticket
Unto my Goldsmiths. Here, my man comes too,
Trains enters. To carry it fitly. How now, Trains? What birds?

TRA. Your Cousin Euer-ill met me, and has beat me,
Because I would not tell him where you were:
I think he has dogd me to the house too.

FIT. Well --
You shall go out at the back-doore, then, Trains.
You must get Guilt-head hither, by some means:

TRA. It Is impossible!

FIT. Tell him, we have venison,
I Will g' him a piece, and send his wife a Phesant.

TRA. A Forest moves not, till that forty pound,
Yo' had of him, last, be pai'd. He keeps more stir,
For that same petty sum, then for your bond
Of six; and Statute of eight hundred!

FIT. Tell him
We Will hedge in that. Cry up Fitz-dottrell to him,
Double his price: Make him a man of metal.

TRA. That will not need, his bond is current enough.

ACT. III.
SCENE. I.
GVILT-HEAD. PLVTARCHVS.
ALl this is to make you a Gentleman:
I Will have you learn, Son. Wherefore have I placed you
With Sr. Poul Either-side, but to have so much Law
To keep your own? Besides, he is a Justice,
Here in the Town; and dwelling, Son, with him,
You shall learn that in a year, shall be worth twenty
Of having stayed you at Oxford, or at Cambridge,
Or sending you to the Innes of Court, or France.
I am called for now in haste, by Master Meere-craft
To trust Master Fitz-dottrel, a good man:
IN have inquired him, eighteen hundred a year,
(His name is current) for a diamant ring
Of forty, shall not be worth thirty (that's gained)
And this is to make you a Gentleman!
PLV. O, but good father, you trust too much!

GVI. Boy, boy,
We live, by finding fools out, to be trusted.
Our shop-bookes are our pastures, our corn-grounds,
We lay 'hem open, for them to come into:
And when we have 'hem there, we drive 'hem up
In to one of our two Pounds, the Compters, straight,
And this is to make you a Gentleman!
We Citizens never trust, but we do coozen:
For, if our debtors pay, we coozen them;
And if they do not, then we coozen our selves.
But that is a hazard every one must run,
That hopes to make his Son a Gentleman!

PLV. I do not wish to be one, truly, Father.
In a descent, or two, we come to be
Just 'i their state, fit to be coozend, like 'hem.
And I had rather have tarryed in your trade:
For, since the Gentry scorn the City so much,
Me thinks we should in time, holding together,
And matching in our own tribes, as they say,
Have got an Act of Common Council, for it,
That we might coozen them out of rerum natura.

GVI. I, if we had an Act first to forbid
The marrying of our wealthy heirs unto 'hem:
And daughters, with such lavish portions.
That confounds all.

PLV. And makes a Mungril breed, Father.
And when they have your money, then they laugh at you:
Or kick you down the stayres. I cannot abide 'hem.
I would feign have 'hem coozen'd, but not trusted.

ACT. III. SCENE. II.
MERE-CRAFT. GVILT-HEAD. FITZ-DOTTRELL. PLVTARCHVS.
O, is he come! I knew he would not fail me.
Welcome, good Guilt-head, I must have you do
A noble Gentleman, a courtesy, here:
In a mere toy (some pretty Ring, or Jewel)
Of fifty, or threescore pound (Make it a hundred,
And hedge in the last forty, that I owe you,
And your own price for the Ring) He Is a good man, Sr,
And you may hap' see him a great one! He,
Is likely to bestow hundreds, and thousands,
Wi' you; if you can humor him. A great prince
He will be shortly. What do you say?

GVI. In truth, Sir
I cannot. 'T has been a long vacation with us,

FIT. Of what, I pray thee? of wit? or honesty?
Those are your Citizens long vacations.

PLV. Good Father do not trust 'hem,

MER. Nay, Thom. Guilt-head.
He will not buy a courtesy and beg it:
He Will rather pay, then pray. If you do for him,
You must do cheerfully. His credit, Sir,
Is not yet prostitute! Who Is this? thy son?
A pretty youth, what is his name?

PLV. Plutarchus, Sir.

MER. Plutarchus! How came that about?

GVI. That year Sr,
That I begot him, I bought Plutarch's lives,
And fell s' in love with the book, as I called my son
By 'his name; In hope he should be like him:
And write the lives of our great men!

MER. IN the City?
And you do breed him, there?

GVI. His mind, Sir, lies
Much to that way.

MER. Why, then, he is in the right way.

GVI. But, now, I had rather get him a good wife,
And plant him in the country; there to use
The blessing I shall leave him:

MER. Out upon 't!
And lose the laudable means, thou have at home, here,
TO advance, and make him a young Alderman?
Buy him a Captains place, for shame; and let him
Into the world, early, and with his plume,
And Scarfes, march through Cheapside, or along Cornehill,
And by the vertue' of those, draw down a wife
There from a windo', worth ten thousand pound!
Get him the posture book, and 's leaden men,
To set upon a table, against his Mistress
Chance to come by, that he may draw her in,
And show her Finsbury battles.

GVI. I have placed him
With Justice Eytherside, to get so much law --

MER. As thou have conscience. Come, come, thou do wrong
Pretty Plutarchus, who had not his name,
For nothing: but was borne to train the youth
Of London, in the military truth --
That way his Genius lies. My Cousin Euerill!

ACT. III. SCENE. IIJ.
EVER-ILL. PLVTARCHVS. GVILT-HEAD. MERE-CRAFT. FITZDOTTRELL.
O, are you here, Sir? 'pray you let us whisper.

PLV. Father, dear Father, trust him if you love me.

GVI. Why, I do mean it, boy; but, what I do,
Must not come easily from me: We must deal
With Courtiers, boy, as Courtiers deal with us.
If I have a Business there, with any of them,
Why, I must wait, I Am sure on 't, Son: and though
My Lord dispatch me, yet his worshipful man --
Will keep me for his sport, a month, or two,
To show me with my fellow Citizens.
I must make his train long, and full, one quarter;
And help the spectacle of his greatness. There,
Nothing is done at once, but injuries, boy:
And they come headlong! all their good turns move not,
Or very slowly

PLV. Yet sweet father, trust him.

GVI. Well, I will think.

EV. Come, you must do 't, Sir.
I Am undone else, and your Lady Tayle-bush
Has sent for me to dinner, and my clothes
Are all at pawn. I had sent out this morning,
Before I heard you were come to town, some twenty
Of my epistles, and no one return --

MER. Mere-craft t^lls him of his faults. Why, I have told you of this. This
comes of wearing
Scarlet, gold lace, and cut-works! your fine gartring!
With your blown roses, Cousin! and your eating
Phesant, and Godwit, here in London! haunting
The Globes, and Mermaides! wedging in with Lords,
Still at the table! and affecting lechery,
In velvet! where could you have contented your self
With cheese, salt-butter, and a pickled hering,
IN the Low Countries; there worn cloth, and fustian!
Been satisfied with a leap of your Host's daughter,
In garrison, a wench of a stoter! or,
Your Sutlers wife, in the leaguer, of two blanks!
You never, then, had run upon this flat,
To write your letters missiue, and send out
Your privy seals, that thus have frighted off
All your acquintance; that they shun you at distance,
Worse, then you do the Bailies!

EV. Pox upon you.
He repines, I come not to you for counsel, I lack money.

MER. You do not think, what you owe me already?

EV. I?
They owe you, that mean to pay you. I Will besworne,
I never meant it. Come, you will project,
and threatens him. I shall undo your practice, for this month else:
You know me.

MER. I, yo' are a right sweet nature!

EV. Well, that is all one!

MER. You Will leave this Empire, one day?
You will not ever have this tribute paid,
Your scepter of the sword?

EV. Tie up your wit,
Do, and provoke me not --

MER. Will you, Sir, help,
To what I shall provoke another for you?

EV. I cannot tell; try me: I think I am not
So utterly, of an ore vn-to-be-melted,
They join. But I can do my self good, on occasions.

MER. Strike in then, for your part. Mr. Fitz-dottrel
If I transgress in point of manners, afford me
Your best construction; I must beg my freedom
Mere-craft pretends business. From your affairs, this day.

FIT. How, Sr.

MER. It is
In succor of this Gentleman's occasions,
My kins-man --

FIT. You Will not do me that affront, Sr.

MER. I am sorry you should so interpret it,
But, Sir, it stands upon his being invested
In a new office, he has stood for, long: Mere-craft describes the office of
Dependancy.
Master of the Dependances! A place
Or my proiection too, Sir, and has met
Much opposition; but the State, now, see's
That great necessity of it, as after all
Their writing, and their speaking, against Duells,
They have erected it. His book is drawn --
For, since, there will be differences, daily,
'Twixt Gentlemen; and that the roaring manner
Is grown offensive; that those few, we call
The civil men of the sword, abhor the vapors;
They shall refer now, hither, for their process;
And such as trespass against the rule of Court,
Are to be fined --

FIT. In troth, a pretty place!

MER. A kind of arbitrary Court 'twill be, Sir.

FIT. I shall have matter for it, I believe,
Ere it be long: I had a distaste.

MER. But now, Sir,
My learned council, they must have a feeling,
They Will part, Sir, with no books, without the hand-gout
Be oyld, and I must furnish. If 't be money,
To me straight. I am Mine, Mint and Exchequer,
To supply all. What is it? a hundred pound?

EVE. No, the Harpey, now, stands on a hundred pieces.

MER. Why, he must have 'hem, if he will. To morrow, Sir,
Will equally serve your occasion's, --
And therefore, let me obtain, that you will yield
To timing a poor Gentleman's distresses,
In terms of hazard. --

FIT. By no means!

MER. I must
Get him this money, and will. --

FIT. Sir, I protest,
I Would rather stand engaged for it my self:
Then you should leave me.

MER. O good Sr. do you think
So coursely of our manners, that we would,
For any need of ours, be pressed to take it:
Though you be pleased to offer it.

FIT. Why, by heaven,
I mean it!

MER. I can never believe less.
But we, Sir, must preserve our dignity, He offers to be gone.
As you do publish yours. By your fair leave, Sir.

FIT. As I am a Gentleman, if you do offer
To leave me now, or if you do refuse me,
I will not think you love me.

MER. Sir, I honor you.
And with just reason, for these noble notes,
Of the nobility, you pretend too! But, Sir --
I would know, why? a motive (he a stranger)
You should do this?

(EVE. You Will mar all with your finenesse)

FIT. Why, that is all one, if 'twere, Sir, but my fancy.
But I have a Business, that perhaps I Would have
Brought to his office.

MER. O, Sir! I have done, then;
If he can be made profitable, to you.

FIT. Yes, and it shall be one of my ambitions
To have it the first Business? May I not?

EVE. So you do mean to make it, a perfect Business.

FIT. Nay, I Will do that, assure you: show me once.

MER. Sr, it concerns, the first be a perfect Business,
For his own honor!

EVE. I, and the reputation
Too, of my place.

FIT. Why, why do I take this course, else?
I am not altogether, an Ass, good Gentlemen,
Wherefore should I consult you? do you think?
To make a song on it? How Is your manner? tell us.

MER. Do, satisfy him: give him the whole course.

EVE. First, by request, or otherwise, you offer
Your Business to the Court: wherein you crave:
The judgment of the Master and the Assistants.

FIT. Well, that is done, now, what do you upon it?

EVE. We straight Sr, have recourse to the springhead;
Visit the ground; and, so disclose the nature:
If it will carry, or no. If we do find,
By our proportions it is like to prove
A sullen, and black Business That it be
Incorrigible; and out of, treaty; then,
We file it, a Dependence!

FIT. So it is filled.
What follows? I do love the order of these things.

EVE. We then advise the party, if he be
A man of means, and hauings, that forthwith,
He settle his estate: if not, at least
That he pretend it. For, by that, the world
Takes notice, that it now is a Dependence.
And this we call, Sir, Publication.

FIT. Very sufficient! After Publication, now?

EVE. Then we grant out our Process, which is diverse;
Either by Chartell, Sir, or ore-tenus,
Wherein the Challenger, and Challengee
Or (with your Spaniard) your Prouocador,
And Prouocado, have their several courses --

FIT. I have enough on it! for an hundred pieces?
Yes, for two hundred, vnder-write me, do.
Your man will take my bond?

MER. That he will, sure,
But, these same Citizens, they are such sharks!
He whispers Fitz-dottrell aside. There Is an old debt of forty, I ga' my word
For one is run away, to the Bermudas,
And he will hook in that, or he wi' not do.

FIT. Why, let him. That and the ring, and a hundred pieces,
Will all but make two hundred?

MER. No, no more, Sir.
And then Guilt-head What ready Arithmetique you have? do you hear?
A pretty mornings work for you, this? Do it,
You shall have twenty pound on it.

GVI. Twenty pieces?

(PLV. Good Father, do it)

MER. You will hook still? well,
Show us your ring. You could not have done this, now
With gentleness, at first, we might have thanked you?
But groan, and have you courtesies come from you
Like a hard stool, and stink? A man may draw
Your teeth out easier, then your money? Come, He pulls Plutarchus by the lips.
Were little Guilt-head here, no better a nature,
I should never love him, that could pull his lips off, now!
Was not thy mother a Gentlewoman?

PLV. Yes, Sir.

MER. And went to the Court at Christmas, and St. Georges-tide?
And lent the Lords-men, chains?

PLV. Of gold, and pearl, Sr.

MER. I knew, thou must take, after some body!
Thou could not be else. This was no shop-looke!
I Will have thee Captain Guilt-head, and march up,
And take in Pimlico,, and kill the bush,
At every tavern! Thou shall have a wife,
If smocks will mount, boy. How now? you have there now
Some Bristo-stone, He turns to old Guilt-head. or Cornish counterfeit
You Would put upon us.

GVI. No, Sir, I assure you:
Look on his luster! he will speak himself!
I Will gi' you leave to put him in the Mill,
H' is no great, large stone, but a true Paragon,
H' has all his corners, view him well.

MER. H' is yellow.

GVI. Vpo' my faith, Sr, of the right black-water,
And very deep! H' is set without a foil, too.
Here Is one of the yellow-water, I Will sell cheap.

MER. And what do you value this, at? thirty pound?

GVI. No, Sir, he cost me forty, ere he was set.

MER. Turnings, you mean? I know your Equiuocks:
You' are grown the better Fathers of 'hem of late.
Well, where't must go, 't will be judged, and, therefore,
Look you't be right. You shall have fifty pound for it. Now to Fitz-dottrel.
Not a deneer more! And, because you would
Have things dispatched, Sir, I Will go presently,
Inquire out this Lady. If you think good, Sir.
Having an hundred pieces ready, you may
Part with those, now, to serve my kinsmans turns,
That he may wait upon you, anon, the freer;
And take 'hem when you have sealed, a gain, of Guilt-head.

FIT. I care not if I do!

MER. And dispatch all,
Together.

FIT. There, the are just: a hundred pieces!
IN have told 'hem over, twice a day, these two months. He turns 'hem out
together. And Euerill and he fall to share.

MER. Well, go, and seal then, Sr, make your return
As speedy as you can.

EVE. Come gi' me.

MER. Soft, Sir,

EVE. Mary, and fair too, then. I Will no delaying, Sir.

MER. But, you will hear?

EV. Yes, when I have my diuident.

MER. There Is forty pieces for you.

EVE. What is this for?

MER. Your half. You know, that Guilt-head must have twenty.

EVE. And what is your ring there? shall I have none of that?

MER. O, that's to be given to a Lady!

EVE. Is It so?

MER. By that good light, it is.

EV. Come, gi' me
Ten pieces more, then.

MER. Why?

EV. For Guilt-head? Sir,
Do' you think, I Will 'low him any such share:

MER. You must.

EVE. Must I? Do you your musts, Sir, I Will do mine,
You wi'not part with the whole, Sir? Will you? Go too.
Gi' me ten pieces!

MER. By what law, do you this?

EVE. E'n Lyon-law, Sir, I must roar else.

MER. Good!

EVE. Yo' have heard, how the Ass made his divisions, wisely?

MER. And, I am he: I thank you.

EV. Much good do you, Sr.

MER. I shall be rid of this tyranny, one day?

EVE. Not,
While you do eat; and lie, about the town, here;
And coozen in your bullions; and I stand
Your name of credit, and compound your business;
Adiourne your beatings every term; and make
New parties for your proiects. I have, now,
A pretty tasque, of it, to hold you in
Wi' your Lady Tayle-bush: but the toy will be,
How we shall both come off?

MER. Leave you your doubting.
And do your portion, what is assigned you: I
Never failed yet.

EVE. With reference to your aids?
You Will still be unthankful. Where shall I meet you, anon?
You have some feate to do alone, now, I see;
You wish me gone, well, I will find you out,
And bring you after to the audit.

MER. S'light!
There Is Ingines share too, I had forgot! This reign
Is too-too-vnsuportable! I must
Quit my self of this vassalage! Ingine! welcome.

ACT. IIJ. SCENE. IV.
MERE-CRAFT. INGINE. VVITTIPOL.
HOw goes the cry?

ING. Excellent well!

MER. Will It do?
Where Is Robinson?

ING. Here is the Gentleman, Sir.
Will undertake to himself. I have acquainted him,

MER. Why did you so?

ING. Why, Robinson would have told him,
You know. And he is a pleasant wit! will hurt
Nothing you purpose. Then, he' is of opinion,
That Robinson might want audacity,
She being such a gallant. Now, he has been,
In Spain, and knows the fashions there; and can
Discourse; and being but mirth (he says) leave much,
To his care:

MER. But he is too tall!

ING. For that, He excepts at his stature.
He has the brauest device! (you will love him for it)
To say, he wears Cioppinos: and they do so
In Spain. And Robinson's as tall, as he.

MER. Is he so?

ING. Every jot.

MER. Nay, I had rather
To trust a Gentleman with it, of the two.

ING. Pray you go to him, then, Sir, and salute him.

MER. Sir, my friend Ingine has acquainted you
With a strange business, here.

WIT. A merry one, Sir.
The Duke of Drown'd-land, and his Duchess?

MER. Yes, Sir.
Now, that the Coniurers have laid him by,
I have made bold, to borrow him a while;

WIT. With purpose, yet, to put him out I hope
To his best use?

MER. Yes, Sir.

WIT. For that small part,
That I am trusted with, put off your care:
I would not lose to do it, for the mirth,
Will follow of it; and well, I have a fancy.

MER. Sir, that will make it well.

WIT. You will report it so.
Where must I have my dressing?

ING. At my house, Sir.

MER. You shall have caution, Sir, for what he yields,
To six pence.

WIT. You shall pardon me. I will share, Sir,
IN your sports, only: nothing in your purchase.
But you must furnish me with complements,
To the manner of Spain; my coach, my guarda duenn'as;

MER. Ingine's your Pro'uedor. But, Sir, I must
(Now IN have entered trust wi' you, thus far)
Secure still in your quality, acquaint you
With somewhat, beyond this. The place, designed
To be the Scene, for this our merry matter,
Because it must have countenance of women,
To draw discourse, and offer it, is here by,
At the Lady Taile-bushes.

WIT. I know her, Sir,
And her Gentleman hutsher.

MER. Mr Ambler?

WIT. Yes, Sir.

MER. Sir, It shall be no shame to me, to confess
To you, that we poor Gentlemen, that want acres,
Must for our needs, turn fools up, and plough Ladies
Sometimes, to try what glebe they are: and this
Is no unfruitful piece. She, and I now,
Are on a project, for the fact, and venting
Of a new kind of fucus (paint, for Ladies)
To serve the kingdom: wherein she her self
Has trauell'd, specially, by way of service
Unto her sex, and hopes to get the Monopoly,
As the reward, of her invention.

WIT. What is her end, in this?

EV. Merely ambition,
Sir, to grow great, and court it with the secret:
Though she pretend some other. For, she is dealing,
Already, upon caution for the shares,
And Mr. Ambler, is he named Examiner
For the ingredients; and the Register
Of what is vented; and shall keep the Office.
Now, if she break with you, of this (as I
Must make the leading thread to your acquaintance,
That, how experience gotten in your being
Abroad, will help our business) think of some
Pretty additions, but to keep her floting:
It may be, she will offer you a part,
Any strange names of --

WIT. Sr, I have my' instructions.
Is it not high time to be making ready?

MER. Yes, Sir,

ING. The foole's in sight, Dottrel.

MER. Away, then.

ACT. IIJ. SCENE. V.
MERE-CRAFT. FITZ-DOTTREL. PVG.
Returned so soon?

FIT. Yes, here is the ring: I have sealed.
But there is not so much gold in all the row, he says --
Till 't come fro' the Mint. It Is taken up for the gamesters.

MER. There Is a shop-shift! plague on 'hem.

FIT. He does swear it.

MER. He Will swear, and forswear too, it is his trade,
You should not have left him.

FIT. S'lid, I can go back,
And beat him, yet.

MER. No, now let him alone.

FIT. I was so earnest, after the maine Business,
To have this ring, gone.

MER. True, and it is time.
IN have learned, Sir, sin' you went, her Ladi-ship eats
With the Lady Tail-bush, here, hard by.

FIT. In The lane here?

MER. Yes, if you had a servant, now of presence,
Well clothed, and of an aerie voluble tongue,
Neither too big, or little for his mouth,
That could deliver your wives complement;
To send along withal.

FIT. I have one Sir,
A very handsome, gentleman-like-fellow,
That I do mean to make my Duchess Usher --
I entertained him, but this morning, too:
I Will call him to you. The worst of him, is his name!

MER. She Will take no note of that, but of his message. He shows him his Pug.

FIT. Devil! How like you him, Sir. Pace, go a little.
Let Us see you move.

MER. He Will serve, Sr, give it him:
And let him go along with me, I Will help
To present him, and it.

FIT. Look, you do sirah,
Discharge this well, as you expect your place.
Do' you hear, go on, come off with all your honors. Gives him instructions.
I would feign see him, do it.

MER. Trust him, with it;

FIT. Remember kissing of your hand, and answering
With the French-time, in flexure of your body.
I could now so instruct him -- and for his words --

MER. I Will put them in his mouth.

FIT. O, but I have 'hem
OF the very Academies.

MER. Sir, you will have use for 'hem,
Anon, your self, I warrant you: after dinner,
When you are called.

FIT. S'light, that'll be just play-time. He longs to see the play.
It cannot be, I must not lose the play!

MER. Sir, but you must, if she appoint to sit.
And, she is president.

FIT. S'lid, it is the Devil! Because it is the Devil.

MER. And, 'twere his Damme too, you must now apply
Your self, Sir, to this, wholly; or lose all.

FIT. If I could but see a piece --

MER. Sr. Never think on it.

FIT. Come but to one act, and I did not care --
But to be seen to rise, and go away,
To vex the Players, and to punish their Poet --
Keep him in awe!

MER. But say, that he be one,
Wi' not be awed! but laugh at you. How then?

FIT. Then he shall pay for 'his dinner himself.

MER. Perhaps,
He would do that twice, rather then thank you.
Come, get the Devil out of your head, my Lord,
(I Will call you so in private still) and take
Your Lord-ship in your mind. You were, sweet Lord, He puts him in mind of
his quarrel.
In talk to bring a Business to the Office.

FIT. Yes.

MER. Why should not you, Sr, carry it of your self,
Before the Office be up? and show the world,
You had no need of any man's direction;
In point, Sir, of sufficiency. I speak
Against a kinsman, but as one that tenders
Your graces good.

FIT. I thank you; to proceed --

MER. To Publications: have your Deed drawn presently.
And leave a blancke to put in your Feoffees
One, two, or more, as you see cause --

FIT. I thank you
Heartily, I do thank you. Not a word more,
I pray you, as you love me. Let me alone. He is angry with himself.
That I could not think of this, as well, as he?
O, I could beat my infinite blocke-head --!

MER. Come, we must this way.

PVG. How far is it.

MER. Hard by here
Over the way. Now, to atchieue this ring,
He thinks how to coozen the bearer, of the ring. From this same fellow, that
is to assure it;
Before he give it. Though my Spanish Lady,
Be a young Gentleman of means, and scorn
To share, as he does say, I do not know
How such a toy may tempt his Lady-ship:
And therefore, I think best, it be assured.

PVG. Sir, be the Ladies brave, we go unto?

MER. O, yes.

PVG. And shall I see 'hem, and speak to 'hem?

MER. Questions his man. What else? have you your false-beard about you? Trains.

TRA. Yes,

MER. And is this one of your double Cloakes?

TRA. The best of 'hem.

MER. Be ready then. Sweet Pitfall!

ACT. IIJ. SCENE. VI.
MERE-CRAFT. PITFALL. PVG. TRAINS.
Offers to kiss. COme, I must busse --

PIT. Away.

MER. I Will set thee up again.
Never fear that: can thou get never a bird?
No Thrushes hungry? Stay, till cold weather come,
I Will help thee to an Onsell, or, a Field-fare.
She runs in, in haste: he follows. Who Is within, with Madame?

PIT. I Will tell you straight.

MER. Please you stay here, a while Sir, I Will go in.

PVG. I do so long to have a little venery,
Pug leaps at Pitfall's coming in. While I am in this body! I would taste
Of every sin, a little, if it might be
After the manner of man! Sweetheart!

PIT. What would you, Sr?

PVG. Nothing but fall in, to you, be your Blackbird,
My pretty pit (as the Gentleman said) your Throstle:
Lie tame, and taken with you; here' is gold!
To buy you so much new stuffes, from the shop,
Traine's in his false cloak, brings a false message, and gets the ring.
Mere-craft follows presently, and asks for it. Em. Train's as himself
again. As I may take the old up --

TRA. You must send, Sir.
The Gentleman the ring.

PVG. There it is. Nay look,
Will you be foolish, Pit,

PIT. This is strange rudeness.

PVG. Dear Pit.

PIT. I Will call, I swear.

MER. Where are you, Sr?
Is your ring ready? Go with me.

PVG. I sent it you.

MER. Me? When? by whom?

PVG. A fellow here, even now,
Came for it in your name.

MER. I sent none, sure.
My meaning ever was, you should deliver it,
Your self: So was your Masters charge, you know.
What fellow was it, do you know him?

PVG. Here,
But now, he had it.

MER. Saw you any? Trains?

TRA. Not I.

PVG. The Gentleman saw him.

MER. Enquire.

PVG. I was so earnest upon her, I marked not! The Devil confesses himself
coozen'd.
My devilish Chief has put me here in flesh,
To shame me! This dull body I am in,
I perceive nothing with! I offer at nothing,
That will succeed!

TRA. Sir, she saw none, she says.

PVG. Satan himself, has taken a shape to abuse me. Mere-craft accuses him of
negligence.
It could not be else!

MER. This is above strange!
That you should be so retchlesse. What'll you do, Sir?
How will you answer this, when you are questioned?

PVG. Run from my flesh, if I could; put off mankind!
This's such a scorn! and will be a new exercise,
For my Archduke! Woe to the several cudgells,
Must suffer, on this back! Can you no succors? Sir? He asks aid.

MER. Alas! the use of it is so present.

PVG. I ask,
Sir, credit for another, but till to morrow?

MER. There is not so much time, Sir. But how ever,
The Lady is a noble Lady, and will
(To save a Gentleman from check) be entreated
To say, she has received it.

PVG. Do you think so? Mere-craft promises faintly, yet comforts him.
Will she be won?

MER. No doubt, to such an office,
It will be a Lady's bravery, and her pride.

PVG. And not be known on it after, unto him?

MER. That were a treachery! Upon my word,
Be confident. Return unto your master,
My Lady President sits this afternoon,
Has taken the ring, commends her services
Unto your Lady-Dutchesse. You may say
She Is a civil Lady, and does give her
All her respects, already: Bad you, tell her
She lives, but to receive her wished commandments,
And have the honor here to kiss her hands:
For which she will stay this hour yet. Hasten you
Your Prince, away.

PVG. And Sir, The Devil is doubtful. you will take care
The excuse be perfect?

MER. You confess your fears.
Too much.

PVG. The shame is more, I Will quit you of either.

ACT. IIIJ.
SCENE. I.
TAILE-BVSH. MERE-CRAFT. MANLY.
A Pox vpo' referring to Commissioners,
IN had rather hear that it were past the seals:
Your Courtiers move so Snaile-like in your Business.
Wuld I had not begun wi' you.

MER. We must move,
Madame, in order, by degrees: not iump.

TAY. Why, there was Sr. John Monie-man could iump
A Business quickly.

MER. True, he had great friends,
But, because some, sweet Madame, can leap ditches,
We must not all shun to go over bridges.
The harder parts, I make account are done:
He flatters her. Now, it is referred. You are infinitely bound
Unto the Ladies, they have so cried it up!

TAY. Do they like it then?

MER. They have sent the Spanish-Lady,
To gratulate with you --

TAY. I must send 'hem thanks
And some remembrances.

MER. That you must, and visit 'hem.
Where Is Ambler?

TAY. Lost, to day, we cannot hear of him.

MER. Not Madam?

TAY. No in good faith. They say he lay not
At home, to night. And here has fallen a Business
Between your Cousin, and Master Manly, has
Unquieted us all.

MER. So I hear, Madame.
Pray you how was it?

TAY. Troth, it but appears
Ill of your Kinsmans part. You may have heard,
That Manly is a suitor to me, I doubt not:

MER. I guessed it, Madame.

TAY. And it seems, he trusted
Your Cousin to let fall some fair reports
Of him unto me.

MER. Which he did!

TAY. So far
From it, as he came in, and took him railing
Against him.

MER. How! And what said Manly to him?

TAY. Enough, I do assure you: and with that scorn
Of him, and the injury, as I do wonder
How Euerill bore it! But that guilt vndoe's
Many men's valors

MER. Here comes Manly.

MAN. Madame, Manly offers to be gone.
I Will take my leave --

TAY. You sha' not go, in faith.
I Will have you stay, and see this Spanish miracle,
Of our English Lady.

MAN. Let me pray your Ladyship,
Lay your commands on me, some other time.

TAY. Now, I protest: and I will have all piec'd,
And friends again.

MAN. It will be but ill solder'd!

TAY. You are too much affected with it.

MAN. I cannot
Madame, but think on it for the injustice.

TAY. Sir,
His kinsman here is sorry.

MER. Not I, Madam, Mere-craft denies him.
I am no kin to him, we but call Cousins,
And if we were, Sir, I have no relation
Unto his crimes.

MAN. You are not urged with 'hem.
I can accuse, Sir, none but mine own judgment,
For though it were his crime, so to betray me:
I Am sure, 'twas more mine own, at all to trust him.
But he, therein, did use but his old manners,
And savor strongly what he was before.

TAY. Come, he will change!

MAN. Faith, I must never think it.
Nor were it reason in me to expect
That for my sake, he should put off a nature
He sucked in with his milk. It may be Madam,
Deceiving trust, is all he has to trust to:
If so, I shall be loath, that any hope
Of mine, should bate him of his means.

TAY. Yo' are sharp, Sir.
This act may make him honest!

MAN If he were
To be made honest, by an act of Parliament,
I should not alter, in my faith of him.

TAY. Eyther-side! She spies the Lady Eyther-side.
Welcome, dear Either-side! how have thou done, good wench?
Thou have been a stranger! I have not seen thee, this week.

ACT. IIIJ. SCEN.E II.
EITHERSIDE. To them
EVer your servant, Madame.

TAY. Where have 'hou been?
I did so long to see thee.

EIT. Visiting, and so tired!
I protest, Madame, it is a monstrous trouble!

TAY. And so it is. I swear I must to morrow,
Begin my visits (would they were over) at Court.
It tortures me, to think on 'hem.

EIT. I do hear
You have cause, Madam, your suit goes on.

TAY. Who told thee?

EYT. One, that can tell: Mr. Eyther-side.

TAY. O, thy husband!
Yes faith, there is life in it, now: It is referred.
If we once see it under the seals, wench, then,
Have with 'hem for the great Carroch, six horses,
And the two Coach-men, with my Ambler, bare,
And my three women: we will live, in faith,
The examples of the town, and govern it.
I Will lead the fashion still.

EIT. You do that, now,
Sweet Madame.

TAY. O, but then, I Will every day
Bring up some new device. Thou and I, Either-side,
Will first be in it, I will give it thee;
And they shall follow us. Thou shall, I swear,
Wear every month a new gown, out of it.

EIT. Thank you good Madame.

TAY. Pray thee call me Taile-bush
As I thee, Either-side; I not love this, Madame.

EYT. Then I protest to you, Taile-bush, I am glad
Your Business so succeeds.

TAY. Thank thee, good Eyther-side.

EYT. But Master Either-side tells me, that he likes
Your other Business better.

TAY. Which?

EIT. OF the Tooth-picks.

TAY. I never heard on it.

EIT. Ask Mr. Mere-craft.

MER. Madame? H'is one, in a word, I Will trust his malice,
Mere-craft has whispered with the while. With any man's credit, I would have
abused!

MAN. Sir, if you think you do please me, in this,
You are deceived!

MER. No, but because my Lady,
Named him my kinsman; I would satisfy you,
What I think of him: and pray you, upon it
To judge me!

MAN. So I do: that ill men's friendship,
Is as unfaithful, as themselves.

TAY. Do you hear?
Have you a Business about Tooth-picks?

MER. Yes, Madame.
Did I never tell't you? I meant to have offered it
Your Lady-ship, on the perfecting the pattent.

TAY. How is it!

MER. For serving the whole state with Tooth-picks; The Project for Tooth-picks.
Somewhat an intricate Business to discourse) but --
I show, how much the Subject is abused,
First, in that one commodity? then what diseases,
And putrefactions in the gummes are bred,
By those are made' of' adultrate, and false wood?
My plot, for reformation of these, follows.
To have all Tooth-picks, brought unto an office,
There sealed; and such as counterfeit 'hem, mulcted.
And last, for venting 'hem to have a book
Printed, to teach their use, which every child
Shall have throughout the kingdom, that can read,
And learn to pick his teeth by. Which beginning
Barely to practice, with some other rules,
Of never sleeping with the mouth open, Trains his man whispers him. chawing
Some grains of masticke, will preserve the breath
Pure, and so free from taym -- have what is it? sai'st thou?

TAY. Good faith, it sounds a very pretty Business!

EIT. So Mr. Either-side says, Madame.

MER. The Lady is come.

TAY. Is she? Good, wait upon her in. My Ambler
Was never so ill absent. Either-side,
How do I look to day? Am I not dressed, She looks in her glass
Spruntly?

FIT. Yes, verily, Madame.

TAY. Pox of Madame,
Will you not leave that?

EIT. Yes, good Taile-bush.

TAY. So?
Sounds not that better? What vile Fucus is this,
Thou have got on?

EIT. It Is Pearl.

TAY. Pearl? Oyster-shells:
As I breath, Either-side, I know it. Here comes
(They say) a wonder, sirrah, has been in Spain!
Will teach us all! she is sent to me, from Court.
To gratulate with me! Pr'y thee, let us observe her,
What faults she has, that we may laugh at 'hem,
When she is gone,

EIT. That we will heartily, Tail-bush. Wittipol enters.

TAY. O, me! the very Infanta of the Giants!

ACT. IIIJ. SCENE. IJI.
MERE-CRAFT. WITTIPOL. to them.
MER. Wittipol is dressed like a Spanish Lady. Excuses him self for not kissing.
Here is a noble Lady, Madame, come,
From your great friends, at Court, to see your Ladi-ship:
And have the honor of your acquaintance.

TAY. Sir.
She does us honor.

WIT. Pray you, say to her Ladyship,
It is the manner of Spain, to embrace only,
Never to kiss. She will excuse the custom!

TAY. Your use of it is law. Please you, sweet, Madame,
To take a seat.

WIT. Yes, Madame. IN have had
The favor, through a world of fair report
To know your virtues, Madame; and in that
Name, have desired the happiness of presenting
My service to your Ladyship!

TAY. Your love, Madame,
I must not own it else.

WIT. Both are due, Madame,
To your great undertakings.

TAY. Great? In troth, Madame,
They are my friends, that think 'hem any thing:
If I can do my sex (by 'hem) any service,
IN have my ends, Madame.

WIT. And they are noble ones,
That make a multitude beholden, Madame:
The common wealth of Ladies, must acknowledge from you.

EIT. Except some envious, Madame.

WIT. Yo' are right in that, Madame,
Of which race, I encountered some but lately.
^ho ('t seems) have studied reasons to discredit
Your business.

TAY. How, sweet Madame.

WIT. Nay, the parties
Wi' not be worth your pause -- Most ruinous things, Madame,
That have put off all hope of being recouer'd
To a degree of handsomeness.

TAY. But their reasons, Madame?
I would feign hear.

WIT. Some Madame, I remember.
They say, that painting quite destroys the face --

EIT. O, that is an old one, Madame.

WIT. There are new ones, too.
Corrupts the breath; has left so little sweetness
In kissing, as it is now used, but for fashion:
And shortly will be taken for a punishment.
Decays the fore-teeth, that should guard the tongue;
And suffers that run riot euer-lasting!
And (which is worse) some Ladies when they meet
Manly begins to know him. Cannot be merry, and laugh, but they do spit
In one another faces!

MAN. I should know
This voice, and face too:

WIT. Then they say, it is dangerous
To all the fallen, yet well disposed Mad-dames,
That are industrious, and desire to earne
Their living with their sweat! For any distemper
Of heat, and motion, may displace the colors;
And if the paint once run about their faces,
Twenty to one, they will appear so ill-fauour'd,
Their servants run away, too, and leave the pleasure
Imperfect, and the reckoning als' vnpay'd.

EIT. Pox, these are Poets reasons.

TAY. Some old Lady
That keeps a Poet, has devised these scandales.

EIT. Faith we must have the Poets banished, Madame,
As Master Either-side says.

MER. Master Fitz dottrel?
And his wife: where? Madame, the Duke of Drown'd-land,
That will be shortly.

WIT. Is this my Lord?

MER. The same.

ACT. IIIJ. SCENE. IV.
FITZ-DOTTREL. Mistress FITZ-DOTTRELL. PVG. to them.
YOur servant. Madame!

WIT. How now? Friend? offended, Wittipol whispers with Manly.
That I have found your haunt here?

MAN. No, but wondering
At your strange fashioned venture, hither.

WIT. It is
To show you what they are, you so pursue.

MAN. I thinke't will prove a medicine against marriage;
To know their manners.

WIT. Stay, and profit then.

MER. The Lady, Madame, whose Prince has brought her, here, He presents
Mistress Fitz-dottrel.
To be instructed.

WIT. Please you sit with us, Lady.

MER. That Is Lady-President.

FIT. A goodly woman!
I cannot see the ring, though.

MER. Sir, she has it.

TAY. But, Madame, these are very feeble reasons!

WIT. So I urged Madame, that the new complexion,
Now to come forth, in name of your Ladiship's fucus,
Had no ingredient --

TAY. But I durst eat, I assure you.

WIT. So do they, in Spain.

TAY. Sweet Madam be so liberal,
To give us some of your Spanish Fucuses!

WIT. They are infinite Madame.

TAY. So I hear, they have
Water of Gourdes, of Radish, the white Beans,
Flowers of Glass, of Thistles, Rose-marine.
Raw Honey, Mustard Seed, and Bread dough-bak'd,
The crumbs of bread, Goats-milke, and whites of Eggs,
Campheere, and Lilly-roots, the fat of Swannes,
Marrow of Veale, white Pigeons, and pine- kernells,
The seeds of Nettles, perse line, and hares gall.
Limons, thin-skind --

EIT. How, her Ladyship has studied
Al excellent things!

WIT. But ordinary, Madame.
No, the true rarities, are the Aluagada,
And Argentata of Queen Isabella!

TAY. I, what are their ingredients, gentle Madame?

WIT. Your Alum Scagliola, or Pol-dipedra;
And Zuccarino; Turpentine of Abezzo.
VVash'd in nine waters: Soda di leuante,
Or your Fern ashes; Benjamin di gotta;
Grasso di serpe; Porcelletto marino;
Oils of Lentisco; Zucche Mugia; make
The admirable Vernish for the face,
Gives the right luster; but two drops tub'd on
With a piece of scarlet, makes a Lady of sixty
Look at sixteen. But, above all, the water
Of the white Hen, of the Lady Estifanias!

TAY. O, I, that same, good Madame, I have heard of:
How is it done?

WIT. Madame, you take your Hen,
Plume it, and skin it, cleanse it of the inwards:
Then chop it, bones and all: add to four ounces
Of Carrnuacins, Pipitas, Soap of Cyprus,
Make the decoction, streine it. Then distill it,
And keep it in your galley-pot well, glidder'd:
Three drops preserues from wrinkles, warts, spots, moles,
Blemish, or Sun-burnings, and keeps the skin
In decimo sexto, ever bright, and smooth,
As any looking-glass; and indeed, is called
The Virgins milk for the face, Oglio reale;
A Ceruse, neither cold or heat, will hurt;
And mixed with oil of myrrh, and the red Gilli-flower
Called Cataputia; and flowers of Rouistico;
Makes the best muta, or dye of the whole world.

TAY. Dear Madame, will you let us be familiar?

WIT. Your Ladyships servant.

MER How do you like her.

FIT. Admirable!
He is jealous about his ring, and Mere-craft delivers it. But, yet, I cannot
see the ring.

PVG. Sir.

MER. I must
Deliver it, or mar all. This foole's so jealous.
Madame -- Sir, wear this ring, and pray you take knowledge,
'Twas sent you by his wife. And give her thanks,
Do not you dwindle, Sir, bear up.

PVG. I thank you, Sir,

TAY. But for the manner of Spain! Sweet, Madame, let us
Be bold, now we are in: Are all the Ladies,
There, in the fashion?

WIT. None but Grandee's, Madame,
OF the clasped train, which may be worn at length, too,
Or thus, upon my arm.

TAY. And do they wear
Cioppino's all?

WIT. If they be dressed in punto, Madame.

EIT. Guilt as those are? madame?

WIT. Of Goldsmiths work, madame;
And set with diamants: and their Spanish pumps
Of perfumed leather.

TAI. I should think it hard
To go in 'hem, madame.

WIT. At the first, it is, madame.

TAI. Do you never fall in 'hem?

WIT. Never.

EI. I swear, I should
Six times an hour.

WIT. But you have men at hand, still,
To help you, if you fall?

EIT. Only one, madame,
The Guardo-duennas, such a little old man,
As this.

EIT. Alas! he can do nothing! this!

WIT. I Will tell you, madame, I saw in the Court of Spain once,
A Lady fall in the Kings sight, along.
And there she lay, flat spread, as an Vmbrella,
Her hoope here cracked; no man durst reach a hand
To help her, till the Guarda-duenn'as came,
Who is the person onel' allowed to touch
A Lady there: and he but by this finger.

EIT. Have they no servants, madame, there? nor friends?

WIT. An Escudero, or so madame, that wayts
Upon 'hem in another Coach, at distance,
And when they walk, or dance, holds by a hand-kercher,
Never presumes to touch 'hem.

EIT. This's sciruy!
And a forced gravity! I do not like it.
I like our own much better.

TAY. It Is more French,
And Courtly ours.

EIT. And tastes more liberty.
We may have our doozen of visiters, at once,
Make love to us.

TAY. And before our husbands?

EIT. Husband?
As I am honest, Tayle-bush I do think
If no body should love me, but my poor husband,
I should e'n hang my self.

TAY. Fortune forbid, wench:
So fair a neck should have so foul a neck-lace,

EIT. It Is true, as I am handsome!

WIT. I received, Lady,
A token from you, which I would not be
Rude to refuse, being your first remembrance.

(FIT. O, I am satisfied now!

MER. Do you see it, Sir.)

WIT. But since you come, to know me, nearer, Lady,
I Will beg the honor, you will wear it for me, Wittipol gives it Mistress
Fitz-dottrel. Mere-craft murmures, He is satisfied, now he sees it.
It must be so.

Mrs. FIT. Sure I have heard this tongue.

MER. What do you mean, Sr?

WIT. Would you ha'me mercenary?
We'll recompense it anon, in somewhat else,

FIT. I do not love to be gulled, though in a toy.
Wife, do you hear? yo' are come into the Schole, wife,
Where you may learn, I do perceive it, any thing!
How to be fine, or fair, or great, or proud,
Or what you will, indeed, wife; here it is taught.
And I am glad on it, that you may not say,
Another day, when honors come upon you,
You wanted means. I have done my parts: been,
He vpbraids her, with his Bill of costs. To day, at fifty pound charge, first,
for a ring,
To get you entered. Then left my new Play,
To wait upon you, here, to see it confirmed.
That I may say, both to mine own eyes, and ears,
Senses, you are my witness, sha' has inioy'd
All helps that could be had, for love, or money --

Mrs. FIT. To make a fool of her.

FIT. Wife, that is your malice,
The wickedness of you nature to interpret
Your husbands kindesse thus. But I Will not leave;
Still to do good, for your deprau'd affections:
Intend it. Bend this stubborn will; be great.

TAY. Good Madame, whom do they use in messages?

WI. They commonly use their slaves, Madame.

TAI. And does your Ladyship.
Think that so good, Madame?

WIT. no, indeed, Madame; I,
Therein prefer the fashion of England far,
Of your young delicate Page, or discreet Usher,

FIT. And I go with your Ladyship, in opinion,
Directly for your Gentleman-usher,
There Is not a finer Officer goes on ground.

WIT. If he be made and broken to his place, once.

FIT. Nay, so I presuppose him.

WIT. And they are fitter
Managers too, Sir, but I would have 'hem called
Our Escudero's.

FIT. Good.

WIT. Say, I should send
To your Ladyship, who (I presume) has gathered
All the dear secrets, to know how to make
Pastillos of the Duchess of Braganza,
Coquettas, Almoiauana's, Mantecada's,
Alcoreas, Mustaccioli; or say it were
The Peladore of Isabella, or balls
Against the itch, or aqua nanfa, or oil
Of Iessamine for gloves, of the Marquess Muja;
Or for the head, and hair: why, these are offices

FIT. Fit for a gentleman, not a slave. They only
Might ask for your piueti, Spanish-cole,
To burn, and sweeten a room: but the Arcana
Of Ladies Cabinets --

FIT. Should be elsewhere trusted.
He enters himself with the Lady's Yo' are much about the truth. Sweet
honored Ladies,
Let me fall in wi'you. I'ha' my female wit,
As well as my male. And I do know what suits
A Lady of spirit, or a woman of fashion!

WIT. And you would have your wife such.

FIT. Yes, Madame, aerie,
Light; not to plain dishonesty, I mean:
But, somewhat of this side.

WIT. I take you, Sir.
H' has reason Ladies. I Will not give this rush
For any Lady, that cannot be honest
Within a thread.

TAY. Yes, Madame, and yet venture
As far for the other, in her Fame --

WIT. As can be;
Coach it to Pimlico; dance the Saraband;
Hear, and talk bawdy; laugh as loud, as a larum;
Squeake, spring, do any thing.

EIT. In young company, Madame.

TAY. Or before gallants. If they be brave, or Lords,
A woman is engaged.

FIT. I say so, Ladies,
It is ciuility to deny us nothing.

PVG. You talk of a University! why, The Devil admires him. Hell is
A Grammar-schoole to this!

EIT. But then,
She must not lose a look on stuffes, or cloth, Madame.

TAY. Nor no course fellow.

WIT. She must be guided, Madame
By the clothes he wears, and company he is in;
Whom to salute, how far --

FIT. I have told her this.
And how that bawdry too, vpo' the point,
Is (in it self) as civil a discourse --

WIT. As any other affayre of flesh, what ever.

FIT. But she will never be capable, she is not
So much as coming, Madame; I know not how
She loses all her opportunities
With hoping to be forced. IN have entertained
A gentleman, a younger brother, here, He shows his Pug.
Whom I would feign breed up, her Escudero,
Against some expectation's that I have,
And she will not countenance him.

WIT. What Is his name?

FIT. Devil, of Darbi-shire.

EIT. Bless us from him!

TAY. Devil?
Call him De-uile, sweet Madame.

Mrs. FI. What you please, Ladies.

TAY. De-uile's a prettier name!

EIT. And sounds, me thinks,
As it came in with the Conqueror --

MAN. Over smocks!
What things they are? Manly goes out with indignation. That nature should be
at leisure
Ever to make 'hem! my woing is at an end.

WIT. What can he do?

EIT. Let Us hear him.

TAY. Can he manage?

FIT. Please you to try him, Ladies. Stand forth, Devil.

PVG. Was all this but the preface to my torment?

FIT. Come, let their Ladyships see your honors.

EIT. O,
He makes a wicked leg.

TAY. As ever I saw!

WIT. Fit for a Devil.

TAY. Good Madame, call him De-uile.

WIT. De-uile, They begin their Catechism. what property is there most required
IN your conceit, now, in the Escudero?

FIT. Why do you not speak?

PVG. A settled discreet pase, Madame.

WIT. I think, a barren head, Sir, Mountaine-like,
To be exposed to the cruelty of weathers --

FIT. I, for his Valley is beneath the waste, Madame,
And to be fruitful there, it is sufficient.
Dullness upon you! Could not you hit this? He strikes him.

PVG. Good Sir --

WIT. He then had had no barren head.
You daw him too much, in troth, Sir.

FIT. I must walk
With the French stick, like an old vierger for you, The Devil prays.

PVG. O, Chief, call me to Hell again, and free me.

FIT. Do you murmur now?

PVG. Not I, Sr.

WIT. What do you take
Mr. Deuile, the height of your employment,
In the true perfect Escudero?

FIT. When?
What do you answer?

PVG. To be able, Madame,
First to enquire, then report the working,
Of any Ladies physic, in sweet phrase,

WIT. Yes, that is an act of elegance, and importance.
But what above?

FIT. O, that I had a goad for him.

PVG. To find out a good Corne-cutter.

TAY. Out on him!

EIT. Most barbarous!

FIT. Why did you do this, now?
Of purpose to discredit me? you damned Devil.

PVG. Sure, if I be not yet, I shall be. All
My days in Hell, were holy days to this!

TAY. It Is labor lost, Madame?

EIT. H' is a dull fellow
Of no capacity!

TAI. Of no discourse!
O, if my Ambler had been here!

EIT. I, Madame;
You talk of a man, where is there such another?

WIT. Mr. Deuile, put case, one of my Ladies, here,
Had a fine brach: and would employ you forth
To treat 'bout a convenient match for her.
What would you observe?

PVG. The color, and the size, Madame.

WIT. And nothing else?

FIT. The Moon, you calfe, the Moon!

WIT. I, and the Sign.

TAI. Yes, and receipts for pronenesse.

WIT. Then when the Puppies came, what would you do?

PVG. Get their natiuities cast!

WIT. This's well. What more?

PVG. Consult the Almanack-man which would be least?
Which cleaneliest?

WIT. And which silentest? This's well, madame!

WIT. And while she were with puppy?

PVG. Walk her out,
And air her every morning!

WIT. Very good!
And be industrious to kill her fleas?

PVG. Yes!

WIT. He will make a pretty proficient.

PVG. Who,
Coming from Hell, could look for such Catechizing?
The Devil is an Ass. I do acknowledge it.

FIT. Fitz-dottrel admires Wittipol. The top of woman! All her sex in abstract!
I love her, to each syllable, falls from her.

TAI. Good madame give me leave to go aside with him!
And try him a little!

WIT. Do, and I Will withdraw, Madame,
The Devil prays again. With this fair Lady: read to her, the while.

TAI. Come, Sr.

PVG. Dear Chief, relieve me, or I perish.

WIT. Lady, we'll follow. You are not jealous Sir?

FIT. He gives his wife to him, taking him to be a Lady. O, madame! you shall
see. Stay wife, behold,
I give her up here, absolutely, to you,
She is your own. Do with her what you will!
Melt, cast, and form her as you shall think good!
Set any stamp on! I Will receive her from you
As a new thing, by your own standard!

WIT. Well, Sir!

ACT. IIIJ. SCENE. V.
MERE-CRAFT. FITZ-DOTTREL. PIT-FAL. EVER-ILL. PLVTARCHVS.
But what have you done in your Dependence, since?

FIT. O, it goes on, I met your Cousin, the Master --

MER. You did not acquaint him, Sr?

FIT. Faith, but I did, Sr.
And upon better thought, not without reason!
He being chief Officer, might have taken it ill, else,
As a Contempt against his Place, and that
In time Sir, have drawn on another Dependence.
No, I did find him in good terms, and ready
To do me any service.

MER. So he said, to you?
But Sr, you do not know him.

FIT. Why, I presumed
Because this business of my wives, required me,
I could not have done better: And he told
Me, that he would go presently to your Council,
A Knight, here, in the Lane --

MER. Yes, Justice Either-side.

FIT: And get the Feoffment drawn, with a letter of Attorney,
For liuerie and seisen!

MER. That I knowe's the course.
But Sir, you mean not to make him Feoffee?

FIT. Nay, that I Will pause on!

MER. How now little Pit-fall.

PIT. Your Cousin Master Euer-ill, would come in --
But he would know if Master Manly were here. Mere-craft whispers against him.

MER. No, tell him, if he were, I have made his peace!
He Is one, Sir, has no State, and a man knows not,
How such a trust may tempt him.

FIT. I conceive you.

EVE. Sr. this same deed is done here.

MER. Pretty Plutarchus?
Art thou come with it? and has Sir Paul viewed it?

PLV. His hand is to the draught.

MER. Will you step in, Sr.
And read it?

FIT. Yes.

EVE. I pray you a word wi' you. Eueril whispers against Mere-craft.
Sir Paul Eitherside willed me gi' you caution,
Whom you did make Feoffee: for it is the trust
OF your whole State: and though my Cousin here
Be a worthy Gentleman, yet his valor has
At the tall board bin questioned; and we hold
Any man so impeached, of doubtful honesty!
I will not justify this; but give it you
To make your profit of it: if you utter it,
I can forswear it!

FIT. I believe you, and thank you, Sir.

ACT. IIIJ. SCENE. VI.
VVITTIPOL. Mistress FITZ-DOTTREL. MANLY. MERE-CRAFT.
BE not afraid, sweet Lady: yo' are trusted
To love, not violence here; I am no rauisher,
But one, whom you, by your fair trust again,
May of a servant make a most true friend.

Mrs. FI. And such a one I need, but not this way:
Sir, I confess me to you, the mere manner
Of your attempting me, this morning took me,
And I did hold m'inuention, and my manners,
Were both engaged, to give it a requital;
But not unto your ends: my hope was then,
(Though interrrupted, ere it could be vtter'd)
That whom I found the Master of such language,
That brain and spirit, for such an enterprise,
Could not, but if those succors were demanded
To a right use, employ them virtuously!
And make that profit of his noble parts,
Which they would yield. Sr, you have now the ground,
To exercise them in: I am a woman;
That cannot speak more wretchedness of my self,
Then you can read; matched to a mass of folly;
That every day makes haste to his own ruin;
The wealthy portion, that I brought him, spent;
And (through my friends neglect) no ioynture made me.
My fortunes standing in this precipice,
It Is Counsel that I want, and honest aides:
And in this name, I need you, for a friend!
Never in any other; for his ill,
Must not make me, Sr, worse.

MAN. O friend! forsake not
Manly, concealed this while shows himself. The brave occasion, virtue offers
you,
To keep you innocent: I have feared for both;
And watched you, to prevent the ill I feared.
But, since the weaker side has so assured me,
Let not the stronger fall by his own vice,
Or be the less a friend, cause virtue needs him.

WIT. Virtue shall never ask my succors twice;
Most friend, most man; your Counsels are commands:
Lady, I can love goodness in you, more
Then I did Beauty; and do here entitle
Your virtue, to the power, upon a life
You shall engage in any fruitful service,
Even to forfeit.

MER. Madame: Do you hear, Sir, Mere-craft takes Wittipol aside, and moves a
project for himself.
We have another leg-strain'd, for this Dottrel.
He' has a quarrel to carry, and has caused
A deed of Feoffment, of his whole estate
To be drawn yonder; h' have within: And you,
Only, he means to make Feoffee. H'is fallen
So desperately enamored on you, and talks
Most like a madman: you did never hear
A Phrentick, so in love with his own favor!
Now, you do know, it is of no validity
In your name, as you stand; Therefore advise him
To put in me. (h'is come here:) You shall share Sir.

ACT. IV. SCENE. VIJ.
VVITTIPOL. Mistress FITZ-DOTTREL. MANLY. MERE-CRAFT. FITZ-DOTTRELL. EVERILL.
PLVTARCHVS.
FIT. Madame, I have a suit to you; and aforehand,
I do bespeake you; you must not deny me,
I will be granted.

WIT. Sir, I must know it, though.

FIT. No Lady; you must not know it: yet, you must too.
For the trust of it, and the fame indeed,
Which else were lost me. I would use your name,
But in a Feoffment: make my whole estate
Over unto you: a trifle, a thing of nothing,
Some eighteen hundred.

WIT. Alas! I understand not
Those things Sir. I am a woman, and most loath,
To embarque my self --

FIT. You will not slight me, Madame?

WIT. Nor you will not quarrel me?

FIT. No, sweet Madame, I have
Already a dependence; for which cause
I do this: let me put you in, dear Madame, He hopes to be the man.
I may be fairly killed.

WIT. You have your friends, Sir,
About you here, for choice.

EVE. She tells you right, Sir.

FIT. Death, if she do, what do I care for that?
Say, I would have her tell me wrong.

WIT. Why, Sir,
If for the trust, you will let me have the honor
To name you one.

FIT. Nay, you do me the honor, Madame:
She designs Manly. Who is it?

WIT. This Gentleman:

FIT. O, no, sweet Madame,
I^ 'is friend to him, with whom I have the dependence.

WIT. Who might he be?

FIT. One Wittipol: do you know him?

WIT. Alas Sir, he, a toy: This Gentleman
A friend to him? no more then I am Sir!

FIT. But will your Ladyship undertake that, Madame?

WIT. Yes, and what else, for him, you will engage me.

FIT. What is his name?

WIT. His name is Eustace Manly.

FIT. Whence does he write himself?

WIT. of Middle-sex,
Esquire.

FIT. Say nothing, Madame. Clerk, come hither
Write Eustace Manly, Squire of Middle-sex.

MER. What have you done, Sir?

WIT. Named a gentleman,
That I Will be answerable for, to you, Sir.
Had I named you, it might have been suspected:
This way, it is safe.

FIT. Come Gentlemen, your hands,
Eueril applaudes it. For witness.

MAN. What is this?

EVE. You have made Election
Of a most worthy Gentleman!

MAN. Would one of worth
Had spoke it: whence it comes, it is
Rather a shame to me, then a praise.

EVE. Sir, I will give you any Satisfaction.

MAN. Be silent then: "falsehood commends not truth.

PLV. You do deliver this, Sir, as your deed.
To the use of Mr. Manly?

FIT. Yes: and Sir --
When did you see young Wittipol? I am ready,
For process now; Sir, this is Publication.
He shall hear from me, he would needs be courting
My wife, Sir.

MAN. Yes: So witnesses his Cloak there.

FIT. Fitz-dottrel ^ suspicious of Manly still. Nay good Sir, -- Madame, you
did undertake --

WIT. What?

FIT. That he was not Wittipols friend.

WIT. I hear
Sr. no confession of it.

FIT. O she know's not;
Now I remember, Madame! This young Wittipol,
Would ha'd debauched my wife, and made me Cuckold,
Through a casement; he did fly her home
To mine own window: but I think I sou't him,
And ravished her away, out of his pownces.
Tha' sworn to have him by the ears: I fear
The toy, wi' not do me right.

WIT. No? that were pity!
What right do you ask, Sir? Here he is will do it you?

FIT. Wittipol discouers himself. Ha? Wittipol?

WIT. I Sir, no more Lady now,
Nor Spaniard!

MAN. No indeed, it is Wittipol.

FIT. Am I the thing I feared?

WIT. A Cuckold? No Sir,
But you were late in possibility,
I Will tell you so much.

MAN. But your wife's too virtuous!

WIT. VVee'll see her Sir, at home, and leave you here,
To be made Duke of Shore-ditch with a project.

FIT. Thieves, rauishers.

WIT. Cry but another note, Sir,
I Will mar the tune, of your pipe!

FIT. Gi' me my deed, then. He would have his deed again.

WIT. Neither: that shall be kept for your wives good,
Who will know, better how to use it.

FIT. Have
To feast you with my land?

WIT. Sir, be you quiet,
Or I shall gag you, ere I go, consult
Your Master of dependances; how to make this
A second business, you have time Sir.

FIT. Oh! VVitipol bufflees him, and goes out
What will the ghost of my wife Grandfather,
My learned Father, with my worshipful Mother,
Think of me now, that left me in this world
In state to be their Heir? that am become
A Cuckold, and an Ass, and my wives Ward;
Likely to loose my land; have my throat cut:
All, by her practice!

MER. Sir, we are all abused!

FIT. And be so still! Who hinders you, I pray you,
Let me alone, I would enjoy my self,
And be the Duke of Drown'd-Land, you have made me.

MER. Sir, we must play an after-game of this

FIT. But I am not in case to be a Gam-ster:
I tell you once again --

MER. You must be ruled
And take some counsel.

FIT. Sir, I do hate counsel,
As I do hate my wife, my wicked wife!

MER. But we may think how to recover all:
If you will act.

FIT. I will not think; nor act;
Nor yet recover; do not talk to me?
I Will run out of my wits, rather then hear;
I will be what I am, Fabian Fitz-Dottrel,
Though all the world say nay to it.

MER. Let Us follow him.

ACT. V.
SCENE. I.
AMBLER. PITFALL. MERE-CRAFT.
But has my Lady mist me?

PIT. Beyond telling!
Here has been that infinity of strangers!
And then she would have had you, to have sampled you
With one within, that they are now a teaching;
And does pretend to your rank.

AMB. Good fellow Pit-fall,
Tell Mr. Mere-craft, I entreat a word with him.
Pitfall goes out. This most unlucky accident will go near
To be the loss of my place; I am in doubt!

MER. With me? what say you Mr Ambler?

AMB. Sir,
I would beseech your worship stand between
Me, and my Ladies displeasure, for my absence.

MER. O, is that all? I warrant you.

AMB. I would tell you Sir
But how it happened.

MER. Brief, good Master Ambler,
Mere-craft seems full of business. Put your self to your rack: for I have
tasque
Of more importance.

AMB. Sir you will laugh at me!
But (so is Truth) a very friend of mine,
Finding by conference with me, that I lived
Too chaste for my complexion (and indeed
Too honest for my place, Sir) did advise me
If I did love my self (as that I do,
I must confess)

MER. Spare your Parenthesis.

AMB. To gi' my body a little euacuation --

MER. Well, and you went to a whore?

AMB. No, Sr. I durst not
(For fear it might arrive at some body's ear,
Ambler tells this with extraordinary speed. It should not) trust my self to a
common house;
But got the Gentlewoman to go with me,
And carry her bedding to a Conduit-head,
Hard by the place toward Tyborne, which they call
My L. Majors Banqueting House. Now Sir, This morning
Was Execution; and I never dreamed on it,
Till I heard the noise of the people, and the horses;
And neither I, nor the poor Gentlewoman
Durst stir, till all was done and past: so that
IN the Interim, we fell a sleep again. Heflags

MER. Nay, if you fall, from your gallop, I am gone Sr.

AMB. But, when I waked, to put on my clothes, a suit,
I made new for the action, it was gone,
And all my money, with my purse, my seals,
My hard-wax, and my table-bookes, my studies,
And a fine new devise, I had to carry
My pen, and ink, my ciuet, and my tooth-picks,
All under one. But, that which greiu'd me, was
The Gentlewomans shoes (with a pair of roses,
And garters, I had given her for the business)
So as that made us stay, till it was dark.
For I was feign to lend her mine, and walk
In a rug, by her, barefoote, to Saint Giles'es.

MER. A kind of Irish penance! Is this all, Sir?

AMB. To satisfy my Lady.

MER. I will promise you, Sr.

AMB. I have told the true Disaster.

MER. I cannot stay wi' you
Sir, to condole; but gratulate your return.

AMB. An honest gentleman, but he is never at leisure
To be himself: He has such tides of business.

ACT. V. SCENE. II.
PVG. AMBLER.
O, Call me home again, dear Chief, and put me
To yoaking foxes, milking of Hee-goates,
Pounding of water in a mortar, lauing
The sea dry with a nut-shell, gathering all
The leaves are fallen this Autumn, drawing farts
Out of dead bodies, making ropes of sand,
Catching the winds together in a net,
Mustring of ants, and numbering atoms; all
That hell, and you thought exquisite torments, rather
Then stay me here, a thought more: I would sooner
Keep fleas within a circle, and be accomptant
A thousand year, which of 'hem and how far
Out leaped the other, then endure a minute
Such as I have within. There is no hell
To a Lady of fashion. All your tortures there
Ambler comes in, and suruayes him Are pastimes to it. 'T would be a refreshing
For me, to be in the fire again, from hence.

AMB. This is my suite, and those the shoes and roses!

PVG. The have such impertinent vexations,
Pug perceiues it, and starts. A general Council of devils could not hit --
Ha! This is he, I took a sleep with his Wench,
And borrowed his clothes. What might I do to balke him?

AMB. Do you hear, Sr?

PVG. Answ. him but not to the purpose

AMB. He answers quite from the purpose. What is your name, I pray you Sir.

PVG. Is It so late Sir?

AMB. I ask not of the time, but of your name, Sir,

PVG. I thank you, Sir. Yes it dos hold Sir, certain.

AMB. Hold, Sir? What holds? I must both hold, and talk to you
About these clothes.

PVG. A very pretty lace!
But the Tailor cossend me.

AMB. No, I am cossend
By you! robbed.

PVG. Why, when you please Sir, I am
For three penny Gleeke, your man

AMB. Pox of your gleeke,
And three pence. Give me an answer.

PVG. Sir,
My master is the best at it.

AMB. Your master!
Who is your Master.

PVG. Let it be friday night.

AMB. What should be then?

PVG. Your best songs Thom of Bet'lem

AMB. I think, you are he. Does he mock me trow, from purpose?
Or do not I speak to him, what I mean?
Good Sir your name.

PVG. Only a couple a' Cocks Sir,
If we can get a Widgin, it is in season.

AMB. For Scepticks. He hopes to make on of these Scipticks of me
(I think I name 'hem right) and does not fly me.
I wonder at that! it is a strange confidence!
I Will prove another way, to draw his answer.

ACT. V. SCENE. IIJ.
MERE-CRAFT. FITZ-DOTTREL. EVERILL. PVG.
It is the easiest thing Sir, to be done.
As plain, as sizzling: roll but wi' your eyes,
And foame at the mouth. A little castle-soape
Will do 't, to rub your lips: And then a nutshell,
With toe, and touch-wood in it to spit fire,
Did you never read, Sir, little Darrels tricks,
With the boy of Burton, and the 7, in Lancashire,
Summers at Nottingham? All these do teach it.
And we will give out, Sir, that your wife has bewitched you: They repair
their old plot

EVE. And practiced with those two, as Sorcerers.

MER. And ga' you potions, by which means you were
Not Compos mentis, when you made your feoffment.
There Is no recovery of your state, but this:
This, Sir, will sting.

EVE. And move in a Court of equity.

MER. For, it is more then manifest, that this was
A plot of your wives, to get your land.

FIT. I think it.

EVE. Sir it appears.

MER. Nay, and my cossen has known
These gallants in these shapes.

EVE. TO have don strange things, Sir.
One as the Lady, the other as the Squire.

MER. How, a man's honesty may be fooled! I thought him
A very Lady.

FIT. So did I: renounce me else.

MER. But this way, Sir, you will be revenged at height.

EVE. Upon 'hem all.

MER. Yes faith, and since your Wife
Has run the way of woman thus, even give her --

FIT. Lost by this hand, to me; dead to all joys
Of her dear Dottrell, I shall never pity her:
That could, pity her self.

MER. Princely resolved Sir,
And like your self still, in Potentia.

ACT. V. SCENE. IV.
MERE-CRAFT, etc. to them. GVILT-HEAD. SLEDGE. PLVTARCHVS. SERIEANTS.
GVilt-head what news?

FIT. O Sir, my hundred pieces: Fitz-dottrel asks for his money.
Let me have them yet.

GVI. Yes Sir, officers
Arrest him.

FIT. Me?

SER. I arrest you.

SLE. Keep the peace,
I charge you gentlemen.

FIT. Arrest me? Why?

GVI. For better security, Sir. My son Plutarchus
Assures me, y' are not worth a groat.

PLV. Pardon me, Father,
I said his worship had no foot of Land left:
And that I Will justify, for I writ the deed.

FIT. Have you these tricks in the city?

GVI. Yes, and more.
Arrest this gallant too, here, at my suite. Meaning Mere-craft

SLE. I, and at mine. He owes me for his lodging
Two year and a quarter.

MER. Why M. Guilt-head, Landlord,
Thou art not mad, though the art Constable
Puffed up with the pride of the place? Do you hear, Sirs.
Have I deserved this from you two? for all
My pains at Court, to get you each a patent

GVI. The Project of forks For what?

MER. Vpo' my project of the forkes,

SLE. Forkes? what be they?

MER. The laudable use of forkes,
Brought into custom here, as they are in Italy,
To the sparing of Napkins. That, that should have made
Your bellows go at the forge, as his at the furnace.
I have procured it, have the Signet for it,
Dealt with the Linnen-drapers, on my private,
By cause, I feared, they were the likelyest ever
To stir against, to cross it: for 'twill be
A mighty sauer of Linen through the kingdom
(As that is one of my grounds, and to spare washing)
Now, on you two, had I laid all the profits.
Guilt-head to have the making of all those
Of gold and silver, for the better personages;
And you, of those of Steel for the common sort.
And both by Pattent, I had brought you your seals in.
Sledge is brought about, And Guilt-head comes. But now you have prevented me,
and I thank you.

SLE. Sir, I will bail you, at mine own ap-perill.

MER. Nay choose.

PLV. Do you so too, good Father.

GVI. I like the fashion of the project, well,
The forkes! It may be a lucky one! and is not
Intricate, as one would say, but fit for
Plain heads, as ours, to deal in. Do you hear
Officers, we discharge you.

MER. Why this shows
A little good nature in you, I confess,
But do not tempt your friends thus. Little Guilt-head,
Advise your sire, great Guilt-head from these courses:
And, here, to trouble a great man in reuersion,
For a matter of fifty on a false Alarm,
Away, it shows not well. Let him get the pieces
And bring 'hem. Yo'll hear more else.

PLV. Father.

ACT. V. SCENE. V.
AMBLER. To them.
O Master Sledge, are you here? I have been to seek you.
You are the Constable, they say. Here Is one
That I do charge with Felony, for the suite
He wears, Sir.

MER. Who? M. Fitz-Dottrels man?
Ware what you do, M. Ambler.

AMB. Sir, these clothes
I Will swear, are mine: and the shoes the gentlewomans
I told you of: and have him before a Justice,
I will.

PVG. My master, Sir, will pass his word for me.

AMB. O, can you speak to purpose now?

FIT. Not I, Fitz-dottrel disclaimes him.
If you be such a one Sir, I will leave you
To your God fathers in Law. Let twelve men work.

PVG Do you hear Sir, pray, in private.

FIT. well, what say you?
Brief, for I have no time to loose

PVG. Truth is, Sir,
I am the very Devil, and had leave
To take this body, I am in, to serve you.
Which was a Cutpurses, and hanged this Morning.
And it is likewise true, I stole this suite
To cloth me with. But Sir let me not go
To prison for it. I have hitherto
Lost time, done nothing; shown, indeed, no part
OF my Devils nature. Now, I will so help
Your malice, against these parties: so advance
The business, that you have in hand of witchcraft,
An your possession, as my self were in you.
Teach you such tricks, to make your belly swell,
And your eyes turn, to foame, to stare, to gnash
Your teeth together, and to beat your self,
Laugh loud, and feign six voices --

FIT. Out you Rogue!
You most infernal counterfeit wretch! Auaunt!
Do you think to gull me with your Aesops Fables?
Here take him to you, I have no part in him.

PVG. Sir.

FIT. Away, I do disclaim, I will not hear you. And sends him away.

MER. What said he to you, Sir?

FIT. Like a lying rascal
Told me he was the Devil.

MER. How! a good rest!

FIT. And that he would teach me, such fine devils tricks
For our new resolution.

EVE. OF pox on him,
'Twas excellent wisely done, Sir, not to trust him.

MER Why, if he were the Devil, we sha' not need him, Mere-craft gives the
instructions to him and the rest.
If you will be ruled. Go throw your self on a bed, Sir,
And feign you ill. We Will not be seen wi' you,
Till after, that you have a fit: and all
Confirmed within. Keep you with the two Ladies
And persuade them. I Will to Justice Either-side,
And possess him with all. Trains shall seek out Ingine,
And they two fill the town with it, every cable
Is to be veer'd. We must employ out all
Our emissaries now; Sir, I will send you
Bladders and Bellows. Sir, be confident,
It Is no hard thing to out do the Devil in:
A Boy of thirteen year old made him an Ass
But to toher day.

FIT. Well, I Will begin to practice,
And escape the imputation of being Cuckold,
By mine own act.

MER. yo' are right.

EVE. Come, you have put
Your self to a simple coil here, and your friends,
By dealing with new Agents, in new plots.

MER. No more of that, sweet cousin.

EVE. What had you
To do with this same Wittipol, for a Lady?

MER. Question not that: it is done.

EVE. You had some strain
Above E- la?

MER. I had indeed.

EVE. And, now, you crack for 't.

MER. Do not vpbraid me.

EVE. Come, you must be told on it;
You are so covetous, still, to embrace
More then you can, that you loose all.

MER. It Is right.
What would you more, then Guilty? Now, your succors.

ACT. V. SCENE. VJ.
SHAKLES. PVG INIQVITY. DEVIL.
HEre you are lodged, Sir, you must send your garnish,
Pug is brought to New gate. If you will be private.

PVG. There it is, Sir, leave me.
To Newgate, brought? How is the name of Devil
Discredited in me! What a lost fiend
Shall I be, on return? My Chief will roar
In triumph, now, that I have been on earth,
A day, and done no noted thing, but brought
Enter Iniquity the Vice. That body back here, was hanged out this morning.
Well! would it once were midnight, that I knew
My utmost. I think Time be drunk, and sleeps;
He is so still, and moves not! I do glory
Now in my torment. Neither can I expect it,
I have it with my fact.

INI. Child of hell, be thou merry:
Put a look on, as round, boy, and red as a cherry.
Cast care at thy posternes; and firke in thy fetters,
They are ornaments, Baby, have graced thy betters:
Look upon me, and hearken. Our Chief does salute thee,
And least the coldyron should chance to confute thee,
H' has sent thee, grant-paroll by me to stay longer
A month here on earth, against cold Child, or honger

PVG. How? longer here a month?

ING. Yes, boy, till the Session,
That so thou may have a triumphall egression.

PVG. In a cart, to be hanged.

ING. No, Child, in a Carre,
The chariot of Triumph, which most of them are.
And in the mean time, to be greazy, and bouzy,
And nasty, and filthy, and ragged and louzy,
With dam'n me, renounce me, and all the fine phrases;
That bring, unto Tiborne, the plentiful gazes.

PVG. He is a Devil! and may be our Chief!
The great Superior Devil! for his malice?
Arch-diuel! I acknowledge him. He knew
What I would suffer, when he tie'd me up thus
In a rogues body: and he has (I thank him)
His tyrannous pleasure on me, to confine me
To the unlucky carcass of a Cutpurse,
Wherein I could do nothing.

DIV. Impudent fiend, The great Devil enters, and vpbraids him with all his
days work.
Stop thy lewd mouth. Do thou not shame and tremble
To lay thine own dull damned defects upon
An ^nnocent case, there? Why thou heavy slave!
The spirit, that did possess that flesh before
Put more true life, in a finger, and a thumb,
Then thou in the whole Mass. Yet thou rebell'st
And murmur'st? What one profer have thou made,
Wicked enough, this day, that might be called
Worthy thine own, much less the name that sent thee?
First, thou did help thy self into a beating
Promptly, and with 't endangered'st too thy tongue:
A Devil, and could not keep a body entire
One day! That, for our credit. And to vindicate it,
Hinderd'st (for ought thou know) a deed of darkness:
Which was an act of that egregious folly,
As no one, to'ard the Devil, could have thought on,
This for your acting! but for suffering! why
Thou have been cheated on, with a false beard,
And a turned cloak. Faith, would your predecessor
The Cutpurse, think you, have been so? Out upon thee,
The hurt the have don, to let men know their strength,
And that the' are able to out-doe a devil
Put in a body, will for ever be
A scarre upon our Name! whom have thou dealt with,
Woman or man, this day, but have out-gone thee
Some way, and most have proved the better fiendes?
Yet, you would be employed? Yes, hell shall make you
Provincial of the Cheaters or Bawd-ledger,
For this side of the town! No doubt you will render
A rare account of things. Bane of your itch,
And scratching for employment. I Will have brimstone
To al lay it sure, and fire to sindge your nails off,
But, that I would not such a damned dishonor
Stick on our state, as that the devil were hanged;
And could not save a body, Iniquity takes him on his back. that he took
From Tyborne, but it must come thither again:
You should even ride. But, up away with him --

INI. Mount, dearling of darkness, my shoulders are broad:
He that caries the fiend, is sure of his load.
The Devil was wont to carry away the evil;
But, now, the Evil out-carries the Devil.

ACT. V. SCENE. VIJ.
SHACKLES. KEEPERS.
A great noise is heard in Newgate, and the Keepers come out affrighted. O me!

KEE. 1. What Is this? 2. A ^ece of Justice Hall
Is broken down. 3. Fough! what esteem of brimstone
Is here? 4. The prisoner's dead, came in but now!

SHA. Ha? where? 4. Look here.

KEE. S'lid, I should know his countenance!
It is Gill-Cut-purse, was hanged out, this morning!

SHA. It Is he! 2. The Devil, sure, has a hand in this!
3. What shall we do?

SHA. Carry the news of it
Unto the Sherifes. 1. And to the Justices.
4. This strange! 3. And savors of the Devil, strongly!
2. IN have the sulphur of Hell-coale in my nose.
1. Fough.

SHA. Carry him in. 1. Away. 2. How rank it is!

ACT. V. SCENE. VIII.
Sir POVLE. MERE-CRAFT. EVER-ILL. TRAINS. PITFALL. FITZ-DOTTREL. To them
VVITTIPOL. MANLY. Mistress FITZ-DOTTREL. INGINE. To them GVILT-HEAD. SLEDGE.
to them SHACKLES.
The Justice comes out wandering and the rest informing him. THis was the
notablest Conspiracy,
That ere I heard of.

MER. Sir, They had given him potions,
That did enamour him on the counterfeit Lady --

EVE. Just to the time of delivery of the deed --

MER. And then the witchcraft 'gan't' appear, for straight
He fell into his fit.

EVE. Of rage at first, Sir,
Which since has so increased.

TAY. Good Sr. Poule, see him,
And punish the impostors.

POV. Therefore I come, Madame.

EIT. Let Mr Etherside alone, Madame.

POV. Do you hear?
Call in the Constable, I will have him by:
H' is the Kings Officer! and some Citizens,
Of credit! I Will discharge my conscience clearly.

MER. Yes, Sir, and send for his wife.

EVE. And the two Sorcerers,
By any means!

TAY. I thought one a true Lady,
I should be sworn. So did you, Eyther-side?

EIT. Yes, by that light, would I might never stir else, Tailbush.

TAY. And the other a civil Gentleman.

EVE. But, Madame,
You know what I told your Ladyship.

TAY. I now see it:
I was providing of a banquet for 'hem.
After I had done instructing of the fellow
De-uile, the Gentleman's man

MER. Who Is found a thief, Madam.
And to have robbed your Usher, Master Ambler,
This morning.

TAY. How?

MER. I Will tell you more, anon. He begins his fit.

FIT. Gi me some garlic, garlic, garlic, garlic.

MER. Hark the poor Gentleman, how he is tormented!

FIT. My wife is a whore, I Will kiss her no more: and why?
Ma'st not thou be a Cuckold, as well as I?
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, etc.

POV. That is the Devil speaks, and laughes in him.

MER. Do you think so, Sr.

POV. I discharge my conscience. The Justice interpret all:

FIT. And is not the Devil good company? Yes, wis.

EVE. How he changes, Sir, his voice!

FIT. And a Cuckold is
Where ere he put his head, with a a Wanion,
If his horns be forth, the Devils companion!
Look, look, look, else.

MER. How he foames!

EVE. And swells!

TAY. O, me! what is that there, rises in his belly!

EIT. A strange thing! hold it down:

TRA. PIT. We cannot, Madam.

POV. It Is too apparent this!

FIT. Wittipol, Wittipol.

WIT. How now, what play have we here.

MAN. What fine, new matters? Wittipol, and Manly. and Mistr. Fitz-dottrel
enter.

WIT. The Cockscomb, and the Couerlet.

MER. O strange impude^ce!
That these should come to face their sin!

EVE: And outface
Justice, they are the parties, Sir.

POV. Say nothing.

MER. Did you mark, Sir, upon their coming in,
How he called Wittipol.

EVE. And never saw 'hem.

POV. I warrant you did I, let 'hem play a while.

FIT. Buz, buz, buz, buz.

TAY. Less poor Gentleman!
How he is tortured!

Mrs. FI. Fie, Master Fitz-dottrel!
What do you mean to counterfeit thus?

FIT: O, o, His wife goes to him.
She comes with a needle, and thrusts it in,
She pulls out that, and she puts in a pin,
And now, and now, I do not know how, nor where,
But she pricks me here, and she pricks me there: oh, oh:

POV. Woman forbear.

WIT. What, Sr?

POV. A practice foul
For one so fair:

WIT. Has this, then, credit with you?

MAN. Do you believe in it?

POV. Gentlemen, I Will discharge
My conscience. It Is a clear conspiracy!
A dark, and devilish practice! I detest it!

WIT. The Justice sure will prove the merrier man!

MAN. This is most strange, Sir!

POV. Come not to confront
Authority with impudence: I tell you,
I do detest it. Here comes the Kings Constable,
And with him a right worshipful Commoner;
My good friend, Master Guilt-head! I am glad
I can before such witnesses, profess
My conscience, and my detestation of it.
Horible! most vnaturall! Abominable!

EVE. They whisper him. You do not tumble enough.

MER. Wallow, gnash:

TAY. O, how he is vexed!

POV. It Is too manifest.

EVE. Give him more soap to foame with, now lie still.

MER. and give him soape to act with. And act a little.

TAY. What does he now, Sr.

POV. Show
The taking of Tobacco, with which the Devil
Is so delighted.

FIT. Hum!

POV. And calls for Hum.
You takers of strong Waters, and Tobacco,
Mark this.

FIT. Yellow, yellow, yellow, yellow, etc.

POV. That Is Starch! the Devils Idol of that color.
He ratifies it, with clapping of his hands.
The proofs are pregnant.

GVI. How the Devil can act!

POV. He is the Master of Players! Master Guilt-head,
And Poets, too! you heard him talk in rhyme!
I had forgot to observe it to you, ere while!

TAY. Sir Poule interprets Figgum to be a Iuglers game. See, he spits fire.

POV. O no, he plays at Figgum,
The Devil is the Author of wicked Figgum --

MAN. Why speak you not unto him?

WIT. If I had
All innocence of man to be endangered,
And he could save, or ruin it: I Would not breath
A syllable in request, to such a fool,
He makes himelfe.

FIT. O they whisper, whisper, whisper.
We shall have more, of Devils a score,
To come to dinner, in me the sinner.

EYT. Alas, poor Gentleman!

POV. Put 'hem asunder.
Keep 'hem one from the other.

MAN. Are you phrenticke, Sir,
Or what grave dotage moves you, to take part
With so much villainy? we are not afraid
Either of law, or trial; let us be
Examined what our ends were, what the means?
To work by; and possibility of those means.
Do not conclude against us, ere you hear us.

POV. I will not hear you, yet I will conclude
Out of the circumstances.

MAN. Will you so, Sir?

POV. Yes, they are palpable:

MAN. Not as your folly:

POV: I will discharge my conscience, and do all
To the Meridian of Justice:

GVI. You do well, Sir.

FIT. Provide me to eat, three or four dishes of good meat,
I Will feast them, and their trains, a Justice head and brains
Shall be the first.

POV. The Devil loves not Justice,
There you may see.

FIT. A spare-rib of my wife,
And a whores purt'nance! a Guilt-head whole.

POV. Be not you troubled, Sir, the Devil speaks it.

FIT. Yes, wis, Knight, shite, Poule, Ioule, owl, foul, troule, boule.

POV. Crambe, another of the Diuell's games!

MER. Speak, Sir, some Greek, if you can. Is not the Justice
A solemn gamester?

EVE. Peace.

FIT. (...),
(...),
(...).

POV. He curses
In Greek, I think.

EVE. Your Spanish, that I taught you.

FIT. Quebremos elojo de burlas,

EVE. How? your rest --
Let Us break his neck in jest, the Devil says,

FIT. Di gratia, Signor miose haucte denari fatamene part.

MER. What, would the Devil borrow money?

FIT. Ouy,
Ouy Monsieur, un pauure Diable! Diablet in!

POV. It is the devil, by his several languages. Enter the Keeper of Newgate.

SHA. Where Is Sr. Poule Ether-side?

POV. Here, what is the matter?

SHA. O! such an accident fallen out at Newgate, Sir:
A great piece of the prison is rent down!
The Devil has been there, Sir, in the body --
Of the young Cutpurse, was hanged out this morning,
But, in new clothes, Sir, every one of us know him.
These things were found in his pocket.

AMB. Those are mine, Sr.

SHA. I think he was committed on your charge, Sir.
For a new felony

AMB. Yes.

SHA. He Is gone, Sir, now,
And left us the dead body. But withal, Sir,
Such an infernal stincke, and steame behind,
You cannot see St. Pulchars Steeple, yet.
They smell't as far as Ware, as the wind lies,
By this time, sure.

FIT. Is this upon your credit, friend? Fitz-dottrel leaves counterfaiting.

SHA. Sir, you may see, and satisfy your self.

FIT. Nay, then, it is time to leave off counterfeiting.
Sir I am not bewitched, nor have a Devil:
No more then you. I do defy him, I,
And did abuse you. These two Gentlemen
Put me upon it. (I have faith against him)
They taught me all my tricks. I will tell truth,
And shame the Feind. See, here, Sir, are my bellows,
And my false belly, and my Mouse, and all
That should have come forth?

MAN. Sir, are not you ashamed
Now of your solemn, serious vanity?

POV. I will make honorable amends to truth.

FIT. And so will I. But these are Coozeners, still;
And have my land, as plotters, with my wife:
Who, though she be not a witch, is worse, a whore.

MAN. Sir, you belie her. She is chaste, and virtuous,
And we are honest. I do know no glory
A man should hope, by venting his own follyes,
But you will still be an Ass, in spite of providence.
Please you go in, Sir, and hear truths, then judge 'hem:
And make amends for your late rashness; when,
You shall but hear the pains and care was taken,
To save this fool from ruin (his Grace of Drown'd-land)

FIT. My land is drowned indeed --

POV. Peace.

MAN. And how much
His modest and too worthy wife has suffered
By mis-construction, from him, you will blush,
First, for your own belief, more for his actions!
His land is his: and never, by my friend,
Or by my self, meant to another use,
But for her succors, who has equal right.
If any other had worse counsels in 't,
(I know I speak to those can apprehend me)
Let 'hem repent 'hem, and be not detected.
It is not manly to take joy, or pride
In humane errors (we do all ill things,
They do 'hem worst that love 'hem, and dwell there,
Till the plague comes) The few that have the seeds
Of goodness left, will sooner make their way
To a true life, by shame, then punishment.

The End.
The Epilogue.
THus, the Proiecter, here, is ouer-throwne.
But I have now a Project of mine own,
If it may pass: that no man would inuit
The Poet from us, to sup forth to night,
If the play please. If it displeasant be,
We do presume, that no man will: nor we.
CHRISTMAS, HIS MASQUE; AS IT WAS PRESENTED AT COURT. 1616.
Enter Christmas with two or three of the Guard. HE is attired in round Hose,
long Stockings, a close Doublet, a high crowned Hat with a Broach, a long thin
beard, a Truncheon, little Ruffes, white Shoes, his Scarffes, and Garters tied
cross, and his Drum beaten before him. WHy Gentlemen, do you know what you
do? ha! would you have kept me out? Christmas, old Christmas? Christmas of
London, and Captain Christmas? Pray you let me be brought before my Lord
Chamberlain, i will not be answered else: it is merry in hall when beards wag
all: I have seen the time you have wished for me, for a merry Christmas, and now
you have me; they would not let me in: I must come another time! a good jest,
as if I could come more then once a year; why, I am no dangerous person, and
so I told my friends, of the Guard. I am old Gregory Christmas still, and
though I come out of Popes-head-alley as good a Protestant, as any in my
Parish. The troth is, I have brought a Masque here, out of the City, of my own
making, and do present it by a set of my Sons, that come out of the Lanes
of London, good dancing boys all: It was intended I confess for Curryers
Hall, but because the weather has been open, and the Livory were not at
leisure to see it till a frost came that they cannot work. I thought it
convenient, with some little alterations, and the Groom of the Revells hand to
't, to fit it for a higher place, which I have done; and though I say it,
another manner of devise then your New years night. Bones of bread, the King!
Son Rowland, Son Clem, be ready there in a trice; quick, Boys.

Enter his Sons and Daughters being ten in number, led in, in a string by
Cupid, who is attired in a flat Cap, and a Prentises Coat, with wings at his
shoulders. The names of his Children, with their attyres.
MIS-RULE. IN a velvet Cap with a Sprig, a short Cloak, great yellow Ruff
like a Reveller, his Torch-bearer bearing a Rope, a Cheese and a Basket,
CAROLL. A Long tawny Coat, with a red Cap, and a Flute at his girdle, his
Torch-bearer carrying a Song book open. MINC'D-ITEMIE. LIke a fine Cooks
Wife, dressed neat; her Man carrying a ITEMie, Dish, and Spoones. GAMBOLL. LIke a
Tumbler, with a hoope and Bells; his Torch-bearer armed with a Cole-staffe, and
a blinding cloth. ITEMOST AND ITEMAIRE. WIth a paire-Royall of Aces in his Hat;
his Garment all done over with ITEMayres, and ITEMurrs; his Squier carrying a
Box, Gards, and Counters. NEW-YEARES-GIFT. IN a blew Coat, serving-man like,
with an Orange, and a sprig of Rosemarie guilt on his head, his Hat full of
Broaches, with a collar of Gingerbread, his Torch-bearer carrying a
March-paine, with a bottle of wine on either arm. MUMMING. IN a Masquing pied
suite, with a Visor, his Torch-bearer carrring the Box, and ringing it.
WASSALL. LIke a neat Sempster, and Songster; her ITEMage bearing a brown
bowl, dressed with Ribbands, and Rosemarie before her. OFFERING. IN a short
gown, with a ITEMorters staff in his hand; a With borne before him, and a
Basin by his Torch-bearer. BABIE-COCKE. Dressed like a Boy, in a fine long Coat,
Biggin, Bib, Muckender, and a little Dagger; his Usher bearing a great Cake
with a Bean, and a ITEMease.


They enter singing. NOw God preserve, as you well do deserve,
your Majesty's all, two there;
Your Highness small, with my good Lords all,
and Ladies, how do you do there?
Gi'me leave to ask, for I bring you a Masque
from little little little little London;
Which say the KING likes, I ha'passed the Pikes,
if not, old Christmas is undone.
CHR. A' peace, what is the matter there?


GAMB. Here Is one, of Friday street would come in.


CHR. By no means, nor out of neither of the Fishstreets, admit not a man;
they are not Christmas creatures: Fish, and fasting days, foh! Sons, said I
well? look to it.


GAMB. No body out of Friday-street, nor the two Fish-streets there; do yo
hear?


CAROL. Shall John Butter of Milke-street come in? ask him.


GAMB. Yes, he may slip in for a Torch-bearer, so he melt not too fast, that he
will last till the Masque be done.


CHR. Right Son.


Sing again. Our Dances freight, is a matter of eight,
and two, the which are Wenches;
In all they be ten, four Cocks to a Hen,
and will swim to the tune like Tenches.
Each has his knight, for to carry his light,
which some would say are Torches;
To bring them here, and to lead them there,
and home again to their own porches.
Now their intent --
Enter Venus, a deaf Tire-woman. VEN. Now, all the Lords bless me, where am I
tro? where is Cupid: serve the King? they may serve the Cobbler well enough,
some of 'em, for any courtesy they have y'wisse; they have need of mending:
unrude people they are, your Courtiers, here was thrust upon thrust indeed! was
it ever so hard to get in before, tro?


CHR. How now? what is the matter?


VEN. A place forsooth, I do want a place; I would have a good place to see my
Child act in before the KING, and QUEEN'S Majesty's (God bless 'em) to night.


CHR. Why, here is no place for you.


VEN. Right forsooth, I am Cupids Mother, Cupids own Mother: forsooth; yes
forsooth: I dwell in pudding-lane; I forsooth, he is Prentise in Love-lane with
a Bugle-maker, that makes of your Bobs, and Bird-bolts for Ladies,


CHR. Good Lady Venus of Pudding-lane, you must go out for all this.


VEN. Yes forsooth, I can sit any where, so I may see Cupid act; he is a
pretty Child, though I say it that perhaps should not, you will say: I had him
by my first Husband, he was a Smith forsooth, we dwelt in Doe-little lane then,
he came a month before his time, and that may make him somewhat imperfect: But
I was a Fishmongers daughter.


CHR. No matter for your Pedigree, your house; good Venus will you depart?


VEN. I forsooth, he will say his part I warrant him, as well as ere a Play boy
of 'em all: I could have had money enough for him, an I would ha been tempted,
and have let him out by the week, to the Kings Players: Master Burbadge has
been about and about with me; and so has old Mr. Hemings too, they have need of
him, where is he tro'a? I would feign see him, pray God they have given him
some drink since he came.


CHRIST. Are you ready Boys? strike up, nothing will drown this noise but a
Drum: a' peace, yet, I have not done


Sing -- Now their intent, is above to present -- CAROL. Why? here be half of
the properties forgotten, Father.


OFFERING. Post and Pair wants his pur-chops, and his pur-dogs.


CAROL. Have you nere a Son at the Groom-Porters to beg, or borrow a pair of
Cards quickly?


GAMB. It shall not need, here is your Son Chrater without; has Cards in his
pocket.


OFFERING. Odds so; speak to the Guard to let him in, under the name of a
property.


GAMB. And here is New-yeares-gift h'as an Orange, and Rosmarie, but not a clove
to stick in it.


NEVV-YEER. Why, let one go to the Spicery.


CHR. Fie, fie, fie; it is naught, it is naught boys.


VEN. Why, I have cloves, if it be cloves you want, I have cloves in my purse,
I never go without one in my mouth.


CAROL. And Mumming, has not his vizard neither.


CHR. No matter, his own face shall serve for a punishment, and it is bad
enough; has Wassell her boule, and Mince-pie her spoones?


OFFER. I, I; but Mis-rule does not like his suite: he says the Players have
lent him one too little, on purpose to disgrace him.


CHR. Let him hold his peace, and his disgrace will be the less: what? shall
we proclaim where we were furnished? Mum! Mum! a' peace, be ready good Boys.


Sings again. Now their intent, is above to present
with all the appurtenances
A right Christmas, as of old it was,
to be gathered out of the Dances.
Which they do bring, and before the King,
the Queen, and Prince, as it were now
Drawn here by Love; who, over and above,
does draw himself in the geere too.
Here the Drum, and Fife sounds, and they march about once; at the second
coming up he proceeds in his song. Hum drum, sauce for a Coney;
no more of your Martial music:
Even for the sake, of the next new stake,
for there I do mean to use it.
And now to ye, who in place are to see,
with Roll and Farthingale hooped:
I pray you know, though he want his bow
by the wings, that this is Cupid.
He might go back, for to cry what you lack,
but that were not so witty:
His Cap, and Coat, are enough to note
that he is the Love of the City.
And he leads on, though he now begone,
for that was only his-rule:
But now comes in, Tom of Bosoms Inn,
and he presents Mis-rule.
Which you may know, by the very show,
albeit you never ask it:
For there you may see what his Ensigns be,
the Rope, the Cheese, and the Basket.
This Carol plays, and has been in his days
a chirping boy, and a kill pot:
Kit Cobbler it is, I Am a Father of his,
and he dwells in the lane, called Fil-pot.
But who is this? OF my daughter Sis
Mince-pie, with her do not dally
On pain of your life: She Is an honest Cooks wife,
and comes out of Scalding-Alley.
Next in the trace, comes Gambol in place,
and to make my tale the shorter:
My Son Hercules, taken, out of Distaffe-lane
but an active man, and a Porter.
Now Post and Pair, old Christmasses heir
does make, and a gingling Sally:
And wott you who, it is one of my two
Sons, Cardmakers in Pur-alley.
Next in a trice, with his box and his Dice,
Mac-pippin my Son, but younger,
Brings Mumming in; and the knave will win,
for a' is a Costermonger.
But New-yeares-gift, of himself makes shift
to tell you what his name is:
With Orange on head, and his Gingerbread,
Clem Waspe of Honey-lane it is.
This I you tell, is our jolly Wassell,
and for Twelfe-night more meet too:
She works by the Ell, and her name is Nell,
and she dwells in Thred-needle-street too.
Then Offering he, with his Dish, and his Tree,
that in every great house keeps;
Is by my Son, young Little-worth done,
and in Penny-rich-street he sleeps.
Last, Baby-cake, that an end does make
of Christmas merry, merry vain a
Is Child Rowlan, and a straight young man,
though he come out of Crooked-lane' a.
There should have been, and a dozen I wene,
but I could find but one more;
Child of Christmas, and a Logge it was,
when I them all had gone ore.
I prayed him, in a time so trim,
that he would make one to praunce it:
And I my self, would have been the twelfe,
of hut Log was to heavy to dance it.
Now Cupid come you on. CUPID. You worthy wights, King, Lords, and Knights,
or Queen, and Ladies bright:
Cupid invites, you to the sights
he shall present to night.

VEN. It Is a good child, speak out, hold up your head Love.


CUPID. And which Cupid -- and which Cupid, etc.


VEN. Do not shake so Robin, if thou be a'cold, I have some warm waters for
thee, here.


CHR. Come, you put Robin Cupid out with your waters, and your fisling; will
you be gone?


VEN. I forsooth; he is a child, you must conceive, and must be used tenderly;
he was never in such an assembly before forsooth, but once at Warmoll Quest,
forsooth, where he said grace as prettily as any of the Sheriffs Hinch-boyes
forsooth.


CHR. Will you peace, forsooth?


CUPID. And which Cupid, and which Cupid, etc.


VEN. I that is a good boy, speak plain, Robin: how does his Majesty like
him, I pray? will he give eight pence a day think you? speak out Robin.


CHR. Nay, he is out enough, you may take him away, and begin your Dance; this
it is to have speeches.


VEN. You wrong the Child, you do wrong the Infant; IN peale to his Majesty.


Here they Dance. CHR. Well done Boys, my fine Boys, my bully Boys.


Sings again. The Epilogue.
NOr do you think that their legs is all
the commendation of my Sons,
For at the Artillery-Garden they shall
as well (forsooth) use their Guns.
And march as fine, as the Muses nine,
along the streets of London:
And i'their brave tires, to gi'their false fires,
especially Tom my Son.
Now if the Lanes and the Allies afford,
such an ac-ativitie as this:
At Christmas next, if they keep their word,
can the children of Cheapside miss?
Though, put the case, when they come in place,
they should not dance, but hop:
Their very gold lace, with their silk would'em grace,
having so many knights, of the Shop!
But were I so wise, I might seem to advise
so great a Potentate as your self:
They should Sir, I tell ye, spar't out of their belly,
and this way spend some of their pelf.
I, and come to the Court, for to make you some sport,
at the least once every year:
As Christmas has done, with his seventh or eigth Son,
and his couple of Daughters dear.
The End.
A Masque PRESENTED IN THE HOUSE OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD HAY.

BY DIVERSE OF NOBLE QVALITY, HIS FRIENDS.

FOR THE ENTERTAINment of Monsieur LE BARON DE TOVR, extraordinary Ambassador
for the FRENCH KING.

On Saturday the 22. of FEBRVARY, 1617.

MART. Quid titulum poscis? Versus duo tresve legantur.

1617.

THE FRONT BEFORE THE SCENE, was an Arch-Triumphall.
On the top of which, HVMANITIE placed in figure, sat with her lap full of
flowers, scattering them with her right hand; and holding a golden chain in
her left hand: to show both the freedom, and the bond of Courtesy, with this
inscription. SVPER OMNIA VULTVS. her servants.
On the two sides of the Arch CHEEREFVLNES, and READINESS,
CHEEREFVLNES, in a loose flowing garment, filling out wine from an antique
piece of plate; with this word Adsit laetitiae dator.

READINESS, a winged Maid, with two flaming bright lights in her hands; and her
word. Amor addidit alas.

The Scene discovered, is (on the one side) the head of a Boat, and in it
CHARON putting off from the shore, having landed certain imagined ghosts, whom
MERCVRY there receives, and encourages to come on toward the River LETHE, who
appears lying in the person of an old man. The FATES sitting by him on his
bank; a grove of myrtles behind them, presented in perspective, and growing
thicker to the outer side of the Scene. MERCVRY, perceiving them to faint,
calls them on, and shows them his golden rod. And the whole Mask was sung
(after the Italian manner) Stylo recitativo, by Master Nicholas Lanier; who
ordered and made both the Scene, and the Music. MERCVRY. NAy, faint not now,
so near the fields of rest.
Here no more furies, no more torments dwell,
Then each has felt already in his breast;
Who has been once in love, has proved his Hell.
Up then, and follow this my golden rod,
That points you next to aged LETHES shore,
Who poures his waters from his urne abroad,
Of which but tasting, you shall faint no more.

LETHE. Stay, who, or what phantastique shades are these
That HERMES leads?

MERCVRY. They are the gentle forms,
Of Lovers, tossed upon those frantique seas,
Whence VENUS sprung.

LETHE. And have rid out her storms?

MERCVRY. No.

LETHE. Did they perish?

MERCVRY. Yes.

LETHE. How?

MERCVRY. Drowned by love,
That drew them forth with hopes as smooth as were
Th'unfaithfull waters he desired them prove.

LETHE. And turned a tempest, when he had them there?

MERCVRY. He did, and on the billow would he roll,
And laugh to see one throw his heart away,
Another sighing, vapor forth his soul,
A third, to melt himself in tears, and say,
O Love, I now to salter water turn
Then that I die in; then, a fourth, to cry
Amid the surges; oh! I burn, I burn:
A fifth, laugh out, it is my ghost, not I.
And thus in paires I found'hem. Only one
There is, that walks, and stops, and shakes his head,
And shuns the rest, as glad to be alone,
And whispers to himself, he is not dead.

FATES. No more are all the rest.

MERCVRY. No:

1. FATE. No.

MERCVRY. But, why
Proceeds this doubtful voice from destiny?

FATES. It is too sure.

MERCVRY. Sure?

2. FATE. I. Thinks MERCVRY,
That any things, or names on earth do die,
That are obscured from knowledge of the FATES,
Who keep all rolls?

3. FATE. And know all natures dates?

MERCVRY. They say themselves, they are dead.

1. FATE. It not appears.
Or, by our rock.

2. FATE. Our spindle.

3. FATE. Or our sheeres.

FATES. Here all their threads are growing, yet none cut.

MERCVRY. I'gin to doubt, that Love with charms has put
This phant'sie in'hem; and they only think
That they are ghosts.

FATE. If so, then let'hem drink
Of LETHES stream.

FATE. 'Twill make'hem to forget
LOVES name.

FATE. And so, they may recover yet!

MERCVRY. Do, bow unto the reverend lake:
And having touched there; up, and shake
The shadows off, which yet do make
Us you, and you your-selves mistake.

Here they all stoop to the water, and dance forth their Antimasque in
several gestures, as they lived in love: And retyring into the Grove, before
the last person be off the Stage; the first couple appear in their posture
between the trees, ready to come forth, changed. MERCVRY. See! see! they are
themselves again!

1. FATE. Yes, now the'are substances, and men.

2. FATE. LOVE, at the name of LETHE flies.

LETHE. For, in oblivion drowned, he dies.

3. FATE. He must not hope, though other states
He often subdue, he can the FATES.

FATES. 'Twere insolence, to think his powers
Can work on us; or equal ours.

CHORUS. Return, Return,
Like lights to burn
On earth,
For others good:
Your second birth
Will fame old LETHES flood,
And warn a world,
That now are hoorld
About in tempest, how they prove
Shadows for Love.
Leap forth: your light it is the nobler made,
By being struck out of a shade.

Here they dance forth their entry, or first dance: after which CUPID --
appearing, meets them. WHy, now you take me! these are rites
That grace Loves days, and crown his nights!
These are the motions, I would see,
And praise, in them that follow me!
Not sighs, nor tears, nor wounded hearts,
Nor flames, nor ghosts: but ayrie parts
Tried, and refined as yours have bin,
And such they are, I glory in

MERCVRY. Look, look unto this snakie rod,
And stop your ears, against the charming god;
His every word, falls from him, is a snare:
Who have so lately known him, should beware.
Here they Dance their maine dance, which ended,
CUPID. Come, do not call it CVPIDS crime,
You were thought dead before your time.
If thus you move to HERMES will
Alone; you will be thought so still.
Go, take the Ladies forth, and talk,
And touch, and taste too: Ghosts can walk.
'Twixt eyes, tongues, hands, the mutual strife
Is bred, that tries the truth of life.
They do, indeed, like dead men move,
That think they live, and not in love!
Here they take forth the Ladies, and the Revells follow: after which,
MERCVRY. Nay, you should never have left off:
But stayed, and heard your CUPID scoff,
To find you in the line you were.

CUPID. Your too much wit, breeds too much fear.

MERCVRY. Good Fly, good night.

CUPID. But will you go?
Can you leave LOVE, and he entreat you so?
Here, take my quiver, and my bow,
My torches too; that you, by all, may know
I mean no danger to your stay:
This night, I will create my holiday,
And be yours naked, and entire.

MERCVRY. As if that LOVE, dis-arm'd, were less a fire?
Away, away.
They Dance their going out: which done,
MERCVRY. Yet lest that VENUS wanton Son,
Should with the world, be quite undone,
For your fair sakes (you brighter stars,
Who have beheld these civil wars.)
FATE is content, these Lovers here
Remain still such: so LOVE will swear
Never to force them act to do,
But what he will call HERMES too.

CUPID. I swear: and with like cause thank MERCVRY,
As these have, to thank him, and destiny.

CHORUS. All then take cause of joy: for who has not?
Old LETHE, that their follies are forgot;
We, that their lives unto their fates they fit:
They, that they still shall love, and love with wit.

The End.
THE VISION OF DELIGHT PRESENTED AT COURT IN CHRISTMAS, 1617.
THE SCENE. A Street in perspective of fair building discovered. DELIGHT Is
seen to come as afar off, accompanied with
Grace, Love, Harmony, Revell, Sport, Laughter.
WONDER following.
DELIGHT spoke in song (stylo recitativo.) Let us play, and dance, and sing,
let us now turn every sort;
OF the pleasures of the Spring,
to the graces of a Court.
From air, from cloud, from dreams, from toys,
to sounds, to sense, to love to joys;
Let your shows be new, as strange,
let them often and sweetly vary;
Let them haste so to their change,
as the Seers may not tarry;
Too long to expect the pleasing't sight
does take away from the delight.
Here the first Anti-maske entered. A she Monster delivered of six Burratines,
that dance with six Pantalones, which done DELIGHT, spoke again. Yet hear
what your delight does pray
all sour and sullen looks away,
that are the servants of the day,
Our sports are of the humorous night,
Who feeds the stars that give her light,
and uses (then her wont) more bright,
to help the vision of DELIGHT.

Here the Night rises, and took her Chariot be spangled with stars. DELIGHT,
proceeds. See, see her Scepter, and her Crown
are all of flame, and from her gown
a train of light comes waving down.
This night in dew she will not steep
The brain, nor lock the sense in sleep;
but all awake, with Phantomes keep,
and those to make DELIGHT more deep.
By this time the Night, and Moon being both risen; Night hovering over the
place, Sung Break Phant'sie from thy cave of cloud,
and spread thy purple wings;
Now all thy figures are allowed,
and various shapes of things;
Create of ayrie forms, a stream;
it must have blood, and naught of fleame,
And though it be a waking dream;
The Quire Yet let it like an odor rise
to all the Senses here,
And fall like sleep upon their eyes,
or music in their ear.

The Scene here changed to Cloud, and Phant'sie breaking forth, spoke. Bright
Night, I obey thee, and am come at thy call
But it is no one dream that can please these all;
Wherefore I would know what Dreams would delight'em;
For never was Phant'sie more loath to affright'em.
And Phant'sie I tell you has dreams that have wings,
And dreams that have honey, and dreams that have stings;
Dreams of the maker, and Dreams of the teller,
Dreams of the kitchen, and Dreams of the Cellar:
Some that are tall, and some that are Dwarffes,
Some that were halter'd, and some that wear scarffes;
Some that are proper, and signify of thing,
And some another, and some that are nothing:
For say the French Verdingale, and the French hood
Were here to dispute; must it be understood
A feather, for a wispe were a fit moderator?
Your Ostritch believe it is no faithful translator
Of perfect Utopian; And then it were an od-piece
To see the conclusion peep forth at a cod-piece.
The politic pudding has still his two ends,
Tho the bellows, and the bag-pipe were never so good friends:
And who can report what offense it would be
For the Squirrell to see a Dog clime a tree?
If a Dream should come in now to make you afeard,
With a Windmill on his head, and bells at his beard;
Would you straight wear your spectacles, here, at your toes,
And your boots of your brows, and your spurs of your nose?
Your Whale he will swallow, a hogs-head for a pill;
But the maker of the mouse-trap, is he that has skill.
And the nature of the Onion, is to draw tears,
As well as the Mustard; peace, pitchers have ears,
And Shitlecocks wings, these things do not mind'em,
If the Bell have any sides, the clapper will find'em:
There Is twice so much music in beating the tabor,
As in the Stock Fish, and somewhat less labor.
Yet all this while, no proportion is boasted
T'wixt an egg, and an Ox, though both have been roasted,
For grant the most Barbers can play of the Citterne,
Is it requisite a Lawyer should plead to a Ghitterne?
You will say now, the Morris-bells were but bribes
To make the heel forget that ever it had kibes;
I say let the wine make never so good jelly,
The conscience of the bottle, is much in the belly:
For why? do but take common Council in your way,
And tell me who will then set a bottle of hay
Before the old Usurer, and to his horse
A slice of salt-butter, perverting the course
Of civil society? open that gap,
And out skip your fleas, four and twenty at a clap,
With a chain and a trundle-bed following at th'heeles,
And will they not cry then, the world runs a wheels:
As for example, a belly, and no face,
With the bill of a Shoveler, may here come in place;
The haunches of a Drum, with the feet of a pot,
And the tail of a Kentishman to it; why not?
Yet would I take the stars to be cruel,
If the Crab, and the Ropemaker ever fight duel,
On any dependence, be it right, be it wrong,
But mum; a thread may be drawn out too long.
Here the second Anti-masque of Phantos'mes came forth, which danced. PHANT'SIE
proceeded. Why? this you will say was fantastical now,
As the Cock, and the Bull, the Whale, and the Cow;
But vanish away, I have change to present you,
And such as I hope will more truly content you:
Behold the gold-haird Hour descending here,
That keeps the gate of Heaven, and turns the year,
Already with her sight, how she does cheer,
And makes another face of things appear.
Here one of the Hours descending, the whole Scene changed to the Bower of
Zephyrus, whilst, Peace sung, as follows Why look you so, and all turn
dumb!
to see the opener of the New-yeare come?
My presence rather should invite,
and aid, and urge, and call to your delight,
The many pleasures that I bring
are all of youth, of heat, of life, and spring,
And were prepared to warm your blood,
not fix it thus as if your Statutes stood.
The Quire we see, we hear, we feel, we taste,
we smell the change in every flower,
we only wish that all could last,
and be as new still as the hour.
The Song ended. WONDER spoke. WONDER must speak, or break; what is this?
grows
The wealth of Nature here, or Art? it shows
As if Favonius, father of the Spring,
Who, in the verdant Meads does reign sole king,
Had rowsd him here, and shook his feathers, wet
With purple swelling Nectar? and had let
The sweet and fruitful dew fall on the ground
To force out all the flowers that might be found?
Or a Minerva with her needle had
Th'enamourd earth with all her riches clad,
And made the downie Zephire as he flew
Still to be followd with the Springs best hue?
The gaudie Peacocke boasts not in his train,
So many lights and shadows, nor the rain*
Resolving Iris, when the Sun does court ber,
Nor purple Phesant while his Aunt does sporther
To hear him crow; and with a pearched pride
Wave his dis-coloured neck, and purple side?
I have not seen the place could more surprise,
It looks (me thinks) like one of natures eyes,
Or her whole body set in art? behold!
How the Blew-binde weed does it self infold
With Honey-suckle, and both these intwine
Themselves with Bryonie, and Jessamine,
To cast a kind and odoriferous shade?
PHANT'SIE. How better then they are, are all things made
By WONDER? But a while refresh thine eye,
I Will put thee to thy oftener, what, and why?
Here (to a loud music) the Bower opens, and the Maskers discovered, as the
glories of the Spring.
WONDER again spoke. Thou will indeed; what better change appears?
Whence is it that the air so sudden cleares,
And all things in a moment turn so mild,
Whose breath or beams, have got proud earth with child,
Of all the treasure that great Natur's worth,
And makes her every minute to bring forth?
How comes it Winter is so quite forced hence,
And locked up under ground? that every sense
Has several objects? Trees have got their heads,
The fields their coats? that now the shining Meads
Do boast the Paunce, the Lilly, and the Rose;
And every flower does laugh as Zephire blows?
That Seas are now more even then the Land?
The Rivers run as smoothed by his hand;
Only their heads are crisped by his stroke:
How plays the Yeareling with his brow scarce broke
Now in the open Grass? and frisking Lambs
Make wanton Salts about their drie-suckt Dams;
Who to repair their bags do rob the fields?
How is it each bough a several music yields?
The lusty Throstle, early Nightingale
Accord in tune, though vary in their tale?
The chirping Swallow called forth by the Sun,
And crested Lark does his division run?
The yellow Bees, the air with murmr fill?
The Finches caroll, and the Turtles bill?
Whose power is this? what God?

PHANT'SIE Behold a King
Whose presence makes this perpetual Spring,
The glories of which Spring grow in that Bower,
And are the marks and beauties of his power.
To which the Quire answered. It Is he, it is he, and no power else
That makes all this what Phant'sie tells;
The founts, the flowers, the birds, the Bees,
The herds, the flocks, the grass, the trees,
Do all confess him; but most These
Who call him lord of the four Seas,
King of the less and greater Isles,
And all those happy when he smiles.
Advance, his favor calls you to advance,
And do your (this nights) homage in a'dance.
Here they danced their entry, after which they sung again. Again, again;
you cannot be
Of such a true delight too free,
Which who once saw would ever see;
And if they could the object prize,
Would while it lasts not think to rise,
But wish their bodies all were eyes.
They Danced their maine Dance, after which they sung. In curious knots and
mazes so
The Spring at first was taught to go;
And Zephire, when he came to woo
His Flora, had their motions too,
And thence did Venus learn to lead
The Idalian Braules, and so tread
As if the wind, not she did walk;
Nor pressed a flower, nor bowed a stalk.
They Danced with Ladies, and the whole Revells followed; after which Aurora
appeared (the Night and Moon) descended, and this Epilogue followed. I was not
wearier where I lay
By frozen Tythons side to night,
Then I am willing now to stay,
And be a part of your delight.
But I am urged by the Day,
Against my will to bid you come away.
The Quire. They yield to Time, and so must all.
As Night to sport, Day does to action call,
Which they the rather do obey,
Because the Morn, with Roses strew's the way.

Here they Danced their going off, and Ended.
PLEASURE RECONCILED TO VERTVE. A Masque. AS IT WAS PRESENTED AT COURT BEFORE
KING JAMES. 1619.
The SCENE was the Mountain ATLAS. WHo had his top ending in the figure of an
old man, his head and beard all hoary, and frost, as if his shoulders were
covered with snow; the rest Wood, and Rock. A Grove of Ivy at his feet; out
of which, to a wild Music of Cymbals, Flutes, and Tabers is brought forth,
COMVS the God of Cheer, or the Belly, riding in Triumph, his head crowned with
Roses, and other flowers, his hair curled: They that wait upon him crowned
with Ivy, their Javelins done about with it; one of them going with Hercules
his Boule bare before him, while the rest presented him with this Hymn.

Room, room, make room for the bouncing belly,
First father of sauce, and deviser of jellie;
Prime master of Arts, and the giver of wit,
That found out the excellent Engine, the spit;
The plough, and the flaile, the mill, and the hopper,
The hutch, and the boulter, the furnace and copper,
The oven, the baven, the mawkin, the peele,
The harth, and the range, the dog, and the wheel,
He, he first invented the hogshead and tun,
The gimlet and vice too, and taught 'em to run,
And since with the funnell, and Hippocras bag,
H'as made of himself, that now he cries swag;
Which shows though the pleasure be but of four inches,
Yet he is a Weesell, the gullet that pinches
Of any delight, and not spares from this back,
What ever to make of the belly a sack!
Hail, hail plump paunch, o the founder of taste,
For fresh-meats, or powlder'd, or pickle, or paste,
Devourer of broyl'd, backed, roasted, or sod;
And emptier of cups, be they even or odd;
All which have now made thee so wide in the waste,
As scarce with no pudding thou art to be laced,
But eating and drinking until thou do nod,
Thou break'st all thy girdles, and breakst forth a god.
To this the Boule-bearer. DO you hear my friends? to whom did you sing all
this now? pardon me only that I ask you, for I do not look for an answer;
He answer my self, I know it is now such a time as the Saturnalls for all the
World, that every man stands under the eaves of his own hat, and sings what
please him; that is the right, and the liberty of it. Now you sing of god Comus
here the bellie-god; I say it is well, and I say it is not well: It is well as
it is a ballad, and the belly worthy of it; I must needs say, and 'twere
forty yards of ballad more, as much ballad as tripe. But when the belly is not
edyfied by it, it is not well; for where did you ever read or hear, that the
belly had any ears? Come never pumpe for an answer, for you are defeated; Our
fellow Hunger there that was as ancient a reteiner to the belly as any of us,
was turned away for being unseasonable, not unreasonable, but unseasonable; and
now is he poor thin-gut, feign to get his living with teaching of Starlings,
Mag-pies, Parrots, and Jacke-dawes, those things he would have taught the
belly. Beware of dealing with the belly, the belly will not be talked too,
especially when he is full; then there is no venturing upon Venture, he will
blow you all up, he will thunder indeed-la: Some in dirision call him the
father of farts; but I say he was the first inventor of great Ordnance, and
taught us to discharge them on Festival days, would we had a fit feast for
him in faith, to show his activity; I would have something now fetched in to
please his five senses, the throat, or the two senses the eyes: Pardon me for
my two senses, for I that carry Hercules Boule in the service, may see double by
my place; for I have drunk like a frog to day: I would have a Tun now brought
in to dance, and so many bottles about him. Ha! you look as if you would make
a problem of this; do you see? do you see? a problem: why bottles? and why a
tun? and why a tun? and why bottles to dance? I say that men that drink hard,
and serve the belly in any place of quality (as the joviall Tinkers, or the
lusty kindred) are living measures of drink, and can transform themselves,
and do every day to bottles, or tuns when they please: And when they have done
all they can, they are as I say again, (for I think I said somewhat like it
before) but moving measures of drink, and there is a piece in the Cellar can hold
more than all they. This will I make good, if it please our new god but to give
a nod, for the belly does all by signs; and I am all for the belly, the
truest clock in the world to go by.

Here the first Anti-maske, after which HERCULES. What Rites are these? breeds
earth more monsters yet?
Antaeus scarce is cold: what can beget
This store? (and stay) such contraries upon her,
Is earth so fruitful of her own dishonor?
Or'cause his vice was inhumanitie,
Hopes she by vicious hospitality
To work an expiation first? and then
(Help virtue) these are sponges, and not men:
Bottles? mere vessels? half a tun of paunch?
How? and the other half thrust forth in haunch?
Whose feast? the bellies? Comus? and my cup
Brought in to fill the drunken Orgies up?
And here abused? that was the crowned reward,
Of thirsty Heroes, after labor hard?
Burdens, and shames of nature, perish, die;
(For yet you never lived) but in the stie
Of vice have wallow'd, and in that swines strife
Been buried under the offense of life:
Go reele and fall under the load you make,
Till your swollen bowels burst with what you take.
Can this be pleasure, to extinguish man?
Or so quite change him in his figure? can
The belly love his pain? and be content
With no delight but what is a punishment?
These monsters plague themselves, and fitly too,
For they do suffer; what, and all the do,
But here must be no shelter, nor no shroud
For such: Sincke Grove, or vanish into cloud.
At this the whole Grove vanished, and the whole Music was discovered,
sitting at the foot of the Mountain, with Pleasure, and Virtue seated above
them. The Quire invited Hercules to rest with this Song.
GReat friend and servant of the good,
Let cool a while thy heated blood,
And from thy mighty labor cease.
Lie down, lie down,
And give thy troubled spirits peace,
Whilst virtue, for whose sake
Thou do this god-like travail take,
May of the choysest herbage make
(Here on this Mountain bred,)
A crown, a crown
For thy immortal head.

Here Hercules being laid down at their feet, the second Anti-mask which was of
Pigmies, appeared. 1. PIGMIE. ANtaeus dead! and Hercules yet live!
Where is this Hercules? what would I give
To meet him now? meet him? nay, three such other,
If they had hand in murder of our brother?
With three? with four? with ten? nay with as many
As the name yields? pray anger there be any
Whereon to feed my just revenge, and soon:
How shall I kill him? hurl him against the Moon,
And break him in small portions? give to Greece
His brain? and every tract of earth a piece.
2 PIG. He is yonder.
1 Where?
3 At the hill foot, asleep.
1 Let one go steal his club.
2 My charge, I Will creep.
4 He Is ours.
1 Yes, peace.
3 Triumph, we have him boy.
4 Sure, sure, he is sure.
1 Come, let us dance for joy.
At the end of their dance they thought to surprise him, when suddenly being
awaked by the music, he rowsed himself, they all run into holes.
Song.
Wake Hercules, awake; but heave up thy black eye,
It Is only asked from thee to look, and these will die,
Or fly:
Already they are fled,
Whom scorn had else left dead.
At which Mercury descended from the hill, with a garland of Poplar to crown
him. MERCVRY. REst still thou active friend of virtue; These
Should not disturb the peace of Hercules.
Earths worms, and Honors dwarfes (at too great ods)
Prove, or provoke the issue of the gods.
See, here a Crown the aged Hill has sent thee,
My Grand-sire Atlas, he that did present thee
With the best sheep that in his fold were found,
Or golden fruit in the Hesperian ground,
For rescuing his fair Daughters, then the prey
Of a rude Pirate as thou came this way;
And taught thee all the learning of the Sphere,
And how like him thou might the heavens up-beare;
As that thy labors virtuous recompense
He, though a Mountain now, has yet the sense
Of thanking thee for more, thou being still
Constant to goodness, guardian of the hill;
Antaeus by thee suffocated here,
And the voluptuous Comus god of cheer
Beat from his Grove, and that defaced, but now
The time's arrived that Atlas told thee of, how
B'unalterd law, and working of the Stars,
There should be a cessation of all jars,
Twixt Virtue and her noted opposite
Pleasure; that both should meet here in the sight
Of Hesperus, the glory of the West,
The brightest star that from his burning crest
Lights all on this side the Atlanticke-Seas,
As far as to thy Pillars, Hercules,
See where he shines, Justice, and Wisdom placed
about his throne, and those with honor graced
Beauty, and Love: It is not with his Brother
Bearing the world, but ruling such another
Is his renown, Pleasure, for his delight
Is reconciled to Virtue, and this night
Virtue brings forth, twelve Princes have been bred
In this rough mountain, and near Atlas head
The hill of knowledge; one, and chief of whom
Of the bright race of Hesperus is come,
Who shall in time, the same that he is be,
And now is only a less light then he;
These now she trusts with Pleasure, and to these
She gives an entrance to the Hesperides
Fair beauties garden; neither can she fear
They should grow soft, or wax effeminate here;
Since in her sight, and by her charge all is done,
Pleasure the servant, Virtue looking on.
Here the whole Quire of Music called the twelve Maskers forth from the top
of the Mountain, which then opened with this
Song.
OPEN aged Atlas, open then thy lap,
And from thy beamy bosom strike a light,
That men may read in the mysterious map
All lines
And signs
Of royal education, and the right,
See how they come and show,
That are but borne to know.
Descend
Descend
Though pleasure lead,
Fear not to follow:
They who are bred
Within the Hill
Of skill,
May safely tread
What path they will,
No ground of good is hollow.
In their descent from the Hill, Daedalus came down before them, of whom
Hercules questioned Mercury. HERCULES. BUT Hermes stay, a little let me pause,
Who Is this that leads?

MER. A guide that gives them laws
To all their motions, Dedalus the wise;

HER. And does in sacred harmony comprise
His precepts?

MER. Yes.

HER. they may securely prove
Then any laborinth, though it be of love.

Here while they put themselves in form, Dedalus had his first Song. COme on,
come on; and where you go,
so interweave the curious knot,
As even th'observer scarce may know
which lines are Pleasures, and which not:
First figure out the doubtful way,
at which a while all youth should stay,
Where she and Virtue did contend,
which should have Hercules to friend.
Then as all actions of mankind,
are but a laborinth, or maze:
So let your Dances be entwined,
yet not perplex men unto gaze;
But measured, and so numerous too,
as men may read each act they do;
And when they see the graces meet,
admire the wisdom of your feet:
For dancing is an exercise,
not only shows the movers wit,
But makes the beholders wise,
as he has power to rise to it.
The first Dance. After which Dedalus again. Song 2.
O More, and more, this was so well,
As praise wants half his voice to tell,
again your selves compose,
And now put all the aptness on,
Of figure, that proportion,
or color can disclose.
That if those silent Arts were lost,
Design, and picture, they might boast,
from you a newer ground,
Instructed by the heightning sense
Of dignity and reverence,
in their true motions found.
Begin, begin; for look, the fair
Do longing, listen to what air
you form your second touch;
That they may vent their murmuring hymns,
Just to the -- you move your limbs,
and wish their own were such.
Make haste, make have, for this
The laborinth of beauty is.
The second Dance. That ended. Dedalus Song 3.
IT follows now you are to prove
The subt'lest maze of all, that is Love,
and if you stay too long,
The fair will think you do'em wrong:
Go choose among -- But with a mind
as gentle as the stroaking wind
runs ore the gentler flowers.
And so let all your actions smile,
As if they meant not to beguile,
the Ladies but the hours.
Grace, laughter, and discourse may meet,
and yet the beauty not go less:
For what is noble should be sweet,
But not dissolved in wantonness.
Will you that I give the law
to all your sport and some-it,
It should be such should envy draw,
but -- overcome it.
Here they Danced with the Ladies, and the whole Revells followed; which ended,
Mercury called to him in this following speech: which was after repeated in Song
by two Trebles, two Tennors, a Base, and the whole Chorus. Song 4.
AN eye of looking back were well,
Or any murmr that would tell
Your thoughts, how you were sent,
and went
To walk with Pleasure, not to dwell.
These, these are hours by virtue spared
Her self, she being her own reward:
But she will have you know,
that though
Her sports be soft, her life is hard:
You must return unto the Hill
and their advance
With labor, and inhabit still
that height and Crown,
From whence you ever may look down
upon triumphed chance.
She, she it is in darkness shines,
It Is she that still her self refines,
by her own light to every eye:
More seen, more known when vice stands by.
And though a stranger here on earth,
In Heaven she has her right of birth:
There, there is Virtues seat,
Strive to keep her your own,
It Is only she can make you great,
Though place here make you known.
After which, they Danced their last Dance, returned into the Scene, which
closed, and was a Mountain again as before. The End.
This pleased the KING so well, as he would see it again, when it was
presented with these additions.

FOR THE HONOR OF WALES.
The SCENE standing as before, a Mountain; but now the name changed from
ATLAS, to CRAIG-ERIRI. Enter Gentlemen. Griffith, Jenkin, Evan, a Welsh
Attorney. GRIF. COssin, I know what belongs to this place sym what petter then
you; and therefore give me leave to be pold to advise you. 'Is not a small
matter to offer your self into presence of a king, and aull his Court? Be not
too byssie and forward, till you be caulld, I tauke reason to you.


JEN. Cym, never tauke any taukes: if the King of gread Prittaine keep it
Assizes here, I will cym into Court: Loog you, do you see now, and please Got.


GRI. Taw, d in ynbhyd, y, dhwyti-n abl i anabhy, pob peth oath folineb, agy
tyny gwatwar ar die wlac.


JEN. Gad vynl Lonyth. I say I will appear in Court.


EV. Appear as you s'ud do then, Dab Jenkin in good sort; do not discredit
the nation, and pyt wrong upon us aull by your rassnes.


JEN. What do you caull rassnesse Evan y Gynrn, is not aull the Cyntrie, and
aull Welse, and the Prince of Wales too abused in him? by this hand, I will
tell it the Kings own ears every 'oord, do you see him now? Bless your
ursip, pray God is in Heaven bless ever ince of your ursip; and Wales is
comend it to your ursip, from top to toe, with aull his hearts aull over, by
got'utch me, and would be glad as a silling to see you in him. Come it down
once a day and try; I tell you now, you s'all be as welcomely there, as where
you were in your own Cyntries last two Symmers, and pershance we will made you
as good s'eere too; we will promise your ursip as good a piece of Seeze, as you
need pit in your head, and pleas'yow s'all be toasted too. Go too, see him
once upon a time your own sellive, is more good mean you, then is aware of:
By got' is very hard, but s'all make you a Shestice of Peace the first days
you come; and pershance (say nothing) Knight of the S'ire too: 'Is not Worsters,
nor Pembrokes, nor Mongymeries s'all carry him from you. But aull this while
s'all I tell you a liddell now? 'is a great huge deal of anger upon you, from
aull Wales and the Nation; that your ursippe would suffer our young Master
Sarles your 'ursips Son and Heir, and Prince of Wales, the first time he
ever play Dance, to be pit up in a Mountain (got knows where) by a palterly
Poet, how do you say him Evan?


EVAN. Libia.


JEN. Vellhy! Libia. And how do you caull him the Mountain; his name is


EV. Adlas.


JEN. Hynno, hynno. Adlas? I please your ursip is a Welsse Attorney, and a
preddilie scholars, a wear him his long coat, line with Seepes skin, as you
see every days of the week. A very sufficient litigious fellow's in the
Terms, and a finely Poets out of the Terms, he has a sprig of Laurel already
toward his girlonds. He was get in here at Twelfe-night and see aull; what do
you call it, your matters, and says is naught, naught, stark naught.


EV. I do say'and't please his Madestee, I do not like him with aull his
heart; h'is plugd in by the ears, without all piddies, or mercies of
propriedies or decorums. I will do injuries to no man before his Madestee; but
'is a very vile and absurd as a man would wisse, that I do say, to pyt the
Prince of Wales in an outlandis Mountain; when he is known, his Highness
has as goodly Mountains and as tawll a Hills of his own (look you, do you
see now) and of as good standing, and as good descent, as the prowdest Adlas
christened.


JEN. I good Evan, I pray you reckon his Madestee some of the Welse Hills, the
Mountains.


EV. Why there is Talgar.


JEN. Well said.


EV. Eliennieth.


JEN. Well said Evan.


EV. Cadier Arthur.


JEN. Toudge him, toudge him.


EV. Pen-maen-maur.


JEN. Is good boys, Evan.


EV. And Craig-eriri.


JEN. Aw? vellhy? why law you now? 'Is not Pen-maen-maur, and Craig-Eriri as
good sound, as Adlas every whit of him.


EV. 'Is caulld the British Aulpes, Craig-Eririri, a very sufficient Hills.


JEN. By got we will play with him Hills for Hills, for sixteen and forty
s'illings when he dares.


EV. I pray you let it alone your wachers a liddle while Cossin Davy ap Jenkin,
and give it leave I may give his Madestee, and the Court informations toudging
now the Reformations.


JEN. Why? cannot you and I tauke too Cossin? the Haull (God bless it) is big
enough to hold both our taukes, and we were twice as much as we are.


EV. Why, tauke it aull then, if you think is reason in you.


JEN. No; I know is no reason, Evan, I confess him; but every man would show
himselve a good subject as he can to his means; I am a subject by my place,
and two heads is better then one I imagine under correction.


EV. Got's ownes, here is no corrections man; imagine what you please, do in
got's name, imagine, imagine, why do you not imagine? here is no pennyrths of
corrections.


GRIF. Aw dgwin Tawson.


EV. 'Is so invincibles, so in mercifullys ignorant, a man knows not upon what
inces of ground to stand to him; does conceive it no more as I am a true Welse
christian, then (sirreverence 'o the cympany) the-hilts of his dagger.


JEN. Go too, I will make the hilts conceive a knock upon your pate, and
pershance a bumpe to if you tauke.


EV. How! upon my pate?


JEN. Yes upon your pate; your Poetlie pate, and your Law pate too.


GR. Tawson, Tawson. Fore'got you will go nere to hazard a thumb, and a four
finger of your best hand; if you knock him here, you may knock him better
s'eape at Ludlow a great deal: do you know the place where it is?


EV. Well, I can be patient, I trust, I trust it is in a presence I presume
that loves no quarrels, nor replies, nor the lies, nor the shallenge, nor the
Duells: but -- I will do my byssinesse now, and make this a byssinesse for
another days hereafter: Pleas' your Madestee -- By got I am out of my tempers
terribly well, got forgive me, and pyt me in my selive again. How does your
Highness -- I know not a 'oord or a syllable what I say; 'is do me that
vexations.


GR. O Evan; for the honor of Wales.


EV. I remember him now, 'is enough, blessings upon me 'is out of my head
again; lost, quite lost: this knock, of my pate has knock aull my wits out
of my brains I think, and turn my reasons out of doors. Believe it I will
rub, and break your s'ins for this, I will not come so high as your head, but
I will take your nose in my way, very sufficiently.


JEN. Hang your sufficiency.


EV. It Is well, very well; it is better, better, exceedingly well.


Howell, and Rheese to them HOW. What? -- you mean (hough) to make us so long
tarry here, ha?


GR. Marry, here is aull undone with distempers me thinks, and angers, and
passions.


THE. Who is angry?


EV. Why it is I is angry, and hungry too, if you mark me; I could eat his
Flint-seere face now, offer to knock my pate in the hearing of aull these, and
more too? well, before his Madestee I do yet forgive him now with aull my
heart, and will be revenged another time.


HOW. Why that is good Evan, honest brave Evan.


THE. Have you told the Kings Madestee of the alterations.


EV. I am now once again about him: peace; please your Madestee, the Welse
Nation hearing that the Prince of Wales was to come into the Hills again,
before your Madestee have a desire of his Highness for the honor of Wales, to
make him a Welse hills, which is done without any manner of sharshese to your
Madestee, only shanging his name: He is caull now Craig-Eriri, a Mountain in
Carnarvan-Seere; has as gray beard, and as much snow upon his head aull the
year long,


JEN. As Adlas for his gutts.


EV. He tells your Madestee true, for aull he is a liddle out of season: but
cym every man tell as much as he cannow, my quality is I hope sufficiently
known to his Madestee, that I am Rector Chori is aull my ambitions, and that I
would have it aull Welse; that is the s'ort and the long of the Requests. The
Prince of Wales we know is aull over Welse.


JEN. And then my Lord Marquise.


EV. Both my Lord Marquise is as good, noble, true Briton, as any ever is come
out of Wales.


JEN. My Lord Mongymerie is as sound Welse too, as flese and blood can make him.


HO. And the Howard's by got, is Welse as strait as any arrow.


EV. Houghton is a Town bear his name there by Pipidiauke.


HO. And Erwin, his name is Wyn; but the Duts-men come here in Wales, and caull
him Heer-win.


RH. Then Car is plain Welse, Caerlton, Caermardin, Cardiffe.


JEN. And Palmer, his Ancestors was call him Pen-maure.


RH. And Acmooty, is Ap mouth-wye of Llanmouthwye.


JEN And Abercromy, is aull one as Abermarlys.


EV. Or Abertau.


HO. Or Aberdugled haw.


HO. Or Abes hodney.


JEN. Or Abergevenny.


HO. Or Aber conway.


EV. Aberconway is very like Abercromy, a liddell hard s'ifte has pit'em aull
into Wales; but our desires and petitions is, that the muisiques be aull Welse,
and the dances, and no' Erculus brought in now with a gread staff, and a
pudding upon him.


JEN. Aw; was his distaffe, was not his club.


EV. What need of Ercules, when Cadwallader --


JEN. Or Lluellin, or Reese ap Griphin, or Cradock, or Owen Glendower, with a
Welse hook, and a Goats skin on his back, had done very better, and twice
as well?


EV. Nay, and to pyt apparel on a pottell of hay, and caull him Lantaeus.


GR. The Bellie-gods too, was as proper a monster as the best of'hem.


EV. I, stand to it, there was neither Poetries, nor Architectures, nor
designs in that bellie-god; nor a note of musicks about him. Come, bring forth
our musickes, you s'all hear the true Pritan strains now, the ancient Welse
Harp -- you tauke of their Pigmees too, here is a Pigmees of Wales now; set
forth another Pigmees by him!


Two Women, and Music to them. 1 WOE. Aw Diesus! what a bravely company is
here? This's a finely Haull indeed!


2 What a deal of fine candle it is?


JEN. I, peace; let his Madestee hear the Music.


2 Blemae yr Brenin.


JEN. Docko ve.


1 Diesus blesse'him; Saint Davy blesse'him. I bring my boy of my back ten mile
here to loog upon him: Loog Hullin, loog Hullin, spewch humma ven nayd Dumma
braveris: you s'all hear him play too.


EV. Peace, no more pradling; begin set him down.


Song.
Song. 1
EVAN. I'Is not come here to tauke of Brut,
from whence the Welse does take his root;
Nor tell long pedigree of Prince Camber,
whose lineage would fill aull this Chamber;
Nor sing the deeds of old Saint Davy,
the ursip of which would fill a Navy.
But hark you me now, for a liddell tales
s'all make a gread deal to the credit of Wales;

Chorus In which we will toudg your ears,
with the praise of her thirteen S'eeres;
And make you as glad, and merry
as fourteen pot of Perrie.
Still, still we will toudg your ears with the praise, etc.

2 Song.
HOVVELL. It Is true, was wear him Sherkin freize,
but what is that? we have store of s'eize,
And Got his plenty of Goats milk
that sell him well, will buy him silk
Enough to make him fine to quarrel
At Hereford-sizes in new apparel;
And get him as much green Melmet perhap,
s'all give it a face to his Monmouth cap.
But then the ore of Lemster,
By got is never a Sempster;
That when he is spun, ore did,
Yet match him with her third
Still, still, etc.

3 Song.
RHEESE. AVll this's the backs now, let us tell ye,
of some provisions for the belly:
As Cid, and Goat, and great Goats mother,
and Runt, and Cow, and good Cowes Other.
And once but taste of the Welse-mutton,
your Englis-s'eep's not worth a button.
And then for your Fiss, s'all shoose it your diss.
look but about, and there is a Trout.
A Salmon, Cor, or Chevin,
Will feed you six, or seven,
As taull man as ever swagger,
With Welse-hooke, or long dagger.
Still, still, etc.

4 Song.
EVAN. But aull this while was never think
a word in praise of our Welse drink,
Yet for aull that, is a cup of Bragat,
all England S'eere, may cast his Cab-at.
And what you say to Ale of Webley,
toudge him as well, you will praise him trebly,
As well as Metheglin, or Sidar, or Mead,
S'all S'ake it your dagger quite out of the seath.
And Oat-cake of Guarthenion,
With a goodly Leeke, or Onion,
To give as sweet a Rellis
As ere did Harper, Ellis.
Still, still, etc.

5 Song.
HOVVELL. ANd yet, is nothing now aull this,
if of our Musiques we do miss;
Both Harpes, and Pipes too; and the Crowd,
must aull come in and tauke alowd,
As loud as Bangu, Davies bell,
of which is no doubt you have here tell,
As well as our louder Wrexham, Organ,
and rumbling Rocks in S'eere Glamorgan;
Where look but in the ground there,
And you s'all see a sound there,
That put him aull togedder,
Is sweet as measure pedder.
Still, still, etc.

6 Song.
RHEESE. AV, but what say you should it shance too,
that we should leap it in a Dance too,
And make it you as great a pleasure,
if but your eyes be now at leisure;
As in your ears s'all leave a laughter,
to last upon you six days after?
Ha! wella-goe too, let us try to do
as your old Britton, things to be writ on.
Come put on other looks now,
And lay away your hooks too;
And though yet you have no pump sirs,
Let'hem hear that you can jump sirs.
Still, still, etc.

JEN. Speak it your conscience now; did your Ursip ever see such a song in
your days; 'is not as finely a tunes as a man would wisse to put in his ears.


EVA. Come, his Madestee s'all hear better to your Dance.


Here a Dance of men. EV. Haw, well danced, very well danced.


JEN. Well played Howell, well played Rheese: Dawharry vellhee; well danced
in faith.


EV. Good boys, good boys; pold, and Prittan, pold, and Prittan.


After the Dance. JEN. Is not better this now then Pigmies? this is men, this
is no monsters, and you mark him: Well caull forth you Goats now, your Ursip
s'all see a properly natural devise come from the Welse Mountains; Is no
Tuns, nor no Bottils: Stand by there, s'ow his' Ursip the Hills, was dronkenry
in his eyes that make that devise in my mind. But now, marg, marg your Ursip I
pray you now, and you s'all see natures and propriedies; the very beasts of
Wales s'all do more then your men pyt in bottills, and barrills, there was a
tale of a tub in faith. 'Is the Goat-heard and his dog, and his son, and his
wife make musiques to the Goats as they come from the Hills; give 'hem rooms,
give 'hem rooms, now the cym: The elderly Goats is indifferently grave at
first, because of his beard, and only tread it the measures; byt you will see
him pyt off his gravities by and by well enough, and friske it as fine as ere a
Kid on'hem aull. The Welse Goat is an excellent dancer by birth, that is
written of him, and of as wisely carriage, and comely behaviors a beast (for
his footing especially) as some one or two man, God bless him.


EV. A Haull, a haull; come a haull, Au vellhee.


Here the Dance of Goats. After the Dance. 1 WOE. Nay, and your Madestee bid
the Welse Goats welcome; The Welse Wen-ces s'all sing your praises, and dance
your healths too.


Song.
1 AW, God bless it our good King S'ames,
His Wife, and his S ildren, and aull his Reames,

2 And aull his 'ursipfull S'istice of peace about him,

1 And send that his Court be never without him.

2 Ow, that her would come down into Wales,

1 Her s'ud be very welcome to Welse Ales.

2 I have a Cow,

1 And I have a hen;

2 S'all give it milk,

1 And eggs for aull his men.

CHORUS. 'It self s'all have venison, and other Seere,
And may it be sterved, that steal him his Dear,
there, there, and every where.

JEN. Cym dance now, let us hear your dance, dance.


EV. Ha! well played Ales.


HO. For the Honor of Wales.


Here was the Dance of men and women. After the Dance. JEN. DIggon. Enough,
enough, Diggon, well now aull the absurdities is removed and cleared; the rest
and'please your Grace s'all tarry still, and go on as it was; Virtue, and
Pleasure was well enough, indifferently well enough: Only we will entreat
Pleasure to cym out of Driffimdore, that is the Gilden Valley, or Gelthleedore,
that is the Golden Grove, and is in Care Marden the Welse Garden. 'Is a
thousand place in Wales as finely places as the Esperides every crum of him:
Merlin was borne there too, put we would not make him rise now and wake him,
because we have his Prophecies already of your Madestee's name to as good
purpose, as if he were here in presence, Pod hy geller Evan?


EV. You will still pyt your selve to these plunses, you mean his Madestees
Anagrams of Charles James Stuart.


JEN. I that is Claims Arthurs Seat, which is as much as to say, your
Madestee s'ud be the first King of gread Prittan, and sit in Cadier Arthur,
which is Arthurs Chair, as by Gods blessing you do: And then your Son
Master S'harles his, how do you caull him? is Charles Stuart, calls true
hearts, that is us, he calls us, the Welse Nation to be ever at your service,
and love you, and honor you, which we pray you understand it his meaning. And
that the Musicians yonder, are so many Brittis bards that sing o'pen the Hills
to let out the Prince of Wales, and his Welse friends to you, and all is done.


GR. Very homely done it is I am well assured, if not very rudely: But it is
hoped your Madestee will not interpret the honor, merits, love, and affection
of so noble a portion of your people, by the poverty of these who have so
imperfectly uttered it: You will rather for their saks, who are to come in the
name of Wales, my Lord the Prince, and the others; pardon what is past, and
remember the Cyntrie has always been fruitful of loyal hearts to your
Majesty; a very garden and seed plot of honest minds and men: What lights of
learning has Wales sent forth for your Schools? What industrious Studients of
your Laws? what able Ministers of your Justice? whence has the Crown in all
times better servitors, more liberal of their lives and fortunes? where has
your Court or Council (for the present) more noble ornaments or better aids?
I am glad to see it, and to speak it, and though the Nation be said to be
unconquered,, and most loving liberty, yet it was never mutinous (and please
your Majesty;) but stout, valiant, courteous, hospitable, temperate,
ingenious, capable of all good Arts, most lovingly constant, charitable, great
Antiquaries, Religious preservers of their Gentry, and Genealogy, as they are
zealous and knowing in Religion.

In a word, It is a Nation bettered by prosperity so far, as to the present
happiness it enjoyes under your most sacred Majesty, it wishes nothing to be
added, but to see it perpetual in You, and your Issue.


God of his great goodness grant it, and show he is an errant knave, and no
true Britain does not say Amen too with his heart.
NEWS FROM THE NEW WORLD DISCOVERED IN THE MOON. A Masque, AS IT WAS
PRESENTED AT COURT BEFORE KING JAMES. 1620.
Nascitur e tenebris: and se sibi vindicat Orbis.
Enter 1 Herald, 2 Herald, Printer, Chronicler, Factor. 1 HER. News, news,
news.


2 HER. Bold, and brave new!


1 HER. New as the night they are borne in;


2 HER. Or the Phant'sie that begot'hem.


1 HER. Excellent news!


2 HER. Will you hear any news?


PRINT. Yes, and thank you too sir; what is the price of'hem?


1 HER. Price, Cocks-combe! what price, but the price of your ears? As if any
man used to pay for any thing here.


2 HER. Come forward, you should be some dull tradesman by your pigheaded
Sconce now, that think there is nothing good any where; but what is to be sold.


PRIN. Indeed I am all for sale Gentlemen, you say true, I am a Printer, and a
Printer of News; and I do hearken after'hem, where ever they be at any rates;
I Will give any thing for a good Copy now, be it true or false, so't be news.


1 HER. A fine youth!


CHRO. And I am for matter of State Gentlemen, by consequence, story, my
Chronicle, to fill up my great book, which must be three Reame of paper at
least; I have agreed with my Stationer aforehand to make it so big, and I want
for ten quire yet. I have been here ever since seven a clock in the morning to
get matter for one page, and I think I have it complete; for I have both
noted the number, and the capacity of the degrees here; and told twice over how
many candles there are in the room lighted, which I will set you down to a
snuff precisely, because I love to give light to posterity in the truth of
things.


1 HER. This is a finer youth!


FACT. Gentlemen, I am neither Printer, nor Chronologer, but one that otherwise
take pleasure i'my Pen: A Factor of news for all the Shieres of England; I do
write my thousand Letters a week ordinary, sometim twelve hundred, and
maintain the business at some charge, both to hold up my reputation with mine
own ministers in Town, and my friends of correspondence in the Country; I
have friends of all rancks, and of all Religions, for which I keep an
answering Catalogue of dispatch; wherein I have my Puritan news, my Protestant
news, and my Pontificiall news.


2 HER. A Superlative this!


FAC. And I have hope to erect a Staple for news ere long, whether all shall
be brought, and thence again vented under the name of Staple-newes; and not
trusted to your printed Conundrums of the serpent in Sussex, or the witches
bidding the Devil to dinner at Derbie: News, that when a man sends them down
to the Shieres where they are said to be done, were never there to be found.


PRIN. Sir that is all one, they were made for the common people; and why should
not they have their pleasure in believing of lies are made for them, as you have
in Paul's that make'hem for your selves.


1 HER. There he speaks reason to you sir.


FAC. I confess it, but it is the Printing I am offended at, I would have no
news printed; for when they are printed they leave to be news; while they
are written, though they be false, they remain news still.


PRIN. See men's diverse opinions! It is the Printing of'hem makes 'hem news to a
great many, who will indeed believe nothing but what is in Print. For those I
do keep my Presses, and so many Pens going to bring forth wholesome relations,
which once in half a score years (as the age grows forgetful) I Print over
again with a new date, and they are of excellent use.


CHRO. Excellent abuse rather.


PRIN. Mr. Chronicler do not you talk, I shall --


1 HER. Nay Gentlemen, be at peace one with another; we have enough for you
all three, if you dare take upon trust.


PRIN. I dare, I assure you.


FAC. And I, as much as comes.


CHRO. I dare too, but nothing so much as I ha'done; I have been so cheated
with false relations i'my time, as I have found it a far harder thing to correct
my book, then collect it.


FA. Like enough; but to your news Gentlemen, whence come they?


1 HER. From the Moon, ours sir.


FAC. From the Moon! which way? by sea? or by Land?


1 HER. By Moone-shine, a nearer way I take it.


PR. Oh by a Trunck! I know it, a thing no bigger than a Flute-case; A
neighbor of mine, a spectacle-maker, has drawn the Moon through it at the
boar of a whistle, and made it as great as a Drum-head twenty times, and
brought it within the length of this Room to me, I know not how often.


CHR. Tut, that is no news; your perplexive Glasses are common. No, it will
fall out to be Pythagoras way I warrant you, by writing, and reading in the Moon.


PR. Right, and as well read of you, In Faith: for Cornelius Agrippa has it, In
disco Lunae, there it is found.


1 HER. Sir, you are lost I assure you; for ours came to you neither by the way
of Cornelius Agrippa, nor Cornelius Drible.


2 HER. Nor any glass of --


1 HER. No Philosophers fantasy.


2 HER. Methematicians Perspicill.


1 HER. Or brother of the Rosy crosses intilligence, no forced way, but by the
neat and clean power of Poetry,


2 HER. The Mistress of all discovery.


1 HER. Who after a world of these curious uncertainties, has employed thither
a servant of hers in search of truth: who has been there --


2 HER. In the Moon.


1 HER. In person.


2 HER. And is this night returned.


FAC. Where? which is he? I must see his Dog at his girdle, and the bush of
thorns at his back, ere I believe it.


1 HER. Do not trouble your faith then, for if that bush of thorns should
prove a goodly Grove of Oaks; in what case were you, and your expectation.


2 HER. Those are stale Ensigns of the Stages, man in the Moon, deliverd down
to you by musty Antiquity, and are of as doubtful credit as the makers.


CHR. Sir, nothing again Antiquity I pray you, I must not hear ill of
Antiquity.


1 HER. Oh! you have an old Wife belike, or your venerable Jerkin there, make
much of'hem: Our relation I tell you still is news.


2 HER. Certain, and sure news.


1 HER. Of a new World,


2 HER. And new creatures in that World.


1 HER. In the Orb of the Moon.


2 HER. Which is now found to be an Earth inhabited!


1 HER. With navigable Seas, and Rivers.


2 HER. Variety of Nations, Polities, Laws.


1 HER. With Havens in it, Castles, and Port-Townes!


2 HER. Inland Cities, Boroughes, Hamlets, Faires, and Markets!


1 HER. Hundreds, and Weapontakes! Forests, Parks, Coney-ground,
Meadow-pasture, what not?


2 HE. But differing from ours.


FAC. And has your Poet brought all this?


CHAPTER Troth, here was enough; it is a pretty piece of Poetry as'tis.


1 HE. Would you could hear on, though.


2 HE. Gi' your minds to it a little.


FAC. What Innes, or Alehouses are there there? does he tell you?


1 HE. Truly I have not asked him that.


2 HE. Nor were you best, I believe.


FAC. Why, in travail a man knows these things without offense; I am sure if
he be a good Poet, he has discovered a good Tavern in his time.


1 HE That he has, I should think the worse of his Verse else.


PR. And his Prose too in faith.


CHR. Is he a Man's Poet, or a Woman's Poet I pray you?


2 HE. Is there any such difference?


FAC. Many, as betwixt your man's Tailor, and your woman's Tailor.


1 HE. How? may we beseech you?


FAC. I Will show you; your Man's Poet may break out strong and deep in the mouth, as
he said of Pindar, Monte decurrens velut amnis. But your Woman's Poet must flow,
and stroke the ear, and (as one of them said of himself sweetly) Must write a
Verse as smooth, and calm as Cream,
In which there is no torrent, nor scarce stream.



2 HE. Have you any more on it?


FAC. No, I could never arrive but to this Remnant.


1 HE. Pity! would you had had the whole piece for a pattern to all Poetry.


PR. How might we do to see your Poet? did he undertake this journey (I pray
you) to the Moon o'foot?


1 HE. Why do you ask?


PR. Because one of our greatest Poets (I know not how good a one) went to
Endenburgh of foot, and came back; marry he has been restive they say ever
since, for we have had nothing from him; he has set out nothing I am sure.


1 HE. Like enough, perhaps he has not all in, when he has all in, he he will
set out (I warrant you) at least those from whom he had it, it is the very same
party that has been in the Moon now.


PR. Indeed! has he been there since? belike he rid thither then.


FAC. Yes Post, upon the Poets horse for a wager.


1 HE. No I assure you, he rather flew upon the wings of his Muse. There are in
all but three ways of going thither; one is Endymions way, by rapture in
sleep, or a dream. The other Minipus his way, by wing, which the Poet took.
The the third, old Empedocles way; who when he leapt into Aetna, having a dry
sear body, and light, the smoke took him and whift him up into the Moon,
where he lives yet waving up and down like a feather, all soot and embers
coming out of that cole-pit; our Poet met him, and talked with him.


CHR. In what language good sir?


2 HE. Only by signs and gestures, for they have no articulate voices there,
but certain motions to music: all the discourse there is harmony.


FAC. A fine Lunatique language in faith; how do their Lawyers then?


2 HER. They are Pythagorians, all dumb as fishes, for they have no
controversies to exercise themselves in.


FAC. How do they live then?


1 HE. O'th deaw o'th Moon like Grasshoppers, and confer with the Doppers.


FAC. Have you Doppers?


2 HE. A world of Doppers! but they are there as lunatic persons, walkers
only; that have leave only to hum, and ha, not daring to prophecy, or start
up upon stools to raise doctrine.


1 HE. The brethren of the Rosie-Crosse have their College within a mile of the
Moon; a Castle in the air that runs upon wheels with a winged lantern --


PR. Tha' seen't in print.


2 HER. All the fantastical creatures you can think of, are there.


FAC. It Is to be hoped there are women there then?


1 HE. And zealous women, that will out-grone, the groaning wives of Edinburgh.


FAC. And Lovers as phantasticke as ours?


2 HE. But none that will hang themselves for Love, or eat candles ends, or
drink to their Mistresse-eyes, till their own bid'hem good night, as the
Sublunary Lovers do.


FAC. No sir?


2 HER. No, some few you shall have, that sigh or whistle themselves away; and
those are presently hung up by the heels like Meteors, with Squibs in their
tails, to give the wiser sort warning.


PR. Excellent!


FAC. Are there no selfe-Lovers there?


2 HER. There were, but they are all dead of late for want of Tailors.


FAC. S'light what luck is that? we could have spared them a Colonie from
hence.


2 HE. I think some two or three of them live yet, but they are turned
Moone-Calves by this.


PR. O, I, Moone-Calves! what Monster is that I pray you?


2 HER. Monster? none at all; a very familiar thing, like our fool here on
earth.


1 HER. The Ladies there, play with them instead of little Dogs.


FAC. Then there are Ladies?


2 HER. And Knights, and Squires.


FAC. And servants, and Coaches?


1 HER. Yes, but the Coaches are much of the nature of the Ladies, for they go
only with wind.


Chro. Prittie, like China-waggons.


FAC. Have they any places of meeting with their Coaches, and taking the fresh
open air, and then covert when they please, as in our Hide-Parke, or so?


2 HER. Above all the Hide-parkes in Christendom, far more hiding and
private, they do all in clouds there; they walk in the clouds, they sit in the
clouds, they lie in the clouds, they ride and tumble in the clouds, their very
Coaches are clouds.


PR. But have they no Carmen to meet and break their Coaches?


2 HE. Alas! Carmen, they will over a Carman there, as he will do a Child
here; you shall have a Coachman with cheeks like a trumpeter, and a wind in
his mouth blow him before him as far as he can see him; or skirre over him
with his batts wings a mile and a half, ere he can steer his wry neck to
look where he is.


FAC. And they have their new Wells too, and physical waters I hope to visit
all time of year?


1 HE. Your Tunbridge, or the Spaw it self are mere puddle to'em: When the
pleasant months of the year come, they all flock to certain broken Islands
which are called there, the Isles of delight:


FAC. By clouds still?


1 HE. What else? Their Boats are clouds too.


2 HE. Or in a mist; the mists are ordinary in the Moon, a man that owes money
there, needs no other protection; only buy a mist and walk in it, he is never
discerned, a matter of a Baubee does it.


1 HE. Only one Island they have, is called the Isle of the Epecaenes, because
there under one Article both kinds are signified, for they are fashioned
alike, male and female the same, not heads and broad hats, short doublets, and
long points; neither do they ever untrusse for distinction, but laugh and lie
down in Moone-shine, and stab with their ponyards; you do not know the
delight of the Epicaenes in Moonshine.


2 HE. And when they have tasted the springs of pleasure enough, and bild, and
kissed,, and are ready to come away; the she is only lay certain eggs (for they
are never with Child there,) and of those eggs are disclosed a race of
Creatures like men, but are indeed a sort of Foul, in part covered with
feathers (they call 'hem Volatees), that hop from Island to Island, you shall
see a covey of'hen if you please presently.


1 HE. Yes faith, it is time to exercise their eyes, for their ears begin to be
weary.


2 HE. Then know, we do not move these wings so soon,
On which our Poet mounted to the Moon
Menippus-like; but all twixt it and us,
Thus cleares and helps to the presentment, thus.
The Antimaske of Volatees.
2 HE. WE have all this while (though the Muses Heralds) adventured to tell
your Majesty no news; for hitherto we have moved rather to your delight, than
your belief. But now be pleased to expect a more noble discovery worthy of
your ear, as the object will be your eye; A race of your own, formed,
animated, lightened, and heightened by you, who rapt above the Moon far in
speculation of your virtues, have remained their intranc'd certain hours,
with wonder of the piety, wisdom, Majesty reflected by you, on them, from
the Divine light, to which only you are less. These by how much higher they
have been carried from earth to contemplate your greatness, have now
conceived the more haste and hope in this their return home to approach your
goodness; and led by that excellent likeness of your self, the truth,
imitating Procritus endeavor, that all their motions be formed to the music
of your peace, and have their ends in your favor, which alone is able to
resolve and thaw the cold they have presently contracted in coming through the
colder Region.

They descend and shake off their Isicles.
I. Song.
HOw ere the brightness may amaze,
Move you, and stand not still at gaze,
As dazeled with the light;
But with your motions fill the place,
And let their fullness win your Grace,
Till you collect your sight.
So while the warmth you do confess,
And temper of these Rays no less,
To quicken then refine:
You may by knowledge grow more bold,
And so more able to behold
The body whence they shine.
The first Dance follows. II. Song.
NOw look and see in yonder throne,
How all those beams are cast from one.
This is that Orb so bright,
Has kept your wonder so awake;
Whence you as from a mirror take
The Suns reflected light.
Read him as you would do the book
Of all perfection, and but look
What his proportions be;
No measure that is thence contrived,
Or any motion thence derived,
But is pure harmony.
Maine Dance, and Revelle. III. Song.
NOt that we think you weary be,
for he
That did this motion give,
And made it so long live,
Could likewise give it perpetuity.
Nor that we doubt you have not more,
and store
Of changes to delight,
For they are infinite,
As is the power that brought forth those before.
But since the earth is of his name,
and fame
So full you cannot add,
Be both the first, and glad
To speak him to the Region whence you came.
The last Dance. IIII. Song.
Look, look already where I am,
bright fame,
Got up unto the sky,
thus high,
Upon my better wing,
to sing
The knowing King,
And make the music here,
With yours on earth the same.
CHORUS. Join then to tell his name,
and say but JAMES is he;
All ears will take the voice,
And in the tune rejoice,
Or truth has left to breath, and fame has left to be.
1 HER. See, what is that this music brings,
And is so carried in the air about?

2 HER. Fame that does nourish the renown of Kings,
And keeps that fair, which envy would blot out.

The End.
A MASQUE OF THE METAMORPHOS'D GYPSIES.

AS IT WAS THRICE PRESENTED TO KING JAMES.

FIRST, AT BVRLEIGH on the Hill.

NEXT, AT BELVOYR.

AND LASTLY, AT WINDSOR.

AUGUST, 1621.

THE PROLOGUE AT WINDSOR.
AS many blessings as there be bones
In Ptolome's fingers and all at ones,
Held up in Andrews Cross for the nones.
Light on you good Master,
I dare be no waster
Of time, or of speech
Where you are in place:
I only beseech
You take in good grace,
Our following the Court,
Since it is for your sport
To have you still merry,
And not make you weary.
We may strive to please,
So long (some will say) till we grow a disease
But you Sir, that twice
Have graced us already, encourage to thrice;
Wherein if our boldness your patience invade,
Forgive us the fault that your favor has made.
THE SPEECH AT THE KINGS ENTRANCE AT BURLEIGH.
IF for our thoughts there could but speech be found,
And all that speech be uttered in one sound;
So that some power above us would afford
The means to make a language of a word,
It should be welcome: In that only voice
We would receive, retain, enjoy, rejoice;
And all effects of love, and life dispense,
Till it were called a copious eloquence:
For should we vent our spirits (now you are come,)
In other sillables, were as to be dumb.
Welcome, o welcome then, and enter here,
The House your bounty has built, and still does reere
With those high favovrs, and those heap't increases,
Which shows a hand not greev'd, but when it ceases.
The Master is your creature, as the place;
And every good about him is your grace:
Whom though he stand by silent, think not rude,
But as a man turned all to gratitude.
For what he never can hope, how to restore,
Since while he meditates one, you heap on more.
Vouchsafe to think, he only is oppressed
With their abundance, not that in his breast
His pow'res are stupid grown; for please you enter
Him, and his house, and search them to the center:
You Will find within no thanks, or vows there shorter,
For having trusted thus much to his Porter.
THE GYPSIES METAMORPHOS'D.
Enter a Gypsy, leading a Horse laden with five little Children bound in a
trace of scarffes upon him. A second, leading another Horse laden with stoll'ne
Poultrey: The first leading Gypsy speaks, being the JACKMAN. Room for the
five Princes of Aegipt, mounted all upon the Horse like the four Sons of
Aymon, to make the miracle the more, by a head, if it may be: gaze upon them,
as on the Offspring of Ptolomie, begotten upon several Cleopatraes, in their
several Countries; especially on this brave Spark struck out of Flint-shire,
upon Justice Jugges Daughter then Sheriff of the County; who running away with
a kinsman of our Captains, and her Father pursuing her to the Marshes, He
great with Justice, She great with Juggling, they were both for the time turned
stone upon the fight each of other, in Chester: Till at last (see the Wonder) A
Jugge of the Town Ale reconciling them; the memorial of both their gravities,
his in beard, and hers in belly, has remained ever since preserved in picture
upon the most stone Jugs of the Kingdom. The famous impe yet grew a
wretchcocke, and though for seven years together, he were very carefully
carried at his mothers back, rocked in a cradle of Welch-cheese, like a
Maggot, and there fed with broken beer, and blown wine of the best daily; yet
looks he, as if he never saw his Guinquennium. It Is true, he can thread needles
o'horse-backe, to draw a yard of inckle through his nose: But what is that to a
grown Gypsy, one of the blood, and of his time if he had thrived: Therefore,
till with his painful Progenitors, he be able to beat it on the hard hoof,
or the been Bawse, or the Starling, Ken to nip a Jan, and Cly the Jack; it is
thought fit he march in the Infants equipage.

With the Convoy, Cheats, and peckage,
Out of Clutch of Harman Beckage,
To their libkins at the Crackmans,
Or some skipper of the Blackmans.

2 GYPSY. WHere the Cacklers, but no Grunters,
Shall uncas'd be for the Hunters,
Those we still must keep alive;
I, and put them out to thrive
In the Parkes, and in the Chases,
And the finer walled places;
As Saint James-es, Greenwich, Tibballs,
Where the Acornes plumpe as Chibballs,
Soon shall change both kind and name,
And proclaime'em the Kings game.
So the act no harm may be
Unto their keeper Barnabee;
It will prove as good a service,
As did ever Gypsy Jervice,
To our Captain Charles the tall man,
And a part too of our Salmon.

JACKMAN. IF we here be a little obscure, it is our pleasure; for rather than
we will offer to be our own interpreters, we are resolved not to be
understood: yet if any man doubt of the significancie of the language, we
refer him to the third vollume of reports, set forth by the learned in the
laws of Canting, and published in the Gypsies tongue: Give me my Guittarra,
and room for our Chief.

Dance. Which is the entrance of the Captain, with six more attendant; After
which the Jackman sings. Song.
FRom the famous Peacke of Darby,
And the Devils arse there hard-by,
Where we yearly keep our musters,
Thus the Aegiptians throng in clusters,
Be not frighted with our fashion,
Though we seem a tattered Nation;
We account our rags, our riches,
So our tricks exceed our stitches.
Give us Bacon, rindes of Walnuts,
Shells of Cockels, and of Smalnuts;
Ribands, bells, and Safrond lynnen,
All the World is ours to win in.
Knackes we have that will delight you,
slight of hand that will invite you,
To endure our tawny faces.
WOE. Quit your places, and not cause you cut your laces.
All your fortunes we can tell ye,
Be they for the back or belly;
In the Moodes too, and the Tenses,
That may fit your fine five senses.
Draw but then your gloves we pray you,
And sit still, we will not fray you;
For though we be here at Burley,
We Would be loath to make a hurly.


PATRICO. STay my sweet Singer,
The touch of thy finger,
A little, and linger;
For me that am bringer
Of bound to the border,
The rule and Recorder,
And mouth of the order,
As Priest of the game,
And Prelate of the same.
There Is a Gentry Cove here,
Is the top of the Shiere,
Of the Bever Ken,
A man among men;
You need not to fear,
I have an eye, and an ear
That turns here and there,
To look to our gear.
Some say that there be
One or two, if not three,
That are greater then he.
ANd for the Roome-Morts,
I know by their ports,
And their jollie resorts,
They are of the sorts
That love the true sports
Of King Ptolomeus,
Or great Coriphaeus,
And Queen Cleopatra,
The Gypsies grand Matra.
Then if we shall sharke it,
Here Fair is, and Market.
Leave Pig by, and Goose,
And play fast, and loose,
A short cut, and long,
Some inch of a song,
Pythagoras lot,
Drawn out of a pot;
With what says Alchindus?
And Pharaotes Indus,
John de Indagine
With all their Pagine
Of faces and Palmistrie,
And this is Almistrie.
Lay by your wimbles,
Your boring for thimbles,
Or using your nimbles,
In diving the pockets,
And sounding the sockets
Of Simper-the Cockets;
Or angling the purses,
Of such as will curse us;
But in the strict duel
Be merry, and cruel,
Strike fair at some jewel,
That mine may accrue well,
For that is the fuel,
To make the Town brew well,
And the pot wring well,
And the brain sing well,
Which we may bring well
About by a string well,
And do the thing well.
It is but a strain
Of true legerdemaine,
Once twice and again.
Or what will you say now
If with our fine play now,
Our feats, and our fingring,
Here without lingering;
Cosening the sights
Of the Lords, and the knights.
Some one of their Georges
Come off to save charges.
Or what will you say now?
If with our fine play now,
Our knackes, and our dances,
We work on the fancies
Of some of these Nancies.
These trinckets, and tripsies,
And make'em turn Gypsies.
Here Is no Justice Lippus
Will seek for to nip us,
In Crampring, or Cippus,
And then for to strip us,
And after to whip us.
His justice to vary,
While here we do tarry,
But be wise, and wary,
And we may both carry,
The Kate, and the Mary,
And all the bright ae'ry,
A way to the quarry.
The George and the Garter,
Into our own quarter;
Or durst I go further
In methood and order:
There Is a purse and a Seal,
I have a great mind to steal.
That when our tricks are done,
We might seal our own pardon;
All this we may do,
And a great deal more too,
If our brave Ptolomee,
Will but say follow me.

3. GYPSY. Captain, if ever at the Bozing Ken,
You have in draught of Darby drilled your men;
And we have served there armed all in Ale,
With the brown bowl, and charged in bragget stale:
If mustered thus, and disciplined in drink,
In our long watches we did never shrink,
But so commanded by you kept our station,
As we preserved our selves a royal Nation;
And never yet did branch of Statute break,
Made in your famous Pallas of the Peake.
If we have deemed, that Mutton, Lamb, or Veale,
Chicke, Capon, Turkey, sweetest we did steal;
As being by our Magna Charta taught
To judge no urands wholesome that are bought.
If for our Linen we still used the lift,
And with the hedge (our trades increase) made shift;
And ever at your solemn feast, and calls,
We have been ready with the Egyptian bralls;
To set Kit Callot forth in Prose or Rhyme,
Or who was Cleopatra for the time.
If we have done this, that, more, such, or so;
Now lend your ear but to the Patrico.

CAPTAIN. Well, Dance another strain, and we will think how

Dance 2. 1. Strain. Song 2.
THe faery beam upon you,
The stars to glister on you;
A Moon of light,
In the noone of night,
Till the Fire-drake has over gone you.
The wheel of fortune guide you,
The Boy with the bow beside you;
Run aye in the way,
Till the bird of day,
And the luckier lot beside you.
CAPTAIN. Bless my sweet Masters, the old, and the young,
From the gall of the heart, and the stroke of the tongue.
With you luckie Bird I begin, let me see,
I aim at the best, and I trow you are he,
Here Is some luck already, if I understand
The grounds of mine Art; here is a Gentleman's hand.
I Will kiss it for lucks sake, you shall by this line
Love a Horse, and a Hound; but no part of a swine.
To hunt the brave Stagge, not so much for the food,
As the weal of your body, and the health o'your blood.
Your a man of good means, and have Territories store
Both by Sea, and by Land; and were borne Sir to more,
Which you like a Lord, and the Prince of your peace,
Content with your havings, despise to increase:
You are no great Wencher, I see by your table,
Although your Mons Veneris says you are able;
You live chaste, and single, and have buried your Wife,
And mean not to marry, by the line of your life.
Whence he that conjectures, your quality learnes,
You are an honest good man, and care of your Barnes.
Your Mercuries hill too, a wit does betoken,
Some booke-craft you have, and are pretty well spoken.
But stay, in your Jupiters mount, what is here?
A King, a Monarch; what wonders appear!
High, Bountiful, Just: a Jove for your parts,
A Master of men, and that Reign in their hearts.
I Will tell it my train,
And come to you again.

Song 3.
TO the old, long life and treasure,
To the young, all health and pleasure;
To the fair, their face
With eternal grace,
And the foul to be loved at leisure.
To the witty, all clear mirrors,
To the foolish, their dark errors;
To the loving sprite,
A secure delight,
To the jealous his own false terrors.
After which the Kings fortune is pursued by the
CAPTAIN. COuld any doubt that saw this hand,
Or who you are, or what command
You have upon the fate of things,
Or would not say you were let down
From Heaven, on earth to be the Crown,
And top of all your neighbor Kings?
To see the ways of truth you take,
To sallance business, and to make
All Christian differences cease.
Or till the quarrel, and the cause
You can compose, to give them laws,
As arbitor of War, and Peace.
For this, of all the world you shall
Be styled James, the just, and all
Their states dispose, their Sons and daughters,
And for your fortune you alone,
Among them all shall work your own,
By peace, not by human slaughters.
But why do I presume, though true,
To tell a Fortune, Sir, to you,
Who are the maker here of all;
Where none do stand, or sit in view,
But owe their fortune unto you,
At least what they good fortunes call?
My self a Gypsy here do shine,
Yet are you maker, Sir, of mine.
Oh that confession could content
So high a bounty, that does know
No part of motion, but to flow,
and giving never to repent.
May still the matter wait your hand,
That it not feel, or stay, or stand;
but all desert still over charge.
And may your goodness ever find
In me whom you have made, a mind,
As thankful as your own is large.
2 Dance. 2 Strain. After which, the Princes fortune is offered at by the
2 GYPSY. AS my Captain has begun
With the Sire, I take the Son,
Your hand Sir.
Of your fortune be secure,
Love, and she, are both at your
Command Sir.
See what States are here at strife,
Who shall tender you a Wife,
A brave one;
And a fitter for a man,
Then is offered here, you can
Not have one.
She is Sister of a star,
One the noblest now that are,
Bright Hesper.
Whom the Indians in the East,
Phosphore call, and in the West,
Hight Vesper.
Courses even with the Sun,
Does her mighty brother run,
For splendour.
What can to the marriage night,
More then morn, and evening light
Attend her?
Save the promise before day,
Of a little James to play
Hereafter.
Twixt his Grandsiers knees, and move
All the pretty ways of love,
And laughter.
Whilst with care you strive to please,
In your giving his cares ease,
And labors;
And by being long the aid
Of the Empire, make afraid
III Neighbors.
Till your self shall come to see
What we wish, yet far to be
Attending:
For it skills not when, or where
That begins, which cannot fear
An ending.
Since your name in peace, or wars,
Naught shall bound until the stars
up take you.
2 Dance. Stain 3. After which, the Lady Marquis Buckinghams by the
3 GYPSY. Hurl after an old shoe,
I Will be merry what ever I do,
Though I keep no time,
My words shall chyme,
I Will over-take the sense with a ryme.
Face of a rose
I pray thee depose
Some small piece of silver: It shall be no loss,
But only to make the sign of the cross;
If your hand you hallow,
Good fortune will follow.
I swear by these ten,
You shall have it again,
I do not say when.
But Lady, either I am tipsie,
Or you are to fall in love with a Gypsy;
Blush not Dame Kate,
For early, or late,
I do assure you it will be your fate;
Nor need you be once ashamed of it Madam,
He Is as handsome a man, as ever was Adam.
A man out of wax,
As a Lady would axe;
Yet he is not to wed ye:
H'has enjoyd you already,
And I hope he has sped ye.
A dainty young fellow,
And though he look yellow,
He never will be jealous,
But love you most zealous.
There Is never a line in your hand but does tell us.
And you are a foul so white, and so chaste,
A table so smooth, and so newly ra'ste,
As nothing called foul,
Dare approach with a blot,
Or any least spot;
But still you control,
Or make your own lot,
Preserving love pure as it first was begot:
But Dame I must tell ye,
The fruit of your belly,
Is that you must tender,
And care so to render;
That as your self came
In blood, and in name,
From one house of fame,
So that may remain
The glory of twain.
2 Dance. 4 Strain. After which, the Countess of Rutlands by the
3 GYPSY. YOu sweet Lady have a hand too,
And a fortune you may stand too;
Both your brav'ry, and your bounty
Style you Mistress of the County;
You will find it from this night,
Fortune shall forget her spite,
And heap all the blessings on you,
That she can pour out upon you;
To be loved, where most you love,
Is the worst that you shall prove;
And by him to be embraced,
Who so long has known you chaste,
Wise, and fair; whilst you renew
Joys to him, and he to you:
And when both your years are told,
Neither think the other old.
And the Countess of Exeters by the
PATRICO MAdam we know of your coming so late,
We could not well fit you a nobler fate
Then what you have ready made;
An old man's wife,
Is the light of his life,
A young one is but his shade.
You will not importune,
The change of your fortune;
For if you dare trust to my forecasting,
It Is presently good, and will be lasting.
Dance 2. 5 Strain. After which, the Countess of Buckinghams by the
4 GYPSY. YOur pardon Lady, here you stand,
If some should judge you by your hand
The greatest fellon in the Land
Detected:
I cannot tell you by what Arts,
But you have stolen so many hearts,
As they would make you at all parts
Suspected.
Your very face first, such a one
As being viewed it was alone,
Too slipperie to be looked upon;
And threw men.
But then your graces they were such,
As none could er'e behold too much;
Both every taste, and every touch
So drew men.
Still blessed in all you think, or do,
Two of your Sons are Gypsies too,
You shall our Queen be, and see who
Importunes
The heart of either yours, or you;
And does not wish both George, and Sue,
And every Barn besides, all new
Good fortunes.
The Lady Purbecks by the
2 GYPSY. Help me wonder, here is a book,
Where I would for ever look;
Never yet did Gypsy trace,
Smoother lines in hands, or face:
Venus here does Saturn move
That you should be Queen of love;
And the other Stars consent,
Only Cupid not content;
For though you the theft disguise,
You have told him of his eyes:
And to show his envy further,
Here he charge you with murder;
Says, although that at your sight,
He must all his troches light;
Though your either cheeks discloses,
Mingled bathes of milk and Roses,
Though your lips be banks of blisses,
Where he plants, and gathers kisses;
And your self the reason why,
Wisest men for love may dye,
You will turn all hearts to tinder,
And shall make the World one cinder.

And the Lady Elizabeth Hattons by the 5 GYPSY. Mistress, of a fayrer table
Has not history, nor sable;
Others fortunes may be shown,
You are builder of your own.
And what ever Heaven has given you,
You preserve the state still in you,
That which time would have depart,
Youth without the help of Art,
You do keep still, and the glory
Of your Sex, is but your story.

The Lord Chamberlain by the JACKMAN. THough you Sir be Chamberlain, I have a
key
To open your fortune a little by the way;
You are a good man,
Deny it that can;
And faithful you are,
Deny it that dare.
You know how to use your sword and your Pen,
And you love not alone the Arts, but the men;
The graces and Muses every where follow
You, as you were their second Apollo;
Only your hand here tells you to your face,
You have wanted one grace,
To perform, what has been a right of your place;
For by this line which is Mars his Trench,
You never yet helped your Master to a Wench:
It Is well for your honor he is pious, and chaste,
Or you had most certainly been displaste.

Dance 2. Strain 3. The Lord Keepers fortune by the PATRICO. AS happy a Palm
Sir, as most in the Land,
It should be a pure, and an innocent hand;
And worthy the trust,
For it says you will be just,
And carry that Purse,
Without any curse
Of the Publique-weale,
When you take out the Seal,
You do not appear,
A Judge of a year.
I Will venture my life
You never had wife,
But i will venture my skill,
You may when you will.
You have the Kings conscience too in your breast,
And that is a good guest;
Which you will have true touch of,
And yet not make much of;
More then by truth your self forth to bring,
The man that you are, for God, and the King.
The Lord Treasurers fortune by the
3 GYPSY. I Come to borrow, and you will grant my demand Sir,
Since it is for no money, pray lend me your hand Sir;
And yet this good hand if you please to stretch it,
Had the Errant been money, could easily fetch it;
You command the Kings treasure, and yet on my soul
You handle not much, for your palm is not foul:
Your fortune is good, and will be to set
The Office upright, and the King out of debt;
To put all that have Pensions soon out of their pain,
By bringing the Exchequer in credit again.
The Lord Privie-Seales,
2 GYPSY. HOnest, and old,
In those the good part of a fortune is told;
God send you your health,
The rest is provided, honor, and wealth;
All which you possess,
Without the making of any man less,
Nor need you my warrant, enjoy it you shall,
For you have a good Privie-Seale for it all.
The Earl Marshalls,
3 GYPSY. NExt the great Master, who is the Donor,
I read you here the preserver of honor,
And spy it in all your singular parts,
What a father you are, and a nurse of the Arts.
By cherishing which, a way you have found,
How the free to all, to one may be bound,
And they again love their bonds; for to be
Obliged to you, is the way to be free:
But this is their fortune; Hark to your own,
Yours shall be to make true Gentry known
From the fictitious, not to prize blood
So much by the greatness, as by the good:
To show, and to open clear virtue the way,
Both whether she should, and how far she may;
And whilst you do judge twixt valor, and noise
To'extinguish the race of the roaring boys.
The Lord Stewards by the
4 GYPSY. I find by this hand
You have the command
Of the very best man's house in the land:
Our Captain, and we,
Ere long will see
If you keep a good table;
Your Master's able.
And here be bountiful lines that say
You Will keep no part of his bounty away.
Thus written to Frank
On your Venus bank;
To prove a false steward you will find much ado,
Being a true one by blood, and by office too.
Lord Marquess Hamiltons by the
3 GYPSY. Only your hand, and welcome to Court,
Here is a man both for earnest, and sport.
You were lately employed
And your Master is joy'd
To have such in his train
So well can sustain
His person abroad,
And not shrink for the load.
But had you been here,
You should have been a Gypsy I swear,
Our Captain had summond you by a doxie,
To whom you would not have answered by proxy,
One, had she come in the way of your Scepter,
It Is ods, you had laid it by to have leapt her.
The Earl of Buckclougs by the
PATRICO. A Hunter you have been heretofore,
And had game good store;
But ever you went
Upon a new sent,
And shifted your loves
As often as they did their smockes, or their gloves:
But since that your brave intendments are
Now bent for the war,
The world shall see
You can constant be,
One Mistress to prove,
And court her for your love.
Pallas, shall be both your Sword, and your Gage;
Truth, bear your Shield, and fortune your Page,

PATR. WHy this is a sport,
See it North, see it South,
For the taste of the Court,

JACK. For the Courts own mouth.
Come Windsor, the Town,
With the Mayor, and oppose,
Weell put them all down,

PATR. Do -- do -- down like my hose.
A Gypsy in his shape
More calls the beholder,
Then the fellow with the Ape,

JAC. Or the Ape on his shoulder.
H'is a sight that will take
An old Judge from his Wench,
I, and keep him awake,

PAT. Yes, awake on the Bench.
And has so much worth,
Though he sit in the stocks,
He will draw the Girls forth,

JAC. I, forth i'their smocks.
Tut, a man's a man;
Let the Clownes with their Sluts
Come mend us if they can,

PAT. If they can, for their guts.
Come mend us, come lend us, their shouts, and their noise,

BOTH. Like thunder, and wonder at Ptolomies boys.
2 Dance. 6 Strain, which leads into Dance 3. During which, Enter the Clownes,
COCKRELL, CLOD, TOVVNSHEAD, PUPPIE.
COCK. OH the Lord! what be these? Tom do thou know? Come hither, come hither
Dick, did thou ever see such? the finest Olive-colour'd spirits, they have so
danced, and gingled here, as if they had been a set of over-growne Fayries.


CLO. They should be Morris-dancers by their gingle, but they have no napkins:


CO. No, nor a Hobbyhorse.


CL. Oh, he is often forgotten, that is no rule; but there is no Maydmarian, nor
Friar amongst them, which is the surer mark.


CO. Nor a Fool that I see.


CL. Unless they be all fools.


TOVV. Well sed Tom fool; why thou simple pish Ass thou! did thou never see
any Gypsies? these are a covie of Gypsies, and the bravest new-come, that ever
Constable flew at; goodly game Gypsies, they are Gypsies of this year, of this
Moon in my conscience.


CL. Oh they are called the Moon men I remember now!


COC. One shall hardly see such gentleman-like- Gypsies, though under a hedge
in a whole Summers day, if they be Gypsies.


TOVV. Male Gypsies all, not a Mort among them.


PUP. Where? where? I could never endure the sight of these Rogue-Gipsies,
which be they: I would feign see'em.


CL. Yonder they are.


PUP. Can they Cant, or Mill? are they masters of their Arts?


TO. No bachelours these, they cannot have proceeded so far; they have scarce
had their time to be lousy yet.


PU. All the better; I would be acquainted with them while they are in clean
life, the 'ile do their tricks the cleanlier.


COC. We must have some music then, and take out the Wenches.


PUP. Music, we will have a whole poverty of pipers, call cheeks upon the
Bagpipe, and Tom Ticklefoot with his Tabor; see where he comes!


CO. I, and all the good wenches of Windsor; after him, yonder is Prue of the
Park,


TOVV. And Frances of the Castle;


PUP. And long Meg of Eaton;


CLO. And Christian of Dorny.


TOVV. See the miracle of a Minstrell.


CO. He Is able to muster up the smocks of the two Shieres;


PU. And set the Codpeeces and they by the ears at pleasure.


TO. I cannot hold now, there is my groat, let us have a fit for mirth sake.


CO. Yes, and the'ile come about us for luck sake.


PU. But look to our pockets, and purses, for our own sake.


CL. I, I have the greatest charge; gather the money.


CO. Come Girls, here be Gypsies come to town, let us dance'em down.

The Clownes take out their Wenches. PRUDENCE, FRANCES, MEGGE, CHRISTIAN.
Country Dance. During which, the Gypsies come about them prying, and after the
PATRICO. Sweet Doxies, and Dells,
My Roses, and Knells,
Scarce out of the shells,
Your hands nothing else.
We ring you no knells
With our Ptolomies bells,
Though we come from the fells,
But bring you good spells,
And tell you some chances,
In midst of your dances,
That fortune advances,
To Prudence, or Frances;
To Sisly, or Harry,
To Roger, or Mary,
Or Pegge of the Dary;
To Maudlin, or Thomas,
Then do not run from us,
Although we look tawny,
We are healthie, and brawny,
What ere your demand is,
Weell give you no jaundis.

PUP. Say you so old Gypsy? 'slid these go to it in rymes; this is better then
canting by tone half.


TO. Nay, you shall heare'em; peace, they begin with Prudence, mark that.


PU. The wiser Gipsie's the Marry.


TO. Are you advised?


PU. Yes, and i will stand to it, that a wise Gypsy (take him at time o'year) is
as pollique a piece of flesh, as most Justices in the County where he stalks.


3 GIP. To love a Keeper, your fortune will be;
But the Doucets better then him, or his fee.

TO. Ha Prue, has he hit you in the teeth with a sweet bit?


PU. Let her alone, she will swallow well enough; A learned Gypsy.


TO. You Will hear more hereafter.


PU. Marry, and i will listen; who stands next? Jack Cockrell.

You Will have good luck to horseflesh of my life,
You plowed so late with the Vicars wife.

PU. A Prophet, a prophet, no Gypsy; or if he be a Gypsy, a divine Gypsy.


TO. Mark Frances, now she is going to it, the virginity of the Parish.


PAT. Fear not, in hell you will never lead Apes;
A mortified maiden, of five scapes.

PU. Birlady he touched the virgin string there a little too hard, they are
arrant learned men all I see; what say they upon Tom, Clod, List.


1 GIP. Clods feet will in Christmas go near to be bare,
When he has lost all his hob nails at Post and pair.

PU. Has hit the right nail o'th head, his own game.


TO. And the very metal he deals in at play if you mark it.


PU. Peace, who is this? Long Meg?


TO. Long, and foul Meg, if she be a Meg, as ever I saw of her inches; pray
God they fit her with a fair fortune.


PU. They slip her, and treat upon Tickle-foot.


1 GIP. On Sundays you rob the poores box with your tabor,
The Collectors would do it, you save them a labor.

PUP. Faith but a little, they will do it non upstant.


TO. Here Is my little Christian, forget, ha you any fortune left for her; a
straight-lac'd Christian of sixteen.


PAT. Christian shall get her a loose bodide-gowne,
In tri'mge, how a Gentleman differs from a Clown.

PUP. Is that a fortune for a Christian; a Turk, or a Gypsy could not have
told her a worse.


TO. Come, I Will stand my self, and once venture the poor head of the Town, do
your worst, my name's Townshead, and heers my hand I Will not be angry.


3 GIP. A Cuckold you must be, and that for three lives;

Your own, the Parsons, and your Wives.


TO. I swear I Will never marry for that, an't be but to give fortune my foe the
lie; Com Pan Puppie you must in too:


PUP. No, I Am well enough, I would ha'no good fortune an I might;


PAT. Yet look to your self, you will ha some ill luck,
And shortly, for I have his purse at a pluck.
Away birds Mum,
I hear by the Hum,
If Beck-harman come,
He Will strike us all dumb,
With a noise like a Drum,
Let Us give him our room,
Here, this way some,
And that way others,
We are not all brothers;
Leave me to the cheats,
I Will show 'em some feats.

PUP. What! are they gone? flowne all of a sudden? this is fine in faith? a
covie call y'em, they are a covie soon scattered me think, who sprung 'em I
marle?


TO. Marry your self Puppie for ought I know, you quested last.


CLO. Would he had quested first, and sprung y'em an 'owre ago, for me.


TO. Why! what is the matter man?


CLO. 'Slid, they have sprung my purse, and all I had about me.


SO. They have not, have they?


CLO. As I am true Clod, have they, and ransacled me of every penny, outcept I
were with child with an owl (as they say) I never saw such luck, it is enough
to make a man a whore.


PUP. Hold thy peace, thou talk as if thou had a license to lose thy
purse alone in this company; 'slid here be those can lose a purse in honor of
the Gypsies, as well as thou for thy heart, and never make word of it: I have
lost my purse too.


COC. What was there i'thy purse, thou keep'st such a whining; was the lease of
thy house in it.


PU. Or thy Grannams silver ring.


CL. No, but a Mill sixe-pence I loved as dearly, and a 2 pence I had to spend
over and above; besides; the Harper that was gathered amongst us, to pay the
Piper.


TOM. Our whole stock, is that gone? how will Tom Tickle-foot do to wet his
whistle then?


PUP. Marry, a new collection, there is no music else masters, he can ill pipe
that wants his upper lip; Money.


PRU. They have robbed me too of a dainty race of ginger, and a jetring I had,
to draw Jacke straw hither a holy days.


TOM Is It possible? fine fingered Gypsies in faith.


ME. And I have lost an enchanted Nutmegge, all gilded over, was enchanted at
Oxford for me, to put i'my sweet-hearts Ale a mornings; with a row of
white-pins that prick me to the very heart, the loss of them.


CLO. And I have lost, besides my purse, my best bride-lace I had at Joane
Turners wedding, and a halpeworth of hobnayles: Francis Addle-breech has lost
somewhat too, besides her Mayden-head.


FRA. I have lost my thimble, and a skeine of Coventry-blew I had to work
Gregory Lichfield a handkercheife.


CHR. And I unhappie Christian as I am, have lost my Practice of Piety, with a
bowed groat; and the ballet of Whoope Barnibie, which grieves me ten times
worse.


CLO. And Tickle-foot h'as lost his cloute he says, with a three pence and
four tokens in it; besides his Tabouring-sticke even now.


CO. And I my knife and sheath, and my fine Dogs-leather gloves.


TO. H'a we lost never a dog amongst us, where is Puppie.


PUP. Here goodman Townshead, you have nothing to lose it seems, but the
Towne-braines you are trusted with.


OH my dear marrowes!
No shooting of arrows,
Or shafts of your wit,
Each other to hit,
In your skirmishing fit?
Your store is but small,
Then venture not all.
Remember each mock,
Does spend of the stock;
And what was here done,
Being under the Moon,
And at afternoon,
Will prove right soon
Disceptio visus,
Done Gratia risus.
There Is no such thing,
As the loss of a ring,
Or what you count worse,
The miss of a purse.
But hay for the maine,
And pass of the strain,
Here Is both come again.
And there is an old twinger,
Can show yet the ginger;
The Pinnes, and the Nutmegge
Are safe here with Slut-megge;
Then strike up your Tabour,
And there is for your labor;
The sheath, and the knife, I Will venture my life,
Shall breed you no strife,
But like man, and wife,
Or Sister, and brother, keep one with another,
And light as a feather,
Make haste to come hither.
THe Coventry-blew,
Hangs there upon Prue,
And here is one opens
The Clout, and the Tokens;
Deny the bowed groat,
And you lie in your throat.
Or the Tabourers nine pence,
Or the six fine pence.
As for the ballet,
Or the book what you call it;
Alas our society,
Mell's not with piety,
Himself has forsook it,
That first undertook it;
For thimble, or bride-lace
Search yonder side less.
All Is to be found,
If you look your selves round;
We scorn to take from ye,
We had rather spend on ye,
If any man wrong ye,
The Theef's among ye.
TOVV. EXcellent in faith, a most restorative Gypsy, all is here again; and yet
by his learning of Legier-demaine, he would make us believe we had robbed our
selves.


CO. A Gypsy of quality believe it, and one of the Kings Gypsies; this a
Drinke-alian, or a Drinke-braggatan?

Ask him.

The King has his noise of Gypsies, as well as of Bearwards, and other
Minstrells.


PU. What sort or order of Gypsies, I pray sir.


A Flagon-fekian,
A Devils-arse-a Pekian;
Borne first at Niglington,
Bred up at Filchington,
Boarded at Tappington,
Bedded at Wappington.
TO. Fore me, a dainty derived Gypsy.


PU. But I pray sir, if a man might ask on you, how came your Captains place
first to be called the Devills-arse.


PAT. For that take my word,
We have a record,
That does it afford,
And says our first Lord,
Cocklorrell he hight,
On a time did invite
The Devil to a feast;
The tail of the jest,
Though since it be long,
Lives yet in a song;
Which if you would hear,
Shall plainly appear.
I Will call in my Clarke
Shall sing like a Lark,
Come in my long sharke,
With thy face brown and dark;
With thy tricks, and thy toys,
Make a merry merry noise,
To those mad Country boys,
And chant out the fart of the Grand-devils arse.

SONG.
COck-lorrell, would needs have the Devil his guest,
And bad him once into the Peake to dinner,
Where never the Fiend had such a feast,
Provided him yet at the charge of a sinner.
His stomach was queasie (for coming there Coacht),
The jogging had caused some crudities rise;
To help it he called for a Puritan poacht,
That used to turn up the egg's of his eyes.
And so recovered unto his wish,
He sat him down, and he fell to eat;
Promooter in plum-broth was the first dish,
His own privy kitchen had no such meat.
Yet though with this he much were taken
Upon a sudden he shifted his trencher
As soon as he spied the Bawd, and bacon,
By which you may note the devill's a wencher.
Six pickled Tailors sliced and cut,
Sempsters, Tyrewomen, fit for his pallat;
With Feathermen, and perfumes put,
Some twelve in a Charger to make a grand sallet:
A rich fat Usurer stu'd in his marrow,
And by him a Lawyers head and green-sawce;
Both which his belly took in like a barrow,
As if till then he had never seen sauce.
Then Carbonadoed, and Cook't with pains,
Was brought up a cloven Serjants face;
The sauce was made of his Yeamans brains,
That had been beaten out with his own mace.
Two roasted Sheriffs came whole to the board;
(The feast had nothing been without 'em)
Both living, and dead, they were foxt, and fu'rd,
Their chains like sawsages hung about 'em.
The very next dish, was the Mayor of a Town,
With a pudding of maintenance thrust in his belly;
Like a Goose in the feathers dressed in his gown,
And his couple of Hinch-boyes boyld to a jelly.
A London Cuckold, hot from the spit,
And when the Carver up had broke him;
The Devil chopped up his head at a bit,
But the horns were very near like to have choakt him.
The chine of a Lecher too there was roasted,
With a plumpe Harlots haunch and garlic;
A Panders pettitoes that had boasted
Himself for a Captain, yet never was warlicke.
A large fat pastie of a Midwife hot;
And for a cold baked meat into the story,
A reverend painted Lady was brought,
And coffined in crust, till now she was hoary.
To these, an over-growne-justice of peace,
With a Clarke like a gizzard thrust under each arm;
And warrants for sippets, laid in his own grease,
Set over a chaffing dish to be kept warm.
The joule of a Jailer, served for fish,
A Constable sous'd with vinegar by;
Two Aldermen lobsters asleep in a dish,
A Deputy tart, a Churchwarden pie.
All which devovr'd; He then for a close,
Did for a full draught of Derby call;
He heaved the huge vessel up to his nose,
And left not till he had drunk up all.
Then from the table he gave a start,
Where banquet, and wine were nothing scarce;
All which he slirted away with a fart,
From whence it was called the Devils Arse.
And there he made such a breach with the wind,
The hole too standing open the while,
That the sent of the vapor, before, and behind,
Has foully perfumed most part of the Isle.
And this was Tobacco, the learned suppose;
Which since in Country, Court, and Town,
In the Devils glister-pipe smoaks at the nose
Of Polle at, and Madam, of Gallant, and Clown.
From which wicked weed, with Swines-flesh, and Ling;
Or any thing else that's feast for the Fiend:
Our Captain, and we, cry God save the King,
And send him good meat, and mirth without end.
PUP. AN excellent song, and a sweet Songster, and would have done rarely in a
Cage, with a dish of water, and hempseed; a fine breast of his own: Sir you
are a Prelate of the Order, I understand, and I have a terrible grudging now
upon me to be one of your company; will your Captain take a Prentise Sir? I
would bind my self to him body and soul, either for one and twenty years,
or as many lives as he would.


CLO I, and put in my life for one, for I am come about too; I am sorry I had
no more money in my purse when you came first upon us Sir; If I had known you
would have picked my pocket so like a Gentleman, I would have been better
provided; I shall be glad to venture a purse with your Worship at any time
you will appoint, so you would prefer me to your Captain; I Will put in security
for my truth, and serve out my time, though I dye to morrow.


COC. I, upon those terms Sir, and in hope your Captain keeps better cheer
then he made the Devil, for my stomach will nere agree with that diet, we will
be all his followers; I Will go home and fetch a little money Sir, all I have,
and you shall pick my pocket to my face, and i will avouch it; A man would not
desire to have his pocket picked in better company.


PUP. Tut, they have other manner of gifts then picking of pockets, or telling
fortunes; if they would but please to show 'em, or thought us poor Country
mortals worthy of them; what might a man do to be a Gentleman of your company
Sir?

I, a Gypsy in ordinary, or nothing.


PAT. Friends not to refell ye,
Or any way quell ye,
To buy or to sell ye,
I only must tell ye;
Ye aim at a mystery,
Worthy a History;
There Is much to be done,
E're you can be a Son,
Or brother of the Moon.
It Is not so soon
Acquired, as desired.
You must be Ben-bowsie,
And sleepy, and drowsy,
And lasie, and lousy,
Before ye can rowse ye,
In shape that arowse ye.
And then you may stalk
The Gypsies walk;
To the Coopes, and the Pens,
And bring in the Hens,
Though the Cock be sullen
For loss of the Pullen:
Take Turkey, or Capon,
And Gammons of Bacon,
Let naught be forsaken;
We Will let you go loose,
Like a Fox to a Goose,
And show you the stie
Where the little Pigs lie;
Whence if you can take
One or two, and not wake
The Sow in her dreams,
But by the Moon beams;
So warily hye,
As neither do cry.
You shall the next day
Have license to play
At the hedge a flirt,
For a sheet, or a shirt;
If your hand be light,
I Will show you the slight
Of our Ptolomies knot,
It is, and it is not,
To change your complexion,
With the noble confection
Of Wall-nuts, and Hog's Grease,
Better then Dogs-grease:
And to milk the Kine,
Ere the Milke-mayd fine
Has opened her eine.
Or if you desire
To spit, or fart fire,
I Will teach you the knacks,
Of eating of flax;
And out of their noses,
Draw Ribbands, and posies,
As for example,
Mine own is as ample,
And fruitful a nose,
As a wit can suppose;
Yet it shall go hard,
But there will be spared,
Each of you a yard,
And worth your regard.
When they color, and size
Arrive at your eyes.
And if you incline
To a cup of good wine,
When you suppe, or dine;
If you chance it to lack,
Be it Clarret, or Sack;
I Will make this snout,
To deal it about,
Or this to run out,
As it were from a spout.

TOVV. Admirable tricks, and he does 'em all se defendendo, as if he would not
be taken in the trappe of authority, by a frail fleshly Constable.


PVP. Without the aid of a Cheese,


CLO. Or help of a flitch of bacon.


CO. Oh, he would chirp in a pair of stocks sumptuously; I Would give any thing
to see him play loose with his hands, when his feet were fast.


PVP. OF my conscience he fears not that, and the Marshall himself were here;
I protest I admire him.


PAT. IS this worth your wonder,
Nay then you shall under-
Stand more of my skill.
I can (for I will)
Here at Burley o'th Hill,
Give you all your fill,
Each Jacke with his Gill,
And show you the King,
The Prince too and bring;
The Gypsies were here,
Like Lords to appear,
With such there attenders,
As you thought offenders,
Who now become new men,
You Will know them for true men;
For he we call chief,
I Will tell 't ye in breife,
Is so far from a theife,
As he gives ye releife
With his bread, bear, and beife
And it is not long since
Ye drank of his Wine,
And it made you fine;
Both Clarret, and Sherrie,
Then let us be merry;
And help with your call,
For a Hall, a Hall.
Stand up to the wall,
Both good men, and tall,
We are one man's all.

BEVER. THe fist of August,
Will not let saw-dust
Lie in your throats,
Or cobwebs, or Oats;
But help to scour ye.
This is no Gowrie,
Has drawn James hither,
But the goodman of Bever,
Our Buckinghams Father;
Then so much the rather
Make it a jolly night,
For it is a holy night,
Spite of the Constable,
Or Mas Deane of Dunstable.

ALL. A Hall, a hall, a hall.
The Gypsies changed Dance.
PATRICO. WHy now ye behold,
It Was truth that I told,
And no devise;
They are changed in a trice,
And so will I,
Be my self, by and by.
I only now
Must study now
To come off with a grace,
With my Patrico's place:
Some short kind of blessing,
It self addressing
Unto my good Master,
Which light on him faster,
Then wishes can fly.
And you that stand by
Be as jocund as I;
Each man with his voice,
Give his heart to rejoice,
Which I Will requite,
If my Art hit right,
Though late now at night,
Each Clown here in sight,
Before day light,
Shall prove a good Knight;
And your Lasses Pages
Worthy their wages,
Where fancy engages
Girls to their ages.

CLOVV. Oh any thing for the Patrico, what is it? what is it?

PAT. Nothing, but bear the bob of the close,
It will be no bruthen you well may suppose.
But bless the Sov'raine, and his senses,
An to wish away offenses,

CLO. Let us alone, bless the Sov'raine, and his senses.

PAT. We Will take them in order, as they have being,
And first of seeing.

PAT. 1
FRom a Gypsy, in the morning,
Or a pair of squint-eyes turning:
From the Coblin, and the spectre,
Or a Drunkard, though with Nectar;
From a woman true to no man,
Which is ougly, besides common;
A smock rampant, and the itches,
To be putting on the breeches:
Where so 'ere they have their being,
Bless the Sov'raine, and his seeing.
2
FRom a fool, and serious ^oyes;
From a Lawyer, three parts noise;
From impertinence, like a Drum
Beat at dinner in his room;
From a tongue without a file,
Heaps of Phrases, and no style.
From a Fiddle out of tune,
As the Cuckoo is in June.
From the candlesticks of Lothbury,
And the loud pure wives of Banbury:
Or a long pretended fit;
Meant for mirth, but is not it:
Only time, and ears out-wearing,
Bless the Sov'raine, and his hearing.
3
FRom a strolling Tinkers sheet,
Or a pair of Carriers feet:
From a Lady that does breath,
Worse above, then underneath.
From the Diet, and the knowledge
Of the students in Beares-colledge.
From Tobacco, with the tipe
Of the Devils glister-pipe;
Or a stincke all stincks excelling,
A Fishmongers dwelling,
Bless the Sov'raigne, and his smelling.
4
FRom an Oyster, and fried fish
A Sowes babye in a dish:
From any portion of a Swine,
From bad Venison, and worse wine.
Ling, what Cook so'ere it boil,
Though with mustard fawc'd and oil,
Or what else would keep man fasting,
Bless the Sov'raigne, and his tasting.
5
BOth from birdlime, and from pitch,
From a Doxie, and her itch.
From the brisles of a Hog,
Or the ring-worme in a Dog.
From the courtshippe of a brier,
Or St. Anthonies old fire.
From a needle, or a thorn;
In The bed at Even, or Morn.
Or from any Gowtes least grutching.
Bless the Sov'raigne, and his touching.
Bless him too from all offenses,
In his sports, as in his fences.
From a Boy to cross his way,
From a fall, or a foul day.
Bless him, o bless him Heaven, and lend him long
to be the sacred burden of all song;
The Acts, and years, of all our Kings to out go;
And while he is mortal, we not think him so.

After which, ascending up, the Jackman sings. SONG I.
THe sports are done, yet do not let
Your joys in sudden silence set;
Delight, and dumbness never met
In one self subject yet.
If things opposed must mixed appear,
Then add a boldness to your fear,
And speak a hymn to him,
Where all your duties do of right belong,
Which I will sweeten with an under song.
CAPTAIN. GLory of ours, and grace of all the Eath;
How well your figure does become your birth,
As if your form, and fortune equal stood,
And only virtue got above your blood.

SONG 2.
Virtue; his Kingly virtue which did merit
This Isle entire, and you are to inherit.
4 GYPSY. HOw right he does confess him in his face,
His browe, his eye, and every mark of State;
As if he were the issue of each Grace,
And bore about him both his fame, and fate.

SONG 3.
Look, look, is he not fair,
And fresh, fragrant too
As Summer sky, or purged Air,
And looks as Lillies do,
That were this morning blown.
4 GYPSY. Oh more! that more of him were known.

3 GYPSY. Look how the Winds upon the Waves grown tame,
Take up Land sounds upon their purple wings;
And catching each from other, bear the fame
To every angle of their sacred springs.
So will we take his praise, and hurl his name
About the Globe, in thousand Ay'ry rings,
If his great virtue be in lore with fame,
For that contem'd, both are neglected things.

SONG 4.
GOod Princes soar above their fame,
And in their worth,
Come greater forth,
Then in their name.
Such, such the Father is,
Whom every title strives to kiss;
Who on his Royal grounds unto himself does raise,
The work to trouble fame, and to astonish praise.
4 GYPSY. INdeed he is not Lord alone of all the State,
But of the love of men, and of the Empires fate.
The Muses Arts, the Schools commerce, our honors laws,
And Virtues hang on him, as on their working cause.

2 GIP. His Hand-mayd Justice is,

3 GIP. Wisdom, his Wife;

4 GIP. His Mistress, Mercy;

5 GIP. Temperance, his life.

2 GIP. His Pages bounty, and grace which many prove,

3 GIP. His Guards are Magnanimity, and love.

4 GIP. His Ushers, Council, Truth, and Piety,

5 GIP. And all that follows him, Felicity.

SONG 5.
OH that we understood
Our good;
There Is happiness indeed in blood,
And store,
But how much more,
When vertu's flood
In the same stream does hit?
As that grows high with years, so happiness with it.
CAPTAIN. LOve, love his fortune then, and virtues known,
Who is the top of men,
But makes the happiness our own;
Since where the Prince, for goodness is renownd,
The Subject with Felicity is Crowned.

The End.
The EPILOGUE.
AT Burley, Bever, and now last at Windsor,
Which shows we are Gypsies of no common kind Sir.
You have behold (and with delight) their change,
And how they came transformed, may think it strange.
It being a thing not touched at by our Poet,
Good Ben slept there, or else forgot to show it;
But least it prove like wonder to the sight,
To see a Gypsy, as an Aethiope, white.
Know, that what died our faces, was an ointment
Made, and laid on by Mr. Woolfes appointment,
The Court Licanthropos; yet without spells,
By a mere Barber, and no Magic else:
It was fetched off with water, and a ball,
And to our transformation, this is all,
Save what the Master Fashioner calls his,
For to Gypsies Metamorphosis;
Who does disguise his habit, and his face,
And takes on a false person by his place:
The power of Poetry can never fail her;
Assisted by a Barber, and a Tailor.
FINIS.
THE MASQUE OF AUGURES. WITH THE SEVERAL ANTIMASQVES PRESENTED ON
TWELFE-NIGHT, 1622.
The first Antimasque had for the SCENE The Court Buttry-hatch.
The Presenters were from St. KATHARINES, Notch a Brewers Clarke, Slug a
Lighterman, Van-goose a rare Artist; Lady Alewife, her two Women, three dancing
Bears, Urson the Bear-ward, Groom of the Revells. NOTCH. COme, now my head's
in, I Will even venture the whole: I ha seen the Lions ere now, and he that has
seen them may see the King.


SIVG. I think he may; but have a care you go not too high (neighbor Notch)
least you chance to have a Tally made of your pate, and be clawed with a
cudgel; there is as much danger going too near the King, as the Lions.


GROOM. Whither? whither now gamesters? what is the business? the affair?
stop I beseech you.


NOT. This must be an Officer, or nothing, he is so peart and breife in his
demands! a pretty man! and a pretty man is a little of this side nothing;
howsoever we must not be daunted now, I am sure I am a greater man than he out
of the Court, and I have lost nothing of my Sire since I came to it.


GROOM. Hey-da! what is this? A hogshead of beer broake out of the Kings
buttery, to some Dutch Hulke! whether are you bound? The wind is against you,
you must back; do you know where you are?


NOT. Yes sir, if we be not mistaken, we are at the Court, and would be glad
to speak with something of less authority, and more wit, that knows a little
in the place.


GRO. Sir, I know as little as any man in the place; speak, what is your
business? I am an Officer, Groom of the Revels, that is my place.


NOT. To fetch Bonge of Court a parcel of invisible bread, and beer for the
Plaiers (for they never see it) or to mistake six Torches from the Chandry,
and give them one.


GRO. How sir?


NOT. Come, this is not the first time you have carried coals to your own
house, I mean that should have warmed them.


GROOM. Sir, I may do it by my place, and I must question you farther.


NOT. Be not so musty sir, our desire is only to know whether the Kings
Majesty, and the Court expect any disguise here to night.


GRO. Disguise! what mean you by that? do you think that his Majesty sits
here to expect drunkards?


NOT. No, if he did, I believe you would supply that place better then you do
this: Disguise was the old English word for a Masque sir, before you were an
implement belonging to the Revels.


GR. There is no such word in the Office now I assure you sir, I have served
here, man, and boy a Prentiship or twain, and I should know. But, by what name
so ever you call it, here will be a Masque, and shall be a Masque, when you and
the rest of your Comrogues shall sit disguised in the stocks.


NOTCH. Sure by your language you were never meant for a Cour^ier, howsoever it
has been your ill fortune to be taken out of the nest young; you are some
Constables egg, some such Widgin of Authority, you are so easily offended!
Our coming was to show our loves sir, and to make a little merry with his
Majesty to night, and we have brought a Masque with us, if his Majesty had not
been better provided.


GROOM. Who you? you a Masque? why you stincke like so many bloat-herrings
newly taken out of the chimney! In the name of Ignorance, whence came you? or
what are you? you have been hanged in the smoke sufficiently, that is smelt
out already.


NOTCH. Sir, we do come from among the Brewhouses in Saint Katherines, that is
true, there you have smoked us (the Docke comfort your nosthrills,) and we may
have lived in a mist there, and so mist our purpose; but for mine own part I
have brought my properties with me to express what I am; the keys of my
calling hang here at my girdle, and this the Register book of my function
shows me no less then a Clarke at all points, and a Brewers Clarke, and a
Brewers head Clarke.


GRO. A man of account sir! I cry you mercy.


SLVG. I sir, I knew him a fine Merchant, a merchant of Hops, till all hopt
into the water.


NOTCH. No more of that, what I have been, I have been; what I am, I am: I
Peter Notch, Clarke, hearing the Christmas invention was drawn dry at Court;
and that neither the KINGS Poet, nor his Architect had wherewithal left to
entertain so much as a Baboone of quality, nor scarce the Welsh Ambassador if
he should come there: Out of my allegiance, to wit, drew in some other friends
that have as it were presumed out of their own naturalls, to fill up the vacuum
with some pretty presentation, which we have addressed, and conveyed hither
in a Lighter at the general charge, and landed at the back door of the
Buttery, through my neighbor Slug's credit there.


SLVG. A poor Lighter-man sir, one that has had the honor sometimes to lay
in the Kings beer there; and I assure you I heard it in no worse place then
the very Buttry, for a certain, there would be no Masque, and from such as
could command a jacke of beer, two, or three.


VAN. Dat is all true, exceeding true, de inventors be barren, lost, two, dre,
vour mile, I know that from my selven; dey have no ting, no ting van deir own,
but dat dey take vrom de eard, or de zea, or de heaven, or de hell, or de rest
van de veir Clementen, de place a, dat be so common as de vench in de Burdello.
Now me would bring in some dainty new ting, dat never was, nor never sall be in
de rebus natura; dat has neder van de materia, nor de forma, nor de hoffen, nor
de voote, but a mera devisa of de brain --


GROOM. Hey-da! what Hans Flutter kin is this? what Dutchman does build or
frame Castles in the Air?


NOT. He is no Dutch man sir, he is a Britain borne, but has learned to
misuse his own tongue in travel, and now speaks all languages in ill
English; a rare Artist he is sir, and a Projector of Masks. His Project in
ours is, that we should all come from the three dancing Bears in Saint
Katherines (you may hap know it sir) hard by where the Priest fell in, which
Alehouse is kept by a distressed Lady; whose name (for the honor of
Knighthood) will not be known; yet she is come in person here Errant, to fill
up the adventure with her two women that draw drink under her, Gentlewomen
borne all three, I assure you.


SLVG. And were three of those Gentlewomen that should have acted in that
famous matter of Englands joy in six hundred and three.


LADY. What talk you of England's joy, Gentlemen? you have another matter in
hand I wis, Englands sport and delight if you can manage it. The poor Cattle
yonder are passing away the time, with a cheat loaf, and a bumbard of broken
beer, how will ye dispose of them?


GRO. Cattle! what cattle does she mean?


LADY. No worse then the Kings game I assure you; The Bears, Bears both of
quality and fashion, right Bears, true Bears.


NOT. A devise only to express the place from whence we come (my Ladies house)
for which we have borrowed three very Bears that (as her Ladyship aforesaid
says) are well bred, and can dance to present the sign, and the Beareward to
stand for the signe-poast.


GRO. That is pretty; but are you sure you have sufficient Bears for the
purpose.


SLVG. Very sufficient Bears as any are in the Ground, the Parish-Garden, and
can dance at first sight, and play their own tunes if need be. John Vrson the
Beare-ward, offers to play them with any Citie-dancers christened, for a ground
measure.


NOT. Marry, for lofty tricks, or dancing on the Ropes he will not undertake,
it is out of their element he says. Sir, all our request is since we are come,
we may be admitted, if not for a Masque, for an Antickmask; and as we shall
deserve therein, we desire to be returned with credit to the Buttry from whence
we came, for reward, or to the Porters Lodge with discredit, for our punishment.


GRO. To be whipped with your Bears? Well, I could be willing to venture a good
word in behalf of the Game, if I were assured the aforesaid game would be
cleanly, and not fright the Ladies.


NOT. For that sir, the Bear-ward has put in security, by warranting my Lady
and her Women to dance the whole changes with them in safety; and for their
abusing the place you shall not need to fear, for he has given them a kind
of Dyet-bread to bind them to their good behavior.


GRO. Well, let them come; if you need one, I Will help you my self.


Enter John Urson with his Bears singing. Ballad.
THough it may seem rude
For me to intrude,
With these my Bears by chance-a;
'Twere sport for a King,
If they could sing
As well as they can dance-a
Then to put you out
Of fear or doubt,
We came from St. Katharin-a;
These dancing three,
By the help of me,
Who am the Post of the signe-a
We sell good ware,
And we need not care
Though Court, and Country knew it:
Our Ale's of the best,
And each good guest
Prays for their souls that brew it.
For any Alehouse,
We care not a lowse,
Nor Tavern in all the Towne-a;
Nor the Vintry Cranes,
Nor St. Clements Danes,
Nor the Devil can put us down-a,
Who has once there been,
Comes thither again,
The liquour is so mighty;
Beer strong and stale,
And so is our Ale,
And it burns like Aquavita.
To a stranger there,
If any appear,
Where never before he has bin;
We show the iron Gate,
The wheel of St. Kate,
And the place where the Priest fell in.
The Wives of Wapping
They trudge to our tapping,
And still our Ale desire;
And there sit and drink,
Till the spue, and stink,
And often piss out our fire.
From morning to night,
And about to daylight,
They sit and never grudge it;
Till the Fish-wives join
Their single coin,
And the Tinker pawnes his budget.
If their brains be not well,
Or their bladders do swell,
To ease them of their burden;
My Lady will come
With a bowl and a broom,
And her Hand-mayd with a Jorden.
From Court we invite
Lord, Lady, and knight;
Squire, gentlman, yeoman and groom.
And all our stiff drinkers,
Smiths, Porters, and Tinkers,
And the beggars shall give ye room.
VAN. How like you? how like you?


GRO. Excellent! The Bears have done learnedly, and sweetly.


VAN. It Is noting, it is noting; vill you see someting? Ick sall bring in de
Turk^chen, met all zin Bashawes, and zin dirty towsand Yanitsaries met all zin
Whooren Cunuken, all met an auder, de Sofie van Persia, de Tartar Cham met de
great King of Mogull, and make deir men, and deir horse, and deir Elephant en
be seen fight in de air, and be all killen, and aliven, and no such ting. And
all dis met de Ars van de Catropricks, by de reflesbie van de glassen.


NOT. Oh, he is an admirable Artist.


SLVG. And a half sir.


GRO. But where will he place his glasses?


VAN. Fow, dat is all ean, as it be two, dree, veir, vife tousand Mile off: Ick
sall multipliren de vizioun, met an ander secret dat Ick heb: Spreck, vat vil
you haben?


GRO. Good sir put him toot, bid him do something that is impossible; he will
undertake it I warrant you.


NOT. I do not like the Mogul, nor the great Turk, nor the Tartar, their
names are somewhat to big for the Room; marry if he could show us some
Country Plaiers, strolling about in several Shires, without license from the
Office, that would please I know whom, or some Welsh Pilgrims.


VAN. Pilgrim? now you talk of de Pilgrim, it come in my head, Ick vill show
you all de whole brave Pilgrim o'de Vorld: de Pilgrim dat go now, now at de
instant, two, dre towsand Mile to de great Mahomet, at de Mecha, or here, dear,
every where, make de fine Labyrints, and show all de brave error in de vorld.


SLVG. And shall we see it here?


NAN. Yau, here, here, here in dis Room, it is very Room: vel vat is dat to you
if Ick do de ting? vat an devil, vera boten devil?


GRO. Nay, good sir be not angry.


NOT. It Is a disease that follows all excellent men, they cannot govern their
passions; but let him alone, try him one 'bout.


GRO. I would try him, but what has all this to do with our Mask?


VAN. O Sir, all de better vor an Antick-maske, de more absurd it be, and vrom
de purpose, it be ever all de better. If it go from de nature of de ting, it
is de more Art: for dear is Art, and dear is Nature, you sall see.
Hochos-pochos, Paucos, Palabros.


The Second Antimaske.
Which was a perplexed Dance of straying and deformed Pilgrims taking several
paths, till with the opening of the light above, and breaking forth of Apollo,
they were all frighted away, and the Maine Masque begun. APOLLO Arts eximias
quatuor Apollini acceptas tulit antiquitas
descending, Sung. IT is no dream, you all do wake, and see;
Behold, who comes! Sagittandi peretiam, unde apud Homerum, frequens illud
Epithetom (...), long jaculans.
far-shooting Phoebus he
That can both hurt and Medicinam, unde Medici nomen adeptus.
heal; and with his Musicam, unde (...), appellatus.
voice
Rear Towns, and make societies rejoice;
That taught the Muses all their harmony,
Et Divinationem (in qua etiam Augurium) unde Augur Apollo dictus, Virg.
Aeneid. lib. 4. and Horat. Car. lib. 1. Ode. 2. Nube cadentes humeros amictus
Augur Apollo. Et Car. saecul. ult. ubi doctissimus Poeta ^^as arts totidem
versibus complectitur. Augur and fulgente decorus arcu Phoebus, acceptus que
no^^^ (...), Qui salutari levat art f^ssos corporis artu^.
And men the tunefull Art of Augurie.
Apollo stoopes, and when a God descends,
May Mortals think he has no vulgar ends.

Being near the earth, he called these persons following, who came forth as
from their Tombs. Linus Appollinis and Terpsichores filius. Paus.
LInus, and Orpheus, Apollinis and Calliopes, de quibus Virg, in Ecloga
inscript. Non me Carminibus vincet, nec Thraetius Orpheus. Nec Linus, huic
matter quamvis, atque hui^ pater ad^^^ Orphei Calliopea Lino formosus Apollo.
Orpheus, Branchus, Apollinis and Jances filius, de quo vid. Strab. lib. 4. and
Statium, Thebaid. lib. 3 -- patrioque aequalis honori Branchus.
Branchus, Jdmon, Apollinis and Aft^ries filius. De illo vid. Valor. Flac. lib.
1. Argonautic. -- Contra Phoebius Idmon non pallore vtris non ullo honor
comarum terriblis, plenus fatis, Phoeboque quieto cui genitor tribunt
praenoscere Divum Omina, seu Flammas, seu lubrica cominus exta seuplenum cert^^
interroget ^era penni^.
Idmon, all
My sacred Sons, rise at your Fathers call
From your immortal Graves; where sleep, not death,
Yet binds your powers.
LINVS. Here.


ORPHEUS. Here.


BRANCHVS. What sacred breath
Does re-inspire us?

IDMON. Who is this we feel?


PHOEMONOE. Phoemoen filia Phoebi quae prima carmen heroicum cecinit. Hesiod.
in Theog
What heat creepes through me, as when burning steel
Is dipped in water?

Apollo. I, Phoemonoe,
Thy Father Phoebus 's fury fills thee;
Confess my Godhead; once again I call,
Let whole Apollo enter in you all,
And follow me.

CHORUS. We fly, we do not tread,
The Gods do use to ravish whom they lead.

Apollo descended, showed them where the King sat, and sung forward. BEhold
the love and care of all the Gods
Of the Ocean, and the happy Isles;
That whilst the World about him is at ods,
Sits Crowned Lord here of himself, and smiles.
CHORUS. To see the erring mazes of mankind;
Who seek for that, does punish them to find.

Then he advanced with them to the King. APOLLO. PRince of thy Peace, see what
it is to love
The Powers above!
Jove has commanded me
To visit thee;
And in thine honor with my Allus^^^d illud Ovid^j Epistol. Epist. Parid.
Ilion aspi^ies, s^mataque turribus altis Moenia Apol^^ne e^^ruc^^a avore lyr^^
Music rear
Augura^di scientia nobilis erat and antiqua, apud Gentes praes^^tam He^^^seos:
quibus erat Collegium and Domicilium celeberrimum Augurum, quorum summa fuit
Authoritas and Dignitas per totam Italiam potissi^um Romae. Romulus urbe
cona^ta, Collegium and Augures ^^^instatuit, ipse nobiles, ut apud Liu. Lib.
and Tull. lib. 1. Optimus Augur. Eorum officium fuit auspi^ia captare and
ex^i^s colligere signa futurarum rerum, Deorumque moni^a considerare de
eventibus prosperi^ vel adversis. Sacer erat Romany and res regia habita,
dig^^tasque penes patricios and principes viros mansit etiam apud ^mperatores
obtinuit unde ab Apolline nostro, tales Praeses pulchre designatus
a College here,
Of tunefull Augures, whose divining skill,
shall wait thee still,
And be the Heralds of his highest will.
The work is done,
And I have made their President thy Son;
Great Mars too, on these nights,
Saltationes in rebus sacris ad hibebantur apud omnes pene gentes: and a
saliendo, seu saltatione sacra ad saliare carmen institut a ^dlij dicti and
Marti consecrati. Omnes etiam qui ad cantum and tibiam ludebant Sal^j and
Salisubsul^ dicebantur. Salius, (...) vet. gloss. and Pacuvi. Pro Imperio sic
Sal^subsulus vest^ro excubet Mars. and Virg. ^ Aeneid lib. 8. Tum Salij ad
Cantus incensa altariacircum populeis adsunt evinct^ tempora ramis.
has added Salian rites.
Yond, yond afar,
They closed in their Auguria captaturi coelum eligebant purum and serenum,
^^^eque mitido Lituum (qui erat baculus incurvus Augurale Signum) manu tenebat
Augur. Eocoeli regiones designab^^t, and m^^tas ^^tra quas contineri debebant
Auguria: and hae vocabantur Templa* und^ Contem latio dic^^^^s^ Consideratio
and meditatio rerum sacrarum, ut dextrum sinisirumque latus observaret.
I^^mpet^^^^ sibi ipso regiones definiebat; in oblato marum suam respexit laevam
aut dextram. Regiones ab^ (...) ^assum terminabat limite decuma^o, and cardine
ex tranverso signo metato, quo occuli ferrent qua illo^^g^ssime. Artica in
Ortum vergebat. Postica regio a Tergo ad occ^sum. Dextra ad meridiem. Sinis^ra
ad septentrionem. Observationes ^ebant Augure sedente, capite velato, t^ga
duplici Augura^^ candida a^^cto, a media nocte ad mediam diem, crescente non
deficiente die. Neque captabantur Auguria post^menisem Julium, propterea quod
Aves redderentur imbiciliores and morbidae, Pullique eorum ^^ssent impersi^^li.
Temple are,
And each one guided by a star.

CHORUS. Haste, haste, to meet them, and as they advance
'twixt every Dance;
Let us interpret their Prophetic trance.

Here they fetched out the Maskers, and came before them with the Torch-bearers
along the Stage, singing this full Song. APOLLO and CHORUS. WHich way, and
whence the lightning flew,
Or how it burned, bright, and blew,
Design, and figure by your lights:
Then forth, and show the several flights
Your Augurandi scientia (...) dicta. Divinatio per aves. Aves aut Oscines, aut
Prepetes Oscines, quae ore, Proepetes, quae volatu Augurium significant*
Pullitripudio. Aves auspicatae, and Praepetes, Aquila, Vultur, Sanqualis seu
ossifraga, Triarches, sive Buteo, Immussulus, Accipiter, Cygnus, Columba,
Oscines, Cornix, Cornus, Anser, Ciconia, Ardea, Noctua, inauspicatae; Milvus,
^arra, Nycticorax, Striges, Hirundo, Picus, etc.
Birds have made, or what the wing
Or voice in Augurie does bring.
Which hand the Crow cried on, how high
The Vulture, or the Erne did fly,
What wing the Swan made, and the Dove,
The Storke, and which did get above:
Show all the Birds of food or Prey,
But pass by the unluckie Jay,
The Night-Crow, Swallow, or the Kite
Let those have neither right, CHOR. Nor part,
In this nights art.

The Torch-bearers daunced. After which the Augures laid by their Staves, and
Danced their Entry, which done, APOLLO and the rest, interpreted the Augurie.
APOLLO. THe Signs are Habebant dextra and laeva omnia; antica and postica;
Orientalia and Occident^lia. Graeci cum se od Septentrionem obverterent, Ortum
ad dextram habuere. Romani cum Meridiem in auspicando cum tuerentur Ortum ad
laevam habuere. Itaque sinistrae parts eadem sunt Romany quae Graecis dextrae
ad ortum. Sinistra igitur illis meliora, Dextra pejora: Graecis contra.
Sinistra, pertinentia ad ortum: Salutaria, qui ortus lucis index and auctor.
Dextra, quia specta^t occasum tristia.
luckie all, and Habebant dextra and laeva omnia; antica and postica;
Orientalia and Occident^lia. Graeci cum se od Septentrionem obverterent, Ortum
ad dextram habuere. Romani cum Meridiem in auspicando cum tuerentur Ortum ad
laevam habuere. Itaque sinistrae parts eadem sunt Romany quae Graecis dextrae
ad ortum. Sinistra igitur illis meliora, Dextra pejora: Graecis contra.
Sinistra, pertinentia ad ortum: Salutaria, qui ortus lucis index and auctor.
Dextra, quia specta^t occasum tristia.
right
There has not been a voice, or flight
Of ill Presage. Linus. The Columbae augura non nisi regibus dant; quia nunquam
singulae volant: sicut Rex nunquam selus incedit. Nuntiae pacis.
bird that brings
Her Augurie alone to Kings
The Dove, has flowne. Orpheus. And to thy peace
Fortunes and the Fates increase.

BRANCHUS. Ardea, and Ardeola, rerum arduarum auspicium. Minervae sacra. Apud
Homer. Ili^d. K. (...).
Minerva's Hernshaw and her Owl,
Do both proclaim, thou shall control
The course of things. Idmon. As now they be
With tumult carried: Apollo. And live free
From hatred, faction, or the fear,
To blast the Olive thou do wear.

CHORUS. More is behind, which these do long to show,
And what the Gods to so great virtue owe.

The maine Dance. CHORUS. Still, still the Auspicium, ab ave specienda. Paul.
Nam quod nos cum praepositione dicimus ASPICIO apud veteres sine praepositione
SPICIO dicebatur.
Auspice is so good,
We wish it were but understood;
It even puts Apollo
To all his strengths of art, to follow,
Signa quae sese offerent, erat multifaria: nam s^obieceretur avis aliqua,
considerabatur quo volatu ferretur, an abliquo vel prono, vel supinomotu
Corporis, quo flecteret, contorqueret, aut contraharet membra; qua in part
seoccultaret; an ad dextram vel sinistraem canerent Oscines, etc.
The flights, and to devine
What Is meant by every Sign.
Thou can not less be, then the charge
of every Dietie.
That thus art left here to enlarge,
And shield their piety!
Thy neighbors at thy fortune long have gazed,
But at thy wisdom, all do stand amazed.
And wish to be,
Overcome, or governed by thee!
Safety it self so sides thee, where thou go,
And Fate still offers what thou covet'st most!

THE REVELLS. After which Apollo went up to the King and Sung. Do not expect
to hear of all
Your good at once, lest it forestall
A sweetness would be new:
Some things the Fates would have concealed
From us the Gods, lest being revealed
Our powers shall envy you.
It is enough your people learn
The reverence of your peace
As well as Strangers do discern
The Glories, by the increase
And that the Romulus augur fuit, and Numa, and reliqui reges Romani sicut ante
eos Turnus, Rhamnetes and alij. Lacedemonij suis regibus Augurem Assessorem
dabant, Cilices, Lycij, Cares, Arab^s, in summa veneratione habuerunt Auguria.
princely Augur here, your Son
Do by his Fathers lights his courses run.
CHORUS. Him shall you see triumphing over all
Both foes and vices: and your young and tall
Nephews, his Sons grow up in your embraces,
To give this Island Princes in long races.

Here the heaven opened; and Jove, with the Senate of the Gods, were
discovered, while Apollo returne^ to his Seat, and ascending sung. APOLLO. SEE
heaven expects my return*
The forked fire begins to burn,
Jove beckons to me come.

JOVE. Though Phoebus be the god of Arts,
He must not take on him all parts:
But leave his Frather some.

APOLLO. My arts are only to obey. JOVE. Vide Orpheum in hymn. de omnip. Jovis.
And mine to sway
Jove is that one, whom first, midst, last, you call
The power that governes, and conserveth all;
Earth, Sea, and Air, are subject to our check,
And Fate with heaven, moving at our beck.
Till Jove it ratify,
It is no Augurie,
Though uttered by the mouth of Destiny.

APOLLO. Dear father, give the Sign, and seal it then.


The Earth rises. It is the suit of Earth and Men.


JOVE. What do their Mortals crave without our wrong?


Earth with the rest. That Jove will lend us this our Sovereign long;
Let our grandchildren, and not we,
His want or Absence ever see.

JOVE. Your wish is blessed.
Mos Jovis, annuendo votis and firmandis omnibus. Apud Homer, etc.
Jove knocks his Chin against his breast,
And firmes it with the rest.

CHORUS. Sing then his fame, through all the orbs; in even
Proportions, rising still, from Earth to Heaven:
And of the lasting of it leave to doubt,
The power of time shall never put that out.

This done, the whole Scaene shut, and the Maskers danced their last Dance.

The End.
TIME VINDICATED TO HIMSELF, AND TO HIS HONORS.
In the presentation at COURT on Twelfth night. 1623.
-- qui semirantur, in illos
Virus habe: nos haec novimus esse nihil.

TIME VINDICATED.
A Trumpet sounded. FAME enters, followed by the Curious, the Eyed, the Eared,
and the Nosed. FAME. GIve ear, the worthy, hear what Fame proclaims.


EARS. What? what? Is It worth our ears?


EYES. Or eyes?


NOSE. Or noses?
For we are curious, Fame: indeed, the Curious.

EYES. We come to spy.


EARS. And hearken.


NOSE. And smell out.


FAME. More than you understand, my hot Inquisitors,


NOES. We cannot tell.


EYES. It may be.


EARS. However, go you on, let us alone.


EYES. We may spy out, that, which you never meant.


NOSE. And nose the thing you sent not. First, whence come you?


FAME. I came from Saturn.


EARS. Saturn, what is he?


NOSE. Some Protestant I warrant you, a Time-server,
As Fame her self is.

FAME. You are near the right.
Indeed, he is Time it self, and his name KRONOS,

NOSE. How! Saturn! Chronos! and the Time it self!
You're found: enough. A notable old Pagan!

EARS. One of their Gods, and ea^es up his own children.


NOSE. A Fencer, and does travel with a since
Instead of a long-sword.

EYES. Has been often called from it,
To be their Lord of misrule.

EARS. As Cincinnatus
Was from the plough, to be Dictator.

EYES. Yes.
We need no interpreter, on, what of Time?

FAME. The Time has sent me with my Trumpe to summon
All sorts of persons worthy, to the view
Of some great spectacle he means to night,
T'exhibite; and with all solemnity.

NOSE. O, we shall have his Saturnalia.


EYES. His days of feast, and liberty again.


EARS. Where men might do, and talk all that they list.


EYES. Slaves of their lords.


NOSE. The servants of their masters!


EARS. And subjects of their Sovereign.


FAME. Not so lavish.


EARS. It was a brave time that!


EYES. This will be better:
I spy it coming, peace. All the impostures,
The prodigies, diseases, and distempers,
The knaveries of the Time, we shall see all now.

EARS. And hear the passages, and several humors
Of men, as they are swayd by their affections:
Some grumbling, and some mutining, some scoffing,
Some pleased, some pyning, at all these we laughing.

NOSE. I have it here, here, strong, the sweat of it,
And the confusion (which I love) I nose it,
It tickles me.

EYES. My four eyes itch for it.


EARS. And my ears tingle, would it would come forth:
This room will not receive it.

NOSE. That Is the fear.


Enter CHRONO-MASTIX. CHRON. What? what? my friends, will not this room
receive?


EYES. That which the Time is presently to show us.


CHRO. The Time? Lo I the man, that hate the time
That is, that love it not; and (though in ryme,
I here do speak it) with this whipp you see,
Do lash the Time, and am myself lash-free.

FAME. Who Is this?


EARS. It Is Chronomastix, the brave Satyr,


NOSE. The gentleman-like Satyr, cares for no body,
His forehead tip't with bays, do you not know him?

EYES. Yes Fame must know him, all the Town admires him.


CHRO. If you would see Time quake and shake, but name us,
It is for that, we are both beloved, and famous.

EYES. We know, Sir. But the Time's now come about.


EARS. And promises all liberty.


NOSE. Nay license.


EYES. We shall do what we list.


EARS. Talk what we list.


NOSE. And censure whom we list, and how we list.


CHRO. Then I will look on Time, and love the same,
And drop my whip: who is this! my Mistress! Fame!
The lady whom I honor, and adore!
What luck had I not to see her before!
Pardon me, Madam, more than most accursed,
That did not spy your Ladyship at first,
To Have given the stoop, and to salute the skirts
Of her, to whom all Ladies else are flirts!
It is for you, I revell so in rhyme,
Dear Mistress, not for hope I have the Time
Will grow the better by it. To serve Fame
Is all my end, and get my self a name.

FAME. Away, I know thee not, wretched Impostor,
Creature of glory, Mountebanke of wit,
Selfe-loving Braggart, Fame does sound no trumpet
To such vain, empty fools: It Is Infamy
Thou serv'st, and follow'st, scorn of all the Muses,
Go revell with thine ignorant admirers,
Let worthy names alone.

CHRO. O, you the Curious,
Breath you to see a passage so injurious,
Done with despite, and carried with such tumor
Against me, that am so much the friend of rumor?
(I would say Fame?) whose Muse has rid in rapture
On a soft ambling verse to every capture,
From the strong guard, to the weak child that reads me,
And wonder both of him that loves, or dread's me!
Who with the lash of my immortal pen
Have scourged all sorts of vices, and of men!
Am I rewarded, thus? have I, I say,
From Envies self torn praise, and bays away,
With which my glorious front, and word at large,
Triumphs in print at my admirers charge.

EARS. Rare! how he talks in verse, just as he writes!


CHRO. When have I walked the streets, but happy he
That had the finger first to point at me,
Prentice, or Journeyman! The shop does know it!
The unlettered Clarke! major and minor Poet!
The Sempster has sat still as I passed by,
And dropped her needle! Fish-wives staid their cry*
The Boy with buttons, and the Basket wench!
To vent their wares into my works do trench!
A pudding-wife that would despise the Times,
Has uttered frequent pen'worths, through my rimes,
And, with them, dived into the Chambermaid,
And she unto her Lady has convay'd
The seasoned morsels, who has sent me pensions,
To cherish, and to heighten my inventions.
Well, Fame shall know it yet, I have my faction,
And friends about me, though it please detraction,
To do me this affront. Come forth that love me,
And now, or never, spite of Fame, approve me.

At this the Mutes come in. THE ANTIMASQUERS. FAME. How now! what is here? Is
hell broke loose?


EYES. You Will see.
That he has favorers, Fame, and great ones too.
That unctuous Bounty, is the Bosse of Belinsgate,

EARS. Who feasts his Muse with claret wine, and oysters,


NOSE. Grows big with Satyr;


EARS. Goes as long as an Elephant:


EYES. She labors, and lies in of his inventions,


NOSE. Has a male- poem in her belly now,
Big as a colt,

EARS. That kicks at Time already,


EYES. And is no sooner foald, but will neigh sulphur:


FAME. The next?


EARS. A quondam Justice, that of late
Has been discarded out of the pack of the peace,
For some lewd levitie he holds in capite,
But constantly loves him. In days of yore,
He used to give the charge out of his poems,
He carries him about him, in his pocket,
As Philip's Son did Homer, in a casket,
And cries, O happy Man, to the wrong party,
Meaning the Poet, where he meant the subject:

FAME. What are this pair?


EYES. The ragged rascals?


FAME. Yes.


EYES. Mere rogues, you would think them rogues, but they are friends,
One is his Printer in disguise, and keeps
His press in a hollow tree, where to conceal him,
He works by glow-worme light, the Moone's too open.
The other zealous ragge is the Compositor,
Who in an angle, where the ants inhabit,
(The emblem's of his labors) will sit curled
Whole days, and nights, and work his eyes out for him.

NOSE. Strange arguments of love! There is a Schoolmaster
Is turning all his works too, into Latin,
To pure Satyricke Latin; makes his Boys
To learn him; calls him the times Juvenal;
Hangs all his School with his sharp sentences;
And over the Execution place has painted
Time whipped, for terror to the Infantery.

EYES. This Man of war, in the rere, He is both Trumpet
And Champion to his Muse.

EARS. For the whole City.


NOSE. H'as him by roat, recites him at the tables,
Where he does govern; swears him into name,
Upon his word, and sword, for the sole youth
Dares make profession of Poetic truth,
Now militant amongst us: To th'incredulous,
That dagger is an article he uses,
To rivet his respect into their pates,
And make them faithful. Fame, you will find you'ave wronged him.

FAME. What a confederacy of Folly is here!


They all dance but Fame, and make the first Antimasque, In which they adore,
and carry forth the Satyr, and the Curious come up again. EYES. Now Fame, how
like you this?


EARS. This falls upon you
For your neglect.

NOSE. He scorns you, and defies you,
H'as got a Fame on's own, as well as a Faction.

EYES. And these will deifie him, to despite you.


FAME. I envy not the (...).
'Twill prove but deifying of a Pompion.

NOSE. Well, what is that the Time will now exhibit?


EYES. What gambols? what devises? what new sports?


EARS. You promised us, we should have any thing.


NOSE. That Time would give us all we could imagine.


FAME. You might imagine so, I never promised it.


EYES. Pox, then it is nothing. I had now a fancy
We might have talked of the King.

EARS. Or State.


NOSE. Or all the World.


EYES. Censured the Counsel, e're they censure us.


EARS. We do it in Paul's.


NOSE. Yes, and in all the tavernes!


FAME. A comely license. They that censure those
They ought to reverence, meet they that old curse,
To beg their bread, and feel eternal Winter.
There Is difference 'twixt liberty, and license.

NOSE. Why if it be not that, let it be this then
(For since you grant us freedom, we will hold it,)
Let Us have the giddy world turned the heels upward,
And sing a rare black Sanctus, on his head,
Of all things out of order.

EYES. No, the Man
In The Moon dance a Corranto, his bush
At's back, a fire; and his dog piping Lachrimae.

EARS. Or let us have all the people in an uprore,
None knowing, why, or to what end: and in
The amidst of all, start up an old mad woman
Preaching of patience.

NOSE. No, no, I Would have this.


EYES. What?


FAME. Any thing.


NOSE. That could be monstrous:
Enough, I mean. A Babel of wild humors.

EARS. And all disputing of all things they know not,


EYES. And talking of all men they never heard of,


EARS. And all together by the ears of the sudden,


EYES. And, when the matter is at hottest, then
All fall asleep.

FAME. Agree among your selves,
And what it is you would have, I Will answer you.

EYES. O, that we shall never do.


EARS. No, never agree.


NOSE. Not upon what. Something that is unlawful.


EARS. I, or unreasonable.


EYES. Or impossible.


NOSE. Let 't be uncivil enough, you hit us right.


EARS. And a great noise.


EYES. To little, or no purpose.


NOSE. And if there be some mischief, 'twill become it.


EYES. But see, there be no cause, as you will answer it.


FAME. These are mere Monsters.


NOSE. I, all the better.


FAME. You do abuse the Time. These are fit freedoms
For lawless Prentices, on a Shrovetuesday,
When they compel the Time to serve their riot.
For drunken Wakes, and strutting Beare-baytings,
That savor only of their own abuses.

EYES. Why, if not those, then something to make sport.


EARS. We only hunt for novelty, not truth.


FAME. I Will fit you, though the Time faintly permit it.


The second Antimasque of Tamblers, and Juglers, brought in by the Cat and
fiddle, who make sport with the Curious, and drive them away. FAME. Why now
they are kindly used, like such spectators,
That know not what they would have. Commonly,
The curious are ill natured, and like flies,
Seek Times corrupted parts to blow upon:
But may the sound ones live with fame, and honor,
Free from the molestation of these Insects:
Who being fled, Fame now persues her errand.

Loud MVSIQUE. To which the whole Scene opens, where Saturn sitting with Venus
is discovered above, and certain Votaries coming forth below, which are the
Chorus. FAME. For you, great King, to whom the Time does owe
All his respects, and reverence, behold
How Saturn, urged at request of Love,
Prepares the object to the place to night.
Within yond' darkness, Venus has found out
That Hecate (as she is Queen of shades)
Keeps certain glories of the Time obscured,
There, for her self alone to gaze upon,
As she did once the fair Endimion.
These, Time has promised at Loves suit to free,
As being fitter to adorn the age,
By you restored on earth, most like his own:
And fill this world of beauty here, your Court.
To which his bounty, see, how men prepare
To fit their votes below, and thronging come
With longing passion to enjoy the effect!
Hark, it is Love begins to Time. Expect.

VENUS. Beside, that it is done for Love,
It is a work, great Time, will prove
Thy honor, as men's hopes above.

SATURN. If Love be pleased, so am I:
For Time could never yet deny
What Love did ask, if Love knew why.

VOTARIES. She knew, and has expressed it now.
And so does every public vow
That heard her why, and waits thy how.

SATURN. You shall not long expect: with ease
The things come forth, are borne to pleass:
Look, have you seen such lights as these?

The Masquers are discovered, and that which obscured them, vanishes.
VOTARIES. These, these must sure some wonders be!


CHORUS. O, what a glory it is to see
Men's wishes, Time, and Love agree

{A Pause There SATVRNE and VENUS pass away, and the Masquers descend. CHORUS.
What grief, or envy had it been,
That these, and such had not been seen,
But still obscured in shade!
Who are the glories of the Time,
Of youth, and feature too, the prime,
And for the light were made!

VOTARIES. 1 Their very number, how it takes!
2 What harmony their presence makes!
3 How they inflame the place!

CHORUS. Now they are nearer seen, and viewd;
For whom could Love have better su'd?
Or Time have done the grace?

Hereto a loud Music, they march into their figure. and dance their ENTRY,
or first DAVNCE. After which. VENUS. The night could not these glories miss,
Good Time, I hope, is taken with this.

SATURN. If Time were not, I Am sure Love is.
Between us it shall be no strife:
For now it is Love, gives Time his life.

VOTARIES. Let Time then so with Love conspire,
as straight be sent into the court
A little Cupid, armed with fire,
Attended by a jocund Sport,
To breed delight, and a desire
of being delighted, in the nobler sort.

SATURN. The wish is crowned, as soon as made.


VOTARIES. And CUPID conquers, e're he does invade.
His victories of lightest trouble prove.
For there is never labor, where is Love.

Then, follows the maine DAVNCE, which done, CUPID, with the SPORT, goes out.
CUPID. Take breath awhile, young Bloods, to bring
{To the Masquers. Your forces up, whilst we go sing
Fresh charges, to the Beauties here.

SPORT. Or, if they charge you, do not fear,
Though they be better armed then you:
It is but standing the first view,
And then they yield.

CUPID. Or quit the field.


SPORT. Nay, that they will never do.
They Will rather fall upon the place,
Then suffer such disgrace.
You are but Men at best, they say,
And they from those never ran away.

{Pause. CUIPID. You, Sir, that are the Lord of Time,
{To the King. Receive it not as any crime
Against Majesty, that Love and Sport
Tonight have entered in your Court.

SPORT. Sir, doubt him more of some surprise
Upon your self. He has his eyes.
You are the noblest object here,
And it is for you alone I fear:
For here are Ladies, that would give
A brave reward, to make Love live
Well, all his life, for such a draught.
And therefore, look to every shaft,
The Wags a Deacon in his craft.

{Pause. CUPID. My Lords, the Honors of the Crown,
{To the Lords. Put off your sowrenesse, do not frown^,
Bid cares depart, and business hence:
A little, for the Time dispense.

SPORT. Trust nothing that the Boy lets fall,
My Lords, he has plots upon you all.
A Pensioner unto your wives,
To keep you inuxorious gives,
And so your sense to fascinate,
To make you quit all thought of state,
His amorous questions to debate.
But, hear his Logic, he will prove
There is no business, but to be in love.

CUPID. The words of Sport, my Lords, and course.
{Pause. Your Ladies yet, will not think worse
{To the Ladies. Of Love for this: they shall command
My Bow, my Quiver, and my Hand.

SPORT. What, here to stand
and kill the Flies?
Alas, thy service they despise.
One Beauty here, has in her eyes,
More shafts then from thy bow over flew,
Or that poor quiver knew.
These Dames,
They need not Love's, they have Natures flames:

CUPID. I see the Beauty, that you so report.


SPORT. Cupid, you must not point in Court;
Where live so many of a sort.
Of Harmony these learned their speech,
The Graces did them footing teach,
And, at the old Idalian bralls,
They daunc'd your Mother down. She calls.

CUPID. Arm, arm then all.


SPORT. Young bloods come on,
And charge: Let every man take one.

CUPID. And try his fate.


SPORT. These are fair wars.
And will be carried without scarres.

CUPID. A joining, but of feet, and hands.
Is all the Time, and Love commands.

SPORT. Or if you do their gloves off-strip.
Or taste the Nectar of the lip:
See, so you temper your desires,
For kisses, that ye suck not fires.

The REVELS follow, which ended, the CHORUS appear again, and DIANA descends to
HIPPOLITUS, the whole Scene being changed to a Wood, out of which he comes.
CHORUS. The Courtly strife is done, it should appear,
Between the Youths, and Beauties of the year,
We hope that now these lights will know their sphere,
And strive hereafter to shine ever here:
Like brightest Planets, still to move
In the eye of Time, and orbs of Love.

DIANA. Hippolitus, Hippolitus.

HIPPOLITUS. Diana?

DIANA. She.
Be ready you, or Cephalus,
To wait on me.

HIPPOLITUS. We ever be.

DIANA. Your Goddess has been wronged to night,
By Loves report unto the Time.

HIPPOLITUS. The injury, it self will right,
Which only Fame has made a crime.
For Time is wise,
And has his ears as perfect as his eyes.

SATURN. Who Is that descends? Diana?

VOTARIES. Yes.

VENUS. By like her troop she has begun to miss.

SATURN. Let Us meet, and question what her errand is.

HIPPOLITVS. She will prevent thee, Saturn, not to ^^^us^
Her-selfe unto thee, rather to complain
That thou and Venus both should so abuse
The name of Dian, as to entertain
A thought, that she had purpose to defraud
The Time, of any glories that nere his:
To do Time honor rather, and applaud
His worth, has been her study.

DIANA. And it is.
I called these Youth's forth; in their blood; and prime
(Out of the honor, th^^ I bore their parts)
To make them fitter so to serve the Time
By labor, riding, and those ancient arts,
That first enabled men unto the wars,
And furnished Heaven with so many Stars:

HIPPOLITVS. As Perseus, Castor, Pollux, and the rest,
Who were of Hunters first, of Men the best;
Whose shades do yet remain within yond' groves,
Themselves there sporting with their nobler loves:

DIANA. And so may these do, if the Time give leave.


SATURN. Chaste Dians purpose we do now conceive,
And yield thereto.

VENUS. And so does Love.


VOTARIES. All Votes do in one circle move.


CHORUS. Turn Hunters then,
again.
Hunting, it is the noblest exercise,
Makes men laborious, active, wise,
Brings health, and does the spirits delight,
It help's the hearing, and the sight:
It teaches arts that never slip
The memory, good horsmanship,
Search, sharpness, courage, and defense,
And chaseth all ill habits thence.
Turn Hunters then,
again,
But not of men.
Follow his ample;
And just example,
That hates all chase of malice, and of blood:
And studies only ways of good,
To keep soft Peace in breath.
Man should not hunt Mankind to death,
But strike the enemies of Man;
Kill vices if you can:
They are your wildest beasts.
And when they thickest fall, you make the Gods true feasts.

The End.
NEPTUNES TRIUMPH FOR THE RETVRNE OF ALBION.
CELEBRATED IN A Masque At the Court on the Twelfth night. 1624.
Omnis and ad reducem jam litat ara Deum.

Mart. lib. VIII. Epig. XIV.
NEPTVNES TRIVMPH.
HIs Matie being set, and the loud Music ceasing. All, that is discovered of
a Scene, are two erected Pillars, dedicated to Neptune, with this inscription
upon the one, NEP. RED. On the other, SEC. IOV. The POET entering on the STAGE,
to disperse the Argument, is called to by the Master-Cooke. COOK. Do you
hear, you, Creature of diligence, and business! what is the affair, that you
pluck for so, under your cloak?


POET. Nothing, but what I color for, I assure you; and may encounter with, I
hope, if Luck favor me, the Gamsters Goddess.


COOK. You are a Votary of hers, it seems by your language. What went you
upon? may a man ask you?


POET. Certainties, indeed Sir, and very good ones; the presentation of a
Masque; you will see it, anon.


COOK. Sir, this is my room, and region too, the banqueting house. And in
matter of feast, the solemnity, nothing is to be presented here, but with my
acquaintance, and allowance to it.


POET. You are not his Majesty's Confectioner? Are you?


COOK. No, but one that has as good title to the room, his Master-Cooke. What
are you, Sir?


POET. The most unprofitable of his servants, I, Sir, the Poet. A kind of a
Christmas Ingine? one, that is used, at least once a year, for a trifling
instrument, of wit, or so.


COOK. Were you ever a Cook?


POET. A Cook? no surely.


COOK. Then you can be no good Poet: for a good Poet differs nothing at all
from a Master-Cooke. Eithers Art is the wisdom of the Mind.


POET. As how, Sir?


COOK. Expect. I am by my place, to know how to please the palates of the
guests; so, you, are to know the palate of the times: study the several
tastes, what every Nation, the Spaniard, the Dutch, the French, the Walloun,
the Neapolitan, the Brittan, the Sicilian, can expect from you.


POET. That were a heavy and hard task, to satisfy Expectation, who is so
severe an exactresse of duties; ever a tyrannous mistress: and most times a
pressing enemy.


COOK. She is a powerful great Lady, Sir, at all times, and must be
satisfied: So must her sister, Madam Curiosity, who has as dainty a palate
as she, and these will expect.


POET. But, what if they expect more then they understand?


COOK. That Is all one, Mr. Poet. you are bound to satisfy them. For, there is
a palate of the Understanding, as well as of the Senses. The Taste is taken
with good relishes, the Sight with fair objects, the Hearing with delicate
sounds, the Smelling with pure sents, the feeling with soft and plumpe bodies,
but the Understanding with all these: for all which you must begin at the
Kitchen. There, the Art of Poetry was learned, and found out, or no where: and
the same day, with the Art of Cookery.


POET. I should have given it rather to the Cellar, if my suffrage had bin asked.


COOK. O, you are for the Oracle of the Bottle, I see; Hogshead Trismegistus:
He is your Pegasus. Thence flows the spring of your Muses, from that hoof.

Seduced Poet, I do say to thee, --
A Boyler, Range, and Dresser were the fountains
Of all the knowledge, in the Universe,
And that is the Kitchen. Where, a Master-Cooke!
Thou do not know the man! nor can thou know him!
Till thou have served some years in that deep school,
That Is both the Nource, and Mother of the Arts,
And hear'st him read, interpret, and demonstrate.
A Master-Cooke! why, he is the man of men,
For a Professor! He designs, he draws,
He paints, he carves, he builds, he fortifies,
Makes Citadels of curious foul, and fish,
Some he dry-ditches, some motes round with broths;
Mounts marrow-bones; cuts fifty-angled custards;
Reares bulwark pies; and, for his outer works,
He raises ramparts of immortal crust;
And teaches all the tacticks at one dinner:
What ranks, what files, to put his dishes in
The whole Art Military! Then he knows
The influence of the stars, upon his meats;
And all their seasons, tempers, qualities,
And so, to fit his relishes, and sauces!
He, has Nature in a pot! 'bove all the Chemists,
Or bare-breech'd brethren of the Rosie-Crosse!
He is an Architect, an Inginer,
A Soldier, a Physician, a Philosopher,
A general Mathematician!

POET. It is granted.


COOK. And, that you may not doubt him for a Poet,


POET. This Fury shows, if there were nothing else.
And it is divine!

COOK. Then, Brother Poet,


POET. Brother.


COOK. I have a suite.


POET. What is it?


COOK. Your devise.


POET. As you came in upon me, I was then
Offering the argument, and this it is.

COOK. Silence.


POET. The mighty Neptune, mighty in his styles,
And large command of waters, and of Isles,
Not, as the Lord and Sovereign of the Seas,
But, Chief in the art of riding, late did please
To send his Albion forth, the most his own,
Upon discovery, to themselves best known,
Through Celtiberia; and, to assist his course,
Gave him his powerful MANAGER of Horse,
With divine Proteus, Father of disguise,
To wait upon them with his counsels wise,
In all extremes. His great commands being done,
And he desirous to review his Son,
He does dispatch a floting I Will, from hence,
Unto the Hesperian shores, to waft him thence.
Where, what the arts were, used to make him stay,
And how the Sirens wooed him, by the way,
What Monsters he encountered on the coast,
How near our general Joy was to be lost,
Is not our subject now: though all these make
The present gladness greater, for their sake.
But what the triumphs are, the feast, the sport,
And proud solemnities of Neptunes Court,
Now he is safe, and Fame's not heard in vain,
But we behold our happy pledge again.
That with him, loyal HIPPIVS is returned,
Who for it, under so much envy, burned
With his own brightness, till her sterv'd snakes saw
What Neptune did impose, to him was law.

COOK. But, why not this, till now?


POET. -- It was not time,
To mix this Music with the vulgars chime.
Stay, till th'abortive, and extemporall dinne
Of balladry, were understood a sin,
Minerva cried: that, what tumultuous verse,
Or prose could make, or steal, they might rehearse,
And every Songster had sung out his fit;
That all the Country, and the Citie-wit,
Of bells, and bonfires, and good cheer was spent,
And Neptunes Guard had drunk all that they meant;
That all the tales and stories now were old
Of the Sea Monster Archy, or grown cold:
The Muses then might venture, undeterr'd,
For they love, then, to sing, when they are heard.

COOK. I like it well, it is handsome: and I have
Some thing would fit this. How do you present 'hem?
In a fine Island, say you?

POET. Yes, a Delus:
Such, as when fair Latona fell in travail,
Great Neptune made emergent.

COOK. I conceive you.
I would have had your I Will brought floting in, now
In a brave broth, and of a sprightly green,
Just to the color of the Sea; and then,
Some twenty Sirens, singing in the kettel,
With an Arion, mounted on the back
Of a grown Conger, but in such a posture,
As, all the world should take him for a Dolphin:
O, 'twould ha'made such music! Ha'you nothing,
But a bare Island?

POET. Yes, we have a tree too,
Which we do call the Tree of Harmony,
And is the same with what we read, the Sun,
Brought forth in the Indian Musicana first,
And thus it grows. The goodly bole, being got
To certain cubits height, from every side
The boughs decline, which taking root afresh,
Spring up new boles, and those spring new, and newer,
Till the whole tree become a Porticus,
Or arched Arbor, able to receive
A numerous troop, such as our Albion,
And the Companions of his journey are.
And this they sit in.

COOK. Your prime Masquers?


POET. Yes.


COOK. But where is your Antimasque now, all this while?
I hearken after them.

POET. Faith, we have none.


COOK. None?


POET. None, I assure you, neither do I think them
A worthy part of presentation,
Being things so heterogene, to all devise,
Mere By-workes, and at best Outlandish nothings.

COOK. O, you are all the heaven awrie! Sir.
For blood of Poetry, running in your veins,
Make not your self so ignorantly simple.
Because Sir, you shall see I am a Poet,
No less then Cook, and that I find you want
A special service here, an Antimasque,
I Will fit you with a dish out of the Kitchen,
Such, as I think, will take the present palates,
A metaphorical dish! And, do but mark,
How a good wit may jumpe with you. Are you ready, Child?
(Had there bin Mask, or no Mask, I had made it.)
Child of the boiling house.

CHILD. Here, Father.


COOK. Bring forth the pot. It is an Olla Podrida,
But I have persons, to present the meats.

POET. Persons!


COOK. Such as do relish nothing, but di stato,
(But in another fashion, then you dream of)
Know all things the wrong way, talk of the affairs,
The clouds, the cortines, and the mysteries
That are a foot, and, from what hands they have'hem
(The master of the Elephant, or the Camels)
What correspondences are held; the Posts
That go, and come, and know, almost, their minutes,
All but their business: Therein, they are fishes.
But have their garlic, as the Proverb says,
They are our Quest of enquiry, after news.

POET. Together with their learned Authors?


CHILD. Yes Sir,
And of the Epicoene gender, He Is, and She Is:
Amphibion Archy is the chief.

COOK. Good boy!
The Child is learned too. Note but the Kitchen.
Have you put him, into the pot, for Garlic?

CHILD. One in his coat, shall stink as strong as he, Sir,
And his friend Giblets with him.

COOK. They are two,
That give a part of the seasoning.

POET. I coneeive
The way of your Gally-mawfrey.

COOK. You will like it,
When they come pouring out of the pot together.

CHILD. O, if the pot had been big enough!


COOK. What then, Child?


CHILD. I had put in the Elephant, and one Camel, at least, for Biefe.


COOK. But, whom ha'you for Partridge?


CHILD. A brace of Dwarfes, and delicate plump birds!


COOK. And whom for Mutton, and Kid?


CHILD. A fine laced Mutton,
Or two; and either has her frisking Husband:
That reads her the Corranto, every week.
Grave Mr. Ambler, Newes-master of Poules,
Supplies your Capon; and grown Captain BuZ
(His Emissary) under-writes for Turkey,
A gentleman of the Forest presents Phesant,
And a plump Poultrers wife, in Graces street,
Plays Hen with eggs in the belly, or a Coney,
Choose which you will.

COOK. But, where is the Bacon, Thom?


CHILD. Hogrel the Butcher, and the Sow his wife,
Are both there.

COOK. It is well, go, dish'hem out.
Are they well boyld?

CHILD. Podrida!


POET. What Is that? rotten?


COOK. O, that they must be. There Is one maine ingredient
We have forgot, the Artichoke.

CHILD. No Sir.
I have a Fruicterer, with a cold red nose,
Like a blue fig, performs it.

COOK. The fruit looks so.
Good child, go poure'hem out; show their concoction.
They must be rotten boyld, the broth's the best on it,
And that is the Dance. The stage here is the Charger.
And Brother Poet, though the serious part
Be yours, yet, envy not the Cook his art.

POET. Not I. Nam lusus ipse Triumphus amat.


The Antimasque is danced by the persons described, coming out of the pot.
POET. Well, now, expect the Scene it self; it opens!


The Island is discovered, the Masquers sitting in their several sieges. The
heavens opening, and Apollo, with Mercury, some Muses, and the Goddess
Harmony, make the music, the while, the Island moves forward, Proteus sitting
below, and APOLLO sings. Song.
APOLLO. Look forth, the Shepherd of the Seas,
And of the Ports, that keep'st the keys,
And to your Neptune tell,
His ALBION, Prince of all his Isles,
For whom the sea, and land so smiles,
Is home returned well.

CHORUS. And be it thought no common Cause,
That, to it, so much wonder draws,
And all the Heavens consent,
With HARMONY, to tune their notes,
In answer to the public votes,
That, for it, up were sent.
It was no envious Stepdames rage;
Or Tyrants malice of the age,
That did employ him forth.
But such a Wisdom, that would prove,
By sending him, their hearts, and love
That else might fear his worth.

By this time, the Island has joined it self with the shore: And Proteus,
Portunus, and Saron; come forth, and go up singing to the State, while the
Masquers take time to Land. Song.
PROTEVS. I! now the Pomp of Neptunes triumph shines!
And all the glories of his great designs
Are read, reflected, in his sons return!

PORTVNVS. How all the eyes, the looks, the heart here burn
at his arrival!

SARON. These are the true fires.
Are made of joys!

PROTEVS. Of longing!


PORTVNVS. Of desires!


SARON. Of hopes!


PROTEVS. Of fears!


PORTVNVS. No intermitted blocks.


SARON. But pure affections, and from odorous stocks!


CHORUS. It Is incense all, that flames!
And these materials scarce have names!

PROTEVS. My King looks higher, as he scorned the wars
Of winds, and with his trident touched the stars.
There is no wrinkle in his brow, or frown;
But, as his cares he would in Nectar drown,
And all the silver-footed Nymphs were dressed;
To wait upon him, to the Oceans feast.

PORTVNVS. Or, here in rows upon the banks were set,
And had their several hayres made into net
To catch the youths in, as they come on shore.

SARON. How! Galatea sighing! O, no more.
Banish your fears.

PORTVNVS. And Doris dry your tears.
Albion is come:

PROTEVS. And Haliclyon, too,
That kept his side, as he was charged to do,
With wonder.

SARON. -- And the Sirens have him not.


PORTVNVS. Though they no practice, nor no arts forgot,
That might have won him, or by charm, or song.

PROTEVS. Or laying forth their tresses all along
Upon the glassie waves;

PORTVNVS. Then diving:


PROTEVS. Then,
Up with their heads, as they were mad of men.

SARON. And there, the highest-going billows crown,
Until some lusty Sea-god pulled them down.

CHORUS. See! He is here!


PROTEVS. Great Master of the main,
Receive thy dear, and precious pawn again.

CHORUS. SARON, PORTVNVS, PROTEVS, bring him thus,
Safe, as thy Subjects wishes gave him us:
And of thy glorious Triumph let it be
No less a part, that thou their loves do see,
Then, that his sacred head's returned to thee.

This sung, the Island goes back, whilst the upper Chorus takes it from them,
and the Masquers prepare for their figure. CHORUS. Spring all the Graces of the
age,
And all the Loves of time;
Bring all the pleasures of the stage,
And relishes of rhyme:
Add all the softnesses of Courts
The looks, the laughters, and the sports.
And mingle all their sweets, and salts,
That none may say, the Triumph halts.

Here, the Masquers dance their Entry. Which done, the first prospective of a
maritime Palace, or the house of Oceanus is discovered, with loud Music. And
the other above is no more seen. POET. Behold the Palace of Oceanus!
Hayle Reverend structure! Boast no more to us
Thy being able, all the Gods to feasts;
We have seen enough: our Albion was thy guest.

Then follows the Maine Dance. After which the second prospect of the Sea, is
shown, to the former Music. POET. Now turn and view the wonders of the
deep,
Where Proteus herds, and Neptunes Orkes do keep,
Where all is plough'd, yet still the pasture's green
The ways are found; and yet no paths are seen.

There Proteus, Portunus, Saron, go up to the Ladies with this Song, PROTEVS.
Come noble Nymphs, and do not hide
The joys, for which you so provide:

SARON. If not to mingle with the men,
What do you here? go home again.

PORTVNVS. Your dressing do confess,
By what we see, so curious parts
Of Pallas, and Arachnes arts,
That you could mean no less.

PROTEVS. Why do you wear the Silke-wormes toils;
Or glory in the shellfish spoils?
Or strive to show the grains of ore
That you have gathered on the shore,
Whereof to make a stock
To graft the greener Emerald on
Or any better-water'd stone?

SARON. Or Ruby of the rock?


PROTEVS. Why do you smell of Amber gris,
Of which was formed Neptunes Neice,
The Queen of Love; unless you can
Like Sea-borne Venus love a man?

SARON. Try, put your selves unto't.


CHORUS. Your looks, your smiles, and thoughts that meet,
Ambrosian hands, and silver feet,
do promise you will do it.

The Revells follow. Which ended, the Fleet is discovered, while the three
Cornets play. POET. It Is time, your eyes should be refreshed at length
With something new, a part of Neptunes strength
See, yond', his fleet, ready to go, or come,
Or fetch the riches of the Ocean home,
So to secure him both in peace, and wars,
Till not one ship alone, but all be stars.

A shout within follows. After which the Cook enters. COOK. I have another
service for you, Brother Poet, a dish of pickled Saylors, fine salt Sea-boyes,
shall relish like Anchoves, or Caveare, to draw down a cup of Nectar, in the
skirts of a night.


SAYLORS. Come away boys, the Town is ours, hay for Neptune, and our young
Master.


POET. He knows the Compass, and the Card,
While Castor sits on the maine yard,
And Pollux too, to help your hayles;
And bright Leucothoe, fills your sails:
Arion sings, the Dolphins swim,
And, all the way, to gaze on him.

The Antimasque of Saylors. Then The last Song to the whole Music, five
Lutes, three Cornets, and ten voices. Song.
PROTEVS. Although we wish the Triumph still might last
For such a Prince, and his discovery past,
Yet now, great Lord of waters, and of Isles,
Give Proteus leave to turn unto his wiles:

PORTVNVS. And, whilst young Albion does thy labors ^ase,
Dispatch Portunus to thy Ports,

SARON. And Saron to thy Seas:
To meet old Nereus, with his fifty girls,
From aged Indus laden home with Pearls,
And orient gummes, to burn unto thy name.

CHORUS. And may thy Subjects hearts be all on flame:
Whilst thou do keep the earth in firm estate,
And amongst the winds do suffer no debate.
But both at Sea, and Land, our powers increase
With health, and all the golden gifts of peace.

The last Dance. The End.
PANS ANNIVERSARIE; OR, THE SHEPHERDS HOLY DAY.
THE SCENE ARCADIA. As it was presented at Court before King JAMES. 1625.
The Inventors, Inigo Jones. Ben. Johnson.

The first presentation is of three Nymphs strewing several sorts o^ flowers,
followed by an old Shepherd with a Censer and perfumes. NYMPH I. THus, thus,
begin the yearly rites
Are due to PAN on these bright nights;
His Morn now rises, and invites
To sports, to dances, and delights:
All Envious, and Profane away,
This is the Shepherds Holy Day.

NYMPH II. Strew, strew, the glad and smiling ground
With every flower, yet not confound
The Prime-rose drop, the Springs own spouse,
Bright Dayes-eyes, and the lips of Cowes,
The Garden-star, the Queen of May,
The Rose, to crown the Holy Day.

NYMPH III. Drop, drop you Violets, change your hues,
Now red, now pale, as Lovers use,
And in your death go out as well,
As when you lived unto the smell:
That from your odor all may say,
This is the Shepherds Holy Day.

SHEPHERD. Well done my pretty ones, rain Roses still,
Until the last be drapt: Then hence: and-fill
Your fragrant prickles for a second shower,
Bring Corn-flag, Tulips, and Adonis flower,
Fair Oxe-eye, Goldy-locks, and Columbine,
Pinkes, Goulands, King-cups, and sweet Sops-in-wine,
Blew Harebells, Pagles, Pansies, Calaminth,
Flower-gentle, and the faire-hair'd Hyacinth,
Bring rich Carnations, Floure-de-luces, Lillies,
The chequ'd, and purple-ringed Daffodillies,
Bright Crowne-imperiall, Kings-speare, Holy-hocks,
Sweet Venus Navill, and soft Lady-smocks,
Bring too, some branches forth of Daphnes hair,
And gladdest myrtle for these posts to wear
With Spikenard weaved, and Marjoram between,
And star'd with yellow-golds, and Meadows ^ueene,
That when the Altar, as it ought is dressed,
More odor come not from the Phaenix nest;
The breadth thereof Panchaia may envy,
The colors China, and the light the sky.

LOUD MUSIC. The Scene opens, and in it are the Masquers discovered sitting
about the Fountain of light. The Musicians attyr'd like the Priests of Pan
standing in the work beneath them, when enters to the old Shepherd. A Fencer
flourishing. Room for an old Trophie of Time; a Son of the sword, a Servant
of Mars, the Minion of the Muses, and a Master of Fence. One that has shown
his quarters, and played his prizes at all the games of Greece in his time; as
Fencing, Wrestling, Leaping, Dancing, what not? And has now ushered hither by
the light of my long-sword certain bold Boys of Baeotia, who are come to
challenge the Arcadians at their own sports, call them forth on their own
holy day, and Dance them down on their own Greene-swarth.


SHEPHERD. It Is boldly attempted, and must be a Baeotian enterprise by the face
of it, from all the parts of Greece else, especially at this time when the
best, and bravest spirits of Arcadia, called together by the excellent Arcas,
are yonder sitting about the Fountain of light, in consultation of what
honors they may do the great Pan by increase of anniversarie rites fitted to
the Music of his peace.


FENCER. Peace to thy Pan, and mum to thy Music, Swain; There is a Tinker of
Thebes a coming, called Epam, with his kettle will make all Arcadia ring of
him; What are your sports for the purpose? say, if singing, you shall be sung
down, if dancing, daunc'd down. There is no more to be done with you, but
know what; which it is; and you are in smoke, gone, vapour'd, vanished, blown,
and (as a man would say) in a word of two sillables, Nothing.


SHEPHERD. This is short, though not so sweet. Surely the better part of the
solemnity here will be dancing.


FENCER. Enough; They shall be met with instantly in their own sphere, the
sphere of their own activitie a dance. But by whom, expect: No Cynaetheian,
nor Satyrs; but (as I said) Boys of Baeotia; things of Thebes, (the Town is
ours, Shepherd) mad merry Greeks, Lads of life, that have no gall in us, but
all air and sweetness. A Tooth-drawer is our Foreman, that if there be but a
bitter tooth in the company, it may be called out at a twitch; he does command
any man's teeth out of his head upon the point of his Poynard; or tickles them
forth with his ryding rod: He draws teeth a horseback in full speed, yet
he will dance a foot, he has given his word: He is yeoman of the mouth to
the whole Brotherhood, and is charged to see their gummes be clean, and their
breath sweet, at a minutes warning. Then comes my learned Theban, the Tinker I
told you of, with his kettle Drum (before and after) a Master of Music, and a
man of metal; He beats the march to the tune of Tickle-foot, Pam, pam, pam,
brave Epam with a nondas. That Is the strain.


SHEPHERD. A high one.


FENCER. Which is followed by the trace, and tract of an excellent Juggler,
that can juggle with every joint about him, from head to heel. He can do
tricks with his toes, wind silk, and thread Pearl with them, as nimble a fine
fellow of his feet, as his hands: For there is a noble Corne-cutter his
companion, has so pared, and finified them --. Indeed, he has taken it into
his care, to reform the feet of all, and fit all their footing to a form;
only ones play-foot in the company, and he is a Bellowes-mender, allowed who
has the looking to of all their lungs by patent, and by his place is to set
that leg before still, and with his puffes keeps them in breath during
pleasure; A Tinder-box-man to strike new fire into them at every turn, and
where he spies any brave spark that is in danger to go out, plie him with a
match presently.


SHEPHERD. A most politic provision.


FENCER. Nay, we have made our provisions beyond example, I hope. For to these
there is annexed a Clock-keeper, a grave person, as Time himself, who is to
see that they all keep time to a nick, and move every elbow in order, every
knee in compass. He is to wind them up, and draw them down as he sees cause;
Then is there a subtle shrewd-bearded Sir, that has been a Politician, but
is now a maker of Mouse-traps, a great Inginer yet; and he is to catch the
Ladies favors in the Dance with certain cringes he is to make; and to bait
their benevolence. Nor can we doubt of the success, for we have a Prophet
amongst us of that peremptory pate, a Taylour, or master Fashioner, that has
found it out in a painted cloth, or some old hanging (for those are his
Library) that we must conquer in such a time, and such a half time, therefore
bids us go on crosse-leg'd, or however thread the needles of our own
happiness, go through-stitch with all, unwind the clew of our cares, he has
taken measure of our minds, and will fit our fortune to our footing. And to
better assure us; at his own charge, brings his Philosopher with him, a a
great Clerk, who (they say) can write, and it is shrewdly suspected but he can
read too: And he is to take the whole Daunces from the foot by Brachygraphie,
and so make a memorial, if not a map of the business. Come forth lads, and
do your own turns.


The Antimasque is Daunced. After which FENCER. How like you this Shepherd?
was not this gear gotten on a holy day?


SHEPHERD. Faith, your folly may deserve pardon, because it has delighted:
But, beware of presuming, or how you offer comparison with persons so near
Deities. Behold where they are, that are now forgiven you, whom should you
provoke again with the like, they will justly punish that with anger, which
they now dismiss with contempt, Away.

And come you prime Arcadians forth, that taught
By PAN the rites of true society,
From his loud Music, all your manners wraught
And made your Commonwealth a harmony
Commending so to all posterity.
Your innocence from that fair Fount of light
As still you sit without the injury
Of any rudeness, Folly can, or spite:
Dance from the top of the Lycaean mountain
Down to this valley, and with nearer eye
Enjoy, what long in that illumined Fountain
You did far of, but yet with wonder spy.

HYMN I. 1. Of PAN we sing, the best of Singers Pan
That taught us swains, how first to tune our lays,
And on the pipe more aires then Phoebus can.
CHO. Hear O you groves, and hills resound his praise.
2. Of Pan we sing, the best of Leaders, Pan
That leads the Nayad's, and the Dryad's forth;
And to their daunces more then Hermes can.

CHO. Hear O you groves, and hills, resound his worth.
3. Of Pan we sing, the best of Hunters, Pan
That drives the Heart to seek unused ways,
And in the chase more then Sylvanus can,

CHO. Hear, O you groves, and hills resound his praise.
4. Of Pan we sing, the best of Shepherds, Pan,
That keeps our stocks, and us, and both leads forth
To better pastures then great Pales can:

CHO. Hear O you groves, and hills resound his worth.
And while his powers, and praises thus we sing
The Valleys let rebound, and all the rivers ring.

The Masquers descend, and dance their Entry. HYMN II. PAN is our All, by him
we breath, we live,
We move, we are; It Is he our lambs does rear,
Our flocks does bless, and from the store does give
The warm and finer fleeces that we wear.
He keeps away all heates, and colds,
Drives all diseases from our folds:
Makes every where the spring to dwell,
The Ewes to feed, their udders swell;
But if he frown, the sheep (alas)
The Shepherds wither, and the grass.
Strive, strive, to please him then by still increasing thus
The rites are due to him, who does all right for us.

The Maine Dance. HYMN III. If yet, if yet
Pans orgies you will further fit,
See where the silver-footed Fayes do sit,
The Nymphs of wood and water;
Each trees, and Fountains daughter,
Go take them forth, it will be good
To see some wave it like a wood,
And others wind it like a flood;
In springs,
And rings,
Till the applause it brings,
Wakes Echo from her seat,
The closes to repeat.
( EACH. The closes to repeat)
Echo the truest Oracle on ground,
Though nothing but a sound.
( EACH. Though nothing but a sound.)
Beloved of Pan, the Vallyes Queen
( EACH. The Valleys Queen)
And often heard, though never seen,
( EACH. Though never seen.)

REVELLS. FENCER. Room, room there: where are you Shepherd? I am come again
with my second part of my bold Bloods, the brave Gamesters: who assure you by
me, that they perceive no such wonder in all is done here, but that they dare
adventure another trial. They look for some sheepish devises here in Arcadia,
not these, and therefore a hall, a hall they demand.


SHEPHERD. Nay, then they are past pity, let them come, and not expect the
anger of a Deity to pursue them, but meet them. They have their punishment
with their fact. They shall be sheep.


FENCER. O spare me, by the law of Nations, I am but their Ambassador.


SHEPHERD. You speak in time Sir.


2. ANTIMASQUE. SHEPHERD. Now let them return with their solid heads, and
carry their stupiditie into Boeotia, whence they brought it, with an emblem of
themselves, and their Country. This is too pure an air for so gross Brains.

End you the rites, and so be eased
Of these, and then great Pan is pleased.

HYMN IIII. Great Pan the Father of our peace, and pleasure,
Who giv'st us all this leisure,
Hear what thy hallowd troop of Herdsmen pray
For this their Holy Day,
And how their vows to Thee, they in Lycaeum pay.
So may our Ewes receive the mounting Rams,
And we bring thee the earliest of our Lambs:
So may the first of all our fells be thine,
And both the beestning of our Goats, and Kine
As thou our folds do still secure,
And keep'st our fountains sweet and pure
Driv'st hence the Wolf, the Tode, the Brock,
Or other vermin from the flock.
That we preserved by Thee, and thou observed by us
May both live safe in shade of thy loved Maenalus.

SHEPHERD. Now each return unto his Charge,
And though to day you have lived at large,
And well your flocks have fed their fill,
Yet do not trust your hirelings still.
See, yond' they go, and timely do
The office you have put them to,
But if you often give this leave
Your sheep, and you they will deceave.

The End.
THE MASQUE OF OWLS AT KENELWORTH. Presented by the Ghost of Captain Coxe
mounted in his Hoby-horse. 1626.
CAP. COXE. Room, room, for my Horse will wince,
If he come within so many yards of a Prince,
And though he have not on his wings,
He will do strange things.
He is the Pegasus that uses
To wait on Warwick Muses;
And on gaudy-dayes he paces
Before the Coventrie Graces;
For to tell you true, and in rhyme,
He was foald in Q. Elizabeth's time,
When the great Earl of Lester
In this Castle did feast her.
Now, I am not so stupid
To think, you think me a Cupid;
Or a Mercury, that sit him:
Though these Cocks here would fit him.
But a spirit very civil,
Neither Poets God, nor Devil,
An old Kenelworth Fox,
The Ghost of Captain Cox,
For which I am the bolder,
To wear a Cock on each shoulder.
This Captain Cox, by St. Mary,
Was at Bullen with King Hary;
And (if some do not vary)
Had a goodly library,
By which he was discerned
To be one of the learned
To entertain the Queen here,
When last she was seen here.
And for the Town of Coventrie
To act to her soveraigntie.
But so his lot fell out,
That serving then afoot,
And being a little man;
When the skirmish began
'Twixt the Saxon, and the Dane,
(For thence the story was taken)
He was not so well seen
As he would have been of the Queen.
Though this sword were twice so long
As any man's else in the throng
And for his sake, the Play
Was called for the second day.
But he made a vow
(And he performs it now)
That were he alive, or dead,
Hereafter, it should never be sed
But Cap. Cox would serve on horse
For better or for worse,
If any Prince came hither.
And his horse should have a feather
Nay, such a Prince it might be
Perhaps he should have three.
Now, Sir (in your approach
The rumbling of your Coach
Awaking me, (his Ghost)
I come to play your Host;
And feast your eyes and ears,
Neither with Dogs, nor Bears,
Though that have been a fit
Of our maine-shire wit,
In times heretofore,
But now, we have got a little more.
These then that we present
With a most loyal intent
And (as the Author says)
No ill meaning to the Catholic faith,
Are not so much beasts, as Fowls,
But a very Nest of Owls,
And natural, so thrive I,
I found them in the Ivy,
A thing, that though I blundred at,
It may in time be wondered at,
If the place but affords
Any store of lucky birds,
As I make'em to flush
Each Owl out of his bush.
Now, these Owls (some say) were men,
And they may be so again,
If once they endure the light
Of your highness sight:
For Bank-rupts, we have known
Rise to more then their own.
With a little-little savor
Of the Princes favor,
But, as you like their tricks,
I Will spring'em, they are but six.
Hey, Owl first.
This Bird is London bred
As you may see by his horned head.
And had like to have been taken
At his shop in Jvy-lane,
Where he sold by the peney
Tobacco, as good as any;
But, whether it did provoke
His conscience, he sold smoke;
Or some other toy he took,
Toward his calling to look:
He fled by Moone-shine thence;
And broke for sixteen pence.
Hey, Owl second.
This too, the more is the pity
Is of the breed, of the same City,
A true Owl of London
That gives out he is undone,
Being a Cheese-monger,
By trusting two of the younger
Captains, for the hunger
Of their halfe-staru'd number;
Whom since they have shipped away:
And left him God to pay,
With those ears for a badge
Of their dealing with his Madge.
Hey, Owl third.
A pure native Bird
This, and though his hue
Be not Coventrie-blue,
Yet is he undone
By the thread he has spunne,
For since the wise town
Has let the sports down
Of May-games, and Morris,
For which he right sorry is:
Where their Maids, and their Makes,
At dancings, and Wakes,
Had their Napkins, and poses,
And the wipers for their noses.
And their smocks all-be-wrought
With his thread which they bought,
It now lies on his hands,
And having neither wit, nor lands,
Is ready to hang, or choke him,
In a skeyne of that, that broke him.
Hey, Owl fourth.
Was once a Bankrupt of worth;
And having run a shifting race
At last by money, and grace,
Got him a Sergeants place,
And to be one of Chase.
A full so rtnight was not spent,
But out comes the Parliament,
Takes away the use of his Mace,
And left him in a worse, then his first case.
Hey, Owl the fifth.
But here was a defeat,
Never any so great,
Of a Don, a Spanish Reader,
Who had thought to have bin the Leader
(Had the Match gone on)
Of our Ladies one by one,
And triumphed our whole Nation,
In his Rodomant fashion:
But now since the breach,
He has not a Scholar to teach.
Hey, Owl sixth.
The Bird-bringer up is a Knight,
But a passionate wight,
Who, since the Act against swearing,
(The tale's worth your hearing)
In this short times growth
Has at twelve pence an oath;
For that (I take it) is the rate
Sworn himself out of his estate.
The third varied.
A Crop-eard Scrivener, this,
Who when he heard but the whisper of moneys to come down,
Fright got him out of Town
With all the Bills and Bands
Of other men's in his hands,
And cried, who will drive the trade,
Since such a Law they had made:
It was not he that broke.
Two in the hundred spoke.
Nor cared he for the curse,
He could not hear much worse,
He had his ears in his purse.

The End.
THE FORTUNATE ISLES, AND THEIR UNION. CELEBRATED IN A MASQVE Designed for the
Court, on the Twelfth night. 1626.
Hic choreae, cantusque vigent.
THE FORTVNATE ISLES.
His Mtie being set, Enters in, running, JOHPHIEL, an aerie spirit, and
(according to the Magi) the Intelligence of Jupiters sphere: Attired in light
silks of several colors, with wings of the same, a bright yellow hair, a
chaplet of flowers, blew silk stockings, and pumpes, and gloves, with a silver
fan in his hand. JOHPHIEL. Like a lightning from the sky,
Or an arrow shot by Love,
Or a Bird of his let fly;
Be It a Sparrow, or a Dove:
With that winged have, come I,
Loosed from the Sphere of Jove,
To wish goodnight
To your delight.

To him enters a Melancholique Student, in bare and worn clothes, shrouded
under an obscure cloak, and the eaves of an old hat, fetching a deep sigh,
his name, Mr. Mere-Foole. MERE-FOOLE. Oh, oh!

JOHPHIEL. In Saturn's name, the Father of my Lord!
What overcharged piece of Melancholy
Is this, breaks in between my wishes thus,
With bombing sighs?

MERE-FOOLE. No! no Intelligence!
Not yet! and all my vows now nine days old!
Blindness of fate! Puppies had seen by this time:
But I see nothing! that I should! or would see!
What mean the Brethren of the Rosie-Crosse
So to desert their votarie!

JOHPHIEL. O! it is one
Has vowed himself unto that aerie order,
And now is gaping for the fly they promised him.
I Will mix a little with him for my sport.

MERE-FOOLE. Have I both in my lodging, and my diet,
My clothes, and every other solemn charge
Observ'd'hem! made the naked bords my bed!
A faggot for my pillow! hungered sore!

JOHPHIEL. And thirsted after 'hem!

MERE-FOOLE. To look gaunt, and lean!

JOHPHIEL. Which will not be.

MERE-FOOLE. (Who Is that?) yes, and outwatcht,
Yea, and out-walked any Ghost alive
In solitary circle, worn my boots,
Knees, arms, and elbowes out!

JOHPHIEL. Ran on the score!

MERE-FOOLE. That have I (who suggests that?) and for more
Then I will speak of, to abate this flesh,
And have not gaind the sight;

JOHPHIEL. Nay scarce the sense.

MERE-FOOLE. (Voice, thou art right) of any thing but a cold
Wind in my stomach.

JOHPHIEL. And a kind of whimsie.

MERE-FOOLE. Here in my head, that puts me to the staggers,
Whether there be that Brotherhood, or no.

JOHPHIEL. Believe frail man, they be: and thou shall see.

MERE-FOOLE. What shall I see?

JOHPHIEL. Me.

MERE-FOOLE. Thee? Where?

JOHPHIEL. Here. If you
Be Mr. Mere-Foole.

MERE-FOOLE. Sir, our name is Mery-Foole.
But by contraction Mere-foole.

JOHPHIEL. Then are you
The wight I seek: and Sr. my name is Jophiel,
Intelligence to the Sphere of Jupiter,
An aerie jocular spirit, employed to you
From Father OVTIS.

MERE-FOOLE. OVTIS? who is he?

JOHPHIEL. Know ye not OVTIS? Then you know No body:
The good old Hermit, that was said to dwell
Here in the forest without trees, that built
The Castle in the air, where all the Brethren
Rhodostaurotick live. It flies with wings,
And runs on wheels: where Julian de Campis
Holds out the brandisht blade.

MERE-FOOLE. Is It possible
They think on me?

JOHPHIEL. Rise, be not lost in wonder,
But hear me, and be faithful. All the Brethren
Have heard your vows, salute you, and expect you,
By me, this next return. But the good Father
Has bin content to die for you.

MERE-FOOLE. For me?

JOHPHIEL. For you. Last New-yeares day, which some give out,
Because it was his Birthday, and began
The year of Jubilee, he would rest upon it,
Being his hundred five and twentieth year:
But the truth is, having observed your Genesis,
He would not live, because he might leave all
He had to you.

MERE-FOOLE. What had he?

JOHPHIEL. Had? An office,
Two, three, or four.

MERE-FOOLE. Where?

JOHPHIEL. In the upper Region:
And that you will find. The Farm of the great Customs,
Through all the Ports of the Aires Intelligences;
Then Constable of the Castle Rosie-Crosse:
Which you must be, and Keeper of the Keys
Of the whole Kaball, with the Seals; you shall be
Principal Secretary to the Stars;
Know all their signatures, and combinations,
The divine rods, and consecrated roots.
What not? Would you turn trees up like the wind,
To show your strength? march over heads of armies,
Or points of pikes, to show your lightness? force
All doors of arts, with the petarre, of your wit?
Read at one view all books? speak all the languages
Of several creatures? master all the learnings
Were, are, or shall be? or, to show your wealth,
Open all treasures, hid by nature, from
The rock of Diamond, to the mine of Sea-coale?
Sir, you shall do it.

MERE-FOOLE. But how?

JOHPHIEL. Why, by his skill,
Of which he has left you the inheritance,
Here in a pot: this little gally pot
Of tincture, high rose tincture. There Is your Order,
You will have your Collar sent you, er't be long.

MERE-FOOLE. I looked Sir, for a halter, I was desperate.

JOHPHIEL. Reach forth your hand.

MERE-FOOLE. O Sir, a broken sleeve
Keeps the arm back as it is in the proverb.

JOHPHIEL. Nay,
For that I do commend you: you must be poor
With all your wealth, and learning. When you ha'made
Your glasses, gardens in the depth of Winter,
Where you will walk invisible to Mankind,
Talked with all birds and beasts in their own language,
When you have penetrated hills like air,
Dived to the bottom of the Sea, like lead.
And riss' again like cork, walked in the fire
An 'twere a Salamander, passed through all
The winding orbs, like an Intelligence,
Up to the Empyreum, when you have made
The World your gallery, can dispatch a business
In some three minutes, with the Antipodes,
And in five more, negotiate the Globe over;
You must be poor still.

MERE-FOOLE. By my place, I know it.

JOHPHIEL. Where would you wish to be now? or what to see?
Without the fortunate purse to bear your charges,
Or wishing hat? I will but touch your temples,
The corners of your eyes, and tinct the tip,
The very tip of your nose, with this Collyrium
And you shall see in the air all the Idea's,
Spirits, and Atoms, Flies, that buz about
This way, and that way, and are rather admirable,
Then any way intelligible.

MERE-FOOLE. O, come, tinct me,
Tinct me: I long, save this great belly, I long.
But shall I only see?

JOHPHIEL. See, and command
As they were all your varlets, or your foot-boyes:
But first you must declare, (your greatness must,
For that is now your style) what you would see.
Or whom.

MERE-FOOLE. Is that my style? My Greatness, then,
Would see King Zoroastres.

JOHPHIEL. Why you shall:
Or any one beside. Think whom you please?
Your thousand, Your ten thousand, to a million:
All Is one to me, if you could name a myriad.

MERE-FOOLE. I have named him.

JOHPHIEL. You'ave reason.

MERE-FOOLE. I, I have reason.
Because he is said to be the Father of conjurers,
And a cunning man in the stars.

JOHPHIEL. I, that is it troubles us.
A little for the present: For, at this time
He is confuting a French Almanac,
But he will straight have done, Have you but patience;
Or think but any other in mean time,
Any hard name.

MERE-FOOLE. Then, Hermes Trismegistus.

JOHPHIEL. O, (...)? Why, you shall see him,
A fine hard name. Or him, or whom you will,
As I said to you before. Or what do you think
Of Howle-glasse, in stead of him.

MERE-FOOLE. No, him
I have a mind to.

JOHPHIEL. OF, but Vlen-spiegle.
Were such a name! but you shall have your longing.
What luck is this, he should be busy too?
He is waighing water, but to fill three houre-glasses,
And mark the day in pen' orths like a cheese,
And he has done. It Is strange you should name him
Of all the rest! there being Jamblicus,
Or Porphyrie, or Proclus, any name
That is not busy.

MERE-FOOLE. Let me see Pythagoras.

JOHPHIEL. Good.

MERE-FOOLE. Or Plato.

JOHPHIEL. Plato, is framing some Idea's,
Are now bespoken, at a groat a dozen,
Three gross at least: And, for Pythagoras,
He' has rashly run himself on an employment,
Of keeping Asses from a field of beans;
And cannot be stav'd off.

MERE-FOOLE. Then, Archimedes.

JOHPHIEL. Yes, Archimedes!

MERE-FOOLE. I, or Aesope.

JOHPHIEL. Nay,
Hold your first man, a good man, Archimedes,
And worthy to be seen; but he is now
Inventing a rare Mouse-trap with Owls wings
And a Catts-foot, to catch the Mise alone:
And Aesop, he is filing a Fox tongue,
For a new fable he has made of Court;
But you shall see'hem all, stay but your time
And ask in season; Things as'kd out of season
A man denies himself. At such a time
As Christmas, when disguising is o'foot,
To ask of the inventions, and the men,
The wits, and the ingines that move those Orbs!
Me thinks, you should enquire now, after Skeleton,
Or Mr. Skogan.

MERE-FOOLE. Skogan? what was he?

JOHPHIEL. OF a fine Gentleman, and a Master of Arts,
Of Henry the fourth's times, that made disguises
For the Kings sons, and writ in ballad-royall
Daintily well.

MERE-FOOLE. But, wrote he like a Gentleman?

JOHPHIEL. In rhyme! fine tinckling rhyme! and flow and verse!
With now and then some sense! and he was paid for it,
Regarded, and rewarded: which few Poets
Are now adays.

MERE-FOOLE. And why?

JOHPHIEL. 'Cause every Dabler
In rhyme is thought the same. But you shall see him.
Hold up your nose.

MERE-FOOLE. I had rather see a Brachman,
Or a Gymnosophist yet.

JOHPHIEL. You shall see him, Sir.
Is worth them both. And with him Domine Skeleton,
The worshipful Poet Laureat to K. Harry,
And Tytire tu of those times. Advance quick Skogan,
And quicker Skeleton, show your crafty heads,
Before this Heir of arts, this Lord of learning,
This Master of all knowledge in reversion.

Enter SKOGAN, and SKELETON in like habits, as they lived. SKOGAN. Seems we
are called of a moral intent,
If the words that are spoken, as well now be meant.

JOHPHIEL. That Mr. Skogan I dare you ensure.

SKOGAN. Then, Son, our acquaintance is like to endure.

MERE-FOOLE. A pretty game! like Crambe. Mr. Skogan,
Give me thy hand: You Are very lean, me thinks,
Is It living by thy wits?

SKOGAN. If it had been that,
My worshipful Son, thou had never bin so fat.

JOHPHIEL. He tells you true Sir. Here Is a Gentleman
(My pair of crafty Clerks) of that high caract,
As hardly has the age produced his like.
Who not content with the wit of his own times,
Is curious to know yours, and what has been,

MERE-FOOLE. Or is, or shall be.

JOHPHIEL. Note his Latitude!

SKELETON. O, vir amplissimus!
(Ut scholis dicimus)
Et gentilissimus!

JOHPHIEL. The question- issimus
Is, should he ask a sight now, for his life;
I mean, a person, he would have restored,
To memory of these times, for a Play-fellow,
Whether you would present him, with an Hermes,
Or, with an Howle-glas?

SKELETON. An Howleglasse
To come, to pass
On his Fathers Ass;
There never was,
By day, nor night,
A finer sight.
With feathers upright
In his horned cap,
And crooked shape,
Much like an Ape.
With Owl on fist,
And Glass at his wrist.

SKOGAN. Except the four Knaves entertained for the guards,
Of the Kings, and the Queens that triumph in the cards.

JOHPHIEL I, that were a sight and a half, I confess,
To see 'hem come skipping in, all at a mess!

SKELETON. With Elinor Rumming.
To make up the mumming,
That comely Gill,
That dwelt on a hill,
But she is not grill:
Her face all bowsie,
Droopie, and drowsy,
Scurvy, and lousy,
Comely crinkled,
Wondrously wrinkled,
Like a roast pigs ear,
Bristled with hair.

SCOGAN. Or, what do you say to Ruffian Fitz-Ale?

JOHPHIEL. An excellent sight, if he be not to stale.
But then, we can mix him with modern Vapors,
The Child of Tobacco, his pipes, and his papers.

MERE-FOOLE. You talked of Elinor Rumming, I had rather
See Ellen of Troy.

JOHPHIEL. Her you shall see.
But credit me,
That Marie Ambree
(Who marched so free.
To the siege of Gaunt,
And death could not daunt,
As the Ballad does vaunt)
Were a braver wight,
And a better sight.

SKELETON. Or Westminster Meg,
With her long leg,
As long as a Crane;
And feet like a plane:
With a pair of heels,
As broad as two wheels;
To drive down the dew,
As she goes to the stew:
And turns home merry,
By Lambeth Ferry.
Or you may have come
In, Thomas Thumb,
In a pudding fatt
With Doctor Ratt.

JOHPHIEL. I, that! that! that!
We Will have'em all,
To fill the Hall.

The Antimasque follows. Consisting of these twelve persons, Owleglasse, the
four Knaves, two Ruffians, Fitz-ale, and Vapore, Elnor Rumming, Mary Ambree,
Long-Meg of Westminster, Tom Thumb, and Doctor Ratt. Which done, MERE-FOOLE.
What! are they vanished! where is skipping Skeleton?
Or moral Skogan? I do like their show
And would have thankt'em, being the first grace
The Company of the Rosie-Crosse has done me.

JOHPHIEL. The company of the Rosie-Crosse! you wigion,
The company of Players. Go, you are,
And will be still your self, a Mere-foole, In;
And take your pot of honey here, and hogs grease,
See, who has guld you, and make one. Great King,
Your pardon, if desire to please have trespassed.
This fool should have been sent to Antycira,
(The I Will of Ellebore) there to have purged,
Not hoped a happy seat within your waters.
Hear now the message of the Fates, and Jove,
On whom those Fates depend, to you, as Neptune
The great Commander of the Seas, and Isles.
That point of Revolution being come
When all the Fortunate Islands should be joined,
MACARIA, one, and thought a Principal,
That hitherto has floted, as uncertain
Where she should fix her blessings, is to night
Instructed to adhere to your BRITANNIA:
That where the happy spirits live, hereafter
Might be no question made, by the most curious,
Since the Macarij come to do you homage,
And join their cradle to your continent.

Here the Scene opens, and the Masquers are discovered sitting in their
several seiges. The air opens above, and APOLLO with Harmony, and the spirits
of Music sing, the while the Island moves forward, Proteus sitting below, and
hearkening. SONG.
Look forth the Shepherd of the Seas,
And of the Ports that keep the keys,
And to your Neptune tell,
MACARIA, Prince of all the Isles,
Wherein there nothing grows, but smiles,
Does here put in, to dwell.
The winds are sweet, and gently blow,
But Zephirus, no breath they know,
The Father of the flowers:
By him the virgin violets live,
And every plant does odours give,
As new, as are the hours.
CHORUS. Then, think it not a common cause,
That to it so much wonder draws,
And all the heavens consent,
With Harmony to tune their notes,
In answer to the public votes,
That for it up were sent.

By this time, the Island having joined it self to the shore; PROTEVS,
PORTVNVS, and SARON come forth, and go up singing to the State, while the
Masquers take time to rank themselves. Song.
PROTEVS. I, now, the heights of Neptunes honors shine,
And all the glories of his greater style
Are read, reflected in this happiest I Will.

PORTVNVS. How both the air, the soil, the seat combine
To speak it blessed!

SARON. These are the true groves,
Where joys are borne.

PROTEVS. Where longings,

PORTVNVS. And where loves!

SARON. That live!

PROTEVS. That last!

PORTVNVS. No intermitted wind
Blows here, but what leaves flowers, or fruit behind.

CHORUS. It Is odor all, that comes!
And every tree does give his gummes.

PROTEVS. There is no sickness, nor no old age known
To man, nor any grief that he dares own.
There is no hunger there, nor envy of state.
Nor least ambition in the Magistrate.
But all are even-hearted, open, free,
And what one is, another strives to be.

PORTVNVS. Here all the day, they feast, they sport, and spring;
Now dance the Graces Hay; now Venus Ring:
To which the old Musicians play, and sing.

SARON. There is ARION, tuning his bold Harp,
from flat to sharp.

PORTVNVS. And light Anacreon,
He still is one!

PROTEVS. Stesichorus there, too,
That Linus, and old Orpheus does out-doe
To wonder.

SARON. And Amphion! he is there.

PORTVNVS. Nor is Apollo dainty to appear
In such a quire, although the trees be thick,

PROTEVS. He will look in, and see the aires be quick,
And that the times be true.

PORTVNVS. Then, chanting,

PROTEVS. Then,
Up, with their notes, they raise the Prince of Men.

SARON. And sing the present Prophecy that goes
Of joining the bright LILLY, and the ROSE.

CHORUS. See! all the flowers

PROTEVS. That spring the banks along,
Do move their heads unto that under-song.

CHORUS. SARON, PORTVNVS, PROTEVS, help to bring
Our Primrose in, the glory of the spring!
And tell the Daffadill, against that day,
That we prepare new Gyrlands fresh as May.
And enter-weave the Myrtle, and the Bay.

This sung, the Island goes back, whilst the upper Chorus takes it from them,
and the Masquers prepare for their figure. CHORUS. Spring all the Graces of the
age,
And all the Loves of time;
Bring all the pleasures of the stage,
And relishes of rhyme:
Add all the softnesses of Courts,
The looks, the laughters, and the sports.
And mingle all their sweets, and salts,
That none may say, the Triumph halts.

The Masquers Dance their Entry or first dance. Which done, the first
Prospective, a Maritime Palace, or the house of Oceanus is discovered to loud
Music. The other above is no more seen. JOHPHIEL. Behold the Palace of
Oceanus!
Hayle Reverend structure! Boast no more to us
Thy being able, all the Gods to feast;
We saw enough: when ALBION was thy guest.

The Measures. After which, the second Prospective, a Sea is shown, to the
former Music. JOHPHIEL. Now turn; and view the wonders of the deep,
Where Proteus Herds, and Neptunes Orkes do keep,
Where all is plough'd, yet still the pastures green
New ways are found, and yet no paths are seen.

Here Proteus, Portunus, Saron, go up to the Ladies with this Song. PROTEVS.
Come noble Nymphs, and do not hide
The joys, for which you so provide:

SARON. If not to mingle with the Men,
What do you here? Go home again.

PORTVNVS. Your dressings do confess,
By what we see, so curious parts
Of Pallas, and Arachnes arts,
That you could mean no less.

PROTEVS. Why do you wear the Silk-wormes toils,
Or glory in the shellfish spoils;
Or strive to show the grains of Ore
That you have gathered on the shore,
whereof to make a stock
To graft the greener Emerald on,
Or any better watered stone,

SARON. Or Rubie of the Rock?

PROTEVS. Why do you smell of Amber-gris,
Of which was formed Neptunes Neice,
The Queen of Love: unless you can
Like Sea-borne Venus love a Man?

SARON. Try, put your selves unto't.

CHORUS. Your looks, your smiles, and thoughts that meet,
Ambrosian hands, and silver feet,
Do promise you will do it.
The Revells follow.
Which ended, the Fleet is discovered, while the
three Corners play.

JOHPHIEL. It Is time, your eyes should be refresht at length
With something new, a part of NEPTVNES strength,
See yond', his Fleet, ready to go or come,
Or fetch the riches of the Ocean home,
So to secure him, both in peace, and wars,
Till not one ship alone, but all be stars.

Then the last Song.
PROTEVS. Although we wish the glory still might last
Of such a night, and for the causes past:
Yet now, great Lord of waters, and of Isles,
Give Proteus leave to turn unto his wiles.

PORTVNVS. And, whilst young ALBION does thy labors ease;
Dispatch Portunus to the Ports.

SARON. And Saron to the Seas:
To meet old Nereus, with his fifty girls,
From aged Indus laden home with pearls,
And Orient gummes, to burn unto thy name.

CHORUS. And may thy subjects hearts be all on flame,
Whilst thou do keep the earth in firm estate,
And amongst the winds, do suffer no debate,
But both at Sea, and Land, our powers increase,
With health, and all the golden gifts of Peace.

After which, their last Dance. The End.
LOVES TRIUMPH THROUGH CALLIPOLIS. Performed in a Masque at Court. 1630. By his
Majesty, with the Lords, and Gentlemen assisting.
The Inventors. Ben. Johnson. Inigo Jones.
Quando magis dignos licuit spectare triumphos?
To make the Spectators understanders.
WHereas all Representations, especially those of this nature in Court,
public Spectacles, either have been, or ought to be the mirrours of man's
life, whose ends, for the excellence of their exhibiters (as being the
donatives, of great Princes, to their people) ought always to carry a mixture
of profit, with them, no less then delight; We, the Inventors, being
commanded from the King, to think on something worthy of his Majesty's putting
in act, with a selected company of his Lords, and Gentlemen, called to the
assistance. For the honor of his Court, and the dignity of that heroique
love, and regal respect borne by him to his unmatchable Lady, and Spouse, the
Queens Majesty, after some debate of cogitation with our selves, resolved on
this following argument.

First, that a Person, boni ominis, of a good Character, as Euphemus, sent
down from Heaven to Callipolis, which is understood, the City of Beauty or
Goodness, should come in; and, finding her Majesty there enthroned, declare
unto her, that Love who was wont to be respected as a special Deity in Court,
and Tutelar God of the place, had of late received an advertisement, that in
the suburbs, or skirts of Callipolis, were crept in certain Sectaries, or
depraved Lovers, who neither knew the name, or nature of love rightly, yet
boasted themselves his followers, when they were fitter to be called his
Furies: their whole life being a continew'd vertigo, or rather a torture on the
wheel of Love, then any motion, either of order or measure. When suddenly they
leap forth below, a Mistress leading them, and with antic gesticulation, and
action, after the manner of the old Pantomimi, they dance over a distracted
Comoedy of Love, expressing their confused affections, in the Scenicall
persons, and habits of the four prime European Nations.

A glorious boasting Lover.
A whining Ballading Lover.
An adventurous Romance Lover.
A phantasticke umbrageous Lover.
A bribing corrupt Lover.
A froward jealous Lover.
A sordid illiberall Lover.
A proud scornful Lover.
An angry quarrelling Lover.
A Melancholique despairing Lover.
An envious unquiet Lover.
A sensual brute Lover.
All which, in varied, intricate turns, and involved mazes, expressed, make the
Antimasque: and conclude the exit, in a circle. EVPHEMVS descends singing. Joy,
joy to mortals, the rejoicing fires
Of gladness, smile in your dilated hearts!
Whilst Love presents a world of chaste desires,
Which may produce a harmony of parts!
Love is the right affection of the mind,
The noble appetite of what is best:
Desire of union with the thing designed,
But in fruition of it cannot rest.
The Father plenty is, the Mother want. Porus, and Penia.

Plenty the beauty, which it wants, draws;
Want yields it self: affording what is scant.
So, both affections are the union's cause.
But, rest not here. For Love has larger scopes,
New joys, new pleasures, of as fresh a date
As are his minutes: and, in him no hopes
Are pure, but those he can perpetuate.
He goes up to the State. To you that are by excellence a Queen!
The top of beauty! but, of such an air,
As, only by the minds eye, may be seen
Your enter-woven lines of good, and fair!
Vouchsafe to grace Loves triumph here, to night,
Through all the streets of your Callipolis;
Which by the splendour of your rays made bright
The seat, and region of all beauty is.
Love, in perfection, longs to appear,
But prays of favor, he be not called on,
Till all the suburbs, and the skirts be clear
Of perturbations, and the infection gone.
Then will he flow forth, like a rich perfume
Into your nostrils! or some sweeter sound
Of melting Music, that shall not consume
Within the ear, but run the mazes round.

Here the Chorus walk about with their Censers. CHORUS. Meanetime, we make
lustration of the place,
And with our solemn fires, and waters prove
TO have frighted hence, the weak diseased race
Of those were tortured on the wheel of love.
1 The glorious, 2 whining, 3 the adventurous fool,
4 Phantastique, 5 bribing, and the 6 jealous ass
1 The sordid, 2 scornful, 3 and the angry mule
4 The melancholique, 5 dull, and envious mass,

CHORUS. With all the rest, that in the sensual school
Of lust, for their degree of brute may pass.
The prospect of Se^a appears.
All which are vapour'd hence.
No loves, but slaves to sense:
Mere cattle, and not men.
Sound, sound, and treble all our joys again,
Who had the power, and virtue to remove
Such monsters from the labyrinth of love.

The Triumph is first seen a-farre off, and led in by Amphitrite, the Wife of
Oceanus, with four Sea-gods attending her. NEREUS, PROTEUS, GLAUCUS, PALAEMON.
It consists of fifteen Lovers, and as many Cupids, who rank themselves
seven, and seven on a side, with each a Cupid before him, with a lighted torch,
and the middle person (which is his Majesty,) placed in the center.

1. The provident. 2. The judicious. 3. The secret. 4. The valiant. 5. The
witty. 6. The joviall. 7. The secure. 8. The substantial. 9. The modest. 10.
The candid. 11. The courteous. 12. The elegant. 13. The rational. 14. The
magnificent. 15. The Heroical.
AMPHITRITE. Here, stay a while: This! this
The Temple of all Beauty is!
Here, perfect Lovers, you must pay
First Fruits; and on these altars lay
(The Ladies breast's) your ample vows,
Such, as Love brings, and Beauty best allows!

CHO. For Love, without his object, soon is gone:
Love must have answering love, to look upon.

AMPHITRITE. To you, best Judge then, of perfection!

EVPHEMVS. The Queen, of what is wonder, in the place!

AMPHITRITE. Pure object, of Heroique Love, alone!

EVPHEMVS. The center of proportion --!

AMPHITRITE. Sweetness.

EVPHEMVS. Grace?

AMPHITRITE. Daigne to receive all lines of love in one.

EVPHEMVS. And by reflecting of them fill this space.

CHO. Till it a circle of those glories prove,
Fit to be sought in Beauty, found by Love.

SEME-CHO. Where Love is mutual, still
All things in order move,

SEMI-CHO. The circle of the will
Is the true sphere of Love.

CHO. Advance, you gentler Cupids, then advance,
And show your just perfections in your dance.

The Cupids dance, their dance. And the Masquers their entry. Which done,
Euclia, or a fair Glory appears in the heavens, singing an applausive song,
or Paan of the whole, which she takes occasion to ingeminate in the second
Chorus, upon the sight of a work of Neptunes, being a hollow rock, filling
part of the Sea-prospect, whereon the Muses sit.

EVCLIAS Hymn. So love, emergent out of Chaos brought
The world to light!
And gently moving on the waters, wrought
All form to sight!
Loves appetite
Did beauty first excite:
And left imprinted in the air,
Those signatures of good, and fair,

CHO. Which since have flowed, flowed forth upon the sense
To wonder first, and then to excellence,
By virtue of divine intelligence!
The ingemination. And Neptune too,
Shows what his waves can do:
To call the Muses all to play,
And sing the birth of Venus day,

CHO. Which from the Sea flowed forth upon the sense
To wonder first, and next to excellence,
By virtue of divine intelligence!

Here follow the Revells. Which ended, the Scene changes to a Garden, and the
heavens opening, there appear four new persons, in form of a Constellation,
sitting, or a new Asterisme, expecting Venus, whom they call upon with this
song.

JUPITER, JUNO, GENIUS, HYMEN. JVP. Have daughter Venus, have, and come away:

JVN. All powers, that govern Marriage, pray
That you will lend your light

GENESIS Unto the constellation of this night,

HIM. Hymen.

JVN. And Juno.

GENESIS And the Genius call,

JVP. Your father Jupiter,

CHO. And all
That bless, or honor holy nuptial.

VENUS here appears in a cloud, and passing through the Constellation,
descends to the earth, when presently the cloud vanishes, and she is seen
sitting in a throne.

VENUS. Here, here I present ame
Both in my girdle, and my flame.
Wherein are woven all the powers
The Graces gave me, or the Hours
(My nources once) with all the arts
Of gayning, and of holding hearts:
And these with I descend.
But, to your influences, first commend
The vow, I go to take
On earth, for perfect love and beauties sake!

Her song ended, and she rising to go up to the Queen, the Throne
disappeares: in place of which, there shoots up a Palm tree with an
imperial (rowne on the top, from the root whereof, Lillies and Roses, twining
together, and embracing the stem, flourish through the crown, which she in
the song, with the Chorus describes.

Beauty and Love, whose story is mysteriall,
In yonder Palm Tree, and the Crown imperial,
Do from the Rose, and Lilly so delicious,
Promise a shade, shall ever be propitious
To both the Kingdoms. But to Britains Genius
The snaky rod, and serpents of Cyllenius
Bring not more peace, then these, who so united be
By Love, as with it Earth and Heaven delighted be.
And who this King, and Queen would well historifie,
Need only speak their names: Those them will glorify.
MARY, and CHARLES, CHARLES with his MARY, named are
And all the rest of Loves, or Princes famed are.
After this they dance their going out and end.
The Masquers Names.
The King.
The Marquess Hammilton. Earl of Holland. Earl of Newport. Lord Strange. Sir
Robert Stanley. Master Goring. Master Dimock. Lord Chamberlain. Earl of
Carnarvan. Vicount Doncaster. Sir William Howard. Sir William Brook. Master
Ralegh. Master Abercromy.
The End.
CHLORIDIA. RITES TO CHLORIS AND HER NYMPHS. Personated in a Masque at Court.
By the Queens Majesty And her Ladies. At Shrove-tide. 1630.
The Inventors. Ben. Johnson. Inigo Jones.
Unius tellus ante coloris erat.
CHLORIDIA.
THe King, and Queens Majesty, having given their command for the Invention of
a new argument, with the whole change of the Scene, wherein her Majesty, with
the like number of her Ladies, purposed a presentation to the King. It was
agreed, it should be the celebration of some Rites, done to the Goddess
Chloris, who in a general counsel of the Gods, was proclaimed Goddess of the
flowers, according to that of Ovid, in the Fasti.

Arbitrium tu Dea floris habe. And was to be stellified on Earth, by an
absolute decree from Jupiter, who would have the Earth to be adorned with
stars, as well as the Heaven.

Upon this hinge, the whole Invention moved.

The ornament, which went about the Scene, was composed of Foliage, or leaves
heightened with gold, and enter-woven with all sorts of flowers; and naked
children, playing, and climbing among the branches; and in the midst, a great
Garland of flowers, in which was written, CHLORIDIA.

The Curtain being drawn up, the Scene is discovered, consisting of pleasant
hills, planted with young trees, and all the lower banks adorned with flowers.
And from some hollow parts of those Hills, Fountains come gliding down,
which, in the farre-off Land-shape, seemed all to be converted to a River.

Over all, a serene sky, with transparant clouds, giving a great luster to
the whole work, which did imitate the pleasant Spring.

When the spectators had enough fed their eyes, with the delights of the Scene,
in a part of the air, a bright Cloud begins to break forth; and in it is
sitting a plumpe Boy, in a changeable garment, richly adorned, representing the
mild Zephyrus. On the other side of the Scene, in a purplish Cloud, appears
the Spring, a beautiful Maid, her upper garment green, under it, a white robe
wrought with flowers; A garland on her head.

Here Zephyrus begins his Dialogue, calling her forth, and making narration of
the Gods decree at large, which she obeyes, pretending, it is come to Earth
already: and there begun to be executed by the Kings favor, who assists with
all bounties, that may be either urged, as causes, or reasons of the Spring.

The first Song.
ZEPHYRVS. Come forth, come forth, the gentle Spring,
And carry the glad news, I bring,
To Earth, our common mother:
It is decreed, by all the Gods
The Heaven, of Earth shall have no odds,
But one shall love another:
Their glories they shall mutual make,
Earth look on Heaven, for Heavens sake;
Their honor's shall be even:
All aemulation cease, and jarres;
Jove will have Earth to have her stars
And lights, no less then Heaven.

SPRING. It is already done, in flowers
As fresh, and new as are the hours,
By warmth of yonder Sun.
But will be multiplied on us,
If from the breath of ZEPHYRUS
Like favor we have won.

ZEPHYRVS. Give all to him: His is the dew,
The heat, the humor,

SPRING. -- All the true.
Beloved of the Spring!

ZEPHYRVS. The Sun, the Wind, the Verdure!

SPRING. -- All,
That wisest Nature cause can call
Of quickening any thing.

At which, Zephyrus passes away through the air, and the Spring descends to
the Earth: and is received by the Naiades, or Napeae; who are the Nymph's,
Fountains, and Servants of the season.

The second Song.
FOVNTAINES. Fair Maid, but are you come to dwell,
And tarry with us here?

SPRING. Fresh Fountains, I am come to tell
A tale in yond' soft ear,
Whereof the murmr will do well:
If you your parts will bear.

FOVNTAINES. Our purlings wait upon the Spring.

SPRING. Go up with me, then: help to sing
The story to the King.

Here the Spring goes up, singing the argument to the King; and the Fountains
follow with the close. SPRING. Cupid has taken offense of late
At all the Gods, that of the State,
And in their Council, he was so deserted,
Not to be called into their Guild
But slightly passed by, as a child.

FOVNTAINES. Wherein he thinks his honor was perverted.

SPRING. And though his Mother seek to season,
And rectify his rage with reason,
By showing he lives yet under her command,
Rebellious he, does disobey,
And she has forced his arms away.

FOVNTAINES. To make him feel the Justice of her hand.

SPRING. Whereat the Boy, in fury fell,
With all his speed, is gone to hell,
There to excite, and stir up Jealousy,
To make a party against the Gods,
And set Heaven, Earth, and Hell at odds.

FOVNTAINES. And raise a chaos of calamity.

The Song ended, the Nymphs fall into a Dance, to their voices, and
instruments, and so return into the Scene.

THE ANTIMASQVE.
First Entry.
A part of the underground opening, out of it enters a Dwarfe-Post from Hell,
riding on a Curtall, with cloven feet, and two Lacqueys: These dance, and make
the first entry of the Antimasque. He alights, and speaks.

POSTILION. Hold my stirrup, my one Lacqucy; and look to my Curtall, the
other: walk him well, Sirrah, while I expatiate my self here in the report of
my office! oh the Furies! how I am joyed with the title of it! Postilion of
Hell! yet no Mercury. But a mere Cacodaemon, sent hither with a packet of
news! news! never was Hell so furnished of the commodity of news! Love has
been lately there, and so entertained by Pluto, and Proserpine, and all the
Grandees of the place, as, it is there perpetual Holy Day: and a cessation of
torment granted, and proclaimed for ever! Halfe-famish'd Tantalus is fallen to
his fruit, with that appetite, as it threaten's to undo the whole company of
Costard-mungers, and has a River before him, running excellent Wine; Ixion is
loosed from his wheel, and turned Dancer, does nothing but cut capreols, fetch
friskals, and leads Lavaltoes, with the Lamiae! Sisyphus has left rolling the
stone, and is grown a Mr. bowler; challenges all the prime gamesters, Parsons
in hell, and gives them odds: upon Tityus his breast, that (for six of the nine
acres) is counted the subtlest bowling-ground in all Tartary. All the Furies
are at a game called nine-pins, or keilles, made of old Usurers bones, and
their souls looking on with delight, and betting on the game. Never was there
such freedom of sport. Danaus Daughters have broke their bottomless tubs, and
made bonfires of them. All is turned triumph there. Had Hell gates been kept
with half that strictness, as the entry here has been to night, Pluto would
have had but a cold Court, and Proserpine a thin presence, though both have a
vast territory. We had such a stir to get in, I, and my Curtall, and my two
Lacqueys all ventured through the eye of a Spanish needle, we had never come
in else, and that was by the favor of one of the guard who was a
womans-taylor, and held open the passage. Cupid by commission has carried
Jealousy from Hell, Disdain, Fear, and Dissimulation, with other Goblins, to
trouble the Gods. And I am sent after post, to raise Tempest, Winds,
Lightnings, Thunder, Rain, and Snow, for some new exploit they have against
the Earth, and the Goddess Chloris, Queen of the flowers, and Mistress of the
Spring. For joy of which I will return to my self, mount my Bidet, in a
dance; and corvet upon my Curtall.


The speech ended, the Postillion mounts his Curtall, and with his Lacqueys,
danceth forth as he came in. 2. Entry. Cupid, Jealousy, Disdain, Fear, and
Dissimulation, dance together. 3. Entry. The Queens Dwarf, richly apparelled,
as a Prince of Hell, attended by six infernal Spirits; He first danceth alone,
and then the Spirits: all expressing their joy, for Cupids coming among them.
4. Entry. Here the Scene changes, into a horrid storm; Out of which enters
the Nymph Tempest, with four Winds, they dance. 5. Entry. Lightnings, three
in number, their habits glistering, expressing that effect, in their motion. 6.
Entry. Thunder alone dancing the tunes to a noise, mixed, and imitating
thunder. 7. Entry. Rain, presented by five persons all swollen, and clouded
over, their hair flagging, as if they were wet, and in their hands, balls full
of sweet water, which, as they dance, sprinkle all the room. 8. And last
entry. Seven with rugged white heads, and beards, to express Snow, with flakes
on their garments, mixed with hayle. These having danced, return into the
stormy Scene, whence they came. Here, by the providence of Juno, the tempest on
an instant cease: And the Scene is changed into a delicious place, figuring
the bower of Chloris. Where, in an arbor fayn'd of Goldsmiths work, the
ornament of which was borne up with Terms of Satyrs, beautified with
Pestones, Garlands, and all sorts of fragrant flowers. Beyond all this, in the
sky a-farre off appeared a Rainebow, in the most eminent place of the Bower,
sat the Goddess Chloris, accompanied with fourteen Nymphs, their apparel
white, embroydered with silver, trimmed at the shoulders with great leaves of
green, embroydered with gold, falling one under the other. And of the same
work were their bases, their head-'tyres of flowers, mixed with silver, and
gold, with some sprigs of Aegrets among, and from the top of their dressing, a
thin veil hanging down.

All which beheld, The Nymphs, Rivers, and Fountains with the Spring, sung
this rejoicing Song. Song 3.
RIVERS, SPRING, FOVNTAINES. Run out, all the Floods, in joy with your silver
feet;
And have to meet, the enamored Spring;
For whom the warbling Fountains sing:
The story of the flowers; preserved by the Hours;
At Juno's soft command, and Iris showers;
Sent to quench jealousy, and all those powers
Of Loves rebellious war:
Whilst Chloris sits a shining star
To crown, and grace our jolly song, made long,
To the notes, that we bring, to glad the Spring.

Which ended, the Goddess, and her Nymphs, descend the degrees, into the
room, and dance the entry of the grand-masque.

After this, another Song by the same persons, as before. Song 4.
RIVERS, FOVNTAINES. Tell a truth, gay Spring, let us know
What feet they were, that so
Impres't the Earth, and made such various flowers to grow!

SPRING. She that led, a Queen was at lest,
Or a Goddess, 'bove the rest:
And all their graces, in her self expres't!

RIVERS, FOVNTAINES. O, 'twere a fame, to know her name!
Whether she were the root;
Or they did take the impression from her foot.

The Masquers here dance their second dance. Which done, The farther Prospect
of the Scene changes into air, with a low Land-shape, in part covered with
clouds: And in that instant, the Heaven opening, Juno, and Iris are seen, and
above them many aerie spirits, sitting in the clouds.

Song 5.
JVNO. Now Juno, and the Air shall know
The truth of what is done below,
From our discolored bow. Iris, what news?

IRIS. The air is clear, your bow can tell,
Chloris renowned, Spite fled to Hell;
The business all is well. And Cupid sues

JVNO. For pardon. Does he?

IRIS. He sheds tears
More then your Birds have eyes.

JVNO. The Gods have ears.
Offenses, made against the Deities,
Are soon forgot-

IRIS. If who offends, be wise.

Here, out of the Earth, arises a Hill, and on the top of it, a globe, on
which Fame is seen standing with her Trumpet, in her hand; and on the Hill,
are seated four Persons, presenting Poesy, History, Architecture, and
Sculpture: who together with the Nymphs, Floods, and Fountains, make a full
Quire, at which, Fame begins to mount, and moving her wings, flies, singing up
to Heaven.

FAME. Rise golden Fame, and give thy name a birth

CHORUS. From great and generous actions, done on Earth.

FAME. The life of Fame is action.

CHORUS. Understood
That action must be virtuous, great, and good!

FAME. Virtue it self by Fame is often protected,
And dies despised --

CHORUS. Where the Fame's neglected.

FAME. Who has not heard of Chloris, and her Bower
Fair Iris act, employed by Juno's power
To guard the Spring, and prosper every flower,
Whom Jealousy and Hell thought to devour?

CHORUS. Great actions, often obscured by time, may lie,
Or envy --

FAME. But they last to memory.

POESY. We that sustain thee, Learned Poesy,

HISTORY. And I, her sister, severe History.

ARCHITECTVRE. With Architecture, who will raise thee high,

SCVLPTVRE. And Sculpture, that can keep thee from to dye.

CHORUS. All help lift thee to eternity.

JVNO. And Juno, through the air, does make thy way,

IRIS. By her serenest Messenger of Day.

FAME. Thus Fame, ascend's, by all degrees, to Heaven:
And leaves a light, here, brighter then the seven.

CHORUS Let all applaud the sight.
Air first, that gave the bright
Reflections, Day or night!
With these supports of Fame,
That keep alive her name!
The beauties of the Spring.
Fount's, Rivers, every thing:
From the height of all,
To the Waters fall-
Resound, and sing
The honor's of his Chloris, to the King.
Chloris, the Queen of Flowers;
The sweetness of all Showers;
The ornament of Bowres;
The top of Par-amours!

Fame, being hidden in the clouds, the hill sinkes: and the Heaven closes. The
Masquers dance with the Lords. The End.
The Names of the Masquers as they sat in the Bower.
The Queen. Countess of Carlisle. Countess of Berkeshire. Countess of
Newport. La. Howard. M. EliZ. Savage. Countess of Oxford. Lady Anne Cavendish.
Lady Penelope Egerton. M. Anne Weston. Lady Strange. Countess of Carnarvan. M.
Porter. M. Dor. Savage. M. Sophia Carry.
UNDER-WOODS. CONSISTING OF DIVERSE POEMS.

By BEN. JOHNSON.

Martial -- Cineri, gloria sera venit.

LONDON. Printed M.DC.XL.

To the Reader.
WIth the same, leave the Ancients, called that kind of body Sylva, or (...),
in which there were works of diverse nature, and matter congested; as the
multitude call Timber Trees, promiscuously growing, a Wood, or Forest: so am I
bold to entitle these lesser Poems, of later growth, by this of Underwood, out
of the Analogy they hold to the Forest, in my former book, and no otherwise.

BEN. JOHNSON.

VNDER-VVOODS. POEMS OF DEVOTION.
The Sinners Sacrifice. To the Holy Trinity.
1.
O Holy, blessed, glorious Trinity
Of persons, still one God, in Unity.
The faithful man's believed Mystery,
Help, help to lift
2.
My self up to thee, harrow'd, torn, and bruised
By sin, and Satan; and my flesh misused,
As my heart lies in pieces, all confused,
O take my gift.
3.
All-gracious God, the Sinners sacrifice.
A broken heart thou were not wont despise,
But 'bove the fat of rams, or bulls, to prize
An offering meet,
4.
For thy acceptance. O, behold me right,
And take compassion on my grievous plight.
What odor can be, then a heart contrite,
To thee more sweet?
5.
Eternal Father, God, who did create
This All of nothing, gave it form, and fate,
And breathe into it, life, and light, with state
To worship thee.
6.
Eternal God the Son, who not denyd'st
To take our nature; becam'st man, and dyd'st,
To pay our debts, upon thy Cross, and cryd'st
All Is done in me.
7.
Eternal Spirit, God from both proceeding,
Father and Son; the Comforter, in breeding
Pure thoughts in man: with fiery zeal them feeding
For acts of grace.
8.
Increase those acts, o glorious Trinity
Of persons, still one God in Unity;
Till I attain the longed-for mystery
of seeing your face.
9.
Beholding one in three, and three in one,
A Trinity, to shine in Unity;
The gladdest light, dark man can think upon;
O grant it me!
10.
Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, you three
All coeternall in your Majesty,
Distinct in persons, yet in Unity
One God to see.
11.
My Maker, Savior, and my Sanctifier.
To hear, to meditate, sweeten my desire,
With grace, with love, with cherishing entire,
O, then how blessed;
12.
Among thy Saints elected to abide,
And with thy Angels, placed side, by side,
But in thy presence, truly glorified
Shall I there rest?
A Hymn to God the Father.
Hear me, O God!
A broken heart,
Is my best part:
Use still thy rod,
That I may prove
Therein, thy Love.
If thou had not
Been stern to me,
But left me free,
I had forgot
My self and thee.
For, sin's so sweet.
As minds ill bent
Rarely repent,
Until they meet
Their punishment.
Who more can crave
Then thou have done:
That gav'st a Son,
To free a slave?
First made of naught;
Withal since bought.
Sin, Death, and Hell,
His glorious Name
Quite overcame,
Yet I rebel,
And slight the same.
But, I Will come in,
Before my loss,
Me farther toss,
As sure to win
Under his Cross.
A Hymn On the Nativitie of my Savior.
I Sing the birth, was borne to night,
The Author both of Life, and light;
The Angels so did sound it,
And like the ravished Sheep'erds said,
Who saw the light, and were afraid,
Yet searched, and true they found it.
The Son of God, the Eternal King,
That did us all salvation bring,
And freed the soul from danger;
He whom the whole world could not take,
The Word, which heaven, and earth did make;
Was now laid in a Manger.
The Fathers wisdom willed it so,
The Sons obedience knew no No,
Both wills were in one stature;
And as that wisdom had decreed,
The Word was now made Flesh indeed,
And took on him our Nature.
What comfort by him do we win?
Who made himself the price of sin,
To make us heirs of glory?
To see this Babe, all innocence;
A Martyr borne in our defense;
Can man forget this Story?
A Celebration of CHARIS in ten Lyrick Pieces.
1. His Excuse for loving.
LEt it not your wonder move,
Less your laughter; that I love.
Though I now write fifty years,
I have had, and have my Peers;
Poets, though devine are men:
Some have loved as old again.
And it is not always face,
Clothes, or Fortune gives the grace;
Or the feature, or the youth:
But the Language, and the Truth,
With (...) Ardor, and the Passion,
Gives t^^ ^over weight, and fashion.
If you t^^^ will read the Story,
First, prepare you to be sorry,
That you never knew till now,
Either whom to love, or how:
But be glad, as soon with me,
When you know, that this is she,
Of whose Beauty it was sung,
She shall make the old man young.
Keep the middle age at stay,
And let nothing high decay.
Till she be the reason why,
All the world for love may die.
2. How he saw her.
I Beheld her, on a Day,
When her look out-flourisht May:
And her dressing did out-brave
All the Pride the fields than have:
Far I was from being stupid,
For I ran and called on Cupid;
Love if thou will ever see
Mark of glory, come with me;
Where Is thy Quiver? bend thy Bow:
Here Is a shaft, thou art to slow!
And (withal) I did untie
Every Cloud about his eye;
But, he had not gained his sight
Sooner, then he lost his might,
Or his courage; for away
Strait he ran, and durst not stay,
Letting Bow and Arrow fall,
Nor for any threat, or Call,
Could be brought once back to look,
I foole-hardie, there up took
Both the Arrow he had quit,
And the Bow: which thought to hit
This my object. But she threw
Such a Lightning (as I drew)
At my face, that took my sight,
And my motion from me quite;
So that there, I stood a stone,
Mocked of all: and called of one
(Which with grief and wrath I heard)
Cupids Statue with a Beard,
Or else one that played his Ape,
In a Hercules-his shape,
3. What he suffered.
AFter many scorns like these,
Which the prouder Beauties please,
She content was to restore
Eyes and limbs; to hurt me more
And would on Conditions, be
Reconciled to Love, and me
First, that I must kneeling yield
Both the Bow, and shaft I held
Unto her; which love might take
At her hand, with oath, to make
Me, the scope of his next draught
Aimed, with that selfsame shaft
He no sooner heard the Law,
But the Arrow home did draw
And (to gain her by his Art)
Left it sticking in my heart:
Which when she beheld to bleed,
She repented of the deed,
And would feign have changed the fate,
But the Pity comes too late.
Looser-like, now, all my wreake
Is, that I have leave to speak,
And in either Prose, or Song,
To revenge me with my Tongue,
Which how Dexterously I do
Hear and make Example too.
4. Her Triumph.
SEE the Chariot at hand here of Love
Wherein my Lady rides!
Each that draws, is a Swan, or a Dove
And well the Carre Love guides
As she goes, all hearts do duty
Unto her beauty;
And enamored, do wish, so they might
But enjoy such a sight,
That they still were, to run by her side,
Through Swords, through Seas, whether she would ride.
Do but look on her eyes, they do light
All that Loves world compriseth!
Do but look on her Hair, it is bright
As Loves star when it rises!
Do but mark her forhead's smoother
Then words that sooth her!
And from her arched brows, such a grace
Sheds it self through the face,
As alone there triumphs to the life.
All the Gain, all the Good, of the Elements strife.
Have you seen but a bright Lilly grow,
Before rude hands have touched it?
Have you marked but the fall of the Snow
Before the soil has smutch'd it?
Have you felt the wool of Bever?
Or Swans Down ever?
Or have smelt of the bud of the Brier?
Or the Nard in the fire?
Or have tasted the bag of the Be?
O so white! O so soft! O so sweet is she!
5. His discourse with Cupid.
NOblest Charis, you that are
Both my fortune, and my Star!
And do govern more my blood,
Then the various Moon the flood!
Hear, what late Discourse of you,
Love, and I have had; and true.
Amongst my Muses finding me,
Where he chanced your name to see
Set, and to this softer strain;
Sure, said he, if I have Brain,
This here sung, can be no other
By description, but my Mother!
So has Homer praised her hair;
So, Anacreon drawn the Air
Of her face, and made to rise
Just about her sparkling eyes,
Both her Brows, bent like my Bow.
By her looks I do her know,
Which you call my Shafts. And see!
Such my Mothers blushes be,
As the Bath your verse discloses
In her cheeks, of Milk, and Roses;
Such as often I wanton in?
And, above her even chin,
Have you placed the bank of kisses,
Where you say, men gather blisses,
Rip'ned with a breath more sweet,
Then when flowers, and West-winds meet.
Nay, her white and polished neck,
With the Lace that does it deck,
Is my Mothers! Hearts of slain
Lovers, made into a Chain!
And between each rising breast,
Lies the Valley, called my nest,
Where I sit and proyne my wings
After flight; and put new stings
To my shafts! Her very Name,
With my Mothers is the same.
I confess all, I replide,
And the Glass hangs by her side,
And the Girdle 'bout her waste,
All is Venus: save unchaste.
But alas, thou see the least
Of her good, who is the best
Of her Sex; But could thou Love,
Call to mind the forms, that strove
For the Apple, and those three
Make in one, the same were she.
For this Beauty yet does hide,
Something more then thou have spied
Outward Grace weak love beguiles:
She is Venus, when she smiles,
But she is Juno, when she walks,
And Minerva, when she talks.
6. Clayming a second kiss by Desert.
CHaris guess, and do not miss,
Since I drew a Morning kiss
From your lips, and sucked an air
Thence, as sweet, as you are fair.
What my Muse and I have done:
Whether we have lost, or won,
If by us, the odds were laid,
That the Bride (allowed a Maid)
Looked not half so fresh, and fair,
With the advantage of her hair,
And her Jewels, to the view
Of The Assembly, as did you!
Or, that did you sit, or walk,
You were more the eye, and talk
Of the Court, to day, then all
Else that glister'd in White Hall;
So, as those that had your sight,
Wished the Bride were changed to night,
And did think, such Rites were due
To no other Grace but you!
Or, if you did move to night
In the Daunces, with what spite
Of your Peers, you were beheld,
That at every motion sweld
So to see a Lady tread,
As might all the Graces lead,
And was worthy (being so seen)
To be envied of the Queen.
Or if you would yet have stayed,
Whether any would up-braid
To himself his loss of Time;
Or have charged his sight of Crime,
To have left all sight for you:
Guess of these, which is the true;
And, if such a verse as this,
May not claim another kiss.
7. Begging another, on color of mending the former.
FOr Loves-sake, kiss me once again,
I long, and should not beg in vain,
Here Is none to spy, or see;
Why do you doubt, or stay?
I Will taste as lightly as the Be,
That does but touch his flower, and flies away.
Once more, and (faith) I will be gone
Can he that loves, ask less then one?
Nay, you may err in this,
And all your bounty wrong:
This could be called but half a kiss.
What we are but once to do, we should do long,
I will but mend the last, and tell
Where, how it would have relished well;
Join lip to lip, and try:
Each suck others breath.
And whilst our tongues perplexed lie,
Let who will think us dead, or wish out death.
8. Urging her of a promise.
CHaris one day in discourse
Had of Love, and of his force,
Lightly promised, she would tell
What a man she could love well:
And that promise set on fire
All that heard her, with desire.
With the rest, I long expected,
When the work would be effected:
But we find that cold delay,
And excuse spun every day,
As, until she tell her one,
We all fear, she loves none.
Therefore, Charis, you must do it,
For I will so urge you to it
You shall neither eat, nor sleep,
No, nor forth your window peep,
With your emissarie eye,
To fetch in the Forms go by:
And pronounce, which band or lace,
Better fits him, then his face;
Nay I will not let you sit
Before your Idol Glass a whit,
To say over every purle
There; or to reform a curle;
Or with Secretary Sis
To consult, if Fucus this
Be as good, as was the last:
All your sweet of life is past,
Make account unless you can,
(And that quickly) speak your Man.
9. Her man described by her own Dictamen.
OF your Trouble, Ben, to ease me,
I will tell what Man would please me.
I would have him if I could,
Noble; or of greater Blood:
Titles, I confess, do take me.
And a woman, Gop did make me.
French to boot, at least in fashion,
And his Manners of that Nation.
Young Il'd have him to, and fair,
Yet a man; with crisped hair
Cast in thousand snares, and rings
For Loves fingers, and his wings:
Chestnut color, or more slack
Gold, upon a ground of black.
Venus, and Minerva's eyes
For he must look wanton-wise.
Eyebrows bent like Cupids bow,
Front, an ample field of snow;
Even nose, and cheek (withal)
Smooth as is the Billiard Ball:
Chin, as woolly as the Peach;
And his lip should kissing teach,
Till he cherished too much beard,
And make Love or me afeard.
He would have a hand as soft
As the Down, and show it often;
Skin as smooth as any rush,
And so thin to see a blush
Rising through it e're it came;
All his blood should be a flame
Quickly fired as in beginners
In loves school, and yet no sinners.
'Twere to long to speak of all,
What we harmony do call
In a body should be there.
Well he should his clothes to wear;
Yet no Tailor help to make him
Dressed, you still for man should take him;
And not think h' had eat a stake,
Or were set up in a Brake.
Valiant he should be as fire,
Showing danger more then ire.
Bounteous as the clouds to earth;
And as honest as his Birth.
All his actions to be such,
As to do nothing too much.
Nor o're-praise, nor yet condemn;
Nor out-valew, nor contemn;
Nor do wrongs, nor wrongs receave;
Nor tie knots, nor knots unweave;
And from baseness to be free,
As he durst love Truth and me.
Such a man, with every part,
I could give my very heart;
But of one, if short he came,
I can rest me where I am.
10. Another Ladies exception present at the hearing.
FOr his Mind, I do not care,
That Is a Toy, that I could spare:
Let his Title be but great,
His Clothes rich, and band sit neat,
Himself young, and face be good,
All I wish is understood
What you please, you parts may call,
It Is one good part I Would lie withal.
The Musical strife; In a Pastoral Dialogue.
SHE. COme with our Voices, let us war,
And challenge all the Spheres,
Till each of us be made a Star,
And all the world turn Ears.

HE. At such a Call, what beast or foul,
of reason empty is!
What Tree or stone does want a soul?
What man but must lose his?

SHE. Mix then your Notes, that we may prove
To stay the running floods?
To make the Mountain Quarries move?
And call the walking woods?

HE. What need of me? do you but sing
Sleep, and the Grave will wake,
No tunes are sweet, nor words have sting,
But what those lips do make.

SHE. They say the Angels mark each Deed,
And exercise below,
And out of inward pleasure feed
On what they viewing know.

HE. O sing not you then, lest the best
Of Angels should be driven
To fall again; at such a feast,
Mistaking earth for heaven.

SHE. Nay, rather both our souls be strayn'd
To meet their high desire;
So they in state of Grace retained,
May wish us of their Quire.

A SONG.
OH do not wanton with those eyes,
Lest I be sick with seeing;
Nor cast them down, but let them rise,
Lest shame destroy their being:
O, be not angry with those fires,
For then their threats will kill me;
Nor look too kind on my desires,
For then my hopes will spill me;
O, do not steep them in thy Tares,
For so will sorrow slay me;
Nor spread them as distract with fears,
Mine own enough betray me.
In the person of Woman kind. A Song Apologetique.
MEn if you love us, play no more
The fools, or Tyrants with your friends,
To make us still sing over, and over,
Our own false praises, for your ends:
We have both wits, and fancies too,
And if we must, let us sing of you.
Nor do we doubt, but that we can,
If we would search with care, and pain,
Find some one good, in some one man;
So going through all your strain:
We shall at last, of parcells make
One good enough for a songs sake.
And as a cunning Painter takes
In any curious piece you see
More pleasure while the thing he makes
Then when it is made, why so will we.
And having pleased our art, we will try
To make a new, and hang that by.
Another. In defense of their Inconstancy. A Song.
HAng up those dull, and envious fools
That talk abroad of Woman's change,
We were not bred to sit on stools,
Our proper virtue is to range:
Take that away, you take our lives,
We are no women then, but wives.
Such as in valor would excel
Do change, though man, and often fight
Which we in love must do as well,
If ever we will love aright.
The frequent varying of the deed,
Is that which does perfection breed.
Nor is it inconstancy to change
For what is better, or to make
(By searching) what before was strange,
Familiar, for the uses sake;
The good, from bad, is not descride,
But as it is often vexed and tried.
And this profession of a store
In love, does not alone help forth
Our pleasure; but preserves us more
From being forsaken, then does worth,
For were the worthiest woman cursed
To love one man, he would leave her first.
A Nymphs Passion.
I Love, and he loves me again,
Yet dare I not tell who;
For if the Nymphs should know my Swain,
I fear they would love him too;
Yet if it be not known,
The pleasure is as good as none,
For that is a narrow joy is but our own.
I Will tell, that if they be not glad,
They yet may envy me:
But then if I grow jealous mad,
And of them pitied be,
It were a plague 'bove scorn
And yet it cannot be forborne.
Unless my heart would as my thought be torn.
He is if they can find him, fair,
And fresh and fragrant too,
As Summers sky, or purged Air,
And looks as Lillies do,
That are this morning blown,
Yet, yet I doubt he is not known,
And fear much more, that more of him be shown.
But he has eyes so round, and bright,
As make away my doubt,
Where Love may all his Torches light
Though hate had put them out;
But then to increase my fears,
What Nymph so e're his voice but hears
Will be my Rival, though she have but ears.
I Will tell no more, and yet I love,
And he loves me; yet no
One un-becomming thought does move
From either heart, I know;
But so exempt from blame,
As it would be to each a fame:
If Love, or fear, would let me tell his name.
The Houre-glasse.
Do but consider this small dust,
Here running in the Glass,
By Atoms moved;
Could you believe, that this,
The body was
Of one that loved?
And in his Mrs. flame, playing like a fly,
Turned to cinders by her eye?
Yes; and in death, as life unblest,
To have't expressed,
Even ashes of lovers find no rest.
My Picture left in Scotland.
I Now think, Love is rather deaf, then blind,
For else it could not be,
That she,
Whom I adore so much, should so slight me,
And cast my love behind:
I Am sure my language to her, was as sweet,
And every close did meet
In sentence, of as subtle feet,
As has the youngest He,
That sits in shadow of Apollo's tree.
Oh, but my conscious fears,
That fly my thoughts between,
Tell me that she has seen
My hundreds of gray hairs,
Told seven and forty years.
Read so much wast, as she cannot embrace
My mountain belly, and my rockie face,
And all these through her eyes, have stopped her ears.
Against Jealousy.
WRetched and foolish Jealousy,
How came thou thus to enter me?
I n're was of thy kind;
Nor have I yet the narrow mind
To vent that poor desire,
That others should not warm them at my fire,
I wish the Sun should shine
On all men's Fruit, and flowers, as well as mine.
But under the Disguise of love
Thou sai'st, thou only came to prove
What my Affections were,
Think thou that love is helped by fear?
Go, get thee quickly forth
Loves sickness, and his noted want of worth
Seek doubting Men to please,
I never will owe my health to a disease.
The Dream.
OR Scorn, or pity on me take,
I must the true Relation make,
I am undone to Night;
Love in a subtle Dream disguised,
Has both my heart and me surpised,
Whom never yet he durst attempt to awake;
Nor will he tell me for whose sake
He did me the Delight,
Or Spite,
But leaves me to inquire,
In all my wild desire
Of sleep again; who was his Aid,
And sleep so guilty and afraid,
As since he dares not come within my sight.
An Epitaph on Master VINCENT CORBET.
I Have my Piety too, which could
It vent it self, but as it would,
Would say as much, as both have done
Before me here, the Friend and Son;
For I both lost a friend and Father,
Of him whose bones this Grave does gather:
Dear Vincent Corbet who so long
Had wrestled with Diseases strong,
That though they did possess each limb,
Yet he broke them, e're they could him,
With the just Canon of his life,
A life that knew nor noise, nor strife:
But was by sweetning so his will,
All order, and Disposure, still
His Mind as pure, and neatly kept,
As were his Nourceries; and swept
So of uncleanness, or offense,
That never came ill odor thence:
And add his Actions unto these,
They were as specious as his Trees.
It Is true, he could not reprehend
His very Manners, taught t'amend,
They were so even, grave, and holy;
No stubbornness so stiff, nor folly
To license ever was so light,
As twice to trespass in his fight,
His looks would so correct it, when
It chid the vice, yet not the Men.
Much from him I profess I won,
And more, and more, I should have done,
But that I understood him scant,
Now I conceive him by my want,
And pray who shall my sorrows read,
That they for me their tears will shed;
For truly, since he left to be,
I feel, I Am rather dead than he?
Reader, whose life, and name, did e're become
An Epitaph, deserved a Tomb:
Nor wants it here through penury, or sloth,
Who makes the one, so't be first makes both.
An Epistle to Sir EDWARD SACVILE, now Earl of Dorset.
IF Sackvile, all that have the power to do
Great and good turns, as well could time them too,
And knew their how, and where: we should have, then
Less list of proud, hard, or ungrateful Men.
For benefits are owed with the same mind
As they are done, and such returns they find:
You then whose will not only, but desire
To succor my necessities took fire,
Not at my prayers, but your sense; which laid
The way to meet, what others would upbraid;
And in the Act did so my blush prevent,
As I did feel it done, as soon as meant:
You cannot doubt, but I who freely know
This Good from you, as freely will it owe;
And though my fortune humble me, to take
The smallest courtesies with thanks, I make
Yet choice from whom I take them; and would shame
To have such do me good, I durst not name:
They are the Noblest benefits; and sink
Deepest in Man, of which when he does think,
The memory delights him more, from whom
Then what he has received. Gifts stink from some,
They are so long a coming, and so hard
Where any Deed is forced, the Grace is mard.
Can I owe thanks, for Courtesies received
Against his will that does 'hem? that has weaved
Excuses, or Delays? or done 'hem scant,
That they have more oppressed me, then my want?
Or if he did it not to succor me,
But by mere Chance? for interest? or to free
Himself of farther trouble, or the weight
Of pressure, like one taken in a straight?
All this corrupts the thanks, less has he won,
That puts it in his Debt-booke e're't be done;
Or that does sound a Trumpet, and does call
His Grooms to witness; or else lets it fall
In that proud manner: as a good so gained,
Must make me sad for what I have obtained.
No! Gifts and thanks should have one cheerful face,
So each, that is done, and taken, becomes a Brace.
He neither gives, or does, that does delay
A Benefit: or that does throw't away
No more then he does thank, that will receive
Naught but in corners; and is loath to leave,
Lest Air, or Print, but flies it: Such men would
Run from the Conscience of it if they could.
As I have seen some Infants of the Sword
Well known, and practiced borrowers on their word,
Give thanks by stealth, and whispering in the ear,
For what they straight would to the world forswear;
And speaking worst of those, from whom they went
But then, fist filled to put me off the sent.
Now dam'mee, Sir, if you shall not command
My Sword ('it is but a poor Sword understand)
As far as any poor Sword in the Land,
Then turning unto him is next at hand,
Dam's whom he damned too, is the veriest Gull,
H'as Feathers, and will serve a man to pull.
Are they not worthy to be answered so,
That to such Natures let their full hands flow,
And seek not wants to succor: but enquire
Like Money-brokers; after Names, and hire
Their bounties forth, to him that last was made,
Or stands to be'n Commission of the blade?
Still, still, the hunters of false fame apply
Their thoughts and means to making loud the cry;
But one is bitten by the Dog he fed,
And hurt seeks Cure, the Surgeon bids take bread,
And spunge-like with it dry up the blood quite:
Then give it to the Hound that did him bite;
Pardon, says he, that were a way to see
All the Towne-curs take each their snatch at me.
O, is it so? knows he so much? and will
Feed those, at whom the Table points at still?
I not deny it, but to help the need
Of any, is a Great and generous Deed:
Yea, of th'ingratefull: and he forth must tell
Many a pound, and piece will pace one well;
But these men ever want: their very trade
Is borrowing, that but stopped they do invade
All as their prize, turn Pirates here at Land,
Ha'their Bermudas, and their streights in the Strand:
Man out of their Boats to the Temple, and not shift
Now, but command; make tribute, what was gift;
And it is paid 'hem with a trembling zeal,
And superstiti^* I dare scarce reveal
If it were clear, but being so in cloud
Carried and wrapped, I only am aloud
My wonder! why? the taking a Clownes purse,
Or robbing the poor Market-folkes should nurse
Such a religious horror in the breasts
Of our Town Gallantry! or why there rests
Such worship due to kicking of a Punck!
Or swaggering with the Watch, or Drawer drunk;
Or feats of darkness acted in Mid-Sun,
And told of with more License then they were done!
Sure there is Mystery in it, I not know
That men such reverence to such actions show!
And almost deifie the Authors! make
Loud sacrifice of drink, for their health-sake
Rear Suppers in their Names! and spend whole nights
Unto their praise, in certain swearing rites;
Cannot a man be reck'ned in the State
Of Valor, but at this Idolatrous rate?
I thought that Fortitude had been a mean
'Twixt fear and rashness: not a lust obscene,
Or appetite of offending, but a skill,
Or Science of a discerning Good and Ill.
And you Sir know it well to whom I write,
That with these mixtures we put out her light
Her ends are honesty, and public good!
And where they want, she is not understood.
No more are these of us, let them then go,
I have the list of mine own faults to know,
Look too and cure; He Is not a man has none,
But like to be, that every day mends one,
And feels it; Else he tarries by the Beast,
Can I discern how shadows are decreast,
Or grown; by height or lowness of the Sun?
And can I less of substance? when I run,
Ride, sail, am coach'd, know I how far I have gone,
And my minds motion not? or have I none:
No! he must feel and know, that I will advance
Men have been great, but never good by chance,
Or on the sudden. It were strange that he
Who was this Morning such a one, should be
Sydney e're night? or that did go to bed
Coriat, should rise the most sufficient head
Of Christendom? And neither of these know
Were the Rack offered them how they came so;
It Is by degrees that men arrive at glad
Profit in ought each day some little add,
In time 'twill be a heap; This is not true
Alone in money, but in manners too.
Yet we must more then move still, or go on,
We must accomplish; It Is the last Key-stone
That makes the Arch, The rest that there were put
Are nothing till that comes to bind and shut.
Then stands it a triumphall mark! then Men
Observe the strength, the height, the why, and when,
It was erected; and still walking under
Meet some new matter to look up and wonder!
Such Notes are virtuous men! they live as fast
As they are high; are rooted and will last.
They need no stilts, nor rise upon their toes,
As if they would belie their stature, those
Are Dwarfes of Honor, and have neither weight
Nor fashion, if they chance aspire to height,
It Is like light Canes, that first rise big and brave,
Shoot forth in smooth and comely spaces; have
But few and fair Devisions: but being got
A loft, grow less and straightened; full of knot.
And last, go out in nothing: You that see
Their difference, cannot choose which you will be.
You know (without my flattering you) too much
For me to be your Indice. Keep you such,
That I may love your Person (as I do)
Without your gift, though I can rate that too,
By thanking thus the courtesy to life,
Which you will bury, but therein, the strife
May grow so great to be example, when
(As their true rule or lesson) either men
Donnor's or Donnee's to their practice shall
Find you to reckon nothing, me owe all.
An Epistle to Master JOHN SELDOM.
I Know to whom I write Here, I am sure,
Though I am short, I cannot be obscure:
Less shall I for the Art or dressing care,
Truth, and the Graces best, when naked are
Your Book, my Seldom, I have read, and much
Was trusted, that you thought my judgment such
To ask it: though in most of works it be
A penance, where a man may not be free.
Rather then Office, when it does or may
Chance that the Friends affection proves Allay
Unto the Censure. Yours all need does fly
Of this so vicious Humanity.
Then which there is not unto Study, a more
Pernicious enemy, we see before
A many of books, even good judgments wound
Themselves through favoring what is there not found:
But I on yours far otherwise shall do,
Not fly the Crime, but the Suspicion too:
Though I confess (as every Muse has erred,
And mine not least) I have too often preferred
Men, past their terms, and praised some names too much,
But 'twas with purpose to have made them such,
Since being deceived, I turn a sharper eye
Upon my self, and ask to whom? and why?
And what I write? and vex it many days
Before men get a verse: much less a Praise;
So that my Reader is assured, I now
Mean what I speak: and still will keep that Vow,
Stand forth my Object, then you that have been
Ever at home: yet, have all Countries seen:
And like a Compass keeping one foot still
Upon your Center, do your Circle fill
Of general knowledge; watched men, manners too,
Heard what times past have said, seen what ours do:
Which Grace shall I make love too first? your skill,
Or faith in things? or is it your wealth and will
T'instruct and teach? or your unwearied pain
Of Gathering? Bounty in pouring out again?
What fables have you vexed! what truth redeemed!
Antiquities searched! Opinions dis-esteem'd!
Impostures branded! and Authorities urged,
What blots and errors, have you watched and purged
Records, and Authors of! how rectified,
Times, manners, customs! Innovations spide!
Sought out the Fountains, Sources, Creekes, paths, ways,
And noted the beginnings and decays!
Where is that nominall mark, or real rite,
Form Act or Ensign, that has escaped your sight.
How are Traditions there examined: how
Conjectures retriv'd! And a Story now
And then of times (besides the bare Conduct
Of what it tells us) weaved in to instruct.
I wondered at the richness, but am lost,
To see the workmanship so'xceed the cost!
To mark the excellent seas'ning of your Style!
And manly elocution, not one while
With horror rough, then rioting with wit!
But to the Subject, still the Colors fit
In sharpness of all Search, wisdom of Choice,
Newness of Sense, Antiquity of voice!
I yield, I yield, the matter of your praise
Flows in upon me, and I cannot raise
A bank against it. Nothing but the round
Large claspe of Nature, such a wit can bound
Monarch in Letters! Amongst thy Titles shown
Of others honors, thus, enjoy their own,
I first salute thee so; and gratulate
With that thy Style, thy keeping of thy State;
In offering this thy work to no great Name,
That would, perhaps, have praised, and thanked the same,
But naught beyond. He thou have given it to,
Thy learned Chamber-fellow, knows to do
It true respects. He will not only love
Embrace, and cherish; but he can approve
And estimate thy Pains; as having wrought
In the same Mines of ^^owledge; and thence brought
Humanity enough to be friend,
And strength to be a Cha^^ion, and defend
Thy gift against envy. O how I do count
Among my commings in, and see it mount,
The Grain of your two friendships! Hayward and
Seldom! two Names that so much understand!
On whom I could take up, and never abuse
The Credit, what would furnish a tenth Muse!
But here is no time, nor place, my wealth to tell,
You both are modest. So am I. Farewell.
An Epistle to a Friend, to persuade him to the Wars.
WAke, friend from forth thy Lethargy: the Drum
Beats brave, and loud in Europe, and bids come
All that dare rowse: or are not loath to quit
Their vicious ease, and be overwhelmed with it.
It is a call to keep the spirits alive
That gasp for action, and would yet revive
Man's buried honor, in his sleepie life:
Quickening dead Nature, to her noblest strife.
All other Acts of Worldlings, are but toil
In dreams, begun in hope, and end in spoil.
Look on the ambitious man, and see him nurse,
His unjust hopes, with praises begged, or (worse)
Bought Flatteries, the issue of his purse,
Till he become both their, and his own curse!
Look on the false, and cunning man, that loves
No person, nor is loved: what ways he proves
To gain upon his belly; and at last
Crushed in the snakie brakes, that he had past!
See, the grave, sower, and supercilious Sir
In outward face, but inward, light as Furre,
Or Feathers: lay his fortune out to show
Till envy wound, or maime it at a blow!
See him, that is called, and thought the happiest man,
Honored at once, and envied (if it can
Be honor is so mixed) by such as would
For all their spite be like him if they could:
No part or corner man can look upon,
But there are objects, bid him to be gone
As far as he can fly, or follow Day,
Rather then here so bogg'd in vices stay
The whole world here leavened with madness swells?
And being a thing, blown out of naught, rebels
Against his Maker; high alone with weeds,
And impious rankness of all Sects and seeds:
Not to be checked, or frighted now with fate,
But more licentious made, and desperate!
Our Delicacies are grown capital,
And even our sports are dangers! what we call
Friendship is now masked Hatred! Justice fled,
And shamefastness together! All laws dead
That kept man living! Pleasures only sought!
Honor and honesty, as poor things thought
As they are made! Pride, and stiff Clownage mixed
To make up Greatness! and man's whole good fixed
In bravery, or gluttony, or coin,
All which he makes the servants of the Groine,
Thither it flows, how much did Stallion spend
To have his Court-bred-fillie there commend
His Lace and Starch; And fall upon her back
In admiration, stretched upon the rack
Of lust, to his rich Suit and Title, Lord?
I, that is a Charm and half! She must afford
That all respect; She must lie down: Nay more
It Is there civilitie to be a whore;
He Is one of blood, and fashion! and with these
The bravery makes, she can no honor leese
To do it with Cloth, or Stuffes, lusts name might merit
With Velvet, Plush, and Tissues, it is spirit.
O, these so ignorant Monsters! light, as proud,
Who can behold their Manners, and not clowd-
Like upon them lighten? If nature could
Not make a verse; Anger; or laughter would
To see 'hem aye discoursing with their Glass,
How they may make some one that day an Ass
Planting their Purles, and Curles spread forth like Net,
And every Dressing for a Pitfall set
To catch the flesh in, and to pound a Prick
Be at their Visits, see 'hem squemish, sick
Ready to cast, at one, whose band sits ill,
And then, leap mad on a neat Pickardill;
As if a Brize were gotten in their tail,
And firke, and jerke, and for the Coachman rail,
And jealous each of other, yet think long
To be abroad chanting some baudie song,
And laugh, and measure thighs, then squeake, spring, itch,
Do all the tricks of a saut Lady Bitch;
For to other pound of sweetmeats, he shall feel
That pays, or what he will. The Dame is steel,
For these with her young Company she will enter,
Where Pittes, or Wright, or Modet would not venture,
And comes by these Degrees, the Style t'inherit
Of woman of fashion, and a Lady of spirit:
Nor is the title questioned with our proud,
Great, brave, and fashioned folk, these are allowed
Adulteries now, are not so hid, or strange,
They Are grown Commodity upon Exchange;
He that will follow but another wife,
Is loved, though he let out his own for life:
The Husband now is called churlish, or a poor
Nature, that will not let his Wife be a whore;
Or use all arts, or haunt all Companies
That may corrupt her, even in his eyes.
The brother trades a sister; and the friend
Lives to the Lord, but to the Ladies end.
Less must not be thought on then Mistress: or
If it be thought killed like her Embrions; for,
Whom no great Mistress, has as yet infam'd
A fellow of course Letcherie, is named
The Servant of the Serving-woman in scorn,
Never came to taste the plenteous Mariage-horne.
Thus they do talk. And are these objects fit
For man to spend his money on? his wit?
His time? health? soul? will he for these go throw
Those thousands on his back, shall after blow
His body to the Counters, or the Fleet?
Is it for these that fine man meets the street
Coach'd, or on foot cloth, thrice changed every day,
To teach each suit, he has the ready way
From Hide-Parke to the Stage, where at the last
His dear and borrowed Bravery he must cast?
When not his Combs, his Curling-irons, his Glass,
Sweet bags, sweet Powders, nor sweet words will pass
For less Security? O for these
Is it that man pulls on himself Disease?
Surfeit? and Quarrel? drinks the the other health?
Or by Damnation voids it? or by stealth?
What fury of late is crept into our Feasts?
What honor given to the drunkennest Guests?
What reputation to bear one Glass more?
When often the Bearer, is borne out of door?
This has our ill-us'd freedom, and soft peace
Brought on us, and will every hour increase
Our vices, do not tarry in a place,
But being in Motion still (or rather in race)
Tilt one upon another, and now bear
This way, now that, as if their number were
More then themselves, or then our lives could take,
But both fell pressed under the load they make.
I Will bid thee look no more, but flee, flee friend,
This Praecipice, and Rocks that have no end,
Or side, but threatens Ruin. The whole Day
Is not enough now, but the Nights to play:
And whilst our states, strength, body, and mind we waste;
Go make our selves the Usurers at a cast.
He that no more for Age, Cramps, Palsies, can
Now use the bones, we see does hire a man
To take the box up for him; and pursues
The Dice with glassen eyes, to the glad viewers
Of what he throws: Like letchers grown content
To be beholders, when their powers are spent.
Can we not leave this worm? or will we not?
Is that the truer excuse? or have we got
In this, and like, an itch of Vanity,
That scratching now is our best Felicity?
Well, let it go. Yet this is better, then
To lose the forms, and dignities of men
To flatter my good Lord, and cry his Bowl
Runs sweetly, as it had his Lordships Soul,
Although, perhaps it has, what is that to me,
That may stand by, and hold my peace? will he
When I am hoarse, with praising his each cast,
Give me but that again, that I must wast
In Sugar Candide, or in buttered beer,
For the recovery of my voice? No, there
Pardon his Lordship. Flattry's grown so cheap
With him, for he is followed with that heap
That watch, and catch, at what they may applaud
As a poor single flatterer, without Baud
Is nothing, such scarce meat and drink he will give,
But he that is both, and slave to both, shall live,
And be beloved, while the Whores last. O times,
Friend fly from hence; and let these kindled rimes:
Light thee from hell on earth: where flatterers, spies,
Informers, Masters both of Arts and lies,
Lewd slanderers, soft whisperers that let blood
The life, and fame-vaynes (yet not understood
Of the poor sufferers) where the envious, proud,
Ambitious, factious, superstitious, loud
Boasters, and perjured, with the infinite more
Praevaricators swarm. Of which the store,
(Because they are every where amongst Mankind
Spread through the World) is easier far to find,
Then once to number, or bring forth to hand,
Though thou were Muster-master of the Land.
Go quit 'hem all. And take along with thee,
Thy true friends wishes, Colby which shall be,
That thine be just, and honest, that thy Deeds
Not wound thy conscience, when thy body bleeds;
That thou do all things more for truth, then glory,
And never but for doing wrong be sorry;
That by commanding first thy self, thou make
Thy person fit for any charge thou take
That fortune never make thee to complain,
But what she gives, thou dare give her again;
That whatsoever face thy fate puts on,
Thou shrink or start not; but be always one,
That thou think nothing great, but what is good,
And from that thought strive to be understood.
So, 'live or dead, thou will preserve a fame
Still precious, with the odor of thy name.
And last, blaspheme not, we did never hear
Man thought the valianter, 'cause he durst swear
No more, then we should think a Lord had had
More honor in him, 'cause we'ave known him mad:
These take, and now go seek thy peace in War,
Who falls for love of God, shall rise a Star.
An Epitaph on Master PHILIP GRAY.
Reader stay,
And if I had no more to say,
But here does lie till the last Day,
All that is left of PHILIP GRAY.
It might thy patience richly pay:
For, if such men as he could die,
What surety of life have thou, and I.
Epistle To a Friend.
THey are not, Sir, worst Owers, that do pay
Debts when they can: good men may break their day;
And yet the noble Nature never grudge,
It Is then a crime, when the Usurer is Judge.
And he is not in friendship. Nothing there
Is done for gain: If It be it is not sincere.
Nor should I at this time protested be,
But that some greater names have broke with me,
And their words too; where I but break my Band,
I add that (but) because I understand
That as the lesser breach: for he that takes
Simply my Band, his trust in me forsakes,
And looks unto the forfeit. If you be
Now so much friend, as you would trust in me,
Venture a longer time, and willingly:
All is not barren land, does fallow lie.
Some grounds are made the richer, for the Rest;
And I will bring a Crop, if not the best.
An Elegy.
CAn Beauty that did prompt me first to write,
Now threaten, with those means she did invite:
Did her perfections call me on to gaze!
Then like, then love; and now would they amaze!
Or was she gracious a-farre off? but near
A terror? or is all this but my fear?
That as the water makes things, put in it, straight,
Crooked appear; so that does my conceit:
I can help that with boldness; And love swear,
And fortune once, t'assist the spirits that dare.
But which shall lead me on? both these are blind
Such Guides men use not, who their way would find.
Except the way be error to those ends:
And then the best are still, the blindest friends!
Oh how a Lover may mistake! to think,
Or love, or fortune blind, when they but wink
To see men fear: or else for truth, and State,
Because they would free Justice imitate,
Veil their own eyes, and would impartially
Be brought by us to meet our Destiny.
If it be thus; Come love, and fortune go,
I Will lead you on; or if my fate will so,
That I must send one first, my Choice assigns,
Love to my heart, and fortune to my lines.
An Elegy.
BY those bright Eyes, at whose immortal fires
Love lights his torches to inflame desires;
By that fair Stand, your forehead, whence he bends
His double Bow, and round his Arrows sends;
By that tall Grove, your hair; whose globy rings
He flying curles, and crispeth, with his wings.
By those pure bathes your either cheek discloses,
Where he does steep himself in Milk and Roses;
And lastly by your lips, the bank of kisses,
Where men at once may plant, and gather blisses:
Tell me (my loved Friend) do you love or no?
So well as I may tell in verse, it is so?
You blush, but do not: friends are either none,
(Though they may number bodies) or but one.
I Will therefore ask no more, but bid you love;
And so that either may example prove
Unto the other; and live patterns, how
Others, in time may love, as we do now.
Slip no occasion; As time stands not still,
I know no beauty, nor no youth that will.
To use the present, then, is not abuse,
You have a Husband is the just excuse
Of all that can be done him; Such a one
As would make shift, to make himself alone,
That which we can, who both in you, his Wife,
His Issue, and all Circumstance of life
As in his place, because he would not vary,
Is constant to be extraordinary.
A Satyricall Shrub.
A Woman's friendship! God whom I trust in,
Forgive me this one foolish deadly sin;
Amongst my many other, that I may
No more, I am sorry for so fond cause, say
At fifty years, almost, to value it,
That never was known to last above a fit?
Or have the least of Good, but what it must
Put on for fashion, and take up on trust:
Knew I all this before? had I perceived,
That their whole life was wickedness, though weaved
Of many Colors; outward fresh, from spots,
But their whole inside full of ends, and knots?
Knew I, that all their Dialogues, and discourse,
were such as I will now relate, or worse.
Here, something is wanting.

............................
............................
Knew I this Woman? yes; And you do see,
How penitent I am, or I should be?
Do not you ask to know her, she is worse
Then all Ingredients made into one curse,
And that poured out upon Mankind can be!
Think but the Sin of all her sex, it is she!
I could forgive her being proud! a whore!
Perjured! and painted! if she were no more --,
But she is such, as she might, yet forestall
The Devil; and be the damning of us all.
A little Shrub growing by.
Ask not to know this Man. If fame should speak
His name in any metal, it would break.
Two letters were enough the plague to tear
Out of his Grave, and poison every ear.
A parcel of Court-durt, a heap, and mass
Of all vice hurld together, there he was,
Proud, false, and treacherous, vindictive, all
That thought can add, unthankful, the lay-stall
Of putrid flesh alive! of blood, the sink!
And so I leave to stir him, lest he stink.
An Elegy.
THough Beauty be the Mark of praise,
And yours of whom I sing be such
As not the World can praise too much,
Yet is it your virtue now I raise.
A virtue, like Allay, so gone
Throughout your form; as though that move;
And draw, and conquer all men's love,
This subjects you to love of one.
Wherein you triumph yet: because
It Is of your self, and that you use
The noblest freedom, not to choose
Against or Faith, or honors laws.
But who should less expect from you,
In whom alone love lives again?
By whom he is restored to men:
And kept, and bred, and brought up true?
His falling Temples you have reared
The withered Garlands taken away;
His Altars kept from the Decay,
That envy wished, and Nature feared.
And on them burn so chaste a flame,
With so much Loyalties expense
As Love t'aquit such excellence.
Is gone himself into your Name.
And you are he: the Dietie
To whom all Lovers are designed;
That would their better objects find:
Among which faithful troop am I.
Who as an offspring at your shrine,
Have sung this Hymn, and here entreat
One spark of your Diviner heat
To light upon a Love of mine.
Which if it kindle not, but scant
Appear, and that to shortest view,
Yet give me leave to adore in you
What I, in her, am grieved to want.
An Ode. To himself.
WHere do thou careless lie
Buried in ease and sloth?
Knowledge, that sleeps, does die;
And this Security,
It is the common Moath,
That eats on wits, and Arts, and destroys them both.
Are all the Aonian springs
Dried up? lies Thespia wast?
Does Clarius Harp want strings,
That not a Nymph now sings!
Or droop they as disgraced,
To see their Seats and Bowers by chattring Pies defaced?
If hence thy silence be,
As it is too just a cause;
Let this thought quicken thee,
Minds that are great and free,
Should not on fortune pause,
It Is crown enough to virtue still, her own applause.
What though the greedy Fry
Be taken with false Baytes
Of worded Balladrie,
And think it Poesy?
They die with their conceits,
And only pitious scorn, upon their folly waits.
Then take in hand thy Lyre,
Strike in thy proper strain,
With Japhets line, aspire
Sols Chariot for new fire,
To give the world again:
Who aided him, will thee, the issue of Joves brain.
And since our Dainty age,
Cannot endure reproof.
Make not thy self a Page,
To that strumpet the Stage,
But sing high and aloof,
Safe from the wolves black jaw, and the dull Asses hoof.
The mind of the Frontispice to a Book.
FRom Death, and dark oblivion, never the same,
The Mistress of Man's life, grave History
Razing the World to good and evil fame
Does vindicate it to eternity.
Wise Providence would so; that nor the good
Might be defrauded, nor the great secured,
But both might know their ways were understood,
When Vice alike in time with virtue dur'd
Which makes that (lighted by the beamie hand
Of Truth that searches the most Springs
And guided by experience, whose strait wand
Does meet, whose line does sound the depth of things:)
She cheerfully supporteth what she reares,
Assisted by no strengths, but are her own,
Some note of which each varied Pillar bears,
By which as proper titles, she is known
Times witness, herald of Antiquity,
The light of Truth, and life of Memory.
An Ode to JAMES Earl of Desmond, writ in Queen ELIZABETH'S time, since lost,
and recovered.
WHere art thou Genius? I should use
Thy present Aid: Arise Invention,
Wake, and put on the wings of Pindars Muse,
To tower with my intention
High, as his mind, that does advance
Her upright head, above the reach of Chance,
Or the times envy:
Cynthius, I apply
My bolder numbers to thy golden Lyre:
O, then inspire
Thy Priest in this strange rapture; heat my brain
With Delphick fire:
That I may sing my thoughts, in some unvulgar strain.
Rich beam of honor, shed your light
On these dark rymes; that my affection
May shine (through every chincke) to every fight graced by your Reflection!
Then shall my Verses, like strong Charms
Break the knit Circle of her Stony Arms,
That hold your spirit:
And keeps your merit
Locked in her cold embraces, from the view
Of eyes more true,
Who would with judgment search, searching conclude,
(As proved in you)
True noblesse. Palm grows straight, though handled never so rude?
Nor think your self unfortunate,
If subject to the jealous errors
Of politic pretext, that wryes a State,
Sink not beneath these terrors:
But whisper; O glad Innocence
Where only a man's birth is his offense;
Or the dis-favour,
Of such as savor
Nothing, but practice upon honors thrall.
O virtues fall,
When her dead essence (like the Anatomy
in Surgeons hall)
Is but a Statists theme, to read Phlebotomie.
Let Brontes, and black Steropes,
Sweat at the forge, their hammers beating;
Pyracmon's hour will come to give them ease,
Though but while mettal's heating:
And, after all the Aetnean Ire,
Gold, that is perfect, will outlive the fire.
For fury wastes,
As patience lasts.
No Armor to the mind! he is shot free
From injury,
That is not hurt; not he, that is not hit;
So fools we see,
Often escape an Imputation, more through luck, then wit.
But to your self most loyal Lord,
(Whose heart in that bright Sphere flames clearest.
Though many Gems be in your bosom stored,
Unknown which is the Dearest.)
If I auspitiously devine,
(As my hope tells) that our fair Phoeb's shine,
Shall light those places,
With lustrous Graces,
Where darkness with her glomie Sceptred hand,
Does now command.
O then (my best-best loved let me importune,
That you will stand,
As far from all revolt, as you are now from Fortune.
An Ode.
High spirited friend,
I send nor Balmes, nor Cor'sives to your wound,
Your fate has found,
A gentler, and more agile hand, to tend
The Cure of that, which is but corporal,
And doubtful Days (which were named Critical,)
Have made their fairest flight,
And now are out of sight.
Yet does some wholesome Physic for the mind,
Wrapped in this paper lie,
Which in the taking if you mis-apply,
You are unkind.
Your covetous hand,
Happy in that fair honor it has gained,
Must now be rayn'd.
True valor does her own renown command
In one full Action; nor have you now more
To do; then be a husband of that store.
Think but how dear you bought,
This same which you have caught,
Such thoughts will make you more in love with truth
It Is wisdom and that high,
For men to use their fortune reverently,
Even in youth.
An Ode.
HEllen, did Homer never see
Thy beauties, yet could write of thee?
Did Sappho on her seven-tongu'd Lute,
So speak (as yet it is not mute)
Of Phaos form? or does the Boy
In whom Anacreon once did joy,
Lie drawn to life, in his soft Verse,
As he whom Maro did rehearse?
Was Lesbia sung by learned Catullus?
Or Delia's Graces, by Tibullus?
Does Cynthia, in Propertius song
Shine more, then she the Stars among?
Is Horace his each love so high
Raped from the Earth, as not to die?
With bright Lycoris, Gallus choice,
Whose fame has an eternal voice.
Or has Corynna, by the name
Her Ovid gave her, dimn'd the fame
Of Caesar's Daughter, and the line
Which all the world then styled devine?
Has Petrarch since his Laura raised
Equal with her? or Ronsart praised
His new Cassandra, 'bove the old,
Which all the Fate of Troy foretold?
Has our great Sydney, Stella set,
Where never Star shone brighter yet?
Or Constables Ambrosiack Muse,
Made Dian, not his notes refuse?
Have all these done (and yet I miss
The Swan that so relished Pancharis)
And shall not I my Celia bring,
Where men may see whom I do sing,
Though I, in working of my song
Come short of all this learned throng,
Yet sure my tunes will be the best,
So much my Subject drownes the rest.
A Sonnet. To the noble Lady, the Lady MARY WORTH.
I That have been a lover, and could show it,
Though not in these, in rithmes not wholly dumb,
Since I exscribe your Sonnets, am become
A better lover, and much better Poet.
Nor is my Muse, or I ashamed to owe it.
To those true numerous Graces; whereof some,
But charm the Senses, others overcome
Both brains and hearts; and mine now best do know it:
For in your verse all Cupids Armorie,
His flames, his shafts, his Quiver, and his Bow,
His very eyes are yours to overthrow.
But then his Mothers sweets you so apply,
Her joys, her smiles, her loves, as readers take
For Venus Ceston, every line you make.
A Fit of Rhyme against Rhyme.
Rhyme the rack of finest wits,
That expresses but by fits,
True Conceit
Spoiling Senses of their Treasure,
Cosening Judgment with a measure,
But false weight.
Wresting words, from their true calling;
Propping Verse, for fear of falling
To the ground.
Joynting Syllabes, drowning Letters,
Fastening Vowells, as with fetters
They were bound!
Soon as lazy thou were known,
All good Poetry hence was flowne,
And are banished.
For a thousand years together,
All Pernassus Green did wither,
And wit vanished.
Pegasus did fly away,
At the Wells no Muse did stay,
But bewailed.
So to see the Fountain dry,
And Apollo's Music die,
All light failed!
Starveling rimes did fill the Stage,
Not a Poet in an Age,
Worth crowning.
Not a work deserving Baies,
Nor a line deserving praise,
Pallas frowning;
Greek was free from Rimes infection,
Happy Greek by this protection!
Was not spoiled.
Whilst the Latin, Queen of Tongues,
Is not yet free from Rimes wrongs,
But rests foiled.
Scarce the hill again does flourish,
Scarce the world a Wit does nourish,
To restore,
Phoebus to his Crown again;
And the Muses to their brain;
As before.
Vulgar Languages that want
Words, and sweetness, and be scant
Of true measure,
Tyran Rhyme has so abused,
That they long since have refused,
Other ceasure;
He that first invented thee,
May his joints tormented be,
Cramped forever;
Still may Syllabes jarre with time,
Still may reason war with rhyme,
Resting never.
May his Sense when it would meet,
The cold tumor in his feet,
Grow unsounder.
And his Title be long fool,
That in rearing such a School,
Was the founder.
Presented upon a plate of Gold to his son Rob. E. of Salisbury, when he was
also Tresurer.
An Epigram On WILLAM Lord Burl: Lo: high Treasurer of England.
IF thou would know the virtues of Mankind
Read here in one, what thou in all can find,
And go no farther: let this Circle be
Thy Universe, though his Epitome
Cecill, the grave, the wise, the great, the good,
What is there more that can ennoble blood?
The Orphans Pillar, the true Subjects shield,
The poores full Storehouse, and just servants field.
The only faithful Watchman for the Realm,
That in all tempests, never quit the helm,
But stood unshaken in his Deeds, and Name,
And labored in the work; not with the fame:
That still was good for goodness sake, nor thought
Upon reward, till the reward him sought.
Whose Offices, and honors did surprise,
Rather than meet him: And, before his eyes
Closed to their peace, he saw his branches shoot,
And in the noblest Families took root
Of all the Land, who now at such a Rate,
Of divine blessing, would not serve a State?
For a poor Man.
An Epigram. To THOMAS Lo: ELSMERE, the last Term he sat Chancellor.
SO justest Lord, may all your Judgments be
Laws; and no change e're come to one decree:
So, may the King proclaim your Conscience is
Law, to his Law; and think your enemies his:
So, from all sickness, may you rise to health,
The Care, and wish still of the public wealth,
So may the gentler Muses, and good fame
Still fly about the Odor of your Name;
As with the safety, and honor of the Laws,
You favor Truth, and me, in this man's Cause.
For the same.
Another to him.
THe Judge his favor timely then extends,
When a good Cause is destitute of friends,
Without the pomp of Counsel; or more Aid,
Then to make falsehood blush, and fraud afraid:
When those good few, that her Defenders be,
Are there for Charity, and not for fee.
Such shall you hear to Day, and find great foes
Both armed with wealth, and slander to oppose,
Who thus long safe, would gain upon the times
A right by the prosperity of their Crimes;
Who, though their guilt, and perjurie they know,
Think, yea and boast, that they have done it so
As though the Court pursues them on the sent,
They will come of, and escape the Punishment,
When this appears, just Lord, to your sharp sight,
He does you wrong, that craves you to do right.
An Epigram to the Counselor that pleaded, and carried the Cause.
THat I hereafter, do not think the Bar,
The Seat made of a more then civil war;
Or the great Hall at Westminster, the field
Where mutual frauds are fought, and no side yield;
That henceforth, I believe nor books, nor men,
Who against the Law, weave Calumnies my --
But when I read or hear the names so rife
Of hirelings, wranglers, stitchers-to of strife,
Hook-handed Harpies, gowned Vultures, put
Upon the reverend Pleaders; do now shut
All mouths, that dare entitle them (from hence)
To the Wolves study, or Dogs eloquence;
Thou art my Cause: whose manners since I knew,
Have made me to conceive a Lawyer new.
So do thou study matter, men, and times,
Make it religion to grow rich by Crimes!
Dare not abuse thy wisdom, in the Laws,
Or skill to carry out an evil cause!
But first do vex, and search it! If not sound,
Thou prov'st the gentler ways, to cleanse the wound,
And make the Scarre fair; If that will not be,
Thou have the brave scorn, to put back the fee!
But in a business, that will bide the Touch,
What use, what strength of reason! and how much
Of Books, of Presidents, have thou at hand?
As if the general store thou did command
Of Argument, still drawing forth the best,
And not being borrowed by thee, but possessed.
So comm'st thou like a Chief into the Court
Armed at all pieces, as to keep a Fort
Against a multitude; and (with thy Style
So brightly brandished) wound'st, defend'st! the while
Thy Adversaries fall, as not a word
They had, but were a Reed unto thy Sword.
Then come thou off with Victory and Palm,
Thy Hearers Nectar, and thy Clients Balm,
The Courts just honor, and thy Judges love.
And (which does all Achievements get above)
Thy sincere practice, breeds not thee a fame
Alone, but all thy rank a reverend Name.
An Epigram. To the small Pox.
ENvious and foul Disease, could there not be
One beauty in an Age, and free from thee?
What did she worth thy spite? were there not store
Of those that set by their false faces more
Then this did by her true? she never sought
Quarrel with Nature, or in balance brought
Art her false servant; Nor, for Sir Hugh Plot,
Was drawn to practice other hue, then that
Her own blood gave her: She never had, nor has
Any belief, in Madam Baud-bees bath,
Or Turners oil of Talck. Nor ever got
Spanish receipt, to make her teeth to rot.
What was the cause then? Thought thou in disgrace
Of Beauty, so to nullify a face,
That heaven should make no more; or should amiss,
Make all hereafter, had thou ruined this.
I, that thy Aim was; but her fate prevailed:
And scorned, thou'ast shown thy malice, but have failed.
An Epitaph.
WHat Beauty would have lovely stilde,
What manners pretty, Nature mild,
What wonder perfect, all were filled,
Upon record in this blessed child.
And, till the coming of the Soul
To fetch the flesh, we keep the Roll.
A Song.
LOVER. C^^e, let us here enjoy the shade,
For love; in shadow best is made.
Though Envy often his shadow be,
None brooks the Sun-light worse then he.

MISTRES. Where love does shine, there needs no Sun,
All lights into his one does run;
Without which all the world were dark;
Yet he himself is but a spark.

ARBITER. A Spark to set whole world a-fire,
Who more they burn, they more desire,
And have their being, their waste to see;
And waste still, that they still might be.

CHORUS. Such are his powers, whom time has styled,
Now swift, now slow, now tame, now wild;
Now hot, now cold, now fierce, now mild,
The eldest God, yet still a Child.

An Epistle to a friend.
SIr, I am thankful, first, to heaven, for you;
Next to your self, for making your love true:
Then to your love, and gift. And all is but due.
You have unto my Store added a book,
On which with profit, I shall never look,
But must confess from whom what gift I took.
Not like your Countrie-neighbours, that commit
Their vice of loving for a Christmasse fit;
Which is indeed but friendship of the spit:
But, as a friend, which name your self receave,
And which you (being the worthier) gave me leave
In letters, that mix spirits, thus to weave.
Which, how most sacred I will ever keep,
So may the fruitful Vine my temples steep,
And Fame wake for me, when I yield to sleep.
Though you sometimes proclaim me too fevere,
Rigid, and harsh, which is a Drug austere
In friendship, I confess: But dear friend, hear.
Little know they, that profess Amity,
And seek to scant her comely liberty,
How much they lame her in her property.
And less they know, who being free to use
That friendship which no chance but love did choose,
Will unto License that fair leave abuse.
It is an Act of tyranny, not love
In practiced friendship wholly to reprove,
As flattery with friends humors still to move.
From each of which I labor to be free,
Yet if with eithers vice I teynted be,
Forgive it, as my frailty, and not me.
For no man lives so out of passions sway,
But shall sometimes be tempted to obey
Her fury, yet no friendship to betray.
An Elegy.
It Is true, I Am broke! Vows, Oaths, and all I had
Of Credit lost. And I am now run mad:
Or do upon my self some desperate ill;
This sadness makes no approaches, but to kill.
It is a Darkness has blockt up my sense,
And drives it in to eat on my offense,
Or there to sterve it, help O you that may
Alone lend succors, and this fury stay,
Offended Mistress, you are yet so fair,
As light breaks from you, that affrights despair,
And fills my powers with persuading joy,
That you should be too noble to destroy.
There may some face or menace of a storm
Look forth, but cannot last in such form.
If there be nothing worthy you can see
Of Graces, or your mercy here in me
Spare your own goodness yet; and be not great
In will and power, only to defeat.
God, and the good, know to forgive, and save.
The ignorant, and fools, no pity have.
I will not stand to justify my fault,
Or lay the excuse upon the Vintners vault;
Or in confessing of the Crime be nice,
Or go about to countenance the vice,
By naming in what company 'twas in,
As I would urge Authority for sin.
No, I will stand arraigned, and cast, to be
The Subject of your Grace in pardoning me,
And (Styled your mercies Creature) will live more
Your honor now, then your disgrace before,
Think it was frailty, Mistress, think me man,
Think that your self like heaven forgive me can,
Where weakness does offend, and virtue grieve,
There greatness takes a glory to relieve.
Think that I once was yours, or may be now,
Nothing is vile, that is a part of you:
Error and folly in me may have crossed
Your just commands; yet those, not I be lost.
I am regenerate now, become the child
Of your compassion; Parents should be mild:
There is no Father that for one demerit,
Or two, or three, a Son will dis-inherit,
That is the last of punishments is meant;
No man inflicts that pain, till hope be spent:
An ill-affected limb (what e're it aile)
We cut not off, till all Cures else do fail:
And then with pause; for severed once, that is gone,
Would live his glory that could keep it on:
Do not despair my mending; to distrust
Before you prove a medicine, is unjust,
You may so place me, and in such an air
As not alone the Cure, but scarre be fair.
That is, if still your Favors you apply,
And not the bounties you have done, deny.
Could you demand the gifts you gave, again!
Why was it? did e're the Clouds ask back their rain?
The Sun his heat, and light, the air his dew?
Or winds the Spirit, by which the flower so grew?
That were to wither all, and make a Grave
Of that wise Nature would a Cradle have?
Her order is to cherish, and preserve,
Consumptions nature to destroy, and sterve.
But to exact again what once is given,
Is natures mere obliquitie! as Heaven
Should ask the blood, and spirits he has infused
In man, because man has the flesh abused.
O may your wisdom take example hence,
God lightens not at man's each frail offense,
He pardons, slips, goes by a world of ills,
And then his thunder frights more, then it kills.
He cannot angry be, but all must quake,
It shakes even him, that all things else does shake.
And how more fair, and lovely looks the world
In a calm sky; then when the heaven is horl'd
About in Clouds, and wrapped in raging weather,
As all with storm and tempest ran together.
O imitate that sweet Serenitie
That makes us live, not that which calls to die
In dark, and sullen mornes; do we not say
This looks like an Execution day?
And with the vulgar does it not obtain
The name of Cruel weather, storm, and rain?
Be not affected with these marks too much
Of cruelty, lest they do make you such.
But view the mildness of your Makers state,
As I the penitents here emulate:
He when he sees a sorrow such as this,
Straight puts off all his Anger, and does kiss
The contrite Soul, who has no thought to win
Upon the hope to have another sin
Forgiven him; And in that line stand I
Rather then once displease you more, to die
To suffer tortures, scorn, and Infamy,
What Fools, and all their Parasites can apply;
The wit of Ale, and Genius of the Malt
Can pumpe for; or a Libell without salt
Produce; though threatening with a coal, or chalk
On every wall, and sung where e're I walk.
I number these as being of the Chore
Of Contumely, and urge a good man more
Then sword, or fire, or what is of the race
To carry noble danger in the face:
There is not any punishment, or pain,
A man should fly from, as he would disdain.
Then Masters here, here let your rigor end,
And let your mercy make me ashamed to offend.
I will no more abuse my vows to you,
Then I will study falsehood, to be true.
O, that you could but by dissection see
How much you are the better part of me;
How all my Fibers by your Spirit do move,
And that there is no life in me, but love.
You would be then most confident, that tho
Public affairs command me now to go
Out of your eyes, and be awhile away;
Absence, or Distance, shall not breed decay.
Your form shines here, here fixed in my heart
I may dilate my self, but not depart.
Others by common Stars their courses run,
When I see you, then I do see my Sun,
Till then it is all but darkness, that I have,
Rather then want your light, I wish a grave.
An Elegy.
TO make the Doubt clear that no Woman's true,
Was it my fate to prove it full in you.
Thought I but one had breathed the purer Air,
And must she needs be false, because she is fair?
It is your beauties Mark, or of your youth,
Or your perfection not to study truth;
Or think you heaven is deaf? or has no eyes?
Or those it has, wink at your perjuries;
Are vows so cheap with women? or the matter
Whereof they are made, that they are writ in water;
And blown away with wind? or does their breath
Both hot and cold at once, threat life and death?
Who could have thought so many accents sweet
Tuned to our words, so many sighs should meet
Blown from our hearts, so many oaths and tears
Sprinkled among? All sweeter by our fears,
And the Devine Impression of stolen kisses,
That sealed the rest, could now prove empty blisses?
Did you draw bonds to forfeit? Sign, to break,
Or must we read you quite from what you speak,
And find the truth out the wrong way? or must
He first desire you false, would wish you just?
O, I profane! though most of women be,
The common Monster, Love shall except thee
My dearest Love, how ever jealousy,
With Circumstance might urge the contrary.
Sooner I Will think the Sun would cease to cheer
The teeming Earth, and that forget to bear;
Sooner that Rivers would run back, or Thames
With ribs of Ice in June would bind his streams:
Or Nature, by whose strength the world indures,
Would change her course, before you alter yours:
But, O, that treacherous breast to whom, weak you
Did trust our counsels, and we both may rue,
Having his falsehood found too late! 'twas he
That made me cast you Guilty, and you me.
Whilst he black wretch, betrayed each simple word
We spoke unto the coming of a third!
Cursed may he be that so our love has slain,
And wander wretched on the earth, as Cain.
Wretched as he, and not deserve least pity
In plaguing him let misery be witty.
Let all eyes shun him, and he shun each eye,
Till he be noisome as his infamy;
May be without remorse deny God thrice,
And not be trusted more on his souls price;
And after all selfe-torment, when he dies
May Wolves tear out his heart, Vultures his eyes,
Swyne eat his Bowels, and his falser Tongue,
That uttered all, be to some Raven flung,
And let his carrion corse be a longer feast
To the Kings Dogs, then any other beast.
Now I have cursed, let us our love receive;
In me the flame was never more alive.
I could begin again to court and praise,
And in that pleasure lengthen the short days
Of my life's lease; like Painters that do take
Delight, not in made works, but whilst they make
I could renew those times, when first I saw
Love in your eyes, that gave my tongue the Law
To like what you liked, and at Masks, or Plays,
Commend the selfsame Actors, the same ways
Ask how you did? and often with intent
Of being officious, grow impertinent;
All which were such lost pastimes, as in these
Love was as subtly caught as a Disease.
But, being got, it is a treasure, sweet,
Which to defend, is harder then to get;
And ought not be profaned on either part,
For though it is got by chance, it is kept by art.
An Elegy.
THat Love's a bitter sweet, I never conceive
Till the sower Minute comes of taking leave,
And then I taste it. But as men drink up
In have the bottom of a med'cin'd Cup,
And take some sirrup after; so do I
To put all relish from my memory
Of parting, drown it in the hope to meet
Shortly again: and make our absence sweet.
This makes me Mrs. that sometime by stealth
Under another Name, I take your health;
And turn the Ceremonies of those Nights
I give, or owe my friends, into your Rites,
But ever without blazon, or least shade
Of vows so sacred, and in silence made;
For though Love thrive, and may grow up with cheer,
And free society, he is borne elsewhere,
And must be bred, so to conceal his birth,
As neither wine do rack it out, or mirth.
Yet should the Lover still be ayrie and light
In all his Actions ratified to spright
Not like a Midas shut up in himself,
And turning all he touches into pelf,
Keep in reserved in his Dark lantern face,
As if that ex'lent Dullness were Loves grace;
No Masters no, the open merry Man
Moves like a sprightly River, and yet can
Keep secret in his Channels what he breeds
'Bove all your standing waters, choked with weeds.
They look at best like Creame-bowles, and you soon
Shall find their depth: they are sounded with a spoone.
They may say Grace, and for Loves Chaplains pass;
But the grave Lover ever was an Ass;
Is fixed upon one leg, and dares not come
Out with the other, for he is still at home;
Like the dull wearied Crane that (come on land)
Does while he keeps his watch, betray his stand.
Where he that knows will like a Lapwing fly
Far from the Nest, and so himself belie.
To others as he will deserve the Trust
Due to that one, that does believe him just.
And such your Servant is, who vows to keep
The Jewel of your name, as close as sleep
Can lock the Sense up, or the heart a thought,
And never be by time, or folly brought,
Weakness of brain, or any charm of Wine,
The sin of Boast, or other countermine
(Made to blow up loves secrets) to discover
That Article, may nor become our lover:
Which in assurance to your breast I tell,
If I had writ no word, but Dear, farewell.
An Elegy.
SInce you must go, and I must bid farewell,
Hear Masters, your departing servant tell
What it is like: And do not think they can
Be idle words, though of a parting Man;
It is as if a night should shade noonday,
Or that the Sun was here, but forced away;
And we were left under that Hemisphere,
Where we must feel it Dark for half a year.
What fate is this to change men's days and hours,
To shift their seasons, and destroy their powers!
Alas I have lost my heat, my blood, my prime,
Winter is come a Quarter e're his Time,
My health will leave me; and when you depart,
How shall I do sweet Mistress for my heart?
You would restore it? No, that is worth a fear,
As if it were not worthy to be there:
O, keep it still; for it had rather be
Your sacrifice, then here remain with me.
And so I spare it, Come what can become
Of me, I Will softly tread unto my Tomb;
Or like a Ghost walk silent amongst men,
Till I may See both it and you again.
An Elegy.
LEt me be what I am, as Virgil cold
As Horace fat; or as Anacreon old;
No Poets verses yet did ever move,
Whose Readers did not think he was in love.
Who shall forbid me then in Rithme to be
As light, and Active as the youngest he
That from the Muses fountains does indorse
His lines, and hourly sits the Poets horse
Put on my Ivy Garland, let me see
Who frowns, who jealous is, who taxes me.
Fathers, and Husbands, I do claim a right
In all that is called lovely: take my sight
Sooner then my affection from the fair.
No face, no hand, proportion, line, or Air
Of beauty; but the Muse has interest in:
There is not worn that lace, purle, knot or pin,
But is the Poets matter: And he must
When he is furious love, although not lust.
But then content, your Daughters and your Wives,
(If they be fair and worth it) have their lives
Made longer by our praises. Or, if not
Wish, you had foul ones, and deformed got;
Cursed in their Cradles, or there changed by Elves,
So to be sure you do enjoy your selves.
Yet keep those up in sackcloth too, or lether,
For Silk will draw some sneaking Songster thither.
It is a ryming Age, and Verses swarm
At every stall; The City Cap's a charm.
But I who live, and have lived twenty year
Where I may handle Silk, as free, and near,
As any Mercer; or the whale-bone man
That quilts those bodies, I have leave to span:
Have eaten with the Beauties, and the wits,
And braveries of Court, and felt their fits
Of love, and hate: and came so nigh to know
Whether their faces were their own, or no.
It is not likely I should now look down
Upon a Velvet Petticote, or a Gown,
Whose like I have known the Tailors Wife put on
To do her Husbands rites in, e're'twere gone
Home to the Customer: his Letcherie
Being, the best clothes still to praeoccupie.
Put a Coach-mare in Tissue, must I horse
Her presently? Or leap thy Wife of force.
When by thy sordid bounty she has on,
A Gown of that, was the Caparison?
So I might dote upon thy Chaires; and Stools
That are like clothed, must I be of those fools
Of race accounted, that no passion have
But when thy Wife (as thou conceiv'st) is brave?
Then open thy wardrobe, think me that poor Groom
that from the Footman, when he was become
An Officer there, did make most solemn love,
To every Petticote he brushed, and Glove
He did lay up, and would adore the shoe,
Or slipper was left off, and kiss it too,
Court every hanging Gown, and after that,
Lift up some one, and do, I tell not what.
Thou did tell me; and were o're-joy'd to peep
In at a hole, and see these Actions creep
From the poor wretch, which though he played in prose,
He would have done in verse, with any of those
Wrung on the Withers, by Lord Loves despite,
Had he had the faculty to read, and write!
Such Songsters there are store of; witness he
That chanced the lace, laid on a Smock, to see
And straightway spent a Sonnet; with that other
That (in pure Madrigall) unto his Mother
Commended the French-hood, and Scarlet gown
The Lady Mayresse passed in through the Town,
Unto the Spittle Sermon. O, what strange
Variety of Silks were on The Exchange!
Or in Moore-fields! this other night, sings one,
Another answers, 'Lasse those Silks are none
In smiling L'envoye, as he would deride
Any Comparison had with his Cheap Side.
And vouches both the Pageant, and the Day,
When not the Shops, but windows do display
The Stuffes, the Velvets, Plushes, Fringes, Lace,
And all the original riots of the place:
Let the poor fools enjoy their follies, love
A Goat in Velvet; or some block could move
Under that cover; an old Mid-wives hat!
Or a Close-stoole so cased; or any fat
Bawd, in a Velvet scabberd! I envy
None of their pleasures! nor will ask thee, why
Thou art jealous of thy Wifes, or Daughters Case:
More then of eithers manners, wit, or face!
An Execration upon Vulcan.
ANd why to me this, thou lame Lord of fire,
What had I done that might call on thine ire?
Or urge thy Greedy flame, thus to devour
So many my Yeares-labours in an hour?
I never attempted Vulcan against thy life;
Nor made least line of love to thy loose Wife;
Or in remembrance of thy afront, and scorn
With Clownes, and Tradesmen, kept thee closed in horn.
'Twas Jupiter that hurled thee headlong down,
And Mars, that gave thee a Lantern for a Crown?
Was it because thou were of old denied
By Jove to have Minerva for thy Bride.
That since thou take all envious care and pain,
To ruin any issue of the brain?
Had I wrote treason there, or heresy,
Imposture, witchcraft, charms, or blasphemy?
I had deserved then, thy consuming looks,
Perhaps, to have been burned with my books.
But, on thy malice, tell me, did thou spy
Any, least loose, or surrile paper, lie
Concealed, or kept there, that was fit to be,
By thy own vote, a sacrifice to thee?
Did I there wound the honors of the Crown?
Or tax the Glories of the Church, and Gown?
Itch to defame the State? or brand the Times?
And my self most, in some selfe-boasting Rimes?
If none of these, then why this fire? Or find
A cause before; or leave me one behind.
Had I compiled from Amadis de Gaul,
The Esplandians, Arthur's, Palmerins, and all
The learned Library of Don Quixote;
And so some goodlier monster had begot,
Or spun out Riddles, and weaved fittie tomes
Of Logogriphes, and curious Palindromes,
Or pomp'd for those hard trifles Anagrams,
Or Eteostichs, or those finer flammes
Of Eggs, and Halberds, Cradles, and a Hearse,
A pair of Scisars, and a Comb in verse;
Acrostichs, and Telestichs, on jumpe names,
Thou then had had some color for thy flames,
On such my serious follies; But, thou wilt say,
There were some pieces of as base allay,
And as false stamp there; parcels of a Play,
Fitter to see the fire-light, then the day;
Adulterate moneys, such as might not go:
Thou should have stayed, till public fame said so.
She is the Judge, Thou Executioner,
Or if thou needs would trench upon her power,
Thou might have yet enjoyed thy cruelty
With some more thrift, and more variety:
Thou might have had me perish, piece, by piece,
To light Tobacco, or save roasted Geese.
Sindge Capons, or poor Pigges, dropping their eyes;
Condemned me to the Ovens with the pies;
And so, have kept me dying a whole age,
Not ravished all hence in a minutes rage.
But that is a mark, whereof thy Rites do boast,
To make consumption, ever where thou go;
Had I fore-knowne of this thy least desire
TO have held a Triumph, or a feast of fire,
Especially in paper; that, that steame
Had tickled your large Nosthrill: many a Reame
To redeem mine, I had sent in enough,
Thou should have cried, and all been proper stuff.
The Talmud, and the Alcoran had come,
With pieces of the Legend; The whole sum
Of errant Knighthood, with the Dames, and Dwarfes;
The charmed Boats, and the enchanted Wharfes,
The Tristram's, Lanc'lots, Turpins, and the Peer's,
All the mad Rolands, and sweet Oliveer's;
To Merlins Marvailes, and his Caballs loss,
With the Chimaera of the Rosie-Crosse,
Their Seals, their Characters, Hermetique rings,
Their Jemme of Riches, and bright Stone, that brings
Invisibilitie, and strength, and tongues:
The art of kindling the true Coal, by lungs
With Nicholas Pasquill's, Meddle with your match,
And the strong lines, that so the time do catch,
Or Captain Pamplets horse, and foot; that sallie
Upon the Exchange, still out of Popes-head-Alley.
The weekly Corrants, with Paul's Seal; and all
Th'admir'd discourses of the Prophet Ball:
These, had thou pleased either to dine, or sup,
Had made a meal for Vulcan to lick up.
But in my Deske, what was there to accite
So ravenous, and vast an appetite?
I dare not say a body, but some parts
There were of search, and mastry in the Arts.
All the old Venusine, in Poetry,
and lighted by the Stagerite, could spy,
Was there mad English: with the Grammar too,
To teach some that, their Nurses could do.
The purity of Language; and among
The rest, my journey into Scotland song,
With all th'adventures; Three books not afraid
To speak the fate of the Sicilian Maid
To our own Ladies; and in story there
Of our fifth Henry, eight of his nine year;
Wherein was oil, beside the succor spent,
Which noble Carew, Cotton, Seldom lent:
And twice-twelve-yeares stored up humanity,
With humble Gleanings in Divinity;
After the Fathers, and those wiser Guides
Whom Faction had not drawn to study sides.
How in these ruins Vulcan, thou do lurk,
All soote, and embers! odious, as thy work!
I now begin to doubt, if ever Grace,
Or Goddess, could be patient of thy face.
Thou woo Minerva! or to wit aspire!
'Cause thou can halt, with us in Arts, and Fire!
Son of the Wind! for so thy mother gone
With lust conceived thee; Father thou had none
When thou were borne, and that thou look at best,
She durst not kiss, but flung thee from her breast.
And so did Jove, who never meant thee his Cup:
No mar'le the Clownes of Lemnos took thee up.
For none but Smiths would have made thee a God.
Some Alchimist there may be yet, or odd
Squire of the Squibs, against the Pageant day,
May to thy name a Vulcanale say;
And for it lose his eyes with Gunpowder,
As the other may his brains with Quicksilver.
Welfare the Wiseman yet, on the Banckside,
My friends, the Watermen! They could provide
Against thy fury, when to serve their needs,
They made a Vulcan of a sheafe of Reeds,
Whom they durst handle in their holy day coats,
And safely trust to dress, not burn their Boats.
But, O those Reeds! thy mere disdain of them,
Made thee beget that cruel Stratagem,
(Which, some are pleased to style but thy mad pranck)
Against the Globe, the Glory of the Bank.
Which, though it were the Fort of the whole Parish,
Flanck'd with a Ditch, and forced out of a Marish,
I saw with two poor Chambers taken in
And razed; e're thought could urge, this might have been!
See the worlds Ruins! nothing but the piles
Left! and wit since to cover it with Tiles.
The Brethren, they straight noised it out for News,
'Twas verily some Relic of the Stews.
And this a Sparkle of that fire let loose
That was locked up in the Winchestrian Goose
Bred on the Banck, in time of Popery,
When Venus there maintained in Mystery.
But, others fell, with that conceit by the ears,
And cried, it was a threatening to the bears;
And that accursed ground, the Parish-Garden:
Nay, sighed, ah Sister 'twas the Nun, Kate Arden
Kindled the fire! But, then did one return,
No Fool would his own harvest spoil, or burn!
If that were so, thou rather would advance
The place, that was thy Wives inheritance.
O no, cried all. Fortune, for being a whore,
Escaped not his Justice any jot the more:
He burnt that Idol of the Revels too:
Nay, let White Hall with Revels have to do,
Though but in daunces, it shall know his power;
There was a Judgment shown too in an hour.
He is true Vulcan still! He did not spare
Troy, though it were so much his Venus care.
Fool, will thou let that in example come?
Did not she save from thence, to build a Rome?
And what have thou done in these petty spights,
More then advanced the houses, and their rites?
I will not argue thee, from those of guilt,
For they were burnt, but to be better built.
It Is true, that in thy wish they were destroyed,
Which thou have only vented, not enjoyed.
So would they have run upon the Rolls by stealth,
And did invade part of the Commonwealth,
In those Records, which were all Chronicles gone,
Will be remembered by Six Clerks, to one.
But, say all fix, Good Men, what answer ye?
Lies there no Writ, out of the Chancerie
Against this Vulcan? No Injunction?
No order? no Decree? Though we be gone
At Common Law: Me thinks in his despite
A Court of Equity should do us right.
But to confine him to the Brew-houses,
The Glasse-house, Dye-fats, and their Fornaces;
To live in Sea-coale, and go forth in smoke;
Or lest that vapor might the City choke,
Condemn him to the Brick-kills, or some Hill-foot
(out in Sussex) to an iron Mill;
Or in small Fagots have him blaze about
Vile Tavernes, and the Drunkards piss him out;
Or in the Bell-Mans Lantern like a spy,
Burn to a snuff, and then stink out, and die:
I could invent a sentence, yet were worse;
But I Will conclude all in a civil curse.
Pox on your flameship, Vulcan; if it be
To all as fatal as't has been to me,
And to Pauls-Steeple; which was unto us
'Bove all your Fire-workes, had at Ephesus,
Or Alexandria; and though a Divine
Loss, remains yet, as unrepair'd as mine.
Would you had kept your Forge at Aetna still,
And there made Swords, Bills, Glaves, and Arms your fill.
Maintained the trade at Bilbo; or elsewhere;
Struck in at Millan with the Cutlers there;
Or stayed but where the Friar, and you first met,
Who from the Divels-Arse did Guns beget,
Or fixed in the Low-Countrey's, where you might
On both sides do your mischiefs with delight;
Blow up, and ruin, mine, and countermyne,
Make your Petards, and Granats, all your fine
Engines of Murder, and receive the praise
Of massacring Mankind so many ways.
We ask your absence here, we all love peace,
And pray the fruits thereof, and the increase;
So does the King, and most of the Kings men
That have good places: therefore once again,
Pox on thee Vulcan, thy Pandora's pox,
And all the Evils that flew out of her box
Light on thee: Or if those plagues will not do,
Thy Wives pox on thee, and B.Bs. too.
A speech according to Horace.
WHy yet my noble hearts they cannot say,
But we have Powder still for the Kings Day,
And Ord'nance too: so much as from the Tower
To Have waked, if sleeping, Spaines Ambassador
Old Aesope Gundomar: the French can tell,
For they did see it the last tilting well,
That we have Trumpets, Armor, and great Horse,
Lances, and men, and some a breaking force.
They saw too store of feathers, and more may,
If they stay here, but till Saint Georges Day.
All Ensigns of a War, are not yet dead,
Nor marks of wealth so from our Nation fled,
But they may see Gold-Chaines, and Pearl worn then,
Lent by the London Dames, to the Lords men;
Withal, the dirtie pains those Citizens take,
To see the Pride at Court, their Wives do make:
And the return those thankful Courtiers yield
To have their Husbands drawn forth to the field,
And coming home, to tell what acts were done
Under the Auspice of young Swynnerton.
What a strong Fort old Pimblicoe had been!
How it held out! how (last) 'twas taken in!
Well, I say thrive, thrive brave Artillery yard,
Thou Seed-plot of the war, that have not spared
Powder, or paper, to bring up the youth
Of London, in the Military truth,
These ten years day; As all may swear that look
But on thy practice, and the Posture book:
He that but saw thy curious Captains drill,
Would think no more of Vlushing, or the Brill:
But give them over to the common ear
For that unnecessarie Charge they were
Well did thy crafty Clerk, and Knight, Sir Hugh
Supplant bold Panton; and brought there to view
Translated Aelian tactickes to be read,
And the Greek Discipline (with the modern) shed
So, in that ground, as soon it grew to be
The Cittie-Question, whether Tilly, or he,
Were now the greater Captain? for they saw
The Berghen siege, and taking in Breda,
So acted to the life, as Maurice might,
And Spinola have blushed at the sight.
O happy Art! and wise Epitome
Of bearing Arms! most civil Soldierie!
Thou can draw forth thy forces, and fight dry
The Battles of thy Aldermanitie;
Without the hazard of a drop of blood:
More then the surfets, in thee, that day stood.
Go on, increast in virtue; and in fame:
And keep the Glory of the English name,
Up among Nations. In the stead of bold
Beauchamps, and Nevills, Cliffords, Audley's old;
Insert thy Hodges, and those newer men. Waller.

As Styles, Dike, Ditchfield, Millar, Crips, and Fen:
That keep the war, though now't be grown more tame
Alive yet, in the noise; and still the same
And could (if our great men would let their Sons
Come to their Schools,) show'hem the use of Guns.
And there instruct the noble English heirs
In Politic, and Militar Affairs;
But he that should persuade, to have this done
For education of our Lordings; Soon
Should he hear of billow, wind, and storm,
From the Tempestuous Grandlings, who will inform
Us, in our bearing, that are thus, and thus,
Borne, bred, allied? what is he dare tutor us?
Are we by Booke-wormes to be awde? must we
Live by their Scale, that dare do nothing free?
Why are we rich, or great, except to show
All license in our lives? What need we know?
More then to praise a Dog? or Horse? or speak
The Hawking language? or our Day to break
With Citizens? let Clownes; and Tradesmen breed
Their Sons to study Arts, the Laws, the Creed:
We will believe like men of our own Rank,
In so much land a year, or such a Bank,
That turns us so much moneys, at which rate
Our Ancestors imposed on Prince and State.
Let poor Nobility be virtuous: We,
Descended in a rope of Titles, be
From Guy, or Bevis, Arthur, or from whom
The Herald will. Our blood is now become,
Past any need of virtue. Let them care,
That in the Cradle of their Gentry are;
To serve the State by Councels, and by Arms:
We neither love the Troubles, nor the harms.
What love you then? your whore? what study? gate,
Carriage, and dressing. There is up of late?
The Academie, where the Gallants meet --
What to make legs? yes, and to smell most sweet,
All that they do at Plays. O, but first here
They learn and study; and then practice there.
But why are all these Irons in the fire
Of several makings? helps, helps, t'attire
His Lordship. That is for his Band, his hair
This, and that box his Beauty to repair;
This other for his eyebrows; hence, away,
I may no longer on these pictures stay,
These Carcasses of honor; Tailors blocks,
Covered with Tissue, whose prosperity mocks
The fate of things: whilst tottered virtue holds
Her broken Arms up, to their empty moulds.
An Epistle to Master Arth: Squib.
WHat I am not, and what I feign would be,
Whilst I inform my self, I would teach thee,
My gentle Arthur; that it might be said
One lesson we have both learned, and well read;
I neither am, nor art thou one of those
That hearkens to a Jacks-pulse, when it goes.
Nor ever trusted to that friendship yet
Was issue of the Tavern, or the Spit:
Much less a name would we bring up, or nurse,
That could but claim a kindred from the purse.
Those are poor Ties, depend on those false ends,
It Is virtue alone, or nothing that knits friends:
And as within your Office, you do take
No piece of money, but you know, or make
Inquiry of the worth: So must we do,
First weigh a friend, then touch, and try him too:
For there are many slips, and Counterfeits.
Deceit is fruitful. Men have Masks and nets,
But these with wearing will themselves unfold:
They cannot last. No lie grew ever old.
Turn him, and see his Threads: look, if he be
Friend to himself, that would be friend to thee.
For that is first required, A man be his own.
But he that is too-much that, is friend of none.
Then rest, and a friends value understand
It is a richer Purchase then of land.
An Epigram on Sir Edward Coke, when he was Lord chief Justice of England.
HE that should search all Glories of the Gown,
And steps of all raised servants of the Crown
He could not find, then thee of all that store
Whom Fortune aided less, or virtue more,
Such, Coke, were thy beginnings, when thy good
In others evil best was understood:
When, being the Strangers help, the poor man aid,
Thy just defenses made the oppressor afraid.
Such was thy Process, when Integrity,
And skill in thee, now, grew Authority;
That Clients strove, in Question of the Laws,
More for thy Patronage, then for their Cause,
And that thy strong and manly Eloquence
Stood up thy Nations fame, her Crowns defense,
And now such is thy stand; while thou do deal
Desired Justice to the public Weal
Like Solons self; explat'st the knottie Laws
With endless labors, whilst thy learning draws
No less of praise, then readers in all kinds
Of worthiest knowledge, that can take men's minds.
Such is thy All; that (as I sung before)
None Fortune aided less, or Virtue more.
Or if Chance must, to each man that does rise
Needs lend an aid, to thine she had her eyes.
An Epistle answering to one that asked to be Sealed of the Tribe of BEN.
MEn that are safe, and sure, in all they do,
Care not what trials they are put unto;
They meet the fire, the Test, as Martyrs would;
And though Opinion stamp them, not are gold,
I could say more of such, but that I fly
To speak my self out too ambitiously,
And showing so weak an Act to vulgar eyes;
Put conscience and my right to comprimise.
Let those that merely talk, and never think,
That live in the wild Anarchie of Drink
Subject to quarrel only; or else such
As make it their proficiencie, how much
They'ave glutted in, and letcher'd out that week,
That never yet did friend, or friendship seek
But for a Sealing: let these men protest.
Or the other on their borders, that will jest
On all Souls that are absent; even the dead
Like flies, or worms, which man's corrupt parts fed:
That to speak well, think it above all sin,
Of any Company but that they are in,
Call every night to Supper in these fitts,
And are received for the Covey of Wits;
That censure all the Town, and all the affairs,
And know whose ignorance is more then theirs;
Let these men have their ways, and take their times
To vent their Libels, and to issue rimes,
I have no portion in them, nor their deal
Of news they get, to strew out the long meal,
I study other friendships, and more one,
Then these can ever be; or else wish none.
What is it to me whether the French Design
Be, or be not, to get the Val-telline?
Or the States Ships sent forth belike to meet
Some hopes of Spain in their West-Indian Fleet?
Whether the Dispensation yet be sent,
Or that the Match from Spain was ever meant?
I wish all well, and pray high heaven conspire
My Princes safety, and my Kings desire,
But if for honor, we must draw the Sword,
And force back that, which will not be restored,
I have a body, yet, that spirit draws
To live, or fall, a Carcass in the cause.
So far without inquiry what the States,
Brunsfield, and Mansfield do this year, my fates
Shall carry me at Call; and I Will be well,
Though I do neither hear these news, nor tell
Of Spain or France; or were not pricked down one
Of the late Mystery of reception,
Although my Fame, to his, not under-heares,
That guides the Motions, and directs the bears.
But that is a blow, by which in time I may
Lose all my credit with my Christmas Clay,
And animated Porc'lane of the Court,
I, and for this neglect, the courser sort
Of earthen Jarres, there may molest me too:
Well, with mine own frail Pitcher, what to do
I have decreed; keep it from waves, and press;
Lest it be justled, cracked made naught, or less:
Live to that point I will for which I am man,
And dwell as in my Center, as I can
Still looking too, and ever loving heaven;
With reverence using all the gifts then given.
Amongst which, if I have any friendships sent
Such as are square, wel-tagde, and permanent,
Not built with Canvasse, paper, and false lights
As are the Glorious Scenes, at the great sights;
And that there be no fev'ry heats, nor colds,
Oily Expansions, or shrunk durtie folds,
But all so clear, and led by reasons flame,
As but to stumble in her sight were shame.
These I will honor, love, embrace, and serve:
And free it from all question to preserve.
So short you read my Character, and theirs
I would call mine, to which not many Stairs
Are asked to climb. First give me faith, who know
My self a little. I will take you so,
As you have writ your self. Now stand, and then
Sir, you are Sealed of the Tribe of Ben.
The Dedication of the Kings new Cellar. To Bacchus.
SInce, Bacchus, thou art father
Of Wines, to thee the rather
We dedicate this Cellar,
Where new, thou art made Dweller;
And seal thee thy Commission:
But'tis with a condition,
That thou remain here taster
Of all to the great Master.
And look unto their faces,
Their Qualities, and races,
That both, their odor take him,
And relish merry make him.
For Bacchus thou art freer
Of cares, and over-seer,
Of feast, and merry meeting,
And still begin'st the greeting:
See then thou do attend him
Lyoeus, and defend him,
By all the Arts of Gladness
From any thought like sadness.
So may thou still be younger
Then Phoebus; and much stronger
To give mankind their eases,
And cure the Worlds diseases:
So may the Muses follow
Thee still, and leave Apollo
And think thy stream more quicker
Then Hippocrenes liquor:
And thou make many a Poet,
Before his brain do know it;
So may there never Quarrel
Have issue from the Barrel;
But Venus and the Graces
Pursue thee in all places,
And not a Song be other
Then Cupid, and his Mother.
That when King James, above here
Shall feast it, thou may love there
The causes and the Guests too,
And have thy tales and jests too,
Thy Circuits, and thy Rounds free
As shall the feasts fair grounds be.
Be it he hold Communion
In great Saint Georges Union;
Or gratulates the passage
Of some wel-wrought Embassage:
Whereby he may knit sure up
The wished Peace of Europe:
Or else a health advances,
To put his Court in dances,
And set us all on skipping,
When with his royal shipping
The narrow Seas are shadie,
And Charles brings home the Lady.
Accessit fervor Capiti, Numerusque Lucernis.
An Epigram on The Court Pucell.
Does the Court-Pucell then so censure me,
And thinks I dare not her? let the world see.
What though her Chamber be the very pit
Where fight the prime Cocks of the Game, for wit?
And that as any are struck, her breath creates
New in their stead, out of the Candidates?
What though with Tribade lust she force a Muse,
And in an Epicaene fury can write news
Equal with that, which for the best news goes
As aerie light, and as like wit as those?
What though she talk, and cannot once with them,
Make State, Religion, Bawdrie, all a theme.
And as lip-thirstie, in each words expense,
Does labor with the Phrase more then the sense?
What though she ride two mile on Holy Days
To Church, as others do to Feasts and Plays,
To show their Tires? to view, and to be viewed?
What though she be with Velvet gowns indu'd,
And spangled Petticotes brought forth to eye,
As new rewards of her old secrecy!
What though she has won on Trust, as many do,
And that her truster fears her? Must I too?
I never stood for any place: my wit
Thinks it self naught, though she should value it.
I am no Statesman, and much less Divine
For bawdry, it is her language, and not mine.
Farthest I am from the Idolatry
To stuffes and Laces, those my Man can buy.
And trust her I would least, that has forswore
In Contract twice, what can she perjure more?
Indeed, her Dressing some man might delight,
Here face there is none can like by Candle light.
Not he, that should the body have, for Case
To his poor Instrument, now out of grace.
Shall I advise thee Pucell? steal away
From Court, while yet thy fame has some small day;
The wits will leave you, if they once perceive
You cling to Lords, and Lords, if them you leave
For Sermoneeres: of which now one, now other,
They say you weekly invite with fits o'th'Mother,
And practice for a Miracle; take heed
This Age would lend no faith to Dorrels Deed;
Or if it would, the Court is the worst place,
Both for the Mothers, and the Babes of grace,
For there the wicked in the Chair of scorn,
Will cal't a Bastard, when a Prophet's borne.
An Epigram. To the honored -- Countess of --
THe Wisdom Madam of your private Life,
Where with this while you live a widowed wife,
And the right ways you take unto the right,
To conquer rumor, and triumph on spite;
Not only shunning by your act, to do
Ought that is ill, but the suspicion too,
Is of so brave example, as he were
No friend to virtue, could be silent here.
The rather when the vices of the Time
Are grown so fruitful, and false pleasures climb
By all oblique Degrees, that killing height
From whence they fall, cast down with their own weight.
And though all praise bring nothing to your name,
Who (herein studying conscience, and not fame)
Are in your self rewarded; yet't will be
A cheerful work to all good eyes, to see
Among the daily Ruins that fall foul,
Of State, of fame, of body, and of soul,
So great a Virtue stand upright to view,
As makes Penelopes old fable true,
Whilst your Ulisses has taken leave to go,
Countries, and Climes manners, and men to know.
Only your time you better entertain,
Then the great Homers wit, for her, could feign;
For you admit no company, but good,
And when you want those friends, or near in blood,
Or your Allies, you make your books your friends,
And study them unto the noblest ends,
Searching for knowledge, and to keep your mind
The same it was inspired, rich, and refined.
These Graces, when the rest of Ladies view
Not boasted in your life, but practiced true,
As they are hard, for them to make their own,
So are they profitable to be known:
For when they find so many meet in one,
It will be shame for them, if they have none.
Lord BACONS Birthday.
Hail happy Genius of this ancient pile!
How comes it all things so about the smile?
The fire, the wine, the men! and in the midst,
Thou stand'st as if some Mystery thou did!
Pardon, I read it in thy face, the day
For whose returns, and many, all these pray:
And so do I. This is the sixtieth year
Since Bacon, and thy Lord was borne, and here;
Son to the grave wise Keeper of the Seal,
Fame, and foundation of the English Weal.
What then his Father was, that since is he,
Now with a Title more to the Degree;
Englands high Chancellor: the destined heir
In his soft Cradle to his Fathers Chair,
Whose even Thread the Fates spinne round, and full,
Out of their Choysest, and their whitest wool.
It Is a brave cause of joy, let it be known,
For 't were a narrow gladness, kept thine own.
Give me a deep-crown'd-Bowle, that I may sing
In raising him the wisdom of my King.
A Poem sent me by Sir William Burlase. The Painter to the Poet.
TO paint thy Worth, if rightly I did know it,
And were but Painter half like thee, a Poet;
Ben, I would show it:
But in this skill, m'unskilfull pen will tire,
Thou, and thy worth, will still be found far higher;
And I a Lier.
Then, what a Painter's here? or what an eater
Of great attempts! when as his skil's no greater,
And he a Cheater?
Then what a Poet's here! whom, by Confession
Of all with me, to paint without Digression
There Is no Expression.
My Answer. The Poet to the Painter.
WHy? though I seem of a prodigious wast,
I am not so voluminous, and vast,
But there are lines, wherewith I might b'embrac'd.
It Is true, as my womb swells, so my back stoupes,
And the whole lump grows round, deformed, and droupes,
But yet the Tun at Heidelberg had houpes.
You were not tied, by any Painters Law
To square my Circle, I confess; but draw
My Superficies: that was all you saw.
Which if in compass of no Art it came
To be described by a Monogram,
With one great blot, yo'had formed me as I am.
But whilst you curious were to have it be
An Archetipe, for all the world to see,
You made it a brave piece, but not like me.
O, had I now your manner, maistry, might,
Your Power of handling, shadow, air, and spright,
How I would draw, and take hold and delight.
Put, you are he can paint; I can but write:
A Poet has no more but black and white,
Ne knows he flattering Colors, or false light.
Yet when of friendship I would draw the face
A lettered mind, and a large heart would place
To all posterity; I will write Burlase.
An Epigram. To, WILLIAM, Earl of Newcastle.
WHen first my Lord, I saw you back your horse,
Provoke his metal, and command his force
To all the uses of the field, and race,
Me thought I read the ancient Art of Thrace,
And saw a Centaure, past those tales of Greece,
So seemed your horse; and you both of a piece!
You showed like Perseus upon Pegasus;
Or Castor mounted on his Cyllarus*
Or what we hear our home-borne Legend tell,
Of bold Sir Bevis, and his Arundell:
Nay, so your Seat his beauties did endorse,
As I began to wish my self a horse:
And surely had I but your Stable seen
Before: I think my wish absolved had been.
For never saw I yet the Muses dwell,
Nor any of their household half so well.
So well! as when I saw the floor, and Room
I looked for Hercules to be the Groom:
And cried, away, with the Caesarian bread,
At these Immortal Mangers Virgil fed.
Epistle To Mr. ARTHUR SQUIB.
I Am to dine, Friend, where I must be weighed
For a just wager, and that wager paid
If I do lose it: And, without a Tale
A Merchants Wife is Regent of the Scale.
Who when she heard the match, concluded straight,
An ill commodity! 'T must make good weight.
So that upon the point, my corporal fear
Is, she will play Dame Justice, too severe;
And hold me to it close; to stand upright
Within the balance; and not want a mite;
But rather with advantage to be found
Full twenty stone; of which I lack two pound:
That Is six in silver; now within the Socket
Stinketh my credit, if into the Pocket
It do not come: One piece I have in store,
Lend me, dear Arthur, for a week five more,
And you shall make me good, in weight, and fashion,
And then to be returned; or protestation
To go out after -- till when take this letter
For your security. I can no better.
To Mr. JOHN BURGES.
WOuld God my Burges, I could think
Thoughts worthy of thy gift, this Ink,
Then would I promise here to give
Verse, that should thee, and me outlive.
But since the Wine has steeped my brain
I only can the Paper stain;
Yet with a Dye, that fears no Moth,
But Scarlet-like out-lasts the Cloth.
Epistle. To my Lady COVELL.
YOu won not Verses, Madam, you won me,
When you would play so nobly, and so free.
A book to a few lines: but, it was fit
You won them too, your odds did merit it,
So have you gained a Servant, and a Muse:
The first of which I fear, you will refuse;
And you may justly, being a tardie cold,
Unprofitable Chattell, fat and old,
Laden with Belly, and does hardly approach
His friends, but to break Chaires, or crack a Coach.
His weight is twenty Stone within two pound;
And that is made up as does the purse abound.
Marry the Muse is one, can tread the Air,
And stroke the water, nimble, chaste, and fair,
Sleep in a Virgins bosom without fear,
Run all the Rounds in a soft Ladies ear,
Widow or Wife, without the jealousy
Of either Suitor, or a Servant by.
Such, (if her manners like you) I do send:
And can for other Graces her commend,
To make you merry on the Dressing stool,
A mornings, and at afternoones, to fool
Away ill company, and help in rhyme,
Your Joane to pass her melancholy time.
By this, although you fancy not the man
Accept his Muse; and tell, I know you can:
How many verses, Madam, are your Due!
I can lose none in tendering these to you.
I gain, in having leave to keep my Day,
And should grow rich, had I much more to pay.
To Master John Burges.
FAther John Burges,
Necessity urges
My woeful cry,
To Sir Robert Pie:
And that he will venture
To send my Debentur.
Tell him his Ben
Knew the time, when
He loved the Muses;
Though now he refuses,
To take Apprehension
Of a years Pension,
And more is behind:
Put him in mind
Christmas is near;
And neither good Cheer,
Mirth, fooling, nor wit,
Nor any least fit
Of gambol, or sport
Will come at the Court,
If there be no money,
No Plover, or Coney
Will come to the Table,
Or Wine to enable
The Muse, or the Poet,
The Parish will know it.
Nor any quick-warming-pan help him to bed,
If the 'Chequer be empty, so will be his Head.
Epigram, to my Bookseller.
THou, Friend, wilt hear all censures; unto thee
All mouths are open, and all stomachs free:
Be thou my Books intelligencer, note
What each man says of it, and of what coat
His judgment is; If he be wise, and praise,
Thank him: if other, he can give no Bays.
If his wit reach no higher, but to spring
Thy Wife a fit of laughter; a Cramp-ring
Will be reward enough: to wear like those,
That hang their richest jewels in their nose;
Like a rung Bear, or Swine: grunting out wit
As if that part lay for a [] most fit!
If they go on, and that thou love a-life
Their perfumed judgments, let them kiss thy Wife.
An Epigram. To WILLIAM Earl of Newcastle.
THey talk of Fencing, and the use of Arms,
The art of urging, and avoiding harms,
The noble Science, and the maistring skill
Of making just approaches how to kill:
To hit in angles, and to clash with time:
As all defense, or offense were a chime!
I hate such measured, give me mettall'd fire
That trembles in the blaze, but (then) mounts higher!
A quick, and dazeling motion! when a pair
Of bodies, meet like ratified air!
Their weapons shot out, with that flame, and force,
As they out-did the lightning in the course;
This were a spectacle! A sight to draw
Wonder to Valor! No, it is the Law
Of daring, not to do a wrong, is true
Valor! to slight it, being done to you!
To know the heads of danger! where it is fit
To bend, to break, provoke, or suffer it!
All this (my Lord) is Valor! This is yours!
And was your Fathers! All your Ancestors!
Who durst live great, amongst all the colds, and heates,
Of humane life! as all the frosts, and sweates
Of fortune! when, or death appeared, or bands!
And valiant were, with, or without their hands.
An Epitaph, on HENRY L. La-ware. To the Passer-by.
IF, Passenger, thou can but read:
Stay, drop a tear for him that is dead,
Henry, the brave young Lord La-ware,
Minerva's and the Muses care!
What could their care do against the spite
Of a Disease, that loved no light
Of honor, nor no air of good?
But crept like darkness through his blood?
Offended with the dazeling flame
Of Virtue, got above his name?
No noble furniture of parts,
No love of action, and high Arts.
No aim at glory, or in war,
Ambition to become a Star,
Could stop the malice of this ill,
That spread his body over, to kill:
And only, his great Soul envied,
Because it durst have noblier died.
An Epigram.
THat you have seen the pride, beheld the sport,
And all the games of Fortune, played at Court;
Viewed there the merca^, read the wretched rate
At which there are, would sell the Prince, and State:
That scarce you hear, a public voice alive,
But whispered Counsels, and those only thrive;
Yet are got off thence, with clear mind, and hands
To lift to heaven: who is it not understands
Your happiness, and does not speak you blessed,
To see you set apart, thus, from the rest,
TO obtain of God, what all the Land should ask?
A Nations sin got pardoned! 'twere a task?
Fit for a Bishops knees! O bow them often,
My Lord, till felt grief make our stone hearts soft,
And we do weep, to water, for our sin.
He, that in such a flood, as we are in
Of riot, and consumption knows the way,
To teach the people, how to fast, and pray,
And do their penance, to avert Gods rod,
He is the Man, and Favorite of God.
An Epigram. To K. CHARLES for a 100. pounds he sent me in my sickness.
GReat CHARLES, among the holy gifts of grace
Annexed to thy Person, and thy place,
'T is not enough (thy piety is such)
To cure the called Kings Evil with thy touch;
But thou will yet a Kinglier mastrie try,
To cure the Poets Evil, Poverty:
And, in these Cures, do so thy self enlarge,
As thou do cure our Evil, at thy charge.
Nay, and in this, thou show'st to value more
One Poet, then of other folk ten score.
O piety! so to weigh the poores estates!
O bounty! so to difference the rates!
What can the Poet wish, his King may do,
But, that he cure the Peoples Evil too?
To K CHARLES, and Q MARY. For the loss of their firstborn, An Epigram
Consolatorie.
W^^ dares deny, that all first fruits are due
To God, denies the Godhead to be true:
Who doubts, those fruits God can with gain restore,
Does by his doubt, distrust his promise more.
He can, he will, and with large interest pay,
What (at his liking) he will take away.
Then Royal CHARLES, and MARY, do not grutch
That the Almighties will to you is such:
But thank his greatness, and his goodness too;
And think all still the best, that he will do.
That thought shall make, he will this loss supply
With a long, large, and blessed posterity!
For God, whose essence is so infinite,
Cannot but heap that grace, he will requite.
An Epigram. To our great and good K. CHARLES On his Anniversary Day.
HOW happy were the Subject! if he knew
Most pious King, but his own good in you!
How many times, live long, CHARLES, would he say,
If he but weighed the blessings of this day?
And as it turns our joyful year about,
For safety of such majesty, cry out?
Indeed, when had great Britain greater cause
Then now, to love the Sovereign, and the Laws?
When you that reign, are her Example grown,
And what are bounds to her, you make your own?
When your assiduous practice does secure
That Faith, which the professes to be pure?
When all your life's a president of days,
And murmr cannot quarrel at your ways?
How is she barren grown of love! or broke!
That nothing can her gratitude provoke!
O Times! O Manners! Surfeit, bred of ease
The truly Epidemicall disease!
'T is not alone the Merchant, but the Clown,
Is Banke-rupt turned! the Cassock, Cloak, and Gown,
Are lost upon account! And none will know
How much to heaven for thee, great CHARLES they owe!
An Epigram on the Princes birth
ANd art thou borne, brave Babe? Blessed be thy birth?
That so has crowned our hopes, our spring, and earth
The bed of the chaste Lilly, and the Rose!
What Month then May, was fitter to disclose
This Prince of flowers? Soon shoot thou up, and grow
The same that thou art promised, but be slow,
And long in changing. Let our Nephews see
Thee, quickly the gardens eye to be,
And there to stand so. Have, now envious Moon,
And interpose thy self, ('care not how soon.)
And threat' the great Eclipse. Two hours but run,
Sol will re-shine. If not, CHARLES has a Son.
-- Non displicuisse meretur
Festinat Caesar qui placuisse tibi.
An Epigram to the Queen, then lying in. 1630.

Hail Mary, full of grace, it once was said,
And by an Angel, to the blessed'st Maid
The Mother of our Lord: why may not I
(Without profaneness) yet, a Poet, cry
Hail Mary, full of honors, to my Queen,
The Mother of our Prince? When was there seen
(Except the joy that the first Mary brought,
Whereby the safety of Mankind was wrought.)
So general a gladness to an Isle!
To make the hearts of a whole Nation smile,
As in this Prince? Let it be lawful, so
To compare small with great, as still we owe
Glory to God. Then, Hail to Mary! spring
Of so much safety to the Realm, and King.
An Ode, or Song, by all the Muses. In celebration of her Majesty's birthday.
1630.

1. CLIO. UP public joy, remember
This sixteenth of November,
Some brave un-common way:
And though the Parish-steeple
Be silent, to the people,
Ring thou it Holy Day.

2. MEL. What, though the thriftie Tower
And Gunnes there, spare to pour
Their noises forth in Thunder:
As fearful to awake
This City, or to shake
Their guarded gates asunder?

3. THAL. Yet, let our Trumpets sound;
And cleave both air and ground,
With beating of our Drum's:
Let every Lyre be strung,
Harp, Lute, Theorbo sprung,
With touch of dainty thum's!

4. EVT. That when the Quire is full,
The Harmony may pull
The Angels from their Spheres:
And each intelligence
May wish it self a sense;
Whilst it the Dittie hears.

5. TERP. Behold the royal Mary,
The Daughtrr of great Harry!
And Sister to just Lewis!
Comes in the pomp, and glory
Of all her Brothers story,
And of her Fathers prowess!

6. ERAT. She shows so far above
The fained Queen of Love,
This sea-girt Isle upon:
As here no Venus were;
But, that she reigning here,
Had got the Ceston on!

7. CALLI. See, see our active King
Has taken twice the Ring
Upon his pointed Lance:
Whilst all the ravished rout
Do mingle in a shout,
Hay! for the flower of France!

8. URA. This day the Court does measure
Her joy in state, and pleasure;
And with a reverend fear,
The Revells, and the Play,
Sum up this crowned day,
Her two and twenti'th year!

9. POLY. Sweet! happy Mary! All
The People her do call!
And this the womb divine!
So fruitful, and so fair,
Has brought the Land an Heir!
And CHARLES a Caroline.

An Epigram, To the Household. 1630.

WHat can the cause be, when the K. has given
His Poet Sack, the Household will not pay?
Are they so scanted in their store? or driven
For want of knowing the Poet, to say him nay?
Well, they should know him, would the K. but grant
His Poet leave to sing his Household true;
Hee'ld frame such ditties of their store, and want,
Would make the very Greene-cloth to look blew:
And rather wish, in their expense of Sack,
So, the allowance from the King to use,
As the old Bard, should no Canary lack,
'T were better spare a Butt, then spill his Muse.
For in the Genius of a Poets Verse,
The Kings fame lives. Go now, deny his teirce.
Epigram. To a Friend, and Son.
Son, and my Friend, I had not called you so
To me; or been the same to you; if show,
Profit, or Chance had made us: But I know
What, by that name, we each to other owe,
Freedom, and Truth; with love from those begot.
Wise-crafts, on which the flatterer ventures not.
His is more safe commodity, or none:
Nor dares he come in the comparison.
But as the wretched Painter, who so ill
Painted a Dog, that now his subtler skill
Was, to have a Boy stand with a Club, and fright
All live dogs from the lane, and his shops sight.
Till he had sold his Piece, drawn so unlike:
So does the flattrer, with far cunning strike
At a Friends freedom, proves all circling means
To keep him off; and how-so-e're he gleanes
Some of his forms, he lets him not come near
Where he would fix, for the distinctions fear.
For as at distance, few have faculty
To judge; So all men coming near can spy,
Though now of flattery, as of picture are
More subtles works, and finer pieces far,
Then knew the former ages: yet to life,
All is but web, and painting; be the strife
Never so great to get them: and the ends,
Rather to boast rich hangings, then rare friends.
To the immortal memory, and friendship of that noble pair, Sir LUCIUS CARRY,
and Sir H. MORISON.
The Turn.
BRave Infant of Saguntum, clear
Thy coming forth in that great year,
When the Prodigious Hannibal did crown
His rage, with razing your immortal Town.
Thou, looking then about,
E're thou were half got out,
Wise child, did hastily return,
And made thy Mothers womb thine urne.
How summed a circle did thou leave mankind
Of deepest lore, could we the Center find!
The Counter-turne.
Did wiser Nature draw thee back,
From out the horror of that sack,
Where shame, faith, honor, and regard of right
Lay trampled on; the deeds of death, and night,
Urged, hurried forth, and horld
Upon the affrighted world:
Sword, fire, and famine, with fell fury met;
And all on utmost ruin set;
As, could they but life's miseries foresee,
No doubt all Infants would return like thee?
The Stand.
For, what is life, if measured by the space,
Not by the act?
Or masked man, if valued by his face,
Above his fact?
Here Is one outlived his Peers,
And told forth fourscore years;
He vexed time, and busied the whole State;
Troubled both foes, and friends;
But ever to no ends:
What did this Stirrer, but die late?
How well at twenty had he fallen, or stood!
For three of his foure-score, he did no good.
The Turn.
He entered well, by virtuous parts,
Got up and thrived with honest arts:
He purchased friends, and fame, and honors then,
And had his noble name advanced with men:
But weary of that flight,
He stooped in all men's sight
To sordid flatteries, acts of strife,
And sunk in that dead sea of life
So deep, as he did then death's waters sup;
But that the Cork of Title boy'd him up.
The Counter-turne.
Alas, but Morison fell young:
He never fell, thou fall'st my tongue.
He stood, a Soldier to the last right end,
A perfect Patriot, and a noble friend,
But most a virtuous Son.
All Offices were done
By him, so ample, full, and round,
In weight, in measure, number, sound,
As though his age imperfect might appear,
His life was of Humanity the Sphere.
The Stand.
Go now, and tell out days summed up with fears,
And make them years;
Produce thy mass of miseries on the Stage,
To swell thine age;
Repeat of things a throng,
To show thou have been long,
Not lived; for life does her great actions spell,
By what was done and wrought
In season, and so brought
To light: her measures are, how well
Each syllab'e answered, and was formed, how fair;
These make the lines of life, and that is her air.
The Turn.
It is not growing like a tree
In bulk, does make man better be;
Or standing long an Oak, three hundred year,
To fall a logge, at last, dry, bold, and sear:
A Lilly of a Day,
Is fairer far, in May,
Although it fall, and die that night;
It was the Plant, and flower of light.
In small proportions, we just beauties see:
And in short measures, life may perfect be.
The Counter-turne.
Call, noble Lucius, then for Wine,
And let thy looks with gladness shine:
Accept this garland, plant it on thy head,
And think, nay know, thy Morison's not dead.
He leaped the present age,
Possessed with holy rage,
To see that bright eternal Day:
Of which we Priests, and Poets say
Such truths, as we expect for happy men,
And there he lives with memory; and Ben.
The Stand.
Johnson, who sung this of him, e're he went
Himself to rest,
Or taste a part of that full joy he meant
To have expressed,
In this bright Asterisme:
Where it were friendships schism,
(Were not his Lucius Long with us to tarry)
To separate these twi-
Lights, the Dioscuri;
And keep the one half from his Harry.
But fate does so alternate the design,
Whilst that in heaven, this light on earth must shine.
The Turn.
And shine as you exalted are;
Two names of friendship, but one Star:
Of hearts the union. And those not by chance
Made, or indenture, or leas'd out to advance
The profits for a time.
No pleasures vain did chime,
Of rimes, or ryots, at your feasts,
Orgies of drink, or feigned protests:
But simple love of greatness, and of good;
That knits brave minds, and manners, more then blood.
The Counter-turne.
This made you first to know the Why
You liked, then after, to apply
That liking; and approach so one the the other,
Till either grew a portion of the other:
Each styled by his end,
The Copy of his friend.
You lived to be the great surnames,
And titles, by which all made claims
Unto the Virtue. Nothing perfect done,
But as a CARRY, or a MORISON.
The Stand.
And such a force the fair example had,
As they that saw
The good, and durst not practice it, were glad
That such a Law
Was left yet to Mankind;
Where they might read, and find
Friendship, indeed, was written, not in words:
And with the heart, not pen,
Of two so early men,
Whose lines her rowles were, and records.
Who, e're the first down bloomed on the chin,
Had sowed these fruits, and got the harvest in.
To the Right Honorable, the Lord high Treasurer of England.
An Epistle Mendicant.
MY LORD;
Poor wretched states, pressed by extremities,
Are feign to seek for succors, and supplies
Of Princes aides, or good men's Charities.
Disease, the Enemy, and his Ingineeres
Want, with the rest of his concealed compeeres,
Have cast a trench about me, now five years.
And made those strong approaches, by False braies,
Reducts, Halfe-moones, Horne-workes, and such close ways,
The Muse not peepes out, one of hundred days.
But lies blocked up, and straightned, narrow'd in,
Fixed to the bed, and boords, unlike to win
Health, or scarce breath, as she had never bin.
Unless some saving- Honor of the Crown,
Dare think it, to relieve, no less renown,
A Bedridden Wit, then a besieged Town.
To the King. On his Birthday. November. 19 1632.
An Epigram Anniversarie.
THis is King CHARLES his Day. Speak it thou Tower
Unto the Ships, and they from tier, to tier,
Discharge it 'bout the Island, in an hour,
As loud as Thunder, and as swift as fire.
Let Ireland meet it out at Sea, half way,
Repeating all Great Brittain's joy, and more,
Adding her own glad accents, to this Day,
Like Echo playing from the other shore.
What Drum's or Trumpets, or great Ord'nance can,
The Poetry of Steeples, with the Bells,
Three Kingdoms Mirth, in light, and aerie man,
Made lighter with the Wine. All noises else,
At Bonefires, Rockets, Fire-workes, with the Shoutes
That cry that gladness, which their hearts would pray,
Had they but grace, of thinking, at these routes,
On th'often coming of this Holy Day:
And ever close the burden of the Song,
Still to have such a CHARLES, but this CHARLES long.
The wish is great; but where the Prince is such,
What prayers (People) can you think too much!
On the Right Honorable, and virtuous Lord Weston, L. high Treasurer of
England, Upon the Day, He was made Earl of Portland. 17. Febr. 1632.

To the Envious.
Look up thou seed of envy, and still bring
Thy faint, and narrow eyes, to read the King
In his great Actions: view whom his large hand,
Has raised to be the Port unto his Land!
WESTON! That waking man! that Eye of State!
Who seldom sleeps! whom bad men only hate!
Why do I irritate, or stir up thee,
Thou sluggish spawne, that can, but wilt not see!
Feed on thy self for spite, and show thy Kind:
To virtue, and true worth, be ever blind.
Dream thou could hurt it, but before thou wake,
TO effect it; Feel, thou 'ast made thine own heart ache.
To the Right honble Hierome, L. Weston. An Ode gratulatorie. For his Return
from his Embassy.
SUch pleasure as the teeming Earth,
Does take in easy Natures birth,
When she puts forth the life of every thing:
And in a dew of sweetest Rain,
She lies delivered without pain,
Of the prime beauty of the year, the Spring.
The Rivers in their shores do run;
The Clouds rack clear before the Sun,
The rudest Winds obey the calmest Air:
Rare Plants from every bank do rise,
And every Plant the sense surprise,
Because the order of the whole is fair!
The very verdure of her nest,
Wherein she sits so richly dressed,
As all the wealth of Season, there was spread;
Does show, the Graces, and the Hours
Have multiplied their arts, and powers,
In making soft her aromatique bed.
Such joys, such sweet's does your Return
Bring all your friends, (fair Lord) that burn
With love, to hear your modesty relate,
The business of your blooming wit,
With all the fruit shall follow it,
Both to the honor of the King and State.
O how will then our Court be pleased,
To see great Charles of Travail eased,
When he beholds a graft of his own hand,
Shoot up an Olive fruitful, fair,
To be a shadow to his Heir,
And both a strength, and Beauty to his Land!
EPITHALAMION; OR, A SONG: CELEBRATING THE NVPTIALS OF THAT NOBLE Gentleman,
Mr. HIEROME WESTON, Son, and Heir, of the Lord WESTON, Lord high Treasurer of
England, with the Lady FRANCES STUART, Daughter of ESME D. of Lenox deceased,
and Sister of the Surviving Duke of the same name.
EPITHALAMION.
THough thou have past thy Summer standing, stay
Awhile with us bright Sun, and help our light;
Thou can not meet more Glory, on the way,
Between thy Tropicks, to arrest thy sight,
Then thou shall see to day:
We woo thee, stay
And see, what can be seen,
The bounty of a King, and beauty of his Queen!
See the Procession! what a Holy day
(Bearing the promise of some better fate)
Has filed, with Cacoches, all the way,
From Greenwich, hither, to Row-hampton gate!
When looked the year, at best,
So like a feast?
Or were Affairs in tune,
By all the Spheres consent, so in the heart of June?
What Beauty of beauties, and bright youth's at charge
Of Summers Liveries, and gladding green;
Do boast their Loves, and Brav'ries so at large,
As they came all to see, and to be seen!
When looked the Earth so fine,
Or so did shine,
In all her bloome, and flower;
To welcome home a Pair, and deck the nuptial bower?
It is the kindly Season of the time,
The Month of youth, which calls all Creatures forth
To do their Offices in Natures Chime,
And celebrate (perfection at the worth)
Marriage, the end of life,
That holy strife,
And the allowed war:
Through which not only we, but all our Species are.
Hark how the Bells upon the waters play
Their Sister-tunes, from Thames his either side,
As they had learned new changes, for the day,
And all did ring th'approches of the Bride;
The Lady Frances, dressed
Above the rest
Of all the Maidens fair;
In graceful Ornament of Garland, Gemmes, and Hair.
See, how she paceth forth in Virgin-white,
Like what she is, the Daughter of a Duke,
And Sister: darting forth a dazzling light
On all that come her Simplesse to rebuke!
Her tresses trim her back,
As she did lack
Naught of a Maiden Queen,
With Modesty so crowned, and Adoration seen.
Stay, thou will see what rites the Virgins do!
The choicest Virgin-troup of all the Land!
Porting the Ensigns of united Two,
Both Crowns, and Kingdoms in their either hand;
Whose Majesty's appear,
To make more clear
This Feast, then can the Day
Although that thou, O Sun, at our entreaty stay!
See, how with Roses, and with Lillies shine,
(Lillies and Roses, Flowers of either Sex)
The bright Brides paths, embelish'd more then thine
With light of love, this Pair does intertexe!
Stay, see the Virgins sow,
(Where she shall go)
The Emblemes of their way.
O, now thou smil'st, fair Sun, and shin'st, as thou would stay!
With what full hands, and in how plenteous showers
Have they bedewed the Earth, where she does tread,
As if her ayrie steps did spring the flowers,
And all the Ground, were Garden, where she led!
See, at another door,
On the same floor,
The Bridegroom meets the Bride
With all the pomp of Youth, and all our Court beside.
Our Court, and all the Grandees; now, Sun, look,
And looking with thy best Inquiry, tell,
In all thy age of Journals thou have took,
Saw thou that Pair, became these Rites so well,
Save the preceding Two?
Who, in all they do,
Search, Sun, and thou will find
They are th'exampled Pair, and mirror of their kind.
Force from the Phoenix then, no raritie
Of Sex, to rob the Creature; but from Man
The king of Creatures; take his paritie
With Angels, Muse, to speak these: Nothing can
Illustrate these, but they
Themselves to day,
Who the whole Act express;
All else we see beside, are Shadows, and go less.
It is their Grace, and favor, that makes seen,
And wondered at the bounties of this day:
All is a story of the King and Queen!
And what of Dignity, and Honor may
Be duly done to those
Whom they have chose,
And set the mark upon
To give a greater Name, and Title to! Their own!
Weston, their Treasure, as their Treasurer,
That Mine of Wisdom, and of Counsels deep,
Great Say-Master of State, who cannot err,
But does his Carract, and just Standard keep
In all the proved assayes,
And legal ways
Of Trials, to work down
Men's Loves unto the Laws, and Laws to love the Crown.
And this well moved the Judgment of the King
To pay with honors, to his noble Son
To day, the Fathers service; who could bring
Him up, to do the same himself had done.
That farre-all-seeing Eye
Could soon epsy
What kind of waking Man
He had so highly set; and, in what Barbican.
Stand there; for when a noble Nature 's raised,
It brings Friends Joy, Foes Grief, Posterity Fame;
In him the times, no less then Prince, are praised,
And by his Rise, in active men, his Name
Does Emulation stir;
Toth' dull, a Spur
It is: to th'envious meant,
A mere upbraiding Grief, and torturing punishment.
See, now the Chapel opens; where the King
And Bishop stay, to consummate the Rites:
The holy Prelate prays, then takes the Ring,
Asks first, Who gives her (I Charles) then he plights
One in the others hand,
Whilst they both stand
Hearing their charge, and then
The Solemn Quire cries, Joy; and they return, Amen.
O happy bands! and thou more happy place,
Which to this use, were built and consecrate!
To have thy God to bless, thy King to grace,
And this their chosen Bishop celebrate;
And knit the Nuptial knot,
Which Time shall not,
Or cankered Jealousy,
With all corroding Arts, be able to untie!
The Chapel empties, and thou may be gone
Now, Sun, and post away the rest of day:
These two, now holy Church has made them one,
Do long to make themselves, so, another way:
There is a Feast behind,
to them of kind,
which their glad Parents taught
One to the other, long e're these to light were brought.
Haste, haste, officious Sun, and send them Night
Some hours before it should, that these may know
All that their Fathers, and their Mothers might
Of Nuptial Sweets, at such a season, owe,
To propagate their Names,
And keep their Fames
Alive, which else would die,
For Fame keeps Virtue up, and it Posterity.
The Ignoble never lived, they were awhile
Like Swine, or other Cattle here on earth:
Their names are not recorded on the File
Of Life, that fall so; Christians know their birth.
Alone, and such a race,
We pray may grace,
Your fruitful spreading Vine,
But dare, not ask our wish in Language fescennine:
Yet, as we may, we will, with chaste desires,
(The holy perfumes of the Marriage bed.)
Be kept alive, those Sweet, and Sacred fires
Of Love between you, and your Lovely-head:
That when you both are old,
You find no cold
There; but, renewed, say,
(After the last child borne;) This is our wedding day.
Till you behold a race to fill your Hall,
A Richard, and a Hierome, by their names
Upon a Thomas, or a Francis call;
A Kate, a Frank, to honor their Grand-dames,
And 'tweene their Grandsires thighs,
Like pretty Spies,
Peep forth a Gemme; to see
How each one plays his part, of the large Pedigree.
And never may there want one of the Stem,
To be a watchful Servant for this State;
But like an Arm of Eminence amongst them,
Extend a reaching virtue, early and late:
Whilst the maine tree still found
Upright and sound,
By this Sun's Noone sted 's made
So great; his Body now alone projects the shade.
They both are slipped to Bed; Shut fast the Door,
And let him freely gather Loves First Fruits,
He Is Master of the Office; yet no more
Exacts then she is pleased to pay: no suits
Strifes, murmures, or delay,
Will last till day;
Night, and the sheets will show,
The longing Couple, all that elder Lovers know.
The humble Petition of poor Ben. To the best of Monarchs, Masters, Men, King
CHARLES.
-- Does most humbly show it,
To your Majesty your Poet:
THat whereas your royal Father
JAMES the blessed, pleased the rather,
Of his special grace to Letters,
To make all the MUSES debtors
To his bounty; by extension
Of a free Poetique Pension,
A large hundred Marks annuitie,
To be given me in gratuitie
For done service, and to come:
And that this so accepted sum,
Or dispensed in books, or bread,
(For with both the MUSE was fed)
Has drawn on me, from the times,
All the envy of the Rymes,
And the rattling pit-pat-noyse,
Of the less- Poetique boys;
When their pot-guns aim to hit,
With their pellets of small wit,
Parts of me (they judged) decayed,
But we last out, still unlay'd.
Please your Majesty to make
Of your grace, for goodness sake,
Those your Fathers Marks, your Pounds;
Let their spite (which now abounds)
Then go on, and do its worst;
This would all their envy burst:
And so warm the Poets tongue
You Would read a Snake, in his next Song.
To the right Honorable, the Lord Treasurer of England. An Epigram.
IF to my mind, great Lord, I had a state,
I would present you now with curious plate
Of Noremberg, or Turkey; hang your rooms
Not with the Arras, but the Persian Loomes.
I would, if price, or prayer could them get,
Send in, what or Romano, Tintaret,
Titian, or Raphael, Michael Angelo
Have left in fame to equal, or out-goe
The old Greek-hands in picture, or in stone.
This I would do, could I know Weston, one
Caught with these Arts, wherein the Judge is wise
As far as sense, and only by the eyes.
But you, I know, my Lord; and know you can
Discern between a Statue, and a Man;
Can do the things that Statues do deserve,
And act the business, which they paint, or carve.
What you have studied are the arts of life;
To compose men, and manners; stint the strife
Of murmuring Subjects; make the Nations know
What worlds of blessings to good Kings they owe.
And mightiest Monarchs feel what large increase
Of sweets, and safeties, they possess by Peace.
These I look up at, with a reverent eye,
And strike Religion in the standers-by;
Which, though I cannot as an Architect
In glorious Piles, or Pyramids erect
Unto your honor: I can tune in song
Aloud; and (happ'ly) it may last as long.
An Epigram To my MUSE, the Lady Digby, on her Husband, Sir KENELME DIGBY.
THOUGH, happy Muse, thou know my Digby well;
Yet read him in these lines: He does excel
In honor, courtesy, and all the parts
Court can call hers, or Man could call his Arts.
He Is prudent, valiant, just, and temperate;
In him all virtue is beheld in State:
And he is built like some imperial room
For that to dwell in, and be still at home.
His breast is a brave Palace, a broad Street
Where all heroique ample thoughts do meet:
Where Nature such a large survey has taken,
As other souls to his dwelt in a Lane:
Witness his Action done at Scanderone;
Upon my Birthday the eleventh of June;
When the Apostle Barnabee the bright
Unto our year does give the longest light,
In sign the Subject, and the Song will live
Which I have vowed posterity to give.
Go, Muse, in, and salute him. Say he be
Busy, or frown at first; when he sees thee,
He will clear up his forehead: think thou bring'st
Good Omen to him, in the note thou sing'st,
For he does love my Verses, and will look
Upon them, (next to Spenser's noble book.)
And praise them too. O! what a fame 't will be?
What reputation to my lines, and me,
When he shall read them at the Treasurers board?
The knowing Weston, and that learned Lord
Allows them? Then, what copies shall be had,
What transcripts begged? how cried up, and how glad,
Will thou be, Muse, when this shall them befall?
Being sent to one, they will be read of all.
NEw years, expect new gifts: Sister, your Harp,
Lute, Lyre, Theorbo, all are called to day.
Your change of Notes, the flat, the mean, the sharp,
To show the rites, and to usher forth the way
Of the New Year, in a new silken warpe.
To fit the softness of our Yeares-gift: When
We sing the best of Monarchs, Masters, Men;
For, had we here said less, we had sung nothing then.
A New-yeares-Gift sung to King CHARLES, 1635.
Rector Chori. TO day old Janus opens the new year,
And shuts the old. Haste, haste, all loyal Swains,
That know the times, and seasons when to appear,
And offer your just service on these plains;
Best Kings expect first fruits of your glad gains.
1. PAN is the great Preserver of our bounds.
2. To him we owe all profits of our grounds.
3. Our milk. 4. Our fells. 5. Our fleeces. 6. and first Lambs.
7. Our teeming Ewes, 8. and lustie-mounting Rams.
9. See where he walks with MIRA by his side.

Chor. Sound, sound his praises loud, and with his, hers divide.

Shep. Chor. Of PAN we sing, the best of Hunters, PAN,
That drives the Heart to seek unused ways,
And in the chase, more then SYLVANUS can,
Hear, o you Groves, and, Hills, resound his praise.

Nym. Chor. Of brightest MIRA, do we raise our Song,
Sister of PAN, and glory of the Spring:
Who walks on Earth as May still went along,
Rivers, and Valleys, Echo what we sing.

Shep. Chor. Of PAN we sing, the Chief of Leaders, PAN,
That leads our flocks and us, and calls both forth
To better Pastures then great PALES can:
Hear, O you Groves, and, Hills, resound his worth.

Nymp. Chor. Of brightest MIRA, is our Song; the grace
Of all that Nature, yet, to life did bring;
And were she lost, could best supply her place,
Rivers, and Valleys Echo what we sing.
1. Where ere they treadth' enamored ground,
The Fairest flowers are always found;
2. As if the beauties of the year,
Still waited on'hem where they were.
1. He is the Father of our peace;
2. She, to the Crown, has brought increase.
1. We know no other power then his,
PAN only our great Shep'ard is,

Chorus. Our great, our good. Where one's so dressed
In truth of colors, both are best.
Haste, haste you hither, all you gentler Swains,
That have a Flock, or Herd, upon these plains;
This is the great Preserver of our bounds,
To whom you owe all duties of your grounds;
Your Milkes, your Fells, your Fleeces, and first Lambs,
Your teeming Ewes, as well as mounting Rams.
Whose praises let us report unto the Woods,
That they may take it echoed by the Floods.
It Is he, it is he, in singing he,
And hunting, PAN, exceeds thee.
He gives all plenty, and increase,
He is the author of our peace.
Where e're he goes upon the ground,
The better grass, and flowers are found.
To sweeter Pastures lead he can,
Then ever PALES could, or PAN;
He drives diseases from our Folds,
The thief from spoil, his presence holds.
PAN knows no other power then his,
This only the great Shep'ard is.
'This he, 't is he, etc.
Fair Friend, 't is true, your beauties move
My heart to a respect:
Too little to be paid with love,
Too great for your neglect.
I neither love, nor yet am free,
For though the flame I find
Be not intense in the degree,
'T is of the purest kind.
It little wants of love, but pain,
Your beauty takes my sense,
And lest you should that price disdain,
My thoughts, too, feel the influence.
It Is not a passions first access
Ready to multiply,
But like Loves calmest State it is
Possessed with victory.
It is like Love to Truth reduced
All the false value's gone,
Which were created, and induced
By fond imagination.
'T is either Fancy, or 't is Fate,
To love you more then I;
I love you at your beauties rate,
Less were an Injury.
Like unstamp'd Gold, I weigh each grace,
So that you may collect,
The intrinsique value of your face,
Safely from my respect.
And this respect would merit love,
Were not so fair a sight
Payment enough; for, who dare move
Reward for his delight?

On the Kings Birthday.
ROwse up thy self, my gentle Muse,
Though now our green conceits be gray,
And yet once more do not refuse
To take thy Phrygian Harp, and play
In honor of this cheerful Day:
Long may they both contend to prove,
That best of Crowns is such a love.
Make first a Song of Joy, and Love,
Which chastely flames in royal eyes,
Then tune it to the Spheres above,
When the benignest Stars do rise,
And sweet Conjunctions grace the skies.
Long may, etc.
To this let all good hearts resound,
Whilst Diadems invest his head;
Long may he live, whose life does bound
More then his Laws, and better led
By high Example, then by dread.
Long may, etc.
Long may he round about him see
His Roses, and his Lillies blown:
Long may his only Dear, and He
Joy in Ideas of their own,
And Kingdoms hopes so timely sown.
Long may they both contend to prove,
That best of Crowns is such a love.
To my L. the King, On the Christning His second Son JAMES.
THat thou art loved of God, this work is done,
Great King, thy having of a second Son:
And by thy blessing, may thy People see
How much they are beloved of God, in thee;
Would they would understand it! Princes are
Great aides to Empire, as they are great care
To pious Parents, who would have their blood
Should take first Seisin of the public good,
As has thy JAMES; cleans'd from original dross,
This day, by Baptism, and his Saviors cross:
Grow up, sweet Babe, as blessed, in thy Name,
As in renewing thy good Grandsires fame;
Me thought, Great Britain in her Sea, before,
Sat safe enough, but now secured more.
At land she triumphs in the triple shade,
Her Rose, and Lilly, intertwind, have made.
Oceano secura meo, securior umbris. An Elegy On the Lady ANNE PAVVLET,
Marchion: of Winton.
WHat gentle Ghost, besprent with April deaw,
Hayles me, so solemnly, to yonder Yewgh?
And beckning wooes me, from the fatal tree
To pluck a Garland, for her self, or me?
I do obey you, Beauty! for in death,
You seem a fair one! O that you had breath,
To give your shade a name! Stay, stay, I feel
A horror in me! all my blood is steel!
Stiff! stark! my joints against one another knock!
Whose Daughter? ha? Great Savage of the Rock?
He Is good, as great. I am almost a stone!
And e're I can ask more of her she is gone!
Alas, I am all Marble! write the rest
Thou would have written, Fame, upon my breast:
It is a large fair table, and a true,
And the disposure will be something new,
When I, who would the Poet have become,
At least may bear th'inscription to her Tomb.
She was the Lady Jane, and Marchionisse
Of Winchester; the Heralds can tell this.
Earl Rivers Grandchild -- serve not forms, good Fame,
Sound thou her Virtues, give her soul a Name.
Had I a thousand Mouths, as many Tongues,
And voice to raise them from my brazen Lungs,
I durst not aim at that: The dotes were such
Thereof, no notion can express how much
Their Carract was! I, or my trump must break,
But rather I, should I of that part speak!
It is too near of kin to Heaven, the Soul,
To be described! Fames fingers are too foul
To touch these Mysteries! We may admire
The blaze, and splendour, but not handle fire!
What she did here, by great example, well,
to inlive posterity, her Fame may tell!
And, calling truth to witness, make that good
From the inherent Graces in her blood!
Else, who does praise a person by a new,
But a feigned way, does rob it of the true.
Her Sweetness, Softness, her fair Courtesy,
Her wary guardes, her wise simplicity,
Were like a ring of Virtues, 'bout her set,
And piety the Center, where all met.
A reverend State she had, an awful Eye,
A dazzling, yet inviting, Majesty:
What Nature, Fortune, Institution, Fact
Could sum to a perfection, was her Act!
How did she leave the world? with what contempt*
Just as she in it lived! and so exempt
From all affection! when they urged the Cure
Of her disease, how did her soul assure
Her sufferings, as the body had been away!
And to the Torturers (her Doctors) say,
Stick on your Cupping-glasses, fear not, put
Your hottest Causticks to, burn, lance, or cut:
It Is but a body which you can torment,
And I, into the world, all Soul, was sent!
Then comforted her Lord! and blessed her Son!
Cheered her fair Sisters in her race to run!
With gladness tempered her sad Parents tears!
Made her friends joys, to get above their fears!
And, in her last act, taught the Standers-by,
With admiration, and applause to die!
Let Angels sing her glories, who did call
Her spirit home, to her original!
Who saw the way was made it! and were sent
To carry, and conduct the Complement
'Twixt death and life! Where her mortality
Became her Birthday to Eternity!
And now, through circumfused light, she looks
On Natures secrets, there, as her own books:
Speaks Heavens Language! and discovers free
To every Order, every Hierarchy!
Beholds her Maker! and, in him, does see
What the beginnings of all beauties be;
And all beatitudes, that thence do flow:
Which they that have the Crown are sure to know!
Go now, her happy Parents, and be sad
If you not understand, what Child you had.
If you dare grudge at Heaven, and repent
TO have paid again a blessing was but lent,
And trusted so, as it deposited lay
At pleasure, to be called for, every day!
If you can envy your own Daughters bliss,
And wish her state less happy then it is!
If you can cast about your either eye,
And see all dead here, or about to dye!
The Stars, that are the Jewels of the Night,
And Day, deceasing! with the Prince of light,
The Sun! great Kings! and mightiest Kingdoms fall!
Whole Nations! nay Mankind! the World, with all
That ever had beginning there, to'ave end!
With what injustice should one soul pretend
TO esape this common known necessity,
When we were all borne, we began to die;
And, but for that Contention, and brave strife
The Christian has to enjoy the future life,
He were the wretched'st of the race of men:
But as he soars at that, he bruiseth then
The Serpents head: Gets above Death, and Sin,
And, sure of Heaven, rides triumphing in.
EUPHEME; OR, THE FAIR FAME. LEFT TO POSTERITY Of that truly-noble Lady, the
Lady VENETIA DIGBY, late Wife of Sir KENELME DIGBY, Knight: A Gentleman
absolute in all Numbers;
Consisting of these Ten Pieces.
The Dedication of her CRADLE. The Song of her DESCENT. The Picture of her
BODY. Her MIND. Her being chosen a MUSE. Her fair OFFICES. Her happy MATCH.
Her hopeful ISSUE. Her (...), or Relation to the Saints. Her Inscription, or
CROWN.
Vivam amare voluptas, defunctam Religio. Stat. 1. The Dedication of her CRADLE.
Fair FAME, who art ordained to crown
With ever-greene, and great renown,
Their Heads, that ENVY would hold down
With her, in shade
Of Death, and Darkness; and deprive
Their names of being kept alive,
By THEE, and CONSCIENCE, both who thrive
By the just trade
Of Goodness still: Vouchsafe to take
This CRADLE, and for Goodness sake,
A dedicated Ensign make
Thereof, to TIME.
That all Posterity, as we,
Who read what the CREPUNDIA be,
May something by that twilight see
'Bove rattling Rhyme.
For, though that Rattles, Timbrels, Toys,
Take little Infants with their noise,
As prop'rest gifts, to Girls, and Boys
Of light expense;
Their Corrals, Whistles, and prime Coats,
Their painted Maskes, their paper Boats,
With Sails of silk, as the first notes
Surprise their sense:
Yet, here are no such Trifles brought,
No cobweb Call's; no Surcoates wrought
With Gold, or Claspes, which might be bought
On every Stall.
But, here is a Song of her DESCENT;
And Call to the high Parliament
Of Heaven; where SERAPHIM take tent
Of ord'ring all.
This, uttered by an ancient BARD,
Who claims (of reverence) to be heard,
As coming with his Harp, prepared
To chant her 'gree,
Is sung: as als' her getting up
By JACOBS Ladder, to the top
Of that eternal Port kept ope'
For such as SHE.
2. The Song of her DESCENT.
I Sing the just, and uncontrol'd Descent
Of Dame VENETIA DIGBY, styled The Fair:
For Mind, and Body, the most excellent
That ever Nature, or the later Air
Gave two such Houses as NORTHUMBERLAND,
And STANLEY, to the which she was Co-heire.
Speak it, you bold PENATES, you that stand
At either Stem, and know the veins of good
Run from your roots; Tell, testify the grand
Meeting of Graces, that so swelled the flood
Of virtues in her, as, in short, she grew
The wonder of her Sex, and of your Blood.
And tell thou, ALDE-LEGH, None can tell more true
Thy Neeces line, then thou that gav'st thy Name
Into the Kindred, whence thy Adam drew
Meschines honor with the Cestrian fame
Of the first Lupus, to the Family
By Ranulph --
The rest of this Song is lost.
3. The Picture of the BODY.
SItting, and ready to be drawn,
What makes these Velvets, Silks, and Lawne,
Embroderies, Feathers, Fringes, Lace,
Where every lim takes like a face?
Send these suspected helps, to aid
Some Form defective, or decayed;
This beauty without falsehood fair,
Needs naught to cloth it but the air.
Yet something, to the Painters view,
Were fitly interposed; so new:
He shall, if he can understand,
Work with my fancy, his own hand.
Draw first a Cloud: all save her neck;
And, out of that, make Day to break;
Till, like her face, it do appear,
And Men may think, all light rose there.
Then let the beams of that, disperse
The Cloud, and show the Universe;
But at such distance, as the eye
May rather yet adore, then spy.
The Heaven designed, draw next a Spring,
With all that Youth, or it can bring:
Four Rivers branching forth like Seas,
And Paradise confining these.
Last, draw the circles of this Globe,
And let there be a starry Robe
Of Constellations 'bout her horld;
And thou have painted beauties world.
But, Painter, see thou do not sell
A Copy of this piece; nor tell
Whose it is: but if it favor find,
Next sitting we will draw her mind.
4. The MIND.
PAinter yo' are come, but may be gone,
Now I have better thought thereon,
This work I can perform alone;
And give you reasons more then one.
Not, that your Art I do refuse:
But here I may no colors use.
Beside, your hand will never hit,
To draw a thing that cannot sit.
You could make shift to paint an Eye,
An Eagle towering in the sky,
The Sun, a Sea, or soundlesse Pit;
But these are like a Mind, not it.
No, to express a Mind to sense,
Would ask a Heavens Intelligence;
Since nothing can report that flame,
But what is of kin to whence it came.
Sweet Mind, then speak your self, and say,
As you go on, by what brave way
Our sense you do with knowledge fill,
And yet remain our wonder still.
I call you Muse; now make it true:
Henceforth may every line be you;
That all may say, that see the frame,
This is no Picture, but the same.
A Mind so pure, so perfect fine,
As it is not radiant, but divine:
And so disdaining any tryer;
It Is got where it can try the fire.
There, high exalted in the Sphere,
As it another Nature were,
It moves all; and makes a flight
As circular, as infinite.
Whose Notions when it will express
In speech; it is with that excess
Of grace, and Music to the ear,
As what it spoke, it planted there.
The Voice so sweet, the words so fair,
As some soft chime had stroak'd the air;
And, though the sound were parted thence,
Still left an Echo in the sense.
But, that a Mind so rapt, so high,
So swift, so pure, should yet apply
It self to us, and come so nigh
Earths grossnesse; There Is the how, and why.
Is it because it sees us dull,
And stuck in clay here, it would pull
Us forth, by some Celestial slight
Up to her own sublimed hight?
Or has she here, upon the ground,
Some Paradise, or Palace found
In all the bounds of beauty fit
For her t'inhabit? There is it.
Thrice happy house, that have receipt
For this so lofty form, so straight,
So polisht, perfect, round, and even,
As it slid molded off from Heaven.
Not swelling like the Ocean proud,
But stooping gently, as a Cloud,
As smooth as Oil poured forth, and calm
As showers; and sweet as drops of Balm.
Smooth, soft, and sweet, in all a flood
Where it may run to any good;
And where it stays, it there becomes
A nest of odorous spice, and gummes.
In action, winged as the wind,
In rest, like spirits left behind
Upon a bank, or field of flowers,
Begotten by that wind, and showers.
In thee, fair Mansion, let it rest,
Yet know, with what thou art possessed,
Thou entertaining in thy breast,
But such a Mind, make God thy Guest.
A whole quaternion in the midst of this Poem is lost, containing entirely
the three next pieces of it, and all of the fourth (which in the order of the
whole, is the eighth) excepting the very end: which at the top of the next
quaternion goes on thus:

BUt, for you (growing Gentlemen) the happy branches of two so illustrious
Houses as these, where from your honored Mother, is in both lines descended;
let me leave you this last Legacy of Counsel; which so soon as you arrive at
years of mature Understanding, open you (Sir) that are the eldest, and read it
to your Brethren, for it will concern you all alike. Vowed by a faithful
Servant, and Client of your Family, with his latest breath expiring it B.I.

TO KENELME, JOHN, GEORGE.
BOast not these Titles of your Ancestors;
(Brave Youths) they are their possessions, none of yours:
When your own Virtues, equaled have their Names,
'T will be but fair, to lean upon their Fames;
For they are strong Supporters: But, till then,
The greatest are but growing Gentlemen.
It is a wretched thing to trust to reeds;
Which all men do, that urge not their own deeds
Up to their Ancestors; the rivers side,
By which yo'are planted, shows your fruit shall bide:
Hang all your rooms, with one large Pedigree:
It Is Virtue alone, is true Nobility.
Which Virtue from your Father, ripe, will fall;
Study illustrious Him, and you have all.
9. Elegy on my Muse.
THe truly honored Lady, the Lady VENETIA DIGBY; who living, gave me leave to
call her so. Being Her (...), or Relation to the Saints.
Sera quidem tanto struitur medicina dolori.
An Elegy on my Muse.
'TWere time that I tied too, now she is dead,
Who was my Muse, and life of all I died.
The Spirit that I wrote with, and conceived,
All that was good, or great in me she weaved,
And set it forth; the rest were Cobwebs fine,
Spun out in name of some of the old Nine!
To hang a window, or make dark the room,
Till swept away, the were cancelled with a broom!
Nothing, that could remain, or yet can stir
A sorrow in me, fit to wait to her!
O! had I seen her laid out a faite Corse,
By Death, on Earth, I should have had remorse
On Nature, for her: who did let her lie,
And saw that portion of her self to die.
Sleepie, or stupid Nature, could thou part
With such a Raritie, and not rowse Art
With all her aids, to save her from the seize
Of Vulture death, and those relentlesse cleies?
Thou would have lost the Phoenix, had the kind
Been trusted to thee: not to 't self assigned.
Look on thy sloth, and give thy self undone,
(For so thou art with me) now she is gone.
My wounded mind cannot sustain this stroke,
It rages, runs, flies, stands, and would provoke
The world to ruin with it; in her Fall,
I sum up mine own breaking, and wish all.
Thou have no more blows, Fate, to drive at one,
What Is left a Poet, when his Muse is gone?
Sure, I am dead, and know it not! I feel
Nothing I do; but, like a heavy wheel,
Am turned with an others powers. My Passion
Whoorles me about, and to blaspheme in fashion!
I murmr against God, for having taken
Her blessed Soul, hence, forth this valley vane
Of tears, and dungeon of calamity!
I envy it the Angels amity!
The joy of Saints! the Crown for which it lives,
The glory, and gain of rest, which the place gives!
Dare I profane, so irreligious be
To 'greet, or grieve her soft Euthanasee!
So sweetly taken to the Court of bliss,
As spirits had stolen her Spirit, in a kiss,
From off her pillow, and deluded bed;
And left her lovely body unthought dead!
Indeed, she is not dead! but laid to sleep
In earth, till tht last Trumpe awake the sheep
And Goats together, whither they must come
To hear their Judge, and his eternal doom.
To have that final retribution,
Expected with the fleshes restitution.
For, as there are three Natures, Schoolmen call
One corporal, only; the other spiritual,
Like single; so, there is a third, commixt,
Of Body and Spirit together, placed betwixt
Those other two; which must be judged, or crowned:
This as it guilty is, or guiltless found,
Must come to take a sentence, by the sense
Of that great Evidence, the Conscience!
Who will be there, against that day prepared,
TO accuse, or quit all Parties to be heard!
O Day of joy, and surety to the just!
Who in that feast of Resurrection trust!
That great eternal Holy Day of rest,
To Body, and Soul! where Love is all the guest!
And the whole Banquet is full sight of God!
Of joy the Circle, and sole Period!
All other gladness, with the thought is barred;
Hope, has her end! and Faith has her reward!
This being thus: why should my tongue, or pen
Presume to interpell that fullness, when
Nothing can more adorn it, then the seat
That she is in, or, make it more complete?
Better be dumb, then superstitious!
Who violates the Godhead, is most vicious
Against the Nature he would worship. He
Will honored be in all simplicity!
Have all his actions, wondered at, and viewed
With silence, and amazement! not with rude,
Dull, and profane, weak, and imperfect eyes,
Have busy search made in his mysteries!
He knows, what work h' has done, to call this Guest,
Out of her noble body, to this Feast:
And give her place, according to her blood
Amongst her Peers, those Princes of all good!
Saints, Martyrs, Prophets, with those Hierarchies,
Angels, Archangels, Principalities,
The Dominations, Virtues, and the Powers,
The Thrones, the Cherube, and Seraphick bowers,
That, planted round, there sing before the Lamb,
A new Song to his praise, and great I AM:
And she does know, out of the shade of Death,
What 't is to enjoy, an everlasting breath!
To have her captived spirit freed from flesh,
And on her Innocence, a garment fresh
And white, as that, put on: and in her hand
With boughs of Palm, a crowned Victrice stand*
And will you, worthy Son, Sir, knowing this,
Put black, and mourning on? and say you miss
A Wife, a Friend, a Lady, or a Love;
Whom her Redeemer, honored has above
Her fellows, with the oil of gladness, bright
In heaven Empire, and with a robe of light?
Thither, you hope to come; and there to find
That pure, that precious, and exalted mind
You once enjoyed: A short space severs ye,
Compared unto that long eternity,
That shall re-joyne ye. Was she, then, so dear,
When she departed? you will meet her there,
Much more desired, and dearer then before,
By all the wealth of blessings, and the store
Accumulated on her, by the Lord
Of life, and light, the Son of God, the Word!
There, all the happy souls, that ever were,
Shall meet with gladness in one Theater;
And each shall know, there, one another face:
By beatifick virtue of the Place.
There shall the Brother, with the Sister walk,
And Sons, and Daughters, with their Parents talk;
But all of God; They still shall have to say,
But make him All in All, their Theme, that Day:
That happy Day, that never shall see night!
Where He will be, all Beauty to the Sight;
Wine, or delicious fruits, unto tee Taste;
A Music in the Ears, will ever last;
Unto the Sent, a Spicerie, or Balm;
And to the Touch, a Flower, like soft as Palm.
He will all Glory, all Perfection be,
God, in the Union, and the Trinity!
That holy, great, and glorious Mystery,
Will there revealed be in Majesty!
By light, and comfort of spiritual Grace;
The vision of our Savior, face, to face
In his humanity! To hear him preach
The price of our Redemption, and to teach
Through his inherent righteousness, in death,
The safety of our souls, and forfeit breath!
What fullness of beatitude is here?
What love with mercy mixed does appear?
To style us Friends, who were, by Nature, Foes?
Adopt us Heirs, by grace, who were of those
Had lost our selves? and prodigally spent
Our native portions, and possessed rent:
Yet have all debts forgiven us, and advance
B' imputed right to an inheritance
In his eternal Kingdom, where we sit
Equal with Angels, and Co-heires of it.
Nor dare we under blasphemy conceive
He that shall be our supreme Judge, should leave
Himself so un-inform'd of his elect
Who knows the hearts of-all, and can dissect
The smallest Fiber of our flesh; he can
Find all our Atoms from a point to a span!
Our closest Creekes, and Corners, and can trace
Each line, as it were graphick, in the face.
And best he knew her noble Character,
For 't was himself who formed, and gave it her.
And to that form, lent two such veins of blood
As nature could not more increase the flood
Of title in her! All nobility
(But pride, that schism of incivilitie)
She had, and it became her! she was fit
TO have known no envy, but by suffering it!
She had a mind as calm, as she was fair;
Not tossed or troubled with light Lady-aire;
But, kept an even gate, as some straight tree
Moved by the wind, so comely moved she.
And by the awful manage of her Eye
She swaid all business in the Family!
To one she said, Do this, he did it; So
To another, Move; he went; To a third, Go,
He run; and all did strive with diligence
TO obey, and serve her sweet Commandments.
She was in one, a many parts of life;
A tender Mother, a discreeter Wife,
A solemn Mistress, and so good a Fried,
So charitable, to religious end
In all her petite actions, so devote,
As her whole life was now become one note
Of Piety, and private holiness.
She spent more time in tears her self to dress
For her devotions, and those sad essays
Of sorrow, then all pomp of gaudy days:
And came forth ever cheered, with the rod
Of divine Comfort, when sh' had talked with God.
Her broken sighs did never miss whole sense:
Nor can the bruised heart want eloquence:
For, Prayer is the Incense most perfumes
The holy Altars, when it least presumes.
And hers were all Humility! they beat
The door of Grace, and found the Mercy-Seat.
In frequent speaking by the pious Psalms
Her solemn hours she spent, or giving Alms,
Or doing other deeds of Charity,
To cloth the naked, feed the hungry. She
Would sit in an Infirmer, whole days
Poring, as on a Map, to find the ways
To that eternal Rest, where now sh'hath place
By sure Election, and predestined grace!
She saw her Savior, by an early light,
Incarnate in the Manger; shining bright
On all the world! She saw him on the Cross
Suffering, and dying to redeem our loss!
She saw him rise, triumphing over Death
To justify, and quicken us in breath!
She saw him too, in glory to ascend
For his designed work the perfect end
Of raising, judging, and rewarding all
The kind of Man, on whom his doom should fall!
All this by Faith she saw, and framed a Plea,
In manner of a daily Apostrophe,
To him should be her Judge, true God, true Man,
Jesus, the only gotten Christ! who can
As being Redeemer, and Repairer too
(Of lapsed Nature) best know what to do,
In that great Act of judgment: which the Father
Has given wholly to the Son (the rather
As being the Son of Man) to show his Power,
His Wisdom, and his Justice, in that hour,
The last of hours, and shutter up of all,
Where first his Power will appear, by call
Of all are dead to life! His Wisdom show
In the discerning of each conscience, so!
And most his Justice, in the fitting parts,
And giving dues to all Mankinds deserts!
In this sweet Ecstasy, she was rapt hence.
Who reads, will pardon my Intelligence,
That thus have ventured these true strains upon;
To publish her a Saint. My Muse is gone.
In pietatis memoriam
quam praestas
Venetiae tuae illustrissim:
Marit: dign: Digbeie
Hanc (...), tibi, tuisque sacro.
The Tenth, being her Inscription, or CROWN, is lost.

Vitae Rusticae Lauds.
BEatus ille, qui procul negotiis,
Ut prisca gens mortalium,
Paterna rura bobus exercet suis,
Solutus omni foenore:
Nec excitatur classico miles truci,
Nec horret Iratum mare:
Forumque vitat, and superba Civium
Potentiorum limina.
Ergo aut adulta vitium propagine
Altas maritat Populos:
Aut in reducta valle mugientium
Prospectat erranteis Greges:
Inutileisque falce ramos amputans,
Foeliciores inserit:
Aut pressa puris mella condit amphoris,
Aut tondet infirmis Oveis:
Vel cum decorum mitibus pomis caput
Autumnus arvis extulit:
Ut gaudet insitiva decerpens pyra,
Certantem and uvam Purpurae,
Qua muneretur te, Priape, and te, Pater
Sylvane, tutor finium!
Libet jacere modo sub antiqua Ilice:
Modo in tenaci gramine.
Labuntur altis interim ripis aquae:
Queruntur in Sylvis aves,
Fontesque Lymphis obstrepunt manantibus,
Somnos quod invitet leveis.
At cum tonantis annus hibernus Jovis
Imbreis niveisque comparat;
Aut trudit acreis hinc, and hinc multa cane
Apros in obstanteis plagas:
Aut amite levi rara tendit retia;
Turdis edacibus dolos,
Pavidumque leporem, and advenam laqueo gruem
Jucunda captat proemia:
Quis non malorum, quas amor curas habet
Haec inter obliviscitur?
Quod si pudica Mulier in partem juvet
Domum, atque dulces liberos,
( Sabina qualis, aut perusta solibus
Pernicis uxor Appuli
Sacrum vetustis extruit lignis focum
Lassi sub adventum viri)
Claudensque textis cratibus laetum pecus
Distenta siccet ubera;
The praises of a Country life.
Happy is he, that from all Business clear;
As the old race of Mankind were,
With his own Oxen tills his Sires left lands,
And is not in the Usurers bands:
Nor Souldier-like started with rough alarmes,
Nor dreads the Seas enraged harms:
But flees the Bar and Courts, with the proud bords,
And waiting Chambers of great Lords.
The Poplar tall, he then does marrying twine
With the grown issue of the Vine;
And with his hook lops off the fruitless race,
And sets more happy in the place:
Or in the bending Vale beholds a-farre
The lowing herds there grazing are:
Or the pressed honey in pure pots does keep
Of Earth, and sheares the tender Sheep:
Or when that Autumn, through the fields lifts round
His head, with mellow Apples crowned,
How plucking Pears, his own hand grafted had,
And purple-matching Grapes, he is glad!
With which, Priapus, he may thank thy hands,
And, Sylvane, thine that keptst his Lands!
Then now beneath some ancient Oak he may
Now in the rooted Grass him lay,
Whilst from the higher Banks do slide the floods?
The soft birds quarrel in the Woods,
The Fountains murmr as the streams do creep,
And all invite to easy sleep.
Then when the thundering Jove, his Snow and showers
Are gathering by the Wintry hours;
Or hence, or thence, he drives with many a Hound
Wild Bores into his toils pitched round:
Or strains on his small forke his subtle nets
Forth' eating Thrush, or Pit-falls sets:
And snares the fearful Hare, and new-come Crane,
And 'counts them sweet rewards so taken.
Who (amongst these delights) would not forget
Loves cares so evil, and so great?
But if, to boot with these, a chaste Wife meet
For household aid, and Children sweet;
Such as the Sabines, or a Sun-burnt-blowse,
Some lusty quick Apulians spouse,
To deck the hallowed Harth with old wood fired
Against the Husband comes home tired;
That penning the glad flock in hurdles by
Their swelling udders does draw dry:
Et horna dulci Vina promens dolio
Dapes inemptas apparet;
Non me Lucrina juverint Conchylia,
Magisve Rhombus, aut Scari,
Si quos Eois intonata fluctibus
Hiems ad hoc vertat Mare:
Non Afra avis descendat in ventrem meum:
Non Attagen Ionicus
Jucundior, quam lecta de pinguissimis
Oliva ramis arborum:
Aut herba Lapathi prata amantis, and gravi
Malvae salubres corpori:
Vel Agna festis caesa Terminalibus:
Vel Hoedus ereptus Lupo.
Has inter epulas, ut juvat pastas Oveis
Videre properanteis domum!
Videre fessos vomerem inversum Boves
Collo trahenteis languido;
Positosque vernas, ditis examen domus,
Circum renidenteis Lareis!
Haec ubi locutus foenerator Alphius,
Jam jam futurus rusticus,
Omnem relegit Idibus pecuniam,
Quaerit Calendis ponere.
Ode 1. Lib. quarto. Ad Venerem.
INtermissa Venus diu,
Rursus bella moves: parce precor, precor,
Non sum qualis eram bonae
Sub regno Cynarae: desine, dulcium
Matter saeva Cupidinum,
Circa lustra december flectere Mollibus
Jam durum imperiis: abi
Quo blandae Juvenum te revocant preces.
Tempestivius in domo
Pauli purpureis ales oloribus,
Comessabere Maximi,
Si torrere jecur quaeris Idoneum.
Namque and nobilis, and decens,
Et pro sollicitis non tacitus reis.
Et centum puer Artium,
Late Signa feret militiae tuae.
Et quandoque potentior
Largis muneribus riserit amuti,
Albanos prope te lacus
Ponet marmoream sub trabe Cyprea.
And from the sweet Tub Wine of this year takes,
And unbought viands ready makes:
Not Lucrine Oysters I could then more prize,
Nor Turbot, nor bright Golden eyes
If with bright floods, the Winter troubled much,
Into our Seas send any such:
The Ionian God-wit, nor the Ginny hen
Could not go down my belly then
More sweet then Olives, that new gathered be
From fattest branches of the Tree:
Or the herb Sorrel, that loves Meadows still,
Or Mallows loosing bodies ill:
Or at the Feast of Bounds, the Lamb then slain,
Or Kid forced from the Wolf again.
Among these Cates how glad the sight does come
Of the fed flocks approaching home!
To view the weary Oxen draw, with bare
And fainting necks, the turned Share!
The wealthy household swarm of bondmen met,
And 'bout the steeming Chimney set!
These thoughts when Usurer Alphius, now about
To turn more farmer, had spoke out
Against the Ides, his moneys he gets in with pain,
At th'Calends, puts all out again.
Ode the first. The fourth Book. To Venus.
VEnus again thou mov'st a war
Long intermitted, pray thee, pray thee spare:
I am not such, as in the Reign
Of the good Cynara I was: Refrain,
Sower Mother of sweet Loves, forbear
To bend a man now at his fiftieth year
Too stubborn for Commands, so slack:
Go where Youths soft entreaties call thee back.
More timely hie thee to the house,
With thy bright Swans of Paulus Maximus:
There jest, and feast, make him thine host,
If a fit livor thou do seek to toast;
For he 's both noble, lovely, young,
And for the troubled Clyent fyl's his tongue,
Child of a hundred Arts, and far
Will he display the Ensigns of thy war.
And when he smiling finds his Grace
With thee 'bove all his Rivals gifts take place,
He will thee a Marble Statue make
Beneath a Sweet-wood Roof, near Alba Lake:
Illic plurima Naribus
Duces tura, lyraeque, and Berecynthiae
Delectabere tibiae
Mistis carminibus non sine fistula.
Illic bis pueri die,
Numen cum teneris virginibus tuum
Laudantes, pede candido
In mortem Salium ter quatient humum.
Me nec foemina, nec puer,
Jam, nec spes animi credula mutui,
Nec certare juvat mero:
Nec vincere novis tempora floribus.
Sed cur, heu Ligurine, cur
Manat rara meas lachryma per genos?
Cur facunda parum decoro
Inter verba cadit lingua silentio?
Nocturnis te ego Somniis
Jam captum teneo, jam volucrem sequor:
Te per gramina Martii
Campi, te per aquas, dure, volubileis,
Ode ix. lib. 3. Ad Lydiam. Dialogus Horatii and Lydiae.
HOR. DOnec gratus eram tibi,
Nec quisquam potior brachia candida
Cervici juvenis dabat;
Persarum vigui rege beatior.

LYD. Donec non alia magis
Arsisti, neque erat Lydia post Chloen.
Multi Lydia nominis
Romana vigui clarior Ilia.

HOR. Me nunc Thressa Cloe regit,
Dulceis docta modos, and Citharae sciens:
Pro qua non metuam mori,
Si parcent animae fata superstiti.

LYD. Me torret face mutua
Thurini Calais filius Ornithi:
Pro quo bis patiar mori,
Si parcent puero fata superstiti.

HOR. Quid si priscaredit Venus,
Diductosque jugo cogit aheneo?
Si flava excutitur Chloe
Rejectaeque patet janua Lydiae?

LYD. Qanquam sidere pulchrior
Ille est, tu levior Cortice, and improbo
iracundior Adria,
Tecum vivere amem, tecum obeam libens.
There shall thy dainty Nostrill take
In many a Gum, and for thy soft ears sake
Shall Verse be set to Harp and Lute,
And Phrygian Hau'boy, not without the Flute.
There twice a day in sacred Lays,
The Youths and tender Maids shall sing thy praise:
And in the Salian manner meet
Thrice 'bout thy Altar with their Ivory feet.
Me now, nor Wench, nor wanton Boy,
Delights, nor credulous hope of mutual Joy,
Nor care I now healths to propound;
Or with fresh flowers to girt my Temple round.
But, why, oh why, my Ligurine,
Flow my thin tears, down these pale cheeks of mine?
Or why, my well-grac'd words among,
With an uncomely silence fails my tongue?
Hard-hearted, I dream every Night
I hold thee fast! but fled hence, with the Light,
Whether in Mars his field thou be,
Or Tybers winding streams, I follow thee.

Ode IX. 3 Book, to Lydia. Dialogue of Horace, and Lydia
HOR. WHilst, Lydia, I was loved of thee,
And ('bout thy Ivory neck,) no youth did fling,
His arms more acceptable free,
I thought me richer then the Persian King.

LYD. Whilst Horace loved no Mistres more,
Nor after Cloe did his Lydia found;
In name, I went all names before,
The Roman Ilia was not more renowned.

HOR. 'T is true, I Am Thracian Chloes, I
Who sings so sweet, and with such cunning plays,
As, for her, I'l'd not fear to die,
So Fate would give her life, and longer days.

LYD. And, I am mutually on fire
With gentle Calais Thurine, Orniths Son;
For whom I doubly would expire,
So Fates would let the Boy a long thread run.

HOR. But, say old Love return should make,
And us dis-joyn'd force to her brazen yoke,
That I bright Cloe off should shake;
And to left- Lydia, now the gate stood open.

LYD. Though he be fairer then a Star;
Thou lighter then the bark of any tree,
And then rough Adria, angrier, far;
Yet would I wish to love, live, die with thee.

Fragmentum Petron. Arbitr.
FOeda est in coitu, and brevis voluptas,
Et taedet Veneris statim peractae.
Non ergo ut pecudes libidinosa,
Coeci protinus irruamus illuc:
Nam languescit Amor peritque Flamma.
Sed sic, sic, sine fine feriati,
Et tecum jaceamus osculantes:
Hic nullus labor est, ruborque nullus;
Hoc juvit, juvat, and diu juvabit:
Hoc non deficit, incipitque semper.
The same translated.
Doing, a filthy pleasure is, and short;
And done, we straight repent us of the sport:
Let us not then rush blindly on unto it,
Like lustful beasts, that only know to do it:
For lust will languish, and that heat decay,
But thus, thus, keeping endless Holy Day,
Let us together closely lie, and kiss,
There is no labor, nor no shame in this;
This has pleased, does please, and long will please; never
Can this decay, but is beginning ever.
Epigramma Martialis. Lib. viii. Lxxvii.
LIber, amicorum dulcissima curatuorum,
Liber in aeterna vivere digne rosa;
Si sapis Assyrio semper tibi crinis amomo
Splendeat, and cingant florea serta caput:
Candida nigrescant vetulo christalla Falerno,
Et caleat blando mollis amore thorus.
Qui sic, vel medio finitus vixit in aevo,
Longior huic facta, quam data vita fuit.
The same translated.
LIber, of all thy friends, thou sweetest care,
Thou worthy in eternal Flower to fare,
If thou be'st wise, with 'Syrian Oil let shine
Thy locks, and rosy garlands crown thy head;
Dark thy clear glass with old Falernian Wine;
And heat, with softest love, thy softer bed.
He, that but living half his days, dies such,
Makes his life longer then 't was given him, much.
THE KINGS ENTERTAINMENT AT WELBECK IN NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE, A house of the Right
Honorable, WILLIAM Earl of Newcastle, Vicount Mansfield, Baron of Botle, and
Bolsover, etc. At his going into Scotland. 1633.
His Matie being set at Dinner,
A Song was sung: A Dialogue between the Passions, Doubt and Love.
DOVET. WHat softer sounds are these salute the Ear
From the large Circle of the Hemispheare,
As if the Center of all sweets met here!

LOVE. It is the breath, and Soul of every thing,
Put forth by Earth, by Nature, and the Spring,
To speak the Welcome, Welcome of the King.

CHORUS. The joy of plants. The spirit of flowers,
Of Affections, Joy. Delight, etc.
The smell, and verdure of the bowers,
The waters murmr; with the showers
Distilling on the new-fresh hours:
The whistling winds, and birds, that sing
The Welcome of our great, good King.
Welcome, O Welcome, is the general voice,
Wherein all Creatures practice to rejoice.

The second Strain.
LOVE. WHen was old Sherewood's head more quaintly curled?
Or looked the Earth more green upon the world?
Or Natures Cradle mere inchas'd, and purl'd?
When did the Air so smile, the Winds so chime?
As Quiristers of Season, and the Prime!

Dou. If what they do, be done in their due time.

CHORUS. He makes the time for whom 't is done,
From whom the warmth, heat, life, begun,
Into whose fostring arms do run
All that have being from the Sun.
Such is the fount of light, the King,
The heart, that quickens every thing,
And makes the Creatures language all one voice;
In Welcome, Welcome, Welcome, to rejoice:
Welcome is all our Song, is all our sound,
The Treble part, the Tenor, and the Ground.

After Dinner.
THe King, and the Lords being come down, and ready to take horse, In the
Crowd were discovered two notorious persons, and men of business, as by their
eminent dressing, and habits did soon appear.

One in a costly Cassock of black Buckram girt unto him, whereon was painted
Party-per pale: On the one side.
Noune. Pronoune. Verb. declined Participle.
On the other side.
Adverbe. Conjunction. Praeposition. Undeclined. Interjection.
With his Heart, Hat-band, Stockings, and Sandals suited, and marked, A.B.C. etc.

The other in a Taberd, or Heralds Coat of Azure, and Gules quarterly changed
of Buckram; Limn'd with yellow, in stead of Gold, and pasted over with old
Records of the two Shires, and certain fragments of the Forest, as a Coat of
Antiquity, and President, willing to be seen, but heard to be read, and is
loath to be understood, without the Interpreter, who wore it: For the wrong end
of the letters were turned upward, therefore was a labell fixed to, To the
Curious Prier, advertising: Look not so near, with hope to understand;
Out-cept, Sir, you can read with the left hand.


Their Names were, Accidence, Fitz-Ale.

ACCI. BY your fair leave Gentlemen of Court; for leave is ever fair being
asked; and granted is as light, according to our English Proverb, Leave is
light. Which is the King I pray you?


FITZ. Or rather the Kings Lieutenant? For we have nothing to say to the King,
till we have spoken with my Lord Lieutenant.


ACC. Of Nottinghamshire.


FITZ. And Darbyshire, for he is both. And we have business to both sides of
him from either of the Counties.


ACC. As far as his Command stretches.


FITZ. Is this he?


ACC. This is no great man by his timber (as we say in the Forest) by his
thewes he may. I Will venture a Part of Speech, two, or three at him; to see how
he is declined. My Lord, Pleases your good Lordship, I am a poor Neighbor,
here, of your Honors, in the County.


FITZ. Mr. A-B-Cee Accidence, my good Lord, Schoolmasters of Mansfield, the
painful Instructor of our Youth in their Country elements, as appears by
the sign of correction, in his hat, with the trust of the
Towne-Pen-and-Inkehorne, committed to the Sure-tie of his Girdle, from the
whole Corporation.


ACC. This is the more remarkable man, my very good Lord; Father Fitz-ale,
Herald of Darbie, Light, and Lantern of both Counties; the learned Antiquarie
of the North: Conserver of the Records of either Forest, as witnesses the
brief Tabard, or Coat Armor he carries, being an industrious Collection of
all the written, or reported Wonders of the Peake.

SAint Anne of Buxstons boiling Well,
Or Elden bottomless, like Hell:
Pooles-hole, or Satan's sumptuous Arse,
(Surreverence) with the Mine-mens Farce.
Such a light, and metall'd Dance
Saw you never yet in France.
And by Lead-men, for the nonce,
That turn round like grindlestones:
Which they dig out fro' the Delves,
For their Bairnes-bread, Wives, and sell's:
Whom the Whetstone sharpes to eat,
And cry Milstones are good meat.
He can fly over hills, and dales,
And report you more odd tales,
Of our Outlaw Robinhood
That revell'd here in Sherewood;
And more stories of him show
(Though he never shot in his Bow.)
Then au' men, or believe, or know.

FITZ. Stint, stint, your Court,
Grow to be short,
Throw by your Clatter,
And handle the matter:
We come with our Peers,
And crave your ears,
To present a Wedding,
Intended a bedding,
Of both the Shires.
Father FitZ-ale
Has a Daughter stale
In Darbie-Towne,
Known, up, and down
For a geat Antiquity:
And Pem she hight
A solemn Wight
As you should meet
In any street,
In that Ubiquitie.
Her, he has brought
As having sought
By many a draught
Of Ale, and Craft;
With skill to graft
In some old Stock,
OF the Yeoman block,
And Forrest-blood,
Of old Sherewood.
And he has found
Within the ground,
At last no Shrimpe,
Whereon to impe,
His jolly Club,
But a bold Stub
OF the right wood,

FITZ. A Champion good;
Who here in place,
Presents himself,
Like doughtie Elfe,
Of Greenwood Chase.

Here Stub the Bridegroom presented himself, being apparelled in a yellow
Canvas Doublet, cut, a green Jerkin, and Hose, like a Ranger. A Munmouth Cap,
with a yellow Feather, yellow Stockings, and Shoes, for being to dance, he
would not trouble himself with Boots.

Stub of Stub-hall,
Some do him call;
But most do say
He Is Stub, will stay;
To run his race,
Not run away

ACC. At Quintin, he,
In honor of this Bridaltee,
Has challenged either wide Countee;
Come Cut, and Long-taile. For there be
Six Batchelers, as bold as he,
Adjuting to his Companee,
And each one has his Liverie;

FITZ. Six Hoods they are, and of the blood,
They tell of ancient Robinhood.
Here the six Hoods presented themselves severally, in their Livory Hoods,
whilst FitZ-ale spoke on.

Red-hood the first that does appear Red-hood.

In Stamel.

ACC. Scarlet is too dear.

FITZ. Then Green-hood.

AC. He Is in Kendal Green, Green-hood.

As in the Forest Color seen.

FITZ. Next Blew-hood is, and in that hue Blew-hood.

Does vaunt a heart as pure, and true
As is the Sky; (give him his due.)

ACC. Of old England the Yeoman blew.

FITZ. Then Tawney fra' the Kirk that came. Tawney-hood.


ACC. And cleped was the Abbots man.

FITZ. With Motley-hood, the Man of Law. Motley-hood.


ACC. And Russet-hood keeps all in Awe. Russet-hood.

Bold Batchelers they are, and large,
And come in at the Country charge;
Horse, Bridles, Saddles, Stirrups, Girts,
All reckoned of the County skirts!
And all their Courses, miss, or hit,
Intended are, for the Sheere-wit,
And so to be received. Their game
Is Country sport, and has a name
From the Place that bears the cost,
Else all the Fat in the Fire were lost.
Go Captain Stub, lead on, and show
What house you come on, by the blow
You give Sir Quintin, and the Cuffe,
You escape of the Sand-bags Counterbuffe.

Stubs Course. 1. ACC. A Flourish.
O well run, Yeoman Stub!
Thou have knocked it, like a Club,
And made Sir Quintin know:
By this his race so good;
He himself is also wood;
As by his furious blow.

Red-hoods Course. 2. FITZ. Flourish.
Bravely run Red-hood,
There was a shock,
To have buff'd out the blood
From ought but a block.

Greene-hoods Course 3. ACC. Flourish.
Well run Green-hood, got between,
Under the Sand-bag, he was seen,
Lowting low, like a For'ster green:

FITZ. He knows his tackle, and his treene.

Blew-hoods Course. 4. ACC. Flourish.
Gi' the old England Yeoman his due,
H' has hit Sir Quin: just in the Qu:
Though that be black, yet he is blew.
It is a brave patch, and a new!

Tawny-hoods Course. 5. FITZ. Flourish.
Well run Tawney, the Abbots Churl
His Jade gave him a Jerk,
As he woul' have his Rider hurl
His Hood after the Kirk.
But he was wiser, and well beheft,
For this is all, that he has left.

Motley-hoods Course. 6. FITZ. Flourish.
Or the Saddle turned round, or the Girths brake,
For low on the ground (wo' for his sake)
The Law is found.

ACC. Had his pair of tongues, not so much good,
To keep his head, in his Motley-hood?

Russet-hoods Course. 7. FITZ. Flourish.
Russet ran fast, though he be thrown,

ACC. He lost no stirrup, for he had none.
1. His horse, it is the Heralds weft.
2. No it is a mare, and has a cleft.
3. She is Countrey-borrow'd, and no veil,
But's hood is forfeit to FitZ-ale.
Here Accidence did break them of, by calling them to the Dance, and to the
Bride, who was dressed like an old May-Lady, with Skarfes, and a great wrought
Handkerchiefe, with red, and blew, and other habiliments. Six Maids attending
on her, attired, with Buckram Bride-laces beguilt: White sleeves, and Stammell
Petticotes, dressed after the cleanliest Country guise; among whom Mistress
Alphabet, Master Accidence's Daughter, did bear a prime sway.

The two Bride Squires, the Cake-bearer, and the Boll-bearer, were in two
yellow leather Doublets, and russet Hose, like two twin-Clownes pressed out for
that office, with Livery Hatts, and Ribbands.


ACC. Come to the Bride; another fit,
Yet show, Sirs, of your Country wit,
But of your best. Let all the Steel
Of back, and brains fall to the heel;
And all the Quicksilver in the mine
Run in the foot-veines, and refine
Your Firk-hum-Jerk-hum to a Dance,
Shall fetch the Fiddles out of France;
To wonder at the Horne-pipes, here,
Of Nottingham, and Darbishire.

FITZ. With the Phant'sies of Hey-troll,
Trol about the Bride-all Boll,
And divide the broad Bride-Cake
Round about the Brides-stake.

ACC. With, here is to the fruit of Pem,

FITZ. Grafted upon Stub his Stem,

ACC. With the Peakish Nicetie,

FITZ. And old Sherewoods Vicetie.

The last of which words were set to a Tune, and sung to the Bagpipe, and
Measure of their Dance; the Clownes, and company of Spectators drinking, and
eating the while.

The Song.
Let Us sing about, and say, Hey-trol,
Troll to me the Bridal Boll,
And divide the broad Bride-Cake,
Round about the Brides-stake.
With, Here, is to the fruit of Pem,
Grafted upon Stub his stem;
With the Peakish Nicetie,
And old Sherewoods Vicetie.
But well daunc'd Pem upon record,
Above thy Yeoman, or May-Lord.
Here it was thought necessary they should be broken off, by the coming in of
an Officer, or servant of the Lord Lieutenants, whose face had put on, with his
Clothes, an equal authority for the business.

Gentleman. GIve end unto your rudeness: Know at length
Whose time, and patience you have urged, the Kings.
Whom if you knew, and truly, as you ought,
'T would strike a reverence in you, even to blushing,
That King whose love it is, to be your Parent!
Whose Office, and whose Charge, to be your Pastor!
Whose single watch, defends all your sleeps!
Whose labors, are your rests! whose thoughts and cares,
Breed you delights! whose business, all your leasures!
And you to interrupt his serious hours,
With light, impertinent, unworthy objects,
Sights for your selves, and sav'ring your own tast's;
You are too blame. Know your disease, and cure it,
Sports should not be obtruded on great Monarchs,
But wait when they will call for them as servants,
And meanest of their servants, since their price is
At highest, to be styled, but of their pleasures!
Our King is going now to a great work
Of highest Love, Affection, and Example,
To see his Native Country, and his Cradle,
And find those manners there, which he sucked in
With Nurses Milk, and Parents piety!
O Sister Scotland! what have thou deserved
Of joyful England, giving us this King!
What Union (if thou like) have thou not made?
In knitting for Great Britain such a Garland?
And letting him, to wear it? Such a King!
As men would wish, that knew not how to hope
His like, but seeing him! A Prince, that is Law
Unto himself. Is good, for goodnesse-sake;
And so becomes the Rule unto his Subjects!
That studies not to seem, or to show great,
But be! Not dressed for others eyes, and ears,
With Vizors, and false rumors; but make Fame
Wait on his Actions, and thence speak his Name!
O bless his Goings out, and Commings in,
Thou mighty God of Heaven, lend him long
Unto the Nations, which yet scarcely know him,
Yet are most happy, by his Government.
Bless his fair Bed-mate, and their certain Pledges,
And never may he want those nerves in Fate;
For sure Succession fortifies a State.
Whilst he himself is mortal, let him feel
Nothing about him mortal, in his house;
Let him approve his young increasing Charles,
A loyal Son: and take him long to be
An aid, before he be a Successor.
Late, come that day, that Heaven will ask him from us:
Let our Grandchild, and their issue, long
Expect it, and not see it. Let us pray
That Fortune never know to exercise
More power upon him, then as Charles his servant,
And his great Britains slave: ever to wait
Bondwoman to the GENIUS of this State.

Performed, the xxi. of May. 1633.
LOVES VVEL-COME. THE KING AND QVEENES ENTERTAINMENT AT BOLSOVER: AT The Earl
of Newcastles, The thirtieth of July, 1634.
The Song at the Banquet; Sung by two Tenors, and a Base.
IF Love be called a lifting of the Sense
To knowledge of that pure intelligence, CHORUS.
Wherein the Soul has rest, and residence:
1. TEN. When were the Senses in such order placed?

2. TEN. The Sight, the Hearing, Smelling, Touching, Taste,
All at one Banquet?

BAS. 'Would it ever last!

1. We wish the same: who set it forth thus?

BAS. Love!

2. But to what end, or to what object?

BAS. Love!

1. Does Love then feast it self?

BAS. Love will feast Love!

2. You make of Love, a riddle, or a chain,
A circle, a mere knott, untie't again.

BAS. Love is a Circle, both the first, and last
Of all our Actions, and his knotts, too, fast.

1. A true-love Knot, will hardly be unti'd,
And if it could, who would this Pair divide.

(...) 1. God made them such, and Love.

2. TEN. Who is aring,
The likest to the year of anything,

2. And runs into it self.

BAS. Then let us sing,
And run into one sound.
Let Welcome fill
CHORUS Our thoughts, hearts, voices, and that one word trill,
Through all our Language, Welcome, Welcome still,

Complement.
1. Could we put on the beauty of all Creatures,

2. Sing in the Air, and notes of Nightingales,

1. Exhale the sweets of Earth, and all her features,

2. And tell you, softer then in Silk, these tales,

BAS. Welcome should season all for Taste.
And hence,
CHORUS At every real banquet to the Sense,
Welcome, true Welcome fill the Complements.

After the Banquet, the King and Queen retired, were entertained with Coronell
Vitruvius his Oration to his Dance of Mechanickes.
VIT. COme forth, boldly put forth, in your Holy Day Clothes, every Mothers
Son of you. This is the King, and Queens, Majesticall Holy Day. My Lord has
it granted from them; I had it granted from my Lord: and do give it unto you
gratis, that is bona fide, with the faith of a Surveyour, your Coronell
Vitruvius. Do you know what a Surveyour is now? I tell you a Supervisor! A
hard word, that; but it may be softened, and brought in, to signify something.
An Overseer! One that oversee-eth you. A busy man! And yet I must seem busier
then I am, (as the Poet sings, but which of them. I will not now trouble my
self to tell you.) O Captain Smith! The first Quaternio. Captain Smith, or
Vulcan, with three Cyclops.
or Hammer-armed Vulcan! with your three Sledges, you are our Music, you come
a little too tardie; but we remit that, to your polt-foot, we know you are
lame. Plant your selves there, and beat your time out at the Anvile. Time, and
Measure, are the Father, and Mother of Music, you know, The second Quatern:

Chesil. The Carver.

Maul. The Free-Mason.

Sq. Su^mer. The Carpenter.

Twybil. His Man.

The third Quaternio.

Dresser. The Plomber.

Quarrel. The Glasier.

Fret. The Plaisterer.

Beuter. The Morter-man.


and your Coronell Vitruvius knows a little. O Chesil! our curious Carver! and
Master Maul, our Free-Mason; Squire Summer, our Carpenter, and Twybil his Man;
stand you four, there, in the second rank, work upon that ground. And you
Dresser, the Plomber; Quarrel, the Glasier; Fret, the Plaisterer; and Beater,
the Morterman; put all you on in the reere, as finishers in true footing, with
Tune, and Measure. Measure is the Soul of a Dance, and Tune the Tickle-foot
thereof. Use Holy Day legs, and have 'hem: Spring, Leap, Caper, and Gingle;
Pumpes, and Ribbands, shall be your reward, till the Soles of your feet swell,
with the surfeit of your light and nimble Motion.

Well done, my Musical, Arithmeticall, They begun to Dance. Geometrical
Gamesters! or rather my true Mathematical Boys! It is carried, in number,
weight, and measure; as if the Aires were all Harmony, and the Figures a
well-tim'd Proportion! I cry still; Deserve Holy Days, and have 'hem. I Will
have a whole Quarter of the year cut out for you in Holy Days, and laced with
Statute-Tunes, and Dances; fitted to the activitie of your Tressels, to which
you shall trust, Ladds, in the name of your Iniquo Vitruvius. Hay for the
Lilly, for, and the blended Rose.

The Dance ended.
And the King, and Queen, having a second Banquet, set down before them from
the Clouds by two Loves; One, as the Kings, the other as the Queens;
differenced by their Garlands only: His of White, and Red Roses; the other of
Lilly's inter-weav'd, Gold, Silver, Purple, etc. With a bough of Palm (in his
hand) cleft a little at the top. They were both armed, and winged: with Bows
and Quivers, Cassocks, Breeches, Buskins, Gloves, and Perukes alike. They stood
silent awhile, wondering at one another, till at last the lesser of them began
to speak.

Eros. Anteros.
ER. ANother Cupid?

AN. Yes, your second self,
A Son of Venus, and as mere an elfe,
And wagge as you.

ER. Eros?


AN. No, Anteros:

Your Brother, Cupid, yet not sent to cross',
Or spy into your favors, here, at Court.

EROS. What then?

AN. To serve you, Brother, and report
Your graces from the Queens side to the Kings,
In whose name I salute you.

ER. Break my wings
I fear you will.

AN. O be not jealous, Brother!
What bough is this?

ER. A Palm.


AN. Give me't. Antero^ snatched at the Palm, but Eros divided it.

ER. Another
You may have.

AN. I will this.


ER. Divide it.


AN. So.

This was right Brother-like! The world will know
By this one Act, both natures. You are Love,
I Love, again. In these two Spheres we move,
Eros, and Anteros.

ER. We have cleft the bough,
And struck a tallie of our loves, too, now.

AN. I call to mind the wisdom of our Mother
Venus, who would have Cupid have a Brother --

ER. To look upon, and thrive. Me seems I grew
Three inches higher sin' I met with you.
It was the Counsel, that the Oracle gave
Your Nurses the glad Graces, sent to crave
Themis advice. You do not know (quoth she)
The nature of this Infant. Love may be
Brought forth thus little, live awhile alone,
But never will prosper, if he have not one
Sent after him to play with.

ER. Such another
As you are Anteros, our loving brother.

AN. Who would be always, planted, in your eye;
For Love, by Love increases mutually.

ER. We, either, looking on each other, thrive;

AN. Shoot up, grow galliard --

ER. Yes, and more alive!

AN. When one's away, it seems we both are less.

ER. I was a Dwarf, an Urchin, I confess,.
Till you were present.

AN. But a bird of wing,
Now, fit to fly before a Queen, or King.

ER. I have not one sick feather sin' you came,
But turned a jollier Cupid.

AN. Then I am.

ER. I love my Mothers brain, could thus provide
For both in Court, and give us each our side,
Where we might meet.

AN. Embrace.

ER. Circle each other.

AN. Confer, and whisper.

ER. Brother, with a Brother.

AN. And by this sweet Contention for the Palm,
Unite our appetites, and make them calm.

ER. To will, and nill one thing.

AN. And so to move
Affection in our Wills, as in our Love.

ER. It is the place sure breeds it, where we are,

AN. The King, and Queens Court, which is circular,
And perfect.

ER. The pure school that we live in,
And is of purer Love, a Discipline.

Philalethes. NO more of your Poetry (pretty Cupids) lest presuming on your
little wits, you profane the intention of your service. The Place I confess,
wherein (by the Providence of your Mother Venus) you are now planted, is the
divine School of Love. An Academie, or Court, where all the true lessons of
Love are thoroughly read and taught. The Reasons, the Proportions, and Harmony,
drawn forth in analytick Tables, and made demonstrable to the Senses. Which if
you (Brethren) should report, and swear to, would hardly get credit above a
Fable, here in the edge of Darbyshire (the region of Ale) because you relate in
Rhyme. O, that Rhyme is a shrewd disease, and makes all suspected it would
persuade. Leave it, pretty Cupids, leave it. Rhyme will undo you, and hinder
your growth, and reputation in Court, more then any thing beside you have
either mentioned, or feared. If you dable in Poetry once, it is done of your
being believed, or understood here. No man will trust you in this Verge, but
conclude you for a mere case of Canters, or a pair of wandering Gypsies.

Return to your selves (little Deities) and admire the Miracles you serve,
this excellent King, and his unparalled Queen, who are the Canons, the
Decretals, and whole Schoole-Divinitie of Love. Contemplate, and study them.
Here shall you read Hymen, having lighted two Torches, either of which inflame
mutually, but waste not. One Love by the others aspect increasing, and both in
the right lines of aspiring. The Fates spinning them round and even threads, and
of their whitest wool, without brack, or purle. Fortune, and Time fettered at
their feet with Adamantine Chains, their wings deplum'd, for starting from
them. All amiablenesse in the richest dress of delight and colors, courting
the season to tarry by them, and make the Idea of their Felicity perfect;
together with the love, knowledge, and duty of their Subjects perpetual. So
wishes the glad, and grateful Client, seated here, the overjoyed Master of
the house; and prays that the whole Region about him could speak but his
language. Which is, that first the Peoples love would let that People know
their own happiness, and that knowledge could confirm their duties, to an
admiration of your sacred Persons; descended, one from the most peaceful, the
other the most warlike, both your pious, and just progenitors; from whom, as
out of Peace came Strength, and out of the Strong came sweetness, alluding to
the holy Riddle, so in you joined by holy marriage in the flower and ripeness
of years, live the promise of a numerous Succession to your Scepters, and a
strength to secure your own Islands, with their own Ocean, but more your own
Palme-branches, the Types of perpetual Victory. To which, two words be added,
a zealous Amen, and ever rounded, with a Crown of Welcome. Welcome, Welcome. *


MORTIMER HIS FALL.

A TRAGEDY, WRITTEN BY BEN. JOHNSON.

HOR. in Art. Poetic. Et docuit magnumque loqui, nitique cothurno.

Printed M.DC.XL.

The Persons Names.
MORTIMER. Earl of March. ISABEL. Queen Mother. ADAM D'ORLTON. B. of
Worc'ter. CHORUS. Of Ladies, Knights, and Squires. EDWARD. 3. K. of England.
JOHN, the K. Brother. Earl of Cornwall. HEN. the K. Cousin. Earl of Lancaster.
W. MOUNTACUTE. K. Servant. TO. D'ELAND. Constable. of Not. Castle. NUNCIUS. Or a
Herald.
Arguments.
THe first Act comprehends Mortimers pride and security, raised to the degree
of an Earl, by the Queens favor, and love; with the Counsels of Adam
D'orlton, the politic B. of Worc'ter, against Lancaster.

The Chorus of Ladies, celebrating the worthiness of the Queen; in rewarding
Mortimers services, and the Bishops.

The second Act shows the Kings love, and respect to his Mother, that will
hear nothing against Mortimers greatness, or believe any report of her
extraordinary favors to him, but imputes all to his Cousin Lancasters envy;
and commands there-after, an utter silence of those matters.

The Chorus of Courtiers, celebrating the Kings worthiness of Nature, and
Affection to his Mother, who will hear nothing, that may trench upon her
honor, though delivered by his Kinsman, of such neerenesse, and thereby take
occasion to extol the Kings piety, and their own happiness under such a
King.

The third Act relates (by the occasion of a vision, the blind Earl of L. had)
to the Kings Brother E. of Cornwall, the horror of their Fathers death, and
the cunning making away of their Uncle, the Earl of K. by Mortimers hired
practice.

The Chorus of Country Justices, and their Wives, telling how they were
deluded, and made believe, the old King lived, by the show of him in Corfe
Castle; and how they saw him eat, and use his knife, like the old King, etc.
with the description of the feigned Lights, and Masks there, that deceived
'hem, all which came from the Court.

The fourth Act expresses by conference between the K. and his Brother a
change, and intention to explore the truth of those reports, and a charge of
employing W. Montacute, to get the keys of the Castle of Not. into the K.
power, and draw the Constable, Sir Rob. D'Eland, to their party.

Mortimers security, scorn of the Nobility, too much familiarity with the
Queen, related by the Chorus, the report of the Kings surprising him in his
Mothers bedchamber, a general gladness, his being sent to execution.

The fifth Act, the Earl of Lancasters following the cry, and meeting the
report. The Celebration of the Kings Justice.

MORTIMER HIS FALL.
Act I.
MORTIMER. THis Rise is made, yet! and we now stand, ranck'd,
To view about us, all that were above us!
Naught hinders now our prospect, all are even,
We walk upon a Level. Mortimer
Is a great Lord of late, and a new thing! -- A Prince, an Earl, and Cousin to
the King.
At what a diverse price, do diverse men
Act the same things! Another might have had
Perhaps the Hurdle, or at least the Axe,
For what I have this Crownet, Robes, and Wax.
There is a Fate, that flies with towering spirits
Home to the mark, and never checks at conscience.
Poor plodding Priests, and preaching Friars may make
Their hollow Pulpits, and the empty Isles
Of Churches ring with that round word: But we
That draw the subtle, and more piercing air,
In that sublimed region of Court,
Know all is good, we make so, and go on
Secured by the prosperity of our crimes.
To day, is Mortimer made Earl of March.
For what? For that, the very thinking it
Would make a Citizen start! some politic Tradesman
Curle with the Caution of a Constable!
But I, who am no common Council man,
Knew, injuries of that dark nature done
Were to be thoroughly done, and not be left
To fear of a revenge. They'are light offenses
Which admit that. The great ones get above it.
Man does not nurse a deadlier piece of folly
To his high temper, and brave soul, then that
Of fancying goodness, and a seal to live by
So differing from man's life. As if with Lions,
Bears, Tigers, Wolves, and all those beasts of Prey,
He would affect to be a Sheep! Can man
Neglect what is, so, to attain what should be,
As rather he will call on his own ruin,
Then work to assure his safety? I should think
When amongst a world of bad, none can be good,
(I mean so absolutely good, and perfect,
As our religious Confessors would have us)
It is enough, we do decline the rumor
Of doing monstrous things: And, yet, if those
Were of emolument, unto our ends,
Even of those, the wiseman will make friends
For all the brand, and safely do the ill,
As Usurers rob, or our Physicians kill.

ISABEL. MORTIMER. My Lord! sweet Mortimer!

MOR. My Q. my Mistress!
My Sovereign! nay, my Goddess! and my Juno!
What name, or title, as a mark of Power
Upon me, should I give you?

ISA. Isabel,
Your Isabel, and you my Mortimer:
Which are the marks of Paritie, not power
And these are titles, best become our love.

MOR. Can you fall under those?

ISA. Yes, and be happy.
Walk forth, my loved, and gentle Mortimer,
And let my longing eyes enjoy their feast,
And fill of thee; my faire-shap'd, God-like man:
Thou art a banquet unto all my Senses;
Thy form does feast mine eye, thy voice mine ear,
Thy breath, my smell, thy every kiss my taste;
And softness of thy skin, my very touch:
As if I felt it dactile through my blood.
I never was reconciled to these robes,
This garb of England, till I saw thee in them.
Thou make, they seem not boistrous, nor rude,
Like my rough haughty Lords de Engle-terre,
With whom I have so many years been troubled.

MOR. But now redeemed, and set at liberty,
Queen of your self, and them.

He died, and left it unfinished.

THE MAGNETIC LADY: OR, HVMORS RECONCILED.

A COMEDY composed By BEN: JOHNSON.

I am lapides suus ardor agit ferrumque tenetur,
Illecebris. --
Claud. de Magnet. LONDON, Printed M.CD.XL.

THE SCENE LONDON.
The Persons that act.
LADY Loadstone, The Magnetic Lady. Mrs. Polish, Her Gossip, and she-Parasite
Mrs. Placentia, Her Neice. Pleasance, Her Waiting Woman. Mrs. Keep, The Neices
Nourse. MOTHER Chair, The Midwife. Mr. Compass, A Scholar, Mathematick.
CAPTAIN Ironside, A Soldier. PARSON Palate, Prelate of the Parish. DOCTOR
Rut, Physician to the house. Tim Item, His Apothecary. SIR Diaph Silkworm, A
Courtier. Mr. Practice, A Lawyer. SIR Moath Interest, An Usurer, or Money-baud.
Mr. Bias, A Vi-politique, or Sub secretary. Mr. Needle, The Ladies Steward, and
Tailor.
CHORUS by way of Induction.

THE INDVCTION, OR, CHORUS.
Two Gentlemen entering upon the Stage. Mr. PROBEE and Mr. DAMPLAY. A BOY of the
house, meets them. Boy. What do you lack, Gentlemen? what is it you lack? any
fine Phansies, Figures, Humors, Characters, Idaeas, Definitions of Lords, and
Ladies? Waiting-women, Parasites, Knights, Captains, Courtiers, Lawyers? what
do you lack?


Pro. A pretty prompt Boy for the Poetique Shop.


Dam. And a bold! where is one of your Masters, Sirrah, the Poet?

Boy. Which of 'hem? Sir we have diverse that drive that trade, now: Poets,
Poet'accios, Poetasters, Poetito's --


Dam. And all Haberdashers of small wit, I presume: we would speak with the
Poet of the day, Boy.


Boy. Sir, he is not here. But, I have the dominion of the Shop, for this
time, under him, and can show you all the variety the Stage will afford for the
present.


Pro. Therein you will express your own good parts, Boy.


Dam. And tie us two, to you, for the gentle office.


Pro. We are a pair of public persons (this Gentleman, and my self) that
are sent, thus coupled unto you upon state-busines.


Boy. It concerns but the state of the Stage I hope!


Dam. O, you shall know that by degrees,


Boy. No man leaps into a business of state, without fourding first the state of
the business.


Pro. We are sent unto you, indeed from the people.


Boy. The people! which side of the people?


Dam. The Venison side, if you know it, Boy.


Boy. That Is the left side. I had rather they had been the right.


Pro. So they are. Not the Paces, or grounds of your people, that (...) in the
oblique caves and wedges of your house, your sinful sixe-penny Mechanics --


Dam. But the better, and braver sort of your people! Plush and
Velvet-outsides! that stick your house round like so many eminences --


Boy. Of clothes, not understandings? They are at pawn. Well, I take these as
a part of your people though; what bring you to me from these people?


Dam. You have heard, Boy, the ancient Poets had it in their purpose, still to
please this people.


Pro. I, their chief aim was --


Dam. Populo ut placerent: (if he understands so much.)


Boy. Quas fecissent fabulas.) I understand that, sin' I learned Terence, in the
third form at Westminster: go on Sir.


Pro. Now, these people have employed us to you, in all their names, to entreat
an excellent Play from you.


Dam. For they have had very mean ones, from this shop of late, the Stage as
you call it.


Boy. Troth, Gentlemen, I have no wares, which I dare thrust upon the people
with praise. But this, such as it is, I will venture with your people, your gay
gallant people: so as you, again, will undertake for them, that they shall
know a good Play when they hear it; and will have the conscience, and
ingenuity beside, to confess it.


Prob. We Will pass our words for that: you shall have a brace of us to engage
our selves.


Boy. You Will tender your names, Gentlemen, to our book then?


Dam. Yes, here is Mr. Probee; A man of most powerful speech, and parts to
persuade.


Pro. And Mr. Damplay, will make good all he undertakes.


Boy. Good Mr. Probee, and Mr. Damplay! I like your securities: whence do you
write yourselves?


Pro. Of London, Gentlemen: but Knights brothers, and Knights friends, I assure
you.


Dam. And Knights fellow's too. Every Poet writes Squire now.


Boy. You are good names! very good men, both of you! I accept you.


Dam. And what is the Title of your Play, here? The Magnetic Lady?


Boy. Yes, Sir, an attractive title the Author has given it.


Pro. A Magnete, I warrant you.


Dam. O, no, from Magnus, Magna, Magnum.


Boy. This Gentleman, has found the true magnitude --


Dam. Of his portall, or entry to the work, according to Vitruvius.


Boy. Sir all our work is done without a Portall -- or Vitruvius. In Foro, as
a true Comoedy should be. And what is conceald within, is brought out, and
made present by report.


Dam. We see not that always observed, by your Authors of these times: or
scarce any other.


Boy. Where it is not at all known, how should it be observed? The most of
those your people call Authors, never dreamt of any Decorum, or what was proper
in the Scene; but grope at it, in the dark, and feel, or fumble for it; I
speak it, both with their leave, and the leave o'your people.


Dam. But, why Humors reconciled? I would feign know?


Boy. I can satisfy you there, too: if you will. But, perhaps you desire not
to be satisfied.


Dam. No? why should you conceive so, Boy?


Boy. My conceit is not ripe, yet: I Will tell you that anon. The Author,
beginning his studies of this kind, with every man in his Humor; and after,
every man out of his Humor; and since, continuing in all his Plays,
especially those of the Comic thread, whereof the New-Inne was the last, some
recent humors still, or manners of men, that went along with the times,
finding himself now near the close, or shutting up of his Circle, has
phant'sied to himself, in Idaea, this Magnetic Mistress. A Lady a brave
bountiful Housekeeper, and a virtuous Widow: who having a young Neice, ripe
for a man and marriageable, he makes that his Center attractive, to draw
thither a diversity of Guests, all persons of different humors to make up his
Perimiter. And this he has called Humors reconciled.


Pro. A bold undertaking! and far greater, then the reconciliation of both
Churches, the quarrel between humors having been much the ancienter, and,
in my poor opinion, the root of all Schism, and Faction, both in Church and
Commonwealth.


Boy. Such is the opinion of many wisemen, that meet at this shop still; but
how he will speed in it, we cannot tell, and he himself (it seems)
lessecares. For he will not be entreated by us, to give it a Prologue. He has
lost too much that way already, he says. He will not woo the gentile
ignorance so much. But careless of all vulgar censure, as not depending on
common approbation, he is confident it shall super-please judicious
Spectators, and to them he leaves it to work, with the rest by example, or
otherwise.


Dam. He may be deceived in that, Boy: Few follow examples now, especially, if
they be good.


Boy. The Play is ready to begin, Gentlemen, I tell you, lest you might defraud
the expectation of the people, for whom you are Delegates! Please you take a
couple of Seats, and plant your selves, here, as near my standing as you can:
Fly every thing (you see) to the mark, and censure it; freely. So, you
interrupt not the Series, or thread of the Argument, to break or pucker it,
with unnecessary questions. For, I must tell you, (not out of mine own
Dictamen, but the Authors,) A good Play, is like a skeene of silk: which, if
you take by the right end, you may wind off, at pleasure, on the bottom, or
card of your discourse, in a tale, or so; how you will: But if you light on the
wrong end, you will pull all into a knot, or else-lock; which nothing but the
sheers, or a candle will undo, or separate.


Dam. Stay! who be these, I pray you?


Boy. Because it is your first question, and (these be the prime persons) it
would in civility require an answer: but I have heard the Poet affirm, that to
be the most unlucky Scene in a Play, which needs an Interpreter; especially,
when the Auditory are awake: and such are you, he presumes. Ergo.


THE MAGNETIC LADY: OR, HUMORS RECONCILED.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Compass, Ironside.
COm. Welcome good Captain Ironside, and brother;
You shall along with me. I Am lodged hard by,
Here at a noble Ladies house in the street,
The Lady Loadstones (one will bid us welcome)
Where there are Gentlewomen, and male Guests,
Of several humors, carriage, constitution,
Profession too: but so diametrall
One to another, and so much opposed,
As if I can but hold them all together,
And draw 'hem to a sufferance of themselves,
But till the Dissolution of the Dinner;
I shall have just occasion to believe
My wit is magisteriall; and our selves
Take infinite delight, in the success.

Iro. Troth, brother Compass, you shall pardon me;
I love not so to multiply acquaintance
At a meals cost, 'twill take off of my freedom
So much: or bind me to the least observance.

Com. Why Ironside, you know I am a Scholar,
And part a Soldier; I have been employed,
By some the greatest Statesmen of the kingdom,
These many years: and in my time conversed
With sundry humors, suiting so my self
To company, as honest men, and knaves,
Good-fellowes, Hypocrites, all sorts of people,
Though never so divided in themselves,
Have studied to agree still in the usage,
And handling of me (which has been fair too.)

Iro. Sir I confess you to be one well read
In men, and manners; and that, usually,
The most ungoverned persons, you being present,
Rather subject themselves unto your censure,
Then give you least occasion of distaste,
By making you the subject of their mirth:
But (to deal plainly with you, as a brother)
When ever I distrust i'my own valor:
I Will never bear me on another wit,
Or offer to bring off, or save my self
On the opinion of your Judgment, gravitie,
Discretion, or what else. But (being away)
You'are sure to have lesse-wit-worke, gentle brother,
My humor being as stubborn, as the rest,
And as unmannageable.

Com. You do mistake
My Caract of your friendship, all this while!
Or at what rate I reckon your assistance
Knowing by long experience, to such Animals,
Halfe-hearted Creatures, as these are, your Fox, there,
Vnkenneld with a Choleric, ghastly aspect,
Or two or three comminatory Terms,
Would run their fears to any hole of shelter,
Worth a days laughter! I am for the sport:
For nothing else.

Iro. But, brother, I have seen
A Coward, meeting with a man as valiant
As our St. George (not knowing him to be such,
Or having least opinion that he was so)
Set to him roundly, I, and swindge him soundly:
And in the virtue of that error, having
Once overcome, resolved for ever after
To err; and think no person, nor no creature
More valiant then himself.

Com. I think that too.
But, Brother, (could I over entreat you)
I have some little plot upon the rest
If you would be contented, to endure
A sliding reprehension, at my hands,
To hear your self, or your profession glanced at
In a few sleighting terms: It would beget
Me such a maine Authority, of the by:
And do your self no dis-repute at all!

Iro. Compass, I know that universal causes
In nature produce nothing; but as meeting
Particular causes, to determine those,
And specify their acts. This is a piece
Of Oxford Science, stays with me ere since
I left that place; and I have often found
The truth thereof, in my private passions:
For I do never feel my self perturb'd
With any general words against my profession,
Unless by some smart stroke upon my self
They do awake, and stir me: Else, to wise
And well experienced men, words do but signify;
They have no power; save with dull Grammarians,
Whose souls are naught, but a Syntaxis of them.

Com. Here comes our Parson, Parson Palate here
A venerable youth! I must salute him,
And a great Clerk! he is going to the Ladies,
And though you see him thus, without his Cope,
I dare assure you, he is our Parish Pope!
God save my reverend Clergy, Parson Palate.

ACT I. SCENE II.
Palate, Compass, Ironside.
Pal. The witty Mr. Compass! how is it, with you?

Com. My Lady stays for you, and for your Council,
Touching her Neice Mrs. Placentia Steel!
Who strikes the fire of full fourteen, to day,
Ripe for a husband.

Pal. I, she chimes, she chimes,
Saw you the Doctor Rut, the house Physician?
He Is sent for too.

Com. To Council? 'time yo' were there.
Make haste, and give it a round quick dispatch:
That we may go to dinner betimes, Parson:
And drink a health, or two more, to the business.

Iro. This is a strange put-off! a reverend youth,
You use him most surreverently me thinks!
What? call you him? Palate Please? or Parson Palate?

Com. All Is one, but shorter! I can gi'you his Character.
He, is the Prelate of the Parish, here;
And governes all the Dames; appoints the cheer;
Writes down the bills of fare; pricks all the Guests;
Makes all the matches and the marriage feasts
Within the ward; draws all the parish wills;
Designs the Legacies; and strokes the Gills
Of the chief Mourners; And (who ever lacks)
Of all the kindred, he has first his blacks.
Thus holds he weddings up, and burials,
As his maine tithing; with the Gossips stals,
Their pewes; He Is top still, at the public mess;
Comforts the widow, and the fatherless,
In funeral Sack! Sits 'bove the Alderman!
For of the Ward-mote Quest, he better can,
The mystery, then the Levitick Law:
That piece of Clark-ship does his Vestry awe
He is as he conceives himself, a fine
Well furnished, and apparaled Divine.

Iro. Who made this EPIGRAMME, you?

Com. No, a great Clarke
As any'is of his bulk. (Ben: Ionson) made it.

Iro. But what is the other Character, DOCTOR Rut?

Com. The same man made 'hem both: but his is shorter,
And not in rhyme, but blancks. I Will tell you that, too.
Rut is a young Physician to the family:
That, letting God alone, ascribes to nature
More then her share; licentious in discourse,
And in his life a professed Voluptary;
The slave of money, a Buffon in manners;
Obscene in language; which he vents for wit;
Is saucy in his Logicks, and disputing,
Is any thing but civil, or a man.
See here they are! and walking with my Lady,
In consultation, before the door;
We will slip in, as if we saw 'hem not.

ACT I. SCENE III.
Lady, Palate, Rut.
Lad. I, it is his fault, she is not bestowed,
My brother Interests.

Pal. Who, old Sir Moath?

Lad. He keeps off all her Suitors, keeps the portion,
Still in his hands: and will not part withal,
On any terms.

Pal. Hinc illae lachrymae;
Thence flows the cause of the maine grievance.

Rut. That
It is a maine one! how much is the portion?

Lad. No petty sum.

Pal. But sixteen thousand pound.

Rut. He should be forced, Madam, to lay it down.
When is it payable?

Lad. When she is married.

Pal. Marry her, marry her, Madam.

Rut. Get her married.
Loose not a day, an hour --

Pal. Not a minute.
Pursue your project real. Mr. Compass,
Advised you, too. He is the perfect Instrument,
Your Ladyship should sail by.

Rut. Now, Mr. Compass
Is a fine witty man; I saw him go in, now.

Lad. Is he gone in?

Pal. Yes, and a Fether with him,
He seems a Soldier.

Rut. Some new Suitor, Madam.

Lad. I am beholden to him: he brings ever
Variety of good persons to my table,
And I must thank him, though my brother Interest
Dislike of it a little.

Pal. He likes nothing
That runs your way.

Rut. Troth, and the other cares not.
He Will go his own way, if he think it right.

Lad. He Is a true friend! and there is Mr. Practice,
The fine young man of Law comes to the house:
My brother brooks him not, because he thinks
He is by me assigned for my Neice:
He will not hear of it.

Rut. Not of that ear:
But yet your Ladyship does wisely in it --

Pal. 'Twill make him to lay down the portion sooner,
If he but dream you will march her with a Lawyer.

Lad. So Mr. Compass says. It is between
The Lawyer, and the Courtier, which shall have her.

Bal. Who, Sir Diaphanous Silke-worme?

Rut. A fine Gentleman.
Old Mr. Silke-wormes Heir.

Pal. And a near Courtier,
Of a most elegant thread

Lad. And so my Gossip
Polish assures me. Here she comes! good Polish
Welcome in troth! How do thou gentle Polish?

Rut. Who Is this?

Pal. Dame Polish, her shee-Parasite,
Her talking, soothing, sometime governing Gossip.

ACT. I. SCENE IV.
Polish, Lady, Palate, Rut.
Pal. Your Ladyship is still the Lady Loadstone
That draws, and draws unto you, Guests of all sorts:
The Courtiers, and the Soldiers, and the Scholars,
The Travelers, Physicians, and Divines,
As Doctor Ridley writ, and Doctor Barlow?
They both have wrote of you, and Mr. Compass.

Lad. We mean, they shall write more, ere it be long.

Pol. Alas, they are both dead, and 't please you; But,
Your Ladyship means well, and shall mean well,
So long as I live. How does your fine Neice?
My charge, Mistress Placentia Steel?

Lad. She is not well.

Pol. Not well?

Lad. Her Doctor says for

Rut. Not very well; she cannot shoot at Buts.
Or manage a great Horse, but she can cranch
A sack of small coal! eat you lime, and hair,
Soap-ashes, Loame, and has a dainty spice
OF the green sickness!

Pol. 'Od shield!

Rut. Or the Dropsy!
A toy, a thing of nothing. But my Lady, here
Her noble Aunt.

Pol. She is a noble Aunt!
And a right worshipful Lady, and a virtuous;
I know it well!

Rut. Well, if you know it, peace.

Pal. Good sister Polish hear your betters speak.

Pol. Sir I will speak, with my good Ladies leave,
And speak, and speak again; I did bring up
My Ladies Neice, Mrs. Placentia Steel,
With my own Daughter (who is Placentia too)
And waits upon my Lady, is her woman:
Her Ladyship well knows Mrs. Placentia
Steel (as I said) her curious Neice, was left
A Legacy to me; by Father, and Mother
With the Nurse, Keep, that tended her: her Mother
She died in Childbed of her, and her Father
Lived not long after: for he loved her Mother!
They were a godly couple! yet both di'd,
(As we must all.) No creature is immortal;
I have heard our Pastor say; no, not the faithful!
And they did die (as I said) both in one month.

Rut. Sure she is not long lived, if she spend breath thus.


Pol. And did bequeath her, to my care, and hand,
To polish, and bring up. I molded her,
And fashioned her, and formed her; she had the sweat
Both of my brows and brains. My Lady knows it
Since she could write a quarter old.

Lad. I know not
That she could write so early, my good Gossip.
But I do know she was so long your care,
Till she was twelve year old; that I called for her,
And took her home, for which I thank you Polish,
And am beholden to you.

Rut. I sure thought
She had a Lease of talking, for nine lives --

Pal. It may be she has.

Pol. Sir sixteen thousand pound
Was then her portion! for she was, indeed,
Their only child! and this was to be paid
Upon her marriage, so she married still
With my good Ladies liking here, her Aunt:
(I heard the Will read) Mr. Steel her father,
The world condemned him to be very rich,
And very hard, and he did stand condemned
With that vain world, till, as 'twas 'prov'd, after,
He left almost as much more to good uses
In Sir Moath Interests hands, my Ladies brother,
Whose sister he had married: He holds all
In his close gripe. But Mr. Steel, was liberal,
And a fine man; and she a dainty Dame,
And a religious, and a bountiful --

ACT I. SCENE V.
Compass, Ironside. To them.
You knew her Mr. Compass?

Com. Spare the torture,
I do confess without it.

Pol. And her husband,
What a fine couple they were? and how they lived?

Com. Yes.


Pol. And loved together, like a pair of Turtles?

Com. Yes.


Pol. And feasted all the Neighbors?

Com. Take her off
Some body that has mercy.

Rut. O he knows her,
It seems!

Com. Or any measure of compassion:
Doctors, if you be Christians, undertake
One for the soul, the other for the body!

Pol. She would dispute with the Doctors of Divinity
At her own table! and the Spitle Preachers!
And find out the Armenians.

Rut. The Armenians?


Pol. I say the Armenians.

Com. Nay, I say so too!

Pol. So Mr. Polish called 'hem, the Armenians!

Com. And Medes, and Persians, did he not?

Pol. Yes, he knew 'hem,
And so did Mistress Steel! she was his Pupil!
The Armenians, he would say, were worse then Papists!
And then the Persians, were our Puritanes,
Had the fine piercing wits!

Com. And who, the Medes?

Pol. The middle men, the Lukewarm Protestants?

Rut. Out, out.


Pol. Sir she would find them by their branching*
Their branching sleeves, brancht cassocks, and brancht doctrine,
Beside their Texts.

Rut. Stint Karlin: I Will not hear,
Confute her Parson.

Pol. I respect no Persons,
Chaplins, or Doctors, I will speak.

Lad. Yes, so't be reason,
Let her.

Rut. Death, she cannot speak reason.

Com. Nor sense, if we be Masters of our senses!

Iro. What mad woman have they got, here, to bate?

Pol. Sir I am mad, in truth, and to the purpose;
And cannot but be mad; to hear my Ladies
Dead sister slighted, witty Mrs. Steel!

Iro. If she had a wit, Death has gone near to spoil it,
Assure your self.

Pol. She was both witty, and zealous,
And lighted all the Tinder of the truth,
(As one said) of Religion, in our Parish:
She was too learned to live long with us!
She could the Bible in the holy tongue:
And read it without pricks: had all her Masoreth;
Knew Burton, and his Bull; and scribe Prin-Gent!
Fraesto-be-gon: and all the Pharisees.

Lad. Dear Gossip,
Be you gone, at this time, too, and vouchsafe
To see your charge, my Neice.

Pol. I shall obey
If your wise Ladyship think fit: I know,
To yield to my Superiors.

Lad. A good woman!
But when she is impertinent, grows earnest,
A little troublesome, and out of season:
Her love, and zeal transport her.

Com. I am glad,
That any thing could port her hence. We now
Have hope of dinner, after her long grace.
I have brought your Ladyship a hungry Guest, here,
A Soldier, and my brother Captain Ironside:
Who being by custom grown a Sanguinarie,
The solemn, and adopted son of slaughter:
Is more delighted in the chase of an enemy,
An execution of three days, and nights;
Then all the hope of numerous succession,
Or happiness of Issue could bring to him.

Rut. He is no Suitor then?

Pal. So't should seem.

Com. And, if he can get pardon at heavens hand,
For all his murders, is in as good case
As a new christened Infant: (his employments
Continued to him, without Interruption;
And not allowing him, or time, or place
To commit any other sin, but those)
Please you to make him welcome for a meal, Madam.

Lad. The nobleness of his profession makes
His welcome perfect: though your course description
Would seem to fully it.

Iro. Never, where a beam
Of so much favor does illustrate it,
Right knowing Lady.

Pal. She has cured all well.

Rut. And he has fitted well the Complement.

ACT I. SCENE VI.
Sir Diaphanous. Practice. To them.
Com. No; here they come! the prime Magnetic Guests
Our Lady Loadstone so respects: the Artick!
And the Antartick! Sir Diaphanous Silke-worme!
A Courtier extraordinary; who by diet
Of meats, and drinks; his temperate exercise;
Choice music; frequent bathes; his horary shifts
Of Shirts and Wast-coats; means to immortalize
Mortality it self; and makes the essence
Of his whole happiness the trim of Court.

Dia. I thank you Mr. Compass, for your short Encomiastick.


Rut. It is much in little, Sir.


Pal. Concise, and quick: the true style of an Orator.


Com. But Mr. Practice here, my Ladies Lawyer!
Or man of Law: (for that is the true writing)
A man so dedicate to his profession,
And the preferments go along with it;
As scarce the thundering bruit of an invasion,
Another eighty eight, threatening his Country
With ruin; would no more work upon him,
Then Syracusa's Sack, on Archimede:
So much he loves that Nightcap! the Bench-gowne!
With the broad Guard o'th back! These show
A man betrothed unto the study of our Laws!

Pra. Which you but think the crafty impositions,
Of subtle Clerks, feats of fine understanding,
To abuse Clots, and Clownes with, Mr. Compass,
Having no ground in nature, to sustain it
Or light, from those clear causes: to the inquiry
And search of which, your Mathematical head,
Has so devow'd it self.

Com. Tut, all men are
Philosophers, to their inches. There Is within,
Sir Interest, as able a Philosopher,
In buying, and selling! has reduced his thrifte,
To certain principles, and i'that method!
As he will tell you instantly, by Logorythmes,
The utmost profit of a stock employed:
(Be the Commodity what it will) the place,
Or time, but causing very, very little,
Or, I may say, no paralaxe at all,
In his pecuniary observations!
He has brought your Neices portion with him, Madam;
At least the man that must receive it; Here
They come negotiating the affair;
You may perceive the Contract in their faces;
And read th'indenture: If you would sign 'hem. So.

ACT I. SCENE VII.
Interest. Bias. To them.
Pal. What is he, Mr. Compass?

Com. A Vi-politique!
Or a sub-aiding Instrument of State!
A kind of a laborious Secretary
To a great man! (and likely to come on)
Full of attendance! and of such a stride
In business politic, or oeconomick,
As, well, his Lord may stoop t'advise with him,
And be prescribed by him, in affairs
Of highest consequence, when he is dulled,
Or wearied with the less.

Dia. It Is Mr. Bias,
Lord Whach'um's Politic.

Com. You know the man?

Dia. I have seen him wait at Court, there, with his Maniples
Of papers, and petitions.

Pra. He is one
That overrules though, by his authority
Of living there; and cares for no man else:
Neglects the sacred letter of the Law;
And holds it all to be but a dead heap,
Of civil institutions: the rest only
Of common men, and their causes, a farragoe,
Or a made dish in Court; a thing of nothing:

Com. And that is your quarrel at him? a just plea.


Int. I tell you sister Loadstone --

Com. (Hang your ears
This way: and hear his praises, now Moath opens)

Int. I have brought you here the very man! the Jewel
Of all the Court! close Mr. Bias! Sister,
Apply him to your side! or you may wear him
Here of your breast! or hang him in your ear!
He Is a fit Pendant for a Ladies tip!
A Chrisolite, a Gemme: the very Agat
Of State, and Polity: cut from the Quar
Of Macchiavel, a true Cornelian,
As Tacitus himself! and to be made
The brooch to any true State-cap in Europe!

Lad. You praise him brother, as you had hope to sell him.

Com. No Madam, as he had hope to sell your Neice
Unto him.

Lad. 'Ware your true jests, Mr. Compass;
They will not relish.

Int. I will tell you, sister,
I cannot cry his Carract up enough:
He is unvaluable: All the Lords
Have him in that esteem, for his relations,
Corrant's, Avises, Correspondences
With this Ambassador, and that Agent! He
Will screw you out a Secret from a Statist --.

Com. So easy, as some Cobbler worms a Dog.

Int. And lock it in the Cabinet of his memory --.

Com. Till 't turn a politic insect, or a Fly!
Thus long.

Int. You may be merry Mr. Compass,
But though you have the reversion of an office,
You are not in it Sir.

Bia. Remember that.

Com. Why, should that fright me; Mr. By --, from telling
Whose as you are?

Int. Sir he is one, can do
His turns there: and deliver too his letters,
As punctually, and in as good a fashion,
As ere a Secretary can in Court.

Ir^. Why, is it any matter in what fashion
A man deliver his letters, so he not open 'hem?

Bia. Yes, we have certain precedents in Court,
From which we never swerve, once in an age:
And (whatsoere he thinks) I know the Arts,
And Sciences do not directlier make
A Graduate in our Universities;
Then an habitual gravitie prefers
A man in Court.

Com. Which by the truer style,
Some call a formal, flat servility.

Bia. Sir you may call it what you please. But we
(That tread the path of public businesses)
Know what a tacit shrug is, or a shrink;
The wearing the Callott; the politic hood:
And twenty other parerga, of the by,
You Seculars understand not: I shall trick him,
If his reversion came, in my Lords way.

Dia. What is that Mr. Practice? you sure know?
Mas' Compasses reversion?

Pra. A fine place
(Survey or of the Projects general)
I would I had it.

Pal. What is it worth?

Pra. O Sir,
A Nemo scit.

Lad. We Will think on it before dinner.
Chorus.
BOy. Now, Gentlemen, what censure you of our Protasis, or first Act?


Pro. Well, Boy, it is a fair Presentment of your Actors. And a handsome
promise of somewhat to come hereafter.


Dam. But, there is nothing done in it, or concluded: Therefore I say, no Act.


Boy. A fine piece of Logic! Do you look, Mr. Damplay, for conclusions in a
Protesis? I thought the Law of Comedy had reserved to the Catastrophe: and that
the Epitasis, (as we are taught) and the Catastasis, had been interveening
parts, to have been expected. But you would have all come together it seems:
The Clock should strike five, at once, with the Acts.


Dam. Why, if it could do so, it were well, Boy.


Boy. Yes, if the nature of a Clock were to speak, not strike. So, if a Child
could be borne, in a Play, and grow up to a man, in the first Scene, before he
went off the Stage: and then after to come forth a Squire, and be made a
Knight: and that Knight to travel between the Acts, and do wonders in the
holy land or else where; kill Paynims wild Boores, dun Cowes, and other
Monsters; beget him a reputation, and marry an Emperors Daughter: for his Mrs.
Convert her Fathers Country; and at last come home, lame and all to be laden
with miracles.


Dam. These miracles would please, I assure you: and take the People! For there
be of the People, that will expect miracles, and more then miracles from this
Pen.


Boy. Do they think this Pen can juggle? I would we had Hokospokos for 'hem
then; your People, or Travitanto Tudesko.


Dam. Who Is that Boy?


Boy. Another Juggler, with a long name. Or that your expectors would be gone
hence, now, at the first Act; or expect no more hereafter, then they understand.


Dam. Why so my peremptory Jack?


Boy. My name is John, indeed -- Because, who expect what is impossible, or
beyond nature, defraud themselves.


Pro. Nay, there the Boy said well: They do defraud themselves indeed.


Boy. And therefore, Mr. Damplay, unless like a solemn Justice of wit, you
will damn our Play, unheard, or unexamin'd; I shall entreat your Mrs. Madam
Expectation, if she be among these Ladies, to have patience, but a pissing
while: give our Springs leave to open a little, by degrees: A Source of
ridiculous matter may break forth anon, that shall steep their temples, and
bathe their brains in laughter, to the fomenting of Stupiditie it self, and
the awaking any velvet Lethargy in the House.


Pro. Why do you maintain your Poets quarrel so with velvet, and good
clothes, Boy? we have seen him in indifferent good clothes, ere now.


Boy. And may do in better, if it please the King (his Master) to say Amen to
it, and allow it, to whom he acknowledges all. But his clothes shall never be
the best thing about him, though; he will have somewhat beside, either of
humane letters, or severe honesty, shall speak him a man though he went naked.


Pro. He is beholden to you, if you can make this good, Boy.


Boy. Himself has done that, already, against Envy.


Dam. What Is your name Sir? or your Country?


Boy. John Try-gust my name: A Cornish youth, and the Poets Servant.


Dam. West-countrey breed, I thought, you were so bold.


Boy. Or rather saucy: to find out your palate, Mr. Damplay, Faith we do call
a Spade, a Spade, in Cornwall. If you dare damn our Play, in the wrong place,
we shall take heart to tell you so.


Pro. Good Boy.


ACT II.
SCENE I.
Keep. Placentia. Pleasance.
Kee. SWeet Mistress, pray you be merry: you are sure
To have a husband now.

Pla. I, if the store
Hurt not the choice.

Ple. Store is no sore, young Mistress,
My mother is wont to say.

Keep. And she will say wisely,
As any mouth in the Parish. Fix on one,
Fix upon one, good Mistress.

Pla. At this call, too,
Here Is Mr. Practice, who is called to the Bench
Of purpose.

Kee. Yes, and by my Ladies means --

Ple. It Is thought to be the man.

Kee. A Lawyers wife.

Ple. And a fine Lawyers wife.

Kee. Is a brave calling.

Ple. Sweet Mistress Practice!

Kee. Gentle Mistress Practice!

Ple. Fair, open Mistress Practice!

Kee. I, and close,
And cunning Mrs. Practice!

Pla. I not like that,
The Courtiers is the neater calling.

Ple. Yes,
My Lady Silke-worme.

Kee. And to shine in Plush.

Ple. Like a young night Crow, a Diaphanous Silkeworme.

Kee. Lady Diaphanous sounds most delicate!

Ple. Which would you choose, now Mistress?

Pla. Cannot tell.
The copy does confound one.

Ple. Here Is my Mother.

ACT II. SCENE II.
Polish. Keep. Placentia. Pleasance. Needle.
Pol. How now, my dainty charge, and diligent Nurse?
What were you chanting on? ( To her daughter kneeling. God bless you Maiden.)

Kee. We were enchanting all; wishing a husband
For my young Mistress here. A man to please her.

Pol. She shall have a man, good Nurse, and must have a man:
A man, and a half, if we can choose him out:
We are all in Counsel within, and sit about it:
The Doctors, and the Scholars, and my Lady;
Who Is wiser then all us --. Where Is Mr. Needle?
Her Ladyship so lacks him to prick out
The man? How does my sweet young Mistress?
You look not well, me thinks! how do you, dear charge?
You must have a husband, and you shall have a husband;
There Is two put out to making for you: A third,
Your Uncle promises: But you must still
Be ruled by your Aunt: according to the will
Of your dead father, and mother (who are in heaven.)
Your Lady-Aunt has choice in the house for you:
We do not trust your Uncle; he would keep you
A Batchler still, by keeping of your portion:
And keep you not alone without a husband,
But in a sickness: I, and the green sickness,
The Maidens malady; which is a sickness:
A kind of a disease, I can assure you,
And like the Fish our Mariners call remora --.

Kee. A remora Mistress!

Pol. How now goody Nurse?
Dame Keep of Katernes? what? have you an oar
IN the Cockboat, 'cause you are a Saylors wife?
And come from Shadwell? I say a remora:
For it will stay a Ship, that is under Sail!
And stays are long, and tedious things to Maids!
And maidens are young ships, that would be sailing,
When they be rigged: wherefore is all their trim else?

Nee. True; and for them to be staid --.

Pol. The stay is dangerous:
You know it Mrs. Needle.

Nee. I know somewhat:
And can assure you, from the Doctors mouth,
She has a Dropsy; and must change the air,
Before she can recover.

Pol. Say you so, Sir?

Nee. The Doctor says so.

Pol. Says his worship so?
I warrant 'hem he says true, then; they sometimes
Are Soothsayers, and always cunning men.
Which Doctor was it?

Nee. Eeene my Ladies Doctor:
The neat house-Doctor: But a true stone-Doctor.

Pol. Why? hear you, Nurse? How comes this gear to pass?
This is your fault in truth: It shall be your fault,
And must be your fault: why is your Mistress sick?
She had her health, the while she was with me.

Kee. Alas good Mistress Polish, I am no Saint,
Much less, my Lady, to be urged give health,
Or sickness at my will: but to awaite
The stars good pleasure, and to do my duty.

Pol. You must do more then your duty, foolish Nurse:
You must do all you can; and more then you can,
More then is possible: when folks are sick,
Especially, a Mistress; a young Mistress.

Kee. Here Is Mr. Doctor himself, cannot do that

Pol. Doctor Doo-all can do it. Thence he is called so.

ACT II. SCENE III.
Rut. Polish. Lady. Keep. Placentia.
Rut. Whence? what is he called?

Pol. Doctor, do all you can,
I pray you, and beseech you, for my charge, here.

Lad. She Is my tendering Gossip, loves my Neice.

Pol. I know you can do all things, what you please, Sir,
For a young Damsel, my good Ladies Neice, here!
You can do what you list.

Rut. Peace Tiffany.

Pol. Especially in this new case, of the Dropsy.
The Gentlewoman (I do fear) is leven'd.

Rut. Leven'd? what is that?

Pol. Puffed, blown, and't please your worship.

Rut. What! Dark, by darker? What is blown? puffed? speak
English --

Pol. Tainted (and't please you) some do call it.
She swells, and swells so with it. --

Rut. Give her vent,
If she do swell. A Gimblet must be had:
It is a Tympanites she is troubled with;
There are three kinds: The first is Ana-sarca
Under the Flesh, a Tumor: that is not hers.
The second is Ascites, or Aquosus,
A watery humor: that is not hers neither.
But Tympanites (which we call the Drum)
A wind bombes in her belly, must be unbrac'd,
And with a Faucet, or a Peg, let out,
And she will do well: get her a husband.

Pol. Yes,

I say so Mr. Doctor, and betimes too.

Lad. As
Soon as we can: let her bear up to day,
Laugh, and keep company, at Gleeke, or Crimpe.

Pol. Your Ladyship says right, Crimpe, sure, will cure her.

Rut. Yes, and Gleeke too; peace Gossip Tittle-Tattle,
She must to morrow, down into the Country,
Some twenty mile; A Coach, and six brave Horses:
Take the fresh air, a month there, or five weeks:
And then return a Bride, up to the Town,
For any husband in the Hemisphere,
To chuck at; when she has dropped her Timpane.

Pol. Must she then drop it?

Rut. Thence, it is called a Dropsy.
The Timpanites is one spice of it;
A toy, a thing of nothing, a mere vapor:
I Will blow't away.

Lad. Needle, get you the Coach
Ready, against to morrow morning.

Nee. Yes Madam.

Lad. I Will down with her my self, and thank the Doctor.

Pol. We all shall thank him. But, dear Madam, think,
Resolve upon a man, this day.

Lad. I have done't.
To tell you true, (sweet Gossip;) here is none
But Master Doctor, he shall be of the Counsel:
The man I have designed her to, indeed,
Is Master Practice: he is a neat young man,
Forward, and growing up, in a profession!
Like to be some body, if the Hall stand!
And Pleading hold! A prime young Lawyers wife,
Is a right happy fortune.

Rut. And she bringing
So plentiful a portion, they may live
Like King, and Queen, at common Law together!
Sway Judges; guide the Courts; command the Clerks,
And fright the Evidence; rule at their pleasures,
Like petty Sovereigns in all cases.

Pol. O, that
Will be a work of time; she may be old
Before her husband rise to a chief Judge;
And all her flower be gone: No, no, a Lady
OF the first head I Would have her; and in Court:
The Lady Silk-worme, a Diaphanous Lady:
And be a Vi-countesse to carry all
Before her (as we say) her Gentleman Usher:
And cast off Pages, bare, to bid her Aunt
Welcome unto her honor, at her lodgings.

Rut. You say well, Ladies Gossip; if my Lady
Could admit that, to have her Neice precede her.

Lad. For that, I must consult mine own Ambition,
My zealous Gossip.

Pol. O, you shall precede her:
You shall be a Countess! Sir Diaphanous,
Shall get you made a Countess! Here he comes;
Has my voice certain: O fine Courtier!
O blessed man! the bravery pricked out,
To make my dainty charge, a Vi-countesse!
And my good Lady, her Aunt, Countess at large!

ACT II. SCENE IIII.
Diaphanous. Palate. To them.
Dia. I tell thee Parson, if I get her, reckon
Thou have a friend in Court; and shall command
A thousand pound, to go on any errand,
For any Church preferment thou have a mind too.

Pal. I thank your worship: I will so work for you,
As you shall study all the ways to thank me:
I Will work my Lady, and my Ladies friends;
Her Gossip, and this Doctor; and Squire Needle,
And Mr. Compass, who is all in all:
The very Fly she moves by: He is one
That went to Sea with her husband, Sir John Loadstone,
And brought home the rich prizes: all that wealth
Is left her; for which service she respects him:
A dainty Scholar in the Mathematics;
And one she wholly imployes. Now Dominus Practice
Is yet the man (appointed by her Ladyship)
But there is a trick to set his cap awry:
If I know any thing; he has confessed
To me in private, that he loves another,
My Ladies woman, Mrs. Pleasance: therefore
Secure you of Rivalship.

Dia. I thank thee
My noble Parson: There Is five hundred pound
Waits on thee more for that.

Pal. Accoast the Neice:
Yonder she walks alone: I Will move the Aunt:
But here is the Gossip: she expects a morsel.
Have you nere a Ring, or toy to throw away?

Dia. Yes, here is a Diamont of some threescore pound,
I pray you give her that.

Pal. If she will take it.

Dia. And there is an Emerauld, for the Doctor too:
Thou Parson, thou shall coin me: I am thine.

Pal. Here Mr. Compass comes: Do you see my Lady?
And all the rest? how they do flutter about him!
He is the Oracle of the house, and family!
Now, is your time: go nick it with the Neice:
I will walk by; and hearken how the Chimes go.

ACT II. SCENE V.
Compass. To them.
Com. Nay Parson, stand not off; you may approach:
This is no such hid point of State, we handle,
But you may hear it: for we are all of Counsel.
The gentle Mr. Practice, has dealt clearly,
And nobly with you, Madam.

Lad. Have you talked with him?
And made the overture?

Com. Yes, first I moved
The business trusted to me, by your Ladyship,
IN your own words, almost your very Sillabes:
Save where my Memory trespassed against their elegance:
For which I hope your pardon. Then I enlarged
In my own homely style, the special goodness,
And greatness, of your bounty, in your choice,
And free conferring of a benefit,
So without ends, conditions, any tie
But his mere virtue, and the value of it,
To call him to your kindred, to your veins,
Insert him in your family, and to make him
A Nephew, by the offer of a Neice,
With such a portion; which when he had heard,
And most maturely acknowledged (as his calling
Tends all unto maturity) he returned
A thanks, as ample as the Courtesy,
(In my opinion) said it was a Grace,
Too great to be rejected, or accepted
By him! But as the terms stood with his fortune,
He was not to prevaricate, with your Ladyship,
But rather to require ingenious leave,
He might with the same love, that it was offered
Refuse it, since he could not with his honesty,
(Being he was engaged before) receive it.

Pal. The same he said to me.

Com. And name the party.

Pal. He did, and he did not.

Com. Come, leave your Schemes,
And fine Amphibolies, Parson.

Pal. You Will hear more.

Pol. Why, now your Ladyship is free to choose,
The Courtier Sir Diaphanous: he shall do it,
I Will move it to him my self.

Lad. What will you move to him?

Pol. The making you a Countess.

Lad. Stint, fond woman.
Know you the party Mr. Practice means?
To Compass.
Com. No, but your Parson says he knows, Madam.

Lad. I fear he fables; Parson do you know
Where Mr. Practice is engaged?

Pal. I Will tell you!
But under seal, her Mother must not know:
It Is with your Ladyships woman, Mrs. Pleasance.

Com. How!

Lad. He is not mad.

Pal. O hide the hideous secret
From her, she will trouble all else. You do hold
A Cricket by the wing.

Com. Did he name Pleasance?
Are you sure Parson?

Lad. O it is true, your Mrs!
I find where your shoe wrings you, Mr. Compass:
But, you will look to him there.

Com. Yes, here is Sir Moath,
Your brother, with his Bias, and the Party
Deep in discourse: 'twill be a bargain, and sale;
I see by their close working of their heads,
And running them together so in Council.

Lad. Will Mr. Practice be of Council against us?

Com. He is a Lawyer, and must speak for his Fee,
Against his Father, and Mother, all his kindred;
His brothers, or his sisters: no exception
Lies at the Common Law. He must not alter
Nature for form, but go on in his path --
It may be he will be for us. Do not you
Offer to meddle, let them take their course:
Dispatch, and marry her off to any husband;
Be not you scrupulous; let who can have her:
So he lay down the portion, though he gueld it:
It will maintain the suit against him: somewhat,
Something in hand is better, then no birds.
He shall at last account, for the utmost farthing,
If you can keep your hand from a discharge.

Pol. Sir, do but make her worshipful Aunt a Countess,
And she is yours: her Aunt has worlds to leave you!
The wealth of six East Indian Fleets at least!
Her Husband, Sir John Loadstone, was the Governor
OF the Company. seven years.

Dia. And came there home,
Six Fleets in seven years?

Pol. I cannot tell,
I must attend my Gossip, her good Ladyship.

Pla. And will you make me a Vi-countesse too? For,
How do they make a Countess? in a Chair?
Or 'pon a bed?

Dia. Both ways, sweet bird, I Will show you.

ACT II. SCENE VI.
Interest. Practice. Bias. Compass. Palate. Rut. Ironside. To them.
Int. The truth is, Mr. Practice, now we are sure
That you are off, we dare come on the bolder:
The portion left, was sixteen thousand pound,
I do confess it, as a just man should.
And call here Mr. Compass, with these Gentlemen,
To the relation: I will still be just.
Now for the profits every way arising,
It was the Donors wisdom, those should pay
Me for my watch, and breaking of my sleeps;
It is no petty charge, you know, that sum;
To keep a man awake, for fourteen year.

Pra. But (as you knew to use it in that time)
It would reward your waking.

Int. That Is my industry;
As it might be your reading, study, and counsel;
And now your pleading, who denies it you?
I have my calling too. Well, Sir, the Contract
Is with this Gentleman, ten thousand pound.
(An ample portion, for a younger brother,
With a soft, tender, delicate rib of man's flesh,
That he may work like wax, and print upon.)
He expects no more then that sum to be tendered,
And he receive it: Those are the conditions.

Pra. A direct bargain, and sale in open market.


Int. And what I have furnished him with all of the by,
To appear, or so: A matter of four hundred,
To be deduced upo' the payment --.

Bia. Right.
You deal like a just man still.

Int. Draw up this
Good Mr. Practice, for us, and be speedy.

Pra. But here is a mighty gain Sir, you have made
Of this one stock! the principal first doubled,
In the first seven year; and that redoubled
In The next seven! beside six thousand pound,
There Is threescore thousand got in fourteen year,
After the usual rate of ten in the hundred,
And the ten thousand paid.

Int. I think it be!


Pra. How will you escape the clamor, and the envy?


Int. Let 'hem exclaim, and envy: what care I?
Their murmurs raise no blisters i'my flesh.
My moneys are my blood, my parents, kindred:
And he that loves not those, he is unnatural:
I am persuaded that the love of money
Is not a virtue, only in a Subject,
But might befit a Prince. And (were there need)
I find me able to make good the Assertion.
To any reasonable man's understanding.
And make him to confess it.

Com. Gentlemen,
Doctors, and Scholars, yo'll hear this, and look for
As much true secular wit, and deep Lay-sense,
As can be shown on such a common place.

Int. First, we all know the soul of man is infinite
I what it covets. Who desires knowledge,
Desires it infinitely. Who covets honor,
Covets it infinitely, It will be then
No hard thing, for a coveting man, to prove
Or to confess, he aims at infinite wealth.

Com. His soul lying that way.


Int. Next, every man
Is in the hope, or possibility
Of a whole world: this present world being nothing,
But the dispersed issue of first one:
And therefore I not see, but a just man
May with just reason, and in office ought
Propound unto himself.

Com. An infinite wealth!
He bear the burden: Go you on Sir Moath.

Int. Thirdly, if we consider man a member,
But of the body politic, we know,
By just experience, that the Prince has need
More of one wealthy, then ten fighting men.

Com. There you went out of the road, a little from us.


Int. And therefore, if the Princes aims be infinite,
It must be in that, which makes all.

Com. Infinite wealth.


Int. Fourthly, it is natural to all good subjects,
To set a price on money; more then fools
Ought on their Mrs. Picture; every piece
Fro' the penny to the twelve pence, being the Hieroglyphick,
And sacred Sculpture of the Sovereign.

Com. A manifest conclusion, and a safe one.


Int. Fifthly, wealth gives a man the leading voice,
At all conventions; and displaceth worth,
With general allowance to all parties:
It makes a trade to take the wall of virtue;
And the mere issue of a shop, right Honorable.
Sixthly, it does enable him that has it
To the performance of all real actions,
Referring him to himself still: and not binding
His will to any circumstance; without him;
It gives him precise knowledge of himself;
For, be he rich, he straight with evidence knows
Whether he have any compassion,
Or inclination unto virtue, or no;
Where the poor knave erroniously believes,
If he were rich, he would build Churches, or
Do such mad things. Seventhly, your wise poor men
Have ever been contented to observe
Rich Fools, and so to serve their turns upon them:
Subjecting all their wit to the others wealth.
And become Gentlemen Parasites, Squire Bauds,
To feed their Patrons honorable humors.
Eighthly, it is certain that a man may leave
His wealth, or to his Children, or his friends;
His wit he cannot so dispose, by Legacy?
As they shall be a Harrington the better for it.

Com. He may intaile a Jest upon his house, though:
Enter Ironside. Or leave a tale to his posterity,
To be told after him.

Iro. As you have done here?
T'invite your friend, and brother to a feast,
Where all the Guests are so mere heterogene,
And strangers, no man knows another, or cares
If they be Christians, or Mahumetans!
That here are met.

Com. Is It any thing to you brother,
To know Religions more then those you fight for?

Iro. Yes, and with whom I eat. I may dispute,
And how shall I hold argument with such,
I neither know their humors, nor their heresies;
Which are religions now, and so received?
Here Is no man among these that keeps a servant,
To'inquire his Master of: yet in the house,
I hear it buzzed, there are a brace of Doctors;
A Fool, and a Physician: with a Courtier,
That feeds on mulbery leaves, like a true Silkeworme:
A Lawyer, and a mighty Money-Baud,
Sir Moath! has brought his politic Bias with him:
A man of a most animadverting humor:
Who, to indeare himself unto his Lord,
Will tell him, you and I, or any of us,
That here are met, are all pernicious spirits,
And men of pestilent purpose, meanly affected
Unto the State we live in: and beget
Himself a thanks, with the great men of the time,
By breeding Jealouses in them of us,
Shall cross our fortunes, frustrate our endeavors,
Twice seven years after: And this trick be called
Cutting of throats, with a whispering, or a penknife.
I must cut his throat now: I Am bound in honor,
And by the Law of arms, to see it done;
I dare to do it; and I dare profess
The doing of it: being to such a Rascal,
Who is the common offense grown of mankind;
And worthy to be torn up from society.

Com. You shall not do it here, Sir.


Iro. Why? will you
Entreat your self, into a beating for him,
My courteous brother? If you will, have at you,
No man deserves it better (now I think on it)
Then you: that will keep consort with such Fiddlers,
Pragmatick Flies, Fools, Publicanes, and Moathes:
And leave your honest, and adopted brother.

Int. 'Best raise the house upon him, to secure us;
He Will kill us all!

Pal. I love no blades in belts.


Rut. Nor I.


Bia. Would I were at my shop again,
In Court, safe stowed up, with my politic bundels.

Com. How they are scattered!

Iro. Run away like Cimici,
Into the cranies of a rotten bed-stead.

Com. I told you such a passage would disperse 'hem,
Although the house were their Fee-simple in Law,
And they possessed of all the blessings in it.

Iro. Pray heaven they be not frighted from their stomachs:
That so my Ladies Table be disfurnish'd
Of the provisions!

Com. No, the Parsons calling
By this time, all the covey again, together.
Here comes good tidings! Dinners of the board.

ACT II. SCENE VII.
Compass. Pleasance.
Com. Stay Mrs. Pleasance, I must ask you a question:
Have you any suites in Law?

Ple. I, Mr. Compass?

Com. Answer me briefly, it is dinner time.
They say you have retained brisk Mr. Practice
Here, of your Council; and are to be joined
A Patentee with him.

Ple. In what? who says so?
You are disposed to jest.

Com. No, I am in earnest.
It is given out in the house so, I assure you;
But keep your right to your self, and not acquaint
A common Lawyer with your case. If he
Once find the gap; a thousand will leap after.
I Will tell you more anon.

Ple. This Riddle shows
A little like a Love-trick, of one face,
If I could understand it. I will study it.

Chorus. Dam. But whom does your Poet mean now by this -- Mr. Bias? what Lords
Secretary, does he purpose to personate, or perstringe?


Boy. You might as well ask me, what Alderman, or Aldermans Mate, he meant
by Sir Moath Interest? or what eminent Lawyer, by the ridiculous Mr. Practice?
who has rather his name invented for laughter, then any offense, or injury it
can stick on the reverend Professors of the Law: And so the wise ones will
think.


Pro. It is an insidious Question, Brother Damplay! Iniquity it self would not
have urged it. It is picking the Lock of the Scene; not opening it the fair
way with a Key. A Play, though it apparel, and present vices in general,
flies from all particularities in persons. Would you ask of Plantus, and
Terence, (if they both lived now) who were Davus, or Pseudolus in the Scene?
who Pyrgopolinices, or Thraso? who Euclio or Menedemus?


Boy. Yes, he would: And inquire of Martial, or any other Epigrammatist, whom
he meant by Titius, or Seius (the common John a Noke, or John a Style) under
whom they note all vices, and errors taxable to the Times? As if there could
not be a name for a Folly fitted to the Stage, but there must be a person in
nature, found out to own it.


Dam. Why, I can phant'sie a person to my self Boy, who shall hinder me?


Boy. And, in not publishing him, you do no man an injury. But if you will
utter your own ill meaning on that person, under the Authors words, you make a
Libell of his Comoedy.


Dam. O, he told us that in a Prologue, long since.


Boy. If you do the same reprehensible ill things, still the same reprehension
will serve you, though you heard it before: They are his own words. I can
invent no better, nor he.


Pro. It is the solemn vice of interpretation, that deformes the figure of
many a fair Scene, by drawing it awry; and indeed is the civil murder of most
good Plays: If I see a thing vively presented on the Stage, that the Glass of
custom (which is Comedy) is so held up to me, by the Poet, as I can therein
view the daily examples of men's lives, and images of Truth, in their manners,
so drawn for my delight, or profit, as I may (either way) use them: and will
I, rather (then make that true use) hunt out the Persons to defame, by my
malice of misapplying? and imperill the innocence, and candor of the Author, by
his calumny? It is an unjust way of hearing, and beholding Plays, this, and
most unbecomming a Gentleman to appear malignantly witty in another Work.


Boy. They are no other but narrow, and shrunk natures; shriveld up, poor
things, that cannot think well of themselves, who dare to detract others. That
Signature is upon them, and it will last. A halfe-witted Barbarism! which no
Barbers art, or his bals, will ever expunge or take out.


Dam. Why, Boy? This were a strange Empire, or rather a Tyranny, you would
entitle your Poet to, over Gentlemen, that they should come to hear, and see
Plays, and say nothing for their money.


Boy. O, yes; say what you will: so it be to purpose, and in place.


Dam. Can any thing be out of purpose at a Play? I see no reason, if I come
here, and give my eighteen pence, or two shillings for my Seat, but I should
take it out in censure, on the Stage.


Boy. Your two shilling worth is allowed you: but you will take your ten,
shilling worth, your twenty shilling worth, and more: And teach others (about
you) to do the like, that follow your leading face; as if you were to cry up
or down every Scene, by confederacy, be it right or wrong.


Dam. Who should teach us the right, or wrong at a Play?


Boy. If your own science can not do it, or the love of Modesty, and Truth;
all other entreaties, or attempts -- are vain. You are fitter Spectators for
the Bears, then us, or the Puppets. This is a popular ignorance indeed,
somewhat better appareld in you, then the People: but a hard handed, and stiff
ignorance, worthy a Trewel, or a Hammer-man; and not only fit to be scorned,
but to be triumphed ore.


Dam. By whom, Boy?


Boy. No particular, but the general neglect, and silence. Good Master
Damplay, be your self still, without a second: Few here are of your opinion to
day, I hope; to morrow, I am sure there will be none, when they have ruminated
this.


Pro. Let us mind what you come for, the ^lay, which will draw on to the
Epitasis now.


ACT III.
SCENE I.
Item. Needle. Keep. Pleasance.
Item. Where Is Mr. Doctor?

Nee. O Mr. Tim Item,
His learned Pothecary! you are welcome:
He is within at dinner.

Ite. Dinner! Death!
That he will eat now, having such a business,
That so concerns him!

Nee. Why, can any business
Concern a man like his meat?

Ite. O twenty millions,
To a Physician, that is in practice: I
Do bring him news, from all the points of the Compass,
(That Is all the parts of the sublunary Globe.)
Of times, and double times.

Nee. In, in, sweet Item,
And furnish forth the Table with your news:
Deserve your dinner: Sow out your whole bag full:
The Guests will hear it.

Item. I heard they were out.


Nee. But they are piec'd, and put together again,
You may go in, you will find them at high eating:
The Parson has an edifying stomach,
And a persuading Palate (like his name:)
He has begun three draughts of sack in Doctrines,
And four in Uses.

Ite. And they follow him.


Nee. No, Sir Diaphanous is a Recusant
In sack. He only takes it in French wine,
With an allay of water. In in, Item,
And leave your peeping.

Kee. I have a months mind,
To peep a little too. Sweet Mas' Needle,
How are they set?

Nee. At the boords end my Lady --.


Kee. And my young Mrs. by her?

Nee. Yes, the Parson
On the right hand (as he will not lose his place
For thrusting) and against him Mrs. Polish:
Next, Sir Diaphanous, against Sir Moath;
Knights, one again another: Then the Soldier,
The man of war, and man of peace the Lawyer:
Then the port Doctor, and the politic Bias,
And Mr. Compass circumscribeth all.

Ple. Nurse Keep, nurse Keep!

Nee. What noise is that within?

Ple. A noise within. Come to my Mistress, all their weapons are out.


Nee. Mischief of men! what day, what hour is this?

Kee. Run for the cellar of strong waters, quickly.


ACT III. SCENE II.
Compass. Ironside. To them after.
Com. Were you a mad man to do this at table?
And trouble all the Guests, to affright the Ladies,
And Gentlewomen?

Iro. Pox upo' your women,
And your half man there, Court-Sir Amber-gris:
A perfumed braggart: He must drink his wine
With three parts water; and have Amber in that too.

Com. And you must therefore break his face with a Glass,
And wash his nose in wine.

Iro. Cannot he drink
In Orthodoxe, but he must have his Gums,
And Panym Drugs?

Com. You should have used the Glass
Rather as balance, then the sword of Justice:
But you have cut his face with it, he bleeds.
Come you shall take your Sanctuary with me;
The whole house will be up in arms against you else,
Within this half hour; this way to my lodging.

Rut. Lady. Polish. Keep, carrying Placentia over the Stage. Pleasance. Item.
Rut. A most rude action! carry her to her bed;
And use the Fricace to her, with those oils.
Keep your news Item now, and tend this business.

Lad. Good Gossip look to her.


Pol. How do you sweet charge?

Kee. She Is in a sweat.


Pol. I, and a faint sweat mary.


Rut. Let her alone to Tim: he has directions,
I Will hear your news Tim Item, when you have done.

Lad. Was ever such a Guest brought to my table?

Rut. These boistrous Soldiers have no better breeding.
Here Mr. Compass comes: where is your Captain,
Rudhudibr as de Ironside?

Com. Gone out of doors.


Lad. Would he had nere come in them, I may wish.
He has discredited my house, and board,
With his rude swaggering manners, and endangered
My Neices health (by drawing of his weapon)
God knows how far; for Mr. Doctor does not.

Com. The Doctor is an Ass then, if he say so,
And cannot with his conjuring names, Hippocrates;
Galen or Rasis, Avicen. Averroes,
Cure a poor wenches falling in a swoune:
Which a poor Farthing changed in Rosa solis,
Or Cynnamon water would.

Lad. How now? how does she?

Kee. She Is somewhat better. Mr. Item has brought her
A little about.

Pol. But there is Sir Moath your brother
Is fallen into a fit of the happyplexe,
It were a happy place for him, and us,
If he could steal to heaven thus: All the house
Are calling Mr. Doctor, Mr. Doctor.
The Parson he has gi'n him gone, this half hour;
He Is pale in the mouth already, for the fear
OF the fierce Captain.

Lad. Help me to my Chamber,
Nurse Keep: Would I could see the day no more,
But night hung over me, like some dark cloud;
That, buried with this loss of my good name,
I, and my house might perish, thus forgotten --

Com. Her taking it to heart thus, more afflicts me
Then all these accidents, for they will blow over.

ACT III. SCENE III.
Practice. Silkworme. Compass.
Pra. It was a barbarous Injury, I confess:
But if you will be counseled, Sir, by me,
The reverend Law lies open to repair
Your reputation. That will gi' you damages;
Five thousand pound for a finger, I have known
Given in Court: And let me pack your Jury.

Silk. There Is nothing vexes me, but that he has staind
My new white satin Doublet; and bespattered
My spick and span silk Stockings, of the day
They were drawn on: And here is a spot in my hose too.

Com. Shrewd maimes! your Clothes are wounded desperately,
And that (I think) troubles a Courtier more,
An exact Courtier, then a gash in his flesh.

Silk. My flesh? I swear had he given me twice so much,
I never should have reckoned it. But my clothes
To be de defaced, and stigmatized so foulely!
I take it as a contumely done me
Above the wisdom of our Laws to right.

Com. Why then you will challenge him?

Silk. I will advise,
Though Mr. Practice here does urge the Law;
And reputation it will make me of credit,
Beside great damages (let him pack my Jury.)

Com. He speaks like Mr. Practice, one, that is
The Child of a Profession he is vowed too,
And servant to the study he has taken,
A pure Apprentice at Law! But you must have
The Counsel of the Sword; and square your action
Unto their Cannons, and that brotherhood,
If you do right.

Pra. I tell you Mr. Compass,
You speak not like a friend unto the Laws,
Nor scarce a subject, to persuade him thus,
Unto the breach of the peace: Sir you forget
There is a Court above, of the Star Chamber,
To punish Routs and Riots.

Com. No, young Master,
Although your name be Practice there in Term time,
I do remember it. But you will not hear
What I was bound to say; but like a wild
Young haggard Justice, fly at breach of the Peace,
Before you know, whether the amorous Knight
Dares break the peace of conscience in a Duel.

Silk. Troth Mr. Compass, I take you my friend;
You shall appoint of me in any matter
That Is reasonable, so we may meet fair,
On even terms.

Com. I shall persuade no other,
(And take your learned Counsel to advise you)
I Will run along with him. You say you will meet him,
On even terms. I do not see indeed
How that can be, 'twixt Ironside and you,
Now I consider it. He is my brother.
I do confess (we have called so twenty year:)
But you are, Sir, a Knight in Court, allied there,
And so befriended, you may easily answer
The worst success: He a known, noted, bold
Boy of the Sword, has all men's eyes upon him;
And there is no London-Iury, but are led
In evidence, as far by common fame,
As they are by present deposition.
Then you have many brethren, and near kinsmen.
If he kill you, it will be a lasting Quarrel
T'wixt them, and him. Whereas Rud: Ironside,
Although he have got his head into a Beaver,
With a huge feather, 's but a Corriers son,
And has not two old Cordov'an skins, to leave
In Leather Caps to mourn him in, if he die.
Again, you are generally beloved, he hated
So much, that all the hearts, and votes of men
Go with you, in the wishing all prosperity
Unto your purpose; he is a fat, corpulent,
Unweildy fellow: you, a dieted Spark,
Fit for the Combat. He has killed so many;
As it is ten to one his turn is next;
You never fought with any; less, slew any:
And therefore have the hopes before you.
I hope these things thus specified unto you,
Are fair advantages: you cannot encounter
Him upon equal terms. Beside, Sir Silkworme,
He has done you wrong in a most high degree:
And sense of such an Injury received,
Should so exacuate, and whet your choler,
As you should count your self an host of men,
Compared to him. And therefore you, brave Sir,
Have no more reason to provoke, or challenge
Him, then the huge great Porter has to try
His strength upon an Infant.

Silk. Mr. Compass,
You rather spur me on, then any way
Abate my courage to the Enterprise.

Com. All Counsell's as it is taken. If you stand
On point of honor, not to have any odds,
I have rather then dissuaded you, then otherwise:
If upon terms of humor and revenge,
I have encouraged you. So that I think,
I have done the part of a friend on either side:
In furnishing your fear with matter first,
If you have any: Or, if you dare fight,
To heighten, and confirm your resolution.

Pra. I now do crave your pardon, Mr. Compass:
I did not apprehend your way before,
The true Perimiter of it: you have Circles,
And such fine draughts about!

Silk. Sir I do thank you,
I thank you Mr. Compass heartily;
I must confess, I never fought before,
And I Will be glad to do things orderly,
In the right place: I pray you instruct me.
Is It best I fight ambitiously, or maliciously?

Com. Sir, if you never fought before, be wary,
Trust not your self too much.

Silk. Why? I assure you,
I Am very angry.

Com. Do not suffer, though,
The flatuous, windy choler of your heart,
To move the clapper of your understanding,
Which is the guiding faculty, your reason:
You know not, if you will fight, or no, being brought
Vpo' the place.

Silk. O yes, I have imagined
Him treble armed, provoked too, and as furious
As Homer makes Achilles; and I find
My self not frighted with his same one jot.

Com. Well, yet take heed. These fights imaginary,
Are less then skirmishes; the fight of shadows:
For shadows have their figure, motion
And their umbratile action from the real
Posture, and motion of the bodies act
Whereas (imaginarily) many times,
Those men may fight, dare scarce eye one another,
And much less meet. But if there be no help,
Faith I would wish you, send him a fair Challenge.

Silk. I will go pen it presently.

Com. But word it
In the most generous terms.

Silk. Let me alone.

Pra. And silken phrase: the courtliest kind of Quarrel.

Com. He Will make it a petition for his peace.

Pra. O, yes, of right, and he may do it by Lau.

ACT III. SCENE IV.
Rut. Palate. Bias, bringing out Interest in a Chair. Item. Polish following.
Rut. Come, bring him out into the air a little:
There set him down. Bow him, yet bow him more,
Dash that same Glass of water in his face:
Now tweak him by the nose. Hard, harder yet:
If it but call the blood up from the heart,
I ask no more. See, what a fear can do!
Pinch him in the nape of the neck now; nip him, nip him.

Ite. He feels, there is life in him.

Pal. He graones, and stirs.

Rut. Tell him the Captaine's gone.

Int. Ha!

Pal. He Is gone Sir.

Rut. Gi' him a box, hard, hard, on his left care.

Int. O!

Rut. How do you feel your self?

Int. Sore, sore.

Rut. But where?

Int. I'my neck.

Rut. I nipt him there.

Int. And in my head.

Rut. I box'd him twice, or thrice, to move those Sinews.

Bia. I swear you did.

Pol. What a brave man's a Doctor,
To beat one into health! I thought his blows
Would eene have killed him: he did feel no more
Then a great horse.

Int. Is the wild Captain gone?
That man of murder?

Bia. All is calm and quiet.

Int. Say you so, Cosen Bias? Then all is well.

Pal. How quickly a man is lost!

Bia. And soon recovered!

Pol. Where there are means, and Doctors, learned men,
And their Apothecaries, who are not now,
(As Chawcer says) their friendship to begin.
Well, could they teach each other how to win
I'their swath bands --.

Rut. Leave your Poetry good Gossip.
Your Chawcers clouts, and wash your dishes with 'hem,
We must rub up the roots of his disease,
And crave your peace a while, or else your absence.

Pol. Nay, I know when to hold my peace.

Rut. Then do it.
Gi' me your hand Sir Moath. Let Us feel your pulse.
It is a Pursinesse, a kind of Stoppage,
Or tumor of the Purse, for want of exercise,
That you are troubled with: some ligatures
In The neck of your Vesica, or Marsupium,
Are so close knit, that you cannot evaporate;
And therefore you must use relaxatives.
Beside, they say, you are so restive grown,
You cannot but with trouble put your hand
Into your pocket, to discharge a reckoning.
And this we sons of Physic do call chiragra
A kind of Crampe, or Hand-Gout. You shall purge for it.

Ite. Indeed your worship should do well to advise him,
To cleanse his body, all the three high ways;
That is, by Sweat, Purge, and Phlebatomy.

Rut. You say well learned Tim, I Will first prescribe him,
To give his purse a purge once, twice a week
At Dice, or Cards: And when the weather is open,
Sweat at a bowling Alley; or be let blood
IN the lending vein, and bleed a matter of fifty,
Or threescore ounces at a time. Then put
Your thumbs under your Girdle, and have some body
Else, pull out your purse for you, till with more ease,
And a good habit, you can do it your self.
And then be sure always to keep good diet;
And h'your table furnished from one end,
Unto the the other: It is good for the eyes,
But feed you on one dish still, have your Diet-drinke,
Ever in Bottles ready, which must come
From the King's Head: I will prescribe you nothing;
But what I Will take before you mine own self:
That is my course with all my Patients.

Pal. Very methodicall, Secundum Artem.

Bia. And very safe pro captu recipientis.

Pol. All errant learned men, how they 'spute Latin.

Rut. I had it of a Jew, and a great Rabbi,
Who every morning cast his cup of White Wind
With sugar, and by the residence in the bottom,
Would make report of any Chronick malady,
Such as Sir Moath's is, being an oppilation,
In that you call the neck of the money bladder,
Most anatomicall, and by dissection.

Kee. O Mr. Doctor, and his Pothecary Inter (...)
Good Mr. Item, and my Mistress Polish!
We need you all above! She Is fallen again,
In a worse fit then ever.

Pol. Who?

Kee. Your charge.

Pol. Come away Gentlemen.

Int. This fit with the Doctor,
Has mended me past expectation.

ACT III. SCENE V.
Compass. Diaphanous. Practice. Bias. Ironside.
Com. O Sir Diaphanous, have you done?

Dia. I have brought it.

Pra. That Is well.

Com But who shall carry it now?

Dia. A friend:
I Will find a friend to carry it; Mr. Bias here
Will not deny me that.

Bia. What is it?

Dia. To carry
A Challenge I have writ unto the Captain.

Bias. Faith but I will Sir, you shall pardon me
For a twi-reason of State: I Will he^ren^ Challenges;
I will not hazard my Lords favor so;
Or forfeit mine own Judgment with his honor,
To turn a Russian: I have to commend me
Naught but his Lordships good opinion;
And to it my Kallygraphy, a fair hand,
Fit for a Secretary: Now you know, a man's hand
Being his executing part in fight,
Is more obnoxious to the common peril --

Dia. You shall not fight Sir, you shall only search
My Antagonist; commit us fairly there
Vpo' the ground on equal terms.

Bia. O Sir!
But if my Lord should hear I stood at end
Of any quarrel, 'twere an end of me
In a state course! I ha'read the Politiques;
And heard th'opinions of our best Divines.

Com. The Gentleman has reason! Where was first
The birth of your acquaintance? or the Cradle
Of your strickt friend shipmade?

Dia. We met in France, Sir.

Com. In France! that Garden of humanity,
The very seed-plot of all courtesies:
I wonder that your friendship sucked that aliment,
The milk of France; and see this sower effect
It does produce, against all the sweets of travel:
There, every Gentleman professing arms,
Thinks he is bound in honor to embrace
The bearing of a Challenge for another,
Without or questioning the cause, or asking
Least color of a reason. There Is no Cowardice,
No Poultrounerie, like urging why? wherefore?
But carry a Challenge, die, and do the thing.

Bia. Why, hear you Mr. Compass, I but crave
Your ear in private? I would carry his Challenge,
If I but hoped your Captain angry enough
To kill him: For (to tell you truth) this Knight,
Is an impertinent in Court, (we think him:)
And troubles my Lords Lodgings, and his Table
With frequent, and unnecessary visits,
Which we (the better sort of Servants) like not:
Being his Fellows in all other places,
But at our Masters board; and we disdain
To do those servile offices, often times,
His foolish pride, and Empire will exact,
Against the heart, or humor of a Gentleman.

Com. Truth Mr. Bias, I Would not have you think
I speak to flatter you: but you are one
OF the deepest Politiques I ever met,
And the most subtily rational. I admire you.
But do not you conceive in such a case,
That you are accessory to his death,
From whom you carry a Challenge with such purpose.

Bia. Sir the corruption of one thing in nature,
Is held the Generation of another;
And therefore, I had as leive be accessory
Unto his death, as to his life.

Com. A new
Moral Philosophy too! you will carry't then.

Bia. If I were sure, 't would not incense his choler
To beat the Messenger.

Com. OF I Will secure you,
You shall deliver it in my lodging; safely,
And do your friend a service worthy thanks.

Bia. I Will venture it, upon so good Induction,
To rid the Court of an Impediment,
This baggage Knight.

Iro. Peace to you all Gentlemen, Enter Ironside.
Save to this Mushrome; who I hear is menacing
Me with a Challenge: which I come to anticipate,
And save the Law a labor: Will you fight Sir?

Dia. Yes, in my shirt.

Iro. O, that is to save your doublet;
I know it a Court trick! you had rather have
An Ulcer in your body, then a Pinke
More in your clothes.

Dia. Captain, you are a Coward,
If you not fight in your shirt.

Iro. Sir I not mean
To put it off for that, nor yet my doublet:
Yo' have cause to call me Coward, that more fear
The stroke of the common, and life giving air,
Then all your fury, and the Panoplie.

Pra. (Which is at best, but a thin linen armor.)
I think a cup of generous wine were better,
Then fighting in your shirts.

Dia. Sir, Sir, my valor,
It is a valor of another nature,
Then to be mended by a cup of wine.

Com. I should be glad to hear of any valors,
Differing in kind; who have known hitherto,
Only one virtue, they call Fortitude,
Worthy the name of valor.

Iro. Which, who has not,
Is justly thought a Coward: And he is such.

Dia. O, you have read the Play there, the New Inn,
Of Ionsons, that decries all other valor
But what is for the public.

Iro. I do that too,
But did not learn it there; I think no valor
Lies for a private cause.

Dia. Sir, I Will redargue you,
By disputation.

Com. O let us hear this!
I long to hear a man dispute in his shirt
Of valor, and his sword drawn in his hand.

Pra. His valor will take cold; put on your doublet.

Com. His valor will keep cold, you are deceived;
And relish much the sweter in our ears:
It may be too, in the ordinance of nature.
Their valors are not yet so combatant,
Or truly antagonistick, as to fight;
But may admit to hear of some divisions,
Of Fortitude, may put 'hem off their Quarrel.

Dia. I would have no man think me so ungoverned,
Or subject to my passion, but I can
Read him a Lecture 'twixt my undertakings,
And executions: I do know all kinds
Of doing the business, which the Town calls valor.

Com. Yes, he has read the Town, Towne-top's his Author!
Your first?

Dia. Is a rash headlong unexperience.

Com. Which is in Children, Fools, or your street Gallants
OF the first head.

Pra. A pretty kind of valor!

Com. Commend him, he will spin it out in's shirt,
Fine, as that thread.

Dia. The next, an indiscreet
Presumption, grounded upon often scapes.

Com. Or the insufficiency of Adversaries,
And this is in your common fighting Brothers.
Your old Perdu's, who (after a time) do think,
The one, that they are shot free; the other, sword free.
Your third?

Dia. Is naught but an excess of choler,
That reigns in resty old men --.

Com. Noble men's Porters,
And self conceited Poets.

Dia. And is rather
A peevishness, then any part of valor.

Pra. He but reherses, he concludes no valor.

Com. A history of distempers, as they are practiced,
His Harangue undertaketh, and no more.
Your next?

Dia. Is a dull desperate resolving.

Com. In case of some necessitous misery, or
Incumbent mischief.

Pra. Narrowness of mind,
Or ignorance being the root of it.

Dia. Which shou shall find in Gamesters, quite blown up.

Com. Banckrupt Merchants, undiscovered Traitors.

Pra. Or your exemplified Malefactors,
That have survived their infamy, and punishment.

Com. One that has lost his ears, by a just sentence
OF the Star Chamber, a right valiant Knave --
And is a Histrionicall Contempt,
Of what a man fears most; it being a mischief
In his own apprehension unavoidable.

Pra. Which is in Cowards wounded mortally,
Or Thieves adjudg'd to die.

Com. This is a valor,
I should desire much to see encouraged:
As being a special entertainment
For our rogue People; and make often good sport
Unto 'hem, from the Gallows to the ground.

Dia. But mine is a Judicial resolving,
Or liberal undertaking of a danger --.

Com. That might be avoided.

Dia. I, and with assurance,
That it is found in Noblemen, and Gentlemen,
Of the best sheafe.

Com. Who having lives to lose,
Like private men, have yet a world of honor,
And public reputation to defend --.

Dia. Which in the brave historified Greeks,
And Romans you shall read of.

Com. And (no doubt)
May in our Alder-men meet it, and their Deputies,
The Soldiers of the City, valiant blades,
Who (rather then their houses should be ransacked)
Would fight it out, like so many wild beasts;
Not for the fury they are commonly armed with:
But the close manner of their sight, and custom,
Of joining head to head, and foot to foot.

Iro. And which of these so well-prest resolutions
Am I to encounter now? For commonly,
Men that have so much choice before 'hem, have
Some trouble to resolve of any one.

Bia. There are three valors yet, which Sir Diaphanous,
Has (with his leave) not touched.

Dia. Yea? which are those?

Pra. He perks at that!

Com. Nay, he does more, he chatters.

Bia. A Philosophical contempt of death,
Is one: Then an infused kind of valor,
Wrought in us by our Genii, or good spirits;
Of which the gallant Ethnicks had deep sense:
Who generally held, that no great Statesman,
Scholar, or Soldier, ere did any thing
Sine divino aliquo afflatu.

Pra. But there is a Christian valor, 'bove these too.

Bia. Which is a quiet patient toleration,
Of whatsoever the malicious world
With Injury does unto you; and consists
In passion, more then action, Sir Diaphanous.

Dia. Sure, I do take mine to be Christian valor --.

Com. You may mistake though. Can you justify
On any cause, this seeking to deface,
The divine Image in a man?

Bia. O Sir!
Let 'hem alone: Is not Diaphanous
As much a divine Image, as is Ironside?
Let Images fight, if they will fight, a God's name.

ACT III. SCENE VI.
Keep. Needle. Interest. To them inner (...)
Kee. Where Is Mr. Needle? Saw you Mr. Needle?
We are undone.

Com. What ailes the frantic Nurse?

Kee. My Mistress is undone, she is crying out!
Where is this man trow? Mr. Needle?

Nee. Here.

Kee. Run for the party, Mrs. Chair the Midwife.
Nay, look how the man stands, as he were gok't!
She Is lost, if you not haste away the party.

Nee. Where is the Doctor?

Kee. Where a scoffing man is.
And his Apothecary, little better;
They laugh, and geere at all: will you dispatch?
And fetch the party quickly to our Mistress:
We are all undone! The Timpanie will out else.

Int. News, news, good news, better then buttered news!
My Neice is found with Child, the Doctor tells me,
Exit. And fallen in labor.

Com. How?

Int. The portion's paid!
The portion -- of the Captain! Is he here?

Pra. H'has spied your swords out! put 'hem up, put up,
Yo' have driven him hence; and yet your quarrell's ended.

Iro. In a most strange discovery.

Pra. Of light gold.

Dia. And cracked within the Ring. I take the Omen,
As a good Omen.

Pra. Then put up your Sword,
And on your Doublet. Give the Captain thanks.

Dia. I had been slur'd else. Thank you noble Captain!
Your quarrelling caused all this.

Iro. Where Is Compass?

Pra. Gone,
Shrunk hence,! contracted to his Center, I fear.

Iro. The slip is his then.

Dia. I had like to have been
Abused in the business, had the slip slur'd on me,
A Counterfeit.

Bias. Sir, we are all abused:
As many as were brought on to be Suitors;
And we will join in thanks, all to the Captain,
And to his fortune that so brought us off.

Chorus. Dam. This was a pitiful poor shift of your Poet, Boy, to make his
prime woman with child, and fall in labor, just to compose a quarrel.


Boy. With whose borrowed ears, have you heard, Sir, all this while, that you
can mistake the current of our Scene so? The stream of the Argument, threatened
her being with child from the very beginning, for it presented her in the first
of the second Act, with some apparent note of infirmity, or defect: from
knowledge of which, the Auditory were rightly to be suspended by the Author,
till the quarrel, which was but the accidental cause, hastened on the
discovery of it, in occasioning her affright; which made her fall into her
throws presently, and within that compass of time allowed to the Comedy,
wherein the Poet expressed his prime Artifice, rather then any error, that the
detection of her being with child, should determine the quarrel, which had
produced it.


Pro. The Boy is too hard for you. Brother Damplay, best mark the Play, and
let him alone.


Dam. I care not for marking the Play: I Will damn it, talk, and do that I come
for. I will not have Gentlemen lose their privilege, nor I my self my
prerogative, for near an overgrowne, or superannuated Poet of 'hem all. He
shall not give me the Law; I will censure, and be witty, and take my Tobacco,
and enjoy my Magna Charta of reprehension, as my Predecessors have done before
me.


Boy. Even to license, and absurdity.


Pro. Not now, because the Gentlewoman is in travel: and the Midwife may come
on the sooner, to put her and us out of our pain.


Dam. Well, look to your business afterward, Boy, that all things be clear,
and come properly forth, suited, and set together; for I will search what
follows severely and to the nail.


Boy. Let your nail run smooth then, and not scratch: lest the Author be bold
to pare it to the quick, and make it smart: you will find him as severe as your
self.


Dam. A shrewd Boy! and has me every where. The Midwife is come, she has made
haste.


ACT IIII.
SCENE I.
Chair. Needle. Keep.
CHa. Stay Mr. Needle, you do prick too fast
Vpo' the business: I must take some breath:
Lend me my stool, you have drawn a stitch upon me,
In faith, son Needle, with your haste.

Nee. Good Mother, piece up this breach; I Will gi' you a new Gown,
A new silke-Grogoran Gown. I Will do it Mother.

Kee. What'll you do? you have done too much already
With your prick-seame, and through-stitch. Mr. Needle,
I pray you sit not fabling here old tales,
Good Mother Chair, the Midwife, but come up.

ACT IIII. SCENE II.
Compass. Keep. Practice.
Com. How now Nurse, where is my Lady?

Kee. In her Chamber
Locked up, I think: she will speak with no body.

Com. Knows she of this accident?

Kee. Alas Sir, no;
Would she might never know it.

Pra. I think her Ladyship
Too virtuous, and too nobly innocent,
To have a hand in so ill-form'd a business.

Com. Your thought Sir is a brave thought, and a safe one,
The child now to be borne is not more free,
From the aspersion of all spot, then she?
She have her hand in plot, against Mr. Practice.
If there were nothing else, whom she so loves?
Cries up, and values? knows to be a man
Marked out, for a chief Justice in his cradle?
Or a Lord Paramount; the head of the Hall?
The Top or the Top-gallant of our Law?
Assure your self, she could not so deprave,
The rectitude of her Judgment, to wish you
Unto a wife, might prove your Infamy,
Whom she esteemed that part of the Commonwealth,
And had up for honor to her blood.

Pra. I must confess a great beholdingness
Unto her Ladyships offer, and good wishes.
But the truth is, I never had affection,
Or any liking to this Neice of hers.

Com. You foresaw somewhat then?

Pra. I had my notes,
And my Prognostics.

Com. You read Almanacks,
And study 'hem to some purpose, I believe?

Pra. I do confess, I do believe, and pray too:
According to the Planets at sometimes.

Com. And do observe the sign in making Love?

Pra. As in Phlebotomy.

Com. And choose your Mistress
By the good days, and leave her by the bad?

Pra. I do, and I do not.

Com. A little more
Would fetch all his Astronomy from Allestree.

Pra. I tell you Mr. Compass, as my friend,
And under seal, I cast mine eye long since,
Vpo' the other wench, my Ladies woman,
Another manner of piece for handsomnesse,
Then is the Neice (but that is sub sigillo,
And as I give it you) in hope of your aid,
And counsel in the business.

Com. You need counsel?
The only famous Counsel, of the kingdom,
And in all Courts? That is a Jeere in faith,
Worthy your name, and your profession too,
Sharp Mr. Practice.

Pra. No, upo' my Law,
As I am a Bencher, and now double Reader,
I meant in mere simplicity of request.

Com. If you meant so. The Affairs are now perplexed,
And full of trouble, give 'hem breath, and settling,
I Will do my best. But in mean time do you
Prepare the Parson. (I am glad to know
This; for my self liked the young Maid before,
And loved her too.) Have you a License?

Pra. No;
But I can fetch one straight.

Com. Do, do, and mind
The Parsons pint t'ingage him -- the business;
A knitting Cup there must be.

Pra. I shall do it.

ACT IV. SCENE III.
Bias. Interest. Compass.
Bia. It Is an affront, from you Sir; you here brought me,
Unto my Ladies, and to woo a wife,
Which since is proved a cracked commodity;
She has broke bulk too soon.

Int. No fault of mine,
If she be cracked in pieces, or broke round;
It was my sisters fault, that ownes the house,
Where she has got her clap, makes all this noise.
I keep her portion safe, that is not scattered:
The money's rattle not; nor are they thrown,
To make a Musse, yet among the game some Suitors.

Com. Can you endure that flout, close Mr. Bias,
And have been so bred in the Politiques?
The injury is done you, and by him only;
He lent you impressed money, and upbraids it:
Furnished you for the wooing, and now waves you.

Bia. That makes me to expostulate the wrong
So with him, and resent it as I do.

Com. But do it home then,

Bia. Sir, my Lord shall know it.

Com. And all the Lords of the Court too.

Bia. What a Moath
You are Sir Interest!

Int. Wherein I entreat you,
Sweet Master Bias?

Com. To draw in young Statesmen,
And heirs of policy into the noose
Of an infamous matrimony.

Bia. Yes,
Infamous, quasi in communem famam:
And Matrimony, quasi, matter of Money.

Com. Learnedly urged, my cunning Mr. Bias.

Bia. With his lewd, known, and prostituted Neice.

Int. My known, and prostitute: how you mistake,
And run upon a false ground, Mr. Bias!
(Your Lords will do me right.) Now, she is prostitute,
And that I know it (please you understand me.)
I mean to keep the portion in my hands:
And pay no moneys.

Com. Mark you that Don Bias?
And you shall still remain in bonds to him,
For wooing furniture, and impressed charges.

Int. Good Mr. Compass, for the sums he has had
Of me, I do acquit him: They are his own.
Here, before you, I do release him.

Com. Good!

Bia. O Sir.

Com. 'Slid take it: I do witness it:
He cannot hurl away his money better.

Int. He shall get so much Sir, by my acquaintance,
To be my friend: And now report to his Lords
As I deserve no otherwise.

Com. But well:
And I will witness it, and to the value;
Four hundred is the price, if I mistake not,
Of your true friend in Court. Take hands, you have bought him,
And bought him cheap.

Bia. I am his worships servant.

Com. And you his slave, Sir Moath. Sealed, and delivered.
Have you not studied the Court Complement?
Here are a pair of Humors, reconciled now,
That money held at distance: or their thoughts,
Baser then money.

ACT IV. SCENE IV.
Polish. Keep. Compass.
Pol. Out thou catife witch!
Baud, Beggar, Gipsey: Any thing indeed,
But honest woman.

Kee. What you please, Dame Polish,
My Ladies Stroaker.

Com. What is here to do?
The Gossips out!

Pol. Thou art a Traitor to me,
An Eve, the Apul, and the Serpent too:
A Viper, that have eat a passage through me,
Through mine own bowels, by thy retchlesnesse.

Com. What frantic fit is this? I Will step aside
And hearken to it.

Pol. Did I trust thee, wretch,
With such a secret, of that consequence,
Did so concern me, and my child, our livelihood,
And reputation? And have thou undone us?
By thy connivence, nodding in a corner,
And suffering her begot with child so basely?
Sleepie unlucky Hag! Thou bird of night,
And all mischance to me.

Kee. Good Lady Empress!
Had I the keeping of your Daughters clicket
In charge? was that committed to my trust?

Com. Her Daughter.

Pol. Softly Devil, not so lowed,
You Would have the house hear, and be witness, would you?

Kee. Let all the world be witness. Before I Will
Endure the Tyranny of such a tongue --
And such a pride --.

Pol. What will you do?

Kee. Tell truth,
And shame the She-man-Divell in puffed sleeves;
Run any hazard, by revealing all
Unto my Lady: how you changed the cradles,
And changed the children in 'hem.

Pol. Not so high!

Kee. Calling your Daughter Pleasance, there Placentia,
And my true Mistress by the name of Pleasance.

Com. A horrid secret, this! worth the discovery;

Pol. And must you be thus loud?

Kee. I will be louder:
And cry it through the house, through every room,
And every office of the Lawndry-maids:
Till it be borne hot to my Ladies ears.
Ere I will live in such a slavery,
I Will do away my self.

Pol. Did thou not swear
To keep it secret? and upon what book?
(I do remember now) The Practice of Piety.

Kee. It was a practice of impiety,
Out of your wicked forge, I know it now,
My conscience tells me. First, against the Infants,
To rob them of their names, and their true parents;
TO abuse the neighborhood, keep them in error;
But most my Lady: She has the maine wrong:
And I will let her know it instantly.
Repentance, (if it be true) nere comes too late.

Pol. What have I done? Conjured a spirit up
I sha' not lay again? drawn on a danger,
And ruin on my self thus, by provoking
A peevish fool, whom nothing will pray of,
Or satisfy I fear? Her patience stirred,
Is turned to fury. I have run my Bark,
On a sweet Rock, by mine own arts, and trust:
And must get off again, or dash in pieces.

Com. This was a business, worth the listening after.

ACT IIII. SCENE V.
Pleasance. Compass.
Ple. O Mr. Compass, did you see my Mother?
Mistress Placentia, my Ladies Neice;
Is newly brought to bed of the bravest boy!
Will you go see it?

Com. First, I Will know the father,
Ere I approach these hazards.

Ple. Mistress Midwife
Has promised to find out a father for it,
If there be need.

Com. She may the safelier do it,
By virtue of her place. But pretty Pleasance,
I have a news for you, I think will please you.

Ple. What is it Mr. Compass?

Com. Stay, you must
Deserve it ere you know it. Where Is my Lady?

Ple. Retired unto her Chamber, and shut up.

Com. She hears of none of this yet? well, do you
Command the Coach; and fit your self to travel?
A little way with me.

Ple. Whither, for Gods sake.

Com. Where I Will entreat you not to your loss, believe it.
If you dare trust your self.

Ple. With you the world ore.

Com. The news will well requite the pains, I assure you.
And in this tumult you will not be mist.
Command the Coach, it is an instant business,
Wu' not be done without you. Parson Palate
Most opportunely met, step to my Chamber:
I Will come to you presently. There is a friend,
Or two, will entertain you, Mr. Practice.
Have you the License?

ACT IV. SCENE VI.
Practice. Compass. Pleasance. Palate.
Pra. Here it is.

Com. Let Us see it:
Your name's not in it.

Pra. I Will fill that presently;
It has the Seal, which is the maine: And restgistred,
The Clarke knows me, and trusts me.

Com. Have you the Parson?

Pra. They say he is here, he' pointed to come hither.

Com. I would not have him seen here for a world,
To breed supition. Do you intercept him,
And prevent that. But take your License with you,
And fill the blanke: or leave it here with me,
I Will do it for you, stay you with us at his Church,
Behind the old Exchange, we will come in the Coach,
And meet you there within this Quarter at least.

Pra. I am much bound unto you, Mr. Compass,
You have all the Law, and parts of Squire Practice
For ever at your use. I Will tell you news, too:
Sir, your Reversion's fallen: Thin-wits dead,
Surveyor of the Projects general.

Com. When died he?

Pra. Een^ this morning, I received it
From a right hand.

Com. Conceal it Mr. Practice,
And mind the maine affair, you are in hand with.

Ple. The Coach is ready Sir.

Com. It Is well fair Pleasance,
Though now we shall not use it, bid the Coachman
Drive to the Parish Church, and stay about there,
Till Mr. Practice come to him, and employ him:
I have a License now, which must have entry
Before my Lawyers. Noble Parson Palate,
Thou shall be a mark advanced: here is a piece,
And do a feat for me.

Pal. What, Mr. Compass?

Com. But run the words of Matrimony, over
My head, and Mrs. Pleasances in my Chamber:
There Is Captain Ironside to be a witness:
And here is a License to secure thee. Parson!
What do you stick at?

Pal. It is afternoon Sir,
Directly against the Canon of the Church;
You know it Mr. Compass: and beside,
I am engaged unto our worshipful friend,
The learned Mr. Practice in that business.

Com. Come on, engage yourselfe: Who shall be able
To say you married us, but in the morning,
The most canonical minute of the day,
If you affirm it? That Is a spic'd excuse,
And shows you have set the Common Law, before
Any profession else, of love, or friendship.
Come Mrs. Pleasance, we cannot prevail
With the rigid Parson here; but Sir, I Will keep you
Locked in my lodging, 'till't be done elsewhere,
And under fear of Ironside.

Pal. Do you hear, Sir?

Com. No, no, it matters not.

Pal. Can you think Sir
I would deny you my thing? not to loss
Of both my Livings: I will do it for you,
Have you a wedding Ring?

Com. I and a Poesy:
Annulus hic nobis, quod scit uterque dabit.

Pal. Good!
This Ring will give you what you both desire.
I Will make the whole house chant it, and the Parish.

Com. Why, well said Parson. Now to you my news,
That comprehend my reasons, Mrs. Pleasance.

ACT IIII. SCENE VII.
Chair. Needle. Polish. Keep.
Cha. Go, get a Nurse, procure her at what rate
You can: and out o'th'house with it, son Needle.
It is a bad Commodity.

Nee. Good Mother,
I know it, but the best would now be made on it.

Cha. And shall: you should not fret so, Mrs. Polish,
Nor you Dame Keep; my Daughter shall do well,
When she has taken my Cawdle. I have known
Twenty such breaches piec'd up, and made whole,
Without a bum of noise. You two fall out?
And tear up one another?

Pol. Blessed woman?
Blessed be the Peacemaker.

Kee. The Pease-dresser!
I Will hear no peace from her. I have been wronged,
So has my Lady, my good Ladies worship,
And I will right her, hoping she will right me.

Pol. Good gentle Keep, I pray thee Mistress Nurse,
Pardon my passion, I was misadvis'd,
Be thou yet better, by this grave sage woman,
Who is the Mother of Matrons, and great persons,
And knows the world.

Kee. I do confess, she knows
Something -- and I know something --.

Pol. Put your somethings.
Together then.

Cha. I, here is a chance fallen out
You cannot help; less can this Gentlewoman;
I can and will, for both. First, I have sent
By-chop away; the cause gone, the fame cease.
Then by my Cawdle, and my Cullice, I set
My Daughter on her feet, about the house here:
She Is young, and must stir somewhat for necessity,
Her youth will bear it out. She shall pretend,
To Have had a fit of the Mother: there is all.
If you have but a Secretary Landresse,
To blanch the Linen -- Take the former counsels
Into you; keep them safe in your own breasts;
And make your Merkat of 'hem at the highest.
Will you go peach, and cry yourselfe a fool
At Granam's Cross? be laughed at, and dispis'd*
Betray a purpose, which the Deputy
Of a double Ward, or scarce his Alderman,
With twelve of the wisest Questmen could find out,
Employed by the Authority of the City?
Come, come, be friends: and keep these women-matters,
Smock-secrets to our selves, in our own verge.
We shall mar all, if once we open the mysteries
OF the Tyring-house, and tell what is done within:
No Theaters are more cheated with apparances,
Or these shop-lights, then the Ages, and folk in them,
That seem most curious.

Pol. Breath of an Oracle!
You shall be my dear Mother; wisest woman
That ever tip'd her tongue, with point of reasons,
To turn her hearers! Mistress Keep, relent,
I did abuse thee; I confess to penance:
And on my knees ask thee forgiveness.

Cha. Rise,
She does begin to melt, I see it --.

Kee. Nothing
Grieved me so much, as when you called me Baud:
Witch did not trouble me, nor Gypsy; no
Nor Beggar. But a Baud, was such a name!

Cha. No more rehearsals; Repetitions
Make things the worse: The more we stir (you know
The Proverb, and it signifies a) stink.
What Is done, and dead, let it be buried.
New hours will fit fresh handles, to new thoughts.

ACT IV. SCENE VIII.
Interest, with his Footboy. To them Compass. Ironside. Silkeworme. Palate.
Pleasance. To them the Lady: and after Practice.
Int. Run to the Church, Sirrah. Get all the Drunkards
To ring the Bells, and jangle them for joy
My Neice has brought an Heir unto the house,
A lusty boy. Where Is my sister Loadstone?
A sleep at afternoones! It is not wholesome;
Against all rules of Physic, Lady sister.
The little Doctor will not like it. Our Neice
Is new delivered of a chopping Child,
Can call the Father by the name already,
If it but open the mouth round. Mr. Compass,
He is the man, they say, fame gives it out,
Has done that Act of honor to our house,
And friendship to pomp out a Son, and Heir,
That shall inherit nothing, surely nothing
From me at least. I come to invite your Ladyship
To be a witness; I will be your Partner,
And give it a horne-spoone, and a treene dish;
Bastard, and Beggars badges, with a blanket
For Dame the Doxey to march round the Circuit,
With bag, and baggage.

Com. Thou malicious Knight,
Envious Sir Moath, that eats on that which feeds thee,
And frets her goodness, that sustaines thy being;
What company of Mankind would own thy brotherhood,
But as thou have a title to her blood,
Whom thy ill nature has chose out t'insult on,
And vex thus, for an Accident in her house,
As if it were her crime! Good innocent Lady,
Thou show thy self a true corroding Vermin,
Such as thou art.

Int. Why, gentle Mr. Compass?
Because I wish you joy of your young Son,
And Heir to the house, you have sent us?

Com. I have sent you?
I know not what I shall do. Come in friends:
Madam, I pray you be pleased to trust your self
Unto our company.

Lad. I did that too late;
Which brought on this calamity upon me,
With all the infamy I hear; your Soldier,
That swaggering Guest.

Com. Who is returned here to you,
Your vowed friend, and servant; comes to sup with you,
So we do all; and 'll prove he has deserved,
That special respect, and favor from you,
As not your fortunes, with your self to boot,
Cast on a Feather-bed, and spread of the sheets
Under a brace of your best Persian Carpets,
Were scarce a price to thank his happy merit.

Int. What impudence is this? can you endure
To hear it sister?

Com. Yes, and you shall hear it;
Who will endure it worse. What deserves he
In your opinion, Madam, or weighed Judgment,
That, things thus hanging (as they do in doubt)
Suspended, and suspected, all involved,
And wrapped in error, can resolve the knot?
Redintigrate the fame, first of your house?
Restore your Ladyships quiet? render then
Your Neice a Virgin, and unvitiated?
And make all plain, and perfect (as it was)
A practice to betray you, and your name?

Int. He speaks impossibilities.

Com. Here he stands,
Whose fortune has done this, and you must thank him:
To what you call his swaggering, we owe all this.
And that it may have credit with you Madam,
Here is your Neice, whom I have married, witness
These Gentlemen, the Knight, Captain, and Parson,
And this grave Politic Tell-troth of the Court.

Lad. What Is she that I call Neice then?

Com. Polishes Daugh
Her Mother Good wy' Polish has confessed it
To Granam Keep, the Nurse, how they did change
The children in their Cradles.

Lad. To what purpose?

Com. To get the portion, or some part of it,
Which you must now disburse entire to me, Sir,
If I but gain her Ladyships consent.

Lad. I bid God give you joy, if this be true.

Com. As true it is, Lady, Lady, in the song.
The portion's mine, with interest Sir Mouth;
I will not 'bate you a single Harrington,
Of interest upon interest. In mean time,
I do commit you to the Guard of Ironside.
My brother here, Captain Rudhudibras:
From whom I will expect you, or your Ransom.

Int. Sir you must prove it, and the possibility,
Ere I believe it.

Com. For the possibility,
I leave to trial. Truth shall speak it self.
O Mr. Practice, did you meet the Coach?

Pra. Yes Sir, but empty.

Com. Why, I sent it for you.
The business is dispatched here, ere you come;
Come in, I Will tell you how: you are a man
Will look for satisfaction, and must have it.

All. So do we all, and long to hear the right.

Chorus. Dam. Troth, I am one of those that labor with the same longing, for
it is almost pucker'd, and pulled into that knot, by your Poet, which I cannot
easily, with all the strength of my imagination, untie.


Boy. Like enough, nor is it in your office to be troubled or perplexed with
it, but to sit still, and expect. The more your imagination busies it self,
the more it is entangled, especially if (as I told, in the beginning) you
happen on the wrong end.


Pro. He has said sufficient, Brother Damplay; our parts that are the
Spectators, or should hear a Comedy, are to await the process, and events of
things, as the Poet presents them, not as we would corruptly fashion them. We
come here to behold Plays, and censure them, as they are made, and fitted for
us; not to beslave our own thoughts, with censorious spitle tempering the
Poets clay, as we were to mould every Scene anew: That were a mere Plastic,
or Potters ambition, most unbecomming the name of a Gentleman. No, let us
mark, and not lose the business on foot, by talking. Follow the right thread, or
find it.


Dam. Why, here his Play might have ended, if he would have let it; and have
spared us the vexation of a fifth Act yet to come, which every one here knows
the issue of already, or may in part conjecture.


Boy. That conjecture is a kind of Figure-flinging, or throwing the Dice, for a
meaning was never in the Poets purpose perhaps. Stay, and see his last Act, his
Catastrophe, how he will perplexe that, or spring some fresh cheat, to
entertain the Spectators, with a convenient delight, till some unexpected, and
new encounter break out to rectify all, and make good the Conclusion.


Pro. Which, ending here, would have shown dull, flat, and unpointed; without
any shape, or sharpness, Brother Damplay.


Dam. Well, let us expect then: And wit be with us, of the Poets part.

ACT V.
SCENE I.
Needle. Item.
Nee. TRoth Mr. Item, here is a house divided,
And quartered into parts, by your Doctors ingine.
H'has cast out such aspersions on my Ladies
Neice here, of having had a Child; as hardly
Will be wiped off, I doubt.

Ite. Why, is it not true?

Nee. True! did you think it?

Ite. Was she not in labor?
The Midwife sent for?

Ite. There Is your error now!
Yo' have drunk of the same water.

Item. I believed it,
And gave it out too.

Nee. More you wronged the party;
She had no such thing about her, innocent creature!

Iem. What had she then? only a fit of the Mother,
They burnt old shoes, Goose-feathers, Assafoetida,
A few horn shavings, with a bone, or two,
And she is well again, about the house; --

Ite. Is It possible?

Nee. See it, and then report it.

Ite. Our Doctors Vrinall-Judgement is halfe-crack'd then.

Nee. Cracked in the case, most hugely, with my Lady,
And sad Sir Moath, her brother; who is now
Under a cloud a little.

Ite. Of what? Disgrace?

Nee. He is committed to Rud-hudibras,
The Captain Ironside, upon displeasure,
From Mr. Compass, but it will blow off.

Ite. The Doctor shall reverse his, instantly,
And set all right again: if you will assist
But in a toy; Squire Needle, comes in my nodle now.

Nee. Good, Needle and Nodle! what may't be? I long for it.

Ite. Why, but to go to bed: feign a distemper
Of walking in your sleep, or talking in it
A little idly, but so much, as on' it,
The Doctor may have ground, to raise a cure
For's reputation.

Nee. Any thing, to serve
The worship of the man I love and honor.

ACT V. SCENE II.
Polish. Pleasance. Chair. Placentia. Keep.
Pol. O! gi' you joy Mademoiselle Compass!
You are his Whirle-poole now: all to be married,
Against your Mothers leave, and without counsel!
H' has fished fair, and caught a Frog, I fear it.
What fortune have you to bring him in dower?
You can tell stories now: you know a world
Of secrets to discover.

Ple. I know nothing
But what is told me; nor can I discover
Anything.

Pol. No, you shall not, I Will take order.
Go, get you in there: It is Ember-weeke!
I Will keep you fasting from his flesh a while.

Cha. See, who is here? she 'has been with my Lady; who kissed her, all to kissed
her, twice or thrice.

Nee. And called her Neice again, and viewed her Linen.

Pol. You have done a Miracle, Mother Chair.

Cha. Not I,
My Cawdle has done it. Thank my Cawdle heartily.

Pol It shall be thanked, and you too, wisest Mother;
You shall have a new, brave, foure-pound Beaver hat,
Set with enameled studs, as mine is here:
And a right pair of Cristall Spectacles,
Cristall of the Rock, thou mighty Mother of Dames,
Hung in an Ivory Case, at a gold Belt,
And silver Bells to gingle, as you pase
Before your fifty Daughters in procession
To Church, or from the Church.

Cha. Thanks Mrs. Polish.

Kee. She does deserve as many pensions,
As there be pieces in a -- Maidenhead;
Were I a Prince to give 'hem.

Pol. Come sweet Charge,
You shall present your self about the house, be confident, and bear up;
you shall be seen.

ACT V. SCENE III.
Compass. Ironside. Practice.
Com. What? I can make you amends, my learned Counsel,
And satisfy a greater Injury
To chafed Mr. Practice. Who would think
That you could be thus testie?

Iro. A grave head!
Gi'n over to the study of our Laws.

Com. And the prime honors of the Commonwealth.

Iro. And you to mind a wise.

Com. What should you do
With such a toy as a wife, that might distract you,
Or hinder you in your Course?

Iro. He shall not think on it.

Com. I will make over to you my Possession,
Of that same place is fallen (you know) to satisfy
Surveyor of the Projects general.

Iro. And that is an office, you know how to stir in.

Com. And make your profits of.

Iro. Which are (indeed)
The ends of a gown'd man: Show your activity,
And how you are built for business.

Pra. I accept it
As a P^ssession, be it but a Reversion.

Com. You first told me 'twas a Possession.

Pra. I,
I told you that I heard so.

Iro. All is one,
He Will make Reversion a Possession quickly.

Com. But I must have a general Release from you.

Pra. Do one, He do the other.

Com. It Is a match
Before my brother Ironside.

Pra. It Is done.

Com. We two are reconciled then.

Iro. To a Lawyer,
That can make use of a place, any half title,
Is better then a wife.

Com. And will save charges
Of Coaches, Vellute Gowns, and cut-worke Smocks.

Iro. He is to occupy an office wholly.

Com. True, I must talk with you nearer, Mr. Practice,
About recovery of my wives portion,
What way I were best to take.

Pra. The plainest way.

Com. What Is that, for plainness?

Pra. Sue him at Common Law:
Arrest him on an Action of Choke-baile,
Five hundred thousand pound; it will affright him,
And all his sureties. You can prove your marriage?

Com. Yes.
We Will talk of it within, and hear my Lady.

ACT V. SCENE IV.
Interest. Lady. Rut. Item.
Int. I Am sure, the Rogue of the house went all that way;
She was with Child, and Mr. Compass got it.

Lad. Why, that you see, is manifestly false,
H' has married the other; our true Neice he says:
He would not woo 'hem both: he is not such
A Stallion, to leap all. Again, no Child
Appears, that I can find with all my search,
And strictest way of Inquiry, I have made
Through all my family. A fit of the Mother,
The women say she had, which the Midwife our'd,
With burning bones and feathers: Here Is the Doctor. Enter Doctor.

Int. O noble Doctor, did not you, and your Item,
Tell me our Neice was in labor?

Rut. If I did,
What follows?

Int. And that Mother Midnight
Was sent for?

Rut. So she was; and is in the house still.

Int. But here has a noise been since, she was delivered
Of a brave boy, and Mr. Compasse's getting.

Rut. I know no rattle of Gossips, nor their noyses.
I hope you take not me for a Pimpe errant,
To deal in smock Affairs? Where Is the Patient?
The infirm man, I was sent for, Squire Needle?

Lad. Is Needle sick?

Rut. My 'Pothecary tells me Enter Tim.
He is in danger; how is it Tim? where is he?

Ite. I cannot hold him down. He Is up, and walks,
And talks in his perfect sleep, with his eyes shut,
As sensibly, as he were broad awake.

Rut. See, here becomes, He Is fast asleep, observe him.

Rut. He Will tell us wonders: What do these women here?

ACT V. SCENE V.
Rut. Needle. Interest. Item. Lady. Polish. Chair. Keep. Placentia.
Hunting a man half naked? you are fine beagles!
You Would have his dousets.
Nee. I have linen breeks on.

Rut. He hears, but he sees nothing.

Nee. Yes, I see
Who hides the treasure yonder.

Int. Ha? what treasure?

Rut. If you ask questions, he 'wakes presently:
And then you will hear no more, till his next fit.

Nee. And whom she hides it for.

Rut. Do you mark Sir? Int.

Nee. A fine she spirit it is, an Indian Mag-pie.
She was an Aldermans Widow, and fell in love
With our Sir Moath, my Ladies brother.

Rut. (Hear you?)

Nee. And she has hid an Aldermans estate;
Dropped through her bill in little holes, in the Garden,
And scrapes earth over 'hem; where none can spy
But I, who see all by the Glowormes light,
That creeps before.

Pol. I knew the Gentlewoman;
Alderman Parrots Widow, a fine Speaker,
As any was in the Clothing, or the Bevy;
She did become her scarlet, and black Velvet,
Her green, and purple --

Rut. Save thy colors, Rainebow,
Or she will run thee over, and all thy lights.

Pol. She dwelt in Doo-little Lane, a top of the hill there;
IN the round Cage, was after Sir Chime Squirrell's.
She would eat naught but Almonds, I assure you.

Rut. Would thou had a dose of pills, a double dose,
OF the best purge, to make thee turn tale, the other way.

Pol. You are a foul mouthed, purging, absurd Doctor;
I tell you true, and I did long to tell it you.
You ha'spread a scandal in my Ladies house here,
On her sweet Neice, you never can take off
With all your purges, or your plaster of Oaths;
Though you distill your Dam-me, drop by drop,
IN your defense. That she has had a Child,
Here she does spit upon thee, and defy thee;
Or I do it for her.

Rut. Madam, pray you bind her
To her behavior. Tie your Gossip up,
Or send her unto Bet'lem.

Pol. Go thou thither,
That better have deserved it, shame of Doctors:
Where could she be delivered? by what charm?
Restored to her strength so soon? who is the Father?
Or where the Infant? Ask your Oracle,
That walks, and talks in his sleep.

Rut. Where is he? gone?
You have lost a fortune listening to her, to her Tabour.
Good Madam lock her up.

Lad. You must give loosers
Their leave to speak, good Doctor.

Rut. Follow his footing
Before he get to his bed: This rest is lost else.

ACT V. SCENE VI.
Compass. Practice. Ironside. Polish. Lady.
Com. Where is my wife? what have you done with my wife,
Gossip of the Counsels?

Pol. I, sweet Mr. Compass?
I honor you, and your wife.

Com. Well, do so still.
I will not call you Mother though, but Polish.
Good Gossip Polish, where have you hid my wife?

Pol. I hide your wife?

Com. Or she is run away.

Lad. That would make all suspected, Sir, a fresh.
Come we will find her, if she be in the house.

Pol. Why should I hide your wife, good Mr. Compass?

Com. I know no cause, but that you are goo'dy Polish,
That Is good at malice; good at mischief; all
That can perplexe, or trouble a business, thoroughly.

Pol. You may say what you will: yo' are Mr. Compass,
And carry a large sweep, Sir, in your Circle.

Lad. I Will sweep all corners, Gossip, to spring this.
If It be above ground, I will have her cried,
By the Common-cryer, through all the Ward,
But I will find her.

Iro. It will be an Act
Worthy your justice, Madam.

Pra. And become
The integrity, and worship of her name.

ACT V. SCENE VII.
Rut. Interest. Item. Needle.
Rut. It Is such a Fly, this Gossip, with her buz,
She blows on every thing, in every place!

Int. A busy woman, is a fearful grievance!
Will he not sleep again?

Rut. Yet instantly,
As soon as he is warm. It is the nature
Of the disease, and all these cold dry fumes,
That are melancholicke, to work at first,
Slow, and insensibly in their ascent,
Till being got up, and then distilling down
Vpo' the brain; they have a pricking quality
That breeds this restless rest, which we, the sons
Of Physic, call a walking in the sleep,
And telling mysteries, that must be heard.
Softly, with art, as we were sowing pillowes
Under the Patients elbowes, else they would fly
Into a frenzy, run into the Woods,
Where there are Noises, huntings, shoutings, hallowings,
Amidst the brakes, and furzes, over bridges
Fall into waters: Scratch their flesh: Sometimes
Drop down a praecipice, and there be lost.
How now! what does her?

Ite. He is up again, Enter Item.
And 'gins to talk.

Int. OF the former matter, Item?

Ite. The treasure, and the Lady: That Is his argument.

Int. O me, happy man! he cannot off it.
I shall know all then.

Rut. With what appetite
Our own desires delude us! Hear you Tim?
Let no man interrupt us.

Ite. Sir Diaphanous,
And Mr. Bias, his Court-friend's, desire
To kiss his Neices hands, and gratulate
The firm recovery of her good fame,
And honor --

Int. Good, say to 'hem, Mr. Item,
My Neice is on my Ladies side: they will find her there.
I pray to be but spared, for half an hour:
I Will see 'hem presently.

Rut. Do, put 'hem off, Tim.
And tell 'hem the importance of the business.
Here, he is come! sooth; and have all out of him.

Nee. How do you Lady-bird? so hard at work, still?
What Is that you say? Do you bid me walk, sweet Bird?
And tell our Knight? I will. How? walk knave, walk?
I think y' are angry with me

Pol. Fine Pol!
Pol's a fine bird! O fine Lady Pol!
Almond for Parrat; Parrat's a brave bird:
Three hundred thousand pieces have you stuck,
Edge-long into the ground, within the Garden?
O'bounteous Bird!

Int. And me, most happy creature.

Rut. Smother your joy.

Nee. How? and dropped twice so many --

Int. Ha! where?

Rut. Contain your self.

Nee. IN the old Well?

Int. I cannot, I am a man of flesh, and blood:
Who can contain himself, to hear the Ghost
Of a dead Lady, do such works as these?
And a City Lady too, of the straight waste?

Rut. He Is gone.

Nee. I will go try the truth of it.

Rut. Follow him,

Tim: See what he does; if he bring you
A'ssay of it now.

Int. I Will say he is a rare fellow:
And has a rare disease.

Rut. And I will work
As rare a cure upon him.

Int. How, good Doctor?

Rut. When he has uttered all, that you would know of him;
I Will cleanse him with a pill (as small as a pease)
And stop his mouth: for there his issue lies,
Between the Muscles of the tongue.

Int. He Is come.

Rut. What did he, Item?

Ite. The first step he stepped
Into the Garden, he pulled these five pieces
Up, in a fingers breath one of another.
The dirt sticks on 'hem still.

Int. I know enough.
Doctor, proceed with your Cure, I Will make thee famous,
Famous among the sons of the Physicians,
Machaon, Podalirius, Esculapius.
Thou shall have a golden beard, as well as he had;
And thy Tim Item here, have one of silver:
A livery beard. And all thy 'Pothecaries
Belong to thee. Where Is Squire Needle? gone?

Ite. He Is pricked away, now he has done the work.

Rut. Prepare his pill, and gi' it him before Supper.

Int. I Will send for a dozen o'labourers to morrow,
To turn the surface of the Garden up.

Rut. In mould? bruise every clod?

Int. And have all sifted;
For I Will not loose a piece of the Birds bounty,
And take an Inventory of all.

Rut. And then,
I would go down into the Well --

Int. My self;
No trusting other hands: Six hundred thousand,
To the first three; nine hundred thousand pound --

Rut. 'Twill purchase the whole Bench of Aldermanity,
Stripped to their shirts.

Int. There never did accrue,
So great a gift to man, and from a Lady,
I never saw but once; now I remember,
We met at Merchants* Taylors-hall, at dinner,
In Thred-needle street,

Rut. Which was a sign Squire Needle
Should have the thredding of this thread.

Int. It Is true;
I shall love Parrots better, while I know him.

Rut. Il'd have her statue cut, now in white marble.

Int. And have it painted in most orient colors.

Rut. That Is right! all City statues must be painted:
Else, they be worth naught in their subtle Judgments.

ACT V. SCENE VIII.
Interest. Bias. Rut. Palate.
Int. My truest friend in Court, dear Mr. Bias;
You hear of the recovery of our Neice
In fame, and credit?

Bia. Yes, I have been with her,
And gratulated to her; but I am sorry
To find the Author of the foul aspersion
Here in your company, this insolent Doctor.

Int. You do mistake him: He is clear got off on it.
A Gossips Jealousy first gave the hint.
He drives another way, now, as I would have him.
He Is a rare man, the Doctor, in his way.
H' has done the noblest cure here, in the house,
On a poor Squire, my sisters Tailor, Needle
That talked in's sleep; would walk to Saint John's wood,
And Waltham Forest, escape by all the ponds,
And pits in the way; run over two-inch bridges;
With his eyes fast, and in the dead of night!
I Will have you better acquainted with him. Doctor,
Here is my dear, dear, dearest friend in Court,
Wise, powerful Mr. Bias; pray you salute
Each other, not as strangers, but true friends.

Rut. This is the Gentleman you brought to day,
A Suitor to your Neice?

Int. Yes.

Rut. You were
Agreed, I heard; the writings drawn between you?

Int. And sealed.

Rut. What broke you off?

Int. This rumor of her?
Was it not Mr. Bias?

Bia. Which I find
Now false, and therefore come to make amends
IN the first place. I stand to the old conditions.

Rut. Faith give 'hem him, Sir Moath, what ere they were.
You have a brave occasion now, to cross
The flanting Mr. Compass, who pretends
Right to the portion, by the other Intaile.

Int. And claims it. You do hear he is married?

Bia. We hear his wife is run away from him,
Within: She is not to be found in the house,
With all the Hue, and Cry is made for her,
Through every room; the Larders have been searched,
The Bak-houses, and Boulting-tub, the Ovens,
Wash-house, and Brew House, nay the very Furnace,
And yet she is not heard of.

Int. Be she nere heard of,
The safety of Great Britain lies not on it.
You are concent with the ten thousand pound,
Defalking the four hundred garnish money?
That Is the condition here, before the Doctor,
And your demand, friend Bias.

Bia. It is Sir Moath. Enter Palate.

Rut. Here comes the Parson then, shall make all sure.

Int. Go you with my friend Bias, Parson Palate,
Unto my Neice; assure them we are agreed.

Pal. And Mrs. Compass too, is found within.

Int. Where was she hid?

Pal. In an old Botle-house,
Where they scraped trenchers; there her mother had thrust her.

Rut. You shall have time, Sir, to triumph on him,
When this fine feate is done, and his Rud-Ironside.

ACT V. SCENE IX.
Compass. Pleasance. Lady. Ironside. Practice. Polish. Chair. Keep. etc.
Com. Was ever any Gentlewoman used
So barbarously by a malicious Gossip,
Pretending to be Mother to her too?

Pol. Pretending! Sir, I am her Mother, and challenge
A right, and power for what I have done.

Com. Out, Hag.
Thou that have put all nature off, and woman:
For sordid gain, betrayed the trust committed
Unto thee by the dead, as from the living:
Changed the poor innocent Infants in their Cradles:
Defrauded them of their parents, changed their names,
Calling Placentia, Pleasance; Pleasance, Placentia.

Pol. How knows he this?

Com. Abused the neighbour-hond,
But most this Lady. Did enforce an oath,
To this poor woman, on a pious book,
To keep close thy impiety.

Pol. Have you told this?

Kee. I told it? no, he knows it, and much more,
As he is a cunning man.

Pol. A cunning fool,
If that be all.

Com. But now to your true daughter,
That had the Child, and is the proper Pleasance,
We must have an account of that too, Gossip;

Pol. This's like all the rest of Mr. Compass.

ACT V. SCENE X.
Enter to them running, Rut.
Rut. Help, help for Charity; Sir Moath Interest
Is fallen into the Well.

Lad. Where? where?

Rut. IN the Garden.
A rope to save his life.

Com. How came be there?

Rut. He thought to take possession of a fortune,
There newly dropped him, and the old Chain broke,
And down fell he in the Bucket.

Com. Is it deep?

Rut. We cannot tell. A rope: help with a rope.

Sil. He is got out again. The Knight is saved. Enter Silke-worme. Ironside.
Item. Needle, and Interest. Rut.

Iro. A little sows'd in the water: Needle saved him.

Ite. The water saved him, 'twas a fair escape.

Nee. Have you no hurt?

Int. A little wet.

Nee. That Is nothing.

Rut. I wished you stay Sir till to morrow: And told you,
It was no lucky hour: since six a Clock
All stars were retrograde.

Lad. IN the name Lady.
Of fate, or folly how came you in the Bucket?

Int. That is a Quere of another time, sister,
The Doctor will resolve you -- who has done
The admirable'st cure upon your Needle!
Gi' me thy hand good Needle: thou came timely.
Take off my hood and coat. And let me shake
My self a little. I have a world of business. Bias. Placentia.
Where is my Nephew Bias? and his wife?
Who bids God gi'hem joy? Here they both stand Palate.
As sure affianced, as the Parson, or words
Can tie 'hem.

Rut. We all wish 'hem joy, and happiness.

Silk. I saw the Contract, and can witness it.

Int. He shall receive ten thousand pounds to morrow.
You looked for it, Compass, or a greater sum,
But it is disposed of, this, another way.
I have but one Neice, verily Compass.

Com. I Will find another. Varlet, do your office.

Var. I do arrest your body, Sir Moath Interest, Varlet.
In the Kings name: At suite of Mr. Compass,
And Dame Placentia his wife. The Action sentred,
Five hundred thousand pound.

Int. Hear you this, sister?
And has your house the ears, to hear it too?
And to resound the affront?

Lad. I cannot stop
The Laws, or hinder Justice. I can be
Your Bail, if it may betaken,

Com. With the Captains,
I ask no better.

Rut. Here are better men,
Will give their Bail.

Com. But yours will not be taken,
Worshipful Doctor; you are good security
For a suit of clothes, to the Tailor, that dares trust you:
But not for such a sum, as is this Action.
Varlet, You know my mind.

Var. You must to prison, Sir,
Unless you can find Bail the Creditor likes.

Int. I would feign find it, if you would show me where.

Silk. It is a terrible Action; more indeed,
Then many a man is worth. And is called Fright-Baile.

Iro. Faith I will bail him, at mine own apperill.
Varlet, be gone: I Will once ha'the reputation,
To be security for such a sum.
Bear up Sir Moath.

Rut. He is not worth the Buckles
About his Belt, and yet this Ironside clashes.

Int. Peace, lest he hear you Doctor; we will make use of him.
What does your brother Compass, Captain Ironside,
Demand of us, by way of challenge, thus?

Iro. Your Neices portion; in the right of his wife.

Int. I have assured one portion, to one Neice,
And have no more t'account for, that I know of:
What I may do in charity -- if my sister,
Will bid an Offering for her maid, and him,
As a Benevolence to 'hem, after Supper,
I Will spit into the Basin, and entreat
My friends to do the like.

Com. Spit out thy gall,
And heart, thou Viper: I will now no mercy,
No pity of thee, thy false Neice, and Needle;
Bring forth your Child, or I appeal you of murder,
You, and this Gossip here, and Mother Chair.

Cha. Pleasance steps out. The Gentleman's fallen mad!

Ple. No, Mrs. Midwife.
I saw the Child, and you did give it me,
And put it in my arms, by this ill token,
You wished me such another; and it cried.

Pra. The Law is plain; if it were heard to cry,
And you produce it not, he may indict
All that conceal 't, of Felony, and Murder.

Com. And I will take the boldness, Sir, to do it:
Beginning with Sir Moath here, and his Doctor.

Silk. Good faith this same is like to turn a business.

Pal. And a shrewd business, marry: they all start at't.

Com. I have the right thread now, and I will keep it.
You good'y Keep, confess the truth to my Lady,
The truth, the whole truth, nothing but the truth.

Pol. I scorn to be prevented of my glories.
I plotted the deceit, and I will own it.
Love to my Child, and lucre of the portion
Provoked me; wherein though the event has failed
In part, I will make use of the best side.
This is my Daughter, and she has had a Child
This day, unto her shame, I now profess it.)
By this mere false-stick Squire Needle, but
Since this wise Knight, has thought it good to change
The foolish Father of it, by assuring
Her to his dear friend, Mr. Bias; and him
Again to her, by clapping of him on
With his free promise of ten thousand pound,
Before so many witnesses.

Silk. Whereof I
Am one.

Pal. And I another.

Pol. I should be unnatural
To my own flesh, and blood, would I not thank him.
I thank you Sir: and I have reason for it.
For here your true Neice stands, fine Mrs. Compass.
(I Will tell you truth, you have deserved it from me.)
To whom you are by bond engaged to pay
The sixteen thousand pound, which is her portion,
Due to her husband, on her marriage-day.
I speak the truth, and nothing but the truth.

Iro. You Will pay it now, Sir Moath, with interest?
You see the truth breaks out on every side of you.

Int. Into what nets of cous'nage am I cast
On every side? each thread is grown a noofe:
A very mesh: I have run my self into
A double break, of paying twice the money.

Bia. You shall be released of paying me a penny,
With these conditions.

Pol. Will you leave her then?

Bia. Yes, and the sum, twice told, ere take a wife,
To pick out Mounsieur Needles basting threads.

Com. Gossip you are paid: though he be a fit nature,
Worthy to have a Whore justly put on him;
He is not bad enough to take your Daughter,
On such a cheat. Will you yet pay the portion?

Int. What will you 'bate?

Com. No penny the Law gives.

Int. Yes, Bias's money.

Com. What? your friend in Court?
I will not rob you of him, nor the purchase,
Nor your dear Doctor here, stand altogether.
Birds of a nature all, and of a feather.

Lad. Well, we are all now reconciled to truth.
There rests yet a Gratuitie from me,
To be conferred upon this Gentleman;
Who (as my Nephew Compass says) was cause,
First of the offense, but since of all the amends,
The Quarrel caused the affright; that fright brought on
The travel, which made peace; the peace drew on
This new discovery, which ends all
In reconcilement.

Com. When the portion
Is tendered, and received.

Int. Well, you must have it,
As good at first as last. It Is well said brother.
And I, if this good Captain will accept me,
Give him my self, endow him with my estate,
And make him Lord of me, and all my fortunes:
He that has saved my hour, though by chance,
I Will really study his, and how to thank him.

Iro. And ^ embrace you, Lady, and your goodness,
And vow to quit all thought of war hereafter;
Save what is fought under your colors, Madam.

Pal. More work then for the Parson; I shall cap
The Loadstone with an Ironside, I see.

Iro. And take in these, the forlorn Couple, with us,
Needle, and's Thread, whose portion I will think on;
As being a business, waiting on my bounty:
Thus I do take possession of you, Madam,
My true Magnetic Mistress, and my Lady.

The end.
CHORUS Changed into an EPILOGVE: To the KING.
WEll, Gentlemen, I now must under seal,
And the Authors charge, waive you, and make my 'appeale
To the supremest power, my LORD, the KING;
Who best can judge of what we humbly bring.
He knows our weakness, and the Poets faults;
Where he does stand upright, go firm, or halts;
And he will doom him. To which voice he stands,
And prefers that, before all the Peoples hands.
A TALE OF A TUB.

A COMEDY composed By BEN: JOHNSON.

Catul. -- Inficeto est inficetior rure.

LONDON, Printed M.DC.XL.

The Persons that act.
CHAN HVGH, Vicar of Pancrace, and Captain Thums. SQVIRE TVB, Of Totten-Court,
or Squire TRIPOLY. BASKET HILTS, His man, and Governor. IV^^ PREAMBLE, Of
Maribone, alias BRAM^LE. MILES METAPHOR, His Clarke. LADY TVB, Of Totten, the
Squires Mother. POL-MARTEN, Her Huisher. DIDO WISPE her woman. TOBIE TVRFE,
High Constable of Kentish Town. DA: SIBIL TVRFE His Wife. Mrs. AWDREY TVRFE,
Their Daughter the Bride. JOHN CLAY, Of Kilborne Tile-maker, the appointed
Bridegroom. IN-AND-IN. MEDLAY. Of ^slington, Cooper and Headborough. RASI:
CLENCH, Of Hamsted, Farrier, and petty Constable. TO-PAN, Tinker, or Mettal-man
of Belsise. Thirdborough. D' OGE: SCRIBEN, Of Chalcot the great Writer. BALL
PVPPY, The high Constables man. FATHER ROSIN, The Minstrell, and His 2 Boys.
IONE, JOYCE, Maids of the Bridal. MADGE, PARNEL, Maids of the Bridal.
GRISELL, KATE. Maids of the Bridal. BLACK JACK, The Lady Tubs Butler. 2
Grooms.
The Scene, Finsbury-hundred. PROLOGVE.
NO State-affaires, nor any politic Club,
Pretend we in our Tale, here, of a Tub.
But acts of Clownes and Constables, to day
Stuff out the Scenes of our ridiculous Play.
A Coopers wit, or some such busy Spark,
Illumining the high Constable, and his Clarke.
And all the Neighborhood, from old Records,
Of antic Proverbs, drawn from Whitson-Lord's,
And their Authorities, at Wakes and Ales,
With country precedents, and old Wives Tales;
We bring you now, to show what different things
The Cotes of Clownes, are from the Courts of Kings.
A TALE OF A TUB.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Sir Hugh. Tub. Hilts.
Hug. NOw of my faith, old Bishop Valentine,
You' have brought us nipping weather: Februere
Does cut and sheare; your day, and diocese
Are very cold. All your Parishioners;
As well your Layicks, as your Quiristers,
Had need to keep to their warm Fether-beds,
If they be sped of loves: this is no season,
To seek new Makes in; though Sir Hugh of Pancrace,
Be hither come to Totten, on intelligence,
To the young Lord of the Manor, Squire Tripoly,
On such an errand as a Mistress is.
What, Squire! I say?

Tub. I should call him too:
Sir Peter Tub was his father, a Salt-peeter-man;
Who left his Mother, Lady Tub of Totten-
Court, here, to revell, and keep open house in;
With the young Squire her son, and's Governor Basket-
Hilts, both by sword, and dagger: Domine,
Armiger Tub, Squire Tripoly, Expergiscere.
I dare not call aloud, lest she should hear me;
And think I conjured up the spirither, son,
In Priests-lack- latin: O she is jealous
Of all mankind for him.

Tub. Chanon, is it you? At the Windor. He comes down in his night Gown.

Hug. The Vicar of Pancrace, Squire Tub! wa' hoh!

Tub. I come, I stoop unto the call; Sir Hugh!

Hug. He knows my lure is from his Love: fair Awdrey,
The High Constables Daughter of Kentish Town, here Mr.
Tobias Turfe.

Tub. What news of him?

Hug. He has waked me,
An hour before I would, Sir. And my duty,
To the young worship of Totten-Court, Squire Tripoly;
Who has my heart, as I have his: your Mrs.
Is to be made away from you, this morning,
Saint Valentines day: there are a knot of Clownes,
The Counsel of Finsbury, so they are y-styl'd,
Met at her Fathers; all the wise of the hundred;
Old Basi' Clench of Hamsted, petty Constable;
In-and-In Medlay, Cooper of Islington,
And Headborough; with loud To-Pan the Tinker,
Or Mettall-man of Belsise, the Third-borough:
And D'ogenes Scriben, the great Writer of Chalcot.

Tub. And why all these?

Hug. Sir to conclude in Counsel,
A Husband, or a Make for Mrs. Awdrey;
Whom they have named, and pricked down, Clay of Kilborne,
A tough young fellow, and a Tile-maker.

Tub. And what must he do?

Hugh. Cover her, they say:
And keep her warm Sir: Mrs. Awdrey Turfe,
Last night did draw him for her Valentine;
Which chance, it has so taken her Father, and Mother,
(Because themselves drew so, on Valentine's Eve
Was thirty year) as they will have her married
To day by any means; they have sent a Messenger
To Kilborne, post, for Clay; which when I knew,
I posted with the like to worshipful Tripoly,
The Squire of Totten: and my advise to cross it.

Tub. What is it Sir Hugh?

Hugh. Where is your Governor Hilts?
Basquet must do it.

Tub. Basquet shall be called:
Hilts, can you see to rise?

Hill. Cham not blind Sir
With too much light.

Tub. Open your the other eye,
And view if it be day.

Hill. Che can spy that
At's little a hole, as another, through a Millstone.

Tub. He will have the last word, though he talk Bilke for it.

Hugh. Bilke? what is that?

Tub. Why nothing, a word signifying
Nothing; and borrowed here to express nothing.

Hugh. A fine device!

Tub. Yes, till we hear a finer.
What Is your device now, Chanon Hugh?

Hugh. In private.
Lend it your ear; I will not trust the air with it;
Or scarce my Shire; my Cassock sha' not know it;
If I thought it did, I Will burn it.

Tub. That Is the way,
You have thought to get a new one,

Hugh: Is It worth it?
They whisper. Hilts enters, and walks by, making himself ready. Let Us hear
it first.

Hugh. Then hearken, and receive it.
This it is Sir, do you relish it?

Tub. If Hilts
Be close enough to carry it; there is all.

Hill. It i'no sand? nor Butter-milke? If It be,
Ich'am no zive or watring pot, to draw
Knots in your' casions. If you trust me, zo:
If not, praforme it your zelves. 'Cham no man's wife,
But resolute Hilts: you will vind me in the Buttry.

Tub. A testie Clown: but a tender Clown, as wool:
And melting as the Weather in a Thaw:
He Will weep you, like all April: But he' ull roar you
Like middle March before: He will be as mellow,
And tipsie too, as October: And as grave,
And bound up like a frost (with the new year)
In January; as rigid, as he is rusticke.

Hug. You know his nature, and describe it well;
I Will leave him to your fashioning.

Tub. Stay, Sir Hugh;
Take a good Angel with you, for your Guide:
And let this guard you home-ward, as the blessing,
To our devise.

Hug. I thank you Squires-worship,
Most humbly (for the next, for this I am sure of.) The Squire goes off.
O for a Quire of these voices, now,
To chime in a man's pocket, and cry chinke!
One does not chirpe: it makes no harmony.
Grave Justice Bramble, next must contribute;
His charity must offer at this wedding:
I Will bid more to the Basin, and the Bride-ale;
Although but one can bear away the Bride.
I smile to think how like a Lottery
These Weddings are. Clay has her in possession;
The Squire he hopes to circumvent the Tile-Kill:
And now, if Justice Bramble do come off,
It Is two to one but Tub may loose his botome.

ACT I. SCENE II.
Clench. Medlay. Scriben. Pan. Puppy.
Cle. Why, it is thirty year, eene as this day now:
Zin Valentines day, of all days cursin'd, look you;
And the zame day of the month, as this Zin Valentine,
Or I am vowly deceived.

Med. That our High Constable,
Mr. Tobias Turfe, and his Dame were married.
I think you are right. But what was that Zin Valentine?
Did you ever know 'um, Good Man Clench? Cle. Zin Valentine,
He was a deadly Zin, and dwelt at High-gate,
As I have heard, but 't was avore my time:
He was a Cooper too, as you are. Medlay,
An' In-an-In: A woundy, brag young vellow:
As the port went o'hun, then, and in those days.

Scri. Did he not write his name, Sim Valentine?
Vor I have met no Sin in Finsbury books;
And yet I have writ 'hem six or seven times over.

Pan. OF you mun look for the nine deadly Sims,
IN the Church books, Doge'; not the 'high Constables;
Nor in the Counties: Zure, that same Zin Valentine,
He was a stately Zin: an' he were a Zin,
And kept 'brave house.

Cle. At the Cock and Hen, in High-gate.
You have 'fresh'd my rememory well in it! neighbor Pan:
He had a place, in last King Harrie's time,
Of sorting all the young couples; joining 'hem:
And putting 'hem together; which is, yet,
Praform'd, as on his day -- Zin Valentine;
As being the Zin of the shire, or the whole County:
I am old Rivet still, and bear a brain,
The Clench, the Varrier, and true Leach of Hamsted.

Pan. You are a shrewd antiquity, neighbor Clench!
And a great Guide to all the Parishes!
The very Bel-wether of the Hundred, here,
As I may zay. Mr. Tobias Turfe,
High Constable, would not miss you, for a' score ^nus,
When he doe' scourse of the great Charty to us.

Pup. What Is that, a Horse? Can scourse naught but a Horse?
I near read of hun, and that in Smith-veld Chartie:
IN the old Fabians Chronicles: nor I think
In any new. He may be a Giant there,
For I ought I know.

Scri. You should do well to study
Records, Fellow Ball, both Law and Poetry.

Pup. Why, all is but writing, and reading, is it Scriben?
An't be any more, it is mere cheating zure.
Vlat cheating: all your Law, and Poets too.

Pan. Mr. High Constable comes.

Pup. I Will zay't avore 'hun.

ACT I. SCENE III.
Turfe. Clench. Medlay. Scriben. Puppy. Pan.
Tur. What Is that, makes you'all so merry, and loud, Sirs, ha?
I could have heard you to my privy walk.

Cle. A Contervarsie, 'twixt your two learned men here:
Annibal Puppy says, that Law and Poetry
Are both flat cheating; All Is but writing and reading,
He says, be it verse or prose.

Tur. I think in conzience,
He do' zay true? Who is it do thwart 'un, ha?

Med. Why my friend Scriben, and't please your worship.

Tur. Who D'oge? my D'ogenes? a great Writer, marry!
He Will vace me down, me my self sometimes,
That verse goes upon veete, as you and I do:
But I can gi' 'un the hearing; zit me down;
And laugh at 'un; and to my self conclude,
The greatest Clerks, are not the wisest men
Ever. Here they' are both! What Sirs, disputin,
And holdin Arguments of verse, and prose?
And no green thing before the Door, that shows,
Or speaks a wedding?

Scr. Those were verses now,
Your worship spoke, and run upon vive feet.

Tur. Feet, vrom my mouth, D'oge? Leave your 'zurd uppinions:
And get me in some boughs.

Scr. Let 'hem have leaves first.
There Is nothing green but Bays, and Rosemary.

Pup. And they are too good for strewings, your Maids say.

Tur. You take up 'dority still, to vouch against me.
All the twelve smocks in the house, zur, are your Authors.
Get some fresh hay then, to lay underfoot:
Some Holly and Ivy, to make vine the posts:
Is It not Son Valentines day? and Mrs. Awdrey,
Your young Dame to be married? I wonder Clay
Should be so tedious: He Is to play Son Valentine!
And the Clown sluggard's not come fro' Kilborne yet?

Med. Do you call your Son in Law Clown, and't please your worship?

Tur. Yes, and vor worship too; my neighbor Medlay.
A Midlesex Clown^ and one of Finsbury:
They were the first Colon's of the kingdom here:
The Primitory Colon's; my D'ogenes says.
Where Is D'ogenes, my Writer now? What were those
You told me, D'ogenes, were the first Colon's
OF the Country? that the Romans brought in here?

Scr. The Coloni. Sir, Colonus is an Inhabitant:
A Clown original: as you would zay a Farmer, a Tiller of the Earth,
Ere sin' the Romans planted their Colonie first,
Which was in Midlesex.

Tur. Why so, I thank you heartily, good D'ogenes, you have zertified me.
I had rather be an ancient Colon, (as they zay) a Clown of Midlesex:
A good rich Farmer, or high Constable.
I Would play hun 'gaine a Knight, or a good Squire;
Or Gentleman of any other County
IN the Kindome.

Pan. Out cept Kent, for there they landed
All Gentlemen, and came in with the Conqueror,
Mad Julius Caesar; who built Dover-Castle:
My Ancestor To Pan, beat the first Ketle-drum,
Avore 'hun, here vrom Dover on the March:
Which piece of monumentall copper hangs
Up, scourd, at Hammer-smith yet; for there they came
Over the Thames, at a low water mark;
Vore either London, I, or Kingston Bridge --
I doubt were kursind.

Tur. Zee, who is here: John Clay^
Zonne Valentine, and Bridegroom! have you zeene
Your Valentine-Bride yet, sin' you came? John Clay?

ACT I. SCENE IV.
Clay. To them.
Cla. No wusse. Che lighted, I, but now in the yard:
Puppy have scarce unswadled my legs yet.

Tur. What? wispes'o' your wedding day, zonne? This is right
Originous Clay: and Clay of Kilborne too!
I would have had boots of this day, zure, zonne John.

Cla. I did it to save charges: we mun dance,
O this day, zure: and who can dance in boots?
No, I got on my best straw-coloured stockins,
And swaddeld 'hem over to zave charges; I.

Tur. And his new shamois Doublet too with points;
I like that yet: and his long sawsedge-hose,
Like the Commander of four smoking Tile-kils,
Which he is Captain of; Captain of Kilborne:
Clay with his hat turned up, of the leere side, too:
As if he would leap my Daughter yet ere night,
And spring a new Turfe to the old house:
Look, and the wenches have not vound un out;
And do parzent un, with a van of Rosemary,
And Bays; to vill a Bow-pot, trim the head
Of my best vore-horse: we shall all have Bride-laces,
Or points, I zee; my Daughter will be valiant;
And prove a very Mary Anbry in the business.

Cle. They zaid, your worship had sur'd her to Squire Tub
Of Totten-Court here; all the hundred rings on it.

Tur. A Tale of a Tub, Sir; a mere tale of a Tub.
Lend it no ear I pray you: The Squire Tub
Is a fine man, but he is too fine a man,
And has a Lady Tub too to his Mother:
I Will deal with none of these vine silken Tubs.
John Clay, and Cloath-breech for my money, and Daughter.
Here comes another old Boy too, vor his colors
Enter Father Rosin. Will stroke down my wives udder of purses, empty
Of all her milk money, this Winter Quarter;
Old Father Rosin, the chief Minstrell here:
Chief Minstrell too of High gate: she has hired him
And all, his two Boys for a day and a half,
And now they come for Ribbanding, and Rosemary;
Give 'hem enough Girls, gi' 'hem enough, and take it
Out in his tunes anon.

Cle. I Will have Tom Tiler,
For our John Clay's sake, and the Tile kills, zure.

Med. And I the jolly Joyner, for mine own sake.

Pan. I Will have the joviall Tinker for To. Pans sake.

Tur. We Will all be jovy this day, vor son Valentine.
My sweet son John's sake.

Scri. There Is another reading now:
My Mr. reads it Son, and not Sin Valentine.

Pup. Nor Zim: And he is in the right: He is high Constable.
And who should read above un, or avore 'hun?

Tur. Son John shall bid us welcome all, this day:
We Will zerve under his colors: Lead the troop John,
And Puppy; see the Bells ring. Press all noises
Of Finsbury, in our name; D'ogenes Scriben
Shall draw a score of warrants vor the business.
Does any wight parzent her Majesty's person,
This Hundred, 'bove the high Constable?

All. No, no.

Tur. Use our Authority then, to the utmost on it.

ACT I. SCENE V.
Hugh. Preamble. Metaphor.
Hugh. So, you are sure Sir to prevent 'hem all;
And throw a block in the Bride-groomes way, John Clay,
That he will hardly leap ore.

Pre. I conceive you,
Sir Hugh; as if your Rhetoric would say,
Whereas the Father of her is a Turfe,
A very superficies of the earth;
He aims no higher, then to match in Clay;
And there has pitched his rest.

Hug. Right Justice Bramble;
You have the winding wit, compassing all.

Pre. Subtle Sir Hugh, you now are in the wrong,
And err with the whole Neighborhood, I must tell you;
For you mistake my name. Justice Preamble
I write my self; which with the ignorant Clownes, here
(Because of my profession of the Law,
And place of the peace) is taken to be Bramble.
But all my warrants Sir, do run Preamble:
Richard Preamble.

Hugh. Sir I thank you for it.
That your good worship, would not let me run
Longer in error but would take me up thus --

Pre. You are my learned, and canonick neighbor:
I would not have you stray; but the incorrigible
Knot-headed beast, the Clownes, or Constables,
Still let them graze; eat Sallads; chew the Cud:
All the Towne-musicke will not move a log.

Hug. The Beetle and Wedges will, where you will have 'hem.

Pre. True, true Sir Hugh, here comes Miles Metaphore,
My Clarke: He is the man shall carry it, Chanon,
By my instructions.

Hug. He will do it ad unguem,
Miles Metaphore: He is a pretty fellow.

Pre. I love not to keep shadows, or halfe-wits,
To foil a business. Metaphore! you have seen
A King ride forth in state.

Met. Sir that I have:
King Edward our late Liege, and sovereign Lord:
And have set down the pomp.

Pre. Therefore I asked you.
Have you observed the Messengers of the Chamber?
What habits they were in?

Met. Yes; Minor Coats.
Unto the Guard, a Dragon, and a Greyhound,
For the supporters of the Arms.

Pre. Well marked;
You know not any of 'hem?

Met. Here Is one dwells
In Maribone.

Pre. Have you acquaintance with him?
To borrow his coat an hour?

Hug. Or but his badge,
'Twill serve: A little thing he wears on his breast.

Pre. His coat, I say, is of more authority:
Borrow his coat for an hour. I do love
To do all things compleately, Chanon Hugh;
Borrow his coat, Miles Metaphore, or nothing.

Met. The Taberd of his office, I will call it,
Or the Coat Armor of his place: and so
Insinuate with him by that Trope --. Metaph. goes out.

Pre. I know your powers of Rhetoric, Metaphore.
Fetch him off in a fine figure for his coat I say.

Hug. I Will take my leave Sir of your worship too:
Because I may expect the issue anon.

Pre. Stay my diviner Counsel, take your fee;
We that take fees, allow 'hem to our Counsel;
And our prime learned Counsel, double fees:
There are a brace of Angels to support you
IN your foot-walke this frost, for fear of falling;
Or spraying of a point of Matrimony,
When you come at it.

Hug. IN your worships service;
That the exploit is done, and you possessed
Preamble goes out. Of Mrs. Awdrey Turfe --

Pre. I like your project.

Hug. And I, of this effect of two to one;
It works in my pocket, against the Squire,
And his half bottom here, of half a piece:
Which was not worth the stepping ore the style for:
His Mother has quite marred him: Lady Tub,
She Is such a vessel of faeces: all dried earth!
Terra damnata, not a drop of salt!
Or Peeter in her! All her Nitre is gone.

ACT I. SCENE VI.
Lady Tub. Pol-Marten.
Lad. Is the Nag ready Marten? call the Squire.
This frosty morning we will take the air,
About the fields: for I do mean to be
Some-bodies Valentine, in my Velvet Gown,
This morning, though it be but a beggar-man.
Why stand you still, and do not call my son?

Pol. Madam, if he had couched with the Lamb,
He had no doubt been stirring with the Lark:
But he sat up at Play, and watched the Cock,
Till his first warning chid him off to rest.
Late Watchers are no early Wakers, Madam;
But if your Ladyship will have him called --.

Lad. Will have him called? Wherefore did I, Sir, bid him
Be called, you Weazell, Vermin of an Huisher?
You will return your wit to your first style
Of Marten Polcat, by these stinking tricks,
If you do use 'hem: I shall no more call you
Pol-marten, by the title of a Gentleman,
Pol-marten goes out. If you go on thus --

Pol. I am gone.

Lad. Be quick then,
IN your come off: and make amends you Stote!
Was ever such a Full-mart for an Huisher,
To a great worshipful Lady, as my self;
Who, when I heard his name first, Martin Poleat,
A stinking name, and not to be pronounced
Without a reverence. In any Ladies presence; my very heart eene earned, seeing
the Fellow
Young, pretty and handsome; being then I say,
A Basket-Carrier, and a man condemned
To the Salt-peeter works; made it my suit
To Mr. Peeter Tub, that I might change it;
And call him as I do now, by Pol-marten,
To have it sound like a Gentleman in an Office,
And made him mine own Foreman, daily waiter,
And he to serve me thus! Ingratitude!
Beyond the Coursenes yet of any Clownage,
Shown to a Lady! what now, is he stirring? Hev^urnes.

Pol. Stirring betimes out of his bed, and ready.

Lad. And comes he then?

Pol. No Madam, he is gone.

Lad. Gone? whither? ask the Porter: Where Is he gone?

Pol. I met the Porter, and have asked him for him;
He says he let him forth an hour ago.

Lad. An hour ago! what business could he have,
So early? where is his man, grave Basket Hilts?
His Guide, and Governor?

Pol. Gone with his Master.

Lad. Is he gone too? O that same surly knave,
Is his right hand: and leads my son amiss.
He has carried him to some drinking match, or other:
Pol-marten, I will call you so again;
I Am friends with you now. Go get your horse, and ride
To all the Towns about here, where his haunts are;
And cross the fields to meet, and bring me word;
He cannot be gone far, being a foot.
Be curious to inquire him: and bid Wispe
My woman come, and wait on me. The love
We Mothers bear our Sons, we have bought with pain,
Makes us often view them, with too careful eyes,
And over-looke 'hem with a jealous fear,
Out-fitting Mothers.

ACT I. SCENE VII.
Lady Tub. Wispe.
Lad. How now Wispe? Have you
A Valentine yet: I Am taking the air to choose one.

Wis. Fate send your Ladyship a fit one then.

Lad. What kind of one is that?

Wis. A proper man,
To please your Ladyship.

Lad. Out of that vanity,
That takes the foolish eye: Any poor creature,
Whose want may need my alms, or courtesy;
I rather wish; so Bishop Valentine,
Left us example to do deeds of Charity;
To feed the hungry; cloth the naked, visit
The weak, and sick; to entertain the poor;
And give the dead a Christian Funeral;
These were the works of piety he did practice,
And bad us imitate; not look for Lovers,
Or handsome Images to please our senses.
I pray thee Wispe, deal freely with me now:
We are alone, and may be merry a little:
Though art none of the Court-glories; nor the wonders
For wit, or beauty in the City: tell me,
What man would satisfy thy present fancy?
Had thy ambition leave to choose a Valentine,
Within the Queens Dominion, so a subject.

Wis. Yo' have gi' me a large scope, Madam, I confess,
And I will deal with your Ladyship sincerely:
I Will utter my whole heart to you. I would have him,
The bravest, richest, and the properest man
A Tailor could make up; or all the Poets,
With the Perfumers: I would have him such,
As not another woman, but should spite me:
Three City Ladies should run mad for him:
And Countri-Madams infinite.

Lad. You Would spare me,
And let me hold my wits?

Wis. I should with you --
For the young Squire, my Masters sake: dispense
A little; but it should be very little.
Then all the Court-wives I Would have jealous of me;
As all their husbands jealous of them:
And not a Lawyers Pusse of any quality,
But lick her lips, for a snatch in the Term time.

Lad. Come,
Let Us walk: we will hear the rest, as we go on:
You are this morning in a good vein, Dido:
Would I could be as merry. My sons absence
Troubles me not a little: though I seek
These ways to put it off; which will not help:
Care that is entered, once into the breast,
Will have the whole possession, ere it rest.

ACT II.
SCENE I.
Turfe. Clay. Medlay. Clench. To. Pan. Scriben. Puppy.
Tur. ZOnne Clay, cheer up, the better leg avore:
This is a veat is once done, and no more.

Cle. And then it is done vor ever, as they say.

Med. Right! vor a man have his hour, and a dog his day.

Tur. True neighbor Medlay, yo' are still In-and-In.

Med. I would be Mr. Constable, if' ch' could win.

Pan. I zay, John Clay, keep still on his old gate:
Wedding, and hanging, both go at a rate.

Tur. Well said To-Pan: you have still the hap to hit
The nail of the head at a close: I think there ne ver
Marriage was managed with a more avisement,
Then was this marriage, though I say it, that should not;
Especially 'gain 'mine own flesh, and blood;
My wedded Wife. Indeed my Wife would have had
All the young Batchelers and Maids, forsooth,
OF the zixe Parishes hereabout: But I
Cried none, sweet Sybil: none of that gear, I:
It would lick zalt, I told her, by her leave.
No, three, or voure our wise, choice honest neighbors:
Vpstantiall persons: men that have borne office:
And mine own Family, would be enough
To eat our dinner. What? Dear meate's a theife:
I know it by the Butchers, and the Mercat-volke;
Hum drum I cry. No halfe-Oxe in a Pie:
A man that is bid to Bride-ale, if he have cake,
And drink enough, he need not veare his stake.

Cle. It Is right: he has spoke as true as a Gun; believe it.

Tur. Come Sybil, come: Did not I tell you of this?
This pride, and muster of women would mar all?
Six women to one Daughter, and a Mother!
The Queen (God save her) have no more her self.

D. Tur. Why, if you keep so many, Mr. Turfe,
Why, should not all present our service to her?

Tur. Your service? good! I think you will write to her shortly,
Your very loving and obedient Mother.

Tur. Come, send your Maids off, I will have 'hem sent
Home again wife: I love no trains of Kent,
Or Christendom, as they say.

Sc. We will not back,
And leave our Dame.

Mad. Why should her worship lack
Her tail of Maids, more then you do of men?

Tur. What, mutinin Madge?

Io. Zend back your C'lons again.
And we will vollow.

All. Else we will guard our Dame.

Tur. I have zet the nest of waspes all on a flame.

D. Tur. Come, you are such another Mr. Turfe:
A Clod you should be called, of a high Constable:
To let no music go before your child,
To Church, to cheer her heart up this cold morning.

Tur. You are for Father Rosin, and his consort
Of fidling Boys, the great Feats, and the less:
Because you have entertained 'hem all from High-gate.
To show your pomp, you would have your Daughter, and Maids
Dance ore the fields like Faies, to Church this frost?
I Will have no rondels, I, in the Queens paths;
Let 'un scrape the Gut at home, where they have filled it
At afternoon.

D. Turfe. I Will have 'hem play at dinner.

Ite. She is in the right, Sir; vor your wedding dinner
Is starved without the Music.

Med. If the Pies
Come not in piping hot, you have lost that Proverb.

Tur. I yield to truth: wife are you sussified?

Pan. A right good man! when he knows right, he loves it.

Scri. And he will know it, and shew't too by his place
Of being high Constable, if no where else.

ACT II. SCENE II.
Hilts bearded, booted and spurred. To them.
Hill. Well over-taken, Gentlemen! I pray you,
Which is the Queens High Constable among you?

Pup. The tallest man: who should be else, do you think?

Hill. It is no matter what I think, young Clown:
Your answer favors of the Cart.

Pup. How? Cart? and Clown? Do you know whose teame you speak to?


Hill. No: nor I care not: Whose Jade may you be?

Pup. Jade? Cart? and Clown? O for a lash of whip-cord!
Three-knotted coard!

Hill. Do you mutter? Sir, snorle this way;
That I may hear, and answer what you say,
With my schoole-dagger, 'bout your Costard Sir.
Look to it, young growse: I Will lay it on, and sure;
Take It off who is wull.

Cle. Nay, pray you Gentleman --.

Hill. Go too: I will not bate him an ace on it.
What? Rowle-powle? Maple-face? All fellows?

Pup. Do you hear friend, I would wish you, vor your good,
Tie up your brended Bitch there, your dun rustie
Pannyer-hilt poinard: and not vex the youth
With showing the teeth of it. We now are going
To Church, in way of matrimony, some on us:
Tha' rung all in a'ready. If it had not,
All the horn beasts are grazing in this close,
Sold not have pull' me hence, till this Ash-plant
Had rung noone of your pate, Mr. Broome-beard.

Hill. That would I feign zee, quoth the blind George
Of Holloway: Come Sir.

Awd. O their naked weapons!

Pan. For the passion of man, hold Gentleman, and Puppy.

Cla. Murder, O Murder!

Awd. O my Father, and Mother!

D. Tur. Husband, what do you mean? Son Clay for Gods sake --

Tur. I charge you in the Queens name, keep the peace.

Hill. Tell me of no Queen, or Keysar: I must have
A leg, or a hanch of him, ere I go.

Med. But zir,
You must obey the Queens high Officers.

Hill. Why must I, Good Man Must?

Med. You must, an' you wull.

Tur. Gentleman, I Am here for fault, high Constable --

Hill. Are you zo? what then?

Tur. I pray you Sir put up
Your weapons; do, at my request: For him,
On my authority, he shall lie by the heels,
Verbatim continente, an' I live.

D. Tur. Out on him for a knave, what a dead fright
He has put me into? Come Awdrey, do not shake.

Awd. But is not Puppy hurt? nor the the other man?

Cla. No Bun; but had not I cried Murder, I wusse --

Pup. Sweet Good Man Clench, I pray you revise my Mr.
I may not zit in the stocks, till the wedding be past
Dame. Mrs. Awdrey: I shall break the Bride-cake else.

Cle. Zomething must be, to save authority, Puppy.

D. Tur. Husband --

Cle. And Gossip --

Awd. Father --

Tur. 'Treat
me not.
It is in vain. If he lie not by the heels,
I Will lie there for 'hun. I Will teach the Hine,
To carry a tongue in his head, to his subperiors.

Hill. This's a wise Constable! where keeps he school?

Cle. In Kentish Town, a very survere man.

Hill. But as survere as he is; Let me Sir tell him,
He sha' not lay his man by the hee^es for this.
This was my quarrel: And by his office leave,
If It carry 'hun for this, it shall carry double;
Vor he shall carry me too.

Tur. Breach of man!
He is my chattell, mine own hired goods:
An' if you do abet 'un in this matter,
I Will clap you both by the heels, ankle to ankle.

Hilt. You Will clap a dog of wax as soon, old Blurt?
Come, spare not me, Sir; I am no man's wife:
I care not, I, Sir, not three skips of a Lowse for you,
And you were ten tall Constables, not I.

Tur. Nay, pray you Sir, be not angry; but content:
My man shall make you, what amends you will ask 'hun.

Hill. Let 'hun mend his manners then, and know his betters:
It Is all I ask 'hun: and 'twill be his own;
And's Masters too, another day. Che vore 'hun.

Med. As right as a Club, still. Zure this angry man
Speaks very near the mark, when he is pleased.

Pup. I thank you Sir, an' I meet you at Kentish Town,
I have the courtesy of hundred for you.

Hill. Gramercy, good high Constables Hine. But hear you?
Mass: Constable, I have other manner of matter,
To bring you about, then this. And so it is,
I do belong to one of the Queens Captains;
A Gent'man of the Field, one Captain Thum's:
I know not, whether you know 'hun, or no: It may be
You do, and 't may be you do not again.

Tur. No, I assure you on my Constable-ship,
I do not know 'hun.

Hill. Nor I neither in faith.
It skils not much; my Captain, and my self,
Having occasion to come riding by, here,
This morning, at the corner of Saint John's wood,
Some mile of this Town, were set upon
By a sort of country fellows: that not only
Beat us, but robbed us, most sufficiently;
And bound us to our behavior, hand and foot;
And so they left us. Now, Don Constable,
I am to charge you in her Majesty's name,
As you will answer it at your apperill,
That forthwith you raise Hue and Cry in the Hundred,
For all such persons as you can dispect,
By the length and breadth, of your office: vor I tell you,
The loss is of some value, therefore look to it.

Tur. As Fortune mend me, now, or any office
Of a thousand pound, if I know what to zay,
Would I were dead; or vaire hanged up at Tiburne,
If I do know what course to take; or how
To turn my self; just at this time too, now,
My Daughter is to bemarried: I Will but go
To Pancridge Church, hard by, and return instantly,
And all my Neighborhood shall go about it.

Hill. Tut, Pancridge me no Pancridge, if you let it
Slip, you will answer it, and your Cap be of wool;
Therefore take heed, you will feel the smart else, Constable.

Tur. Nay, good Sir stay. Neighbors! what think you of this?

D. Tur. Faith, Man --. Odd precious woman, hold your tongue;
And mind your pigs of the spit at home; you must
Have Ore in every thing. Pray you Sir, what kind
Of fellows were they?

Hill. Theev's kind, I have told you.

Tur. I mean, what kind of men?

Hill. Men of our make.

Tur. Nay, but with patience, Sir, we that are Officers
Must 'quire the special marks, and all the tokens
Of the despected parties, or perhaps -- else,
Be nere the nere of our purpose in 'prehending 'hem.
Can you tell, what 'parrell any of them wore?

Hill. Troth no: there were so many of hun, all like
So one another: Now I remember me,
There was one busy fellow, was their Leader;
A blunt squat swad, but lower then your self,
He' had on a Lether Doublet, with long points.
And a pair of pin'd-up breech's, like pudding bags:
With yellow stockings, and his hat turned up
With a silver Claspe, on his leere side.

D. Tur. By these
Marks it should be John Clay, now bless the man!

Tur. Peace, and be naught: I think the woman be phrensick.

Hill. John Clay? what is he, good Mistress?

Awd. He that shall be
My husband --

Hill. How! your husband, pretty one?

Awd. Yes, I shall anon be married: That Is he.

Tur. Passion of me, undone!

Pup. Bless Masters son!

Hill. O you are well 'prehended: know you me Sir?

Clay. No's my record: I never zaw you avore.

Hill. You did not? where were your eyes then? out at washing?

Tur. What should a man zay? who should he trust
In these days? Hark you John Clay, if you have
Done any such thing, tell troth, and shame the Devil.

Cle. Vaith do: my Gossip Turfe zaies well to you John.

Med. Speak man, but do not convesse, nor be avraid.

Pan. A man is a man, and a beast's a beast, look to it.

D. Tur. IN the name of men, or beasts! what do you do?
Hare the poor fellow out on his five wits,
And seven senses? Do not weep John Clay.
I swear the poor wretch is as guilty from it,
As the Child was, was borne this very morning.

Cla. No, as I am a kyrsin soul, would I were hanged
If ever I -- alas I! would I were out
Of my life, so I would I were, and in again --

Pup. Nay, Mrs. Awdrey will say nay to that.
No, In-and-out? an' you were out of your life,
How should she do for a husband? who should fall
Aboard of her then, Ball? He Is a Puppy?
No; Hanniball has no breeding: well! I say little;
But hitherto all goes well, pray it prove no better.

Awd. Come Father; I would we were married: I am a cold.

Hill. Well, Mr. Constable, this your fine Groom here,
Bridegroom, or what Groom else, soere he be,
I charge him with the felony; and charge you
To carry him back forthwith to Paddington,
Unto my Captain, who stays my return there:
I am to go to the next Justice of peace,
To get a warrant to raise Huy and Cry,
And bring him, and his fellows all before 'hun.
Fare you well Sir, and look to 'hun I charge you,
As yo'll answer it. Take heed; the business
If you defer, may prejudicial you
More then you thinke-for, zay I told you so. Hilts goes out

Tur. Here Is a Bride-ale indeed! Ah zonne John, zonne Clay!
I little thought you would have proved a piece
Of such false metal.

Cla. Father, will you believe me?
Would I might never stir in my new shoes,
If ever I would do so voule a fact.

Tur. Well Neighbors, I do charge you to assist me
With 'hun to Paddington. Be he a true man, so:
The better for 'hun. I will do mine office,
An' he were my own begotten a thousand times.

D. Tur. Why, do you hear man? Husband? Mr. Turfe!
What shall my Daughter do? Puppy, stay here. She follows her busb. and
neighbors.

Awd. Mother, I Will go with you, and with my Father.

ACT II. SCENE III.
Puppy. Awdrey. Hilts.
Pup. Nay, stay sweet Mrs. Awdrey: here are none
But one friend (as they zay) desires to speak
A word, or two, cold with you: How do you veele
Your self this frosty morning?

Awd. What have you
To do to ask, I pray you? I am a cold.

Pup. It seems you are hot, good Mrs. Awdrey.

Awd. You lie; I am as cold as Ice is: Feel else.

Pup. Nay, you have coold my courage: I am past it,
I have done feeling with you.

Awd. Done with me?
I do defy you. So I do, to say
You have done with me: you are a ^awcy Puppy.

Pup. O you mistake! I meant not as you mean.

Awd. Meant you not knavery; Puppy? No: not I.
Clay meant you all the knavery, it seems,
Who rather, then he would be married to you,
Chose to be wedded to the Gallows first.

Awd. I thought he was a dissembler; he would prov^
A slippery Merchant in the frost. He might
Have married one first, and have been hanged after,
If he had had a mind to it. But you men,
Fie on you.

Pup. Mrs. Awdrey, can you vind,
I your heart to fancy Puppy? me poor Ball?

Awd. You are disposed to jeere one, Mr. Hanniball.
Enter Hilts. Pity of me! the angry man with the beard!

Hill. Put on thy hat, I look for no despect.
Where Is thy Master?

Pup. Marry, he is gone
With the picture of despair, to Paddington.

Hill. Pr'y thee run after 'hun, and tell 'hun he shall
Find out my Captain, lodged at the red- Lion
In Paddington; that is the Inn. Let 'un ask
Vor Captain Thum's; And take that for thy pains:
He may seek long enough else. Hi^ thee again.

Pup. Yes, Sir you will look to Mrs. Bride the while?

Hill. That I will: prithee haste.

Awd. What Puppy? Puppy?

Hill. Sweet Mrs. Bride, He Will come again presently.
Here was no subtle device to get a wench.
This Chanon has a brave pate of his own!
A shaven pate! And a right monger, y' vaith!
This was his plot! I follow Captain Thum's?
We robbed in Saint John's wood? IN my the other hose!
I laugh, to think what a fine fools finger they have
O this wise Constable, in pricking out
This Captain Thum's to his neighbors: you shall see
The Tile-man too set fire on his own Kill,
And leap into it, to save himself from hanging.
You talk of a Bride-ale, here was a Bride-ale broke,
IN the nick. Well: I must yet dispatch this Bride,
To mine own master, the young Squire, and then
My task is done. Gen'woman! I 'have in sort
Done you some wrong, but now I Will do you what right
I can: It Is true, you are a proper woman;
But to be cast away on such a Clowne-pipe
As Clay; me thinks, your friends are not so wise
As nature might have made 'hem; well, go too:
There Is better fortune coming toward you,
A^' you do not deject it. Take a voole's
Counsel, and do not stand in your own light.
It may prove better then you think for: Look you.

Awd. Alas Sir, what is it you would have me do?
I Would feign do all for the best, if I knew how.

Hill. Forsake not a good turn, when it is offered you;
Fair Mistress Awdrey, that is your name, I take it.

Awd. No Mistress, Sir, my name is Awdrey.

Hill. Well, so it is, there is a bold young Squire,
The blood of Totten, Tub, and Tripoly --.

Awd. Squire Tub, you mean? I know him: he knows me too.

Hill. He is in love with you: and more, he is mad for you.

Awd. I, so he told me: in his wits, I think.
But he is too fine for me; and has a Lady
Tub to his Mother. Here he comes himself!

ACT II. SCENE IV.
Tub. Hilts. Awdrey.
Tub. O you are a trusty Governor!

Hill. What ailes you?
You do not know when yo'are well, I think:
You Would have the Calfe with the white face, Sir, would you?
I have her for you here; what would you more?

Tub. Quietness, Hilts, and hear no more of it.

Hill. No more of it, quoth you? I do not care,
If some on us had not heard so much often,
I tell you true; A man must carry, and vetch,
Like Bungy's dog for you.

Tub. What Is he?

Hill. A Spaniel.
And scarce be spit in the mouth for it. A good Dog
Deserves, Sir, a good bone, of a free Master:
But, an' your turns be served, the devil a bit
You care for a man after, ere a Lard of you.
Like will to like, y-faith, quoth the scab'd Squire
To the mangy Knight, when both met in a dish
Of buttered vish. One bad, there is nere a good;
And not a barrel better Hering among you.

Tub. Nay Hilts! I pray thee grow not fram-pull now.
Turn not the bad Cow, after thy good soape.
Our plot has hitherto taken good effect:
And should it now be troubled, or stopped up,
'Twould prove the utter ruin of my hopes.
I pray thee haste to Pancridge, to the Chanon:
And gi' him notice of our good success;
Will him that all things be in readiness.
Fair Awdrey, and my self, will cross the fields,
The nearest path. Good Hilts, make thou some haste,
And meet us on the way. Come gentle Awdrey.

Hill. Vaith, would I had a few more geances on it:
An' you say the word, send me to Jericho.
Out-cept a man were a Post-horse, I have not known
The like on it; yet, an' he had kind words,
'Twould never irke 'hun. But a man may break
His heart out in these days, and get a flap
With a fox-taile, when he has done. And there is all.

Tub. Nay, say not so Hilts: hold thee; there are Crowns --
My love bestows on thee, for thy reward.
If Gold will please thee, all my land shall drop
In bounty thus, to recompense thy merit.

Hill. Tut, keep your land, and your gold too Sir: I
Seek neither -- another of 'hun. Learn to get
More: you will know to spend that zum you have
Early enough: you are assured of me.
I love you too too well, to live of the spoil:
For your own sake, were there were no worse then I.
All is not Gold that glisters: I Will to Pancridge.

Tub. See, how his love does melt him into Tears!
An honest faithful servant is a Jewel.
Now the adventurous Squire has time, and leisure,
To ask his Awdrey how she does, and hear
A grateful answer from her. She not speaks:
Has the proud Tiran, Frost, usurped the seat
Of former beauty in my Loves fair cheek;
Staining the rose at tincture of her blood,
With the dull die of blew-congealing cold?
No, sure the weather dares not so presume
To hurt an object of her brightness. Yet,
The more I view her, she but looks so, so.
Ha? gi' me leave to search this mystery!
O now I have it: Bride, I know your grief;
The last nights cold, has bred in you such horror
Of the assigned Bride-groomes constitution,
The Kilborne Clay-pit; that frost-bitten marle;
That lump in courage: melting cake of Ice;
That the conceit thereof has almost killed thee.
But I must do thee good wench, and refresh thee.

Awd. You are a merry man, Squire Tub, of Totten!
I have heard much of your words, but not of your deeds.

Tub. Thou say true, sweet; IN have been too slack in deeds.

Awd. Yet, I was never so straight-lac'd to you, Squire.

Tub. Why, did you ever love me, gentle Awdrey?

Awd. Love you? I cannot tell: I must hate no body,
My Father says.

Tub. Yes, Clay, and Kilburne; Awdrey,
You must hate them.

Awd. It shall be for your sake then.

Tub. And for my sake, shall yield you that gratuitie.

Awd. He offers to kiss her. She puts him back. Soft, and fair, Squire, there
go two word's to a bargain.

Tub. What are those Awdrey?

Awd. Nay, I cannot tell.
My Mother said, zure, if you married me,
You Would make me a Lady the first week: and put me
In, I know not what, the very day.

Tub. What was it?
Speak gentle Awdrey, thou shall have it yet.

Awd. A velvet dressing for my head, it is,
They say will make one brave: I will not know
Besse Moale, nor Margery Turne-up: I will look
Another way upon 'hem, and be proud.

Tub. Troth I could wish my wench a better wi^;
But what she wants there, her face supplies.
There is a pointed luster in her eye
Has shot quite through me, and has hit my heart:
And thence it is, I first received the wound,
That ranckles now, which only she can cure.
Feign would I work my self, from this conceit;
But, being flesh, I cannot. I must love her,
The naked truth is: and I will go on,
Were it for nothing, but to cross my Rivall's.
Come Awdrey: I am now resolved to have thee.

ACT II. SCENE V.
Preamble. Metaphore. Tub. Awdrey.
Pre. Nay, do it quickly, Miles; why shak'st thou man?
Speak but his name: I Will second thee my self.

Met. What is his name?

Pre. Squire Tripoly or Tub.
Any thing --

Met. Squire Tub, I do arrest you
IN the Queens Majesty's name, and all the Councels.

Tub. Arrest me, Varlet?

Pre. Keep the peace I charge you.

Tub. Are you there, Justice Bramble? where is your warrant?

Pre. The warrant is directed here to me,
From the whole table; wherefore I would pray you
Be patient Squire, and make good the peace.

Tub. Well, at your pleasure, Justice. I am wronged:
Sirrah, what are you have arrested me?

Pre. He is a Pursy'vant at Arms, Squire Tub.

Met. I am a Purs'yvant, see, by my Coat else.

Tub. Well Purs'yvant, go with me: I Will give you bail.

Pre. Sir he may take no bail. It is a warrant,
In special from the Council, and commands
Your personal appearance. Sir, your weapon
I must require: And then deliver you
A Prisoner to this officer, Squire Tub.
I pray you to conceive of me no other,
Then as your friend, and neighbor. Let my person
Be severed from my office in the fact,
And I am clear. Here Purs'yvant, receive him
Into your hands; And use him like a Gentleman.

Tub I thank you Sir: But whither must I go now?

Pre. Nay, that must not be told you, till you come
Unto the place assigned by his instructions.
I Will be the Maidens Convoy to her father,
For this time, Squire.

Tub. I thank you Mr. Bramble.
I doubt, or fear, you will make her the balance
To weigh your Justice in. Pray ye do me right,
And lead not her, at least out of the way.
Justice is blind, and having a blind Guide,
She may be apt to slip aside.

Pre. I Will see to her.

Tub. I see my wooing will not thrive. Arrested!
As I had set my rest up, for a wife?
And being so fair for it, as I was. --. Well, fortune,
Thou art a blind Bawd, and a Beggar too,
To cross me thus; and let my only Rival,
To get her from me? That Is the spite of spights.
But most I muse at, is, that I, being none
OF the Court, am sent for thither by the Council!
My heart is not so light, as't was IN the morning.

ACT II. SCENE VI.
Hilts. Tub. Metaphor.
Hill. You mean to make a Hoiden, or a Hare
O me, to hunt Counter thus, and makes these doubles:
And you mean no such thing, as you send about?
Where Is your sweetheart now, I marle?

Tub. Oh Hilts!

Hill. I know you of old! nere halt before a Criple.
Will you have a Cawdle? where is your grief, Sir? speak?

Met. Do you hear friend? Do you serve this Gentleman?

Hill. How then, Sir? what if I do? peradventure yea:
Peraventure nay, what is that to you Sir? Say.

Met. Nay, pray you Sir, I meant no harm in truth:
But this good Gentleman is arrested.

Hill. How?
Say me that again.

Tub. Nay Basket, never storm;
I am arrested here, upon command
From the Queens Council; and I must obey.

Met. You say Sir very true, you must obey.
An honest Gentleman, in faith!

Hill. He must?

Tub. But that which most tormenteth me, is this,
That Justice Bramble has got hence my Awdrey.

Hill. How? how? stand by a little, sirrah, you
With the badge of your breast. Let Us know Sir what you are?

Met. I am Sir (pray you do not look so terribly)
A Purs'yvant.

Hill. A Purs'yvant? your name Sir?

Met. My name Sir --

Hill. What is it? speak?

Met. Miles Metaphor;
And Justice Preambles Clarke.

Tub. What says he?

Hill. Pray you,
Let us alone. You are a Purs'yvant?

Met. No faith, Sir, would I might never stir from you,
IN is made a Purs'yvant against my will.

Hill. Ha! and who made you one? tell true, or my will
Shall make you nothing, instantly.

Met. Put up
Your frightfull Blade; and your dead-doing look,
And I shall tell you all.

Hill. Speak then the truth,
And the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.

Met. My Master, Justice Bramble, hearing your Master,
The Squire Tub, was coming on this way,
With Mrs. Awdrey, the high Constables Daughter;
Made me a Purs'yvant: and gave me warrant
To arrest him, so that he might get the Lady,
With whom he is gone to Pancridge, to the Vicar,
Not to her Fathers. This was the device,
Which I beseek you, do not tell my Master.

Tub. O wonderful! well Basket, let him rise:
And for my free escape, forge some excuse.
I Will post to Paddington, to acquaint old Turfe,
With the whole business, and so stop the marriage.

Hill. Well, bless thee: I do wish thee grace, to keep
Thy Masters secrets, better, or be hanged.

Met. I thank you, for your gentle admonition.
Pray you, let me call you Godfather hereafter.
And as your God-sonne Metaphore I promise,
To keep my Masters privities, sealed up
IN the valleys of my trust, locked close for ever,
Or let me be trussed up at Tiburne shortly.

Hill. Thine own wish, save, or choke thee; Come away.

ACT III.
SCENE I.
Turfe. Clench. Medlay. To Pan. Scriben. Clay.
Tur. PAssion of me, was ever man thus crossed?
All things run Arsie-Varsie; upside down.
High Constable! Now by our Lady of Walsingham.
I had rather be marked out Tom Scavinger.
And with a shovell make clean the high ways,
Then have this office of a Constable,
And a high Constable! The higher charge
It brings more trouble, more vexation with it.
Neighbors, good neighbors, 'vize me what to do:
How we shall bear us in this Huy and Cry.
We cannot find the Captain; no such man
Lodged at the Lion, nor came thither hurt.
The morning we have spent in privy search;
And by that means the Bride-ale is differr'd;
The Bride, she is left alone in Puppie's charge;
The Bridegroom goes under a pair of sureties;
And held of all as a respected person.
How should we bussle forward? Gi' some counsel,
How to bestirre our stumps in these cross ways.

Cle. Faith Gossip Turfe, you have, you say, Remission,
To comprehend all such, as are dispected:
Now, would I make another privy search
Through this Town, and then you have zearch'd two towns.

Med. Masters, take heed, let us not vind too many:
One's enough to stay the Hang-mans stomach.
There is John Clay, who is yvound already;
A proper man: A Tile-man by his trade:
A man as one would zay, molded in clay:
As spruce as any neighbors child among you:
And he (you zee) is taken on conspition,
And two, or three (they zay) what call you 'hem?
Zuch as the Justices of Coram nobis
Grant -- (I forget their names, you have many on 'hem,
Mr. High Constable they come to you.)
I have it at my tongues end -- Cunni-borroughes,
To bring him straight avore the zessions house.

Tur. O you mean warrens, neighbor, do you not?

Med. I, I, thick same! you know 'un well enough.

Tur. Too well, too well; would I had never known 'hem.
We good Vree-holders cannot live in quiet,
But every hour new purcepts, Huy's and Cry's,
Put us to requisitions night and day:
What should a man zay, should we leave the zearch?
I am in danger, to reburse as much
As he was robbed on; I, and pay his hurts,
If I should vollow it, all the good cheer
That was provided; for the wedding dinner
Is spoiled, and lost. Oh there are two vat pigs,
A zindging by the vi^r: Now by Saint Tomy,
Too good to eat, but on a wedding day;
And then, a Goose will bid you all, Come cut me.
Zun Clay, zun Clay (for I must call thee so)
Be of good comfort; take my Muckinder;
And dry thine eyes. If thou be true, and honest;
And if thou find'st thy conscience clear vrom it,
Pluck up a good heart, we will do well enough.
If not, confess a truths name. But in faith
I durst be sworn upon all holy books,
John Clay would nere commit a Robbery
On his own head.

Cla. No; Truth is my rightful Judge:
I have kept my hands, here hence, fro' evil speaking,
Lying, and slandering; and my tongue from stealing.
He do not live this day can say, John Clay
I have zeene thee, but in the way of honesty.

Pan. Faith neighbor Medlay, I durst be his borough,
He would not look a true man in the vace.

Cla. I take the town to concord, where I dwell,
All Kilburne be my witness; If I were not
Begot in bashfulnesse, brought up in shamefac'tnesse:
Let 'un bring a dog, but to my vace, that can
Zay, I have beat 'hun, and without a vault;
Or but a cat, will swear upon a book,
I have as much as zet a vier her tail;
And I Will give him, or her a crown for 'mends.
But to give out, and zay, I have robbed a Captain!
Receive me at the latter day, if I
Ere thought of any such matter; or could mind it --.

Med. No John, you are come of too good personage;
I think my Gossip Clench, and Mr. Turfe
Both think, you would ra 'tempt no such voule matter.

Tur. But how unhappily it comes to pass!
Just on the wedding day! I cry me mercy:
I had almost forgot the Huy and Cry:
Good neighbor Pan, you are the Third-burrow,
And D'ogenes Scriben, you my learned Writer,
Make out a new purcept -- Lord, for thy goodness,
I had forgot my Daughter, all this while;
The idle knave has brought no news from her.
Here comes the sneaking Puppy; What Is the news?
My heart! my heart! I fear all is not well,
Some things mishap'd, that he is come without her.

ACT III. SCENE II.
To them. Puppy. Da: Turfe. Pup. Oh, where is my Master? my Master? my Master?

D. Tur. Thy Master? what would with thy Master, man?
There Is thy Mr. Tur. What Is the matter Puppy?

Pup. Oh Master! oh Dame! oh Dame! oh Master!

D. Tur. What sai'st thou to thy Master, or thy Dame?

Pup. Oh John Clay! John Clay! John Clay!

Tur. What of John Clay?

Med. Luck grant he bring not news he shall be hanged.

Cle. The world forfend, I hope, it is not so well.

Cla. Oh Lord! oh me! what shall I do? poor John!

Pup. Oh John Clay! John Clay! John Clay!

Cla. Alas,
That ever I was borne! I will not stay by it,
For all the Tiles in Kilburne.

D. Tur. What of Clay?
Speak Puppy, what of him?

Pup. He has lost, he has lost.

Tur. For luck sake speak, Puppy, what has he lost?

Pup. Oh Awdrey, Awdrey, Awdrey!

D. Tur. What of my daughter Awdrey?


Pup. I tell you Awdrey -- do you understand me?
Awdrey, sweet Master! Awdrey, my dear Dame --

Tur. Where is she? what is become of her, I pray thee?

Pup. Oh the serving-man! the serving-man! the serving-man!

Tur. What talk thou of the serving-man? where is Awdrey?

Pup. Gone with the serving-man, gone with the serving-man.

D. Tur. Good Puppy, whither is she gone with him?

Pup. I cannot tell, he bad me bring you word,
The Captain lay at the Lion, and before
I came again, Awdrey was gone with the serving-man;
I tell you, Awdrey's run away with the serving-man.

Tur. 'Od'socks! my woman, what shall we do now?

D. Tur. Now, so you help not, man, I know not, I.

Tur. This was your pomp of Maids. I told you on it.
Six Maids to vollow you, and not leave one
To wait upo' your Daughter: I zaid, Pride
Would be paid one day, her old vi' pence, wife.

Med. What of John Clay, Ball Puppy?

Pup. He has lost --

Med. His life for velonie?

Pup. No, his wife by villainy.

Tur. Now, villains both! oh that same Huy and Cry!
Oh neighbors! oh that cursed serving-man!
Clay's first mist. O maids! O wife! But John Clay, where is he?
How! fled for veare, zay ye? will he slip us now?
We that are sureties, must require 'hun out.
How shall we do to find the serving-man?
Cocks bodikins! we must not lose John Clay:
Awdrey, my daughter Awdrey too! let us zend
To all the towns, and zeeke her; but alas,
The Huy and Cry, that must be looked unto.

ACT III. SCENE III.
To them. Tub. Tub. What, in a passion Turfe?

Tur. I good Squire Tub.
Were never honest Varmers thus perplexed.

Tub. Turfe, I am privy to thy deep unrest:
The ground of which, springs from an idle plot,
Cast by a Suitor, to your daughter Awdrey --
And thus much, Turfe, let me advertise you;
Your daughter Awdrey, met I on the way,
With Justice Bramble in her company:
Who means to marry her at Pancridge Church.
And there is Chanon Hugh, to meet them ready:
Which to prevent you must not trust delay;
But winged speed must cross their sly intent:
Then hie thee. Turfe, haste to forbid the Banes.

Tur. Has Justice Bramble got my daughter Awdrey?
A little while, shall he enjoy her, zure.
But O the Huy and Cry! that hinders me:
I must prusue that, or neglect my journey:
I Will ene leave all: and with the patient Ass,
The over-laden Ass, throw off my burden,
And cast mine office; pluck in my large ears
Betimes, lest some dis-judge 'hem to be horns:
I Will leave to beat it on the broken hoof,
And ease my pasternes. I Will no more High Constables.

Tub. I cannot choose, but smile, to see thee troubled
With such a bald, halfe-hatched circumstance!
The Captain was not robbed, as is reported;
That trick the Justice craftily deviz'd,
To break the marriage with the Tile-man Clay.
The Huy, and Cry, was merely counterfeit:
The rather may you judge it to be such,
Because the Bridegroom, was described to be
One of the thieves, first in the velonie.
Which, how far it is from him, yourselves may guess:
'Twas Justice Bramble's vetch, to get the wench.

Tur. And is this true Squire Tub?

Tub. Believe me Turfe,
As I am a Squire: or less, a Gentleman.

Tur. I take my office back: and my authority,
Upon your worships words. Neighbors, I am
High Constable again: where is my zonne Clay?
He shall be zonne, yet, wife, your meat by leisure:
Draw back the spits.

D. Tur. That Is done already man.

Tur. I Will break this marriage off: and afterward,
She shall be given to her first betrothed.
Look to the meat, wife: look well to the roast.

Tub. I Will follow him aloof, to see the event.

Pup. Dame, Mistress, though I do not turn the spit;
I hope yet the Pigs-head.

D. Tur. Come up, Jack-sauce:
It shall be served in to you.

Pup. No, no service,
But a reward for service.

D. Tur. I still took you
For an unmannerly Puppy: will you come,
And vetch more wood to the vier, Mr. Ball?

Pup. I wood to the vier? I shall piss it out first:
You think to make me ene your ox, or ass;
Or any thing. Though I cannot right my self
On you; I Will sure revenge me on your meat.

ACT III. SCENE IV.
La: Tub. Pol-Marten. Wispe. Puppy.
Pol. Madam, to Kentish Town, we are got at length;
But, by the way we cannot meet the Squire:
Nor by inquiry can we hear of him.
Here is Turfe's house, the father of the Maid.

Lad. Pol-Marten, see, the streets are strewn with herbs,
And here has been a wedding, Wispe, it seems!
Pray heaven, this Bridal be not for my son!
Good Marten, knock: knock quickly: Ask for Turfe.
My thoughts misgive me, I am in such a doubt --

Pol. Who keeps the house here?

Pup. Why the door, and walls
Do keep the house.

Pol. I ask then, who is within?

Pup Not you that are without.

Pol. Look forth, and speak.
Into the street, here. Come before my Lady.

Pup. Before my Lady? Lord have mercy upon me:
If I do come before her, she will see
The hand-som'st man in all the Town, pardee!
Now stand I vore her, what zaith velvet she?

Lad. Sirrah, whoseman are you?

Pup. Madam, my Masters.

Lad. And who is thy Master?

Pup. What you tread on, Madam.

Lad. I tread on an old Turfe.

Pup. That Turfe's my Master.

Lad. A merry fellow! what is thy name?

Pup. Ball Puppy
They call me at home: abroad, Hanniball Puppy.

Lad. Come hither, I must kiss thee, Valentine Puppy.
Wispe! have you got you a Valentine?

Wis. None, Madam;
He Is the first stranger that I saw.

Lad. To me
He is so, and such. Let Us share him equally.

Pup. Help, help good Dame. A reskue, and in time.
In stead of Bills, with Colstaves come; in stead of Spears, with Spits;
Your slices serve for slicing swords, to save me, and my wits:
A Lady, and her woman here, their Huisher eke by side,
(But he stands mute) have plotted how your Puppy to divide.

ACT III. SCENE V.
D. Turfe. Maids. To them.
D. Turfe. How now? what noise is this with you, Ball Puppy?

Pup. Oh Dame! And fellows of the Kitchen! Arm,
Arm, for my safety; if you love your Ball:
Here is a strange thing, called a Lady, a Mad-dame:
And a device of hers, yclept her woman;
Have plotted on me, in the Kings highway,
To steal me from my self, and cut me in halfes,
To make one Valentine to serve 'hem both;
This for my right-side, that my left hand love.

D. Tur. So saucy, Puppy? to use no more reverence
Unto my Lady, and her velvet Gown?

Lad. Turfe's wife, rebuke him not: Your man does please me
With his conceit. Hold: there are ten old nobles,
To make thee merrier yet, half- Valentine.

Pup. I thank you right-side: could my left as much,
'Twould make me a man of mark: young Hanniball!

Lad. Dido, shall make that good; or I will for her.
Here Dido Wispe, there is for your Hanniball:
He is your Countryman. as well as Valentine.

Wis. Here Mr. Hanniball: my Ladies bounty
For her poor woman, Wispe.

Pup. Brave Carthage Queen!
And such was Dido: I will ever be
Champion to her, who Juno is to thee.

D. Tur. Your Ladyship is very welcome here.
Please you, good Madam, to go nere the house.

Lad. Turfe's wife, I come thus far to seek thy husband,
Having some business to impart unto him.
Is he at home?

D. Tur. O no, and't shall please you:
He is posted hence to Pancridge with a witness.
Young Justice Bramble has kept level coil
Here in our Quarters, stole away our Daughter,
And Mr. Turfe's run after, as he can,
To stop the marriage, if it will be stopped.

Pol. Madam, these tidings are not much amiss!
For if the Justice have the Maid in keep,
You need not fear the marriage of your son.

Lad. That somewhat eases my suspicious breast.
Tell me, Turfe's wife, when was my son with Awdrey?
How long is it, since you saw him at your house?

Pup. Dame, let me take this rump out of your mouth.

D. Tur. What mean you by that Sir?

Pup. Rumpe, and taile's all one.
But I would use a reverence for my Lady:
I would not zay surreverence, the tale
Out of your mouth, but rather take the rumpe.

D. Tur. A well bred youth! and vull of favor you are:

Pup. What might they zay, when I were gone, if I
Not weighed my wordz? This Puppy is a voole!
Great Hanniball's an Ass; he had no breeding:
No Lady gay, you shall not zay,
That your Val. Puppy, was so unlucky,
In speech to fail, as t'name a tail,
Be as be may be, 'vore a fair Lady.

Lad. Leave jesting, tell us, when you saw our son.

Pup. Marry, it is two hours ago.

Lad. Sin' you saw him?

Pup. You might have seen him too, if you had looked up.
For it shind, as bright as day.

Lad. Mean my son.

Pup. Your sun, and our sun are they not all one?

Lad. Fool, thou mistak'st; I asked thee, for my son.

Pup. I had thought there had been no more suns, then one.
I know not what you Ladies have, or may have.

Pol. Did thou nere hear, my Lady had a son?

Pup. She may have twenty; but for a son, unless
She mean precisely, Squire Tub, her zonne,
He was here now; and brought my Mr. word
That Justice Bramble had got Mrs. Awdrey.
But whither he be gone, here is none can tell.

Lad. Marten, I wonder at this strange discourse:
The fool it seems tells true; my son the Squire
Was doubtless here this morning. For the match,
I Will smother what I think, and staying here,
Attend the sequel of this strange beginning,
Turfe's wife; my people, and I will trouble thee:
Until we hear some tidings of thy husband.
The rather, for my party Valentine.

ACT III. SCENE VI.
Turfe. Awdrey. Clench. Med-lay. Pan. Scriben.
Tur. Well, I have carried it, and will triumph
Over this Justice, as becomes a Constable;
And a high Constable: next our Saint George,
Who rescued the Kings Daughter, I will ride;
Above Prince Arthur.

Cle. Or our Shore ditch Duke.

Med. Or Pancridge Earl.

Pan: Or Bevis, or Sir Guy.
Who were high Constables both.

Cle. One of Southhampton --.

Med. The the other of Warwick-Castle.

Tur. You shall work it
Into a story for me, neighbor Medlay,
Over my Chimney.

Scri. I can give you Sir,
A Roman story of a petty-Constable,
That had a Daughter, that was called Virginia,
Like Mrs. Awdrey, and as young as she;
And how her Father bare him in the business,
Against Justice Appius, a Decemvir in Rome,
And Justice of Assise.

Tur. That, that good D'ogenes!
A learned man is a Chronikell!

Scri. I can tell you
A thousand, of great Pompei, Caesar, Trajan,
All the high Constables there.

Tur. That was their place:
They were no more.

Scr. Dictator, and high Constable
Were both the same.

Med. High Constable was more, though!
He laid Dick: Tator by the heels.

Pan. Dick: Toter!
H'was one of the Waights of the City. I have read o'hun:
He was a fellow would be drunk, debauched --
And he did zet un in the stocks indeed:
His name Vadian, and a cunning Toter.

Awd. Was ever silly Maid thus posted off?
That should have had three husbands in one day;
Yet (by bad fortune) am possessed of none?
I went to Church to have been wed to Clay;
Then Squire Tub he seized me on the way,
And thought to have had me: but he mist his aim;
And Justice Bramble (nearest of the three)
Was well nigh married to me; when by chance,
In rushed my Father, and broke off that dance.

Tur. I, Girl, there is nere a Justice on 'hem all,
Shall teach the Constable to guard his own:
Let Us back to Kentish-Towne, and there make merry;
These news will be glad tiding to my wife:
Thou shall have Clay, my wench. That word shall stand.
He Is found by this time, sure, or else he is drowned:
The wedding dinner will be spoiled: make haste.

Awd. Husbands, they say, grow thick; but thin are sown,
I care not who it be, so I have one.

Tur. I? zay you zo? Perhaps you shall have none, for that.

Awd. Now out on me! what shall I do then?

Med. Sleep Mistress Awdrey, dream on proper men.

ACT III. SCENE VII.
Hugh. Preamble. Metaphore.
Hugh. O bone Deus! have you seen the like?
Here was, Hodge hold thine ear, fair, whilst I strike.
Body of me, how came this gear about?

Pre. I know not, Chanon, but it falls out cross.
Nor can I make conjecture by the circumstance
Of these events; it was impossible,
Being so close, and politickly carried,
To come so quickly to the ears of Turfe.
O Priest, had but thy slow delivery
Been nimble, and thy lazy Latin tongue,
But run the forms ore, with that swift dispatch,
As had been requisite, all had been well!

Hug. What should have been, that never loved the Friar;
But thus you see the old Adage verified,
Multa cadunt inter -- you can guess the rest.
Many things fall between the cup, and lip:
And though they touch, you are not sure to drink.
You lacked good fortune, we had done out parts:
Give a man fortune, throw him in the Sea.
The properer man, the worse luck: Stay a time;
Tempus edax -- In time the stately Ox, etc.
Good counsels lightly never come too late.

Pre. You Sir will run your counsels out of breath.

Hug. Spur a free horse, he will run himself to death.
Sancti Evangelistae! Here comes Miles!

Pre. What news man, with our new made Purs'yvant?

Met. A Pursuyvant? would I were, or more pursie,
And had more store of money; or less pursie,
And had more store of breath: you call me Pursyvant!
But, I could never vant of any purse
I had, sin' yo' were my Godfathers, and Godmothers,
And ga'me that nickname.

Pre. What, now is the matter?

Met. Nay, it is no matter. I have been simply beaten.

Hugh. What is become of the Squire, and thy Prisoner?

Met. The lines of blood, ran streaming from my head,
Can speak what rule the Squire has kept with me.

Pre. I pray thee Miles relate the manner, how?

Met. Be It known unto you, by these presents, then,
That I Miles Metaphore, your worships Clarke:
Have ene been beaten, to an Allegory,
By multitude of hands. Had they been but
Some five or six, IN had whipped 'hem all, like tops
In Lent, and hurled 'hem into Hoblers-hole;
Or the next ditch: I had cracked all their costards,
As nimbly as a Squirrell will crack nuts:
And flourished like to Hercules, the Porter
Among the Pages. But, when they came on
Like Bees about a Hive, Crows about carrion,
Flies about sweet meats; nay, like watermen
About a Fare: then was poor Metaphore
Glad to give up the honor of the day,
To quit his charge to them, and run away
To save his life, only to tell this news.

Hug. How indirectly all things have fallen out!
I cannot choose bat wonder what they were
Reskued your rival from the keep of Miles:
But most of all I cannot well digest,
The manner how our purpose came to Turfe.

Pre. Miles, I will see that all thy hurts be dressed.
As for the Squires escape, it matters not:
We have by this means disappointed him;
And that was all the maine I aimed at.
But Chanon Hugh, now muster up thy wits,
And call thy thoughts into the Consistory.
Search all the secret corners of thy cap,
To find another queint devised drift,
To disappoint her marriage with this Clay;
Do that, and He reward thee jovially.

Hug. Well said Magister Justice. If I fit you not
With such a new, and well-laid stratagem,
As never yet your ears did hear a finer,
Call me, with Lilly, Bos, Fur, Sus, atque Sacerdos.

Pre. I hear, there is comfort in thy words yet, Chanon.
I Will trust thy regulars, and say no more.

Met. I Will follow too. And if the dapper Priest
Be but as cunning, point in his de vise,
As I was in my lie: my Master Preamble
Will stalk, as led by the nose with these new promises,
And fatted with supposes of fine hopes.

ACT III. SCENE VIII.
Turfe. D. Turfe. L. Tub. Pol-mart. Awd. Pup.
Tur. Well Madam, I may thank the Squire your son:
For, but for him, I had been over-reached.

D. Tur. Now heavens blessing light upon his heart:
We are beholden to him, indeed Madam.

Lad. But can you not resolve me where he is?
Nor about what his purposes were bent?

Tur. Madam, they no whit were concerning me:
And therefore was I less inquisitive.

Lad. Fair maid, in faith, speak truth, and not dissemble:
Does he not often come, and visit you?

Awd. His worship now, and then, please you, takes pains
To see my Father, and Mother: But for me,
I know my self too mean for his high thoughts
To stoop at, more then asking a light question,
To make him merry, or to pass his time.

Lad. A sober Maid! call for my woman Marten.

Pol. The maids, and her half- Valentine have pli'd her
With court'sie of the Bride-Cake, and the Bowl,
As she is laid a while.

Lad. O let her rest!
We will cross ore to Canterbury, in the interim;
And so make home. Farewell good Turfe, and thy wife.
I wish your daughter joy.

Tur. Thanks to your Ladyship,
Where is John Clay now? have you seen him yet?

D. Tur. No, he has hid himself out of the way,
For fear of the Huy and Cry.

Tur. What, walks that shadow
Avore'un still? Puppy go seek 'un out,
Search all the corners that he haunts unto,
And call 'un forth. We Will once more to the Church,
And try our vortunes. Luck, son Valentine:
Where are the wisemen all of Finzbury?

Pup. Where wisemen should be; at the Ale, and Bride cake.
I would this couple had their destiny,
Or to be hanged, or married out of the way:
Man cannot get the mount'nance of an Egge-shell, Enter the neighbor to Turfe,
To stay his stomach. Vaith, vor mine own part,
I have zup'd up so much broth, as would have covered
A leg of Beef, ore head and ears, in the porredge pot:
And yet I cannot sussifie wild nature.
Would they were once dispatched, we might to dinner.
I am with child of a huge stomach, and long;
Till by some honest Midwife-peice of Beef,
I be delivered of it: I must go now,
And hunt out for this Kilburne Calfe, John Clay:
Whom where to find, I know not, nor which way.

ACT III. SCENE IX.
Chanon Hugh, like Captain Thumbs. To them.
Hug. Thus as a beggar in a Kings disguise,
Or an old Cross well sided with a May Pole.
Comes Chanon Hugh, accoutred as you see
Disguised Soldado like: mark his devise:
The Chanon, is that Captain Thum's, was robbed:
These bloody scars upon my face are wounds;
This scarf upon mine arm shows my late hurts:
And thus am I to gull the Constable.
Now have among you, for a man at arms:
Friends by your leave, which of you is one Turfe?

Tur. Sir, I am Turfe, if you would speak with me.

Hug. With thee Turfe, if thou be High Constable.

Tur. I am both Turfe, Sir, and High Constable.

Hug. Then Turfe, or Scurfe, high, or low Constable,
Know, I was once a Captain at Saint Quintins,
And passing cross the ways over the countrey'
This morning betwixt this and Hamsted-Heath,
Was by a crew of Clownes robbed, bob'd, and hurt.
No sooner had I got my wounds bound up,
But with much pain, I went to the next Justice,
One Mr. Bramble here, at Maribone:
And here a warrant is, which he has directed
For you one Turfe; if your name be Tobie Turfe;
Who have let fall (they say) the Huy, and Cry:
And you shall answer it before the Justice.

Tur. Heaven, and Hell, Dogs, Devils, what is this?
Neighbors, was ever Constable thus crossed?
What shall we do?

Med. Faith, all go hang our selves:
I know no other way to escape the Law.

Pup. News, news, O news --

Tur. What, have thou found out Clay?

Pup. No Sir, the news is that I cannot find him.

Hug. Why do you dally, you damned russet coat,
You Peasant, nay you Clown, you Constable;
See that you bring forth the suspected party,
Or by mine honor (which I won in field)
I Will make you pay for it, before the Justice.

Tur. Fie, fie; O wife, IN am now in a fine pickle.
He that was most suspected is not found;
And which now makes me think, he did the deed,
He thus absents him, and dares not be seen.
Captain, my innocence will plead for me.
Wife, I must go, needs, whom the Devil drives:
Pray for me wife, and daughter; pray for me.

Hug. I Will lead the way: Thus is the match put off,
And it my plot succeed, as I have laid it,
My Captaine-ship shall cost him many a crown.

D. Tur. They go out. So, we have brought our eggs to a fair Market.
Out on that villain Clay: would he do a robbery?
I Will nere trust smooth-faced Tile-man for his sake.

Awd. They go out. Mother, the still Sow eats up all the draffe.

Pup. Thus is my Master, Toby Turfe, the pattern
Of all the painful a'ventures, now in print.
I never could hope better of this match:
This Bride-ale: For the night before to day,
(Which is within man's memory, I take it)
At the report of it, an Ox did speak;
Who died soon after: A Cow lost her Calfe:
The Belwether was flead for it: A fat Hog
Was singed, and washed, and shaven all over; to
Look ugly against this day: The Ducks they quaked;
The Hens too cackled: at the noise whereof,
A Drake was seen to dance a headless round:
The Goose was cut in the head, to hear it too:
Brave Chant-it-cleare, his noble heart was done;
His comb was cut: And two or three of his wives,
Or fairest Concubines, had their necks broke,
Ere they would zee this day: To mark the verven
Heart of a beast, the very Pig, the Pig,
This very mornin, as he was a rosting
Cried out his eyes, and made a show as he would
Have bit in two the spit, as he would say;
There shall no rost-meat be this dismal day.
And zure, I think, If I had not got his tongue
Between my teeth, and eat it, he had spoke it.
Well, I will in, and cry too; never leave
Crying, until our maids may drive a Buck
With my salt tears at the next washing day.

ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Preamble. Hugh. Turfe. Metaphor.
Pre. Keep out those fellows; I Will have none come in,
But the High Constable, the man of peace,
And the Queens Captain, the brave man of war.
Now neighbor Turfe, the cause why you are called,
Before me by my warrant, but unspecified,
Is this; and pray you mark it thoroughly!
Here is a Gentleman, and as it seems,
Both of good birth, fair speech, and peaceable,
Who was this morning robbed here in the wood:
You for your part a man of good report,
Of credit, landed, and of fair demeanes,
And by authority, high Constable;
Are notwithstanding touched in this complaint,
Of being careless in the Huy and Cry.
I cannot choose but grieve a Soldiers loss:
And I am sorry too for your neglect,
Being my neighbor; this is all I object.

Hug. This is not all; I can allege far more,
And almost urge him for an accessorie.
Good Mr Justice gi'me leave to speak,
For I am Plaintiff. Let not neighborhood
Make him secure, or stand on privilege.

Pre. Sir, I dare use no partiality:
Object then what you please, so it be truth.

Hug. This more: and which is more, then he can answer,
Beside his letting fall the Huy, and Cry
He does protect the man, charged with the felony,
And keeps him hid I hear, within his house,
Because he is affied unto his Daughter.

Tur. I do defy 'hun, so shall she do too.
I pray your worships favor, le' me have hearing.
I do convesse, 'twas told me such a velonie,
And't not disgriev'd me a little when 'twas told me,
Vor I was going to Church, to marry Awdrey:
And who should marry her, but this very Clay,
Who was charged to be the chief theife of hun all.
Now I (the halter stick me, if I tell,
Your worships any leazins did fore-thinke 'un
The truest man, till he waz run away.
I thought, I had had 'un as zure as in a zaw-pit,
Or in mine Oven. Nay, in the Towne-pound.
I was za sure of hun: I Would have gi'n my life for 'un,
Till he did start. But now, I zee 'un guilty,
Az var as I can look at 'un. Would you have more?

Hug. Yes, I will have Sir what the Law will give me.
You gave your word to see him safe, forth coming;
I challenge that: But, that is forfeited;
Beside, your carelessness in the pursuit,
Argues your slacknesse, and neglect of duty,
Which ought be punished with severity.

Pre. He speaks but reason

Turfe. Bring forth the man,
And you are quit: But otherwise, your word
Binds you to make amends for all his loss,
And think your self befriended, if he take it
Without a farther suit, or going to law.
Come to a composition with him, Turfe:
The Law is costly, and will draw on charge.

Tur. Yes, I do know, I vurst mun vee a Returney,
And then make legs to my great man of Law,
To be of my counsel, and take trouble-vees,
And yet zay nothing vor me, but devise
All district means, to ransackle me of my money.
A Pest'lence prick the throats of hun. I do know hun
As well az I waz in their bellies, and brought up there.
What would you have me do? what would you ask of me?

Hug. I ask the restitution of my money;
And will not bate one penny of the sum:
Four score, and five pound. I ask, besides,
Amendment for my hurts; my pain, and suffering
Are loss enough for me, Sir, to sit down with,
I Will put it to your worship; what you award me,
I Will take; and gi' him a general release.

Pre. And what say you now, neighbor Turfe?

Tur. I put it
Ene to your worships bitterment, hab, nab.
I shall have a chance of the dice for it, I hope, let 'hem ene run: And

Pre. Faith then I Will pray you, 'cause he is my neighbor,
To take a hundred pound, and give him day.

Hug. Saint Valentines day, I will, this very day,
Before Sun set: my bond is forfeit else.

Tur. Where will you have it paid?

Hug. Faith, I am a stranger
Here in the country: Know you Chanon Hugh,
The Vicar of Pancrace?

Tur. Yes, we who not him?

Hug. I Will make him my Attorney to receive it,
And give you a discharge.

Tur. Whom shall I send for it?

Pre. Why, if you please, send Metaphore my Clarke.
And Turfe, I much commend thy willingness;
It Is argument of thy integrity.

Tur. But, my integrity shall be my zelfe still:
Good Mr. Metaphore, give my wife this key;
And do but whisper it into her hand:
(She knows it well inow) bid her, by that
Deliver you the two zeal'd bags of silver,
That lie in the corner of the cup-bord, stands
At my bedside, they' are viftie pound a piece;
And bring 'hem to your Master.

Met. If I prove not
As just a Carrier as my friend Tom Long was,
Then call me his curtall, change my name of Miles,
To Guile's, Wile's, Pile's, Bile's, or the foulest name
You can devise, to crambe with, for ale.

Hug. Come hither Miles, bring by that token, too,
Fair Awdrey; say her father sent for her:
Say Clay is found, and waits at Pancrace Church,
Where I attend to marry them in haste.
For (by this means) Miles I may say it to thee,
Thy Master must to Awdrey married be.
But not a word but mum: go get thee gone;
Be wary of thy charge, and keep it close.

Met. O super-dainty Chanon! Vicar in coney,
Make no delay, Miles, but a way.
And bring the wench, and money.

Hug. Now Sir, I see you meant but honestly;
And, but that business calls me hence away,
I would not leave you, till the sun were lower.
But Mr. Justice, one word, Sir, with you.
By the same token, is your Mistress sent for
By Metaphore your Clarke, as from her Father.
Who when she comes, I Will marry her to you,
Unwitting to this Turfe, who shall attend
Me at the parsonage. This was my plot:
Which I must now make good; turn Chanon, again,
In my square cap. I humbly take my leave.

Pre. Adieu, good Captain. Trust me, neighbor Turfe,
He seems to be a sober Gentleman:
But this distress has somewhat stirred his patience.
And men, you know, in such extremities,
Apt not themselves to points of courtesy;
I Am glad you have made this end.

Tur. You stood my friend:
I thank your Justice-worship; pray you be
Prezent anon, at tendering of the money,
And zee me have a discharge: Vor I have no craft
IN your Law quiblins.

Pre. I Will secure you, neighbor.
The Scene interloping. Medlay. Clench Pan. Scriben.
Med. Indeed, there is a woundy luck in names, Sirs,
And a maine mystery, an' a man knew where.
To vind it. My God-sires name, I Will tell you,
Was In-and-In Shittle, and a Weaver he was,
And it did fit his craft: for so his Shittle
Went in, and in, still: this way, and then that way.
And he named me, In-and In Medlay: which serves
A Joyners craft, because that we do lay
Things in and in, in our work. But, I am truly
Architectonicus professor, rather:
That is (as one would zay) an Architect.

Cle. As I am a Varrier, and a Visicarie:
Horse-smith of Hamsted, and the whole Town Leach --.

Med. Yes, you have done woundy cures, Gossip Clench.

Cle. An' I can zee the stale once, through a Vrine-hole,
I Will give a shrewd guess, be it man, or beast.
I cured an Ale-wife once, that had the staggers
Worse then five horses, without rowelling.
My God-phere was a Rabian, or a Jew,
(You can tell D'oge!) They called un Doctor Rasi.

Scr. One Rasis was a great Arabic Doctor.

Cle. He was King Harry's Doctor, and my God-phere.

Pan. Mine was a merry Greek, To-Pan, of Twyford:
A joviall Tinker, and a stopper of holes;
Who left me mettall-man of Belsise, his heir.

Med. But what was yours D'oge?

Scr. Vaith, I cannot tell
If mine were kyrsind, or no. But, zure he had
A kyrsin name, that he left me, Diogenes.
A mighty learned man, but pest'lence poor.
Vor, he had no house, save an old Tub, to dwell in,
(I vind that in records) and still he turned it
IN the winds teeth, as't blew on his backside,
And there they would lie rowting one at other,
A week, sometimes.

Med. Thence came A Tale of a Tub;
And the virst Tale of a Tub, old D'ogenes Tub.

Scr. That was avore Sir Peter Tub, or his Lady.

Pan. I, or the Squire their son, Tripoli Tub.

Cle. The Squire is a fine Gentleman!

Med. He is more:
A Gentleman and a half; almost a Knight;
Within zixe inches: That Is his true measure.

Cle. Zure, you can gage 'hun.

Med. To a streake, or less:
I know his d'ameters, and circumference:
A Knight is six diameters; and a Squire
Is vive, and zomewhat more: I know it by compass,
And skale of man. I have upo' my rule here,
The just perportions of a Knight, a Squire;
With a tame Justice, or an Officer, rampant,
Vpo' the bench, from the high Constable
Down to the Head-borough, or Tithing-man;
Or meanest Minister of the peace, God save 'un.

Pan. Why, you can tell us by the Squire, Neighbor,
Whence he is called a Constable, and whaffore.

Med. No, that is a booke-case: Scriben can do that.
That Is writing and reading, and records.

Scr. Two words,
Cyning and Staple, make a Constable:
As we would say, A hold, or stay for the King.

Cle. All Constables are truly John's for the King,
What ere their names are; be they Tony, or Roger.

Med. And all are sworn, as vingars of one hand,
To hold together against the breach of the peace;
The High Constable is the Thumb, as one would zay,
The hold-fast of the rest.

Pan. Pray luck he speed
Well in the business, between Captain Thums,
And him.

Med. 'Ile warrant 'un for a groat:
I have his measures here in Rithmetique.
How he should bear un self in all the lines
Of's place, and office: Let Us zeeke 'un out.

ACT IIII. SCENE II.
Tub. Hilts. Metaphor.
Tub. Hilts, how do thou like of this our good days work?

Hill. As good ene nere a whit, as nere the better.

Tub. Shall we to Pancridge, or to Kentish-Towne, Hilts?

Hit. Let Kentish-Towne, or Pancridge come to us,
If either will: I will go home again.

Tub. Faith Basket, our success has been but bad,
And nothing prospers, that we undertake;
For we can neither meet with Clay, nor Awdrey,
The Chanon Hugh, nor Turfe the Constable:
We are like men that wander in strange woods,
And loose our selves in search of them we seek.

Hill. This was because we rose on the wrong side:
But as I am now here, just in the midway,
I Will zet my sword on the pommell, and that line
The point valles too, we will take. whether it be
To Kentish-Towne, the Church, or home again.

Tub. Enter Metaphor. Stay, stay thy hand: here is Justice Brambles Clarke,
The unlucky Hare has crossed us all this day.
I Will stand aside whilst thou pump'st out of him
His business, Hilts; and how he is now employed.

Hill. Let me alone? I Will use him in his kind.

Met. Oh for a Pad-horse, Pack-horse, or a Post-horse,
To bear me on his neck, his back, or his croupe!
I am as weary with running, as a Mil-horse
That has led the Mill once, twice, thrice about,
After the breath has been out of his body.
I could get up upon a pannier, a pannell,
Or, to say truth, a very Pack-sadle,
Till all my honey were turned into gall;
And I could ^it in the seat no longer,
Oh the legs of a lackey now, or a footman,
Who is the Surbater of a Clarke current,
And the confounder of his treslesse dormant.
But who have we here, just in the nick?

Hill. I am neither nick, nor in the nick: therefore
You lie Sir Metaphor.

Met. Lie? how?

Hill. Lie so Sir.

Met. He strikes up his heels. I lie not yet in my throat.

Hill. Thou lie of the ground.
Do thou know me?

Met. Yes, I did know you too late.

Hill. What is my name then?

Met. Basket.

Hill. Basket? what?

Met. Basket, the Great --

Hill. The Great? what?

Met. Lubber --
I should say Lover, of the Squire his Master.

Hill. Great is my patience, to forbear thee thus,
Thou Scrape-hill, Skoundrell, and thou skum of man;
Uncivil, orenge-tawny-coated Clarke:
Thou came but half a thing into the world,
And wast made up of patches, parings, shreds:
Thou, that when last thou were put out of service,
Travaild'st to Hamsted Heath, on an Ash-we'nsday,
Where thou did stand six weeks the Jack of Lent,
For boys to hoorle, three throws a penny, at thee,
To make thee a purse: See thou this, bold bright blade?
As minced meat for a pie. I Will set thee in earth
All save thy head, and thy right arm at liberty,
To keep thy hat off, while I question thee,
What? why? and whether thou were going now
With a face, ready to break out with business?
And tell me truly, lest I dash't in pieces.

Met. Then Basket put thy smiter up, and hear;
I dare not tell the truth to a drawn sword.

Hill. It Is sheathed, stand up, speak without fear, or wit.

Met. I know not what they mean; but Constable Turfe
Sends here his key; for moneys in his cubbard
Which he must pay the Captain, that was robbed
This morning. Smell you nothing?

Hill. No, not I;
Thy breeches yet are honest.

Met. As my mouth.
Do you not smell a rat? I tell you truth,
I think all is knavery: For the Chanon whispered
Me in the ear, when Turfe had gi'n me his key,
By the same token to bring Mrs. Awdrey,
As sent for thither; and to say John Clay
Is found, which is indeed to get the wench
Forth for my Master, who is to be married,
When she comes there: The Chanon has his rules
Ready, and all there to dispatch the matter.

Tub. Now on my life, this is the Chanon's plot!
Miles, I have heard all thy discourse to Basket.
Will thou be true, and I Will reward thee well,
To make me happy, in my Mistress Awdrey?

Met. Your worship shall dispose of Metaphore,
Through all his parts, ene from the sole of the head,
To the crown of the foot, to manage of your service.

Tub. Then do thy message to the Mistress Turfe,
Tell her thy token, bring the money hither,
And likewise take young Awdrey to thy charge:
Which done, here, Metaphore, we will attend,
And intercept thee. And for thy reward,
You two shall share the money; I the Maid:
If any take offense, I Will make all good.

Met. But shall I have half the money Sir, in faith?

Tub. I on my Squire-ship, shall thou: and my land.

Met. Then, if I make not, Sir, the cleanliest scuse
To get her hither, and be then as careful
To keep her for you, as't were for my self:
Down of your knees, and pray that honest Miles
May break his neck ere he get ore two styles.

ACT IV. SCENE III.
Tub. Hilts.
Tub. Make haste then: we will wait here thy return.
This luck unlooked for, has revived my hopes,
Which were oppressed with a dark melancholy.
In happy time, we lingered on the way,
To meet these summons of a better sound,
Which are the essence of my souls content.

Hill. This heartlesse fellow; shame to serving-men;
Stain of all livories; what fear makes him do!
How sordid, wretched, and unworthy things;
Betray his Masters secrets, open the closet
Of his devises, force the foolish Justice,
Make way for your Love, plotting of his own:
Like him that digs a trap, to catch another,
And falls into it himself!

Tub. So would I have it.
And hope 'twill prove a jest to twit the Justice with.

Hill. But that this poor white-liver'd Rogue should do it?
And merely out of fear?

Tub. And hope of money, Hilts.
A valiant man will nible at that bait.

Hill. Who, but a fool, will refuse money proffered?

Tub. And sent by so good chance. Pray heaven he speed.

Hill. If he come empty-headed, let him count
To go back empty-headed; I Will not leave him
So much of brain in's pate, with pepper and vinegar,
To be served in for sauce, to a Calves head.

Tub. Thou serv'st him rightly, Hilts.

Hill. I Will seal az much
With my hand, as I dare say now with my tongue;
But if you get the Less from Dargison,
What will you do with her?

Tub. We Will think of that
When once we have her in possession, Governor.

ACT IV. SCENE IV.
Puppy. Metaphore. Awdrey.
Pup. You see we trust you, Mr. Metaphore,
With Mrs. Awdrey: pray you use her well,
As a Gentlewoman should be used. For my part,
I do incline a little to the serving-man;
We have been of a coat -- I had one like yours:
Till it did play me such a sleevelesse errand,
As I had nothing where to put mine arms in,
And then I threw it off. Pray you go before her,
Serving-man-like: and see that your nose drop not.
As for example; you shall see me: mark,
How I go before her. So do you: sweet Miles,
She for her own part, is a woman cares not
What man can do unto her, in the way
Of honesty, and good manners. So farewell
Fair Mrs. Awdrey: Farewell Mr. Miles.
I have brought you thus far, onward o'your way:
I must go back now to make clean the rooms,
Where my good Lady has been. Pray you commend me
To Bridegroom Clay; and bid him bear up stiff.

Met. Thank you good Hanniball Puppy; I shall fit
The leg of your commands, with the straight buskins
Of dispatch presently.

Pup. Farewell fine Metaphore.

Met. Come gentle Mistress, will you please to walk?

Awd. I love not to be led: I Would go alone.

Met. Let not the mouse of my good meaning, Lady,
Be snap'd up in the trap of your suspicion,
To loose the tail there, either of her truth,
Or swallowed by the Cat of misconstruction.

Awd. You are too finicall form; speak plain Sir.

ACT IV. SCENE V.
Tub. Awdrey. Hilts. Metaphore. To them.
Lady. Fol-marten. Tub. Welcome again my Awdrey: welcome Love:
You shall with me; in faith deny me not.
I cannot brook the second hazard Mistress.

Awd. Forbear Squire Tub, as mine own mother says;
I am not for your mowing. You Will be flowne
Ere I be fledge.

Hill. Have thou the money Miles?

Met. Here are two bags, there is fifty pound in each.

Tub. Nay Awdrey, I possess you for this time:
Sirs; Take that coin between you, and divide it.
My pretty sweeting give me now the leave
To challenge love, and marriage at your hands.

Awd. Now, out upon you, are you not ashamed?
What will my Lady say? In faith I think
She was at our house: And I think she asked for you:
And I think she hit me in the teeth with you,
I thank her Ladyship, and I think she means
Not to go hence, till she has found you. How say you?

Tub. Was then my Lady Mother at your house?
Let Us have a word aside.

Awd. Yes, twenty words.

Lad. It Is strange, a motion, but I know not what,
Comes in my mind, to leave the way to Totten,
And turn to Kentish-Towne, again my journey:
And see my son Pol-marten with his Awdrey:
Ere while we left her at her fathers house:
And has he thence removed her in such haste!
What shall I do? shall I speak faite, or chide?

Pol. Madam, your worthy son, with dutious care,
Can govern his affections: Rather then
Break off their conference some other way,
Pretending ignorance of what you know.

Tub. And this all, fair

Awdrey: I am thine.

Lad. Mine you were once, though scarcely now your own.

Hill. 'Slid my Lady! my Lady!

Met. Is this my Lady bright?

Tub. Madam, you took me now a little tardie.

Lad. At prayers, I think you were: what, so devout
Of late, that you will shrive you to all Confessors
You meet by chance? Come, go with me, good Squire,
And leave your linen: I have now a business,
And of importance, to impart unto you.

Tub. Madam, I pray you, spare me but an hour;
Please you to walk before, I follow you.

Lad. It must be now, my business lies this way.

Tub. Will not an hour hence, Madam, excuse me?

Lad. Squire, these excuses argue more your guilt.
You have some new device now, to project,
Which the poor Tile-man scarce will thank you for.
What? will you go?

Tub. I have taken a charge upon me,
To see this Maid conducted to her Father,
Who, with the Chanon Hugh, stays her at Pancrace,
To see her married to the same John Clay.

Lad. It Is very well; but Squire take you no care.
I Will send Pol-marten with her, for that office.
You shall along with me; it is decreed.

Tub. I have a little business, with a friend Madam.

Lad. That friend shall stay for you, or you for him.
Pol-marten; Take the Maiden to your care;
Commend me to her Father.

Tub. I will follow you.

Lad. Tut, tell not me of following.

Tub. I Will but speak
A word.

Lad. No whispering: you forget your self,
And make your love too palpable: A Squire?
And think so meanly? fall upon a Cow-shard?
You know my mind. Come, I Will to Turfe's house,
And see for Dido, and our Valentine.
They all go out but Pol-marten and Awdrey. Pol-marten, look to your charge;
I Will look to mine.

Pol. I smile to think after so many proffers
This Maid has had, she now should fall to me:
That I should have her in my custody:
Twere but a mad trick to make the essay,
And jumpe a match with her immediately:
She Is fair, and handsome: and she is rich enough:
Both time, and place minister fair occasion:
Have at it then: Fair Lady, can you love?

Awd. No Sir, what is that?

Pol. A toy, which women use.

Awd. If It be a toy, it is good to play withal.

Pol. We will not stand discoursing of the toy:
The way is short please you to prov't Mistress?

Awd. If you do mean to stand so long upon it;
I pray you let me give it a short cut, Sir.

Pol. It Is thus, fair Maid: Are you disposed to marry?

Awd. You are disposed to ask.

Pol. Are you to grant?

Awd. Nay, now I see you are disposed indeed.

Pol. I see the wench wants but a little wit;
And that defect her wealth may well supply:
In plain terms, tell me, Will you have me Awdrey?

Awd. In as plain terms, I tell you who would have me.
John Clay would have me, but he has too hard hands;
I like not him: besides, he is a thief.
And Justice Bramble, he would feign have caught me:
But the young Squire, he, rather then his life,
Would have me yet; and make me a Lady, he says,
And be my Knight; to do me true Knights service,
Before his Lady Mother. Can you make me
A Lady, would I have you?

Pol. I can gi' you
A silken Gown, and a rich Petticoat:
And a french Hood. All fools love to be brave:
I find her humor, and I will pursue it.

ACT IIII. SCENE VI.
Lady. D. Turfe. Squire Tub. Hilts. Puppy. Clay.
Lad. And as I told thee, she was intercepted
By the Squire here, my son: and this bold Ruffin
His man, who safely would have carried her
Unto her Father; and the Chanon Hugh;
But for more care of the security,
My Huisher has her now, in his grave charge.

D. Tur. Now on my faith, and holy-dom, we are
Beholden to your worship. She Is a Girl,
A foolish Girl, and soon may tempted be:
But if this day pass well once ore her head,
I Will wish her trust to her self. For I have been
A very mother to her, though I say it.

Tub. Madam, it is late, and Pancridge is in your way:
I think your Ladyship forgets your self.

Lad. Your mind runs much on Pancridge. Well, young Squire,
The black Ox never trod yet O your foot:
These idle Phant'sies will forsake you one day.
Come Mrs. Turfe, will you go take a walk
Over the fields to Pancridge, to your husband?

D. Tur. Madam, I had been there an hour ago:
But that I waited on my man Ball Puppy.
What Ball I say? I think the idle ^^ouch
Be fallen asleep in the barn, he stays so long.

Pup. Satin, in the name of velvet Satin, Dame!
The Devil! O the Devil is in the barn:
Help, help, a legion -- Spirit legion,
Is in the barn! in every straw a Devil.

Tur. Why do thou bawle so Puppy? Speak, what ailes thee?

Pup. My name's Ball Puppy, I have seen the Devil
Among the straw: O for a Cross! a Collop
Of Friar Bacon, or a conjuring stick
Of Doctor Faustus! Spirits are in the barn.

Tub. How! Spirits in the barn? Basket, go see.

Hill. Sir, an' you were my Master ten times over,
And Squire to boot; I know, and you shall pardon me:
Send me among Devils? I zee you love me not:
Hell be at their game: I Will not trouble them.

Tub. Go see; I warrant thee there is no such matter.

Hill. An' they were Giants, 't were another matter.
But Devils! No, if I be torn in pieces,
What is your warrant worth? I Will see the Feind
Set fire of the barn, ere I come there.

D. Tur. Now all Zaints bless us, and if he be there,
He is an ugly spright, I warrant.

Pup. As ever
Held flesh-hooke, Dame, or handled fire-forke rather:
They have put me in a sweet pickle, Dame:
But that my Lady- Valentine smells of musk,
I should be ashamed to press into this presence.

Lad. Basket, I pray thee see what is the miracle!

Tub. Come, go with me: I Will lead. Why stand'st thou man?

Hill. Cocks precious Master, you are not mad indeed?
You will not go to hell before your time?

Tub. Why art thou thus afraid?

Hill. No, not afraid:
But by your leave, I Will come no near the barn.

Tur. Puppy! will thou go with me?

Pup. How? go with you*
Whither, into the Barn? To whom, the Devil?
Or to do what there? to be torn amongst 'hum?
Stay for my Master, the High Constable,
Or In-and-In, the Head-borough; let them go,
Into the Barn with warrant, seize the Feind;
And set him in the stocks for his ill rule:
It Is not for me that am but flesh and blood,
To meddle with 'un. Vor I cannot, nor I wu' not.

Lad. I pray thee Tripoly, look, what is the matter?

Tub. That shall I Madam.

Hill. Heaven protect my Master.
I tremble every joint till he be back.

Pup. Now, now, even now they are tearing him in pieces*
Now are they tossing of his legs, and arms,
Like Loggets at a Peare-tree: I Will to the hole,
Peep in, and look whether he lives or dies.

Hill. I would not be in my Masters coat for thousands.

Pup. Then pluck it off, and turn thy self away.
O the Devil! the Devil! the Devil!

Hill. Where man? where?

D. Tur. Alas that ever we were borne. So near too?

Pup. The Squire has him in his hand, and leads him
Out by the Collar.

D. Tur. O this is John Clay.

Lad. John Clay at Pancrace, is there to be married.

Tub. This was the spirit reveld in the Barn.

Pup. The Devil he was: was this he was crawling
Among the Wheat-straw? Had it been the Barley,
I should have taken him for the Devil in drink;
The Spirit of the Bride-ale: But poor John,
Tame John of Clay, that sticks about the bung-hole --

Hill. If this be all your Devil, I would take
In hand to conjure him: But hell take me
If ere I come in a right Devils walk,
If I can keep me out on it.

Tub. Well meant Hilts.

Lad. But how came Clay thus hid here in the straw,
When news was brought, to you all he was at Pancridge;
And you believed it?

D. Tur. Justice Brambles man
Told me so, Madam: And by that same token,
And other things, he had away my Daughter,
And two sealed bags of money.

Lad. Where Is the Squire?
Is he gone hence?

Tub. H' was here Madam, but now.

Clay. Is the Huy and Cry past by?

Pup. I, I, John Clay.

Clay. And am I out of danger to be hanged?

Pup. Hanged John? yes sure; unless, as with the Proverb,
You mean to make the choice of your own gallows.

Cla. Nay, then all is well, hearing your news Ball Pupy,
You have brought from Paddington, I ene stole home here,
And thought to hide me, in the Barn ere since.

Pup. O wonderful! and news was brought us here,
You were at Pancridge, ready to be married.

Cla. No faith, I nere was further then the Barn.

D. Tur. Haste Puppy. Call forth Mistress Dido Wispe,
My Ladies Gentlewoman, to her Lady;
And call your self forth, and a couple of maids,
To wait upon me: we are all undone!
My Lady is undone! her fine young son,
The Squire is got away.

Lad. Haste, haste, good Valentine.

D. Tur. And you John Clay; you are undone too! All!
My husband is undone, by a true key,
But a false token: And my selfe's undone,
By parting with my Daughter, who will be married
To some body, that she should not, if we haste not.

ACT V.
SCENE I.
Tub. Pol-marten.
Tub. I Pray thee good Pol-marten, show thy diligence,
And faith in both: Get her, but so disguised,
The Chanon may not know her, and leave me
To plot the rest: I will expect thee here.

Pol. You shall Squire. I Will perform it with all care,
If all my Ladies Wardrobe will disguise her.
Come Mistress Awdrey.

Awd. Is the Squire gone?

Pol. He Will meet us by and by, where he appointed:
You shall be brave anon, as none shall know you.

ACT V. SCENE II.
Clench. Medlay. Pan. Scriben. To them.
Tub Hilts. Cle. I wonder, where the Queens High Constable is!
I veare, they have made 'hun away.

Med. No zure; The Justice
Dare not conzent to that. He Will zee 'un forth coming.

Pan. He must, vor we can all take corpulent oath,
We zaw 'un go in there.

Scr. I, upon record!
The Clock dropped twelve at Maribone.

Med. You are right, D'oge!
Zet down to a minute, now it is a 'most vowre.

Cle. Here comes Squire Tub.

Scr. And's Governor, Mr. Basket.
Hilts, do you know 'hun, a valiant wise vellow!
Az tall a man on his hands, as goes on veet.
Bless you Mass' Basket.

Hill. Thank you good D'oge.

Tub. who is that?

Hill. D'oge Scriben, the great Writer Sir of Chalcot.

Tub. And, who the rest?

Hill. The wisest heads of the hundred.
Medlay the Ioyner, Head-borough of Islington,
Pan of Belsize, and Clench the Leach of Hamsted.
The High Constables Counsel, here of Finsbury,

Tub. Prezent me to 'hem, Hilts, Squire Tub of Totten.

Hill. Wise men of Finsbury: make place for a Squire,
I bring to your acquaintance, Tub of Totten.
Squire Tub, my Master, loves all men of virtue.
And longs (az one would zay) till he be one on you.

Cle. His worship's wel'cun to our company:
Would't were wiser for 'hun.

Pan. Here be some on us,
Are called the witty men, over a hundred;

Scr. And zome a thousand, when the Muster day comes.

Tub. I long (as my man Hilts said, and my Governor)
To be adopt in your society.
Can any man make a Masque here in this company?

Pan. A Masque, what is that?

Scr. A mumming, or a show.
With vizards, and fine clothes.

Cle. A disguise, neighbor,
Is the true word: There stands the man, can do it Sir.
Medlay the Joyner, In-and-In of Islington,
The only man at a disguize in Midlesex.

Tub. But who shall write it?

Hill. Scriben, the great Writer.

Scr. He Will do it alone Sir, He will join with no man:
Though he be a Joyner, in design he calls it.
He must be sole Inventer: In-and-In.
Draws with no other in's project, he will tell you,
It cannot else be feazeable, or conduce:
Those are his ruling words? Pleaze you to hear 'hun?

Tub. Yes Mr. In-and-In, I have heard of you;

Med. I can do nothing, I.

Cle. He can do all Sir.

Med. They Will tell you so.

Tub. I Would have a toy presented,
A Tale of a Tub, a story of my self,
You can express a Tub.

Med. If it conduce
To the design, what ere is feazeable:
I can express a Wash-house (If need be)
With a whole pedigree of Tubs.

Tub. No, one
Will be enough to note our name, and family:
Squire Tub of Totten, and to show my adventures
This very day. I Would have it in Tubs-Hall,
At Totten-Court, my Lady Mothers house,
My house indeed, for I am heir to it.

Med. If I might see the place, and had surveyed it;
I could say more: For all Invention, Sir,
Comes by degrees, and on the view of nature;
A world of things, concur to the design,
Which make it feazible, if Art conduce.

Tub. You say well, witty Mr. In-and-In.
How long have you studied Ingine?

Med. Since I first
Joined, or did in-lay in wit, some vorty year.

Tub. A pretty time! Basket, go you and wait
On Master In-and-In to Totten-Court,
And all the other wise Masters; show 'hem the Hall:
And taste the language of the buttery to 'hem;
Let 'hem see all the Tubs about the house,
That can raise matter, till I come -- which shall be a
Within an hour at least.

Cle. It will be glorious,
If In-and-In will undertake it, Sir:
He has a monstrous medlay wit of his own.

Tub. Spare for no cost, either in boords, or hoops,
To architect your Tub: Have you nere a Cooper
At London called Vitruvius? send ^^r him;
Or old John Haywood, call him to you, to help.

Scr. He scorns the motion, trust to him alone.

ACT V. SCENE III.
Lady. Tub. D. Tur. Clay. Puppy. Wispe. Preamble. Turfe.
Lad. O, here is the Squire! you slipped us finely son!
These manners to your Mother, will commend you;
But in an other age, not this: well Tripoly,
Your Father, good Sir Peter (rest his bones)
Would not ha done this: where is my Huisher Martin?
And your fair Mrs. Awdrey?

Tub. I not see'hem,
No creature, but the four wise Masters here,
Of Finsbury Hundred, came to cry their Constable,
Who they do say is lost.

D. Tur. My husband lost?
And my fond Daughter lost? I fear me too.
Where is your Gentleman, Madam? Poor John Clay,
Thou have lost thy Awdrey.

Cla. I have lost my wits,
My little wits, good Mother; I am distracted.

Pup. And I have lost my Mistress Dido Wispe,
Who frowns upon her Puppy, Hanniball.
Loss! loss on everyside! a public loss!
Loss of my Master! loss of his Daughter! loss
Of Favor, Friends, my Mistress! loss of all!

Pre. What Cry is this?

Tur. My man speaks of some loss.

Pup. My Master is found: Good luck, and't be thy will,
Light on us all.

D. Tur. O husband, are you a live?
They said you were lost.

Tur. Where Is Justice Brambles Clarke?
Had he the money that I sent for?

D. Tur. Yes,
Two hours ago, two fifty pounds in silver,
And Awdrey too.

Tur. Why Awdrey? who sent for her?

D. Tur. You Master Turfe, the fellow said.

Tur. He lied.
I am cozened, robbed, undone: your man's a Thief,
And run away with my Daughter, Mr. Bramble,
And with my money.

Lad. Neighbor Turfe have patience,
I can assure you that your Daughter is safe,
But for the moneys I know nothing of.

Tur. My money is my Daughter; and my Daughter
She is my money, Madam.

Pre. I do wonder
Your Ladyship comes to know any thing
In these affairs.

Lad. Yes, Justice Bramble
I met the maiden in the fields by chance,
IN the Squires company my son: How he
Lighted upon her, himself best can tell.

Tub. I intercepted her, as coming hither,
To her Father, who sent for her, by Miles Metaphore,
Justice Preambles Clarke. And had your Ladyship
Not hindered it, I had paid fine Mr. Justice
For his young warrant, and new Purs'yvant,
He served it by this morning.

Pre. Know you that Sir?

Lad. You told me, Squire, a quite other tale,
But I believed you not, which made me send
Awdrey another way, by my Pol-marten:
And take my journey back to Kentish-Towne,
Where we found John Clay hidden in the barn,
To escape the Huy and Cry; and here he is.

Tur. John Clay age'n! nay, then -- set Cock a hoope:
I have lost no Daughter, nor no money, Justice.
John Clay shall pay. I Will look to you now John.
Vaith out it must, as good at night, as morning.
I am ene as vull as a Pipers bag with joy,
Or a great Gun upon carnation day!
I could weep Lions tears to see you John.
It Is but two viftie pounds I have ventured for you:
But now I have you, you shall pay whole hundred.
Run from your Buroughs, son: faith ene be hanged.
An' you once earth your self, John, in the barn,
I have no Daughter vor you: Who did verret 'hun.

D. Tur. My Ladies son, the Squire here, vetch'd 'hun out.
Puppy had put us all in such a vright,
We thought the Devil was in the barn; and no body
Durst venture of hun.

Tur. I am now resolved,
Who shall have my Daughter.

D. Tur. Who?

Tur. He best deserves her.
Here comes the Vicar. Chanon Hugh, we have vound
John Clay again! the matter's all come round.

ACT V. SCENE IV.
To them Chanon Hugh. Hugh. Is Metaphore returned yet?

Pre. All is turned
Here to confusion: we have lost our plot;
I fear my man is run away with the money,
And Clay is found, in whom old Turfe is sure
To save his stake.

Hug. What shall we do then Justice?

Pre. The Bride was met in the young Squires hands.

Hug. And what is become of her?

Pre. None here can tell.

Tub. Was not my Mothers man, Pol-marten, with you?
And a strange Gentlewoman in his company,
Of late here, Chanon?

Hug. Yes, and I dispatched 'hem.

Tub. Dispatched 'hem! how do you mean?

Hug. Why married 'hem.
As they desired; But now.

Tub. And do you know
What you have done, Sir Hugh?

Hug. No harm, I hope.

Tub. You have ended all the Quarrel. Awdrey is married.

Lad. Married! to whom?

Tur. My Daughter Awdrey married,
And she not know of it!

D. Tur. Nor her Father, or Mother!

Lad. Whom has she married?

Tub. Your Pol-marten, Madam.
A Groom was never dreamt of.

Tur. Is he a man?

Lad. That he is Turfe, and a Gentleman, I have made him.

D. Tur. Nay, an' he be a Gentleman, let her shift.

Hug. She was so brave, I knew her not, I swear;
And yet I married her by her own name.
But she was so disguised, so Lady-like;
I think she did not know her self the while!
I married 'hem as a mere p^^re of strangers:
And they gave out themselves for such.

Lad. I wish 'hem
Much joy, as they have given me hearts ease.

Tub. Then Madam, I Will entreat you now remit
Your jealousy of me; and please to take
All this good company home with you, to supper:
We Will have a merry night of it, and laugh.

Lad. A right good motion, Squire; which I yield to:
And thank them to accept it. Neighbor Turfe,
I Will have you merry, and your wife: And you,
Sir Hugh, be pardoned this your happy error.
By Justice Preamble, your friend and patron.

Pre. If the young Squire can pardon it, I do.

ACT V. SCENE V.
Puppy. Dido. tarry behind. Hugh
Pup. Stay my dear Dido, and good Vicar Hugh,
We have a business with you: In short, this
If you dare knit another pair of strangers,
Dido of Carthage, and her Countryman,
Stout Hanniball stands to it. I have asked consent,
And she has granted.

Hug. But says Dido so?

Did. From what Ball-Hanny has said, I dare not go.

Hug. Come in then, I Will dispatch you. A good supper
Would not be lost, good company, good discourse;
But above all where wit has any source.

ACT V. SCENE VI.
Pol-marten. Awdrey. Tub. Lady. Preamble. Turfe. D. Turfe. Clay.
Lad. After the hoping of your pardon, Madam,
For many faults committed. Here my wife,
And I do stand expecting your mild doom.

Lad. I wish thee joy Pol-marten; and thy wife:
As much, Mrs. Pol-marten. Thou have tricked her
Up very fine, me thinks.

Pol. For that I made
Bold with your Ladyships Wardrobe, but have trespassed
Within the limits of your leave -- I hope.

Lad. I give her what she wears. I know all women
Love to be fine. Thou have deserved it of me:
I am extremely pleased with thy good fortune.
Welcome good Justice Preamble; And Turfe,
Look merrily on your Daughter: She has married
A Gentleman.

Tur. So me thinks; I dare not touch her
She is so fine: yet I will say, God bless h^^.

D. Tur. And I too, my fine Daughter. I could love her
Now, twice as well, as if Clay had her.

Tub. Come, come, my Mother is pleased. I pardon all,
Pol-marten in, and wait upon my Lady.
Welcome good Ghests: see supper be served in,
With all the plenty of the house, and worship.
I must confer with Mr. In-and-In,
About some alterations in my Masque;
Send Hilts out to me: Bid him bring the Council
Of Finsbury hither. I Will have such a night
Shall make the name of Totten-Court immortal:
And be recorded to posterity.

ACT V. SCENE VII.
Tub. Medlay. Clench. Pan. Scriben. Hilts. Tub. O Mr. In-and-In, what have you
done?

Med. Surveyed the place Sir, and designed the ground,
Or stand still of the work: And this it is.
First, I have fixed in the earth, a Tub;
And an old Tub, like a Salt-Peeter Tub,
Preluding by your Fathers name Sir Peeter,
And the antiquity of your house, and family,
Original from Salt-Peeter.

Tub. Good y faith,
You have shown reading, and antiquity here, Sir.

Med. I have a little knowledge in design,
Which I can vary Sir to Infinite.

Tub. Ad Infinitum Sir you mean.

Med. I do.
I stand not on my Latin, I Will invent,
But I must be alone then, joined with no man.
This we do call the Stand-still of our work.

Tub. Who are those we? you now joined to your self.

Med. I mean my self still, in the plural number,
And out of this we raise our Tale of a Tub.

Tub. No, Mr. In-and-In, my Tale of a Tub.
By your leave, I am Tub, the Tale's of me,
And my adventures! I am Squire Tub,
Subjectum Fabulae.

Med. But I the Author.

Tub. The Worke-man Sir! the Artificer! I grant you.
So Skelton-Lawreat; was of Elinour Bumming:
But she the subject of the Rout, and Tunning.

Cle. He has put you to it, Neighbor In-and-In.

Pan. Do not dispute with him, he still will win.
That paies for all.

Scr. Are you revised o'that?
A man may have wit, and yet put off his hat.

Med. Now, Sir this Tub, I will have capt with paper:
A fine oild Lanterne-paper, that we use.

Pan. Yes every Barber, every Cutler has it.

Med. Which in it does contain the light to the business.
And shall with the very vapor of the Candle,
Drive all the motions of our matter about:
As we present 'hem. For example, first
The worshipful Lady Tub.

Tub. Right worshipful,
I pray you, I am worshipful my self.

Med. Your Squire-ships Mother, passes by (her Huisher,
Mr. Pol-marten bareheaded before her)
In her velvet Gown.

Tub. But how shall the Spectators?
As it might be, I, or Hilts, know it is my Mother?
Or that Pol-marten there that walks before her.

Med. O we do nothing, if we clear not that.

Cle. You have seen none of his works Sir?

Pan. All the postures
Of the trained bands of the Country.

Scr. All their colors.

Pan. And all their Captains.

Cle. All the Cries of the City:
And all the trades in their habits.

Scr. He has his whistle
Of command: Seat of authority!
And virge to' interpret, tip'd with silver, Sir
You know not him.

Tub. Well, I will leave all to him:

Med. Give me the brief of your subject. Leave the whole
State of the thing to me.

Hill. Supper is ready, Sir.
My Lady calls for you.

Tub. I Will send it you in writing.

Med. Sir, I will render feazible, and facile,
What you expect.

Tub. Hilts, be it your care,
To see the Wise of Finsbury made welcome:
The Squire goes out. Let 'hem want nothing. Iz old Rosin sent for?

Hill. He Is come within.

Scri. Lord! what a world of business
The Squire dispatches!

Med. He is a learned man:
I think there are but view of the Innes of Court,
The rest follow. Or the Innes of Chancery like him.

Cle. Care to fit 'un then.

ACT. V. SCENE VIII.
Jack. Hilts.
Iac. Yonder Is another wedding, Master Basket,
Brought in by Vicar Hugh.

Hill. what are they, Jack?

Iac. The High Constables Man, Ball Hanny; and Mrs. Wispes,
Our Ladies woman.

Hill. And are the Table merry?

Iac. There Is a young Tile-maker makes all laugh;
He will not eat his meat, but cries at the board,
He shall be hanged.

Hill. He has lost his wench already:
As good be hanged.

Iac. Was she that is Pol-marten,
Our fellows Mistress, wench to that sneake- John?

Hill. I faith, Black Jack, he should have been her Bridegroom:
But I must go to wait of my wise Masters.
Jack, you shall wait on me, and see the Mask anon:
I am half Lord Chamberlin, in my Masters absence.

Iac. Shall we have a Masque? Who makes it?

Hill. In-and-In.
The Maker of Islington: Come go with me
To the sage sentences of Finsbury.

ACT. V. SCENE IX.
2 Grooms.
Gro. 1. Come, give us in the great Chair, for my Lady;
And set it there: and this for Justice Bramble.

Gro. 2. This for the Squire my Master, on the right hand.

Gro. 1. And this for the High Constable.

Gro. 2. This his wife.

Gro. 1. Then for the Bride, and Bridegroom, here Pol-marten.

Gro. 2. And she Pol-marten, army Ladies feet.

Gro. 1. Right.

Gro. 2. And beside them Mr. Hanniball Puppy.

Gro. 1. And his she Puppy, Mrs. Wispe that was:
Here Is all are in the note.

Gro. 2. No, Mr. Vicar:
The petty Chanon Hugh.

Gro. 1. And Cast-by Clay:
There they are all.

Tub. Then cry a Hall, a Hall!
It Is merry in Tot tenham Hall, when beards wag all.
Come Father Rozin with your Fidle now,
^ond music. And two tall-toters; Flourish to the Masque.

ACT V. SCENE X.
Lady Preamble before her. Tub. Turfe. D. Turfe. Pol-marten, Awdrey. Puppy.
Wispe. Hugh. Clay. All take their Seats. Hilts waits on the by.
Lad. Neighbors, all welcome: Now does Totten-Hall
Show like a Court: and hence shall first be called so.
Your witty short confession Mr. Vicar,
Within has been the Prologue, and has opened
Much to my sons device, his Tale of a Tub.

Tub. Let my Masque show it self: And In-and-In,
The Architect, appear; I hear the whistle. Hill. Peace.


Med. Thus rise I first, in my light linen breeches, Medlay appears above the
Curtain.
To run the meaning over in short speeches.
Here is a Tub; A Tub of Totten-Court:
An ancient Tub, has called you to this sport:
His Father was a Knight, the rich Sir Peeter;
Who got his wealth by a Tub, and by Salt-Peeter:
And left all to his Lady Tub; the mother
Of this bold Squire Tub, and to no other.
Now of this Tub, and's deeds, not done in ale, He draws the Curtain, and
discovers the top of the Tub. Hill. Have Peace. Loud Music.
Observe, and you shall see the very Tale.

The first Motion.
Med. Here Chanon Hugh, first brings to Totten-Hall
The high Constables council, tells the Squire all;
Which, though discovered (give the Devil his due:)
The wise of Finsbury do still pursue.
Then with the Justice, does he counterplot,
And his Clarke Metaphore, to cut that knot:
Whilst Lady Tub, in her sad velvet Gown,
Missing her son, does seek him up and down.

Tub. With her Pol-marten bare before her.

Med. Yes, I have expressed it here in figure, and Mistress Wispe her woman,
holding up her train.


Tub. In The next page, report your second strain.

The second Motion. Hill. Have Peace. Loud Music.
Med. Here the high Constable, and Sages walk
To Church, the Dame, the Daughter, Bride-maids talk,
Of wedding business; till a fellow in comes,
Relates the robbery of one Captain Thum's:
Charge the Bridegroom with it: Troubles all,
And gets the Bride; who in the hands does fall
Of the bold Squire, but thence soon is taken
By the sly Justice, and his Clarke profane
In shape of Pursuyvant; which he not long
Holds, but betrays all with his trembling tongue:
As truth will break out, and show, etc.

Tub. O thou have made him kneel there in a corner,
I see now: there is simple honor for you Hilts!

Hill. Did I not make him to confess all to you?

Tub. True; In-and-In has done you right, you see.
Thy third I pray thee, witty In-and-In.

Cle. The Squire commends 'un. He does like all well.

Pan. He cannot choose. This is gear made to sell.

Hill. Have peace. Loud music The third Motion.
Med. The careful Constable, here drooping comes,
In his deluded search, of Captain Thum's.
Puppy brings word, his Daughter's run away.
With the tall Serving-man. He frights Groom Clay,
Out of his wits. Returns then the Squire,
Mocks all their pains, and gives Fame out a Liar:
For falsely charging Clay, when 'twas the plot,
Of subtle Bramble, who had Awdrey got,
Into his hand, by this winding device.
The Father makes a reskue in a trice:
And with his Daughter, like Saint George on foot,
Comes home triumphing, to his dear Heart root.
And tell's the Lady Tub, whom he meets there,
Of her sons courtesies, the Bachelor.
Whose words had made 'hem fall the Huy and Cry.
When Captain Thum's coming to ask him, why
He had so done? He cannot yield him cause:
But so he runs his neck into the Laws.

Hill. Have peace. Loud Music. The fourth Motion.
Med. The Laws, who have a noose to crack his neck,
As Justice Bramble tells him, who does peck
A hundredth pound out of his purse, that comes
Like his teeth from him, unto Captain Thum's.
Thum's is the Vicar in a false disguise:
And employes Metaphore, to fetch this prize.
Who tells the secret unto Basket-Hilts,
For fear of beating. This the Squire quilts
Within his Cap; and bids him but purloine
The wench for him: they two shall share the coin.
Which the sage Lady in her 'foresaid Gown
Breaks off, returning unto Kentish-Towne,
To seek her Wispe; taking the Squire along,
Who finds Clay John, as hidden in straw throng.

Hill. O, how am I beholden to the Inventer,
That would not, on record against me enter!
My slacknesse here, to enter in the barn,
Well In-and-In, I see thou can discern!

Tub. On with your last, and come to a Conclusion.

The fifth Motion. Hill. Have peace. Loud Music.
Med. The last is known, and needs but small infusion
Into your memories, by leaving in
These Figures as you sit. I, In-and-In,
Present you with the show: First of a Lady
Tub, and her son, of whom this Masque here, made I.
Then Bridegroom Pol, and Mistress Pol the Bride:
With the sub-couple, who sit them beside.

Tub. That only verse, I altered for the better, (...) gratid.

Med. Then Justice Bramble, with Sir Hugh the Chanon:
And the Bride's Parents, which I will not stan'on,
Or the lost Clay, with the recovered Giles:
Who thus unto his Master, him 'conciles,
On the Squires word, to pay old Turfe his Club,
And so does end our Tale, here, of a Tub.

The end.
EPILOGVE.
Squire TVB.
THis Tale of me, the Tub of Totten-Court,
A Poet, first invented for your sport.
Wherein the fortune of most empty Tubs
Rolling in love, are shown; and with what rubs,
We Are commonly encountered: When the wit
Of the whole Hundred so opposes it.
Our petty Chanon's forked plot in chief,
Sly Justice arts, with the High Constables Brief,
And brag Commands; my Lady Mothers care;
And her Pol-martens fortune; with the rare
Fate of poor John, thus tumbled in the Caske;
Got In-and-In, to gi't you in a Masque:
That you be pleased, who come to see a Play,
With those that hear, and mark not what we say.
Wherein the Poets fortune is, I fear,
Still to be early up, but nere the near.

THE SAD SHEPHERD OR, A TALE OF ROBIN-HOOD.

WRITTEN By BEN: JOHNSON.

Virg. Nec erubuit sylvas habitare Thaleia.

LONDON, Printed M.DC.XLI.

The Persons of the Play.
Robin-hood, The chief Wood-man, Master of the Feast. Marian, His Lady, the
Mistress.
Their Family.
Friar Tuck, The Chaplain and Steward. Little John, Bow-bearer. Scarlet, Two
Brothers, Huntsmen. Scathlock, Two Brothers, Huntsmen. George a Green, Huisher
of the Bower. Much, Robin-hoods Bailiffe, or Acater.
The Guests invited.
Clarion, The Rich. Shepherds. Lionell, The Courteous. Shepherds. Alken, The
Sage. Shepherds. Aeglamour, The Sad. Shepherds. Karolin, The Kind. Shepherds.
Mellifleur, The Sweet. Shepherdesses Amie, The Gentle. Shepherdesses Larine,
The Beautiful. Shepherdesses
The troubles unexpected.
Maudlin, The Envious: The Witch of Papplewicke. Douce, The Proud: Her
Daughter. Lorell, The Rude. A Swine'ard, the Witches son. Puck-hairy, Or
Robin-Goodfellow, their Hinc.
The Reconciler.
Reuben, A devout Hermit.
The SCENE is Sher-wood.

Consisting of a Landt-shape of Forest, Hills, Valleys, Cottages, A Castle, A
River, Pastures, Herds, Flocks, all full of Country simplicity. Robin-hoods
Bower, his Well, The Witches Dimble, The Swine'ards Oak, The Hermits Cell.

THE ARGUMENT of the first ACT.
RObin-hood, having invited all the Shep'erds and Shep'erdesses of the Vale of
Be'voir, to a Feast in the Forest of Sherwood, and trusting to his Mistress,
Maid Marian, with her Wood-men, to kill him Venison against the day: Having
left the like charge with Friar Tuck his Chaplain, and Steward, to command the
rest of his merry men, to see the Bower made ready, and all things in order for
the entertainment; meeting with his Guests at their entrance into the Wood,
welcomes and conducts them to his Bower. Where, by the way he receives the
relation of the sad Shep'ard Eglamour, who is fallen into a deep Melancholy,
for the loss of his beloved Earine; reported to have been drowned in passing
over the Trent, some few days before. They endeavor in what they can to
comfort him: but, his disease having taken so strong root, all is in vain, and
they are forced to leave him. In the mean time Marian is come from hunting
with the Hunts-men, where the Lovers interchangeably express their loves.
Robin-hood enquires if she hunted the Dear at force, and what sport he made,
now long he stood, and what head he bore: All which is briefly answered with
a relation of breaking him up, and the Raven, and her Bone. The suspect had of
that Raven to be Maudlin, the Witch of Paple-wick, whom one of the Huntsmen met
in the morning, at the rowsing of the Dear, and is confirmed by her being then
in Robin-hoods Kitchen, in the Chimney-corner, broyling the same bit, which was
thrown to the Raven, at the Quarry or Fall of the Dear. Marian being gone in,
to show the Dear to some of the Shepherdesses, returns instantly to the Scene
discontented, sends away the Venison she had killed, to her they call the
Witch, quarrels with her Love Robin-hood, abuses him, and his Guests the
Shep'erds; and so departs, leaving them all in wonder and perplexity.

The PROLOGVE.
HE that has feasted you these forty years,
And fitted Fables, for your finer ears,
Although at first, he scarce could hit the bore;
Yet you, with patience harkning more and more,
At length have grown up to him, and made known,
The Working of his Pen is now your own:
He pray's you would vouchsafe, for your own sake,
To hear him this once more, but, sit awake.
And though he now present you with such wool,
As from mere English Flocks his Muse can pull,
He hopes when it is made up into Cloth;
Not the most curious head here will be loath
To wear a Hood of it; it being a Fleece,
To match, or those of Sicily, or Greece.
His Scene is Sherwood: i And his Play a Tale
Of Robin-hood's inviting from the Vale
Of Be'voir, all the Shep'ards to a Feast:
Where, by the casual absence of one Guest,
The Mirth is troubled much, and in one Man
As much of sadness shown, as Passion can.
The sad young Shep'ard, whom we here present,
The sad Sheep'ard passes silently over the Stage. Like his woes Figure, dark
and discontent,
For his lost Love; who in the Trent is said,
To have miscarried; 'lasse! what knows the head
Of a calm River, whom the feet have drowned?
Hear what his sorrows are; and, if they wound
Your gentle breasts, so that the End crown all,
Which in the Scope of one days chance may fall:
Old Trent will send you more such Tales as these,
And shall grow young again, as one does please.
But here is an Heresy of late let fall; Here the Prologue thinking to end,
returns upon a new purpose, and speaks on.
That Mirth by no means fits a Pastoral;
Such say so, who can make none, he presumes:
Else, there is no Scene, more properly assumes
The Sock. For whence can sport in kind arise,
But from the Rural Routs and Families?
Safe on this ground then, we not fear to day,
To tempt your laughter by our rustic Play.
Wherein if we distaste, or be cried down,
We think we therefore shall not leave the Town;
Nor that the Fore-wits, that would draw the rest
Unto their liking, always like the best.
The wise, and knowing Critic will not say,
This worst, or better is, before he weigh;
Where every piece be perfect in the kind:
And then, though in themselves he difference find,
Yet if the place require it where they stood,
The equal fitting makes them equal good.
You shall have Love and Hate, and Jealousy,
As well as Mirth, and Rage, and Melancholy:
Or whatsoever else may either move,
Or stir affections, and your likings prove.
But that no style for Pastoral should go
Current, but what is stamped with Ah, and O;
Who judges so, may singularly err;
As if all Poesy had one Character:
In which what were not written, were not right,
Or that the man who made such one poor flight,
In his whole life, had with his winged skill
Advanced him upmost on the Muses hill.
When he like Poet yet remains, as those
Are Painters who can only make a Rose.
From such your wits redeem you, or your chance,
Lest to a greater height you do advance
Of Folly, to contemn those that are known
Artificers, and trust such as are none.
THE SAD SHEPHERD; OR, A TALE OF Robin-hood.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Aeglamour.
HEre! she was wont to go! and here! and here!
Just where those Daisies, Pincks, and Violets grow:
The world may find the Spring by following her;
For other print her aerie steps near left:
Her treading would not bend a blade of grass!
Or shake the downie Blow-ball from his stalk!
But like the soft West-wind, she shot along,
And where she went, the Flowers took thickest root,
As she had sowed 'hem with her odorous foot.

ACT I. SCENE II.
Marian. Tuck. John. Wood-men, etc.
Mar. Know you, or can you guess, my merry men,
What it is that keeps your Master Robin-hood
So long both from his Marian, and the Wood?

Tuc. Forsooth, Madam, he will be here by noone,
And prays it of your bounty as a boon,
That you by then have killed him Venison some,
To feast his jolly friends, who hither come
In threaves to frolic with him, and make cheer;
Here Is Little John has harbord you a Dear,
I see by his tackling.

Io. And a Heart of ten,
I trow he be, Madam, or blame your men:
For by his Slot, his Entries, and his Port,
His Frayings, Fewmets, he does promise sport,
And standing before the Dogs; he bears a head,
Large, and well beamed: with all rights somm'd, and spread.

Mar. Let Us rowse him quickly, and lay on the Hounds.

Io. Scathlock is ready with them on the grounds;
So is his brother Scarlet: now they'ave found
His Layre, they have him sure within the pound.

Mor. Away then, when my Robin bids a Feast,
'Twere sin in Marian to defraud a Guest.

ACT. I. SCENE III.
Tuck. George a Green. Much. Aeglamour.
Tuc. And I, the Chaplain, here am left to be
Steward to day, and charge you all in fee,
To d'on your Liveries; see the Bowerdrest;
And fit the fine devises for the Feast:
You George must care to make the Baldrick trim,
And Garland that must crown, or her, or him;
Whose Flock this year, has brought the earliest Lamb!

Geo. Good Father Tuck, at your Commands I am
To cut the Table out O the green sword,
Or any other service for my Lord;
To carve the Guests large seats; and these laid in
With turfe (as soft and smooth as the Moles skin:)
And hang the bulled Nose-gaies 'bove their heads,
The Pipers banck, whereon to sit and play;
And a fair Dyall to meet out the day.
Our Masters Feast shall want no just delights:
His entertainments must have all the rites.

Muc. I, and all choice that plenty can send in;
Bread, Wine, Acates, Foul, Feather, Fish, or Fin,
Aegl^mour falls in with them. For which my Fathers Nets have swept the Trent.

Aeg. And have you found her?

Mu. Whom?

Aeg. My drowned Love.
Earine! the sweet Earine!
The bright, and beautiful Earine!
Have you not heard of my Earine?
Just by your Fathers Mills (I think I am right)
Are not you Much the Millers son?

Mu. I am.

Aeg. And Baily to brave Robin-hood?

Mu. The same.

Aeg. Close by your Fathers Mills, Earine!
Earine was drowned! O my Earine!
(Old Maudlin tells me so, and Douce her Daughter)
Have you swept the River say you? and not found her?

Muc. For Foul, and Fish we have.

Aeg. O not for her?
You'are goodly friends! right charitable men!
Nay, keep your way, and leave me: make your toys,
Your tales, your poesies, that you talked of; all
Your entertainments: you not injure me:
Only if I may enjoy my Cipresse wreath!
And you will let me weep! ('it is all I ask;)
Till I be turned to water, as was she!
And troth what less suit can you grant a man?

Tuck. His Fantasy is hurt, let us now leave him:
The wound is yet too fresh, to admit searching.

Aeg. Searching? where should I search? or on what track?
Can my slow drop of tears, or this dark shade
About my brows, enough describe her loss!
Earine, O my Earine's loss!
No, no, no, no; this heart will break first.

Geo. How will this sad disaster strike the ears
Of bounteous Robin-hood, our gentle Master?

Mu. How will it mar his mirth, abate his feast;
And strike a horror into every guest!

Aeg. If I could knit whole clouds about my brows,
And weep like Swithen, or those watery signs,
The Kids that rise then, and drown all the Flocks
Of those rich Shepherds, dwelling in this Vale;
Those careless Shepherds, that did let her drown!
Then I did something or could make old Trent
Drunk with my sorrow, to start out in breaches
To drown their Herds, their cattle, and their corn,
Break down their Mils, their Dams, ore-turne their weeres,
And see their houses, and whole livelihood
Wrought into water, with her, all were good:
I Would kiss the torrent, and those whirles of Trent,
That sucked her in, my sweet Earine!
When they have cast their body on the shore,
And it comes up, as tainted as themselves,
All pale and bloodlesse, I will love it still,
For all that they can do, and make 'hem mad,
To see how I will hug it in mine arms!
And hang upon the looks, dwell on her eyes:
Feed round about her lips, and eat her kisses!
Suck of her drowned flesh! and where is their malice?
Not all their envious sousing can change that:
But I will study some revenge past this!
I pray you give me leave, for I will study.
Though all the Bells, Pipes, Tabors, Timburines ring
That you can plant about me: I will study.

ACT I. SCENE IIII. To him.
Robin-hood. Clarion. Mellifleur. Lionel. Amie. Alken. Tuck. Servants, with
music of all sorts.
Rob. Welcome bright Clarion, and sweet Mellifleur,
The courteous Lionel, fair Amie; all
My friends and neighbors, to the Jolly Bower
Of Robin-hood, and to the greene-wood Walks:
Now that the shearing of your sheep is done,
And the washed Flocks are lighted of their wool,
The smoother Ewes are ready to receive.
The mounting Rams again; and both do feed,
As either promised to increase your breed
At eaning time; and bring you lusty twins.
Why should, or you, or we so much forget
The season in our selves: as not to make
Use of our youth, and spirits, to awake
The nimble Horne-pipe, and the Timburine,
And mix our Songs, and Dances in the Wood,
And each of us cut down a Triumph-bough.
Such were the Rites, the youthful June allow.

Cla. They were, gay Robin, but the sowrer sort
Of Shepherds now disclaim in all such sport:
And say, our Flocks the while, are poorly fed,
When with such vanities the Swains are led.

Tuc. Would they, wise Clarion, were not hurried more
With Covetise and Rage, when to their store
They add the poor man's Eaneling, and dare sell
Both Fleece, and Carcass, not gi'ing him the Fell.
When to one Goat, they reach that prickly weed,
Which makes all the rest forbear to feed;
Or strew Tods hairs, or with their tails do sweep
The dewy grass, to d'off the simpler sheep;
Or dig deep pits, their Neighbors Neat to vex,
To drown the Calves, and crack the Heifers necks.
Or with pretense of chasing thence the Brock,
Send in a curre to worrie the whole Flock.

Lio. O Friar, those are faults that are not seen,
Ours open, and of worst example been.
They call ours, Pagan pastimes, that infect
Our blood with ease, our youth with all neglect;
Our tongues with wantonness, our thoughts with lust,
And what they censure ill, all others must.

Rob. I do not know, what their sharp sight may see
Of late, but I should think it still might be
(As 'twas) a happy age, when on the Plains,
The Wood-men met the Damsells, and the Swains
The Neat'ards, Plow-men, and the Pipers loud,
And each did dance, some to the Kit, or Crowd,
Some to the Bag-pipe, some the Tabret-mov'd,
And all did either love, or were beloved.

Lio. The dextrous Shepherd then would try his sling,
Then dart his Hook at Daysies, then would sing.
Sometimes would wrestle.

Cla. I, and with a Less:
And give her a new garment on the grass;
After a course at Barley-breake, or Base.

Lio. And all these deeds were seen without offense,
Or the least hazard of their innocence.

Rob. Those charitable times had no mistrust.
Shepherds knew how to love, and not to lust.

Cla. Each minute that we lose thus, I confess,
Deserves a censure on us, more or less;
But that a sadder chance has given allay,
Both to the Mirth, and Music of this day.
Our fairest Shepherdess we had of late,
Here upon Trent, is drowned; for whom her mate
Young Aeglamour, a Swain, who best could tread
Our country dances, and our games did lead,
Lives like the melancholy Turtle, drowned
Deeper in woe, then she in water: crowned
With Yewgh and Cypressa, and will scarce admit
The Physic of our presence to his fit.

Lio. Sometimes he sits, and thinks all day, then walks,
Then thinks again; and sighs, weeps, laughs, and talks,
And, 'twixt his pleasing frenzy, and sad grief,
Is so distracted; as no sought relief,
By all our studies can procure his peace.

Cla. The passion finds in him that large increase,
As we doubt hourly we shall lose him too.

Rob. You should not cross him then what ere you do:
For Phant'sie stopped, will soon take fire, and burn
Into an anger, or to a Frenzy turn.

Cla. Nay, so we are advised by Alhen here,
A good sage Shepherd, who all-tho' he wear
An old worn hat and cloak, can tell us more
Then all the forward Fry, that boast their Lore.

Lio. See, yonder comes the brother of the Maid,
Young Karolin! how curious, and afraid
He is at once! willing to find him out,
And loath to'offend him.

Alken. Sure he is here about.

ACT I. SCENE V.
Robin-hood. Clarion. Mellifleur. Lionel. Amie. Alken. Karolin. Aeglamour,
sitting upon a bank by.
Cla. See where he sits.

Aeg. It will be rare, rare, rare!
An exquisite revenge: but peace, no words!
Not for the fairest fleece of all the Flock;
If it be known before, it is all worth nothing!
I Will carve it on the trees, and in the turfe,
On every green sworth, and in every path,
Just to the Margin of the cruel Trent;
There will I knock the story in the ground,
In smooth great peble, and moss fill it round,
Till the whole Country read how she was drowned,
And with the plenty of salt tears thereshed,
Quite alter the complexion of the Spring.
Or I will get some old, old Grandam, thither,
Whose rigid foot but dipped into the water,
Shall strike that sharp and sudden cold, throughout,
As it shall loose all virtue; and those Nimphs,
Those treacherous Nimphs pulled in Earine;
Shall stand curled up, like Images of Ice;
And never thaw! mark, never! a sharp Justice:
Or stay, a better! when the years at hottest,
And that the Dog-starre fomes, and the streams boiles,
And curles, and works, and swells ready to sparkle:
To fling a fellow with a Fever in,
To set it all on fire, till it burn,
Blew as Scamander, before the walls of Troy;
When Vulcan leaped in to him, to consume him.

Rob. A deep hurt Phant'sie.

Aeg. Do you not approve it?

Rob. Yes gentle Aeglamour, we all approve,
And come to gratulate your just revenge:
Which since it is so perfect, we now hope,
You Will leave all care thereof, and mix with us,
In all the profer'd solace of the Spring.

Aeg. A Spring, now she is dead: of what, of thorns?
Briars, and Brambles? Thistles? Burs, and Dorks?
Cold Hemlock? Yewgh? the Mandrake, or the Box?
These may grow still; but what can spring beside?
Did not the whole Earth sicken, when she died?
As if there since did fall one drop of dew,
But what was wept for her! or any stalk
Did bear a Flower! or any branch a bloome;
After her wreath was made: In faith, in faith
You do not fair, to put these things upon me.
Which can in no sort be: Earine,
Who had her very being, and her name,
With the first knots, or buddings of the Spring,
Borne with the Prim rose, and the Violet,
Or earliest Roses blown: when Cupid smiled,
And Venus led the Graces out to dance,
And all the Flowers, and Sweets in Natures lap,
Leaped out and made their solemn Conjuration,
To last, but while she lived: Do not I know,
How the Vale withered the same Day? How Dove,
Deane, Eye, and Erwash, Idell, Snite, and Soar,
Each broke his Vrne, and twenty waters more,
That swelled proud Trent, shrunk themselves dry; that since,
No Sun, or Moon, or other cheerful Star
Looked out of heaven! but all the Cope was dark,
As it were hung so for her Exequies!
And not a voice or sound, to ring her knell:
But of that dismal pair, the scritching Owl;
And buzzing Hornet! hark, hark, hark the foul
Bird! how she flutters with her wicker wings!
Peace you shall hear her scritch.

Cla. Good Karolin sing,
Help to divert this Phant'sie.

Kar. All I can.
Though I am young, and cannot tell, The Song. Which while Karolin sings,
Aegl^mou^ reads
Either what Death, or Love is well,
Yet I have heard, they both bear darts,
And both do aim at humane hearts:
And then again, I have been told
Love wounds with heart, as Death with cold;
So that I fear, they do but bring
Extremes to touch, and mean one thing.
As in a ruin, we it call
One thing to be blown up, or fall;
Or to our end, like way may have,
By a flash of lightning, or a wave:
So Loves inflamed shaft, or brand,
May kill as soon as Deaths cold hand;
Except Loves fires the virtue have
To fright the frost out of the grave.

Aeg. Do you think so? are you in that good heresy?
I mean opinion? If you be, say nothing:
I Will study it, as a new Philosophy,
But by my self alone: Now you shall leave me I
Some of these Nimphs, here will reward you; this
This pretty Maid, although but with a kiss, He forces Amie to kiss him.
Lived my Earine, you should have twenty:
For every line here, one I would allow 'hem
From mine own store, the treasure I had in her:
Now I am poor as you.

Kar. And I a wretch!

Cla. Yet keep an eye upon him, Karoline.

Mel. Alas that ever such a generous spirit, Aeglamour goes out, and Karolin
follows him.
As Aeglamours, should sink by such a loss.

Cla. The truest Lovers are least fortunate,
Looks all their Lives, and Legends; what they call
The Lovers Scriptures: Heliodores, or Tatij!
Longi! Eustathij! Prodomi! you will find it!
What think you Father?

Alk. I have known some few,
And read of more; wh'have had their dose, and deep,
Of these sharp bitter-sweets.

Lio. But what is this
To jolly Robin? who the Story is,
Of all beatitude in Love?

Cla. And told
Here every day, with wonder on the world.

Lio. And with fames voice.

Alk. Save that some folk delight
To blend all good of others, with some spite.

Cla. He, and his Marian, are the Sum and Talk
Of all, that breath here in the Greene-wood Walk.

Mel. Or Be'voir Vale?

Kar. The Turtles of the Wood.

Cla. The billing Pair.

Alk. And so are understood
For simple loves, and sampled lives beside.

Mel. Faith, so much virtue should not be envied.

Alk. Better be so, then pitied Mellifleur!
For' against all envy, virtue is a cure;
But wretched pity ever calls on scorns.
The Deeres brought home: I hear it by their horns.

ACT I. SCENE VI.
To Robin, etc. Marian. John. Scarlet. Scathlock.
Rob. My Marian, and my Mistress!

Mar. My loved Robin!

Mel. The Moons at full, the happy pair are met!

Mar. How has this morning paid me, for my rising!
First, with my sports; but most with meeting you!
I did not half so so well reward my hounds,
As she has me to day: although I gave them
All the sweet morsels, called Tongue, Ears, and Dowcets!

Rob. What? and the inch-pin?

Mar. Yes.

Rob. Your sports then pleased you?

Mar. You are a wanton.

Rob. One I do confess
I wanted till you came, but now I have you,
I Will grow to your embraces, till two souls
Distilled into kisses, through our lips
Do make one spirit of love.

Mar. O Robin! Robin!

Rob. Breathe, breathe a while, what says my gentle Marian?

Mar. Could you so long be absent?

Rob. What a week?
Was that so long?

Mar. How long are Lovers weeks!
Do you think Robin, when they are asunder?
Are they not Prisoners years?

Rob. To some they seem so;
But being met again, they'are Schoole-boyes hours.

Mar. That have got leave to play, and so we use them.

Rob. Had you good sport in your chase to day?

Io. O prime!

Mar. A lusty Stagge?

Rob. And hunted ye at force?

Mar. In a full cry.

Io. And never hunted change!

Rob. You had stanch Hounds then?

Mar. Old and sure, I love
No young rash dogs, no more then changing friends.

Rob. What relayes set you?

Io. None at all; we laid not
In one fresh dog.

Rob. He stood not long then?

Sca. Yes,
Five hours and more. A great, large Dear!

Rob. What head?

Ioh. Forked! A Heart of ten.

Mar. He is good Venison,
According to the season in the blood,
I Will promise all your friends, for whom he fell.

Ioh. But at his fall there hap't a chance.

Mar. Worth mark?

Rob. I! what was that sweet Marian He kisses her.

Mar. You Will not hear?

Rob. I love these interruptions in a Story; He kisses her again.
They make it sweeter.

Mar. You do know, as soon
As the Assay is taken. He kisses her again.

Rob. On my Marian.
I did but take the Assay.

Mar. You stop ones mouth,
And yet you bid 'hem speak -- when the Arbors made.

Rob. Pulled down, and paunch turned out.

Mar. He that undoes him;
Does cleave the brisket-bone, upon the spoone
Of which, a little gristle grows, you call it --

Rob. the Ravens-bone.

Mar. Now, ore head sat a Raven!
On a sere bough! a grown great Bird! and Hoarse!
Who, all the while the Dear was breaking up,
So crok'd and cried for it, as all the hunts-men,
(Especially old Scathlocke) thought it ominous!
Swore it was Mother Maudlin; whom he met,
At the Day-dawne; just as he roused the Dear,
Out of his Laire: but we made shift to run him
Off his four legs, and sunk him e're we left.
Is the Dear come?

Scat. He lies within o the dresser!

Mar. Will you go see him Mellifleur?

Mel. I attend you.

Mar. Come Amie, you will go with us?

Am. I am not well.

Lio. She Is sick of the young Shep'ard that be kissed her.

Mar. Friend, cheer your friends up, we will eat him merrily,

Alk. Saw you the Raven, Friend?

Scat. I, qu'ha should let me?
I should be afraid o you sir should I?

Clar. Hunts-man!
A Dram more of Civilitie would not hurt you?

Rob. Nay, you must give them all their rudenesses;
They are not else themselves, without their language.

Alk. And what do you think of her?

Scat. As of a Witch.
They call her a Wise-woman, but I think her
An arrant Witch.

Cla. And wherefore think you so?

Sca. Because, I saw her since, broiling the bone
Was cast her at the Quarrie.

Alk. Where saw you her?

Sca. IN the Chimley nuik, within: she is there, now.
Rob. Marian*
ACT I. SCENE VII.
To them Marian. Your Hunt holds in his tale, still; and tells more!
Mar. My Hunt? what tale?

Rob. How! cloudie, Marian!
What look is this?

Mar. A fit one, Sir, for you. To Scathlock.
Hand off rude Ranger! Sirrah, get you in
And bear the Venison hence. It is too good
For these course rustic mouths that cannot open,
Or spend a thank for it. A starved Muttons carcass
Would better fit their palates. See it carried
To Mother Maudlins, whom you call the Witch, Sir.
Tell her I sent it to make merry with,
She Will turn us thanks at least! why stand'st thou, Groom?

Rob. I wonder he can move! that he is not fixed!
If that his feeling be the same with mine!
I dare not trust the faith of mine own senses.
I fear mine eyes, and ears! this is not Marian!
Nor am I Robin-hood! I pray you ask her!
Ask her good Shep'ards! ask her all for me;
Or rather ask yourselves, if she be she;
Or I, be I.

Mar. Yes, and you are the spy:
And the spied Spy, that watch upon my walks,
To inform what Dear I kill, or give away!
Where! when! to whom! but spy your worst, good Spy!
I will dispose of this where least you like!
Fall to your cheese-cakes, curdes, and clawted cream,
Your fools, your flaunes; and of ale a stream
To wash it from your livers: strain ewes milk
Into your Cider sillabubs, and be drunk
To him, whose Fleece has brought the earliest Lamb
This year; and wears the Baudrick at your board!
Where you may all go whistle; and record
^hee leaves them. This in your dance: and foot it lustily.

Rob. I pray you friends, do you hear? and see, as I do?
Did the same accents strike your ears? and objects?
Your eyes, as mine?

Alk. We taste the same reproaches!

Lio. Have seen the changes!

Rob. Are we not all changed,
Transformed from our selves?

Lio. I do not know!
The best is silence!

Alk. And to await the issue.

Rob. The dead, or lazy wait for it: I will find it.

The Argument of the second ACT.
THe Witch Maudlin, having taken the shape of Marian to abuse Robin-hood, and
perplexe his guests, comes forth with her daughter Douce, reporting in what
confusion she has left them; defrauded them, of their Venison; made them
suspicious each of the other; but most of all Robin-hood so jealous of his
Marian, as she hopes no effect of love would ever reconcile them; glorying so
far in the extent of her mischief, as she confesses to have surpised
Earine, stripped her of her garments, to make her daughter appear fine, at this
feast, in them; and to have shut the maiden up in a tree, as her sons prize,
if he could win her; or his prey, if he would force her. Her Son a rude
bragging swine'ard, comes to the tree to woo her (his Mother, and Sister
stepping aside, to over-heare him) and first boasts his wealth to her, and his
possessions; which move not. Then he presents her gifts, such as himself is
taken with, but she utterly shows a scorn, and loathing both of him, and
them. His mother is angry, rates him, instructs him what to do the next time,
and persuades her daughter, to show her self about the bower: tells, how she
shall know her mother, when she is transformed, her broidered belt. Mean while
the young sheep'ardes Amy being kissed by Karolin, Earines brother, before, falls
in Love; but knows not what Love is: but describes her disease so innocently,
that Marian pitties her. When Robin-hood, and the rest of his Guests invited,
enter to Marian, upbraiding her with sending away their Venison to Mother
Maudlin by Scathlock, which she denies; Scatchlock affirms it, but seeing his
Mistres weep, and to forswear it, begins to doubt his own understanding,
rather then affront her farther; which makes Robin-hood, and the rest, to
examine themselves better. But Mandlin entering like her self, the Witch comes
to thank her for her bounty: at which, Marian is more angry, and more denies
the deed. Scathlock enters, tells he has brought it again, and delivered it to
the Cook. The Witch is inwardly vexed, the Venison is so recovered from her, by
the rude Huntsman; and murmurs, and curses, bewitches the Cook, mocks poor
Amie, and the rest, discovers her ill nature, and is a mean of reconciling
them all. For the sage Shepherd, suspecteth her mischeife, if she be not
prevented: and so persuades to seize on her. Whereupon Robin-hood dispatcheth
out his woodmen to hunt, and take her. which ends the Act.

ACT. II.
SCENE. I.
Maudlin. Douce.
Mau. HAve I not left 'em in a brave confusion?
Amazed their expectation? got their Venison?
Troubled their mirth, and meeting? made them doubtful,
And jealous of each other? all distracted?
And, in the close, uncertain of themselves?
This can your Mother do my dainty Douce!
Take any shape upon her! and delude
The senses, best acquainted with their Owners!
The jolly Robin, who' has bid this feast,
And made this solemn invitation;
I have possessed so, with syke dislikes
Of his own Marian, that all-bee 'he know her,
As does the vauting heart, his venting hind,
He nere fra' hence, sall neis her in the wind,
To his first liking.

Dou. Did you so distate him?

Mau. As far as her proud scorning him, could 'bate
Or blunt the edge of any Lovers temper.

Dou. But were ye like her mother?

Mau. So like Douce,
As had she seen me her sel', her sell 'had doubted
Whether had been the liker off the two!
This can your Mother do, I tell you Daughter!
I have but dight ye, yet; in the out-dresse;
And 'parraile of Earine! but this raiment,
These very weeds, sall make ye, as but coming
In view or ken of Aeglamour, your form
Shall show too slipperie to be looked upon!
And all the Forest swear you to be she!
They shall rin after ye, and wage the odds,
Upo' their own deceived sights, yee' are her!
Whilst she (poor Less) is stocked up in a tree:
Your brother Lorells prize! For so my largess,
Has lotted her, to be your brothers Mistress;
Gif she can be reclaimed: gif not, his Prey!
And here he comes, new claithed, like a Prince
Of Swine ards! sike he seems! dight in the spoils
Of those he feeds! A mighty Lord of Swine!
He is command now, to woo. Lets step aside,
And hear his love-craft! See, he opes the door!
And takes her by the hand, and helps her forth!
This is true court-ship, and becomes his ray.

ACT II. SCENE II.
Lorel. Earine. Maudlin. Douce.
Lor. Ye kind to others, but ye coy to me
Deft Mistres! whiter then the cheese, new pressed!
Smoother then cream! and softer then the curds!
Why start ye from me, ere ye hear me tell
My wooing errand; and what rents I have?
Large herds, and pastures! Swine, and Kie, mine own!
And though my na'se be camus'd, my lips thick,
And my chin bristled! Pan, great Pan, was such!
Who was the chief of Heards-men, and our Sire!
I am na' Fay! na' Incubus! na' Changlin!
But a good man, that lives of my own geere.
This house! these grounds! this stock is all mine own!

Ear. How better 'twere to me, this were not known!

Mau. She likes it not: but it is boasted well!

Lor. An hundred Udders for the payle I have,
That gi' me Milk and Curds, that make me Cheese
To cloy the Mercatts! twenty swarm of Bees,
Whilke (all the Summer) hum about the hive,
And bring me Wax, and Honey in by live.
An aged Oak the King of all the field,
With a broad Beech there grows before my dur,
That mickell Mast unto the ferme does yield.
A Chestnut, whilk has larded money a Swine,
Whose skins I wear, to fend me fra the Cold.
A Pop^^^ green, and with a kerved Seat,
Under whose shade I solace in the heat;
And thence can see gang out, and in, my neat.
Two trilland brooks, each (from his spring) does meet,
And make a river, to refresh my feet:
In which, each morning ere the Sun does rise,
I look my self, and clear my pleasant eyes,
Before I pipe; For, therein I have skill
'Bove other Swine'ards. Bid me, and I will
Straight play to you, and make you melody.

Ear. By no means. Ah! to me all minstrelsie
Is irksome, as are you.

Lor. Why scorn you me?
He draws out other presents. Because I am a Heards-man, and feed Swine!
I am a Lord of other geere! this sine
Smooth Bawsons Cub, the young Grice of a Gray;
Two tynie Urshins, and this Ferret gay.

Ear. Out on 'hem! what are these?

Lor. I give 'hem ye;
As presents Mrs.

Ear. O, the feind, and thee!
Gar take them hence: they few mand all the claithes,
And prick my Coats: hence with 'hem, limmer lowne,
Thy vermin, and thy self, thy felfe art one;
I lock me up. All Is well when thou art gone.

ACT II. SCENE III.
Lorel. Maudlin. Douce.
Lor. Did you hear this? she wished me at the feind,
With all my presents!

Mau. A tu luckie end
She wishend thee, foul Limmer! drittie Lowne!
Good faith, it duills me that I am thy Mother!
And see, thy Sister scorns thee, for her Brother!
Thou woo thy Love? thy Mistress? with two Hedge-hoggs?
A stinkand brock? a polcat? out thou houlet!
Thou shoul'dst ha'given her, a Madge-Owle! and then
Though had made a present of thy self, Owle-spiegle!

Dou. Why, Mother, I have heard ye bid to give;
And often, as the Cause calls.

Mau. I know well,
It is a witty part, sum-times, to give.
But what? to whame? no monsters! nor to maidens!
He should present them with mare pleasand things,
Things natural, and what all women covet
To see: the common Parent of us all!
Which Maids will twire at, 'tween their fingers, thus!
With which his Sire gat him! He Is get another!
And so beget posterity upon her!
This he should do! (false Gelden) gang thy gait
And du thy turns, betimes: or, I'is gar take
Thy new breikes fra' thee, and thy duib let tu.
The Talleur, and the Sowter sall undu'
All they have made; except thou manlier woo! Lorell goes out.

Dou. Good Mother, gif you chide him, he will du wairs.

Mau. Hang him: I geif him to the Devils eirs.
But, ye my Douce, I charge ye, show your sell,
Tu all the Sheep'ards, baudly: gaing amang'hem.
Be mickell in their eye, frequent, and fuge and.
And, gif they ask ye of Earine,
Or of these claithes; say, that I ga' hem ye,
And say no more. I have that wark in hand,
That web upo' the Luime, sall gar 'hem think
By then, they feelin their own frights, and fears,
I'is pu' the world, or Nature, bout their ears.
But, hear ye Douce, because, ye may meet me
In money shapes tu day; where ere you spy
This browdred belt, with Characters, it is I.
A Gypsan Lady, and a right Beldame,
Wrought it by Moone-shine for me, and Starlight,
Upo' your Granams grave, that very night
We eathed her, in the shades; when our Dame Hecat,
Made it her gaing-night, over the Kirk-yard,
Withal the bark and parish tykes set at her,
While I sat whyrland, of my brazen spindle:
At every twisted third my rock let fly
Unto the sew'ster, who did sit me nigh,
Under the towne-turne-pike; which ran each spell
She stitched in the work, and knit it well.
See, ye take tent to this, and ken 'your Mother.

ACT II. SCENE IV.
Marian. Mellifleur. Amie.
Mar. How do you sweet Amie? yet?

Mel. She cannot tell,
If she could sleep, she says, she should do well.
She feels a hurt, but where, she cannot show
Any least sign, that she is hurt or no.
Her paine's not doubtful to her; but the seat
Of her pain is. Her thoughts too work, and beat,
Oppressed with Cares: but why, she cannot say.
All matter of her care is quite away.

Mar. Has any Vermin broke into your Fold?
Or any rott seized on your flock? or cold?
Or has your feighting Ram, burst his hard horn?
Or any Ewe her fleece? or bag has torn,
My gentle Amie? Am. Marian, none of these.

Mar. Have you been stung by Waspes, or angry Bees?
Or razed with some rude bramble, or rough briar?

Am. No Marian; my disease is somewhat nigher.
I weep, and boil away my Self, in tears;
And then my panting heart would dry those fears:
I burn, though all the Forest lend a shade;
And freize, though the whole Wood one fire were made.

Mar. Alas!

Am. I often have been torn with thorn and briar;
Both in the Leg, and Foot, and somewhat higher:
Yet gave not then such fearful shreikes as these. Ah!
I often have been stung too, with cursed Bees,
Yet not remember that I then did quit
Either my Company, or Mirth for it. Ah!
And therefore, what it is that I feel now,
And know no cause of it, nor where, nor how,
It entered in me, nor least print can see,
I feel afflicts me more, then Briar, or Be. Oh!
How often, when the Sun heavens brightest birth
Has with his burning fervor cleft the earth,
Under a spreading Elm, or Oak, hard by
A cool clear fountain, could I sleeping lie
Safe from the heat? but now, no shadie tree,
Nor purling brook, can my refreshing be?
Often when the meadows, were grown rough with frost,
The rivers ice-bound, and their currents lost,
My thick warm fleece I wore, was my defense
Or large good fires, I made, drove winter thence.
But now, my whole flocks fells, nor this thick grove,
Enflamed to ashes, can my cold remove.
It is a cold, and heat, that does out go
All sense of Winters, and of Summers so.

ACT II. SCENE V.
Robin-hood. Clarion. Lionel. Alken.
Rob. OF, are you here, my Mistress?

Mar. I my Love! She seeing him, runs to embrace him. He puts her back.
Where should I be, but in my Robins arms?
The Sphere which I delight in, so to move?

Rob. What the rude Ranger? and spied Spy? hand off:
You are for no such rusticks.

Mar. What means this,
Thrice worthy Clarion? or wise Alken? know ye?

Rob. Alas no, not they! a poor sterv'd Muttons carcass
Would better fit their palat's, then your Venison.

Mar. What riddle is this! unfold your self, dear Robin.

Rob. You have not sent your Venison hence by Scathlock,
To Mother Maudlin?

Mar. I to Mother Maudlin?
Will Scathlock say so?

Rob. Nay, we will all swear so.
For all did hear it, when you gave the charge so.
Both Clarion, Alken, Lionel, my self.

Mar. Good honest Shep'ards, Masters of your flocks,
Simple, and virtuous men, no others hirelings;
Be not you made to speak against your Conscience,
That which may soil the truth. I send the Venison
Away? by Scathlock? and to mother Maudlin?
I came to show it here, to Mellifleur,
I do confess; but Amies falling ill,
Did put us of it: Scathlock, enters. Since we employed our selves
In comforting of her. OF, here he is!
Did I, Sir, bid you bear away the Venison,
To mother Maudlin?

Sca. I good faith, Madam,
Did you, and I have done it.

Mar. What have you done?

Sea. Obeyed your hests, Madam; done your Commands.

Mar. Done my Commands, dull groom? Fetch it again
Or kennel with the hounds. Are these the Arts
Robin, you read your rude ones of the wood,
To countenance your quarrels, and mistakings?
Or are the sports to entertain your friends
Those formed jealousies? Ask of Mellifleur,
If I were ever from her, here, or Amie,
Since I came in with them; or saw this Scathlock,
Since I related to you his tale, of the Raven?

Sca. Scathlock goes out. I, say you so?

Mel. She never left my side
Since I came in, here, nor I hers.

Cla. This's strange!
Our best of Senses were deceived, our eyes, then!

Lio. And ears too.

Mar. What you have concluded on,
Make good I pray you.

Am. OF my heart, my heart!

Mar. My heart it is, is wounded pretty Amie;
Report not you your greifes: I Will tell for all.

Mel. Some body is to blame, there is a fault.

Mar. Try if you can take rest. A little slumber
Will much refresh you (Amie).

Alk. What Is her grief?

Mar. She does not know: and therein she is happy.

ACT II. SCENE VI.
John, Maudlin, and Scathlock after. To them
Joh. Here Is Mother Maudlin come to give you thanks,
Madam, for some late gift, she has received --
Which she is not worthy of, she says, but crakes,
And wonders of it; hoppes about the house;
She daunceth. Transported with the joy.

Mau. Send me a Stagge!
A whole Stagge, Madam! and so fat a Dear!
So fairelie hunted, and at such a time too!
When all your friends were here!

Rob. Do you mark this, Clarion?
Her own acknowledgement?

Mau. 'Twas such a bounty
And honor done to your poor Bedes-woman,
I know not how to owe it, but to thank you.
And that I come to du: I shall go round,
She turns round, till she falls. And giddie with the toy of the good turn.
Look out, look out, gay folk about,
And see me spin; the ring IN am in
Of mirth, and glee, with thanks for fee
The heart putts on, for the Venison
My Lady sent, which shall be spent
In draughts of Wine, to fume up fine
Into the brain, and down again
Fall in a Swoune, upo' the grown.

Rob. Look to her, she is mad.

Man. My Son has sent you
A pott of Strawberries, gathered in the wood
(His Hoggs would else have rooted up, or trod)
With a choice dish of wildings here, to scald
And mingle with your Cream.

Mar. Thank you good Maudlin,
And thank your Son. Go, bear 'hem into Much
The Acater, let him thank her. Surely, Mother
You were mistaken, or my Woodmen more,
Or most my self, to send you all our store
Of Venison, hunted for our selves, this day!
You will not take it, Mother, I dare say,
If wee'lld entreat you; when you know our ghests:
Red Dear is head still of the forest feasts.

Mau. But I know ye, a right free-hearted Lady,
Can spare it out of superfluity:
I have departit it among my poor Neighbors
To speak your Largess.

Mar. I not gave it, Mother;
You have done wrong. then; I know how to place
My gifts, and where; and when to find my seasons
To give, not throw away my Courtesies.

Mau. Count you this thrown away?

Mar. What Is ravished from me
I count it worse; as stolen: I loose my thanks.
But leave this quest: they fit not you, not me,
Maudlin, Contentions of this quality.
How now?

Sca. Your Stag's returned upon my shoulders, Scathlock, enters.
He has found his way into the Kitchen again:
With his two Legs, If now your Cook can dress him;
Slid, I thought the Swine'ard would have be at me,
He looks so big! the sturdie Karle, lewd Lorel!

Mar. There Scathlock, for thy plines, thou have deserved it. Marian gives him
Gold.

Mau. Do you give a thing, and take a thing, Madam?

Mar. No, Maudlin, you had imparted to your Neighbors;
As much good do it them: I have done no wrong.

Mau. The Spit stand still, no Broches turn
Before the fire, The first Charm.
but let it burn
Both sides, and haunches, till the whole
Converted be into one Cole.

Cla. What Devils Pater noster mumbles she?

Alk. Stay, you will hear more of her witcherie

Mau. The Swilland Dropsy enter in
The Lazy Cuke, and swell his skin;
And the old Mort-malon his shin
Now prick, and itch, withouten blin.

Cla. Speak out Hagge, we may hear your Devils Mattens.

Mau. The Paene, we call S. Antons fire
The Gout, or what we can desire,
To crampe a Cuke, in every lim,
Before they dine, yet; seize on him.

Alk. A soul ill Spirit has possessed her.

Am. O Karol, Karol, call him back again.

Lio. Her thoughts do work upon her, in her slumber.
And may express some part of her disease.

Rob. Observe, and mark, but trouble not her ease.

Am. OF, o.

Mar. How is it Amie?

Mel. Wherefore start you?

Am. OF Karol, he is fair, and sweet.

Mau. What then?
Are there not flowers as sweet, and fair, as men?
The Lilly is fair! and Rose is sweet!

Am. IN, so!
Let all the Roses, and the Lillies go:
Karol is only fair to me!

Mar. And why?

Am. Alas for Karol, Marian, I could die.

Karol. He sings sweetly too!

Mau. What then?
Are there not Birds sing sweeter far, then Men?

Am. I grant the Linet, Lark, and Bul-finchsing,
But best, the dear, good Angel of the Spring,
The Nightingale.

Mau. Then why? then why, alone,
Should his notes please you?

Am. I not long agone
Took a delight, with wanton kidds to play,
And sport with little Lambs a Summers Day!
And view their friskes! me thought it was a sight
Of joy, to see my two brave Rams to fight!
Now Karol, only, all delight does move!
All that is Karol, Karol I approve!
This very morning, but -- (I did bestow
(It was a little against my will, I know)
A single kiss, upon the seely Swain,
And now I wish that very kiss again.
His lip is softer, sweeter then the Rose
His mouth, and tongue with dropping honey flows.
The relish of it was a pleasing thing.

Mau. Yet like the Bees it had a little sting.

Am. And sunk, and sticks yet in my marrow deep
And what does hurt me, I now wish to keep.

Mar. Alas, how innocent her Story is!

Am. I do remember, Marian, I have often
With pleasure kissed my Lambs, and Puppies, soft,
And once a dainty fine Roe-fawne I had,
Of whose out-skipping bounds, I was as glad
As of my health; and him I often would kiss:
Yet had his, no such sting, or pain, as this.
They never pricked or hurt my heart. And, for
They were so blunt, and dull, I wish no more.
But this, that hurtes, and pricks does please; This sweet,
Mingled with sower, I wish again to meet:
And that delay, me thinks, most tedious is
That keeps, or hinders me of Karols kiss.

Mar. We Will send for him sweet Amie, to come to you.

Mau. She goes murmuring out. But, I will keep him of if Charms will do it.

Cla. Do you mark the murmuring hagge, how she does mutter?

Rob. I like her not. And less her manners now.

Alk. She is a shrewd deformed piece, I vow.

Lio. As crooked as her body.

Rob. I believe
She can take any Shape; as Scathlock says.

Alk. She may deceive the Sense, but really
She cannot change her self.

Rob. Would I could see her,
Once more in Marians form! for I am certain
Now, it was she abused us; as I think
My Marian, and my Love, now, innocent:
Which faith I seal unto her, with this kiss,
And call you all to witness of my penance.

Alk. It was believed before, but now confirmed,
That we have seen the Monster.

ACT II. SCENE VII.
Tuck. John. Much. Scarlet. To them
Tuc. Hear you how
Poor Tom, the Cook, is taken! All his joints
Do crack, as if his Limbs were tied with points:
His whole frame slackens; and a kind of rack
Runs down along the Spondylls of his back;
A Gowt, or Crampe, now seizes on his head,
Then falls into his feet; his knees are lead;
And he can stir his either hand, no more
Then a dead stumpe, to his office, as before.

Alk. He is bewitched.

Cla. This is an Argument
Both of her malice, and her power, we see.

Alk. She must by some device restrained be,
Or she will go far in mischief.

Rob. Advise how,
Sage Shep'ard, we shall put it straight in practice.

Alk. Send forth your woodmen, then, into the walks,
Or let them prick her footing hence; A Witch
Is sure a Creature of Melancholy,
And will be found, or sitting in her form,
Or else, at releife, like a Hare.

Cla. You speak
Alken, as if you knew the sport of Witch-hunting, Enter George to the
Huntsmen; who by themselves continue the Scene. The rest going off.
Or starting of a Hag.

Rob. Go sirs about it,
Take George here with you, he can help to find her;
Leave Tuck, and Much behind to dress the Dinner,
IN the Cooks stead.

Much. We Will care to get that done.

Rob. Come Marian, lets withdraw into the bower.

ACT II. SCENE VIII.
John. Scarlet. Scathlock. George. Alken.
Jo. Rare sport I swear! this hunting of the Witch
Will make us.

Scar. Let Us advise upon it, like huntsmen.

Geo. And we can spy her once, she is our own.

Sca. First, think which way she fourmeth, on what wind:
Or North, or South.

Geo. For, as the Shep'ard said,
A Witch is a kind of Hare.

Scat. And marks the weather,
As the hare does.

Jo. Where shall we hope to find her? Alken returns.

Alk. I have asked leave to assist you, jollie huntsmen,
If an old Shep'herd may be heard among you;
Not jear'd or laughed at.

Jo. Father, you will see
Robin-hoods household, know more Courtesy.

Scat. Who scorns at eld, peeles of his own young hairs.

Alk. Ye say right well. Know ye the Witches Dell?

Scar. No more then I do know the walks of Hell.

Alk. Within a gloomie dimble, she does dwell
Down in a pit, ore-growne with brakes and briars.
Close by the ruins of a shaken Abbey
Torn, with an Earthquake, down unto the ground,
Amongst graves, and grotts, near an old Charnell house,
Where you shall find her sitting in her form,
As fearful, and melancholique, as that
She is about; with Caterpillars kells,
And knottie Cobwebs, rounded in with spells;
Thence she steals forth to releif, in the foggs,
And rotten Mistes, upon the fens, and boggs,
Down to the drowned Lands of Lincolneshire;
To make Ewes cast their Lambs! Swine eat their Farrow!
The House-wifes Tun not work! Nor the Milk churne!
Writhe Childrens wrists! and suck their breath in sleep!
Get Vialls of their blood! And where the Sea
Casts up his slimie Owze, search for a weed
To open locks with, and to rivet Charms,
Planted about her, in the wicked feat,
Of all her mischiefs, which are manifold.

Jo. I wonder such a story could be told,
Of her dire deeds.

Geo. I thought a Witches banks
Had enclosed nothing, but the merry prankes
Of some old woman.

Skar. Yes, her malice more!

Sca. As it would quickly appear, had we the Store
Of his Collects.

Geo. I, this good learned Man
Can speak her right.

Skar. He knows, her shifts, and haunts!

Alk. And all her wiles, and turns. The venomed Plants
Wherewith she kill's! where the sad Mandrake grows,
Whose groans are deathfull! the dead-numming Nightshade!
The stupifying Hemlock! Adders tongue!
And Martagan! the shreikes of lucklesse Owls,
We hear! and croaking Night-Crowes in the air!
Greene-bellied Snakes! blew fire-drakes in the sky!
And giddie Flitter-mice, with lether wings!
The scaly Beetles, with their habergeons,
That make a humming Murmur as they fly!
There, in the stocks of trees, white Faies do dwell,
And span-long Elves, that dance about a poole!
With each a little Changeling, in their arms!
The airie spirits play with falling stars!
And mount the Sphere of fire, to kiss the Moon!
While, she fitts reading by the Glow-wormes light,
Or rotten wood (over which the worm has crept)
The banefull scedule of her nocent charms,
And binding Characters, through which she wounds
Her Puppetts, the Sigilla of her witchcraft.
All this I know, and I will find her for you;
And show you'her sitting in her form; I Will lay
My hand upon her; make her throw her skutt
Along her back, when she does start before us.
But you must give her Law: and you shall see her
Make twenty leapes, and doubles; cross the paths,
And then squatt down beside us.

Jo. Crafty Croane!
I long to be at the sport, and to report it.

Scar. We Will make this hunting of the Witch, as famous, As any other blast of
Venerie.

Scat. Hang her foul hagge, she will be a stinking Chase!
I had rather have the hunting of heir heir.

Geo. If we could come to see her, cry, so haw, once!

Alk. That I do promise, or I Am no good Hag-finder.

The Argument of the third ACT.
PUck-hairy discovers himself in the Forest, and discourses his offices with
their necessities, briefly; After which, Douce, entering in the habit of Earine,
is pursued by Karol; who mistaking her at first to be his Sister, questions
her, how she came by those garments. She answers, by her mothers gift. The
sad Shepherd coming in the while, she runs away affrighted, and leaves Karol,
suddenly; Aeglamour thinking it to be Earines ghost he saw, falls into a
melancholique expression of his phantsie to Karol, and questions him sadly
about that point, which moves compassion in Karol of his mistake still. When
Clarion, and Lionell enter to call Karol to Amie; Karol reports to them
Aeglamours passion, with much regreet. Clarion resolves to seek him. Karol to
return with Lionell. By the way Douce, and her Mother (in the shape of Marian)
meet them, and would divert them, affirming Amie to be recovered, which Lionell
wondered at to be so soon. Robin-hood enters, they tell him the relation of the
Witch, thinking her to be Marian; Robin suspecting her to be Maudlin, lay's
hold of her Girdle suddenly, but she striving to get free, they both run out,
and he returns with the belt broken. She following in her own shape,
demanding it, but at a distance, as fearing to be seized upon again; and
seeing she cannot recover it, falls into a rage, and cursing, resolving to
trust to her old arts, which she calls her daughter to assist in. The
Shepherds content with this discovery, go home triumphing, make the relation
to Marian. Amie is gladded with the sight of Karol, etc. In the mean time
enters Lorel, with purpose to ravish Earine, and calling her forth to that lewd
end, he by the hearing of Clarions footing, is staid, and forced to commit her
hastily to the tree again, where Clarion coming by, and hearing a voice
singing, draws near unto it, but Aeglamour hearing it also, and knowing it to
be Earine's, falls into a superstitious commendation of it, as being an
Angels, and in the air, when Clarion espies a hand put forth from the tree,
and makes toward it, leaving Aeglamour to his wild phantsie, who quitteth the
place, and Clarion beginning to court the hand, and make love to it, there
arises amist suddenly, which, darkning all the place, Clarion loses
himself, and the tree where Earine is enclosed, lamenting his misfortune, with
the unknown nimphs misery. The Air clearing, enters the Witch, with her Son
and Daughter, tells them how she had caused that late darkness, to free
Lorell from surprisall, and his prey from being reskued from him: bids him
look to her, and lock her up more carefully, and follow her, to assist a work,
she has in hand, of recovering her lost Girdle; which she laments the loss
of, with cursings, execrations, wishing confusion to their feast, and meeting:
sends her Son, and Daughter to gather certain Simples, for her purpose, and
bring them to her Dell. This Puck hearing prevents, and shows her error still.
The Hunts-men having found her footing, follow the tract, and prick after her.
She getts to her Dell, and takes her Form. Enter, Alken has spied her sitting
with her Spindle, Threads, and Images. They are eager to seize her presently,
but Alken persuades them to let her begin her charms, which they do. Her
Son and Daughter come to her, the Hunts-men are afrighted as they see her
work go forward. And over-hastie to apprehend her, she escapes them all, by
the help and delusions of Puck.

ACT III.
SCENE I.
Puck-hairy.
THe Feind has much to do, that keeps a School;
Or is the Father of a family;
Or governes but a country Academie:
His labors must be great, as are his cares,
To watch all turns, and cast how to prevent 'hem.
This Dame of mine here,

Maud. grows high in evil,
And thinks she does all, when it is I, her Devil,
That both delude her, and must yet protect her:
She Is confident in mischeife, and presumes
The changing of her shape will still secure her.
But that may fail, and diverse hazards meet
Of other consequence, which I must look to.
Not let her be surpised on the first catch.
I must go dance about the Forest, now,
And firke it like a Goblin, till I find her.
Then will my service come worth acceptance;
When not expected of her, when the help
Meets the necessity, and both do kiss
It Is called the timing of a duty, this.

ACT III. SCENE II.
Karol. Douce, to them Aeglamour.
Kar. Sure, you are very like her! I conceived
You had been she, seeing you run before me:
For such a suite she made her against this Feast;
In all resemblance, or the very ^ame;
I saw her in it; had she lived to enjoy it
She had been there an acceptable Guest
To Marian, and the gentle Robin-hood,
Who are the Crown, and Ghirland of the Wood.

Dou. I cannot tell: my Mother gave it me,
And bad me wear it.

Kar. Who, the wise good Woman?
Old Maud. of Pappelwicke?

Dou. Yes, this sullen Man. Aeglamour enters, and Douce goes out.
I cannot like him. I must take my leave

Aeg. What said she to you?

Kar. Who? Aegl. Earine,
I saw her talking with you, or her Ghost;
For she indeed is drowned in old Trents bottom.
Did she not tell who would have pulled her in?
And had her Maidenhead upon the place?
The rivers brim, the margin of the Flood?
No ground is holy enough, (you know my meaning)
Lust is committed in Kings Palaces,
And yet their Majesty's not violated!
No words!

Car. How sad, and wild his thoughts are! gone? Aeglamour goes out, but comes
in again.

Aeg. But she, as chaste, as was her name, Earine,
Died undeflowr'd; and now her sweet soul hovers,
Here, in the Air, above us; and does haste
To get up to the Moon, and Mercury;
And whisper Venus in her Orb, then spring
Up to old Saturn, and come down by Mars,
Consulting Jupiter; and seat her self
Just in the midst with Phoebus; tempring all
The jarring Spheeres, and giving to the World
Again, his first and tunefull planetting!
OF what an age will here be of new concords!
Delightful harmony! to rock old Sages,
Twice infants, in the Cradle o'Speculation, He goes out again, but returns
as soon as before.
And throw a silence upon all the creatures!

Kar. A Cogitation of the highest rapture!

Aegl. The loudest Seas, and most enraged Winds
Shall lose their clangor; Tempest shall grow hoarse;
Loud Thunder dumb; and every speece of storm
Laid in the lap of listening Nature, hushed;
To hear the changed chime of this eighth spheere!
Take tent, and harken for it, loose it not. Aeglamour departs.

ACT III. SCENE III.
Clarion. Lionell. Karol.
Cla. OF, here is Karol! was not that the sad
Shep'erd, slipped from him?

Lio. Yes, I guess it was:
Who was that left you, Karol?

Kar. The last man!
Whom, we shall never see himself again;
Or ours, I fear! He starts away from hand, so,
And all the touches, or soft stroke of reason!
Ye can apply. No Colt is so unbroken!
Or hawke yet half so haggard, or unmann'd!
He takes all toies that his wild phantsy proffers,
And flies away with them. He now conceives
That my lost Sister, his Earine,
Is lately turned a Sphere amid the seven:
And reads a Musique-Lecture to the Planets!
And with this thought, he is run to call 'hem, Hearers*

Cla. Alas, this is a strayn'd, but innocent phant'sie!
I Will follow him, and find him, if I can:
Mean time, go you with Lionell, sweet Karol,
He will acquaint you with an accident
Which much desires your presence, on the place!

ACT III. SCENE IV.
Karol. Lionell.
Kar. What is it, Lionell, wherein I may serve you?
Why do you so survey, and circumscribe me?
As if you stuck one Eye into my breast,
And with the other took my whole dimensions?

Lio. I wish you had a windo' in your bosom
Or 'i your back: I might look thorough you,
And see your in-parts, Karol, liver, heart;
For there the seat of Love is. Whence the Boy
(The winged Archer) has shot home a shaft
Into my sisters breast, the innocent Amie,
Who now cries out, upon her bed, on Karol,
Sweet singing Karol! the delicious Karol!
That kissed her like a Cupid! In your eyes,
She says, his stand is! and between your lipp's
He runs forth his divisions, to her ears,
But will not bide there, less your self do bring him
Go with me Karol, and bestow a visit
In charity, upon the afflicted Maid,
Who pineth with the languor of your love.

Mar. Whither intend you? Amy is recovered,
To them Maud and Douce, but Maud appearing like Marian. Feels no such grief
as she complained of, lately:
This Maiden has been with her from her Mother
Maudlin, the cunning Woman, who has sent her
Herbs for her head, and Simples of that nature,
Have wrought upon her a miraculous Cure;
Settled her brain, to all our wish, and wonder!

Lio. So instantly? you know, I now but left her.
Possessed with such a fit, almost to 'a frenzy;
Your self too feared her, Marian; and did urge
My haste, to seek out Karol, and to bring him.

Mar. I did so. But the skill of that wise woeman
And her great charity of doing good
Has by the ready hand of this deft less
Her daughter, wrought effects, beyond belief,
And to astonishment; we can but thank
And praise, and be amazed, while we tell it. They go^ out.

Lio. It Is strange, that any art should so help nature
In her extremes.

Kar. Then, it appears most real
When the other is deficient.

Rob. Wherefore, Enter Robinhood stay you
Discoursing here, and haste not with your succors
To poor afflicted Amie, that so needs them?

Lio. She is recovered well, your Marian told us
But now here: See, she is returned to affirm it! Enter Maudl: like Marian.
Maudl: espying Robin-hood would run out, but he stays her by the Girdle, and
runs in with her. He returns with the Girdle broken, and she in her own
shape.

Rob. My Marian?

Mar. Robin-hood? Is he here?

Rob. Stay!
What was it you have told my friend?

Mar. Help, murder, help.
You will not rob me Outlaw? Theife, restore
My belt that ye have broken!

Rob. Yes, come near,

Mau. Not in your gripe.

Rob. Was this the charmed circle?
The Copy that so cozened, and deceived us?
I Will carry hence the trophie of your spoils.
My men shall hunt you too upon the start,
And course you soundly.

Mau. I shall make 'hem sport
And send some home, without their legs, or arms.
I Will teach 'hem to climb Styles, leap Ditches, Ponds,
And lie in the Waters, if they follow me.

Rob. Out murmuring Hagge.

Mau. I must use all my powers,
Lay all my wits to piecing of this loss.
Things run unluckily, Where Is my Puck-hairy?

ACT III. SCENE V.
Maud. Puck.
Has he forsook me?

Puc. At your beck, Madame.

Mau. O Puck, my Goblin! I have lost my belt,
The strong theife, Robin Outlaw, forced it from me.

Puck. They are other Clouds and blacker threat you, Dame;
You must be wary, and pull in your sails,
And yield unto the wether of the tempest.
You think your power's infinite as your malice;
And would do all your anger prompts you to:
But you must wait occasions, and obey them:
Sail in an egg-shell, make a straw your mast,
A Cobweb all your Cloth, and pass, unseen,
Till you have escaped the rocks that are about you.

Mau. What rock's about me?

Puc. I do love, Madam,
To show you all your dangers, when you are past 'hem.
Come, follow me, I Will once more be your pilot,
And you shall thank me.

Mau. Lucky, my loved Goblin!
Where are you gaang, now?

Lor. Unto my tree, Lorel meets her.
To see my Maistres.

Mau. Gang thy gait, and try
Thy turns, with better luck, or hang thy sel'.

The End.
HORACE, HIS ART OF POETRY.

MADE ENGLISH BY BEN. JOHNSON.

Printed M.DC.XL.

HORATIUS DE ART POETICA.
HUmano capiti cervicem pictor equinam
Jungere si velit, and varias inaucere plumas,
Undique collatis membris, ut turpiter atrum
Desinat in piscem mulier formosa superne;
Spectatum admissi risum teneatis, amici?
Credit, Pisones, isti tabulae forelibrum
Persimilem; cujus, velut aegri somnia, vanae
Fingentur species, ut nec pes, nec caput, uni
Reddatur formae. Pictoribus, atque Poetis,
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas.
Scimus; and hanc veniam petimusque, damusque vicissim:
Sed non ut placidis coeant immitia, non ut
Serpents avibus geminentur, tigribus agni.
Incoeptis gravibus plerunque and magna professis,
Purpureus late qui splendeat unus and alter
Assuitur pannus, cum lucus, and ara Dianae,
Et proper antis aquae per amoenos ambitus agros,
Aut flumen Rhenum, aut pluvius describitur arcus.
Sed nunc non erat his locus: and, fortasse, cupressum
Scis simulare. quid hoc, si fractis enatat exspes
Navibus, aere dato qui pingitur? amphora coepit
Institui; currente rota, cur urceus exit?
Denique sit, quod vis, simplex duntaxat, and unum.
Maxima pars vatum, pater, and juvenes patre digni,
Decipimur specierecti: Brevis esse laboro,
Obscurus fio: Sectantem levia, nervi
Deficiunt animique: professus grandra, turget:
Serpit humi, tutus nimium, timidusque procellae.
Qui variare cupit rem prodigialiter unam,
Delphinum silvis appingit, fluctibus aprum.
In vitium ducit culpae fuga, si caret art.
Aemilium circa ludum faber imus, and ungucis
Exprimet, and molleis imitabitur are capillos;
Infoelix operis summa: quia ponere totum
Nesciet. Hunc ego me, si quid componere curem,
Non magis esse velim, quam pravo vivere naso,
Spectandum nigris oculis, nigroque capillo.
Sumite materiam vestris, qui scribitis, aequam
Viribus, and versate diu, quid far recusent,
Quid valiant humeri. cui lecta potenter erit res,
Nec facundia deserit hunc, nec lucidus ordo.
Ordinis haec virtus erit, and Venus, aut ego fallor,
Ut jam nunc dicat, jam nunc debentia dici
Pleraque differat: and praesens in tempus omittat.
Hoc amet, hoc spernat promissi carminis author.
In verbis etiam tenuis cautusque serendis,
Dixeris egregie, notum si callida verbum
Reddiderit junctura novum. Si forte necesse est,
Indiciis monstrare recentibus abdita rerum;
Fingere cinctutis non exaudita Cethegis
Continget, dabiturque licentia, sumpta pudenter.
Et nova fictaque nuper habebunt verba fidem, si
Graeco font cadant, parce detorta. Quid autem
Caecilio, Plautoque dabit Romanus, ademptum
Virgilio, Varioque? ego cur acquirere pauca
Si possum, invideor: cum lingua Catonis, and Enni
Sermonem patrium ditaverit; and nova rerum
Nomina protulerit? Licuit, semperque licebit,
Signatum praesente nota producere nomen.
Ut silvae foliis pronos mutantur in annos,
Prima cadunt; ita verborum vetus interit aetas,
Et juvenum ritu florent modo nata, vigentque.
Debemur morti nos, nostraque: sive receptus
Terra Neptunus, classes Aquilonibus arcet,
Regis opus, sterilisve diu palus, aptaque remis,
Vicinas urbes alit, and grave sen^it aratrum:
Seu cursum mutavit iniquum frugibus amnis;
Doctus iter melius. Mortalia facta peribunt:
Nedum sermonum stet honos, and gratia vivax.
Multa renascentur, quae jam cecidere, cadentque,
Quae nunc sunt in honor, vocabula, si volet usus;
Quem penes arbitrium est, and vis, and norma loquendi.
Res gestae regumque, ducumque, and tristia bella
Quo scribi possent numero, monstravit Homerus.
Versibus impariter junctis querimonia primum,
Post etiam inclusa est voti sententia compos.
Quis tamen exiguos elegos emiserit author,
Grammatici certant, and adhuc sub judice lis est.
Musa dedit fidibus Divos puerosque Deorum,
Et pugilem victorem, and equum certamine primum,
Et juvenum curas, and libera vina refer.
Archilochum proprio rabies armavit Iambo.
Hunc socci cepere pedem, grandesque cothurni,
Alternis aptum sermonibus, and populares
Vincentem strepitus, and natum rebus agendis.
Versibus exponi Tragicis res Comica non vult.
Indignatur item privatis, ac prope socco
Dignis carminibus celebrari coena Thyestae.
Singula quaeque locum teneant sortita decenter.
Descriptas servare vices operumque colores,
Cur ego, si nequeo, ignoroque, Poeta salutor?
Cur nescire pudens prave, quam discere malo?
Interdum tamen, and vocem Comoedia tollit,
Iratusque Chremes tumido delitigat ore,
Et Tragicus plerumque dolet sermon pedestri
Telephus, and Peleus, cum pauper, and exul uterque,
Projicit ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba,
Si curat cor spectantis tetigisse querela.
Non satis est pulchra esse poemata: dulcia sunto,
Et quocunque volent animum auditoris agunto.
Ut ridentibus arrident, ita flentibus adflent
Humani vultus. Si vis me flere, dolendum est
Primum ipsi tibi: tunc tua me infortunia laedent
Telephe, vel Pelu. Male si mandata loqueris,
Aut dormitabo, aut ridebo. Tristia moestum
Vultum verba decent: iratum, plena minarum:
Ludentem, lasciva: severum, seria dictu.
Format enim natura prius nos intus ad omnem
Fortunarum habitum: iuvat, aut impellit ad iram,
Aut ad humum moerore gravi deducit, and angit:
Post effert animi motus interpret lingua.
Si dicentis erunt fortunis absona dicta,
Romani tollent equites peditesque cachinnum.
Intererit multum, Davus ne loquatur, an heroes:
Maturusne senex, an adhuc florente juventa
Fervidus: an matrona potens, an sedula nutrix:
Mercatorne vagus, cultorne virentis agelli:
Colchus, an Assyrius: Thebis nutritus, and Argis.
Aut famam sequere, aut sibi convenientia finge
Scriptor. Honoratum si forte reponis Achillem,
Impiger, iracundus, inexorabilis, acer,
Jura neget sibi nata, nihil non arroget armis.
Sit Medea ferox, invictaque; flebilis Ino,
Perfidus Ixion, Io vaga, tristis Orestes.
Si quid inexpertum scenae committis, and audes,
Personam formare novam; servetur ad imum
Qualis ad incoepto pro cesserit, and sibi constet.
Difficile est proprie communia dicere; tuque
Rectius Iliacum carmen deducis in actus,
Quam si proferres ignota, indictaque primus.
Publica materies privati juris erit; si
Nec circa vilem, patulumque moraberis orbem:
Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere fidus
Interpres: nec desilies imitator in arctum,
Unde pedem proferre pudor vetet, aut operis lex.
Nec sic incipies, ut scriptor Cyclicus olim:
Fortunam Priami cantabo, and nobile bellum.
Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu?
Parturient montes, nascetur ridiculus mus.
Quanto rectius hic, qui nil molitur inepte:
Dic mihi Musa virum, captae post tempora Trojae,
Qui mores hominum multorum vidit, and urbeis.
Non fumum ex fulgore, sed ex fumo dare lucem
Cogitat, ut speciosa dehinc miracula promat,
Antiphaten, Scyllamque, and cum Cyclope Charybdim:
Nec gemino bellum Trojanum orditur ab ovo.
Semper ad eventum festinat, and in medias res,
Non secus ac notas, auditorem rapit: and quae
Desperate tractata nitescere posse, relinquit.
Atque ita mentitur, sic veris falsa remiscet,
Primo ne medium, medio ne discrepet imum.
Tu quid ego, and populus mecum desideret, audi.
Si plausoris eges aulaea manentis, and usque
Sessuri, donec cantor, Vos plaudite, dicat,
Aetatis cujusque notandi sunt tibi mores,
Mobilibusque decor naturis dandus, and annis.
Reddere qui voces jam scit puer, and pede certo
Signat humum, gestit paribus colludere, and iram
Colligit, ac ponit temere, and mutatur in horas.
Imberbis juvenis tandem custode remoto,
Gaudet equis, canibusque, and aprici gramine campi,
Cereus in vitium flecti, monitoribus asper,
Utilium tardus provisor, prodigus aeris,
Sublimis, cupidusque, and amata relinquere pernix.
Conversis studiis aetas, animusque virilis
Quaerit opes, and amicitias: inservit honori:
Commisisse cavet, quod mox mutare laboret.
Multa senem circumveniunt incommoda, vel quod
Quaerit, and inventis miser abstinet, ac timet uti:
Vel quod res omneis timide gelideque ministrat;
Dilator, spe longus, iners, avidusque futuri,
Difficilis, querulus, laudater temporis acti
Se puero: censor, castigatorque minorum.
Multa ferunt anni venientes commoda secum:
Multa recedentes adimunt. ne forte seniles
Mandentur juveni parts, pueroque viriles,
Semper in adjunctis, aevoque morabimur aptis.
Aut agitur res in scenis, aut acta refertur.
Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem,
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus, and qua
Ipse sibi tradit spectator. non tamen intus
Digna geri, promise in scenam: multaque tolles
Ex oculis, quae mox narret facundia praesens.
Nec pueros coram populo Medea trucidet:
Aut humana palam coquat exta nefarius Atreus:
Aut in avem Progne vertatur, Cadmus in anguem.
Quodcunque ostendit mihi sic, incredulus odi.
Neve minor, quinto, neu sit productior actu
Fabula quae posci vult, and spectata reponi.
Nec Deus inter sit, nisi dignus vindice nodus
Inciderit: nec quart a loqui personalaboret.
Autoris parteis chorus, officiumque virile
Defendat, neu quid medios intercinat actus
Quod non proposito conducat, and haereat apt.
Ille bonis faveatque, and concilietur amice.
Et regatiratos, and amet peccare timenteis.
Ille dapeis laudet mensae brevis: ille salubrem
Justitiam, legesque, and apertis otia portis.
Ille tegat commissa, Deosque precetur, and oret,
Ut redeat miseris, abeat fortuna superbis.
Tibia non, ut nunc, orichalco vincta, tubaeque
Aemula, sed tenuis, simplex foramine pauco
Aspirare, and adesse choris erat utilis, atque
Nondum spissa nimis complere sedilia flatu.
Quo sane populus numerabilis, utpote parvus,
Et frugi, castusque verecundusque coibat.
Postquam coepit agros extendere victor, and urbent
Latior amplecti murus, Vinoque diurno,
Placari Genius festis impune diebus,
Accessit numerisque modisque licentia major.
Indoctus quid enim saperet, liberque laborum,
Rusticus urbano confusus, turpis honesto?
Sic priscae motumque, and luxuriam addidit arti
Tibicen, traxitque vagus per pulpita vestem.
Sic etiam fidibus voces crevere severis,
Et tulit eloquium insolitum facundia praeceps:
Utiliumque sagax rerum, and divina futuri
Sortilegis non discrepuit sententia Delphis.
Ignotum Tragicae genus invenisse Camoenae
Dicitur, and plaustris vexisse poemata Thespis,
Quae canerent agerentque peruncti faecibus ora.
Post hunc personae pallaeque repertor honestae
Aeschylus, and modicis instravit pulpita tignis,
Et docuit magnumque loqui nitique cothurno.
Carmine qui Tragico vilem certavit ob hircum,
Mox etiam agresteis Satyros nudavit, and asper
Incolumi gravitate jocum tentavit: eo quod
Illecebris erat, and grata novitate morandus
Spectator, functusque sacris, and potus, and exlex.
Verum ita risores, ita commendare dicaces
Conveniet Satyros, ita vertere seria ludo:
Ne, quicunque Deus, quicunque adhibebitur Heroes,
Regali conspectus in auro nuper, and ostro,
Migret in obscuras humili sermon tabernas;
Aut, dum vitat humum, nubeis, and inania captet.
Effutire leveis indigna Tragoedia versus:
Ut festis matrona moveri jussa diebus,
Intererit Satyris paulum pudibunda protervis.
Non ego inornata, and dominantia nomina solum,
Verbaque Pisones, Satyrorum scriptor amabo:
Nec sic enitar Tragico differ colori
Ut nihil intersit, Davus ne loquatur, an audax
Pythias emuncto lucrata Simone talentum;
An custos, fumulusque dei Silenus alumni.
Ex noto fictum carmen sequar, ut sibi quivis
Speret idem: sudet multum frustraque laboret
Ausus idem: tantum series juncturaque pollet:
Tantum de medio sumptis accedit honoris.
Silvis deducti caveant, me judice, Fauni,
Ne velut innati triviis, ac pene forenses,
Aut nimium teneris juvenentur versibus unquam,
Aut immunda crepent, ignominiosaque dicta.
Offenduntur enim, quibus est equus, and pater, and res:
Nec, si quid fricti ciceris probat, and nucis emptor,
Aequis accipiunt animis, donant've corona.
Successit vetus his Comoedia non sine multa
Laud, sed in vitium libertas excidit, and vim
Dignam lege regi. Lex est accepta, chorusque
Turpiter obticuit, sublato jure nocendi.
Syllaba longa brevi subjecta, vocatur Iambus
Pes citus: unde etiam trimetris accrescere jussit
Nomen Iambeis, cum senos redderet ictus,
Primus ad extremum similis sibi: non ita pridem
Tardior ut paulo graviorque veniret ad aureis,
Spondeos stabiles in jura paterna recepit
Commodus, and patiens: non ut de sede secunda
Cederet, aut quarta socialiter. hic and in Acci
Nobilibus trimetris apparet rarus: and Enni.
In scenam missos magno cum pondere versus,
Aut operae celeris nimium, curaque carentis,
Aut ignoratae premit artis crimine turpi:
Non quivis videt immodulata poemata judex.
Et data Romany venia est indigna poetis,
Idcircone vager, scribamque licenter? an omneis
Visuros peccata putem mea? tutus, and intra
Spem veniae cautus? vitavi denique culpam,
Non laudem merui. Vos exemplaria Graeca
Nocturna versate manu, versate diurna.
At nostri proavi Plautinos, and numeros, and
Laudavere saleis: nimium patienter utrunque,
Ne dicam stulte, mirati; si modo ego, and vos
Scimus inurbanum lepido seponere dicto,
Legitimumque sonum digitis callemus, and aure.
Nil intentatum nostri liquere poetae,
Nec minimum meruere decus, vestigia Graeca
Ausi deserere, and celebrare domestica facta:
Vel qui Praetextas, vel qui docuere Togatas.
Nec vertute foret, clarisve potentius armis,
Quam lingua, Latiam, si non offender et unum-
Quemque poetarum limae labor, and mora. Vos o
Pompilius sanguis carmen reprehendite, quod no^
Multa dies, and multa litura coercuit, atque
Perfectum decies non castigavit ad unguem.
Ingenium misera quia fortunatius art
Credit, and excludit sanos Helicone poetas
Democritus, bona pars non ungueis ponere curat,
Non barbam, secreta petit loca, balnea vitat.
Nanciscetur enim pretium, nomenque poetae,
Si tribus Anticyris caput insanabile nunquam
Tonsori Lycino commiserit. O ego laevus,
Qui purgor bilem sub verni temporis horam.
Non alius faceret meliora poemata. verum,
Nil tanti est: ergo fungar vice cotis, acutum
Reddere quae ferrum valet, exors ipsa secandi.
Munus and officium nil scribens ipse docebo;
Unde parentur opes: quid alat formetque Poetam:
Quid deceat, quid non: quo virtus, quo ferat error.
Scribendi recte, sapere, est and principium and fons.
Rem tibi Socraticae poterunt ostendere chartae:
Verbaque provisam rem non invita sequentur.
Qui didicit, patriae quid debeat, and quid amicis:
Quo sit amore parens, quo frater amandus, and hospes:
Quod sit conscripti, quod judicis officium: quae
Parts in bellum missi ducis: ille profecto
Reddere personae scit convenientia cuique.
Respicere exemplar vitae, morumque jubebo
Doctum imitatorem, and veras hinc ducere voces.
Interdum speciosalocis, morataque recte
Fabula, nullius Veneris, sine pondere, and art,
Valdius oblectat populum, meliusque moratur,
Quam versus inopes rerum, nugaeque canorae.
Graiis ingenium, Graiis dedit ore rotundo
Musa loqui, praeter laudem, nullius avaris.
Romani pueri longis rationibus assem
Discunt in parteis centum diducere. Dicat
Filius Albini, Si de quincunce remota est
Uncia, quid superat? poter as dixisse triens. eu,
Rem poteris servare tuam. redit uncia: quid fit?
Semis. ad haec animos aerugo, and cura peculi,
Cum semel imbuer it, speramus carmina fingi
Posse linenda cedro, and levi servanda cupresso?
Aut prodesse volunt, aut delectare Poetae,
Aut simul and jucunda, and idonea dicere vitae.
Silvestres homines sacer, interpresque Deorum.
Caedibus and victu foedo deterruit Orpheus,
Dictus ob hoc lenire tigres, rapidosque leones:
Dictus and Amphion Thebanae conditor arcis
Saxo movere sono testudinis, and prece blanda
D^cere quo vellet. Fuit haec sapientia quondam,
Publica privatis secernere, sacra profanis,
Concubitu prohibere vago: dare jura maritis,
Oppida moliri, leges incidere ligno.
Sic honor, and nomen divinis vatibus, atque
Carminibus venit. post hos insignis Homerus,
Tyrtaeusque mares animos in tristia bella
Versibus exacuit. dictae per carmina sorts,
Et vitae monstrata via est, and gratia regum
Pieriis tentata modis, ludusque repertus,
Et longorum operum finis. ne forte pudori
Sit tibi Musa lyrae solers, and cantor Apollo.
Quicquid praecipies esto brevis: ut cito dicta
Percipiant animi dociles, teneantque fideles.
Omne supervacuum pleno de pectore manat.
Ficta, voluptatis causa, sint proxima veris.
Nec quodcunque volet, poscat sibi fabula credi:
Neu pransae Lamiae vivum puerum extrahat alvo.
Centuriae seniorum agitant expertia frugis:
Celsi praetereunt austera poemata Rhamnes.
Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci,
Lectorem delectando, pariterque monendo.
Hic meret era liber Sosiis: hic and mare transit,
Et longum noto scriptori prorogat aevum.
Sunt delicta tamen quibus ignovisse velimus.
Nam neque chorda sonum reddit, quem vult manus and men's,
Poscentique gravem, persaepe remittit acutum:
Nec semper feriet, quodcunque minabitur arcus.
Verum ubi plura nitent incarmine, non ego paucis
Offendar maculis, quas aut incuria fudit,
Aut humana parum cavit natura. quid ergo?
Ut scriptor si peccat idem librarius usque
Quamvis est monitus, venia caret and citharoedus
Ridetur, chorda qui semper oberrat eadem:
Sic mihi, qui multum cessat, fit Cherilus ille,
Quem bis terque bonum cum risu miror; and idem
Indignor. quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus.
Verum opere in longo fas est obrepere somnum.
Ut pictura, poesis erit: quae, si proprius stes,
Te capiet magis, and quaedam, si longius abstes.
Haec amat obscurum: volet haec sub luce videri,
Judicis argutum quae non formidat acumen.
Haec placuit semel: haec decies repetita placebit.
O major juvenum, quamvis and voce paterna
Fingeris ad rectum, and per te sapis, hoc tibi dictum
Toll memor: certis medium, and tolerabile rebus
Recte concedi. consultus juris, and actor
Causarum mediocris, abest virtute diserti
Messalae, nec scit quantum Cacellius Aulus:
Sed tamen in pretio est. Mediocribus esse poetis
Non homines, non Dii, non concessere columnae.
Ut gratas inter mensas symphonia discors,
Et crassum unguentum, and Sardo cum melle papaver,
Offendunt; poterat duci quia coena sinc istis:
Sic animis natum inventumque poema juvandis,
Si paulum summo discessit, vergit ad imum.
Ludere qui nescit, campestribus abstinet armis,
Indoctusque pilae, discive, trochive, quiescit,
Ne spiss^e risum tollant impune coronae.
Qui nescit, versus tamen audet fingere: quid ni?
Liber, and ingenius, praesertim census equestrem
Summam nummorum, vitioque remotus ab omni.
Tu nihil invita dices, faciesque Minerva.
Id tibi judicium est, ea men's, si quid tamen olim
Scripseris, in Metii descendat judicis aures,
Et patris, and nostras, nonumque prematur in annum.
Membranis intus positis delere licebit,
Quod non aedideris, Nescit vox missa reverti.
Natura fieret laudabile carmen, an art,
Quaesitum est ego nec studium sine divite vena,
Necrude quid profit video ingenium; alterius sic
Altera poscit opem res, and conjurat amice.
Qui studet aptatam cursu contingere metam
Multa tulit fecitque puer: sudavit, and alsit,
Abstinuit Venere, and vino. qui Pythica cantat
Tibicen, didicit prius, extimuitque magistrum.
Nunc satis est dixisse, Ego mira Poemata pango:
Occupet extremum scabies, mihi turpe relinqui est,
Et quod non didici, sane nescire fateri.
Ut proeco ad merces turbam qui cogit emendas,
Assentatores jubet ad lucrum ire Poeta
Dives agris, dives positis in foenore nummis.
Si vero est, unctum qui recte ponere possit,
Et spondere levi pro paupere, and eripere atris
Litibus implicitum; mirabor, si sciet inter-
Noscere mendacem verumque beatus amicum.
Tu seu donaris, seu quid donare voles cui,
Nolito ad versus tibi factos ducere plenum
Laetitiae. clamabit enim, Pulchre, been, recte:
Pallescit super his: etiam stillabit amicis
Ex oculis rorem, saliet, tundet pede terram.
Ut qui conducti plorant in funere, dicunt,
Et faciunt prope plura dolentibus ex animo: sic
Derisor vero plus laudatore movetur.
Reges dicuntur multis urgere culullis,
Et torquere mero, quem perspexisse laborant,
An sit amicitia dignus. si carmina condes,
Nunquam te fallant animi sub vulpe latentes.
Quintilio, si quid recitares, corrige, sodes,
Hoc aiebat, and hoc. melius te posse negares,
Bis, terque expertum frustra; delere jubebat,
Et male tornatos incudi reddere versus.
Si defendere delictum, quam vertere malles,
Nulla ultra verbum, aut operam sumebat inanem,
Quin sine rivali teque and tua solus amares.
Vir bonus and prudens, versus reprehendit inertcis,
Culpabit duros, incomptis allinet atrum
Transverso calamo signum, ambitiosa recidet
Ornamenta, parum claris lucem dare coget:
Arguet ambigue dictum, mutanda notabit:
Fiet Aristarchus, nec dicet, Cur ego amicum
Offendam in nugis? hae nugae seria ducent
In mala, semel derisum, exceptumque sinistre.
Ut mala quam scabies, aut morbus regius urget,
Aut fanaticus error, and iracunda Diana,
Vesanum tetigisse timent fugiuntque Poetam
Qui sapiunt: agitant pueri, incautique sequuntur.
Hic, dum sublimeis versus ructatur, and errat,
Si veluti merulis intentus decidit auceps
In puteum, foveamve, licet succurrite longum
Clamet Io cives, non sit qui tollere curet.
Si quis curet opem far, and demittere funem,
Qui scis, an prudens huc se dejecerit, atque
Servari nolit? dicam, Siculique Poetae
Narrabo interitum. Deus immortalis haberi
Dum cupit Empedocles, ardentem frigidus Aetnam
Insiluit. Sit jus, liceatque perire Poetis.
Invitum qui servat, idem facit occidenti.
Nec semel hoc fecit: nec si retractus erit, jam
Fiet homo: and ponet famosae mortis amorem.
Nec satis apparet, cur versus factitet: utrum
Minxerit in patrios cineres, an triste bidental
Moverit incestus: certe furit, as, velut ursus,
Objectos caveae valuit si frangere clathros
Indoctum, doctumque fugat recitator acerbus.
Quem vero arripuit, tenet, occiditque legendo,
Non missura cuten^ nisi plena cruoris hirude.
FINIS.
HORACE, OF THE ART OF POETRY.
IF to a Woman's head a Painter would
Set a Horse-neck, and diverse feathers fold
On every limb, taken from a several creature,
Presenting upwards, a fair female feature,
Which in some swarthie fish uncomely ends:
Admitted to the sight, although his friends
Could you contain your laughter? Credit me,
This piece, my Piso's, and that book agree,
Whose shapes, like sick-mens dreams, are feigned so vain,
As neither head, nor foot, one form retain.
But equal power, to Painter, and to Poet,
Of daring all, has still been given; we know it:
And both do crave, and give again, this leave.
Yet, not as therefore wild, and tame should cleave
Together: not that we should Serpents see
With Doves; or Lambs, with Tygres coupled be.
In grave beginnings, and great things professed,
Ye have oft-times, that may ore-shine the rest,
A Scarlet piece, or two, stitched in: when or
Diana's Grove, or Altar, with the bor-
Dring Circles of swift waters that intwine
The pleasant grounds, or when the River Rhine,
Or Rainbow is described. But here was now
No place for these. And, Painter, hap'ly, thou
Know only well to paint a Cipresse tree.
What Is this? if he whose money hireth thee
To paint him, has by swimming hopeless escaped,
The whole fleet wrecked? a great jarre to be shaped,
Was meant at first. Why forcing still about
Thy laboring wheel, comes scarce a Pitcher out.
In short; I bid, Let what thou work'st upon,
Be simply quite throughout, and wholly one.
Most Writers, noble Sire, and either Son,
Are, with the likeness of the truth, undone.
My self for shortness labor; and I grow
Obscure. This striving to run smooth, and slow,
Has neither soul, nor sinews. Lofty he
Professing greatness, swells: That low by lee
Creepes on the ground; too safe, too afraid of storm.
This seeking, in a various kind, to form
One thing, prodigiously, paints in the woods
A Dolphin, and a Boar amid' the floods.
So, shunning faults, to greater fault does lead,
When in a wrong, and artlesse way we tread.
The worst of Statuaries, here about
The Aemilian School, in brass can fashion out
The nails; and every curled hair disclose,
But in the maine work hapless: since he knows
Not to design the whole. Should I aspire
To form a work, I would no more desire
To be that Smith; then live, marked one of those,
With fair black eyes, and hair; and a wry nose.
Take, therefore, you that write, still, matter fit
Unto your strength, and long examine it,
Upon your Shoulders. Prove what they will bear,
And what they will not. Him whose choice does rear
His matter to his power, in all he makes,
Nor language, nor clear order ere forsakes.
The virtue of which order, and true grace,
Or I am much deceived, shall be to place
Invention. Now, to speak; and then differ
Much, that might now be spoke: omitted here
Till fitter season. Now, to like of this;
Lay that aside, the Epicks office is.
In using also of new words, to be
Right spare, and wary: then thou speak to me
Most worthy praise, when words that common grew,
Are, by thy cunning placing, made mere new.
Yet, if by chance, in utt'ring things abstruse,
Thou need new terms; thou may, without excuse,
Feign words, unheard of to the well-truss'd race
Of the Cethegi; And all men will grace,
And give, being taken modestly, this leave,
And those thy new, and late-coyn'd words receive,
So they fall gently from the Grecian spring,
And come not too much wrested. What Is that thing,
A Roman to Caecilius will allow,
Or Plautus, and in Virgil disavow,
Or Varius? why am I now envied so,
If I can give some small increase? When, lo,
Cato's and Ennius tongues have lent much worth,
And wealth unto our language; and brought forth
New names of things. It has been ever free,
And ever will, to utter terms that be
Stamped to the time. As woods whose change appears
Still in their leaves, throughout the sliding years,
The firstborn dying; so the aged state
Of words decay, and phrases borne but late
Like tender buds shoot up, and freshly grow.
Our selves, and all that is ours, to death we owe:
Whether the Sea received into the shore,
That from the North, the Navy safe does store,
A kingly work; or that long barren fen
Once rowable, but now does nourish men
In neighbor-towns, and feels the weighty plough;
Or the wild river, who has changed now
His course so hurtful both to grain, and seeds,
Being taught a better way. All mortal deeds
Shall perish: so far off it is, the state,
Or grace of speech, should hope a lasting date.
Much phrase that now is dead, shall be revived;
And much shall dye, that now is nobly lived,
If Custom please; at whose disposing will
The power, and rule of speaking rests still.
The gests of Kings, great Captains, and sad Wars,
What number best can fit, Homer declares.
In Verse unequal matched, first sour Laments,
After men's Wishes, crowned in their events
Were also closed: But, who the man should be,
That first sent forth the dapper Elegy,
All the Grammarians strive; and yet in Court
Before the Judge, it hangs, and waits report.
Unto the Lyrick Strings, the Muse gave grace
To chant the Gods, and all their God-like race,
The conquering Champion, the prime Horse in course,
Fresh Lovers business, and the Wines free source.
The Iambick armed Archilochus to rave,
This foot the socks took up, and buskins grave,
As fit to exchange discourse; a Verse to win
On popular noise with, and do business in.
The Comic matter will not be expressed
In tragic Verse; no less Thyestes feast
Abhorres low numbers, and the private strain
Fit for the sock: Each subject should retain
The place allotted it, with decent thewes.
If now the turns, the colors, and right hues
Of Poems here described, I can, nor use,
Nor know to observe: Why (in the Muses name)
Am I called Poet? wherefore with wrong shame,
Perversely modest, had I rather owe
To ignorance still, then either learn, or know.
Yet, sometime, does the Comedy excite
Her voice, and angry Chremes chafes outright
With swelling throat: and, often the tragic wight
Complains in humble phrase. Both Telephus,
And Peleus, if they seek to heart-strike us
That are Spectators, with their misery,
When they are poor, and banished, must throw by
Their bombard-phrase, and foot-and-halfe-foot words:
It Is not enough, the elaborate Muse affords
Her Poem's beauty, but a sweet delight
To work the hearers minds, still, to their plight.
Men's faces, still, with such as laugh, are prone
To laughter; so they grieve with those that moan.
If thou would have me weep, be thou first drowned
Thy self in tears, then me thy loss will wound,
Peleus, or Telephus. If you speak vile
And ill-penn'd things, I shall, or sleep, or smile.
Sad language fits sad looks; stuffed menacings,
The angry brow; the sportive, wanton things;
And the severe, speech ever serious.
For Nature, first within does fashion us
To every state of fortune; she helps on,
Or urges us to anger; and anon
With weighty sorrow hurles us all along,
And tortures us: and, after by the tongue
Her truch-man, she reports the minds each throw.
If now the phrase of him that speaks, shall flow
In sound, quite from his fortune; both the rout,
And Roman Gentry, jearing, will laugh out.
It much will differ, if a God speak, than,
Or an Hero; If a ripe old man,
Or some hot youth, yet in his flourishing course;
Where some great Lady, or her diligent Nourse;
A ventring Merchant, or the Farmer free
Of some small thankful land: whether he be
Of Cholchis borne; or in Assyria bred;
Or, with the milk of Thebes; or Argus, fed.
Or follow fame, thou that do write, or feign
Things in themselves agreeing: If again
Honored Achilles chance by thee be seized,
Keep him still active, angry, un-appeas'd,
Sharp, and contemning laws, at him should aim,
Be naught so 'bove him but his sword let claim.
Medea make brave with impetuous scorn;
Ino bewaild; Ixion false, forsworn;
Poor Jo wandering; wild Orestes mad:
If something strange, that never yet was had
Unto the Scene thou bringst, and dare create
A mere new person. Look he keep his state
Unto the last, as when he first went forth,
Still to be like himself, and hold his worth.
It Is hard, to speak things common, properly:
And thou may better bring a Rhapsody
Of Homers, forth in acts, then of thine own,
First publish things unspoken, and unknown.
Yet common matter thou thine own may make,
If thou the vile, broad-troden ring forsake.
For, being a Poet, thou may feign, create,
Not care, as thou would faithfully translate,
To render word for word: nor with thy sleight Of imitation, leap into a straight,
From whence thy Modesty, or Poemes law
Forbids thee forth again thy foot to draw.
Nor so begin, as did that Circler late,
I sing a noble War, and Priam's Fate.
What does this Promiser such gaping worth
Afford? The Mountains travailed, and brought forth
A scorned Mouse! O, how much better this,
Who naught assaies unaptly, or amiss?
Speak to me, Muse, the Man, who after Troy was sacked,
Saw many Towns, and Men, and could their manners tract.
He thinks not, how to give you smoke from light,
But light from smoke; that he may draw his bright
Wonders forth after: As Antiphates,
Scylla, Charybdis, Polypheme, with these.
Nor from the brand, with which the life did burn
Of Meleager, brings he the return
Of Diomede; nor Troyes sad War begins
From the two Eggs, that did disclose the twins.
He ever hastens to the end, and so
(As if he knew it) rapps his hearer to
The middle of his matter: letting go
What he despaires, being handled, might not show.
And so well faines, so mixeth cunningly
Falsehood with truth, as no man can epsy
Where the midst differs from the first: or where
The last does from the midst dis-joyn'd appear.
Hear, what it is the People, and I desire:
If such a ones applause thou do require,
That tarries till the hangings be taken down,
And sits, till the Epilogue says Clap, or Crown:
The customs of each age thou must observe,
And give their years, and natures, as they swerve,
Fit rites. The Child, that now knows how to say,
And can tread firm, longs with like lads to play;
Soon angry, and soon pleased, is sweet, or sour,
He knows not why, and changes every hour.
The unbearded Youth, his Guardian once being gone,
Loves Dogs, and Horses; and is ever one
IN the open field; Is Wax like to be wrought
To every vice, as hardly to be brought
To endure counsel: A Provider slow
For his own good, a careless letter-goe
Of money, haughty, to desire soon moved,
And then as swift to leave what he has loved.
These studies alter now, in one, grown man;
His bettered mind seeks wealth, and friendship: than
Looks after honors, and bewares to act
What straightway he must labor to retract.
The old man many evils do girt round;
Either because he seeks, and, having found,
Does wretchedly the use of things forbear,
Or does all business coldly, and with fear;
A great deferrer, long in hope, grown numbe
With sloth, yet greedy still of what is to come:
Froward, complaining, a commender glad
Of the times past, when he was a young lad;
And still correcting youth, and censuring.
Man's coming years much good with them do bring:
At his departing take much thence: lest, then,
The parts of age to youth be given; or men
To children; we must always dwell, and stay
In fitting proper adjuncts to each day.
The business either on the Stage is done,
Or acted told. But, ever, things that run
In at the ear, do stir the mind more slow
Then those the faithful eyes take in by show,
And the beholder to himself does render.
Yet, to the Stage, at all thou may not tender
Things worthy to be done within, but take
Much from the sight, which fair report will make
Present anon: Medea must not kill
Her Sons before the people; nor the ill*
Natured, and wicked Atreus Cook, to the eye,
His Nephews entrails; nor must Progue fly
Into a Swallow there; Nor Cadmus take,
Upon the Stage, the figure of a Snake.
What so is shown, I not believe, and hate.
Nor must the Fable, that would hope the Fate
Once seen, to be again called for, and played,
Have more or less then just five Acts: nor laid,
To have a God come in; except a knot
Worth his untying happen there: And not
Any fourth man, to speak at all, aspire.
An Actors parts, and Office too, the Quire
Must maintain manly; not be heard to sing
Between the Acts, a quite clean other thing
Then to the purpose leads, and fitly 'grees.
It still must favor good men, and to these
Be won a friend; It must both sway, and bend
The angry, and love those that fearet' offend.
Praise the spare diet, wholesome justice, laws,
Peace, and the open ports, that peace does cause
Hide faults, pray to the Gods, and wish aloud
Fortune would love the poor, and leave the proud.
The Hau'-boy, not as now with latten bound,
And rival with the Trumpet for his sound,
But soft, and simple, at few holes breathed time
And tune too, fitted to the Chorus rhyme,
As loud enough to fill the seats, not yet
So over-thick, but, where the people met,
They might with ease be numbered, being a few
Chaste, thriftie, modest folk, that came to view.
But, as they conquered, and enlarged their bound,
That wider Walls embraced their City round,
And they uncensur'd might at Feasts, and Plays
Steep the glad Genius in the Wine, whole days,
Both in their tunes, the license greater grew,
And in their numbers; For, alas, what knew
The Idiot, keeping holy day, or drudge,
Clown, Towns-man, base, and noble, mixed, to judge?
Thus, to his ancient Art the Piper lent
Gesture, and riot, whilst he swooping went
In his trained Gown about the Stage: So grew
In time to Tragedy, a Music new.
The rash, and headlong eloquence brought forth
Unwonted language; And that sense of worth
That found out profit, and foretold each thing
Now differed not from Delphick riddling.
Thespis is said to be the first found out
The Tragedy, and carried it about,
Till then unknown, in Carts, wherein did ride
Those that did sing, and act: their faces died
With lees of Wine. Next Eschylus, more late
Brought in the Visor, and the robe of State,
Built a small timbred Stage, and taught them talk
Lofty, and grave; and in the buskin stalk.
He too, that did in Tragic Verse contend,
For the vile Goat, soon after, forth did send
The rough rude Satyrs naked; and would try,
Though sower, with safety of his gravitie.
How he could jest, because he marked and saw
The free spectators, subject to no Law,
Having well eat, and drunk: the rites being done,
Were to be staid with softnesses, and won
With something that was acceptably new.
Yet so the scoffing Satyrs to men's view,
And so their prating to present was best,
And so to turn all earnest into jest,
As neither any God, were brought in there,
Or Semi-god, that late was seen to wear
A royal Crown, and purple; be made hop
With poor base terms, through every baser shop:
Or whilst he shuns the Earth, to catch at Air
And empty Clouds. For Tragedy is fair,
And far unworthy to blurt out light rimes;
But, as a Matrone drawn at solemn times
To Dance, so she should, shamefaced, differ far
From what the obscene, and petulant Satyrs are.
Nor I, when I write Satyrs, will so love
Plain phrase, my Piso's, as alone to approve
Mere reigning words: nor will I labor so
Quite from all face of Tragedy to go,
As not make difference, whether Davus speak,
And the bold Pythias, having cheated weak
Simo; and, of a talent wiped his purse;
Or old Silenus, Bacchus guard, and Nurse.
I can out of known gear, a fable frame,
And so, as every man may hope the same;
Yet he that offers at it, may sweat much,
And toil in vain: the excellence is such
Of Order, and Connection; so much grace
There comes sometimes to things of meanest place.
But, let the Faunes, drawn from their Groves, beware
Be I their Judge, they do at no time dare
Like men street-borne, and near the Hall, rehearse
Their youthful tricks in over-wanton verse:
Or crack out bawdie speeches, and unclean.
The Roman Gentry, Men of Birth, and Mean
Will take offense, at this: Nor, though it strike
Him that buys chiches blanch't, or chance to like
The nut-crackers throughout, will they therefore
Receive, or give it an applause, the more.
To these succeeded the old Comoedie,
And not without much praise; till liberty
Fell into fault so far, as now they saw
Her license fit to be restrained by law:
Which law received, the Chorus held his peace,
His power of foulely hurting made to cease.
Two rest's, a short and long, the Iambick frame;
A foot, whose swiftness gave the Verse the name
Of Trimeter, when yet it was sixe-pac'd,
But mere Iambicks all, from first to last.
Nor is it long since, they did with patience take
Into their birthright, and for fitness sake,
The steadie Spondaees; so themselves do bear
More slow, and come more weighty to the ear:
Provided, never to yield, in any case
Of fellowship, the fourth, or second place.
This foot yet, in the famous Trimeters
Of Accius, and Ennius, rare appears:
So rare, as with some tax it does engage
Those heavy Verses sent so to the Stage,
Of too much haste, and negligence in part,
Or a worse Crime, the ignorance of art.
But every Judge has not the faculty
To note in Poemes, breach of harmony;
And there is given too, unworthy leave
To Roman Poets. Shall I therefore weave
My Verse at random, and licentiously?
Or rather, thinking all my faults may spy,
Grow a safe Writer, and be warie-driven
Within the hope of having all forgiven.
'T is clear, this way I have got off from blame,
But, in conclusion, merited no fame.
Take you the Greek Examples, for your light,
In hand, and turn them over day, and night.
Our Ancestors did Plautus numbers praise,
And jests; and both to admiration raise
Too patiently, that I not fondly say;
If either you, or I, know the right way
To part scurrilitie from wit: or can
A lawful Verse, by the ear, or finger scan.
Our Poets, too, left naught unproved here;
Nor did they merit the less Crown to wear,
In daring to forsake the Grecian tracts,
And celebrating our own home-borne facts;
Whether the guarded Tragedy they wrought,
Or 'twere the gowned Comoedy they taught.
Nor had our Italy more glorious bin
In virtue, and renown of arms, then in
Her language, if the Stay, and Care to have mended,
Had not our every Poet like offended.
But you, Pompilius offspring, spare you not
To tax that Verse, which many a day, and blot
Have not kept in; and (lest perfection fail)
Not ten times over, corrected to the nail.
Because Democritus believes a wit
Happier then wretched art, and does, by it,
Exclude all sober Poets, from their share
In Helicon; a great sort will not pare
Their nails, nor shave their beards, but to bypath
Retire themselves, avoid the public baths;
For so, they shall not only gain the worth,
But fame of Poets, they think, if they come forth,
And from the Barber Licinus conceal
Their heads, which three Anticyra's cannot heal.
O I left-witted, that purge every spring
For choler! If I did not, who could bring
Out better Poems? But I cannot buy
My title, at the rate, I'ad rather, I,
Be like a Whet-stone, that an edge can put
On steel, though 't self be dull, and cannot cut.
I writing naught my self, will teach them yet
Their Charge, and Office, whence their wealth to fet,
What nourishes, what formed, what begot
The Poet, what becomes, and what not:
Whether truth may, and whether error bring.
The very root of writing well, and spring
Is to be wise; thy matter first to know;
Which the Socratick writings best can show:
And, where the matter is provided still,
There words will follow, not against their will.
He, that has studied well the debt, and knows
What to his Country, what his friends he owes,
What height of love, a Parent will fit best,
What brethren, what a stranger, and his guest,
Can tell a States-mans duty, what the arts
And office of a Judge are, what the parts
Of a brave Chief sent to the wars: He can,
Indeed, give fitting dues to every man.
And I still bid the learned Maker look,
On life, and manners, and make those his book,
Thence draw forth true expressions. For, sometimes,
A Poem, of no grace, weight, art, in rimes
With specious places, and being humored right,
More strongly takes the people with delight,
And better stays them there, then all fine noise
Of verse meere-matter-lesse, and tinckling toies.
The Muse not only gave the Greek's a wit
But a well-compass'd mouth to utter it.
Being men were covetous of naught, but praise;
Our Roman Youths they learn the subtle ways
How to divide, into a hundred parts,
A pound, or piece, by their long compting arts:
There Is Albin's son will say, Substract an ounce
From the five ounces; what remains? pronounce
A third of twelve, you may: four ounces. Glad,
He cries, Good boy, thou wilt keep thine own. Now, add
An ounce, what makes it then? The half pound just;
Six ounces. O, whence once the cankered rust,
And care of getting, thus, our minds has stained,
Think we, or hope, there can be Verses feigned
In juice of Cedar, worthy to be steeped,
And in smooth Cypress boxes to be keep'd?
Poets would either profit, or delight,
Or mixing sweet, and fit, teach life the right.
Orpheus, a priest, and speaker for the Gods
First frighted men, and wildly lived, at ods,
From slaughters, and foul life; and for the same
Was Tigers, said, and Lions fierce, to tame.
Amphion, too, that built the Theban towers,
Was said to move the stones, by his Lutes powers,
And lead them with soft songs, where that he would.
This was the wisdom, that they had of old,
Things sacred, from profane to separate;
The public, from the private; to abate
Wild raging lusts; prescribe the marriage good;
Build Towns, and carve the Laws in leaves of wood.
And thus at first, an honor, and a name
To divine Poets, and their Verses came.
Next these great Homer and Tyrtoeus set
On edge the Masculine spirits, and did whet
Their minds to Wars, with rimes they did rehearse;
The Oracles, too, were given out in Verse;
All way of life was shown; the grace of Kings
Attempted by the Muses tunes, and strings;
Plays were found out; and rest, the end, and crown
Of their long labors, was in Verse set down:
All which I tell, lest when Apollo's named,
Or Muse, upon the Lyre, thou chance b' ashamed.
Be brief, in what thou would command, that so
The docile mind may soon thy precepts know,
And hold them faithfully; For nothing rests,
But flows out, that ore-swelleth in full breasts.
Let what thou fain'st for pleasures sake, be near
The truth; nor let thy Fable think, what e're
It would, must be: lest it alive would draw
The Child, when Lamia 'has dined, out of her maw.
The Poems void of profit, our grave men
Cast out by voices; want they pleasure, then
Our Gallants give them none, but pass them by:
But he has every suffrage can apply
Sweet mixed with sour, to his Reader, so
As doctrine, and delight together go.
This book will get the Sosii money; This
Will pass the Seas, and long as nature is,
With honor make the farre-knowne Author live.
There are yet faults, which we would well forgive,
For, neither does the String still yield that sound
The hand, and mind would, but it will resound
Oft-times a Sharp, when we require a Flat:
Nor always does the loofed Bow, hit that
Which it does threaten Therefore, where I see
Much in the Poem shine, I will not be
Offended with few spots, which negligence
Has shed, or humane frailty not kept thence.
How then? Why, as a Scrivener, if h' offend
Still in the same, and warned will not mend,
Deserves no pardon; or who'd play, and sing
Is laughed at, that still jarreth on one string:
So he that flaggeth much, becomes to me
A Choerilus, in whom if I but see
Twice, or thrice good, I wonder: but am more
Angry. Sometimes, I hear good Homer snore.
But, I confess, that, in a long work, sleep
May, with some right, upon an Author creep.
As Painting, so is Poesy. Some man's hand
Will take you more, the nearer that you stand;
As some the farther off: This loves the dark;
This, fearing not the subtlest Judges mark
Will in the light be viewed: This once, the sight
Does please; this, ten times over, will delight.
You Sir, the elder brother, though you are
Informed rightly, by your Fathers care,
And, of your self too, understand; yet mind
This saying: To some things there is assigned
A mean, and toleration, which does well:
There may a Lawyer be, may not excel;
Or Pleader at the Bar, that may come short
Of eloquent Messalla's power in Court,
Or knows not what Cassellius Aulus can;
Yet, there is a value given to this man.
But neither, Men, nor Gods, nor Pillars meant,
Poets should ever be indifferent.
As jarring Music does, at jolly feasts,
Or thick gross ointment, but offend the Guests:
As Poppie, and Sardane honey; 'cause without
These, the free meal might have been well drawn out:
So, any Poem, fancied, or forth-brought
To bettring of the mind of man, in ought,
If never so little it depart the first,
And highest; sinketh to the lowest, and worst.
He, that not knows the games, nor how to use
His arms in Mars his field, he does refuse;
Or, who is unskilful at the Cort, or Ball,
Or trundling Wheel, he can sit still, from all;
Lest the thronged heaps should on a laughter take:
Yet who is most ignorant, dares Verses make.
Why not? I Am gentle, and freeborn, do hate
Vice, and, am known to have a Knights estate.
Thou, such thy judgment is, thy knowledge too,
Wilt nothing against nature speak, or do:
But, if hereafter thou shall write, not fear
To send it to be judged by Metius ear,
And, to your Fathers, and to mine; though it be
Nine years kept in, your papers by, yo'are free
To change, and mend, what you not forth do set.
The Writ, once out, never returned yet.
It Is now inquired, which makes the nobler Verse,
Nature, or Art. My Judgment will not pierce
Into the Profits, what a mere rude brain
Can; or all toil, without a wealthy vein:
So does the one, the others help require,
And friendly should unto one end conspire.
He, that is ambitious in the race to touch
The wished goal, both did, and suffered much
While he was young; he sweat; and freez'd again:
And both from Wine, and Women did abstain.
Who, since, to sing the Pythian rites is heard,
Did learn them first, and once a Master feared.
But, now, it is enough to say; I make
An admirable Verse. The great Scurfe take
Him that is last, I scorn to come behind,
Or, of the things, that never came in my mind
To say, I Am ignorant. Just as a Crier
That to the sale of Wares calls every Buyer;
So does the Poet, who is rich in land,
Or great in money's out at use, command
His flatterers to their gain. But say, he can
Make a great Supper; or for some poor man
Will be a surety; or can help him out
Of an entangling suit; and bring 't about:
I wonder how this happy man should know,
Whether his soothing friend speak truth, or no.
But you, my Piso, carefully beware,
(Whether yo' are given to, or giver are.)
You do not bring, to judge your Verses, one,
With joy of what is given him, over-gone:
For he will cry, Good, brave, better, excellent!
Look pale, distill a shower (was never meant)
Out at his friendly eyes, leap, beat the groun'.
As those that hired to weep at Funerals, swoune,
Cry, and do more then the true Mourners: so
The Scoffer, the true Praiser does out-goe.
Rich men are said with many cups to plie,
And rack, with Wine, the man whom they would try,
If of their friendship he be worthy, or no:
When you write Verses, with your judge do so:
Look through him, and be sure, you take not mocks
For praises, where the mind conceales a fox.
If to Quintilius, you recited ought:
He Would say, Mend this, good friend, and this; 'T is naught.
If you denied, you had no better strain,
And twice, or thrice had 'ssayd it, still in vain:
He Would bid, blot all: and to the anvile bring
Those ill-torn'd Verses, to new hammering.
Then: If your fault you rather had defend
Then change. No word, or work, more would he spend
In vain, but you, and yours, you should love still
Alone, without a rival, by his will.
A wise, and honest man will cry out shame
On artlesse Verse; the hard ones he will blame;
Blot out the careless, with his turned pen;
Cut off superfluous ornaments; and when
They Are dark, bid clear this: all that is doubtful wrote
Reprove; and, what is to be changed, note:
Become an Aristarchus. And, not say,
Why should I grieve my friend, this trifling way?
These trifles into serious mischiefs lead
The man once mocked, and suffered wrong to tread.
Wise, sober folk, a frantic Poet fear,
And shun to touch him, as a man that were
Infected with the leprosy, or had
The yellow Jaundies, or were furious mad
According to the Moon. But, then the boys
They vex, and follow him with shouts, and noise,
The while he belcheth lofty Verses out,
And stalketh, like a Fowler, round about,
Busy to catch a Blackbird; if he fall
Into a pit, or hole; although he call,
And cry aloud, Help gentle Contrymen,
There Is none will take the care, to help him then;
For, if one should, and with a rope make haste
To let it down, who knows, if he did cast
Himself there purposely, or no; and would
Not thence be saved, although indeed he could?
I Will tell you but the death, and the disease
Of the Sicilian Poet Empedocles,
He, while he labored to be thought a God
Immortal, took a melancholique, odd
Conceit, and into burning Aetna leaped.
Let Poets perish, that will not be kept.
He that preserves a man, against his will,
Does the same thing with him, that would him kill.
Nor did he do this once; for if you can
Recall him yet, hee'ld be no more a man:
Or love of this so famous death lay by.
His cause of making Verses none knows why
Whether he pissed upon his Fathers grave;
Or the sad thunder-stroken thing he have
Defiled, touched; but certain he was mad,
And, as a Bear, if he the strength but had
To force the grates, that hold him in, would fright
All; So this grievous Writer puts to flight
Learned and unlearned; holding, whom once he takes;
And, there an end of him, reciting makes:
Not letting go his hold, where he draws food,
Till he drop off, a Horse-leech, full of blood.
FINIS.
THE ENGLISH GRAMMAR. MADE BY BEN. JOHNSON.

For the benefit of all Strangers, out of his observation of the English
Language now spoken, and in use.

Consuetudo, certissima loquendi Magistra, utendumque plane sermon, ut nummo,
cui publica forma est. Quinct. Printed M.DC.XL.

Non obstant hae disciplinae per illas euntibus sed circa illas haerentibus.

Quinct. Major adhuc restat labor, sed sane sit cum venia, si gratia carebit:
Boni enim artificis parts sunt, quam paucissima possit omittere.

Scalig. lib. 1. c. 25. Neque enim optimi artificis est, omnia persequi.

Gallenus. Expedire Grammatico, etiam, si quaedam nesciat.

Quinctil. THE PREFACE.
THe profit of Grammar is great to Strangers, who are to live in communion, and
commerce with us; and, it is honorable to our selves. For, by it we
communicate all our labors, studies, profits, without an Interpreter.

We free our Language from the opinion of Rudeness, and Barbarism, wherewith
it is mistaken to be diseased; We show the Copy of it, and Matchablenesse,
with other tongues; we ripen the wits of our own Children, and Youth sooner by
it, and advance their knowledge.

Confusion of Language, a Curse.
Experience breeds Art: Lack of Experience, Chance.
Experience, Observation, Sense, Induction, are the four Tryers of Arts. It is
ridiculous to teach any thing for undoubted Truth, that Sense, and Experience,
can confute. So Zeno disputing of Quies, was confuted by Diogenes, rising up
and walking.

In Grammar, not so much the Invention, as the Disposition is to be commended:
Yet we must remember, that the most excellent creatures are not ever borne
perfect; to leave Bears, and Whelps, and other failings of Nature.

IUI. Caesar Scaliger. de cause. ling. Lat. Grammatici unus finis est recte
loqui. Neque necesse habet scribere. Accidit enim Scriptura voci, neque aliter
scribere debemus, quam loquamur.

Ramus in definit. page 30.
Grammatica est ars been loquendi.
(b) Veteres, ut Varro, Cicero, Quinctilianus, Etymologiam in notatione vocum
statuere.

(c) Dictionis natura prior est, posterior orationis. Ex usu v^cerum Latinorum,
Vox, pro dictione scripta accipitur: quoniam vox esse possit. Est articulata,
quae scripto excipi, atque exprimi valeat: inarticulata, quae non. Articulata
vox dicitur, qua genus humanum utitur distinctim, a caeteris animalibus, quae
muta vocantur: non, quod sonum non edant; sed quia soni eorum nullis
exprimantur proprie Literarum notis.

Smithus de recta, and amend. L. Latin. script. (d) Syllaba est elementum sub
accentu. Scalig. lib. 2.

(e) Litera est pars dictionis indivisibilis. Nam, quamquam sunt literae
quaedam duplices, una tamen tantum litera est, sibi quaeque sonum unum certum
servans. Scalig.

Et Smithus, ibid. Litera pars minima vocis articulatae. (f) Natura literae
tribus modis intelligitur; nomine, quo pronunciatur; potestate, qua valet;
figura, qua scribitur. At potestas est sonus ille, quo pronunciari, quem etiam
figura debet imitari; ut his Prosodiam, Orthographia sequatur. Asper.

(g) Prosodia autem, and Orthographia parts non sunt; sed, ut sanguis, and
spiritus per corpus universum fusae. Scal. ut supra. Ramus, page 31.

(h) Litera, a lineando; unde, linere, lineaturae, literae, and liturae. Neque
enim a lituris literae quia delerentur; prius enim factae, quam deletae sunt.
At formae potius, atque (...) rationem, quam interitus, habeamus. Scal. ibid.

(i) Litera genus quoddam est, cujus species primariae duae, vocalis, and
Consonans, quarum natura, and constitutio non potest percipi, nisi prius
cognoscantur differentiae formales, quibus factum est, ut inter se non
convenirent. Scal. ibid.

Literae differentia generica est potestas, quam nimis rudi consilio veteres,
Accidens appellarunt. Est enim forma quaedam ipse flexus in voce, quasi in
materia, propter quem flexum fit; ut vocalis per se possit pronunciari: Muta,
non possit. Figura autem est accidens ab art institutum; potestque attributa
mutari. Iul. Caes. Scal. ibidem. De vi, ac potestate literarum tum accurate
scripserunt Antiqui, quam de quavis alia suae professionis part. Elaborarunt
in hoc argumento Varro, Priscianus, Appion, ille, qui cymbalum dicebatur mundi:
and inter rhetores non postremi judicii, Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Caius
quoque Caesar, and Octavius Augustus. Smith, ibid.

(l) Literae, quae per seipsas possint pronunciari, vocales sunt; quae non,
nisi cum aliis, consonantes.

Vocalium nomina simplici sono, nec differente, a potestate proferantur.

Consonantes, additis vocalibus, quibusaam praepositis; aliis postpositis.

(m) Ex consonantibus, quorum nomen incipit a Consonante, Mutae sunt; quarum a
vocali, somivocales: Mutas non inde appellatas, quod parum sonarent, Sed quod
nihil.

CHAPTER I. Of Grammar, and the Parts.
(a) GRammar is the art of true, and well speaking a Language: the writing is
but an Accident.

The parts of Grammar are
(b) Etymology, which is the true notation of words. Syntaxe, which is the
right ordering of them.

(c) A Word, is a part of speech, or note, whereby a thing is known, or
called: and consists of one, or more Syllabes.

(d) A Syllabe is a perfect sound in a word, and consists of one, of more
Letters.

(e) A Letter is an indivisible part of a Syllabe, (f) whose Prosody, or right
sounding is perceived by the power; the Orthography, or right writing by the
form.

(g) Prosodie, and Orthography, are not parts of Grammar, but diffused, like
the blood, and spirits through the whole.

CHAPTER II. (h) Of Letters, and their powers.
IN our Language we use these twenty, and four Letters.
A.B.C.D.E.F.G.H.I.K.L.M.N.O.P.Q.R.S.T.V.W.X.Y.Z.
a.b.c.d.e.f.g.h.i.k.l.m.n.o.p.q.r.s.t.v.w.x.y.z. The great Letters serve to
begin Sentences, with us, to lead proper names, and express numbers. The less
make the fabric of speech.

Our numerall Letters are,
I. 1. V. 5. X. 10. L. for 50. C. 100. D. 500. M. 1000.

(i) All Letters are either Vowells, or Consonants: and, (k) are principally
known by their powers. The Figure is an Accident.

(l) A Vowell will be pronounced by it self: A Consonant, not without the
help of a Vowell, either before, or after.

The received Vowells in our tongue, are a. e. i. o. u.

Consonants be either Mutes, and close the sound, as b.c.d.g.k.p.q.t. Or, Half
Vowells, and open it, as f.l.m.n.r.s.x.z.

H. Is rarely other then an aspiration in power, though a Letter in form.

W. and Y. have shifting, and uncertain seats, as shall be shown in their
places.

CHAP. III. Of the Vowels.
ALL our (n) Vowels are sounded doubtfully. In quantity, (which is Time) long,
or short. Or, in accent, (which is Tune) sharp, or, flat. Long in these words,
and their like: Debating. conge^ling. expi^ring. opposing. enduring.


Short, in these: Stomaching. severing. vanqushing. ransoming. picturing.

Sharp, in these: Hate. mete. bite. note. pule.

Flat, in these: Hat. met. bit. not. pull.

(o) A, With us, in most words is pronounced less, then the French a, as in,
art. act. apple. ancient.


But, when it comes before l. in the end of a Syllabe, it obtains the full
French (p) sound, and is uttered with the mouth, and throat wide opened, the
tongue bent back from the teeth, as in all. small. gal. fall. tal. call.


So in the Syllables, where a Consonant follows the l. as in Salt. malt.
balm. calm.


(q) E, Is pronounced with a mean opening the mouth, the tongue turned to the
inner roof of the palate, and softly striking the upper great teeth. It is a
Letter of diverse note and use: and either sounds, or is silent. When it is
the last letter, and sounds, the sound is sharp, as in the French i. Example
in me se. agree. ye. she. in all, saving the Article, the.

Where it ends, and sounds obscure, and faintly, it serves as an accent, to
produce the Vowell preceding: as in made. steme. stripe. ore. cure. which else
would sound, mad. stem. strip. or. cur.

It alters the power of ^. g. s. so placed, as in hence, which else would
sound henc. Swinge, to make it differ from swing. Use, to distinguish it from
us.

It is mere silent in words, where l. is coupled with a Consonant in the end;
as Whistle. gristle. britle. fickle. thimble, etc.

Or after v Consonant, or double ss. as in love. glove. move. redress. cross.
loss.


Where it ends a former Syllable, it sounds longish, but flat: as in
derive. prepare. resolve.


Except in Derivatives, or Compounds of the sharp e, and then it answers the
primitive, or simple in the first sound; as Agreeing, of agree: foreseeing, of
foresee: being, of be.


Where it ends a last Syllable, with one, or mo Consonants after it, it
either sounds flat, and full: as in Descent. intent. amend. offend. rest.
best. Or, it passes away obscured, like the faint i. as in these, Written.
gotten. open. says devil, etc.


(r) Which two letters e. and i. have such a neerenesse in our tongue, as often
times they enterchange places: as in enduce, for induce: endite, for indite:
her, for her.


(n) Omnes Vocales ancipites sunt (i.e.) modo longae; modo breves: eodem tamen
modo semper depictae, (nam scripturae est imitatio sermonis, ut pictura
corporis. Scriptio vocum pictura. (Smithus) and eodem sono pronunci^tae. Nisi,
quod vocalis longa bis tantum temporis in effando retinet, quam brevis. Ut
recte cecinit ille de Vocalibus.

Temporis unius brevis est, ut longa duorum. A, (o) Litterae hujus sonus
estemnium Gentium fere communis. Nomen autem, and figura multis nationibus est
diversa. Scalig. and Ramus. Dionysius ait a. esse (...) ex plenitudine vocis.

(p) Teren. Maurus. A, prima locum littera sic ab ore sumit,
Immunia, rictu patulo, tene^^^bra;
Linguamque necesse est ita pandulam reduci,
Ut nisus in illam valeat subire vocis,
Nec partibus ullis aliquos ferire dentes.


(q) E, Triplicem differentiam habet: primam, mediocris rictus: secundam,
linguae, camque duplicem; alteram, interioris, nempe inflexae ad interius
coelum palati; alteram genninos prementis. Tertia est labri inferioris.

Ramus, lib. 2. Duas primas Terentianus notavit; tertiam tacuit. Terentianus 1.
E, quae sequitur, vocula dissona est priori: quia deprimit altum modico tenore
rictum, and remotos premit hinc, and hinc molares.

(r) Apud latinos, e. latius sonat in Adverbio been, quam in Adverbio here:
hujus enim posteriorem vocalem exilius pronunciabant; ita, ut etiam in maxim
exilem sonum transierit heri. Id, quod latius in multis quoque patet: Ut ab Eo,
verbo, deductum, ire: iis, and eis: Diis, and Deis: Febrem, febrim: Turrem,
turrim: Priore, and priori. Ram. and Scalig.

Et propter hanc vicinitatem (ait Quinct.) e. quoque loco i. fuit: ut Menerva.
leber. Magester: pro Minerva, liber, Magister.

(s) I. Porrigit ictum genuino prope ad ipsos
Minimumque renidet supero tenus labello.
Terent.

I. Vocalis sonos habet tres: suum, exilem: alterum, latiorem propriorumque
ipsi e; and tertium, obscuriorem ipsius u, inter quae duo Y gracae vocalis
son^^ continetur: ut non inconsulto Victorinus ambiguam illam quam adduximus
vocem, per Y scribendam esse putarit, Optimus.

Scalig. Ante Consonantem I. semper est Vocalis.

(t) Ante Vocalem ejusdem syllabae Consonans.

(u) Apud Hebraeos I. perpetur est Consonans; ut apud Graecos Vocalis.

(w) Ut in Giacente. Giesu. Gioconda. Giustitia.

O. (x) O Pronunciatur rotundo ore, lingua ad radices Hypoglossis reducta.
(...), and (...), unica tantum nota, sono differenti.

(y) Profertur, ut (...).

(z) Ut oo. vel ou. Gallicum.

Una quoniam sat habitum est notare forma,
Pro temporibus quae gremium ministret usum.
Igitur sonitum reddere voles minori,
Retrorsus adactam modice teneto linguam,
Rictu neque magno sat erit patere labra,
At longior alto tragicum sub oris antro
Molita, rotundis acuit sonum labellis.
Terent. Differentiam o. parvi valde distinctam Franci tenent: sed scriptura
valde confundunt. O, scribunt perinde ut proferunt. At o scribunt modo per au.
modo per ao. quae sonum talem minime sonant, qui simplici, and rotundo motu
oris proferri debet.

(a) Quanta sit affinitas (o.) cum (u.) ex Quinct. Plinio, Papyriano notum est.
Quid enim o. and u. permutatae invicem, ut Hecobe. and Notrix, Culchides, and
Pulixena, scriberentur? sic nostri praeceptores, Cervom, Servomque u. and o.
litteris scripserunt; Sic dederont, probaveront, Romany olim fuere. Quinct.
lib. 1.

Denique o. test Plinio, apud Priscianum aliquot Italiae Civitates non
habebant; sed loco ejus ponebant u. and maxim Umbri, and Tusci. Atque u.
contra, test apud eundem Papyriano, multis Italiae populis, in usu non erat;
sed utebantur o. unde Romanorum quoque vetustissmi in multis dictionibus, loco
ejus o. posuerunt: ut poblicum, pro publicum; polcrum, pro pulcrum; colpam, pro
culpam.

(s) I, Is of a narrower sound then e, and uttered with a less opening of the
mouth; the tongue brought back to the palate, and striking the teeth next the
cheeke-teeth.

It is a Letter of a double power.

As a Vowell in the former, or single Syllabes, it has sometimes the sharp
accent; as in binding. minding. pining. whining. wiving. thriving. mine. thine.


Or, all words of one Syllabe qualified by e. But, the flat in more, as in
these, bill. bitter. giddy. little. incident. and the like.

In the Derivatives of sharp Primitives, it keeps the sound, though it
deliver over the Primitive Consonant to the next Syllabe; as in divi-ning.
requi-ring. repi-ning.


For, a Consonant falling between two Vowells in the word, will be spelled
with the latter. In Syllabes, and words, composed of the same Elements, it
varieth the sound, now sharp, now flat: as in give, give. alive, live. drive,
driven. title, title.


But these, use of speaking, and acquaintance in reading, will teach, rather
then rule.

(t) I. in the other power is merely another Letter, and would ask to enjoy
an other Character. For, where it leads the sounding Vowell, and begins the
Syllabe, it is ever a Consonant: as in James. John. jest. jump. conjurer.
perjured.


And before Dipthongs: as Jay. joy. juice. as, having the force of the Hebrews
(u) Jod, and the Italians (w) Gi.

O, (x) Is pronounced with a round mouth, the tongue drawn back to the root:
and is a Letter of much change, and uncertaintie with us.

In the long time it naturally sounds sharp, and high: as in (y) chosen.
hosen. holy. folly. open. over. note. throat.


In the short time more flat, and a kin to u. as (z) cosen. dosen. mother.
brother. love. prove.


In the Dipthong, sometimes it sounds out: as ought. sought. naught. wrought.
mow. sow.


But oftener upon the u: as in sound. bound. how. now. thou. cow.

In the last Syllabes before n. and w. it frequently loses: as in person.
action. willow. billow.


It holds up, and is sharp, when it ends the word, or Syllabe: as in go. fro.
so. no.
except in to, the Preposition. Two, the numerall. Do, the Verb, and the
compounds of it; as undo: and the Derivatives; as Doing.

It varieth the sound in Syllabes of the same Character, and proportion: as in
shove. shove. glove. grove.
Which double sound it has from the Latin: as (a) Voltus, vultus. vultis,
voltis.


V, (b) Is sounded with a narrower, and mean compass, and some depression of
the middle of the tongue, and is like our i. a letter of a double power. As a
Vowell it sounds thin and sharp, as in use; thick and flat, as in us.

It never ends any word for the nakedness, but yields to the termination
of the Diphthong ew, as in new, true, knew, etc. or the qualifying e. as in
sue. due; and the like.

(c) When it leads a sounding Vowell in the Syllabe, it is a Consonant: as in
save. reve. prove. love. etc.

Which double force is not the unstedfastnesse of our tongue, or incertaintie
of our writing, but fallen upon us from the Latin.

W, (d) Is but the V. geminated in the full sound, and though it have the seat
of a Consonant with us, the power is always Vowellish, even where it leads
the Vowell in any Syllabe: as if you mark it, pronounce the two uu. like ou.
quick in passage, and these words: ou-ine. ou-ant. ou-ood. ou-ast. sou-ing.
sou-am.


Will sound, Wine. want wood. wast. swing. swam.

So put the aspiration before, and these words: hou-at. hou-ich. hou-eele.
hou-ether.


Will be What. which. wheel. whether.

In the Dipthongs there will be no doubt: as in draw. straw. sow. know.

Nor in Derivatives: as knowing. sowing. drawing.

Whether the double w. is of necessity used, rather then the single u. lest it
might alter the sound, and be pronounced knoving. soving. draving.

As in saving. having.

Y, Is also mere Vowellish in our tongue, and has only the power of an i.
even where it obtaines the Seat of a Consonant: as in Young. Younker.

Which the Dutch, whose Primitive it is, write Iunk. Iunker.

And so might we write Iouth. ies. ioke. ionder. iard. ielke. Youth. yes. yoke.
yonder. yard. yelke.


But that we choose y. to distinguish from j. Consonant.

In the Dipthong it sounds always i. as in may. say. way. joy. toy. they.


And in the ends of words: as in deny. reply. defy. cry.


Which sometimes are written by i. but qualified by e.

But where two i.i. are sounded, the first will be ever a y. as in Derivatives:
denying. replying. defying.


(f) Only in the words received by us from the Greek, as Syllabe, Tyran, and
the like, it keeps the sound of the thin, and sharp u. in some proportion;
And this we had to say of the Vowells.

V, Quam scribere Graius, nisi jungat Y. nequibit
Hanc edere vocem quoties paramus ore,
Nitamur ut U. dicere sic citetur ortus.
Productius autem coeuntibus labellis
Natura soni pressi altius meabit. Terentian.


Et alibi. Graeca dipthongus ou, literis tamen nostris vacat,
Sola vocalis quod u. complet hunc satis sonum.


Ut in titulis, fabulis Terentii praepositis. Graecae Menandru: Graeca
Apollodoru, pro (...), and (...), and quidem, ne quis de potestate vocalis
hujus addubitare possit, etiam a mutis animalibus testimonium Plautus nobis
exhibuit e Peniculo Menechmi. ME. Egon' dedi? Pe. tu, tu, inquam, vin' afferri
noctuam, Quae tu, tu, usque dicat tibi: nam nos, jam nos defessi sumus.


Ergo ut ovium halatus (...) literae sonum: sic noctuarum cantus, and cuculi
apud Aristophanem sonum hujus vocalis vindicabit. Nam, quando u. liquescit, ut
in quis, and sanguis habet sonum communem cum Y graeca, (...). Et quando Coccyx
dixerit Coccy. (c) Consonans ut u. Gallicum, vel Digamma profertur
Hanc and modo quam diximus J. simul jugatas
Verum est spacium sumere, vimque Consonantum,
Ut quaeque tamen constiterit loco priore:


Nam si juga quis nominet, J. consona fiet. Terent. Versa vice sit prior V.
sequatur illa, ut in vide.

W, (d) Ut Itali proferunt Edoardo in Edouardo, and Galli, ou-y. Suavis,
suadeo, etiam Latini, ut sou-avis, etc. At quid attinet duplicare, quod simplex
queat sufficere? Proinde W. pro copia Characterum non reprehendo, pro nova
litera certe non agnosco. Veteresque Anglo-Saxones pro ea, quando nos W.
solemus uti, figuram istius modi. solebant conscribere, quae non multum differt
ab ea, qua and hodie utimur. simplici, dum verbum inchoet. Smithus de rect. and
amend. L.A. Script.

(f) Siquidem eandem pro o. gracoretinet: certe alium, quam i. omni in loco
reddere debebat sonum.

B (g) Nobis cum Latinis communis. Smith.
Nam muta jubet comprimi labella,
Vocalis at intus locus exitum ministrat. Terent.
B. Labris per spiritus impetum reclusis edicimus. Mart. cap.


C (h) Litera Androgyne, natura nec mas, nec foemina, and utrumque est neutrum.
Monstrum literae, non litera; Ignorantiae specimen, non artis. Smithus.

Quomodo nunc utimur vulgo, aut nullas, aut nimias habet vires: nam, modo k.
sonat, modo s. At si litera sit a k. and s. diversa, suum debet habere sonum.
Sed nescio quod monstrum, aut Empulsa sit, qua modo mas, modo foemina, modo
serpens, modo cornix, appareat; and per ejusmodi imposturas, pro suo arbitrio,
tam s. quam k. exigat aedibus; and fundis suis: ut jure possint hae duae
literae contendere cum c. per edictum, unde vi: Neque dubito quin, ubi sit
Praetor aequus facile c. cadet caussa.

(i) Apud Latinos c. eandem habuit formam, and Characterem; quem (...) apud
Graecos veteres.

An haec fuit occasio, quod ignorantia, confusioque eundem, quod imperitos
dederit sonum C. quem S. nolo affirmare.

(k) Vetustae illius Anglo-Saxonicae linguae, and scriptionis peritiores
contendunt, apud illos atavos nostros Anglo-Saxones, C. literam, maxim ante e.
and i. eum habuisse sonum, quem, and pro tenui (...) Chi. sono agnoscimus: and
Itali, maxim Hetrusci, ante e. and i. hodie usurpant. Idem ibidem.

(l) C. molaribus super linguae extrema appulsis exprimitur.

Mart. Cap. Terentianus. C. pressius urget; sed, and hinc, hincque remittit,
Quo vocis adhaerens sonus explicetur ore.


D. D. Appulsu linguae circa dentes superiores innascitur.

Terentianus. (m) At portio dentes quotiens suprema linguae
Pulsaverit imos, modiceque curva summas
Tunc D. sonitum perficit, explicatque vocem.


F. (n) Litera a graeca ph. recedit lenis, and hebes sonus.

Idem. (o) Vau consona Varrone, and Dydimo, testibus, nominata est F. figura a
Claudio Caesare factaetiam est. Vis ejus, and potestas est eadem, qua Digamma
Acolici, at ostendit Terentianus in v. consona.

V. vade, veni, refer; teneto vultum:
Crevisse sonum perspicis, and coisse crassum,
Unde Aeoliis litera fingitur Digammos.
H. quasi (...). contrarium F. quae sonat ph.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Consonants.
B. Has the same sound with us, as it has with the Latin, always one, and
is uttered with (g) closing of the lips.

C Is a letter, which our Forefathers might very well have spared in our
tongue: but since it has obtained place, both in our Writing, and Language, we
are not now to quarrel Orthographie, or Custom; but to note the powers.

Before a. u. and o. it plainly sounds k. Chi. or Kappa. as in cable. coble.
cudgel.


Or before the Liquids. l. and r. as in clod. crust.


Or, when it ends a former Syllabe before a Consonant: as in acquaintance.
acknowledgement. action.


In all which it sounds strong.

(i) Before e. and i. it has a weak sound, and hisseth, like s. as in
certain. center. civil. citizen. whence.


Or, before the Dipthongs: as in cease. deceive.


(k) Among the English-Saxons it obtained the weaker force Chi. or the Italians
C. as in Capel. canc. cild. cyrce.


Which were pronounced Chapel. chance. child. church.


(l) It is sounded with the top of the tongue, striking the upper teeth, and
rebounding against the Palate.

D Has the same sound, both before, and after a Vowell with us, as it has
with the Latins: and is pronounced softly, (m) the tongue a little affecting
the teeth, but the nether teeth most.

F Is a Letter of two forces with us: and in them both sounded with the
nether-lip rounded, and a kind of blowing out: but gentler in the one, then the
other.

The more general sound is the softest; (n) and expresses the Greek ph. as
in Faith. field. feight. force.

Where it sounds of.

(o) The other is (...), or van. the Digamma of Claudius: as in cleft. of
cleave. left, of leave.


The difference will best be found in the word of. which as a preposition
sounds (...). of. him.


As the Adverbe of Distance.

off, far off.
G (p) Is likewise of double force in our tongue, and is sounded with an
impression made on the midst of the palate.

Before a. o. and u. strong; as in these, gate. got. gut.


Or, before the Aspriate h. or, Liquids l. and r. as in ghost. glad. grant.

Or in the ends of words: as in long. song. ring. swing.
eg. leg. lug. dug.


Except the qualifying e. follow; and then the sound is ever weak; as in age.
stage. hedge.
sledge. judge. drudge.


Before u. the force is double: as in guile. guide. guest. guise.


Where it sounds like the French gu. And in guin. guerdon. languish. anguish.


Where it speaks the Italian gu.

Likewise, before e. and i. the powers are confused; and uttered, now strong,
now weak: as in long.
get. geld. give. Gitterne. finger.
In weak.
genet. gentle. gin. gibe. ginger.


But this use must teach: the one sound being warranted to our Letter, from the
Greek: the other from the Latin throughout.

We will leave H. in this place; and come to

K, (q) Which is a Letter the Latins never acknowledged, but only borrowed in
the word Kalendae. They used qu. for it. We sound it as the Greek chapter and as
a necessary Letter it precedes, and follows all Vowells with us.

It goes before no Consonants but n. as in knave. knel. knot. etc.


And l. with the quiet e. after: as in mickle. pickle. trickle. fickle.


Which were better written without the c. if that which we have received for
Orthographie, would yet be contented to be altered. But that is an emendation,
rather to be wished, then hoped for, after so long a reign of ill-custome
amongst us.

It follows the s. in many words: as in skape. skoure. skirt. skirmish.
skrape. skuller.


Which do better so sound, then if written with c.

L (r) Is a Letter halfe-vowellish: which, though the Italians (especially the
Florentines) abhor, we keep entire with the Latins, and so pronounce.

G. (p) Spiritus cum palato. Mart. Cap.

De sono quidem hujus literae satis constat: sed distinctionis caussa
Characterem illi dederunt aliqui hunc. ut secernatur a G. Nam ut Graeci in
secunda Conjugatione tres habent literas, chapter g.. tenuem, mediam, densam; Angli
quatuor habent, rata proportione sibi respondentes, ka. ga. ce. e. Illae
simplices, and apertae; hae stridulae, and compressae: illae mediae linguae
officio sonantur; hae summa lingua ad interiores illisa, superiorum dentium
gingivas efflantur. Qoudque est ka. ad ga. idemest ce. ad. Smithus, ibid.

Voces tamen pleraque, quas Meridionales Angli per hunc sonum (...).
pronunciamus in fine: Boreales, per G. proferunt: ut in voce Pons, nos bri:
illi brig. In ruptura, brec: illi brek. Maturam avem ad volandum, nos fli: illi
flig. ibid.

Apud Latinos proximum ipsi C. est G. Itaque Cneum, and Gneum, dicebant: Sic
Curculionem, and Gurgulionem: appulsa enim ad palatum lingua, modicello relicto
intervallo, spiritu tota pronunciatur. Scal. de causs. L.L.

Et Terentianus. Sic amurca, quae vetuste saepe per c. scribitur,
Esse per g. proferendum crediderunt plurimi
Quando (...) Graeca vox est; (...) origo praeferat.
Apud Germanos semper profertur g

K. (q) Cum Kalendae, Graecam habebant diductionem and sonum, (...) Graecam
sunt mutuati literam Romani, ut eas exprimerent. Et, credo tamen, fecerunt ea
forma, ut, and C. Romanum efformarent, quod haberet adjunctum, quasi retro
bacillum, ut robur ei adderent ista forma K. nam C. Romanum stridulum quiddam,
and mollius sonat, quam K. Graecum.

Est and haec litera Gallis plane supervacanea, aut certe qu. est. Nam, qui
quae. quod. quid. nulla pronunciant differentia, ne minima quidem a ki. ke.
kod. kid. faucibus, palatoque formatur. Capel.

Romani in sua serie non habebunt. L (r) Lingua, palatoque dulcescit. M. Cap.

Et sic Dionysius (...), dulcissimam literam nominat.

Qui nescit, quid sit esse Semi-vocalem, ex nostra lingua facile poterit
discere: ipsa enim litera L quandam, quasi Vocalem, in se videtur continere,
ita ut junctae Mutae sine Vocali sonum faciat; ut abl. stabl. fabl. etc.


Quae nos scribimus cum e. in fine, vulgo able. stable. fable.


Sed certe illud e. non tam sonat hic, quam fuscum illud, and foeminimum
Francorum e. Nam nequicquam sonat. Alii haec scribunt abil. stabil. fabul.


Tanquam a fontibus habilis. stabulis. fabula.


Verius, sed nequicquam proficiunt. Nam, consideratius auscultanti, nec i. nec
u. est, sed tinnitus quidam, vocalis naturam habens, quae naturaliter his
liquidis inest.

M (s) Libris imprimitur. M. Capella.

Mugit intus abditum, ac coecum sonum. Terent.

Triplex sonus hujus literae M. Obscurum, in extremitate dictionum sonat; ut
templum: Apertum, in principio, ut magnus: Mediocre, in mediis ut umbra Prisc.

(t) N Quartae sonitus fingitur usque sub palato,
Quo spiritus anceps coeat naris, and oris. Terentian.
Lingua dentibus appulsa collidit. Mart. Capella.


Splendidissimo sono in fine; and subtremulo pleniore in principiis; mediocriin
medio. Jul. C. Scal.

(u) P Labris spiritu erumpit. Mar. Cap.
Pellit sonitum de mediis for as labellis.
Ter. Maurus.

Q (w) Est litera mendica, supposititia, vere servilis, manca, and decrepita;
and sine u. tanquam bacillo nihil potest: and cum u. nihil valet amplius quam k.

Qualis, qualis est, hanc jam habemus, sed semper cum praecedente sua u.
ancilla superba. Smithus. Namque Q. praemissa semper u. simul mugit sibi,
Syllabam non editura, ni comes sit tertia
Quaelibet vocalis. Ter. Mau.
Diomedes ait Q. esse compositam ex c. and u.
Appulsu palati ore restricto profertur. M. Cap.


R (x) Vibrat tremulis ictibus aridum sonorem. Ter. M.
-- Sonat hic de nare canina
Litera. -- Pers. Sat. 1.
R Spiritum, lingua crispante corraditur. M. Cap.
Dionysius (...).
e congeneribus generosissimam appellavit.


S. (y) S promptus in ore, agiturque pone dentes,
Sic lenis and unum ciet auribus susurrum.


It melts in the sounding, and is therefore called a liquid, the tongue
striking the root of the palate gently.

It Is seldom doubled, but where the Vowell sounds hard upon it: as in hell.
bell. kill. shrill. trull. full.


And, even in these, it is rather the haste, and superfluity of the pen, that
cannot stop it self upon the single l. then any necessity we have to use it.
For, the letter should be doubled only for a following Syllabe's sake: as in
killing. beginning. begging. Swimming.


M (s) Is the same with us in sound, as with the Latins. It is pronounced with
a kind of humming inward, the lips closed. Open, and full in the beginning:
obscure in the end: and meanly in the amidst.

N (t) Ringeth somewhat more in the lips and nose: the tongue striking back on
the palate, and has a threefold sound, shrill in the end: full in the
beginning, and flat in the midst.

They are Letters near of kin, both with the Latins, and us.

P (u) Breaks softly through the lips; and is a Letter of the same force with
us, as with the Latins.

Q (w) Is a Letter we might very well spare in our Alphabet, if we would but
use the serviceable k. as he should be, and restore him to the right of
reputation he had with our Forefathers. For, the English-Saxons knew not this
halting Q. with her waiting woman u. after her, but expressed quail. kuaile.
quest. kuest. quick by kuick. quil. kuil.


Till custom under the excuse of expressing enfranchised words with us,
entreated her into our Language, in quality, quarrel, quantity, quitescence, etc.


And has now given her the best of ks. possessions.

R (x) Is the Dogs Letter, and hurreth in the sound; the tongue striking the
inner palate, with a trembling about the teeth. It is sounded firm in the
beginning of the words, and more liquid in the middle, and ends: as in rarer.
riper.


And so in the Latin.

S (y) Is a most easy, and gentle Letter, and softly hisseth against the teeth
in the prolation. It is called the Serpents Letter, and the chief of the
Consonants. It varieth the powers much in our pronunciation, as in the
beginning of words it has the sound of weak c. before Vomells, Dipthong, or
Consonant: as, Salt. say. small. sell. shrik shift. soft. etc.


Sometime it inclines to z. as in these, Muse. use. rose. nose. wise.


And the like: where the latter Vowell serves for the mark, or accent of the
formers production.

So, after the Halfe-Vowells, or the obscure e. as in Bells. gems. we^. burs.
Chimes. rimes. games.


Where the Vowell sits hard, it is commonly doubled.

T, (x) Is sounded with the tongue striking the upper teeth, and has one
constant power, save where it precedeth; and that followed by a Vowell; as in
Faction. action. generation. corruption.


Where it has the force of s. or c.

X, (y) Is rather an abbreviation, or way of short writing with us, then a
Letter. For, it has the sound of k. and s. It begins no word with us, that I
know, but ends many: as Ax. kex. six. fox. box.


Which sound the same with these, Backs. knacks. knocks. locks. etc.


Z, (z) Is a Letter often heard amongst us, but seldom seen: borrowed of the
Greeks at first, being the same with z. and sounds a double ss. with us it
has obtained another sound; but in the end of words: as Muse. maze. nose.
Hose. gaze. as.


Never in the beginning, save with rustic people, that have, zed. zay. zit.
Zo. zome.


And the like, for Said. say. sit. so. some.


Or in the body of words indenison'd; as azure. zeal. zephyre. etc.


H, (a) Whether it be a Lerter or no, has been much examined by the Ancients,
and by some, too much, of the Greek party condemned, and thrown out of the
Alphabet, as an Aspirate merely, and in request only before Vowells in the
beginning of words, and after x. where it added a strong Spirit, which the
Welsh retain after many Consonants. But, be it a Letter, or Spirit, we have
great use of it in our tongue, both before, and after Vowells. And though I
dare not say, she is, (as I have heard one call her) the Queen mother of
Consonants: yet she is the life, and quickening of them.

Quare non est merita, ut a Pindaro diceretur (...). Dionysius quoque cum ipsum
expellit, rejicitque ad Serpents, maluit canem irritatam imitari, quam arbores
naturales susurros seq^i. Scal.

Ram. Est Consonantium prima, and fortissima haec litera, ut agnoscit
Terentianus.
Vivida est haec inter omnes, atque densa litera.
Sibilum facit dentibus verberatis. M. Cap.
Quoties litera media Vocalium longarum, vel subjecta longis esset,
geminabitur; ut Caussa. Cassus. Quintil.

T. (x) T qua superis dentibus intima est origo
Summa satis est ad sonitum ferire lingua.
Teren. T appulsu linguae, dentibusque appulsis excuditur.
M. Cap.

Latin factio. actio. generatio. corruption. vitium. otium. etc.

X. (y) X potestatem habet cs, and gs. ut ex. crux. and frux, appareat.


Quorum obliqui casus sunt Crucis and Frugis.
Ram. in Gram. ex Varrone.

X quicquid c. and s. formavit, exsibilat. Capell.

Neque Latini, neque Nos illa multum utimur.

Z. (z) Z vero idcirco Appius Claudius detestabatur; quod dentes mortui, dum
exprimitur, imitatur. M. Capel.

z compendium duarum literarum est s. d. in una nota, and compendium
Orthographiae, non Prosodiae; quia hic in voce non una litera effertur, sed
duae distinguntur. Compendium ineleganter, and fallaciter inventum. Sonus enim,
nota illa significatus, in unam Syllabam non perpetuo concluditur, sed
dividitur, aliquando. Ut in illo Plauti loco: Non Atticicissat, sed Sicilissat,
pro (...), Graecis; and ubi initium facit, est (...). non (...). sicuti (...),
non (...). sed (...). Ram. in lib. 2.

(a) H, Nulli dubium est, faucibus emicet quod ipsis
H litera, sive est nota, quae spiret anhelum. Ter.
H, contractis paulum faucibus, ventus exhalat.


Mar. Cap. Vocalibus apt, sed and anteposita cunctis
Hastas, Hederas, quum loquor, Hister. Hospes. Hujus.
Solum patitur quatuor ante Consonantes,
Graecis quoties nominibus Latina forma est,
Si quando Choros. Phillida. Rhamnes. Thima. dico.
Recte quidem in hac part Graecissant nostri Walli.
Smithus. H. vero (...), aspiratio vocatur. Est enim omnium literarum
spirituosissima, vel spiritus potius ipse. Nullius, aut quam minimum egens
officii eorum, quae modo nomina vimus instrumenta literarum formandarum.

H. extrinsecus ascribitur Vocalibus, ut minimum sonet, Consonantibus autem
intrinsecus, ut plurimum.

Chapter (b) Omnis litera, sive vox, plus sonat ipsa sese, cum postponitur, quam
cum anteponitur. Quod Vocalibus accidens esse videtur: nec si tollatur ea,
perit etiam vis significationis: ut, si dicam Erennius, absque aspiratione,
quamvis vitium videar facere, intellectus tumen integer permanet. Consonantibus
autem, si cohaeret, ut ejusdem penitus substantiae sit, and si auferatur,
significationis vim minuat prorsus: ut, si dicam Cremes, pro Chremes. Unde hac
considerata ratione, Graecorum doctissimi singulas fecerunt eas quoque literas,
ut pro th. th. pro ph. ph pro chi. ch Ram.

Gh. (c) Sonum illius g. quaerant, quibus ita libet scribere: aures profecto
meae nunquam in his vocibus sonitum ou. g. poterant haurire.

Smithus de rect. and emend.

Ph. and Rh. (d) Litera ph. apud Graecos P. aspirata.

Sh. (e) Si quis error in literis ferendus est, cum corrigi queat, nusquam in
ullo sono tolerabilior est, quam in hoc, si scribatur Sh. and in. si scribatur
per th. Namhae duae quandam violentiam grandiorem spiritus in proferendo
requirunt, quam coeterae literae. ibid.

Th. (f) Hac litera sive charactere, quam spinam, id est, porne, nostri Proavi
appellabant: Avi nostri, and qui proxime ante librorum impressionem vixerunt,
sunt abusi, ad omnia ea scribenda, quae nunc magno Magistrorum errore per th.
scribimus: ut,

th e. th ou. th at. th em. th eefe. th ick.

Sed ubi mollior exprimebatur fonus, superne scribebant; ubi durior, in eodem
sulco: molliorem appello illum, quem Anglo-Saxones per th. Duriorem, quem per.
exprimebant. Nam illud Saxonum th. respondet illi sono, quem vulgaris Graeca
lingua facit, quando pronunciant suum d. aut Hispani d. literam suam molliorem,
ut cum veritatem, verdad appellant. Spina autem illa. videtur refer prorsus
Graecorum th. At th. sonum th. non recte dat. Nam fi th. non esset alia
deflexio vocis, nisi aspirationis additae, aeque facile fuit Graecis (...).
aspirationem adjungere, quam (...).

What her powers are before Vowells and Dipthongs, will appear in hal. heal.
hill. hot. how. hew. hoiday. etc.


In some it is written, but sounded without power: as host. honest. humble.


Where the Vowell is heard without the Aspiration, ost. onest. umble.

After the Vowell it sounds; as in ah, and oh.

Beside, it is coupled with diverse Consonants, where the force varies, and is
particularly to be examined.

We will begin with Chapter

Ch (b) Has the force of the Greek chapter or chapter in many words derived from the
Greek: as in Charact. Christian. Chronicle. Archangel. Monarch.


In mere English words, or fetched from the Latin the force of the Italian c.
Chaplain. chaste. chest. chops. chin. chuf. churl.


Gh (c) Is only a piece of ill writing with us: if we could obtain of Custom
to mend it, it were not the worse for our Language, or us: for the g. sounds
just nothing in trough. cough. might. night. etc.


Only, the writer was at leisure, to add a superfluous Letter, as there are
too many in our Pseudographie.

Ph. and Rh (d) Are used only in Greek infranchis'd words: as Philip. Physic.
Rhetoric. Rhodes. etc.


Sh (e) Is merely English; and has the force of the Hebrew. shin, or the
French chapter as in shake. shed. shine. show. shrink. rush. blush.


Th (f) Has a double, and doubtful sound, which must be found out by use of
speaking; sometimes like the Greek th. as in thief. thing. lengthen.
strengthen. loves. etc.


In others, like their d. or the Spanish d. as this. that. then. thence. those.
bathe. bequeath.


And in this consists the greatest difficulty of our Alphabet, and true
writing: since we have lost the Saxon Characters th. and. that distinguished
the the the. thick. thou. thin. from thine. thread. tho. thrive.


Wh Has been inquired of in w. and this for the Letters.

CHAP. V. Of the Dipthongs.
(g) DIpthongs are the complexions, or couplings of Vowells, when the two
Letters send forth a joint sound, so as in one Syllabe both sounds be heard: as
in Ai. or Ay. Aid. maid. said. pay. day. way. Au. or Aw. audience. author.
aunt. law. saw. draw. Ea. Earl. Pearl. meat. seat. sea. flea.


To which add Yea, and plea; and you have at one view all our words of this
termination.

Ei. slight. straight. weight. theirs. peint. feint. Ew. Few. strew. dew.
anew. Oi. or, Oy. Point. joint. soil. koile. joy. toy. boy. OO. good. food.
mood. brood. etc. Ou. or, Ow. rout. stout. how. now. bow. low. Vi. or, Vy.
buy. or buie. juice. or juice.
These nine are all I would observe: for to mention more, were but to perplexe
the Reader. The Oa. and Ee. will be better supplied in our Orthographie by the
accenting e. in the end: as in broad. lode. cote. bote. queen. seen.


Neither is the double ee. to be thought on, but in derivatives; as trees,
sees, and the like: where it is as two Syllabes. And for eo. it is found but in
three words in our tongue.

Yeoman. people. jeopard.
Which were truer written Ye-man. people. jepard.


And thus much shall suffice for the Dipthongs.

The Tripthong is of a complexion, rather to be feared then loved: and would
fright the young Grammarian to see him. I therefore let him pass, and make
haste to the notion.

CHAPTER. VI. Of the Syllabes.
A Syllabe is a part of a word, that may of it self make a perfect sound; and
is sometimes of one only letter, sometimes of more.

Of one, as in every first Vowell in these words: a. abated. e. ecclipsed. i.
imagined. o. omitted. u. usurped.


A Syllabe of more letters is made, either of Vowells only, or of Consonants
joined with Vowells. Of Vowells only, as the Dipthongs Ai. in Aiton. Ayding.
Au. in Austere. Audients. Ea. in Easy. Eating. Ei. in Eirie of Hawks. Ew. in
Ewer. etc. and in the Tripthong Yea.


Of the Vowells mixed; sometimes but with one Consonant, as to: sometimes two,
as try: sometimes three, as best: or four, as nests: or five, as stumps:
other-while six, as the latter Syllabe in re-straints. At the most they can
have but seven, as strengths.

Some Syllabes, as The. then. there. that. with. and. which.


Are often compendiously, and shortly written: as ye. yen. year. yt. with. and
which.


Which, whosoever list may use: but Orthographie commands it not. A man may
forbear it, without danger of falling into Praemunire.

Here order would require to speak of the Quantity of Syllabes, their
special Prerogative among the Latins and Greeks: whereof so much as is
constant, and derived from Nature, has been handled already. The other which
grows by Position, and placing of letters, as yet (not through default of our
Tongue, being able enough to receive it, but our own carelessness, being
negligent to give it) is ruled by no Art. The principal cause whereof seems
to be this; because our Verses and Rythmes (as it is almost with all other
people, whose Language is spoken at this day) are natural, and such whereof
Aristotle speaks, (...), that is, made of a natural, and voluntary
composition, without regard to the Quantity of Syllabes.

This would ask a larger time and field, then is here given, for the
examination: but since I am assigned to this Province; that it is the lot of my
age, after thirty years conversation with men, to be elementarius Senex: I
will promise, and obtain so much of my self, as to give, in the heel of the
book, some spur and incitement to that which I so reasonably seek. Not that
I would have the vulgar, and practiced way of making, abolished and abdicated,
(being both sweet and delightful, and much taking the ear) but, to the end
our Tongue may be made equal to those of the renowned Countries, Italy, and
Greece, touching this particular. And, as for the difficulty, that shall never
withdraw, or put me off, from the Attempt: For, neither is any excellent thing
done with ease, nor the compassing of this any whit to be despaired:
Especially, when Quintilian has observed to me, by this natural Rythme, that
we have the other Artificial, as it were by certain Marks, and footing, was
first traced, and found out. And the Grecians themselves before Homer, as the
Romans likewise before Livius Andronicus, had no other Meters. Thus much
therefore shall serve to have spoken concerning the Parts of a Word, in a
Letter, and a Syllabe.

It follows to speak of the common affections, which unto the Latins,
Greeks, and Hebrews, are two; the Accent, and Notation. And first

CHAPTER VII. Of the Accent
THe Accent (which unto them was a tuning of the voice, in lifting it up, or
letting it down) has not yet obtained with us any sign; which
notwithstanding were most needful to be added; not wheresoever the force of an
Accent lies, but where for want of one, the word is in danger to be mis-tuned:
as in abased. excessive. besoted, obtain. ungodly. surrender.


But the use of it will be seen much better by collation of words, that
according unto the diverse place of their Accent, are diversely pronounced, and
have diverse significations. Such are the words following, with their like; as
differ, differ, desert, desert, present. present. refuse, refuse. object,
object. incense, incense. convert, convert. torment, torment. etc.


In original Nounes Adjective, or Substantive, derived according to the rule
of the writer of Analogy, the Accent is entreated to the first: as in
fatherlinesse. motherlinesse. peremptory. haberdasher.


Likewise, in the Adverbs: brotherly. sisterly.


All Nounes Dissyllabick, simple in the first; as belief. honor. credit.
silver. surety.


All Nounes trissyllabick, in the first: countenance, jeopardye. etc.


All Nounes compounded in the first, of how many Syllabes soever they be: as
Tennis-court-keeper. Chimney-sweeper.


Words simple in able, draw the Accent to the first, though they be of four
Syllabes: as Sociable. tolerable.


When they be compounded, they keep the same Accent: as insociable.
intolerable.


But in the way of comparison, it alters thus: Some men are sociable, some
insociable; some tolerable, some intolerable. For, the Accent sits on the
Syllabe that puts difference: as Sincerity. insincerity.


Nounes ending in tion, or sion; are accented in antepenultima: as condition,
infusion. etc.


In ty, a Latinis, in antepenultima: as verity. charity. simplicity.


In ence, in antepenultima: as pestilence. abstinence. sustenance. consequence.


All Verbes dissyllabes, ending in er. el. ry. and ish. accent in prima: as
cover, cancel. carry. bury. levy. ravish. etc.


Verbes made of Nounes, follow the Accent of the Nounes: as to blanket. to
basquet.


All Verbes coming from the Latin, either of the Supine, or otherwise; hold
the Accent, as it is found in the first person present of those Latin Verbes:
as from animo. animate. celebro, celebrate.


Except words compound of fac^o: as liquefacio, liquefi.


And of statuo. constituo, constitute.


All variations of Verbes hold the Accent in the same place, as the Theme, I
animate: thou animatest. etc.


And thus much shall serve to have opened the fountain of Orthographie. Now
let us come to the notation of a word.

CHAPTER. VIII. The Notation of a Word
IS, when the original thereof is sought out, and consists in two things;
the Kind, and the Figure.

The Kind is to know, whether the word be a Primitive, Genus.
or Derivative, as Man. love


Are Primitives: Manly. lover


Are Derivatives.

The Figure is to know, whether the word be simple, or compounded; Figura.
as, learned. say


Are simple: unlearned. gainsay are compounded.


Compositio.
In which kind of composition, our English tongue is above all other very hardy,
Saepe tria coagmen: Nom.

A foot-ball-plaier.

A Tennis-court-keeper.

Saepissime duo Substant: ut Hand-ker-chif. Rainbow. Ey-sore. Table-napkin.
Headache. (...). Substantivum cum verbo:

Wood-bind.

Prouomen cum Subslantivo: ut Self-love. (...). self-freedome (...). Verbum cum
Substantivo: ut a Puff-checke (...). Draw-well. Drawbridge. Adjectivum cum
Substantivo: ut

New-ton. (...).

Handi-craft. (...). Adverbium cum Substantivo: ut Downfall.

Adverbium cum Participio: ut

Vp-rising. Downe-lying.


and happy; joining together, after a most eloquent manner, sundry words of
every kind of Speech: as Mil-horse. lip-wise. self-love. twy-light.
there-about. not-with-standing. by-cause. cutpurse. never-the-lesse.


These are the common affections of a word: His diverse sorts now follow. A word
is of Number, or without Number. Of Number, that word is termed to be, which
signifies a number singular, or plural.

Singular, which expresses one only thing: as tree. books. teachers.


Again, a word of number is finite, or infinite. Finite, which varieth his
number with certain ends; as man. run. horse.


Infinite, which varieth not; as true. strong running.


Moreover, a word of number is a Noune, or a Verb. But, here it were fit, we
did first number our Words, or parts of Speech, of which our Language consists.

CHAP. IX. Of the Parts of Speech.
IN our English speech, we number the same parts with the Latins. Noune.
Pronoune. Verb. Participle. Adverbe. Conjunction. Praeposition. Interjection.


Only, we add a ninth, which is the Article: And that is twofold, Finite. as
The. Infinite. as A.


The finite is set before Nounes Appellatives: as The Horse. The Tree. The
Earth. or specially The nature of the Earth.


Proper Names, and Pronounes refuse Articles, but for Emphasis sake: as The
Henry of Henry's. The only He of the Town.


Where He stands for a Noune, and signifies Man.

The Infinite has a power of declaring, and designing uncertain, or infinite
things: as A man. A house.


This Article A. answers to the Germane Ein. or the French, or Italian
Articles, derived from one, not Numerall, but Prepositive: as A House. Ein
Hause. Un Maison. Una Casa.


The is put to both numbers, and answers to the Dutch Article Der. die. das.


Save, that it admits no inflexion.

CHAP. X. Of the Noune.
ALL Nounes are words of Number, Singular, or Plural. They are
common. proper. personal.
And are all
Substantive. or, Adjective.


Their Accidents are, Gender. Case. Declension.


Of the Genders there are six. First, the Masculine, 1. Masculine.
which comprehends all Males, or what is understood under a Masculine
species: as Angels, Men, Stars: and (by Prosopaeia) the Month's, winds,
almost all the Planets. Second, the Feminine, which compriseth Women, and femal
species: 2. Feminine.
I'lands. Countries. Cities.


And some Rivers with us: as Severne, Avon, etc.


Third, the Neuter, or feined Gender: 3. Neuter.
whose notion conceives neither Sex; under which are comprised all inanimate
things; a ship excepted: of whom we say, she sails well, though the name be
Hercules, or Henry, the Prince. As Terence called his Comedy Eunuchus, per
vocabulum Artis.

Fourth, the Promiscuous, or Epicene, which understands both kinds: 4. Epicene.
especially, when we cannot make the difference; as, when we call them Horses,
and Dogs, in the Masculine, though there be Bitches, and Mares amongst them.
So to Fowls for the most part, we use the Feminine, as of Eagles, Hawks; we
say, she flies well; and call them Geese, Ducks, and Doves, which they fly at.

Fifth, the Common, or rather Doubtful gender, we use often, 5. Doubtful.
and with elegance: as in Cousin, Gossip, friend, Neighbor, Enemy, Servant,
Thief, etc.


When they may be of either Sex.

Sixth, is the Common of three Genders: 6. Common of three.
by which a Noune is divided into Substantive, and Adjective. For a Substantive
is a Noune of one only Gender, or (at the most) of two. And an Adjective is a
Noune of three Genders, being always infinite.

CHAP. XI. Of the Diminution of Nounes.
THe common Affection of Nounes is Diminution. A Diminutive is a Noune, noting
the diminution of his Primitive.

The diminution of Substantives has these four diverse terminations: Ell,
part, parcel. cock, cockrell. Et, capon, caponet. poke, poket. Baron,
Baronet. Ock, Hill, hillock. Bull, bullock. Ing, Goose, gosling. Duck, duckling.


So from the Adjective, Dear, darling.

Many Diminutives there are, which rather be abusions of speech, then any
proper English words. And such for the most part are Men's, and Women's Names:
Names, which are spoken in a kind of flattery, especially among familiar
friends and lovers: as Richard, Dick. William, Will. Margery, Madge. Mary, Mal.


Diminution of Adjectives is in this one end, ish: as White, Whitish. Green,
greenish.


After which manner certain Adjectives of likeness are also formed from their
Substantives: as Devil, divelish. Thief, theevish. Coult, coultish. Elf,
elvish.


Some Nounes steal the form of Diminution, which neither in signification
show it, nor can derive it from a Primitive: as Gibbet. Doublet. peevish.


CHAP. XII. Of Comparisons.
THese then are the common Affections, both of Substantives, and Adjectives:
there follow certain other, not general to them both, but proper and peculiar
to each one. The proper affection therefore of Adjectives is Comparison; of
which, after the Positive, there be two degrees reckoned, namely, the
Comparative, and the Superlative.

The Comparative is a degree declared by the Positive, with this Adverbe more;
as Wiser, more wise.


The Superlative is declared by the Positive with this Adverbe most: as Wisest,
most wise.


Both which degrees are formed of the Positive: the Comparative, by putting to
er: the Superlative by putting to est: as in these examples: Learned,
learneder, learnedest. Simple, simpler, simplest. True, trewer, trewest. Black,
blacker, blackest.


From this general rule a few special words are excepted: as Good. better.
best. Ill. worse. worst. Little. less. least. Much. more. most.


Many Words have no comparison; as Reverend. Puissant. Victorious. Renowned.


Other have both degrees; but lack the Positive: as former. foremost.

Some are formed of Adverbs: as Wisely. wiselier. wiseliest. Justly. justlier.
justliest.


Certain Comparisons, form out of themselves: as Less. lesser. Worse. worser.


CHAP. XIII. Of the First Declension.
ANd thus much concerning the proper Affection of Adjectives: The proper
Affection of Substantives follows: And that consists in Declining.

A Declension is the varying of a Noune Substantive into diverse terminations.
Where besides the Absolute, there is, as it were a Genitive Case, made in the
Singular number by putting to s.

Of Declensions there be two kinds: the first makes the Plural of the
Singular, by adding thereunto s. as Tree. Trees. Thing. things. Steeple.
Steeples.


So with s. by reason of the near affinity of these two Letters, whereof we
have spoken before: Park, Parkes. Bucke, Buckes. Dwarf, Dwarfes. Path, paths.


And in this first Declension, the Genitive plural is all one with the plural
absolute.

Singular
Father. Father.
Plur.
Fathers. Fathers.


General exceptions: Nounes ending in z. s. sh. g. and chapter in the declining
take to the genitive singular i. and to the plural e. as Sing.
Prince, Princes.
Plur.
Princes. Princes.


So, rose. bush. age. breech. etc. Which distinctions, not observed, brought in
first the monstrous Syntaxe of the Pronoune, his, joining with a Noune,
betokening a Possessor; as, the Prince his house; for, the Princes house.

Many words ending in Dipthongs, or Vowells, take neither Z. nor s. but only
change their Dipthongs or Vowells, retaining their last Consonant: as Mouse.
Mice, or Meece. Louse. Lyce, or Leece. Goose, Geece. Foot, Feet. Tooth. Teeth.


Exception of number: Some Nounes of the first Declension lack the Plural: as
Rest. Gold. Silver. Bread.


Other the Singular: as Riches. Goods.


Many being in their principal signification Adjectives are here declined, and
in the Plural stand in stead of Substantives: as Other, others. One, ones.
Hundred, hundreds. Thousand, thousands. Necessary, necessaries: and such like.


CHAPTER XIIII. Of the second Declension.
THe second Declension forms the Plural from the Singular, by putting to n.
which notwithstanding it have not so many Nounes, as has the former, yet
lacks not his difficulty, by reason of sundry exceptions, that cannot easily
be reduced to one general head. Of this former are, Ox, Oxen. Hose, Hosen.


Exceptions. Man, and Woman, by a contraction make men and women, or women, in
stead of manen and womenen. Cow, makes Kine, or keen: Brother, for Brethren,
has Brithren, and Brethern. Child forms the plural by adding r. besides the
root; for we say not childen, which according to the Rule given before, is the
right formation; but childern, because that sound is more pleasant to the ears.

Here the genitive plural is made by adding s. unto the Absolute: as Sing.
child childs.
Plur.
childern. childerns.


Exceptions from both Declensions: Some Nounes have the plural of both
Declensions: as House. houses. housen. Eye. eyes. eyes. Shoo. shoes. shooen.


CHAPTER. XV. Of Pronounes.
A Few irregular Nounes, varying from the general precepts, are commonly
termed Pronounes: whereof the first four in stead of the Genitive have an
Accusative case: as.

I. Me. You. or Ye.
Plur.
We. Us. Thou. Thee.
He. she. That. All three make in the Plural, They. Them.

Four Possessives: My, or Mine. Plural: Our, ours. Thy, thine. Plural, Your,
yours. His, Hers, both in the plural making, Their, theirs: As many
Demonstratives. This, plural, These. That, plural Those: yonne, or yonder
same.

Three Interrogatives, whereof one requiring both Genitive, and Accusative, and
taken for a Substantive: who? whose? whom? The other two Infinite, and
Adjectively used, what. whether.

Two Articles in gender, and number infinite, which the Latins lack: A. The.

One Relative, which: One other signifying a Reciprocation, self. pl. selves.

Composition of Pronounes is more common: My-self. our-selves. Thy-self.
your-selves. Him-self. Plural: Them-selves. Her-self. Plural: Them-selves.
Itself. Plural: Them-selves.


This-same, that-same. yonne-same, yonder-same, self-same.

CHAP. XVI. Of a Verb.
HItherto we have declared the whole Etymology of Nounes: which in easiness,
and shortness, is much to be preferred before the Latins, and the Grecians.
It remains with like brevitie, if it may be, to prosecute the Etymology of a
Verb. A Verb is a word of number, which has both Time, and Person. Time is
the difference of a Verb, by the present, past, and future, or to come. A
Verb finite therefore has three only Times, and those always imperfect.

The first is the present: as Amo, Love.


The second is the Time past: as Amabam, loved.


The third is the Future: as Ama, amato: Love, love.


The other Times both imperfect: as Amem, amarem, amabo.


And also perfect: as Amavi, amaverim, amaveram, Amavissem, amavero.


We use to express by a Syntaxe, as shall be seen in the proper place.

The future is made of the present, and is the same always with it.

Of this future arises a Verbo infinite, keeping the same termination: as
likewise of the present, and the Time past, are formed the Participle present
by adding of ing: as Love, loving.


The other is all one with the Time past.

The Passive is expressed by a Syntaxe, like the times going before, as
hereafter shall appear.

A Person is the special difference of a verbal number, whereof the present,
and the Time past, have in every number three.

The second, and third person singular of the present are made of the first, by
adding est, and eth; which last is sometime shortened into z. or s.

The time past is varied, by adding in like manner in the second person
singular est: and making the third like unto the first.

The future has but only two persons; the second, and the third, ending both
alike.

The persons Plural, keep the termination of the first person Singular. In
former times, till about the reign of King Henry the eighth, they were wont to
be formed, by adding en: thus, Loven. sayen. complainen.


But now (whatsoever is the cause) it has quite grown out of use, and that
other so generally prevailed, that I dare not presume to set this a-foot
again. Albeit, (to tell you my opinion) I am persuaded, that the lack hereof
well considered, will be found a great blemish to our tongue. For, seeing time,
and person be, as it were, the right, and left hand of a Verb; what can the
mayming bring else, but a lamenesse to the whole body?

And by reason of these two differences, a Verb is divided two manner of
ways. First, in respect of persons, it is called personal, or impersonall.
Personal, which is varied by three persons: as Love, love, loves.


Impersonall, which only has the third person: as behooves. yrketh.


Secondly, in consideration of the times, we term it active, or neuter:
Active, whose Participle past may be joined with the Verb am: as, I am loved.
Thou art hated.


Neuter, which cannot be so coupled: as Pertain. Dye. Live.


This therefore is the general forming of a Verb, which must to every
special one hereafter be applied.

CHAP. XVII. Of the first Conjugation.
THe varying of a Verb by persons, and times, both finite, and infinite, is
termed a Conjugation. Whereof there be two sorts. The first fetches the time
past from the present, by adding ed: and is thus varyed Pr. Love, love,
loves. Pa. Loved, loved'st, loved. Fu. Love, love. Pl. Love, love, love. Pl.
Loved, loved, loved. Pl. Love, love. Inf. Love. Part. pr. Loving. Part. past.
Loved.


Verbes are oft-times shortened: as Say, sest. would, would. should, shoud.
help, hope.


But, this is more common in the leaving out of e. as Loved'st, for lovedest.
Rubbed, rubbed. tookest, took'st.


Exception of the time-past, for ed. have t. as Licked, lick't. leaved, left.
Gaped, gap't. Blushed, blush't.


Where Verbes ending with d. for avoiding the concourse of two many Consonants,
do cast it away: as Lend, lent. Spend, spent. Gyrd, gyrt.


Make by a rare contraction is here turned into Made. Many Verbes in the time
past vary not at all from the present: such are Cast. hurt. cost. burst. etc.


CHAP. XVIII. Of the second Conjugation.
ANd so much for the first Conjugation; being indeed the most usual forming of
a Verb, and thereby also the common Inn to lodge every strange, and foreign
guest. That which follows for any thing, I can find (though I have with some
diligence searched after it,) intertaineth none, but natural, and home-borne
words, which though in number they be not many, a hundred and twenty, or
thereabouts; yet in variation are so diverse, and uncertain, that they need
much the stamp of some good Logic, to beat them into proportion. We have set
down that, that in our judgment agrees best with reason, and good order.
Which, notwithstanding, if it seem to any to be too rough hewed, let him plane
it out more smoothly, and I shall not only not envy it, but, in the behalf of
my Country, most heartily thank him for so great a benefit; hoping that I
shall be thought sufficiently to have done my part, if in towling this Bell, I
may draw others to a deeper consideration of the matter: for touching my self,
I must needs confess, that after much painful churning, this only would come,
which here we have devised.

The second Conjugation therefore turns the present into the time past, by
the only change of his Letters, namely of Vowells alone, or Consonants also.

Verbes changing Vowells only, have no certain termination of the Participle
past, but derive it as well from the present, as the time past, and that
otherwhile differing from either, as the examples following do declare.

The change of Vowells is, either of simple Vowells, or of Dipthongs; whereof
the first goes by the order of Vowells, which we also will observe.

An a. is turned into oo. Pres. Shake, shakest, shakes. Past. Shook,
shookest, shook. Fut. Shake, shake. Inf. Shake. Part. pre. Shaking. Part. pa.
Shaken. Plur. Shake, shake, shake. Pl. Shook, shook, shook. Plur. Shake,
shake.


This form do the Verbes, take, wake, forsake, and hang, follow, but hang, in
the time past makes hung; not, hangen.

Hereof the Verb, am, is a special exception, being thus varyed:

Pr. Am, art, is. Pl. are, are, are; or, Be, be, be, of the unused word, Be,
be, beeth, in the singular.

Past. Was, wast, was. or, Were, were, were. Fut. Be, be. Inf. Be. Part. pr.
Being. Part. past. Been. Ea. makes first e. short: Pl. Were, were, were. Plur.
Be, be. Pr. Lead. Past. Led. Part. pa. Led.
The rest of the times and persons, both singular, and plural in this, and the
other Verbs that follow, because they jumpe with the former examples, and
rules, in every point, we have chosen rather to omit, then to thrust in
needless words.

Such are the Verbs, eat, beat, (both making Participles past: besides eete,
and bette; eaten, and beaten) spread, shead, dread, sweat, shreade, tread.

Then a, or o. indifferently; Pr. Break. Past. Brake, or broke. Par. pa.
Broke, or broken.


Hither belong, speak, swear, tear, cleave, wear, steal, bear, sheare,
weave. So, get, and help: but halpe, is seldom used, save with the Poets.

i. is changed into a. Pr. give. Past. gave. Par. pa. given.


So, bid, and sit.

And here sometimes i. is turned into a. and o. both. Pr. Win. Past. Wanne,
or Won. Par. pa. Won.


Of this sort are fling, ring, wring, sing, sting, stick, spinne, strick,
drink, sink, spring, begin, stink, shrink, swing, swim.

Secondly, long i. into e. Pr. reed. Pa. read. Par. pa. read.


Also feed, meet, breed, bleed, speed.

Then into o. Pr. Sees. Pa. sodde. Par. pa. sodde, or sodden.


Lastly, it makes, aw: Pr. see. Pa. saw. Par. Pa. seen.


O. has a. Pr. come. Pa. came. Par. Pa. come.


And here it may besides keep his proper Vowell.

Pr. run. Pa. ran, or run. Par. pa. run.
oo. makes o.

Pr. choose. Pa. chose. Par. pa. chosen.
And one more, shoot, shot, in the Participle. past. shot, or shotten.


Some pronounce the Verbs by the Dipthong, ew. chewse, shewte, and that is
Scottish-like.

CHAP. XIX. Of the third Conjugation.
THe change of Dipthongs is of ai. and y. or aw. and ow. All which are changed
into ew. ai.
Pr. Slay. Pa. slew. Par. pa. slain.
y.
Pr. Fly. Pa. flew. Par. pa. flyne, or flowne.
aw.
Pr. draw. Pa. drew. Par. pa. drawn.
ow.
Pr. know. Pa. knew. Par. pa. known.


This form comes oftener, then the three former: snow, grow, throw, blow,
crow.

Secondly, y. is particularly turned, sometimes into the Vowells i. and o. i.
Pr. Byte. Pa. Bitte. Par. pa. Bitte, or bitten.


Likewise, hyde, quyte, chyde, stride, slide.

o.
Pr. Hight. Pa. Hoght. Par. pa. Hoght.
So, Shine, strive, thrive.

And, as Y. severally frames either; so may it jointly have them both: Pr.
Rise. Past. Rise, or rose. Par. pa. Rise, or risen.


To this kind pertain: Smite, write, bide, ride, clyme, dryve, clyve.

Sometimes, into the Dipthongs, ai, and ou. ai.
Pr. Lie. Pa. lay. Par. pa. line, or layne.
ou.
Pr. Find. Pa. found. Par. pa. found.


So, bind, grynde, wind, fight.

Last of all; aw, and ow; do both make e.

aw.
Pr. Fall. Past. fell. Par. pa. fallen.
Such is the Verb, fraught: which Chaucer in the Man of Laws tale: This
Merchants have done, freight their ships new.
ou.
Pr. Howld. Pa. Held. Par. pa. Held, or howlden.


Exceptions of the Time past.

Some that are of the first Conjugation, only have in the Participle past,
besides their own, the form of the second, and the third: as Hew, hewed, and
hewne. Mow, mowed, and mowen. Load, loaded, and laden.


CHAP. XX. Of the fourth Conjugation.
VErbs that convey the Time past for the present, by the change both of Vowells
and Consonants, following the terminations of the first Conjugation, end in d.
or t.

Pr. Stand. Pa. Stood.
Such are these words, Pr. Wolle. wolt. wolle. Pa. would, or would. would,
would. Fut. wolle. woll.


The infinite Times are not used: Pr. Can, can, can. Pa. An old Enlish word,
for which now we commonly use, shall, or shawll.
Cold, or could. Pr. Sholle. sholt. sholl. Pa. Should, or should.


The other Times of either Verb are lacking.

Pr. Hear. Pa. Heard. Pr. Sell. Pa. Sold. So, Tell, told.
Of the other sort are these, and such like: Pr. Feel. Pa. felt.


So, creep, sleep, weep, keep, sweep, meene. Pr. Teach. Pa. Taught.


To this form belong: think, retch, seake, reach, catch, bring, work; and
buy, and owe, which make, bought, and ought.

Pr. Dare, dare, dare. Pa. Durst, durst, durst. Pr. May, may, may. Pa.
Might, might, might.
These two Verbs want the other Times.

A general exception from the former Conjugations. Certain Verbs have the
form of either Conjugation: as Hang, hanged, and hung. Reach, reached, and
rought.


So, cleave, sheare, sting, clyme, cetch, etc.

CHAP. XXI. Of Adverbes.
THus much shall suffice for the Etymology of Words, that have number, both in
a Noune, and a Verb: whereof the former is but short, and easy: the other
longer, and wrapped with a great deal more difficulty. Let us now proceed to
the Etymology of words without number.

A Word without number is that, which without his principal signification
notes not any number. Whereof there be two kinds, an Adverbe, and a
Conjunction.

An Adverb is a word without number, that is joined to another word: as
Well-learned. He fights valiantly. He disputes very subtlely.


So that an Adverbe is as it were an Adjective of Nounes, Verbes; yea, and
Adverbs also themselves.

Adverbs are either of Quantity, or Quality. Of Quantity: as Enough.
too-much. altogether.


Adverbs of Quality be of diverse sorts:

First of Number: as Once. twice. thrice.

Secondly, of Time: as To day. yesterday. then. By, and by. ever. when.


Thirdly of Place: as Here. there. where. yonder.

Fourthly, in affirmation, or negation: as I. yes. indeed. no. not. nay.


Fifthly, in wishing, calling, and exhorting: wishing, as O. If.


Calling; as, Ho. sirrah. Exhorting: as so, so. there, there.

Sixthly in similitude, and likeness: as So. even so. Likewise, even as.


To this place pertain Adverbs of quality whatsoever, being formed from
Nounes, for the most part, by adding ly: as Just, justly. True, truly. Strong,
strongly. Name, namely.


Here also Adjectives, as well positive, as compared stand for Adverbs: When he
least weeneth, soonest shall he fall.


Interjections, commonly so termed, are in right Adverbs, and therefore may
justly lay title to this room. Such are these, that follow, with their like:
as Ah. alas. woe. fie. tush. ha, ha, he. st. a note of silence. Rr. that serves
to set dogs
together by the ears. Hrr, to chase birds away.

Prepositions are also a peculiar kind of Adverbs, and ought to be referred
hither. Prepositions are separable, or inseparable. Separable are for the most
part of Time, and Place: as Among. according. without. Before. after. before.
behind. Under. upon. beneath. over. Against. besides. near.


Inseparable Prepositions are they, which signify nothing, if they be not
compounded with some other word: as.

re. un. in Release. unlearned.
CHAP. XXII. Of Conjunctions.
A Conjunction is a word without number, knitting diverse speeches together: and
is declaring, or reasoning. Declaring, which utters the parts of a Sentence:
And that again is gathering, or separating. Gathering, whereby the parts are
affirmed to be true together, which is coupling, or conditioning. Coupling,
when the parts are severally affirmed: as And. also. neither.


Conditioning, by which the part following depends, as true, upon the part
going before; as If. unless. except.

A separating conjunction is that, whereby the parts (as being not true
together) are separated; and is Severing, or, sundring.


Severing, when the parts are separated only in a certain respect, or reason:
as But. although. notwithstanding.


Sundring, when the parts are separated indeed, and truly, so as more then one
cannot be true: as Either. whither. or.


Reasoning Conjunctions are those which conclude one of the parts by the other,
whereof some render a reason; and some do infer.

Rendering are such, as yield the cause of a thing going before: as For. because.


Inferring, by which a thing that comes after, is concluded by the former: as
Therefore. Wherefore. So that. insomuch that.


THE SECOND BOOK, OF THE ENGLISH GRAMMAR. Of Syntaxe.
CHAP. I. Of Apostrophus.
AS yet we have handled Etymology, and all the parts thereof. Let us come to
the consideration of the Syntaxe.

Syntaxe is the second part of Grammar, that teaches the Construction of
words; The Latins and Hebrews have none.
whereunto Apostrophus, an affection of words coupled, and joined together,
does belong.

Apostrophus is the rejecting of a Vowell from the beginning, or ending of a
Word. The note whereof, though it many times, through the negligence of Writers
and Printers, is quite omitted, yet by right should, and of the learneder sort
has his sign and mark, which is such a Semicircle' placed in the top.

In the end a Vowell may be cast away, when the word next following begins
with another: as The outward man decays:
So the inward man gets strength.
If ye' utter such words of pure love, and friendship,
What then may we look for, if ye' once begin to hate?
Gower. lib. 1. de confess. Amant. If thou' art of his company, tell forth, my
son.
It is time to' awake from sleep.


Vowells suffer also this Apostrophus before the Consonant h. Chaucer in the 3.
Book of Troilus. For of Fortunes sharp adversity,
The worst ^ind of infortune is this:
A man to' have been in prosperity,
And it to remember when it passed is.


The first kind then is common with the Greeks; but that which follows, is
proper to us, which though it be not of any, that I know, either in Writing,
or Printing, usually expressed: Yet considering that in our common speech,
nothing is more familiar, (upon the which all Precepts are grounded, and to the
which they ought to be referred) who can justly blame me, if, as near as I
can, I follow Natures call.

This rejecting therefore, is both in Vowells, and Consonants, going before,
Gower, lib. 4. There is no fire, there is no spark,
There is no door, which may charke.


Who answered, that he was not privy to it, and in excuse seemed to be very
sore displeased with the matter, that his men of War had done it without his
commandment, or consent.

CHAP. II. Of the Syntaxe of one Noune with another.
SYntaxe appertains, both to words of number, and without number, where the
want, and superfluity of any part of speech are two general, and common
exceptions. Of the former kind of Syntaxe is that of a Noune; and Verb.

The Syntaxe of a Noune, with a Noune, is in number, and gender: as Esau could
not obtain his fathers blessing, though he sought it with tears.
Jesabel was a wicked woman, for she slew the Lords Prophets.
An Idol is no god, for it is made with hands.


In all these examples ye see Esau, and he; Jezabel, and she; Idol, and it,
to agree in the singular number. The first example also in the Masculine
gender: the second in the Feminine: the third, in the Neuter. And in this
Construction (as also throughout the whole English Syntaxe) order, and the
placing of words is one especial thing to be observed. So that when a
Substantive, and an Adjective, are immediately joined together, the Adjective
must go before: as Plato shut Poets out of his Commonwealth, as effeminate
Writers, unprofitable members, and enemies to virtue.

When two Substantives come together, whereof one is the name of a Possessor,
the other of a thing possessed, then has the name of a Possessor the former
place, and that in the Genitive: All man's righteousness is like a defiled
cloth.
Gower. lib. 1. An Owl flies by night,
Out of all other birds sight.


But if the thing possessed go before, then does the Preposition of, come
between: Ignorance is the mother of error.
Gower. lib. So that it proves well therefore
The strength of man is sone lore.


Which Preposition may be coupled with the thing possessed, being in the
Genitive. Nort. in Arsan. A road made into Scanderbech's Country by the Duke
of Mysia's men; for the Dukes men of Mysia.


Here the absolute serves sometimes in stead of a Genitive: All trouble is
light, which is endured for righteousness sake.

Otherwise, two Substantives are joined together by apposition; Sir Thomas More
in King Richards Story: George Duke of Clarence, was a Prince at all points
fortunate. Where if both be the names of Possessors, the latter shall be in the
Genitive. Fox in the 2. Volume of Acts and Monuments:
King Henry the Eight, married with the Lady Katherine his Brother, Prince
Arthurs wife.


The general exceptions:

The Substantive is often lacking: Sir Thomas More.

Sometime without small things, greater cannot stand. Chaucer. For some folk
woll be won for riches, And some folk for strokes, and some folk for
gentleness.

Likewise the Adjective: It is hard in prosperity to preserve true Religion,
true godliness, and true humility.

Lidgate, lib. 8. speaking of Constantine, That whilome had the divination
As chief Monarch, chief Prince, and chief President
Over all the world, from East to Occident.


In Greek, and Latin this want were barbarous: the Hebrews notwithstanding
use it.
But the more notable lack of the Adjectives is in the want of the relative; In
the things, which we least mistrust, the greatest danger does often lurk.
Gower, lib. 2. For thy the wisemen ne demen
The things after that their they semen.
But, after that, which they know, and find.
Ps. 118.22. The stone, the builders refused. for, which the builders refused.


And here besides the common wanting of a Substantive, whereof we spoke before;
there is another more special, and proper to the Absolute, and the Genitive.

Chaucer in the 3. book of Fame.
This is the mother of tidings,
As the Sea is mother of Wells, and is mother of Springs.
Rebecca clothed Jacob with garments of his brothers
Superfluity also of Nounes is much used: Sir Tho: More, whose death King
Edward (although he commanded it) when he wist it was done, pitiously bewailed
it, and sorrowfully repented it. Chaucer in his Prologue to the Man of Laws
tale. Such law, as a man yeveth another wight,
He should himself usen it by right.
Gower, l. 1. For, whosoever woll another blame,
He seeks often his own shame.


Special exceptions, and first of Number. Two Singulars are put for our
Plural: All Authority, and Custom of men, exalted against the word of God,
must yield themselves prisoners.

Gower. In thine aspect are all alich,
The poor man, and eke the rich.


The second Person plural is for reverence sake to one singular thing: Gower,
lib. 1. O good Father dear,
Why make ye this heavy cheer.


Where also after a Verb plural, the singular of the Noune is retained: I
know you are a discreet, and faithful man, and therefore am come to ask your
advice.

Exceptions of Genders.

The Articles he, and it, are used in each others Gender.

Sir Tho. More. The south wind sometime swells of himself before a tempest.

Gower of the earth. And for thy men it delve, and ditch,
And earen it, with strength of plough:
Where it has of himself enough,
So that his need is least.


It, also follows for the Feminine: Gower, lib. 4. He swore it should naught
be let,
That, if she have a daughter bore,
That it ne should be forlore.


CHAP. III. Of the Syntaxe of a Pronoune with a Noune.
THe Articles a. and the, are joined to Substantives common never to proper
names of men: William Lambert in the Perambulation of Kent.

The cause only, and not the death makes a Martyr. Yet, with a proper name
used by a Metaphor, or borrowed manner of speech, both Articles may be coupled:
Who so avoucheth the manifest, and known truth, ought not therefore to be
called a Goliath, that is a monster, and impudent fellow, as he was.

Jewel against Harding: You have adventured your self to be the noble David,
to conquer this Giant.

Nort. in Arsan. And if ever it were necessary, now it is, when many an
Athanasius, many an Atticus, many a noble Prince, and godly Personage lies
prostrate at your feet for succor.

Where this Metaphor is expounded. So, when the proper name is used to note
ones parentage, which kind of Nounes the Grammarians call Patronimicks: Nort.
in Gabriells Oration to Scanderbech.

For you know well enough the wiles of the Ottomans.
Perkin Warbeck, a stranger borne, fained himself to be a Plantaginet.
When a Substantive, and an Adjective are joined together, these Articles are
put before the Adjective: A good conscience is a continual feast.
Gower, lib. 1. For false semblant has evermore
Of his counsel in company,
The dark untrue Hypocrisy.


Which Construction in the Article, A, notwithstanding some Adjectives will not
admit: Sir Tho: More. Such a Serpent is ambition, and desire of vainglory.
Chaucer. Under a Shepherd false, and negligent,
The Wolf has many a Sheep, and Lamb to rent.


Moreover, both these Articles are joined to any cases of the Latins, the
Vocative only excepted: as, A man says. The strength of a man.
I sent to a man. I hurt a man.
I was sued by a man.


Likewise, the Apostle testifies: The zeal of the Apostle; Give ear to the
Apostle: Follow the Apostle: Depart not from the Apostle.

So that in these two Pronounes the whole Construction almost of the Latins is
contained. The, agrees to any number: A, only to the singular, save when it is
joined with those Adjectives, which do of necessity require a Plural: The
Conscience is a thousand witnesses.
Lidgate, lib. 1. Though for a season they sit in high cheares,
Their fame shall fade within a few years.


A, goes before words beginning with Consonants, and before all Vowells, (
Dipthongs, whose first letter is y. or w. excepted) it is turned into An: Sir
Tho: More: For men use to write an evil turn in marble stone; but a good
turn they write in the dust.

Gower, lib. 1. For all shall dye; and all shall pass
As well a Lion, as an Ass.


So may it be also before h.

Sir Tho: More. What mischief works the proud enterprise of an high heart.

A, has also the force of governing before a Noune: Sir Tho. More: And the
Protector had laid to her for manner sake, that she was a Council with the
Lord Hastings to destroy him.

Chaucer, 2. book of Troylus: And on his way fast homeward he sped,
And Troylus he found alone in bed.


Likewise, before the Participle present, An, has the force of a Gerund: Nort.
in Arsan. But there is some great tempest a brewing toward us
Lidgate, lib. 7. The King was stain, and ye did assent
In a Forest an hunting, when that he went.


The Article, The, joined with the Adjective of a Noune proper may follow,
after the Substantive: Chaucer. -- Their Chaunticleer the fair
Was wont, and eke his Wives to repair.


Otherwise it varieth from the common Rule. Again, this Article by a
Synecdoche does restrain a general, and common name to some certain and
special one: Gower in his Prologue: The Apostle writes unto us all,
And says, that upon us his fall,
The end of the world. for Paul.


So by the Philosopher, Aristotle. By the Poet, among the Grecians, Homer: with
the Latins, Virgill, is understood.

This, and that, being Demonstratives; and what, the Interrogative, are taken
for Substantives: Sir John Cheek; in his Oration to the Rebels: Ye rise for
Religion: What Religion taught you that?
Chaucer, in the reves tale: And this is very sooth, as I you tell.


Ascham, in his Discourse of the Affairs of Germany. A wonderful folly in a
great man himself, and some piece of misery in a whole Commonwealth, where
fools chiefly, and flatterers, may speak freely what they will; and good men
shall commonly be shent, if they speak what they should.

What, also for an Adverbe of Partition:

Lambert. But now, in our memory, what by decay of the haven, In the other
tongues, quid, (...), have not the force of partition, nor illud (...), of a
Relative.
and what by overthrow of Religious Houses, and loss of Calice, it is brought
in manner to miserable nakedness, and decay.

Chaucer. 3. book of Troilus: Then wot I well, she might never fail
For to been helped, what at your instance?
What at your other friends governance.
That, is used for a Relative:

Sir, John Cheek. Sedition is an Aposteame, which, when it breaks inwardly,
puts the State in great danger of Recovery; and corrupts the whole
Commonwealth, with the rotten fury, that it has putrefied with. For, with
which

They, and those, are sometimes taken, as it were, for Articles: Fox, 2. Volume
of Acts: That no kind of disquietnesse should be procured against them of Bern,
and Zurick.

Gower, lib. 2. My brother has us all sold
To them of Rome. --


The Pronoune, These, has a rare use being taken for an Adjective of
similitude: It is, neither the part of an honest man to tell these tales: nor
if a wise man to receive them. Lidgate, lib. 5. Lo, how these Princes proud,
and retchlesse,
Have shameful ends, which cannot live in peace.


Him, and Them, be used reciprocally for the Compounds, himself, themselves:
Fox. The Garrison desired, that they might depart with bag, and baggage.

Chauncer in the Squires tale: So deep in grain he dyed his colors,
Right, as a Serpent hides him under flowers.


His, their, and theirs, have also a strange use; that is to say, being
Possessives, they serve in stead of Primitives: Chaucer: And shortly so far
forth this thing went,
That my will, was his wills instrument.


Which in Latin were a solecisme; for there we should not say, suae
voluntatis, but voluntatis ipsius.

Pronounes have not the Articles a, and the, going before which, the Relative,
self, and same, only excepted: The same lewd cancred Carle, practices
nothing, but how he may overcome, and oppress the Faith of Christ, for the
which, you, as you know, have determined to labor and travel continually.

The Possessives, My, thy, our, your, and their, go before words: as, my land:
thy goods; and so in the rest: Mine, thine, ours, yours, hers, and theirs,
follow, as it were, in the Genitive case: as these lands are mine, thine, etc.

His, does indifferently go before, or follow after: as, his house is a fair
one; and, this house is his.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Syntaxe of Adjectives.
ADjectives of Quality are coupled with Pronounes Accusative cases:

Chaucer. And he was wise, hardy, secret, and rich,
Of these three points, nas none him lych.
Certain Adjectives include a Partition: From the head does life and motion
flow to the rest of the members.

The Latins Comparative governs an Ab^ative; their Superlative a Genitive
plural. The Greckes, both Comparative, and Superlative has a Genitive; but in
neither tongue is a sign going between.
The Comparative agrees to the parts compared, by adding this Preposition,
than: Chaucer, 3. book of Fame.

What did this Aeolus, but he
Took out his black trumpe of brass,
That blacker than the Devil was.
The Superlative is joined to the parts compared by this Preposition, of:
Gower, lib. 1. Pride is of every miss the prick:
Pride is the worst vice of all wick.
Jewel. The friendship of truth is best of all.


Oftentimes both Degrees are expressed by these two Adverbs, more, and most:
as, more excellent, most excellent. Whereof the latter seems to have his
proper place in those that are spoken in a certain kind of excellency, but
yet without Comparison: Hector was a most valiant man; that is, inter
fortissimos.

Furthermore, these Adverbs, more, and most, are added to the Comparative, and
Superlative degrees themselves, which should before the Positive: Sir Tho.
More. Forasmuch as she saw the Cardinal more readier to depart, then the
remnant; For, not only the high dignity of the Civil Magistrate, but the most
basest handycrafts are holy, when they are directed to the honor of God.



And, this is a certain kind of English Atticisme, or eloquent Phrase of
speech, imitating the manner of the most ancientest, and finest Grecians, who,
for more emphasis, and vehemencies sake used to speak.

Positives are also joined with the Preposition, of, like the Superlative:
Elias was the only man of all the Prophets that was left alive.
Gower. lib. 4. The first point of sloth I call
Lachesse, and is the chief of all.


CHAPTER. V. Of the Syntaxe of a Verb with a Noune.
HItherto we have declared the Syntaxe of a Noune: The Syntaxe of a Verb
follows, being either of Verb with a Noune; or, of one Verb with another.

The Syntaxe of a Verb with a Noune is in number, and person: as I am content.
You are mis-inform'd.
Chaucer 2. book of Fame. For, as flame is but lighted smoke;
Right so is sound air ybroke.


I my self, and your selves, agree unto the first person: You, thou, it, thy
self, your selves, to the second: All other Nounes and Pronounes (that are of
any person) to the third: Again, I, we, thou, he, she, they, who, do ever
govern: unless it be in the Verb, am, that requires the like case after it,
as is before it, Me, us, thee, her, them, him, whom, are governed of the
Verb. The rest, which are Absolute, may either govern, or be governed.

A Verb impersonall in Latin is here expressed by an English impersonall,
with this Article, it, going before: as, oportet, it behooves: decet, it
becomes. General Exceptions:

The person governing is often understood by that went before: True Religion
glorifieth them that honor it; and is a target unto them that are a buckler
unto it.

Chaucer. Women's counsels brought us first to woe,
And made Adam from Paradise to go.
But this is more notable, and also more common in the future; wherein for the
most part we never express any person, not so much as at the first:

Fear God. Honor the King. Likewise the Verb is understood by some other
going before: Nort. in Arsan. When the danger is most great, natural strength
most fe^ble, and divine aid most needful.



Certain Pronounes, governed of the Verb, do here abound. Sir Thomas More.
And this I say, although they were not abused, as now they be, and so long have
been, that I fear me ever they will be.

Chaucer, 3. book of Fame: And as I wondered me, ywis
Upon this house.
Idem in This be: She rist her up with a full dreary heart:
And in cave with dreadful fate she start.
Special Exceptions.

Nounes signifying a multitude, though they be of the Singular number, require
a Verb plural.

Lidgate, lib. 2. And wise men rehearsen in sentence
Where folk be drunken, there is no resistance.
This exception is in other Nounes also very common; especially when the Verb
is joined to an Adverbe, or Conjunction: It is preposterous to execute a man,
before he have been condemned.

Gower, lib. 1. Although a man be wise himselve,
Yet is the wisdom more of twelve.
Chaucer: Therefore I read you this counsel take,
Forsake sin, ere sin you forsake.
In this exception of number, the Verb sometime agrees not with the governing
Noune of the plural number, as it should, but with the Noune governed: as,
Riches is a thing oft-times more hurtful, then profitable to the owners. After
which manner the Latins also speak: omnia pontus erat. The other special
Which notwithstanding the Hebrews use very strangely, Kullain tazubu ubouna,
Job. 17.10. All they return ye and come now.
exception is not in use.

CHAP. VI. Of the Syntaxe of a Verb, with a Verb.
WHen two Verbes meet together, whereof one is governed by the other, the
latter is put in the infinite, and that with this sign to, coming between;
as Good men ought to join together in good things.

But, will, do, may, can, shall, dare, (when it is in Transitive) must, and
let, when it signifies a sufferance, receive not the sign:

Gower. To God no man may be fellow.

This sign set before an infinite, not governed of a Verb, changes it into
the nature of a Noune.

Nort. in Arsan. To win is the benefit of Fortune: but to keep is the power
of wisdom.

General Exceptions.

The Verb governing is understood: Nort. in Arsan. For if the head, which is
the life, and stay of the body, betray the members, must not the members also
needs betray one another; and so the whole body, and head go altogether to
utter wreck, and destruction?

The other general exception is So in Greek and Latin, but in Hebrew this
exception is often. Esai. 6.9. which hebraisme the new Testament is wont to
retain by turning the Hebrew infinite, either into a verbal, (...). Matthew.
13.14. or a Participle, (...). Act. 7.34
wanting.

The Special exception. Two Verbes, have, and am, require always a Participle
past without any sign: as, I am pleased. Thou art hated. Save when they import
a necessity, or conveniencie of doing any thing: In which case they are very A
phrase proper unto our tongue, save that the Hebrews seem to have the former.
Job 20.23. When he is to fill his belly.
eloquently joined to the infinite, the sign coming between: By the example
of Herod, all Princes are to take heed how they give ear to flatterers.

Lidgate, lib. 1. Truth, and falsnesse in what they have done,
May no while assemble in one person.
And here those Times, which in Etymology we remembered to be wanting, are set
forth by the Syntaxe of Verbes joined together. The Syntaxe of imperfect Times
in this manner:

The Presents by the infinite, and the Verb, may, or can, as for, Amem,
Amarem: I may love: I might love. And again, I can love: I could love.

The futures are declared by the infinite, and the Verb, shall, or will: as
Amabo: I shall, or, will love.

Amavero adds thereunto, have, taking the nature of two diverse Times; that
is, of the future, and the Time past: I shall have loved: or, I will have loved.


The perfect Times are expressed by the Verb, have: as, Amavi. Amaveram. I
have loved. I had loved.


Amaverim, and Amavissem add might unto the former Verb: as, I might have
loved.


The infinite past, is also made by adding, have: as, Amavisse, to have loved.


Verbes Passive are made of the Participle past, and, am, the Verb. Amor, and
Amabar, by the only putting to of the Verb: as, Amor, I am loved. Amabar, I
was loved.


Amer, and Amarer, have it governed of the Verb may, or can: as, Amer, I may
be loved: or, I can be loved.
Amarer, I might be loved, or, I could be loved.
In Amabor, it is governed of shall, or, will: as,
I shall, or, will be loved.


CHAP. VII. Of the Syntaxe of Adverbes.
THis therefore is the Syntaxe of words, having number, there remains that of
words without number, which stands in Adverbs, or Conjunctions. Adverbs are
taken one for the other; that is to say, Adverbs of likeness, for Adverbs of
Time. As he spoke those words, he gave up the ghost. Gower, lib. 1. Anon, as
he was meek, and tame.
He found toward his God the same.


The like is to be seen in Adverbs of Time, and Place, used in each others
stead, as among the Latins, and the Grecians.

Nort. in Arsan. Let us not be ashamed to follow the counsel, and example of
our enemies, where it may do us good.

Adverbs stand in stead of Relatives:

Lidgate, lib. 1. And little worth is fairness in certain
In a person, where no virtue is seen.
Nort. to the Northern Rebels. Few women storm against the marriage of
Priests, but such as have been Priests harlots, or feign would be.

Chaucer in his Ballad. But great God disposes,
And makes casual by his Providence
Such things as frail man purposes. For, those things, which.
Certain Adverbs in the Syntaxe of a Substantive, and an Adjective meeting
together, cause, a, the Article to follow the Adjective.

Sir John Cheek: O! with what spite was sundred so noble a body, from so godly
a mind.

Jewel. It is too light a labor to strive for names.
Chaucer. Thou art at ease, and hold thee well therein.
As great a praise is to keep well, as win.
Adjectives The Greek Article is set before the positive also: Theocrit. (...).
compared, when they are used Adverbially, may have the Article the, going
before.

Jewel. The more enlarged is your liberty, the less cause have you to
complain.

Adverbs are wanting. Sir Tho. More. And how far be they off that would
help, as God send grace, they hurt not; for, that they hurt not.

Oftentimes they are used without any necessity, for greater vehemency sake;
as, Then-afterward, Again, once more.

Gower. He saw also the bows spread
Above all earth, in which were
The kind of all birds there.
Prepositions are joined with the In Greek, and in Latin, they are coupled;
some, with one oblique case; some with another.
Accusative cases of Pronounes: Sir Thomas More. I exhort, and require you, for
the love that you have borne to me; and, for the love that I have borne to you;
and for the love, that our Lord bears to us all.

Gower. lib. 1. For Lucifer, with them that fell,
Bare Pride with him into Hell.


They may also be coupled with the Possessives: Mine, thine, ours, yours, his,
hers, theirs. Nort. to the Rebels. Think you, her Majesty, and the wisest of
the Realm, have no care of their own souls, that have charge both of their
own, and yours?

These The Hebrews set them always before.
Prepositions follow sometimes the Nounes they are coupled with: God has made
Princes, their Subjects guides, to direct them in the way, which they have to
walk in.

But, ward, or wards; and, toward, or, toward, have the same Syntaxe, that
versus, and adversus, have with the Latins: that is, the latter coming after
the Noune, which it governs, and the other contrarily: Nort. in Paul Angels
Oration to Scanderbech. For, his heart being unclean to Godward, and
spiteful toward men, does always imagine mischief.

Lidgate, lib. 7. And south- ward runs to Caucasus,
And folk of Scythie, that been laborious.
Now, as before in two Articles, a, and the, the whole construction of the
Latins, was contained: so their whole rection is by Prepositions neere-hand
declared: where the Preposition of, has the force of the Genitive; to, of the
Dative; from, of, in, by, and such like of the Ablative: as, the praise of God.
Be thankful to God. Take the cock of the hoope. I was saved from you by you,
in your house.

Prepositions matched with the The like nature in Greek, and Hebrew have
Prepositions matched with the infinite, as (...).
Participle present, supply the place of Gerundes: as, In loving, of loving, by
loving with loving, from loving, etc.

Prepositions do also govern This in Hebrew is very common: from now, that
is, from this time, whence proceed those hebraismes in the New Testament;
(...), etc.
Adverbs.

Lidgate, lib. 9. Sent from above, as she did understand.

General exceptions: Diverse Prepositions are very often wanting, whereof it
shall be sufficient to give a taste in those, that above the rest, are most
worthy to be noted.

Of, in an Adjective of Partition: Lidgate, lib. 5.

His Lieges each one being of one assent
To live, and dye with him in his intent.
The Preposition, touching, concerning, or some such like does often want,
after the manner of the Hebrew Lamed: Gower. The privities of man's heart
They speaken, and sound in his ear,
As though they loud winds were.


Riches, and inheritance, they be given by Gods providence, to whom of his
wisdom he thinks good: For, touching, riches, and inheritance; or some such
like Preposition.

If, is somewhat strangely lacking: Nort. in Arsan. Unwise are they, that end
their matters with, Had I wist.

Lidgate, lib. 1. For, ne were not this prudent ordinance,
Some, to obey, and above to gye
Destroyed were all worldly Policy.
The superfluity of Prepositions is more rare: Jewel. The whole Universitie,
and City of Oxford.

Gower. So that my Lord touchend of this
I have answered, how, that it is.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Syntaxe of Conjunctions.
THe Syntaxe of Conjunctions is in order only; Neither, and, either, are placed
in the beginning of words: Nor, and or, coming after: Sir Thomas More: He can
be no Sanctuary-man, that has neither discretion to desire it, nor malice to
deserve it.

Sir John Cheek. Either by ambition you seek Lordlinesse, much unfit for you;
or by covetousness, ye be unsatiable, a thing likely enough in you: or else by
folly, ye be not content with your estate, a fancy to be plucked out of you.

Lidgate, lib. 2. Wrong, clyming up of states, and degrees,
Either by murder, or by false treasons
Asks a fall, for their final guerdons.
Here, for nor in the latter member, ne is sometime used: Lambert. But the
Archbishop set himself against it, affirming plainly, that he neither could,
ne would suffer it.

The like Syntaxe is also to be marked in so, and as, used comparatively: for,
when the comparison is in quantity, then so goes before, and as follows.
Ascham. He hates himself, and hastes his own hurt, that is content to hear
none so gladly, as either a fool, or a flatterer.

Gower, lib. 1. Men wist in thilk time none.
So fair a wight, as she was one.
Sometime for so, as comes in. Chaucer. lib. 5. Troil.
And said, I am, albeit to you no joy,
As gentle a man, as any wight in Troy.
But if the Comparison be in quality, then it is contrary: Gower;
For, as the fish, if it be dry
More in default of water dye:
Right so, without air, or live,
No man, nebeast, might thrive.
And, in the beginning of a sentence, serves in stead of an Admiration: And,
what a notable sign of patience was it in Job, not to murmr against the
Lord? Chaucer 3. book of Fame. What, quoth she, and be ye wood!
And, wene ye for to do good,
And, for to have of that no fame?


Conjunctions of diverse sorts are taken one for another: as, But, a severing
Conjunction, for a conditioning: Chaucer in the man of laws tale. But it were
with the ilk eyes of his mind,
With which men seen' after they ben blind.


Sir. Thomas More. Which, neither can they have, but you give it: neither can
you give it, if ye agree not.

The selfsame Syntaxe as in And, the coupling Conjunction; The Lord Berners
in the Preface to his translation of Froisart: What knowledge should we have of
ancient things past, and history were not.

Sir John Cheek. Ye have waxed greedy now upon Cities, and have attempted
mighty spoils to glut up, and you could your wasting hunger.

On the other side, for, a cause-renderer, has sometime the force of a
severing one.

Lidgate. lib. 3. But it may fall a Drewry in his right,
To outrage a Giant for all his great might.
Here the two general exceptions are termed, Asyndeton, and Polysyndeton.
Asyndeton, when the Conjunction wants: The Universities of Christendom are
the eyes, the lights, the leaven, the salt, the seasoning of the world.

Gower. To whom her heart cannot heal,
Turn it to woe, turn it to weal.
Here the sundring Conjunction, or, is lacking; and in the former example, and,
the coupler.

Polysyndeton is in doubling the Conjunction more then it need to be: Gower,
lib. 4. So, whether that he frieze, or sweat,
Or' tte be in, or 'tte be out,
He will be idle all about.


CHAPTER IX. Of the Distinction of Sentences.
ALL the parts of Syntaxe have already been declared. There rests one
general Affection of the whole, dispersed through every member thereof, as the
blood is through the body; and consists in the breathing, when we pronounce
any Sentence; For, whereas our breath is by nature so short, that we cannot
continue without a stay to speak long together; it was thought necessary, as
well for the speakers ease, as for the plainer deliverance of the things
spoken, to invent this means, whereby men pausing a pretty while, the whole
speech might never the worse be understood.

These Distinctions are, either of a perfect, or imperfect Sentence. The
distinctions of an imperfect Sentence are two, a sub distinction, and a Comma.

A Sub-distinction is a mean breathing, when the word serves indifferently,
both to the parts of the Sentence going before, and following after, and is
marked thus (;)

A Comma is a distinction of an imperfect Sentence, wherein with somewhat a
longer breath, the Sentence following; and is noted with this shorter
semicircle (,).

Hither pertains a The Hebrews have no peculiar note to discern this
Parenthesis by, nor the Interrogation, and Admiration following.
Parenthesis, wherein two Comma's include a Sentence:

Jewel. Certain falsehoods (by mean of good utterance) have sometime more
likelihood of truth, then truth it self.

Gower, lib. 1. Division. (the Gospel says)
One house upon another laith.
Chaucer 3. book of Fame. For time, ylost (this know ye)
By no way may recovered be.
These imperfect distinctions in the Syntaxe of a Substantive, and an Adjective
give the former place to the Substantive: Ascham. Thus the poor Gentleman
suffered grief; great for the pain; but greater for the spite.

Gower. lib. 2. Speaking of the envious person:
Though he a man see virtuous,
And full of good condition,
Thereof makes he no mention.
The Distinction of a perfect Sentence has a more full stay, and does rest the
spirit, which is a Pause, or a Period.

A Pause is a Distinction of a Sentence, though perfect in it self, yet joined
to another, being marked with two pricks.(:)

A period is the Distinction of a Sentence, in all respects perfect, and is
marked with one full prick, over against the lower part of the last letter,
thus (.)

If a Sentence be with an Interrogation, we use this note (?)

Sir John Cheek. Who can persuade, where treason is above reason; and might
rules right; and it is had for lawful, whatsoever is lustful; and
Commotioners are better then Commissioners; and common woe is named
Commonwealth?

Chaucer, 2. book of Fame. Lo, is it not a great mischance,
To let a fool have governance,
Of things, that he cannot demayne?
Lidgate, lib. 1. For, if wives be found variable,
Where shall husbands find other stable?
If it be pronounced with an Admiration, then thus (!) Sir Tho. More.

O Lord God, the blindness of our mortal nature!

Chaucer, 1. book of Fame. Alas! what harm does appearance,
When it is false in existence!
These Distinctions (whereof the first is commonly neglected) as they best
agree with nature: so come they nearest to the ancient stays of Sentences
among the Romans, and the Grecians. An example of all four to make the matter
plain, let us take out of that excellent Oration of Sir John Cheek; against
the Rebels, whereof before we have made so often mention: When common order of
the law can take no place in unruly, and disobedient subjects: and all men will
of wilfulness resist with rage, and think their own violence, to be the best
justice: then be wise Magistrates compelled by necessity, to seek an extreme
remedy, where mean salves help not, and bring in the Martial Law, where none
other law serves. *

The End,
TIMBER: OR, DISCOVERIES; MADE UPON MEN AND MATTER: AS THEY have flowed out of
his daily Readings; or had their refluxe to his peculiar Notion of the Times.

By BEN: JOHNSON.

-- Tecum habita, ut noris quam sit tibi curta supellex.

Pers. sat. 4. LONDON, Printed M.DC.XLI.

SYLVA.
RErum, and sententiarum, quasi (...) dicta a multiplici materia, and
varietate, in iis contenta. Quemadmodum enim vulgo solemus infinitam arborum
nascentium indiscriminatim multitudinem Sylvam dicere: Ita etiam libros suos in
quibus variae, and diversae materiae opuscula temere congesta erant, Sylvas
appellabant Antiqui: Tymber-trees.

EXPLORATA: OR, DISCOVERIES.
ILl Fortune never crush't that man, whom good Fortune deceived not. Fortuna.
I therefore have counseled my friends, never to trust to her fairer side,
though she seemed to make peace with them: But to place all things she gave
them so, as she might ask them again without their trouble; she might take
them from them, not pull them: to keep always a distance between her, and
themselves. He knows not his own strength, that has not met Adversity. Heaven
prepares good men with crosses; but no ill can happen to a good man. Contraries
are not mixed. Yet, that which happens to any man, may to every man. But it is
in his reason what he accounts it, and will make it.

Change into extremity is very frequent, and easy. Casus.
As when a beggar suddenly grows rich, he commonly becomes a Prodigal; for,
to obscure his former obscurity, he puts on riot and excess.

No man is so foolish, Consilia.
but may give an other good counsel sometimes; and no man is so wise, but may
easily err, if he will take no others counsel, but his own. But very few
men are wise by their own counsel; or learned by their own teaching. For he
that was only taught by himself, had a fool to his Master. (...). Fama.


A Fame that is wounded to the world, would be better cured by another
Apology, then its own: For few can apply medicines well themselves. Besides,
the man that is once hated, both his good, and his evil deeds oppress him:
He is not easily emergent.

In great Affairs it is a work of difficulty to please all. Negotia.
And often times we lose the occasion of carrying a business well, and
thoroughly, by our too much haste. For Passions are spiritual Rebels, and
raise sedition against the understanding.

There is a Necessity all men should love their country: Amor Patriae.
He that professes the contrary, may be delighted with his words, but his
heart is there.

Natures that are hardened to evil, you shall sooner break, Ingenia.
then make straight; they are like poles that are crooked, and dry: there is no
attempting them.

We praise the things we hear, with much more willingness, Applausus.
then those we see: because we envy the present, and reverence the past;
thinking our selves instructed by the one, and over-laid by the other.

Opinion is a light, vain, crude, and imperfect thing, Opinio.
settled in the Imagination; but never arriving at the understanding, there to
obtain the tincture of Reason. We labor with it more then Truth. There is
much more holds us, then presses us. An ill fact is one thing, an ill fortune
is another: Yet both often times sway us alike, by the error of our thinking.

Many men believe not themselves, Impostura.
what they would persuade others; and less do the things, which they would
impose on others: but least of all, know what they themselves most confidently
boast. Only they set the sign of the Cross over their outer doors, and
sacrifice to their gut, and their groyne in their inner Closets.

Iactura vitae.
What a deal of cold business does a man mis-spend the better part of life in!
in scattering complements, tendering visits, gathering and venting news,
following Feasts and Plays, making a little winter-love in a dark corner.

Hypocrita.
Puritanus Hypocrita est Hareticus, quem opinio propriae perspicaciae, qua sibi
videtur, cum paucis in Ecclesia dogmatibus, errores quosdam animadvertisse, de
statu mentis deturbavit: unde sacro furore percitus, phrenetice pugnut contru
Magistratus, sic ratus, obedientiam praestare Deo.

Mutua auxilia.
Learning needs rest: Sovereignty gives it. Sovereignty needs counsel: Learning
affords it. There is such a Consociation of offices, between the Prince, and
whom his favor breeds, that they may help to sustain his power, as he their
knowledge. It is the greatest part of his Liberality, his Favor: And from whom
does he hear discipline more willingly, or the Arts discoursed more gladly,
then from those, whom his own bounty, and benefits have made able and
faithful?

Cognit universi.
In being able to counsel others, a Man must be furnished with an universal
store in himself, to the knowledge of all Nature: That is the matter, and
seed-plot; There are the seats of all Argument, and Invention. But especially,
you must be cunning in the nature of Man: There is the variety of things, which
are as the Elements, and Letters, which his art and wisdom must rank, and
order to the present occasion. For we see not all letters in single words; nor
all places in particular discourses. That cause seldom happens, wherein a man
will use all Arguments.

Consiliarii adjunct. Probitas. sapientia.
The two chief things that give a man reputation incounsell, are the opinion of
his Honesty; and the opinion of his Wisdom: The authority of those two will
persuade, when the same Counsels uttered by other persons less qualified, are
of no efficacy, or working.

Wisdom without Honesty is mere craft, and coofinage. And therefore the
reputation of Honesty must first be gotten; which cannot be, but by living
well. A good life is a maine Argument.

Vita recta. Obsequentia. Humanitas. Sollicitudo.
Next a good life, to beget love in the persons we counsel, by dissembling our
knowledge of ability in our selves, and avoiding all suspicion of arrogance,
ascribing all to their instruction, as an Ambassador to his Master, or a
Subject to his Sovereign; seasoning all with humanity and sweetness, only
expressing care and solicitude. And not to counsel rashly, or on the
sudden, but with advice and meditation: (Dat nox consilium.) For many foolish
things fall from wise men, if they speak in haste, or be extemporall. It
therefore behooves the giver of counsel to be circumspect; especially to
beware of those, with whom he is not thoroughly acquainted, lest any spice of
rashness, folly, or self-love appear, which will be marked by new persons,
and men of experience in affairs.

Modestia. Parrhesia.
And to the Prince, or his Superior, to behave himself modestly, and with
respect. Yet free from Flattery, or Empire. Not with insolence, or precept; but
as the Prince were already furnished with the parts he should have, especially
in affairs of State. For in otherthings they will more easily suffer
themselves to be taught, or reprehended: They will not willingly contend. But
hear (with Alexander) the answer the Musician gave him, Absit o Rex, ut tu
melius hac sciat, quam ego.

A man should so deliver himself to the nature of the subject, Plutarc. in
vita Alex. Perspicuitas. Elegantia.
whereof he speaks, that his hearer may take knowledge of his discipline with
some delight: and so apparel fair, and good matter, that the studious of
elegancy be not defrauded; redeem Arts from their rough, and braky seats,
where they lay hid, and over-growne with thorns, to a pure, open, and flowery
light: where they may take the eye, and be taken by the hand.

I cannot think Nature is so spent, and decayed, Natura a non effoeta.
that she can bring forth nothing worth her former years. She is always the
same, like her self: And when she collects her strength, is abler still. Men
are decayed, and studies: She is not.

I know Nothing can conduce more to letters, Non nimium cred^dum antiquitati.
then to examine the writings of the Ancients, and not to rest in their sole
Authority, or take all upon trust from them; provided the plagues of Judging,
and Pronouncing against them, be away; such as are envy, bitterness,
precipitation, impudence, and scurrile scoffing. For to all the observations of
the Ancients, we have our own experience: which, if we will use, and apply,
we have better means to pronounce. It is true they opened the gates, and made
the way that went before us; but as Guides, not Commanders: Non Domini nostri,
sed Duces fuere. Truth lies open to all; it is no man's several. Patet omnibus
veritas; nondum est occupata. Multum ex illa, etiam futuris relicta est.

If in some things I dissent from others, whose Wit, Industry, Dissentire licet:
Diligence, and Judgment I look up at, and admire: let me not therefore hear
presently of Ingratitude, and Rashness. For I thank those, that have taught
me, and will ever: Sed cum ratione.
but yet dare not think the scope of their labor, and enquiry, was to envy
their posterity, what they also could add, and find out.

If I err, pardon me: Nulla ars simul and inventa est, and absoluta. Non mihi
cedendum,
I do not desire to be equal to those that went before; but to have my reason
examined with theirs, and so much faith to be given them, or me, as those shall
evict. I am neither Author, or Fautor of any sect. I will have no man addict
himself to me; but if I have any thing right, defend it as Truth's, not mine
(save as it conduces to a common good.) It profits not me to have any man
fence, or fight for me, to flourish, or take a side. Stand for Truth, and it is
enough. Sed veritati. Scientiae liberales.


Arts that respect the mind, were ever reputed nobler, then those that serve
the body: though we less can be without them. As Tillage, Spinning, Weaving,
Building, etc. without which, we could scarce sustain life a day. But these
were the works of every hand; the other of the brain only, and those the most
generous, and exalted wits, and spirits that cannot rest, or acquiesce. The
mind of man is still fed with labor: Opere pascitur.

There is a more secret Cause: Non vulgi sunt.
and the power of liberal studies lies more hid, then that it can be wrought
out by profane wits. It is not every man's way to hit. They are men (I confess)
that set the Caract, and Value upon things, as they love them; but Science is
not every man's Mistress. It is as great a spite to be praised in the wrong
place, and by a wrong person, as can be done to a noble nature.

If diverse men seek Fame, or Honor, by diverse ways; Honesta Ambitio.
so both be honest, neither is to be blamed: But they that seek Immortality,
are not only worthy of leave, but of praise.

Maritus improbus.
He has a delicate Wife, a fair fortune, and family to go to be welcome; yet
he had rather be drunk with mine Host, and the Fiddlers of such a Town, then
go home.

Afflictio pia Magistra. Deploratis facilis descensus Averni. The Devil take
all. Aegidius cursu superat. Prodigo nummi nauci. Munda et sordida. Debitum
deploratum. Latro sesquipedalis.
Affliction teaches a wicked person sometime to pray: Prosperity never.

Many might go to heaven with half the labor they go to hell, if they would
venture their industry the right way: But the Devil take all (quoth he) that
was choked in the Mill-dam, with his four last words in his mouth.

A Criple in the way out-travels a Footman, or a Post out of the way.

Bags of money to a prodigal person, are the same that Cherry-stones are with
some boys, and so thrown away.

A woman, the more curious she is about her face, is commonly the more
careless about her house.

Of this Spilt water, there is little to be gathered up: it is a desperate
debt.

The Theife with a great belly. Com. de schortenhien Calumniae fructus.
that had a longing at the Gallows to commit one Robbery more, before he was
hanged.

And like the German-Lord, when he went out of Newgate into the Cart, took
order to have his Arms set up in his last Herborough: Said he was taken, and
committed upon suspicion of Treason* no witness appearing against him: But the
Judges intertain'd him most civilly, discoursed with him, offered him the
court'sie of the rack; but he confessed, etc.

I am beholden to Calumny, that she has so endeavored, and taken pains to
belly me. It shall make me set a surer Guard on my self, and keep a better
watch upon my Actions.

Impertinens.
A tedious person is one a man would leap a steeple from; gallop down any
steep Hill to avoid him; forsake his meat, sleep, nature it self, with all
her benefits to shun him. A mere Impertinent: one that touched neither heaven
nor earth in his discourse. He opened an entry into a fair room; but shut it
again presently. I spoke to him of Garlic, he answered Asparagus: consulted
him of marriage, he tells me of hanging; as if they went by one, and the same
Destiny.

Bellum scribentium:
What a sight it is, to see Writers committed together by the ears, for
Ceremonies, Syllables, Points, Colons, Comma's, Hyphens, and the like?
fighting, as for their fires, and their Altars; and angry that none are
frighted at their noyses, and loud brayings under their asses skins?

Differentia inter
There is hope of getting a fortune without digging in these quarries. Sed
meliore (in omne) ingenio, animoque quam fortuna, sum usus.

Pinque solum lassat: sed juvat ipse labor. Wits made out their several
expeditions then, for the discovery of Truth, Doctos et Sciolos.
to find out great and profitable Knowledges, had their several instruments
for the disquisition of Arts. Now there are certain Scioli, or smatterers,
that are busy in the skirts, and outsides of Learning, and have scarce any
thing of solid literature to commend them. They may have some edging, or
trimming of a Scholar, a welt, or so: but it is no more.

Imposture is a specious thing; yet never worse, Im^^^torum fucus.
then when it faines to be best, and to none discovered sooner, then the
simplest. For Truth and Goodness are plain, and open; but Imposture is ever
ashamed of the light.

A Puppet-play must be shadowed, and seen in the dark: For draw the Curtain,
Et sordet gesticulatio. Icuncularum motio. Principes, et Administri.


There is a great difference in the understanding of some Princes, as in the
quality of their Ministers about them. Some would dress their Masters in gold,
pearl, and all true Jewels of Majesty: Others furnish them with feathers,
bells, and ribbands; and are therefore esteemed the fitter servants. But they
are ever good men, that must make good the times: if the men be naught, the
times will be such. Finis expectandus est in unoquoque hominum; animali, ad
mutationem promptissimo.

It is a quick saying with the Spaniards: Arts inter haeredes non dividi.
Scitum Hispanicum
Yet these have inherited their fathers lying, and they brag of it. He is an
narrow-minded man, that affects a Triumph in any glorious study: but to triumph
in a lie, and a lie themselves have forged, is frontlesse. Folly often goes
beyond her bounds; but Impudence knows none.

Envy is no new thing, nor was it borne only in our times. Non nova res livor.
The Ages past have brought it forth, and the coming Ages will. So long as
there are men fit for it, quorum odium virtute relicta placet, it will never be
wanting. It is a barbarous envy, to take from those men's virtues, which because
thou can not arrive at, thou impotently despaires to imitate. Is it a crime
in me that I know that, which others had not yet known, but from me? or that I
am the Author of many things, which never would have come in thy thought, but
that I taught them? It is a new, but a foolish way you have found out, that
whom you cannot equal, or come near in doing, you would destroy, or ruin
with evil speaking: As if you had bound both your wits, and natures prentises
to slander, and then came forth the best Artificers, when you could form the
foulest calumnies.

Indeed, nothing is of more credit, or request now, Nil gratius protervo lib.
then a petulant paper, or scoffing verses; and it is but convenient to the
times and manners we live with; to have then the worst writings, and studies
flourish, when the best begin to be despised. Ill Arts begin, where good end.

The time was, when men would learn, and study good things; not envy those
that had them. Then men were had in price for learning: I am littera and
sordent.
now, letters only make men vile. He is upbraydingly called a Poet, as if it
were a most contemptible Nickname. But the Professors (indeed) have made the
learning cheap. Railing, and tinckling Rimers, whose Writings the vulgar more
greedily read; as being taken with the scurtility, and pe^ulancie of such
wits. He shall not have a Reader now, Pastus hodier. Ingen.
unless he jeere and lie. It is the food of men's natures: the diet of the
times! Gallants cannot sleep else. The Writer must lie, and the gentle Reader
rests happy, to hear the worthiest works mis-interpreted; the clearest
actions obscured* the innocent'st life traduced; And in such a license of
lying, field so f^^^^full of slande^^ how can there be matter, wanting to his
laughter? Hence comes the Epidemicall Infection. For how can they escape the
contagion of the Writings, whom the virulency of the calumnies has not stav'd
off from reading.

Sed seculi morbus.
Nothing does more invite a greedy Reader, then an unlooked for subject. And
what more unlooked for, then to see a person of an unblam'd life, made
ridiculous, or odious, by the Artifice of lying? but it is the disease of the
Age: and no wonder if the world, growing old, begin to be infirm: Old age it
self is a disease. It is long since the sick world began to doat, and talk
idly: Would she had but doated still; but her dotage is now broke forth into a
madness, and become a mere phrency.

Alastoris malitia.
This Alastor, who has left nothing unsearch'd, or unassayl'd, by his impudent,
and licentious lying in his aguish writings (for he was in his cold quaking fit
all the while:) what has he done more, then a troublesome base curre? barked,
and made a noise a far off: had a fool, or two to spit in his mouth, and
cherish him with a musty bone? But they are rather enemies of my fame, then me,
these Barkers.

Mali choragi fuere.
It is an Art to have so much judgment, as to apparel a Lie well, to give it
a good dressing; that though the nakedness would show deformed and odious, the
suiting of it might draw their Readers. Some love any Strumpet (be she never
so shop-like, or meritorious) in good clothes. But these nature could not have
formed them better, to destroy their own testimony; and overthrow their
calumny.

Hearsay news.
That an Elephant, 630. came hither Ambassador from the great Mogull, (who
could both write and read) and was every day allowed twelve cast of bread,
twenty Quarts of Canary Sack; besides Nuts and Almonds the Citizens wives sent
him. That he had a Spanish Boy to his Interpreter, and his chief negotiation
was, to confer or practice with Archy, the principal fool of State, about
stealing hence Windsor Castle, and carrying it away on his back if he can.

Lingua sapientis.
A wise tongue should not be licentious, and wandering; but moved, and (as it
were) governed with certain raines from the heart, and bottom of the breast:
and it was excellently said of that Philosopher; that there was a Wall, or
Parapet of teeth set in our mouth, to restrain the petulancy of our words:
that the rashness of talking should not only be retarded by the guard, and
watch of our heart; but be fenced in, and defended by certain strengths,
placed in the mouth it self, and within the lips. But you shall see some, so
abound with words without any seasoning or taste of matter, in so profound a
security, as while they are speaking, for the most part, they confess to
speak they know not what.

Potius quam loquents:
Of the two (if either were to be wished) I would rather have a plain
downright wisdom, then a foolish and affected eloquence. For what is so
furious, and Bet'lem like, as a vain sound of chosen and excellent words,
without any subject of sentence, or science mixed?

Optanda.
Whom the disease of talking still once possesses, he can never hold his
peace. Nay, rather then he will not discourse, he will hire men to hear him.
And so heard, not hearkn'd unto, he comes off most times like a Mountebanke,
that when he has praised his medicines, finds none will take them, Thersites
Homeri.
or trust him. He is like Homers Thersites.

(...): speaking without judgment,
Loquax magis, quam facundus. Salust.

Satis loquentia, sapientiae parum.
(...) Hesiodus.

(...).
Optimus est homini linguae thesaurus, and ingens
Gratia, quae parcis mensurat singula verbis.
Ulysses in Homer, is made a long thinking man, before he speaks; Homeri
Ulysses. Pindar: Epaminond. De macatus Plutarchi. Vid. Zenxidis pict. sermon. ad
Megabizum Plutarch.
and Epaminondas is celebrated by Pindar, to be a man, that though he knew
much, yet he spoke but little. Demacatus, when on the Bench he was long
silent, and said nothing; one asking him, if it were folly in him, or want of
language? he answered: A fool could never hold his peace. For too much
talking is ever the Indice of a fool.

Dum tacet indoctus, poterit cordatus haberi;
Is morbos animi namque tacendo tegit.
Nor is that worthy speech of Zeno, the Philosopher to be past over, without
the note of ignorance: who being invited to a feast in Athens, where a great
Princes Ambassadors were entertained, and was the only person had said
nothing at the table; one of them with courtesy asked him; What shall we
return from thee, Zeno, to the Prince our Master, if he ask us of thee?
Nothing, he replied, more, but that you found an old man in Athens, that knew
to be silent amongst his cups. It was nere a Miracle, to see an old man silent;
since talking is the disease of Age: but amongst cups makes it fully a wonder.

It was wittily said upon one, that was taken for a great, and grave man,
Argu^e dictum.
so long as he held his peace: This man might have been a Counselor of State
till he spoke: But having spoken, not the Beadle of the Ward. (...), Pythag.
quam laudabilis! Vide Apuleium.
(...) Linguam cohibe, prae aliis omnibus, ad Deorum exemplum, Invenal. Acutius
cernuntur vitia, quam virtutes.
Digito compesce labellum.

There is almost no man, but he sees clearlier, and sharper, the vices in a
speaker, then the virtues. And there are many, that with more ease, will find
fault with what is spoken foolishly, then that can give allowance to, wherein
you are wise silently. The treasure of a fool is always in his tongue (said
the witty comic Poet) and it appears not in any thing more, Plautus.
then in that nation; whereof one when he had got the inheritance of an
unlucky old Grange, would needs sell it; and to draw buyers, proclaimed, Trin.
Act. 2. Scaen. ^.
the virtues of it. Nothing ever thrived on it (says he.) No owner of it, ever
dyed in his bed; some hung, some drowned themselves; some were banished, some
starved; the trees were all blasted, the Swyne dyed of the Measils, the Cattle
of the Murren; the Sheep of the Rot; they that stood were ragg'd, bare, and
bald, as your hand; nothing was ever reared there; not a Duckling, or a Goose.
Hospitium fuerat calamitatis. Sim. Mart. lib. 1. ep. 85. Vulgi expectatio.
Was not this man like to sell it?

Expectation of the Vulgar is more drawn, and held with newness, then
goodness; we see it in Fencers, in Players, in Poets, in Preachers, in all,
where Fame promises any thing; so it be now, though never so naught, and
depraved, they run to it, and are taken. Which shows, that the only decay, or
hurt of the best men's reputation with the people, is, their wits have outlived
the peoples palats. They have been too much, or too long a feast.

Claritas Patria.
Greatness of name in the Father, often times helps not forth, but o'rewhelmes
the Son: they stand too near one another. The shadow kills the growth; so
much, that we see the Grandchild come more, and oftener to be the heir of the
first, then does the second: He dies between; the Possession is the thirds.

Eloquentia.
Eloquence is a great, and diverse thing: Nor did she yet ever favor any man
so much, as to become wholly his. He is happy, that can arrive to any degree
of her grace. Yet there are, who prove themselves Masters of her, and absolute
Lords: but I believe, they may mistake their evidence: For it is one thing to
be eloquent in the Schools, or in the Hall; another at the Bar, or in the
Pulpit. There is a difference between Meeting, and Pleading; between Fencing,
and Fighting. To make Arguments in my Study, and confute them is easy; where I
answer my self, not an Adversary. So, I can see whole volumes dispatched by
the vmbraticall Doctors on all sides: But draw these forth into the just lists;
let them appear sub dio, and they are changed with the place, like bodies bred
in the shade; they cannot suffer the Sun, or a Shower; nor bear the open
Air: they scarce can find themselves, that they were wont to domineere so
among their Auditors: but indeed I would no more choose a Ehetorician, for
reigning in a School; then I would a Pilot, for rowing in a Pond.

Amor, et odium.
Love, that is ignorant, and Hatred have almost the same ends: many foolish
Lovers wish the same to their friends, which their enemies would: As to wish a
friend banished, that they might accompany him in exile: or some great want,
that they might relieve him: or a disease, that they might sit by him. They
make a Cawsway to their country by Injury; as if it were not honester to do
nothing, then to seek a way to do good, by a Mischefe.

Injuria.
Injuries do not extinguish courtesies: they only suffer them not to appear
fair. For a man that does me an injury after a courtesy, takes not away the
courtesy, but defaces it: As he that writes other verses upon my verses, takes
not away the first Letters, but hides them.

Beneficia.
Nothing is a courtesy, unless it be meant us; and that friendly, and
lovingly. We owe no thanks to Rivers, that they carry our boats; or Winds,
that they be favoring, and fill our sails; or meats, that they be nourishing.
For these are, what they are necessarily. Horses carry us, Trees shade us; but
they know it not. It is true, some man may receive a Courtesy, and not know
it; but never any man received it from him, that knew it not. Many men have
been cured of diseases by Accidents; but they were not Remedies. I my self
have known one helped of an Ague, by falling into a water; another whipped out
of a Fever: but no man would ever use these for medicines. It is the mind, and
not the event, that distinguishes the courtesy from wrong. My Adversary may
offend the Judge with his pride, and impertinences, and I win my cause: but he
meant it not me, as a Courtesy. I escaped Pirates, by being ship-wrack'd, was
the wrack a benefit therefore? No: The doing of Courtesies aright, is the
mixing of the respects for his own sake, and for mine. He that does them
merely for his own sake, is like one that feeds his Cattle to sell them: he
has his Horse well dressed for Smithfield.

The price of many things is far above, Valor Rerum.
what they are bought and sold for. Life, and Health, which are both
inestimable, we have of the Physician: As Learning, and Knowledge, the true
tillage of the mind, from our Schoolmasters. But the fees of the one, or the
salary of the other, never answer the value of what we received; but served to
gratify their labors.

Memory of all the powers of the mind, is the most delicate, and frail: it is
the first of our faculties, that Age invades. Seneca, the father, the
Rhetorician, Memoria.
confesses of himself, he had a miraculous one; not only to receive, but to
hold. I my self could in my youth, have repeated all, that ever I had made;
and so continued, till I was past forty: Since, it is much decayed in me. Yet
I can repeat whole books that I have read, and Poems, of some selected
friends, which I have liked to charge my memory with. It was wont to be
faithful to me, but shaken with age now, and sloth (which weakens the
strongest abilities) it may perform somewhat, but cannot promise much. By
exercise it is to be made better, and serviceable. Whatsoever I pawned with it,
while I was young, and a boy, it offers me readily, and without stops: but what
I trust to it now, or have done of later years, it lays up more negligently,
and often times loses; so that I receive mine own (though frequently called
for) as if it were new, and borrowed. Nor do I always find presently from it,
what I do seek; but while I am doing another thing, that I labored for, will
come: And what I sought with trouble, will offer it self, when I am quiet. Now
in some men I have found it as happy as nature, who, whatsoever they read, or
pen, they can say without book presently; as if they did then write in their
mind. And it is more a wonder in such, as have a swift style; for their
memories are commonly slowest; such as torture their writings, and go into
council for every word, must needs fix somewhat, and make it their own at
last, though but through their own vexation.

Suffrages in Parliament are numbered, not weighed: Com't. Suffragia.
nor can it be otherwise in those public Councels, where nothing is so
unequal, as the equality: for there, how odd soever men's brains, or wisdoms
are, their power is always even, and the same.

Some Actions be they never so beautiful, and generous, Stare a partibus.
are often obscured by base, and vile mis-constructions; either out of envy, or
ill nature, that judges of others, as of it self. Nay, the times are so
wholly grown, to be either partial, or malicious; that, if he be a friend,
all sits well about him; his very vices shall be virtues: if an enemy, or of
the contrary faction; nothing is good, or tolerable in him: insomuch, that we
care not to discredit, and shame our judgments, to sooth our passions.

Man is read in his face: God in his creatures; but not as the Philosopher,
Deuteronomy in creaturis.
the creature of glory reads him: But, as the Divine, the servant of humility:
yet even he must take care, not to be too curious. For to utter Truth of God
(But as he thinks only) may be dangerous; who is best known, by our not
knowing. Some things of him, so much as he has revealed, or commanded, it is
not only lawful, but necessary for us to know: for therein our ignorance was
the first cause of our wickedness.

Truth is man's proper good; and the only immortal thing, Veritas proprium
hominis.
was given to our mortality to use. No good Christian, or Ethnic, if he be
honest, can miss it: no Statesman, or Patriot should. For without truth all
the Actions of mankind, are craft, malice, or what you will, rather then
Wisdom. Homer says, he hates him worse then hell-mouth, that utters one
thing with his tongue, and keeps another in his breast. Which high expression
was grounded on divine Reason. For a lying mouth is a stinking pit, and
murders with the contagion it venteth. Beside, nothing is lasting that is
feigned; it will have another face then it had, ere long: As Euripides says, No
lie ever grows old.

Nullum vicium sine patrocinio.
It is strange, there should be no vice without his patronage, that (when we
have no other excuse) we will say, we love it; we cannot forsake it: as if
that made it not more a fault. We cannot, because we think we cannot: and
we love it, because we will defend it. We will rather excuse it, then be rid
of it. That we cannot, is pretended; but that we will not, is the true
reason. How many have I known, that would not have their vices hid? Nay, and
to be noted, live like Antipodes, to others in the same City; never see the
Sun rise, or set, in so many years; but be as they were watching a Corpse by
Torch-light; would not sin the common way; but held that a kind of Rusticity;
they would do it new, or contrary, for the infamy? They were ambitious of
living backward; and at last arrived at that, as they would love nothing but
the vices; not the vicious customs. It was impossible to reform these
natures; they were dried, and hardened in their ill. They may say, they desired
to leave it; but do not trust them: and they may think they desired it, but
they may lie for all that; they are a little angry with their follies, now and
then; marry they come into grace with them again quickly. They will confess,
they are offended with their manner of living: like enough, who is not? When
they can put me in security, that they are more then offended; that they hate
it: then I Will hearken to them; and, perhaps, believe them: But many now a days,
love and hate their ill together.

De vere Argutis.
I do hear them say often: Some men are not witty; because they are not every
where witty; then which nothing is more foolish. If an eye or a nose be an
excellent part in the face, therefore be all eye or nose? I think the
eye-brow, the forehead, the cheek, chyn, lip, or any part else, are as
necessary, and natural in the place. But now nothing is good that is natural:
Right and natural language seem to have least of the wit in it; that which is
writhed and tortured, is counted the more exquisite. Cloth of Bodkin, or
Tissue, must be imbrodered; as if no face were fair, that were not pouldred,
or painted? No beauty to be had, but in wresting, and writhing our own tongue?
Nothing is fashionable, till it be deformed; and this is to write like a
Gentleman. All must be as affected, and preposterous as our Gallants clothes,
sweet bags, and night-dressings: in which you would think our men lay in; like
Ladies: it is so curious.

Consura de Poetis.
Nothing in our Age, I have observed, is more preposterous, then the running
Judgments upon Poetry, and Poets; when we shall hear those things commended,
and cried up for the best writings, which a man would scarce vouchsafe, to wrap
any wholesome drug in; he would never light his Tobacco with them. And those
men almost named for Miracles, who yet are so vile, that if a man should go
about, to examine, and correct them, he must make all they have done, but one
blot. Their good is so entangled with their bad, as forcibly one must draw on
the others death with it. A Sponge dipped in Ink will do all: -- Comitetur
punica librum
Spongia. --


Et paulo post, Non possunt multa, una litura potest. Mart. l. 4. epig. 10.


Yet their vices have not, hurt them: Nay, a great many they have profited; for
they have been loved for nothing else. And this false opinion grows strong
against the best men: if once it take root with the Ignorant. Cestius in his
time, was preferred to Cicero; so far, Cestius. Cicero.
as the Ignorant durst. They learned him without book, and had him often in
their mouths: But a man cannot imagine that thing so foolish, or rude, but
will find, and enjoy an Admirer; at least, a Reader, or Spectator. The Puppets
are seen now in despite of the Players: Heath's Epigrams, Heath. Tailor.
and the Skullers Poems have their applause. There are never wanting, that dare
prefer the worst Preachers, the worst Pleaders, the worst Poets: not that the
better have left to write, or speak better, but that they that hear them
judge worse; Non illi pejus dicunt, sed hi corruptius judicant. Nay, if it were
put to the question of the Water-rimers works, against Spencers; I doubt not,
but they would find more Suffrages; Spencer.
because the most favor common vices, out of a Prerogative the vulgar have, to
lose their judgments; and like that which is naught.

Poetry in this latter Age, has proved but a mean Mistress, to such as have
wholly addicted themselves to her; or given their names up to her family. They
who have but saluted her on the by; and now and then tendered their visits, she
has done much for, and advanced in the way of their own professions (both the
Law, and the Gospel) beyond all they could have hoped, or done for themselves,
without her favor. Wherein she does emulate the judicious, but preposterous
bounty of the times Grandes: who accumulate all they can upon the Parasite, or
Fresh-man in their friendship; but think an old Client, or honest servant,
bound by his place to write, and starve.

Indeed, the multitude commend Writers, as they do Fencers; or Wrastlers; who
if they come in robustiously, and put for it, with a deal of violence, are
received for the braver-fellowes: when many times their own rudeness is a
cause of their disgrace; and a slight touch of their Adversary, gives all that
boisterous force the foil. But in these things, the unskilful are naturally
deceived, and judging wholly by the bulk, think rude things greater then
polished; and scattered more numerous, then composed: Nor think this only to
be true in the sordid multitude but the neater sort of our Gallants: for all
are the multitude; only they differ in clothes, not in judgment or
understanding.

I remember, De Shakespeare nostrat.
the Players have often mentioned it as an honor to Shakespeare, that in his
writing, (whatsoever he penned) he never blotted out line. My answer has
been, would he had blotted a thousand. Which they thought a malevolent speech.
I had not told posterity this, but for their ignorance, who choose that
circumstance to commend their friend by, wherein he most faulted. And to
justify mine own candor, (for I loved the man, and do honor his memory (on
this side Idolatry) as much as any.) He was (indeed) honest, and of an open,
and free nature: had an excellent Phantsie; brave notions, and gentle
expressions: wherein he flowed with that facility, that sometime it was
necessary he should be stopped: Augustus in Hat.
Sufflaminandus erat; as Augustus said of Haterius. His wit was in his own
power; would the rule of it had been so too. Many times he fell into those
things, could not escape laughter: As when he said in the person of Caesar,
one speaking to him; Casar thou do me wrong. He replied: Caesar did never
wrong, but with just cause: and such like, which were ridiculous. But he
redeemed his vices, with his virtues. There was ever more in him to be praised,
then to be pardoned.

Ingeniorum discrimina.
In the difference of wits, I have observed; there are many notes: And it is a
little Maistry to know them: to discern, what every nature, every Divines,
some Poets, some Lawyers, some Physicians; some to be sent to the plough, and
trades.

There is no doctrine will do good, where nature is wanting. Some wits are
swelling, and high; others low and still: Some hot and fiery; others cold and
dull: One must have a bridle, the other a sporre.

There be some that are forward, and bold; and these will do every little
thing easily: I mean that is hard by, and next them, which they will utter,
unretarded without any shamefastness. These never perform much, but quickly.
They are, what they are on the sudden; they show presently like Grain, that,
scattered on the top of the ground, shoots up, but takes no root; has a yellow
blade, but the ear empty. They are wits of good promise at first, but there is
an A witstand.
Ingeni-stitium: They stand still at sixteen, they get no higher.



Martial. lib. 11. epig. 91.
Others, that in composition are nothing, but what is rough, and broken: Qua
per salebras, altaque saxa cadunt. And if it would come gently, they trouble it
of purpose. They would not have it run without rubs, as if that style were more
strong and manly, that stroke the ear with a kind of unevenesse. These men
err not by chance, but knowingly, and willingly; they are like men that affect
a fashion by themselves, have some singularity in a Ruff, Cloak, or Hat-band;
or their beards, specially cut to provoke beholders, and set a mark upon
themselves. They would be reprehended, while they are looked on. And this vice,
one that is in authority with the rest, loving, delivers over to them to be
imitated: so that oft-times the faults which he fell into, the others seek
for: This is the danger, when vice becomes a Precedent.

Poets they are called. as you have women's- Tailors.

They write a verse, as smooth, as soft, as cream;
In which there is no torrent, nor scarce stream.
You may sound these wits, and find the depth of them, with your middle finger.
They are Cream-bowle, or but puddle deep.

Some that turn over all books, and are equally searching in all papers,
Essayists, even their Master Mountaigne. Mic. de Montaigne.
These in all they write, confess still what books they have read last; and
therein their own folly, so much, that they bring it to the Stake raw, and
undigested: not that the place did need it neither; but that they thought
themselves furnished, and would vent it.

Some again, who (after they have got authority, or, which is less, opinion,
curious.

And some, by a cunning protestation against all reading, and false venditation
naturals, think to divert the sagacity of their Readers from themselves, and
cool the sent of their own fox-like thefts; when yet they are so rank, a^ a
man may find whole pages together usurped from one Author. Their necessities
compelling them to read for present use, which could not be in many books; and
so come forth more ridiculously, and palpably guilty, then those; who because
they cannot trace, they yet would slander their industry.

But the Wretcheder are the obstinate contemners of all helps, and Naturals
(which perhaps are excellent) dare deride all diligence, and seem to mock at
the terms, when they understand not the things; thinking that way to get off
wittily, with their Ignorance. These are imitated often by such, as are their
Peers in negligence, though they cannot be in nature: And they utter all they
can think, with a kind of violence, and indisposition; unexamin'd, without
relation, either to person, place, or any fitness else; an the more wilful,
and stubborn, they are in it, the more learned they are esteemed of the
multitude, through their excellent vice of Judgment; Who think those things
the stronger, that have no Art: as if to break, were better then to open; or
to rent asunder, gentler then to loose.

It cannot but come to pass, that these men, who commonly seek to were afraid
of her; or depart from life, and the likeness of Truth; but speak to the
capacity of his hearers. And though his language differ from the vulgar
somewhat; it shall not fly from all humanity, with the Tamerlanes, and
Tamer-Chams, of the late Age, which had nothing in them but the scenicall
strutting, and furious vociferation, to warrant them them to the ignorant
gapers. He knows it is his only Art, so to carry it, as none but Artificers
perceive it. In the mean time perhaps he is called barren, dull, lean, a
poor Writer (or by what contumelious word can come in their cheeks) by these
men, who without labor, judgment, knowledge, or almost sense, are received,
or preferred before him. He gratulates them, and their fortune. An other Age,
or juster men, will acknowledge the virtues of his studies: his wisdom, in
dividing: his subtilty, in arguing: with what strength he does inspire his
Readers: with what sweetness, he strokes them; in inveighing: what
sharpness; in Jest, what urbanity he uses. How he does reign in men's
affections; how invade, and break in upon them; and makes their minds like the
thing he writes. Then in his Elocution to behold, what word is proper: which
has ornament: which height: what is beautifully translated: where figures are
fit: which gentle, which strong to show the composition Manly. And how he has
avoided, faint, obscure, obscene, sordid, humble, improper, or effeminate
Phrase; which is not only praised of the most, but commended, (which is worse)
especially for that it is naught.

Ignorantia anima.
I know no disease of the Soul, but Ignorance; not of the Arts, and Sciences,
but of it self: Yet relating to those, it is a pernicious evil: the darkner
of man's life: the disturber of his Reason, and common Confounder of Truth: with
which a man goes groping in the dark, no otherwise, then if he were blind.
Great understandings are most wracked and troubled with it: Nay, sometimes they
will rather choose to dye, then not to know the things, they study for. Think
then what an evil it is: and what good the contrary.

Scientia.
Knowledge is the action of the Soul; and is perfect without the senses, as
having the seeds of all Science, and Virtue in its self: but not without the
service of the senses: by those Organs, the Soul works: She is a perpetual
Agent, prompt and subtle; but often flexible, and erring; intangling her self
like a Silke-worme: But her Reason is a weapon with two edges, and cuts
through. In her Indagations oft-times new Sents put her by; and she takes in
errors into her, by the same conduits she does Truths.

Otium.
Ease, and relaxation, are profitable to all studies. The mind is like a Bow,
the stronger by being unbent. But the temper in Spirits is all, when to command
a man's wit; when to favor it. I have known a man vehement on both sides; that
knew no mean, either to intermit his studies, or call upon them again. When
he has set himself to wriing, he would join night to day; press upon
himself without release, not minding it, till he fainted: and when he left
off, resolve himself into all sports, and looseness again; that it was
almost a despair to draw him to his book: But once got to it, he grew
stronger, and more earnest by the ease. His whole Powers were renewed: he would
work out of himself, what he desired; but with such excess, as his study
could not be ruled: Studiorum.
he knew not how to dispose his own Abilities, or husband them, he was of
that immoderate power against himself. Nor was he only a strong, but an
absolute Speaker, and Writer: but his subtilty did not show it self; his
judgment thought that a vice. For the ambush hurts more that is hid. He never
forced his language, nor went out of the highway of speaking; but for some
great necessity, or apparent profit. For he denied Figures to be invented for
ornament, but for aid; and still thought it an extreme madness to bend, or
wrest that which ought to be right.

It is no Wonder, men's eminence appears but in their own way. Et stili
eminentia. Virgil. Tully. Salust. Plato.
Virgils felicity left him in prose, as Tullies forsook him in verse. Salusts
Orations are read in the honor of Story: yet the most eloquent Plato's speech,
which he made for Socrates, is neither worthy or the Patron, or the Person
defended. Nay, in the same kind of Oratory, and where the matter is one, you
shall have him that reasons strongly, open negligently: another that prepares
well, not fit so well: and this happens, not only to brains, but to bodies.
One can wrestle well; another run well; a third leap, or throw the bar; a
fourth lift, or stop a Cart going: Each has his way of strength. So in other
creatures; some dogs are for the Dear: some for the wild Boar: some are
Fox-hounds: some Otterhounds. Nor are all horses for the Coach, or Saddle; some
are for the Cart, and Panniers.

I have known many excellent men, that would speak suddenly, De claris
Oratoribu^
to the admiration of their hearers; who upon study, and premeditation have
been forsaken by their own wits; and no way answered their fame: Their
eloquence was greater, then their reading: and the things they uttered, better
then those they knew. Their fortune deserved better of them, then their care.
For men of present spirits, and of greater wits, then study, do please more in
the things they invent, then in those they bring. And I have heard some of them
compelled to speak, out of necessity, that have so infinitely exceeded
themselves, as it was better, both for them, and their Auditory, that they were
so surpised, not prepared. Nor was it safe then to cross them, for their
adversary, their anger made them more eloquent. Yet these men I could not but
love, and admire, that they returned to their studies. They left not diligence
(as many do) when their rashness prosper'd. For diligence is a great aid,
even to an indifferent wit; when we are not contented with the examples of our
own Age, but would know the face of the former. Indeed, the more we confer
with, the more we profit by, if the persons be chosen.

One, though he be excellent, and the chief, Dominus Verulanus.
is not to be imitated alone. For never no Imitator, ever grew up to his
Author; likeness is always on this side Truth: Yet there hapn'd, in my time,
one noble Speaker, who was full of gravity in his speaking. His language,
(where he could spare, or pass by a jest) was nobly censorious. No man ever
spoke more neatly, more presly, more weightily, or suffered less emptiness,
less idleness, in what he uttered. No member of his speech, but consisted of
the own graces. His hearers could not cough, or look aside from him, without
loss. He commanded where he spoke; and had his Judges angry, and pleased at
his devotion. No man had their affections more in his power. The fear of every
man that heard him, was, lest he should make an end.

Scriptorum Catalogus. Sir Thomas Moore. Sir Thomas Wiat. Hen: Earl of Surrey.
Sir Thomas Chaloner. Sir Thomas Smith. Sir Thomas Eliot. B. Gardener. Sir Nic:
Bacon. L.K. Sir Philip Sydney. M. Richard Hooker. Rob. Earl of Essex. Sir
Walter Raleigh. Sir Henry Savile. Sir Edwin Sands. Sir Thomas Egerton. L. C.
Sir Francis Bacon. L. C. De Augmentis scientiarum. Julius Caesar. Lord S.
Albane. Horat: de art: Poetica. De corruptela morum.
Cicero is said to be the only wit, that the people of Rome had equaled to
their Empire. Ingenium par imperio. We have had many, and in their several
Ages, (to take in but the former Seculum.) Sir Thomas Moore, the elder Wiat;
Henry, Earl of Surrey; Chaloner, Smith, Cliot, B. Gardener, were for their
times admirable: and the more, because they began Eloquence with us. Sir Nico:
Bacon, was singular, and almost alone, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
times. Sir Philip Sidney, and Mr. Hooker (in different matter) grew great
Masters of wit, and language; and in whom all vigor of Invention, and strength
of judgment met. The Earl of Essex, noble and high; and Sir Walter Rawleigh,
not to be contemned, either for judgment, or style. Sir Henry Savile grave,
and truly lettered; Sir Edwin Sands, excellent in both: Lo: Egerton, the
Chancellor, a grave, and great Orator; and best, when he was provoked. But his
learned, and able (though unfortunate) Successor) is he, who has filled up all
numbers; and performed that in our tongue, which may be compared, or preferred,
either to insolent Greece, or haughty Rome. In short, within his view, and
about his times, were all the wits borne, that could honor a language, or
help study. Now things daily fall: wits grow downe-ward, and Eloquence grows
back-ward: So that he may be named, and stand as the mark, and (...) of our
language.

I have ever observed it, to have been the office of a wise Patriot, among the
greatest affairs of the State, to take care of the Commonwealth of Learning.
For Schools, they are the Seminaries of State: and nothing is worthier the
study of a Statesman, then that part of the Republicke, which we call the
advancement of Letters. Witness the care of Julius Caesar; who in the heat of
the civil war, writ his books of Analogy, and dedicated them to Tully.
This made the late Lord S. Albane, entitle his work, nonum Organum. Which
though by the most of superficial men; who cannot get beyond the Title of
Nominals, it is not penetrated, nor understood: it really opens all defects
of Learning, whatsoever; and is a Book.

Qui longum noto scriptori porriget aevum. My conceit of his Person was never
increased toward him, by his place, or honors. But I have, and do reverence
him for the greatness, that was only proper to himself, in that he seemed
to me ever, by his work one of the greatest men, and most worthy of
admiration, that had been in many Ages. In his adversity I ever prayed, that
God would give him strength: for Greatness he could not want. Neither could I
condole in a word, or syllable for him; as knowing no Accident could do harm
to virtue; but rather help to make it manifest.

There cannot be one color of the mind; an other of the wit. If the mind be
staid, grave, and composed; the wit is so, that vitiated, the other is blown,
and deflowered. Do we not see, if the mind languish, the members are dull?
Look upon an effeminate person: his very gate confesses him. If a man be
fiery, his motion is so: if angry, it is troubled, and violent. So that we may
conclude: Wheresoever, manners, and fashions are corrupted; Language is. It
imitates the public riot. The excess of Feasts, and apparel, are the notes
of a sick State; and the wantonness of language, of a sick mind.

If we would consider, what our affairs are indeed; De rebus mundanis.
not what they are called, we should find more evils belong us, then happen to
us. How often does that, which was called a calamity, prove the beginning, and
cause of a man's happiness? And on the contrary: that which happened, or came to
an other with great gratulation, and applause, how it has lifted him, but a
step higher to his ruin! As, if he stood before, where he might fall safely.
Vulgi mores.


The vulgar are commonly ill-natured; and always grudging against their
Governors: which makes, that a Prince has more business, and trouble with them,
then ever Hercules had with the Bull, or any other beast: by how much they have
more heads, then will be rein'd with one bridle. There was not that variety of
beasts in the Arc; as is of beastly natures in the multitude; especially when
they come to that iniquity, to censure their Sovereign's actions. Then all the
Counsels are made good, Morbus Comitial^.
or bad by the events. And it falls out, that the same facts receive from
them the names; now of diligence; now, of vanity; now of Majesty; now of fury:
where they ought wholly to hang on his mouth; as he to consist of himself; and
not others counsels. Princeps.


After God, nothing is to be loved of man like the Prince: He violates nature,
that does it not with his whole heart. For when he has put on the care of the
public good, and common safety; I am a wretch, and put o^ man, if I do not
reverence, and honor him: in whose charge all things divine and humane are
placed. Do but ask of nature, why all living creatures are less delighted
with meat, and drink, that sustaines them, then with Venery, that wastes them.
And she will tell thee, the first respects but a private; the other, a common
good, Propagation. De eodem.


He is the Arbiter of life, and death: when he finds no other subject for his
mercy, he should spare himself. Orpheus hymn.
All his punishments are rather to correct, then to destroy. Why are prayers
with Orpheus said to be the daughters of Jupiter; but that Princes are thereby
admonished, that the petitions of the wretched, ought to have more weight with
them, then the Laws themselves.

It was a great acculation to his Majesty's deserved praise; De opt. Rege
Iacobo.
that men might openly visit, and pity those, whom his greatest prisons had at
any time received, or his Laws condemned.

Wise, is rather the Attribute of a Prince, then learned, or good. De Prin^:
adjunctie. -- Sed vere prudens hand concipi possit Princeps, nisi -- simul and
bonus. Licurgus. Sylla. Lysander. Cyrus.
The learned man profits others, rather then himself: the good man, rather
himself then others: But the Prince commands others, and does himself. The
wise Licurgus gave no Law, but what himself kept. Sylla, and Lysander, did not
so: the one living, extremely dissolute himself, enforced frugality by the
Laws: the other permitted those Licenses to others, which himself abstained
from. But the Princes Prudence is his chief Art, and safety. In his Counsels,
and deliberations he foresees the future times. In the equity of his
judgment, he has remembrance of the past; and knowledge of what is to be
done, or avoided for the present. Hence the Persians gave out their Cyrus, to
have been nursed by a Bitch, a creature to encounter it; as of sagacity to
seek out good; showing that Wisdom may accompany fortitude, or it leaves to
be, and puts on the name of Rashness.

De maligu: studentium.
There be some men are borne only to suck out the poison of books: Habent
venenum pro victu: imo, pro deliciis. And such are they that only relish the
obscene, and foul things in Poets: Which makes the profession taxed. But by
whom? men, that watch for it, (and had they not had this hint) are so unjust
valuers of Letters; as they think no Learning good, but what brings in gain.
It shows they themselves would never have been of the professions they are;
but for the profits and fees. But, if an other Learning, well used, can
instruct to good life, inform manners; no less persuade, and lead men, then
they threaten, and compel, and have no reward, is it therefore the worse
study? I could never think the study of Wisdom confined only to the
Philosopher: or of Poetry to the Divine: or of State to the Politic. But that
he which can feign a Commonwealth (which is the Poet) can gown it with
Counsels, strengthen it with Laws, correct it with Judgments, inform it with
Religion, and Morals; is all these. We do not require in him mere Elocution;
or an excellent faculty in verse; but the exact knowledge of all virtues; and
their Contraries; with ability to render the one loved, the other hated, by his
proper embattaling them. The Philosophers did insolently, to challenge only to
themselves that which the greatest Generals, and gravest Counselors never
durst. For such had rather do, then promise the best things.

Controvers. scriptores.
Some Controverters in Divinity are like Swaggerers in a Tavern, that catch
that which stands next them; the candlestick, or pots; turn every thing into
a weapon: More Andabatarum, qui clausis oculis pugnant.
often times they fight blindfold; and both beat the Air. The one milkes a
Hee-goat, the other holds under a Sive. Their Arguments are as fluxive as
liquour spilt upon a Table; which with your finger you may draine as you will.
Such Controversies, or Disputations, (carried with more labor, then profit)
are odious: where most times the Truth is lost in the midst; or left untouched.
And the fruit of their fight is; that they spit one upon another, and are both
defiled. These Fencers in Religion, I like not.

Morbi.
The Body has certain diseases, that are with less evil tolerated, then
removed. As if to cure a Leprosy, a man should bathe himself with the warm
blood of a murdered Child: So in the Church, some errors may be dissimuled
with less inconvenience, then can be discovered.

Iactantia intempestiva.
Men that talk of their own benefits, are not believed to talk of them,
because they have done them: but to have done them, because they might talk of
them. That which had been great, if another had reported it of them,
vanishes; and is nothing, if he that did it speak of it. For men, when they
cannot destroy the deed, will yet be glad to take advantage of the boasting,
and lessen it.

Adulatio.
I have seen, that Poverty makes men do unfit things; but honest men should
not do them: they should gain otherwise. Though a man be hungry, he should
not play the Parasite. That hour, wherein I would repent me to be honest:
there were ways enough open for me to be rich. But Flattery is a fine Pick-lock
of tender ears: especially of those, whom fortune has borne high upon their
wings, that submit their dignity, and authority to it, by a soothing of
themselves. For indeed men could never be taken, in that abundance, with the
Sprindges of others Flattery, if they began not there; if they did but
remember, how much more profitable the bitterness of Truth were, then all the
honey distilling from a whorish voice; which is not praise, but poison. But now
it is come to that extreme folly, or rather madness with some: that he that
flatters them modestly, or sparingly, is thought to malign them. If their
friend consent not to their vices, though he do not contradict them; he is
nevertheless an enemy. When they do all things the worst way, even then they
look for praise. Nay, they will hire fellows to flatter them with suites, and
suppers, and to prostitute their judgments. They have Livery-friends, friends
of the dish, and of the Spit, that wait their turns, as my Lord has his
feasts, and guests.

I have considered, our whole life is like a Play: De vita humana.
Wherein every man forgetful of himself, is in travail with expression of
another. Nay, we so insist in imitating others, as we cannot (when it is
necessary) return to ourselves: like Children, that imitate the vices of
Stammerers so long, till at last they become such; and make the habit to
another nature, as it is never forgotten.

Good men are the Stars the Planets of the Ages wherein they live, De piis and
probis.
and illustrate the times. God did never let them be wanting to the world: As
Abel, for an example, of Innocence; Enoch of Purity, Noah of Trust in Gods
mercies, Abraham of Faith, and so of the rest. These sensual men thought mad,
because they would not be partakers, or practisers of their madness. But they
placed high on the top of all virtue, looked down on the Stage of the world,
and contemned the Play of Fortune. For though the most be Players, some must be
Spectators.

I have discovered, that a feigned familiarity in great ones, Mores Aulici.
is a note of certain usurpation on the less. For great and popular men,
feign themselves to be servants to others, to make those slaves to them. So
the Fisher provides baits for the Trowte, Roch, Dace, etc. that they may be
food to him.

The Complaint of Caligula, was most wicked, Impiorum querela. Augustus, Varus.
Tiberius.
of the condition of his times: when he said; They were not famous by any
public calamity, as the reign of Augustus was, by the defeat of Varus, and
the Legions; and that of Tiberius, by the falling of the Theater at Iidenae:
whilst his oblivion was eminent, through the prosperity of his affairs. As
that other voice of his, was worthier a heads-man, then a head; when he wished
the people of Rome had but one neck. But he found (when he fell) they had many
hands. A Tyranne, how great and mighty soever he may seem to Cowards and
Sluggards; is but one creature, one Animal.

I have marked among the Nobility, Nobilium Ingenia.
some are so addicted to the service of the Prince, and Commonwealth, as they
look not for spoil; such are to be honored, and loved. There are others,
which no obligation will fasten on; and they are of two sorts. The first are
such as love their own ease: or, out of vice, of nature, or selfe-directio^
avoid business and care. Yet, these the Prince may use with safety. The other
remove themselves upon craft, and design (as the Architects say) with a
premeditated thought to their own, rather then their Princes profit. Such let
the Prince take heed of, and not doubt to reckon in the List of his open
enemies.

Principum varia. -- Firmissimavero omnium basis jus haereditarium Principis --.
There is a great variation between him, that is raised to the Soveraignity,
by the favor of his Peers; and him that comes to it by the suffrage of the
people. The first holds with more difficulty; because he has to do with
many, that think themselves his equals; and raised him for their own
greatness, and oppression of the rest. The latter has no upbraiders; but was
raised by them, that sought to be defended from oppression: whose end is both
the easier, and the honester to satisfy. Beside, while he has the people to
friend, who are a multitude, he has the less fear of the Nobility, who are
but few. Nor let the common Proverb of (He that builds on the people, builds
on the dirt) discredit my opinion: For that has only place, where an
ambitious, and private person, for some popular end, trusts in them against the
public Justice, and Magistrate. There they will leave him. But when a Prince
governs them, so as they have still need of his Administration (for that is his
Art) he shall ever make, and hold them faithful.

Clementia.
A Prince should exercise his cruelty, not by himself, but by his Ministers:
so he may save himself, and his dignity with his people, by sacrificing
those, Macchiavell.
when he list, says the great Doctor of State, Macchiavell. But I say, he puts
off man, and goes into a beast, that is cruel. No virtue is a Princes own; or
becomes him more, then this Clemency: And no glory is greater, then to be able
to save with his power. Many punishments sometimes, and in some cases as much
discredit a Prince, as many Funerals a Physician. The state of things is
secured by Clemency; Severity represseth a few, but it irritates more. Haud
infima ars in Principe, ubi lenitas, ubi severitas -- plus polleat in commune
bonum callere. Clementia tutelat opima. St. Nicolas.
The lopping of trees makes the boughs shoot out thicker; And the taking away
of some kind of enemies, increases the number. It is then, most gracious in a
Prince to pardon, when many about him would make him cruel; to think then,
how much he can save, when others tell him, how much he can destroy: not to
consider, what the impotence of others has demolished; but what his own
greatness can sustain. There are a Princes virtues; And they that give him
other counsels, are but the Hangmans Factors.

He that is cruel to halfes, (says the said St. Nicolas) loses no less
the opportunity of his cruelty, then of his benefits: For then to use his
cruelty, is too late; and to use his favors will be interpreted fear and
necessity; and so he loses the thanks. Still the counsel is cruelty. But
Princes by harkning to cruel counsels, become in time obnoxious to the
Authors, their Flatterers, and Ministers; and are brought to that, that when
they would, they dare not change them: they must go on, and defend cruelty
with cruelty: they cannot alt^ the Habit. It is then grown necessary, they
must be as ill, as those have made them: And in the end, they will grow more
hateful to themselves, then to their Subjects. Whereas, on the contrary, the
merciful Prince is safe in love, not in fear. He needs no Emissaries, Spies,
Intelligencers, to entrap true Subjects. He fears no Libels, no Treasons. His
people speak, what they think; and talk openly, what they do in secret.
They have nothing in their breasts, that they need a Cipher for. He is guarded
with his own benefits.

Religio. Palladium Homeri.
The strength of Empire is in Religion. What else is the Palladium, (with
Homer) that kept Troy so long from sacking? Nothing more commends the
Sovereign to the Subject, then it. For he that is religious, must be
merciful and just necessarily. And they are too strong ties upon mankind.
Justice is the virtue, that Innocence rejoices in. Yet even that is not always
so safe; but it may love to stand in the sight of mercy. For sometimes
misfortune is made a crime, and then Innocence is succor'd, no less then
virtue. Nay, often times virtue is made Capital: and through the condition of
the times, it may happen, that that may be punished with our praise. Let no man
therefore murmr at the Actions of the Prince, who is placed so far above
him. If he offend, he has his Discoverer. God has a height beyond him. But
where the Prince is good, Euripides says: God is a Guest in a humane body.
Euripides. Tyranni.


There is nothing with some Princes sacred above their Majesty; or profane,
but what violates their Scepters. But a Prince with such Counsel, is like the
God Terminus, of Stone, his own Land-marke; or (as it is in the Fable) a
crowned Lion. It is dangerous offending such an one; who being angry, knows
not how to forgive. That cares not to do any thing, for maintaining, or
enlarging of Empire; kills not men, or Subjects; but destroys whole Countries,
Armies, mankind, male, and female; guilty or not guilty, holy or profane: Yea,
some that have not seen the light. All is under the Law of their spoil, and
license. But Princes that neglect their proper office thus, their fortune is
often times to draw a Scianus, to be near about him; Scianus.
who will at last affect to get above' him, and put them in a worthy fear, of
rooting both them out, and their family. For no men hate an evil Prince more,
then they, that helped to make him such. And none more boastingly, weep his
ruin, then they, that procured and practiced it. The same path leads to ruin,
which did to rule, when men profess a License in governing. A good King is a
public Servant.

A Prince without Letters, is a Pilot without eyes. Illiteratus Princeps.
All his Government is groping. In Soveraignity it is a most happy thing, not
to be compelled; but so it is the most miserable not to be counseled. And how
can he be counseled that cannot see to read the best Counselors (which are
books.) For they neither flatter us, nor hide from us? He may hear, you will
say. But how shall he always be sure to hear Truth? or be counseled the best
things, not the sweetest? They say Princes learn no Art truly, but the Art of
Horse-manship. The reason is, the brave beast is no flatterer. He will throw a
Prince, as soon, as his Groom. Which is an Argument, that the good
Counselors to Princes are the best instruments of a good Age. For though the
Prince himself be of most prompt inclination to to all virtue: Yet the best
Pilots have need of Mariners, beside Sails, Anchor, and other Tackle.

If men did know, what shining fetters, gilded miseries, Character. Principis.
and painted happiness, Thrones and Scepters were. There would not be so
frequent strife about the getting, or holding of them. There would be more
Principalities, then Princes. For a Prince is the Pastor of the people. He
ought to sheere, no to flea his sheep; to take their fleeces, not their fels.
Who were his enemies before, being a private man, become his children, now he
is public. He is the soul of the Commonwealth; and ought to cherish it, as
his own body. Alexander the Great was wont to say: He hated that Gardener,
that plucked his herbs, Alexander magnus.
or flowers up by the roots. A man may milk a beast, till the blood come:
Churne milk, and it yields butter: but wring the nose, and the blood
follows. He is an ill Prince, that so pulls his Subjects feathers, as he
would not have them grow again: that makes his Exchequer a receipt for the
spoils of those he governs. No, let him keep his own, not affect his
Subjects: strive rather to be called just, then powerful. Not, like the Romans
Tyrans, affect the Surnames that grow by humane slaughters: Neither to seek
war in peace, or peace in war; but to observe faith given, though to an
Enemy. Study Piety toward the Subject: Show care to defend him. Be slow to
punish in diverse cases; but be a sharp, and severe Revenger of open crimes.
Break no decrees, or dissolve no orders, to slacken the strength of Laws.
Choose neither Magistrates civil, or Ecclesiastic, by favor, or Price: but
with long disquisition, and report of their worth, by all Suffrages. Sell no
honors, nor give them hastily; but bestow them with counsel, and for reward;
If he do acknowledge it, (though late) and mend it. For Princes are easy to
be deceived. And what wisdom can escape it; where so many Court- Arts are
studied? But above all, the Prince is to remember, that when the great day of
Account comes, which neither Magistrate, nor Prince can shun, there will be
required of him a reckoning for those, whom he has trusted; as for himself,
which he must provide. And if Piety be wanting in the Priests, Equity in the
Judges, or the Magistrate be found rated at a price; what Justice or Religion
is to be expected? which are the only two Attributes make Kings a kin to
Gods; and is the Delphick sword, both to kill Sacrifices, and to chastise
offenders.

De Gratiosis.
When a virtuous man is raised, it brings gladness to his friends: grief to
his enemies, and glory to his Posterity. Nay his honors are a great part of
the honor of the times: when by this means he is grown to active men, an
example; to the sloathfull, a spur; to the envious, a Punishment.

Divites.
He, which is sole heir to many rich men, having (beside his Fathers, and
Uncles) the states of diverse his kindred come to him by accession; must needs
be richer then Father, or Gran-father: So they which are left heirs ex Ass,
Haeredes ex Ass.
of all their Ancestors vices; and by their good husbandry improve the old, and
daily purchase new; must needs be wealthier in vice, and have a greater
revenue, or stock of ill to spend on.

Fures Publici.
The great thieves of a State are lightly the officers of the Crown; they hang
the less still; play the Pikes in the Pond; eat whom they list. The Net was
never spread for the Hawke or Buzzard that hurt us, but the harmless birds,
they are good meat.

Invenalis.
Dat veni am corvis, vexat censura columbas.
Plautus.
Non rete Accipitri tenditur, neque milvo.
But they are not always safe, though especially, when they meet with wise
Masters. They can take down all the huffe, and swelling of their looks; and
like dexterous Auditors, place the Counter, where he shall value nothing. Lewis
xi.
Let them but remember Lewis the eleventh, who to a Clarke of the Exchequer,
that came to be Lord Treasurer, and had (for his device) represented himself
sitting upon fortunes wheel: told him, he might do well to fasten it with a
good strong nail, lest turning about, it might bring him, where he was
again. As indeed it did.

A good man will avoid the spot of any sin. De boni^ e^ malis.
The very aspersion is grievous: which makes him choose his way in his life, as
he would in his journey. The Ill-man rides through all confidently; he is
coated, and booted for it. The oftener he offends, the more openly; and the
fowler, the fitter in fashion. His modesty like a riding Coat, the more it is
worn, is the less cared for. It is good enough for the dirt still; and the
ways he travels in. An Innocent man needs no Eloquence: De Innocentia.
his Innocence is in stead of it: else I had never come off so many times from
these Precipices, whether men's malice has pursued me. It is true, I have been
accused to the Lords, to the King; and by great ones: but it happened my
accusers had not thought of the Accusation with themselves; and so were driven
for want of crimes, to use invention, which was found slander: or too late,
(being entered so far) to seek starting holes for their rashness, which were
not given them. And then they may think, what accusation that was like to
prove, when they, that were the Ingineers, feared to be the Authors. Nor were
they content, to feign things against me, but to urge things feigned by the
Ignorant, against my profession; which though from their hired, and mercenary
impudence, I might have past by, as granted to a Nation of Barkers, that let
out their tongues to lick others sores; yet I durst not leave my self
undefended, having a pair of ears unskilful to hear lies; or have those
things said of me, which I could truly prove of them. They objected, making of
verses to me, when I could object to most of them, their not being able to
read them, but as worthy of scorn. Nay, they would offer to urge mine own
Writings against me; but by pieces, (which was an excellent way of malice) as
if any man's Context, might not seem dangerous, and offensive, if that which
was knit, to what went before, were defrauded of his beginning; or that things
by themselves uttered, might not seem subject to Calumny, which read entire,
would appear most free. At last they upbraided my poverty; I confess, she is
my Domestic; sober of diet, simple of habit; frugall, painful; a good
Counselors to me; that keeps me from Cruelty, Pride, or other more delicate
impertinences; which are the Nurse-children of Riches. But let them look over
all the great, and monstrous wickednesses, they shall never find those in
poor families. They are the issue of the wealthy Giants, and the mighty
Hunters: Whereas no great work, or worthy of praise, or memory, but came out
of poor cradles. It was the ancient poverty, that founded Commonweals; built
Cities, invented Arts, made wholesome Laws; armed men against vices; rewarded
them with their own virtues; and preserved the honor, and state of Nations,
till they betrayed themselves to Riches.

Money never made any man rich, but his mind. Amor nummi.
He that can order himself to the Law of nature, is not only without the
sense, but the fear of poverty. O! but to strike blind the people with our
wealth, and pomp, is the thing! what a wretchedness is this, to thrust all
our riches outward, and be beggars within: to contemplate nothing, but the
little, vile, and fordid things of the world; not the great, noble, and
precious? we serve our avarice, and not content with the good of the Earth,
that is offered us; we search, and dig for the evil that is hidden. God
offered us those things, and placed them at hand, and near us, that he knew
were profitable for us; but the hurtful he laid deep, and hid. Yet do we
seek only the things, whereby we may perish; and bring them forth, when God
and nature has buried them. We covet super-fluous things; when it were more
honor for us, if we could contemn necessary. What need has nature of silver
dishes, multitudes of Waiters, delicate Pages, perfumed Napkins? She requires
meat only, and hunger is not ambitious. Can we think no wealth enough, but
such a state, for which a man may be brought into a Praemunire, begged,
proscribed, or poisoned? O! if a man could restrain the fury of his gullet,
and groyne, and think how many fires, how many kitchins, Cooks, Pastures, and
plough'd Lands; what Orchards, Stews, Ponds, and Parkes, Coupes, and Garners
he could spare: What Velvets, Tissues, Imbroderies, Laces he could lack; and
then how short, and uncertain his life is; He were in a better way to
happiness, then to live the Emperor of these delights; and be the Dictator of
fashions? But we make our selves slaves to our pleasures; and we serve Fame,
and Ambition, which is an equal slavery. Have not I seen the pomp of a whole
Kingdom, and what a foreign King could bring hither. Also to make himself
gazed, and wondered at, laid forth as it were to the show, and vanish all away
in a day? And shall that which could not fill the expectation of few hours,
entertain, and take up our whole lives? when even it appeared as superfluous
to the Possessors, as to me that was a Spectator. The bravery was shown, it
was not possessed while it boasted it self, it perished. It is vile, and a
poor thing to place our happiness on these desires. Say we wanted them all.
Famine ends famine.

De mollibus and ^ffaminatis.
There is nothing valiant, or solid to be hoped for from such, as are always
kempt'd, and perfumed; and every day smell of the Tailor. The exceedingly
curious, that are wholly in mending such an imperfection in the face, in taking
away the Morphew in the neck; or bleaching their hands at Midnight, gumming,
and bridling their beards, or making the waste small, binding it with hoopes,
while the mind runs at waste: Too much pickednesse is not manly. Not from those
that will jest at their own outward imperfections, but hide their ulcers
within, their Pride, Lust, Envy, ill nature, with all the art and authority
they can. These persons are in danger; For whilst they think to justify their
ignorance by impudence; and their persons by clothes, and outward ornaments,
they use but a Commission to deceive themselves. Where, if we will look with
our understanding, and not our senses, we may behold virtue, and beauty,
(though covered with rags) in their brightness; and vice, and deformity so
much the fowler, in having all the splendour of riches to guild them, or the
false light of honor and power to help them. Yet this is that, wherewith the
world is taken, and runs mad to gaze on: Clothes and Titles, the Birdlime of
Fools.

De st^lti^id.
What petty things they are, we wonder at? like children, that esteem every
trifle; and prefer a Fairing before their Fathers: what difference is
between us, and them? but that we are dearer Fools, Cockscombes, at a higher
rate. They are pleased with Cockleshels, Whistles, Hobby-horses, and such like:
we with Statues, marble Pillars, Pictures, gilded Roofes, where under-neath
is Lath, and Lyme; perhaps Lome. Yet, we take pleasure in the lie, and are
glad, we can cosen our selves. Nor is it only in our walls, and feelings; but
all that we call happiness, is mere painting, and guilt: and all for money:
what a thin Membrane of honor that is? and how has all true reputation
fallen, since money began to have any? yet the great heard, the multitude; that
in all other things are divided; in this alone conspire, and agree: To love
money. They wish for it, they embrace it, they adore it; while yet it is
possessed with greater stir, and torment, then it is gotten.

Some men, what losses soever they have, they make them greater: De sibi
molestis.
and if they have none, even all, that is not gotten, is a loss. Can there be
creatures of more wretched condition, then these; that continually labor under
their own misery, and others envy? A man should study other things, not to
covet, not to fear, not to repent him: To make his Base such, as no Tempest
shall shake him: to be secure of all opinion; and pleasing to himself, even
for that, wherein he displeases others. For the worst opinion gotten for doing
well, should delight us: would not thou be just, but for fame; thou ought
to be it with infamy: He that would have his virtue published, is not the
servant of virtue, but glory.

It is a dangerous thing, Periculosa Melancholia.
when men's minds come to sojourne with their affections, and their diseases
eat into their strength: that when too much desire, and greediness of vice,
has made the body unfit, or unprofitable; it is yet gladded with the sight,
and spectacle of it in others: and for want of ability to be an Actor; is
content to be a Witness. It enjoyes the pleasure of sinning, in beholding
others sin; as in Dicing, Drinking, Drabbing, etc. Nay, when it cannot do
all these, it is offended with his own narrowness, that excludes it from the
universal delights of Mankind; and often times dies of a Melancholy, that it
cannot be vicious enough.

I am glad, when I see any man avoid the infamy of a vice; Falsae species
fugiendae.
but to shun the vice it self were better. Till he do that, he is but like
the Prentise, who being loath to be spied by his Master, coming forth of
Black-Lucis, went in again; to whom his Master cried; the more thou runnest
that way to hide thyselfe, the more thou art in the Place. So are those, that
keep a Tavern all day; that they may not be seen at night. I have known
Lawyers, Divines; yea, great ones of this Heresy.

There is a greater Reverence had of things remote, or strange to us, Decipimur
specie.
then of much better, if they be nearer, and fall under our sense. Men, and
almost all sort of creatures, have their reputation by distance. Rivers, the
farther they run, and more from their spring, the broader, they are, and
greater. And where our original is known, we are the less confident: Among
strangers we trust fortune. Yet a man may live as renowned at home, in his
own country, or a private Village, as in the whole world. For it is virtue
that gives glory: That will endenizon a man every where. It is only that can
naturalize him. A native, if he be vicious, deserves to be a stranger, and
cast out of the Commonwealth, as an Al^en.

Dejectio Aulic.
A dejected countenance, and mean clothes, beget often a contempt; but it is
with the shallowest creatures: Courtiers commonly look up even with them in a
new suite; you get above 'hem straight. Nothing is more short-lived then Pride:
It is but while their clothes last; stay but while these are worn out, you
cannot wish the thing more wretched, or dejected.

Poesis, et Pictura. Plutarch.
Poetry, and Picture, are Arts of a like nature; and both are busy about
imitation. It was excellently said of Plutarch, Poetry was a speaking Picture,
and Picture a mute Poesy. For they both invent, feign, and devise many things,
and accommodate all they invent to the use, and service of nature. Yet of the
two, the Pen is more noble, then the Pencill. For that can speak to the
Understanding; the other, but to the Sense. They both behold pleasure, and
profit, as their common Object; but should abstain from all base pleasures,
lest they should err from their end: and while they seek to better men's
minds, destroy their manners. They both are borne Artificers, not made. Nature
is more powerful in them then study.

De Pictura.
Whosoever loves not Picture, is injurious to Truth: and all the wisdom of
Poetry. Picture is the invention of Heaven: the most ancient, and most a kin
to Nature. It is it self a silent work: and always of one and the same
habit: Yet it does so enter, and penetrate the inmost affection (being done by
an excellent Artificer) as sometimes it orecomes the power of speech, and
oratory. There are diverse graces in it; so are there in the Artificers. One
excels in care, another in reason, a third in easiness, a fourth in nature and
grace. Some have diligence, and comeliness: but they want Majesty. They can
express a humane form in all the graces, sweetness, and elegancy; but they
miss the Authority. They can hit nothing but smooth cheeks; they cannot
express roughness, or gravity. Others aspire to Truth so much, as they are
rather Lovers of likeness, then beauty. Zeuxis, and Parrhasius, are said to be
contemporaries: The first, found out the reason of lights, and shadows in
Picture: the other, more subtily examined the lines.

De stylo. Pliny.
In Picture, light is required no less then shadow: so in style, height, as
well as humbleness. But beware they be not too humble; as Pliny pronounced of
Regulus writings. You would think them written, not on a child, but by a
child. Many, out of their own obscene Apprehensions, refuse proper and fit
words; as occupy, nature, and the like: So the curious industry in some of
having all alike good, has come nearer a vice, then a virtue.

De progress. Picturae. Parrhasius.
Picture took her faining from Poetry: from Geometry her rule, compass,
lines, proportion, and the whole Symmetry. Parrhasius was the first wan
reputation, by adding Symmetry to Picture: he added subtilty to the
countenance, elegancy to the hair, love-lines to the face; and, by the public
voice of all Artificers, deserved honor in the outer lines. Eupompus gave it
splendour by numbers, Eupompus.
and other elegancies. From the Optics it drew reasons; by which it
considered, how things placed at distance, and a far off, should appear
less: how above, or beneath the head, should deceive the eye, etc. So from
thence it took shadows, recessor, light, and heightnings. From moral
Philosophy it took the soul, the expression of Senses, Perturbations,
Manners, when they would paint an angry person, a proud, an inconstant, an
ambitious, a brave, a magnanimous, a just, a merciful, a compassionate, an
humble, a dejected, a base, and the like. They made all heightnings bright, all
shadows dark, all swellings from a plane; all solids from breaking. See Plin.
lib. 35. c. 2.5.6 and 7. Vitruv. li. 8. and 7.
where he complains of their painting Chimaera's, by the vulgar unaptly called
Grottesque: Saying, that men who were borne truly to study, and emulate nature,
did nothing but make monsters against nature; which Horat. in art Poet.
Horace so laughed at. The Art Plasticke was moulding in clay, or potters earth
anciently. This is the Parent of Statuary sculpture, Graving and Picture;
cutting in brass, and marble, all serve under her. Socrates. Parrhasius. Clyto.
Socrates taught Parrhasius, and Clito (two noble Statuaries) first to express
manners by their looks in Imagery. Polygnotus. Aglaophon
Polygnotus, and Aglaophon were ancienter. After them Zeuxis.
Zeuxis, who was the Lawgiver to all Painters: after Parrhasius.
Parrhasius. They were contemporaries, and lived both about Philips time, the
Father of Alexander the Great. There lived in this latter Age six famous
Painters in Italy: who were excellent, and emulous of the Ancients: Raphael de
urbino. Mich: Angel. Buonarota. Titian. Antonie de Correg. Sebast: de Venet.
Iulio Romano. Andrea Sartorio.
Raphael de Vrbino, Michel Angelo Buonarota, Titian, Antonie of Correggio,
Sebastian of Venice, Iulio Romano, and Andrea Sartorio.

These are Flatterers for their bread, that praise all my oraculous Lord does
or says, be it true or false: invent tales that shall please: make baits for
his Lordships ears: and if they be not received in what they offer at, they
shift a point of the Compass, and turn their tale presently tacke about; deny
what they confessed, and confess what they denied; fit their discourse to the
persons, and occasions. What they snatch up, and devour at one table, utter at
another: and grow suspected of the Master, hated of the servants, while they
inquire, and reprehend, and compound, and delate business of the house they have
nothing to do with: They praise my Lords wine, and the sauce he likes; observe
the Cook, and Bottle-man, while they stand in my Lords favor, speak for a
pension for them: but pound them to dust upon my Lords least distaste, Parasiti
ad mensam.
or change of his palate.

How much better is it, to be silent; or at least, to speak sparingly! For it
is not enough to speak good, but timely things. If a man be asked a question,
to answer, but to repeat the Question, before he answer, is well, that he be
sure to understand it, to avoid absurdity. For it is less dishonor, to hear
imperfectly, then to speak imperfectly. The ears are excused, the
understanding is not. And in things unknown to a man, not to give his opinion,
lest by affectation of knowing too much, he lose the credit he has by
speaking, or knowing the wrong way, what he utters. Nor seek to get his
Patrons favor, by imbarking himself in the Factions of the Family: to inquire
after domesticke simulties, their sports, or affections. They are an odious,
and vile kind of creatures, that fly about the house all day; and picking up
the filth of the house, like Pies or Swallows, carry it to their nest (the
Lords ears) and oftentimes report the lies they have feigned, for what they
have seen and heard.

These are called instruments of grace, and power, with great persons; Imo
serviles.
but they are indeed the Organs of their impotencie, and marks of weakness.
For sufficient Lords are able to make these Discoveries themselves. Neither
will an honorable person inquire, who eats, and drinks together, what that
man plays, whom this man loves; with whom such a one walks; what discourse
they held, who sleeps, with whom. They are base, and servile natures, that
busy themselves about these disquisitions. How often have I seen, (and
worthily) these Censors of the family, undertaken by some honest Rustic, and
cudgel'd thriftily? These are commonly the off-scowring, and dregs of men, that
do these things, or calumniate others: Yet I know not truly which is worse;
he that malignes all, or that praises all. There is as great a vice in
praising, and as frequent, as in detracting.

It pleased your Lordship of late, to ask my opinion, touching the education
of your sons, and especially to the advancement of their studies. To which,
though I returned somewhat for the present; which rather manifested a will in
me, then gave any just resolution to the thing propounded: I have upon better
cogitation called those ayds about me, both of mind, and memory; which shall
venture my thoughts clearer, if not fuller, to your Lordships demand. I
confess, my Lord, they will seem but petty, and minute things I shall offer
to you, being writ for children, and of them. But studies have their Infancy,
as well as creatures. We see in men, even the strongest compositions had their
beginnings from milk, and the Cradle; and the wisest tarried sometimes about
apting their mouths to Letters, and syllables. In their education therefore,
the care must be the greater had of their beginnings, to know, examine, and
weigh their natures; which though they be proner in some children to some
disciplines; yet are they naturally prompt to taste all by degrees, and with
change. For change is a kind of refreshing in studies, and infuseth knowledge
by way of recreation. Thence the School it self is called a Play, or Game:
and all Letters are so best taught to Scholars. They should not be afrighted,
or deterred in their Entry, but drawn on with exercise, and emulation. A youth
should not be made to hate study, before he know the causes to love it: or
taste the bitterness before the sweet; but called on, and allured, entreated,
and praised: Yea, when he deserves it not. For which cause I wish them sent to
the best school, and a public; which I think the best. Your Lordship I fear
hardly hears of that, as willing to breed them in your eye, and at home; and
doubting their manners may be corrupted abroad. They are in more danger in
your own Family, among ill servants, (allowing, they be safe in their
Schoolmasters) then amongst a thousand boys, however immodest: would we did
not spoil our own children, and overthrow their manners our selves by too
much Indulgence. To breed them at home, is to breed them in a shade; where in a
school they have the light, and heat of the Sun. They are used, and
accustomed to things, and men. When they come forth into the Commonwealth,
they find nothing new, or to seek. They have made their friendships and ayds;
some to last till their Age. They hear what is commanded to others, as well as
themselves. Much approved, much corrected; all which they bring to their own
store, and use; and learn as much, as they hear. Eloquence would be but a
poor thing, if we should only converse with singulars; speak, but man and
man together. Therefore I like no private breeding. I would send them where
their industry should be daily increased by praise; and that kindled by
emulation. It is a good thing to inflame the mind: And though Ambition it self
be a vice, it is often the cause of great virtue. Give me that wit, whom praise
excites, glory puts on, or disgrace grieves: he is to be nourished with
Ambition, pricked forward with honor; checked with Reprehension; and never to
be suspected of sloth. Though he be given to play, it is a sign of spirit,
and liveliness; so there be a mean had of their sports, and relaxations. And
from the rod, or ferule, I would have them free, as from the menace of them:
for it is both deformed, and servile.

For a man to write well, there are required three Necessaries. De stylo, ^^
optimo scribendi genere.
To read the best Authors, observe the best Speakers: and much exercise of his
own style. In style to consider, what ought to be written; and after what
manner; He must first think, and excogitate his matter; then choose his
words, and examine the weight of either. Then take care in placing, and ranking
both matter, and words, that the composition becomely; and to do this with
diligence, and often. No matter how slow the style be at first, so it be
labored, and accurate; seek the best, and be not glad of the forward
conceits, or first words, that offer themselves to us, but judge of what we
invent; and order what we approve. Repeat often, what we have formerly
written; which beside, that it helps the consequence, and makes the juncture
better, it quickens the heat of imagination, that often cooles in the time of
setting down, and gives it new strength, as if it grew lustier, by the going
back. As we see in the contention of leaping, they jumpe farthest, that fetch
their race largest: or, as in throwing a Dart, or Iavelin, we force back our
arms, to make our loose the stronger. Yet, if we have a fair gale of wind, I
forbid not the steering out of our fail, so the favor of the gale deceive us
not. For all that we invent does please us in the conception, or birth; else
we would never set it down. But the safest is to return to our Judgment, and
handle over again those things, the easiness of which might make them justly
suspected. So did the best Writers in their beginnings; they imposed upon
themselves care, and industry. They did nothing rashly. They obtained first to
write well, and then custom made it easy, and a habit. By little and little,
their matter showed it self to 'hem more plentifully; their words answered,
their composition followed; and all, as in a well ordered family, presented it
self in the place. So that the sum of all is: Ready writing makes not good
writing; but good writing brings on ready writing: Yet when we think we have
got the faculty, it is even then good to resist it: as to give a Horse a check
sometimes with bit, which does not so much stop his course, as stir his
mettle. Again, whether a man's Genius is best able to reach thither, it should
more and more contend, lift and dilate it self, as men of low stature, raise
themselves on their toes; and so often times get even, if not eminent. Besides,
as it is fit for grown and able Writers to stand of themselves, and work with
their own strength, to trust and endeavor by their own faculties: so it is
fit for the beginner, and learner, to study others, and the best. For the mind,
and memory are more sharply exercised in comprehending an other man's things,
then our own; and such as accustom themselves, and are familiar with the best
Authors, shall ever and anon find somewhat of them in themselves, and in the
expression of their minds, even when they feel it not, be able to utter
something like theirs, which has an Authority above their own. Nay, sometimes
it is the reward of a man's study, the praise of quoting an other man fitly: And
though a man be more prone, and able for one kind of writing, then another, yet
he must exercise all. For as in an Instrument, so in style, there must be a
Harmony, and consent of parts.

Precipiendi modi.
I take this labor in teaching others, that they should not be always to be
taught; and I would bring my Precepts into practice. For rules are ever of
less force, and value, then experiments. Yet with this purpose, rather to show
the right way to those that come after, then to detect any that have slipped
before by error, and I hope it will be more profitable. For men do more
willingly listen, and with more favor to precept, then reprehension. Among
diverse opinions of an Art, and most of them contrary in themselves, it is hard
to make election; and therefore, though a man cannot invent new things after so
many, he may do a welcome work yet to help posterity to judge rightly of the
old. But Arts and Precepts avail nothing, except nature be beneficial, and
ayding. And therefore these things are no more written to a dull disposition,
then rules of husbandry to a barren Soil. No precepts will profit a Fool; no
more then beauty will the blind, or music the deaf. As we should take care,
that our style in writing, be neither dry, nor empty: we should look again
it be not winding, or wanton with far-fetcht-descriptions; Either is a vice.
But that is worse which proceeds out of want, then that which riots out of
plenty. The remedy of fruitfulness is easy, but no labor will help the
contrary; I will like, and praise some things in a young Writer; which yet if
he continue in, I cannot, but justly hate him for the same. There is a time to
be given all things for maturity; and that even your Countrey-husband-man can
teach; who to a young plant will not put the proyning knife, because it seems
to fear the iron, as not able to admit the scarre. No more would I tell a
green Writer all his faults, lest I should make him grieve and faint, and at
last despair. For nothing does more hurt, then to make him so afraid of all
things, as he can endeavor nothing. Therefore youth ought to be instructed
betimes, and in the best things: for we hold those longest, we take soonest.
As the first sent of a Vessel lasts: and that tinct the wool first receives.
Therefore a Master should temper his own powers, and descend to the others
infirmity. If you power a glut of water upon a Bottle, it receives little of
it; but with a Funnell, and by degrees, you shall fill many of them, and spill
little of your own; to their capacity they will all receive, and be full. And
as it is fit to rende the best Authors to youth first, so let them be of the
openest, and clearest. Livy. Salust. Sydney. Done. Gower. Chaucer.
As Livy before Salust, Sydney before Done: and beware of letting them taste
Gower, or Chaucer at first, lest falling too much in love with Antiquity, and
not apprehending the weight, they grow rough and barren in language only. When
their judgments are firm, and out of danger, let them read both, the old and
the new: but no less take heed, that their new flowers, and sweetness do not
as much corrupt, as the others dryness, Spencer.
and squallor, if they choose not carefully. Spencer, in affecting the Ancients
writ no Language: Yet I would have him read for his matter; but as Virgil read
Eunius. Virgil. Ennius. Homer. Virgil. Quintilian.
The reading of Homer and Virgil is counseled by Quintilian, as the best way
of informing youth, and confirming man. For besides that, the mind is raised
with the height, and sublimity of such a verse, it takes spirit from the
greatness of the matter, and is tincted with the best things. Tragic, and
Liricke Poetry is good too: and Comicke with the best, if the manners of the
Reader be once in safety. In the Greek Poets, Plautus. Terence.
as also in Plautus, we shall see the Economy, and disposition of Poems,
better observed then in Terence, and the later: who thought the sole grace, and
virtue of their Fable, the sticking in of sentences, as ours do the forcing in
of jests.

We should not protect our sloth with the patronage of difficulty. Ials.
querel. fugien^.
It is a false quarrel against nature, that she helps understanding; but in
a few, when the most part of mankind are inclined by her thither, if they would
take the pains; no less then birds to fly, horses to run, etc. Which if they
lose, it is through their own sluggishnesse, and by that means become her
prodigies, not her children I confess, nature in children is more patient of
labor in study, then in Age; for the sense of the pain, the judgment of the
labor is absent, they do not measure what they have done. And it is the
thought, and consideration, Platonis. Peregrinatio in Italiam.
that affects us more, then the weariness it self. Plato was not content with
the Learning, that Athens could give him, but sailed into Italy for Pythagora's
knowledge: And yet not thinking himself sufficiently informed, went into Egypt
to the Priests, and learned their mysteries. He labored, so must we. Many
things may be learned together, and performed in one point of time; as
Musicians exercise their memory, their voice, their fingers, and sometime their
head, and feet at once. And so a Preacher in the invention of matter, election
of words, composition of gesture, look, pronunciation, motion, uses all these
faculties at once. And if we can express this variety together, why should
not diverse studies, at diverse hours delight, when the variety is able alone
to refresh, and repair us? As when a man is weary of writing, to read; and
then again of reading, to write. Wherein, howsoever we do many things, yet
are we (in a sort) still fresh to what we begin: we are recreated with
change, as the stomach is with meats. But some will say, this variety breeds
confusion, and makes, that either we loose all, or hold no more then the last.
Why do we not then persuade husbandmen, that they should not till Land, help
it with Marle, Lyme, and Compost? plant Hop-gardens, prune trees, look to
Bee-hives, rear sheep, and all other Cattle at once? It is easier to do
many things, and continue, then to do one thing long. Praecept. Element.


It is not the passing through these Learnings that hurts us, but the dwelling
and sticking about them. To descend to those extreme anxieties, and foolish
cavils of Grammarians, is able to break a wit in pieces; being a work of
manifold misery, and vainenesse, to be Elementarij senes. Yet even Letters are
as it were the Bank of words, and restore themselves to an Author, as the
pawnes of Language: But talking and Eloquence are not the same: to speak, and
to speak well, are two things. A fool may talk, but a wise man speaks, and
out of the observation, knowledge, and use of things. Many Writers perplexe
their Readers, and Hearers with mere Nonsense. Their writings need sunshine.
Pure and neat Language I love, yet plain and customary. A barbarous Phrase
has often made me out of love with a good sense; and doubtful writing has
wrackt me beyond my patience. The reason why a Poet is said, that he ought to
have all knowledges, is that he should not be ignorant of the most, especially
of those he will handle. And indeed when the attaining of them is possible, it
were a sluggish, and base thing to despair. For frequent imitation of any
thing, becomes a habit quickly. If a man should prosecute as much, as could be
said of every thing; his work would find no end.

De orationis. dignitate.
Speech is the only benefit, man has to express his excellency of mind above
other creatures. It is the Instrument of Society. Therefore Mercury, who is the
President of Language, is called Deorum hominumque interpres. In all speech,
words and sense, are as the body, and the soul. The sense is, as the life and
soul of Language, without which all words are dead. Sense is wrought out of
experience, the knowledge of humane life, and actions, or of the liberal Arts,
which the Greeks called (...). (...). Julius Caesar. Of words see Hor. de Art.
Poetie. Quintil. l. 8. Ludov. Vives, page 6. and 7. Metaphora.
Words are the Peoples; yet there is a choice of them to be made. For Verborum
delectus, origo est eloquentiae. They are to be chose according to the persons
we make speak, or the things we speak of. Some are of the Camp, some of
the Councell-board, some of the Shop, some of the Sheepe-coat, some of the
Pulpit, some of the Bar, etc. And herein is seen their Elegance, and
Propriety, when we use them fitly, and draw them forth to their just strength
and nature, by way of Translation, or Metaphore. But in this Translation we
must only serve necessity (Nam temere nihil transfertur a prudenti) or
commodity, which is a kind of necessity; that is, when we either absolutely
want a word to express by, and that is necessity; or when we have not so fit
a word, and that is commodity. As when we avoid loss by it, and escape
obscenenesse, and gain in the grace and property, which helps significance.
Metaphors farfet hinder to be understood, and affected, lose their grace. Or
when the person fetches his translations from a wrong place. As if a
Privie-Counsellor should at the Table take his Metaphore from a Dicing-house,
or Ordinary, or a Vintners Vault; or a Justice of Peace draw his similitudes
from the Mathematics; or a Divine from a Bawdy House, or Tavernes; or a
Gentleman of Northamptonshire, Warwickshire, or the Mid-land, should fetch
all his Illustrations to his country neighbors from shipping, and tell them
of the maine sheat, and the Boulin. Metaphors are thus many times deformed, as
in him that said, Castratam morte Aphricani Rempublicam. And an othet, stercus
curiae Glanciam. And Cana nive conspuit Alps. All attempts that are new in
this kind, are dangerous, and somewhat hard, before they be softened with use. A
man coins not a new word without some peril, and less fruit; for if it
happen to be received, the praise is but moderate; if refused, the scorn is
assured. Yet we must adventure, for things at first, hard and rough, are by
use made tender and gentle. It is an honest error that is committed, following
great Chiefes.

Consuetudo.
Custom is the most certain Mistress of Language, as the public stamp
makes the current money. But we must not be too frequent with the mint, every
day coining. Nor fetch words from the extreme and utmost ages; Perspicuita^
Venustas.
since the chief virtue of a style is perspicuitie, and nothing so vicious in
it, as to need an Interpreter. Words borrowed of Antiquity, do lend a kind of
Majesty to style, Authoritat.
and are not without their delight sometimes. For they have the Authority of
years, and out of their intermission do win to themselves a kind of
grace-like newness. But the eldest of the present, and newness of the past
Language is the best. For what was the ancient Language, which some men so
doat upon, but the ancient Custom? Yet when I name Custom, I understand not
the vulgar Custom: For that were a precept no less dangerous to Language,
then life, if we should speak or live after the manners of the vulgar: But
that I call Custom of speech, which is the consent of the Learned; as Custom
of life, which is the consent of the good. Virgill was most loving of
Antiquity; Virgil. Lucretius. Chaucerisme.
yet how rarely does he insert aquai, and pictai! Lucretius is scabrous and
rough in these; he seeks 'hem: As some do Chaucerismes with us, which were
better expunged and banished. Some words are to be culled out for ornament and
color, as we gather flowers to straw houses, or make Garlands; but they are
better when they grow to our style; as in a Meadow, where though the mere
grass and greenness delights; yet the variety of flowers does heighten and
beautify. Marry we must not play, or riot too much with them, as in
Paranomasies: Nor use too swelling, Paranomasia.
or ill-sounding words; Quae per salebras, altaque saxa cadunt. It is true,
there is no sound but shall find some Lovers, as the bitter'st confections are
grateful to some palats. Our composition must be more accurate in the
beginning and end, then in the midst; and in the end more, then in the
beginning; for through the midst the stream bears us. And this is attained by
Custom more then care, or diligence. We must express readily, and fully, not
profusely. There is difference between a liberal, and a prodigal hand. As it
is a great point of Art, when our matter requires it, to enlarge, and veere out
all sail; so to take it in, and contract it, is of no less praise when the
Argument does ask it. Either of them has their fitness in the place. A good
man always profits by his endeavor, by his help; yea, when he is absent; nay
when he is dead by his example and memory. So good Authors in their style: De
stylo.
A strict and succinct style is that, where you can take away nothing without
loss, and that loss to be manifest. The brief style is that which expresses
much in little. Tacitus. The Laconicke. Suetonius. Seneca and Fabianus.
The concise style, which expresses not enough, but leaves somewhat to be
understood. The abrupt style, which has many breaches, and does not seem to
end, but fall. The congruent, and harmonious fitting of parts in a sentence,
has almost the fastening, and force of knitting, and connection: As in stones
well squared, which will rise strong a great way without mortar. Periods are
beautiful; Periodi.
when they are not too long; for so they have their strength too, as in a Pike
or Javelin. As we must take the care that our words and sense be clear; so
if the obscurity happen through the Hearers, or Readers want of understanding,
I am not to answer for them; no more then for their not listening or marking; I
must neither find them ears, nor mind. But a man cannot put a word so in
sense, but some thing about it will illustrate it, if the Writer understand
himself. For Order helps much to Perspicuity, as Confusion hurts. Rectitudo
lucem adfert; obliquitas et circumductio offuscat. We should therefore speak
what we can, the nearest way, so as we keep our gate, not leap; for too
short may as well be not let into the memory, as too long not kept in.
Whatsoever loses the grace. and clearenesse, converts into a Riddle;
Obscuritas ^ffundit te^ebras.
the obscurity is marked, but not the value. That perishes, and is past by,
like the Pearl in the Fable. Our style should be like a skeine of silk to be
carried, and found by the right thread, not ravel'd, and perplexed; Superlatio.
then all is a knot, a heap. There are words, that do as much raise a style,
as others can depresse it. Superlation, and over-muchnesse amplifies. It may be
above faith, but never above a mean. It was ridiculous in Cestius, Cestius.
when he said of Alexander:

Fremit Oceanus, quasi indignetur, quod terras relinquas; Virgil.
But propitiously from Virgil: -- Crea^^innate reuulsas Cycladas. He does not
say it was so, but seem ^^o be so. Although it be somewhat incredible, that is
excused before it be spoken. But there are Hyperboles, which will become one
Language, that will by no means admit another. Caesar comment: circa fin.
Quintilian.
As Eos esse P. R. exercitus, qui coelum possint perrumpere: who would say this
with us, but a mad man? Therefore we must consider in every tongue what is
used, what received. Quintilian warnes us, that in no kind of Translation, or
Metaphore, or Allegory, we make a turn from what we began; As if we fetch
the original of our Metaphore from sea, and billows; we end not in flames
and ashes; It is a most foul inconsequence. Neither must we draw out our
Allegory too long, lest either we make our selves obscure, or fall into
affectation, which is childish. But why do men depart at all from the right,
and natural ways of speaking? Sometimes for necessity, when we are driven,
or think it fitter to speak that in obscure words, or by circumstance, which
uttered plainly would offend the hearers. Or to avoid obscenenesse, or
sometimes for pleasure, and variety; as Travailers turn out of the high way,
drawn, either by the commodity of a foot-path, or the delicacy, or freshness
of the fields. And all this is called (...), or figured Language.

Oration imago animi.
Language most shows a man: speak that I may see thee. It springs out of the
most retired, and inmost parts of us, and is the Image of the Parent of it, the
mind. No glass renders a man's form, or likeness, so true as his speech. Nay,
it is likened to a man; and as we consider feature, Structura, and statura.
Sublimis Humilis pumila.
and composition in a man; so words in Language: in the greatness, aptness,
sound, structure, and harmony of it. Some men are tall, and big, so some
Language is high and great. Then the words are chosen, their sound ample, the
composition full, the absolution plenteous, and powered out, all grave, sin
wye and strong. Some are little, and Dwarfes: so of speech it is humble, and
low, the words poor and flat; Mediocris Plana and placida. Vit iosa oration,
vasta. Tumens. Enormis. Affectata. Abjecta.
the members and Periods, thin and weak without knitting, or number. The
middle are of a just stature. There the Language is plain, and pleasing: even
without stopping, round without swelling; all well-torn'd, composed, elegant,
and accurate. The vicious Language is vast, and gaping, swelling, and
irregular; when it contends to be high, full of Rock, Mountain, and
pointednesse: As it affects to be low, it is abject, and creeps, full of bogs,
and holes. And according to their Subject, these styles vary, and lose their
names: For that which is high and lofty, declaring excellent matter, becomes
vast and tumorous: Speaking of petty and inferior things: so that which was
even, and apt in a mean and plain subject, will appear most poor and humble
in a high Argument. Would you not laugh, to meet a great Counselor of state in
a flat cap, with his trunck hose, and a hobbyhorse Cloak, his Gloves under
his girdle, and yond Haberdasher in a velvet Gown, furred with fables? There
is a certain latitude in these things, by which we find the degrees. The next
thing to the stature, is the figure and feature in Language: that is, whether
it be round, and straight, Figura.
which consists of short and succinct Periods, numerous, and polished, or
square and firm; which is to have equal and strong patts, every where
answerable, and weighed. Cutis five Cortex. Compositio.
The third is the skin, and coat, which rests in the well-joyning, cementing,
and coagmentation of wor^^; when as it is smooth, gentle, and sweet; like a
Table, upon which you may run your finger without rubs, and your nail cannot
find a joint; not horrid, rough, wrinckled, gaping, or chapt: After these the
flesh, blood, and bones come in question. We say it is a fleshy style, when
there is much Periphrases, Carnosa. Adipata.
and circuit of words; and when with more then enough, it grows fat and
corpulent; Arvina orationis, full of suet and tallow. It has blood, and juice,
when the words are proper and apt, their sound sweet, and the Phrase neat and
picked. Oration uncta, and been pasta. But where there is Redundancy, both the
blood and juice are faulty, and vicious. Redundans.
Redundat sanguine, qua multo plus dicit, quam necesse est. Juice in Language
is somewhat less then blood; for if the words be but becoming, and
signifying, and the sense gentle, there is Juice: but where that wants, the
Language is thin, fl^gging, poor, starved; scarce covering the bone, Iejuna
macilenta, strigosa.
and shows like stones in a sack. Some men to avoid Redundancy, run into
that; and while they strive to have no ill blood, or Juice, they loose their
good. There be some styles again, that have not less blood, Ossia, and
nervosa.
but less flesh, and corpulence. These are bony, and sinnewy: Ossa habent, et
nervos.

It was well noted by the late L. St. Alban, Notae Domini St. Albani de
doctrine; intemper. Dictator. Aristoreles.
that the study of words is the first distemper of Learning: Vain matter the
second: And a third distemper is deceit, or the likeness of truth. Imposture
held up by credulity. All these are the Cobwebs of Learning, and to let them
grow in us, is either sluttish or foolish. Nothing is more ridiculous, then to
make an Author a Dictator, as the schools have done Aristotle. The damage is
infinite, knowledge receives by it. For to many things a man should owe but a
temporary belief, and a suspension of his own Judgment, not an absolute
resignation of himself, or a perpetual captivity. Let Aristotle, and others
have their dues; but if we can make farther Discoveries of truth and fitness
then they, why are we envied? Let us beware, while we strive to add, we do
not diminish, or deface; we may improve, but not augment, By discrediting
falsehood, Truth grows in request. We must not go about like men anguish'd,
and perplexed, for vicious affectation of praise: but calmely study the
separation of opinions, find the errors have intervened, awake Antiquity, call
former times into question; but make no parties with the present, nor follow
any fierce undertakers, mingle no matter of doubtful credit, with the
simplicity of truth, but gently stir the mould about the root of the
Question, and avoid all digladiations, facility of credit, or superstitious
simplicity; seek the consonancy, and concatenation of Truth; stoop only to
point of necessity; and what leads to convenience. Then make exact
animadversion where style has degenerated, where flourished, and thrived in
choisenesse of Phrase, round and clean composition of sentence, sweet falling
of the clause, varying an illustration by tropes and figures, weight of Matter,
worth of Subject, soundness of Argument, life of Invention, and depth of
Judgment. This is Monte potiri, to get the hill. For no perfect Discovery can
be made upon a flat or a level.

De optimo scriptore.
Now, that I have informed you in the knowing these things; let me lead you
by the hand a little farther, in the direction of the use; and make you an able
Writer by practice. The conceits of the mind are Pictures of things, and the
tongue is the Interpreter of those Pictures. The order of Gods creatures in
themselves, is not only admirable, and glorious, but eloquent; Then he who
could apprehend the consequence of things in their truth, and utter his
apprehensions as truly, were the best Writer, or Speaker. Therefore Cicero said
much, when he said, Dicere recte nemo potest, Cicero.
nisi qui prudenter intelligit. The shame of speaking unskilfully were small,
if the tongue only thereby were disgraced: But as the Image of a King, in his
Scale ill-represented, is not so much a blemish to the wax, or the Signet that
sealed it, as to the Prince it represents; so disordered speech is not so
much injury to the lips that give it forth, as to the disproportion, and
incoherence of things in themselves, so negligently expressed. Neither can his
mind be thought to be in tune, whose words do jarre; nor his reason in frame,
whose sentence is preposterous; nor his Elocution clear and perfect, whose
utterance breaks it self into fragments and uncertainties: Were it not a
dishonor to a mighty Prince, to have the Majesty of his embassage spoiled by a
careless Ambassador? and is it not as great an Indignity, that an excellent
conceit and capacity, by the indiligence of an idle tongue should be disgraced?
Negligent speech does not only discredit the person of the Speaker, but it
discrediteth the opinion of his reason and judgment; it discrediteth the force
and uniformity of the matter, and substance. If it be so then in words, which
fly and escape censure, and where one good Phrase begs pardon for many
incongruities, and faults; how shall he then be thought wise, whose penning is
thin and shallow? How shall you look for wit from him, whose leisure and head,
assisted with the examination of his eyes, yield you no life, or sharpness in
his writing.

De stylo Epistolari. Inventio.
In writing there is to be regarded the Invention, and the Fashion. For the
Invention, that arises upon your business; whereof there can be no rules of
more certainty, or precepts of better direction given, then conjecture can lay
down, from the several occasions of men's particular lives, and vocations: But
sometimes men make baseness of kindness: As (I could not satisfy my self,
till I had discharged my remembrance, and charged my Letters with commendations
to you.) Or, [My business is no other, then to testify my love to you, and to
put you in mind of my willingness to do you all kind offices.] Or, [Sir, have
you leisure to descend to the remembering of that assurance you have long
possessed in your servant; and upon your next opportunity, make him happy with
some commands from you?] Or, the like; that go a begging for some meaning, and
labor to be delivered of the great burden of nothing. When you have invented,
and that your business be matter, and not bare form, or mere Ceremony, but
some earnest: then are you to proceed to the ordering of it, and digesting the
parts, which is had out of two circumstances. One is the understanding of the
Persons, to whom you are to write; the other is the coherence of your Sentence.
For men's capacity to weigh, what will be apprehended with greatest attention,
or leisure; what next regarded, and longed for especially; and what last will
leave satisfaction, and (as it were) the sweetest memorial, and belief of all
that is past in his understanding, whom you write to. For the consequence of
Sentences, you must be sure, that every clause do give the Q. one to the
other, and be bespoken ere it come. So much for Invention and order. Now for
fashion it consists in four things, which are Qualities of your style. The
first is Brevity. For they must not be Treatises, or Discourses (your Letters)
except it be to learned men. And even among them, there is a kind of thrift,
and saving of words. Therefore you are to examine the clearest passages of your
understanding, and through them to convey the sweetest, and most significant
words you can devise; that you may the easier teach them the readiest way to an
other man's apprehension, and open their meaning fully, roundly, and distinctly.
So as the Reader may not think a second view cast away upon your letter. And
though respect be a part following this; yet now here, and still I must
remember it, if you write to a man, whose estate and cense as senses, you are
familiar with, you may the bolder (to set a task to his brain) venture on a
knot. But if to your Superior, you are bound to measure him in three farther
points: First, your interest in him: Secondly, his capacity in your Letters:
Thirdly, his leisure to peruse them. For your interest, or favor with him, you
are to be the shorter, or longer, more familiar, or submisse, as he will
afford you time. For his capacity you are to be quicker, and fuller of those
reaches, and glances of wit, or learning, as he is able to entertain them.
For his leisure, you are commanded to the greater briefnesse, as his place is
of greater discharges, and cares. But with your betters, you are not to put
Riddles of wit, by being too scarce of words: not to cause the trouble of
making Breviates, by writing too riotous, and wastingly. Brevity is attained in
matter, by avoiding idle Complements, Prefaces, Protestations, Parentheses,
superfluous circuit of figures, and digressions: In the composition, by
omitting Conjunctions, [Not only; But Also] Both the one, and the other,
whereby it comes to passe] and such like idle Particles, that have no great
business in a serious Letter, but breaking of sentences; as often timts a short
journey is made long, by unnecessary baits.

But as Quintilian says, there is a briefnesse of the parts sometimes,
Quintilian.
that makes the whole long, as I came to the stairs, I took a pair of oars,
they launched out, rowed a pace, I landed at the Court-gate, I paid my fair,
went up to the Presence, asked for my Lord, I was admitted. All this is, but I
went to the Court, and speak with my Lord. This is the fault of some Latin
Writers, within these last hundred years, of my reading, and perhaps Seneca may
be appeacht of it; 2. Perspicutas.
I accuse him not. The next property of Epistolarie style is Perspicuity, and
is often times by affectation of some wit ill angled for, or oftentation of
some hidden terms of Art. Few words they darken speech, and so do too many:
as well too much light hurts the eyes, as too little; and a long Bill of
Chancery confounds the understanding, as much as the shortest note. Therefore,
let not your Letters be penned like English Statutes, and this is obtained.
These vices are eschewed by pondering your business well, and distinctly
concerning your self, which is much furthered by uttering your thoughts, and
letting them as well come forth to the light, and Judgment of your own
outward senses, as to the censure of other men's ears: For that is the reason,
why many good Scholars speak but fumblingly; like a rich man, that for want
of particular note and difference, can bring you no certain ware readily out
of his shop. Hence it is, that talkative shallow men do often content the
Hearers, more then the wise. But this may find a speedier redress in writing;
where all comes under the last examination of the eyes. First mind it well,
then pen it, then examine it, then amend it; and you may be in the better hope
of doing reasonably well. Under this virtue may come Plainness, which is not
to be curious in the order, as to answer a letter, as if you were to answer to
Intergatories. As to the first, first; and to the second, secondly, etc. But
both in method to use (as Ladies do in their attire) a diligent kind of
negligence, and their sportive freedom; though with some men you are not to
jest, or practice tricks: yet the delivery of the most important things, may be
carried with such a grace, as that it may yield a pleasure to the conceit of
the Reader. There must be store, though no excess of terms; as if you are to
name Store, sometimes you may call it choice, sometimes plenty; sometimes
copiousnesse, or variety: but ever so, that the word which comes in lieu, have
not such difference of meaning, as that it may put the sense of the first in
hazard to be mistaken. You are not to cast a Ring for the perfumed terms of
the time, as Accommodation, Complement, Spirit, etc. But use them properly in
their place, 3. Vigor.
as others. There follows Life, and Quickness, which is the strength and
sinnewes (as it were) of your penning by pretty Sayings, Similitudes, and
Conceits, Allusions, some known History, or other common place, such as are in
the Courtier, and the second book of Cicero de oratore. 4. Discretio
The last is; Respect to discern, what fits your self; him to whom you write;
and that which you handle, which is a quality fit to conclude the rest, because
it does include all. And that must proceed from ripeness of judgment, which
as one truly says, is gotten by four means, God, Nature, Diligence, and
Conversation. Serve the first well, and the rest will serve you.

We have spoken sufficiently of Oratory; let us now make a diversion to Poetry.
De Poetica.
Poetry in the Primogeniture had many peccant humors, and is made to have more
now, through the Levity, and inconstancy of men's Judgments. Whereas indeed,
it is the most prevailing Eloquence, and of the most exalted Charact. Now the
discredits and disgraces are many it has received, through men's study of
Depravation or Calumny: their practice being to give it diminution of Credit,
by lessening the Professors estimation, and making the Age afraid of their
Liberty: And the Age is grown so tender of her fame, as she calls all writings
Aspersions.

That is the State-word, the Phrase of Court, (Placentia College) which some
call Parasites Place, the Inn of Ignorance.

Whilst I name no persons, but deride follies; why should any man confess, or
betray himself? D. Hieronimus.
why does not that of S. Hierome come into their mind; Vbi generalis est de
vitiis disputatio, ibi nullius esse personae injuriam? It is such an inexpiable
crime in Poets, to tax vices generally; and no offense in them who, by their
exception, confess they have committed them particularly. Are we fal'ne into
those times that we must not Auriculas tener as mordaci rodere vero? Pers.
Sat. 1. Livius.
Remedii votum semper verius erat, quam spes. If men may by no means write
freely, or speak truth, but when it offends not; why do Physicians cure with
sharp medicines, or corrosives? Is not the same equally lawful in the cure of
the mind, that is in the cure of the body? Some vices, (you will say) are so
foul, that it is better they should be done, then spoken. But they that take
offense where no Name, Character, or Signature does blazon them, seem to me
like affected as women; who, Sexus foemin':
if they hear any thing ill spoken of the ill of their Sex, are presently
moved (...) the contumely respected their particular: and, on the contrary,
when they hear good of good women, conclude, that it belongs to them all. If
I see any thing that touches me, shall I come forth a betraier of my self,
presently? No; if I be wise i will dissemble it; if honest, i will avoid it: lest I
publish that on my own forehead, which I saw there noted without a title. A
man, that is on the mending hand, will either ingeniously confess, or wisely
dissemble his disease. And, the wise, and virtuous, will never think any thing
belongs to themselves that is written, but rejoice that the good are warned not
to be such; and the ill to leave to be such. The Person offended has no
reason to be offended with the writer, but with himself; and so to declare
that properly to belong to him, which was so spoken of all men, as it could be
no man's several but his that would wilfully and desperately claim it. It
suffices I know, what kind of persons I displease, men bred in the declining,
and decay of virtue, betrothed to their own vices; that have abandoned, or
prostituted their good names; hungry and ambitious of infamy, invested in all
deformity, enthralled to ignorance and malice, of a hidden and concealed
malignitie, and that hold a concomitancy with all evil.

What is a Poet? A Poet is that, which by the Greeks is called (...), a Maker,
or a fainer: His Art, an Art of imitation, or faining; Poeta.
expressing the life of man in fit measure, numbers, and harmony, according to
Aristotle: From the word (...), which signifies to make or feign. Hence, he is
called a Poet, not he which writes in measure only; but that fayneth and
forms a fable, and writes things like the Truth. For, the Fable and Fiction
is (as it were) the form and Soul of any Poetical work, or Poem.

What mean you by a Poem? A Poem is not alone any work, or composition of
the Poets in many, Poema. Virgilius. Aeneid. lib. 3. Martial. lib. 8. epi^^. 19.
or few verses; but even one alone verse sometimes makes a perfect Poem. As,
when Aeneas hangs up, and consecrates the Arms of Abas, with this Inscription;
Aeneas haec de Danais victoribus arma. And calls it a Poem, or Carmen. Such
are those in Martial.

Omnia, Castor, emis: sic fiet, ut omnia vendas. And,
Pauper videri Cinna vult, and est pauper.
Pauper videri Cinna vult, and est pauper.
Horatius. Lucretius.
So were Horace his Odes called, Carmina; his Lirik, Songs. And Lucretius
designs a whole book, in his sixth: Quod in primo quoque carmine claret. And
anciently, Epicum. Dramaticum. Liricum. Elegiacum. Epigramat. Poesis.
all the Oracles were called, Carmina; or, what ever Sentence was expressed,
were it much, or little, it was called, an Epick, Dramatick, Lirike, Elegiake,
or Epigrammatike Poem But, how differs a Poem from what we call Poesy?

A Poem, as I have told you is the work of the Poet; the end, and fruit of
his labor, and study. Poesy is his skill, or Craft of making: the very
Fiction it self, the reason, or form of the work. And these three voices
differ, as the thing done, the doing, and the doer; the thing feigned, the
faining, and the fainer: so the Poem, the Poesy, and the Poet. Now, the Poesy
is the habit, Artium Regina.
or the Art: nay, rather the Queen of Arts: which had her Original from
heaven, received thence from the 'Ebrewes, and had in prime estimation with the
Greeks, transmitted to the Latins, and all Nations, that professed Civility.
Aristotle.
The Study of it (if we will trust Aristotle) offers to mankind a certain
rule, and Pattern of living well, and happily; disposing us to all Civil
offices of Society. M.T. Cicero.
If we will believe Tully, it nourishes, and instructs our Youth; delights
our Age; adornes our prosperity; comforts our Adversity; entertaines us at
home; keeps us company abroad, travailes with us; watches; devides the times
of our earnest, and sports; shares in our Country recesses, and recreations;
insomuch as the wisest, and best learned have thought her the absolute
Mistress of manners; and nearest of kin to Virtue. And, whereas they entitle
Philosophy to be a rigid, and austere Poesy: they have (on the contrary)
styled Poesy, a dulcet, and gentle Philosophy, which leads on, and guides us
by the hand to Action, with a ravishing delight, and incredible Sweetness. But,
before we handle the kinds of Poems, with their special differences; Poet:
differentiae. Grammatica. Logic. Rhetoric. Ethica. 1. Ingenium.
or make court to the Art it self, as a Mistress, I would lead you to the
knowledge of our Poet, by a perfect Information, what he is, or should be by
nature, by exercise, by imitation, by Study; and so bring him down through
the disciplines of Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, and the Ethics, adding
somewhat, out of all, peculiar to himself, and worthy of your Admittance, or
reception.

First, we require in our Poet, or maker, (for that Title our Language
affordes him, elegantly, with the Greek) a goodness of natural wit. For,
whereas all other Arts consist of Doctrine, and Precepts: the Poet must be able
by nature, and instinct, to power out the Treasure of his mind; and, as Seneca
says, Seneca.
Aliquando secundum Anacreontem insanire, jucundum esse: by which he
understands, the Poetical Rapture. And according to that of Plato; Frustra
Poetio as fores sui compos pulsavit: Plato. Aristotle.
And of Aristole; Nullum magnum ingenium sine mixtura dementiae fuit. Nec
potest grande aliquid, and supra caeteros loqui, nisi mota men's. Then it rises
higher, as by a devine Instinct, when it contemnes common, and known
conceptions. It utters somewhat above a mortal mouth. Helicon. Pegasus.
Parnassus. Ovidius.
Then it gets a lost, and flies away with his Ryder, whether, before, it was
doubtful to ascend. This the Poets understood by their Helicon, Pegasus, or
Parnassus; and this made Ovid to boast: Est, Deus in nobis; agitante calescimus
illo:
Sedibus aethereis spiritus ille venit.
And Lipsius, Lipsius.
to affirm; Scio, Poetam neminem praestantem fuisse, sine part quadam
uberiore divinae aurae. And, hence it is, that the coming up of good Poets,
(for I mind not mediocres, or imos) is so thin and rare among us; Every
beggarly Corporation affoords the State a Major, or two Bailiffs, yearly: but,
solus Rex, aut Poeta, non quotannis nascitur. Petron. in fragm. 2. Exercitatio.
To this perfection of Nature in our Poet, we require Exercise of those parts,
and frequent. If his wit will not arrive soddainly at the dignity of the
Ancients, let him not yet fall out with it, quarrel, or be over hastily Angry:
offer, to turn it away from Study, in a humor; but come to it again upon
better cogitation; try an other time, with labor. If then it succeed not cast
not away the Quills, yet: nor scratch the Wainescott, beat not the poor
Deske; but bring all to the forge, and file, again; turn it a new. There is
no Statute Law of the Kingdom bidds you be a Poet, against your will; or the
first Quarter. If it come, in a year, or two, it is well. The common Rymers
power forth Verses, such as they are, (ex tempore) but there never come from
them one Sense, worth the life of a Day. A Rymer, and a Poet, are two things.
It is said of the incomparable Virgil, that he brought forth his verses like a
Bear, Virgill. Scaliger.
and after formed them with licking. Scaliger, the Father, writes it of him,
that he made a quantity of verses in the morning, which a fore night he
reduced to a less number. But, that which Valerius Maximus has left recorded
of Euripides, Valor. Maximus. Euripides. Alcestis.
the tragic Poet, his answer to Alcestis, an other Poet, is as memorable, as
modest: who, when it was told to Alcestis, that Euripides had in three days
brought forth, but three verses, and those with some difficulty, and throws;
Alcestis, glorying he could with ease have sent forth a hundred in the space;
Euripides roundly repl'd, like enough. But, here is the difference; Thy verses
will not last those three days; mine will to all time. Which was, as to tell
him; he could not write a verse. I have met many of these Rattles, that made a
noise, and buz'de. They had their humme; and, no more. Indeed, things, wrote
with labor, deserve to be so read, and will last their Age. The third
requisite in our Poet, or Maker, is Imitation, to be able to convert the
substance, 3. Imitatio.
or Riches of an other Poet, to his own use. To make choice of one excellent
man above the rest, and so to follow him, till he grow very He: or, so like
him, as the Copy may be mistaken for the Principal. Not, as a Creature, that
swallows, what it takes in, crude, raw, or indigested; but, that feeds with
an Appetite, and has a Stomach to concoct, devide, and turn all into
nourishment. Not, to imitate servilely, as Horace says, and catch at vices,
Horatius.
for virtue: but, to draw forth out of the best, and choicest flowers, with the
Be, and turn all into Honey, work it into one relish, and savor: make our
Imitation sweet: observe, how the best writers have imitated, and follow them.
How Virgil, and Statius have imitated Homer: how Horace, Archilochus; how,
Virgilius. Statius. Homer. Horat. Archil. Alceus. etc. 4. Lectio.
Alcaeus, and the other Liricks: and so of the rest. But, that, which we
especially require in him is an exactness of Study, and multiplicity of
reading, which makes a full man, not alone enabling him to know the History,
or Argument of a Poem, and to report it: but so to master the matter, and
Style, as to show, he knows, how to handle, place, or dispose of either, with
elegancie, when need shall be. And not think, he can leap forth suddenly
a Poet, by dreaming he has been in Parnassus, or, Parnassus. Helicon. Ars
coron.
having washed his lips (as they say) in Helicon. There goes more to his
making, then so. For to Nature, Exercise, Imitation, and Study, Art must be
added, to make all these perfect. And, though these challenge to themselves
much, in the making up of our Maker, it is Art only can lead him to perfection,
and leave him there in possession, as planted by her hand. It is the assertion
of Tully, M.T. Cicero.
If to an excellent nature, there happen an accession, or confirmation of
Learning, and Discipline, there will then remain somewhat noble, and singular.
For, as Simylus says in Stobaeus; Simylus. Stob.
(...) without Art, Nature can nere be perfect; and, without Nature, Art can
claim no being. But, our Poet must beware, that his Study be not only to
learn of himself; for, he that shall affect to do that, confesses his ever
having a Fool to his master. He must read many; but, ever the best, and
choicest: those, that can teach him any thing, he must ever account his
masters, Horatius. Aristoteles.
and reverence: among whom Horace, and (he that taught him) Aristotle,
deserved to be the first in estimation. Aristotle, was the first accurate
Critic, and truest Judge; nay, the greatest Philosopher, the world ever had:
for, he noted the vices of all knowledges, in all creatures, and out of many
men's perfections in a Science, he formed still one Art. So he taught us two
Offices together, how we ought to judge rightly of others, and what we ought
to imitate specially in our selves. But all this in vain, without a natural
wit, and a Poetical nature in chief. For, no man, so soon as he knows
this, or reads it, shall be able to write the better; but as he is adapted to
it by Nature, he shall grow the perfecter Writer. He must have Civil prudence,
and Eloquence, and that whole; not taken up by snatches, or pieces, in
Sentences, or remnants, when he will handle business, or carry Counsels, as
if he came then out of the Declamors Gallerie, or Shadow, furnished but out of
the body of the State, Virorum schola Respub.
which commonly is the School of men. The Poet is the nearest Borderer upon
the Orator, and expresses all his virtues, though he be tied more to numbers;
is his equal in ornament, and above him in his strengths. And, (of the kind)
the Comicke comes nearest: Because, in moving the minds of men, and stirring of
affections (in which Oratory shows, Lysippus Apelles.
and especially approves her eminence) he chiefly excells. What figure of a
Body was Lysippus, ever able to form with his Graver; or Apelles to paint with
his Pencill, as the Comedy to life expresses so many, and various affections
of the mind? There shall the Spectator see some, insulting with Joy; others,
fretting with Melancholy; raging with Anger; mad with Love; boiling with
Avarice; undone with Riot; tortured with expectation; consumed with fear: no
perturbation in common life, but the Orator finds an example of it in the
Scene. And then, for the Elegancy of Language, Naevius.
read but this Inscription on the Grave of a Comicke Poet: Immortales mortales,
si fas esset, flere,
Flerent divae Camaenae Naevium Poetam;
Itaque postquam est Orcino traditus the sauro,
L. Aelius. Stilo. Plautus. M. Varro.
Obliti sunt Romae, lingua loqui Latina.
Or, that modester Testimony given by Lucius Aelius. Stilo upon Plautus; who
affirmed, Musas, si latin voluissent, Plautino sermon fuisse loquuturas. And
that illustrious judgment by the most learned M. Varro of him; who pronounced
him the Prince of Letters, and Elegancie, in the Roman Language.

I am not of that opinion to conclude a Poets liberty within the narrow limits
of laws, which either the Grammarians, or Philosophers prescribe. For, before
they found out those Laws, there were many excellent Poets, that fulfilled
them. Sophocles.
Amongst whom none more perfect then Sophocles, who lived a little before
Aristotle.

Demosthenes. Pericles Alcibiades.
Which of the Greekelings durst ever give precepts to Demosthenes? or to
Pericles, (whom the Age surnamed heavenly) because he seemed to thunder, and
lighten, with his Language? or to Alcibiades, who had rather Nature for his
guide, then Art for his master?

But, whatsoever Nature at any time dictated to the most happy; or long
exercise to the most laborious, that the wisdom, and Learning of Aristotle,
Aristotle.
has brought into an Art: because, he understood the Causes of things: and
what other men did by chance or custom, he does by reason; and not only found
out the way not to err, but the short way we should take, not to err.

Many things in Euripides has Aristophanes wittily reprehended; Euripides.
Aristophanes.
not out of Art, but out of Truth. For, Euripides is sometimes peccant, as he
is most times perfect. But, Judgment when it is greatest, if reason does not
accompany it, is not ever absolute.

To judge of Poets is only the faculty of Poets; and not of all Poets, Cens:
Scal: in Lil: Germ. Senec: de brev: vit: cap. 13. and epist. 88.
but the best. Nemo infaelicius de Poetis judicavit, quam qui de Poetis
scripsit. But, some will say, Critics are a kind of Tinkers; that make more
faults, then they mend ordinarily. See their diseases, and those of
Grammarians. It is true, many bodies are the worse for the meddling with: And
the multitude of Physicians has destroyed many sound patients, with their
wrong practice. But the office of a true Critic, or Censor, is, not to throw
by a letter any where, or damn an innocent Syllabe, but lay the words
together, and amend them; judge sincerely of the Author, and his matter, which
is the sign of solid, and perfect learning in a man. Such was Horace, an
Author of much Civilitie; Horace.
and (if any one among the heathen can be) the best master, both of virtue, and
wisdom; an excellent, and true judge upon cause, and reason; not because he
thought so; but because he knew so, out of use and experience. Cato, the
Grammarian, a defender of Lucilius. Heins: de Sat: 265.

Cato Grammaticus, Latina Siren,
Qui solus legit, and facit Poetas.
Quintilian of the same heresy, but rejected. Page 267. Page 270.271. Page
273. and seq. Page: in comm. 153. and seq.

Horace his judgment of Choerillus, defended against Joseph Scaliger. And, of
Laberius, against Julius.


But chiefly his opinion of Plautus, vindicated against many, that are
offended, and say, it is a hard Censure upon the parent of all conceit, and
sharpness. And, they wish it had not fallen from so great a master, and Censor
in the Art: whose bondmen knew better how to judge of Plautus, then any that
dare patronize the family of learning in this Age; who could not be ignorant
of the judgment of the times, in which he lived, when Poetry, and the Latin
Language were at the height: especially, being a man so conversant, and
inwardly familiar with the censures of great men, that did discourse of these
things daily amongst themselves. Again, a man so gracious, and in high favor
with the Emperor, as Augustus often called him his witty Manling, (for the
littlenes of his stature;) and (if we may trust Antiquity) had designed him
for a Secretary of Estate; and invited him to the place, which he modestly
praid off, and refused.

Horace did so highly esteem Terence his Comedies, Terence. Menander.
as he ascribes the Art in Comedy to him alone, among the Latins, and joins
him with Menander.

Now, let us see what may be said for either, to defend Horace his judgment to
posterity; and not wholly to condemn Plautus.

The parts of a Comedy are the same with a Tragedy, The parts of a Comedy
and Tragedy.
and the end is partly the same. For, they both delight, and teach; the Comicks
are called (...), of the Greeks; no less then the Tragicks.

Nor, is the moving of laughter always the end of Comedy, that is rather a
fowling for the peoples delight, or their fooling. For, Aristotle.
as Aristotle says rightly, the moving of laughter is a fault in Comedy, a
kind of turpitude, that depraves some part of a man's nature without a disease.
As a wry face without pain moves laughter, or a deformed vizard, or a rude
Clown, dressed in a Ladies habit, and using her actions, we dislike, and scorn
such representations; which made the ancient Philosophers ever think laughter
unfitting in a wise man. Plato. Homer.
And this induced Plato to esteem of Homer, as a sacrilegious Person; because
the presented the Gods sometimes laughing. As, also it is divinely said of
Aristotle, that to seem ridiculous is a part of dishonesty, and foolish.

The wit of the old Comedy.
So that, what either in the words, or Sense of an Author, or in the language,
or Actions of men, is a wry, or depraved, does strangely stir mean
affections, and provoke for the most part to laughter. And therefore it was
clear that all insolent, and obscene speeches, jest upon the best men;
injuries to particular persons; perverse, and sinister Sayings (and the rather
unexpected) in the old Comedy did move laughter; especially, where it did
imitate any dishonesty; and scurrility came forth in the place of wit: which
who understands the nature and Genius of laughter, cannot but perfectly know.

Aristophanes. Plautus.
Of which Aristophanes affords an ample harvest, having not only out, gone
Plautus, or any other in that kind; but expressed all the moods, and figures,
of what is ridiculous, oddly. In short, as Vinegar is not accounted good,
until the wine be corrupted: so jests that are true and natural, seldom
raise laughter, with the beast, the multitude. They love nothing, that is
right, and proper. The farther it runs from reason, or possibility with them,
the better it is.

Socrates.
What could have made them laugh, like to see Socrates presented, that Example
of all good life, honesty, and virtue, to have him hoisted up with a Pullie,
and there play the Philosopher, in a basquet. Measure, how many foot a Flea
could skip Geometrically, by a just Scale, and edify the people from the
ingine. Theatricall wit.
This was Theatricall wit, right Stage-jesting, and relishing a Playhouse,
invented for scorn, and laughter; whereas, if it had savored of equity,
truth, perspicuity, and Candor, to have tasten a wise, or a learned Palate,
spit it out presantly; this is bitter and profitable, this instructs, and would
inform us: what need we know any thing, that are nobly borne, more then a
Horse-race, or a hunting-match, our day to break with Citizens, and such
innate mysteries.

The Cart.
This is truly leaping from the Stage, to the Tumbrell again, reducing all wit
to the Original Dungcart.

Of the magnitude, and compass of any Table,
Epicke, or Dramatick.
What the measure of a Fable is. The Fable, or Plott of a Poem, defined.
To the resolving of this Question, we must first agree in the definition of
the Fable. The Fable is called the Imitation of one entire, and perfect Action;
whose parts are so joined, and knitt together, as nothing in the structure can
be changed; or taken away, without imparing, or troubling the whole; of which
there is a proportionable magnitude in the members. As for example; if a man
would build a house, he would first appoint a place to build it in, which he
would define within certain bounds: So in the Constitution of a Poem, the
Action is aimed at by the Poet, which answers Place in a building; and that
Action has his largeness, compass, and proportion. But, as a Court or Kings
Palace requires other dimensions then a private house: The Epick fable.
So the Epick asks a magnitude, from other Poems. Since, what is Place in the
one, is Action in the other, the difference is in space. So that by this
definition we conclude the fable, to be the imitation of one perfect, and
entire Action; as one perfect, and entire place is required to a building. By
perfect, we understand that, to which nothing is wanting; as Place to the
building, that is raised, and Action to the fable, that is formed. It is
perfect, perhaps, differing
not for a Court, or Kings Palace, which requires a greater ground; but for the
structure we would raise, so the space of the Action, from the Dramaticke.
What (...) understand by Whole.
may not prove large enough for the Epick Fable, yet be perfect for the
Dramatick, and whole.

Whole, we call that, and perfect, which has a beginning, a midst, and an
end. So the place of any building may be whole, and entire, for that work;
though too little for a palace. As, to a Tragedy or a Comedy, the Action may be
convenient, and perfect, that would not fit an Epicke Poem in Magnitude. So a
Lion is a perfect creature in himself, though it be less, then that of a
Buffalo, or a Rhinocerote. They differ; but in specie: either in the kind is
absolute. Both have their parts, and either the whole. Therefore, as in every
body; so in every Action, which is the subject of a just work, there is
required a certain proportionable greatness, neither too vast, nor too
minute. For that which happens to the Eyes, when we behold a body, the same
happens to the Memory, when we contemplate an action. I look upon a
monstrous Giant, as Tityus, whose body covered nine Acres of Land, and mine eye
sticks upon every part; the whole that consists of those parts, will never be
taken in at one entire view. So in a Fable, if the Action be too great we can
never comprehend the whole together in our Imagination. Again, if it be too
little, there arises no pleasure out of the object, it affords the view no
stay: It is beheld and vanishes at once. As if we should look upon an Ant or
Pismyre, the parts fly the sight, and the whole considered is almost nothing.
The same happens in Action, which is the object of Memory, as the body is of
sight. Too vast oppresses the Eyes, and exceeds the Memory: too little scarce
admits either.

Now, What the utmost bound of a fable.
in every Action it behooves the Poet to know which is his utmost bound, how
far with fitness, and a necessary proportion, he may produce, and determine
it. That is, till either good fortune change into the worse, or the worse into
the better. For as a body without proportion cannot be goodly, no more can the
Action, either in Comedy, or Tragedy without his fit bounds. And every bound
for the nature of the Subject, is esteemed the best that is largest, till it
can increase no more: so it behooves the Action in Tragedy, or Comedy, to be
let grow, till the necessity ask a Conclusion: wherein two things are to be
considered; First, that it exceed not the compass of one Day: Next, that there
be place left for digression, and Art. For the Episodes, and digressions in a
Fable, are the same that household stuff, and other furniture are in a house.
And so far for the measure, and extent of a Fable Dramaticke.

Now, that it should be one, and entire. One is considerable two ways: What by
one, and entire.
either, as it is only separate, and by it self: or as being composed of many
parts, it begins to be one, as those parts grow, or are wrought together.
That it should be one the first way alone, and by it self, no man that has
tasted letters ever would say, especially having required before a just
Magnitude, and equal Proportion of the parts in themselves. Neither of which
can possibly be, if the Action be single and separate, not composed of parts,
which laid together in themselves, with an equal and fitting proportion, tend
to the same end; which thing out of Antiquity it self, has deceived many;
and more this Day it does deceive.

Hercules. Theseus. Achilles. Ulysses.
So many there be of old, that have thought the Action of one man to be one: As
of Hercules, Theseus, Achilles, Ulysses, and other Heroes; which is both
foolish and false; since by one and the same person many things may be
severally done, which cannot fitly be referred, or joined to the same end:
which not only the excellent Tragick-Poets, Homer, and Virgill.
but the best Masters of the Epick, Homer, and Virgil saw. For though the
Argument of an Epick-Poeme be far more diffused, and powered out, then that of
Tragedy; yet Virgil writing of Aeneas has pretermitted many things. Aeneas.
He neither tells how he was borne, how brought up; how he fought with
Achilles; how he was snatched out of the battle by Venus; Venus.
but that one thing, how he came into Italy, he prosecutes in twelve books.
The rest of his journey, his error by Sea, the Sack of Troy, are put not as
the Argument of the work, but Episodes of the Argument. Homer:
So Homer laid by many things of Ulysses and handled no more, then he saw
tended to one and the same end.

Contrary to which and foolishly those Poets did, whom the Philosopher taxes;
Theseus. Hercules. Invenal. Codrus.
Of whom one gathered all the Actions of Theseus: another put all the Labors
of Hercules in one work. So did he, whom Juvenal mentions in the beginning,
hoarse Codrus, that recited a volume compiled, which he called his Theseide,
not yet finished, to the great trouble both of his hearers and himself: Amongst
which there were many parts had no coherence, nor kindred one with other, so
far they were from being one Action, one Fable. For as a house, consisting of
diverse materials, becomes one structure, and one dwelling; so an Action,
composed of diverse parts, may become one Fable Epicke, Sophocles. Ajax.
or Dramaticke. For example, in a Tragedy look upon Sophocles his Ajax: Ajax
deprived of Achilles's Armor, which he hoped from the suffrage of the Greeks,
disdaines; and, growing impatient of the Injury, rages, and turns mad. In
that humor he does many senseless things; and at last falls upon the Grecian
flock, Ulysses.
and kills a great Ram for Ulysses: Returning to his Sense, he grows ashamed
of the scorn, and kills himself; and is by the Chiefes of the Greeks
forbidden burial. These things agree, and hang together, not as they were
done; but as seeming to be done, which made the Action whole, entire, and
absolute.

The conclusion concerning the Whole, and the Parts.
For the whole, as it consists of parts; so without all the parts it is not
the whole; and to make it absolute, is required, not only the parts, but such
parts as are true. For a part of the whole was true; which if you take away,
you either change the whole, or it is not the whole. For if it be such a part,
as being present or absent, nothing concerns the whole, it cannot be called a
part of the whole: Which are Episodes. Ajax, and Hector. Homer.
and such are the Episodes, of which hereafter. For the present, here is one
example; The single Combat of Ajax with Hector, as it is at large described in
Homer, nothing belongs to this Ajax of Sophocles.

You admire no Poems, but such as run like a Brewers-cart upon the stones,
hobling, Et, quae per salebras, altaque saxacadunt.
Actius, and quidquid Pacuviusque vomunt.
Martial. lib. 11. epigr. 91.
Attonitusque legis terrai, frugiferai.


FINIS. *

