A MIRROVR TO CONFESS WELL FOR SVCH PERSONS as do frequent this Sacrament.

Abridged out of sundry Confessionals, by a certain devout, and Religious man.

FOR JOHN HEIGHAM, ANNO 1624.

A MIRROVR TO CONFESS WELL, For the use of such as do frequent this Sacrament.
HAving made the sign of the CROSS, thou shall say the Confiteor, if thou
can, and afterward thou shall say:

Father, I was confessed in such a time, and did my Penance enjoined me: and
now accuse my self, that I (...) not come to Confession with that preparation
and sorrow for my sins as I ought.

I have not loved, nor thanked God for his benefits, as I was bound.

I have made my prayers, and heard Mass, with a distracted mind.

I have received my Savior with small devotion: of al which I do confess my
fault.

I have been disobedient, and made those that were at home with me to contend,
and have contended also my self. It is a Venial Sin.

I have had many idle and vain thoughts, they are V. S.

I have had evil thoughts, but against my will, and have cast them off, as
much as lay in me: yet I do accuse my self of negligence in this behalf.

I have had evil thoughts, and willingly have delighted my self in them, and
would have put them in execution, if I had could. Here thou must explicate,
what thoughts they were, and the number of them also, because they be Mortal
sins.

I have willingly thought (...) of others, and judged rashly of them in
grievous matters, and that without any lawful cause. It is a M.S. but in
things of no moment, or of very small, it but a V. S.

I have suspected evil of others, without any certain opinion, it is a V. S.

I have doubted in matters of faith. If unwillingly, it is a V. S. If with
deliberation, it is a M. S.

I have given credit to dreams, enchantments, and other superstitions, but
not steadfastly. If steadfastly, thou must tell what, and how it was: as also if
thou have made, or caused to be made, any enchantments, or witchcraft: and if
thou have borne about thee any superstitious writings, of what sort they were.

I have thought, that in some things God does not well, but this against my
will. It is a V. S. if willingly, it is a M. S.

I have in my heart, desired evil to some persons, but not with intention that
any evil should happen unto them. It is a V. S. but if it were with a full
purpose, and in weighty matters, or of importance, as to wish their death, and
the like: it is a M. S.

Then has a man a full purpose, when he does mark the evil, and yet does wish
it to any one.

I have been sorrowful at other men's good, and taken joye in their evils that
were of importance, and this with a settled mind. It is a M. S. but if it were
without deliberation, it is a V. S as also in light matters.

I have taken pleasure in my Mortal sins of time paste, and have been sorry
that I had not committed more and this with a steadfast mind, It is a M.S. as
also to desire that one sin mortally, or forsake not mortal sin.

To praise one for committing a mortal sin, or to exhort him to do it, is
a M. Sin.

I have made a vow, and have not kept the same able. It is a M. S. Thou must
tell what vow it was, because not to keep a vow in a small matter, as of a
Pater noster, is no M. S.

I have lied, without swearing, or hurt of my Neighbor, it is a V. S. with an
oath it is always M. S. although it were in sport. So likewise when thou do
swear that which is doubtful for true, and when thou have no mind to
perform that which thou do promise with an oath: and when thou do swear
to do any thing that is a mortal sin, if indeed thou have a mind to
fulfill it, there be two mortal sins.

It is a M. S. not to fulfill an oath made of a good thing, if thou be able to
keep the same.

Likewise it is a M. S. to make any other swear falsely.

Also if thou do think that thou do swear falsely.

To swear that thou will do any thing, which thou do either know or
suppose, that thou can not do, is a M. S.

To swear in vain, that is without necessity, is a V. S. if yet that which
thou do swear be true.

To say by my faith, in truth, or truly, not meaning thereby the faith or
truth of God, is no oath.

To say, God help me, by this heaven, fire, or other things, adding God
thereunto, as also to say by my life, by my soul, and the like, is an oath.

To swear, to accuse an other, with intention so to do, if afterward thou
do it not, because thou do think it not to be done, is not perjury nor
sin; so the mother that does swear to beat her child though she do not
beat him, does not sin.

To swear not to do a thing which in it self is no sin, nor occasion of
sin, but is indifferent; as for example, not to wear any more such hosen,
not to play at Tenesse, not to go with such a one, or in such a house or
street, if thou do the contrary it is no M. S. unless there were any cause of
M. S. which cause being removed, thou may go.

I have cursed as well others, as my self through choler, but without intention
that any e-euill should befall them. It is a V. S. but with a purposed mind it
is a M. S. The like is to be understood of cursing the souls of those that be
dead.

I have called upon the devil to help me, to carry me away, or to do any
harm or good, to my self or others, without desire it should be so indeed, a
V. S. with a full purpose, it is a M. S. As also to do him any reverence, or
give him thy soul, is a M. S.

Thou shall tell whither thou have blaphemed, or cursed God, Christ, or the
Saints, and whether thou have spoken any injurious words against them, for it
is a M. S. And thou must utter what sort of blasphemies, and injuries they were.

I have of purpose given occasion to others, to curse, or, blaspheame God, his
Saints, or other, men, and have done and spoken things without any necessity,
knowing that by this they would blaspheame. It is a M. S. The like is to be
said of scandal, touching that that does concern a matter of Mortal sin,
if it be given of purpose.

To curse the day, the time, water, wind, etc. without intention to curse God
who has made the^, is a V.s. So to curse Christmas day Easter day, etc without
mind to curse the mysteries contained in those days, or by the^ represented is
a V S.

I have spoken injurious and villainous words of importance, against some
person, diffaminge them by this means, as calling an honest woman a queen, an
honest man's son, a bastard, etc. it is a. M S. but if it be a light matter,
it is a V. s. and of grievous injuries, he is bound to ask forgiveness, and
make restitution.

I have spoken evil of others, and slaundred them in matters of great weight,
by saying they have committed some filthy acts, they have stolen, etc. it is
a M.S. but in light matters, it is only a V. S.

To utter true things, but yet unknown, with mind to diffame any one
grieuouslie, or so that infamy do follow thereof. is a M. S.

To speak that which is notoriously known, as to say such a woman is a
harlot, she being so indeed, is no sin: and the like is to be understood of
other public sins, and sinners.

I have willingly given ear to such as speak ill of others, for some great
hatred or envy. It is a M. S.

For one to vaunt him self to have committed a M. s. which he has not
committed, if it be with notable harm of himself or others, or with other men's
infamy, or with some evil intention, or to take pleasure as if he had done
such things, is a M. S. But without these conditions, it is a V. s for so much as
he is prodigal of his own fame, whereof himself is the owner.

I have not heard Mass upon Sundaies, and Holy days, or have lost a great
part thereof, without any lawful cause, it is a M. S. So also to have a mind
not to hear Mass on such days. Likewise to be occasion that others do not
hear it at such times, without any lawful reason.

Moreover to talk the greatest time of mass on those days, or to think
purposely on other affairs at that time, is a M. S.

If one do not fast being of sufficient years, it is a M. S.

To work upon Holy days for much space of time, it is a M. S.

I have borne hatred to my parents and superiors, and wished the^ some great
hurt, with a deliberate mind, it is a M. S.

I have not obeyed my Parents and superiors, in that which appertains to the
government of their family and goods, if it be advisedly and with contempt, it
is a M. S. otherwise it is Venial, in small matters, but it is a M. S. in
matters of importance.

I have disobeyed my superiors and Rulers in such things as belong to good
manners, and to the salvation of my soul, as to fly scandalls; plays that be
forbidden, and the like it is a M. S. so likewise if one do think it to be a
shame that he is borne of such Parents, or to be taken for their child, if it
comes of contempt, but if it be to avoid greater incommodity, it is not a
mortal sin.

I have been at variance, I have stricken others, fought with them, and thrown
at them, etc. with intention to do the^ notable harm, it is a M. S. but
without such intention, and in light things, it is a V. S.

I have borne hatred to others, wishing them some great dommage, it is a M. s.
but in light matters, and without intention of evil, it is a Venial sin,

To reveal a secreat with notable hurt, or with mind to damage thy neighbor,
is a M. S. As also if thou did swear not to reveal it.

To commit any carnal and filthy act with thine own self, it is a Mortal
sin. And if at the same time, thou had thy mind set upon any man or woman
etc. If thou do not utter this circumstance in Confession, the Confession is
of no valewe.

Thou must also Confess, if thou have sinned with any others, and with what
sort of persons. Likewise of touching others, of kissing, of promise, of
unclean words to any evil end: all be M. S. As also all desires to sin,
when there is a full purpose.

I have had carnal motions, and have taken pleasure, and been glad of them,
and this willingly. They are always M. s. but not if they be against our
will, and do displease us, and that we seek to be rid of them, as speedily
as we may: but if we were a little negligent, they are V: s. and it is
expedient always to Confess them.

I have desired to be beloved of men or women, to an ill end. I have cast my
sight, here and there, and wandered up and down, to accomplish my ill desire,
and would have fulfilled the same, if I had could. I have decked and trimmed my
self for this purpose. I have read and song, lascivious and wanton things,
tending to the same end. These things are always Mortal sin, when there
is a deliberate mind.

I have had pollution in my sleep, without any fault of mine, and was
afterward discontented that I had it. It is no sin. But when willingly
there is occasion given, or when we take pleasure of it, as of an ill act, it
is a M. s.

So likewise when we do wish or desire, that a filthy carnal dream had been
true indeed. As also the pollution that a man has being waking, through his
own fault, by thinking, looking, or touching others, or him: self, is a M. S.

To sin with brute beasts, or to take carnal delight by touching or
behoulding the^, etc. is M. S.

I have taken other men's goods, and have deceived them in matters of importance
it is M. S. So likewise to take any thing of moment in the house where we dwell,
against the will of those that be superiors in that house, and it is called
domestical or household theft: in a small matter it is V. S. with mind to
steal much, it is a M. s.

I have desired other men's goods vnjustlie, and to do them some great damage,
and this with a full purpose: it is a M. S. but not when one does desire to
have as great goods as another, without harm or damage to him.

I have bin proud: vaunting, and preferring my self before others, and
contemning them.

I have bin vain glorious, and praised my self: but very slightly, without
harm of any others, and without taking due honor from God it is a V. S. So
likewise of anger in small things, as also of Glutonie, Covetousness, sloth,
etc.

Moreover if thou have committed any other sins, that be not written or set
down here, thou must yet Confess them.

If one did remain a whole year, with purpose to commit mortal sin, never
repenting him self thereof all that time, he is in state of mortal sin, and
ought to Confess how long he has bin in that state by saying, I have borne
hatred a whole year. I have had carnal desires two months etc.

Certain aduises.
NOTE 1. That before thou go to the sacrament of confession, thou must think
upon thy sins, and examen thy conscience well, reading such things as be
noted here. Thou may also write thy sins, and read them before thy
ghostly father, if thy memory do not serve thee.

Note 2. That to conceal, one mortal sin, willingly, is sacrilege, and the
Confession is not available, nor of force: as neither that confession which
thou do make afterward, although thou do confess the sin left out
before, if thou do not utter that in thine other confession, thou did
willingly conceal it: and thou must repeat as well the former confession, as
all others made in this manner. so likewise if thou doubt whether any thing be a
mortal sin, and do not utter the same, it is a M. s. but not if thou
leave to doubt, and art resolved that it is no M. S.

To co^ceale a Venial sin, and not to confess it, is no M. S.

Note 3. That the Confession is not of force, if thou have not a true and full
purpose to abstain from all Mortal Sin, and true sorrow for those that be
past: nay thou do sin mortallie, if thou go to Confession with intention
to be absolved in that state: but not if thou go with a desire to be helped of
thy ghostly father, and to do that which thou ought.

Note 4, That thou must tell the number of thy Mortal sins, as near as thou
can remember, and if willingly thou do not utter them, thy Confession is not
available: as also if thou do not manifest the circumstances which do
change the nature and kind of Mortal sins. And therefore it suffices not
to say, I have sinned with a woman, but is needful also to tell whether she
were kin to thee or no: and if she were such, then whether she were a
virgin, or a married woman, Religious or secular, etc.

Note 5. That a man must forgo and leave the occasion of M. S. as the
conversation of such persons, and in such places, where, and with whom, he is
wont to sin, otherwise he may not be absolved: for that it is a sign that he
does not repent him self, although he say the contrary in words.

Note 6. That it is necessary to restore other men's goods, as soon as may be,
and likewise their good name, by saying, that is not true which I told of
such, or such a person and this to all those to whom it was spoken of, if it
were false: but if it were true, it is sufficient to praise the persons that
were spoken ill of.

Note 7. That if one had bin a means, or procured, that any other sinned
mortallie, he must needs confess it.

Note 8. That if one went into Nuneries forbidden by Excommunication without
license, he is excommunicated: as also he have strooken by diabolical
suggestion any Religious person, or any that had holy orders, or such as had
lesser orders.

Note 9. That he which does examen his conscience touching the thing a
forementioned, must take that only which he has done, and tell it as it is
there set down, that is, whether he did it with a full purpose, or no: and the
like is to be understood of lies, whether they were with oaths, or without
them, that so the ghostly father may know when it is a M. S. and when not.
The which thou shall see, if thou do find adjoined thereunto these letters M.
S. and where there is V. S. it signifies a Venial Sin: which being
understood by thee, thou must fly mortal sins, and choose rather to die
then to commit one only: as also thou must eschew venial sins as much as
lies in thee.

Note lastly, that a steadfast mind, a full purpose, a resolute will,
advisedly, and with all our heart, is one thing, and when this is, it makes
that our thoughts, desires, words and deeds be mortal sin, in matters of
importance, and therefore it is needful to refrain our will that it consent
not, but rather to say with our will, I will not, or no; for that, where the
will has repugna^ce, there cannot be sin, especially mortal: well there may
be venial sin, by reason of our negligence, in not resisting so soon as we
should. As for example, if there came to thy mind an evil thought, whilst thou
do not mark it, it is no sin: but when thou do reflect upon it and see
it, if thou do cast it off speedily, thou do merit thereby: and a little
negligence in this behalf, does make it a Venial sin: but voluntary, or
willing delighte in the same, does make it mortal, albeit thou had no
purpose to put it in execution, but only to take pleasure in such a wicked
thought. The resolution to put it in practice, does make the sin greater,
and if it be done in deed, it makes it yet greater, and when there was the
act now reallie done, it is sufficient only to confess the same, because in
this is understood the thought, and the resolution made: but if it were a
thought, only with the delight aforesaid, it must alone be uttered in
Confession eue^ as it past

Some one perchance will say. Sir I can not speedily rid my self of such
naughty thoughts. The answer is: that then thou art supposed to have cast
them off speedily, when thy will does repugne and mislike of them, and says
no or, I will not, albeit such thoughts continued for a whole year together,
or turned back a thousand times a day, against thy will. The which if it be
understood aright, and as it behooves, will give exceeding great comfort to
devout souls, and to those that have a timorous conscience, who never would
consent to any sin. From which being free together with doing good and godly
works, we may hope through the grace of almighty God, to arrive to the glory
of heaven, by his infinite mercy. Amen.

WHAT THE PENITENT OUGHT TO DO AFTER he has examined his conscience.
AFter that the penitent has recollected himself, gathered, and set before
his eyes, that which his conscience shall tell him, of the sins which he has
committed since his last Confession, be it either by thoughts, by words, or
by works, he shall excite him self to co^trition and repentance for his
sins, where with he has defiled the beauty of his soul, with great
confidence in the mercy of God, and in the merits of the precious blood of
JESUS CHRIST, by the which we are washed from our sins in the Sacrament of
Penance, and with a firm purpose of amendeme^t; for which effect, let him say
the prayer following.

A devout prayer to procure Contrition.
O Good IESV, good IESV, good IESV. O my hope, my refuge, and my health; have
mercy, have mercy, have mercy on me. Alas I am a most wicked, and most
unworthy sinner. I am a most vile sinner. I have sinned I have sinned, I have
sinned, and done evil before thee. After a thousand, and a thousand graces
received from thee. After a thousand, and a thousand promises made unto thee, I
am as wretchedly fallen as before. A thousand times therefore, have I deserved
to be everlastingly damned. Nay, hell it self has not so many punishments, as
may worthelie correct my sin and iniquity. Wretch that I am, I am unworthy
to be called thy creature. Unworthy whom the earth should bear, or to whom
it should afforde any manner of sustenance. O my Lord, I have just occation to
shed forth a river of tears, yea rather of blood, then of water. It is truly
a wonder, that my heart does not burste in sunder, with vehemence of
Contrition, when I consider the greatness, and enormitie of my sin. O would
to God, would to God, I had never offended. Would to God I had never let thy
grace in me. Would to God I had never contemned thy mercy toward me. O let
it please thee sweet IESV, for the same thy mercy, once more to wash me with
thy precious blood. Once more to heal me with thy sacred wounds. Once more to
sanctify me with thy death and passion. O cleanse me, cleanse me, cleanse me
perfectly. Restore me the innocence which thou gave me in Baptism, that I
may truly please thee. Here I make, Lord, in thy presence, and before all the
Angels and blessed spirits, a firm purpose to amend my life. I renounce al
sensual delectation. I renounce all vanity and impuritie. I renounce, and
utterly detest, al sin and iniquity. My dear Savior, shed forth thy wrath
upon this my body. Afflict me. Cut me in pieces Burn me in this world. Lay
thy Cross upon my shoulders. I am content with all, only that I never more
offend thee.

A prayer before Confession.
O Most sweet Lord, the fountain of all mercy* give me I beseech thee, true
Contrition and sorrow for my sins. Send me the gift of speech and of
verity, that (...) may explicate and declare my sins, humbly, simply, an^
entierely to my ghostly Father, without either disguising, or concealing any
thing to the end that making an entire Confession, I may obtain a full and
perfect absolution Amen.

Another for the same.
O Most beningne and gentle Savior IESV, I beseech thee by the merits of thy
bitter Passion, that it would please thee to have pity on him whom thou have
created to thine image and likeness, and bought by a painful and dolorous
death. O my Lord, who art the wisdom divine, let it please thee to inform me
of the knowledge of my sins, that I be not deceived by the spirit of lying in
the recital of them, which I intend to make to my ghostly father, by thee
established, in virtue of thy precious blood to give me absolution. O my Lord,
which art the power divine, drive from me, I beseech thee, all fear and humane
shame, to the end that I be not any ways withdrawn, to open and manifest the
wounds of my soul: grant this by the merits of thy worthy wounds, so many
times for me opened and renewed. Amen.

What the penitent is to do when the Priest gives him absolution.
WHILST the Confessor shall give the Absolution, the Penitent may consider the
great bounty and mercy of God, to have given us this Sacrament, for the washing
and Purgation of our souls, by the merits of the Passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ: or think upon some point or article of the Passion or say some brief
jaculatory Prayer, such as this which follows, or the like.

A Prayer to be said whilst the Absolution is given.
O My sweet Lord God, give me the grace, that there be not in me, any
impediment to receive the true, entire, and total remission of all my sins,
by the merit of thy most precious blood shed for me upon the Cross, O IESV
have mercy on me. O God be merciful to me a sinner. Thou who sufferedst for
me, have mercy on me.

A Prayer after Confession.
O My Lord God the Father of mercy, who have called me, and expected my
repentance, and coming unto thee by the Sacrament of Confession, thou have
gently received me, by thy bounty, pity, and mercy, and by the merits of
the precious blood of my Savior JESUS, which has been applied unto me in this
holy Sacrament. Thou have given me the grace to have Contrition, and sorrow
for my sins and faults, which is the first part of Penance; Thou have given
me the force and constancy to confess them all, so far forth as I could
remember, which is the second. Give me grace now to fulfill the third, which
is Satisfaction, in discharging me duly, and devoutly, of the pain which is
commanded me, so that having accomplished the whole mystery of Penance, I may
be received and reckoned amongst the number of thy true children, with Saint
Peter, and S. Mary Magdalen, the true mirours of penance. Amen.

Another for the same.
O Sovereign bounty, bottomless depthe of mercy, and God of all clemency
and sweetness, it is unto thee that I come to render my self: unto thee I make
my refuge, having unfolded my faults in the Sacrament of Confession, and
discharged my self of the great burden of my sins, which did overmuch
oppress my soul, whereof I give thee most humble thanks, and I beseech thee,
to confirm in my spirit the hope of salvation, which thou have given me by
newnes of life, the which hereafter thou may make to grow in me by thy holy
grace. O let it please thee for the time to come, to support me by thy power,
to the end that I fall not into the snares of mine enemies, who seek every
moment to devour me. I call, o Lord, for thy help, help me against the
world, the flesh, and the devil, that I may keep and preserve me in the
observance of thy holy commandments, and diligently, humbly, and devoutly
serve thee, and laud thee, by the blood and merits of JESUS CHRIST thy Son, to
whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be all praise and glory. Amen.

FINIS.
CERTAIN VERY PIOUS AND GODLY CONSIDERATIONS.

Proper to be exercised, whilst the incruentall Sacrifice of the Mass is
celebrated.

SET FORTH For the comfort and benefit of al^ devout Catholics.

By JOHN HEIGHAM.

ANNO 1624.

THE MANNER HOW TO HEAR MASS. AND FIRST, Of the Ornaments appertayning to
the Priest.
Of the Amice.
WHEN the Priest puts the Amice before his eyes: I will consider the cloth
wherew^^^ the Jews did blind-fould (...) eyes of Christ, and buffet him on the
face saying. Prophecy unto us, O Christ, who was he that smit thee.

Of the same.
When he puteth the same Amice upon his head. I will consider the sharp
Crown of thorns, which was s^t upon our Saviors head, which peirced his
brains, to his exceeding torment.

Of the Albe.
When he puts on the Albe. I will consider the long white garment, wherein
Christ being clothed, they mocked him, despised him, and reputed him for a
fool.

Of the Gyrdle.
When he puteth on the Gyrdle. I will call to mind how they straightly bound
the hands of our Lord behind him, and like a notorious malefactor, led him
from place to place, and from one Judge to another.

Of the Manuple.
When he puts on the Manuple: I will consider the cords wherewith they
tied that innocent LAMB, wh^^^^ he was lamentably whi^^ (...) and scourged at
the Pillar.

Of the Stole.
When he puts on the Stole: I will consider the heavy Cross, which was
laid upon our Saviors shoulders: as also the ropes wherewith he was
ignominiously haled to the Mount of Caluary.

Of the vestement.
When he puts on the Vestement: I will consider the purple Garment
wherewith being reuested, in most pitiful manner he was showed of PILATE to
the people, saing, Ecce homo. Behold the man.

And I at the putting on of these, will beseech our LORD to grant unto me; The
Amice of Sufferance; The Albe of clean conversation; The Girdle of chastity;
The Manuple of co^stancy. The Stole of Obedience. And the Vesteme^t of Charity.

Of the Introibo, or entry to the Mass.
WHen the Priest begins the entry to the Mass. I will consider the great
dignity and woorthin^^ ^f this holy Sacrifice, and mine own great unworthiness
to be present at the same. And I will beseech our Lord that I may woorthelie
asist thereat, and that him self would put those words into my mouth, and
those conceptions into my heart, which as his own, may both be heard, and
received of him.

Of the Confiteor.
When he says the Confiteor. I will consider the offense of our first
parents; the offenses of all the world; and mine own offenses. Of all which I
will most heartily ask forgiveness.

Of kissing the Altar.
When he approaches to the Altar and kisseth the same. I will consider the
Incarnation of CHRIST, and the union of man's nature, with the word Eternal;
And further, the spiritual union of every soul with his Lord JESUS: which
union of my soul with my Savior, I also will desire.

Of the introite.
WHen the Intr^^^ is said; I will (...) ^^der the great (...) ^^uent desire of
the Ho^^ ^^thers, for the coming o^ CHRIST. And I also will desire, that he
will vouchsafe to come unto me, and to dwell in my soul.

Of the Kyrie eleison.
When Kyrie eleison is said, I will beseech the three divine persons, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost* to have mercy upon me, an^ upon the
whole world.

Of Gloria in excelsis.
When Gloria in excelsis i^ said. I will imagine that I see the child JESUS
borne in the manger and to heart the holy Angels sing this glorious hymn.
With whom I will endeavor to praise our Lord and to render him thanks for so
great a benefit.

Of Dominus vobiscum.
When Dominus vobiscum is said. I will call to mind how our Savior
manifested himself to the three Kings, and in them to all the Gentiles. And I
will pray him that he will also manifest himself to me, although most unworthy
and full of miscry.

Of the first Collects
When the first Collects are said. I will consider how Christ, at twelve
years age, went unto the temple to pray and to worship his heavenly Father:
and how his B. Mother with great sorrow, sought him three days together,
supposing she had lost him. And I will beseech him, that whenever I loose him
by my sin, I may by true Contrition, Confession and Satisfaction, never cease
to seek him until I find him, in the temple of my soul.

Of the Epistle.
When the Epistle is read I will remember S. JOHN Baptist, how he remained in
the wilderness, and preached unto the people that the Messiah was come. I will
call to mind also, how CHRIST was baptized of him, and began to preach the
Gospel to the Jews, who yet received no fruit thereby: and I will account my
self to be worsse then they, for that by the doctrine of our Savior and his
Saints, I have so little amended my life.

Of removing the Book.
When the Book is removed. I will fear: considering how Christ forsaking the
Jews, turned to the Gentiles: and will humbly beseech him that he will never
forsake me, although far unworthy of his grace and mercy.

Of the Gospel.
When the Gospel is read I will think of the Conversion of the holy
Apostles, and other Disciples of our Lord by his preaching unto them and of the
wonderful zeal^ of their hearts, who forsook all that they had to follow him:
and I will desire of God to increase in me faith, and his holy grace, whereby I
may forsake all, to follow JESUS CHRIST my Lord.

Of the Creed.
When the Creed is rehearced. I will consider the multitude of Gentiles which
were illuminated with the light of faith by the preaching of the Gospel: and
I will instantly beseech Almighty God, to give me that holy light, and lively
faith, with which I may believe, all the mysteries of the Catholic faith.

Of Dominus vobiscum.
When Dominus vobiscum is said. I will consider how our Lord did manifest his
power, wisdom, and goodness, in working so many miracles, in healing so many
infirmityes, and in raising the dead: and I will beseech him that he will raise
me to a new fervor and love of him, and with his power and grace, heal all
the diseases of my soul.

Of the Offertory.
When the Offertory is read, and the Host is offered: I will consider that most
prompte will, wherewith our Lord in every action of his life, did resign
himself to his Father, especially in offering himself to suffer his passion
and death for my sake: with which oblation I will also offer my self, with
desire to fulfill his divine pleasure, and patiently to suffer all aduersityes,
yea death it self for his honor and glory.

Of the mingling of water with Wine
When the Water is mingled with the wine: I will consider the straight union
which is betwixt Christ our Lord and his Church: And I will desire that
inseparable union beetwixt my soul and my Savior JESUS.

Of Washing the Priests fingers
When the Priest Washes the ends of his fingers. I will consider the great
purity and cleanes, which is required in handling and receiving the body of
Christ: and I will earnestly beg of him, to grant the same to me.

Of Orate fratres.
When Orate fratres is fayed I will meditate on this admonition as made by
Christ to me, and from thence forth I will raise up my self more fervently to
prayer and devotion, in the rest of the Mass.

Of the secret Collect.
When the Secret is said. I will consider how our Savior some few days
before his Passion, with-drue him self in secret from the malice of the Jews,
And how his own disciple consented to sell and deliver him into their wicked
hands. And I will beseech our Lord, never to permit me to sell him to my
proper desires as heretofore I have done, nor to deliver him into the hands of
my disordinate pleasures.

Of the Preface.
When the Preface is said. I will consider the coming back of our Savior to
Jerusalem upon Palm sunday, and I will imagine to hear the voices of the
children, crying aloude. Bendictus qui venit in nomine Domini, Osanna in
excelsis. Blessed is he that comes in the name of our Lord, Osanna in the
highest. And I with great joy and preparation will dispose my self to receive
my Savior.

Of the Canon.
When the Canon is said. I will consider the prayer which our Lord made in the
Garden and there, in steed of sweat, did shed an infinite number of drops of
blood. And I will offer this his bloody sweat instead of the tears which I
have not, and which for the hardness of my heart I can not shed.

Of the first Memento.
When the first Memento is said. I will remember the great mindfulnes and care
which our Savior had of his Disciples, in the midest of this his agony: and
how he arose and went unto the^, and finding them asleep, exhorted the^ to
pray. And I will the^ remember al those, for who^ by charity, promise, or
duty, I am bound to pray.

As for the whole Catholic Church of Christ. For the chief Pastor thereof.
For all Ecclesiastical, and religious parsons. For peace and unity amongst all
Christian Kings and Princes. For the conversion of all Infidels, Hetiques, and
Scismatiques. for your Father, mother, husband, wife, children, brothers
sisters, kinsfolks, benefactors, friends and enemies, and for all that are in
the state of mortal sin. For all that are persecuted, imprisoned, fallen,
oppressed, or tempted. For all poor, distressed sick, and diseased persons.
For all laborers, bond servants, travelers, and captives. For all poor
widows, fatheries children, and women in childbirth. Finally for the fruits
of the earth, for your temporal substance, and your preservation from all
dangers, soudaine death, fire and all misfortunes. Commending any of these, or
any other necessities, to the grace and mercy of our Savior JESUS, and to the
merits of his precious death and passion, applied unto us by the means of this
Sacrifice.

Of extending the Priests hands over the Chalice.
When the Priest extends his hands over the Chalice. I will consider how^
Christ for me was taken, bou^^^, scourged, condemned to die, and also forsaken
of his disciples. And I will remember, that for me he suffered all these
things, and yet have I often forsaken him for fear of trouble.

Of the Crosses made upon the Host and Chalice.
When he makes the Crosses upon the Host and Chalice: I will think how that
great cross was prepared and laid upon the shoulders of my Lord, who carried
it to the mount of Caluary, where he was nailed to the same: and I will crave
aid of him to bear my cross, and that with the nails of his love, he would
transpeirce my heart.

Of the elevation of the Host.
When the Host is lifted up. I will consider how that most noble and precious
body of my Lord and Savior JESUS, was lifted up upon the Cross for my
salvation. And I will beseech him to lift up my soul to him, that I may truly
consider those his wounderfull pains and death, which he did then endure to
give me life.

Of the elevation of the Chalice.
When the chalice is lifted up I will consider the great abundance of blood,
which flowed forth of his most sacred wounds. And then with great fervor
will I offer up this sacrifice, to the eternal Father, to his honor and
glory; and for the remission of mine own sins, and of the whole world.

Of the second Memento.
At the second Memento. I will consider, how our Savior hanging three hours
alive upon the Cross, at the last gave up the ghost, and his blessed soul
descended to the Fathers that were detained in Limbo. And I will then pray for
N. and N. and for the departed, that their souls may be delivered from their
pains, by the merits of his most holy passion.

Of Nobis quoque peccatoribus.
When the Priest smites his breast, saying. Nobis quoque peccatoribus. I will
consider the great heaviness and compassion of the Centurion, and of other good
people, for the death of our Savior, who went away smiting their breasts for
sorrow. And I with great contrition, and sorrow* will bewail my sin, which
was the cause of this his sufferance.

Of omnis honor and gloria.
When the short Elevation is made, and the Host is laid upon the corporal. I
will call to mind the taking down of my Lord and Savior Christ from the
cross, wrapped in a most pure and clean Syndon, and laid in the Sepulcher.
And I will beseech him to cleanse etc paurify my heart, that he may be burryed
therein.

Of the Pater noster.
When the Pater noster is said. I will consider the prayer which the blessed
Virgin, the Apostles, and other holy women, made in those three days: I will
think on, that great desire wherewith they did burn to see our Lord. And I
with them will desire to sed my Lord, now glorified, in my heart.

Of Pax Domini.
When Pax Domini is said. I will contemplate my Lord risen from the dead, all
glorious and immortal: and how he appeared to the Blessed Virgin, to Marie
Magdalen and the holy Apostles, saying. Pax vobis: and I will desire of him,
that he will give me true peace and quietness.

Of dividing the Host into three parts.
When the Host is divided into three parts: I will consider the holy Church,
divided in three parts, triumphant, militant, and in Purgatoire. And I will
beseech our Lord, that he will grant to me, and to all other, to aspire to the
triumphant.

Of the Agnus Dei.
When the true Agnus Dei is said. I will think Christ to be the true lamb
without spot, which S. John Baptist did point at with his fingar, by whose
blood the sins of the world are taken away: and I will beseech him by virtue
of his precious blood, to cleanse my soul from all sin.

Of the Priests receuing.
When the Priest does? Communicate. I will consider with what unspeakable
glory and triumph, our Lord ascended into heaven in the sight of all his
Apostles, until at the last cloud received him. And I ^ith most inflamed and
bu^ning affection, will spiritually communicate with the Priest, and make my
heart a heaven to receive my Savior.

Of Dominus vobiscum.
When Dominus vobiscum is said. I will consider, that although our Lord be
ascended into heaven, yet he is always present with us in the blessed
Sacrament. And I will render him thanks for so great a benefit.

Of the last Collects.
When the last Collects are said. I will give most great and hearty thanks to
the holy Trinity, for all his benefits; and especially for that he has granted
me to be present, and to be partaker of so great a mystery.

Of removing back the Book.
When the Book is carried back to the right end of the Altar. I will think
how in the end of the world, the Jews shall be converted to the faith of Christ.
And I will pray for the conversion of all Heretics and Infidels.

Of Dominus vobiscum.
When the last Dominus vobiscum is said. I will imagine to hear the sound of
the Angels Trumpe, wherein our Lord in the end of the world, will come to
Judgment. And I will beseech him, that he will make me ready and prepared, in
that dreadful day.

Of Ite missa est.
When Ite Missa est is said. I will recall to mind that, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, which shall be spoken to the damned: and that, Come ye
blessed of my Father, which shall be spoken to the saved.

Of the last benediction.
When the last Benediction is given. I will call to mind the benediction of
Christ in that day, which he will give over all the elect, and will lead them
with him into paradise. And I will beseech him that he will bless me and all
the standers by, who have assisted with me at this Sacrifice, that both in this
world, and the next, we may perpetually praise, and glorify his name. Amen.

Paternoster. Aue. Credo.

FINIS.
DIVERSE DEVOVT CONSIDERATIONS.

FOR THE MORE worthy receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.

COLLECTED And gathered, out of sundry Catholic and approved Authors.

AND Published for the benefit of all devout Catholics, By JOHN HEIGHAM.

ANNO 1624.

ADVERTISEMENTS FOR THE NIGHT BEFORE RECEIVING
THe night wherein you mean to communicate the day following, eat either
nothing, or very little to your supper.

After supper presently arise: spend not the time in idle talk, but privately
in your chamber in talk with God.

Before you go to sleep, pray unto God that he would keep you that night
from all illusions of the devil, from ill sin, and hurtful fantasies.

Make choice the same night, of some affection or intention, either one or more,
for which you will specially purpose to receive; and often stir up, and renew
in your mind, the memory thereof.

In the morning when you awake, persuade your self, that you lie in the arms
of Christ; and begin to meditate upon his passion: and to recall to mind your
former affection.

Of the affections, and inte^tions for receiving the B. Sacrament.
THe affections and intentions of those that come to communicate, are sundry,
according to the sundry dispositions of the parties.

Some are moved with the love of God; that they may by means of this
Sacrament, inuit and bring their beloved unto them, and delectably embrace him
within their fowls.

Some ar moved by the knowledge of their own infirmity and weakness; that they
may by the help of this heavenly Physician, be cured and healed of their
diseases.

Some are moved thereunto by the consideration of their sins and offenses;
that by means of this divine Oblation and Sacrifice, they may be purged and
pardoned.

Some are brought thereunto, by reason of some grief, trouble, vexation, or
temptation; the end that by the virtue of him who is omnipotent, they may be
conforted and delivered.

Some are moved with a desire of some particular grace; that by means of him
to who^ the Father denies nothing, they may obtain the grace which they
desire.

Some are moved with a thankful acknowledging of sundry benefits, which God
has bestowed upon them, considering that we can not of our parts offer to the
Father a thing of greater thanks, then this Sacrifice of thanksgiving.

Some are moved with a desire to praise and honor almighty God and his
Saints; for as much as we can not honor, nor praise him more, then in
remembrance of them, to offer this Sacrifice of praise unto him.

Some are moved with an earnest desire of their neighbors salvation, and with
compassion of their afflictions and miseries; knowing that there is nothing
more available in the sight of the Father, both for the quick and the dead,
then the precious blood of his only Son, which was shed both for the one and
the other.

Some are moved with intention to aid and help the Church universal, which
are all faithful people; understanding and knowing, that he is a member of
that mistical body wheof JESUS CHRIST is the head, and therefore desires to
receive the same, for all those who are worthy to have participation thereof.

Some are moved thereunto, to renew the memory of our Lords holy Passion, and
to render thanks to our merciful redemer, for the inestimable work of our
redemtion.

Some are moved with desire to receive the true spirit of Christ, to be made
one with him, to be wholly transformed and changed into him; that they may live
as he lived, in all charity, obedience, poverty of spirit, mortification of
body, contempt of the world, and the like.

Finally, some are moved with desire the sooner to depart out of this world,
into that glorious and perpetual habitation of heaven, there to receive the
full fruition and vision of his divinity.

Of diverse other devout affections fit for the more worthy receiving of the B.
Sacrament.
OTHERS there be, who coming to this Sacrament, do resemble them selves in
their minds after sundry manners: and by this means, do obtain many devout
affections.

Sometimes as a prodigal child; to his Father of pity.

Sometimes as a guilty person, or one comdemned; to hi^ merciful Judge and
Savior

Sometimes as a false an^ disloyal spouse, taken in adultery; to her loving
and tender hearted husband.

Sometimes as a sister, to her most dear, and cordial brother.

Sometimes as a strayed and wandering sheep; to his good Pastor.

Sometimes as a poor blind man; to the restorer of sight.

Sometimes as one famished, to the sweet refectio^ of his soul.

Sometimes as one languishing for thirst; to the fountain of grace, and water
of life.

Sometimes as one frozen with cold, to the furnace of burning love.

Sometimes as a little infant toward his nourse, without whom he can in no
wise be comforted.

Sometimes again with intention to do the greatest honor to God, that ever he
did him before.

Sometimes to have greater devotion, charity, and love of God, then ever he
had before.

In all which to use the^ arigh^ and to our better benefit, w^ must putt upon
us, as it were the habitt and estate of the self same person, with all other
circumstances co^curring the unto.

And so sometimes to use one sometimes another, as God shall move us, and as our
disposition and devotion shall serve us: which also we may do, not only when
we shall communicate sacramentally, but always as often as we shall hear
mass, or communicate spiritually.

Devout consideratio^s of the quality in which God prese^teth him self unto
us, to encourage al fearful and scrupulous persons
OUR merciful Lord comes unto us in the holy Sacrament, after seven sundry
manners.

1. He comes in such excessive and wonderful humility, that none is so
wicked, and vilde a sinner, but that our Lord God will come unto him, and offer
him self (if a man will have him with him) and will receive him.

2. He comes in so great patience, that none is so great a sinner, or so much
his enemy, which he will not bear withal, and suffer patiently, and if he
will reconcile him self unto him, be most ready and prepared to remitt him al
his faults, and freely to pardon him.

3. He comes with such a love and affection, which he bears unto us, that
none is so cold and obstinate, whom he does not heat (if he will) in his
burning love.

4. He comes, in such liberality, so amp^e and copious, that none is so poor
and destitute of grace and virtue, whom he may not enrich with the store and
plenty of all precious substance.

5. He gives him self in food most delicious, most sweet, and most
sufficient, in such sort, that none is so feeble, weak, or famished, that may
not be healed, refreshed, strenghtned, and sustained.

6. He comes in such splendour and brightness, that none can be so blinded,
obscursed; or held in such darkness, that may not by his presence, be instructed
and lightened.

7. He comes in such plenitude and abundance of grace, that none is so
indeuout, negligent, and slouthful, that may not be awakened stirred, and
excited to devotion.

O great, and ouer-flowing love, who is he, who well considering this, will not
marvel, and with sighing sey. O Lord what is man that so thou do visit
him, and set thy heart toward him?

Aspirations to acknowledge our great unworthiness, to receive the holy
Sacrament, of the precious body and blood of our Savior Jesus.
O My Lord, O my God, who art thou, and who am I, that I should presume to come
to receive thee? The Angels in heaven do reverence thee, and the highest
powers and glorious Spirits, with trembling do adore thee. What then shall I
do that am here in earth (dust and ashes that I am) what shall I do?

O my Lord, o my God, thy only greatness, does humble the Angels, although they
acknowledge in them no sin, nor evil: Yea the highest Seraphins, draw in
their wings, and repute them selves like little flies before thee: what then
shall I do, that am charged with the burden of my iniquity, but bow down
my head, prostrate my self upon the earth, and fear to lift up mine eyes
before thee?

O my Lord, O my God, if I sinful wretch had prepared my self a thousand
years by devout meditations, and had in my self, the merits of all the just
men upon the earth, and of all the glorious Saints in heaven, all this were
very little, nay nothing to receive thee according to thy dignity: how much
less then, O my Lord, alas how much less shall I do it, naked that I am of
all merits, and charged with an infinite number of sins and vices?

Aspirations to crave purity of mind and conscience, where with worthelie to
receive the most B. Sacrament
O My Lord, my sweet Savior and my God, who may give me at this present, a
pure heart, a clean heart, a new heart, a heart purged from all soil, a heart set
on fire with divine love, a heart lightened, and shining, with celestial
brightness: so that my fair, and delicate spouse Christ JESUS coming, he may
find a place of rest prepared to him in my heart, and nothing which may offend
the eyes of his Majesty?

2. O that I could (if it were possible) receive thee, sweet Lord, at this
present into my soul, with that fervor, love, and affection, wherewith thy
worthy and sacred Mother conceived thee: and with that desire, love and
devotion, that ever thy devout servants have received, do receive, or ever
shall receive thee.

3. O that I had in my self, all the beauty of the nine orders of Angels, the
burning charity of the Seraphins, the sanctity and purity of the heavenly
Saints, the fervent love, devotion, and desire, of all the chosen frindes of
God, which ever were, are, or shall be, either in heaven or earth.

Aspirations to express a fervent, longing, and impatient desire of the soul,
for the coming of our Savior in the B. Sacrament.
1. O Sweet IESV, sweet IESV, sweet IESV, a thousand times do I long for
thee, a thousand times do I desire thee, when will thou come my sweet
Savior, when will thou come; wheh shall I see thee, when shall I feel thee
within my soul?

2. O dear IESV, dear IESV, dear IESV, when shall I according to my desire,
possess thy blessed presence within my soul? when will thou come, that I may
lovingly join my heart to thine? Come therefore, O sweet JESUS, come O bread
of Angels, O heavenly manna, O food of faithful souls. Come O my sweet
love, come and transform into thee, all my intentions, conceptions, and
inward parts, come and ravish me from all things created, even fom my life,
even from my own self.

3. O divine fire, come and inflame my heart. O the spouse of my soul, come
quickly unto me. Wound my heart with thy love, Come take thy repose within my
conscience. Come sweet JESUS, come quickly, and defer no longer to come. Come
the health, the life, and only desire of my heart.

Aspirations proper to be said when the time of reaming the B. Sacrament, is
near at hand
1. O My soul, behold thy spouse is coming, arise and go earth to meet him;
enter now and join thee near unto him; Be glad and rejoice of the approaching
of so great a guest: because there comes unto thee, thy Creator, thy Lord and
thy Lover, thy Father, thy Pastor, and thy Spouse; Christ JESUS thy beloved, he
who gave for thee his dearest life, that he might redeem thy soul from
eternal death.

2. Open o my soul, open the gate to thy Lord and thy God, coming toward
thee; give place to thy Creator; give access to thy spouse, who with such love
approaches unto thee.

3. Them imagine that you hear the sweet and amiable voice of our Savior
calling unto you, and saying. Veni amica mea, veni sponsa mea veni. Come my
beloved, come my spouse, come unto me. To who make answer saying. Paratum cor
meum Deus, ^ratum cor meum. Ingredere benedicte Domine, and miserere mei. O God
my heart is ready, o God my heart is ready. Enter blessed Lord, and have mercy
on me.

Aspirations to be said inwardly when the B. Host is in your mouth.
1. O Most sweet, most potent, most fair, most noble, most high, most
gentle, most amiable, and most gracious IESV. Vouchsafe to enter into the poor
house of they servant, whose burning desire is wholly to enjoy thee, and whom
all the creatures in heaven and earth, cannot satisfy without thee.

2. My God, enter into my soul and sanctify it; enter into my heart and
purify it; my God, enter into my body and countergarde it; and from thy love
never separate it.

3. Into thy hands, o Lord IESV, I commend my spirit; to thee I resign my
life and my soul, receive me, sweet Savior, and so keep me, that I never
escape out of thy hands.

Aspirations after receiving, admiring the love of our Savior, expressed unto
us in the most B. Sacrament.
1 I Remember sweet IESV, the words thou spakest to thine Apostles, after
thou had washed their feet; saing. Know you what I have done unto you? o
how well may thou now say unto me. Know you what I have done unto you? For
what could thou do more for me, or what gteater love, o good JESUS, could
thou show unto me, then first to give this thy body to death for me, and now
again to give the self same body and blood in meat and drink unto me, in
memory of the same thy death?

2. O my Lord, what is the cause of this thy love? what means, I pray thee,
this Wonderful love? See thou not upon how vilde a creature thou have cast
thy love? Will thou desce^d now once again into hell? Will thou put thy self
now once again into the hands of sinners to be crucified? will thou once
again be borne in a stable amongst brute beasts (meaning your heart?) o
strong, o pure, o unspeakable love.

3. Dear Lord, have thou perchance lack of some subject to delight thee (thou
that art most happy and most perfect in thy self) that thou searchest out a
little worm of so evil life and odor as I? Truly it seems, as if that thou
had need of thine own creature; for thou use such means to obtain his
love, as though thou could not be, nor live without him. O inestimable and
most sweet love, who can but be inflamed of so great a love? what heart can
defend it self, that it be not melted and quite consumed with this love?

Aspirations expressing our love again unto our Savior for this singular
benefitt of the B. Sacrament.
1. IF all the riches of the earth were proposed unto me; If all the honors and
crowns of the world; If all the pleasures and delights which is possible to
imagine; with all the knowledge both of men and Angels, I would repute all as
dunge, and as mere nothing; I would make no account at al of it, in
comparison, O Lord, of this thy sweet and unspeakable love. 2. If all the
creatures in the world were in my power, I would move them all in thy praise
for this singular benefit which have bestowed upon me. If the force and virtue
of all men and Angels were alone in me, I would wholly employ them all to
magnify thee, for this thy especial love unto me. 4. Lord, Lord, thy love does
draw me, thy love does wound me, thy love does rauishe me. O that I had in me
the purity of Angels, and the inflamed and burning desires of all the B.
Saints. O that I had a thousand hearts to shed forth in thy love, and to
answer to this so great a love.

Aspirations very fervent, into which the soul bursteth forth in great
admiration of the B. Sacrament.
O Bread of life, O bread of Angels, O sanctuary of souls, o secret comforter
of holy minds! O heavenly spouse, O JESUS CHRIST my delectable love! O riches
of the soul! O solace of the afflicted O food of the famished! O my joy, O my
glory, and al my beatitude!

2. O meek lamb, O mild majesty! O high charity, o low humility! o
great mercy, o bottomless depthe of incomprehensible bounty! o my Lord, h^^
much am I bound for the good which thou have done me, and above all, for the
manner by which thou have done this good unto me.

3. O heavenly Lord, who so much love me. o true Pelican, who in thy blood
do so quicken me. o good Pastor, who so do give thy self in meat unto me.
o faithful Keeper, who have so wonderful a care over such as thou have taken
in chardge unto thee

Aspirations after receiving the B. Sacrament, in utter detestation, and hatred
of sin.
MY God, my Lord, and sweetest love, never any more, never any more of sin;
never any more pleasure of the flesh; never any more of the world; never any
more of vanity. I utterly detest all sin whatsoever, and to thee only, do I
render my self; to thee only, will I serve and obey for the time to come. To
thee only do I desire, to live and die, only grant that I never more offend
thee, nor that I ever be separated from thee.

2. My God, I have no greater grief in the world, then to think that
heretofore I have so much offended thee. And to think that sometimes again I
may come to offend thee, causes so great a fear in my soul, and does so
much afflict me, that I would wish to die a thousand deaths to be out of this
danger that I never any more become thy enemy,

3. O my God, permit not, I beseech thee, that for the time to come I ever
more displease thee. And if thou forseest that either by frailty or suggestion
of the devil, living yet longer, I shall mortally offend thee, show me the
grace to take me out of the world, and that I die before I commit the sin
actually.

Aspirations in which the soul defiereth wholly to be withdrawn from all
creatures: with a perfect resignation to God, and altogether to be governed by
him.
1. O My souueraigne and dreadful Lord, I would wish for the time to come;
never any more to appear amongst men but to hide me, if it were possible;
under the earth, that by this means no earthly creature, may ever regayne my
love from thee, ever withdraw my heart from thee, or ever separate my affection
from thee.

2. O mine eyes, what desire you more to see here? o mine ears, what desire
you more to hearken here? o my tongue, what desire thou more to taste here? o
my heart and all my senses, shut up, shut up your gates, shut them up I say
perpetually, to the end that never any thing may have access into my soul,
which may ever dissolve this straight conjunction betwixt my Savior and me.

3. O my sweet and merciful Lord, behold that from this very hour, I do
wholly abandon my self to thy divine providence, and voluntarily and freely,
now, and for ever give, present and consigne my self, body and soul unto thee
desiring that thou work in me as it shall please thee, and all that it shall,
please thee, and that on my part, I never give thee any let or impediment.
Finally, govern all my desires, and guide al my actions and works, so that
all my works may render thee obedience, honor, and glory, for ever and ever.
Amen.

Devout and iaculatorie co^ceptions very proper to he used, in the day wherein
one has received the B. Sacrament.
FIRrst you may burst forth in to these words, in manner of a spirit wholly
replenisht and ravished with joy, and say.

O my sovereign Lord, my Savior, my Redeemer, and my God, I have here the
pledge of thy love, I have here the memorial of thy death, I have here the
price of all the world, I have here my Lord, my God, and al my good.

O wonderful grace, o wonderful grace, to have mine own Savior enclosed
within my soul!

O my Lord and my God, my spirit is swallowed up, and quiet transported into
thee, it is in a manner wholly melted in to thee, by reason of thy love, and it
causes my heart, even to open it self at thy presence, like as the rose before
the sin. Thanks, thanks, thanks therefore, o my Lord, for so infinite,
inestimable, and unspeakable a benefit.

You may sometimes also, by way of a diligent care that you would not offend
him, propose this dema^d unto your own heart, saying.

Domine est ne cor meum, and corpus meum adhuc mundum in conspectu tuo? Lord is
my body and my mind yet clean before thee?

Sometimes again by way of humble prayer that he would not leave you, saying
with the holy Prophet.

Ne derelinquas me Domine: Deus meus, ne discesseris a me.

Leave me not, O my Lord: o my God depart not from me.

Sometimes likewise, you may with great, joy of spirit recite the song of the
3. children Da^ 3. saying Benedicite omnia opera Domini Domino, laudate and
superexaltate eum in soecula. etc. Benedicite Angeli Domini Domino: benedicite
caeli Domino, etc.

All ye works of our Lord, bless ye our Lord; praise and ex toll him for
ever

Bless our Lord ye Angels of our Lord: ye heavens bless our Lord, etc. As in
the office of our Lady.

Moreover, to exercise some other acts of great devotion, you may sometimes
imagine your self as one wounded in soul with sundry wounds, and that JESUS
CHRIST, the true physician of souls, comes to cast his wounds upon yours, to
the end perfectly to heal you.

You may likewise sometimes by imgination, transform your self into the form
of a little Be, mounting upon the tree of the Cross, and flying busily from
one wound to another, to gather and suck into your soul the sweet, honey of
his most precious blood.

A brief prayer for conclusion.
Sweet JESUS by the virtue of this most B. Sacrament; I beseech thee to root
up and extirpate in me, all the branches and seeds of my evil passions, renew
me wholly into thee, so that in thee I may take a new force and viguere: and
that in virtue of thy grace, of vicious, which I have always been, I may for
time hereafter become virtuous: of a child of vanity, a contemner of the
world: of leacherous, chaste: of gluttenous, sober: of slothful, fervent and
diligent: of harslie, choleric, and impatient, sweet, meek, and patient: of
vnpittifull, charitable: of proud, humble: of presumptuous and ill advised,
discreet and modest: of vain and light* grave and settled: of incon^^ant,
firm and stable: finally, of a sinner, and enwrapped in ^iseries, I may become
by thy grace, just, and of exemplar, and holy conversation. Grant this sweet
Savior IESV, for thy infinite love and mercy sake. Amen.

THE LITANY OF the blessed Sacrament.
LOrd have mercy.

Christ have mercy.

Lord have mercy.

Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

O God the Father of heaven. Have mercy upon us.

o God the Son redeemer of the world. Have mercy upon us

O God the Holy Ghost. Have mercy upon us.

O holy Trinity one God. Have mercy, upon us.

Lively Bread that did descend from heaven. Have.

God hidden, and my Savior. Have mercy upon us.

Bread of the elect. Have

Wine budding forth virgins. Have mercy upon us

Fruitful Bread, and the delight of kings. Have.

Holy Sacrifice. Have.

Pure oblation. Have.

Lamb without spot Have.

Table of proposition Have. mercy upon us.

Most pure Table. Have.

Food of Angels. Have.

Hidden Manna Have.

Memorial of the wonderful works of God. Have.

Supersubsta^tial bread. Have.

Word made flesh, and dwelling in us Have.

Holy host. Have.

Chalice of benediction. Have mercy upon us.

Mystery of faith. Have.

Most high and venerable Sacrament. Have.

Sacrifice of all other most holy. Have mercy upon us.

Truly propitiatory for the quick and dead. Have.

Heavenly Preservative, whereby we are preserved from sin. Have.

Miracle above al others astonishing. Have.

Most sacred co^memoration of our Lords death. Have.

Gift surpassing al fulness. Ha

Chief memorial of divine Love Have.

Abundance of divine bounty. Have.

Holy, and most majesticall mystery. Have mercy upon us.

Medicine of immortallity. Have mercy upon us.

Dreadful and life-giuing Sacrament. Have.

Bread of the Almighty word, made flesh. Have

Unbloody Sacrifice. Have

Most sweet banquet, whereon the ministering Angels attend. Have

Sacrament of Piety. Have

Bond of Charity. Have.

Offerer, and oblation. Have

Spiritual sweetness tasted in his proper fountain. Have

Refection of holy souls. Have mercy upon us.

Voyage food of those which dye in our Lord. Have mercy upon us.

Pledge of future glory. Have mercy upon us.

Be merciful. Spare us o Lord.

Be merciful. Hear us o Lord.

From the unworthy receiving of thy body and blood Deliver us o Lord.

From concupiscence of the flesh. Deliver us.

From concupiscence of the eyes. Deliver us

From pride of life. Deliver.

From all occasion of sin. Deliver us o Lord.

By that desire wherewith thou desieredst to eat this Passover with thy
Disciples. Deliver us o Lord.

By thy great humility, wherewith thou did wash the feet of thy Disciples.
Deliver us o Lord.

By thy burning Charity, wherewith thou did ordain this divine Sacrament.
Deliver us.

By thy most precious blood which thou have left unto us upon the Altar.
Deliver us.

By the five wounds of this thy most holy body, which thou receiuedst for us.
Deliver us o Lord.

We sinners. Do beseech thee to hear us.

That thou would increase and keep in us true faith, reverence, and devotion
of this holy Sacrament. We beseech thee.

That thou would voutchsafe to bring us to the frequent use of this holy
Eucharist by true confession of our sins. We beseech.

That thou would voutchsafe to deliver us from all heresy, infidelity, and
blindness of heart. We beseech thee.

That thou would voutchsafe to impart unto us the precious and heavenly
fruits of this holy Sacrament We beseech thee.

That in the hour of our death, thou would stre^gthen and defend us with
this heavenly viaticum. We beseech thee.

Son of God. We beseech.

Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world. Spare us o Lord.

Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world. Hear us o Land.

Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world. Have mercy.

THE PRAYER.
O God, who under this wonderful Sacrament have left unto us the memory of
thy passion, Grant us so to woorship the sacred mysteries of thy body and
blood, that we may continually feel in us the fruit of thy redemption: who
live and raignest with God the Father, in unity of the holy Ghost, one God
for ever and ever. Amen.

This which follows may be fitly said when the benediction of the B.
Sacrament is given, or coming to adore before the Tabernacle, or Altar, where
the same is reserved.
IN the name of JESUS every knee bow, of the celestials, terrestrials, and
infernals, and every tongue confess, that our Lord JESUS CHRIST is in the
glory of God the Father. Phil. 2.10.

And let all the people say, Amen, Amen. Psalm. 105.47.

Who shall not fear the o Lord, and magnify thy name because thou only art
holy, because all nations shall come and adore in thy sight, because thy
judgments be manifest. Apocalip. 15.4.

And let all the people say, Amen. Amen.

The lamb that was slain is worthy to receive power, and strenght, and
honor, and glory, and benedictio^ Apoc. 5.12

And let all the people say, Amen, Amen.

Thou art worthy o Lord to take the book and to open the seals thereof:
because thou wast slain and have redeemed us to God in thy blood, out of every
tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation Apo. 5.9.

And let all the people say, Amen, Amen.

Thou art worthy o Lord our God to receive glory, and honor, and power,
because thou have created al things, and for thy will they were, and have bin
created. Apo. 4.11.

And let all the people say, Amen, Amen.

Blessed be our Lord God of Israel, world without end, and let all the people
say. Amen, Amen.

Praise, and glory, and power is to our God. Amen.

To the king of the worlds, immortal, inuisibIe, only God, honor, and glory,
for ever and ever. 1. Tim. 1.17. Amen.

To the only God our Savior by JESUS CHRIST our Lord be glory and
magnificence, empire and power before all worlds, and now and for all worlds
ever more. Jude 25. Amen.

Benediction, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, honor, and power, and
strength to our God for ever and ever. Apocalypse. 7.12. Amen.

Salvation to our God which sits upon the throane, and to the lamb. Apoc.
7.10.

To him that sits in the throne, and to the lamb, benedictio^, and honor,
and glory, and power for ever. Apoc. 5.13. Amen.

To thee, IESV CHRIST, be glory for ever. Amen Romans 11.36.

To thee, IESV CHRIST, be honor, and glory forever and ever. Ame^. Romans 16.17.

To thee IESV CHRIST, be glory, and empire for ever and ever. Amen. 1. Pet.
4.11.

To thee, IESV CHRIST, be glory, for ever and ever. Amen. 2. Tim. 3.18.

To thee, IESV CHRIST, be honor, and empire everlasting. Amen. 1. Tim. 6.10.

To thee, IESV CHRIST, be glory both now and unto the day of eternity. Ame^
2. Pet. 3.18.

Grace with all that love our Lord JESUS CHRIST in incorruption. Amen. Ephesians.
6.24.

FINIS.
CERTAIN ADVERTISMENTS TEACHING MEN HOW TO LEAD A Christian life.

Written in Italia^ by S. CHARLES BOROMEVS, Cardinal of Rome.

FOR JOHN HEIGHAM. Anno 1624.

THE PREFACE OF THE AVTHOR.
Our nature being now corrupted through sin, is of it self so bent and
inclined to evil, that we do easily forgett, and leave to do good. For this
cause we have great need of helps and encouragements, whereby to live well;
and of some one that continually may putt us in mind thereof. To this end may
serve certain aduertisments or counsels gathered here together, that by often
reading them, each one as in a glass, may in some part behold the form and
rule of Christian life, and therein consider as well what he does want, as also
what he ought to do.

GENERAL ADVERTISMENTS.
THE chiefest thing that we must procure, and to which most of al we must have
an eye, is to obtain the grace of almighty God, and to keep our selves in the
same, seeing that it is impossible without Gods grace, to live Christianlie.

To this will help exceedingly, that we have always in our hearts the fear
of God, which is the beginning of our salvation and of all good; taking great
care that we do not any thing, which may offend his most pure and divine eyes.

Have God therefore always before thine eyes, in whose sight thou do stand
and who continually does behold thee.

Consider often with thy self, the end for which thou wast created, which is
to attain to the gloire of heaven: and that thou must go towords this, and al
other creatures further thee thereu^to

Think oftentimes upon that which is to follow after, to wit perpetual joy
in heaven, or in hell everlasting pain.

Be zealous of Gods honor, and not only to observe with all diligence his
holy commandments, but also that his divine name be not blasphemed, nor any
irreuerence done thereunto by others.

Bear great respect and honor to all things that appertain to God, and to all the orders of the holy Church, and of thy pastor, procuring to observe them
entirely as much as lies in thee.

Have great confidence and trust in our Lord, that he will dispose always
that, which shall be most for thy good and profit.

Have still an eye the providence of God, esteeming that nothing does befall us
without his holy will and pleasure, and that all is to draw some good thereby.

Exercise thy self in the knowledge of thy self, of thine own vileness
baseness and misery, flying all ambition, self reputation, and other
vanities of the world. Do thou never trust to much to thine own judgment, but
remitt thee easily to the judgment of others, and take counsel oftentimes of
spiritual and discreet persons.

Procure to be thankful to God for so many benefits, as thou have received at
his hands, acknowledging them and giving thanks, and endeavoring to live well,
thereby to give him co^tentment.

Take thou not so much care to please men, as to please God. And have always
an eye to that, which makes to his greater glory and service.

Expect the reward of all thy pains of God, and not of the world.

In the business and affairs which thou have to do, have an intention, not to
do any thing which is not lawful, and to do all that thou do for the
love of God, for in this sort shall thy works be all meritorious.

Acknowledge and ponder with thy self, that we have no greater riches nor
treasure, nor any thing more excellent or of more profit, then to love God;
and that all the rest does pass away as wind, smoke and shadow.

Obey willingly and readielie, in all things that be virtuous, to all thy
Superiors even such as be temporal: and bear them due reverence and respect.

Endeavor, what lies in thee, to maintain peace and quietness at home in thy
house as much as may be possible: living in charity with all sort of people,
whither they be married, or in any other state.

Procure with Gods grace to refrain and bridel thy anger, in such things as
daily fall out, either at home or abroad, and not to be at debate with any
one, that so thou fall not into greater inconveniences.

Be mindful to support the faults of others, be they domestical, or external,
eue^ in such manner, as thou would that others should bear with thee.

Remember well that thou art a Christian, and that for this respect, thou
ought, for the love of christ, to suffer patiently such injuries as be done
unto thee, yea to forgive them: and that which more is, to render good for
evil, and to pray for thine enemies, and those that persecute thee.

In thy tribulations and adversities be mindful to fly to prayer, and accept
of whatsoever scourges, be they universal or particular, and of al things else
that do happen contrary to thy expectation, as coming from the hands of our
Lord.

Dispose thou so of the substance of this world, as if thou were Gods factor,
or steward, and not absolute Lord of the same: and use what thou have for
necessity and need, but not for pleasure; and procure so to pass thorough
these temporal things, that thou loose not those that be eternal.

In the beginning of whatsoever action of thine, make the sign of the Cross,
and have great confidence in the virtue thereof.

Thou shall not begin any affair of importance, without making first thy
prayer, and taking also advise of thy ghostly father, or of some other
discreet and godly persons.

Sometimes in the year ^^ke of some one, who^ thou d^st greatly trust, what
opinion he has of thy life; and bethink thy self whither thou be in the
right way to salvation or not.

See that thou dispose and distribute the hours of the day, according to thy
diverse affairs; as for example to pray, to hear Mass, to traffic, to take
thy refectio^, and so thou shall not loose time.

Blasphemous and dishonest speeches, ought to be passing far from the mouth
of a Christian man.

Beware of an evil custom to swear, albeit it were with truth.

Eschew al kind of superstition, and forbidden arts.

Do not easily judge thy neighbor, chiefelie his inte^tio^, but have regard
to thine own sins and imperfections.

Take heed thou be not desirous nor curious, to know other men's doings: and
beware of all sort of novelties, especially in matters belonging to belief, as
also to speak of that which thou do neither know, nor understand.

See that thou do not murmour, nor speak evil of others, nor diminish the
good name of any one.

Do thou never relate, not report any thing to others, which may trouble
their peace and quietness, or breed any dissension amongst the^.

Beware of idle words, and much more of such as be dissolute and dishonest.

Avoid al dissolutenes and looseness of life, in thy doings and behavior,
which does offend both God and good men. and endeavor to be modest and settled
in all thy gestures.

Fly evil companies more then the plague, as every one likewise that shall
give thee naughty counsel and bad example, and moreover al occasions and
entisements to sin.

Eschew assemblies, as carding, baunkets, dancing, maskings, feasts, vain
comedies and other such like things, by which God is highly offended: and
take heed that not only thou be not partaker of these things, but nether
present at the doing of them.

Beware of idleness, as being a poison of the soul: and endeavor to be always
busied, either in godly works, or in such as be profitable.

Be careful that in thy house there be no profane book, nor picture, much
less dishonest, neither on the walls, nor in books, nor in any other things,
because it does hurt thee, and is offensive to others.

In traffic, selling and bying, fly all kind of deceit, falsehood, lying,
and oaths, and desiring of other men's goods.

Eschew, what lies in thee to deal in other men's money or goods, unless thou
were bound by law of charity, or otherwise so to do.

Neither for gain, nor frindshippe, nor love of parents, nor favor, must thou
do any thing that is not just, and according to the will of God.

In prosperity thou must beware of too much co^tentment and comfort, which
does cause a man to cast himself headlong, into the miseries and dangers of
this life.

At that time therefore be mindful of the calamities and chaunges of these
transitory and worldly things, and so it shall be very expedient to read
then for this end, some book treating of the contempt and vanity of things
contained in this world, in like sort as a most holy and learned man was wont
to do, who in time of his greatest prosperities, was accustomed to read the
lamentations of the Prophet Jeremy.

In time of adversities, do thou not loose heart and courage, neither be thou
ever sorry, but rather rejoice, considering that this is the right way to
heaven, and one of the best tokens, that a man can have of his salvation, and
be mindful in such occasions, to read some spiritual treatise of
tribulations.

PARTICVLAR ADVERTIsme^ts: and first of the custody of the heart, and of all
our senses.
MAke a steadfast purpose never to offend Almighty God, chiefly through any
mortal sin; but rather to endure whatsoever evil, yea death it self, and to
fly as much as lies in thee, every sort of sin althought it were but
venial.

Be vigilant to keep thy heart, that there e^ter no wicked thought into it,
purposing this often with thy self, and examining also often in that which
thou do fail

When any disordered passion, or wicked thought does rise in thee, procure to
resist it even in the beginning; and do not give it place in thee, but cast it
off, to the end that afterward it draw thee not to sin.

Have thou likewise exceeding great care of thine eyes, not easily lifting
them up, nor looking steadfastly upon that, which thou may not lawfully
desire.

Refrain thy tongue, speak not whatsoever comes to thy mouth.

Remember that we be continually tempted and enuironned on every side with
devils, which expect only how to make us fall, and therefore we must be always
upon our guard.

SECONDLY OF CONfession and Communion.
BE careful at the beginning of thy conversion, thou make a good general
confession of all thy life, if yet thou have never made it before, to the end
that the same may serve for the beginning and foundation of a good new life,
which thou do now purpose to ^eade.

Thou shall make choice of a good and learned ghostly father, to be the guide
of thy soul, to whom thou must give great credittte, and confer with him in
all thy difficulties and doubts, as also in all other affairs of importance,
in which there may be any burden of conscience, and suffer thy self to be
ruled according to his counsel.

Go often to confession, for that the oftener thou go, the better it is,
and see thou go either every eight days, or at the least every monthe, and
moreover, in all the solemn feasts through out the whole year.

Likewise thou shall frequent the blessed Communion, and when thou can not
communicate, do not therefore leave to confess, that so thou may obtain
the grace which is given by this Sacrament.

Take heed thou never go to bed in state of mortal sin, but rather go to
confess the same sooner the^ latter: and if thou can nor out of hand do so,
endeavor at the least, to have co^trition and sorrow, and bewail thy sin
bitterly, and with the first opportunity confess thy self.

Every week do some kind of penance, as fasting disciplining, weareing of
hear cloth, lying on the ground, and such like things, but all this must be
with advise and leave of thy ghostly Father.

THIRDLY OF prayer and spiritual exercises.
HAVE in thy chamber some devout picture of Christ, of our Lady, or of some
other Saint, to whom thou do bear most devotion.

Thou ought to have holy water in thy chamber, and going to sleep, rising
in the morning, entering in, or going out or thy chamber, to sprinkle thy self
with the same, against all the deceits of the devil.

Bear particular devotion and reverence to thy Angel keeper.

Thou shall have one also, or more Saints for thine aduocats, as for example
that Saint, whose name was given thee in Baptism, and thou shall take in
particular, the glorious Virgin MARY for thy protectrice and have recourse to
her especially in all thy necessities.

If thou can read, thou shall say the office of our Lady at least upon
feast-daies, if not every day else: but thy beads thou shall say every day,
or as often as thou have leisure.

Never leave thy prayer, at least that of the morning and evening, but by all
means, whither thou be in company of others thy neighbors, in the Church, or
of those of thine own family, or in thy work house, or wheresoever else thou
art, or wither thou be alone. And being alone use me^tal prayer, if thou know
how to do it, or else that time say the seven Penitential Psalms, or the
Litanies, or the Rosarie, or some other vocal prayer.

Remember to pray not only for thy self, but for all degrees of persons, and
chiefelie for the exaltation of the holy Catholic Church; for the Popes
holiness, for thine own Pastor, for all Bishops, for all Christian Princes, and
principally for thy King our Lord, for his Magistrates and Officers, and for
the souls of those that be departed out of this world.

Thou must be very devout to those Saints that be protectors of thy City and
Diocese, and observe their feasts, vigilles, and relics, principally upon
the days of their solemnities, and holy service.

Fail not to go to al general processions, or to such as be particular,
which be within the city,

Likewise thou shall go to all prayers of forty houers, finishing thy hour
when it shall fall to thy turn, and rather doing more the^ less.

When sign is given to carry the blessed Sacrament to the sick, thou must
nor fail to accompany the same devoutly, bearing thy candel: and thou must
glory, and not be ashamed to acco^panie thy Lord, the King of the universal
world. And going on the way, thou shall pray for the sick to whom it is
carried, and yield ^ha^kes to God that he has vouchsfed to make us worthy of
so great a benefit, as to leave us himself in this most excellent Sacrament.

This office, to accompany this most blessed Sacrament whither it must at any
time be carried, thou shall perform as often as thou shall meet it on the
way, lighting, down also from thy coache or chariot, if thou were in it.

When it ringeth to the Aue Maria in the morning, at noone, and at evening,
thou shait say three times the Aue Maria on thy knees, and also those three
verses, which are set down in the daily exercise, printed in the office of
our Lady, calling to mind, the Incarnation and Passion of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST.

When at home, or in any other place, thou shall hear the belle tole at the
elevation of our Savior in the high Mass, thou must be mindful of the
lifting up of thy Redeemer on the Cross, and kneeling down lift up thy mind
to adore and worship him, and make a short prayer unto him, as if he were
present before thee

As often as they ring for any one that is dead, thou must pray for him, and
reme^^er that thou art th follow him shortly, and therefore purpose with thy
self to be in a readiness.

When they ring against any tempest, besides that thou must speedily move thy
self to prayer for that danger, going in have to the Church or else performing
the same in the place where thou, art at that present, thou ought also to
think upon those thu^ders, lightnings and fears that shall be on that day,
when Christ shall come to judge the universal world.

Accustom thy self, to those kind of prayers which the Saints do call
Iaculatorie, saying often in the day with thy heart or mouth (but yet very
softly, when thou art in presence of others) some brief sentence out of the
Psalms, or other place of holy scripture, or else short prayers that may lighte^
thy understanding, and revive thy affection toward God in every occasion
that does present it self: as for example; in the beginning of every thing.
Deus in adiutorium meum intend. Domine ad adiuuandum me festina: In thy
difficulties, In te Domine speraui non confundar in aeternum; In thy
afflictions. Saluum me fac Domine, quoniam intrauerunt aquae, vsque ad animam
meam: In thy temptations, Adiutor meus esto, ne derelinquas me: In considering
thy own miseries: Miserere mei Domine, quoniam infirmus sum: In remembering
thine own sins, Sana me Domine and sanabor: Desiring to love our Lord,
Diligam te Domine fortitudo mea; In all thy doubts, Deus meus illumina, tenebras
meas. Wishing perseverance to do good, Deus meus es tu, ne discesseris a me;
and such like prayers, of which the Psalms, and other books of holy
scripture, and the soliloquies or ghostly aspirations of the Saints are full,
as thou may learn of thy ghostly father.

In the night time when thou do awake, and can not sleep, let thy mind be
occupied in God and spiritual things, neither do thou give place to any
fleashly thoughts, but rather say some psalms, or thy beads, with devotion.

When thou go to bed, think that perhaps thou shall not be alive in the
morning: and when thou do arise in the morning, that peradventure thou shall
not live till night, and so thou will look well to thy self.

Trafficking or laboring, endeavor to occupy thy mind on some spiritual
thing, as in that which our Savior Christ, or any Saint did or thought, or in
singing Psalms or spiritual songs.

Every time that thou do go or return from doing any thing, esteem that
thy Angel keeper is in thy company, and ready to help thee, counting al thy
prayers and good works: and think that thou art in the presence of our
Savior Christ, and in his company.

Study to draw some fruit and spiritual meaning of every thing that is
done, that happens, or thou seeste: As for tilling the ground, with what
travail and diligence it is requisite to till our soul that it may render
good fruit to our Lord? Of a fair sun shining day, what pleasure it will
be to see that eternal light of heaven, since this other does so much delight
us? Of an obscure and cloudie day, what a torment shall it be, to dwell for ever
in eternal darkness, seeing that a littell mistie water, does so much
discontent thee? And of a garden full of odoriferous and sweet flowers; how
goodly a thing it is, and how much God is delighted in a soul adorned with
flowers, that have sundry colors of virtues; and how passing great the
wisdom of almighty God is, for so much as we see s excellent art and skill
in a flower, or in one only leaf? and the like thou may do in all other
creatures.

FOURTHLY OF THE particular exercise in the morning.
IN the morning when thou do rise, first of all other things have recourse
to God, requesting him of his help, and betake thy self to prayer, before
thou occupy thy mind in any other thing and amongst the rest of thy devout
prayers, remember in particular to say the, Pater noster, Aue Maria, and
Creed.

So soon as thou do awake occupy thy mind in God, and think that even then
thy Angel does call thee, that thou go with him to praise our Lord.

In putting on thy apparel, think upon some spiritual thing. As for
example, how in baptism thou wast clothed with grace, and that thou art a
pilgrim, and do go toward the country of heaven.

After this kneeling down in the place appointed for prayer, first of al
thank God, that he has preserved thee that night, and kept thee till this
time, and does bestow so many benefits upon thee.

Then pray him that he will defend thee that day and ever from all sin, and
that thou offend him not at any time.

That he give thee grace to fulfill always his holy will, and to direct all
things according, to his best pleasure.

Offer up thy self unto him, and all that which thou art to do, say, or
think, with a pure intention, that al may be to his praise and gloire.

Commend thy self to the most glorius Virgin, and to thine Angel keeper, to
thy Saint protector, and to all Saints, saying some good prayer to this intent.

Afterward for some space of time make thy mental or vocal prayer, according
to the commmoditie and capacity which thou have.

FIFTHLY OF THE prayer and exercise to be made at evening before thou lie down
to sleep.
AT evening after supper, or at some other time: read, if thou be able a
little of some devout and spiritual book, or of the Saints lives, or such
like, and chiefly of the S. whose day that is, thinking for some short space
upon the same,

Before thou go to sleep. kneeling down before some holy Image, first give
thanks to God for his benefits received in general, and specially that day,
and withal demand grace and true light, to know and hate which is sin;
then next examen thy conscience of whatsoever thou have do^ne, said, or
thought that day, and request his divine majesty to pardonne all the faults
and offenses thou shall find in thy self, making a steadfast purpose, with Gods
help and assistance, to be more wary in time to come, and to confess thee,
with the first opportunity of what is past.

In putting off thy apparel, think that for sin man was bereaved of grace,
and that it is needeful that we cast off our evil habits and inclinations; or
else think of some other good thing, or say some devout prayer.

SIXTHLY OF THE manner how to pray and behave a man's self in the Church
Endeavor thy self to make thy prayers kneeling and with the greatest
devotion thou can.

Going to the place of prayer, consider that our Lord is there present to
behold what thou do, and whither thou do it as thou ought.

Hearing the peale to Mass, or to the rest of the divine service to which thou
art to go, lift up thy mind to consider that thou art to go to pray and to
assist, at the oblatio^ of the Sacrifice of the body and blood of our savior
Chist JESUS, for the remission of thy sins, or else to praise God. And
therefore thou must go with great contrition and devotion.

Entering into the Church, when thou do take holy water, lift up thy soul,
and ^^me^ber that thou art baptized, and what thou did promise there at, and
procure to wash thy soul from sin with tears, and penance, purposing to
lead a new life hence forward.

In the Church behave thy self with reverence and fear of God, standing in
thy place, not in that of the Clergy, or appointed for any other state of
me^, neither do thou, sit irreverently, with thy back towades the blessed
Sacrament, nor approach not to the foot, nor within the railes of the Altars,
and eschew, being in the Church, whatsoever speech, motion, gesture or act,
that may be thought irreuerent or indecent.

Be attentive to the divine service, and look not to any other thing, but to
those most holy mysteries, and such things as have devotion.

At Mass be always kneelling, and at the Gospel stand up right.

SEVENTHLY OF exercises to be done upon holy days, and other blessed times
and Vigills.
BE careful to spend the holy days, not in vanities, but in good works.

Procure upon feast-daies to hear Mass in thine own Parish Church, and there
to harken to such good lessons as be given thee, and use what diligence thou
can, to be instructed in those things, which every christian is bound to
know for his salvation, and be careful to use, the good old custom of
offering at Mass time.

Endeavor upon feast-daies, to hear Even song and divine service.

Endeavor to hear sermons and holy lessons, not only upon holy days, but
upon all other days, when thou can have the^, and this not for curiosity,
but to take fruit thereby, going there to hear them, where thou do find
most inward feeling: procuring also with great diligence to put them in
practice.

When any feast or solemnity of holy time is near, as of Adue^t, of
Sexagesima, of Lent, and the like, see that thou renew thy whole life and
manners, preparing thy self to celebrate the same, with Confession, Communion,
and such other godly exercises.

In every Sunday of Adue^t remember to do that which a holy Bishop does warn
thee of, that is, to Communicate with great devotion and pureness: and the
like thou must procure to do upon the Sundaies of Lent,

Upon fasting-daies, thou must accompany thy fasting with often prayer, and
also with almsdeeds, if thou be able.

Albeit thou eat but one meal upon fasting-daies, yet, as S. Austine does
warn thee, thou must not load thy table with too great store of meat,

That which thou do save in such days, and not spend in supper, it shall be
very good to give to the poor for Gods sake.

EIGHTHLY OF GOOD and godly works
TAke delight in the works of mercy, to do alms, to visit the hospitalles,
those that be in prisons, or sick folks, and by all means that thou may to
help the poor, chiefelie those that be in necessity.

Seek to be of some holy congregation or company, of godly and virtuous men,
so to do some good work and occupy thy self well, principally upon feast
days.

Be ready with that littell or much, that God has given thee of worldly
substance and where thou do want this with thy own labor and sweat, to
help the Churches, and specially thy parish where thine own church is, for
the ornaments and other necessities thereof, that all things be therein with
such decency, as becomes the house of God.

When thou do see thy neighbor to be in any manifest sin, or ready to
fall, use toward him thy dutiful brotherly correction, or warning with
charity and discretion, thereby to gain him.

Such as be noble, rich, men of high degree, and Governors, must be as it were
guides and examples, to others of lower calling, in all sort of godly and pious
works.

If thou feel thy self moved to go any holy pilgrimage, take advise of thy
ghostly Father, and omit not in any wise to have his benediction, according to
the ancient use of the Catholic Church.

If thou go any voyage, use every morning, ere thou go on thy way, to say
those brief and short prayers which are called Itinerariu^, or iournal, and be
printed in the office of our Lady.

NINTHLY OF MEAT, drink and apparel.
EVery time that thou do go to the table to eat, thou must think that thou
do go for necessities, sake, and say first the benediction that is in our
Ladies office, and often give thanks to our Lord, as is there also contained:
and if thou can not say these things, say a Pater noster, and Aue Maria,
making the sign of the holy Cross upon the table, and meat.

When thou do sit down or art at the table, think first of al before thou
begin to eat, upon that sin which our first parents did comitt, by eating
the forbidden fruit: for this will serve as a bridel to refrain thine
appetite, and as a rule whereby to measure that action of thine.

Endeavor to be very te^perate, in eating, and drinking, sleeping, and
clothing, in clining rather to too little, then to too much.

Beware of pomp and pride of apparel, and of all sort of vain, and
superfluous decking and triming: have great regard unto this, whether thou be
a man or a woman, or of whatsoever else condition and degree.

FINIS.
A BRIEF AND PROFITABLE EXERCISE.

OF THE SEVEN PRINCIPAL EFFVsions of the precious blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

WHEREWITH We may exercise our selves all the days in the week in one of
these seven Effusions, And to obtain the seven virtues contrary to the
aforesaid vices.

TRANSLATED Out of the French into English, by JOHN HEIGHAM.

At. s. Omers, Anno 1624.

THE FIRST Effusion on Sunday.
FIRST upon the Sunday, we are to have in memory the first Effusion of our
Lord and Savior JESUS, the which was in the garden of Oliuet. In this day
ought the denout soul to enter into this garden, and to contemplate as if he
were present in spirit, behoulding how the blessed Son of God was there in
marvelous sorrow etc agony, when to redeem us, miserable, and in grateful
people from the goulfe of hell, he was abandonned, and deprived, of all
comfort, help and succor: of his heavenly Father, of his Apostles which lay
a sleep, of his neighbors, and kinsfolks, and of all his friends and
acquaintance. Wherefore he had just cause to say, My soul is sorrowful even
unto death. And as the Prophet David says: My friends and my Neighbors have
approached and stood against me, and they that were near me, stood far off.
To wit, the chief Priests, and principal Doctors, to whom of love, he had
showed and done so many works for their good and benefit, and for whose sakes
especially he was come into this world.

And seeing furthermore, that the merit of his dolorous passion, should nothing
profitte the greatest part of the world, as the scripture ^aith. Many be
called, but few ^^ect (albeit that one only of his precious blood was
sufficient alone to save the whole world) by this consideration, and by the
great desire which he had to accomplish our redemption, and to make
satisfaction for our sins, and to save us, he apprehended such an agonious
and excessive sorrow, that there issued out of al parts of his body,
abundance of sweat converted into blood, which peirced through his garments
and ran upon the earth. Then might he well say with the holy Prophet, My soul
is replenished wi^^ evils. And as Elias measured himself three times upon the
dead infant, saying. O Lord I beseech thee, that the soul of this Infant may
return again into him: so our Savior and redeemer JESUS, prostrated him
self three times upon the earth, praying devoutly unto his Father, to revive
ou^ souls which were dead by sin:

And then the devout sou^^ ought to approach, and to join him to JESUS CHRIST
prostrat upon the ground, and by amourouse compassion to lift him from the
earth, and to gather up the drops of his most precious blood, and to pour
them into the violl of his heart, saying devoutly the prayer which follows.

The prayer for the first Effusio^
I Salute the most noble and precious blood running in great abundance out of
the body of my Lord and Savior JESUS, being in the garden of oliuet in
prayer: repleate with marvelous and excessive agony, by the consideration of
his most bitter and shameful passion, so near approaching; which he was to
suffer, for the satisfaction of all the offenses and sins, perpetrated and
committed from the beginning of the world, and which ever shalll be committed,
to the latter ending of the same.

O most sweet JESUS, ^umblie, I beseech thee, that by the virtue of this
blessed bloody sweat, thou would cleanse and purge my poor soul, defiled
with diverse sorts of sins, which I have often committed by sloth,
ignorance, malice, negligence, omission, faintnes of heart, sins of my youth,
and perdition of the precious time in idleness by thoughts, words, and worldly
occupations. that I may conform my self to the wise man, who says: He which
tilleth his land shall be filled with breads: but he which pursues idleness,
is a very fool wherefore I should be most foolish and unwise, if now I should
no^ labor by perfect amendeme^t of my life, to gather up the drops of thy
most precious blood, which thou have shed for my redemption.

Wherefore, sweet IESV, I humbly beseech thee, by the virtue of thy sacred
blood, shed in the garden of Oliuet, thorough ardent love, that it may please
thee to give me the virtue of diligence, and the feruor of devotion: illuminate
my understanding and inflame my affection in the love of thee: that for the
time to come, I may dilige^tlie, attentively, and devoutly, be vigilant, and
watchful in Prayer, in hearing of Mass, in saying my hours, or other divine
offices and virtuous operations: fruitefullie also to emploie my time, in
works of piety, pity, and mercy, to thy honor, and glory, to my
salvation, and edification of my neighbor.

True it is, o my Lord, that full often do thou enseigne me, often to call
upon thee, and do further incite me, by promising to hear me, saying. All
things whatsoever you shall ask in prayer believing, you shall receive.
Wherefore hereafter I will be more diligent, by the help of thy grace, the
which for this purpose, I will ever seek and require, until I may attain.

Furthermore, my sweet Savior JESUS, for the great sorrow, anguishe and
oppression of thy blessed heart, for all thy sighs, groans, and drops of
bloody tears shed in this garden. I adore thee, love thee, and laud thee,
beseeching thee by thy excessive sorrow, and abundant effusion of thy
precious blood, to drive utterly from my heart, all foolish, and worldly
vanity, mirthe, joy and disordinate pastimes, that I may be wholly estranged
from al such vanities, and to say with the Prophet. Turn away mine eyes, Lord,
least they behold and look after vanities: And comfort me, I beseech thee,
in all my tribulations, as thou haste promised me, saying; I am with him in
tribulation: I will deliver him, and will glorify him. Give me also true and
holy Compunction, and tears of Contrition, and of love, the which I desire
with the Prophet, saying: Who shall give unto mine eyes a fountain of tears,
that I may weep both day and night.

O sweet JESUS, let the continual memory of thy dolorous Passion, wholly
swallow me up in the zeal, and ardour of thy love, and such zeal as thou
hadest of thy Fathers house, such zeal let there be in my soul toward
thee, that I may not think but of thee, and ever to repose by grace and love,
wholly in thee, Amen. Pater noster. Aue Maria.

THE SECOND Effusion on Monday.
Secondly on Monday, we must consider and contemplat, how four Sarga^ts,
void of all pity, dispoiled our Savior JESUS. And how these four
murderers, cruel as Lions, bound him streightlie, and will anouslie to the
Pillar, and as four greedy wolves, hongring, and thirsting for the blood of
this innocent lamb, most inhumanly stripped him, beat him, scourged him,
wounded him, and tore his tender and virginal flesh, with thornie rods,
scorpio^s and whippes of iron, in such sort that there was no whole part in
all his body, wherefore rightly might he say. They have stricken me, and
wounded me, so that from the sole of my foot, to the crown of my head, there
was no whole place in me.

And then the devout soul, ought with tears and sobbes to say. He has nether
form nor beauty left him, for blood which powers down on every side, and
his body altogether disfigured: we have seen him as having no sight, and his
face all bespitt and defiled: we have esteemed him as a Leaper, smitten of God
and humbled: but he it is who is wounded for our iniquities, and peirced for
our sins. The figure hereof was the good Job, who was stricken full of ulcers
and soars, from the sole of the foot to the top of his head. And in this
manner was our blessed Savior in his flagellation, which the good Christian
considering, he may make his prayer saying

The prayer for the 2. Effusion.
I Salute the most worthy, and precious blood, which ran in great abou^dance
out of the noble body of my redemer and Savior JESUS, being most hardly
bound to the Pillar, and most cruelly beaten, and scourged, in such lamentable
wise, that al his sacred body was full of wounds, and no part remained entire,
from the sole of his foot, to the crown of his head.

O most patient JESUS, I beseech thee, that by the virtue of thy most holy
blood, powered out in such great abundance, and soiled, and fowled under the
feet of those fellons, tirants, and murderers, and by thy unspeakable
meekenes, and patience, vouchsafe to pardon me all my sins, and enormities,
which I have committed thorough ire, malice, rancour, impatience, perjury,
blasphemy, injury, contumely, reproache, opprobrie, indignation, and desire
of vengeance, by the which I have full often haynouslie offended thy divine
majesty. And most hartelie I beseech thee, O my Savior, to give unto me, the
virtue of sweetness, benignity, ma^suetude, meekenes, supportation, tolleration,
and perfect patience: to the end that I may be ever hereafter, more aimable,
peaceable, sweet, affable, beninge, and gentle to all persons, as thy blessed
Apostle S. Paul cou^selleth, saying. Bear ye one an others burthe^s, and so
you shall fulfill the law of Christ. And that so I may be a faithful obseruer
of the law of my sweet Lord JESUS CHRIST.

O most bening Savior, and redeemer, I adore, laud, and give thee thanks,
for the great shame which thou suffredst, being naked before all the world, and
for that thou would be mocked for the shame of my sins: give me grace, I
beseech thee, clearly, and entirely, to declare all my sins in Confession,
and not to appear before thee at the hour of my death, naked of virtues,
merits and good works. And I render thee hearty thanks, for all the dolours,
which thou suffredst in thy hard flagellation, and for all thy drops of blood
which thou have shed for the satisfaction of my sins: beseeching thy goodness,
from the bottom of my heart, by the merits of thy bitter scourging, of al thy
wou^des, and effusio^s of thy precious blood, at the hour of my death, to
deliver me from all sin and pains, that being all pure and clean, purged
and washed from all spots of sin, I may depart out of this present life, into
everlasting glory there to laud, and glorify thee for ever.

I beseech thee also, sweet IESV, that to conform me to thy dolorous
Passion, I may for the love of thee, tolerate, and bear patiently, and in
humilite of heart, without murmuring, or contradiction, all injury, derision,
confusion, villainy, detraction, persecution, and generally all adversity and
tribulation, and thy Fatherly correction, such as thou shall please to send me;
and always for the same, without end to laud thee, and to render thee
perpetual thanks and praises. Amen. Pater noster, Aue Maria.

THE THIRD Effusion on Tuesday.
THIRDLY on Tuesday, we ought to think and meditate, how the blessed Son of
God, was attiered with a vestment, or purple mantell, and how those fellons,
and cruel butchers, imposed upon his holy and reverend head (which is the
honor of Paradise, the mirror of Angels, and the pattern of all beauty) a
sharp Crown of Thorns, very peirceing, smitting thereon with staves, to
enforce the^ with violence, to pierce his venerable head, so that the thorns
did pass into his brains, wherewith his clear and beautiful face was al
bloody, and on every side goared, and they afterward impudently, spitt in
his holy visage, and mocked him, in so much that he was made the most deformed,
and disfigured, that ever was beheld.

To conform himself to this article, and to reduce into memory, this third
Effusio^ of the sacred blood of our Lord and Savior, call to mind these
figures: how Sampson was mocked of the Philistians, and imprisoned amongst
the^. Note also, sleeping in his Tabernacle uncovered, was mocked of his son,
and for this was accursed of his Father. Elizeus was derided of the little
children, saying. Go up bald-head; and for this derision they were cursed of
him, and torn in pieces by two wild Bears. And by these personages, which
were so mocked, is signified our Lord, who was also mocked of his enemies in
his passion. We may likewise call to mind, that which is written in the
Canticles: saying Go forth thou daughter of Sion, and behold the King Solomon
with his crown, wherewith his mother (that is the Sinagogue of the Jews)
has crowned him in the day of his espousales. And the^ the devout soul may
say, in great bitterness, and profou^de humility, as follows.

The prayer for the third Effusio^
I Salute the most noble, and precious blood, running down abundantly, from
the blessed and reverend head, of my Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, to wash and
purge my soul from all my sins. O most noble, and most patient Son of God,
King of heaven and of earth, my God, and my Creator, humbly I adore thee, and
glorify thee. For me thou have e^dured many mockeries, injuries, and
villainies, being clothed with a purple mantell, crowned with a crown of most
pricking thorns, holding in thy hand (instead of a regal Scepter) a light,
and rotten Reed. Alas my most element and meek Savior IESV, how much pain
and torment have thou suffered for me in thy blessed head. Alas my God and
dear spouse of my soul, it is my sin that has caused thee this marvelous
dolor and afflictions.

O good IESV, for the great torment, dolor, vituperie, derision, opprobrie,
and effusion of thy most precious blood, in this agonion, I adore thee, and
thank thee, for thy profounde humility, and infinite goodness in the merit of
this effusion: humbly beseeching thee, that thou will pardon al my sins,
which I have committed thoroughe pride, presu^ptio^, arrogancy, vain glory,
ostentation, disordinate appetit of honors, po^pe, worldly glory, estimation
of my self, disobedience to others, and all other bra^che of Pride, to the e^d
(after the council of Saint Paul) I esteem not too much of my self; Be not
(says he) wise in your own conceit, but fear by the which fear I may (by
thy grace) obtain the noble virtue of humility, which is the foundation, and
guard of all other virtues: and that I may ever think humbly of my self, and
contemn all worldly honors, and vain glory, and ever desire to be
contemned, despised, and counted most abiecte, saying with the Apostle. I
rejoice in mine infirmities.

O sweet JESUS, give me from henceforth, a heart co^trite, humble, and obedient
to thy holy commandments. Give me a heart according to thine own heart, which
may be transperced with such ardent charity, and cordial compassion, that I
may be always mindful of thee, study to please thee, ever to repose in
thee, and never to be separated from thee. Amen. Pater noster. Aue Maria.

THE FOVRTHE Effusion on VVensday.
FOURTHLY on wensday, we ought to call to memory, and to meditate, how our
Lord and Savior JESUS, was led forth of the City of Jerusalem, accompanied
with two notorius Thieves, toward, the mount of Caluarie, bearing upon his
shoulders a heavy, and weighty Cross, of fifteen foot long, which put him
to marvelous pain and travel, and caused a very great and grievous wou^d,
in his sacred shoulder: in so much that the blood ran abou^dantlie down the
middle of his back: and so was he led, pulled, and pushed forward, very rudely,
and forcebly, with great shame, wearines, and pain, unto the mount of Caluarie
to be crucified.

In figure hereof, Abraham took the wood of the sacrifice, and laid it upon
the shoulders of Isaac his son, to offer him up to God. And our Savior being
come to the end of his way, upon this hill of Caluaire, there was presented unto
him (to refresh and comfort him) most bitter gaul and vinegar, as the Prophet
foretold saying. In my thirste, they gave me vinegar to drink.

The devout soul, to conform him self to this article, ought to go forth of
the estate of all sins and vices, by an earnest detestation of them, and
utterly abandoning this wicked, unhappy, and wretched world: and with hearty
contrition and repentance for his sins, in bitterness of soul, and great
compassion, ought he to go alonge with his Lord God, and with the dolorous
Virgin Marie, and help him carry his cross, and to gather up the drops of his
precious blood, which ra^ne from his sacred shoulders, and from his whole body,
sorely bruised and wounded, thorough the great travail and pain which he
sustained, in this hard and opprobrious voyage, in so much that he fell on the
earth under the Cross, thorough great weakness, debility, and faintnes, being
in a manner half dead. Wherefore that we may be partakers of the merits of the
same blessed passion of our Savior JESUS Christ, let us say devoutly this
prayer following.

The prayer for the fourth Effusion.
I Salute the most precious blood of my Redeemer JESUS, the which he shed forth
going toward the mount of Caluary, to receive that most cruel and shameful
death for my sins, bearing that heavy Cross upon his shoulders, so
pitifully torn, bruised and wounded: which Cross was so great, and weighty,
that the Son of God fell to the ground under it.

O my soul go thou by the side of thy sweet lover, and Lord, and behold how
for the love of thee, he is ouercharged with this ponderous Cross, having
laid all thy sins upon his shoulders, to carry them to the mount of Caluary,
to faste^ and nail them to his holy Cross, and to reconcile thee in his
blood, to his heavenly Father.

Behold, O my soul, how thy Savior JESUS, by the burden of his cross, and
great feeblenes, by the debility of his body, so far spent, and ouerwearyed, is
not able to go any further, but with exceeding pain, and dolor. Have then
pity and compassion on him, in all his pains, agonyes, and calamityes, and
assiste him to bear and support his Cross, by bearing thy own cross of
penance, and of all tribulation, and adversity, voluntarily, and patiently,
for the love of him, saying:

O most sweet Jesus, who would bear thy Cross in great doulour and pain
with so many improperations, illusions, and dirisions of thine enemies; humbly
I beseech thee, that by the same sufferance, dolor and travail, which thou
sustainedst in bearing of thy heavy Cross, to give me grace in this present
life, gladly to bear my cross of pe^nance, and of all sufferance, that I may
never be separated from thee, but willingly and meekely in all patience, to
follow thee to the death, and with thee to dye upon the cross, fullfilling thy
holy council, saying: If any man will come after me, let him take up his
Cross daily and follow me. And again: He that does not bear his Cross, and
come after me, cannot be my disciple.

O dear IESV, I beseech thee, by the drink and bitter liquor, which in great
malice was given to thee on the mount of caluary, for comfort and refreshing
after thy labor and hard travail, that thou would pardon all my offenses,
which I have committed by the sin of Gluttony. For well I know it to be thy
will, not only by thy own holy example, but also by the doctrine of thy blessed
Apostle which admonishes us, That we walk honestly and virtuously, not in
gorma^dising and wantones. And in another place he says: I chastise my body
and bring it into servitude. Which I alas, have euelly observed, exceeding in
drinking, and eating, such exquisite and delicate dishes; in multitude, and
variety of viandes, and delectable licours: in violating, and breaking the
fasting-dayes commanded, and days of abstinence.

Wherefore give me good Lord, the virtue of temperance, sobriety, and Christian
abstine^ce, both in my eating and drinking, and always to have a holy mean and
measure, both in the quantity, and quality, whereby I may hold in subjection,
my body, and sensuality, to the spirit and reason: and to be more vigilant in
prayer, meditation, and contemplation, of spiritual, divine, and heavenly
things, and other virtuous and profitable endeavors: and to be so much more
diligent and fervent, devoutly and reverently to accomplish thy divine
service, to love, honor, and laud thee for ever more, Amen. Pater noster. Aue
Maria.

THE FIFTH EFfusion on Thursday.
FIFTHLY, we ought to have in mind and think, how the blessed Son of God,
being arrived at the mount of caluarie, much travailed, wearied, and exceeding
feeble, was by those fellons, and murderers, rudely and cruelly despoiled,
whereby all his former wounds were renewed, and began to bleed a fresh, by
reason that his coat cleaued fast unto his blessed body, the which was a
marvelous pain and torment unto him, for in this violent extraction of his
robe, the blood ran down a new, from all parts of his blessed body.

The figure hereof was showed, when Joseph was despoiled by his brethren, and
his coat dipped in the blood of a kidde. To comforme himself to this article
the devout soul ought to say this prayer following.

The prayer for the fifthe Effusion.
I Salute the most precious blood of my Savior JESUS, shed forth abundantly
on the mount of Caluarie, by the rude, and violent extraction of his coat,
which held and cleaued so fast unto him, that all his precious wounds were
renewed, and the blood dropped down from his blessed body upon the ground.

I beseech thee, most sweet JESUS, for that willingly and voluntarily, thou
would be unclothed and dispoiled nakedly before all the world, suffering,
great shame and confusion for the shame and confusion of mine offenses, and to
enriche me, would be deprived of all kind of comfortes, make me to be
entirely dispoiled of all kind of wordlie contentments, so far as they are
either contrary, or hurtful to my salvation, to the end that in all nakedness,
I may follow thee, nakedlie crucified on the cross.

And pardon me, I beseech thee, all my sins and excesses, which I have
committed in my apparel, ornaments, and habits of superfluity, and in my
garments, and in all other things exceeding mine estate, that I may say with
Saint Paul. I have made all things as detriment, and do esteem them as
doung, that I may gain Christ. And let me not appear naked of al virtues,
merittes, and good works, before thee, at the hour of my death, and dreadful
day of judgment. And by the virtue and Effusion of thy most noble and precious
blood, vouchsafe to blot out all my sins committed by avarice, and
disordinate love toward temporal goods. Which greedy avarice has made me
fall from thy grace, and deprived me of the participation of thy heavenly
kingdom; for as the holy scripture says: Neither the covetous nor
extorsioners shall possess the kingdom of God. And our Savior also says in
the gospel, I say unto you it is a hard thing for a rich man to enter into
the kingdom of heaven, it is more easy for a Camel to go through the eye of a
needel, then for a rich man to enter into heaven.

O my blessed Redeemer JESUS, the lover of holy poverty, who have through all
thy life, from thy first entrance into this world, unto thy death, been a true
and perfect obseruer of this holy precept, give me thy grace to be poor in
spirit, and illuminate my understanding, to know and contemn, for the love of
thee, the vileness, abusion, and deception of temporal riches, and of all
honor, glory, pomp and worldly dignity: and to place all my heart, care, and
cogitation, in the obtaining of spiritual riches, whereby I may possess the
everlasting and eternal treasures, and to be of the number of them, of whom
thou speak in the ghospel, saying: Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

THE SIXTHE EFfusion on Friday.
SIXTHLY, the devout soul ought to think, meditate, and co^template, how our
Savior and Redeemer Jesus, all the time they were preparing the cross, set
himself upon the earth, on both his knees, praying to God his Father, that he
would receive his oblation and sacrifice, to wit, his most ignominious and
bitter death, for the reconciliation of all poor sinners, and for the
remission of their sins. And how afterward those inhumane murderers took
him, and furiously threw him upon the cross, whereon he spread his sacred
arms of his own accord: and how his blessed hands and feet, were
straightly, and viole^tlie stretched unto the holes, and hardly fastened with
boisterous nails, which put him unto marvelous pain, and intolerable
torment.

The figure hereof was the Serpent of Bras, which Moses caused to be made, and
set it up for a sign, so that all those which were smitten with any disease,
looking thereon, were healed: likewise our Lord and Savior, being lifted up
and hanging on the cross, his precious blood ran forth abundantly on the
earth, as if it had been forth of four fountains, or rivers.

Behold here the sign elevated, whereof the Prophet foretold saying: Our
Lord God shall lift up a glorious sign among all nations. And now co^template
how in all his pains, and excessive dolours, as a meek lamb he is silent and
says nothing, unless it be to pray unto his blessed Father for his enemies,
for their conversion, and salvation.

Wherefore the devout soul, ought here to rest him self, and depeelie to
weighe and consider the exceeding ardour of love and charity, which the
blessed son of God has expressed and showed unto him hanging upon the
Cross, and pronouncing those seven sacred words and holy sentences. And
with how great patience, he gave and resigned up his holy life. And how much,
and how many lamentations, tears, sighs, and bitter groans was then to be
heard of his dolorous mother (for then was performed the prophecy of holy
Simeon, who said that the sword of sorrow should pierce her soul) and of his
other friends: behoulding him in such pitiful pain, and so cruelly fastened
on the cross, pierced and wounded for the satisfaction of our sins. And then
ought he to say with a heart contrit, dolorous and replenished with compassion,
and tears of true love, this devout petition following.

The prayer for the sixth Effusio^.
I Salute the noble blood of my amourous lover, ru^ing abundantly as four
rivers, out of his precious body for my redemption, and for the satisfaction of
my manifold offenses. O good IESV, for this marvelous charity, bounty, and
mercy which issued out of thy bountiful heart, and for that thou wast
stretched for us upon thy cross with such extremity, and fastened thereon with
such boisterous nails, and for all thy bitter sorrows, pains, and dolor,
and for the multitude of thy stripes, injuries, blasphemies, a^guishes, and
oppressions of thy sweet and gentle heart, and for all thy afflictions and
tribulations which thou pacientlie enduredst, and principally in these three
hours, hanging rufully naked betwixt two Thieves, as their head or Captain: I
adore thee, praise thee, bless thee, and render thee humble thanks, praying
that thorough thy grace, my old concupisce^ce may be crucified with thee, and
that the body of sin, may be mortified and quite distroyed in me.

O most sweet IESV, I hartelie beseech thee, for all the stripes, dolours,
and pains, of thy blessed body, and for all the drops of thy most precious
blood, which thou vouchsafedst to shed, even to the utmost drop, in so much
that with thy precious blood, the Cross and the earth were died wholly red:
that it would please thee to take from me, all envy, detraction, obloquie,
disaffection, hatred, and hard opinion of my neighbor, and to pardon all my
offenses committed by envy. For well I know, thou have admonished me by thy
holy Apostle saying: Lay aside enuies and all detractions. And Solomon says.
Hatered and envious have perished together. And therefore, my most amourous and
dearly beloved lover, give me most ardent, perfect, inviolable, and
perpetual charity, and so fully replenish my soul there with, that I may
first in all things perfectly love thee, and next my neighbor entirely in
thee, and most purely and sincerely for the love of thee. And that I may from
the very bottom of my heart for the love of thee, pardon al those which have any
way offended me, and do any way hate me: and both to wish them, and do them,
all kind of good, to the utmost of mine ability; as S. Paul admonishes
saying: If thine enemy hunger, give him meat: if he thirst give hi^ drink.

O most bening IESV, I beseech thee by thy unspeakable charity, and infinite
mercy, that thou would so inflame my heart, and wholly swallowe it up in thy
love, that I may never be separated from thee. Draw my heart always unto thee,
and suffer me not to be vanquished by any temptation, nor surmounted by any
manner of adversity: defend, fortify, and deliver me from all sin, and from
the assaults of mine enemies: govern and direct me in all mine affairs, and
in all things, take unto thee the total possession of me. Give me the grace
so to be inwardly wounded with thy love, and pitiful passion, that in all
things, and in all places, I may still see and behold thee crucified for me,
that my heart may by love perpetually be united unto thee, saying with the
Prophet David: It is good for me to be united and conjoined to my God, and to
put my trust and confidence in my Lord.

And furthermore I beseech thee, most sweet JESUS, for all those who^ thou
have suffered thy most bitter death and passion (to the end that the meritt of
the same, and of thy exceeding charity, may neither be lost, nor perish in
them) to comfort all those which are in any trouble or affliction; to support
and stre^ghten them which are in any temptation: and all those which are in thy
holy grace, vouchsafe to confirm them. Convert again all such as by
imbecility are fallen, and all sinners which run astray, and save us, and
glorify us altogether, to the end that we may eternally laud thee, and
perpetually love thee, Amen. Pater noster, Aue Maria.

THE SEVENTH Effusion on Saturday.
SEauenthlie, upon the Saturday the devout soul ought to embrace his meek
Lord lovingly with his heart, and to consider and contemplate the bitter and
dolorous departure of his sweet Redeemer and Savior JESUS, when his vermillian
cheeks and lips began to wax pale, his sacred eyes to send forthgrosse, and
cloddy tears, his holy mouth to be drawn together, his reuered head to
incline and hang downward, and finally his most blessed soul to depart out of
his body.

The devout soul contemplating hereon, ought to be mollifyed, and with
compassion to melte, and be quite resolved into tears, considering this sharp
and bitter death of our blessed Lord and Savior, and ought also to dye with
him spiritually unto the world, and to forsake and leave all sin, to live with
him eternally.

The devout soul ought also to think, that after his death and passion, those
wicked and fellonous Jews, were not yet fully satisfied with those dolours,
pains, torments, abuses, and contumelies, which already in his life time, they
had inflicted upon him: but also after his death they add new torments unto
his blessed body, and with most execrable cruelty, they pierced his sacred
side, unto his very heart, whereout issued water and blood, as says S. John:
One of the soldiers with a spear opened his side, and incontinent there
issued forth blood and water.

Think, what torment, dolor, anguish, sorrow, and affliction, this struck
to the tender heart of his blessed mother, who was there present. Wherefore to
conform himself to this article, let the devout soul, with great compassion,
dolor, and compunction, heartily say this prayer following.

The prayer for the Seventh Effusion.
I Salute the most noble, precious, and prizeles blood, which issued out of the
right side of mine amorous Savior JESUS, hanging dead upon the Cross, by the
which blood he has made full satisfaction unto the divine Justice, to recover
and redeem us from everlasting damnation.

O my Lord, my God, the hope, and health of all the world, the Creator of all
creatures, who of thy inco^prehensible love, would dye a most bitter and
shamfull death, for me a vilde, miserable, and sinful creature, give me
grace, sweet IESV I beseech thee, that I may dye spiritually with thee, and
that at the hour of my death, thou receive my soul unto thy mercy.

O most sweet IESV, I recommend my soul, and my body into thy hands, extended
on the Cross, peirced, nailed, and all be-purpled with thy precious blood. And
I ask in all profound humility thy holy grace, that in the last hour of my
life, I may with good understanding, and perfect memory, with firm faith, and
assured hope, reco^mend my soul unto thy mercy, sauuegard and sacred
protection. And that I may be worthy to hear that sweet and comfortable voice:
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

O my amorous Redeemer, who did permit (after thou wast dead) thy blessed
side to be opened with a lance, whereout did issue both water and blood:
vouchsafe deeply to wou^d and pierce my soul, with the lance of thy divine
love: to the end that at the hour of my death, I may be worthy to receive thy
blessed body, in the most holy and blessed Sacrament, as a spiritual food
against the everlasting famine, and thy precious blood, for comfortable drink,
against the eternal and unquenchable thirst.

In the opening of thy sacred side, O my gracious Lord, thou have opened to
thine elect, the gate of Paradise, and of eternal life. I beseech thee dear
IESV, have not memory of my sins and iniquities, least this gate and entry be
shut and closed against me for mine offenses, which thou have mercifully opened
to all poor sinners, penitents and repentants: but receive my soul at the
hour of my death favorably unto thy mercy, and place it with thee in
perpetual joy and felicity.

And furthermore sweet IESV I beseech thee, for the honor of al thy pains,
dolours, death, and passion, and for the Effusion of thy most precious blood:
that thou would pardon me all my grievous sins of carnality, committed in
thoughts, words, deeds, or motions, by my disordinate affection of
concupiscence, and sensual delectation. And that I may follow and perform the
council of S. Paul saying: Mortify your sinful members. And again: If you
live according to the flesh you shall dye, but if by the spirit you subdue the
works of the flesh, you shall live.

Give me, dear IESV, I beseech thee, this fair Angelical virtue of
Chastity, of Continence, Purity of soul, and body. Sweet IESV, mortify and
kill in me all vices, all motions, and prouocations to concupiscence and carnal
affection. Take from me I beseech thee, all that which is unlawful,
disordinate, and displeasing to thy divine majesty: and give me a heart most
simple, clean pure, fervent, divine, and conformable to thy own heart, which
no vicious, nor disordinate affection, may ever infect, soil or maculate.

My Lord, my God, and most compassionate spouse of my soul, I beseech thee, to
keep and defend me from all wicked, unlawful, and vicious deeds: from all
unseemly, unclean, and hurtful take, and from all evil, fleshly, and
filthy thoughts, that I may worthily and faithfully serve thee, in all
pureness of soul and body.

Sweet IESV, take the whole possession of my heart unto thee, and give me either
thine own heart, or make this heart of mine comfortable unto thyn, to the end
that all my thoughts, wills, and desires, may always be in thee, and to thy
honor and glory, and that I may perpetually repose in thee, saying with the
Prophet: My soul shall rest and sleep in peace.

Finally, most merciful IESV, I pray thee for the souls of my parents
fre^des, and benefactors, and generally for all the souls, in the fire of
Purgatory; humbly beseeching thee, by thy cleme^cie, goodness, and infinite
bounty, and by the merit of thy most holy death and passion, to deliver and
release them of their pains and torments, and to give them perpetual and
everlasting rest. Amen. Pater noster. Aue Maria. Credo.

FINIS.
PREVILEGE.
PHilippe par la grace de Dieu Roy de Castile, d'Arragon, etc. permettons de
grace especialle a IEAN HEIGHAM d'Imprimer, ou fair imprimer les six livers
Spirituelles en Anglois, a l'exclusion de tous autres, pour l'espace de quinze
ans, commencant le 1. de Iullet 1622. a peine de co^fiscation and amend
mentione en ledit Prouilege.

Sign LE COMTE.


